A PLEA FOR LIBERTY, In Vindication of the COMMONWEALTH OF ENGLAND: Wherein is
demonstrated from Scripture and Reason, Together with the consent of the
chiefest Politicians, Statists, Lawyers, Warriors, Orators, Historians,
Philosophs, and the example of the chiefest Republics, a Commonwealth of all
Politic States to be the best. Against SALMASIUS, and others.

By a Friend to Freedom.

Printed in the Year 1655.

To the READER.
THough my broken speech can add nothing to the worth of this Treatise; yet I
judge it my duty to utter some few words concerning it. I know, Truth in all
ages has had many enemies, some men asking what it is, and some contradicting
and opposing. And surely that truth which crosses most the vanity, glory, and
pride of this world, is most opposed by the men of this world, in whom the
Prince of the power of the air works. Yea, and any truth which in former ages
has not appeared unto the sons of light, but has been under a cloud, (the Sun
of Righteousness, in whose light Saints see light, being pleased not to make
the cloud flee away) is seen, and scarce clearly seem, but by few, who are of
the day, and not of the night. Hence is it that many who are light even oppose
such a truth. No wonder then though the truth spoken of here be so much
opposed, seeing it not only crosses the vanity of a vainglorious age, but also
has been so long over-clouded. Howsoever it is very necessary to be known.
Doubtest thou whether it be lawful for thee to submit to the present
Government, the Power of the King being in thy apprehension absolute without
the bounds of Law; or the Kingly Government being the choicest and best, (and
so not be altered) far better then a Commonwealth; or it being unlawful to
resist the King and decline his Authority? Thou shall find these things fully
and largely cleared from arguments of all sorts. To the Law, and to the
Testimony of the Spirit of Truth, that complete rule, they are brought. In the
balance of Reason they are weighed. But if that shall not suffice thee who
eyest much the examples of Politic Governments, and sayings of men. These
arguments also are to be found here. You shall find that even certain of your
Poets, Kings, Lawmakers, Historians, Orators, Philosophers have said so, as
says this Treatise. And that this Government is neither newfound out, nor
usurped, nor bad and dangerous; but by example of the first and best, the
oldest, sweetest, and most to be desired, and by lawful practices of old, far
from usurpation. But if thou imaginest that thou art engaged by the League and
Covenant to stand for Monarchy; and so can not take a contrary Engagement.
That case also is answered and cleared here. I counsel thee who doubtest, to
search whether the things which are laid down in the Treatise as truths be so
or not. That is Nobility indeed. O! if the sons of men could learn to be
Berean-like, more noble then those of Thessalonica. Shut not thine eyes, stop
not thine ears at the seeing and hearing of things of such use and concernment.

But poss bly (courteous Reader) thou art fully persuaded in thy mind of the
truths spoken-of in this Book; and therefore apprehendest it to be useless, or
born out of due time. Well, but art thou so full of knowledge, and so clear in
the thing, that thou can not receive any more. Be not received. It may be,
thou shall receive greater information therein if it pleases thee diligently
to weigh and consider. D^st thou engage thy life estate, name, o^ pains (...)
way or other in defense of that truth which here by arguments is defended, thou
shall do well to inform thy self well, and to strengthen thy self with good and
sound grounds, that with the better and cleaner conscience, or greater courage
thou may go on thy way? Moreover, if the Book had come forth when first it
was written, thou could not but have said, it had been born in the due time.
But hitherto it has been hindered. Yet I suppose it is born in a due time, if
we look upon the greatest part of men. And if the spirits of men, chiefly of
such as know not this truth, were so framed as in moderation, impartiality, and
simplicity to read the Treatise, they should rejoice at the birth thereof, and
say it is very seasonable: Yea, and find more perhaps in it then in others of
that same nature. They would see the adversaries of these truths discomfited
and overthrown by their own weapons in which they so much glory; even by
Reason, the testimonies of men, and that of all stations and conditions; and
example of the most refined Policies and Governments. And what obscurity or
obstrusness is in the Book, it is because of such boasters; whose mouths the
Author judged expedient to stop with arguments of that kind; and so to beat
them from that place in which they thought their strength did lie.

I have no more to add, but do again wish that without prejudice, malice,
envy, hatred, selfishness, in moderation and sobriety, thou would peruse the
Treatise: and I dare say thou should receive more good thereby then possibly
thou in the least expectest. And for thine ease I have written the heads of it,
as so many Assertions, or Conclusions. I leave thee, and it, to the disposal of
Him who rules all things in the Army of Heaven, and among the Inhabitants of
the Earth, whose Kingdom and Dominion are everlasting, in whose hand the hearts
of the most mighty are, as the rivers of water; and He turns them
whithersoever he will. And do remain,

Thy ingenuous wel-wisher, DAVID PIERSON.

ANAGRAM. MONARCHY, and DEMOCRACIE, described under the names of (...) and
(...).
(...), alone; (...), desirous of reigning; (...), an Ass, and the upper part
of an Asse-mill; (...), ancient.

(...), People; (...), most strong; (...), best; (...), right; (...), or (...),
judgment.

(...). He Millstone. like weighs-down and grinds the state,
The people poor Asse-like enslaveth, and
He Reigns alone, and Has an AnCIEnt date.
(...). People Do rule, Electing who command.
MOst strong and best he is, and from Clear debate
Makes Right Appear, and Causes Judgment stand.
And if (...) best Does signify,
Thu is, me thinks, Pure ARISTOCRACIE.
THE CONTENTS Of the whole BOOK.
SECT. I.
THe Power of the King, as it commands just and lawful things, is absolute,
and in such a notion cannot belaw fully contraveened. page 2 The King has not
a Power above Law, and a Prerogative Royal to dispose upon things according to
his pleasure, whether with, or against Law and Reason. p. 6 SUBSECT. 1.
The Jewish Sanhedrin had power over the Kings of Israel, and Judah. p. 11
Because of extraordinary Heroicism and gallantry of old, some were of a simply
vast and absolute power, and in nothing subject to Law. 29 The first erecters
of Kingdoms, and planters of Colonies were of an absolute power, altogether
unsubject to Law. 34 Personal endowments and extraordinary gifts have drawn-on
People to devolve an absolute and full power, without all reservation, upon
some men. 40 Conquering Kings in old were of an absolute power. 47 Usurping and
tyrannous Kings in old had an absolute power. 47 Except for some of these
causes, there was never any King so absolute, but his power one way or other,
according to Law, was restricted. Ibid.
SUBSECT. 2.
The wicked Kings of the Jews had an arbitrary power both over Religion, and
the People of GOD. 120 The tyrannous and usurping Kings of the Jews, in all
probability had an arbitrary power over the Republic. Ibid. The good Kings of
the Jews, because of personal endowments, had exemption and immunity from Law.
121 The Kings of the Jews, de jure, had no arbitrary and uncircumscribed power.
125

SECT. II.
Royal Power, ectypically, is the choicest of Governments. 135 Monarchy, (...),
is the best Government. 136 Monarchy, demotically, in respect of the
disposition of people, is the choicest Government. Ibid. Kingly Government,
consecutively, in respect of its fruits and consequences, may be hic and nunc,
the best of all Governments. 138 Regulated and mixed Monarchy, per se and in it
self, is the sweetest Government. 140 Monarchy, consecutively, in respect of
the fruits and effects it may and does produce, simply and absolutely, is of
all Governments most dangerous, and least to be desired. 141
SECT. III.
Democracy arightly constituted, simply and absolutely, is the sweetest
Government, and most for the good of the People. 152 Moses before the counsel
of Jethro, had a Kingly power. 155 After the accomplishment of Jethro's
counsel, and the institution of the seventy Elders, neither Moses, nor any of
the Judges had a Kingly power. 157 No man by Nature, in a formal and antecedent
way, is born subject to Government. 165 Nature per accidens and in a secondary
way, intends Government. 169
SECT. IV.
It is not lawful to resist the King, as King, nor the Kingly power, as the
Kingly power. 171 It is lawful and commendable to resist the tyranny of the
King, and the abuse of his power. Ibid. Kingly Government may very lawfully be
declined, that one better may be set-up. 180
SECT. V.
We are tied by League and Covenant, to maintain and espouse Christ's interest,
absolutely, notwithstanding any thing may ensue thereupon. Ibid. By no Oath, or
Covenant can we be absolutely tied to espouse the King's interest, and preserve
Monarchy involably. Ibid.
A SURVEY of POLICY; OR, A Free V^NDICATION of the COMMONWEALTH of ENGLAND.
PROEME.
COURTEOUS READER,
I Beseech thee judge of me impartially; Do not imagine I speak my mind more
freely then is pertinent: Let me tell thee, my freedom is upon a good account;
I may hold my face toward Heaven, and say, what I speak it is from the
simplicity of my spirit: My record is from on high, I do not speak from a
by-assed principle, and if I do so, shall not my Lord try it out? Why, I pray
thee, will thou stumble at my freedom in expressing my mind against Kingly
Government, in behalf of that which is popular? Verily, I desire thee, not to
cleave to my judgment implicitly: Yet would I have thee duly examining without
prejudice, what I speak, and embrace that which is good: will thou learn so
much of that which the world calls Scepticisme, as to suspend thy judgment a
little, and not sentence against me at the first. Be not wedded to thine own
opinion, but try all things, and hold that which is good. Do thou kindly
embrace any thing which is of GOD in this Book. I do ingenuously profess, I
shall forthwith be of thy judgment, if thou show me better grounds, enforcing
the contrary of what I maintain: Well, the main subject in hand resolves upon
this Question,

Whether or not is the Commonwealth of ENGLAND an usurped power?

These Questions being put aside, that follow, it is easily answered.

1. Whether or not, is the power of the King absolute? 2. Whether or not, is
Royal Government the choicest of Governments? 3. Whether or not, is a
Commonwealth the best of Governments? 4. Whether or not, is it lawful to
resist the Royal Person, and decline the Royal Authority? 5. Whether or not,
does the Covenant tie us, to preserve Monarchy inviolably?
Of these as follows.

SECT. I.
Whether or not, is the power of the King absolute?

THe Court-Parasits, and Nation of Royalists, do plead much for an arbitrary
and illimited power to the Royal Person. But in this matter we do freely offer
our judgment.

ASSERT. I. The power of the King, as it commands just and lawful things, is
absolute, and in such a notion cannot be lawfully contraveened.

It is made good, firstly, from that which Solomon says, -- for he does
whatsoever pleases him. Where the word of a King [is, there is] power, and who
may say unto him, What do thou? Eccl. 8. These words by Writers are diversely
expounded. (1.) Some expound them concerning the absolutenes of the Kings
power, whether in things lawful or unlawful, good or bad. And in this we find
none more willing then Salmasius the Humanist, Defens. Reg. cap. 2. (2.) Others
again who are no friends to absolute and unlimited Monarchy, do interpret the
words, not de jure, but de facto Regis, i. e. they opinionat, that Solomon does
not speak here of the power of Kings, which according to Law and Reason does
belong to them, but concerning the absolute way of governing, which one way or
other, is conferred upon Kings, whether by usurpation or tyranny, or by a
voluntary and free subjection of the people to an absolute and arbitrary power
in the Kingly Person. Yet (3.) I do choose a way distinct from either of these.
And I expound the words concerning an absolute power in the King, in things
lawful and honest. This I make good from the Contexts. 1. The Preacher says,
I [counsell thee] to keep the Kings commandment, and that in regard of the oath
of GOD. Now, what power the Holy Ghost here gives to Kings, is such a power,
whose ordinances he exhorts to obey, and that under an obligation, being tied
to obey it by a lawful oath, the oath of GOD. But we cannot obey the unjust
Acts and Ordinances of an arbitrary and illimited power. Unless you will say,
that it is lawful for us to sin against the LORD, and to do the will of man
rather then the will of GOD, which is contrary to that which is spoken, Act. 4.
and 5. Yea, as afterward is showed, arbitrary Monarchy invested with a
boundless power, to do both good and evil, is sinful and unlawful. And
therefore we cannot tie our selves by the oath of GOD to maintain it. Sure we
are, we can not lawfully swear, to maintain and obey a sinful and unlawful
power. Unless you may also say, that we may lawfully engage our selves by oath
and Covenant, to maintain and obey the ordinance of Satan. 2. He speaks of
such a power which is not for maintaining vice, and allowing that which is
evil, but for correcting and punishing of evill-doers. Be not hasty to go out
of his sight, (so do knaves who hate the light) stand not in an evil thing:
Why? for he does whatsoever pleases him, etc. Would the Holy Ghost say, ye
must not dare to do evil, and withdraw your selves preposterously from the
Kings presence; for he has a power conferred on him, that cannot be
contraveened in executing justice on malefactors. And therefore if ye
transgress, be sure the King will punish you. So then this manifestly holds
out to us, that the Holy Ghost speaks in this place, of such a power in
Kings, which exercises good, and performs that which according to the Law of
GOD, is incumbent to the Kingly power to do. But sure I am, illimited Monarchy,
whose power is also to do evil, can spare the malefactor, and punish the
righteous. The Holy Ghost speaks of a Kingly power, that produces contrary
effects. 3. The Holy Ghost subjoyneth, Whose keeps the commandment, shall feel
no evil thing. Then, this must be a just and lawful commandment; otherwise
obedience to it would bring forth death, Romans 6. But sure we are, this cannot
be spoken concerning a boundless and arbitrary Regal power: for as Solomon
here speaks of the Regal power, so he speaks of the effects thereof, and
of our obedience thereto. And as we find, he speaks only of good effects; so
he only speaks of an obedience and subjection thereto, which according to
the oath of GOD, and in conscience we are tied to perform. But as we cannot
lawfully give up our oath of Allegiance to boundless and arbitrary Regal
power, so there is a vast dis-proportion between it and the effects of that
power which Solomon speaks of here. Solomon speaks of a power which only
produces good effects. But arbitrary Monarchy is in a capacity of producing
both good and bad effects.

Secondly, we establish the point from reason it self; the Kingly power, as it
produces good effects, not only in it self is the Ordinance of GOD, but also
it executes the purpose of GOD both on good and bad. But as the Ordinance of
GOD cannot be contraveened; so it is laid on us as a necessary duty, to subject
our selves for conscience sake to him who executes the purpose of GOD,
according to the prescript of GOD'S will, Romans 13. So then, in such cases as GOD
can not be contraveened, no more can the Kingly power be withstood, but what it
enacteth according to equity and reason, should absolutely be obeyed. In this
sense the Holy Ghost commands obedience and subjection, not only to Kings,
but also to all other Rulers, Tit. 3. 1. Pet. 2. Kings and all Magistrates in
this sense are called Gods, GOD'S Deputies and Lieutenants upon Earth, Ex. 4.
and 22. Ps. 82. feeders of the LORD'S people, Ps. 78. the shields of the Earth,
Ps. 47. nursing Fathers of the Church, Is. 49, Captains over the LORD'S people,
1. Sam. 9. Their Throne is the Throne of GOD, 1. Chr. 19, their judgment is the
judgment of the LORD, 2. Chr. 19 The Land lies under great judgment when it
wants them, Is. 3. Who then dare adventure in such respects any way to
contraveen the Kingly power, and to decline his authority? for so, there is a
divine sentence in his lips, his mouth transgresses not in judgment, his
Throne is established by righteousness, righteous lips are his delight, and he
loves him that speaks right, his wrath is as messengers of death, but in the
light of his countenance is life, and his favor is as a cloud of the latter
rain, Prove. 16. In such cases his wrath is as the roaring of a Lion, but his
favor is as dew upon the grass; he sits in the Throne of judgment,
scattering away all evil with his eyes, scattering the wicked, and bringing
the wheel over them: So mercy and truth preserve him and his Throne is upholden
by mercy; Yea, his fear is as the roaring of a Lion, so that he who provokes
him to anger, sineth against his own soul, Prove. 19, and 20. Upon these
grounds, and in these respects Solomon exhorts us, to honor the King,
Proverb. 24. and not to strike Princes for equity, Prove. 17. Therefore the
Kingly power, as it is in it self, and as it executes the purpose of the just
LORD of Heaven and Earth, according to the LORD'S good will and pleasure,
neither his power, nor the just Acts thereof, can be any more contraveened,
then the power of GOD, and that which he commands to be performed: for so the
King's power is GOD'S power, and what he does, is according to divine
authority. And in these notions we hold the Kingly power to be absolute: for
so, as his power in such respects can not be contraveened, in like manner he
may lawfully execute every thing that is good and expedient, with a full and
vast power, according to Law and reason. So the power of the King of kings is
vast and absolute, not because he may do both justly and unjustly, according to
his pleasure, but because he may do every thing that seems good in his eyes,
according to justice.

In this sense, I confess, Salustius his Author says very well, Impune quidvis
facere; id est, Regem esse. Indeed, the King may do every thing that is just
and equitable, according to Law and Reason, and deserves not to be punished
therefore. This is the same which Solomon says, Eccl. 8. v. 3. and 4. compared
with Prove. 17.26. Albeit we may put such a favorable construction upon these
words, yet do we doubt much if Salustius his Author's meaning be such. Indeed,
I take him to be of Aristotle's opinion, who says concerning the King, --
(...), Pol. l. 3. c. 12. The Law also says concerning the King, -- Tanta est
ejus celsitudo, ut non posset ei imponi Lex in Regno suo, Curt. in consol. 65.
col. 6. ad F. Petr. Rebuf. notab. 3. repet. L. un. c. Omnia sunt possibilia
Regi, Imperator omnia potest, Bald. in Sect. F. de no. for. fid. in F. and in 1
Constit. C. col. 2. Chass. catal. glor. mun. part 5. consid. 24. All these go
no other ways (says our learned Countryman) but thus, The King can do all
things, which by Law he can do, and that holds in him, Id possumus, quod jure
possumus. Lex Rex, q. 26. ass. 3. This is a very quick and noble gloss. But
for my self, as I judge their meaning to be nothing such, so I am indifferent,
whether it be so, or not. No question, there be many who do plead for absolute
and arbitrary Monarchy, beside the Nation of Royallists. And those, to whose
temper absolute Monarchy does most relish, we find, to be attended with these
qualifications. (1) They are merely heroic and ambitious. So were the Giants
before the Flood, Genesis 6. Beros. Antiq. l. 1. Nimrod after the Flood, Genesis 10.
Bern. Antiq. l. 4. and all the rest of the great Heroes, Arist. pol. 3. c. 10.
(2) They are merely tyrannous and cruel. So we find that Pharaoh had an
arbitrary power over the People of Israel, Exodus 1 and 5. Nebuchad-nezzar had
the like power over his Kingdoms, Dan. 2. and 3. By virtue of Ahasuerus
absolute power, Haman was licenced to exercise tyranny on the People of the
Jews, Est. 3. We might allege many examples to this purpose: But the point is
most clear in it self: for those who are of a tyrannous disposition can endure
no Law, but their will: Otherwise, they could never get their tyranny
exercised. (3) Those whom we find chief pleaders for absolute Monarchy, are
either concerned therein themselves, as Alexander M. and M. Aurelius, and such
like; or else Flatterers and Court-Parasites, as Lyricus Romans Virgil, and such
like. And of this sort we find none more violent in this matter, than Dr. Fern,
Hugo Grotius, Arnisaeus, Spalato, etc. whose footsteps, with his ful-speed
Salmasius does trace. But although men by way of flattery and by-respect, may
act and plead for arbitrary Monarchy; yet let me tell you, I do not imagine, but
they may act and plead for it through simple error and delusion. And so I
conclude, that Aristotle, Xiphilin, Salust, and the foresaid Lawyers do much
run this way, though they be more moderate in the matter then the rest. And as
afterward is showed, we find the Talmudick and Rabbinick Writers this way
somewhat inclining to the lawless and arbitrary power of absolute Monarchy.

Assert. 2. The King has not a power above Law, and a Prerogative Royal, to
dispose upon things according to his pleasure, whether with, or against Law and
Reason.

Firstly, Such an arbitrary and vast power is repugnant to the first
Institution and Scripture-mould of Kings. According to the Holy Ghost's way of
moulding the King, he is thus qualified. (1) He is an Elective King, chosen by
the People, in subordination to God. Thou shall in any ways set [him] King
over thee, whom the LORD thy God shall choose -- Deuteronomy. 17. (2) A Brother-King.
and not a stranger-King [One] from amongst thy Brethren shall thou set King
over thee: thou may not set a stranger over thee, who is not thy Brother.
Ibid. (3) He must not tyrannize over the People, by Leavying Forces, and by
strength of hand, drawing them into Egyptian slavery. -- He shall not multiply
horses to himself, nor cause the People to return to Egypt, to the end that he
should multiply horses: forasmuch as the LORD has said unto you, Ye shall
henceforth return no more that way. Ibid. These words properly, and in their
emphatick sense, can import nothing else, but a discharging of the King by
Forces and Armies to tyrannize over his People, that bringing them into
bondage, and upon their ruins he may not strengthen himself, and multiply his
Forces. So the King of Egypt did with the People of Israel, whileas they were
in Egypt, under his tyrannons yoke. (4) Not a Leacherous King, given to women,
for drawing him on into temptation. Neither shall he multiply wives to himself,
that his heart turn not away. -- Ibid. (5) Nor Covetous, given to enrich
himself, and to build-up his own estate upon the ruins of his People. -- Nether
shall he greatly multiply to himself Silver and Gold. Ibid. (6) But he must be
a King, acquiring the Scriptures of GOD, meditating on them his whole
lifetime, thereby learning to fear the LORD, to observe his Commandments, and
to practice them, that he may be humble and lowly, not turning aside either to
the right hand or to the left. And it shall be, when he sits upon the Throne
of his Kingdom, that he shall write him a Copy of this Law in a Book, out of
[that which is] before the Priests the Levits. And it shall be with him, and he
shall read therein all the days of his life, that he may learn to fear the
LORD his God, to keep all the words of this Law, and these Statutes, to do
them: That his heart be not lifted up above his Brethren, and that he turn not
aside from the Commandment, to the right hand, or to the left, -- Ibid. Here*
from we draw this Argument:

The power of him is not Arbitrary, and beyond the bounds of Law; whose power
according to the Law and Word of GOD is Regulated and kept within the bounds of
Law.

But the power of the King according to the Law and Word of God, is Regulated
and kept within the bounds of Law:

Ergo, the Power of the King is not Arbitrary, and beyond the bounds of Law.

The Major cannot be denied, unless men will be so bold, as to deny a
Regulating and squaring of their Acts and Institutions according to the Word
and Law of God. Sure I am none will deny it but such as will contradict
Scripture it self, and decline it as the rule and pattern of their Actions: The
Minor is manifest from the Text above Cited.

Barclay the Royallist, distinguishes between the Office and power of the
King; and so the man endeavors to elude our Argument thus: The Office of the
King (quoth he) is set down Deuteronomy. 17. and the King's power is spoken of, 1 Samuel
8 where (says he) an Arbitrary power is conferred upon the King, and laid upon
his shoulders. But this distinction serves not for his purpose: For either the
power of the King is according to the Word and Law of God, or not. If it be,
then as the Office of the King is regulated, in like manner his power also is
kept within the compass of Law: For his Office spoken of, Deuteronomy. 17. admits
bounds, and is kept within marches. That which is spoken concerning the King,
Deuteronomy. 17. in terminis does subject the King to Law, and taketh-away
Arbitrarines in his Government: So then that which is spoken of the King, 1 Samuel 8. does either contradict that which is spoken, Deuteronomy. 17. or else it
gives him no power and liberty of governing above Law at random. If it be not,
then it is not a Divine but a diabolick power. Moreover, what the King does
according to his power, either he does it by virtue of his Office, or contrary
to it. If by virtue of his Office, Ergo, the Kingly power cannot be absolute,
unless his Office be also absolute: for so the exercise of his power depends
from his Office. In such a case he can do nothing according to his power, but
what he has Authority for from his Office: But his Office, Deuteronomy. 17 is not
absolute, but Regulated according to Law. If contrary to it, Ergo, it is not
the Kings Office to exercise an absolute power, and consequently the Kings
Authority is not absolute. Furthermore, either the King, as King, is absolute,
or not. If he be absolute as King, Ergo, the Royal Office is absolute: For the
King is formally King by virtue of his Royal Office. If not absolute as King,
then we gain the point: For so it follows, that the Kingly Government in
itself is not absolute and illimited; and if the Kingly Government in itself
be not of a vast and absolute extent, we Demand, in what notion the Authority
of the King is Arbitrary and illimited? Either ab intrinseco, i. e. As it is
essentially a Kingly Authority, or ab extrinseco, i. e. according to some
cadent and accident of the Regal Office. If the former, ergo the Office of the
King itself is absolute, which is not only repugnant to that, Deuteronomy. 17. but
also to that which Barclay confesses himself. If the latter, ergo the King, as
King, and according to his Office is not absolute: for, quod convent rei
accidentaliter, ei non convenit formaliter. Then we demand, if the King, as
King, be not absolute, whether, or not, he be absolute as he is a Judge, or as
he is a Man? If as he is a Judge, ergo all Judges no less then Kings, are of
an absolute and Arbitrary power, which Royallists themselves do altogether
deny; yea, they make the King essentially different from other Judges under
this notion, because the Kings power is absolute, and their's is not. And
consequently, seeing according to the Doctrine of Royallists, the King is
essentially differenced from other Judges as he is absolute, then nolint
velint, the King, as King, is absolute. Thus the Gentlemen do contradict
themselves. If as he is a Man, ergo all men, let-be Kings, are of an Arbitrary
and boundless power; but sure I am, no Royallist will say so.

Next to Barclay in-steppeth Salmasius on the floor, as one minding to cut the
knot, if he cannot loose it: This Gentleman labourreth (though in vain) to
reconcile that of Deuteronomy. 17. with that which is spoken of the King, 1 Samuel 8.
The Israelites (says he) did not seek from God one King only, but a change of
the government by Judges, and in stead of that, they required a Regal
Government: But (quoth he) the Prophet to dissuade them therefrom, propounded
to them these incommodities which ensue upon the Kingly government; this the
Prophet calls jus Regum, which I (quoth he) call the Arbitrary license, which
is granted as a lawful power to those who govern after a Kingly manner. This
jus Regum (says he) the Grecians translate it (...). Whereby is understood a
just and reasonable way of carry-on matters. And the Jews in this place, call
it (...) which signifies (...): For the Septuagints translate this Hebrew word
sometimes (...). Now this pertains to the office of some man; and albeit
(...) does differ from (...), yet some small difference being between them, the
one is taken for the other, Defens. Reg. cap. 2.

Ans. This Gentleman is so far from loosing the knot of the difficulty, as that
he tieth it a great deal faster then it was before: And he must give me leave
to say, that he mistaketh the state of the question in hand. The Question is,
whether or not that which is spoken 1 Samuel 8. is repugnant to that which is
spoken concerning the King, Deuteronomy. 17. This Royall^st denies the one place to
contradict the other; and he rendereth no other reason for it, but because the
Prophet 1 Samuel 8. calls absoluteness and Arbitrary license in the Royal
Person, (...) R^gum. Now the man espyeth not the lightness of his own
inference which is this:

The Prophet 1 Samuel 8. calls Arbitrary power jus Regum:

Ergo that which is spoken of the King 1 Samuel 8. is not repugnant to that which
is spoken of him, Deuteronomy. 17.

Whereas this man should prove the consequence, he does nothing but plays
upon the word (...). Well, I desire him to learn this much, in his probation of
the Antecedent he stands by that, which makes the contradiction between
these places the more apparent. We have showed already, and he himself does not
deny it, That the holy Ghost, Deuteronomy. 17. subjecteth the King to Law, and
disclaimeth Arbitrary Power in him. And yet this Gentleman will have the holy
Ghost, to allow and cry-up (1 Samuel 8.) absolute power in the King. This he not
only says, but he also endeavors to prove from the word (...) as it is
translated and taken by some, both in Greek and Latin. But I pray you, Friend,
what is this, but to prove a contradiction upon your self? Let it be so, that
the word (...) is so taken, as you will have it, (the contrary whereof we shall
demonstrate) yet shall you never reconcile these two places together, but
thereby you enforce the more a contradiction between them. And consequently,
according to your way, the consequence is so far from being deducible from the
Antecedent, that contrariwise it is directly repugnant to it. So then, my
Friend, albeit I should grant you all that you would have, yet you have this to
prove, That though the holy Ghost, Deuteronomy. 17. cries down Arbitrary Government
in the King, and 1 Samuel 8. proclaims it, and allows the same in the King,
yet notwithstanding the holy Ghost does not contradict Himself, and neither of
the places is repugnant one to another. Prove this, -- Et eris mihi magnus
Apollo. And whereas you only prove the Antecedent, you do nothing but beat the
air, and proceed ab ignorantia elenchi.

Secondly, It is repugnant to the power, which the holy Ghost in Scripture has
conferred upon inferior Judges. It is clear from the Book of God, that the
Lord investeth inferior Judges with power to execute judgment on all, without
respect of persons, and commands them to do so. And consequently they are
invested with power, to execute judgment on Kings themselves. But if the power
of the King were absolute and above Law, then that power which the holy Ghost
in Scripture conferreth on inferior Judges, is altogether unlawful, and in
vain.

Royallists start much at this Argument. They talk much against it, and I wot
not what. Because Salmasius speaks most against it, we shall firstly begin
with him. This man plainly denies, inferior Judges to have any Authoritative
power over Kings. But because he is very large upon this matter, and for
preventing tediousness to the Reader, we shall therefore handle the whole
substance of that, which he replieth and objecteth against this Argument, in a
following Sub-section.

SUBSECT. I.
Salmasius his Opinion concerning the Power of Inferior Judges, examined, and
refuted.

THat we may in a methodick and square way, handle his opinion, and
conveniently meet with these things which he replieth against our second
Argument, we shall lay down his mind in these Propositions.

Propos. 1. The Jewish Sanhedrin had no power over the Kings of Israel, and
Judah.

That he may establish this Proposition, he takes this way to prove it:
Firstly, The people of Israel (says he) did seek a King to reign over them,
after the manner of the Nations. But all the Kings of the Nations in these
times were absolute, and not subject to Law: Ergo. The Proposition he proves
from 1. Sam. 8. The Assumption he takes for granted, saying, that the
Assyrians, whose Monarchy was at that time, when the Israelites sought a King
to reign over them, did not restrict their Kings within the bounds of Law.
Therefore Artabanus Persa much commends that Law, whereby the Persians
enacted, that the King should be honored as the image of GOD. Plut. in vit.
Themist. And Claudianus says, that they gave alike obedience to cruel and
tyrannous Kings. Yea, Otades calls Monarchy, that to which every thing is
lawful, unpunishably. Herodot. lib. 3. Then seeing the Persians succeeded to the
Medes, and the Medes to the Assyrians, who reigned at that time when the
Israelites did seek a King to reign over them, it appears that as the Persian
Monarchy, so likewise the Assyrian and Median Monarchies, were of an absolute
and arbitrary power. And Homer ( who lived, as some imagine, about that time
when the Israelites sought a King from Samuel to reign over them,) says, that
Kings are from Jupiter, and those do reign who get authority from the son of
Saturn. Whom he also calls (...), divine Kings, (...) trained up by Jupiter.
Therefore Kings in Homer's time, were not subject to Law. Defens. Reg. cap. 2.
and 5.

Ans. Both the Propositions of this Gentleman's Argument seem very strange to
us. As for the first Proposition we do not deny it: for the people of Israel
said to Samuel, -- Now make us a King to judge us like all the Nations, 1. Sam.
8. But it do h not follow, Ergo, make us an absolute King, as the Nations about
us have. 1. Because Moses, Deuteronomy. 17. by the Spirit of prophecy foretells
their seeking of a King after the manner of the Nations. But it is evident,
that Moses there does only prophecy of their seeking a King after the manner
of the Nations, i. e. that as the Nations about had Kings over them, so they
might have a King over them in like manner: for both Deuteronomy. 17. and 1. Sam. 8.
the words are general. In neither of these it is said, Make us an absolute king
after the manner of the Nations. The words admit a twofold sense; and so they
may either signify, As other Nations have Kings, so make us a King. This sense
we allow; or, as other Nations have absolute Kings, so make us an absolute
King. This sense we deny; And so, this is a fallacy, either ab Homonymia, or a
figura dictionis. (2.) We may as well conclude from these words, after the
manner of the Nations, that the people of Israel did seek a non-absolute and
regulated King: for at that time there were Kings of the Nations, who were
regulated according to Law. We read, that Priamus was not only withstood by his
own subjects who did steal Helena, but also what he did in the matter of
Helena's away-taking, was according to the advice and counsel of Senators,
whom Paris with his Accomplices did overawe, Dict. Cret. de bello Tro. lib. 1.
And it is observable, that Agamemnon and Palamedes, though the Kings of Kings
were subjected to Law. So story Dictys Cretensis, Dares Phrygius, Homer and
Aristotle. Which was at that time, when the Jews did seek a King to reign over
them. Yea then the Egyptian Kings were subjected to Law. Diod. Sic. Rer. Ant.
l. 2. c. 3. And it is also evident, that at this time the Athenian Monarchy was
not absolute. So Heraclid. de polit. (...). Diod. Sic. lib. 5. c. 5. Moreover,
we do not imagine, but there were many other Monarchies at that time, which
were not arbitrary and of an illimited power. We might prove this at length; if
it were not both tedious and needless. But Salmasius himself acknowledges,
that then all the Kingdoms of the Orient were of a limited power, regulated
(...). And for proof of this he cites Aristotle, pol. lib. 3. c. 10. and 11.
(3.) The people of Israel did seek a King under very fair pretenses. They not
only alleged, that Samuel was unfit because of his years, to govern them,
according to Law and reason, but also they pleaded for a King from the tyranny
of Samuel's sons, and their non-governing according to justice and equity. Then
tell me, would they ever have sought a King, that he might govern them
according to his pleasure, whether to tyrannize over them, or not? Thus they
should not only have palpably contradicted themselves, but also they should
have cut off from themselves these pretenses, whereby they urged their purpose
in seeking a King. (4.) To say, that the people of Israel did seek an absolute
King, is to militat directly against these ends which they propounded to
Samuel, and set before their eyes in seeking a King. The ends are three. 1. To
judge them. 2. To conduct them. 3. To fight for them, and defend them from
their enemies. These three particular ends do abundantly evidence, that they
did not seek a King to govern them, after the manner of the Nations, whether
according to Law, or contrary to it, but that they sought a King to govern
them, only according to Law and reason. I am sure, the second and third end
imply no less. And if you say, that the first end may take along with it a
judging, whether according or contrary to Law, we do easily obviat this
difficulty. (1.) Because you shall not find in Scripture, where judging is
taken for an act of injustice and tyranny. And the Holy Ghost in Scripture
expounds judgment, calling it justice, 2. Sam. 8. (2.) Had the people of
Israel sought a King to judge them, whether according to justice or injustice,
then their arguments whereby they enforced their purpose in seeking a King, had
been altogether useless. Samuel happily might have said to them, I see now ye do
praevaricate in this matter, your profession is altogether vain, in declaring
your selves sensible of my weakness and inability for judging you according to
justice and equity, and of the corruption and iniquity of my sons, in
perverting righteous judgment. Away (might Samuel have said) this is nothing
but words. Whereas ye seek a King to judge you, whether according to Law or
not, ye contradict your own profession, and give your selves the lie to your
face. Yea, Salmasius himself does acknowledge, that they did not seek a King to
tyrannize over them, and to rule contrary to Law and reason, Def. Reg. c. 2.
But mark how the man straight-wayes gives himself the lie: For (says he) they
did not deprecat nor abominat an unjust King, wicked, violent, ravenous, and
suchlike as use to be among the Nations, though most wicked, Ibid. We demand
at this Gentleman, whether or not they did positively seek such a King as that,
to reign over them? If he affirm it, then they sought a tyrannous King to reign
over them. And so he belieth himself. If he deny it, then it follows, that in
even-down terms they sought no King but one who would judge them in
righteousness. But this Royallist will have them positively to seek an
absolute King to reign over them. Then tell me, how can this agree with these
pretenses whereupon they sought a King, to wit, to reform their Commonwealth,
and to banish corruption out of Judgment-seats? and because Samuel was not able
to perform this (as they alleged) therefore they sought a King. But Samuel
might have said to them in seeking an absolute King, ye seek a remedy worse
then the disease. Such a King whom ye seek, having power to govern at random,
according to his pleasure, will not be a fit man to redress the enormities of
your Estate. He may well aggravat the burdens under which ye now groan, but he
will not lessen them, and ease you of your burden. Be sure, ye will get few or
no good Kings, but ye will have many bad, who having a vast power, will make
you groan under their yoke. So then (might Samuel have said) ye can no ways
pretend a sense in you of the want of the exercise of righteous judgment, and
of corruption and enormity in the Judges. Ye scorn your selves to enforce your
purpose therefrom in seeking a King, whenas in seeking an absolute King, ye
forthwith give your selves the lie, and undermine your own grounds. Again, if
positively (as is manifest from these ends above-written) they sought no King
to reign over them, but such who would govern them according to Law and reason;
then is it more then apparent, that positively they sought a regulated and
non-absolute King to reign over them: for, as governing according to judgment
and righteousness, is done according to Law and reason, so it can never
absolutely be performed, unless the governing power be absolutely hemmed in by
Law, and regulated thereby. Now, the absolute ends which the Israelites did set
before their eyes in seeking a King, do resolve upon governing according to
judgment and righteousness. And I would fain know of this man, how he can
conclude this consequence,

The people of Israel did seek a King, to govern them according to judgment and
righteousness:

Ergo, they did seek an absolute King, and did not deprecat the greatest of
tyrants.

Verily the consequence, at least virtually, is repugnant to the Antecedent:
for, in so far as they seek a just and righteous King, fit to govern them
according to Law and reason, in as far they abominat an absolute King, one in a
capacity of tyrannizing over them. Thus you see, that the people of Israel do
neither positively nor negatively, seek an unjust and tyrannous King to reign
over them.

We hasten now to the Assumption. And we observe, that the man contradicts
himself in it: for he says not only, cap. 5. but also cap. 2. that there were
many Kings of the Nations at that time subject to Law. And for proof of this,
he cites Aristotle, Pol. l. 3. c. 10. and 11. Diod. Sic. l. 2. But as a man
awaking out of his wine he recalleth to his memory, what has escaped him, and
labors to correct it. And so he adds, that though Diodore storieth, that
the Kings of Egypt were subjected to Law, yet do we never read (says he) that
ever any of them was cut off and beheaded by the inferior judges. And though
Aristotle (quoth he) says that all the Oriental Kings did govern (...), yet
notwithstanding they did rule with an absolute power, though more remisly then
did other Kings. Def. reg. c. 5. and 8. Albeit this man does not admit a
plenary and full subjection of Kings to Law, yet nevertheless he is constrained
by force of example, to acknowledge, that Kings were some way or other kept
under the power and reverence of Law. And he cannot deny but Diodore storieth
of a most wonderful subjection of the ancient Egyptian Kings to Law. He
tells us, that they were subjected to Law in their eating and drinking, lying
and rising: yea, in preserving their health they were restricted to Law. And
which (says he) is more admirable, they had not power, to judge, to gather
Money together, nor to punish any through pride or anger, or any other unjust
cause. And yet (says Diodore) they took not this in an evil part, but thought
themselves happy to be subjected to Law. I trow, this is far from Salmasius his
cui quod libet licet. He will have the King above Law, not subject to any Law.
But the Egyptians will have their Kings under the Law, and subject to it. And
though this immodest man does say, That the Egyptians notwithstanding did not
cut off any of their Kings, yet catches he nothing thereby. (1) Because the
Egyptian Kings, as Diodore tells us, were most observant of the Laws.
Therefore he says, Plurimi regum, the greatest part of their ancient Kings
lived blamelesly, and died honorably. Rer ant. l. 2. c. 3. But I believe that
Law cannot strike against the innocent. It Is iniquity to kill a man, who
deserves not death. Diodore tells us of three things, which made the ancient
Egyptian Kings to walk closely, and keep themselves within bounds. Firstly,
their ways were narrowly hedged-in by Law. Secondly, they were always
attended with the Sons of the Noble and Chief-Priests, whose eyes were always
fixed on them. Thirdly, Kings that walked not straightly, as nothing was
proclaimed in their lifetime to their praise, but to their discredit; so in
their death they wanted the honor of solemn and sumptuous burials, which were
given to good Kings, after their death. The fear of this, hedged-in their
ways, and made them stand in awe. (2) We deny not, but Diadore in that same
place insinuates, there were many evil ancient Egyptian Kings. Yet we say not,
tyrannous, as Salmasius would have it: for we do not think, that though many of
their Kings were wicked in themselves, they got liberty to tyrann ze over the
People. The Egyptian Laws were more strict then that they would dispense such a
liberty to any of their Kings. Diodore says, they were tied to the Law no less
then private men. And withal he says, their Judges were most impartial, and
could not be bought-by, either by favor or gain. Which makes us imagine, that
they hemmed-in the ways of the most dissolute King amongst them, and did not
give him liberty to tyrannize over the People. Therefore it is very observable
that Amasis getting power in his hands, did tyrannize over the Egyptians: Whose
tyranny the Egyptians did tolerate, so long (as Diodore says) as they wanted
the opportunity of punishing him, till Actisanes King of Ethiopia came down
into Egypt. And then (says the story) the Egyptians called to mind old
quarrels against Amasis, and falling from him to Actisanes, they unkinged him,
and set-up Actisanes in his room, who governed them most gently and amicably.
Rer. ant. l. 2. c. 1. (3) Let it be so, many of the Egyptian Kings in old did
tyrannize over them, and they, notwithstanding, were not punished, and cut off
by the People and inferior Judges. What then? That will never conclude their
unwillingness and unreadiness to execute judgment on their tyrannous Kings, but
that they wanted opportunity and power to do such a thing. So it went (as is
said already) with the People and inferior Judges under Amasis tyrannous yoke.
But so soon as they got the opportunity, they verified the old Maxim, Quod
differiur, non aufertur. Yea, Diadore tells us, That the People did withstand
the Priests and those, who withheld honorable and solemn burials from the bad
Egyptian Kings in old. Which affords us matter to aver, That if the inferior
Judges in Egypt did not execute judgment on their wicked and tyrannous Kings,
it was not because they were unready to do so, but because the People were
refractory thereto. No question, they would much more have withstood the
off-cutting of their Kings, then the want of solemnities at their death: for
what is it, I pray you, that draws People on to act and engage for their
Princes, but because they take them up in the notion of half-gods, and far
above the teach of ordinary men? Whereupon they conclude, that both their
Persons and Authority are altogether inviolable. They dote so much upon them,
that they think they should in no terms be resisted, far less cut off and
punished according to their deserts. This, daily experience teaches. Therefore
the People of Egypt would far more have withstood the inferior Judges in
cutting-off their Kings, then in denying them sumptuous and stately burials for
their offenses. (4) It is easy to be learned from Diadore, that the Egyptians
esteemed the want of honorable burials to their Kings more then any punishment
could have been inflicted upon them. Know this, they were a most superstitious
People, tainted with a world of blind zeal. And withal (as Diadore stor^eth)
the fear of the want of honorable and solemn burials provoked their Kings to
live circumspectly, and keep themselves within bounds. Whereupon we conclude,
That both King and People, thought no punishment more capital, and more
hurtful to the King, then the want of an honorable burial. And so the
inferior Judges imagined, that in withholding from tyrannous Kings sumptuous
and stately burials, they executed more judgment upon them, then if they should
have brought them to the Scaffold, and cause strike the heads from them.
Therefore if Salmasius shall not admit the third Reason, (which though it be
true in general, yet not in this particular case, as is most probable, though
not demonstrative) he must needs confess, that the Praetors of Egypt, not only
in their apprehension, but also in the up taking both of the King and People,
acted more against some tyrannous King or other, in depriving him of an
honorable and sumptuous burial after his death, then the Representative of
England did in bringing King Charles to the Scaffold, and causing his head to
be cut off.

As for that which Salmasius says, alleging that Aristotle says, that the
Oriental Kings in old did not simply govern (...), according to Law. Well, let
it be so. If they were any ways subjected to Law, as Aristotle in even-down
terms confesses they were, it is far from Salmasius his cui quod libet licet.
Qui legibus solutus est. Yea, and (which is more) Aristotle says, That the
very government of the Heroes was (...), according to Law, and in some things
their power was determinat, and not absolute. This is far from Salmasius his
mind, who will have the King to be of an infinite and illimited power. The man
would have a care, that he do not speak blasphemy and knows not of it. I take
infinacy in power to be only proper to GOD. And it is not good to abuse it, in
applying it to the creature. Howsoever, I heartily subscribe to what Aristotle
says concerning the Oriental Kings. I do not think but in old, as namely, in,
and about the days of the Heroes, Kings, as Gods, were adored by men. But
Salmasius must give me leave to say, that even then Kings were punished by the
People. We read how the heroic Theseus was banished by the Athenians. Val.
Max. l. 5. c. 3. Diod. Sic. rer. ant. l. 5. c. 5. Plut. in These. I do not deny,
but as these Historiographers report, as likewise Heraclid de Pol. Ath. Theseus
before that time had restored liberty to the Subject, and had put Power in the
People's hand. It is also reported, that Agamemnon the King of Kings, was
thrust from his Charge, because he would not suffer his eldest Daughter to be
sacrificed to satisfy the fury of Diana, for the Roe which he killed feeding
about her grove. Dict. Cret. l. 1. That of Theseus, and of Agamemnon were done
about the time the Children of Israel did seek a king to reign over them. We
might also here allege examples of other ancient kings, who were brought into
subjection to the sentence of inferior judges. But we pass them as not
beseeming the purpose in hand: for they are relative to after-ages, of latter
years then what Aristotle speaks of. Yet we find one example or two more then
what we have alleged already, answering to this purpose. It is reported that
Sardanapalus, because of his beastliness and sensuality, was dethroned by his
Subjects. Arist. Pol. l. 5. c. 10. Metasth. an. Pers. lib. Just. l. 1. Diod.
Sic. l. 3. c. 7. Miltiades was incarcerated by the Athenians, and died in
prison. Val. Max. l. 5. c. 3. Aemil. Prob. in vit. Milt. Plut. in vit. Cim.
Albeit he was not the Athenian king, yet was he their great General, and
crowned king of Chersonesus. Herod. l. 6. Aem. Prob. in vit. Mil. It is
needless to examplifie this any more; for afterward it shall be showed by
multiplied examples, how that kings in all ages have been brought to the Stage,
and punished by the People.

Therefore Salmasius shall do well, not to imagine, that in old times all Kings
were absolute, and the inferior Judge did not sit upon the Bench against any
of them. And for my self, I do not deny, but in old, Kings were of a vast and
absolute power, though I cannot be moved to think that either all of them were
absolute, or any of them so absolute as Salmasius dreameth of. But more of this
afterward. And, I do also think, that the Assyrian Monarchy, caeteris paribus,
was in itself rather more, then less absolute, then either the Median, or the
Persian; though by some accidental occurrents, as afterward shall appear, it
was not. Indeed it had the first start of them, and was in the time wherein
Royal Power was more in request then either before or after. This makes
Aeschylus to call the king of the Argives, (...), a governor that may not be
judged. At this time the Inachides did reign: whose kingdom began about the
reign of Baleus, the eight king of the Assyrians. Herod. lib. 1. Diod. Sic.
rer. ant. lib. 6. cap. 14. compared with Beros. ant. lib. 5. ARAL VII. BAL.
VIII. MAM XVI. SPAR. XVII, and Xenoph. de aequiv. PHOR. And as for Homer, I do
not doubt but the man idolized Kings. But in the interim you will be pleased to
give me leave to say, that it follows not: Homer calls kings, Divine, and
such who are educated and brought-up by Jupiter: Ergo Homer opinionateth, that
they were absolute and subjected to none but to GOD. He tells us, that
Agamemnon, in a convention of the general Persons of the Army, was greatly
upbraided. Iliad. 9. And yet he calls him, a king begotten of Jupiter, and
trained-up by him. And, it is very well known, that Agamemnon was not an
absolute King over the Grecian Princes: for both Dict. Cret. lib. 1. and Dar.
Phr. de exc. Tro. lib. report, that Agamemnon was put from his Office, and
Palamedes chosen in his room. See also Arist. Pol. lib. 3. cap. 10. I stand not
here to dispute at what time Homer lived, but leave it arbitrary to the Reader,
either to follow Archil. lib. de temp. who says, that he lived in his time,
an. D. after the destruction of Troy. Or Herod. de vit. Hom. who says, that he
lived, CLXVIII after the Trojan battle. Yet one thing I may determine on, that
Homer calls those kings of the nations, who lived about the time wherein the
People of Israel did seek a king to reign over them, (...). And whatever be
Homer's meaning in these words, yet I am not of another opinion, but do think
that he was much, if not all the way for absolute Monarchy. The temper of his
times did lead him that far on. But though I subscribe to this, yet will it
never therefrom follow, that all the Kings of the Nations at that time, when
the People of Israel did seek a King to reign over them, were absolute and not
subject to law. This we have made good already.

Secondly: While as Samuel taught the Jews, of what temper kingly-government
is, lest afterward they should pretend ignorance of the power and right of the
king, he plainly declares unto them, That he might do any thing, without fear
of punishment, not subject to any but to GOD. Salmas. def. reg. cap. 5. Friend,
this is rather said, then proved. But afterward, nolis, velis, we shall
evidence, That Samuel thought no such thing.

Thirdly: If Kings had been subjected to the Sanhedrin, and ought to have been
arraigned before it, either to have been accused or condemned, then had there
been no difference between the Judges and the Kings of the Jews. But the
latter is false: Ergo. This is Salmasius his great gun. And for proof of the
Major he says, The Judges of the people of Israel did judge, led forth their
Armies, made Laws, executed judgment, and did exercise all other suchlike
functions which are exercised by Kings. Therefore unless the Kings of the
Jews had been unliable to the Sanhedrin, there had been no difference between
the Judges and the Kings of Israel. The Assumption he makes it good thus: It
had been altogether in vain (says he) to have changed the government of the
Judges into the government of Kings, if they had been both one. Thus the
difference had only been in name, and not in reality, Def. Reg. cap. 5. But
the man cap. 2. proves the Assumption more largely and most pertinently. There
(says he) the Judges amongst the people of the Jews were subject to the
Sanhedrin. And so he says, the Judges amongst the Jews were like the Consuls
among the Carthaginians and Romans. They were called in the Hebrew (...)
Sophetim Whence the Paenans derive the word Suferes. Now, the Judges in the
Senate of Carthage were called Sufetes. And Festus observes, that Sufetes in
the Punick language signifies and denotateth a Consul. And out of Caelidus he
cites these words: Senatus censuit referentibus Sufetis. So the Roman Consuls
referred to the Senate, and the Senate judged of their refer. Therefore seeing the
Judges of Israel were but like Consuls who were subject to the Senate (as the
case was amongst the Carthaginians and Romans,) they were not of a kingly
power, but subject to the Sanhedrin, though they retained the government so
long as they lived, whereas the Roman Consuls, and Carthaginian Sufetes, were
only but yearly Magistrates. And this is further cleared from the Holy Ghost's
contradistinguishing, Judge. 9. the government of Abimelech, (who took upon him
a kingly government) from the government of the rest of the Judges. Yea, the
Israelites, Judge. 8. offered to Gideon that same power over them, which his son
Abimelech usurped. This was a kingly government that they offered to him. Which
Gideon refused. And yet nevertheless he was a Judge. And consequently if both
Judges and Kings amongst the people of Israel had one and the same power, not
only the people of Israel had offered to Gideon, no new power, but what he had
before, but also Gideon had refused to enjoy that power which actually he did
enjoy.

Ans. We heartily subscribe to the Minor, and do much cry-up Salmasius in the
probation thereof. I wish the man were as solid and pertinent in all the rest,
as in that. Yet I crave his leave to deny the Major. And I think, I have good
reason to do so: for he only differenceth absolute Kings from Judges, imagining
that none properly can be a King essenitally distinct from a judge, but he who
is absolute and unlyable to the Law. He far mistaketh the point. It is one
thing to be an absolute King, not subject to the Sanhedrin and Senate, and
another thing to be a non-absolute King and subject to Law. And yet both are
properly and univocally King. The non-absolute King is essentially differenced
from the Sophet or Sufet, the Judge, because he is major singulis, but minor
universis in synedrio. But the Judge is but of equal authority with the rest of
his colleagues in the Senate, though because of his eminency and personal
endowments, he may praeside and be as a leading man amongst the rest. Such was
the case of the kings and Judges amongst the Jews, as afterward shall be
showed. There are some accidental differences also between the Judges amongst
the people of the Jews and their kings, as namely, 1. The Judges were in a
most special, immediate, and extraordinary manner, designed and appointed by
GOD himself, to govern his people. Kings were not so, if we look to them in an
ordinary way, and for the most part. 2. The Judges of Israel had no hereditary
power and government over them. Such had their kings. 3. The kings of Israel
both in their ordination and afterward, were attended with prodigal, sumptuous
and Royal Dignities, which were denied to their Judges. And whereas Salmasius
essentially distinguishes Melech a king, from Sophet a Judge, because the one
is of an absolute power, and the other is not, he shall do well to advert, that
he lose not more this way then he gains: for so he puts the essential
frame of the king in an absolute and uncircumscribed power. But in our first
argument against this, we have showed the incongruity and absurdity thereof.
Which afterward shall more appear from what is spoken, as follows.

Fourthly: There can be no example alleged in the Book of God, whereby is
pointed-out the subjection of Kings to Law. We read not, that ever the
Sanhedrin, or the people of the Jews did punish Kings for their faults. And yet
many of their Kings were most guilty of many great and criminal faults, as
namely David and Solomon. Def. Reg. cap. 5.

Ans. This argument is like the first. Both of them speak much de facto, but
nothing de jure. This is a very bad consequence: The people of Israel sought an
absolute King to reign over them, and did set-up such a King over them: Ergo
the power of an absolute King is lawful, and Kings de jure are not subject to
Law. Friend, you break-off too soon. Though I should grant you the Antecedent,
yet before I can approve the validity of the consequence, you must prove the
validity of their practice. You count your reckoning too soon, whileas you thus
conclude: There is no practice in Scripture holding-out to us that the Jewish
Sanhedrin did ever execute judgment, on any of their Kings, who transgressed
the Law, and did violate it: Ergo Kings are not subject to Law. What if I
should grant the Antecedent? You have notwithstanding to prove the lawfulness
of their non-executing judgment on their kings who transgressed, before I can
at any time subscribe to the consequence. Philosophs know (though many
Humanists do not) that a facto ad jus non statim valet consequentia, Aye, they
can tell you, that argumentum negativum nihil concludit. Well, as I deny your
consequence, so I do not admit your Antecedent. I illustrate the vanity of it
from examples in Scripture, both ordinary and extraordinary. Ordinary]
Jehojadah in the face of the Assembly commanded to fall upon Athaliah, and kill
her, 2 Kings 11. 2 Chronicles. 23. And though you shall deny this practice as
concluding any thing against your purpose, yet I pray you, what can you say of
that practice in killing Amasiah? We have showed elsewhere, that such a thing
was done in a Public and legal way. Extraordinary] The Prophets rebuked the
Kings of Israel and Judah for their faults and transgressions. And what is
rebuke but a degree of punishment? And so Kings not having immunity from the
lesser degree of punishment, why are they not also liable to the greater,
according to their delinquency? Magis and minus non variant speciem. Yea, Jehu
executing the purpose of the Lord on the house of Ahab, slew both the King of
Israel and the King of Judah, 2 King. 9. and withal he caused cut off all the
sons of Ahab, 2 King. 10. O, but you will say, These practices of the Prophets
and of Jehu were extraordinary. And then; It is a very bad Argument: The
Apostles preached by the extraordinary instinct of the Spirit: Ergo Ministers,
who have nothing but an ordinary spirit, should not preach. So, it does not
follow: The Prophets and Jehu acted against delinquent kings through an
extraordinary call thereto: Ergo those, who have nothing but an ordinary call
thereto, should not do so. It may be you will say, The People can have no
ordinary call, to act against their kings. Be not mistaken. (1) Extraordinary
things supply the room of ordinary things, whileas they are wanting. So Samuel
killed Agag, because Saul, the ordinary Judge, was wanting in his duty. 1 Samuel
15. (2) At least it follows, that the same thing, which is done
extraordinarily, may also be done lawfully in an ordinary way. Otherwise many
absurdities and blasphemies should follow. (3) Dato uno oppositorum datur and
alterum. And consequently seeing there is an extraordinary call for punishing
Kings, there is also an ordinary call for doing it. The reason of this is,
because esse extraordinariae vocationis is so called, and is so in itself,
because it stands in opposition to esse ordinariae vocationis, as we have
showed at length, curs. Philosophico-theolog. disp. 4. Sect. 6. And therefore
there can be no extraordinary call for punishing Delinquent Kings, unless
there be also an ordinary call for doing so. (4) Punishing of delinquent Kings
either in itself is sinful and unlawful, or not. If sinful and unlawful,
then neither ordinarily, nor extraordinarily may Kings lawfully be punished:
for no sin can be committed by an extraordinary Divine providence. Otherwise
God should extraordinarily sin. But we have showed already, that Kings may be
punished by virtue of an extraordinary call. And consequently, it is not a sin
in itself, to punish delinquent Kings. If lawful and unsinfull, I see no
reason why a thing which is in itself lawful and honest, may not lawfully be
done, by ordinary as well as by extraordinary midses: for either the exercise
of ordinary midses is in it self lawful, or not. None, I am sure, will say,
that the exercise of ordinary midses is unlawful, Otherwise every thing that
is done ordinarily, is done sinfully. Which to say, is absurd. And if you say
that the exercise of them in it self is lawful, then it is lawful in it self
by virtue of an ordinary call, to punish delinquent Kings. But if there be any
fault and escape in the way and manner of employing that call that no whit
hinders, but the call in it self is lawful and commendable: for such things
are merely extrinsecall to the nature of the call itself. And ab extrinseco,
ad intrinsecum, non est sequela. (5) Jehu and the Prophets, had no other
reasons for them in speaking and acting by virtue of an extraordinary call
against delinquent Kings, but what those may have in proceeding against them,
by virtue of an ordinary call. They no otherwise proceeded against them by
virtue of their extraordinary call, but as it was for the good of the LORD's
People, and for executing Justice on their delinquency, that others might learn
not to offend. But sure we are, such grounds are competent to an ordinary call,
for proceeding against delinquent Kings. And it is an undoubted maxim, Idem est
jus, ubi eadem est ratio juris.

Inst. That example concerning Athaliah (says Salmasius) deserves not an
answer: for (says he) she usurped the kingdom, and killed the whole Royal
Family. And so there was less executed against her, then she deserved. And
withal according to the Jewish Laws, it was not permitted to women to sway
the Scepter, and sit on the Throne: for it is not said Deuteronomy. 17. Thou shall set
a Queen over thee, but a King over thee, Def. Reg. cap. 4.

Ans. That the example concerning Athaliah very much concludes our purpose, we
argue thus: E^ther Athaliah had the right and authority of a King, or not. If
she had the right and authority of a King, ergo if the King be of an absolute
power, and not subject to Law, then Athaliah was no more subject to Law then
any other King: for as Salmasius, and all Royallists will have it, the King is
of an absolute power, and not subject to Law. And consequently, Athaliah being
invested with the right of a Kingly power and authority, she was no more
subject to Law, then any other of the Kings of Judah. Therefore if you say that
Athaliah was invested with the right and authority of a King, you must either
commend the practice of Jehojadah and the people in killing her, or else you
must change your opinion, and not imagine Kings to be absolute, and not subject
to Law. If she had not the right and authority of a King, then either because
she usurped the Kingdom, and intruded her-self upon it, contrary to the consent
of the People, or because she did cut off the righteous heirs of the Kingdom,
and set up her-self in the Kingdom, or else because according to the Law women
ought not to govern. Not the first, because according to the Doctrine of
Royallists, conquest is a lawful title to the Crown. But Athaliah conquered
the Crown of Judah to her-self. What more I pray you, did she in intruding
her-self upon the Kingdom of Judah, then unjust Conquerers do, in thrusting
themselves in upon the kingdoms which they subdue? As she intruded her-self,
without the free consent and election of the People, so do they. And yet
Salmasius, with the rest of his Brethren, will have such Conquerers lawful
heirs, and absolute kings over these kingdoms, which they subdue. Nor can you
say the second, because conquerers, who subdue other men's kingdoms, cut off
all those who by pretended blood-right, claim a title to the Crown. And yet
Royallists will have such lawful heirs, and absolute kings over these
kingdoms, to which they have no title but the sword. Nor can you say the third,
because all Royallists admit Royal birth, a just and absolute title to the
Crown. But women no less then men may be and are of the Royal Offspring. And
consequently, if the doctrine of Royallists be true, and unless Salmasius will
contradict himself, women may as lawfully govern as men: Therefore it does not
follow, that because Athaliah was a woman, she had not right to govern the
People of the Jews, and reign over them. I confess, by Royal birth she had no
title to the Crown. But she conquered the Crown to her-self, and did reign six
years with the consent of the People. But sure I am, Salmasius and all the
Royall^sts, as they hold the consent of the People, as a necessary ingredient
to make-up the lawfulness of the title to the Crown, so they maintain conquest
without all exception, to be a just and lawful title thereto But what need I
thus to stand? do not I know that Salmasius and the whole nation of Royalists
will have the formal and essential being of the King to consist in an
absolute and illimited power? But any person, whether man or woman, usurper or
non-usurper, is capable of such a power, and may be invested therewith. And
consequently, though Atha^iah was but a woman, and an usurper, it does not
follow, that because she was such, therefore she was not of an absolute and
arbitrary power. The greatest of Tyrants, and the worst of women, is capable of
such a power. And the power is not changed, because of the change of the
person, and of such and such qualifications in him. Such things are merely
extrinsecal to the nature of the power itself. So then, if the King be
formally a King, because he is of an illimited and arbitrary power; I see no
reason why Athaliah did not reign as a King: for she was capable of such a
power, wherein, according to the doctrine of Royallists, the essential frame
of a King does consist. And consequently, seeing she did reign in stead of the
King of Judah, and exercised his authority, there is no reason why she was not
absolute and unsubject to Law, as well as he. Therefore Salmasius must either
leave-off his opinion, and not imagine that the Kings of Judah were absolute
and not subject to Law, or else he must cry-down the laudable practice of
Jehojadah, and of the People, in killing Athaliah. For shame he will not do
this.

Propos. 2. Except the Lacoedemonian kingdom, there was no kingdom in old,
wherein absolute and uncircumscribed Monarchy was not erected, though in some
more remiss, and in others more intense.

For proof of this Salmasius shows, what was the condition of Monarchy in the
Assyrian, Egyptian, Jewish, Median, Persian, Grecian, and Roman kingdoms. Of
the Jewish kingdom we have spoken already, and more of it afterward in a more
convenient place. As for the Assyrian kingdom, together with the Median, he
proves, that kings in them were absolute and un-subject to Law, because such
was the condition of the kings of Persia. This he makes good from Ottanes the
Persian, who defines Monarchy to be that, to which every thing is lawful,
unpunishably. Herod. lib. 3. Yea, Artabanus averreth, That no Law amongst the
Persians was more commendable then that whereby they enacted, that the King
should be honored as the Image of God. Plut. in vit. Themist. And Claudian
says, That they gave a like obedience to cruel and tyrannous Kings. Therefore
(says Salmasius) seeing the Medians succeeded to the Assyrians, and the
Persians to the Medians; it appears, that as the Kings of Persia, so the
Kings of Assyria and Media, were absolute, and not subject to Law. And though
the Egyptian Kings, before they were subdued by the Persians, were hemmed-in by
the bonds of Law in every thing that they did, yet notwithstanding, we never
read that at any time they brought any of their Kings upon the stage, and
caused them to suffer for their Delinquencie. They did bear the yoke of two
cruel tyrants (Busiris and Cambyses) most patiently without reluctancie. Which
Cambyses, because of his cruelty, the Jews called Nebuchodonozor. He desired in
marriage his german sister: and so calling a Council, he demanded at his
Counselors, if there was any Law in Persia which did permit such a marriage.
They desirous to gratify their King, told him, That they found a Law whereby
the King of Persia was permitted to do any thing he pleased. Herod. lib. 3. As
for the Grecian Empire, it is known (says Salmasius) that Agamemnon had an
absolute power over that Army, which be led on against the Trojans. And
therefore he is called Rex Regum. And Aeschylus calls the King of the
Argives, (...), an uncensurable Governor. So Homer calls the Grecian Kings,
Kings made by Jupiter, reigning by, and holding their Crown of him. He calls
them, (...), divine Kings, trained up by Jupiter Philip says, that the King
has equal power with GOD. Diogenes, in lib. de Reg. writes, that the King is
just so in respect of the Commonwealth, as GOD is in respect of the Universe.
And so, as GOD has power over the whole world, in like manner the King has
power on earth. In like manner Ecphantas calls it a thing proper to the King,
to govern himself, and to be governed by none. Lastly, he stepeth-in to show,
how that the Roman Kings of old were of a vast and arbitrary power. Romulus
(says Tacitus) governed the Romans as he pleased. Pomponius writes, that
Kings at the beginning of Rome had all poor. Dio says, they are unsubject to
any Law. Plutarch and Justinian, will have the Laws subjected to them. Which
makes Severus and Attoninus to say, Licet legibus soluti simus, attamen
legibus vivimus, Instit. lib. 2. tit. 17. Plinius in his Panegyricks says to
Trojanus, that he subjecteth himself to the Laws. And yet, as Dio says, he had
power to do every thing by himself, to command both himself, and the Laws to do
every thing that he would, and not do what he would not. And Salust says, that
to do every thing unpunishably, that is to be a King. Def. Reg. cap. 5.

Answ. I suppose, there is not plena enumeratio partium here. There were more
Kingdoms then what Salmasius has reckoned-up. Howsoever I shall do my
endeavor to find him out. And that I may take away the strength of all that he
objecteth, and leave not so much as the ground-stone thereof, I lay down these
following Conclusions.

Conclus. 1. Because of extraordinary heroicisme and gallantry of old, some
were of a simply vast and absolute power, and in nothing subject to Law.

This we make good from the condition of some Kings, both before and after the
Flood. Before the Flood, the point is clear. About the 500. year of Noah's age,
which was in the 1556. year of the world, Policy began to have some footing:
for then men began to follow after their own inventions and hearts desires; and
so men then a-dayes being of huge strength, and undaunted courage, given to
pleasure and renown, those amongst them, who by strength of hand could carry
the pre-eminence and precedence over others, no less performed it then
endeavored it. And Noah was five hundred years old, -- Genesis 5. There were
Giants in the earth in those days, and also after that when the sons of God
came-in unto the daughters of men, and they bear [children] unto them, the same
became mighty men, who [were] of old men of renown, Genesis 6. Hence mark these
two things. 1. That in the 500. year of Noah's age there were men of a
gigantine strength, mighty men, given to hard and warlike exploits, minding
their own honor and renown. 2. That such men lived at random, not subject to
law, nor under the command of any. Their extraordinary valor and desire of
renown led them on to rule, and not to be ruled. Therefore they took them wives
of all which they chose, Genesis 6. Their awless and lawles living, makes the
Lord say, My Spirit shall not always strive with man, -- Ibid. But the faithful
Historian, Berosus, gives us great clearness in this matter. He says that
before the Flood there was a City called Oenon, about L^banus, a receptacle of
Giants, who did reign over the whole world, from the Occident to the Orient.
These (says he) confiding in the vast strength and stature of their body,
having found Arms and Engines of war, oppressed all and governed according to
their pleasure. Antiq lib. 1.

After the Flood the first King we read of, is Nimrod; of whom it is said, And
Cush begat Nimrod, -- (...) And the beginning (or the head) of his Kingdom was
Babel and Erech, -- Genesis 10. This Nimrod the holy Ghost calls, a mighy one in
the earth, or the mighty hunter before the Lord, Genesis 10. i. e. a man
matchless, none like him in the earth for strength and gallantry. Because of
this he erected a kingdom, despising the comma^dment of Noah, Beros. ant. lib.
4. and disdaining to be in subjection, whether to God or man Joseph. ant. Jud.
lib. 1. cap. 5 his aspiring thoughts drew him on to build a Tower, that thereby
he might get himself a name to secure himself both before God and man. Genesis 11.
Phil. Jud. bibl. ant. lib. And Josephus in even-down terms tells us, that he
incited his followers to pride, and to the contemning of God, telling them that
their happiness did not depend from GOD, but from their own proper strength.
Whereupon at last he tyrannized and governed at random. Ant. Iud. lib. 1. cap.
5. To Nimrod succeeded Belus, to Belus Ninus, and to Ninus Semiramis in the
Kingdom of Assyria. Every one of which acted more then another for enlarging
their Empire. They subdued all, and ruled over all, libidine dominandi. Ber.
ant. lib. 5. Mnes. lib. 97. hist. Archil. lib. de temp. Fab. Pict. de aur. sec.
etc. lib. 1. Metast lib. de judic temp. and annal. Persic. Herod. lib. 1. and
3. Diod. Sic. rer. ant. lib. 3. cap. 1, 2, etc. And as amongst the Assyrians,
we find these four grand and matchless Heroes, who governed at random without
any subjection to Law, so we find amongst other Nations some also of that same
stamp. Amongst the Egyptians, Osiris, who succeeded to his Father, Chemesenuus
in the Kingdom of Egypt, commanding the whole earth, except these Nations and
Kingdoms that were under the Authority of Zames King of Assyria. In the eight
year of whose reign, Osiris returned into Egypt, with triumph over all the
Nations, beside what were under the jurisdiction of the Assyrian Empire. And as
Osiris did reign as an universal Monarch, so did his son Hercules, who
succeeded Osiris in the Kingdom, under the reign of Baleus, the eleventh King
over the Assyrians. Ber. ant. lib. 5. We read also of Simandius and Sesostris,
two Egyptian Kings, who subdued the whole world Herod. lib 2. Diod. Sic. rer.
ant. lib. 2. cap. 1. But it is very easy to prove from Berosus, that Simandius
is Osiris, and Sesostris is Hercules. Amongst the Libyans, Dionysius was the
great Heroes. Herodot, and Diodore report, that he subdued the world, and
conquered many Kingdoms by battle. And Berosus says, that Dionysius gave to
Osiris the Kingdom of Egypt. Albeit Herodot and Diodore, opinionate him to be a
Grecian, yet I rather incline to the judgment of Berosus, who says he was
begotten of Rhea, by Hammon, and became Jupiter to the Libyans, even as his
mother was the pretended Goddess of the Egyptians. Hesiodus, Marcianus, and
other Grecian Writers, hold him as a God, and allege him to have been begotten
of Semele, by Jupiter. Howsoever for valor and strength, he was a most
extraordinary person, and swayed many Kingdoms by his Scepter. Amongst the
Grecians we find namely two extraordinary Heroes, Hercules and Alexander M.
What great things were done by Hercules, and how he vanquished many Kings, and
subdued many Kingdoms, is clear from many grave Writers, Hesiod. scut. Herc.
Pindar. od. 1. and 7 Sophoc. Trach. Diod. rer. ant. lib. 5. cap. 2. Of him
Herodot, Theocritus, and others do write. The extraordinary valor and courage
of Alexander, Justin, Plutarch, Q. Curtius, and other grave Writers do
abundantly testify. I need not to stand here in a particular and exact way, to
prove that these Kings had an absolute immunity from Law, without all
restriction and reservation. But to satisfy the curious ear a little therein,
we shortly make it good thus. 1. These Kings came not to their Crowns, whether
by election, or succession. At least all that they commanded fell not to them,
either of these ways. They held the right to their Crown by their sword. And
so overruling all by force and strength of hand, they could be tied to no Law
by any civil sanction, but as they pleased voluntarily to subject their necks
to the yoke of Law. But as they delighted to overruled men, no question they
have thought it their glory to be likewise above the Law itself. I confess it
is very gatherable both out of Berosus and Diodore, that Osiris, and Hercules
the Egyptian, did live according to the Laws. Yet I do not think that it was
by command, but according to their own free and voluntary resignation. That
held true in them which the Roman Emperors speak of themselves, Licet legibus
soluti simus, attamen legibus vivimus. Instit. lib. 2. tit. 17. Indeed there is
great difference between a Kingly power had by succession, and election, and a
Kingly power obtained by conquest and sword-right. In an elective and
heriditary Crown, people have at least a Physical power, to bind the King to
them by Oath and Covenant. But the case is far otherwise between a conquered
people and the Conqueror. They have no power to tie him to them by Law. He may
put them all to the edge of the sword, if he will. And it is in his own
goodness whether to spare them, or square himself according to their Laws.
Experience teaches today what boundless power the Turk and the King of Spain
have over those Kingdoms to which they have no title, but sword-right.
Therefore it is no wonder though these grand and matchless Heroes had an
arbitrary and boundless power over the Kingdoms, which they conquered by
strength of hand. 2. The men themselves were esteemed and honored as Gods. And
so by proportion a GOD-like power was given unto them. Nimrod was called the
Babylonian Saturn, and Dionysius the Libyan Jupiter. The Assyrians hold Belus
and Ninus as Gods. The Egyptians worshipped Osiris and Hercules as Gods. So did
the Grecians honor Dionysius and Hercules as Gods. And Alexander thought no
shame to be called the son of Jupiter, and honored as a God. And as Ninus was
holden as Jupiter, amongst the Assyrians, so Semiramis was holden by them as
Juno, and worshipped as a Goddess. And what God-like titles Semiramis caused
put on and engrave upon the Pillar, she set upon Ninus, you may read it,
Xenoph. de aequiv. You may read also some specious and stately titles on some
of these Heroes, Herod. lib. Diod. rer. ant. lib. 2. cap. 1. All which serve to
point-out the boundlesnesse of their power. And withal in terminis we have
showed already, that Nimrod's power was most vaste and absolute. And so it
follows that Belus, Ninus and Semiramis, who succeeded him were rather more
then less absolute then he: for as every one of them enlarged their power
beyond another, so all of them extended their power beyond what Nimrod's power
did reach to. And of Belus, Berosus says in express terms, -- Coepit libidine
dominandi torqueri, -- of Ninus, -- Omnibus bellum intulit, nulli parcens, --
quod esset in omnium desiderio, omn^^di^ ad inten^^tum quaeritabat. -- Hic
omnium primus ex nostris regibu^ Babylonicum regnum propagavit, -- And of
Semiramis, -- haec ante^^ssit militia, tr^umphis, divi^iis, victoriis and
imperio omnes mortales. -- N^mo unquam huic foeminae comparandus est virorum,
tanta in ejus vitadicuntur, and scribuntur tum ad vituperationem, tum maxim ad
collandationem magnificam. Ant. lib. 5. It is both needless and infinite
labor for me to sum up the absolute and arbitrary actings of these grand
Heroes. I pass them over in silence, and do remit the Reader to spend his
brain a-little, if he be curious, upon these Histories above cited. Where he
shall find all made good that we speak of this purpose. 3. These Kings were not
only extraordinary men, and Kings, but also they were extraordinary Heroes.
They were even extraordinary amongst extraordinary men, being the chiefest of
all the Heroes. And so, seeing other Kings and Heroes were of an absolute and
arbitrary power, as afterward is showed, much more they. 4. It cannot be denied
but Alexander M. was of vaste and boundless power. 1. Because he commanded
Darius to write to him not only as to a King, but also as to his King. 2. He
gloried to be called the son of Jupiter, and to be holden more then a man. 3.
He despised Parmenio's counsel, and Darius his offer, disdaining that any
should govern but he alone. Whereupon Menstree says notably.

No, I will reign, and I will reign alone,
Disdaining to admit of more Commanders:
For as the heaven can hold no Sun but one,
The earth cannot contain two Alexanders.
4. Whileas a seditious tumult was raised in his Army, upon his march toward
the Occident, whereas no words would asswadge them, after a Speech had to his
Army, he did leap as a Lion from the Bench, amongst the midst of them, and with
his own hands, none daring to withstand him, took thirteen of his prime
Incendiaries, and delivered them up to his Guard. All which demonstrate the
absoluteness of Alexander's power. By undoubted consequence it follows, that
the rest of the foresaid Hereos were rather more then less absolute then he.
1. Because they were men, if not of g^^^er courage, at least of greater
strength then he. They lived in the flower of time, when strength and courage
were most in vigor. Indeed, in this they had the start far before Alexander.
2. Because Alexander himself esteems it honor and power enough to imitate
the ways and carriages of Heroes who went before him. Ad Herculis imitationem
me contuli, ad aemulandum Perseum me comparavi. Volo Liberi patris, mei
progenitoris, generisque mei proauctoris vestigia persequi. Plut. de fortu.
Alex.

Conclus. 2. Without all controversy those who firstly erected Kingdoms, and
planted Colonies, were of an absolute power, and altogether unsubject to Law.

For clearing the point, we shortly glance at some of these. In the tenth year
of Nimrod, Comerus Gallus erected a Kingdom in Italy, gathering a number of
people together, over whom he ruled as King, Ber. ant. lib. 5. Hence Myrsilus
says, that the Tyrrhenians do affirm, themselves to have their arisal from
Razenu^, Janus Vadymona's son. De Orig. It. and Tyr. lib. But Berosus clears
it, how the Italians had their arisal from Janus his son, saying, that having
left his daughter Grana Helerna, together with his son Cranus whose posterity,
to diff^r from the Aboriginists he called them Razenues, after his son Cranus
Razenuus. Long before this time Italy was inhabited by the posterity of Comerus
Gallus, and his Colonies. Myrsilus also tells us, that some do opinionate the
Tyrrhenians to have their arisal from the Lydians, saying, that A^ys King of
Maonia, begotten by Hercules upon the virgin Omphalis, daughter to Jardana
Queen of the Maeonians, begot two twins, to wit, Lydus and Tyrrhenus. But when
as one Kingdom could not contain them both, Atys commanding his son Tyrrhenus
to go from him, he forthwith went toward the Septentrional part of Tiber, and
there built Cities and Towns, calling them after his own name. But the Grecians
mistake this very far. Indeed, Hercules the Egyptian came into Italy, and built
Cities there, leaving his son Thuscus behind him to reign over them, Ber. ant.
lib. 5. And as Myrsilus says, the Thuscits only worshipped Jupiter and Juno.
So Osiris and Isis were called the parents of Hercules the Egyptian. Ber. ant.
lib. 5. Diod. rer. ant. lib. 1. cap. 2. That the Italians had their arisal from
the posterity of Noah, see M. Burc. Cat. ex lib. orig. fragm. Fab. Pict. de an.
saec. etc. lib. 1. Sempron. de divis. Ita. etc. In the twelfth year, of Nimrod,
Jubal gathering a number of Colonies together, erected a Satrape in Celtiber,
called Spain, and afterward planted other Colonies, called Sam^tes. In the
fifteenth year of his reign, Oceanus and Chemesenuus, with their Colonies,
erected a Kingdom in Egypt. In the eighteenth year, Gogus with his Colonies
inhabited Arabia felix, Triton Libya, Japet Atlaa-Africk, Cur Aethiopia, and
Getulis Getulia. In the twenty fifth. Thuyscon, with his Colonies, erected a
Kingdom at Sarmaria, and Masa, with the sons of Ister, erected Colonies from
the hill Adula unto Pontica Mesembria. In the thirty eighth, Saga with his
Armenian Colonies possessed all the region of Caspia, from Armenia unto
Bactria, and Janus translated the Janean Colonies unto Hyrcaria, as also the
Janilians unto Mesopotamia. In the fourteeth, some Colonies of the sons of
Gomer, erected a Kingdom in Bactria, and Ganges in India. In the third year of
Belus, Tyras erected a Kingdom in Thracia, Arcadius in Arcadia, and Aematnia,
or Macedonia. Yea, Phaeton, whom Porcius calls the first of all the Grecians,
erected a Kingdom in Italy, by emplacing Colonies therein, after he had
abandone Attica. Ber. ant. lib. 5. Porc. Cat. ex lib. orig. fragm. Janus
erected Colonies in Arabia felix, calling them ^anineans; and Camesennus in
Italy, calling them Montan aboriginists, An. Nin. 4. Yea Janus coming out of
Africa unto Celtiber-Hispania, emplaced, two Colonies, calling them Noelans,
and Noeglans. Berosus also reports, that Dardanus being gifted by Ato, with a
part of the Land of Maeonia, with his Colonies there erected the kingdom of
Dardani. An. Ascat. 41. About which time Tyrr^enus planted the Tyrrhenians to
Italy. Where also the Griphonians, and the Colonies of Phaeton were planted,
together with the Colonies of Auson. An. Aral. 8, 9, 10. and 49. And Armatr.
an. 20. Cydnus, and Eridanus erected the Kingdom of Ister in Italy. Ber. ant.
lib. 5.

In shall not be amiss for us, here to use a distinction. Some of these
forenamed Colonies were immediately planted after the flood, about the 150. year
thereafter. Such are these, who were planted under the reign of Nimrod, Belus,
and Ninus, or thereabout. Some of them were planted a long time after, while-as
all the Countries round about, where they took up their residence, were
aforehand planted. So the Tyrrhenians, Griphonians, Dardanians, Istenians, the
Colonies of Rhaeton and Auson, were planted. Indeed, I may say, that the heads
of the Colonies of both sorts, were absolute and of an arbitrary power. Yet I
cannot imagine, but the absoluteness of the heads of the first sort of Colonies
was more intense then that of the other. 1. Because the heads of the first sort
were holden and worshipped as gods. Thus Cur is called the Saturn of Aethiopia,
Chemesenuus the Saturn of Egypt. Xenoph. de ^quiv. And it is observable, that
all the first founders of Kingdoms, are called Saturns, and those, who
immediately succeed to them, are called Jupiters. And consequently the first and
primary erecters of Kingdoms being holden as gods, yea, as the chief gods, to
us it is more then apparent, that such have been of a most intense and absolute
power. They could not be honored and esteemed as gods, unless a God-like power
had been ascribed unto them. But we judge, that the after-planted Colonies, who
came in upon other men's share, sheltering under their wings, and receiving
places of abode from them, had no proper gods of their own, but honored those
as their gods, from whom they received the places of their residence and abode.
So the Thuscits worshipped Juno and Jupiter, i. e. Isis and Osiris, who are
Egyptian gods. These they worship, because Hercules, Osiris son, who is also
called Jupiter, erected them, and gave them his son Thuscus to reign over them.
Yea, the Tyrrhenians do not worship Tyrrhonus, though he was their first King,
but Janus who was the first planter of Italy, by whose Colonies Janus had
planted there, Tyrrhenus was graciously received. And it is observable, that
the chief Kingdoms which were first inhabited, as Assyria, Italy, Egypt, and
Ethiopia, did honor and worship their first Kings and Planters, as great gods.
And so, we do not think, but the first and primary Founders of other Kingdoms,
(as Mese and Getulis, who erected the Kingdom of the Masagets in India, as did
Anamaeon the Kingdom of Maeonia. An. Nim. 45.) were likewise holden by their
People and Colonies as prime gods, to whom they did owe God-like worship and
respect. Thence it is that Xenophon says, Saturni dicuntur familiarum nobilium
Regum, qui urbes condiderunt senissimi. De aequi^. And as the first and primary
Founders of Kingdoms are holden as Saturns, and primary gods, so their
firstborn are holden as Jupiters and Junoes, and the chiefest of their
grandchildren as Herculeses. And so, as Xenophon says, the secondary gods are
multiplied according to the multiplication and diversity of the primary gods.
So then, seeing the primary Kingdoms, and first Colonies have their own proper
gods, and the secondary Kingdoms, which were planted in aftertimes, the chief
parts of the Continent being aforehand planted by primary Colonies, had no
proper gods, but such as were common, both to them, and the primary Colonies,
or the first inhabiants: It is evident to us, that the heads and leaders of the
secondary and after-Colonies, had no such absolute power as the heads and
leaders of the primary, Colonies. The power is proportioned according to the
honor and respect people give to their Kings and Rulers. A primary honor, a
primary power, a secondary honor a secondary power. And consequently, the
Kings of the primary Colonies being attended with a primary respect, whereas
the Kings of the after-Colonies got but honor in a secondary way; no question,
the power of the one was more intense, then the power of the other. 2. Because
the heads of the after-Colonies being in aftertimes, were neither men of such
ancient descent and root, as the heads of the primary Colonies; nor do I think
they were men of such courage and strength as they. Strength and courage was
the more in vigor, how much more they approached the youth and beginings of
time. Time's youth declining, man's youth also faded. After-time,
after-strength. And withal, after-Colonies coming in upon other men's lot,
both the Law of courtesy and obligation (unless the primary Colonies by way
of gratification, or else in simplicity, had past all claim of privilege over
them; of which we read nothing, neither is it probable) did tie them to hold
one way or other of the former and primary inhabitants. This makes nothing
against the absolute power of their own proper Kings, though they honored the
first Kings of the primary Colonies, as gods. They might very well have
acknowledged their own proper Kings, as their absolute Lords, though ascribing
a divine and more intense honor and respect to the first Kings of the primary
Colonies. This makes us think, that the Thuscites (albeit Thuscus was their
proper King) held Hercules the Egyptian, (though Hercules to the Egyptians) as
Jupiter. Idem quoque qui unis populis est Hercules alteris est Jupiter. They
held of Hercules more then of Thuscus. Thuscus was their King, but they had
their being and residence of Hercules. Whereupon we conclude, that the first of
Kings were most absolute, of a more vaste and intense power then Kings of
aftertimes and secondary Colonies. Yet we cannot deny but even such were
absolute also, they being men of great valor and courage, and not only such,
but even those from whose conduct and means the being of their people did in a
most special manner depend. They did not only govern them, as a people, but
they made them a people. But notwithstanding this, I cannot imagine that their
power was so absolute, as that it admitted no restraint. And so in respect of
them, I take Aristotle by the hand, who says that in the days of the Heroes
Kings were absolute, though some of them in some things were restricted. (...),
Polit. lib. 3. cap. 11. I say some of them, because the first founders of
Kingdoms and the grand Heroes were absolute, without all restriction. But
afterward we show, that Aristotle's meaning is concerning Heroes of the
secondary rank, and such who in aftertimes erected Kingdoms and planted
Colonies.

Moreover, as there were colonies planted in old, by way of donation, shelter
and gratification, (as were the Griphonians, the Tyrhenians, and the colonies
of Phaeton and Auson) so colonies were planted by way of commission and
subordination. So the Assyrian, Median, and Magogan, colonies were planted in
Asia, together with the Moscits, who at one time erected their tabernacle both
in Asia and Europ. An Nimr. 45. This they did by virtue of a Commission, which
Assyrius, Me^us, Magogus, and Moscus, their four chief leaders had from Nimrod.
I can not imagine that such had a vaste and arbitrary power over their
colonies: for what power they had over them was by way of Commission, and in
subordination to the Assyrian Monarchy. But we shall not stand much to grant
that even such had an absolute power over their colonies, though not so vast
and intense as that of Nimrod's. 1. Because though the Princes of these
colonies were subordinate to Nimrod, yet it is very likely that their Colonies
had no power over them: for as the being and residence of these colonies did in
a most special manner depend from the conduct and means of their Princes and
leaders, so then a days people did much adore Princely Government, and they
knew very little then what it was to call consistories and exercise the Laws,
Xenophon tells us, that Ninus was Jupiter to the Assyrians. De aequiv. and so
we conceive, that their Hercules has been Assyrius, their first Prince and
leader: for so by proportion Nimrod was their Coelum, Belus their Saturn, Ninus
their Jupiter, and consequently their Hercules behoved either to be Assyrius,
or else Saturn's grandchild. Xenophon alleges that the chiefest of Saturns
grandchildren are the Herculeses. But Belus had not a grandchild who
succeeded to him in the Kingdom. And so we suppose that their Saturn's
grandchild being wanting, they have conferred the honor of Hercules upon their
own native Prince. And what the Assyrian colonies did in that purpose, is most
probable the rest of the foresaid colonies did the like also. And so they
conferring a Divine honor upon their Princes and first leaders, no question
they have given them all obedience and absolute subjection. And Ashur (whom
Berosus calls Assyrius) is reckoned up Genesis 10. as a very mighty and active
Prince. 2. Because Herod though a precary and substitute King, yet was he not
subject to Law, and was declared unanswerable to any for the murder which he
had committed against Aristobulus. Joseph. ant. lib. 15. cap. 4. I confess
this was by the means and vindication of him, of whom Herod in a precary and
substitute way held the Kingdom. And why may we not think far rather, that the
Princes of these Colonies, though but Nimrod's deputies, were of an absolute
and arbitrary power, though you should say, that they had it not because of
themselves, but because of Nimrod. Howsoever I stand not much here, but let the
Reader choose either of the parts he will. And I only put him in mind of this,
that the Colonies of Gelnus and Eridanus were Commissionary and subordinative:
for they erected a Kingdom in Istria, by ordors and Commission from Ligur. An.
Armat. 20.

Furthermore observe, there were some Colonies planted by mere purchase. So
Hercules the Egyptian planted the Thuscits, whom Berosus calls Arnits,
Libarnits and Musarnits. These he planted by his own power and conquest. So did
Aeneas plant his Trojans in Italy, and Brutus his Trojans in England. Yea,
Iolaus upon his own proper purchase planted a Colonie in Sardinia, calling it
Iolaa. Diod. lib. 5. cap. 2. And as for the Kings and heads of such Colonies, I
see nothing against it but they have been of an absolute and arbitrary power:
for as they planted their Colonies, without all obligation to the natives, so
the being and residence of their people did more intimately depend from their
conduct and means, then any of these sorts of colonies, we have spoken-of
already, did depend from their Captains and leaders. And so, I think, caeteris
paribus, there was more reason for the absolutenes of the leading men of such
colonies, then for the absoluteness of the heads of any of the rest of the
colonies spoken-of already. Here mere purchase carries the business, but
there the business is carried-on by the free donation of others, and by lot,
or land for the up-taking. Thus the colonies were the more oblidged to the
conduct and industry of their Leaders. Whereas in the plantation of Colonies
according to this last sort, they are extremely engaged to the endeavor and
conduct of their heads and overseers. This makes me think the fondness of the
people, in ascribing too much to their industry, has made them devolve their
whole power over upon their Kings, who by their conquest and purchase made them
a people, and possessed them in land.

Conclus. 3. Personal endowments, and extraordinary gifts have drawn-on people
to devolve an absolute and full power, without all reservation, upon some men.

We may make this good from the example of Noah. The Scripture acquainteth us
with his compleatnesse, how that there was none like him in his time, Genesis 5,
6, 7, 8, and 9. Yea, Berosus talks much to his praise and commendation, ant.
lib. 1, 2, 3, 4. and 5. He holds him as a God, yea, as the first and chiefest
of all Gods. So did the Italians, Myrs. de orig. Ital. M. Porc. Cat. ex lib.
orig. frag. Fab. Pict. de aur. saec. etc. lib. 1. Sempr. de divis. It. etc. So
do Archilochus, lib. de Temp. Xenophon, de aequiv. and Metasthenes, de judic.
temp. and annal. Pers. lib. But for the clear up-taking of this matter, you
shall observe with me, that in Noah's time, about the 131. or 150. year after
the flood, the whole earth was divided. But before this time they were all of
one mind, without all sedition and division. Then men conveniently lived
without any Civil and Politic Government* for so they lived under Noah as
under a common father, receiving the Law from his mouth, and withal every one
of his posterity did know, how that nature had laid most strict and near bonds
of relation upon each one to other. Whence peace and piety were preserved
amongst them, Genesis 8.9. and 10. Ber. ant. lib. 3. Ios. ant. Iud. lib. 2. cap.
4. and 5. Men then were given more to Piety then Policy. They were little, or
rather nothing acquainted with the rules of complex Policy. They studied more
to entertain simple ingenuity, and the ties of pure nature, then to rule one of
them over another. Hence says Archilochus that 250. years after the flood,
there was a golden age, in which Nature it self lived within the bounds of Law,
without all politic sanction, ever and while Ninus and Semiramus by force of
Arms began to corrupt the way of Man's living. Lib. de temp. So says Mues.
Phoex. Damasc. 97. histor. and likewise Ovid. Metam. lib. 1. But Fabius Pictor
nobly storieth to this purpose, saying, That in the golden age, there was no
Kingly Government, because then the desire of governing had not entered any
man's breast. De aur. saec. etc. lib. 1. In the interim observe, concerning the
duration of this golden age there are different opinions. Some who allege
Ninus to have been the first that usurped authority and government, do reckon
it to have lasted 250. years. So Mnes. hist. lib. 97. Xenoph. de aequiv. Por.
Cat. ex. lib. orig. frag. Pict. de aur. saec. lib. 1. These again who allege
Nimrod to have been the first King, and erecter of government after the flood,
allege it to have endured 131. years. Beros. ant. lib. 4. Whom both Manetho
and Metasthenes do follow. But Archilochus halteth between these two opinions.
Yet we incline to the judgment of Berosus, and the Caldean Writers. Therefore
seeing immediately after the Flood, 131. years, Noah was honored by all as a
common father; no question all power was devolved over upon him. And that not
only because of his paternall privilege which he had over them all, but also
because of his personal endowments, wherein he exceeded all his posterity at
that time. Therefore nobly says Fabius Pictor, that because those who
commanded them, were just men and devouted to Religion, they were called and
esteemed as Gods: for then (says he) they did not depart from the Law, whether
the governors or the governed. All then of their own accord, did hold that
which is good, either without fear or constraint. Shamefastness governed the
people, and Law the Princes. De aur. sec. lib. 1. But by the Princes he does
not understand Kings or politic Governors. As you may find it above written;
he says in terminis, that at that time there were none such. Therefore by
Princes he understands the chief Fathers, and the heads of the chiefest
Families; As Noah, his sons, and his sons sons. Whom indeed these Ethnic
Writers, which before we have often already cited, call and hold as Gods.
Philo-Judaus gives us a very large and express Catalogue of these Princes and
chief heads of Families at that time. Bibl. ant. lib. what can we say of Noah
who was the father of al, but that he was also the chief and head of all?
Whereupon we need not fear to conclude, but Noah then had a vast and absolute
power. And this may be considered two ways in respect of the object of his
power. 1. In respect of good. And so I do not think but he had a power without
al limitation, to order and govern every thing in an orderly and beseeming way.
Firstly, because he was the common father of all, and by nature itself had the
precedence over them. Secondly, the case then was extraordinary: for at that
time he was the only man who best knew how to order and govern affairs. Men at
that time were little or nothing acquainted with Laws and constitutions.
Knowledge and Learning were but in their beginnings then. Therefore the
ignorance of these times necessarily called them to take the word at Noah's
mouth, who was extraordinarily endowed with grace and knowledge from above.
None like him in his time. All the rest weak and ignorant in respect of him.
Therefore seeing he had the precedence before all, not only in respect of
nature, but also in respect of gifts and graces, and not only so, but likewise
all stood in need at that time of information from him, no question all the
reason in the world makes for an absolute power in Noah, in respect of every
good thing. Thence it is storied of him, that he went abroad from Country to
Country planting Colonies, and ordering things wherein GOD's honor and the
peoples weal were concerned. 2. In respect of evil. Indeed I will not say that
such a Saint of GOD as he, did take on him a power to rule at random, and
according to his heart's lust. I conceive indeed, he took upon him an absolute
power, to govern according to Law, but not against Law. Neither did he take on
him such a power, because he delighted to govern, and to be above others. No
verily. But because he was necessarily called to govern so. Both the precedence
in respect of nature, and likewise in respect of gifts, as also the weakness
and ignorance of the times, called him to overruled all according to Law, with
a vast and full power. His government was extraordinary, and by necessity. And
therefore we can conclude no ordinary government from it, (absolutely to govern
according to Law) devolved-over upon the shoulders of one man, or of some few.
Much less can there be concluded therefrom a power of governing contrary to
Law, without all bounds of limitation. Albeit I make it no question, whether
Noah took upon him an absolute power of governing, whether against, or
according to Law; yet do I think it very probable that none at this time would
have taken it upon them, to have judged him, accused him, or condemned him. 1.
No question, drunkenness is punishable by Law: But we hear of none that did so
much as rebuke him for it, but wicked Cham, who therefore derided him, and was
therefore accursed. 2. He was the common father of all at that time. 3. Of all
at that time he was the most reverend, wise, and eminent. 4. They knew little
what it was to hold Assizes, and call Consistories. All which move us to
apprehend, that none at that time would have dared to judge him, even albeit he
should have desired them. David far inferior to him, wanting many privileges
over his People which Noah had over his in the golden age, notwithstanding both
his adultery and murder, was spared and over-leaped by the Sanhedrin. So
Solomon was not judged by it, notwithstanding his idolatry and multiplication
of wives and horses; which were punishable, and inhibited by Law. And yet
Solomon had no such privileges over his people, as Noah had over his
posterity. And I do verily believe, that the emency of David and Solomon, and
because they were extraordinary persons, moved the Sanhedrin to spare them.
Yea, it is to be considered, that such eminent men do not fall through a
preposterous and malignant humor, but through an extraordinary desertion of
God, for noble and high ends best known to God himself. No question, this has
been taken to heart by the Sanhedrin. And this being conferred with the
eminency and singularity of the men, has carried the Sanhedrin by, from
inflicting punishment upon them. I shall not stand to dispute, whether they did
this de jure, or not. But sure I am, as they did it de facto, so they have been
much moved thereto from pregnant considerations of the men's personal
endowments. And for my self, though I think a David subject to Law, yet would I
think it a great temptation to me, (though as Judge) to sentence such a man
with death. The eminency of the man, and the way of his falling would put me to
my second thoughts, albeit I should endeavor nothing therein but justice.
Well, call it injustice in the Sanhedrin to have spared David and Solomon, yet
would I not have you to wonder too much thereat. There is great difference
between a David and an Ahab, a Solomon and a Jeroboam. Such are not all days
men. And therefore I must needs say, that as the Sanhedrin spared David and
Solomon, from thoughts of the singularity and eminency of the men; far more
would Noah's posterity, in the golden age, have spared Noah, though in many
things delinquent: for as the man was most eminent and singular, and could not
have fallen but by an extraordinary desertion, and for most good and noble
ends, so he had a privilege from Nature above all in his time. Yea, in David,
and Solomon's time, people were well seen in Laws and politic Constitutions.
The Sanhedrin needed not to have spared David and Solomon through ignorance and
want of skill. But it was far otherwise in the golden age in Noah's time. Then
men were but Apprentises, and spelling the first side of the Catechism of
Policy. Every thing was but in its beginnings, in its first rudiments. Let it
be so, that de facto, and not de jure, in the golden age, Noah's posterity
denied not to him an absolute and uncircumscribed power. I seek no more but
that. And I may say, that though at that time de facto, Noah should have had
immunity from the exercise of Law against him, though much delinquent, yet
shall I not think that ever Noah claimed such a privilege to himself, as
competent to him de jure, and according to the Law.

As for Noah's authority and power, after his posterity was divided into
factions, before we can determine upon it, you shall mark with me, immediately
after the golden age, that there were three divided and distinct parties. 1.
The godly party. 2. The heroic party. 3. The politic party. The godly party
was of the posterity of Shem. These followed Noah, and walked in his ways. The
heroic, and politic party were of the posterity of Ham and Japhet. And as the
heroic party followed Nimrod, so the politic party followed Ham, whom the
Chaldeans call Chemesenuus. No question, Noah immediately after the golden age
had a vast and absolute power over the godly, and those who walked in his
ways. You may learn the reasons of this from what is above-written. And as for
the heroic, and politic party, it would seem probable, that they contemned
Noah, and slighted his Authority: for they walked contrary to his ways, Genesis
10.11. It is known, how that Ham (the head of the politic, yea and of the
magical party) did mock Noah, Genesis 9. Beros. ant. lib. 3. Yea, Nimrod, the head
of the heroic party, contrary to the mind and purpose of Noah, caused Babel to
be built, Genesis 10.11. Ber. ant. lib. 4. But notwithstanding this we may say,
that at the most it concludes that such were disobedient to Noah, and walked
contrary to his will. But it will not conclude that such denied to Noah
immunity from the Law. V. g. A prodigal and riotous son may work and act
contrary to his father's will: But it does not follow, ergo sach a child does
strike and punish his father. Nay, a debording child may act contrary to his
father's will, and be so far from eclipsing his power over him, that he may in
patience endure his correction over him. So we read that Ham did not repine
against his father's reproving and cursing him, Genesis 10. Yea, Berosus storieth,
that Noah did shut him out from his presence, and he did so accordingly, ant.
lib. 3. And beside that he tells us, that Noah, Nin. an. 19. gave him liberty
to stay beside him three years in Italy. But finding, how he did corrupt the
Colonies there, he commanded him to be gone, and he did so. And yet at this
time he was the Saturn of Egypt, a mighty King, and of great power, both in
Egypt and in Italy. Ant. lib. 5. I think there is very good reason for it, to
say, that Noah in so far had an absolute power over them, as that none of them
in a direct and positive way would have acted against his commandment,
despising him as an enemy, and as one on whom they would and did execute their
fury. The most we can call them, is disobedient, but not rebels to Noah. They
acted against his will, but not in despite of his will. They took not liberty
from him, to do his will, though they took liberty to do their own will also.
We can not think that the light of Nature was so far extinguished in them, that
they did not honor him as their father. A debording son, as Esau, can
entertain Isaac with Venison, though he walk not in his ways. And I do not
think, if they had not honored him as their common father, unless they had
been extraordinarily restrained, they had destroyed him and all his followers.
Sure I am, they wanted not power to do so. The godly party was but an handful
in respect of them. What then, I pray you, could be the ordinary mean of their
restraint, but their natural respect and affection toward him? Nay, they
honored him so much, that they esteemed him their Coelum, their Sol, their
Chaos, the semen mundi, yea, and the father, both of the greater, and lesser
gods, Ber. ant. lib. 3.

And what we have spoken of Noah, the like also may be said of Adam. Before the
Flood there was also a golden age 1556 years. Wherein men lived as under one
common father, each of them knowing the intimate relations one to another,
until Monarchy was erected, till the close of the 500 year of Noah's age, as is
showed already. Before which time Adam had died 626 years, and Seth 514 years.
But so long as Adam lived, what superiority Noah had over his posterity in the
golden age after the Flood, Adam had it rather in a more then less measure
then he. Adam was not only their common father, but also he was their first
and primary father.

As we have evinced the truth of this point, from examples in Scripture, so we
may evidence it from examples in humane Histories. V. G. The Mitylenians gave
to Pittacus an absolute power of governing because of his personal endowments.
Diog. La. de vit. Phil. lib. 1. de Pit. Arist. Pol. lib. 3. cap. 10. The like
power did the Athenians confer upon Solon, upon the same account, Diog. La. de
Sol. Plut. in Sol. So it is alleged, that James 6. because of his pretended
personal endowments, obtained an absolute power and a negative voice in
Parliament. In the interim observe, That those who allow absolute Monarchy,
because of personal endowments, do not imagine that Kings have an absolute
power because they are Kings, but as they are such Kings, i. e. Kings not only
in respect of station, but also in respect of qualification, exceeding all
others. And so they conclude, that a King so qualified may very conveniently be
entrusted with an absolute power: for they apprehend, that though such a man
have power above Law, yet will he not act against Law. And likewise they
imagine, that such a man being in all respects above all men, both in respect
of station, and qualification, can no ways be inferior to any man. Thus
Aristotle inclines to absolute Monarchy of this moulding, Pol. lib. 3. cap.
11, and 12.

Conclus. 4. Kings in old were of an absolute power, without the bounds of all
restriction, by virtue of purchase and conquest.

So were the grand Heroes, as is showed already. Hence was it, that
Nebuchadnezzar, and the Kings of the Persians, had an absolute power over the
People of the Jews.

Conclus. 5. Kings in old, by mere usurpation and tyranny, had an absolute
power, without any circumscription.

So Pharaoh had an absolute power over the children of Israel, and the wicked
Kings of Judah (at least of Israel) over their people. Thus Nebuchadnezzar had
an absolute power, not only over the people of the Jews, but also over all his
subjects. Of whom it is said, -- Whom he would he slew, and whom he would he
kept alive; and whom he would he set-up, and whom he would he put-down, Dan. 5.
After this manner Ahasuerus, and Artaxerxes, had an absolute power over the
people of the Jews; though we deny not, but what either of them did act or
intend against the Jews, was by the mediation of evil Counselors. So had
Herod an absolute power. Matthew. 2. Jos. Ant. lib. 15. Yet we deny not, but it
was through other men's means more then his own, that he had a power to
tyrannize and govern at random. The ten persecuting Kings, Dan. 7. Rev. 13. had
an absolute power over the People of God. But more examples of Tyrants you may
read, Judge. 1. and 9. 2 Samuel 21. Mat. 27. Luke 23. and Act. 12. In the books of
Apocrypha, as Tob. 1. Jude 2. and 3. 1 Macc. 10. 2 Mac. 4.14. etc. See also
Beros. Ant. lib. 1. Diog. La. lib. 6. Plut. de Dionys. Brus. lib. 6. cap. 21.
Arist. Pol. lib. 5. cap. 10. What needs us so to accumulate quotations and
examples, when as it is evident, both from divine and profane writ, that there
have been almost, tot Tyranni, quot Reges?

Conclus. 6. Unless it had been for some of these causes above-written, there
was never at any time any King so absolute, but one way or other, according to
Law, his power was restricted.

In establishing this Conclusion, we observe this order.

Firstly, we prove the point from example. And in doing so you will do well to
observe, that examples to this purpose are of a twofold kind. 1. There are some
which point-out to us, That Kings in old were no less subject to Law, then any
of the People. 2. Some of them show to us, That though the King's power for the
most part has been absolute, yet notwithstanding in some case or other it has
been hemmed-in by Law. Of the first kind we have examples both in the days of
the Heroes, and in aftertimes. That in the days of the Heroes, some Kings
were no less subjected to Law then the People, may be examplified both from
the Commonwealth of the Jews, as also from the condition of some Kingdoms
amongst the Gentiles. But we forbear till afterward, to speak any thing of the
Jewish Commonwealth. And amongst the Heathen, you have to begin with the
ancient and stately Kingdom of Egypt. It cannot be denied, but the Kings of
Egypt in old were most precisely hedged-in by Law. Whatsoever they did, was
according to Law. They walked, they washed, they lay with their wives, they did
eat and drink, according to Law: They wrote Letters, and dispatched Messages
according to Law. It was not permitted to them to treasure-up silver, to judge
or punish any at random and according to their pleasure: but as private men they
were subjected to the Laws, the yoke of which they did bear patiently,
willingly submitting themselves thereto, and esteemed themselves happy to be
subject to them. Diod. Sic. rer. ant. lib. 2. cap. 3. This Diodore, as he
confesses himself, has from the writings of the Egyptian Priests, which he
diligently searched, as he says. Out of whose writings he gives us three
reasons, why the Kings of Egypt were for the most part good and kept themselves
within bounds. 1. Because the sons of the chiefest Priests, who were the
greatest and the most learned of all the rest, beyond the age of twenty years,
were ordained to attend the King day and night: By whose on-looking and
presence, the King was taught reservedness. 2. Because the Laws were most
exactly and precisely exercised on the King's Person. 3. Because the Priests,
as both before death, and after death, did celebrate the praises of the good
Kings, honoring them with hyperbolick encomies, so they spoke both before, and
after death, to the discommendation and disparagement of the bad and wicked
Kings, depriving them of stately Exequies at their interring. Now the desire of
the one, and the fear of the other, kept them back from extravagency and
debording, and caused them cheerfully to take with the yoke. Ibid. And, which
is more to be wondered at, Sesostris, one of the grand and primary Heroes,
ordained Praetors, as Judges, to govern in the Land of Egypt. Diod. rer. ant.
lib. 2. cap. 1. The care of every thing was cast over upon them. Yea, Berosus
tells us, That Sesostris, whom he calls Hercules, delivered Italy from
tyranny and slavery. Ant. lib. 5. This insinuates, that this Noble Conqueror
delighted much to live according to Law, when as he could not endure tyranny to
be exercised in a strange Kingdom, which he conquered. Far less I think, would
he have suffered tyranny to be in his own Kingdom. The like also did his father
Osiris (whom Diodore calls Simandius) in Italy. Ber. ant. lib. 5. Him Berosus
calls Jupiter the just. I conceive he could not have been so called, unless
he had been a man that walked strictly according to Law. And if these two
glorious Heroes, and noble Conquerours did subject themselves to Law, how much
more the rest of the Kings of Egypt in old, who were far inferior to them? Let
it be so, these two lived according to the Law, ex voluntate, but not ex lege,
yet will it conclude (if we compare arightly the highness of them with the
lowness of the rest) that the rest ex lege were subject to Law. So says Diod.
Ant. lib. 2. cap. 3. Where he also says out of the Egyptian Writers, That the
Egyptians choosed-out the best men of their chiefest Cities, of whom they
made-up a Judicatory, not inferior either to the Council of Athens, or the
Senate of Lacedemon, judging all impartially without respect of persons.
Aristotle observes, That it is a sign of a well governed Commonwealth, where
neither tyranny, nor sedition is. Pol. 2. cap. 9. But we read not, but very
seldom, that in old either of these was in Egypt. See Beros. ant. lib. Maneth.
de Reg. Egypt. lib. Diod. Sic. rer. ant. lib. 2. cap. 1, 2. etc. Moreover,
Aristotle prescribes it as a rule, for preventing sedition, and keeping the
Commonwealth in its integrity, to govern according to Law, and to abstain from
tyranny. Pol. 5. cap. 8. and 10. The like do all Politicians, together with the
consent of Machjavel, and Salmasius. But it is known, that the Kingdom of
Egypt, as in old there was seldom sedition in it, so likewise it endured a long
time inviolable. Which makes us conclude, that the Egyptian Kings kept
themselves within bounds, refrained from tyranny, and walked according to the
Law. But they could not ordinarily and for a long time have done so, unless
they had been subordinate and subjected to their Counselors and Parliament.
The proverb is, Who get Liberty, do take Liberty. And for the most part, it
always holds good.

We must not imagine that the Kings of Egypt in the days of the Heroes were
singular in this matter. The Athenians under Theseus had a Kingly government,
rather like a Commonwealth then Monarchy. Therefore says Heraclid, (...). --
De Pol. Ath. i. e. Theseus having gathered the Athenians together, reconciled
them, making them all of an equal and like authority. And Plutarch says the
like. But (says he) he kept back the popular government of Athens from
confusion, differencing between persons and persons. De These. And so Theseus
being subject to Law was at last banished by the People. Val. max. lib. 5. cap.
3. Diod. ant. lib. 5. cap. 5. Plut. in These. So insinuates Heraclid in the
place above cited. Verily Theseus was both their King, and in valor and
Heroicisme a second to Hercules the Grecian. Yea, Agamemnon whom Paterculus,
and others do call Rex regum was subject to Law, albeit Salmasius def. reg.
cap. 5. alleges the contrary. (1.) Because it is reported that he was thrust
from his charge, because he would not suffer his eldest daughter to be
sacrificed, to satisfy the fury of Diana, for the Roe which he killed feeding
about her grove. Dict. Cret. lib. 1. (2) Because he was put from his Office by
common consent of the Officers of the Army, and Palamedes put in his room.
Dict. Cret. lib. 1. and Dar. Phr. de exoi. Tro. (3) In a Convocation of the
general Persons of the Army Agamemnon was greatly upbraided. Homer. Iliad. 9.
(4) Because Aristotle likeneth the Laconick Government, to Agamemnon's power.
And for this he cites that of Homer, by us already alleged. And the Laconick
Government, he callech it (...), most according to Law. Pol. lib. 3. cap. 10. I
confess with Salmasius, that Agamemnon had the potestas belli. But what then?
ergo he had a power in battle, whether to destroy the Army or not, either to
deliver it up to the Enemy, or not. It no ways follows. I confess, he had
an absolute Power in battle, to govern according to Law, but not both according
to it, and against it. Questionless, the Army never gave him such a power as
that over them, whereby in the time of command he might have disposed upon them
as he pleased. They still kept a power in their own hands of deposing him, and
acting against him according to his deserts. They deposed him, and acted
against him, upon mere prejudices and groundless apprehensions: Ergo far more
would they have acted against him, if in the time of battle he should have gone
about to have sold them unto the Enemy. It Is ridiculous to say, that the
General of an Army, has power to sell the whole Army to the Enemy, and the
Army may not resist him in so doing in the time of battle, though the Army may
withstand him at any other time. Sure I am, they have more reason to withstand
him at that time, then at any other: for as then they are most in hazard, so
then they have most reason to stand by their own security and
self-preservation. It is reported of Achilles, That he disdained to be
commanded by Palamedes. And yet Palamedes was invested with that same power
which Agamemnon had. Moreover, Minos was not only King, but also the Lawgiver
of Crete. Heracl. de Pol. Cret. Nic. Damasc. de mor. gent. Cret. Val. max. lib.
1. cap. 3. Diod. Sic. rer. ant. lib. 3. cap. 5. lib. 5. cap. 5. and alib. Plut.
de These. But, as afterward is also showed, the Cretian Monarchy was not
absolute, but regulated. And though you say, that it was so in aftertimes, but
not in the days of Minos, yet do we gain the point: for it cannot be denied
but the Cretians did use these same Laws in aftertimes, which Minos first
established amongst them. So says Aristotle, Pol. 2. cap. 8. The like also
says Plato in the alleged Dialogue between Minos and Socrates. Socrates
moving the question, Whether or not did the Cretians use the ancient Laws of
Minos and Rhadamanthus; Minos answered, they did. Lib. 7. Min. vel. de Leg. And
Plato extolleth Minos above the very Heavens. And for this he cites Homer and
Hesiodus. He is holden by Homer to have been such a strict justiciar, that he
faineth him to be the Judge of the departed souls. To which Lucian alludeth,
Dial. Min. and Sost. Withal, he alleges him to have gotten his Laws from
Jupiter. And Hesiod in even-down terms calls him, the best of all mortal
Kings. Yea Plato says, That what he commanded the People to do, he did it
himself also. And, which is more, he alleges, That the Lacedaemonians had
their Laws from the Cretians. Therefore we may conclude, that in Minos time the
Cretian Monarchy was regulated: for what he commanded the People to do, that
same he did himself likewise. And it was like to the Lacedaemonian Monarchy,
which was not absolute, but precisely regulated according to Law. What? Can I
think that such a strict Justiciar and eminent Lawgiver as Minos, would have
assumed any arbitrary and loose power to himself, and denied it to others,
executing on them the full rigor of the Law? That verily is against this
practice of which Plato speaks, who says, That he commanded not to do one
thing, and did another himself. The man is reckoned up amongst the chiefest
Lawgivers, and, as Hesiod, Homer, and Plato would have it, he is the chiefest
of them all. But afterward it shall be showed, that all such were against a
vast and arbitrary power. And to close up this whole matter in a word,
Aristotle says, That in old, Kingly Government was amongst the Cretians, but
afterward the Cretian Cosmi (like to the Lacedaemonian Ephori) did take it
away. Pol. 2. cap. 8. This insinuates, that in old amongst the Cretians these
Cosmi were, whose power was all one with the Lacedaemonian Ephori, who indeed
had power over their Kings. And we read not of any beside Minos, who did
institute these Cosmi amongst the Cretians. He was the first Lawgiver amongst
them, whose Laws they retained until after-ages, as is said already.

As amongst the Egyptians and Grecians, we find Monarchy in the days of the
Heroes, in like manner we find it to have been regulated also in other
Kingdoms. The Ethiopian Kings were so much restricted to Law, that it can
hardly be determined, whether they, or the Egyptian Kings were most subjected
thereto. As Diodore tells us, of the subjection of the one to Law, so does he
story of the subjection of the other thereto. In express terms he says, That
the Ethiopian King, according to statute and ordination, leads his life
according to the Laws, doing every thing according to the Country-fashion,
neither rewarding, nor punishing any, but according to the Law of his
Ancestors. And, which is more to be wondered at, the Priests have such power
over the King, that at their command and pleasure he suffers death. And for
this they allege it to have been an old custom amongst all their Kings from
the beginning, to undergo death at the desire of the Priests. Rer. ant. lib. 4.
cap. 1. I shall not stand here to dispute, whether or not, Monarchy amongst the
Indians, in the days of the Heroes was regulated and subjected to Law. Albeit
there be some probability for the non-absoluteness thereof, yet we think it
good to leap it over, because the matter is not clear enough. And we shall
begin with the Indian Kingdom, to show, that in aftertimes in it Kings were of
a non-arbitrary and regulated power. It is reported, that the Indians
established those Laws which they received from their ancient Philosophers, the
Gymnosophists: Who taught, that all were free, and none were servants. This
they established by Law. And so the Indians, like the Lacedaemonians, had their
Ephori and overseers, chosen-out from amongst the common people; and beside
them there were some few chosen, who in nobility and prudence exceeded all the
rest, who were interested in governing and ordering all the great affairs, both
of King and Kingdom. Diod. rer. ant. lib. 3. cap. 10. In like manner the
Egyptians, as in the heroic times, so in aftertimes, they most precisely
subjected their Kings to Law. Diod. ant. lib. 2. cap. 3. For as in old both the
King and the Kingdom were governed and regulated by Pretors, so afterward out
of their chiefest Cities, Heliopolis, Memphis, and Thebes, the best men were
chosen to fit in Judgment, and to overruled all, not inferior to the Athenian
Areopagites, nor to the Lacedemonian Senators.

Amongst the Grecians there were several Kingdoms wherein the Regal power was
hemmed-in by the hedges of Law, in aftertimes after the days of the Heroes.
Which makes Aristotle say, that in aftertimes the power of Kings was weakened,
and subjected to the People, partly by the peopl's detracting from their power,
and partly by the King's own voluntary dimission. Polit. 3. cap. 10. We have
examples of these not only amongst the Grecians, but also among other nations.
The Athenians diminished the power of their Kings after the Codrids had become
lecherous, soft and effeminate. At that time they changed their Kings into
Princes, whom they called (...). Heracl. de Pol. Ath. But it seems very
probable that then they rather changed the name then the power of their Kings:
for long before the race of Codrus was extirpated, Theseus had restored liberty
to the Athenians, and (as is said already) had erected a Commonwealth amongst
them. Which appears to have lasted during both the time of the Kings, and
likewise of the Princes. And consequently seeing there was a Commonwealth in
both their times, there could be no difference in their power. But that we may
give an exact and punctual answer to this pre-occupation, you shall take
notice of the different condition of the Athenian Commonwealth, and of the
changes thereof. First, before Theseus reign, we do not imagine otherwise, but
that the Athenians were governed, not only by a Kingly government, Ber. ant.
lib. 5. Maneth. de reg. Egypt lib. Heracl. de Pol. Ath. but also their Kings
then were of a vaste and absolute power, according as the power of the Kings
used to be in the days of the Heroes, Arist. Pol. 3. cap. 10. and 11.
Secondly, under Theseus reign the power of the Kingly government was much
impaired. Then the people were restored to liberty, and got power in their
hand, as is said already. Therefore Euripides says, that the Athenians under
Theseus did not come under the yoke of one man, but the people as freemen
governed like a King by course. In These. Yet we must not imagine that then
there was a perfect and entire Commonwealth erected. No, verily: for Theseus
remained notwithstanding as their Prince, and as one having greater authority
then any Patriot and Commonwealth's-man. I will not say that Theseus retained a
power in his hand, equal to the power of the People, and their Representative.
That is expressly against what Euripides and others above cited do report. But
this much I may say, that he retained as much power in his own hand, as made
him superior and of greater authority then any one at-least, whether of the
Council, or of the People. And that he was the first man in dignity and
authority in the Commonwealth is clear. 1. Because as both Aristotle and
Plutarch report, he remained notwithstanding the Prince of the Commonwealth.
Therefore even unto this day he is reckoned-up in the Catalogue of the Athenian
Kings. 2. Because he differenced between the Patricians (whom we call
gentlemen) tillers of the ground, and Crafts-men, giving to them power
according to their ranks and stations, investing some of them with greater, and
some of them with lesser power: and consequently seeing he differenced one kind
of persons from another in the Commonwealth, making some of them in authority
Superior to others, much more has he retained a power in his own hand,
whereby he was differenced from any amongst all the rest. 3. Because the
Codrids and those who succeeded him, were properly called Kings, and therein
they are contra-distinguished from (...), the Princes, and diametrally opposed
to them. But I conceive that there was greater reason why Theseus was a King
then they were. He was heroic, and not so were they. Yea, Heraclid in plain
terms says, that Kings were not abrogated from amongst the Athenians till the
posterity of Codrus became effeminate and lecherous. At which time (says he)
they were taken-away, and Princes put in their room. Observe therefore, that
from Theseus until the last of the Corids, the Athenian Monarchy was
regulated. We establish the point thus. 1. Because Theseus himself (as is
proved already) was regulated: Ergo far more Codrus and his posterity were
regulated. Theseus was of an heroic temper, such as were not the Codrids. And
so by nature he was more disposed for an absolute way of governing then they.
He lived in an heroic time, wherein Monarchy was most in request. But their
time was of another stamp wherein Monarchy was wearing-out of request. 2.
Because, whileas the Grecians carried-on an Engagement against Troy, at that
time the Athenian Monarchy remained regulated also. Justin says, that
Demophoon son to Theseus was Captain of the Athenian navy, which went out with
Agamemnon against the Trojans. lib. 2. But we believe other more ancient
Writers rather then him, who say, that the Captain of the Athenian navy then
was Mnestheus, Theseus son. Dict. cret. de bell. Tro. lib. 1. Dar. Phr. de exc.
Tro. lib. and Homer. Iliad. 2. Howsoever Plutarch gathers from the way of
Homer's speaking of the Navy, which came from Athens, under the conduct of
Mnestheus, that Theseus government was regulated and much impaired: for (says
he) Homer does call these ships, as belonging to the People. in These. Just so
say Dictys Cretensis, and Dares Phrygius. And so Plutarch's way of reasoning
holding good the Athenian Monarchy, whether under Mnestheus, as some say, or
under Demophoon, as Justin says, was not absolute but limited: for the ships
which were rigged-out of Athens, against Troy were not called Mnestheus or
Demophoon's ships, but ships belonging to the people of Athens. Well, I
reverence this consequence, not for itself (for Homer speaks that same way
of the out rigging of ships in other Grecian Kingdoms, where I do not think but
there was absolute Monarchy, though in some things peradventure circumscribed)
but for Plutarch's authority. And so in this matter resting upon it, I
conclude, that seeing the Athenian Monarchy was kept within the bounds of Law,
in the days of Mnestheus and Demophoon two brave Heroes, much more was it of a
circumscribed power in the days of Codrus and his posterity, who were but of
an ordinary and non-heroick temper. And as for Codrus himself, I do not think
that such a man would have endeavored the away-taking of those liberties
wherewith Theseus privileged the Athenians, whereas in maintenance of their
liberties he exposed himself to the undergoing of death itself. Val. max. lib.
5. cap. 6. Just. lib. 2. Plut. in Codr. Aye, and which is more, whileas the
Codrids became lecherous, soft, and effeminate, the Athenians did abrogate
Kings from amongst them, and changed their Kings into Princes. Which bears us
this much in hand, that the Athenians did retain a power in themselves, whereby
they might either keep-in or shut-out their Kings. And it is remarkable that it
is not said they did abrogate their Kings, because of the tyranny of the
Codrids. Heracl. de Pol. Ath. Which insinuates that notwithanding their
personal escapes and out-breakings, they acted nothing for diminishing the
peoples Power.

Thirdly, after the Codrids had become effeminate, and had abused their power,
the people took-away Kings from amongst them, and in their room set up Princes.
Now, the question may be moved whether or not had these Princes as great power
as had Theseus and Codrus? For removing of this difficulty observe, that there
were some who did govern only as Princes, and some did rule as Kings. Those
who governed as Princes are of a threefold kind. 1. Some of them were appointed
to govern for their whole lifetime. Who were thirteen in number, each of them
reigning after another. 2. Some of them were decennal Princes, seven in number
who governed every one of them for the space of ten years. The last of the
decennall Princes was Erixias, whose government left-off, an. mun. 3282 before
the reign of Pisistratus about 128. years. 3. Some of them were annual and
yearly Magistrates. Some would think it strange to say that these three kinds
of Princes had that same power and authority which Theseus and Codrus, or any
other of the Athenian Kings had. But if you take along with you this
distinction, you shall find the matter clear. There is a twofold non-absolute
and circumscribed power. 1. Intensive and substantial. 2. Extensive and
circumstantiall. It cannot be denied but these Princes in all the three kinds
had one and the same power, intensively and essentially, which Theseus and the
Codrids had. The reason of this is because the power of the Athenian Kings in
itself, and at the utmost was but a regulated power subjected to the Law of the
people, as is proved already. Therefore says Euripides, bringing-in Theseus
speaking of the power of the Athenians, -- (...)
(...).
(...)
(...). --
In English. -- Athens,
A city free is not governed by one.
As King by course the people reign alone.
Whence it is more then evident, that Theseus was no less subjected to Law
then any of the people. Thence it is that Diodore reports, that the Athenians
taking it in an evil part that Helen by lot had fallen to be wife to Theseus,
he feared them, and therefore transported her into Amphidria. Rer. ant. lib. 5.
cap. 5. And how they kept both him and the Codrids in subjection to Law, is
already proved at length. Which makes us say, that formally and according to
the essential frame of non-absolute and limited power, they had no more power
then any of these Princes abovesaid, who did govern only as Princes: for both
of them were subjected to Law, and neither of them had a prerogative over it,
and an exemption from it. We have showed already that the Athenian Kings had no
such privilege: Ergo far less had the Athenian Princes any such privilege.
1. Because Princes as Princes are ever one way or other inferior to Kings. 2.
Because the Athenians changed their Kings into Princes, because their Kings
became lecherous, soft, and effeminate. And consequently unless they had
changed their power as well as their name, they had wrought to no purpose for
reforming the abuses and enormities of their Kings. 3. The annual and yearly
Princes, (whereof nine did govern together, six of them being Thesmothites)
were solemnly sworn to the people that they should govern according to Law. And
he who was (...), King, amongst these (...), Princes, had no more power but to
provide for the sacrifices, and to order and govern the battle. Heracl. de
Pol. Ath. This comes just to that which Aristotle says concerning the
detracting of the power of Kings in after-ages. Then (says he) the people
detracted so much from their Kings, that they entrusted them with no more power
but to govern the battle, and to over-see (...) the sacrifices. Polit. 3. cap.
10. This is reckoned-up by him as the lowest degree of Monarchy, which he
calls (...), most according to Law, and of the Laconick kind. Pol. 3. cap.
10. and 11. But if you shall allege that the yearly Princes amongst the
Athenians had not such power as the decennal Princes, and those Princes who
kept the government for their lifetime, I shall not stand much to yield
that: for I suppose that as in some accidental and circumstantial way in the
matter of power the Athenian Kings were differenced from the Athenian Princes,
so it is most probable that after such a manner, these three foresaid kinds of
Athenian Princes were differenced each-one from another; and therefore it is
alleged that a Commonwealth was not erected amongst the Athenians till annual
Princes were set over them. Which makes the Princes of the first and second
kind, though not of the third, to be reckoned up as Kings. Yet they must give
me leave to say, that though the Athenian Commonwealth was not fully and
completely established till the up-setting of annual and yearly Princes;
notwithstanding in some degree or other, there was ever a Commonwealth amongst
them, from the days of Theseus until some of their annual Princes began to
usurp and brought them under bondage: for not only, as is said already, their
Princes of the third kind, but also their Kings and Princes of the first and
second sort were subjected to Law, and the people had a ruling power over them.
And so all of them had the like power according to the essential frame of a
regulated and non-absolute power, though the Kings had a more vaste authority,
and might extend their power further according to Law then the Princes, and
those of the first kind, then the Princes of the second, or at least of the
third kind. Even-as Majors, v. g. have greater power then Alder-men, and
Alder-men then Counselors. Howsoever we find that the Princes of the third
kind are also called (...), as well as the rest. They are said to have had the
power of the battle, and (...), of the sacrifices. He who had this power is
called (...), King. Thus we find that he had that same power which the
Lacedemonian Kings had. But it is afterward showed that such were proper,
though not absolute Kings. Well, I regard not though you esteem not such as
Kings properly so called. I lose nothing by this. If we argue from examples of
former and ancient Commonwealths, then have we the Athenian and Lacedemonian
Republics as presidents of a popular government and Commonwealth. Friend, this
is the mark we drive most at in the matter in hand.

Those Princes who governed as Kings did usurp a greater power then what
according to the fundamental government of the Kingdom, and the institution
of Theseus did belong to them. So Cylon endeavored, but his attempt was choked
in the bud. Herod. lib. 5. Thucid. lib. 1. Herac. de Pol. Ath. Cic. de leg.
Phutar. de Sol. But what he intended Pisistratus acted, as is storied by the
same authors, together with Diogenes Laertius, Valerius maximus, and Diodore.
And that usurpation continued until Thrasybilus and Rhinon's days. These did
vindicate the liberty of the Athenians, against those tyrants who did keep them
under bondage. Herac. de Pol. Ath. Val. max. lib. 4. cap. 1. lib. 5. cap. 6.
Aemil. Prob. de Thras. And so their government turned merely popular, and
became an even-down Commonwealth. Alex. ab Alex. lib. 4. cap. 23. And as for
these Princes we deny not, nor can we say otherwise, but they had, not only as
great, but also greater power then any of the Athenian Kings, whether Theseus
or any King that succeeded him. And that they were of equal power at-least, is
evident: for they did reign not as Princes, but as Kings. Her. de Polit. Ath.
And Pisistratus (one of these usurping Kings) in his Epistle to Solon says
plainly that he walked according to Solon's Laws, differing in nothing from
the people but in honor and dignity. But he adds, that he took upon him that
power which the Athenians conferred upon Codrus and his posterity. And in this
he acknowledges that he failed, and had such a power, not by the Law of the
Kingdom, but by a Law of his own making. Whence it is evident that Pisistratus
by usurpation took upon him as great power as did Codrus, or any of his race.
Yea, and that they had greater power, is also clear: for Justine storieth, That
after Codrus, while-as the Administration of the Republic was given over into
the hands of yearly Magistrates, the King's lust became the People's law. Thus
he tells us, that in the times of defection, and vvhile-as corruption entered
the State of Athens, Kings became absolute and were of an arbitrary power.
Post Codrum, -- administratio Reipublicae annus Magistratibus permissa est. Sed
Civitati nullae Leges tunc erant, quia libido Regum pro legibus habebatur. And
afterward he speaks, how they were reformed by Solon, and how Pisistratus
and others who succeeded him, did tyrannize over them. Lib. 2. Solon looked
upon the Athenians, under Pisistratus reign (albeit he governed according to
Solon's Laws) as under the yoke of bondage.

(...). Diog. La. de vit. Phil. lib. 1. in Sol. And it is reported, that Cleon,
and those who followed him, destroyed the Commonwealth. Great tyranny there
indeed, and arbitrariness of power. Her. de Pol. Ath. Thus we see clearly, how
that not only Kings in aftertimes were regulated and in all things subjected
to Law, but also, as some of the Athenian Princes were inferior, so some of
them were superior to the Athenian Kings.

In Corinth, the Kingly Government was also regulated. (...), Herac. de Pol.
Corinth. i. e. Periander first changed the Commonwealth, taking to himself a
guard, -- and at last appointing to himself a Senate. Now you must not think,
that this Senate had not power over Periander. 1. Because that Senate cannot
properly be called a Senate, wherein the King has a negative voice: It is but
at the most a cipher, far from the nature of Senates that were in old amongst
the Athenians, Carthaginians, etc. 2. Because Periander, in his Epistle to
Solon, advised at him, what he should do in securing himself from those who
went about to kill him. And Solon in his Epistle to him, advised him to
lay-down his lording power. It is very easy to know what has been the cause,
why his own subjects endeavored to cut him off: for it is reported of him,
that he was the first King who went conveyed with a guard of Soldiers.
Whereupon he suffered none to live in the City. This could not but irritate his
subjects against him, and make them conspire against his life. See Herod. lib.
5. Diog. La. de vit. Phil. lib. 1. in Sol. and Periand. Herac. de Pol. Corin.
Thra. sibulus counsel was just contrary to Solon's. He desired him, to spare
none, whether friend or foe, but cut all off. Which he did indeed, as Herodot
reports. But we must think, that he advised with Solon, after he had put in
execution Thrasibulus counsel: for Solon, in his Epistle to him, tells him,
That the way to secure himself in his Kingdom, was, not to cut off any, but to
lay-down his lording power over them. This insinuates, that he had followed
Thrasibulus counsel, and had cut off his subjects, before either Solon wrote to
him, or he had advised with Solon. And Heraclid says in even-down terms, That
he was neither unjust, nor violent, hating all gross and scandalous vices, and
commanding all those to be drowned in the sea, who were prostitute to such
manner of wickedness. This could not be in the time of his tyranny, when he
made havoc of his people, and of which Heraclid speaks, before he enters
a-talking any thing of his justice and reservedness. Which is more then
apparent to us, that he became a just and moderat man, leaving-off his tyranny
and oppression, upon Solon's counsel and advice. And so we fear not to say,
that he did put power in the peoples hand, adding a Council to him, for keeping
him within the bounds of Law. This we may learn from Heraclid, who having
spoken of his moderation and justice, tells us, That he did constitute (...),
a Council or Senate. Verily, we cannot think but it was Periander's wisdom and
choice, to follow Solon's counsel, in giving liberty to the people, and in
priviledging them with a power over him, to hedge-in his ways by the rules of
Law. Aristotle says, that his lording over the people made them lay their
heads together against him. Pol. 5. cap. 10. And Solon counseled him, to
leave-off his lording power, as the chief and only way of securing himself,
and conciliating the favor of the people. Who can think that such a wise man
as he (who is reckoned-up amongst the seven Sages) would have despised the
counsel of such a wise man, another of the Sages also? Yea Chilo, in his
Epistle to Periander, though in a satyrick way, is little or nothing different
from that which Solon counseled him to. And that Periander practiced
according to Solon's advice and counsel, is clear, by comparing it with what
Heraclid speaks concerning Periander. He had the wise men, his fellows in
wisdom, in greater respect then to postpone any of their advices, as is
evident from his Epistle which he vvrote to them. Diog. La. de vit. Phil. lib.
1. in Per. 3. Because it was Periander's express judgment, that Popular
Government was better then Monarchy, Dio. La. ibid. Now, this could not be,
while-as Periander delighted to lord and tyrannize over his people. And so,
it is more then probable, that as he changed his judgment, he likewise changed
his practice. These two go always hand in hand together. Wherefore to me it is
more then evident, that Periander gave his people power over him, and willingly
subjected himself to Law.

Regal Government amongst the Carthaginians, in aftertimes was regulated, and
in all things subjected to Law. But you will do well to consider with me these
things. 1. As Carthage was in its beginnings. 2. As it was in after-ages. In
the first respect, it cannot be denied, but Regal Government in it was
absolute. Firstly, Because Dido, the first founder of Carthage was worshipped
by the Carthaginians as a Goddess. Secondly, Because Dido, by her own proper
industry builded Carthage, and made the Carthaginians a People. Just. lib. 18.
Thirdly, Because in the beginning Kingly Government was most in request. And
therefore Kingdoms in the beginning were governed by Kings. So say Aristotle,
Justin and Salust. Then men were little acquainted with the rules of Policy.
Which makes Aristotle say, that Kingly Government in the beginning was
established, because it was then difficult and hard to find-out many men of wit
and judgment, to govern the Commonwealth. Pol. lib. 3. cap. 11. and lib. 4.
cap. 13. We shall therefore not judge it strange, that Kings in the beginning
of any Kingdom were absolute and of an arbitrary power. People then had not
policy, and knew not how to exercise Law aright, and to keep their Kings within
the bounds thereof. But according to the second respect, we must think that
there was a change in Court. Then the Carthaginian Kings became subjected to
Law. It is therefore reported, that Machaeus (or, as Orosius says, Mezeus)
was banished by the Carthaginians. And finding, that (after he was by
strength of hand released from his banishment) he endeavored to lord over
them, they accused him, and executed judgment on him, as on a malefactor and
paracide, both as a Rebel against his Country, and as a murderer of his son.
Just. lib. 18. Tell me not that Machaeus was not their King, but the general
Captain of their Army. (1) Because his son Cartalo, was by the Carthaginians
trimmed-up in a Kingly attire, instead of Machaeus his father; they clothed him
in Purple, and put a Crown of Gold upon his head. This signifies that Machaeus
was of a Kingly Power, though not boundless and arbitrary. Just. ibid. (2)
Because the Lacedemonian Kings had no power, but of the battle. And yet they
were properly Kings. But Machaeus had such a power as that. (3) Because it
cannot be denied, but Machaeus had as great power as Hannibal. Mago succeeded
to Machaeus, Asdrubal to Mago, and Hannibal to Asdrubal. Just. ibid. But it is
known, that Hannibal was of a Kingly Power: for he was one of the two
Carthaginian Kings, Aemyl. prob. in Han. It Is remarkable that Hannibal, for
fear of the Carthaginian Senate, fled into Syria. Wherefore the Senate
forfeited his estate, did cast down his house, and declared him a banished man.
Prob. ib. Plut. in Han. Howsoever Aristotle in even-down terms tells us, That
the Carthaginian Kings were subjected to Law. For comparing the Carthaginian,
and Lacedemonian Commonwealths together, he says, that the Carthaginian Kings,
and Senate were just so as the Lacedemonian Kings and Senators: (...). Pol. 2.
cap. 9. And so he subjoyneth, that the People both amongst the Carthaginians,
and Lacedaemonians, did command both King and Senate, having a power of judging
them, and of contradicting their Ordinance. That same also he says of the
Cretian Commonwealth. And cap 7. he says That Cosmi amongst the Cretians, had
the same power which Ephori had amongst the Lacedaemonians. I confess in that
chap. he says, That in the beginning the Cretians were governed by Kings, who
were at last taken away, and the power of the battle devolved upon the Cosmi.
This makes nothing against us: for so he insinuates, that the Cretian Kings
had but the power of the battle, seeing in putting-out their Kings he speaks
of no more power that was added to the Cosmi, but that they were entrusted with
the managing of the war. And cap. 9. in plain terms he says, (comparing the
Cretian and Lacedemonian Commonwealths together) That the Cretian Kings and
Senate were of the same stamp and condition, of which were the Lacedemonian
Kings and Senators. And (says he) in the Carthaginian, Lacedemonian, and
Cretian Commonwealths, the people had power both over King and Senate, to judge
and withstand them.

As for the Lacedemonian Kings, it is beyond all controversy, that in
after-ages they were subjected to Law, no less then the people. Therefore
says Xenophon, (...). De Repub. Laced. lib. i. e. Lycurgus did not suffer a
lording and tyrannick power to be given to the King, nor did he put such power
in the people's hand, as to beget jealousy and envy against the kingly power.
And Aristotle says, (...). Polit. 3. cap. 10. i. e. The Kingly Power in the
Laconick Commonwealth is most restricted to Law: for it has not a vaste and
arbitrary power. This makes him say, Pol. 2. cap. 7, and 9. That the Kingly
Power was subjected to the People, and the Ephori had the greatest power in the
Commonwealth. Which comes just to that which Heraclid says, (...). De Pol.
Laced. i. e. The Lacedemonian Ephori had the greatest power in the
Commonwealth. Xenophon likewise says, That the King did swear monthly to the
People, to govern according to Law. De Rep. Lac. lib. And Nicolaus Damascenus,
That he did swear to govern according to Law, before he got the Crown. (...).
De Mor. Gent. Laced. And how great the power of the Ephori, the Representative
of the People, was over all the rest of the Magistrates in the Commonwealth,
you may learn it from Plat. de Leg. lib. 4. Isoc. Pan. and Plut. de Civil.
Instit. Whereupon says Xenophon, they had power of deposing, imprisoning and
judging (even to the sentence of death) the rest of the Magistrates. (...). De
rep. Laced. lib. And because of the vastness of their power over the rest of
the Magistrates, they did at their own hand imprison and condemn Agis their
King, Plut. in Ag. In this they went against the Law of the Nation, because
according to it, they had only power to judge and sentence their King, while-as
the King of the other family did sit upon the Bench with them. Pausan. Lacon.
But they without the concurrence of any, at their own hand did imprison and
sentence Agis. The power of the Lacedemonian King is taken-up in these notions.
1. At home he had charge of the sacrifices, Arist. Pol. 3. cap. 10. Herod. lib.
6. Xenoph. de rep. Lac. lib. of ordaining Magistrates and Priests, and of
dismissing Messages, whether friendly or hostile. See Herod. and Xenoph. ibid.
But Xenophon says, That at home he had but the honor of a private man. 2.
From home, and in the battle, he was first, and had the chief hand in managing
the matters of the war: So say the forecited Authors.

Inst. 1. The Lacedemonian Monarchy (says Salmasius) was peculiar. All other
Monarchies beside were absolute and of an uncircumscribed power, though some
were more intense, and some more remiss. And (says he) the Lacedemonian Kings
were rather General Captains, then Kings. Therefore Aristotle defines their
power, to be a power of commanding the battle, from a perpetual title of
birthright. Pol. 3. cap. 10.14. Yea, and though the Lacedemonian Ephori did
cut off Agis, yet notwithstanding the people did abominate and detest that
fact. Def. Reg. cap. 8. Wherefore the man does esteem the annual Carthaginian
Kings properly not to have been Kings. Otherwise (says he) the Judges of
Israel may also properly be called Kings: for they had that same power which
the Carthaginian Kings had. The one were called Sophetim, and the other
Sufetes. Both which come to one purpose. And yet (says he) the Scripture
calls the Judges of Israel, Kings, Judge. 18. But this must be taken in an
improper sense. And so he concludes, that Probus does call the Carthaginian
Sufetes, Kings improperly. Def. Reg. cap. 7.

Ans. We do much wonder at the man, who is not ashamed to say, that all
Monarchies besides the Lacedemonian were absolute and unsubjected to Law. We
have evinced the contrary of that already, having showed from the examples of
many Commonwealths, that Kings were no less subjected to Law then any of the
people. And in this the manner of Royal Power amongst the Romans is not
wanting. The power of the King was subjected to the Senate. Rex ad Senatum
referebat. Pomp. Laet. de mag. Romans i. e. The King had his referres to the
Senate. Penes hoc quidem senatores adeo semper totius Reipublicae summa innixa
est, ut ne Reges quidem, Consules, aut Dictatores, aut alius quispiam
magistratus inconsulto Senatu quippiam moliretur. Fenest. de mag. Romans i. e.
The sum and head of the whole Commonwealth did ever so depend from these
senators, that even Kings, Consuls, or Dictators, or any other Magistrate did
not enterprise any thing without consulting the Senate. Senatores, -- voluti
praesides, and Reipublicae custodes, tantae authoritatis fuere, ut si populus
Regem, aut magistratum quempiam jussisset, id sic ratum foret, si Senatus
author fieret. Alex. ab Al. lib. 4. cap. 11. i. e. The Senators, -- as
Praesidents and keepers of the Republic were of so great authority that if the
people had commanded the King, or any Magistrate, that accordingly should be
ratified, if the Senate authorized it. See also Live. lib. 1. Dionys. lib. 2.
Digest. lib. 1 tit. 9. Luci. Ann. lib. 1. cap. 1. and Plut. in Romul. Aye,
which is more, Dictatours (whereof Julius Caesar was one) who amongst the
Romans were of greater power then Kings, were subjected to the Tribunes: for it
is reported that M. Fabius appealing from L. Papyrius Dictatour to the
Tribunes, by their authority exempted his son Q Fabius from punishment. Alex.
de Alex. lib. 1. Well, we shall not allege that the Tribunes, the
Representative of the people, had greater authority positively in exercising
acts of Law then the Dictatours: for not only Alexander ab Alex. lib. 1. Geni.
di. cap. 3. lib. 4. cap. 23. lib. 5. cap. 2. but also Pomponius Laet. de
magist. Romans and Fenestella de mag. Romans lib. alt. do plainly say, that in
respect of positive authority the Dictatours were above the Tribunes, and there
was no a^pellation from them. Yet all of them say, that in respect of negative
authority, the Tribunes were above Dictatours, Consuls, and all the rest of the
Roman Magistrates, because they had power of interdicting and discharging all
the rest of the Magistrates, Dictatours, or any other from undertaking any
thing as they judged fit and expedient, should neither be acted-for nor
against. And so having this power de jure, as is condescended upon by Alexander
himself, and all others, I admire why Alexander makes any question concerning
M. Fabius appellation from the Dictatour to the Tribunes: for so he did not
appeal to them, as to judges of greater authority then the Dictatour, but as to
propugnatours and defenders, having a power of inhibiting what was done, as
they judged amiss by the rest of the Magistrates. Albeit they had not a main
voice in judging (wherein the power of the Dictatour was above their's) and in
descerning, yet had they a main voice in defending, approving and disapproving.

And whereas this man alleges that Aristotle is of his judgment, he is close
mistaken: For Aristotle does not define the Laconick Monarchy, (...), the power
of the battle, according to a perpetual title from blood-right, because he
opinionateth that the Lacedemonian Kings were not properly Kings, but because
the greatest authority the Lacedemonian Kings had, was in leading-forth the
Army. There indeed they were primi above the Senate and Ephorie. Whereupon he
also calls the Laconick Monarchy (...), a power of leading forth the Army by
it is own power. He is so far from being of Salmasius opinion, that contrariwise
he reckons up the Laconick Monarchy amongst the proper species and and kinds
of royal power. Polit. 3. cap. 10. and 11. And whileas he speaks of the
Lacedemonian Kings, he does so call them, Pol. 2. cap. 7. and 9.

Inst. 2. Aristotle does so (says Salmasius) 1. Because the power of the
battle was hereditary to the Lacedemonian Kings. 2. Because the Lacedemonian
Kings in battle had a full free and Kingly power. Aye, (says he) they had
also a power in those things, which related to the ceremonies, wherewith Kings
in old were solemnly entrusted. Def. Reg. cap. 8. Ans. The first reason is
forthwith naught. It Is a bad consequence: The Lacedemonian Kings were
hereditary Commanders of the Army in chief: Ergo Aristotle because of that
calls them Kings. Quasi vero he had had no such reason for him to call them
Kings, if they had only been entrusted with the power of the battle by
election. Friend, you are a-little mistaken in this. 1. Because Aristotle
divides the power of the battle into hereditary and elective power. Pol. 3.
cap. 10. Thus he contra-distinguisheth the one from the other, as two different
species properly and specifically differencing the power of the battle in
general. 2. Because a Kingly power is not therefore Kingly, because it is
hereditary. Yea, which is more, a Kingly power, caeteris requisitis, is
properly and formally elective. And therefore Aristotle should have had more
reason to have called them Kings, if their power had been by election, and not
by succession. So the man himself judges whileas he says, that the
Carthaginian and Cretian kings were better ordained then the Laconick; Because
(says he) the Laconick kings are ordained by succession, and they by election.
And he adds a reason to this, because says he, by election the best are
choosed, whereas by blood-right the like cannot be had. Whereupon (says he)
the heriditary title of Kings amongst the Lacedaemonians has brought great hurt
and detriment unto the Commonwealth. Polit. 2. cap. 9. And as for his second
reason, it plainly contradicts himself: for so he confesses, that in the
battle they had a Kingly power. And he has little reason to say, that
Aristotle called them Kings because they had a power of over-seeing the
sacrifices. So had the Athenian annual Princes, whom properly he will not
admit to be called Kings. Howsoever it cannot be denied, but properly they were
Kings, albeit they were subjected to Law. 1. Because it does not follow that a
King properly is not a King, because he is a regulated King. We have showed
already, that GOD no otherwise mouldeth the King, but as he subjecteth him to
Law. Assert. 2. And afterward we shall show how that the Kings of the Jews were
regulated Kings. And yet who will deny but they were proper Kings? 2. The King
is not properly King, unless he be a regulated King and subjected to Law, as
both already and afterward is showed. And therefore the Lacedemonian Kings were
Kings properly, the rather because they were regulated. 3. Because Salmasius
himself confesses, that in the battle the Lacedemonian Kings had a full and
Kingly power. And yet then their power was not absolute and arbitrary. They had
not then a full power to act against Law, but according to Law, as you may
learn from Conclus. 6. in comparing their power with Agamemnon's power.
Therefore either Salmasius will contradict himself, or else he must needs say,
that Kings are properly Kings, though they be regulated. 4. Because all that
write of the Lacedemonian Commonwealth, of whom we have cited many already, do
call the Captain-Generals of their Armies, Kings. And it is remarkable that
Lysander in an oration, which was found after his death, persuaded the
Lacedaemonians to shakeoff the Kingly government, and elect a Captain-Generall
for governing the battle. Plut. and Aemyl. prob. in Lys. This he speaks of
the Lacedemonian Kings, as contradistinguished from Captain-Generals of Armies.
O, but (says Salmasius) Lysander only dehorted the people from setting over
their Armies Captain-Generalls by succession, and persuaded them to take from
them the name of Kings. Def. reg. cap. 8. See how the man bewrays himself:
for Lysander was Captain-Generall of the Lacedemonian Army. And yet he was not
their King. Therefore amongst the Lacedaemonians it was one thing to be King,
and another thing to be Captain General of the Army. I confess their King had
also the power of the Army. But he had not only other power beside, but also
he had power of the battle in a more intense way then any deputed and
substituted Captain amongst the people. Otherwise there had been no difference
between Lysander and the King, who was but only Captain of the Army. Yea,
which is more, Lysander does not speak of shaking-off regium nomen, but regiam
potestatem as is clear out of Probus. But sure I am, regia potestas is not
nomen regis, but res regis.

Salmasius shall have no need to deny that the Carthaginian annual Kings were
Kings properly so called. But in the interim he shall give us leave to consider
and take a light view of the nature of the word sufetes. Which is taken in a
twofold sense. 1. Largely. And so the word may be derived from the root (...)
sapha. Whence sufes is all one with (...) sophe, speculator inspector,
episcopus, or ephorus. Thus sufetes may be referred to judges of any sort. And
in this sense Alexander ab Alexandro refers it to the Grecian aesymnetae,
the Egyptian dioecetes, the Persian megistanes, the Oscian medix, etc. Geni.
di. lib. 4. cap. 23. Him Julius Scaliger follows, whileas he says, Porro qui
Hebraice sciunt, and non ignorant Poenos, Tyrorum colonos esse, concedent mihi,
Sufes idem esse, quod (...). And so the man supplying Festus words, says,
Sufes dictus est Poenorum lingua summus magistratus, ut Oscorum medix, etc. 2.
Strictly and by limitation. And so it is derived from the root (...) saphat.
Whence sufes is all one with (...) sophet. Which in the Greek is (...), a
judge. In this sense it is applied to the Carthaginian yearly Kings, and Roman
Consuls. Alex. ab. Al. genesis di. lib. 3. cap. 3. The word sufes by Festus, and
T. Livius is rendered consul. So it is by Sabellicus, Aen. 5. lib. 5. It cannot
be denied but as sufetes is a Punick word, so in it is most strict and rigorous
acceptance, it is only relative to the Carthaginian annual Kings. Yet I must
needs say, that as it is taken strictly and by way of limitation, with very
good reason in may be referred to the Roman consuls: for they had that same
power which the Carthaginian Kings had, and both of them were yearly
Magistrates. Having thus discussed the grammary of the word, you may observe,
that in it is first acceptance it is not only relative to those who in old
were above Kings, but also to those who were inferior to them. And in the
second acceptance it is relative to such, who amongst the Carthaginians were
both re, and nomine Kings, and amongst the Romans, to such who were Kings, not
nomine, but re. But if we take sufetes precisely for sophetim, (unless you
take sophetim in a larger sense then it is taken in the book of the Judges) you
must needs say, that it is only relative to such who were Kings neither re nor
nomine: for afterward I shall make it appear, that the Judges of Israel were so
far from being of a Kingly power, that contrariwise they were but of equal
authority with any of the Sanhedrin. At least it is easy to prove that they
were not of a Kingly power, or of such power as had the Roman consuls, and the
Carthaginian sufetes, albeit we should say that they were the first of the
Sanhedrin, having greater power then any of the rest: for the Athenian annual
Princes had more power then any member of the Athenian council, and yet they
were not properly Kings. We may say the like also concerning the decennal
Princes, and those Princes who amongst the Athenians did govern for their
lifetime. I deny not but these may be, yea and were, called Kings, who were
not so indeed, as the Judges of Israel, Judge. 18. And, we deny not, (as
Salmasius will have it, Def. reg. cap. 8.) but many both of old and new also
were and are not called Kings, who were and are of greater honor and authority
then they. What then? This will never conclude, that the Carthaginian sufetes
were not of a Kingly power. Though the word sufetes may be taken for sophetim,
yet shall we never conclude therefrom, that the Carthaginian sufetes had no
more Power then the Judges of Israel. At the most it concludes, that they had
not a kingly power in a full and intense measure. And therefore the word in its
most native signification is all one with Consules, who had a kingly power,
though not in the highest degree. And for my-self, I can find no essential
difference between the Carthaginian Sufetes, and the Lacedemonian Kings.
Whereupon I am made to conclude, That as the one, so the other also, were of a
kingly power.

This man looks upon the off-cutting of Kings, as a thing of another world,
even as if such a thing had never been practiced before since the world began.
He tells us of Agis, how that amongst all the Lacedemonian Kings, none was
cut off but he. But in the interim he shall observe, that though in the
examples which we shall allege to this purpose, there be some of them which
speak nothing of the off-cutting of Kings. Yet all of them do speak of the
punishment of Kings, either one way or other. And know likewise, that in old,
Kingdoms in punishing of capital faults, used diverse ways of punishment.
Amongst the Indians the delinquent, though guilty of the greatest crime, got no
more for his punishment, but to be shaved at the King's command. This was
thought amongst them a capital punishment. Nicol. Damasc. de Mor. Gent. Ind.
Some Nations, who dwelt about Caucasus, on capital transgressors did execute
banishment, as a capital punishment. They executed it instead of death. It is
reported, That the Tratlians thought it punishment enough to inflict upon a
murderer, if he did give a bushel, or measure, of Pulse to the friends of the
defunct. The Druids and Cercets, for the greatest faults, did no more, but
interdicted the delinquent from being accessory to the sacrifice. The like
punishment was also executed upon sacrilegious persons in Elephantine Ethiopia.
Alex. ab. Al. genesis di. lib. 3. cap. 5. Where if the Reader shall be pleased a
little to trouble his eyes, he shall see how that some Nations in old,
according to the Laws of the kingdom, in their punishments were most severe,
though against the smallest faults, and some were not so, but were most remiss
in their punishment, though against the greatest crimes. Therefore Salmasius
shall not think, that those, who did not punish their Kings with death, were
any more favorable to them, then those, who did bring them to the scaffold and
cut off their heads: for he may see, that amongst some Nations, even a small
punishment was thought capital. We shall therefore think, that the Egyptians of
old in with holding stately and glorious burials from their delinquent Kings,
did esteem that as great, if not a greater punishment, then if they should have
brought them forth, and caused cut off their head. Diod. rer. ant. lib. 2. cap.
3. In Meros they withdrew themselves from the society of their delinquent
Kings, till through want of company they consumed away in languish. This they
esteemed a greater punishment, (and indeed so it was) then if they should have
brought him to the scaffold. Alex. ab. Alex. lib. 3. cap. 5. And how the
Egyptians plagued Amasis their King, is storied already, Prop. 1. Ans. The
Senate amongst the Cumaeans, which they called Phylactus, holding their Kings
by the hand, still detained them till they either rewarded them, or punished
them according to their deserts. Alex. ab. Alex. ib. The heroic Theseus was
banished by the Athenians. Val. max. lib. 5. cap. 3. Diod. Sic. rer. ant. lib.
5. cap. 5. Plut. in These. Sardanapalus, because of his beastliness and
sensuality, was dethroned by his subjects. Arist. Po. lit. lib. 5. cap. 10.
Metasth. an. Pers. lib. Just. lib. 1. Diod. Sic. ant. lib. 3. cap. 7. And (as
Herodotus, lib. 1. storieth) after Sardinapalus was put out of the way, both
the Assyrians and Medes for a long time were governed without Kings, by Popular
government. The Athenians did cut off Cylon, together with his accomplices, who
intruded himself upon the Kingdom, or at least endeavored to do so. So did
they cut off Hipparchus, son to Pisistratus, and also endeavored the
off-cutting of Thessalus, another of his sons, who succeeded to him in the
Kingdom. They did also cut off Cleon, together with 1500 with him, who had
destroyed the Commonwealth. Herac. de Pol. Ath. They caused Miltiades to die in
prison, although he was King of Chersonesus. Herod. lib. 6. Val. max. lib. 5.
cap. 3. Aemil. Prob. in vit. Miltiad. Plut. in vit. Cim. And you will find
Aristotle tell you in the general concerning Pisistratus and his posterity, who
were Kings in Athens, how they were punished and shut from their Kingdom. Pol.
5. cap. 10. Leonidas, King of Lacedemonia was banished. So was Cleombrotus. And
Agis was imprisoned, and cut off in prison, though I must needs say, unjustly.
Plut. in Ag. and Cle. But Aristotle shutteth-up all this in a word, (...), i.
e. Therefore the Lacedaemonians have destroyed many kingly powers. Pol. 5. cap.
10. The Syracusians, under the conduct of Dion, expelled Dionysius, and
banished him. Arist. Pol. 5. cap. 10. Aemil. Prob. and Plut. in Dion. The
Carthaginians once banished, and at last did cut off Machaeus. Just. lib. 18.
They also banished Hannibal, and forfeited his estate: And if he had not stolen
away privily, they had cut him off. Plut. and Prob. in Han. Tarquinius
superbus, C. Caesar, and D. Nero, were cut off by the Romans. Luc. An. lib. 1.
cap. 7. lib. 4. cap. 2. Plut. in C. Caes. and Carol. M. Suet. in C. Caes. and
Ner. Aurel. victor. in Ner. Epit. vit. Caes. in C. Caes. Ignat. Romans prin. in
lib. 1.

Inst. 3. O but (says Salmasius) Nero was cut off, not de jure, but de facto.
And (says he) there was as great a difference between Charles and Nero, as was
between the Roman Senators, and the English Butchers. Def. Reg. cap. 4. Ans.
This poor man ^oweth not what he would be at. His over-word is, Did ever any,
as the Rebels in England, cut off their King? Was ever any Nation (says he) so
monstrous, so cruel, and so barbarous as the English Rebels, Cut-purses, and
bloody Butchers, who dared to put hand in their dread Sovereign? Read this
man's Book all over, and you will find this to be over-word: What? Did not the
Senate of Rome cut off Nero? And yet (says he) never any before did cut off
their King, but the English Enthusiasts, and giddy-headed Traitors. The man
needs not to look upon the off-cutting of Charles, as a thing singular: If he
will not be wilfully deluded, he may learn from what foregoeth, many examples
of punishing, and cutting-off delinquent Kings. The Question between us is not
only, whether, or not Kings, de jure, may be cut off; but also, whether, or
not, de facto, Kings were punished and cut off by the People? Concerning the
fact, Salmasius cannot get it denied, albeit he strives to justle us out of it,
by changing the state of the question, and starting aside from that, which for
the present is most in hand. And I wonder much, that the man calls in
question the lawfulness of the fact of the Roman Senate, in causing Nero to be
cut off. And as for the jus and lawfulness of the Roman Senat's fact, in
cutting-off Nero, I know not, if any beside Salmasius can deny it, but an
incarnat Devil: he was a murderer, a paricide, a persecuter of the Saints, and
a destroyer of the Commonwealth. And Royallists themselves have not a face to
deny, that it is lawful to cut off Tyrants. And whereas he says, That there
was a difference between Nero and Charles, and between the Senators of Rome,
and the Representative of England. So say I too. Nero was an Ethnic, but
Charles a Christian. But friend, nomine Christian, and re Antichristian. In this
he was worse then Nero, more dangerous at least, though not so gross. Nero was
a paricide, but not Charles. Yet let me tell you, as they differed in some
things, they agreed in other things. As Nero was an enemy to Christ's reign, so
was he. As Nero was a murderer, so was he. As Nero was a persecuter of the
Saints, so was he. And as Nero was a destroyer of the Commonwealth, so was he.
And as for the Representative of England, they differ from the Roman Senators
in this, that they professed friendship to Christ, and the Roman Senators in
Nero's time were not so. And who, but enemies to Christ, will say, That
Ethnicks had more power to execute judgment on a Tyrant, a persecuter of the
Saints, and a destroyer of the Commonwealth, then such had in executing
judgment on a man of that same stamp, rather worse then better?

And to draw home to our own doors, we will give you some examples out of the
English and Scottish Chronicles, how Kings were punished and brought upon the
stage. Amongst the English Kings, we find these, Gorboniannus, Emeriannus,
Vortiger, Edwine: All these were dethroned and put from their Kingdom. Edward
2. was imprisoned by the Barons, with the help of the young Queen and Prince.
Edward 5. was dethroned, and obscurely buried in the Tower of London. Amongst
the Scottish Kings we find not a few, who were either banished, imprisoned, or
cut off. Thereus by his Nobles was constrained to flee for fear of them.
Durstius was killed in battle by his People. Gillus, his People and Nobles
arising against him, diffiding his own, fled into Ireland, and at last was
discomfited, taken, and killed. Evennus 3. was taken in battle by his Nobles,
and condemned into perpetual bonds. Dardanus was taken in battle, and being
beheaded, his head was hanged-up for a spectacle, and his body cast into a
Sinck. Lugthacus, once was censured by a Parliament, for slighting the counsel
of the States, in appointing base men to Public Offices; and at last he was
killed by the Noblemen and People. The like happened to Mogaldus. Conarus
degraded and imprisoned (where he died) till he resigning the Kingdom, they
substituted another. Athirco being pursued by his Nobles, killed himself.
Donaldus 3. usurper, was killed by Crathilinthus, idonea manu collecta.
Romachus was censured by the Parliament, and being beheaded by his Nobles, his
head was put upon a pole. Constantinus 1. was punished by his States.
Ferchardus 1. (Renuentem, arce expugnata, -- in jus pertrahunt) in prison
killed himself. Ferchardus 2. was also censured by the Parliament. Egenus 8.
was put to death by the Parliament, all consenting thereto. Donaldus 5. being
censured by the Parliament, was put in prison, where he killed himself. So
Ethus being dethroned, in prison died of grief. Constantine 4. was killed in
battle. Grimus, being taken in battle, his eyes were put out, and he died of
wounds and grief. Macbethus being vanquished, fled into the Castle of Dunse,
where he was killed. Donald 7. was made to flee by Duncanus (for whom the
Nobles sent) in Aebudas. Duncanus was made to flee, and afterward put in
prison, where he died. This was done by Edgar, sent for by the Noblemen to that
purpose. Edward Baliol was expelled and shut-out of his kingdom. James 3. was
killed in the pursuit by his Nobles. Q. Mary was arraigned in Parliament, and
by a great part condemned to death, by many to perpetual imprisonment. What
will Salmasius say to these practices? Or rather, what will the Scots speak of
them? O marvelous and unspeakable Providence! Never enough admired, never
enough praised: Behold, and see in this matter the stately steps of Providence.
It is known this day to the world, that no Nation is so malignant as Scotland,
so much idolizeth a King, and doteth upon him as it does: It is not ashamed, to
postpone Christ's Interest to Caesar's. No Nation pleads so much for absolute
power to the King, as it does; It pleads for an absolute immunity to the
King, from all punishment and restraint. And yet (albeit I have read most of
the ancient and chief Chronicles of all the ancientest and chiefest Kingdoms of
the world) I never read of any Kingdom that proceeded so much against, and so
often did punish delinquent Kings, as the Scots in old have done. No question,
our LORD in his wisdom has done this, that the ancient Scots may stand up in
judgment today, to condemn the practice of the latter Scots, who are not
ashamed to idolize a King, a creature like themselves.

Having most abundantly evidenced, how that Regal power in many foreign
Kingdoms, in old, has been subjected to Law, no less then any inferior
power; we do now in the next room, drawing home toward our own doors,
demonstrate, the King of Britain to be a regulated and non-absolute King,
according to the Laws and Customs of England and Scotland. As for England, we
must needs take it under these notions: 1. As it was before Julius Caesar
conquered it: for that time, it is thought very doubtsome and uncertain, and
therefore I mind to pass it at this time, till afterward in a more
convenient place; in a word, not sparing to say, that Brutus, the first King of
England, was an absolute King: for as he lived in the days of the Heroes,
wherein Regal power was most in request, so by his own proper conduct and
industry, he firstly founded and planted a Kingdom there. This comes nigh that
which Aristotle says, alleging that in the days of the Heroes Kings had
(...). Observe by the way, that though (...) draws nigh to (...), yet is
there some difference between them. But how they differ, as also how Aristotle
in this place is to be understood, you have at length expressed afterward. Now
Aristotle for his saying assigns many causes, amongst which these be, (...),
either by gathering people together, or by purchasing a Kingdom. Polit. 3. cap.
10. Now Brutus, as is reported, did both these. And consequently, we need not
scruple to say, that he had a full and absolute power. We dare not say so much
in behalf of his posterity, and those who immediately succeeded him. Heroicisme
then was upon the declining hand, and withal, the people were not so much
engaged to them as to Brutus himself. And, after the Line of Brute was ended,
it is reported, that Corbomannus K. 28. was deposed by the people, which could
not have been, if he had had an absolute and arbitrary power. Emerianus K. 34.
when he had tyrannously reigned seven years, was deposed. Chirennus, K. 41.
through his drunkenness reigned but one year. Whereupon we may very probably
conclude, that from Brutus unto Cassivelanus, who was subdued by Julius Caesar,
the English Kings were not absolute. 2. As it was from Julius Caesar, unto
William the Conqueror. As for this time, there may be something said for the
absoluteness of the English Kings. If we speak of those Kings whom the Roman
Emperors deputed, it is likely, they had an absolute power, by derivation from
the Roman Emperors, as had Herod from Antonius, and the Roman Senate. Jos. ant.
lib. 15. cap. 4. And whileas the Englishes were subdued by the Danes and
Saxons, I think it no wonder, though then the Kings of England had an absolute
power, and that which is called (...). We have showed already, that conquering
Kings are all-commanding Kings. See. Concl. 1.4. And those who are acquainted
with the English History, do know, that from Cassivelanus, unto William the
Conqueror, the Kingdom of England was never free, either of intestine or of
foreign wars. It was no time then for exercising Laws to the full against
any, much less Kings. There were some of their Kings at that time, to whose
conduct and valor the Englishes were much engaged, in maintaining their
Liberties, and withstanding the force and fury of the common Enemy. No wonder,
though such, by way of gratification, were invested with a full and large
power. Others again were mere Conquerours, or else deputed by the Conqueror.
And so we think, there was reason for it, why such were clothed with an
absolute and plenary power: for then the Kingdom of England was not under
Kings, but under Masters. And what can Masters do, but lord over their
servants? All that while the Kingdom of England was an unsettled Kingdom, and
could scarcely be called it is own. Which makes me in reason conclude, that
then there was little time left for exercising Policy, and putting Laws in
execution. This Polydorus Virgilius tells in a word, whileas he says, that
before Henry 1. there were few Conventions made by the Kings amongst the
people, for ordering according to Law the business of the Kingdom. Angl. hist.
lib. 11. Although in an absolute notion (...), we may say, that from Brutus
unto Cassivelanus, and from Cassivelanus unto William the Conqueror, Kingly
Government in England was non-absolute, and without full power, yet we cannot
say so in a relative notion (...), as afterward shall appear.

3. As the Kingdom of England was about the days of the Conqueror, whether a
little before, or afterward, unto this time. We deny not but under the reign
of the Conqueror himself, Regal Government in England, was of a most absolute
and arbitrary power. In this we take Salmasius by the hand. He needed not Def.
Reg. cap. 8. to have troubled himself to have cited any Authors for proof
thereof: Very reason itself teaches the point: for he subdued England by
strength of hand. But sure I am, a Conqueror may dispose upon a conquered
Kingdom, according to his pleasure. It is an act of favor in him if he do not
destroy all, much more as an absolute Lord to rule over all. In the interim I
desire Salmasius to take a view of Polyd. Virg. Angl. hist. lib. 9. where he
shall find the point evidenced to his heart's desire, beyond any Historian he
cites. Although in this we go-along with him (as we must needs do) yet
notwithstanding we cannot say so much, whether concerning Edward who preceded,
or those who succeeded him. Let it be so, that those who succeeded the
Conqueror, had the same privileges which the Conqueror did arrogat to
himself. Yet can it not be denied, but according to Edward the Confessor his
Laws, or as they are called, the ancient Laws of the Kingdom, Kingly
Government in England is regulated, and not absolute. We make the point good
from these reasons. Firstly, because according to these Laws the King of
England is not hereditary. And therefore we read not, that ever Edward did tie
the Crown of England to Royal succession. I confess, it is alleged, that he
promised the Crown after him to William the Conqueror, (who was of near kindred
and great credit with him) if he had not children of his own. But this is not
only improbable in itself, but also it is so judged. And why shall we think
otherwise of it, seeing the Conqueror came not to the Crown of England, by
blood-right, but by mere Conquest, having the whole Kingdom of England against
him? And Polydore says, Hinc colligere licet, vel Edovardum non servasse fidem
Gulielmo, quam a principio de hereditate regni, non satis considerate dedisset,
-- vel nullum (quod verisimilius est) fecisse promissum. Angl. hist. lib. 8.
This he gathers from that which Edward spoke to Haraldus, whileas he prayed
GOD, that either he would avert the coming of England into the Conquerours
hand, or else that he would keep him back from it so long as he lived.
Therefore to me it is more then apparent, that the Confessor did not in his
Testament assign the Conqueror to the Crown, albeit Salmasius alleges the
contrary, Def. Reg. cap. 8. What? Does not Polydore tell us, that because
Edgarus was of young and tender years, he was not admitted by the people to
reign? And fearing lest the Conqueror should succeed to the Crown, they
rejoiced greatly, that Harald took upon him to reign in Edward's room: Whereat
(as may be learned from Polydore) Edward was not displeased himself, but very
well satisfied that Harald should succeed to him. Whereupon we fear not to say,
that not only the power of enki^ging was in the people's hands, but also, that
the Confessor did not promise the Kingdom to the Conqueror after him,
although the contrary be alleged. And is it likely, that the people would have
so much declined and withstood the Conqueror, if Edward had assigned him to
the Crown, as his heir? No verily; for they adored him as their Lawgiver. It
is known, that Rufus was but third son to the Conqueror, and yet he was
created King. Him the people preferred before Robert his eldest brother. What?
Would they have done so, if blood-right, by the Law of the Kingdom, had been
the title to the Crown? No verily: It is remarkable, that Rufus was ordained
King, and it was not so much as objected, that Robert was elder then he, he
being but the third son to the Conqueror, and Robert being the eldest Yea,
Rufus dying without children, they appointed Henry, the Conquerours fourth son,
King; as yet passing-by Robert the eldest. And (which is more) though Henry 1.
had left in his Testament, his daughter Mathildis, together with her sons, as
heirs of the Kingdom, yet notwithstanding the people created Steven, Nephew to
Henry 1. By the authority of Parliament it was ordained, that Steven so long as
he lived, should enjoy the Kingdom of England, and that Henry 2. son to
Mathildis, daughter to Henry 1. should succeed to Steven in the Kingdom of
England, passing-by any that was begotten by Steven. Likewayes the people
created John King; although K. Richard (dying without heirs) had left Arthure,
son to Gaufredus, who was elder then John, heir to the Crown. I might speak
more for clearing this purpose, but I forbear, judging this sufficient. Whence
it is more then evident, that the Crown of England, since the days of Edward
the Confessor, by no Law of the Kingdom, is hereditary. I confess, since that
time, now and then, the Kings eldest son did succeed, and was holden as He^r of
the Kingdom. But this was only by custom, through favor of the Race, in
which, according to the manner of Nations, (which I must needs call an abuse)
very ordinarily the firstborn, is preferred as the only lawful Heir of the
Crown. Therefore seeing the Crown of England since that time has not been (at
least, precisely) hereditary; to me it seems very probable, that for that
time it has not been absolute and arbitrary: for so the original and
fountain-power of enkinging is in the People's hands. And consequently in this
respect, the People are simply above the King, as the cause is simply above its
effect. Philosophers say, That causa est nobilior suo effectu. And so, seeing
the King of England depends from the People; no question, they have simply a
power over him, and not he an absolute power over them.

Secondly, Because, according to these Laws, the liberty of the subject is
vindicated, and the Prince is subjected to Law. Because in Henry 1. his time, a
Parliament was holden. At which time Parliamentary Power by the Law of the
Kingdom was declared the Supreme and highest Authority: for any thing of weight
was referred to it. So that whatsoever was done, either by the command of the
King, or of the People, it was holden null, unless it had been ratified by the
Parliament. In it every one, whether King, or other Members thereof, have alike
and equal power of speaking. And withal, nothing spoken in it is of validity
and force, unless it be concluded on by the major part, together with the
approbation of the King. Polyd. Ang. hist. lib. 11. It is observable, That by
the authority of the Parliament it was ordained, That Steven so long as he
lived, should remain King of England, and that Henry 2. afterward should
succeed him. By whose mediation and authority, the debate between Henry and
Steven touching the Crown, was decided. And, I pray you, how could these things
have been, unless the Parliament had been above the King?

Inst. 4. But (says Salmasius) the power af convocating, and dissolving the
Parliament, belongs to the King of England. The power of the Parliament is
extraordinary, and pro tunc. But the power of the King is ordinary and
perpetual. And likewise, the King of England in Parliament, has a negative
voice. And therefore in many Acts of Parliament, he is called the King and Lord
of the Parliament, and what is ordained, is enacted in his Name. And so (says
he) though the King of England does act according to the Laws of the Kingdom,
and concurrence of his Parliament, yet notwithstanding, he is an absolute King.
Otherwise the Kings of the Jews had not been absolute, who had power to do
nothing without the consent of the Sanhedrin. And Artaxerxes had not been
absolute, who could not be reconciled to Vasthi, because the Law discharged it.
Yea, if Kings were not absolute, because they act according to the Law, and the
advice of their Parliament; then Cambyses had not been absolute; who conveened
a Council, whileas be intended to marry his german sister, and demanded of
them, if there was any such law for allowing such a marriage. Def. Reg. cap. 8.
and 9.

Answ. Salmasius shall do well, to consider these few things. 1. What the power
of the English Parliament is. Which is defined by Camdenus, to be made-up of
three Estates, having the highest and most sovereign power in making Laws,
confirming Laws, annulling Laws, interpreting Laws, and in doing every thing
wherein the good of the Commonwealth is concerned. Brit. chorog. de Tribun.
Ang. This is far from Salmasius mind, who ( Def. Reg. cap. 9.) opinionateth,
that the Parliament has not power over every thing in the Kingdom. But
Polydore summeth-up the power of the Parliament under these notions. First,
Every thing wherein the good of the Commonwealth is interested, is referred to
it. Secondly, Whatsoever is done at the command, whether of King or People, is
of none effect, unless it be authorized by the Parliament. Thirdly, It
establishes and takes away Laws, as it judges fit. Fourthly, Every Member of
it has a-like power and freedom in voicing. And what is decreed and enacted by
Parliament, he calls it, the proper and municipal Law of the Kingdom. Seeing
then the Parliament is the most sovereign and supreme power in the Kingdom of
England, according as it was in old; how can it be said, That the King of
England has power over it? If it be so, then you admit two Supreme powers, and
a power above a Supreme power; which is contradicent. The Lacedemonian Ephori
were no otherwise above their Kings, but because they were invested with the
highest and supreme power. All things were referred to the Parliament, even as
the Roman Consuls, as Festus (out of Coelidus) says, did refer every thing to
the Senate. Now, because of this, the Senate had the highest power, and was
above the Consuls. Ergo, seeing all matters of the Commonwealth in old, in the
Kingdom of England, were referred to the Parliament, no question it had power
above the King. The Roman Senate is therefore said, to have been of the
supreamest power, Fenest. de Magistrate. Romans cap. 1. because neither Kings, nor
Consuls, nor Dictators, nor any other Magistrate, could do any thing without
their advice and counsel. Ergo, seeing whatsoever the King of England, or any
other of that Kingdom, did in old, was to no purpose, without the authority and
approbation of Parliament, without all controversy the King of England was
subjected to the Parliament. Salmasius concludes the King to be above the
Parliament, because he alleges, the Parliament can do nothing without the
King. Why may not I then conclude, the Parliament to be above the King, because
re ipsa, and according to the Law of the Kingdom, the King can do nothing
without the authority and consent of the Parliament? Where then, I pray you, is
the King's negative voice? There is not a Member in Parliament, cui aequa
loquendi potestas non competit. So says Polyd. Angl. hist. lib. 11. What? Do
you imagine, that ever the Parliament could by their authority have drawen-up
the foresaid agreement, between Steven and Henry 2. unless they had had power
above the King? What they did therein, was a direct acting both over Steven
their present King, and Henry 2. their future King. But, will you tell me,
whileas the States of England did seek of K. John, to be governed by the
ancient Laws made by Edward the Confessor, whether or not were these Laws
Acts of mere pleasure, giving the King a liberty to do as he would, either to
tyrannize over the people, or not? You can not hold the affirmative, because
what they demanded of the King, was to be restored to liberty, and to be freed
of tyranny. Polyd. Vir. Angl. hist. lib. 15. And if you hold the negative part,
then do the ancient Laws of England pull absoluteness out of the king's hands,
and subject him to Law. Magna charta says, The King can do nothing but by
Laws, and no obedience is due to him but by Law. And the States of England
were so far from permitting John to rule at random, and not according to the
ancient Laws of the kingdom, that contrariwise they combined against him,
entering in oath together, to pursue him still on, till he should govern
according to Law, and establish the ancient Laws of the kingdom. Yea, albeit
that Pope Innocent commanded them to lay-down arms, and though upon their
denial thereof, they were declared enemies by the Pope, they notwithstanding
followed on their purpose, and cryed-out, that they would be avenged by fire
and sword, on such a wicked tyrant, who did so much slight the people. Aye,
which is more, they sent into France, and from thence brought Ludovick the
French king's son, and created him king, notwithstanding any thing either John
or the Pope could do in the contrary. Thus they never rested, till in sorrow
they brought John's head into the grave. Where I pray you is the absoluteness
of the king of England, whenas the States would not suffer him to govern but
according to Law, and in denying to do so, pursued him in arms, unkinging him,
enkinging another in his room, and bringing himself in sorrow to the grave?
This is far from the arbitrary and infinite power of kings, Salmasius speaks
of. And whereas he says, the Parliament is but extraordinary and pro tunc,
this is, either because Kings were long before Parliaments; or because the
Parliament has not power to intermeddle in every business of the
Commonwealth, but is conveened pro re nata, for ordering the weightiest Affairs
of the kingdom. If you say the former, we do not deny it. We heartily confess,
that of all Governments, Monarchy was first established. And Aristotle gives
the reason of it, because (says he) in the beginning it was hard to find-out
many men, fit and able to govern. And therefore necessity moved them to lay the
government on one: for though in the beginning it was hard to finde-out many,
yet was it easy to finde-out one endowed with qualities and gifts for
governing. Polit. 3. cap. 11. lib. 4. cap. 13. But though this be granted, yet
does it not follow, but Senats, or Parliaments being established, they have
(even according to the custom of the Nations) more power then kings, as is
showed already. And therefore Aristotle says in the places forecited, that by
process of time, the number of Common-wealth's-men increasing, kings at last
went close out of request, and were denuded of all power. And Pol. 3. cap. 10.
he says, that in aftertimes the power of kings was extremely lessened, partly
because of their own voluntary demitting, and partly because of the people's
detracting from their greatness. Nay, any king Aristotle allows, he allows
no more power and greatness to him, but to be greater and more powerful then
every one separatim, and many conjunctim, but to be of less power and
greatness then the peoople. Pol. 3. cap. 11. But I pray you, what is the
Parliament, but the Representative of the people? If you say the other, we deny
it, as is showed already. And it seems very strange to me, that the
Parliament has not power in small matters, and yet has power to manage and go
about matters of highest concernment. If Salmasius will ask Philosophs, they
can tell him, Qui potest majus, potest minus. He imagines that he gains the
point, because the King of England had power to conveen and dissolve the
Parliament, as he judged fit. This is but a singing of the triumph before the
victory: for the Roman Consuls had the same power over the Senate. Alex. ab
Alex. genesis di. lib. 3. cap. 3. But who will say, that they had an absolute
power over the Senate, though they had power of convocating and dissolving it?
It is not unknown, that their power notwithstanding, was a non-absolute and
limited power. Alex. ab Al. ibid. Pompon. Laet. de mag. Romans cap. 15. Fenest.
de mag. Romans cap. 7. So say Festus and Coelidus.

2. What honor is given to the King. And if Salmasius will consider this
aright, he will find that there is a vast disproportion between his honor and
his power, and that there is more given to him in word then in deed. The King
of Scotland cannot be called by Salmasius, or any other, an absolute Prince.
This afterward shall most evidently appear. And yet in many Acts of Parliament
he is called the Parliament's Sovereign Lord and King, and what is enacted in
Parliament, ordinarily it is expressed under the King's name. Salmasius
imagines, that this makes much for his purpose, whileas it is said, Dominus
noster Rex, ad petitionem suorum praelatorum, comitum, and baronum
congregatorum in Parlamento, constituit certos articulos. In praef. stat. voc.
Art. sup. chart. temp. Ed. 1. i. e. Our Lord the King at the desire of his
Prelates, Earls and Barons, assembled in Parliament, constituted certain
Articles. In Parlamento supremi domini Regis, illius concilium convenit, and
ita praeceptum est ab ipsomet. In stat. Escheat. fact. 29. an. Edv. 1. i. e. In
the Parliament of our Sovereign Lord the King, his Council conveened, and so
it was commanded by himself. The like we have in the Acts of the Scottish
Parliaments. Eodem die Rex per modum statuti ordinavit. Jam. 1. Parl. 6. act.
83. i. e. The same day the King by way of Statute, ordained. -- Rex, ex
consensatotius Parlamenti, statuit and ordinavit. act. 84. i. e. The King with
consent of the whole Parliament, did statute and ordain. But Parl. 5. act. 81.
the King withal gets a very lordly style. Item the said day, our sovereigne
Lord the King, with consent of the whole Parliament, ordained. The Scottish
parliamentary acts are full to this purpose. But can any therefore conclude,
that the King of Scotland is an absolute Prince? No verily. Kings get such
honor, and every thing for the most part is enacted and emitted in their name,
not because they have power and dignity above the Parliament, but because they
are the highest and chiefest Members of Parliament. And let me tell you, people
are so much deluded with the greatness of the King, that they cannot give him
only that which is his due, but they ascribe that which is due both to him and
Parliament, to him alone. People know better how to idolize Kings, then how to
honor them. Yea, people are more ready to obey the King, then the Parliament:
And therefore I think, Parliaments that will have Kings for effectuating their
purposes, do wisely to emit Acts in the King's name, and set him a-work to
execute them. Therefore Salmasius shall not need to boast with this, that the
King of England is called, the Parliament's Sovereigne Lord; and the
Parliament, the Council of the King. The like he will find more then once
amongst the Prefaces and Acts of the Scottish Parliaments. Yet he, or any for
him, can never prove, that the King of Scotland is an absolute King. He shall
therefore do well, (lest he confound things which should be divided) to
distinguish carefully between that which the king has re tenus, and what is
given to him but nomine tenus. And so he will find, that though the king of
England has as much nomine tenus, as if he were an absolute Prince, yet re
tenus he is subjected to Law.

And whereas he alleges, kings may govern by advice and counsel of
Parliament, and yet may be absolute, and have a negative voice, the like say I
too. But he shall give me leave to say, that such have not such a vast power as
he talketh-of, as afterward is showed. I confess, the examples of Ahasuerus
and Cambyses are to the purpose, though the man fail a little concerning the
jus of the kings of the Jews, as afterward is showed. Howsoever, though I
grant this, yet shall he never prove, that the king of England, according to
the Law of the kingdom, is an absolute Prince, and has a negative voice in
Parliament. He can never show me, that the king of England had the same power
which the king of Persia had.

Inst. After the Conqueror (says Salmasius) in Rufus, Henry 1. Steven, Henry
2. and Richard 1. did remain purum putum Monarchicum, the power of even-down
and unmixed Monarchy. And though (says he) in the reign of King John, that
power was lessened, yet was there nothing derogated from the King's supremacy
and absoluteness, remaining unviolated, until the perjured English rebels at
this day have altered and diminished the just greatness of the King of
England. Def. reg. cap. 8.

Ans. I admire that this man knows nothing, but to rail on them whom he
knows not. Well, I cast him over into GOD'S hands, and fall to examine what
he alleges. Sure I am, notwithstanding all his railing, it cannot abide the
touchstone. It is known to be a manifest lie which he alleges, concerning
the immediate successors of the Conqueror. It is reported in even-down terms,
that these kings (of whom Salmasius expressly speaks) esteemed Norman Laws
established by the Conqueror, too rigorous and unjust. And therefore, before
they got the Crown, they promised to the people to abrogate them, and in place
of them, to establish the Laws of the Confessor. Yea, every-one of them
promised more then another, and to keep themselves within the bounds of Law, to
the very heart's desire of the people. This was not only promised by
themselves, but also by others in their name. And unless they had so promised,
they could never have gotten the Crown. They got it upon the expectation of the
accomplishment of their promise, as the English Histories do abundantly story.
And it cannot be denied but Henry 1. did give the Englishes a free Parliament,
and made it the government of the kingdom. So that he is called the first king
in England, in whose time the power of Parliament was established. And as for
John, it is very well known, that because he did not stand to his oath and
promise at his Coronation, for establishing the ancient Laws of the kingdom,
but endeavored to govern after the manner of the Conqueror, in an arbitrary
and loose way, therefore the people rose-up in arms against him, and dethroning
him, did set-up another in his room. And whereas this man says, that the
ancient Laws of the kingdom did not derogate from the supremacy and
absoluteness of the king, the contrary of that is already proved. It seems
strange to me, that he is not ashamed to affirm, that what Laws were
established by Edward the Confessor, and granted by King John, were preserved
inviolable to this day, derogating nothing from the absoluteness of John's
successors. Who knows not, that the liberties of Magna Charta, and de
Foresta subject the King to Law? And because that Henry 3. did not stand to the
maintenance thereof, after he had given his Oath at a Parliament at Oxford, to
maintain them inviolable, therefore the People took up Arms against him, till
after many debates between them, they caused him often to promise, that they
should be inviolably observed, as well by him, as by all other. Thus they tied,
not only him, but also his heirs, to govern according to the ancient Laws of
the Kingdom. And because Edward 2. did act against these Laws, following the
counsel of Peter Gaveston, and the two Spensers, therefore he was imprisoned
and dethroned, after several conflicts between him and the People? It Is
remarkable, that the People refused to crown him, till firstly he did put P.
Gaveston from him. And likewise Edward 5. was deposed, after he had reigned two
months and eleven days, and was obscurely buried in the Tower of London.
Where then, I pray you, is the absoluteness of the King of England?

Inst. 6. Under Edward 4. (says Salmasius) it was enacted, That the King might
erect a public Judgmet-seat, by his Letters patent, in any part of the kingdom
he would. Under Henry 7. it was enacted and declared, That the King had a full
power in all Causes, in administering Justice to every one. In the first year of
Edward 6. a Statute was made, declaring, all authority, both Spiritual and
Temporal, to be derived from the King. Def. Reg. cap. 9.

Answ. I must needs say, This has more color of probation, then any thing the
man as yet has objected. But notwithstanding this he will do well to observe
this distinction. 1. What is given to the King by way of complement and
Court-expression. 2. What is giving to him in reality and by way of action. The
truth is, in the first notion there is as much ascribed to the King of England,
as if he had been indeed an absolute Prince. On him you have these
Court-Epithets, The King of the Parliament, The sovereign Lord of the
Parliament. Yea, and the Parliament is called, The Parliament of the King. He
is called, The Original both of Spiritual and Temporal power; having full
power over all causes and persons, and to erect Judicatories in any part of the
kingdom, where he pleases. This is spoken. But what then? Examine the matter
aright, and you will find it but spoken. What? cannot Court-Parasites, and
flattering Counselors pass a fair compellation upon their Prince? It Is the
least thing they can do, to bring themselves in credit with him. Read the
Parliamentary Acts of Scotland, and you will find just as much spoken, if not
more, of the King of Scotland. In Parl. 18. Jam. 6. Act. 1. and 2. James 6. is
called, Sovereign Monarch, absolute Prince, Judge and Governor over all
Estates, Persons, and Causes. And yet who dare say, but the King of Scotland,
according to the Law of the kingdom, is a regulated and non-absolute Prince?
But according to the second notion, let us examine the strength of these
Epithets. And so in the first place we fall a-discussing particularly these
three Sanctions, of which Salmasius speaks. The first says, That the King by
his Letters patent may erect Court-Judicatories in any part of the Kingdom,
where he pleases. This will never conclude, that the King of England has an
absolute power. This Act only speaks of his power of calling inferior
Judicatories. What is that to the purpose? The King of England had power to
call, and dissolve the Parliament, the highest Judicatory of the Land. Yea,
Henry 1. did ordain and constitute the Parliament. Yet notwithstanding that,
(as is showed already) the King of England cannot be called absolute. The King
of Scotland has power of giving-out Letters of Caption. Parl. Jam. 2. chap.
12. Courts of Regalities are justified by the King's Justice, chap. 26. And the
Parliament petitioned the King to cause execute the Act anent the Establishment
of Sessions, for executing Justice, chap. 65. The power of the College of
Justice is ratified and approved by the King. Jam. 5. Parl. Edinb. Mar. 17.
1532. But who will therefore call the King of Scotland an absolute King? The
second Sanction gives the King full power over all persons, and all causes.
But I pray you, does this give the King power over the Parliament and Laws? No
verily. It only gives the King power over all persons and estates, separatim,
but not conjunctim, as conveened in parliament. Which comes just to that which
Aristotle says, alleging, that the King has power over all, seorsim, but not
conjunctim. Polit. 3. cap. 11. And he is said, to have a full power, not
because his power is absolute and boundless. Verily, it must not be taken in a
simple and absolute notion, but in relative and comparative sense. It does not
imply the exemption and immunity of the King, from Civil and Politic
subjection to Law: But at the most it pleads for exemption to him from
foreign power, and subjection to foreign laws. This is evident by comparing
this sanction under Henry 7. with stat. 18. Rich. 2. chapter 5. Where it is
declared that the Crown of England is free without subjection to any other
Crown, but is only subject immediately to GOD, in every thing which relates to
the managing of it is Affairs. The like is spoken Henry 8. Par. 24. So we find
the like fullness of power pleaded-for to the King of Scotland. ITEM It is
thought expedient, that since our Sovereign Lord has full jurisdiction, and
free empire within his Realm, that his Highness may make Notares, -- and in
time to-come, that no Notare made nor to be made by the Emperor's authority
have faith in Contracts Civil, unless he be -- approved by the King's
highness. Jam. 3. parl. chapter 38. This exemption is pleaded for to the King of
Scots, from subjection to the Imperial Laws. But who, I pray you, for this
will conclude the King of Scots to be an absolute Prince, having immunity and
freedom from all Laws, whether muncipall and Country-Lawes, or forensick and
foreign? And as for the third sanction, the words whereof be these, Omnem
authoritatem spiritualem and temporalem derivari a Rege, you shall be pleased
concerning it to observe this distinction. There be two terms in the act
itself, one concerning temporal, and another concerning spiritual power. We
begin at temporal power. The King may be called the original of it two ways.
1. Formally, i. e. as if all temporal power were therefore authoritative and
juridicall, because of the Kingly power, it being only in itself essentially
authoritative and commanding. This we deny to be the sense of the sanction, in
respect of temporal power. It is not only repugnant to Magnacharta, the
ancient Laws of the Kingdom, the nature of Parliaments appointed and ordained
in Henry 1. his time, to the oaths and promises of Rufus, Henry 1. and their
successors to act and govern according to Law, but also to the ordinary
practices of the Estates, who in maintenance of their Liberties and the ancient
Laws of the Kingdom, did rise in arms against their Kings, and caused them
nilled they, willed they, to subject their necks to the yokes of Law. Amongst
other of their practices this is very remarkable, that albeit they had saluted
Ludovick as their King, and put him in the room of John, yet notwithstanding in
the end they declined him, and in his stead crowned Henry 3. John's son. This
speaks much of the States power above the King. 2. Virtually. It cannot be
denied but in this notion all temporal power depends from the King. And that
two ways, effectively, and vindicatively. Effectively, because the King of
England had not only power of conveening and dissolving the Parliament, and of
ordaining inferior Judicatories, but also by him the Parliament of England was
firstly instituted and ordained. Vindicatively, because it was his part to
patronize and execute the acts of Parliament, at least as the main and prime
man of maintaining and defending them. The like power the Kings of Scotland had
also as is clear from their Acts of Parliament. But as for the spiritual power
of the King of England, I stand not much to confess that he had a formal and
Ecclesiastic power in Church Matters, and that what power the Church (so
called) had was derived from him. It cannot be denied, but before the conquest
there were Ecclesiastical Laws made by many Kings of England, as Inas, Alfred,
Edward the elder, Gythrum, Ethelstane, Edmund, Edgar, Aetheldred, Canutus and
others. In the interim this Gentleman shall do well to observe, that the King
of England had not always this power. It cannot be denied but Lanfrancus,
Anselmus, and Berket going to complain on their Kings and Governors, firstly
brought the Pope's judicial authority from Rome into England, both over King
and people. Which supremacy of the Pope over the Church of England until in
and about Henry 8. his days, who did shake-off the Pope's yoke, did continue.
And so Edward 6. succeeding to him; to me it is more then probable that by the
foresaid sanction made in his time, the ancient power of the Kings of England
in Church Matters was taken out of the Pope's hands, and put upon the King. And
it cannot be denied, but according to Edward the Confessour's Laws, the King
of England had a primary formal and Ecclesiastic power in Church Matters. I
stand not to grant that. But what though I should say, that according to this
statute made in Edward 6. his time, the King of England had a primary and
original power, and that formally, both in respect of spiritual and temporal
jurisdiction; yet will it only conclude an absoluteness of the King according
to Law, but not against it. It no ways denudeth the people of a fountain
power, to defend themselves against the unjust decrees and actings of the King.
The Roman dictatour had an absolute power in judging, and yet it was lawful
for the people to repeal his acts in their own just defense. Many times have
the People of England defended themselves from their King and stood by their
own liberties, notwithstanding the King's acting against them. What, I pray
you, is it for me to say that the King of England by this act is called the
original both of spiritual and temporal power, under a formal notion? Is he
not called also the King and Sovereign Lord of the Parliament? Is not the
Parliament called his Parliament? Is not every thing ordinarily acted and
emitted under his name? Is it not ordinarily said, It is ordained by the King,
with the consent, or it the desire of the three Estates? It is very seldom
said, It is ordained by the King and Parliament. But, I pray you, what be these
but Court-complements? They are words, and nothing but words. Go, confer them
with the practice of the Parliament and you shall find the one just contrary
to the other. No wonder forsooth, because the King gets more honor then he
has power. Try this, and you will find it an ordinary practice. Aye, which is
more, cannot a corrupt Parliament through the defection of the times give the
King more then what is due to him, either by the Law of GOD, or by the law of
the Nation? Know we not that Parl. 18. K. Jam. 6. through the backsliding of
the times did advance him to greater privileges then the King of Scotland by
the Law of the Kingdom had, or can be warranted by the Law of GOD? Indeed, I
will not say so of Henry 8. for it is known that in his young years he did put
the managing of the Kingdom into the hands of the Princes, as did others of his
predecessors before him. And as for Edward 6. I must needs say, his times were
better then any times of his predecessors. But it appears to me, that as both
Henry and he have encroached very far upon the liberties of the Church (so
called) so did they encroach too far upon the liberties of the State. But
leaving Henry, of whose power I find not so much spoken as of Edward, I must
tell you one thing concerning Edward, and it is this. Those who write of him,
and namely Fox, do cry him up beyond all the Kings of England, for piety,
wisdom and learning. And Fox runs so far out in his commendation, that he
esteems him inferior to no King, though worthy to be preferred to many.
Whereupon he fears not to match him with Josiah, and put the qualifications
of both in one balance. Which makes me imagine that the foresaid act emitted
in Parliament under Edward's reign, did pass in his behalf, because of his
personal endowments. The like act upon that same ground, (though in respect of
him it was merely pretended, without any reality in his person) did pass Parl.
18. upon K. Iam. 6. Thus the case is extraordinary. We deny not but because of
personal endowments Kings may be, and have been advanced to greatest power.
What? will this conclude an ordinary president thereof, and a standing law
therefore? No verily. There is no consequence from extraordinaries to
ordinaries. The standing ancient laws both of England and Scotland are against
absolute Princes. Of Scotland and of England we have spoken already at length.
Verily the example of Edward 1. though there were no more; may serve to clear
our purpose. He, to repair what was done amiss by his father Henry 3. (who was
at variance with the people touching the liberties of Magna charta, and de
foresta) did much gratify the people; restoring them to great liberty, and
abrogating all laws which did make for the bondage and slavery of the people.
Howsoever the matter be sive sic, sive non, these sanctions above cited by
Salmasius, do conclude the Parliament to have power above the King. The reason
is, because if we look precisely on these acts, what power the King has is
from them. They not only declare, but also they enact and ratify his power to
be such such. And so the king's power is the creature of the Parliament,
depending from it, as the effect from the cause. But sure I am, causa est
nobilior suo effectu, And consequently, if the king has an absolute power, by
virtue of the Parliament, then must the Parliament's power be more absolute;
for propter quod unumquodque est tale, illud ipsum est magis tale. And nemo dat
quod non habet.

Inst. 7. Bractonus (says Salmasius) does aver, that the King has power
over all that is in his kingdom. And that those things which concern peace and
power, do only belong to the Royal dignity. Every one (says he) is under the
King, and he is inferior to none but to GOD, as reason requires. In power he
ought to be above all his subjects: for he ought to have none like him, nor
above him in the Kingdom. De Angl. Monar. lib 4. cap. 24. sect. 1. lib. 1. cap.
8 sect. 8. and lib. 2. de Reg. In Rich. 2. stat. 18. cap. 5. it is said, Corona
Angliae libera fuit omni tempore, and non habet terrenam subjectionem, sed
immediate subdita est DEO in omnibus rebus, and nulli alteri. Act. 24 Parl.
Henr. 8. Regnum Angliae est Imperium, and ita ab orb fuit acceptum. Act. Parl.
24, Hen. 8. Quod hoc tuae gratiae regnum nullum superiorem sub DEO, sed solum
tuam gratiam agnoscat. Fuit, and est liberum a subjectione quarumcunque legum
humanarum -- Cap. 9.

Ans. We stand not to gloss Bracton's words. He lived in Henry 3. his days.
And finding the King and States at variance about superiority, as a
Court-parasit, he wrote in behalf of the King, as Royallists do now-a-dayes. He
did just so as they do now. Bracton had that same occasion of writing in behalf
of the King, which Salmasius has today. As the late King was at variance with
the people of England, for claiming absolute power over them; so the
controversy stood just so in Bracton's time between Henry 3. and the people.
But I pray you was it not as free to Bracton to flatter Henry, as for Salmasius
to flatter Charles? Leaving this man to himself, I hasten to examine the
strength of these Acts which Salmasius cites. And in a word, they do not plead
so much for the absoluteness of the king, as of the kingdom. They do not speak
de Rege Angliae, of the king of England, but de corona, or Regno Angliae, of
the Crown or kingdom of England. Howsoever, none of them does speak for
immunity and exemption to the king of England, from municipall, but from
foreign Laws: And therefore they declare the Crown of England to be a free
Crown, and subject to no other Crown; and the kingdom of England to be a free
kingdom, subject to the Laws of no other kingdom. I confess, they declare the
king to be above the kingdom, and inferior to none but to GOD. Which is true
indeed, taking the kingdom in esse divisivo, but not in esse conjunctivo.
Indeed, the King is above all in the kingdom sigillatim, one by one And in this
respect he is inferior to none but to GOD, though taking the kingdom in a
collective body, he be inferior thereto.

Inst. 8. In the first year of James his reign in England, the Parliament
acknowledges him to have an undoubted title to the Crown by blood-right. And
therefore they did swear allegiance both to him and his posterity. Whereupon
Camdenus says, that the King of England has supreme power and mere empire. De
Brit. lib. And Edvardus Cokius says, That according to the ancient Laws of the
Kingdom, the Kingdom of England is an absolute Kingdom: Wherein both the
Clergymen and Laics are subjected immediately under GOD, to their own King and
head. Cap. 9.

Ans. As for that concerning James, we make no reckoning of it: He was declared
the righteous and undoubted heir of the kingdom, through the defection and
backsliding of the times. What other Kings of England hinted at before, that
he did execute. Because he became King of Great Britain, and entered the
kingdom of England upon blood-relation; therefore flattering, Malignant and
Antichristian Counselors did declare his title to the kingdom of England to
be of undoubted hereditary right. I pray you, friend, were there not Malignants
then, as well as now? I may say, there were more then, then now, at least they
had greater authority then what Malignants have now a-dayes. And tell me, do
not Malignants at this day make use of the King's pretended greatness and
hereditary right to the Crown of Britain, for cloaking their knavery, and
effectuating their malignant purposes? Do not you imagine, but Papists and
Malignants in England had that same reason for them, to make use of K. James'
power? What I pray you is the over-word of Papists and Malignants in Britain
today? The King (say they) is the undoubted heir of the kingdom, and absolute
in power: Who then should rise against him? This is even the most they have to
cloak their knavery, and to cast a luster upon their Antichristian and
malignant endeavors. Do you imagine that the devil was sleeping in K. James
time? No verily. And there has nothing been done these twelve or thirteen
years bygone, whether against State or Church, but what was molded then. The
very platform of all was cast in his days, By the Scottish Parliament his
power was declared absolute: And by the English Parliament, his right to the
Crown of England was declared undoubted and hereditary. They stood not to swear
obedience to him and his posterity into all ages. And how far on he drew the
power of Episcopacy, and how much he acted for intruding the Mass Book upon
the Kingdom of Scotland, is more then known. Many wits, and many Pens, in his
days were employed for carrying-on and effectuating malignant and
antichristian designments. S al. is a child to object from the practice of the
English Parliament in K. James time. He may as well object for evincing his
purpose, from the practice of the Parliament holden at Oxford, by Charles. And
if he does either of them he does nothing but beggeth the question. He tells
us that the Parliament of England K. James an. 1. declared and enacted his
right to the Kingdom of England to be undoubted and hereditary. Well I can tell
him that William the Conqueror, the Normane-Lawgiver, does deny to the King
of England any such title or claim to the Crown. Diadema regale (says he) quod
nullus antecessorum meorum gessit, adeptus sum, quod divina solummodo gratia,
non sus contulit haeriditarium, -- Neminem Anglici regni constituo haeredem,
sed aeterno conditori, cujus sum, and in cujus manu sunt omnia, illud commendo;
non enim tantum decus haeriditario jure possedi, sed, diro inflictu, and multa
effusione sanguinis humani, perjuro Regi Haraldo abstuli, and interfectis, vel
fugatis fautoribus ejus dominatui meo subegi. Camd. Brit. chorogr. descr. which
he cites out of hist. de monast. Steph. Cadom. in Norm. i. e. I have acquired
the Royal Crown, which none of my ancestors did bear, which the grace of GOD
alone, and not hereditary right bestowed upon me, -- I constitute no heir of
the English Kingdom, but I recommend it to the eternal Creator, whose I am,
and in whose hands are all things: for I did not enjoy such a honor by
hereditary right, but by dire conflicts, and great effusion of man's blood I
took it from the perjured King Harald, and subjected it to my dominion, having
killed or put to flight his favorers. Thus Salmasius may see that he builds
hereditary right to the Kingdom of England upon a sandy foundation, in pleading
for the undoubtednes thereof from what right the Conqueror had over it. Let it
be so, the Conqueror himself had right to it by the sword, yet in his
foregoing latter-wil he shakes all his successors loose of any right to it by
succession, and casts the disposition thereof wholly over upon GOD and the
people. Whence was it, that (as is said already) the people did create Rufus
king in his room and passed-by Robert his eldest son. It Is remarkable, that no
where it can be read that the Conqueror did tie the Crown of England to his
posterity. Salmasius cap. 8. makes a fashion of proving it out of
Malmsburiensis, Hundingtoniensis, and other English historians: who say nothing
but that the Conqueror subdued England, and caused the people swear allegiance
and fidelity to himself. No other thing can be read in them. And nowhere can
Salmasius find it, that ever he did tie the people of England by oath, both to
himself and his posterity. Neither dar Salmasius conclude any thing from these
Historians, directly. He concludes that but by the way, because of the
Conquerour's full and absolute subjecting of England to himself, as indeed
these Historians do report. Yet friend, this is but a stolen dint. You lose
more then you gain by it.

As for Camden he cannot be of Salmasius judgment, unless he contradict
himself. From him we have said already, that the power of the Parliament is
above the King. Therefore while as he says, that the King of England has
supremam potestatem, and merum imperium, it cannot be understood of the kingdom
taken in a collective body. And it is true indeed, taking the people
sigillatim, one by one, the King of England is above them all, and inferior to
none, but to GOD. And in this sense he speaks well, nec praeter Deum
superiorem agnoscit. In this sense the latter part of Cokius words is to
purpose. Because of this superiority the 24. Parl. Henr. 8. passes a fair
complement upon him, saying, that the kingdom of England does acknowledge none
superior to it under GOD but his majesty, and that it is governed by no Laws,
but what were made within itself by the tolerance of him, and his progenitors.
-- Per tolerantiam tuae gratiae and tuorum progenitorum, -- Mi Salmasi, it had
been more for thy purpose, if they had said, Per authoritatem tu^e gratiae, and
tuorum progenitorum. This sounds no ordinative and effective, but permissive
and approbative power in the King. Well, let this pass, the former part of
Cokius words does not speak of the absoluteness of the King, but of the
kingdom of England. Juxa igitur leges hujus regni antiquas, (says he) hoc
Angliae regnum absolutum est imperium, -- De jur. Reg. eccles* He says not
Angliae Rex absolutus est imperiator. There is a difference indeed between the
King's power, and the kingdom's power. So much of England.

We come now in the next room to demonstrate the King of Scotland, according to
the Law of the Nation, to be a regulated and non-absolute Prince. This is so
clear, that we need not to speak any thing of it. And it is so abundantly
proved by our godly and dear Countryman, Lex Rex, quaest. 43. that no man in
it can go beyond him. Therefore we shall only glance at it by comparing in some
few particulars the Lacedemonian kingdom with the Scottish, in subjecting their
Kings to Law. 1. As the Lacedemonian King did every thing according to Law;
((...) Polit. 3. cap. 10.) so the King of Scotland has power to do no other
ways. In the Parliament an. 1560. the Nobility says frequently to Q. Regent,
Regum Scotorum limitatum esse imperium, nec uuquam ad unius libidinem, sed ad
legum prescriptum, and nobilitatis consensum, regi solitum. So it is declared
Parl. at Sterling. 1567. and 1578. concerning Q. Mary. This was practiced by
Mogaldus, who did all by the Parliament, as the ancient custom was. Whence the
kings of Scotland had no power to do any thing without the advice and counsel
of the Estates. They had no power to establish or abrogate laws, according to
their pleasure. This my dear Countryman proves at length in the place
above cited. In the interim take-alongst with you that decree made in Finnanus,
Rex 10 his time, viz* That the king should enjoin nothing of concernment but by
the authority of Parliament, and that they should not administer the Republic
by private and domestic council, nor the businesses of the king and public,
should be managed without advice of the fathers, and that kings by themselves,
without the ordors of the fathers, shires and governors, should not make or
break war, peace or leagues. 2. As the Lacedemonian king did bind himself by
oath to govern according to the Laws of the kingdom, Xenoph. de Repub. Laced.
and. N. Damasc. de mor. gent. Laced. so the king of Scots by Oath and Covenant
is tied to do the like. The platform of the king's coronation oath is
set-down, K. James 6. Parl. 1. Whereby he is obliged, to maintain the true Kirk
of GOD, and Religion now presently professed in purity, and to rule the people
according to the laws, and constitutions received in the Realm, causing justice
and equity to be ministered without partiality. This did both James 6. and
Charles swear. And that this is no new custom amongst the kings of Scotland,
you will find it more then abundantly proved by our learned Countryman in the
place above-quoted. 3. The Lacedemonian kings were subjected to the stroke of
justice. Which makes Pausanias so to write of them, (...). i. e. Concerning
the Lacedemonian King judgment was so ordered: Twenty eight in number who were
called Senators, were appointed to judge. And with them did sit the Ephorick
magistracy, together with the King of the other family. So the king of Scots
was censured by the Parliament, made up of three Estates. His neck was brought
under their yoke, as my learned Countryman makes good in the place
fore-quoted. And so, as the Lacedaemonians did cut off, and turn-out many kings,
((...), Pol. 5. cap. 10.) so the Scots in old did the like, as is made good
already. See Lex Rex, loc. cit. I have read much of the non-absolutenesse of
the Athenian, Cretian, Lacedemonian kings, etc. But I may justly say, that no
kingdom in the world (as I can learn from history) has exercised Law more, or
so much on their kings, as the Scots have done. There is indeed a strange
change in Court amongst the Scots, if we compare the latter times with the
former. For my self, I observe GOD's special providence in it, who will have
the practices of the ancient Scots much to condemn and plead against the
endeavors and practices of the latter Scots to day. Yea, the ancient Scots
even in this do go beyond the Lacedaemonians, viz. the Lacedemonian king was
hereditary. But till Kenneth 3. the Scottish king was elective, though for
favor of the Fergusian race, those who came of Fergus were created kings. See
Lex Rex, ibid.

It remains now that we make good the conclusion itself, from the examples
of kings in the second notion, i. e. of those kings whose power was one way or
other limited, though for the most part absolute. In this we will observe
Aristotle's method. He brancheth-forth Monarchy into four species. The first he
calls Laconick; and (...), Polit. 3. cap. 10. which cap. 11. he reckoneth-up,
as the fourth branch of Royal Government. Of this we have spoken already at
very great length. The second kind he calls herill and despotick. Such kind
of Monarchy (says he) was in Asia. And albeit he says, that under such kind
of Royal power, the people lived as slaves and servants, yet withal he
tells us, that the government was carried-on and administered according to the
Laws of the kingdom. We stand here a-litle, to illustrate this by example. v.
g. The Median King had an absolute power over the Medes. Any thing the Kings of
the Medes decreed and enacted, was unalterable. Because of the vastness of
their power, the wicked Presidents obtained a Decree from Darius, That none
should make prayer to any, save to the King, for forty days. Dan. 6. And yet
notwithstanding, Darius had not power to recall his Decree after it was made,
albeit he labored till the going-down of the Sun to revoke it. Ibid. The King
of Persia was an absolute Prince, Esth. 1. Dan. 6. Herod. lib. 3. And yet
notwithstanding Ahasuerus, not only in divorcing Vasthi, did call a Council of
wisemen, experienced in the Laws, but also he submitted himself to their
determination, Esth. 1. And albeit he desired through the abundance of love he
did bear to Vasthi, to be recnociled to her, yet could he not recall the
Divorcement, because the Law made against it, Joseph, Antiq. Jud. lib. 11. cap.
6. I deny not but the Persian Kings had an arbitrary power in making Laws. Yet
being made, they had not power at their own pleasure to recall them. Their Laws
were irrevocable, Esth. 1. Dan. 6. And consequently, though their power was
absolute in making Laws, yet was it limited in abrogating them. They had power
to make them, though not to break them. It Is observable, that Cambyses, a most
wicked and tyrannous King, desiring in marriage his german-sister, called a
Council to consult thereabout. Albeit he had an arbitrary power, to do what he
listed, yet went he not about that matter, brevi manu, but sought and followed
the advice of his Counselors therein. And at this day there be many Kingdoms,
wherein Monarchy and Regal Government is of this same stamp and tenor, as
namely amongst the Turks. The third is elective and aesymnetick. This kind of
Monarchy also Aristotle calls (...). This he illustrateth by the example of
the Mityleneans, who elected Pittacus to reign over them. Truly, for my-self I
do imagine, that they did give Pittacus an uncircumscribed power, because of
his personal endowments, to govern as he pleased. Therefore they did not
restrict him to govern according to the Law of the Kingdom, but voluntarily
submitted themselves to Laws of his making. They did not tie him by Law to
them, and in this his power was illimited and without bounds. Yet in so far as
they conferred absolute power upon him, but as because of his personal
endowments, he would undoubtedly govern according to Law; in so far his power
was limited and circumscribed. See Gyraldus, de vit. Pittac. And Diog. Laer. de
vit. Phil. lib. 1. in Pittac. The like power did the Athenians also offer to
Solon, as is abovesaid. The fourth he refers to Monarchy, as it was in the
days of the Heroes. This kind of Monarchy he calls also (...), Pol. 3. cap.
10. and cap. 11. he calls it a Regal power restricted in some things, (...).
And what these things be, he hinteth at, cap. 10. saying, that they had not
power over the sacrifices, which concerned the Priesthood, and that some of
them were either tied by oath to the people, or by lifting-up the scepter, to
govern according to Law. Thus it is manifest, that all the four kinds of
Monarchy Aristotle speaketh-of, which were set up in old, one way or other are
limited and subjected to Law. But concerning the fourth kind, which was in the
days of the Heroes, we must stand a-litle here. Hence the question arises,
whether or not does Aristotle refer this fourth species of Monarchy to the
Heroes without exception? We shall not stand much upon what may be Aristotle's
mind in this matter. It appears to us, that he is in this indefinit. I
confess, his words with a distinction may bear a good sense. Yet I must needs
say, that neither in this, nor in the third species, the man is clear: for, I
take him to be summing up all the ordinary species of Royal power. But either
he erreth, or else he confounds in the third and fourth species, both
ordinary and extraordinary kinds of Royal power, together, taking them both
under the same power and notion. And in this he erreth also. But that we may
clear our purpose, the Reader shall mark this way of differencing the species
of Monarchy one from another. Generally it is divided into ordinary and
extraordinary Monarchy. In an ordinary acceptance it is pambasilick, and
non-pambasilick. In this sense Aristotle is to be understood, as we covceive.
And so the pambasilick Monarchy, ( i. e. which has a power over all things)
relates to the fifth species of Royal power, which Aristotle, Polit. 3. cap.
11. superaddeth to the four foresaid species thereof. And the non-pambasilick (
i. e. which has not a power over all things) is relative to these four
species above-written. Each of them (according as both Aristotle, and example
teach) is either one way or other, limited and kept within bounds. And
afterward we shall also show it from reason itself. But observe by the way,
that the third species of Monarchy in this sense, cannot be illustrated by the
example of Pittacus. What power was laid upon Pittacus, as is showed already,
was done in an extraordinary way. Now Aristotle in this species, cannot
confound that which is ordinary and extraordinary together, and illustrate them
both by one and the same example. As for the fourth species taken in this
sense, I do verily imagine, that his words deserve a distinction. Whereupon the
question may be moved, whether or not does Aristotle by (...), (which he makes
the fifth species of Royal Government) understand an all-commanding power,
according to Law, or both according to, and against Law? It cannot be imagined,
as afterward shall appear, that Aristotle understands an all-commanding power
above Law. Therefore is it, that Polit. 3. cap. 10. he interlaceth the fifth
species of Monarchy with the fourth. Without any clear and formal distinction,
as he does cap. 11. he passes from the one to the other, in a continuat way,
linking the one with the other. And so taking up the fourth and the fifth
species, under a continuat notion, we easily resolve Aristotle's meaning by
this distinction. In the former part of the fourth species, he averreth, That
Monarchy in the days of the Heroes, was in some things restricted, wanting
this (...) an all-commanding power. And in the latter part of it, he says,
that in ancient times kings had that which is called (...). Verily, the man in
this is very cryptick and unclear: He speaks of the days of the Heroes
indefinitly. So does he of ancient times, But opposing ancient times to the
days of the Heroes, they can be relative to no times, but to the golden age;
which was immediately after the Deluge about 131 years. All this time, as is
showed already, there was not so much as any politic government at all. And to
this Age immediately succeeded the time of Heroicisme. Nimrod, and many other
heroic Blades immediately after that Age, did break-forth, who erected
kingdoms, and did many valiant acts. And if we speak of the ancient times
before the Flood, we find also (as is showed already) that contradistinguishing
ancient times from the time of Heroicisme, there was no kingly power set-up,
till men of renown and heroic spirits did erect it about the 1556 year of the
world. And all the while before, which was the Golden Age before the Flood,
there was no kind of Politic government at all, as is showed already. So then,
whether before or after the Flood, the times of the Heroes did immediately
succeed to the ancient times. And as in the ancient times there was no Monarchy
or Regal power, so it was firstly erected and set-up by the Heroes. Therefore
you may see that is very hard to purge Aristotle's meaning in this from error.
Yet for respect I bear to the man, I will put upon his words the best sense
they can bear. And so I suppose, that he refers both the parts of the fourth
species to the days of the Heroes. Now, it cannot be denied, but even amongst
Heroes of the secondary kind, there was difference of power, some being of a
more intense, and some of a more remiss power. No question, those of them who
in respect of time were prior to others, were also in dignity and power, prior
to them. I cannot think, but how much more Regal power was in request, so much
more the power of it was extended. Therefore was it, as is showed already, that
some kings were altogether illimited and uncircumscribed in power. But in the
fore-times of Heroicism Monarchy was more in request then in the aftertimes
thereof. And consequently those ordinary Heroes, who had the first start of
time, before others of that same kind, were of a more vast and intense power
then they. As they were superior to them in time, so likewayes in power. In
this sense Aristotle's words hold good, if he refer the former part of the
fourth species to the after-most times and ultimat center of Heroicisme, and
the latter part to the prior, though not to the first times thereof. You cannot
say, that the former part is relative to ordinary, and the latter part to
extraordinary Heroes. It is already proved by us, Conel. 1. That extraordinary
Heroes had more then (...), an all-commanding power. They had (...), an
arbitrary power, to do what they listed. These two Caligula, speaking of
himself to Antonia, pertinently distinguishes. -- Remember (says he) that I
may do all things, and that I have power to do to all men, what I please,
Sueton. in Calig. cap. 29. Thus he puts a difference between (...), an
all-commanding power, and (...), an all-willing power. And beside this, even
ordinary Heroes, namely the founders of primary Colonies, had an absolute power
without al restriction, Con. 2. Where also is showed, that Heroes in
aftertimes, as founders of after-Colonies, had an absolute power though not so
intense and uncircumscribed as founders of primary Colonies. Such indeed had
power to do all things, though not to undo all things. And so, according to the
rules of proportion, as the after-Heroes were of less power then the former,
so the last of them had lesser power then any of them. Aristotle says, That at
last the power of Kings became exceedingly lessened. This was after the flower
of heroicism was quite faded. This could not be at the first, but has come on
by degrees. After (...), which the erectors of primary Colonies had, in-stepped
(...): Which Aristotle says, was in ancient times. i. e. in the times of the
after-Heroes, in and about the days of the founders of the secondary Colonies.
And then toward the close, or in and about the middle time of Heroicism, the
Kingly power in some things became restricted, as Aristotle says: And so he
subjoyneth, that at last it became exceedingly lessened. Now you see, that in
reason no better construction can be put upon this fourth species of Monarchy,
assigned by Aristotle. And for reverence of the man's memory, I suppose, that
the third species of Royal power, is taken by him, both in an ordinary, and
extraordinary acceptance. And he only illustrateth it, as it is taken in an
extraordinary sense, because that way it is more material then the other way.
He passes the illustration thereof, as it is taken in an ordinary notion,
because so it is not only less material, but also that way it is more clear
then the other way. Or I may say, that Aristotle confounds these two notions
together, because comparitively aesymnetick Monarchy taken in an extraordinary
notion, may be called ordinary. The reason of this is, because men at least may
be, because of personal endowments, more frequently called to govern in an
absolute and ordinary way, then for extraordinary Heroicism, and such like.
Howsoever, this I know, that Aristotle reckoned-up no other kinds of Monarchy,
but such as have power to, and do govern according to Law. But these, who are
advanced to an illimited power, because of personal endowments, are not
precisely called thereto to govern, whether according to, or against Law. That
does militate against the ground and motive of their call. They are no
otherwise called to govern according to their pleasure, but as people expect,
their will shall bring forth the choicest Laws. Whence precisely and formally,
their power both according to the subject and object thereof, is restricted and
kept within the bounds of Law. But we cannot say so of absolute Monarchy,
acquired and conferred by extraordinary heroicism and such like. And
consequently we may very justly say, that Aristotle refers absolute
Monarchy, obtained because of personal endowments, to the third species of
Regal government, and does not refer absolute Monarchy because of extraordinary
heroicism and such like, to any species or kind of Monarchy he speaks of. The
reason we say, is this, because any kind of Monarchy he speaks of, does not
exceed the bounds of Law. But illimited Royal power conferred, beeause of
extraordinary qualifications, precisely and formally does not exceed the bounds
of Law. Whereas being conferred upon grounds of extraordinary heroicism,
purchase, and such like, precisely and formally the power thereof out-reacheth
all Laws. Thus we judge Aristotle's mind to be cleared concerning all the
specics and sorts of Monarchy summed-up by him.

I confess, Salmasius imagines that Aristotle, by Pambasilick, or
all-governing Monarchy, does mean arbitrary Monarchy, having power to govern at
random, either according to, or against Law. But the Gentleman in this is a
little mistaken: for otherwise in the moulding of the King he had not required
such conditions and limitations as he does. Which be these. 1. That he should
descend of such a race, which in virtue and goodness should exceed all others,
Pol. 3. cap. 12. Whence is it, that both there, and Polit. 1. cap, 3. he says,
that the best, according to nature, over-ruleth that which is worse, and less
good. 2. That the King himself should exceed the rest in virtue and goodness.
Yea, but for a King to govern according to his own hearts lust, even against
Law and Reason, there is no necessity of virtue and goodness, seeing illegality
and injustice flow from a vicious and corrupt principle. Therefore Aristotle in
opposing Monarchy, or Government laid upon one, to Government carried-on and
managed according to Law, does not insinuate an arbitrary power in the King,
having immunity and freedom from Law; but in so doing he only opposes the
power of Government laid upon one, to its power being laid upon many, implying,
that as in this respect the Governor is subject to the rest, and cannot act
any thing of Law without their consent and assistance; so in the other respect
the Governor in carrying on things according to Law, has immunity from
subjection to any other beside, and in doing things legally may perform them
without the interposition of any other man's authority. Whence we see that
Aristotle allows an absolute power in the king to act according to Law, but
not to act either according to Law or against it. And therefore in so far he
takes these by the hand, who deny Monarchy to be according to nature, in as
far as they contend, that to be against Nature, which is against Law. Which
makes him conclude, Tyranny to be against Nature, it being against Law and
Reason. And consequently he does not allow arbitrary power in the king, to do
either good or bad according to his pleasure. He only pleads for power to the
King, which is according to Nature, Justice and Utility. He will have him a man
excelling others in virtue, and governing according to Law. (...), -- Polit. 3.
cap. 12. Moreover, it is contrary to the nature of the word (...), which
Aristotle expresses, cap. 11. to render it an arbitrary power. There is a very
great difference between (...), and (...). Howsoover he expounds it himself,
cap. 10. and defines it to be a power (...), to govern the City, and all the
Public matters, whether at home or abroad. Thus the man speaks of a
governing power. But arbitrary power is a misgoverning-power. He speaks of a
power ordering and doing all things. But arbitrary power is a power of
misordering and undoing all things. It does not follow, that because kings of
old had power over all things: Ergo they had power to dispose on them according
to their pleasure Quasi vero there were not an all-commanding power, according
to Law. This consequence does not immediately follow from the Antecedent. It is
a fallacy ab homonymia: for there is a twofold all-commanding power, one
according to, and another above Law. It Is therefore a poor shift, to conclude
an arbitrary power from an all-commanding power. The original (...) does bear
an arbitrary power, only by way of analogy. And it is known, that the Roman
Dictator had (...), an all-commanding power, though not (...), an all-willing
power. Well, let it be so, that Aristotle says, That kings in ancient times
had an arbitrary power, a power above Law. But I pray you, what kings then does
he understand? Either they are the Founders of the primary Colonies, or the
after-Heroes and-Founders of the secondary Colonies. If of the first kind, ergo
you gain just nothing. We have granted that already, Concl. 2. Their power was
extraordinary. If of the second kind, we might also therein take you by the
hand. Howsoever with some distinction or other you have our mind cleared in
this, ibid. Therefore howsoever you understand the latter part of the fourth
Species, I lose nothing. If you say that Aristotle only means in it an
all-commanding power according to Law, then do I gain my purpose. And if you
suppose his meaning to be otherwise, you learn from what foregoeth, that I lose
nothing. Thus the case is extraordinary. And I deny not but Royal power that
way has been arbitrary. Yet you cannot deny, but the first, second, third and
fourth (or the former part thereof) Species of Monarchy, do not speak a word of
Royal power above Law.

Although Aristotle's words may bear this construction, yet do we judge it were
corresponding to his sense and meaning, to put this sense upon them. In the
former part of the fourth Species he contradistinguisheth the times of the
Heroes from the ancient times, which he expresses in the latter part thereof.
But the one being opposed to the other, if we speak rigorously and properly, by
the ancient times can be nothing understood but the golden age: which after the
flood (Ethnic Writers know no time before the flood) lasted, as some say, 250
years, and as others say with better warrant, 131 years. All which time, if we
speak properly and rigorously, there was no kingly government at all: for, as
is showed already Concl. 3. there was no government then but natural and
oeconomick -- In qua nullo ferente legem, natura ipsa vivebatur, -- Mnes.
Phoen. Damasc. lib. 97. hist. Archil. de temp. Notwithstanding this, I do
imagine, that Aristotle opinionateth, there were Kings in the golden age.
Fuerat enim antiqua Civitatum (says he) guhernatio, rationabiliter, paucorum
and regia. Polit. 4. cap. 13. So say Salust, conjur. Catel. and Trogus, or
Justin, hist. lib. 1. Indeed these two do diametrally oppose the ancient times
to the days of the Heroes: for they contradistinguish them from the times
wherein the Assyrian monarchy took its beginnings. Which was the very first
birth of herocisme. And yet they say, before this time Imperium penes Reges
erat. What is meant by these Reges, Fabius Pictor explaineth. Principes (says
he) quia justi erant and religionibus dediti, jure habiti Dii and dicti. De
aur. sec. etc. lib. 1. And yet in the preceding words he says, Ea aetate nulla
erat monarchia, quia mortalium pectoribus nondum haeserat ulla regnandi
cupiditas. Therefore by these Reges, and Principes can be nothing else
understood, but the fathers and heads of the chief families, as Shem, Japhet,
etc. over all whom Noah did rule as a common father. And it cannot be denied,
but such had (...), an all-commanding power; yea, and (...), an all-willing and
arbitrary power, Concl. 3. which makes Trogus say, Principio rerum, --
arbitria Principum pro legibus erant. Lib 1. This was because those Fathers and
Princes did not only stand in order to the People, as natural fathers to
natural children, each of them being by the intimate bonds of Nature tied to
other, (which makes Aristotle compare the fifth Species to oeconomick and
paternal government) but also because they did far go beyond their people in
the matter of qualification. Yet we must not imagine that this arbitrary power
which they had was so, precisely and formally. If we speak rigorously,
arbitrary power conferred because of intimate and natural relations, and
personal endowments, is rather limited then illimited: for as the grounds
thereof tie the people to all due obedience and subjection, so they tie the
Prince to every due and lawful way of governing, and that in a most intense and
extraordinary way. Therefore speaking precisely Aristotle's (...),
all-commanding power, does not include (...), an all-willing and arbitrary
power. But let it be so, that Aristotle speaks of an arbitrary power given to
Princes and heads of chief families, yet can it be no other ways understood,
but as it is already explained by us, Concl. 3. Which speaks nothing, but of
an arbitrary power, in an extraordinary case. But ab extraordinariis ad
ordinaria, non est sequela.

As Aristotle is very unclear in the latter part, so is he likewise intricate
in the former part of the fourth species. In it he says that the Kings in the
in the days of the Heroes were in some things limited and did govern (...),
according to the Law. This indeed deserves a distinction. No question
extraordinary Heroes and the founders of primary Colonies had a vast and
arbitrary power, concl. 1. and 2. What power other Heroes had, I stand not much
on it, to determine. Yet I may very conveniently use those distinctions which
are expressed, concl. 2. But for further clearing this point, we shall stand
here a-little to illustrate by Example all these ways Aristotle sets down
in the former part of the fourth species, whereby heroic Kings came to their
Crowns. In summing them up we shall observe a more exact and resolutory method
then Aristotle does. (1.) By gathering people together and planting Colonies.
Which is considered four ways. Firstly, by way of lot and division. Thus the
primary Colonies were planted. And no question the founders of such had power
to govern at random, concl. 2. Secondly by way of donation. Thirdly, by way of
subordination. Fourthly, by way of purchase and acquisition. Though we cannot
be of Aristotle's mind in respect of the founders of the first sort of
Colonies, yet in respect of the second and third, we may take him by the hand.
And notwithstanding this, we may very probably conclude either of the parts,
whether by granting or by denying, the arbitrarinesse of the founders of these
Colonies. Howsoever concerning all the four sorts you have our judgment
expressed, concl. 2. (2.) By way of battle. Firstly, by way of regaining. So
did Dionysius, Hercules, Ber. lib. 5. and Orestes, Dict. de bell. Tro. lib, 6.
Secondly, by way of conquest. So did the extraordinary Heroes, as is showed
already, concl. 1. Ordinary Heroes who subdued Kingdoms be these. Amongst the
Assyrians, Arius, Baleus, etc. Beros. ant. lib. 5. Amongst the Grecians the
Heraclids who subdued Mycenae, and Alemeon who subdued the Kingdom of Thebes.
Diod. lib. 5. cap. 4. and 6. (3.) Because of the benevolence and bountifulness
of ancestors. So Crana and Cranus were dignified with the swaying of the
Scepter, amongst the Razenues, because of the singular benevolence and
courtesy of Janus their father toward the Italians. For the same reason also
Thuscus, son to Hercules the Egyptian, was graciously admitted by the Arnites,
Libarnites, Musarnites, to reign over them. Beros. ant. lib. 5. (4) By cunning
and art. This may be taken two ways. Firstly, as it implies a conferring of
the Kingly power, because of engine and invention. Thus the Thebans advanced
Oedipus to reign over them, Sophocl. in Oed. tyr. Diod. lib. 5. cap. 6.
Secondly, as it implies a cunning and subtle way of obtaining the Kingdom. So
Camesenuus obtained the Kingdom of Bactria, Ber. lib. 5. and Neoptolemus
acquired the Kingdom of Thessaly, which belonged to his father Achilles, Dict.
Cret. de bell. Tro. lib. 6. (5) By acquisition. This is taken three ways.
Firstly, by way of emption. Thus Agamemnon obtained the military power over all
the Grecian Princes in the Trojan expedition, by letting-out amongst the
Soldiers a huge mass of money, Dict. Cret. lib. 1. Secondly, by way of
compensation. So Antenor was created King of Dardany, in compensation of his
pains in betraying Troy to the Grecians. Dict. Cret. de bell. Tro. lib. 5. Dar.
Phr. de exc. Tro. lib. Thirdly, by way of mere purchase and simple acquisition.
Thus did Aeneas acquire Melena, with its Continent. Dict. Cret. loc. cit.
Salust. conjur. Catel. So did Iolaus purchase a Kingdom to himself in Sardinia,
Diod. lib. 5. cap. 2. These things being thus illustrated by example, I do
nextly desire the Reader carefully to distinguish between extraordinary and
ordinary Heroes, and between those of them who were in the precedent times and
those who were in the subsequent times of Heroicism. For my-self I cannot say,
but extraordinary Heroes at least, and the founders of primary Colonies, were
invested with a vast and arbitrary power. But as for the ordinary Heroes, and
the after-founders of Colonies, I am contented with Aristotle, to say, That
their power was hemmed-in by the hedges of Law. We find several examples
amongst the after-heroes to this purpose. Priamus was not only withstood by his
own subjects, who did steal Helena, but also what he did therein either firstly
or lastly, was according to the advice and counsel of the Senators. Dict,
Cret. de bell. Tro. lib. 1. and 5. Dar. Phr. de excid. Tro. lib. And though
Dares Phrygius reports, that Priamus determined and voiced otherwise then
they who followed Antenor and Aeneas (who appear to us to have been the major
part of the Senate: for we gather from both these Historians, that not only the
greatest part of the Senate, but also the whole body of the People were for the
concluding and drawing up peace with the Grecians. I confess Dares Phrygius in
plain terms says that Priamus voiced against peace, and truce taking-up with
the Grecians, and what he voiced was established and holden as a thing
concluded-on by all. Indeed, he carried it contrary to all who opposed him, as
Dares will have it. Yet Dictys storieth the just contrary, and says, that
Priamus, followed the advice and determination of the Senate. And indeed Q.
Calaber, lib. 12. and Tryphi^dor, de Il. exc. insinuate no less: for they
observe Dictys way, which he has in storying the Grecian stratagem which
ensued upon terms of peace concluded-on between the Trojans and Grecians.
Howsoever, albeit I think my-self rather oblidged to incline to Dares relation,
yet lose I nothing thereby, if I do so. I am not of that opinion to think, that
Priamus was so hemmed-in by Law, as the Lacedemonian Kings. Let it be so, he
had a negative voice in Senate, as Dares insinuates; yet sure I am, none will
say, that the Senate was a cipher, having no authority at all. You will learn
from these forecited historians the contrary of that. And in so far as Priamus
did act according to the advice and counsel of the Senate, in as far he did act
according to Law. Thus he did not simply act according to pleasure, and in an
arbitrary way. No verily. In this his power was somewhat limited. And this is
all that both Aristotle and we do crave. And so we must not think but Alcinous
was some way or other regulated by his Princes and Rulers, as you may read,
Hom. odys. 8. And how much Agamemnon was subjected to Law, is showed already.
Of him is made good, that which Aristotle speaks, of the tying of the King to
the People, by the elevation of the Scepter as by Oath and Covenant. Hom. Il.
2. Alex. ab Alex. lib. 5. cap. 10. We need not think it strange to say, that in
the days of the Heroes Kings were somewhat subjected to Law: for not only
Agamemnon, but also Theseus, were no less subjected to Law, as is showed
already, then the Lacedemonian kings? It Is observable, that Orestes, son to
Agamemnon, and King of Mycenae, was judged and absolved by the Council of
Areopagus. Him Mnestheus, son to Theseus, and King of Athens, could not get set
free, till firstly he was examined by the Areopagites whom Dictys calls most
strict Justiciaries, de bell. Tro. lib. 6. Mark, that the Mycenan King was
judged by the Athenian Judicatory. Then tell me, seeing a King of another
Kingdom in the days of the Heroes was subjected to the Law and Judicatory of
Athens, shall we not think that Kings in those days, in some things at least,
were restricted and subjected to Law? Verily this is an argument from the
greater to the lesser. But hear what Alexander ab Alexandro says, Tantique
Areopagus fuit, ut Heroas and semideos illuc in judicium advocatos dicerent,
and Pisistratus in eo judicium subire non dubitarit. lib. 3. cap. 5. i. e. And
Areopagus was of such power, that they cited into judgment the Heroes and
Semidei, and Pisistratus doubted not to undergo judgment there. And I would
have Royallists to observe, that in this matter I give them more of their will
then Aristotle does: for according to this last sense and exposition, his words
insinuate, That all Kings in the days of the Heroes in some things were rest
icted. Yet we say, that many of them had a vast and arbitrary power. Yea, in
the latter part of the fourth species he says, That Kings in ancient time had
but (...), an all-governing power. But we go further-on with the Malignant, and
say, That they had (...), an all-willing power. Yet precisely and properly,
their power was but Pambasilick, an all-governing, and not arbitrary and
illimited.

We shall stand here a while, to speak of the Kingdom of England: for it is not
only the chief subject of our discourse, in order to which we drive all that we
speak, but also it falleth-in here by a string-line. Already we have spoken of
it at length, from the days of the Conqueror, or a little before, until now.
It therefore remains, we speak of it, as it was from its beginning unto the
reign of the Normans. And so we consider it under these notions. 1. As it was
in its first beginning and original And though I will not say, that Britain was
inhabited so soon as other Kingdoms, which lie in, and about the middle and
chief part of the Earth. No question, such parts were firstly inhabited, as
both history and reason does teach. Yet I may very conveniently say, that the
chiefest Kingdoms, and those which lie next Armenia, being planted, after
people were extremely multiplied on the earth, they did seek out to inhabit the
uttermost Isles of the world. There was a physical necessity for this. People
daily multiplying could not dwell all in one part, but of necessity they
behoved to depart one from another, for residence sakc Yea, there was a moral
reason for it also. No question, desire of great lands and possessions, so soon
as people were greatly multiplied on the earth after the flood, could not but
set them a-work to seek-out the remotest parts. This is confirmed by what the
holy Ghost says: The sons of Japhet, Gomer, -- by these were the Isles of the
Gentiles divided in their lands, every one after his tongue, after their
families, in their nations. Genesis 10. I pray you tell me, while as the holy
Ghost speaks there indefinitely of the Isles of the Nations, if he does
exclude the Isle of Britain? What more reason is there to exclude it then any
other? And for my self I think, there is more reason to include it then any of
the rest. Firstly, because it is the chiefest Isle in the world. And therefore
in it self the more delectable, and the more to be sought after. Secondly,
because Gomer, whom Berosus calls Comerus Gallus, did come into Italy, and
erected Colonies there, Ant. lib. 5. Now tell me, is it not most probable that
Gomer did translate Colonies from Italy into France, and from thence into
Britain, every-one of them lying contiguously one with another? We find as much
in his name as pointeth-out this. (...) Gomer signifies to end. And is not
Britain (as it were) the last center and extreme part of EUROPE? Berosus
gives him a surname, calling him GALLUS. Now the Frenches are called Galli.
And Gallus comes from (...), milk. But the Frenches are called white or fair
in respect of other nations which lie nearer the Sun. But Britain was called
Albion, which signifies whiteness. And thus very appositely it partaketh of
the signification of Gomer's surname. And why shall we not think, whether
France or Britain one way or other, have their denomination from the names of
their first founders, as well as other nations and kingdoms have their names
from the founders, who firstly erected them? V. G. Israelites from Israel,
Assyria from Ashur, Media from Medus, etc. Camden largely disputes for the
plantation of Britain by Gomer. But the man is somewhat intricate, and confused
in it, alleging that the original of the Britains is as it were derived from
the Frenches. I will not deny, but Gomer has sent Colonies, firstly to France,
it lying next to Italy, where Gomer himself took up his residence. Yet I may
say, that he did send Colonies nextly into Britain, which is adjacent to
France. Verily, he might have simul, and semel, translated Colonies into both:
for as France is next adjacent to Italy, so Britain is next adjacent to France.
I cannot imagine, that Britain lying so near Italy, that ever Gomer would have
left it unplanted, till by the multiplication of Colonies in France, people out
of France had been translated into Britain to plant it. Howsoever I stand not
on this, but sure I am, both Frenches and Britains have their original from
Comerus Gallus, as Camden very notably and at length proves, Brit. Chorog.
descr. Albeit Caesar, de bell, Gal, and Diodore, rer. ant. lib. 6. imagine, that
the Britains be (...), Aboriginists. Thirdly, because Theophilus Antiochenus
says, Cum in priscis temporibus, -- homines, -- post linguarum divisionem
aucti and multiplicati paulatim sunt, -- nec prius desierant terram ubique
occupare, quam etiam ad Britannias, in arctois climatibus accesserint. i. e.
When in ancient times -- men, -- after the division of tongues, increased and
multiplied by little and little, -- neither did they leave-off to possess and
take-up the earth everywhere, until they did also come into Britain, situated
under the Pole Artick. In this notion I take, Britain to have been under Gomer
as its King and Saturn. And so I conceive, he had an arbitrary power over them,
Concl. 2. But what Government they had amongst them after Gomer's death, cannot
be determined. Yet in all probability they had no Kingly Government amongst
them till Brutus days. And in respect of this time, Dio Nic. ex Xiphil. epit.
de Brit. says very pertinently, Apud hos populus magna ex part principatum
tenet. And Camden notes, That as the Frenches, so the Britains in old were not
governed by one, but by many. So say Caesar, bell. Gal. lib. 1 and 5. and
Pomponius Mela, de sit. Orb. lib. 3. cap. 2 and 6. But I take all these to
speak of the Government amongst the Frenches and Britains as it was immediately
before the conquest of Julius Caesar, or at least as it was from the first
beginning of these Kingdoms until his days. Howsoever you will do well to
observe with me, that in old, France was divided into three parts, according as
Caesar and Mela do story. But Berosus divides it into two parts; the one he
calls Gallia, and the other Celtae. But for reconciling these divisions, you
shall know, that Berosus speaks of a more large division then they do. He
contradistinguisheth these three Kingdoms one from another, viz. Italy, Celtae,
and Gallia. The inhabitants of Italy he calls Comari, from their King
Comerus. The inhabitants of Celtae he calls Disceltes, or Celtes, whose first
King (says he) was Samotes. The inhabitants of Gallia he calls Galli: for
(says he) Comer's nephews did so call them from his surname, Gallus. This
insinuates, that Comer's nephews sent-out with Colonies from him, did firstly
plant and inhabit Gallia. Which makes us conclude, that Gallia includes both
France and Britain. No question, the inhabitants of both in old have been
called Galli, from Gallus, the surname of Comerus, seeing both of them were
alike planted by him and his posterity. We need not think it strange, to say,
that both of them do pass under the same epithet and notion: for the Frenches
are called Cimbri, as Valerius maximus, Cicero, and Appianus say; and Gomeri,
as Josephus, and Zonaras teach. So the Britains are called Kimbri, changing C,
into K. and Cumeri, changing Go, into Cu. They are so both called from Gomer,
or Comer, the name of Gallus. And consequently, seeing they both have one common
epithet from his forename, why may they not also pass under one notion, and be
called Galli* from Gallus his surname? I will not much contend, whether the
Frenches or Britains had Kings after the days of Comerus and his nephews, or
not. And if they had any, sure I am they were governed by more then one. No
question, the Land in both was divided into diverse Satrapees. So we find the
Kingdom of Italy in old, to have been so divided. Yet we do not think, but
amongst those Satrapees there has been one greater then any of the rest. As no
question, in Italy, the Comars were more powerful then any of the rest of the
Colonies and inhabitants of the Kingdom, as you may learn from Beros. ant. lib.
5. So amongst the Frenches, the chiefest Kingdom was the Satrapee of the
Celtes. Thence it is that Berosus, ant. lib. 5. does reckon-up in a catalogue
the Kings of the Celtes, as he does the Assyrian Kings; and Manetho beginning
where Berosus left, summeth-up one by one the Kings of the Celtes, as he does
reckon-up the Egyptian Kings. Thus there is no repugnancie between the
divisions of Berosus, and of Caesar and Mela: for he speaks of a general and
large division, and they keep themselves within more restricted and narrow
bounds. They only speak of the division of France, separating it into three
parts, Belgia Aquitania, and Celtae. And if we believe them, in old, ever unto
the days of C. C^esar, these were three distinct Satrapees, governed by
different Magistrates and distinct Laws. The chief people in Aquitania were
called Ausci, in Belgia, Treveri, and in Celtae, Hedui. Mel. de sit. Orb. cap.
2. And the chief Magistracy amongst the Hedui, was called Vergobretus. With
which in Caesar's days Divitiacus and Liscus were invested. Which was a yearly
Magistracy, having power both of life and death, as Caesar says, de bell. Gal.
lib. 1. What the Vergobret did amongst the Hedui, was done, convocatis eorum
principibus. Those who were clothed with it as they were annual and but for a
time, so they did nothing absolutely and by themselves, but according to the
counsel and advice of the Princes. This is far from the arbitrary power that
Salmasius speaketh-of. Yet we will not say, that the power of the Celtick Kings
was always so hemmed-in by Law. I do not think but their primary founders, not
only amongst the Celtes, but also amongst the Aquitans and Belgists, had a vast
and arbitrary power. Yea and their after Kings, so long as the flower of
Heroicism lasted; had such power as Aristotle speaketh-of (and which by us is
already expressed) in the fourth species, or in the former part of the fourth
species of Monarchy, Polit. 3* cap. 10, and 11. And so, the flower of Heroicism
fading, and Kingly Government wearing out of request, no question, there has
been no more power left to their Kings, then what Caesar speaketh-of in the
place above cited. Which comes just to that which Aristotle says, concerning
the detracting from, and dimitting of the power of Kings in aftertimes, Polit.
3. cap. 10. Although we may very justly say, That the Kingdom of France was
divided into distinct Satrapees, ever until the days of C. Caesar, yet we dare
not adventure, positively to say so much of Britain, if we take it by
restriction for the Kingdom of England. And, that this may be cleared, We,

2. Must diligently observe the cause and reason, why England and Scotland are
called Britain. Thus we come to consider England in a second notion, as it was
in the days of Brutus, until in and about the days of C. Caesar. By the way I
must needs confess, that this is a hard business on which I now enter, more
difficult to be found-out, then any thing we have spoken to this purpose. The
original of France and Britain, is very easily learned from Beros. ant. lib.
5. M. Porc. Cat. Orig. lib. Solinus, and others. But now Britain was secondly
inhabited, is much controverted amongst the Writers. Some imagine, that it was
secondly planted by Brutus, son to Ascanius. Of this opinion is Galfredus. But
this cannot be: for we read of no such man, whether in Maneth. de Reg. Egypt.
Sempr. de div. Ital. Solin. cap. 1. Marl. lib. 1. cap. 2. or in any other
Writer beside, who speak of Aeneas and his posterity. Others again imagine, this
Brutus to have been a Roman Consul. Of this opinion is Gildas. But for this he
can produce no Author. But others think, that he was either Brito Centaurus, of
whom Hyginus speaks, or else Bretan, whose daughter (as Parthenius Nicaeus
says) was Celtice, on whom Hercules begot Celtus, the father of the Celtes.
From him Hesychius draws the denomination of Britain. For my self I subscribe
to this, albeit I suppose this Brito Centaurus to be all one with Bretan.
Howsoever, if we may give credit to these Writers, Britain was secondly
inhabited by one named Brutus, or Bretan, or Brito, according to the Greek. And
why may we not, I pray you, as it were a posteriori conclude Britain to have
been secondly planted and governed by one called Brutus, or Brito? Kingdoms
ordinarily use to derive their denominations from such. To this very
pertinently agrees that of Sibylla a most ancient Writer, (...), -- (...)
signifies Britains. And I think, the derivation of it very pertinent to deduce
it from Brutus, as Media from Medus, and Gallia from Gallus; And it is
observable that she adds, -- (...) -- The point being thus established, I
make no reckoning whether this Brutus be called a Trojan, or a Grecian. And if
he was a Trojan* then I may justly say, if it be true which Ammian. lib, 15.
says, That while as the Trojans came into France, they did also come into
Britain. And that such came into France, is confirmed by Manetho, who says,
that Francus, about the 9. year of the Egyptian dynastie, was created and
ordained the Celtick King. Him he calls one of Hector's sons. De Reg. Egypt.
Now, this could not have been, unless (as Ammianus reports) many fugitive
Trojans had come along into France. And so in all probability, as the dispersed
Trojans took-up their residence, and erected a Kingdom in France, they have
done the like also in Britain, the one lying contiguous with the other. But for
further clearing the point, we must not lightly over-leap that which Parthenius
says. The man imagines, that Celtus son to Hercules, begotten on Celtice,
daughter to Bretan, was the begetter and founder of the Celtes. Here is need of
a distinction. Surely, Samotes, as is said already, firstly erected the Kingdom
of the Celtes. And Hercules the Egyptian (as Berosus says) coming through the
Celtes into Italy, begot on Galtea (whom Nicaeus calls Celtice) with the
consent and permission of her parents, Galatis, or, as Nicaeus says, Celtus,
who was created King over the Celtes. And from him they were called Galli.
Which, as is imagined, the Latins use for Galatae. Howsoever here from it
appears, that the Celtes had not their being but their name from Hercules
son. And so reconciling Parthenius with Berosus, we may call Hercules son,
Galatis-Celtes. Whence from his name they were called Galatae, or, as the
Romans say, Galli, and from his surname Celtae. Indeed B^rosus does not
express the name of Galtea, or Celtice her father, unless we take Celte, who
did reign over the Celtes, at that time when Hercules came along them. Which
makes us opinion at that Galtea, or Celtice, was daughter to Celte: for, as
Berosus says, with the consent and permission of her parents, Galatis was born
of her, King to the Celtes. And who I pray you, had power to put such a
disposition and right upon Galatis, but the King and Queen of the Celtes. I
warrant you, such a thing standing upon consent and renunciation, without being
obtained by strength of Arms, the consent and permission given to Hercules son
to reign over the Celtes, was not sought from any inferior, but from him
whose interest it was to reign as King. I trow, it stood not upon the consent
and permission of any subject, that Hercules son should be born King to the
Celtes. And consequently, Celte at this time being King over the Celtes, was
Galtea's father, by whom it was given, that Galatis (Hercules son) should be
born his successor and King after him. Therefore, following Berosus, I conclude,
that the Celtes were so called from Celte, grandfather to Galatis, and Galli,
or Galatae from Galatis, nephew to Celte, and son to Hercules. Yet Nicaeus
positively and expressly calls Celtice, or Galtea her father, Bretan, From
whom Hesychius, as is said already, deduceth the original of the Britains. And
this being true, it follows, that Britain's Brutus is more ancient then they
ordinarily talk-of. Although I do fully imagine, that Britain has it is
denomination from this Bretan; yet I will never think, but Britain was
inhabited ere ever this Bretan was. The Celtes are so called from Celte, and
Galli, or Galatae, from Galatis. And yet they were a people long before their
days. Verily, I think it most likely, that Britain has it is denomination from
Bretan, and was secondly enpeopled by him: for resigning the Kingdom of the
Celtes, to Hercules son his nephew, it is more then apparent, that being a King
all his lifetime before, for his own honor and advantage, he has gathered a
number of people together out of his own Kingdom, and translated them into
Britain, and there erected a Kingdom. This was more honorable and advantageable
to him, then to live a private life in subjection to his nephew. What? can it be
imagined but desire of wealth and honor both to himself and his posterity,
would have drawn him on to such an under-taking? No question, he being a
powerful King, and father-in-law to the great Monarch Hercules, on whose son
he had conferred a singular courtesy, in renouncing the kingdom to him, did
want nothing that conduced, not only for undertaking but also for effectuating
such a purpose. Wanting his own kingdom, Britain, a glorious kingdom lying next
to France, either at that time scarcely en peopled, or at least filled with men
of rude breeding, it cannot come in my mind to think otherwise, but this Bretan
became Brutus to Britain. And this I take to be him, about whom they controvert
so much. Which agrees with that which is storied, saying, That the Britans
were a people of lesser Britany, which is in the Celtick region, who in old did
inhabit the Isle of Britain. Whether you shall imagine, this Bretan, and Brito,
to be all one, or that the Trojans came into Britain, while as they came along
into France, I remit it to the Reader to judge, as a thing arbitrary and
indifferent. And herein I do not contemn the authority of Waldhave, who calls
Britain Brute's Lands. Thus concerning the original of Britain, firstly, and
lastly, I have offered my judgment freely, which being arightly considered,
does much serve to reconcile all different opinions in this matter. Well,
whether you say that Bretan came into this Isle with Bretanes, or Brutus, with
Trojans, (I shall not stand to controvert, if he be Brito of whom Hyginus
speaks) while as Francus son to Hector came along into France, and did reign
there, what power they had is already showed, but namely concl. 2.

It being sufficiently proved, that Britain was secondly enpeopled by Bretan,
and very probably concluded to have been enpeopled the third time by fugitive
and dispersed Trojans, under the conduct of Brito, of whom, (as we may probably
say, though the contrary may be also holden) Hyginus speaks: It now remains
to consider what power those Kings had who succeeded Bretan and Brito. The
tract of time which interveened between these two Kings, may be easily learned:
for it is gatherable from Berosus, that Bretan erected his kingdom under the
reign of Baleus, R. Assyr. XI. in, or about the fourteenth, or sixteenth year
of his reign, ann mund. 2225, or 2227. and Brito did set-up his kingdom in
Britain (as may be gathered from Manetbo) in, or about the first, or second
year of Teutheus reign, King of Assyria XXIX, in, and about the year of the
world 2791, or 2792. Concerning the power of these two Kings, we have spoken.
And we come nextly to speak of the power of those Kings who succeeded them,
until the days of C. Caesar. Out of no ancient Writer we can learn in
particular what those Kings were. But in the general we learn these two things.
1. That in old, Britain was governed by Kings. 2. That afterward (though before
Caesar's time) it was divided into Satrapees, and governed by many Princes. We
take it upon us, to illustrate and prove both these. The first is evident from
Tacitus, who says. Olim Regibus parebant. To which he immediately subjoineth,
Nunc per principes factionibus and studiis trabuntur. Thus he distinguishes
between the condition of Britain, as it was in old; and as it was in and about
his time. In old (says he) it was governed by Kings, but now being divided
into factions it is governed by Princes. And therefore in another place he
says, a ragibus, usque ad pri^cipes. But Salmas. by principes understands
the Roman Caesar's Def. Reg. cap. 8. He says so that he may elude the
Government of England by many. He would have it to pass (if he could get it)
that it was never governed but by Kings, It is no wonder that he be blinded in
other things, seeing he shuts his eyes at so clear a light as this. It cannot
be denied, but Tacitus speaks of the government of England as it was in old,
and as it was in and about his time. 1. Because it is very unlike that ever he
would have called the Roman Caesar's, Princes. It Is an epithet of less honor
and power then Kings. And so I imagine, that he would rather have called the
Kings of England Princes then them. Sure I am, the Roman Caesar's were more
powerful and did reign in a more kingly way then the English Kings. 2. Beause
he contradistinguisheth in positive terms the Government of England, as it was
in old, from what it was of late, saying, That in old, Britain obeyed Kings,
but now (says he) it is governed by many, and divided into factions. And
Salmasius himself cannot get this denied. Of which Princes Caesar speaks
himself: Principesque undique convenire, and se, civitatesque suas Caesari
commendare coeperunt, De bell. Gal. lib. 4. Thus the kingdom was delivered-up
into Caesar's hands, not by one man, the King, but by many, the Princes. And
lib. 5. he says, Summa imperii bellique administrandi, communi consilio
permissa est Cassivelauno. On which words, Camden notes, That Britain then was
not governed by one, but by many, taking that same course by common consent, in
choosing Cassivelaunus General and chief leader to them, as the Frenches did in
choosing Divitiacus to repel Caesar, Brit. chorogr. de prim. incol. But what
needs us to stand here? We shall make it more appear in proving the second
particular. The first is also confirmed by the testimony of Mela, Fert
[Britannia] (says he) populos regesque populorum, -- De sit. Orb. lib. 3 cap.
6. And what power those Kings had, I mind not to say precisely that it was so
restricted as the power of the Lacedemonian Kings. Neither will I say, that it
was so narrow as the power of the English Kings, after the Conqueror. Yet I
may justly say, That it was not boundless and arbitrary, as Salmasius
dreameth-of. So says Dio Niceus, ex Xiph. epit. Apud hos populus magna ex
part principatum tenet. i. e. Amongst them ( viz. the Britains) the People in
a great part do govern. This tells, that in old, even in the time of Kings,
in Britain, there was Popular Government. Kings then in Britain were not sole
Lords, but the People did govern also. Hence it is that Cordilla, jussu populi,
was set to reign over the Britains. So Gintolinus, Populi jussu, Rex dicitur,
Polyd. Ang. hist. lib. 1. Because of the People's swaying power of old in
Britain, Kingly Government somewhat before the days of C. Caesar, was
altogether abrogated, as in part is showed already. But Salmasius shall not
think that of old England was singular in this. There were in old other parts
in Britain, where the kingly power was limited and hemmed-in by Law. Concerning
the Aebuaan Isles, Solinus thus speaks, Rex unus est universis. -- Rex nihil
suum habet, omnia universorum, ad aequitatem certis legibus stringitur. Ac ne
avaritia divertat a vero, discit paupertate justitiam, utpote cui nihil sit rei
familiaris, cap. 25. i. e. all of them have one King. -- The King has nothing
proper, all things belong to the people, he is compelled to equity, by certain
Laws. And lest avarice should withdraw him from the truth, he is taught justice
by poverty, (to wit) as one that has nothing belonging to himself.

The second particular is manifest from Strabo, who says, Complures apud eos
sunt dominationes, lib. 4. In the original dominationes is (...), which
signifies Princes or Rulers. Thus they were governed toward his time, by many,
and not by one. And Salmasius from this is made so to say, albeit he
endeavors to elude what Tacitus says, hist. lib. 1. The words are already
cited and vindicated. But Diodore is most clear to this purpose, speaking of
Britain. Reges, principes que, ibi sunt plures, pacem invicem servantes, Rer.
ant. lib 6. cap. 8. But sure I am, Salmasius will not say, that such had an
absolute power over the people. Their Kings had not such power: Ergo far less
they. Yea, the Heduan Vergobret, who did reign over more then any of them, had
not an absolute and arbitrary power. Which makes me think, far less had they
any such power. And it is observable, what they did, was communi concilio,
Caesar de bell. Gal. lib. 5. So much touching the State of England in the second
notion, i. e. as it was from the days of Bretan, Brito, or Brutus.

3. We come now to speak of England, as it was under the Romans, Saxons, and
Danes. As it was under the Roman yoke (speaking precisely) England had no Kings
but the Roman Emperors. And what power they had, is spoken already, concerning
the Roman Dictators. And as for the power of the Danish, and Saxonick Kings, in
England, no question, they had greater power then any of the Kings of England
in old, or since the days of the Conqueror, if we except K. James. But to
say, that their power was boundless and arbitrary, is more then I dare affirm.
I will not deny, but the first, whether of the Danish, or the Saxonick Kings,
had that same power, which the Conqueror had over England. As he subdued
England, so did they. And it is the Conquerours privilege, to rule at random:
Such do ordinarily conquer against Law. And I pray you, why do they not also
rule without Law? But that all who succeeded these, had the like power also, I
cannot be moved to affirm. It cannot be denied, but even under their reign
there were Parliaments and Councels. And I trow, they were not ciphers. I might
enlarge this, but I judge it needless: for I care not which of the parts be
affirmed. Under these Kings, England was not its own, but a subdued, and
unsettled Nation. Which makes me say, that it was no wonder, albeit then there
was no time for it to exercise the Laws against its Kings. Thus at length I
have offered my judgment freely concerning the power of the Kings of England,
both of old and of late. And that we may shut up this whole purpose in a word,
for cutting-off all that Salmasius can object, you shall be pleased carefully
to distinguish between extraordinary, and ordinary Monarchy. As for an
extraordinary Regal power, which was conferred on Kings, whether for
extraordinary heroicism, personal endowments, or such like, we shall not stand
to say, that such had not only (...), an all-commanding power, but also (...),
an all-willing and arbitrary power. See Concl. 1, 2, 3, and 4. Yet we cannot
say so much of ordinary Monarchy, if we look to the precise and ordinary way of
the power of Kings. This by example is at length showed already. And so we come,

Secondly, to prove it by reason. Can any in reason imagine, that people,
unless it be for some extraordinary cause or other, will subject their necks
to the pleasure and arbitrament of any? Nay, it is a combing against the hair,
for people to resign their liberty into the hands of any man, giving him a full
power to dispose upon them at random. It is very observable, That once Kings in
Asia had not only an all-commanding, but also an all-willing power. So Nimrod,
Belus, Ninus, and Semiramis, as is showed already, Concl. 1. And yet at last
this pambasilick and arbitrary power, turned over into a despotick power,
governing (...), according to Law. Polit. 3. cap. 10. Under these four Kings
the condition of Regal power was very extraordinary. And so it was no wonder,
though they did reign in an extraordinary way, having more will then other
Kings. But the kingdom becoming settled, the power of their successors was
hemmed-in. Their wings were a little clipped. And may we not judge so of all
other Nations? Verily, I think it holds a majori: for the Assyrian Kings were
universal Monarchs, and no kingdom could ever match with the Assyrian empire.
Which makes me imagine, that as the Kings of the Assyrian empire in an ordinary
and settled case were reduced to Law, far more in that respect has the case of
other kings been such. And withal observe, there was a time, when Regal
Government was much in request. It was much cried-up in the days of Heroicism.
And that rather in the flower and beginnings, then in the fadings and
aftertimes thereof. And so it was no wonder though at that time kings were
invested with a vast power. But by process of time, Monarchy became less
esteemed. The power of it became much lessened, partly (...), the kings
themselves dimitting, and partly (...), the people detracting from their
greatness. So says Aristotle, Polit. 3. cap. 10. So then we must not imagine
that though kings sometimes had a vast and arbitrary power, they always had
such a power, and their wings were never clipped. Nay, the disposition of every
age is not for Royal power itself, much less for the arbitrariness thereof.
Let me never dream, that the ordinary way of people is to bring their necks
under such a yoke. What is more consonant to nature then liberty? and what is
more dissonant to it then tyranny? Can any deny, but arbitrary power in actu
primo, is tyranny? It is still in a capacity either of tyrannizing, or
non-tyrannizing. It has still a disposition for acting, either according to,
or against Law. Can people then have an ordinary temper for taking with such a
yoke? No verily, that is against the hair with them. It Is repugnant to their
innate liberty, and the natural desire thereof. Yea, it is repugnant to the
natural antipathy which all bear in hand against tyranny.

This being done, we hasten now to give a direct and particular answer to that
which Salmasius alleges for proof of the second Proposition. We confess,
that some Kings of Assyria had an absolute and arbitrary power. But we deny
that such power was competent to all the Assyrian Kings, as is proved already.
It will never follow, that because the first Kings of Assyria, who were
extraordinary Heroes, in whose time the condition of the Kingdom was unsettled,
had an arbitrary power; therefore all the Assyrian Kings had the same power
also, while as the Kingdom became established. The one way the case is
extraordinary, and the other way it is ordinary. But there is no consequence
from extraordinaries to ordinaries. And Salmasius concludes very unjustly, the
Assyrian Kings to have been absolute, because the Persian Kings were so. I
confess, the Persian Kings had a power to do any thing they pleased: but this
was by the means of the great Persian Monarchs, Cyrus and Darius. We read in
Daniel, 6. chapter that in their days, the Persian Laws were unalterable. And so
we conceive, that Law which gave the King of Persia a power to do every thing
according to his pleasure, was made under their reign: Otherwise, they could
not have decreed unalterably; Neither could Darius have decreed, that none for
fou^^y days should pray to any but to him, unless he had had an absolute and
god-like power conferred upon him by the Law of the Kingdom. Of this Law
Herodot speaks, lib. 3. in the history of Cambyses marriage with his german
sister. And it is known, that Cambyses did shortly after succeed to Cyrus. And
it is already said by us more then once, that conquering Kings may, and did
reign at random. And so it was no wonder, though the Persian Kings had an
absolute power. 1. Because it was established amongst the first and
fundamental Laws of the Kingdom. It was enacted by the power and means of the
first Founders of the Persian Monarchy, who subdued the Assyrians, and brought
them under. But you can never show me a Law amongst the Assyrians, establishing
the arbitrary power of their Kings. 2. I do not deny, but arbitrary power may
be retained in succession (being once acquired by some of the predecessors)
for some short time. So arbitrary power acquired by Nimrod, continued till in,
and about the reign of Zames. And if you say that it lasted longer, sure I am,
it did not exceed the days of Heroicism. After which time Monarchy in Asia,
became despotick and heril. Neither can you show me (as is proved already) that
in the days of the Heroes, regal power was arbitrary, unless it had been in
some extraordinary case. Well, I stand not to grant, that arbitrary power once
acquired, may endure some few hundred years. But I cannot be brought to say,
that such a power can be retained into many ages. This you may learn from what
foregoeth. Now the Assyrian Monarchy continued about 1547, whereas the Persian
Monarchy lasted but 230 years. And though Ottanes defines Monarchy to be, that
to which every thing is lawful unpunishably; yet he does so by way of taxing
the greatness thereof. And positively he taxes the greatness of the Persian
Kings, objecting to the people the licentious arbitrarinesse of Cambyses and
Magus. Thus he endeavors to dissuade the People from establishing Monarchy,
telling them, that it was neither good nor pleasant. And he gives this reason
for it: because (says he) it has a privilege to do every thing unpunishably,
Herod. lib. 3. So then he defines Monarchy after that manner, not because he
esteems it to be its due privilege but because he holds it, as that which
is competent to it against the pleasure and profit of the people. Therefore is
it, that he uses it as a dissuading motive, for provoking the people no longer
to set-up Monarchy amongst them. We stand not here to gloss Artabanus mind,
who commends that Law amongst the Persians whereby was enacted, That the King
should be honored as the Image of GOD. He was a great Courtier with the King
of Persia. And it is the least thing Courtiers can do, to flatter. Although we
do verily think, that Artabanus did allow vast and arbitrary power in the
Persian King, yet that can be hardly drawn from his words. In Scripture, Kings
are called Gods, and we are commanded to honor them as GOD's Vicegerents; yet
does it not follow, that according to Scripture-stile they are absolute, and
have an arbitrary power. And we admit that of Claudian, who says, that the
Persians gave alike obedience to cruel and tyranous Kings. Therefore was it,
that by the very Law of the kingdom, arbitrary power was conferred upon their
Kings, and continued so long as the Persian Monarchy endured. And though the
Persian King had an absolute power in making, yet not in breaking Laws, as is
said already. It is already showed by us, That in some things the power of the
Persian King was restricted.

Salmasius needs not to tell us, that the Egyptians did not bring their Kings
to the Stage. This is blocked-up already from his fingers. And though they did
bear much with Cambyses, it was no wonder: for he subdued them. And what can a
subdued people do, but suffer? And it is known that Cambyses himself was a vile
tyrant. Therefore the story of Judeth calls him Nabuchodonosor. So says
Josephus also. And Ottanes adds to that, Herod, lib. 3. And what can Tyrants
do but tyrannize? Such are very ready to usurp an arbitrary power, concl. 5. As
for Busiris, I cannot think that ever the Egyptians had any such King, though
Isocrates says so, I confess, I read of such a man in Diodore, Rer. ant. lib.
2. cap. 1. But I can read little or nothing of him, either in Berosus or in
Manetho. It Is true, Berosus, Ant. lib. 5. says, That Busiris was King of
Phoenicia. So says Diodore, Ant. lib. 1. cap. 2. And Herodot reports, That
Sennacherib invading Egypt, the Egyptians went about to help him against their
own King Sethon, because he abused them, and did not his duty to them, Lib. 2.
Thus we see that the Egyptians did hardly bear with tyrannous kings. This at
length is showed already. And what power Agamemnon had over the Grecian Army,
as also what power the Grecian Kings had, how they were absolute, and how not,
is showed abundantly already. It is no matter that Philip says, That the king
has equal power with God. So did Caligula arrogat an arbitrary and God-like
power to himself. Suet. in Call. cap. 29. It Is the least thing that tyrannous
kings can do, to plead for more interest, then either GOD, or Nature has
conferred on them. And Ecphantas calls the King (...), not because he should
be governed by none, but because he is above every one seorsim. In which notion
he is above all, and subject to none. Yet this does not conclude, but he is
subject to the people, or their Representative. But knowing, that there are
many Court-parasites, I regard not though you reckon-up Ecphantas amongst them.
Yea, it is already showed by us, That the Roman Kings were regulated. And
albeit we should grant, that Romulus was an absolute Prince, yet would
Salmasius gain just nothing: for by his conduct and industry he made the Romans
a People. And we have said already, that such kings, from whose conduct the
people's welfare does intimatly depend, have been absolute. But the case of
such is extraordinary. And as for that which Pomponius says, it needs a
distinction. It cannot be denied, but Romulus had a pambasilick power before
the Senate was erected by him. But after it was established, we deny that he had
any such power, as is showed already. This distinction you almost find in
terminis, Digest. lib. 1. tit. 2. l 2. where Pomponius words are cited. This
way also Tacitus is to be understood. We confess, the Roman Emperors have
immunity from Law, and that according to the very Law of the kingdom. Princeps
legibus solutus est, Dig. lib. 1. tit. 3. l. 31. And upon this ground say
Severus and Antoninus, Licet legibus soluti simus, attamen legibus vivimus*
Instit. lib. 2. tit. 17. And it cannot be denied, but Dio approves that same
Law. So do all king-flatterers. Yet Dion, lib. 51. says, That this Law was
enacted firstly in favor of Octavius. And no wonder: for he subdued and
overcame all that stood by the liberties and privileges of the people. But the
Conqueror may rule at random, as is often said already. So Darius, and Cyrus,
having subdued the Assyrians, obtained the like privilege, not only to
themselves, but also to their successors. In such a case we deny not, but
kings have had an absolute and arbitrary power. But though Augustus obtained
this privilege, yet sure I am, the Dictatours had it not, as is showed already.

I confess, Diotogenes does compare the King with GOD in some respects, i. e.
As GOD is first by Nature and in Himself, and has power over all the
creatures; so the King by way of imitation and resemblance is first, and has
power on earth. But I read not a word in him of his comparing the King with GOD
in the matter of absoluteness. And sure I am he could not make a comparison in
order to GOD under the notion of arbitrary power: for GOD's essence knows not
what it is to act against Law, and to tyrannize. Yet I do verily think that the
man is of Salmasius judgment: for he says, (...), i. e. The King has an
unsubjected power. And we do not deny, but Justinian, Novel. constit. 105.
says, That the King is above Law. He calls himself also (...), Nov. constit.
1. tit. 1. Yet sure I am, Plutarch does not say so, though Salmasius does
father it falsely upon his name. And truly for my self, I think it a great
wonder, that Plutarch being a great Courtier with Trajan the Emperor, did not
swear what Justinian spoke, It Is the least things Kings can do to say, They are
absolute, and Courtiers to seal it with an Oath. A flattering Tacitus can say,
Principi summum rerum arbitrium Dii dederunt. And Virgil before him deluding
Augustus with flattery, blusheth not to say, Divisum imperium cum Jove Caesar
habet. But this may be admired, That Plutarch, a most eminent Courtier, in
plain terms says, Lex omnium regina, Com. in Princ. But more of this
afterward. And though Emperor Justinian claimed an arbitrary power, yet
neither Theopompus, nor Lycurgus do so. But you shall hear more of this
afterward. Well, I think it just nothing for Salmasius to tell me, that Kings
and Courtiers do plead for an arbitrary power to the King. They both hold that
as their interest, and what the one says the other swears. But he must think
it very material, and take it to his second thoughts, that both Kings and
Courtiers do decline and abominate arbitrary and illimited power. Friend there
is not self-interest here. But the other way you cannot say so much. And what
is it that interest will not make a man do, who regards nothing but
self ends? As the one way partiality, so the other way impartiality takes
room. And as for Salust, truly Salmasius wrongeth him very much. It is not his
opinion, Impune quae libet facere, id est Regem esse. But Memmius thereby
endeavors to dissuade the Romans to keep themselves by all means possible
from the yoke of King Jugurtha, hereby insinuating the dangerousnesse and
inconveniency of Monarchy, just so as O^tanes did to the Persians. But neither
of them did allow this, but taxed it as an unjust and hurtful power in Kings. I
must needs say Salmasius quoteth Memmius and Ottanes their words, as the Devil
quoted in tempting Christ, Matthew. 4. David's words, Psa. 91. v. 11. That which
directly made against the Devil's temptation, he held-out, and only expressed
that which he thought made for his purpose. So does Salmasius straight-forth in
quoting the words of Ottanes and Memmius. The thing that makes against him, he
suppresseth, and that which in show makes for him, he expresses.

SUBSECT. 2.
The rest of the Arguments, for enforcing the second Assertion, propounded and
followed-forth.

HAving at length discussed all that Salmasius does, or can reply against our
second Argument, we make ready now to propound the rest of our Arguments,
whereby the King's arbitrary power is dismissed. And what further may be
objected against our second. Argument (as indeed Royallists do) we shall take
it off by the way in prosecuting the rest of our Arguments. And so by the way
we shall meet with these Royallists, who with Salmasius, do directly militar
against our second Argument. Now,

Thirdly, we make good our purpose from the power that the Kings of Israel and
Judah had. And for clearing this, you shall be pleased to take notice of these
Conclusions.

Conclus. 1. The wicked Kings of the Jews had an arbitrary power, both over
Religion and the People of GOD.

For proof of this, see 1 Samuel 13.14, 15.22.23, etc. 2 Samuel 21. 1 King.
12.14.15.16.20.22. 2 King. 3.8.10.13.14.15.16.17.21.24. 2 Chr.
10.11.12.18.21.22.24.25.26.27.28.33.36.

Conclus. 2. The tyrannous and usurping Kings of the Jews, in all probability
had an arbitrary power over the Republic.

There is reason for this: for such did reign against Law. And why did they not
also rule against Law? And what can tyrannous Kings do, but reduce the people
to slavery? Now it is known that the Kings of Israel for the most part, were of
this temper. Many of them were cruel tyrants and vile usurpers. Therefore is it
said, Rex neque judicat, neque judicatur, non dicit testimonium, nec in ipsum
dicitur, In cod. Sanh. 11. This Maimonides expounds concerning the kings of
Israel, in Gemar tract. de synedr. cap. 11. And this I take to be very true
concerning the usurping and tyrannous kings of Israel, They did not judge,
because tyrannous and usurping kings delight in cruelty. They seek nothing but
their own case, and if they act any thing according to Law it is only for the
fashion, as the tyrant Cambyses did, in seeking his german sister in marriage.
What? Such hold will for Law. They know nothing but, Hoc volo, sic jubeo, sit
pro ratione voluntas.
Juv. Satyr. 6. Such Kings do not judge according to the Law of the Kingdom.
Neither is there power according to the Law of the Kindom laid upon such. What
they do is done by themselves unanswerable to any. They act will-way, and not
Law-way. They were not judged, because they did take power to themselves above
all Law. It cannot be denied but Salmastus concludes well from 1 Samuel 8. and 2 Samuel 8. that the King of Israel judged. Def. Reg. cap. 2. But he will do well
to advert, that though this be true Rex judicat, concerning the King of Israel,
according to God's institution the Law of the Nation, and the practice of some
of their Kings, yet this is as true Rex non judicat, concerning the ordinary
practice of their Kings. And it is very observable, that Jannaeus, whom they
called Alexander, all the while he did reign over the people of the Jews, acted
nothing according to Law, but tyrannized over them, Jos. ant. Jud. lib. 13.
cap. 21.22. But in Gem. tract. de Syned.) cap. 11. it is said, that because of
Jannaeus, it was enacted, that the king should neither judge, nor be judged.
And if it be true that it was enacted then, then do I not think that it was
upon that fabalous ground, (which does not so much as relish to Salmasius) of
which the Rabbinick writers speak, but because of the tyranny and cruelty of
the man, who did not govern law-way, but will-way. And as Alexander, so the
tyrant Herod had an arbitrary power, though we suppose it did depend much from
the concession of Antonius, Jos. Ant. lib. 15. cap. 4.

Conclus. 3. The good Kings of the Jews because of personal endowments, had
exemption and immunity from Law.

This is manifest in the examples of David and Solomon. There were two things
chiefly in David which were against the Law. 1. Multiplication of wives.
Whereof David had very many, 1 Chr. 3. and 14.2. Murder upon the back of
adultery, 2 Samuel 11. And Solomon did many things contrary to the Law 1. He
multiplied gold and silver. 2. Horses and Charets, 1 Kin. 10. 2 Chronicles. 9. 3.
Wives. And 4 he fell into adultery, 1. Kin. 11. And yet we read not that either
David or Solomon were judged therefore by the Sanhedrin. And what (I pray you)
could be the reason of this? Not because the king de jure has immunity from
Law. Nor because they overawed the Sanhedrin by force of arms. We read
nothing of that. And you shall not make me believe, that the Sanhedrin durst
not attempt the executing of justice upon them. 1. You thereby put a great note
of reproach upon David and Solomon. You do no less then insinuate a
disposition in them for rebellion, if you allege that the Sanhedrin, which de
jure (as both already and afterward does appear) had power over them, durst not
for fear of their resistance, execute judgment on them. That had been a
disposition to resist the higer powers. which the Holy Ghost condemns, Romans
13. And I will not think that such men had the Spirit of rebellion to repine
against the execution of justice. 2. We find that the Sanhedrin did execute
justice on Amaziah. And the people did so against Athaliah, 2 Kin. 11.2 Chr.
23. Which makes me think that it was not for want of power, that David and
Solomon were spared. Other Kings of Judah were punished for their faults. The
Sanhedrin and people had power to execute justice on them. And why not also on
David and Solomon? They were all Kings alike. And it is very remarkable that
after Solomon's death, ten tribes declined the house of David, because of
Solomon's heavy exactions and tributes he laid upon the people, 1 Kin. 12. 2
Chr. 10. I believe they were as powerful to revolt from Solomon as from
Rehoboam. And seeing the people took so heavily with Solomon's yoke, that
therefore they did revolt from his son, it makes me think that the Sanhedrin
did not spare him, for fear of his power. Verily both they and the people have
born patiently with his slips and heavy impositions, because of his rare and
singular qualifications. Otherwise I can see nothing for it, why the people did
not make a mutiny against, and revolt from Solomon as against, and from
Rehoboam. 3. Because, as both already and afterward does appear, the Sanhedrin,
both according to GOD's institution, and the Law of the nation, had authority
and jurisdiction above the king. But sure I am, it had been a very useless
power if they durst not have exercised it. It had been all one to have wanted
that authority, with wanting power to have put it in execution as occasion
served. And this had been a having, and a non-having power. Which is ridiculous
and repugnant. Neither can you allege that they were spared, because then
judicatories were altogether turned corrupt, and knew not what it was to
exercise justice: for that does directly militate against the eminent
Reformation both of Church and State, that was under the reign of both these
Kings. Therefore seeing David and Solomon were spared, not because they were
absolute, nor because the people durst not execute judgment on them, nor
because the people and judicatories under their reign were altogether
dissolute, not knowing the way of exercising justice; to me it is more then
manifest that their delinquency was past-by, because of their personal
endowments. The shining virtues and eminent graces that did appear in them, no
question have kept back the Sanhedrin from putting hand on them. O! what a
temptation would it be to me, to voice for a David's off-cutting? O! how much
would my soul be grieved, to sentence against a Solomon? And shall not I think
but those of the Sanhedrin were much taken up with the qualifications of these
men, as well as I could be with the virtues of suchlike? I cannot think that I
am singular in this.

In the interim observe, that my meaning is not that they had such a vast power
as Salmasius dreameth of. I do not think that ever the Sanhedrin would have
spared them, unless they could not have done otherwise, if they had turned
positive and even-down tyrants and destroyers of the Commonwealth. But only my
meaning is, that because of their eminent qualifications, they had immunity
from Law in some notes of delinquency. Neither do I speak, that they had this
privilege, de jure, but de facto. Thus you see that this is no argument for
Royallists, who object, the Sanhedrin's sparing of David and Solomon, as a
ground of the King's arbitrary power: And in this none is more ready then
Salmasius, Def. Reg. cap. 5. But they shall do well shortly to observe these
things. 1. They were spared, because of their personal endowments. They were
extraordinary men: Therefore they were extraordinarily privileged: They got an
inch to the yard, and piece beyond common. Now ab extraordinariis, ad
ordinaria, non est sequela. 2. It cannot be denied, but they got a dispensation
for some points of delinquency. But Royallists have to prove, that they
positively tyrannized over the Commonwealth, and destroyed it, and
notwithstanding had exemption and immunity from law. This I am sure they can
never make good. 3. This speaks something of the exemption of Kings from Law,
de facto. But Royallists, when they have said this, have as yet to prove, that
this factum is de jure.

Inst. O but, (say they) de jure, David ( and if he, then also Solomon, and all
other kings beside) had immunity from Law: for he says, Against thee, thee
only have I sinned, Psalm. 51. And they take this to be the meaning of the
place; as if David had been subject to none but to God. And for this namely
they cite Ambrose, in Apolog. Dav. cap. 10. l. 2. Epist. 7. See Deus and Rex,
and Salmasius, def, reg. cap. 3. But this is the main prop that all Royallists
have for setting-up the arbitrary and lawless power of the King.

Ans. I shall not stand here to repeat the judgment of Interpreters. Our
learned and dear Countryman, Lex Rex, quaest. 26. of this speaks abundantly.
But in few words I expound the words thus. They are to be taken (...),
insinuating, that David had mainly sinned against the LORD, and that David was
more grieved for his sins, in so far as they offended GOD, then in so far as
they offended man. No question, they are to be considered in an hyperbolick
sense. They must not be taken in an exclusive, but in an inclusive notion. Just
so as are these words, I [am] the LORD, and [there is] none else, Isa. 45. and
Deuteronomy. 4. Now, this cannot be taken literally and simply as it is propounded.
Otherwise it should follow, that there were no creature beside the Creator, and
no other thing beside the LORD. And yet it is known, that there are Angels,
men, and many other creatures. Therefore their sense is merely figurative and
hyperbolick, pointing-out the eminency of GOD's essence. Even so David thereby
aggravateth his grief for his offense done against the LORD. He only repeateth
his sin done against GOD. But he speaks nothing expressly of it, as it was
done against Bathshebah and Uriah. No reason can be given for this, but because
it more grieved him; that he had offended God then man. And so, as a man only
taken-up with thoughts of guiltiness and miscarriage in order to God, he only
harpeth upon that string: As a man overcharged with sorrow for sin done
against God, can take no time to think upon his offense to man. So David
carries himself just so here. And yet it cannot be denied but he sinned both
against Bathshebah and Uriah. Otherwise, in so far as he committed adultery
with the one, and murder against the other, in so far he did not sin. And
consequently, he was excusable both before God and man. Where there is no sin,
there is no Law. Our godly and dear Countryman would fain put a fair
construction upon Ambrose, saying, that his meaning is, There was none above
David, de facto, ibid. But the simple truth is, Ambrose is altogether of
Salmasius opinion. Rex utique erat, (says he) nullis ipse legibus tenebatur,
etc. Any man that speaks so plain language to this purpose as he does, it is
but lost travel, to gloss it. But if we compare Ambrose's practice with his
judgment, we will find the one contrary to the other. It is reported of him,
That he did excommunicate Emperor Theodosius, and would not suffer him to
enter the Church (so called) till firstly he did satisfy for his slaughter
committed amongst the Thessalonians, Theodor. lib. 5. cap. 17. Sozom. lib. 7.
cap. 24. Hondorf. and Lonic. theatr. hist. exempl. 5. praec. We admire how
Ambrose could do so much against the Emperor in action, seeing to his practice
he is contrary in profession.

I cannot over-leap an interpretation which Salmasius cites out of one whom he
calls Anonymus. He alleges that David says so, because God only could
pardon him. But, says Salmasius, this cannot be: for the remission of sins,
obtained by the blood of Christ, under the new Testament, unto life eternal,
had no place under the old Testament. O! (says he) what ignorance and
wickedness go hand in hand in these knaves? Def. Reg. cap. 3. This gloss,
which Salmasius so much hisseth-at is the very words of Lyra. And it is cited
by our dear Countryman Lex Rex, quaest 26. Well then, let that Anonymus be
what he will (whom I take not to be the author of Lex Rex) Salmasius has no
reason for that interpretation to call him ignorant, unless he call Lyra
ignorant also. And I must needs say, Hell, and the Devil never invented worse,
then what now Salmasius speaks. I wonder if he dare deny, but Christ was also
mediator under the old Testament, as well as under the new. Dare he say, That
under the old Testament remission of sins unto life eternal was not centred
upon Christ, and acquired by him? Has this man a face to deny, Christ to be
the Redeemer of Believers under the Law? By whose mediation I pray you did they
pass from death to life, if not by the righteousness of Christ who is the only
Advocat before the Father for the sins of all the Elect? I confess, those who
were under the Law believed in Christ, who was to be incarnated, and who was
about to shed his blood on the Cross for the Redemption of Believers. But does
this take-away Christ's blood shed under the new Testament, as the ground and
center of Salvation and remission of sins to Believers under the old Testament?
Howsoever, sure I am, this Gentleman cannot deny, but under the old Testament
God only could pardon sin. Now this Author, whom he calls an ignorant and
pestilent knave, says no more but this. And I shall let any indifferent Reader
judge between Salmasius and him, whether or not Salmasius has reason to fail
so much against him, because he says, That under the old Testament GOD only
could pardon David's sin. Oh! that this poor wretch is not ashamed to speak so
blasphemously. This truth is old enough, and can speak for it self. And sure I
am, there is no honest heart who will allow Salmasius in this.

Royallists need not to brag much, because David was unpunishable by man, for
his murder and adultery. Arguing from this, the state of the Question between
us and them is changed. And thus the Question is moved, Whether or not a man
according to God's own heart, one worth ten thousand, and as in qualification,
so in station, above every one of the People, should be cut off and punished by
the State, for committing adultery with a private woman, and committing murder
against a private man? And what if I should hold the negative of the Question,
(as indeed I make it a great case, and do spare to determine upon either of the
parts at this time; yet would Royallists gain just nothing? The Question
between them and us is this: Whether or not the King is unpunishable by man
though turned a positive tyrant, and forthwith a destroyer of the Commonwealth?
Friends, show me the like practice in David, and the Sanhedrin's sparing him
notwithstanding, and I shall yield to you. Ye are so far from being able to do
so, that weighing David's murder in a square balance, you will find it lighter
then is supposed: for neither he, nor his, had formally, but virtually a hand
in the murder of Uriah. This is far from a destroying of the People. It Is not
like Nero's wish, that all Rome had but one Neck, that he might cut it off.
Now, Royallists must object from the Sanhedrin's sparing a Nero. Otherwise they
beat the air, and change the state of the Question.

Conclus. 4. The Kings of the Jews, de jure, had no arbitrary and
uncircumscribed power.

This we make good, firstly from divine institution and God's moulding of the
King, Deuteronomy. 17. from which is already proved, Subsect. 1. Assert. 2. That the
power of the Jewish king is hedged-in by Law. And Josephus on the place says,
That he should do nothing without the consent and advice of the Priest and
Sanhedrin, Antiq. Jud. lib. 14. cap. 8. It Is but vanity in Sa^nasius to clude
Josephus speech, saying, That his meaning is only concerning the Kings of the
Jews after the captivity, Def. Reg. cap. 2. Is he not blind, that sees not
this man's deceit? Sure I am, that which is spoken of the King, Deuteronomy. 17. was
spoken long before the Kings of the Jews after the captivity, yea, long before
there was any King in Israel. It Is the very positive rule and pattern of all
Kings. And Josephus in the place above cited, as it were commenting on Moses
words, gives the meaning of them. Nay, but you shall further observe the
fallacy of this Gentleman. He studieth to put his own construction, as most
beseems his honor, upon Josephus words. And yet notwithstanding, he
refelleth Josephus, and cannot rest satisfied with his own construction. Yea,
which is more, he flees, cap. 9. to what Josephus says, as to a main truth,
in respect of all the Kings of Israel, both before, and after the Captivity.
Then tell me what manner of man can he be, who cap. 2. declineth from, and cap.
9. enclineth to Josephus. In the one place he plainly denies, That the Kings
of the Jews, whether before, or after the Captivity, were tied to do nothing,
without the consent of the High Priest, and Sanhedrin. And yet in the other
place he affirms the contrary. But he loses all his labor, whether to deny
what Josephus says, or to gloss it according to his own humor: for, as
afterward is showed, Josephus was no friend to Monarchy. And, which is more,
what Josephus says, is the common judgment of Jewish Writers Rex, -- obediat
curiae senatus majoris. i. e. The King, -- let him be obedient to the authority
of the higher Sanhedrin, Deuteronomy. 17. Senatus major interficiendi gladio jus
habeat. i. e. Let the higher Sanhedrin have the right and power of killing by
the sword, Exodus 21. Nemo sese opponat decretis sanctioris Senatus. i. e. Let
none withstand and resist the Statutes of the greater Sandedrin, Deuteronomy. 17. R.
Mos. Egypt. praec. aff. 176. and 225. praec. neg. 316. It cannot be denied, but
the Jewish King was regulated, seeing not only he was oblidged to give obedience
to the higher Sanhedrin, but also every one without exception was tied not to
contraveen the Acts and Sentence thereof. He had not so much as (...), much
less (...). The power of the sword was not in his hand, but in the
Sanhedrin's. Thus his power was restricted, as was the authority of the
Lacedemonian king, and the power of other Kings, as is spoken-of already at
length. Yea, Maimonides says, Qui ex familia Davidis, sunt judicant, and
judicantur. And so in expounding that, Rex neque judicat, neque judicatur, cod.
San. cap. 11. he says, That it is true in respect of the Kings of Israel, but
not in respect of the Kings of Judah. And in what sense it is true concerning
the Kings of Israel, is already explicated by us. The Gemarick Writers from
these words, Oh, house of David, -- execute judgment in the morning; and
deliver him that is spoiled out of the hand of the oppressor, Jerem. 21. move
this Question, Nisi in jus vocari possent, quomodo judicarent? i. e. How could
the house of David judge, unless they were judged? This they prove, because in
Scripture we are commanded to search and try our ways, i. e. as they say,
Corrige te ipsum, deinde alios corrige. Salmasius rages at this, and he
denies what they infer. I shall not take it upon me to make good their
consequences. Let Salmasius impugn them as much as he will. My purpose is only
to show, That they are not of his opinion. They are contented not only to say,
That the king of the Jews, at-least of Judah, (as Salmasius himself out of
Sichardus and R. Lakises has) was subjected to Law, but also they dispute for
that, and endeavor to enforce it by Arguments.

Secondly, from their acting with the concurrence of their Princes. And David
consulted with the Captains of thousands, and hundreds, [and] with every
leader. And David said unto all the Congregation of Israel, If it [seem] good
unto you, -- let us send abroad unto our brethren, -- that they may gather
themselves unto us, 1 Chronicles. 13. There is much in this, If it seem good unto
you. This insinuates, that as David would not act without the advice and
counsel of his people, so his acting depended from their determination. For the
King had taken counsel, and his Priests, and all the Congregation in Jerusalem,
to keep the Passover in the second month. He does it not of his own head
without advice. And the thing pleased the King, and all the Congregation. It is
a thing done by common consent. So they established a decree, -- Mark, it is
not said, So the King established a decree. But the Authority both of King and
Princes is interposed. The decree flows from the joynt-authority of both.
Therefore it is added, So the posts went with Letters from the King, and the
Princes, 2 Chronicles. 30. They go not forth as commissioned only from the King, but
also from the Princes. And it is most remarkable, that which Zedekiah said unto
the Princes. -- The King [is] not he [that] can do any thing against you.
Jerem. 38. Ergo, if the King could do nothing against the will of the Princes,
he had not an arbitrary power to dispose upon matters as he pleased.

Inst. The King delivered Jeremiah into the hands of the Princes (says
Salmasius) not because he was inferior to them, but by way of courtesy and
gratification, and perhaps for fear of sedition. Def. reg. cap. 4. Ans. I
confess Josephus ant. lib. 10. cap. 10. does insinuate as much. But by your
leave I must needs say, that Zedekiah might have delivered Jeremiah into the
hands of the Princes, whether through gratification or through jealousy, and
yet he needed not to say that he could do nothing against them. And sure I am,
if he had had an arbitrary power over them, he would never have said so. 1.
Because it had been a known and manifest lie. Which he would have been ashamed
to have spoken in the presence of the Princes. 2. He should have done
altogether against gallantry and wisdom. Against gallantry, because if he
should have denied his power by way of gratification, then should he have been
simple. And if through jealousy, then he had been base and cowardly. Against
wisdom, because the high way of fomenting sedition, is to dash upon suspicion
thereof. The seditious party is encouraged, upon the fainting and relenting of
the other. Well, I do not dispute upon what grounds Zedekiah delivered Jeremiah
into the hands of the Princes. Whether it be the one way or the other, it is
not material. Yet you must give me leave to add, that you can assign no reason
whether from gratification, or from jealousy, why he should have said that he
could do nothing against the will of the Princes, if he had had an arbitrary
and boundless power. Nay but the words are so clear, that they need no
commentary.

Thirdly, from the council of the old men given to Rehoboam, who said to him,
If thou will be a servant unto this people this day, and wilt serve them, and
speak good words to them, then they will be thy servants for ever, 1 Kin. 12. 2
Chr. 10. They persuade the king to keep himself within bounds, and not to rule
at random. They would have the King to carry himself as a servant toward the
people. This is far from an arbitrary and lording power. It came to this, that
either Rehoboam behoved to govern according to Law, and dimit of the power
which his father had, although it was not boundless and arbitrary, in the full
vastness of arbitrary power, or else the people would leave him and revolt
from him. Thus it was not in Rehoboam's option to lessen or not to lessen the
yoke of his father which he held upon the peoples neck. No verily; Neither did
the old men counsel him to dimit any thing of his father's power, as merely
depending from his own arbitriment, but in relation to the people's desire. And
that not only because of necessity, but also because of convenience. Verily,
the old men had been far in the wrong to Rehoboam to have counseled him to
dimit any thing of his power, if he might have retained it justly. No necessity
lawfully could have moved the old men to persuade Rehoboam to dimit his power,
if he had had such a power of GOD, and if the desire of the people had been
unhonest and unjust. No evil should be done, that good may come of it; Romans 3.
Verily the young men's counsel had been more just and reasonable, then the
counsel of the old men, if Rehoboam lawfully might have kept the people under
his fathers yoke, and if the peoples desire had been unlawful. But it is known
(as Salmasius himself confesses) that Solomon unjustly kept the people under
heavy pressures, 1 Kin. 11. and the counsel of the old men was just and
reasonable yea and the desire of the people was honest and equitable, 1 Kin.
12. 2 Chr. 10. Ios. ant. Jud. lib 8. cap. 3. Now tell me, whether or not the
Kings of the Jews de jure had an arbitrary and lording power over the people?
If they had such a power de jure, then did the people contra jus, in desiring
Rehoboam to dimit his father's power, which of the most can be called nothing
but absolute and uncircumscribed, and the old men did also contra jus; in
desiring Rehoboam to satisfy the people's desire. Salmasius himself will not
say so. But he acknowledges that the peopl's desire was just, and the old men's
counsel seasonable. Yet I remit it to any indifferent reader to judge, whether
or not the people could have desired Rehoboam to lessen the yoke of his father,
and the old men could have counseled him to serve the people, and satisfy
their desire without the note of highest treason, if he had been their absolute
lord? And if you deny that de jure they had any such power, then do I gain the
point.

Inst. Salmasius has no more to say against this, But (1) they did not accuse,
condemn, and bring Rehoboam to death, as the English rebels dealt with K.
Charles. (2.) There is none who will not condemn Jeroboam, as an apostate and
rebel, and impute rebellion to all his successors, Def. reg. cap. 4. Ans.
This is a mere shifting of the question. What is it to the purpose that the
people of Israel did not accuse, condemn, and cut off Rehoboam? Will it
therefore follow, that he had an arbitrary and lording power, or that they went
not about to eclipse his power, and to keep it within bounds? The contrary of
that is showed already. And I think, Salmasius will say, that they had not
reason to cut off Rehoboam. He did no more but threatened them with heavy
pressures and grievous impositions, and that through the suggestion of wicked
and evil counsel. We read not that he had tyrannized over them, and had put
any thing in action, which he threatened them with. And yet they say, What
portion [have] we in David? neither have we inheritance in the son of Jesse.
Every man to your tents O Israel, and now, David, see to thine own house, 1
Kin. 12. 2 Chr. 10. My friend, were they any thing behind with Rehoboam in
this? And I am sure, they did as much against Rehoboam in revolting from him,
and in setting another King over them, upon his threatening them with tyranny,
as if they should have cut him off, if at any time he had actually exercised
tyranny upon them. Consideratis considerandis, the case is just one. They
declined him upon his profession of tyranny. And I pray, imagine you but they
would have dealt far more roughly with him, if he had put it in action? Did
they not stone Adoram to death, who was sent out by the King to them? And was
not the King constrained to flee to Jerusalem, for fear of his life, after they
had revolted from him? Yea, were they not always in a posture to have
withstood the King, if he had come against them in arms? 1 King. 12. and 13. 2 Chronicles. 10. and 11. I cannot stand here to dispute, whether or not they did
lawfully revolt from him. But sure I am, I may very justly determine upon
either of these two 1. That Jeroboam was a vile idolater, and was not worthy to
be a King. 2. That the people justly desired Rehoboam, to dimit of the power
which his father had, and that the old men did arightly counsel Rehoboam to do
so. Neither of these does Salmasius deny. And so I gain the point, as is
already proved.

Fourthly, from the People of the Jews processing their Kings. So did they
against Athaliah, 2 King. 11. 2 Chronicles. 23. and Amaziah, 2 King. 14. 2 Chronicles.
25. See subsect. 2. prop. 1. And as they processed their Kings, so did they
resist them, as afterward is showed. But I pray you, could they have done such
things lawfully if their Kings had had an arbitrary power over them? And that
they did such things according to Law and Reason is proved by us.

Fifthly: If Ahab had had an absolute power, I see no reason how he could have
been refused of Naboth's Vineyard, 1 King. 21 Sure I am, if he had had a
prerogative above Law, and a power to dispose according to his pleasure, either
upon the goods or the person of the subject, he might have taken Naboth's
Vineyard at his own hand, without so much as demanding it with Naboth's leave.
And yet the text says, That Naboth having refused to give it him, he went home
much dismayed, and refused to eat bread, because Naboth had denied it to him.
And, which is more, he could not get it till a false process was led against
Naboth, by the craft of Jezebel. But is it imaginable that ever such things
would have been done, if Ahab's power had been arbitrary and uncircumscribed?
No verily. No question, if his power had been boundless, by virtue of a Royal
Act he might have taken Naboth's Vineyard, either without grieving himself, or
without leading a false process against Naboth. And therefore Mr. Withers, al.
Tom Plain-man says notably: -- Why, I pray,
Did Ahab grieve, that Naboth said him nay?
Why made he not this answer thereunto,
(If what the Prophet said, some Kings would do,
Were justly to be done) Thy Vineyard's mine,
And at my pleasure, Naboth, all that is thine,
Assume I may? Why like a Turkey-chick,
Did he so foolishly grow sullen sick,
And get possession by a wicked fact,
Of what might have been his by Royal Act?
If such Divinity as this, were true,
The Queen should not have needed to pursue
Poor Naboth, as she did, or so contrive
His death, since by the King's Prerogative,
She might have got his Vineyard; nor would God
Have scourged that murder with so keen a rod,
On Ahab, had he asked but his due:
For he did neither plot, nor yet pursue,
The murder, nor (for ought that we can tell)
Had knowledge of the deed of Jezebel,
Till God revealed it by the Prophet to him.
Nor is it said, that Naboth wrong did do him,
Or disrespect, in that he did not yield,
To sell, or give, or to exchange his field.
Brit. Remembr. Cant. 8.

Now hereby is made to appear, That the Kings of the Jews were not absolute,
whether according to the Law of God, or the Law of the Kingdom. And why then do
Royallists plead so much for the King's arbitrary power, seeing the Jewish
Kings, de jure, had it not? Which makes me think, other Kings far less should
have it: for the ordination of the Jewish Kings did depend from God in a most
special way, and God therein was most intimatly concerned. We must not think,
that the Kings of Judah, after the captivity, de jure, had any privilege above
Law, more then those who preceded them. According to the Law of God they had no
such privilege, as is showed already. And that according to the Law of the
Nation they had it not, is also evident. (1.) Because after the captivity the
state of the Government was changed. And they had not so much as Kingly
Government, much less absolute Monarchy, till Aristobulus firstly usurped the
Crown Jos. ant. Jud. lib. 13. cap. 19. (2.) Because the people did withstand
the tyrant Alexander. And while as he was dying, he was necessitate to exhort
his wife, who succeeded to him, to dimit of his power, and to promise to govern
according to the advice and counsel of the Senators, and Pharisees, Ant. Jud.
lib. 13. cap. 22, and 23. Which she did accordingly, cap. 24. And at her death
she desired the Sanhedrin to dispose upon the Kingdom as they pleased, even
while her son Aristobulus was in arms, for bringing the Kingdom to himself.
Yea, the Sanhedrin not only accused Antipater, but also arraigned Herod before
them, who for fear of them was constrained to flee, Ant. Jud. lib. 14. cap. 17.
And what arbitrary power Herod had, was by Antonius concession, whom Herod
blinded and deluded with gifts, Ant. Jud. lib. 15. cap. 4. I confess, while as
Herod was cited before the Sanhedrin, he was not King, but Governor of
Galilee. But what then? I hope Salmasius will not deny, (which indeed he
confesses) that his father Antipater did reign as King. And yet the Elders of
the People did accuse him before Hyrcanus. But neither Hyrcanus, who indeed was
King of the Jews, nor Antipater, who was Procurator, and managed the matters of
the Kingdom because of his weakness, were able to absolve Herod,
notwithstanding Caesar the President of Syria, wrote some Letters to Hyrcanus,
threatening him, if he did not absolve him. The Sanhedrin went-on so precisely
against Herod, that they went about to condemn him to death. So that Hyrcanus
was necessitate, in satisfying Caesar's desire, to cause Herod flee quietly
away. Now, I would fain know of Salmasius, if either Hyrcanus or Antipater had
had an absolute and arbitrary power, might they not have absolved Herod at
their pleasure, the Sanhedrin nilling, or willing, and not basely for fear of
the Sanhedrin have dismissed Herod secretly? Therefore Salmasius must give me
leave to say, (though he imagines the contrary) that Sichardus very
pertinently urges this example, to prove, that the power of the Sanhedrin was
above the King. And Salmasius himself denies not, Def. Reg. cap 2. and 5. but
the strain and current of Rabbinick Writers does run this way.

Inst. Nay but (says he) in the Jewish Talmud it is spoken otherwise. And
therefore it is said, Rex neque judicat, neque judicatur, non dicit
testimonium, nec in ipsum dicitur, in Cod. San. cap. 11. Def. Reg. cap. 2.
Answ. Verily this Gentleman needs not brag much of this: for the Jewish
Writers pull this out of his hands by a distinction. Some of them understand it
concerning the Kings of Israel, and some of them refer it to the Samaritan
Kings. But they deny it to have place in the Kings of Judah, and those who came
of David. I admire much, that he should cite the authority of Jewish writ for
him. He does not deny, but the Jewish Writers are no friends to Kingly
Government. And they positively say, (which he denies not himself) that the
King of the Jews was subjected to Law. And, which is more, they particularily
condescend upon three cases, wherein the King was judged and punished by the
Sanhedrin, viz. Idolatry, Murder, and Adultery. Let Salmasius impugn their
sayings and consequences as much as he will, (no question, they speak many
things from the purpose) I regard not. All that I seek of them, is, to show,
that they are far from his opinion, though he leans much to humane authority.
Yea that which in their sayings seems most for him, he himself is not fully
satisfied therewith. He is constrained to put a fair face upon that, Rex neque
judicat, saying, That it only has place in the Kings of the Jews after the
Captivity. But if his construction stand, then we shall expound the words thus,
Rex neque judicat, i. e. The King of the Jews after the Captivity, did not
judge, neque judicatur, i. e. The King of the Jews, whether before, or after
the Captivity, was not judged. And so you must after the same manner expound
the words which are added to these. And for my self I take this exposition of
his to be mere nonsense. And sure I am, there is no Humanist, who according to
the rules of true Rhetoric, can admit such an exposition. I see he will have
Rex, taken in an ambiguous sense. But I know not if ever he read, that one and
the same word in a continuate Oration, is taken under diverse senses. Such
cryptick expressions become not Humanists, but Sophists, and Amphibologick
Prophets. Well, we have given the sense of these words already, in this same
Section, Concl. 2. And we mind no more to stand here, but only put Salmasius in
mind of this, That the Kings of the Jews, whether according to the Law of God,
or the Law of man, had no prerogative royal above Law: Ergo far less any other
Kings are so privileged.

Fourthly: Absolute power, in actu primo, is a tyrannick power: Ergo it is not
a lawful power and a power from God. The Antecedent cannot be denied, because
absolute and arbitrary power puts the King, or any invested therewith, in a
disposition for, and capacity of acting either according, or contrary to Law,
of tyrannizing, and non-tyrannizing over the People. Now this aptitude of
arbitrary power is the very actus primus thereof. The consequence is also
undeniable: for God cannot be the author of any evil and tyrannous power.
Power, in so far as it is tyrannous, in as far it is sinful and unlawful,
either in less or more. The Scripture of God crieth-down tyranny, and so does
the very Law of Nature. But who will say, That God has hand in any thing that
is evil and unjust; unless he will not be ashamed to say, That God is the
author of sin? And if it be so, that absolute and arbitrary power is not of
God, I admire how Malignants are not ashamed to plead so much for it.

The point being thus established from Scripture, and reason grounded
thereupon, the next thing we have to do in this business, is to show, that it
is not only my judgment, but even that also which the very light of Nature
taught Ethnicks to embrace. Herodot approves Pindarus, because he called Law
the King and Lord of every thing, lib. 3. And lib. 7. he says, that amongst
the Lacedaemonians Law was King. In like manner Plutarch approves Pindarus for
that same, comment. in Princ. Plato does much cry-up Lycurgus, because he
prevented tyranny, in choosing some to govern with him in the Kingdom, and made
Law King. So that (says he) Law became the King of men, and not men the Kings
of Law, In epist. ad famil. Dion. And in the politics he says, We should not
call the civil and kingly power absolute. Aristotle reproves arbitrary power
in the Lacedemonian Ephorie, and in plain terms says, that it had done better
to judge according to Law, then according to it is own will, Polit. 2. cap. 7.
And Polit. 4. cap 4. he says in even-down terms, that Law ought to rule all.
Which makes him say, that where Law does not lord, there is not a Republic.
Yea cap. 5. he calls absolute optimacy, tyranny, calling it all one with the
tyranny of kingly government. Pol. 5. cap. 10. he differenceth the tyrant from
the King in this, viz. that the object of the King is honestum, and of the
tyrant, quod placet. Thus he makes Salmasius his cui quod libet licet, the
propriety of a Tyrant, not of a King. And therefore shutting-up the whole
matter in a word, he calls all powers above Law mere tyrannies. But you shall
not need to imagine that Aristotle in this contradicts himself, while as Pol.
3. cap. 11. and 12. he allows pambasilick monarchy. 1. Because, as is above
said, there is great difference between (...), and (...). And already we have
showed that Aristotle does not absolutely, but comparatively oppose government
laid upon one governing ex voluntate, to government managed and carried-on
secundum legem. 2. It is far from Aristotle's mind to dispute simply and
absolutely for such a power. But his main purpose is to dispute against these
who deny pambasilick and all-governing monarcny to be according to Nature. And
it cannot be denied, but both mixed and unmixed monarchy are natural, albeit
arbitrary and unlimited regal power be against the very Law of Nature it self.
It is no wonder though Aristotle speak something for Royal power. Had he not
Alexander to deal-with, who could endure none to govern but himself?
Church-Prophets or rather prating parasites, such as are the lying spirits, and
King-flatterers now a-dayes, were they as great Courtiers as Aristotle was, I
trow they should not be ashamed, in plain language and positive terms to prefer
the King to CHRIST. The Ethnicks called Jupiter primus. But they could find in
their heart to change that, and say, Caesar primus. Tell not me that Aristotle
is for absolute and uncircumscribed monarchy. Compare place with place, and you
will find the contrary. Yea, Polit. 3. cap. 12. he lays down this as a
ground, That Monarchy transgressing the right model, is against Nature it self.
But sure I am, a power to tyrannize and act against Law, is against the right
model: for both in actu primo, and actu secundo it is a tyrannick power.
Howsoever Aristotle in that same place explaineth what the right model is, as
is showed by us already. And it is far from taking-in arbitrary power. And,
which is more, Aristotle is so far from allowing arbitrary Monarchy, that, as
afterward is showed, no Government takes so much room in his heart as
Democracy. And what need we stand here, do not all Lawgivers disclaim
arbitrary and uncircumscribed power? viz. Zaleucus, Charondas, Onomacritus,
Thales, Lycurgus, Philolaus Plato, Dracon, Pittacus, and Androdamas, of whom
Aristotle speaks, Pol. 2. cap. 10. These could not have precisely prescribed
Laws for hedging-in the ways of people, unless they had been positive and
even-down enemies to absolute and arbitrary power. Howsoever it is without
controversy, That the chiefest Lawgivers we read of amongst the Ethnicks,
could not away with arbitrary and uncircumscribed Government. Solon was
altogether against it, Arist. ibid. Diog. Laer. de vit. Phil. lib. 1. in Sol.
Val. Max. lib. 5. cap. 3. lib. 7. cap. 2. and lib. 8. cap. 7. Trog. lib. 2. See
also Isocr. Areop. Panath. De permut. Pittacus was so much against it, that
having reigned awhile over the Mityleneans, at last he resigned the Kingdom,
Diog. La. de vit. Phil. lib. 1. in Pittac. See also Simonid. carm. Val. Max.
lib. 4. cap. 1. lib. 6. cap. 5. Who will deny Lycurgus to have despised
arbitrary power? So Xenoph. de Repub. Laced. and many others do report, as
Herodot, Plato, Aristotle, etc. Neither can it be denied, that Plato was an
enemy thereto, as is showed already. He could not endure the tyrant Dionysius,
as Laertius, Plutarch, and others do report. And that Minos did abhor arbitrary
power, is showed already, Concl. 6. Because he was a most noble Lawgiver,
therefore he is feigned by Homer, Odyss. 11. to be Justiciar over the souls
departed: In a word, that of Pindarus, Lex omnium est Regina, mortalium, atque
immortalium, passes current amongst the chief Lawgivers, and Philosophers. To
which Plato* the great Philosopher and Lawgiver, in terminis does subscribe,
lib. 24. de Rhetor. What? shall we over-leap the most noble Lacedemonian King,
Theopompus, indeed not unlike the signification of his name? No verily. While
as it was said by his friends to him, having superadded the Ephorick power,
That he should leave less power to his successors then he had of his
predecessors; he forthwith answered, saying, Nay, but I leave them a far
greater power, Arist. Pol. 5. cap. 11. See also Valor. max. lib. 4. cap. 1. and
Plut. de doctr. princ. lib. Of the heroic Theseus we have spoken enough
already to this purpose. And; which is to be admired, the very King-flattering
Isocrates does story much of his disclaiming arbitrary power. And this he
reports not to his discredit, but to his praise, Helen. laud. and Panath.
What needeeth us thus to multiply the actings and judgments of men against
arbitrary Monarchy? Have we not already at large showed it to be repugnant to
the ordinary course and strain of all Commonwealths? We will stand no longer
here, but hasten toward another Question.

SECT. II.
Whether or not is Royal Government the choicest of Governments?

AS in the former Question we have offered our judgment very freely, so shall
we do the like here. And that we may do so to some purpose and distinctly, we
offer our judgment to you in these Assertions.

Assert. 1. Royal power, ectypically, is the choicest of Governments.

This is to be taken two ways. 1. In order to the Creator. It cannot be
denied, but Monarchy ectypically and by way of assimilation comes nearest to
the Government of God, and does liveliest represent it: for the Divine Essence
is simply one, admitting no diversity. Now, a thing is no otherwise good and
pure, but as it is squared according to the perfect pattern of the Divine
Essence. And consequently Monarchy having a more intimat assimilation to the
Divine Essence then any other Government, ectypically and by way of
assimilation, it cannot but be the chiefest of Governments. This breaks the
neck of all that is objected from the resemblance that is between Regal
Government, and the Government of God, to prove Monarchy to be the choicest of
Governments. So do some object expressly, Isoc. Nic. Aquin. de Pr. reg. lib. 1.
cap. 2. Clicht. de reg. off. cap. 1. and 3. Bellar. de Romans pont. lib. 1. cap.
4. Salmas. def. reg. cap. 5. and some, insinuatively, Cypr. de Idol. van.
tract. 4.

2. In order to the Creature. We find, that both amongst inanimate, and animate
creatures, a natural kind of Monarchy is observed. Is there not in the complex
body of the Universe one above all the rest? We see the Heaven is above all the
four Elements. And in the Heaven all the stars in height, virtue, and
excellency, are inferior to the Sun. Therefore Dionysius calls the Sun,
imaginem Coeli, terraeque regem, Lib. de Divin. nom. Amongst living (though
brutish) creatures, have not Bees their own King, and flocks of Sheep their own
leader? Apol. Nil. Hierog. lib. 1. Virgil, Geor. 4. Plin. not. hist. lib. 11.
Cypr. tract. 4. Ambros. hexam. lib. 4. Veg. disp. int. ter. sol. etc. Cranes
have also a King, Apol. hierog. lib. 2. Plin. not. hist. lib. 10. Hieron. in
Epist. ad Rust. Ambr. hex. lib. 5. Hence the back of that Argument is also
broken, which Salmas. def. reg. cap. 5. and others do draw from the natural
kind of Monarchy that is amongst inanimate and brutish creatures, to prove
Regal Government of all Governments to be the choicest.

Assert. 2; Monarchy, (...), is the choicest of Governments.

This cannot be denied: for of all Governments Monarchy is the most ancient.
Before the flood we read of no Government Political, but of Royal power, Genesis
5. and 6. Ber. ant. lib. 1. And after the flood it was that also which had
first footing, Genesis 10. Beros, ant. lib. 4. Archil. lib. de temp. Xenoph. de
aequiv. Porc. Cat. ex lib. orig. fragm. Pict. de aur. sec. lib. 1. Metast. de
Pers. annal. Isc^r. Panath. Jos. ant. Jud. lib. 2. cap. 4. and 5. Philo. Jud.
ant. Bibl. lib. To this also Aristotle, Trogus, and Salust, do subscribe, with
the whole current of Writers. Royallists do meanly object, Monarchy simply to
be the choicest of Governments, because it is the ancientest of Governments. So
argues Salmasius, def. reg. cap. 5. We confess, in respect of antiquity it is
the best. It Is a bad consequence, Monarchy is best (...), in respect of
antiquity and priority of time: Ergo it is best (...), simply and absolutely.
This is a caption indeed, a secundum quid, ad simpliciter.

Assert. 3. Monarchy, demotically, in respect of the temper and disposition of
the people, is the best Government.

In clearing this, you shall observe with me, these three times. 1. The golden
time. 2. The heroic time. 3. The non-heroick and after-time. As for the golden
time, it cannot be denied, but people then had only a disposition for natural
and oeconomick government. See subsect. 2. concl. 3. But the heroic time did
extremely incline to Monarchick Government. Before the flood Giants and men of
renown did enlarge their power, and brought all in subjection to them. After
the flood, about 131 years, Nimrod began to erect a Kingdom for himself. And
afterward the heads of Colonies went forth, and established Kingdoms. At that
time heroic spirits one way or other came to Crowns. Of this is spoken already
by us at large: We shall not now need to repeat any thing we spoke, whether
concerning the extraordinary, or ordinary Heroes. That time had such a
disposition for Regal Government, that it carried the People of Israel to seek
a King, whether God would or not, 1 Samuel 8. We find very reason for it, why
then the disposition of people did most intensively carry them toward that kind
of Government. 1. Because men then were ignorant: They were then more prodigal
then politic. There could be found at that time few, or no Commonwealth's-men.
And to this very pertinently agrees that which Aristotle speaks Polit. 3,
cap, 11, and Pol. 4 cap, 13, saying, That Kingly Government was in the
beginning, because then men were ignorant, and few Commonwealth's-men could be
found. I confess, his meaning is mainly concerning the golden age: And in
respect of it he also speaks true. No question, then every thing was but in
its beginning: Men then were but acquainted with the rudiments of learning and
policy, and scarcely that. Any Government they had then was not Politic, but
Natural and oeconomick: At least, it did not much differ therefrom. And it must
needs be said, That then people were not acquainted with the Rules of Policy in
the Heroic age. It cannot be denied, but in the Heroic time men had greater
insight and experience then in the Golden time. In the heroic age Policy began
to have footing. And no question at the end thereof men were better acquainted
therewith, then at the beginning thereof. Their experience and insight then
could not but be the greater. Yet we must needs say, that comparing the age of
Heroicism with aftertimes, men in it were but meanly acquainted with the Rules
of Policy. As far as the herock time therein exceeded the golden time, so far
therein did aftertimes exceed the heroic time. And we find, that always the
latter times do abound more in Learning and Policy, then the preceding and
former. 2. Because in those days men were of a gigantine strength and vast
courage. Then they were much given to warlike exploits, to the building of
Cities, and to the enlarging of their own dominions. What I pray you then could
be more suitable to the disposition of men then Kingly Government? Prodigality
was then more stood-by then Policy. Then men were always set a-work on haughty
and heroic designments. Therefore they could not be governed and ordered, but
by such who were far above their reach. What? did not then the haughtiness of
Israel cry for a King? 1 Samuel 8. They tell Samuel, they will have a King as
other Nations. And this is as much as if they had said, We cannot endure to be
inferior to other Nations. And therefore we will have a King. What was it I
pray you, that made Nimrod to take Royal Power to himself, but because he was a
mighty hunter, Genesis 10. one of an haughty and arrogant disposition? Pride of
heart, and arrogance of spirit would not admit Caesar to be Pompey's equal, and
Pompey Caesar's superior. Live. dec. 14. Luc. An. lib. 4. cap. 2. Plat. de
Pomp. The very instinct of Nature does abundantly teach, Kingly Government most
to beseem the disposition and temper of the proud and haughty. Cranes, and
Bees, which Nature has taught to erect amongst them Kingly Government, in
haughtiness and proudn^sse amongst all beasts are matchless, Apol. in hierogl.
lib. 1. and 2. Virg. Geor. 4. Plin. not. hist. lib. 11. Juv. Sat. 13. Ambr.
hex. lib. 5. Is it any wonder then though in the heroic age men did much dote
upon Kingly Government. Then men were extreme haughty and arrogant, and could
not be governed by equals. They were much given to high and lofty undertakings.
And what could expede them therein more then Kings? In aftertimes, I deny not
but Monarchy did go much out of request, if we compare the non-heroick with the
heroic time. This makes Aristotle say, Polit. 3. cap. 10. That in aftertimes
the kingly power was extremely lessened, partly by the King's dimitting
thereof, and partly by the People's detracting therefrom. This is already
illustrated by us* by manifold examples. No wonder that this was: for as the
heroic age in Policy did exceed the golden age, so therein aftertimes did
exceed the heroic times, yea much more. Thence was it men then so abounded in
Learning and Policy, that in many Commonwealths they could endure no Kings at
all. At last the number of Commonwealth's-men greatly increased, till they did
not leave so much as the name of a King, much less the power. So it was
amongst the Cretians, Athenians, Cyrenians, Romans, and other Republics. Yet
observe this distinction, there is a threefold kind of people. 1. Haughty and
malignant. 2. Ignorant and servil. 3. Witty and politic. The first sort can
endure no Government but kingly. And that not only, because they would be great
Courtiers themselves, and promoted to dignity, but also because they cannot
endure to be governed by their equals. The second sort Stoically are incapable
of the sense of slavery, and apprehend some deified luster in the King. They
are silly, base, common spirits. And because of their silliness, they are
contented to live in slavery. And as they are base* so they are ignorant. And
because of their ignorance, they apprehend all their slavishnesse abundantly to
be made-up, with a glimpse of the King's countenance: for in their delusion,
they look upon it as some deified species apprehending him to be much more then
a man. And the third sort upon no terms can away with kingly Government. And
that, because they delight in freedom, and the enriching of the Commonwealth.
We see, that the most witty and politic Kingdoms we read of, did either
extremely lessen the power of their Kings, or else did shake-off their yoke
altogether, and that both in former and aftertimes. So the Egyptian,
Ethiopian, Indian, Athenian, Lacedemonian, Cretian, Cyrentan, Carthaginian, and
Roman Kingdoms. And to day know we not, that the most witty and politic
Kingdoms of the world, which delight in the liberty of the Subject and wealth
of the Republic, cannot away with kingly Government? So Venice, Florence,
Holland, and England. What I pray you can be the reason, that England cannot
away with kingly Government, and Scotland so much thirsts after it? Speaking
naturally, there can be no reason given, but because England is a witty and
politic Nation, and Scotland is not. What? does not Aristotle, Polit. 3. cap.
11. and Pol. 4 cap. 13. impute it to the ignorance and unpolitickness of
people, that in old, they did set-up Kings to reign over them? And in the same
places he says, That Policy abounding, and Commonwealth's-men increasing,
Kings were suffered no longer to govern. But although this be true, That people
in aftertimes do not so much prize Monarchy, as in former times; and though
even to day some kingdoms be less disposed for it then other kingdoms, having
shaken it off altogether: yet notwithstanding, I am constrained to say, That in
respect of the general and common disposition of the people, nothing does
relish so much to them as kingly government. No wonder forsooth: for there are
more who are malignant and haughty, desiring to set their feet upon the necks of
others, then are politic and witty. And besides this the general and common
sort of people are merely ignorant and insensible of slavery. There are far
more indeed of the first and second sort, then the third.

Assert. 4. Kingly Government, consecutively, in respect of its fruits and
consequences may be, hic and nunc, the best of all Governments.

This we make good. Firstly, from example. It cannot be denied, but the good
Kings, who in old did reign over the Jews, did set-up most glorious and eminent
Reformations amongst the people. They most nobly reformed both Church and
State. 2 Samuel 6, and 7. 1 King. 8 1 Chronicles. 13.15.16.17.22. and 28. Psa. 101. So
much of David. Of Solomon* 1 Kin. 1.2.5.6 7. and 8. 1 Chr. 5.6.7.24.28. and 29.
2 Chr. 2.3*4. and 8. Of Asa, 1 Kin. 15. 2 Chr. 14. and 15. Of Jehoshaphat, 2.
Chron. 17. and 19. Of Hezekiah, 2 King. 18. 2 Chr. 29.30. and 31. There is much
also spoken of Josiah, in acting for Reformation, 2 King. 23. 2 Chronicles. 34 and
35. See also Joseph. Ant. lib. 7.8. and 9. concerning the actings of these
Kings. They were so instrumental in setting-up the Work of God amongst the
people, that therein they did far exceed the Judges. Hence is it, we do not
read, the people of the Jews at any time so cheerfully so fully, so speedily,
and with such a plenary consent, to have gone about duty, as under the reign of
these Kings. Under the conduct of the best Judges we read of great grudgings,
altercations and slips amongst the people, notwithstanding the non-consent of
the Rulers thereto, Exodus 32. Numb. 11.12.13.14.16.20. and 25. Josh. 7. Jud. 2.
But we read not of any such slips amongst the people under these reforming
Kings.

Secondly: Monarchy is attended with many noble proprieties, wherein it
exceeds any other kind of Government. By virtue of which, now and then, here
and there, it produces more noble and eminent effects then any other
Government. In reckoning-up these proprieties we observe Bellarmin's method. 1.
Order. 2. Intense Authority. Whereby it preventeth division, and speedily
attaineth its purpose. In this sense the Poet says well, -- componitur Orbis
Regis ad exemplum. --
From the second propriety, Darius disputing for Monarchy against Ottanes,
concludes it to be the choicest of Governments, Herod. lib. 3. It made Ulysses
to say, (...),
(...), -- Hom. Il. 2.


In English. That many rule it is not a good thing,
One Prince let be, [and let there be] one King.
And therefore he sharply rebuked the dividing and murmuring Grecians, saying,
(...). Hom. ibid.

In English. We shall not, Grecians, in this place
All reign indeed in any case.
From this Isocrates concludes, Monarchy of all Governments simply to be the
best, ad Nic. So do Seneca, lib. 2. cap. 20. Athanasius. Orat. adv. Idol.
Hieronymus, par. 3. tract. 9. epist. 39. and Plutarch, in Number. and Sol. But
they are far mistaken: for this only concludes, Monarchy secundum quid to be
the choicest of Governments. Yea Plato, in Polit. Aristotle, Eth. 8. cap. 10.
Justine, in Or. exhort. Cyprian, tract. de idol. van. in this respect call
Monarchy the chiefest of Governments. Yet not simply and absolutely, as do
Isocrates, Darius, and others, 3. Power and strength. For in so far as
Monarchick Government is less obnoxious to division, and more attended with
union then any of the rest, in as far it secureth and strengthens the
Commonwealth more then any of them. The strength of the Kingdom depends from
union, consent, and harmony. The contrary of this is the ruin of it, Mat. 12.
Whence, after Kingly Government had perished amongst the Romans, many intestine
divisions did ensue, as D. Halicarnassius, Val. maximus, T. Livius, Fenestella,
Plutarch, L. Annaeus, etc. do report. 4. Stability and diuturnity. Now, it is
attended with this propriety for these reasons. Firstly, because it is most
authoritative and farthest from the subjects reach. Secondly, because it is
less liable to division and confusion, then any of the rest of Governments.
Because of these things it is more free, then any other Government, whether
from foreign, or intestine jars. Hence is it, that amongst all Governments, it
has endured longest, as is agreed on by all Historians. I confess, Isocrates,
Panath. says, That Democracy amongst the Athenians lasted 1000 years. But that
comes not up by many hundred years with the duration of the Assyrian,
Egyptian, and other Kingdoms.

But in the interim we humbly desire Bellarmine, not to imagine the Scythian
kingdom to be of such antiquity and stability, that it is not only more ancient
then any other kingdom, but also as yet was never conquered by any foreign
power: for though Justine does allege no less (whose testimony Bellarmine
cites, Lib. 1. de Romans pont. cap. 2.) yet notwithstanding the contrary is
evident from Berosus, ant. lib. 5.

5. Facility of governing. This propriety flows not only from the intensnes
of its authority, but also from its faculty of preventing division and
confusion: for as by the one its purposes are speedily acquired and cheerfully
gone about, so by the other distraction and diversity of opinions is removed.
By virtue of all these proprieties Kingly Government hic, and nunc, of all
Governments proves the sweetest. But these Gentlemen, and Court-parasits, who
because of these proprieties conclude, it simply and absolutely to be the
choicest of Governments, must give me leave to say, they are a little mistaken:
for at the most they conclude it to be secundum quid and in some respect, the
chiefest Government. But a (...), ad (...) non est consequens.

Assert. 5. Regulated and mixed Monarchy, per se and in it self, is of all
Governments the sweetest:

Firstly: Because per se and as it is in it self, it moderateth and removes
the evils of all Governments: for as it is monarchick, it preventeth division
and confusion, the evils of Aristocracy, and Democracy. And as it is regulated
and mixed, it obstructeth the foul emanations of tyranny. Who can deny, that
to be the chiefest Government, per se and as it is in it self; which per se and
as it is in it self moderateth the evils of all Governments, and serves to
remove them? Such is the case of regulated and mixed Monarchy.

Secondly: Because per se and as it is in it self, it does partake of the good
of all Governments: for so it is the medium of all Governments, composed and
made-up of all their natures. And consequently it including within it all the
degrees of political goodness as it is in it self; in such a notion, cannot
but be far more excellent then any kind of Government: for any other Government
in it self does only include one simple kind and degree bonitatis politicae.
And in this sense these say well, who affirm, Regulated and mixed Monarchy to
be of all Governments the choicest. But they will do well to advert, that
though it be so in its essentials and pure naturals, yet it is far otherwise in
its accidentals and way of administration.

Assert. 6. Monarchy, consecutively, in respect of the fruits and effects, it
may, and does produce; simply and absolutely, of all Governments is most
dangerous, and least to be desired.

We establish it thus. Firstly, we make it good from Scripture-example. It
cannot be denied, but as there were more evil Kings then good Kings amongst the
Jews, so there was more evil done by the one, then good by the other. 1 Samuel
13.14.15.22.23, etc. 2 Samuel 21. 1 King. 12.13.14.15.16.20. and 22. 2 King.
3.8.10.13.14.15.16.17.21. and 24. 2 Chronicles. 10.11.12.18.21.22.24.25.26.27.28.33.
and 36. What? does not this hold-out to us, that there is greater danger and
hazard to be expected and looked for at the hands of Kings then good? So it
fared with the people of the Jews at the hands of their Kings. Amongst them all
there were but six good; all the rest wicked. Of whom it is said, That they
walked in the ways of Jeroboam, who made Israel to sin. And it is not for
naught, that such a causal epithet is most often registered in Scripture, and
annexed to the wicked Kings of the Jews, 1 King. 15.16. and 22. 2 King.
3.10.13.14. and 15. Now let the indifferent Reader judge, whether or not that
causal epithet be so often ascribed and given to them in vain. There is a great
emphasis in that, who made Israel to sin. If we plumb the bottom of it
arightly, we shall find, it coucheth as much as that Kingly Government is most
dangerous, and produces badest effects. And it is the more evident, by
comparing the state of the Jewish Commonwealth under Kings, with the state of
it as it were under Judges. Peter Martyr from several pregnant reasons
proves, That the condition of the Jews was far better under the Judges, then
under the Kings, Com. in Judic. cap. 1. His Reasons we digest thus. 1. The
Judges did always deliver them from misery and bondage, Judge.
2.3.4.5.6.7.11.12.13.14.15.16. and 20. Whereupon it is said, Nevertheless the
Lord raised up Judges, who delivered them out of the hand of those that spoiled
them. Judge 2. But the King did not always so. 1 Samuel 28. and 29. 1 Kin. 24. 2
Kin. 6.7.12.13.16. and 17. 2 Chr. 12.18.21. and 28. They oftentimes destroyed
them, 1 Samuel 22. 2 Samuel 21. 1 Kin. 18. and 22. 2 Kin. 16. and 21. 2 Chr. 24.
They compelled them to slavery, to sodomy, and idolatry. 2. The people of the
Jews were not led into captivity under the Judges, as they were under the
Kings. 2 Kin. 18. and 25. 2 Chr. 36. Yea, under Judges, as is clear from the
places above quoted touching them, the people were never brought into any
misery and affliction because of them. They were not only ordained by God to
deliver, and did deliver the Jews out of all their calamities; but also they
labored to keep them back from sinning, which was the cause of all their
sorrows, Judge. 2. But the wicked Kings who did reign over them, not only did
not dissuade them from committing iniquity, but also did draw them on unto the
perpetrating of manifold and most grievous abominations: whence it was, many
sad and sore judgments were infflicted upon them. 3. There were very few good
Kings. But we read not of any evil Judges, save Abimelech and Samuel's sons.
And it is very observable, that because Abimelech perverted judgment, and
usurping the authority, did reign as King, God judicially plagued him, Judge. 9.
Yea, for the bribery of Samuel's sons he rented the Kingdom from them And it
was no won though the most part of the Judges were good, and few of them
wicked. (1) Because (as Peter Martyr says) in electing them they had no regard
to their riches, but to their virtue and godliness, Exodus 18. and Deuteronomy. 1. (2)
Because (as the same author says) they were not declared by the voices of
men, but by the ordinance and inspiration of God. Posterity, or succession was
here of no force, Judge. 2. And it is remarkable, these two conditions being
slighted, the Judges were corrupt and dissolute. But they being observed, they
were ever found holy and much for the good of the people. Then tell me, is it
any wonder though the Jews were in a far better condition under Judges, then
under Kings? The Judges for the most part were holy. They always dehorted the
people from prophanity, always delivered them from slavery, and at no time
brought evil upon them. But the Kings for the most part were wicked, and the
contrary effects were produced by them. This, as a speaking commentary,
intimates to us, That the condition of the people is most desperate and
hazardous under Kings.

We cannot passe-by the condition of the Jews after the captivity, as it was
under Captains or Judges, and as as it was under Kings. All the while they
lived under Captains, their condition was most happy and blessed. Albeit at
that time, now and then they were crossed with the bondage of strangers, yet
were they free from intestine jars. Their Captains did not rise against them,
and bring them under slavery, as did their Kings. Their zeal and forwardness
in acting for the weal both of Church and Commonwealth, are fully regestred in
the books of Ezra and Nehemiah, Macc. 1. and 2 Jos. ant. Jud. lib. 12. and 13.
And how much the Jews under the reign of Kings, after the captivity, suffered,
is storied at length by Josephus, ant. Jud. lib. 13.14. and 15. In a word, the
case of the Jews under Kings being most desperate, far unlike the sweetness of
their condition under Judges, it speaks to us, That Kingly Government of all
Governments is the most hazardous. What better fruits, I pray you, needs any
kingdom to expect at the hands of Kings, then the people of the Jews were
served with at their hands? Verily, I suppose, we may expect rather worse then
better fruits, then the people of the Jews were made to taste of under the reign
of Kings.

Secondly. from the Lord's unwillingnesse to set-up Kingly Government amongst
the people of the Jews in remonstrating to them the extreme hazard and tyranny
they should lie under, if they subjected their necks thereto. This is seen, 1 Samuel 8. And for making good our purpose therefrom we move the question, Whether
or not does Samuel in it describe the office, or rather the tyranny of the
King? Royallists do proudly aver, That in it is understood the Office and Law
of the King. And none herein is more forward then Salmasius, Def. Reg cap. 2.
and 5. But that we may dispatch the business between us, we shall firstly try
the sense of v. 11. what may be imported in the original text. (...) And he
said, This shall be the manner of that King who shall reign over you. But
Salmasius starteth very much at this translation. And for manner, he places
law, or right. So the man will have (...) to signify. Yea, but he is far
mistaken. Firstly, because in many places of Scripture we find the word (...)
taken for manner, consuetude, or custom, Genesis 40. Exodus 21. Numb. 29. Josh. 6.
^ Sam. 2. 1 Samuel 27. 1 King. 18. But a place or two we express for further
clearing this purpose. (...) And they are doing into this very day, after their
former manners 2 Kin. 17. -- (...) And their customs keep not -- Ezekiel. 20.
Secondly, because it is the ordinary and common translation. So the Chaldee
Paraphrast translateth (...) thus, (...) Now (...) is one and the same with
(...) And it is to be rendered manner. Josephus, ant. Jud. lib. 6. cap. 40. is
close of our judgment. And Cl. Alexandrinus in plain terms says. That the
Lord does not promise them a King, but threatens them with a Tyrant. And
Salmasius, though he leans to humane authority, yet he stands not to say,
That Clement, and all, who expound the words contrary to his mind, do err.
Def. Reg. cap. 5. I suppose, the man is for nothing, but what is for him. Ex
ungue Leonem. But we have many more Interpreters and Writers of our judgment.
Beda, lib. 2. in expos. Sam. Glos. interl. Hug. Card. Lyr. Cajet. Serar Corn. a
lap. and Mend. in loc. Tust. Abul. in 1 Reg. cap. 3. quest. 17. Rebuf. tract de
incong. Calv. in loc. P. Mart. in loc. Jun. Trem. Riv. Diod. Pisc. and Brent.
in loc. So says Buchanan. de jur. reg. ap. Scot.

I confess the Septuagints render (...). And this Salmasius runneth-to, as to
a strong tower, withal further alleging that sometime they translate (...),
Def. Reg. cap. 2. But he builds upon a sandy foundation. We make not
reckoning, how the Septuagints elsewhere translate it. They do also in some
places render it (...). The word in itself has diverse significations. But to
our purpose, we contend that here it signifies nothing, but manner or custom.
And though (...), from which (...) has it is arisal, properly signifies jus,
justitia, and fas, yet improperly it is called ritus, mos, and consuetudo. It
is said (...). Hom. Odys. And likewise (...). Arist. de mun. According to this
latter sense we understand the meaning of the Seventy.

Thirdly, we clear it evidently from the text itself. And that according to
these reasons. 1. Because the LORD commanded Samuel to describe to them the
State and condition of the King, to use it as a motive for dissuading them from
following-out such a desire. -- Howbeit yet protest solemnly unto them, and
show them the manner of the King that shall reign over them, i. e. before thou
shall set a King over them, thou shall protest solemnly against it. And in so
doing, thou shall draw arguments and motives of dissuading them from their
purpose, from the very condition and nature of the King that shall reign over
them. And R. Judas speaking on the place, says, that what the LORD commanded
Samuel to speak did serve to strike a terror in the hearts of the people.
Salmasius vainly shifteth this, as subtly he expounds that of R. Jose,
Quicquid dicitur in capite de Rege, eum Regum jus habere, to relate to 1 Samuel
8. and not to Deuteronomy. 17 Def reg. cap. 2. Howsoever see what Josephus says. Now
I command thee to make them a King, whom I shall design. But before thou shall
do so, forewarn them of the great evils that shall ensue thereupon, and protest
that in so doing they cast themselves loose of a good estate into a worse. Ant.
Jud. lib. 6 cap. 4. To this same purpose Brent speaks more plainly and
largely, Hom. 26. in 1 Samuel cap. 8. Now tell me if (...) were to be understood
concerning the office and right of the King, how could Samuel have objected it
as a dissuading argument, to alienate the people's mind from seeking after
Kingly government? Either he here speaks of lawful, or unlawful power. If
of lawful power, either he describes to the people the good or the bad of it.
If the good, ergo he did not protest against the power, but whereas he should
have dissuaded the the people from seeking after it, he tacitly persuades
them thereto: for how much more the excellency and goodness of a thing is
pointed-out, so much more it is desired-after. And to say that Samuel did not
dissuade them therefrom, but persuaded them thereto, is to avouch that either
he did argue against himself, and militate against his own purpose, or else
that he acted contrary to his Commission from GOD. The LORD commanded him
solemnly to protest, and dissuade them from their purpose. He would have him to
lay-out before their eyes the dangerousnesse of Kingly power, to strike terror
in their hearts that they might forbear longer to desire it. If you come to my
hand and say, that the Prophet in this place only speaks of unlawful power,
or of the bad of a lawful power I obtain my desire. I seek no more then that
you say, he speaks here of the abuse, and not the use of Kingly power. And I
trow, the abuse of Kingly power is not the right, but the wrong of it.

2. Because the Prophet in describing the manner of the King, sets down acts
of tyranny, not of lawful authority. We take up the description itself under
a general and particular notion. The general. -- Ye shall be his servants. He
shall beslave you, and make you serve him according to his pleasure. Which made
Josephus say, And that I may speak it in a word, ye together with all yours,
shall serve the King, no otherways then his own domestic servants. Ant. Jud.
lib. 6. cap. 4. See plain language in Brent. to this purpose, hom. 27. in 1 Samuel 8. The particular notion has several parts in it. Firstly, in order to
the King's tyrannizing over the sons of the people. He will take your sons,
etc. As if he had said, your King shall make you sonlesse. He shall beslave
them to his service, employing some in one office, and some in another. And in
all these employments, whether base or not, neither ye, nor your sons, shall be
holden as freemen, but all the fruits of your labors shall turn-over into the
King's private advantage. Whereupon Josephus himself bringeth-in Samuel
speaking, that he would declare to them, who should be their king, but adding,
that he would first show them what things they would suffer under a king, and
with how great disadvantages they would live under him. Therefore ye shall
firstly know, that he will take from you your children, and he shall make some
of them drivers of Chariots, etc. So that there shall be nothing which he shall
not constrain them to do, after the manner of bought slaves. Ant. Jud. lib. 6.
cap. 4. In this Josephus much agrees with these words in the original text
(...) Which in their proper and rigorous signification are rendered, he will
quite take-away your sons. But we judge it not to be an Act of Regal power, but
of mere tyranny, to denude the parent altogether of his child, and the King to
dispose of him at his pleasure. For this Brent gallantly speaks, loc. cit.
Secondly, In order to the King's away-taking of the daughters of the people. --
He will take your daughters to be confectionaries, and to be cooks, and to be
bakers. As if he had said, He shall not only make you sonlesse, but
daughterlesse also. And as he will make slaves of the one, so likewise of the
other. Now (...) is also in the original of this text. And it proporteth a
ravenous and cruel away-taking. But hear Josephus Kings will make
confectionaries of your daughters for their own use, kitchen-women, dressers of
cloth, and they shall compel them to do any other service, which damsels for
fear of strokes do perform. Loc. cit. Nay, but Brent, loc. cit. is more full
and plain. Thirdly, in order to the King's away-taking of their possessions.
And he will take your fields, etc. It may be you think, that your sons, and
your daughters will be well taken-off your hands, and though he should wrong
them, he will not wrong your selves. Peradventure you imagine, his tyranny will
take a stand there. Nay, but I Will tell you, if he take-away your sons and
daughters, he will also take-away your substance. And well know I, if you get
any courtesy at his hand, ye'll have little reason to boast of it. He will
take the tenth from you. Sure I am, he will have so little respect to you, to
your children that serve him, and to your pains, in gathering riches together,
that what ye gain through the sweat of your brows, he will let it out to any
base fellow in his Court, and ye dare not say it is evil done. If this be not
an act of tyranny (says Piscator) then had not God punished Ahab, for
taking-away Naboth's vineyard. Ahab according to Law should have possessed it.
Schol. in 1 Samuel 8. See Josephus, and Brent, loc. cit. Fourthly, In order to
his away-taking of the people's servants. -- And he will take your
menservants, and your maidservants, and your goodliest young men, and put
them to his work. (...) is also in the original of this text. His tyranny shall
not end at your sons and daughters, and at your possessions, but he shall
violently rob you of your servants. And if he take not all of them be sure, he
will take the chiefest of them. See plain Brent. ibid. Fifthly, In relation to
his away-taking of their sheep. He will take away the tenth of your sheep. He
will not leave you so much as a sheep's tail. At least he will take the tenth
of them.

3. The consequent and event both of the general, and particular part of the
description, is the effect of tyranny, not of lawful authority. -- Ye shall
cry-out in that day, because of your King whom ye shall have chosen you -- We
are sure, that the people would never cry-out, for exercising the just and
lawful Acts of Regal Authority. Thereby justice is promoted, and vice is
punished. Which is a blessing, and not a bondage for people, to make them
cry-out in bitterness of spirit. Thus it is abundantly made good, that Samuel
here does not describe the power, but the tyranny of the King. Now in-starteth
another question, Whether or not, does the Prophet in this place, dissuade the
Jews from seeking a King, as a King? To which we answer affirmatively, and
prove it thus: If the Prophet does not dissuade the people from seeking a King,
under the notion of a King, then either because he only taxes carnal
confidence in them, or arogancy and pride, or precipitation only, or else
because they sought a King after the manner of the Nations. But none of these
Reasons, whether conjunctly, or severally, are the adaequat object of the
Prophet's disswasion.

Firstly, Because it is said, That Samuel was displeased, because they sought a
King. The text is not, But the thing displeased Samuel, when they said, We will
have confidence in a King, etc. But it is, The thing displeased Samuel, when
they said, Give us a King. It Is wrong Logic to take (...) King, in esse
accidentali. At least, it is very far fetched Philosophy, to take it under some
extrinsecal and adjunctive notion or other. See Josephus loc. cit. and Brent.
hom. 27. in 1 Samuel 8. Secondly, Because God expressly commands Samuel,
solemnly to protest against the election of a King. But if the Prophet should
only have taxed them for incredulity, arrogance, etc. then should the Lord only
have given Samuel orders, to dissuade them from these evils, in laying-out
before them the wickedness thereof. But the Prophet only layeth-out before them
the danger of Monarchy, and expressly disswadeth them therefrom. Who can imagine,
if his main and only purpose had been for dissuading them from these evils, and
not from setting-up Royal Government amongst them, but he would rather have
turned his face against these evils, in spreading-out the dangers thereof
before their face, then in pointing-out to them the evil of Monarchy? Verily,
were it so, he had harped upon the wrong string: Thirdly, The people's answer
is in reference to Samuel's reasoning. Nay but (say they) we will have a king
over us. This had been a very uncategorick answer, yea plain nonsense; if
Samuel had been only taxing them for carnal confidence, arrogance, etc. and
dehorting them therefrom. Fourthly, Because we have showed already, That
Samuel, according to God's Commandment, draws motives from acts of tyranny
that the King would exercise, to dissuade the people from seeking after him.
Would he say, Ye think your King will fight your battles, and save you from
foreign invasion. Well, let it be so. But I Will tell you the King himself will
tyrannize over you. Get him when you will, I warrant ye shall not be free of
intestine trouble. Nothing is so evil as that. It is worse then foreign war.
Therefore ye will do well to keep your selves free of him, so long as ye want
him. Fifthly, While as the Lord tacitly rebukes them of carnal confidence, in
these words, They have rejected Me, that I should not reign over them, he
likewise in them insinuates a reproof in order to their shaking-off the
Government which he had instituted amongst them. It was God's Ordinance, yea
the chiefest of its own kind. But whosoever shaketh-off though the least of
God's Ordinances, does shake-off God Himself. Romans 13. I mean in a preposterous
and carnal way, delighting in change, and going from the better to the worse.
So did the people of the Jews at this time. Therefore God reproving them, as
rejecters of Democracy, by way of consequence he checketh them as suitors of
Monarchy: for he could no ways have rebuked them for rejecting the one, if he
had not altogether allowed them in seeking after the other. Sixthly, They are
reprehended and taxed expressly for seeking after a King. -- I will call unto
the LORD, -- that ye may perceive and see, that your wickedness is great which
ye have done in the sight of the LORD, in asking you a King. -- And all the
people said unto Samuel, Pray for thy servants, unto the LORD thy God, that we
die not: for we have added to all our sins this evil, to ask us a king. -- Ye
have done all this wickedness, -- 1 Samuel 12. Let the indifferent Reader judge
now, whether or not the Spirit of GOD in these words does manifestly reprehend
them as they had sought after a king. The Royallist would do well not to
imagine, that these things do exclude the Prophet's dissuading the people's
seeking a king, as a king. They rather include then exclude the king in this
notion. And so Royallists in propounding these reasons, proceed a Divisione.
They take inadaequatum, for adaequatum, the part for the whole.

But for the more satisfactory resolution of the fourth particular, we demand,
whether or not the Prophet does tax the Jews, in seeking a King after the
manner of the Nations, as they sought a King, or as they sought a tyrannous
King? If the former, we gain the point. But the other is builded upon a
mis-supposition. 1. Because it is altogether repugnant to Nature, earnestly to
thirst after tyranny, oppression and misery. The like was never heard amongst
any people, though never so rude and barbarous, far less amongst the people of
the Jews, to whom were given the Statutes and Ordinances, and who in seeking a
King, covered their knavery with fair pretenses. 2. They seek a King, as they
suppose, to be free of tyranny, and injustice done by Samuel's sons who judged
them for the time. That did set them a-work to seek a King. 3. Having gathered
themselves together, in seeking a King from Samuel, they add this to their
discourse, Thou art old. Would they say, not only thy sons oppress us and
pervert righteous judgment, but even thou thy self art unfit to judge us. Old
age hat rendered thee unable dexterously to go about matters of judgment.
Therefore let us have a King who will supply thy wants. One who will judge us
justly as thou did in the time of thy youth. Let us have a King to judge us
uprightly, as thou did, and not unjustly as do thy sons. Now, let any
rational man judge it such people who sought a King under such fair pretenses,
for promoving virtue, and removing vice, would ever have sought a King to
tyrannize over them. See Josephus, ant. Jud. lib. 6. cap. 4. and Brent. hom.
25. in 1 Samuel 8. It Is remarkable, Salmasius will not let it be heard, that they
sought a tyrannous king, Def. reg. cap. 2. And it can not be said, that all the
kings of of the nations at that time were tyrants. This is showed already, and
somewhat illustrated by Salmasius, loc. cit. In the interim, I humbly desire
Salmasius that he speak without reflection, and more modestly then he does. He
insinuates, that what Samuel did in dissuading the people, from seeking a
king, that he did it through by-respect and self-interest. But we have showed,
that what he spoke against their course, was from GOD's express and positive
command. He did not dissuade them from it, for his own good, but their good. He
showed them they would be in a far worse condition under kings then under
Judges. It was not for the advantage of his sons, but for the advantage of the
people, that he condescended to grant their desire. So is manifested already.
This man is so malicious, that he spares not to traduce GOD also. He
alleges, what God did, in keeping-back the people from following out their
desire, was to gratify Samuel. Poor man, does he imagine that ever God would
have connived with Samuel, and put words in his mouth, to dissuade the people
from following-out their desire, if it had been for his glory, and their
welfare? Verily, this argues, that God did prefer the gratification of
Samuel to his own honor, and that which conduced most thereto, and the
welfare of his people. This Gentleman needs not boast that Moses, Deuteronomy.
17. foretold the up-setting of kingly government amongst the Jews. This he did
not, because he allowed it, and preferred it to the government which he firstly
instituted amongst them. The LORD commanded Samuel to hearken to the peoples
voice and condescend to their desire. Yet it does not follow that God allowed
it. He commanded Samuel positively to protest against it, and dissuade them
therefrom, by displaying the evils thereof. So Moses through the Spirit of
prediction, infallibly forseeing the Jews in their stiff-neckednes, and pride
of heart, would undoubtedly seek-after, and set-up kingly government amongst
them, thereupon takes occasion to prescribe a true platform of constituting
and moulding kings. And to this day it serves as a moral rule, according to
which the structure of kingly government should be squared. Thus the Holy Ghost
brings forth a most good effect from the foresight of their evil and
sinister purpose. We can stay no longer here, but only put the Reader in mind
of this, that it is not for naught God denied his applause and consent in
setting-up Kings amongst the Jews. That is a strange word, They have set-up
Kings, but not by me; they have made Princes, and I knew [it] not. Hos. 8. I
confess, this mainly relates to the Kings of the ten Tribes. Yet you must
give me leave to say, That it is spoken also in order to all the Kings of the
Jews. Would the author of the exercitation conc. usurp. pow. chapter 1. compare
this place with 1 Samuel 8. he would find, that God as much disowned the one King
as the other. I suppose, this is not a word of applause, but dis-assent, in
making Saul King, I gave thee a King in mine anger, and took [him] away in my
wrath. Hos. 13. Sure I am* this is spoken against the King, both of Israel and
Judah. It cannot be denied, but the direct and main strain of this Prophet is
against the ten Tribes, and the Kings thereof. Yet he hinteth both at Judah,
and Israel, and their Kings, as occasion serves. In things common to both, he
speaks of both. So he does in the text immediately foregoing. Sure I am both
Israel and Judah had hand in seeking Saul to reign over them. Not only Israel,
but Judah said, Give me a King and Princes. And why shall we not think, that
the former text speaks likewise of the Kings of Judah and those who did reign
over both? The Lord's dislike and dis-owning of Kings, is as much in the one
text as in the other. And sure I am Jereboam was as notably called both by God,
and the ten Tribes to reign over them, 1 Kin. 11. and 12. 2 Chronicles. 10. as Saul
was to reign over Judah, and Israel. Howsoever, I deny not Kingly Government to
be from God. I confess, God effectively called Saul to reign over the Jews. So
did he David, Solomon, and others, whom he called to reign in a most special
way. Yea, he gave an hereditary assignation to David's posterity to the Crown
upon conditions. But what then? This only says, that Kingly Government is
good, and in some cases much approved of God. Yet it never concludes, that it
is the best of Governments, most approved of God, and that the people of the
Jews did not sin in setting-up it, and shaking-off another. It is laid before
your eyes, that of all Governments it is the most dangerous. And seeing the Lord
did extremely decline the setting-up of Kingly Government amongst the Jews, how
much more to day amongst us? Beside all moral reasons, there was a special
typical reason for Monarchy amongst the Jews. Under the Law, not only Christ's
Prophetical, and Priestly Office, Acts 3. Heb. 8.9. and 10. but also his
Kingly-hood behoved to be typified, both in substance and circumstance, Genesis
49. 2 Samuel 7. 1 Kin. 8. 2 Chr. 6. Psa. 2. Luke 1. Acts 2. Heb. 1. But I hope,
none under the Gospel can show me such pressing grounds, why Kingly Government
to day should be erected. None verily. Well, let them therefore advert, That
people under the Gospel have more then reason for them, to shake-off and
decline Monarchy. They have not so much reason for it, as the Jews had. And yet
the Lord much disowned it amongst them, and much dis-assented from them in
setting it up. What I pray you is the language of this, but that of all
Governments it is most dangerous? And that it is so, is more then manifest from
Samuel's way of charactering it.

Very reason it self teaches the point. Firstly, because the bad consequence
of Monarchy is tyranny. 1 Samuel 8. I deny not, but it may, and does flow also
from other Governments: yet not ordinarily and properly. Properly and
ordinarily, such have for their bad consequences, division, and confusion. But
it must needs be granted, that tyranny in itself is worse then either of
these. And that, both formally and virtually. Formally, because tyranny, as
tyranny, is positive and even-down oppression. But division, as division, and
confusion, as confusion, cannot be so called. Otherwise the division and
confusion of integral parts, should formally be tyranny and oppression.
Virtually, because tyranny in its proper and rigorous acceptance presupposes
a mere and absolute passivenesse in the parts oppressed and enthralled. But the
case is far otherwise in respect of division and confusion. As they only beget
oppression and thraldom per accidens, so they presuppose mutual resistance on
both sides. They do not imply an absolute and simple passivenesse on either of
the sides. Both parties fall at variance, and both stand to their own defense,
the one against the other. And so the one acting against the other, neither of
them does simply suffer. But absolute thraldom is worse then that which is
non-absolute. For acts of tyranny read Exodus 1. and 5. Judge. 1. and 9. 2 Samuel
21. 1 King. 13.18.19, etc. 2 King. 21. Esth. 3. Jer. 38. and 39. Dan. 2. and 3.
Mat. 2.14. and 27. Mark 6. Luke 23. Acts 12. Apochryphal books, Tob. 1. Jud. 2.
and 3. 1 Macc. 1.5.6.10. and 13. 2 Macc. 4.6.7. and 14. To this day there be
many notable expressions and narrations, which point-out to us that tyranny is
of all evils the most dangerous and violent. Herod. lib. 3. Thucyd. lib. 2.
Polyb. lib. 2. Tac. in vit. Agric. Porn. de lib. Get. lib. Antisthenes being
asked, why he preferred hangmen to tyrants, he answered, By the hangman the
unjust, and by the tyrant, the just are cut off. Stob. sermon. 47. It was
demanded at Diogenes, after what manner the tyrant Dionysius did use his
friends? he answered, He kills the rich, and neglects the poor. Diog. La.
lib. 6. And Bias being posed. What amongst living creatures was most
pernicious? he answered, A Tyrant. Plut. We cannot passe-by a most excellent
story of the tyrant Dionysius. All the Syracusians, excepting the old woman,
Himera, did pray for his death. Which being imparted to the tyrant, he asked
her, why she prayed for long life to him? She answered, When I was young, a
grievous tyrant reigning over us, I prayed, that he might be taken away. To
whom one worse succeeded. I prayed for his death also. To whom thou Dionysius,
worse then either of them succeeded. And now I pray for the lengthning of thy
days, lest one worse then thy self should come in thy room. Brus. lib. 6. cap.
21. That must be of a strange stamp, which can make very Ethnicks to pray
against it. Mark, to pray for the continuing of it, to prevent another of its
own kind worse then it self. Fr. Pat. Senensis says, Tyranny devoureth after
death, lib. 10. cap. 3. All which bear us in hand, that of all things tyranny
is most dangerous and cruel. And it being the ordinary and proper bad
consequence of Monarchy, who can deny Monarchy to be of a I Governments the
most dangerous?

Secondly, Kingly Government, as is said already, is most authoritative and of
more commanding faculty then any other. And consequently, as a good King by his
example, may, and does draw the people into obedience and due performance, so
an evil King may, and does by his example ensnare the people. So Claudian,
Regis ad exemplum totus componitur orbis. What? does not the holy Ghost say,
Riches beget friends, Prove. 14. and 19. And many do entreat the favor of the
Prince, Prove. 19. and 29. It Is storied, that the Soldiers of Ant. Epimanes, a
most leacherous King, did imitate his profane and bad example, Val. max. lib.
9. cap. 1. Many of the Syracusians did follow the evil example of the tyrant
Dionysius. Plut. Whence is concluded, Plerique magis actiones aliorum,
quamlibet pravas, imitantur, quam infortunia eorum cavent, Dion. lib. 53. If
the King be altogether wicked, as ordinarily he is. (More Tyrants then Kings.
Few of them in any age friends to Christ. Most part of them destroyers of the
Commonwealth.) Oh! in how great danger under such does Religion stand, and are
the Liberties of the subject exposed to? Tell not me of a regulated King. It Is
but a playing fast and loose. Aristotle, Pol. 5. cap. 8. says, The least thing
of the Law is not to be changed. This he says, because it makes way for the
abrogating of the whole Law. He falls upon that principle, Principiis obsta,
sero medicina paratur. Set-up to day regulated Monarchy, and to morrow it shall
be absolute. If the King once get-in his little finger, he shall soon thrust-in
his whole body. Small beginnings can produce great effects? It Is good to kill
them in the birth. Make Caesar perpetual Dictator, Augustus shall become
absolute Emperor. One degree brings on another. The least of Kings has
greater favor and power with the people, then the greatest of Councels. All
will be called his. The word subditi is current then. But aequales is
detestable. If Alexander's neck be crooked, all his Courtiers must hang their
heads to that side. I know not what the most of people for the Prince's favor,
be what he will, regulated or absolute, will not do. Tell me, if he be not for
GOD, and the good of the people, do not both Religion and the Commonwealth
stand in greatest hazard? This doleful experience teaches in all ages. Of our
judgment are Jos. ant. lib. 4. cap. 8. lib. 6. c. 4., Mat. Agr. de insip. Reg.
Th. Mor. Anonym. monit. lib. 2. Brent hom. 25. in 1 Samuel 8. Pet. Mart, com. in
Jud. cap. 1. Virg. Malvez. disc. 39. See also Buchanan de Jur. Reg. ap. Scot.

SECT. III.
Whether or not is a Commonwealth the best of Governments?

WE know, Rollists hold the Quaerie absurd. But with their leave, I freely
offer my judgment in the following Assertion.

Assert. Without all controversy, Democracy arightly instituted, simply and
absolutely, is of all Governments the sweetest, and contributeth most to the
good of the people.

In establishing this, we observe this order. Firstly, from the first and
primary institution of the Jewish Commonwealth. It cannot be denied, but it was
popular and democratick, and that for these reasons. 1. Because the Judges and
Rulers of Israel were not choosed and set-apart upon the account of any
national and carnal privilege. The Holy Ghost gives them no preeminence
above their brethren, for old descent, worldly honor and riches. Men to govern
in it were not choosed for their riches, nobility, and blood-respects No
verily. They had only place to govern because of virtue and godliness.
Moreover thou shall provide -- able men, such as fear God, men of truth, hating
covetousness, and place [such] over them [to be] rulers, -- and let them judge
the people at all seasons, -- And Moses choosed able men, -- and made them
heads over the people, rulers. -- And they judged the people at all seasons,
Exodus 18. Mark, there is not a word here of choosing the rich and honorable, or
of any carnal or blood-tie. The Judges that are choosed, are men qualified,
virtuous and godly, able to discharge their trust. And this was not only
required in inferior Judges, but even in the higher Judges also, members of
the Sandrin. The Seventy were wise men, and understanding, and known amongst
the tribes, Deuteronomy. 1. They were not choosed at random, or at all adventures. No
verily: They were selected out from amongst the Judges, spoken of Ex. 18. And
the LORD said unto Moses, Gather unto me seventy men of the elders of Israel,
whom thou know to be the elders of the people, and officers over them, --
Number. 11. Now it is showed, that such men were virtuous and godly, able for
places of trust And yet the LORD rested not satisfied therewith, but being
about to entrust them with higher matters, he doubleth the spirit upon them.
And I will come-down, and talk with thee there, and I will take of the spirit
which is upon thee, and will put [it] upon them, and they shall bear the burden
of the people with thee, that thou bear [it] not thy-self alone. -- And the
LORD came down in a cloud, and spoke unto him, and took of the spirit that was
upon him, and gave it unto the seventy elders. Number. ib. Neither can it be
denied, but those who were called Judges (...), by way of excellency, were most
eminently qualified far beyond any other. GOD had a most special hand in
calling them to the charge, Judge. 2. So Moses, Joshuah, etc. Tell me, I pray
you, have not we more then reason to say, That the first and primary Government
amongst the people of the Jews was popular? I deny not, but qualification may
be looked-to and have place both in Monarchy and Optimacy. But observe, both of
these Governments in their best institution, do look to riches and honor as a
necessary condition. As for Monarchy there is no question. And Aristotle
distinguishes between the government of few, and Optimacy. Both which
ordinarily pass under the notion of Aristocracy. And Oligarchy (says he)
only looks to riches and honor, Pol. 4. cap. 5. as Optimacy does both to
riches and virtue, cap. 7. Thus whether in Monarchy, or Aristocracy in their
most reformed condition, not only qualification is looked-to, but also
natural privileges are required as necessary conditions. But we hear not a
word of any natural privilege in choosing and setting-apart the Judges and
Rulers of the Jewish first Commonwealth. There is not a word spoken of their
riches and honor, but of their abilities for the discharge of their trust. The
Holy Ghost says not, The wise men, rich and honorable, together with the heirs
of the Rulers, were appointed to govern. There is not a word of any such
natural respect. And do you imagine that the Holy Ghost at any time would have
past-by in silence, these natural privileges, if they had been required as
necessary conditions in the Judges and Rulers of the Jews? Well, is it so that
according to the Holy Ghost's way, only the virtuous and godly should govern,
and none other did bear rule in the first institution of the Jewish
Commonwealth, why shall we imagine, but the people did bear rule amongst them?
I hope you will not say, that virtue and godliness is not to be found amongst
the people, but amongst the great ones. The contrary is rather true, It Is hard
for a rich man to enter Heaven, Mat. 19. Job 32, 9. 1 Cor. 1, 26 27, 28, 29.
It Is observable at this time there was but small difference amongst the people
of the Jews in the matter of riches. The most they had was the gold and silver
they had gotten from the Egyptians, Ex. 3.11, and 12. And every man and woman
amonost them got jewels of silver and gold from the Egyptians. Nay, but it was
not a time of their wealth, while as they traveled in the wilderness. Their
condition then was very unsettled. What they had then, was from hand to mouth.
Any provision they had, was from GOD'S extraordinary furnishing. And they were
all that way a-like served. And after they had entered the Land, and gotten
possession of it, we read, the Land was equally divided amongst them, according
to their Tribes and Families. They lived then as a peculiar people, claiming
nearer relation one to another, then any people did. In after-ages and corrupt
times, they could all tell you, they all were the children and seed of Abraham.
The nearest bonds of Nature tied every one of them to supply another's wants.
And as for Titles of honor amongst them, we read of none, till they got
Kings. Such vile and prodigali titles as to day are used, then were unknown.
Yet obeserve, there was a twofold, and only a twofold sort of Titles amongst
them. 1. A Title of Office. And thus (...) Elders, and (...) Officers, Ex. 18.
Deuteronomy. 1. Josh. 24 Both which were called (...) Judges, and (...) Rulers. And as
by their virtue they came to be Judges and Rulers, so by that same they
attained to these Titles of Office. Which are most approved and commendable, as
they are most ordinary and usual. 2. A title of mere nature. Thus in the time
of Judges and Captains they were called (...) Hea^s, Josh. 24. (...) chief of
the Fathers, Ezr. 4.8. and 10. These Titles and Privileges they had from the
precedence of Nature, as the firstborn has from the younger. The very Law of
Nature itself admits precedence, both in respect of office, and of natural
generation and priority. Otherwise every thing should be turned topsie turvie,
and all should run into confusion. But you shall not find through all the Book
of GOD any other sort of titles used. (...) King is also a title of office. You
shall not show me, where the Rulers of the people of Israel are called Dukes,
Marquesses, Earls, Vicounts, etc. Such titles, I tkink came from hell, and I
wish they may thither return Now, tell me, whether or not, I have good reason
to say, that the Jewish Commonwealth under Judges was popular and democratick?
No precedence amongst them was known then, but what either office or nature did
bear them to. They knew not precedence because of honor and riches, what it
meaned. Any precedence amongst them, was either from natural generation, or
from qualification. And none amongst them was advanced to any place of trust,
because of any natural privilege and carnal respect, but because of virtue and
godliness. And this was to be found amongst the people. We believe,
qualification hangs not at the girdles of great men. And such were not
amongst the people of the Jews, in the time of the Judges. And though the
Seventy were chosen out from amongst the Judges and Officers of the people, yet
does it not follow, but they were popular: for the Rulers were chosen from
amongst the people. And so the Seventy being of the Rulers, it necessarily
follows, that they were chosen from among the people. It will never conclude,
that they were not popular Governors, but that afterward they were advanced to
an higher degree of office, then they were formerly. The Sanhedrin was
entrusted with the management of the most public and greatest matters.

2. It is said, Thou shall provide out of all the people able men, -- And Moses
chose able men out of all Israel, -- Ex. 18. There is a noble emphasis in all,
or in all Israel. Mark the vastness and latitude thereof. It is not said,
Judges were chosen from amongst the rich and honorable of Israel. That indeed
had insinuated the restriction of places of office and trust to the rich and
honorable. Blood-respect and natural ties had been necessary conditions in the
choosing of Judges, if that had been said. But the word all, a note of
universality, does exempt none therefrom. It declares, all and every one of
the people, without exception, who were virtuous and godly, and fit for the
discharge of public trust, secluding all natural ties and privileges, to be
capable of official power. Indeed, you need not take all, in a restricted
sense: for at this time they had none enclosing rich men, worldly worms, and
vain-gloriously honorable. They knew nothing but the priority of Nature, and
the precedence of Virtue. And if you call not this Popular Government, I know
not what you call Popular. Howsoever, let me have this, and I crave no better.

Because it is alleged, Moses, Joshua, and the other Judges, did reign as
Kings, we shall shortly demonstrate to you what power they had. Therefore
shortly observe these Conclusions.

Conclus. 1. Moses, before the counsel of Jethro, had a Kingly Power.

This is more then manifest. Ever till then Moses governed all, and none but
he. Exodus 18. This he did, not because he delighted to lord over the people,
and that none should rule but he. It Is known, that he rested not contented with
what Rulers he had appointed at the desire and counsel of Jethro. He entreated
the Lord to appoint other Rulers, to bear burden with him. Number. 11. Deuteronomy. 1.
Neither will I say, that Moses, out of mere simplicity and ignorance, before
Jethro's counsel, did forbear to set any Rulers over the people beside himself.
The very light of Nature taught him, that help was good, and that he alone was
not able to discharge all the businesses of the people. But I conceive, he did
it upon other grounds. He knew that the people of Israel were the Lord's
peculiar people, whom he had brought out of Egypt extraordinarily, and over
whom he had set him in an extraordinary way. Yea, he waited for judgment to the
people, at the very mouth of the Lord. What Laws and Ordinances he delivered to
the people, and what judgment he executed amongst them, were done according to
extraordinary and immediate revelation from the Lord. Which makes me think,
that Moses in all matters of importance taking the word from God's mouth, and
depending from his immediate revelation wholly waited upon God's Oracle, where,
and when, one way or other, should be revealed to him, how, and what Judges
should be appointed to rule with him. And so he perceiving Jethro's counsel to
be wholesome and from the Lord, and that God had employed him as an instrument
of accomplishing his expectation, therefore he thought good not to despise it,
but speedily to embrace it. So we see, he wholly casts the election of the
Seventy over upon God, and therein only takes the word at his mouth. Number. 11.
Deuteronomy. 1. Albeit Moses all this while did reign as King, yet does it make
nothing for Kingly Government. 1. Because he was the Lord's extraordinary
Lieutenant. He was extraordinarily and immediately designed by God to the
charge. And to speak properly and precisely, in a politic notion, not Moses,
but God himself was their King. What Moses did was by an immediate dependency
from the Lord. He took the word at God's mouth. He enquired of God judgment,
and was for the people to Godward. Ex. 18. He was as God's mouth to the
people. God employed him to deliver his Laws and Ordinances to the people,
because they were afraid the Lord should speak to them. They could not without
fear behold his glory and terror. Exodus 20. And Moses finding that his charge
immediately and extraordinarily depended from the Lord, therefore he waited upon
God, till he manifested one way or other, where, when, and how other Governors
should be designed to rule with him over the people. And thus all the while he
did govern alone, not he, but God properly and in a politic notion was their
King: for he did nothing to the people, but by a special, extraordinary, and
immediate dependency from the Lord. 2. Till in and about the time of Jethro's
counsel, there was no fit time to create Rulers over the people. All the while
before they were in a chased and most unsettled condition. In which time Moses
did reign through mere necessity and exigency of the times. He did rule alone,
because the case of the times so required. Thus Moses was King, per accidens,
and not per se. 3. Although Moses had had an absolute and arbitrary power over
the people of Israel, yet would it plead no whit for Kingly Government. By
manifold and most eminent obligations they were tied to him. For their sake he
refused to be called the son of Pharaoh's daughter, preferring affliction with
them, to all the pleasures and pomp of Pharaoh's Court. He conducted them
through the Red Sea, he was as the mouth of God to them, and by his favor with
the Lord, he furnished them with all necessaries in the wilderness. And it is
known that the man was most eminently endowed, matchless in his time. Thus
what Kingly power Moses had, was not only accidental but extraordinary.
Therefore it can be no ground to Royallists to build upon.

Conclus. 2. After the institution of the seventy elders, and the
accomplishment of Jethro 's counsel, neither Moses, nor any other of the
Judges had a Kingly power.

Firstly, The people desired Gideon to reign over them, and offered to devolve
the Kingdom over into the hands of his posterity. And Gideon refused to do so,
and embraced not their offer, Judge. 8. And he adds this as the reason of his
denial, The LORD shall rule over you. As it he had said, Neither I, nor any of
my posterity can take upon us to reign over you as your Kings. Ye are the
LORD'S peculiar people. Of whom the LORD has a most special care. Any that
rule over you, must be deputed by God in an extraordinary way. They must take
the word at his mouth, ruling over you by an immediate dependency from him. Now,
tell me, whether or not was Gideon King at this time? If he was King, ergo he
refused to embrace the power which he had. And that is ridiculous. If he was
not King, I obtain the point. Again, either they offered to Gideon a Kingly
power, or not. If a Kingly power, ergo either Gideon was not King, or else by
way of gratification, they offered him the power which he had already. And that
had been in them greater impertinency then courtesy. Yea, they had dealt
altogether ridiculously. And sure I am, Gideon had never answered them so, as
he did, if he had had such power. He had positively denied to enjoy that which
really he did enjoy. And that they did offer him a Kingly power is manifest.
(1) Because the word in the Original text (...) signifies to lord and govern
in a Kingly way, Genesis 4.37. Dan. 11. Mic. 5. and in many other places. It has
affinity with (...). And the Graecians changing in ^, say (...). Which
signifies, to reign in a kingly way. (2) It could be no other then kingly
power, because Gideon wanted no power but that. He judged them, led-forth their
Armies, and commanded in chief. And consequently either he was not King, or
else the people offered no other power to him, then what formerly he had. And I
cannot imagine, that ever they would have been so impertinent, to gratify his
labors with the offer of just nothing. If they had done so, they had forthwith
befooled themselves. And if Gideon had not kingly power, neither had any other
of the Judges. He had that same power, and no less, which they had. They were
all Judges alike.

Secondly, Abimelech had different power from the Judges. What power he had,
was kingly. This is evident, 1. From the question he putteth-up unto his
mother's brethren, whereby he pleads to reign over the people of Israel. He
uses there the word (...), which the people used in offering to Gideon and his
posterity, power to reign over them. And (as is said already) it implies a
kingly-ruling power. 2. From Jotham's parable, wherein the word (...) is used.
And this under a parabolick notion he alludeth to Abimelech. And it cannot be
denied, but (...) is seldom or never used under any other signification then
King. Precisely and ordinarily it is only attributed to one of a kingly power.
You will find it so in innumerable places of Scripture. 3. From Jotham's
application of the parable to Abimelech. In it is used (...). Whence is derived
(...). And both of them ordinarily are only applied to persons of kingly
authority. See Judge. 9. This is according as it is written in Chron Alex.
(...), i. e. this is Abimelech, who made himself King in the Kingdom, or, who
tyrannously made himself King. I pray you, why does the Holy Ghost call the
Judges (...) Judges, and Abimelech (...) King, if he had not been of a Kingly
and different power from them? I confess Judge. 17, 18, 19, and 21. (...) is
spoken concerning the Judge. Yet not properly, but metaphorically. It is spoken
so, moeroris gratia, to express the dolefulness of the want of Authority, or
of persons in Authority. And I must needs say, that authoritativenes, (...) is
competent, whether to the Kingly person, or to the Kingly power. Therefore the
Holy Ghost in these places expresses his purpose by the word (...). And this
he does not apply to one particular Judge, as to Abimelech, but to the whole
incorporation of Judges. Then hear. Either Abimelech had different power from
the Judges, or not. If different, ergo the Judges were not Kings, and had not
Kingly power. The greatest power Abimelech had, was Kingly. And therein he was
differenced from the Judges. You cannot say, that his power was not different
from theirs, as is showed already. And consequently, his power at the most
being kingly, and notwithstanding different from the authority of the Judges,
it necessarily follows, that the Judges had not kingly power.

Thirdly, If the Judges had had kingly power, then there had been no change in
the Government, after Saul was ordained King. Thus there had been change,
nomine, but not re. And so the people in vain had sought a King, and Samuel in
vain had denied them a King. Thus they sought nothing, and he denied nothing,
but what they had before. Bellarmine, de Romans pont. lib. 1. cap. 2. though to
no purpose, labors to elude this, distinguishing between Rex, and Prorex.
Indeed, we cannot but much commend him because he says, That God in the time
of the Judges was the proper and peculiar King of the Jews. This is showed
already. And so implies Gideon's answer, Judge. 8. And this cutteth the back of
what Bellarmine says: for so they being but Viceroys, and God the only King,
then had they not properly kingly power. This is what I crave. Yet in the
interim I demand, whether or not they could extend their power, as the Kings?
And that they could not, is manifest. Because they had no more power then any
of the Seventy and higher Sanhedrin. The Seventy were chosen to bear equal
burden with Moses and the Judge, in all the weightiest and most public
matters. Number. 11. Now, either conjunctively, or disjunctively, they had equal
power with Moses, and the Judge. If but conjunctively, these two absurdities
will follow. Firstly, that the Judge was not subject to the Sanhedrin: for the
equal is not subject to the equal. And if not subject to the Sanhedrin, I see
no reason why he was not also unpunishable and absolute. And so the Judge had
greater power then the King. Which I am sure, none will admit. Secondly, before
the institution of the Sanhedrin, all the greater and hard matters were
referred to Moses, Ex. 18. And in this Moses power was greater then the power
of those Judges, which he appointed at the advice and counsel of Jethro. But
Moses finding, that he alone was not able to manage all the weightiest matters,
therefore in greatest earnestness he besought the Lord, to add some to him,
who might help him therein, and exonerate him of his burden. Mark a little:
Either Moses as yet remained the only Judge of greatest matters, or else every
one of the higher Sanhedrin had equal power with him. The reason is, because
Moses power was according to the object of it. The greater matters, the greater
power, Ex. 18. So proportion of Nature requires. If you say, that
notwitstanding the institution of the Sanhedrin, and its intermedling with
great and weighty businesses, the greatest of matters were reserved for Moses
and the Judge's managing. I understand not that. That is against Moses desire.
The thing which he prays for, is, That the Lord would ordain some to bear
burden with him in discharging the weightiest matters. We find no such
distinction in his desire, as that some might be appointed to oversee some
weighty matters, and himself notwithstanding to reserve in his own hand the
managing of the greatest affairs. Friend, this had been but a little easing of
Moses burden under which he did grievously groan. Yea, in this case there had
been great by-respect and self-interest in Moses desire. No less forsooth,
then he should be eased of his burden, and notwithstanding reserve a lording
power over his brethren. There is no little carnality in this desire, and as
great absurdity to bind it upon Moses. Yea, were this true, he had been in
power above the Seventy: for so his power did reach further then theirs, and
might do what they could not. Tell not me, that his desire was to be eased of
his burden, and notwithstanding to remain chief man in the Commonwealth. There
is great carnality and self-interest there also. Moses desire is positive,
without distinction. And if he, or any of the Judges was major singulis, I see
no reason why they were not as essentially Kings as Saul, David, etc. The Kings
had no more power. None of them according to Law, was major universis. So is
demonstrated already. And so in the ordination of Kings there was no essential
and substantial change in the Commonwealth. The people sought a King from
Samuel. Was it not a foolish desire to seek what they had already? Samuel
denied a King to them. Was it not foolishness in him to deny them that which
already they had, and debate so much against it? Verily, there was nothing
between them, if this be true, but pugna de lana caprina. And verily,
Bellarmine wrongeth the people of the Jews very much, in alleging, they
sought a despotick, heril, and hereditary King There is no such thing in their
desire, as is showed already. They sought no more but a King. According to the
Law he was regulated. And it is known, that they did not give the kingdom to
Readiness posterity. Well, let it be so, the Judge had greater power then any one
member of the Sanhedrin; yet does it follow, that he only had such power as the
annual Magistrate, v. g. in the Athenian Commonwealth. He had greater power
then any one of the Council. And yet he had not a kingly power. Here from we
draw this Argument:

That Government is simply and absolutely best, and most for the advantage both
of Church and Commonwealth, which the Lord not only did firstly institute
amongst the people of the Jews, but also was unwilling to change it, and set-up
another Government in place thereof:

But the Lord not only did firstly institute Democracy amongst the people of
the Jews, but also was unwilling to change it, and set-up another Government in
place thereof:

Ergo Democracy, simply and absolutely, is the best Government, and most for
the advantage both of Church and Commonwealth.

The Proposition, I suppose, cannot be denied: for whatsoever is most for the
good of Church and Commonwealth, is most also for the glory and honor of God.
And shall not I imagine, that the Lord most endeavors that which is most for
his honor? As there is nothing which is so precious in the eyes of God as his
own honor, so he endeavors most to erect, preserve, and maintain that which
most contributeth thereto. None will say, that the Lord slighteth his own
honor, and postponeth it to any created interest. The Assumption is made good
from what foregoeth, not only in this, but also in the preceding Subsection.

Secondly from the judgment of the gravest and wisest Philosophs. So Solon, of
whom it is storied, 1. That he not only refused himself to reign over the
Athenians, as King, but also he much endeavored that Pisistratus should not
attain thereto. This he did for preserving the liberties of the Athenians, and
popular government amongst them inviolable. 2. He wrote several verses against
the Athenians, because they had set Pisistratus over them, sharply rebuking
them that they had gone from the better to the worse. 3. Because the Athenians
had set-up Monarchy amongst them, therefore he left Athens, and went into
Egypt. 4. Not desiring to live under Kingly government, he left Egypt, Cyprus,
and Lydia, and came into Cilicia, where he built a City, and called the name of
it Solos. And it is very observable, that Craesus having desired him to come
and live beside him, he thanked him for his benevolent courtesy: But withal
he added, that if he desired not to live in a free Commonwealth (which he had
set-up in Cilicia) he would choose rather to live with him, then in Athens. 5.
Being desired by Pisistratus to return to Athens, he told him, he would not,
lest he should appear an approver of his deed, in taking upon him to reign as
King. 6. He wrote an Epistle to Epimenides, wherein he exceedingly regrateth
the foolishness of the Athenians, in translating Democracy into Monarchy. 7.
He wrote to Periander King of Corinth, desiring him to lay-down his Kingly
power. 8. It is reported, that he did institute popular government amongst the
Athenians. But the simple truth is, it was long before instituted by Theseus.
And by process of time, the Commonwealth and the Laws thereof being corrupted,
Solon reformed both. And as Solon, so likewaies all the rest of the Sages, did
prefer Democracy to any other government. Thales wrote to Solon in exile,
desiring him to come and dwell beside him at Miletum. And if he did abominate
the Milesian Monarchy, there was nowhere he could be free of the trouble of
Kings. And therefore he thought it best he should live with him, and his own
friends. Putting him in mind, how that Bias, one of the Wisemen, had desired
him to come to Priene. And if he did so, he told him, they (meaning himself and
the rest of the Sages) would flock about him. I suppose their sympathizing in
affection with Solon, does also insinuat their sympathizing with him in the
matter of judgment. It Is storied, that the Wiseman Chilo was the first who
instituted the Lacedemonian ephori, the representative of the people. This is
controverted. Sosicrates says, Chilo did firstly institute the Ephorick
Magistracy. To this enclineth Laertius de vit. Phil. lib. 1, in Chil. Herodot,
Xenophon, and Satyrus say, it was instituted by Lycurgus; Aristotle and Val.
Maximus, by Theopompus. Howsoever, I may determine on either of these two. 1.
That Chilo was one of that Magistracy himself. Which made his brother envy
him. 2. That not only Lycurgus and Theopompus, but also Chilo acted much for
the maintenance and preservation of that Magistracy. And in an epistle to
Periander, he spares not to say, that nothing is secure to a King, nor is he
happy though he should die in his bed without blood. Pittacus, one of the
Sages, after he had reigned about ten years over the Mityleneans, willingly
resigned the Kingdom. Tell me, if that man desired not people's liberty, who,
though able to do so, would not so much as keep them under an easy yoke: for
he did govern them according to most wholesome laws and constitutions. And in
his answer to Craesus, he avoucheth that Law is the greatest commander. Compare
this speech with his practice, and you will find he was a great friend to
Democracy and people's liberty. Cleobulus greatly sympathized with Solon in his
exile. And in his Epistle to him, he desires him to come and dwell beside him
in Lind; which he calls a free City, not subjected to Kings and Princes. And
there (says he) you shall be free of all fear at Pisistratus hands. Periander,
one of the Wisemen also, though at the first both a King and Tyrant, yet at
last he appointed a Council to govern at Corinth. Which I must needs think,
was popular, because in even-down terms he says, that popular government is
better then Royal. And how much he was taken with high and noble thoughts of
the Sages and Wisemen, does more then appear from his Epistle directed to
them. Epimenides in his epistle to Solon says, that the Athenians before
Pisistratus reign, being free, and governed by most notable laws, would not
still lie under slavery and bondage. Observe, he calls Kingly government,
servitude and bondage. And in the interim he entreats him to come and dwell
beside him in Crete, where there was no King to trouble him. Anaximenes, in his
Epistle to Pythagoras, commends him much for departing from Samos into
Croton, for avoiding the yoke of Monarchy. And withal he regrateth his own
condition, for being not only subjected to the Milesian Kings, but also
threatened by the Median King with bondage, albeit the Ionians did contend for
the liberty of all. This made him dolefully cry out, Oh, how can I, Anaximenes
search out Heaven's secrets, being exposed to the hazard of death and bondage?
And it cannot be denied but Pythagoras was all the way for Democracy. 1.
Because Anaximenes writing to Pythagoras, speaks of liberty: But sure I am,
Aristocracy does as much, if not more, take-away liberty as Monarchy. What? it
is the government of many Kings. And the tyranny of many is worse then the
tyranny of one. 2. Because he went into Crete and Lacedemonia. And being fully
instructed in their Laws, he returned from thence into Croton, where he set-up
a Council consisting of a thousand members. This could not but be popular, if
he followed the platform of the Cretian and Lacedemonian Commonwealths. His
government is called Aristocracy, not as it is different from Democracy, but
because it was managed by the best. It is evident from Anaximenes epistle to
him, that in the matter of government they were both of one judgment. Socrates
is only for popular government. He runs so far on this way, that he
determines upon these things. 1. All within the Kingdom have capacity of
governing. 2. All things are common. 3. All the people are either
ground-tillers or soldiers. I shall not stand here to repeat Aristotle's
examination and censure on these things. But shortly you shall have our
judgment of them. The first cannot be denied, caeteris paribus: for we suppose,
all who are fit to govern, as occasion serves, should be admitted thereto. And
passing all carnal and natural privileges, there is none of the people, who
per se and from nature, has any more power to govern then another. Only
qualification for convenience of, and vocation to governing* do make the
difference amongst men. The second I cannot away with. The community of wives
and children, I understand not. It has no ground either in the Law of GOD, or
of Nature. But as for communication of riches, I shall elsewhere offer my
judgment. We heartily subscribe to the third: for by ground-tillers he
understands men of every trade and vocation, contra-distinct from these who
serve in the wars. Thus I take the man, not to be for idleness and Nobility.
And he holds idle men, and Noblemen (so called) as unprofitable, yea as
non-members in the Commonwealth. So do I too. He is for none such. So am I.
From these three things Socrates concludes, That the Governors of the
Commonwealth are that same way in respect of the people and these whom they
govern, even as other threeds are in respect of silk. He would have the
Magistrate shining and glorious in virtue far beyond the people. Plato is fully
of Socrates judgment. De Rep. Arist. Pol. 2. cap. 4. It Is reported of him, That
the Arcadians, and Thebans, having desired him to institute and set-up
Government amongst them, he did it not, because they would not admit equality,
as he learned. And it is known, that by Aristocracy he does not understand
that, which is contradistinguished from Democracy. No verily. But he opposes
it, not only to the confused multitude, but also to the Government of these,
who are set-apart to govern, because of some natural privileges. Thus by
Aristocracy he understands the Government of the best. And it is the very
quintesscence and complete form of Popular Government. It Is the square and
midway of removing the tyranny of Monarchy, and Oligarchy, and the confusion
of the popular multitude. This kind of Government he desired Dion, to promote
and set-up amongst the Syracusians. It Is observable, while as Dion was setting
forward against Dionysius, for restoring the Syracusians to liberty, and the
up-setting of Popular Government amongst them, he was incited thereto, and
encouraged, not only by Eudamus, and the Governors of the Republic, but also
by Philosophers. All of these unanimously assisted him. Aristotle also in this
is not wanting. He concludes Popular Government to be the best, because it
enclineth to mediocrity. It strikes a midst betwixt all Governments. Polit. 4.
cap. 11.

Thirdly, Of the chiefest Historians and Orators. Berosus imputes it as a
great fault to Nimrod, because he erected Kingly Government, contrary to what
Janus (i. e. Noah) gave commandment and precept for. Ant. lib. 4. I confess,
what Government was before that time, was not purely politic. Yet it drew very
near the borders of Democracy: for then they knew not what it was to be
governed by one, or by some few, because of riches, honor, and such like. No
verily they admitted no precedence, but purely natural and moral. Purely
natural, because (speaking rigorously) they lived then as under fatherly and
oeconomical Government. Purely moral, because those did govern who were eminent
in godliness and virtue. It is called the golden age, because then men were
free of deceit, each one living in a brotherly and conscionable way with
another. They knew not what Law-quircks and Politic quiddities meant then. All
lived as under one common father, governed according to the Laws of pure Nature
and Justice. Subsect. 2. Concl. 3. Thus then none were holden-back to govern,
to whom Nature and Virtue had given the precedence. And this I find only to be
the difference between Popular Government, and what Government was then. The
one was natural, and the other is political. Persons then did govern, not only
because of virtue and godliness, but also because of natural priority. No
wonder, because then they lived under Governors, as under natural fathers.
Government then was rather oeconomical, then political. But Popular Government,
though it gives place to Physical and natural precedence, yet not in the
matter of Government. It admits natural precedence in natural things. But in
policy only virtue and godliness have the first place. Yet there is no
repugnancy, but per accidens in politic things both may consubsist. Natural
precedence in it self is not repugnantly capable of that which gives political
preferment. Herodot seems to commend Ottanes, who against Darius pleaded for
the up-setting of Popular Government among the Persians. He says, that Ottanes
took the middle way. Lib. 3. But in medio stat virtus. No wonder though he
enclineth to Ottanes judgment, rather then to the opinion of Darius, who
pleaded for Monarchy. The man, as is said already, approves Pindarus, in
saying, Law is King. But amongst the Persians, Monarchy was ever above Law.
Josephus calls the Government firstly instituted amongst the Jews, the best
of Governments, Ant. Jud. lib. 4. cap. 8. lib. 6. cap. 4. Howsoever he
taketh-up the platform of that Government is not material. But I may
determinately say, it was democratick and popular. This we take to be the
judgment of Salust. He opposes liberty to Regal Government, a free City to
Monarchy. Yea, he inveigheth against the Grecians, as base, free of virtue and
painfulnesse, because (says he) libertatem per inertiam amiserint. And he
speaks of Noblemen, as unprofitable members, in quibus sicut in statua nihil
est additamenti. Yea, he calls them socordes, ignavi, adding, per superbiam
cuncta gentibus moderantur. Moreover, he lays down this as a maxim, Libertas
juxta bonis and malis, strenuis and ignavis, optabilis est. Liberty is to be
desired by all, good and bad, stout and cowardly. In fragm. Cicero was fully of
Pompey's way. He greatly commended his cause, and did much exhort others
thereto. This you may see in many of his Epistles, lib. 2. ep. 18. lib. 4. ep.
44. lib. 5. ep. 62.64. and 74. See Plutarch in Cicer. Now Pompey was clearly
for the defense and preservation of the Roman Commonwealth, at it was
established before Caesar's usurpation. It is beyond all controversy, at that
time it was in part popular. Then the Romans were governed by Tribunes of the
people, who had power to defend against any Magistrate, whether Dictator,
Consul, or any other of the people. Sure I am, none will say, but Demosthenes
was all the way for Democracy, Orat. cont. Theocr. He pleaded still for the
Liberties of the Athenian Commonwealth in many Orations, whereby he exhorted
the Athenians to withstand Philip, for preserving amongst them Popular
Government inviolable. Plutarch reports, he incited all Greece, both against
Philip, and Alexander. In Demost.

Fourthly, Of notable Kings and warriors. Minos (who by Homer, Hesiod, Plato,
and others, is called the chiefest of Kings, amongst the Cretians) created
Cosmi, Popular Governors. So Theseus, whom Isocrates cries up above Hercules,
did institute Popular Government amongst the Athenians. Theompompus, Lycurgus,
and Agesilaus most noble Kings, and most notable patrons of Popular Government.
And shall we not think, but Miltiades, Themistocles, Aristides, Cimon,
Hannibal, and many other notable warriors, who did live under the yoke of
Popular Government, esteemed it the choicest of Governments? They acted much,
both gallantly and cheerfully, for the preservation thereof. Men's practice is
a more evident testimony of their judgment, then their profession. It Is known,
that Lysander, an eminent warrior, in an oration to the Lacedaemonians,
persuaded them to shake-off Kingly Government altogether. Plut. and Prob. in
Lys. Had that been, I suppose, the Ephorick Magistracy should have governed
all. Though Dion, a matchless warrior, was against the popular multitude,
which inevitably begets confusion; yet was he for Plato's Aristocracy, which
is reformed Democracy.

Fifthly, From the example of the chiefest and most reformed Commonwealths,
whereof some were purely popular, and some mixed. v. g. Athenian, Cyrenian,
Cumaean, Pyrean, Horean, Syracusian, Tarentinian, Theban; Roman. etc. Diodore,
out of Herodot, reports, That the Assyrian Kingdom being overturned by the
Medes, for a long time after the Cities were governed without Kings, by Popular
Government.

The point being thus established, both by divine and human authority, it
nextly falls into our way to make it good from Reason itself. And for this
we shall shortly give you the abridgement of the Arguments of some ancient
Philosophers, which Aristotle alleges, Polit. 3. cap. 11. and 12. As they do
plead for Popular Government, so they do directly militat against Monarchy. The
first is taken from the parity and equality of the Members of the Republic,
the second from the necessity of Magistracy, the third from the equity and
infallibility of Law, the fourth from the inconveniency of setting man above
Law, the fifth and sixth from example. Sparing to repeat their arguments at
length, we content our self with an argument of our own framing. And it is this,

That Government is simply best, which restores us nearest, beyond all
Governments, to our condition and liberties in the state of perfection and pure
naturals:

But Democracy restores us nearest, beyond all Governments, to our condition
and liberties in the state of perfection and pure naturals:

Ergo Democracy, simply, is the best Government.

The Proposition is undeniable, because the state of perfection and integrity
is simply the best. It is without either spot or wrinkle. And consequently, the
nearer we draw to that condition, our case is so much more excellent and good.
And so, whatsoever Government restores us nearest thereto, without all
controversy is simply best. In making good the Assumption, we lay-down these
two Conclusions.

Conclus. 1. No man by nature in a formal and antecedent way is born subject to
Government.

Firstly: If Nature tied man formally and in an antecedent way to
Politick-subjection, we demand, Whether or not in such respect it lays bonds
of subjection upon all men? If it does, then Kings no less then subjects, are
tied by Nature to jurisdiction. 1. Because that which agrees to a thing
formally and (...) is also competent to it universally and (...). 2. If Kings
were not also subjected to Authority by nature, it would inevitably follow, all
men, and not all men, were subjected to it. Which is implicatory. If not; then
it follows, That some men, by nature formally are born subject to Authority,
and some not: Both which are repugnant: for if Nature, as Nature subjecteth man
to Authority, it gives exemption to none, more then to another. Otherwise you
shall either admit a simple contradiction, or else you shall deny all men to be
natural. Therefore of necessity the Royallist must either admit, all men
according to Nature, to be born free, or else, both King, and People, by Nature
to be born subject to Government. He must either admit the one, or deny the
other also. Which he proudly affirms. See what Philosophy this is: Man by
nature is formally born subject to Government. So will the Royallists have it.
This will be the Conclusion: Ergo man by nature is not formally born subject to
Government. A plain contradiction indeed. The reason is: If nature subject man,
formally, to Government, then it subjecteth all men thereto. And if all men, I
demand, Whether or not does nature subject one to another? If it does, ergo
either committitur circulus, or else one by nature is not subjected to another.
Otherwise all according to nature are not subjected thereto, as is showed to
be. If not, ergo none by Nature are borne subjects: for so by Nature there is
none, to whom they are subjected. Non entis nulla sunt accidentia. Therefore it
inevitably follows, either all to be born free, or else all to be born
subjected to Government, and not to be born subjected thereto.

Secondly: If Nature laid formal bonds of subjection upon Man to Politic
Authority, we judge it very strange, how there have been, and may be many
families and societies of men void and free of such subjection. We can scarcely
think, that the interveening of any accidental cause could obstruct the current
of such a formal stream of Nature from issuing and streaming forth its formal
effect. We can hardly digest it, how Nature formally bending its strength to
produce Politic subjection, does not also erect Government amongst Beasts, and
subject one of them to another. See we not by experience, how natural
predominants do always produce effects suitable to their temper? Why may we
not then with as good reason allege, that Nature producing Government and
subjection to Policy, would have also through its natural sourse drawn all
natural creatures, to the erecting of Government and Policy amongst them? How
comes it to pass, I pray you, there is not King-Lion, King-Eagle,
King-Elephant? etc:

Thirdly: If Nature formally tied some men to subjection, and formally derived
power of governing and reigning to others; then the constitution of Judges and
Governors, would be a formal and natural act, Physically and formally flowing
from Nature's principles, not contingently, but necessarily. Which takes away
the freedom of God, Deuteronomy. 17.1. Sam. 12. Ps. 75. and Dan. 4. in setting-up
Governors and Rulers according to his pleasure, excluding all formal and
physical necessity from Nature. And not only so, but also it follows, that
both Rulers, and ruled, are eternal and unchangeable. Which is repugnant both
to Experience and Reason.

The Gymnosophists and Indian Philosophs did enact it by Law* That all by
Nature were freeborn, and none were servants, but to be of equal authority and
alike dignity. Diod. Ant. lib. 3. cap. 10. Dionysius Halicarnassius says, In
all men the desire of liberty is innate, Lib. 5. and 6. Julius Caesar averreth,
All men study to liberty, Lib. 2. and 3. de bell. Gal. And Gregory affirms,
All men by Nature to be free, whom Nations have subjected to bondage. 12.
quaest. 2. The Law speaks much for us in this, and in positive terms says,
what we affirm, L. manumiss. F. de just. and jur. Lib. 1. digest. tit. 1. lib.
1. Inst. tit. 5. Ulpian, and Justian, distinguish between the Law of Nature,
and the Law of Nations. The one is particular, only relating to man; the other
is general, relative both to man and beast. Ulp. lib. 1. sect. ult. Just. dig.
lib. 1. tit. 1. Inst. lib. 1. tit. 2. But I pray you, Wherein can the Law of
Nature be common, both to man and beast, if you affirm Nature to have laid
strait bonds of subjection upon one to another? We find by experience, that
Lions are not subject to King-Lion, Boars to King-Boar, Eagles to King-Eagle.
And so you annul this community of the Law of Nature to Man and Beast, if you
understand subjective authority formally to flow from Nature. They do as yet
more clearly difference these Laws, calling the one slavery, and the other
liberty. Ulp. lib. man. D. Just. dig. lib. 1. Hence Ulpian. Inst. lib. 1. and
Justinian, Dig. lib. 1. say, That all by Nature being freeborn, Manumission to
Nature is unknown. It is the consequent of servitude according to the Law of
Nations. See also Just. Inst. lib. 1. tit. 5. Whence is it, out of Florentine,
he defines liberty from Nature, and servitude from the custom of Nations. Dig.
lib. 1. tit. 5. Where liberty is expressly opposed to Government and Authority.
The one is called humane constitution, and the other, Nature's birth.

But the Lawyer Prate would make us believe, by the Law of Nations Ulpian and
Justinian do understand, a humane, universal Law and Sanction, and by
servitude, praedure and tyrannous form of Government. And so (says he) the Law
of Nations must not always be opposed to the Law of Nature, as Livius says.
Neither must we think (says he) that all Civil Constitution is contrary to
Nature, but such as draws the subjected into slavery. The Lawyer Baldwin
seems to take him by the hand, while as he calls the Law of Nations, the
particular Law of Nature. But the man, com. in. Justit. Inst. lib. 1. and 2.
seems neither to be much for it, nor much against it. Nay but Mr. Prate
wresteth Ulpian and Justinian, their meaning: for if the Law of Nature were
taken by them for any humane Law, then should humane Law be common both to man
and beast. Do not they say, the Law of Nature is common to both? Therefore you
shall either conclude, beasts to be men, and affected with humane faculties, or
else you shall restrict your universal within the bounds of a particular.

But if you shall say, That by the Law of Nations they understand an Universal
Statute, and general Sanction, as it is contradistinct from the Civil Law, you
also gain just nothing for your pains. 1. Because in such a notion, the Law of
Nations is not the proper and immediate opposite of the Law of Nature. So it is
properly and immediately opposed to the Civil Law, as Justinian out of Caius
abundantly clears: for as he opposes Digest. lib. 1. tit. 1. loc. 1. the Law
of Nature to the Law of Nations, so loc. 9. and Inst. lib. 1. tit. 2. loc. 2.
he contradistinguisheth the Law of Nations from the Civil Law. In the one he
takes the Law of Nations, as being the immediate opposite of the Law of Nature,
and in the other, as being the proper opposite of the Civil Law. 2. Because both
Ulpian, and Justinian, in the forequoted places, do call the Law of Nations, a
thing common amongst men. But by your leave, if we take a narrow view of the
Law of Nations, we shall find it rather particular, then general; it being
taken as immediately opposed to the Civil Law: for so it is taken in a strict
and rigorous acceptance. And such Law has greatest footing, when Monarchy and
the governing power is universal.

And whereas Mr. Prate alleges, That by servitude, is understood slavery and
tyranny, he is far in the wrong to Ulpian and Justinian. They mean no such
thing. 1. Because Justinian calls Liberty, a natural faculty, enclining to
that which any man pleases to do, unless it be obstructed either by strength,
or Law. In which we mark two things that make much for us. Firstly, Liberty is
referred to the natural faculty of the Will. So Aristotle defines it, (...).
lib. 6. Polit. Now no Government can be called the natural faculty of the Will,
or any power of the Mind. Secondly, Liberty is opposed, not only to force and
violence, but also to Law and Ordinance. These two things do absolutely
distinguish the reason of Liberty from Government, in so far as it is taken for
natural liberty. Now, Justinian to the definition of Liberty subjoyneth the
definition of Servitude. But, by your favor, why may not I with far better
reason say, That Justinian takes Servitude for Government, then you can
allege him to take it for slavery and tyrannous authority? for as he defines
Liberty, it is uncompetent both to lawful, and unlawful authority. If
Government be natural, the Liberty of which Justinian speaks, is no ways
competent to it. He speaks not of natural, but of moral liberty. 2. Because
Ulpian and Justinian call Servitude, constitutio juris gentium. But my friend,
what Ethnic, much less Christian, would have called tyranny, constitutio
juris, and not rather constitutio non-juris? Show me another place where they
take jus gentium abusively in a catachrestick signification. 3. Albeit we
should yield this to Mr. Prate, yet should he no whit encroach upon the main
purpose in hand: for it is abundantly cleared, that they understand all men by
nature to be born free. Jure enim naturali (says Justinian) omnes homines ab
initio liberi nascebantur. Just. lib. 1. tit. 2. loc. 2. Thence was it in the
golden age, both before and after the Flood, they knew nothing but fatherly
government, and filial subjection. Jerome also in this sideth with us. He
calls Liberty, a faculty of living according to pleasure. But as government
restrains the Will, so Nature gives it liberty, sweetly concurring and
conniving with it. Furthermore, he shows, how that Liberty is natural, both
from the subject and object of it. De Reg. inst. and disc. lib. 5.

Conclus. 2. Nature per accidens and in a secondary way, intends government.

The reason of this is clearer then the light: for in the state of corruption,
Nature lies between two straits. Either it must be altogether be slave^ ^o the
predominant tyranny of it is corruption, or else patiently submit itself to
Government's yoke. Thereby it minds to redintegrat that which by Corruption
it losed. It knows that it would be overcharged by the super-dominion of
lording lusts, if it did not come under the reverence of government. It
chooses rather to take it is hazard of subjection to a friend, then become
captive to a foe, and always remain his prisoner. Thus it no otherwise minds
government, but as in the case of fallen man it cannot be secure, nor preserved
from the rage of lust without it. Therefore Writers do very pertinently call it
natural. Arist. Pol. 1. cap. 2. Ulp. Inst. lib. 1. Just. Dig. lib. 1. tit. 1.
loc. 1. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9. Inst. lib. 1. tit. 2. loc. 1. and 2. And the Lawyer
Vasquez in plain terms says that same which we do, Illustr. quaest lib. 1.
cap. 41. The Law says, De jure gentium secundarius est omnis principatus. I.
fin. ad med. C. de long. temp. praest. I.

This being done, you may abundantly learn herefrom, what man's condition is in
the state of perfection (...) integrity. It Is a condition altogether unliable
to any Politic subjection. It rendereth all free unsubjected to government.
Yet we must not think, that it gives man immunity and exemption from the
Moral Law. That were a giving him power above his duty. Thus he should be
rendered an outlaw. But in the state of integrity, man was most strictly
engaged to all the duties of the Moral Law. He was obliged to perform them
under pain of highest censure. He was answerable then to no humane Judicatory
but only to the Judge of judges. His case was such, that he needed no
governors to hedge-in his ways. He needed nothing for that but his own nature.
It Is integrity and perfection was the best governor and government. But since
the fall, Man is become exceeding labill, and stands in need of many things
which he did not before. Since the fall he is obliged no less then before it,
to observe GOD's Law. And though before the fall he was free and subject to
none but to GOD, yet now he comes under Tutory. Before the fall he needed no
Tutors, having wit enough then to govern himself. But since the fall, he is
become infirm and ignorant, and stands now in need of Tutors to help his
infirmities. And the best Tutor he can have, is government. Now, tell me, which
of the governments is best? No question, that which advances him nearest his
first and primary condition. Nature no otherwise intends government, but as
it contributeth in some measure or other, to make up what it has losed in the
state of corruption. And as it has losed integrity, so likewayes liberty. It
had both these in the state of perfection. Well, will any deny, but of all
goverments, Democracy is most for liberty? Monarchy and Aristocracy draw
people's liberty within a narrow compass. In the one, the whole liberty of the
people is devolved upon one, and in the other upon some few. Thus the liberty
which Man had in the state of perfection, is extremely eclipsed. It denies his
native liberty to him, though in a larger measure he be capable of it. But
Democracy gives people their full liberty which they had in the state of
perfection, in so much as they are capable of it. It withholdeth nothing of it
from them, which in convenience and without violation of the Law it can give
unto them. It cannot conveniently give them the whole liberty which they had in
their primary condition. Otherwise they should be without government. And so
they should become outlaws, loose and dissolute. Thus they should come under
the dominion of sin. Which is not liberty, but slavery. To prevent the
incurable and extreme contagion of which, Nature has provided Government as a
remedy. And that government which advances Nature in the state of fallen man,
in as much as it is capable of, to the liberty, which it had in the state of
innocence and before the fall, no question must be the chiefest remedy against
such contagion. Thus Nature in the state of Corruption, is advanced so near as
is possible to it is state it was in in the case of perfection. But Democracy
amongst all Governments, is that which advances Nature nearest to the liberty
which it had in the state of perfection. It gives liberty not only to one,
and some few, but also to all. It withholds liberty from none, in so far as
it can consubsist with obedience to the Law; to which Man was subjected in the
very state of innocence. It no otherwise withholds liberty, but as it
preventeth Corruption's slavery. Ergo, of all Governments it is simply best. No
wonder: for it advances Man nearest the condition he was in in the state of
perfection.

SECT. IV.
Whether or not is it lawful to resist the Royal Person, and decline the Royal
Authority?

IT will be greater ease for us, to remove this difficulty, then those which
formerly, by the Lords abundant help, we have fully discussed. You learn our
mind in this matter from that which follows.

Assert. 1. It is not lawful to resist the King, as King, nor the Kingly Power,
as the Kingly power.

There is very good reason for this: for the King, as King, is ordained by God,
and Kingly Government in it self is God's Ordinance. Therefore formally,
positively, and directly, we cannot resist the King, nor the Kingly power;
unless we be found fighters against God. This is at length made good by us,
sect. 1. ass. 1.

Assert. 2. It is lawful and commendable, to resist the tyranny of the King,
and the abuse of his power.

This we make good from several examples in Scripture. 1. From the example of
Readiness Army, which in resisting him, rescued Jonathan from his fury. 1 Samuel 14.
Royallists, such as Mr. Symons, and Fern, do opinionate, this was done by no
violence, but by prayers and tears. But this is false. There is not a word of
prayers and tears in the text. The people without, and contrary to the King's
consent enter in oath for rescuing Jonathan. Yea, which is more, contrary to
the King's oath, they laid their heads together, and did bind themselves by
oath to rescue him. The King's oath is, God do so, and more also: for thou
shall surely die, Jonathan. The People's oath is contrary to that, -- As the
Lord lives, there shall not one hair of his head fall to the ground: -- They
go not behind his back, but they tell it him in his face. -- the people said
unto Saul, Shall Jonathan die --? Thus they withstand him to his face. The very
highest degree of resistance. 2. David resisted and withstood Readiness fury, 1 Samuel 22.23* etc. 1 Chr. 12. Nay but Arnisaeus says, David's fact in resisting
Saul, and defending himself by arms against him, was extraordinary. He was
anointed, and designed by God, as successor to Saul. But the man is far
mistaken: for if it be lawful in an extraordinary case to resist Kings, no
question in it self it is lawful to resist them. And so, it being in it self a
thing lawful, it may be put in action, both in an extraordinary and ordinary
case. See subsect. 2. prop. 1. And though David was designed King by the Lord,
yet was he not formally called thereto by the People, in the time of Readiness
reign. Will any deny, but Saul, so long as he lived, was King over Israel, and
that David was his subject? Otherwise David was very far out of it, in calling
him, The Lords Anointed, his Master, Lord, and King. We say no more, but refer
you to Lex Rex, quaest. 32. Salmasius finding-out another starting-hole, says,
David with arms only defended himself against Saul 's tyranny, but not to cut
him off, as the English Rebels, and bloody butchers did, in cutting-off Charles
1. Def. Reg. cap. 4. This is all we say concerning David. And there was very
good reason for it, why David did not cut him off, though he was several times
at his mercy. Firstly, because he could not do it legally. Though he had power
legally to resist him, yet had he not power legally to cut him off. The very
Law of Nature teaches self-defence, though by the smallest means. But the
off-cutting of the Delinquent only belongs to the Magistrate and Judge,
unless it be in an extraordinary case. Nature has always Law enough for
self-defence, but not so for punishing Delinquents. The one is natural, the
other political. Secondly, no question, David, by extraordinary impulsion was
carried-by the off-cutting of Saul. While as Abishai went about to kill him,
David forbade him. And told him he should be cut off and perish another way, 1 Samuel 26. Where you shall find David dehorting Abishai from laying hands on
Saul, from these two grounds. Firstly, from the non-legality of the fact. He is
the Lords Anointed. Thus he holds Saul as his superior. And therefore he had
not power to cut him off. It Is usurpation in the inferior, to rise against the
superior. Secondly, from the assurance of Readiness perishing another way. -- As
the Lord lives, the Lord shall smite him, or his day shall come to die, or he
shall descend into battle and perish. Would David say, It is needless either
for me, or for thee, Abishai, to lay hands on Saul: Assure thy self he shall be
cut off another way. But I believe this man cannot say, the Representative of
the English Commonwealth had such reasons for them, For keeping them back from
cutting-off Charles Stuart.

3. Elishah commanded to shut the door upon Jehoram's teeth. He calls him,
the son of a murderer. -- See ye, how the son of a murderer has sent to
take-away mine head. Look when the messenger comes, shut the door, and hold
him fast at the door. -- 2 Kin. 6. Thus he gives orders to the Elders, those
who did sit in the Sanhedrin, being with him in the house, violently to keep it
out against Jehoram, and his messenger. The word in the original, (...)
proporteth a most violent way of resisting. It signifies a holding fast at the
door with pressing. So the Seventy, Chaldee paraphrast, Avenarius, and others
do render it. It Is a vain thing in Royallists, to imagine, Elishah, and the
Elders with him, did not resist the King, but his messenger. 1. The text makes
clear against this. -- [Is] not the sound of his masters feet behind him? Thus
Elishah commands the door to be shut upon the messenger, because the King was
backing him, and coming-in immediately after the cutthroat. This intimates to
us, the shutting of the door, and the out-keeping of the house, was mainly
against Jehoram himself. His immediate approaching upon the back of the
messenger, is the ground of shutting the door, and keeping-out the house. They
allege also this to be an extraordinary act. Quasi vero self-defence were not
a thing most natural and ordinary. Away with this elusion. 2. Because what the
King's emissary does in the King's name, is done by him, as in the King's
person and authority. And so virtualiter at least it is all one to resist the
King's emissary, and to resist the King himself. Salmasius would loose the knot
another way. And (says he) the impure Puritans can conclude nothing from this,
for cutting-off the head of Charles 1. The Prophet did not take it on him, to
cut off Jehoram. That was done by Jehu* whom God extraordinarily stirred-up
thereto. Def. Reg. cap. 4. Who ever saw such a man as this? He only raileth,
and shifteth the Question. The Question between us now, is not concerning the
off-cutting, but the simple act of resisting Kings. And though Elishah did not
cut off Jehoram, yet he cannot deny, but he withstood him, and defended himself
against his violence. This is all for the present we crave. Neither can he
deny, but Elishah gave orders to one of the children of the Prophets, to anoint
Jehu King. Whereupon he went forth, and did cut off Jehoram, executing the
purpose of God on the house of Ahab. From which example is showed already, to
be lawful to cut off delinquent Kings. It is the Magistrat's part, and not the
Prophet's, unless it be by extraordinary impulsion, to cut off the delinquent.
And so, as from the example of Elishah, it is lawful to resist, so from the
example of Jehu (whom Elishah caused to be anointed, for cutting-off the house
of Ahab) it is lawful to cut off delinquent Kings.

4. Libnah made defection from Jehoram, and revolted from him, 2 Kin. 8. 2 Chr.
21. Salmasius studieth to elude this, yet he says nothing against it, but what
others of his own tribe said before him. And (says he) Libnah's revolt, in
respect of God, the Judge of all the earth, was a just punishment of Jehoram 's
sins. But in respect of the revolters, it is no where justified in all the
text. Def. Reg. cap. 4. But with his leave, the text insinuates the contrary.
This you may learn from comparing the revolt of Libnah, with the revolt of the
Edomites. So the Edomites revolted from under the hand of Judah unto this day.
-- There is nothing added to that. The same time also did Libnah revolt from
under his hand. -- This is added as a reason, because he had forsaken the Lord
God of his fathers. Thus is abundantly holden-out unto us, that Edom and Libnab
revolted from Jehoram in a different way. No question, in respect of God, the
cause and ground of the revolt of both, is one. God caused both to revolt, to
punish the sins and transgressions of Jehoram. But in respect of the Revolters
there are different causes. The Edomites revolted, because they disdained to
live under the yoke of the King of Judah. The text says, they chose a King of
their own. And from that, which is added as a ground of Libnah's revolt, it is
more then apparent to us, it revolted from a principle of Religion. And these
who comment upon the text say, Libnah revolted, because Jehoram pressed the
people of the Land to Idolatry. I suppose upon good reason Libnah's revolt is
far more justifiable, then the defection of the ten Tribes from Rehoboam. The
one revolted upon a natural, and the other upon a spiritual account. And yet,
as is showed already, the ten Tribes revolted allowably.

5. Uzziah was withstood by Azariah, accompanied with fourscore valiant Priests
of the Lord. And in this, contrary to the doctrine of Royallists, we shall make
good these three things. 1. That they resisted him violently. 2. allowably, 3.
that they dethroned him. The first is evident from the text. Firstly, because
it is said, they withstood him. -- They withstood Uzziah the Ki^^ -- 2 Chronicles.
26. (...) They are words of violent resistance, signifying to stand against.
And for this cause the fourscore Priests are called men of valor (...) sons of
strength. So the Seventy, and Arius Montanus translate them. It makes us
imagine, they were purposely selected from amongst the rest of the Priests,
because of their valor and strength, to withstand Uzziah in sacrificing.
Secondly, because they did thrust Uzziah violently out of the Temple --
Azariah, the chief Priest, and all the Priests, -- thrust him out from thence,
Ibid. (...) signifies to thrust out with violence. They hurried him out of the
Temple, as the word imports. The second is also manifest, because the Lord
attended the undertaking of the Priests with miraculous and extraordinary
succesfulnesse. They no sooner laid hands on the King, but beyond all
expectation, the Lord did put hand in him also. He did back them notably. They
no sooner did resist the King, but as soon the Lord from Heaven did strike him
with Leprosy. And is it imaginable but the Lord one way or other had plagued
them also, if they had failed in their duty to the King? I can see no reason,
why he should have spared them in failing in their duty, more then he did not
spare Uzziah in failing in his duty. And, which is more the Priests do not
groundlesly withstand him. They argue from the King's duty, and from their
duty. They tell him in plain terms, It did not become the King, to sacrifice,
Number. 18. but the Priests, Ex. 30. Upon these grounds they set-to, to withstand
him, and keep him back from burning incense. Which insinuat, that their act of
resisting him was in no part of his duty, and that which was proper to his
kingly charge, but only in maintaining their own liberties, and what according
to God's Law, was due to them. Would they say, We will withstand thee, O King,
and have reason to do so; because, as thou do that which is not incumbent to
thee, so thou encroachest upon the peculiar liberties of our charge. The third
is beyond controversy, though Royallists start much at it. (1.) Because he was
cut off from the house of the Lord. This was because of his Leprosy: for
according to the Law, the Leper was cut off from the Congregation. Thus the
Priests spare not to execute the Law upon the King, though Royallists esteem
him, to have exemption and immunity therefrom. And Uzziah, the King, was a
leper unto the day of his death, and dwelt in a several house, being a leper:
for he was cut off from the house of the Lord, (...) signify, a solitary
house, far from resort and society. Thus Uzziah was separated, so long as he
lived, from the society of men. Which is the Law concerning the Leper, Levit.
13. (2.) Because his son was enkinged so soon as Uzziah was separated from the
Congregation. -- And Jotham his son [was] over the King's house, judging the
people of the Land. Ibid. and 2 King. 15. Tell me, is it likely, or can it
stand with reason, they would have enkinged the son, the father as yet
remaining King? And I pray you, had it not been great madness in them, to
retain the kingly power in Uzziah's hand, after he was cut off from the house
of the Lord, because of his leprosy? Firstly, because he was as an
excommunicate man. And those who had not interest in the Church, had not
interest in the State, the Jewish Church being national. What David does in
reforming the State, is in relation and subordination to the good of the
Church. Psa. 101. Secondly, the man being thus cut off, was as unfit to govern,
as either stock or stone. I believe, God appointed not idiots and unfit men to
reign. We shall speak nothing here of these examples, whereby is holden-out,
not only the lawfulness of resisting, but also of off-cutting of Kings, this
not being the proper place thereof. We do only here speak of the simple act of
Resistance.

We add to these examples a few reasons. Firstly: These who have power to
resist the tyranny of the King, and will not, offering both their bodies and
goods to his fury, may very justly be called negative murderers and robbers of
themselves. Thus they expose them needlessly to the Kings merciless cruelty.
Not unlike the man, who being able to preserve both his life, and his goods
from the robbers commits all unto their merciless hands. Who will not say,
and that justly, but such an one is a self-murderer, and self-robber?

Secondly: It is against very Nature itself, men having power in their hands,
to defend themselves against the unjust violence and rage of the King, and yet
to be wanting therein. Either Nature has conferred upon them such power in
vain, or not. You cannot say in vain; unless you reflect upon the Author of
Nature, who works every thing to good purpose. And Nature, as it is in
itself, is good and perfect. So it is repugnant for it, considered as it is in
itself, to work unsquarely and produce bad effects. It Is against the
proportion that is between the cause and the effect. Which makes Aristotle
say, God, and Nature ado nothing in vain. De Coel. lib. 1. cap. 5.

Thirdly: It is a negative betraying of God and his interest. It Is a denying to
act for God, contrary to the King's will. Sure I am, Christ cannot away with
negatives. He puts them up in the score of enemies, Mat. 12. It Is against
the practice of the Apostles, not to act for God, against the will of the
Ruler. They determine to act for him, whether man will or not: Man without
exception. They make no reservation of the King. They resolve, to do God's
will, though contrary to man's. Acts 4. and 5. And I believe the King be but a
man.

Inst. It is altogether against that, which Paul says, Romans 13. (say
Royallists) to resist the King. This is much urged by Salmasius. He concludes,
the Apostles of Christ altogether to have been against the doctrine of
Resistance. This he gathers, not only from the place above cited, but also
from Tit. 3. and 1 Pet. 2. Def. Reg. cap. 3.

Answ. About the place, Romans 13. Royallists amongst themselves do not agree.
Some are so impudent, that they blush not to say, by higher powers are only
understood Kings. But the contrary of this is true. 1. Because the kingly power
is not the higher power, as if there were no power above it. It is not
absolute, but limited, as is already demonstrated 2. The King is not above all
the people. One of the best Kings we read of, is but worth some thousands of
the people. David, a matchless King, at the most is called worth ten thousand,
2 Samuel 18. So then, though the kingly power, secundum quid, may be called the
higher power, yet simpliciter it is not. The power of the people simply and
absolutely is the higher power. The author of the Exercitation Conc. usurp.
pow. by higher power understands no other then lawful and unusurped
Magistracy. And this man brings some Arguments, but to no purpose to prove
this, chapter 5 Which we take-up shortly into these two particulars. 1. Usurped
powers are not powers ordained of God. The powers the Apostle speaks of, have
their ordination from God. 2. The powers the Apostle speaks of may not be
resisted under the pain of damnation, and are appointed for the good of people.
Usurped powers are not so. This man mistaketh the matter very far. He will do
well, carefully to distinguish between the usurped power as it is usurped, and
as it is a power. In the first notion it is not of God, but of the Devil. But
sure I am, in the second notion, it is of God. As it is a power, it is a real
being. But who will deny, that every thing effectively depends from God, and
is ordained by him? A thing as it is in it self, is good. And so it cannot but
be ordained by God, and approved of him. Thus it carries along with it God's
Image and species. And sure I am, God never hated his own Image in any of his
creatures. This is more deep, then half-wit can draw. It is handled by us at
length, curs. Philosophico-theol. disp. 8. sect. 29. I wonder if this
Gentleman will deny, but Nebuchad. nezzar's power which he had over the
Nations was usurped. The best title he had to them, was his sword. And yet the
Lord owneth him in his undertakings, commissionateth him to undertake, and
setteth-up his throne, Jer. 43. What? had he any right over the Jews, but the
lawless right of usurpation? Yet Jeremiah many times exhorted them to subject
their necks to him, upon loss to themselves, and disobedience to God. And
Ezekiel, chapter 17. threatens them with destruction, because of their denying
obedience to him. And I pray you, what better right had Cyrus to the Kingdoms
of the Nations, then Nebuchad-nezzar? And yet the Lord calls him, his
shepherd and his anointed. He promises to concur with him and help him in
subduing the Nations. Isa. 44. and 45. Thus it is most evident, that not only
usurped powers, as powers, are ordained of God, but also all lawful obedience
is due to them. Sure I am, whileas the Apostle wrote this to the Romans, they
did live under the greatest of Tyrants. Did not Nero reign then? And yet the
Apostle commands, to give obedience to such, and calls their power, an
ordinance of God. This man imagines, that C. Caesar, and all his successors,
even unto Nero, had lawful and sufficient calls to govern. I shall not examine
this by history, sensibly perceiving the man's weakness, in not adverting to
the usurpation of Julius, and Augustus. I pass this, and shortly tell him,
such vile Ethnicks, as they, had never right to govern, as may be learned from
what foregoeth. But to make shorter work, he shall do well to observe, all
usurped powers to be, either Kingly, Aristocratick, or Popular. I demand,
Whether or not usurped powers taken under such notions, be Ordinances of God?
This he cannot deny. Will he say, that the Kingly, or any other lawful power,
in abstracto, is not of divine institution? It Is bad reasoning, the Kingly
power in itself to be unlawful, because it is in an usurper's hands.
Usurpation is accidental, whether to the thing, as King, or to the Kingly power
as it is in it self. Tell me, I pray you, what Philosoph will admit a
consequence a (...) per accidens, ad (...) per se? Will any conclude a thing to
be evil in itself, because it is abused? No verily. It is foolishness to say,
the skin is not good, because it is itchy. I go forward. And for the other
particular, I would have this Gentleman observing with me. 1. Paul prescribes
the duty of the inferior toward the superior. This he presses by several
arguments. 2. He prescribes the duty of the Magistrate and superior toward
the inferior. I confess, more expressly and largely he speaks of the first,
then of the second* for as he presses the duty of the inferior toward the
superior, tacitly and by the way he interlaceth the duty of the superior
toward the inferior. Now, albeit the Apostle presses obedience upon the
inferior both toward good and bad, tyrannous and non-tyrannous powers and
Rulers, yet has he very great reason for him, to exhort all Rulers and powers,
to exercise and administer justice. Albeit it be the duty of the inferior, to
give obedience to the usurped and tyrannous power, yet it becomerh the
Magistrate not to usurp nor tyrannize. And so the one being incumbent to the
inferior, and the other to the superior, the Apostle presses upon both of
them their duty. No question, both of them may, and do fail in their duty; yet
it does become the Apostle to press their duty upon both. And in this that the
Apostle says, the Magistrate is God's minister, appointed by him for the good
of the people, in exercising judgment and righteousness: it does not follow
that he only speaks of lawful and un-usurped powers. No verily. But he
tacitly herein disclaimeth such powers, and prescribes what should be the
nature and power of Magistrates de jure, and not what it is de facto. And as it
is the superiour's jus, to rule in righteousness, so it is the jus of the
inferior to give all lawful and due obedience, whether to the usurped, or
non-usurped power. So is proved already. The reason that makes this man so far
misconstrue the Apostle's meaning, is to cut off allegiance from the usurped
power, and, as he says; from the Commonwealth of England, which he is not
ashamed to call an usurped power. But he beats the air. To make short work
of this, we demand, Whether or not the people of the Jews did lawfully give-up
allegiance to the King of Babylon? If they did lawfully, ergo it is lawful to
give-up allegiance to usurped power. Sure I am, Nebuchad-nezzar's power over
the Jews was mere usurpation. And therefore the Lord threatens to punish the
King of Assyria and destroy his Kingdom, Is. 10. If unlawfully, ergo it was
lawful for them, to break the oath of allegiance given to him. But this they
could not: for the Prophets threatened them with wrath for the violation
thereof. But because this matter is not only most clear in it self, but also we
have little or nothing to do with it, therefore we content our self with this
slender view we have taken of it. We leave this, and come to Salmasius, who is
of an higher strain then he. Indeed he pleads for subjection and allegiance
to the worst of powers. But to take away all that he objecteth, observe these
few things concerning the clear meaning and exposition of the place, Romans 13.

1. Carefully distinguish between the superior, and inferior. 2. between the
power itself, and the abuse thereof. For the first we say, It is unlawful and
not permitted, whether by the Law of God, or the Law of Nature, to the
inferior to resist the superior. And as it is not lawful for the inferior to
resist the superior, neither is it lawful to resist the superior power, as it
is in it self. We find both these in the text. Let every soul be subject unto
the higher powers. -- The higher or superior, presupposes lower and
inferior. The one is correlat of the other. Thus it is evident, the subjection
and non-resistance spoken-of by Paul, Romans 13. is between the inferior and
superior. And withal remark, the Apostle presses subjection to the power, and
non-resistance thereof. He does not command obedience to the abuse and tyranny
of it. We do therefore say, the place makes nothing against us, but much for
us. Though it be not lawful for inferiors to resist superiors. (That cannot
be done, unless the inferior intrude himself upon the right of the superior,
and usurp that, which he has not). Yet is it very commendable, for the
superior, to resist the inferior. Therefore it is undoubtedly lawful for the
people, or their Representative, to resist the King. And that because their
power is above his. His power is not absolute admitting no bounds. And
consequently, the text speaks against the resistance made by the King against
the people. The people's power is the higher, yea the supreme power. And so
subjection and obedience is so much more to be performed thereto. The Apostle
commands subjection, and non-resistance to any higher power, though but
higher secundum quid. His words are indefinit and without exception. Ergo much
more to the highest, and the higher power simpliciter. And thus the Apostle to
good purpose, exhorts Christians up and down the Roman Empire, and namely in,
and about the City of Rome, to subject their necks to the yoke of the Roman
Magistrates. They were indeed inferior to them both in power and dignity. They
could not have withstood them, being but an handful, unless they had become
self-murderers and usurpers of power, which both God and Nature had denied
them. And though it be unlawful to resist the power, as it is in it self, yet
it is lawful, as is said already, to withstand the abuse and tyranny thereof.
It does not follow, that Paul commands subjection and non-resistance to the
tyranny of the power, because he commands subjection and non-resistance to
the power it self. This is a fallacy ab accidente. The abuse of the power is
altogether extrinsecal to the power itself. And ab extrinseco ad intrinsecum
the consequence is vain. Thus these of Tit. 3. and 1 Pet. 2. are to be
expounded after the same manner. Verily, if we might not use distinctions here,
or in respect of what the Apostles speak concerning Kings; then were it
altogether unlawful for us to pray against Kings, because the Apostle
commands us, 1 Timothy 2. to pray for them. I wonder if these words can be taken
without all limitation and restriction. No verily. Otherwise it were unlawful
for us, to pray against Popish, Mabumetan, and Paganish Kings. Such side with
the Beast, and whom the Lord appoints to destruction, Rev. 12.17.19. and 20.
In many places of Scripture, we read of prayers poured-out against such.
Therefore the Apostle's words deserve a distinction, and must be taken in a
restricted sense. And if 1 Timothy 2. why not also Romans 13. the Apostle's words
deserve a distinction? And so it is no otherwise lawful for us to pray for
them, but as it is lawful to obey them, and subject our necks to their yoke.
There is a time when we are necessarily tied to obey them. This is in the time
of non-ability to resist. And if it be lawful then to obey them, it is lawful
then to pray for them. When the People of God are brought to such a condition,
that they are not able to resist wicked Kings, nor shake-off their yoke, there
is nothing left them then but prayers and tears. And what is the end of their
prayers for them? It is most for their own good and advantage. That we may lead
a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. The People of God in
the time of weakness and want of power, can do no more but roll their Kings
over upon God, and entreat him to do with, and in their Kings, what they cannot
perform. But whereas the People of God have power to resist Kings, and
shake-off their yoke, no question, as it is lawful to act, so likewise to pray
against their proceedings. And that ever with a reservation of God's secret
decree, for disposing upon their persons according to his pleasure. And whereas
he says, Def. Reg. cap. 6. that, if the power of the People be the higher
power, under any kind of Government, it follows, there is no distinction and
difference of Governments. He is not a little mistaken. It is great want of
Philosophy that makes him say so. The power of the people is the groundwork
of the power of all Governments. The original and fountain-power is still
reserved in the people. And so the kinds of Government, though they be
different formally, yet not materially. Democracy is dilatated Aristocracy, and
Aristocracy dilatated Monarchy, Aristocracy contracted Democracy, and Monarchy
contracted Aristocracy. Thus the three differ not essentially, but
accidentally. Even as the hand v. g. is one, whether folded or unifolded.

Assert. 3. Kingly Government may very lawfully be declined, that one better
may be set-up in its room.

This is made good from what is above written.

SECT. V.
Whether or not does the Covenant tie us, to preserve Monarchy inviolably.

IN removing this difficulty, there be two things in the Covenant which we must
carefully look to. (1.) Christ's Interest. And this is, 1. 2. 4. 5. 6. Art.
(2.) The Interest of King, and Kingdom, Art. 3. In order to these things we
give you these Assertions.

Assert. 1. We are tied by League and Covenant, to maintain and espouse
Christ's interest absolutely, notwithstanding any thing may ensue thereupon.

We shall not need to stand here. It is a matter without all controversy, and
denied by none, who profess Christ. This way there must be no rescinding of
our Oath though to our own hurt, Psa. 15. He that swareth to [his own] hurt,
and changes not, (still espousing Christ's quarrel) shall abide in the Lord's
tabernacle, and shall dwell in his holy hill.

Assert. 2. By no Oath or Covenant can we be absolutely tied, to espouse the
King's interest, and preserve Monarchy inviolably.

There is very good reason for this. To stand-by and maintain Kingly power,
either it is a duty simply necessary, or not. Simply necessary it cannot be. 1.
Because any Civil Government in itself is lawful. And consequently, as they
are in themselves, we may lawfully give-up our allegiance to any of them. But
if Monarchy were simply necessary, at no time could we lawfully by Oath bind
our selves, to maintain any other Government: for so we are absolutely and in
all respects obliged, to maintain Monarchy and submit our necks thereto. 2. The
preservation and maintenance of Monarchy is not necessary to salvation. Who
will say, that none can be saved who act against it, and do not maintain it?
What? is every Government sinful but it? and do all sin who oppose it? No
verily. The contrary is showed already. And if the preservation of, and
standing by Monarchy, be not in itself simply necessary, it is great rashness
and unlawfulness, to enter in Oath and Covenant, absolutely to maintain it,
notwithstanding all hazards may ensue thereupon. It Is to make our duty
necessary, where it is not so in itself. Thus we bind the conscience, where
God binds not. Whereupon I demand, whether or not are we any otherwise
obliged to set-to to our duty, but in answerableness thereto and as it is in it
self? Sure I am, none will say, but the Oath should be suitable and
proportionable to the duty. And if by our Oath we swear either to add to, or
diminish from our duty, then are we either supererogatory, or wanting therein.
And thus we walk not the right way, but incline either to the right, or the
left hand. Whereupon we make our duty will worship, either freeing the
conscience where God freeth not, or binding where God binds not. So then, the
maintenance and preservation of Monarchy being in itself a duty not simply
necessary, it must needs be granted, that we cannot swear absolutely to
maintain it, unless we make our duty will worship and supererogatory. And that
God never required at our hands. Upon this we conclude this argument:

That duty, which in itself is not absolutely necessary, we cannot lawfully
swear absolutely to set-to to it:

But the maintenance and preservation of Monarchy, is a duty in itself not
absolutely necessary:

Ergo we cannot lawfully swear absolutely to set to to it.

The Proposition is manifest, from the proportionablenesse that should be
between the Oath, and the Duty sworn to. The Assumption is no less evident
from the proportionablenesse that ought to be between the duty, and the object
of the duty. And if that be not kept entire, then verily there is an enclining
either to the right, or to the left hand. And so, we either diminish from, or
supererogat to our duty.

Moreover, it is to swear to an impossibility, to enter in Oath and Covenant,
to stand absolutely by Kingly Government. It Is a matter very ordinary and
possible, that all power be blocked-up from thee, till thou can not so much
as endeavor to maintain it, much less actually stand in defense and
preservation thereof. I confess, the People of God, even in the matter of
Religion may be brought to this. But deceive not thy self. The People of God
cannot swear absolutely, by force and might, not only to endeavor, but also to
act for Religion. That is also a vain Oath, and a swearing to impossibilities.
How many times have the People of God been brought so low, that their power
has been wholly eclipsed. They can absolutely swear no more, but to employ all
power God shall put in their hands, in the defense and preservation of
Religion, and never alter nor change their faith, notwithstanding they run the
hazard of perishing, goods, lives and fortunes. Tell me, will thou say, thou
art obliged to swear so in standing by Monarchy? Do thou imagine, thou art
necessarily tied, to stand by Monarchy, as by Religion? Thou can not change
thy faith, nor decline it if it be true, whether before or after thou have
sworn to maintain it, unless thou run the hazard both of sin and condemnation.
Thou can not embrace the contrary faith and Religion without sin. Which
draweth-on, as its inevitable consequent, if persevered therein, the wrath and
eternal displeasure of the Almighty. But, I pray thee, think thou it
damnable to subject thy neck to the yoke of any other Government beside
Monarchy? Are not other Governments lawful as well as it? Are not they
consubsistent with Religion, and the matter of salvation, no less then it? How
dare thou absolutely tie thy self by Oath and Covenant, to stand by one only
kind of Government, when as thou may lawfully submit thy neck, and give-up
thy allegiance to any kind thereof? Thus thou not only overchargest thy
conscience, but also exposest thy self needlessly to hazard. And so much the
rather of this, because of all Governments, Monarchy is most dangerous, and
least to be wished. Art thou not of all fools the greatest, to swear absolutely
to maintain that Government which is least good, though thou may obtain
that, which of all Governments is the sweetest? The Author of Exerc. con.
usurp. pow. cap. 3. mistaketh the matter very far, whileas he says, We are
equally and that same way obliged by League and Covenant, to maintain the
King's Person and Authority, as by it we are tied to maintain Religion. The
contrary of this is already cleared. --

Lastly, I deny not, but not only Monarchy in itself is consistent with
Religion, but also secundum quid it is the best of all Governments. Yet if we
speak simpliciter, and of the ordinary fruits and Consequences of Kingly
Government, the King's interest always comes in competition with Christ's
interest. So is proved invincibly (as we suppose) already. Now will thou swear
absolutely to maintain that, which absolutely and ordinarily stands in
opposition to Christ and his interest? Thus thou swearest to maintain that,
which serves to over-turn both Church and Commonwealth. And hereby thou
preferrest man's interest to God's interest: for so thou exposest both Church
and Commonwealth to ordinary and inevitable danger and hazard, in maintaining
Kingly Government inviolable. The foresaid Author in the place above cited,
endeavors to justle us out of this. He takes much upon trust, but he
proves nothing. He would have us to take it upon his word, that Monarchy is
most consubsistent with Religion and the good of the People. We cannot take him
in this as an (...). We have already upon this concluded more by force of
argument, then he either may, or does speak by word. What? is it any wonder,
though he says so? He is not ashamed to aver against Heaven and experience
itself, That Religion was consubsistent with the preservation and defense of
the last King's Person. Let God judge this. O my soul, come not thou into his
secret; Unto the Assembly of such, mine honor be not thou united.

COROLLARY.
HAving, through the Lord's more then ordinary assistance, discussed these five
Questions above-written, it now remains to try, what strength is in them, to
conclude the Commonwealth of England to be a lawful Government, and not usurped
power. And we make it good thus: If the Commonwealth of England be an unlawful
and usurped power, then either because the power of the King of England, not
only according to the Law of the Kingdom, but also of God, is absolute. And so,
without usurpation he can neither be judged, nor his Kingdom taken from him by
any, but by God. Or because Monarchy is of all Governments the choicest. And so
cannot be altered, nor exchanged with any other Government, unless we go from
the better to the worse. And it is rash madness, or sinful rashness, to
exchange the best with the worst. Or because Popular Government is least to be
desired. Or because it is unlawful, to resist the Royal Person, and decline the
Royal Authority. Or lastly, because we are tied, not only by the Oath of
Allegiance, but also by solemn League and Covenant, to maintain and preserve
Monarchy inviolably. But none of all these you can allege, to bind usurpation
upon the Commonwealth of England, as is showed already. Ergo it is a lawful,
and not usurped power.

FINIS.
Errors to be corrected, thus.
REad Page 6. line 8. Beros. P. 9. l. ult. carrying-on. P. 10 l. 20. (...) P.
12. l. 10. tanes. P. 20. l. 35 (...). P. 30 l. 8. (...). P. 35. l. 4. Satrapie
P. 60. l 24. (...). P 64. l. 33. (...). P. 65. l. ult hos. P. 67. l. 25.
naught. P. 74. l. 17. Gorbomannus. l. ult. censured. P. 75. l. 2.
excommunicated and to be punished. l. 3. Eugenius l 10, for Duncanus, read
Again usurping he. P. 76. l. 12. (...). P. 79. l. 20. after Steven, r. King. P
85. l: ult. after Inst. r. 5. P. 95. l. 17. Imperator. P. 96. l 24 (...). P.
123. l. 30. exclusive. P. 125. l. 32. sect. 1. P 129. l. 32. subsect. 1. P.
132. l. 20. subsection. P. 134 l. 21. before Concl. 6. r. subsect. 1. P. 136. l
21. subsect. 1. P. 144. l. 3. (...) l. 12. (...). P. 148. l: 22. has. P. 163.
l. 40. and P. 171. l. 35. subsect. 1. P. 174, l. 19. hurled. P. 175. l. 2.
(...) P. 175. l. 37. do.

APPENDIX.
In which the seven Angels sounding, are compared with the seven Angels
plaguing, in overturning all Powers and Potentates.

READER,
I Have thought it expedient to annex to the foregoing Treatise concerning the
Commonwealth of England, a small addition concerning the sounding and plaguing
by seven Angels. And that because they do relate to the overthrowing of all
Kings and Kingly Powers whatsoever. Whence my purpose in the foregoing
Treatise is abundantly enforced and established. That I may the more
conveniently give thee my thoughts in order to these Angels, I would have thee
in the first place with me to remark, that the Angels sounding are all one with
the Angels plaguing. And that not only because they are alike in number, but
also one and the same effects are produced by them, though some things are
enlarged in speaking of them the one way, which are abbreviated the other. I do
therefore conceive these Angels are not distinguished but only in order to
different relations and employments. And thus one and the same Angels both
proclaim, and execute the wrath of God upon all the enemies of Christ's
Interest, and his People. And as for their proclaiming by sounding with
trumpets, see Joel 3. v. 9, 10, 11, 12. Of their executing the vials of God's
wrath on the enemy and the avenger, see v. 13, 14, etc. of that same chapter. I
shall a little glance at that which the holy Ghost intends, Rev. 16. And to
this end I divide the chapter in these three parts.

The first is a preface, v. 1. The second is a narration, from v. 2. to v. 18.
The third is a peroration, from v. 18. to the close of the Chapter. The first I
pass in naming of it. In the second there be these two things considerable (1)
a party plaguing, to wit, Angels, the Ministers and executors of God's wrath.
And they be in number Seven. Secondly, a party plagued, in number Seven also.
The first of which is the Earth, v. 2. Which in Scripture in general is taken
two ways, (1) Relatively, i. e. as it is joined with some other words to make
up the sense of it. I have nothing to do with it as it is thus taken. (2)
Absolutely. Thus it is taken three ways. (1) for one of the four Elements,
Genesis 1.1. (2) As it is contradistinguished from Zion, standing in opposition
thereto, Isa. 60.2. compared with ver. 1. and chap. 58. v. 14. And thus it can
be no other but Babylon, or a People walking in a Babylonish state: for upon a
Scripture account, Babylon directly, immediately, and diametrally opposes
Zion, as from many and sundry places is evident. (3) For the assistants of the
Church, Rev. 12.16. In this Rev. 16.2. the Earth cannot be understood to be one
of the four Elements. Sense and Reason will teach us so much that this noisome
and grievous sore, Rev. 16.2. expounded to be hail and fire mingled with blood,
Rev. 8.7. cannot properly be called the punishment or plague of the Earth, one
of the four Elements. It is then to be taken mystically, for the assistants of
the Church; not only because they will rather be preserved then plagued, in
contributing their help to the Saints, (the Kenite escapes when Amalek
perishes, because of his kindness to Israel in his coming up from Egypt) but
also they have rather upon them the mark of the Woman then of the Beast. Now
the Earth spoken of in the foresaid place, is expounded to be men who worship
the image of the Beast, having his mark upon them, who cannot be the opposers,
but the worshippers thereof; and therefore must needs be such as be in and of
Babylon, which must fall; the vials of the wrath of God being powered forth upon
her, Isa. 21.9. Rev. 11. v. 13. chap. 14.8. chap. 18 v. 3.

The second party plagued is the Sea; which is taken in general two ways. (1)
comparatively, Isa. 57.20. (2) absolutely. And that these five or six ways.
(1) For the navigable and salt water, Exodus 14.2. (2) For the brazen and molten
sea, in which the Priest did wash, 2 Chronicles. 4.6. (3) For traffic, Jer. 51.36.
(4) For the powers of the Nations, Isa. 60.5. Jer. 51.42. (5) For the
glassie-Sea in the new Jerusalem. Rev. 4.6. No man will understand the Sea
spoken of, Rev. 16.3. as relating either to the Sea under the Law, or to that
which is navigable: for as the one was long before the out-powring of the
second vial, so the other (to speak properly) is incapable of being plagued.
Moreover, it is very unheard of, that the navigable Sea should be turned into
blood, the third part of the living creatures in it should die, etc. as be
competent to the Sea, spoken of Rev. 16.3. compared with chap. 8.8.9. Neither
can it be understood comparatively, because here it is taken absolutely. And
none will say that it is the Glassy Sea in the new Jerusalem. On such the vials
of Gods wrath will never be poured. It therefore remains to say, that God in
powring-out the vials upon the Sea, destroys the Forces of the Nations, and
blocketh-up all their trading and traffic, which he does by casting a
mountain burning with fire into the Sea, Rev. 8.8. that is, by stretching-out
his hand upon the destroying mountain Babylon, rouling her down from the rocks
and making her a burnt mountain. Jer. 51.2, 5. The fall of Babylon is upon the
powers of the Nations, and her fall making them to fall: for the powers and
forces of the Nations be one of the pillars of the Babylonish-state, the Armies
of the Earth siding with the Beast and False-Prophet, Rev. 19.10. against the
Ancient of days and his Armies, v. 11, 12. So that the fall of Babylon can no
otherwise be accomplished and brought to pass, but as it brings along with it
the ruin and the overthrow of the Forces of the Nations, Hag. 2.22. compared
with Rev. 19.20, 21. Thus the fall of Babylon shall be upon the Forces of the
Nations, in so far as their overthrow is begotten as its ruin is intended and
accomplished.

The third party plagued is the Waters, and fountains of waters, Rev. 16.4. I
do find waters these several ways taken in the Scriptures. (1) for one of the
four Elements, Genesis 1.6. (2) for a calm and spiritual state, Psa. 23.2. (3) for
crosses and afflictions, Psa. 69.1, 2. (4) for the vengeance and judgment of
God, Psa 73.10. (5) for the graces and Spirit of God, Isa. 55.1. compared with
Job. 4.14. and 7.38, 39. (6) for the Nations, as also their Head and Glory,
Isa. 8.7. Rev. 17.15. Moreover, fountains of waters are taken diversely in the
Scriptures, (1) for the heads and springs of the elementary and physical
waters, Genesis 7.11. (2) for goods and possessions, Pro. 5.16. (3) for the
springs of spiritual graces, Isa. 41.18. Rev. 7.17. Beside, I do find the word
as it is taken in the singular number more variously understood then as it is
taken in the plural, viz. for the spring of physical waters, Genesis 16.7. a
woman's fountain, Levit. 20.18. possession and habitation, Deuteronomy. 33.28. God
himself, Jer. 2.13. the Law of the wise, Pro. 13.14. the fear of the Lord,
Prove. 14.27. the Church of Christ, Cant. 4.12.15. spoken of the eye of man,
Jer. 9.1. In this place by waters must needs be understood the Nations; and by
the fountains of waters, the glory of the same. Sure I am, no man in reason
will say, That the plaguing of the elementary waters, of spiritual graces,
spiritual quietness, afflictions and judgment, or any such like thing is
intended in the out-pouring of the third vial. No verily, but the ruin and
desolation of the Nations, together with the head and glory thereof. And that
because the Nations and great ones of the Earth be two main pillars by which
Babylon is underpropped: for as the Whore does sit upon the Nations, Rev.
17.1.15. so the great men of the Earth bewail her desolation, Rev. 18.9, 10,
11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19.23. yea, and side with her as she engages
against the Saints of the Most High, Rev. 19.19. A great Star from Heaven
burning as a Lamp shall fall upon the waters and their fountains, Rev. 8.10. by
which the waters shall be enbittered as with wormwood, v. 11. so that many of
them shall die, being turned into blood and made bitter, Rev. 8.11. compared
with chap. 17.4. Which waters, and fountains thereof, be the very destroyers
and persecutors of the Saints, Rev. 16.6. expounded to be Babylon, and such as
side with her, Rev. 18.24. Behold how the Lord in overthrowing Babylon makes
its King and Lucifer (Isa. 14.4. compared with v. 12.) to fall from his throne
and dignity. Whose fall seiseth upon the Nations, and the great ones of the
Earth, by which they are enbittered and enraged, making die, and made to die.
And that because the ruin of Babylon is attended and accomplished with the fall
of the Nations, Rev. 16.19. and overthrow of Kings, Rev. 19.20, 21. the Lord of
hosts staining the pride of all glory, and bringing into contempt all the
honorable of the Earth, Isa. 23.9. Whereupon the heathen shall rage, and the
people imagine a vain thing, the Kings of the Earth shall set themselves, and
the Rulers take counsel together, against the Lord and against his anointed,
Psa. 2.1, 2. So that as they shall be enbittered, making many die, many men
dying of the waters, because of their bitterness; so they themselves shall be
destroyed, the waters and fountains thereof turning into blood. And thus the
three main props of Babylon shall be quite overturned, viz. the forces of the
Nations, their heads, and the Nations themselves, the Lord overturning,
overturning, overturning, Babylon, that it be no more, until he come whose
right it is, the Lord giving unto his Son the Diadem and the Crown, Ezekiel.
21.26, 27. anointing him King on his holy Hill, Zion, laying the Government on
his shoulders in the day of his Personal Appearance. And thus there is an
overturn for every pillar of Babylon.

The fourth party plagued is the Sun, Rev. 16.8. which in Scripture is taken
these several ways, (1) for the physical and visible Sun, Genesis 15.12. (2) God
himself, Psa. 84.11. (3) Christ, Cant. 1.6. Mal. 4.2. (4) by way of comparison,
it is taken for the Church, Cant. 6.10. (5) the chief, though transformed,
light, or the Lucifer of an Antichristian and Babylonish state, Isa. 13.10.
compared with chap. 14.12. Jer. 15.9. Ezekiel. 32.7. Joel 2.10. and 31. chap.
3.15. Amos 8.9. Mic. 3.6. Matthew. 24.29. Mark 13.24. Acts 2.20. Rev. 6.12. (6) a
main and chief light of the Church of God, Isa. 30.26. No man in reason will
say, that in the out-powring of the fourth vial, is understood the plaguing of
God, of Christ, (which to aver is blasphemy) or any such like thing; but the
darkning the Lucifer of Babylon, or the main pretended light of the
antichristian state with spiritual darkness. So that all the transformed and
pretended lights of the Babylonish state shall be in a great part thereof
smitten with darkness, Rev. 8.12. having their understanding darkened, being
alienated from the life of God, through the ignorance that is in them, because
of the blindness of their heart, Ephesians. 4.18. God sending them strong delusion,
that they should believe a lie, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11.

The fifth party plagued is the Seat of the Beast, Rev. 16.10. i. e. his power
and authority which shall be smitten with great darkness, his kingdom being
full thereof, Rev. 16.10. compared with chap. 13.2. A smoke rising out of the
pit, as the smoke of a great furnace, by which the Sun and Air are darkened at
the sounding of the fifth Angel, while-as a star falls from Heaven on the
Earth, Rev. 9.1, 2. whence Babylon is overthrown by violence and darkness, the
day of the Lord upon it being a day of wastness and desolation, a day of
darkness and gloominess, a day of clouds and thick darkness, Zeph. 1.15. Shall
not the day of the Lord be darkness, and not light, even very dark and no
brightness in it? Amos 5.20. And thus with a whirlwind of violence, and a cloud
of darkness the Lord comes up from the North, Ezekiel. 1.4. to lay Babylon with
all her glory in the dust: for as by violence the powers of Babylon are
overthrown, so by darkness they are hardened in heart, contemning the truth,
blaspheming God, and not repenting of their deeds, Rev. 16.9, 10, 11. So that
the greater violence is executed against them, the more obstinate in wickedness
they become, blaspheming God, his People, and Interest, Rev. 16.21.
Pharaoh-like, the more plagued the more hardened. As appears in some measure
at this very hour among the enemies of Zion's Interest. The more to day the
Egyptians are plagued, the more blasphemously do they reproach and are hardened
in heart.

The sixth party plagued is the River Euphrates, Rev. 16.12. Concerning which
there be these things considerable. (1) The up-drying of it. Which cannot be
understood mystically, seeing in no place of Scripture the word Euphrates is
taken in a mystical sense. It is read twenty times only in the Scriptures, and
no where is it taken mystically, but literally, as is more then evident to any
that shall enquire after it. We must needs therefore say, that the River
Euphrates shall be dried up, the Lord with his mighty wind shaking his hand
over it, smiting it in the seven streams, and making men to go over it
dry-shod, Isa. 11.15. (2) The end for which it is dried-up. Which is to prepare
a way for those Kings that come up from the East or the rising of the Sun, Rev.
16.12. And thus there shall be an high way for the remnant of his people, which
shall be left from Assyria, like as it was to Israel in the day that he came up
from the Land of Egypt, Isa. 11.16. Whence the Lord setting his hand again the
second time to recover the remnant of his people Israel from Assyria, and from
Egypt, Isa. 11.11. shall miraculously deliver them as he did while-as he set
his hand the first time in bringing them up from Egypt by the conduct of Moses:
for as at the first time he dried-up the Red Sea before them, so at the second
time of their recovery he will utterly destroy the tongue of the Egyptian-sea,
and dry up the River Euphrates before them, smiting it in its seven streams,
that they may go over it dry-shod. Now upon what account the people of the Jews
are called the Kings of the East, you may read for this, The Saints Kingdom,
sect. 7. (3) The engagement the people of the Jews come to, as they come up
from the East. Then do the unclean spirits like Frogs, draw forth the Kings of
the Earth with their Armies to a day of engagement against the Kings of the
East. The Paganish, Mabumetan and Antichristian spirits, Frog-like indeed,
shall engage all the Heathenish and Mahumetan powers against the four Angels,
which are bound in the great River Euphrates, prepared for a day, a month, and
a year, for to slay the third part of men, the number of the Army of the
Horsemen being two hundred thousand thousand, Rev. 9.14, 15, 16. And thus at
this day of engagement. Babylon, the powers of the Nations, with all their
Potentates and glory, shall be overthrown: for in that time when the Lord shall
bring again the captivity of Judah and Jerusalem, (gathering all Nations,
bringing them into the valley of Jehoshaphat, to plead with them there, causing
his Mighty-Ones, the Kings of the East, the hundred thousand thousand to come
down upon them, putting in his sicle, the harvest being now ripe, Joel, 3.1, 2,
12, 13.) The Winepresse shall be trodden without the City, till blood come out,
even to the Horse-bridles, by the space of a thousand and six hundred furlongs,
Rev. 14.20. Thus Gog and Magog, the Beast, the false-Prophet, the Kings of the
Earth, and their Armies shall be destroyed in engaging against him who sits
on the white horse, attended with the Armies in Heaven, Ezekiel. 39 8, 9. etc.
Rev. 19.11, 12 etc. (4) the time of this up-drying and engagement. Which is
secret and unknown. It is a time and season which the Father has put in his
own power, Acts 1.7. It Is not for us to know the time when the Kingdom shall be
restored again to Israel. It comes as a thief in the night, Rev. 16.15. and
therefore both secretly and suddenly. Let us therefore watch, and keep our
garments, lest we walk naked, and they see our shame.

The seventh party plagued is the Air, Rev. 16.17. Which in Scripture is taken
three ways, (1) for one of the four Elements, Genesis 1.26. (2) as it signifies
that which is done in vain and to no purpose, 1 Cor. 9.26. chap. 14.9. (3) for
the power of Satan, Ephesians. 2.2. whose power is airy indeed, because of its
subtilty and vanity. And thus as the Lord poureth-out the vials of his wrath
upon the power of the Beast, so does he likewise upon the power of the Dragon;
for as in the day of vengeance, in the reign of the Ancient of days, while-as
Christ reigns in power, the seat and power of the Beast is overthrown by the
up-coming of the Kings of the East; so in the time of Christ's Personal
presence and reign Satan is chained and bound a thousand years, that he may
deceive the Nations no more till the thousand years be finished, Rev. 20.2, 3.
And this is while-as a great voice cometh-out of Heaven from the Throne,
saying, it is done, Rev. 16.17. the Mystery of God being finished, and time
being no longer, in the days of the voice of the seventh Angel, Rev. 10.6, 7.
at whose sounding there be great voices in Heaven saying, The Kingdoms of this
world are become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ, and be shall
reign for ever and ever, Rev. 11.15.

In the third and last part of the Chapter (of which I shall speak but a
little) the holy Ghost recapitulateth and summeth-up in few words all that he
has spoken at length in the second part of the Chapter, in order to the fall
and ruin of Babylon, from verse. 18. to the close. In verse. 18. is spoken as to
the shaking of Babylon, by wars, and rumors of wars, Nation rising against
Nation, and Kingdom against Kingdom, there being tumults and earthquakes in
diverse places. In verse. 19. is spoken of the dividing of Babylon (after its
shaking) into three parts: Of the fall of the Nations, and of Babylon's utter
overthrow and desolation, as it is designed, in laying the Nations desolate. In
verse. 20. is foretold the overthrow of the Forces, Power and Glory of the
Nations, in bringing into contempt all the Honorable of the Earth. In verse.
21. is spoken, as to the grievousnes of the plagues by which Babylon shall be
shaken divided, and overturned, the Nations, their Forces, and their mighty
Ones shall be destroyed, together with men's blaspheming God, his Truth, and
his People, thereupon the more plagued, being the more hardened, as at this
time in some measure does appear.

FINIS.

