A Plea for the late Agents of the Army, against the proceedings of the Genesis
Officers to punish them by Martial Law.
First. THe arbitrary Government of the Army by Law Martial (which is only
necessary when an Army is marching against its enemy, or when no other Courts
of justice in a land are open and free) was wholly dissolved at the Rendezvous
at New Market, upon the 4, and 5. of June last, and this I prove by these
following reasons.

1. They associated themselves only as a company of free Commons of England, to
stand together upon the just principles, and law of nature and nations, to
recover their own and all the peoples just rights and liberties. See the Solemn
Engagement upon June 4. The words are these. We the Officers and Soldiers of
the Army subscribing hereunto, do hereby declare, agree, and promise to and
with each other, that we shall not wilingly disband, nor divide, nor suffer our
selves to be disbanded nor divided, until we have security, that we as private
men, or other the freeborn people of England shall not remain subject to the
like oppression, injury, or abuse as have been attempted. Compare the latter
end of page the 4. with page 5. And upon their march toward London, in
prosecution of this design, whereupon they associated, the General declared
in his letter to the City, that they as English men insisted upon the
settlement of the peace of the Kingdom, and the liberty of the Subject, which
they had right to demand. See the letter from the General, and the General
Officers at Royston upon June 10. page 2. 3. And in their further opening of
their meaning and intentions in their agreeing together, or associating as
before, they declared upon June 14. That they were not a mercenary Army, hired
to serve the Arbitary power of a State, but continued in Arms in judgment and
conscience for the defense of their own and the peoples just rights and
liberties. Now the Army thus refusing to serve the arbitrary power of the
State, and agreeing together as English men, to stand upon principles of right
and freeedome. From hence.

1. Its clear, that the Officers and Soldiers kept in a body, and so were an
Army, not by the will of the State, but by their own mutual Agreement.

2. From thence its as clear, that they not being an Army by the States will,
they were not under those rules of Martial Government, which were given by the
will of the State to rule those which were a Military body or Army by their
will and power.

3. From thence its also as clear, that the continuing an Army at that time,
not by the States will, power or command, but their mutual agreement, they
could be under no other government as an Army but such as they did constitue or
appoint for themselves by mutual agreement, and this leads to a 2. Reason,
proving the dissolution of the Armies government by Martial law.

2. The Soldiers with some Officers of the Army, having by mutual agreement
gathered themselves into, or at least continued themselves a Military body or
Army to stand upon principles of right and freedom, did by the same mutual
Agreement with or Engagement to each other frame, constitute, or appoint a
form of Government for themselves in their prosecuting that just design of
common right and freedom for themselves and the nation.

The words of the Engagement, page 4. 5. are these. We do hereby declare,
agree, and promise to and with each other, that we shall not willingly disband,
nor divide, nor suffer our selves to be disbanded or divided without
satisfaction in relation to our grievances and desires, hertofore presented and
security that we as private men or other the free born people of England, shall
not remain subject to the like oppression and injury, as have been attempted,
and this satisfaction and security to be such as shall be agreed unto by a
Council to consist of those general Officers of the Army (who have concurred
with the Army in the premises) with two Commission Officers, and two Soldiers
to be chosen for each Regiment, who have concurred and shall concur with us
in the premises and in this agreement. Hereby a new Council was constituted
contrary to all Martial Law and Discipline, by whom only they engaged to be
ordered in their prosecution of the ends for which they associated, (...)
consequence seeing they continued an Army by their own wills, and only to
prosecute those ends, this Engagement to be ordered only by that new Council
in their prosecution of those ends extends to a whole rule of them as an Army.

Now that this Council was wholly new, and in away diverse or different from
all Martial Courts or Council of War, that ever the Sun beheld in a
mercenary Army, and as different from the Council by which this Army was
formerly governed appears thus.

1. The Members of this Council by which they engaged to be ordered are (...)
in the Army.

1. The quallity of them is different, none but such as concurred with, in
disobeying the Parliament, and in the principles of common right and freedom
upon which they stood, were to be Members of this Council, neither the
General, nor the Lieutenant General themselves were to be Members of this
Council unless they had concurred in owning the Regiments refusal to
disband, and in their engagement or association, and by consequence they had
been no Officers as will appear hereafter.

In this all the Orders of war and Martial Laws were broken, for if the
General, Lieutenant General, and Comissary Genesis Ireton, had not concurred,
they could not all have cashiered one Officer that did concur, all the
Soldiers had been engaged to oppose them, nay they could not have cashiered one
Soldier that joined in the engagement, for they promised each to other, not to
suffer themselves to be divided before the ends of their Engagement was
accomplished.

2. In this new Council, the station of the Members in the Army is different
from the station of all Members of former Counsels, by the Engagement, there
was to be two Soldiers in no office, out of every Regiment to have voices
equal to the General himself in all votes.

3. The number of the Members of this Council is different from all customs
and rules of Martial Discipline in this Council, there was to be but four of
every Regiment, with the General Officers which concurred.

2. This new Council differed from the rules of war in the manner of its
constitution, this was not to be constituted by the Genesis will, but in a
Parliamentary way by the Soldiers free election, the Gen is bound from calling
an Officer to the Council unless he be chosen by his Regiment.

3. Reason, proving the dissolution of Martial Government in the Army.

The Genesis in associating with the Soldiers did in the very Engagement, give
away all his power of exercising Martial discipline, he engaged to them and
they to him, that they would not suffer themselves to be disbanded or divided,
till the ends of their uniting were obtained hereby he divested himself of his
arbitrary power of cashiering Officers and Soldiers at his pleasure, this is a
dividing which he engaged neither to attempt nor suffer, likewise he divested
himself of power to command the Soldiers to march to what distance he pleases
one from another this is another kind of division.

4. Reason, proving the dissolution of the government by law martial. The whole
Army by agreement or joint consent, cashiered all Officers as N^w market Heath,
that would not associate with them, and engage to stand for common right and
freedom though against the Parliament and so they ho^^ed diverse Officers out of
the field, unhorsed some and rent their ^^oaths, and beat them: and this in the
face of the Genesis and all these acts, had been death by Martial Law: but this
was an actual declaration that the Army did admit of Officers by mutual
agreement only, and therefore Government by law Martial was dissolved unless
it had been established by mutual consent throughout the Army, for Officers at
that time being only admitted by mutual consent they could have no power, but
what was betrusted to them by the Soldiers.

2. Plea, But in case the government of the Army by law martial had not been
dissolved by a mutual engagement, yet the very being of peace did dissolve it,
for in the Petition of Right its declared that no person ought to be adjudged
by law martial except in time of war, and that all Commissions given to execute
martial law in time of peace are contrary to the laws and statutes of the
Kingdom, and it was the Parliaments complaint that martial law, was then
commanded to be executed upon Soldiers for robbery, muteny or murder, and it
was settled as the undoubted right of every English man, that he should be
punishable only in the ordinary Courts of justice, according to the laws and
statutes of the kingdom. By all this it appears that its illegal and unjust
for the officers of the Army to try or punish any agent or other by law
martial upon pretense of muteny or any other offense: the whole Army stand as
Englishmen, and if they offend are not ex^mpted from the proceedings against
them, and punishments to be inflicted upon them by the laws and statutes, and
therefore cannot in justice be subject also to law martial, so that al Agents
and Soldiers now accused for mutiny betray their own and their Countries
Liberty if they shall submit to be tried in any other way then by the known
Laws and statutes of the Land.

Courteous Reader, Mr. Matthew Simmons in Aldersgate street, by a special
Order from the Lords, printed all the Armies declarations in one volume; which
thou may buy of him for 12. or 14, d. in the reading of which comparing them
with the constant serious of their actions, thou shall clearly find there was
never greater diviations and back slidings amongst the ^^^st of the sons of men
from their declared principles, and thou and the kingdom may principally
blame Lie. Ge. Cromwell and his son in Law, Corn, Genesis Ireton, being both now
transcendently Kingified and Lordified.

FJNIS.

