THE SPEECH OF Mr. William Plessington. Who was EXECUTED at CHESTER (For being
a Priest of the Church of Rome) July 19. 1679.
Dear Countrymen.
I Am here to be executed, neither for Theft, Murder, nor any thing against the
Law of God, nor any fact or Doctrine inconsistent with Monarchy or Civil
Government, I suppose several now present heard my Trial the last Assizes, and
can testify that nothing was laid to my charge but Priesthood, and I am sure
that you will find that Priesthood is neither against the Law of God nor
Monarchy, or Civil Government. If you will consult either the Old or New
Testament, (for it is the Basis of Religion) for no Priest no Religion, S. Paul
tells us in Hebrews, the 7. and 12. The Priesthood being changed, there is
made also of necessity a change of the Law, and consequently the Priesthood
being abolish't, the Law and Religion is quite gone.

But I know it will be said, that a Priest ordained by authority derived from
the Sea of Rome, is by the Law of the Nation to die as a Traitor, but if that
be so what must become of all the Clergymen of the Church of England, for the
first Protestant Bishops, had their Ordination from those of the Church of
Rome, or none at all, as appears by their own writers, so that Ordination comes
derivatively to those now living.

As in the Primitive times, Christians were esteemed Traitors; and suffered as
such by National Laws, so are the Priests of the Roman Church, here esteemed
and, suffer as such. But as Christianity then was not against the Law of God,
Monarchy, or Civil Policy, so now there is not any one Point of the Roman
Catholic Faith, (of which Faith I am) that is inconsistent therewith, as is
evident by induction in each several Point.

That the Pope has power to depose or give license to Murder Princes, is no
point of our Belief. And I protest in the sight of God and the Court of
Heaven, that I am absolutely innocent of the Plot so much discouresd of, and
abhor such bloody and damnable designs, and although it be Nine Weeks since I
was sentenced to die, there is not any thing of that laid to my charge, so that
I may well take comfort in S. Peter's words, 1 Pet. 14, 15, 16. Let none of you
suffer as a Murderer, or as a Thief, or as an Evil doer, or as a Busy Body in
other men's matters, yet if any man suffer as a Christian let him not be ashamed
or Sorry. I have deserved a worse death, for though I have been a faithful and
true Subject to my King, I have been a grievous sinner against God; Thieves and
Robbers that Rob on Highways, would have served God in a greater perfection
then I have done had they received so many favors and graces from him as I
have.

But as there was never sinner who truly repented and heartily called to Jesus
for mercy, to whom he did not show mercy; so I hope by the merits of his
Passion, he will have mercy on me, who am heartily sorry that ever I offended
him.

Bear witness good hearers, that I profess that I undoubtedly and firmly
believe all the Articles of the Roman Catholic Faith, and for the truth of
any of them, (by the assistance of God) I am willing to die, and I had rather
die then doubt of any Point of Faith, taught by our Holy Mother the Roman
Catholic Church.

In what condition Margaret Plat one of the chiefest witnesses against me was
before, and after she was with me, let her nearest relations declare.

George Massey, another witness swore falsely, when he swore, I gave him the
Sacrament, and said Mass at the time and place he mentioned, and I verily think
that he never spoke to me, or I to him, or saw each other but at the Assizes
week; the Third witness Robert Wood was suddenly killed, but of the Dead why
should I speak? These were all the witnesses against me, unless those that only
declared what they heard from others. I heartily and freely forgive all that
have been or are any way instrumental to my Death, and heartily desire that
those that are living may heartily repent.

God bless the King and the Royal Family and grant his Majesty a prosperous
Reign here and a Crown of glory hereafter, God grant peace to the Subjects, and
that they live and die in true Faith, Hope, and Charity, That which remains is,
that I recomend my self to the mercy of my Jesus by whose merits I hope for
mercy, O Jesu be to me a Jesus.

FINIS.

