The Plot Revived: OR A MEMORIAL OF THE LATE AND PRESENT POPISH PLOTS,
Published to refresh the Memories of all undepraved Englishmen, and thereby
prevent the Ruin of this Nation, by disbelieving, or forgetting of them.
First, THe Burning of the City of London, in the Year 1666; by which the
Papists (by Plunder in the time of the Fire) got 13000 l. declaro, which they
brought into their Treasury, for carrying on of their Satanical Designs; the
Truth of which is proved by that most worthy and deserving person Dr. Titus
Oats, to whom, and to Sir William Waller, next under God, and our King, we owe
our Deliverance.

Secondly, The Burning of Southwark, by which the Papists got, in the same way
as before, 3000 l. to bring into their Treasury; as is also proved by Dr.
Oats; whose Evidence stands authentic and un-impeached, maugre the Attempts
of the wicked Church of Rome, and their Adherents, for the invalidating of it.

Thirdly, The Burning of St. Katherines by the Papists, is proved by that
Faithful Servant to his King and Country, Capt. Bedloe; and all these are
perpetrated by them, as previous, and in order to their Grand and Hellish
Conspiracy.

Fourthly, The Murder of the King, the Introducing of Popery, and Arbitrary
Government; and consequently the Massacring of (at least) the Chief and Heads
of the Protestants; without which, they could not promise to themselves the
effecting of their Design: And the Truth of this has been sufficiently made
out at the several Trials of the several persons that have been Executed for
the same; and with so much Demonstration of the Truth hereof to his Majesty,
that he has, First, Owned his Belief of it, by several Proclamations; giving
the Plot the true Epithetes of Hellish and Damnable; and Secondly, By his
appointing throughout the Land a Day of Humiliation in Fasting and Praying,
upon the Occasion of the Discovery hereof; all which may well lay an Obligation
of Duty upon all good Subjects, not to question the Truth of his Proclamations,
which are also seconded by the Judgment of two several Parliaments, who after
Hearing of Witnesses, Voted their full satisfaction of the Truth of these
Infernal Popish Plots; And however Parliaments may be mistaken in other things,
those that know the Method of Parliamentary Proceedings, must hold it almost
morally impossible for them, to fail in Matter of Fact, because being composed
of persons of several Humors, Affections and Judgments, a Vote for Matter of
Fact cannot pass, until every one has received a clear Answer and
Satisfaction unto his Objections. And I never heard that there was so much as
one Negative to the Truth of this not to be paralleled grand Plot; and
therefore upon the whole, the Verity of it ought not to be doubted, or called
in question. And now,

The Ways which have been used by the Papists, to stifle the Credit of these
Discoveries, and to bring the Truth of them into Question, are fit to be
remembered; being as follows.
First, By Barbarously Murdering of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, because, he having
taken the Examinations concerning the Plot, which they knew he carried about
with him, they might seize them (as they did) and so as they presumed, put a
Disbelief upon the Plot; but God in his Mercy preserving the chief Witness (who
they intended to have sent after Sir Edmond.) has turned the Murder of this
Gentleman upon their own heads, in a Disadvantage to themselves.

Secondly, By endeavoring to bring Mr. Prance to deny the Truth of what he had
confessed upon Oath, concerning the Murder of the said Sir Edmond.

Thirdly, By employing one Reading a Barrister at Law, to suborn Capt. Bedlo,
to deny the Truth of what he had upon Oath confessed; of which subornation of
Perjury, the said Reading was found guilty in the Court of King's Bench, and for
his Crime therein, Condemned in the penalty of 1000 l. to lie in prison a year;
and after that, until he pays his Fine, and to stand in the Pilory (as he has
done) before Westminster Hall; and at his Trial, it appeared that the Lords in
the Tower, committed for the Grand Plot, did employ him, promising both him and
Capt. Bedlo great Rewards; but his Years of Imprisonment being now expired, or
near upon, his Fine, as is hoped by his Relations, will be remitted, and he set
at liberty; which I mention to the end to Caution all men to take heed of him,
and let his vile and vexatious Carriage to the Countrey-People in the Northern
Level be a Warning to them.

Fourthly, By Suborning, Knox, Lane, and Osburn, to Invalidate the Testimony of
Dr. Oats, by Indicting him of most Inormous Crimes, for which the two first
(the third being run away) were found Guilty, in the Court of Kings Bench of
Subornation of Perjury, Condemned in several Fines, to lie a Year in Prison
after that, until they pay their Fines, and Lane, to stand in the Pillory.
Knox was Servant to the Lord Latimore, and Dunblain, or to one of them, both
Sons to Thomas Osburn Earl of Danby, etc.

Fifthly, By Employing Mr. Taisbrough, (then Servant to a Person of Quality)
and one Mrs. Price, to Suborn Mr. Dugdale, to Recant and Deny the Evidence he
had given upon Oath against the Lords Stafford, and Aston, for Conspiring the
death of his Majesty, with promises of great reward for so doing, of which
Subornation of Perjury, they are found Guilty in the Court of Kings Bench, and
are this Term to receive their Sentence, which is hoped, will be adequeate to
the odiousness of their Crimes, for if this trade of Subornation be suffered to
go on, no man can be safe, Innocence being no defense.

Sixthly, By Employing Mr. Dangerfield and Mrs. Cellier, to kill my Lord
Shaftsbury, and make the Meal Tub Plot, with designs most Wickedly, and
Unjustly, to Father it upon the Protestants, to the end, to render them (though
Innocent) as Vile and Detestable as themselves, who cannot be parallelled by
any on this side Hell, except the by some of their own Church, for which the
Countess of Powis, Mrs. Cellier, and Mr. Gadbury, were all Committed to several
Prisons for High Treason: and this Plot appears to have been hatched in the
Tower, and cariyed on by the Lords there, according to (their chief Agent in
the business) Mr. Dangerfields Narrative, for the Impeached Lords, having
liberty to come to one another and to have whom they please come to them, they
do little beside Contriving one Plot after another.

Seventhly, the attempting the Murder of Mr: Mowbray, a chief Witness against
Sr. Thomas Cascoin, and the rest of the Consult in the North, for Killing of
the King (though the Parties are not discovered) may reasonably be reckoned to
proceed from the same Fountain as the rest.

Eighthly, The Witness brought from St. Omers, who by the Confession of some of
themselves, were (in giving their Evidence) to follow the Directions they
should receive here, from the Papists who sent for them, and lodged them in the
forementioned Mrs. Celliers House, had all of them the ill luck to be detected
in Court of great Forgery, at the Trial of their Friends, the Priests and
Jesuits.

Ninthly, The endeavors of Mr. Jennisons Friends to bring him to deny what he
has discovered Concerning the Popish Plot, appears by the several Letters Writ
to him by his Brother the Jesuit, and others, which are recited in Mr.
Jennisons Narrative.

Tenthly, Their present Conspiracy for Massacring, and (to enrich themselves)
Plundering the City of London, is the Master Piece of their Father the Devil;
but yet wherein they Glory most God is above them, and though they will not
see, he will make them see, and be ashamed of their Malice and Hatred against
his People.

Their drawing in a few Ignorant, Debauched Apprentices to color their
Mischievous Devices, show more the Malice and Hatred of their Hearts, than
strength of their Brains, for though there may be some lewd Fellows amongst
them, there cannot be enough to do their abominable drugery, they being in the
general of sober education, and as we at least haters of their damnable
Intentions, and their Policy in giving their present Contrivance the name of
the Apprentices Plot, is easily seen through hope, For.

First, They do it, to keep the odium of it off themselves, and according to
their usual Practice, to thrust it upon the Protestants; as had the
Gunpowder-Plot taken effect, they were in those days, provided of St. Omer-like
Witnesses, to have proved that they did it in their own defense, to prevent a
Massacre of them, which was intended by the Protestants: as also the Papists at
this day are so Impudent, that I have heard some of them affirm, that the
Massacre in Ireland, was a Massacre of them by the Protestants, and not of the
Protestants by the Papists, and surely never any Heathens, or Infidels, made
Lies their Refuge like to the Papists.

Secondly, knowing that Popery cannot be brought into England, where the light
of the Gospel shines so clear, without Arbitrary Government, and that cannot be
introduced without ruining of the City, they call the Plot after the Name of
the Apprentices, to this end, that when they have destroyed the King, they may
make the Government of the City, not being able to keep the Citizens in peace,
a pretense for taking away the Charter of it, and thence to rule it for the
future by a Governor, with a Garrison, after their own will and pleasure, which
would be a more effectual way for destroying of London, than the burning of it;
for the loss by Fire, may be recovered by Trade, but the loss of Trade, by the
loss of Liberty is irreparable, and this Plot, like the rest, appears by
examination, to have been forged in the Tower, and carried on by the Lords that
are Prisoners init.

Eleventhly, The Papists late, most inhumane, brutish, and worse than Beastly
usage of Mr. Arnold, in the many wounds they most cruelly and maliciously gave
him, beside Butcher-like cutting of his Throat with a Knife, after they had by
men employed to that purpose, knocked him down in a by Lane, at 10 a Clock at
Night, to prevent his Information the next Day against them, is another
demonstration of their murtherous and bloody Princiciples; and the miraculous
escape and recovery of this Gentleman, ought to be reckoned with the rest of
the merciful Providence of God toward us, and as an earnest of his special
protection, and that he who has delivered us, will still deliver us, as also a
warning to us, to have a watchful Eye upon the Papists, whose Mercies are
Cruelties.

The Burning of the Temple, the several Fires in London, the design Three or
Four years ago for burning the Market Towns in Hartfordshire; Durance
endeavoring subornation of perjury against Sr. Rob. Payton, I omit it, as not
being so Authentickly proved as the rest, though under violent presumption,
that they all derive their Original from one and the same Fountain, the
whisling insignificant Castlemain, and the rest of the Papists.

And now upon the whole it may be observed; First, that these several
subornations of Perjurie, with the other contrivances plotted against the
Blood, Life, and Estates of the Innocents, in Fathering High Treson upon them,
are clear demonstrations of guilt in the Papists, as to all these Plots, for
that it cannot reasonably be supposed that faultless persons, especially of
their quality, would interest themselves in such wicked, odious, and
disgraceful designs, as the worst and meanest of mortal Men would abhor.

Secondly, That the assaulting the fidelity of the Kings Evidence with
temptations of great rewards (which they rejected) is a full proof; First, of
the integrity of the Evidence. Secondly, that the Papists know nothing to
invalid their Testimony by; otherwise, they would not have had recourse to the
dishonorable way of Bribery. And thirdly, That the Reproaches the Papists
endeavor to cast upon them, are not to be believed, proceeding from malicious
and implacable Enemies, destitute of all Honor or Honesty, whose slanderous
practices are but according to the Doctrine of their Church toward any that
oppose them.

Thirdly, That the Papists Industry in endeavoring unjustly to Father one Plot
after another upon the Protestants, wherein they have still been detected, is a
sufficient Testimony of the Innocence and Loyalty of the Protestants, and of
the Sordid, Devilish and Inhumane Designs of the Papists.

And Fourthly, If after His Majesty's Proclamations, declaring the Damnableness
of the Popish Plots, His appointing upon the occasion of them, a Day of Fasting
and Praying, and two several Parliaments agreeing with the King in Voting the
same, any shall dare to Question the Truth of them, they ought, and may with
great reason, be judged private, if they are not public professed Papists, or
men void of Common Sense and Reason.

FINIS.

