A POEM, In vindication of the late PUBLIC PROCEEDINGS.

By way of DIALOGUE, Between a High TORY and a TRIMMER.

To which is added, The High Tory's CATECHISM.

As when the Sea breaks over its bounds,
And overflows the level Grounds;
Those Banks and Dams that like a Screen
Did keep it out, now keep it in.
So when Tyrannical Usurpation
Invades the freedom of a Nation,
The Laws of the Land that were intended
To keep it out, are made Defend it.
HUDIBRAS. Printed in the Year, 1689.

A POEM In Vindication of the Late Public Proceedings: By way of Dialogue
between a High TORY and a TRIMMER.
WHen King and Queen the Seas had crossed,
Because a good Design was lost;
Scamp'ring away in hasty Pet,
'Cause people would not have them get
Their Heirs by proxy, and Throne fill
With Issue, not of Loins but Will:
Of discourse then I heard a story,
Between a Trimmer and high Tory.
With visage grave and politic,
Quoth Tory, pray how can you stick
To a rebellious wicked cause,
Against so many Oaths and Laws;
Which bind to absolute submission,
Without reserve without condition?
Why don't you then the King recall,
And reinthrone him at Whitehall?
For would his Subjects but submit,
And foreign Forces England quit;
He Would grant enough to blast all hope
Of hated Romish Priests and Pope;
And Right and Property restore,
Never to be endangered more.
Trim. Suppose, quoth Trimmer, things might be
As you affirm, great fools were we
Should we believe't, for on what ground
Can we a just assurance found?
Promise no doubt he will give, but what
Security to make good That?
No Vow, no Oath, nor Declaration
Will serve again to gull the Nation,
Which now is alike inclined to trust
The Nants-Edicts of Great and Just.
Would James have granted what you say
He will, he never had gone away;
And sure abroad he is not gone
With purpose to return alone.
Shall we the word of Lewis take,
That James no more his word shall break,
And let French Faith attend him home
Joined with the Charity of Rome?
Who have of the one experience had,
May try the other, if they are mad.

Tory. Why truly should the King return,
To us who are his Liege-subjects born
The Act of Sixty one in force is,
Even though he landed with French Forces:
Or else pray tell me what is the sense
Of bearing arms on no pretense,
And in no case, against the King,
Or those that his Commission bring?

Trimmer. In this Objection seems to lie
Your greatest strength, but I reply;
No Acts or Laws have obligation
To the destruction of a Nation;
Which to preserve is their intent,
(And this not mentioned is still meant,)
And when they answer not this end,
But to the peoples damage tend
(Who thereby harmed are or annoyed,)
Without Repeal grow null and void;
Which much more sure they ought to do, in
Case they advance the public ruin.
No Law is bound for Pope to cut
(No more than Essex) its own throat;
Whose very Essence is contrary
To absolute and arbitrary,
And if it enacts such Sovereignty
Must guilty of Self-murder be.
Nor can one Law hold to suspend
Or to all others put an end;
(But that Law makes all others cease,
Which bids Kings do even what they please.)
And he who does with Laws dispense
Made for our safety and defense,
And only such in force will have
As serve the people to enslave,
Says in effect his subjects must
Be ruled by his ungoverned lust;
And such usurping Tyrant should
Like first Invader be withstood.
That only Pacts to one convey
The Right of many I Will not say;
But yet Protection sure is to,
Although not for, obedience due:
And if a Prince withdraws protection
While people pay all due subjection,
Why Loyal men should passive be
Till they are ruined, I cannot see.
He that to Law will not submit
His Power, destroys the source of it;
And legal Title gone, new Right
Must be acquired by force and might:
He thence of no claim is possessed,
Till he atchieves That of conquest;
And That will any others be
Who shows a longer sword than he.

Tory. This is wild arguing, but pray
What Scripture Rule to disobey
Your Governors can you produce,
Which you may bend to private use;
And, as you are wont, by wresting sense
Of Text, make plausible defense?
For here you will your dearest Paul
In vain to your assistance call,
And if you would this cause support,
Must find some new Apostle for it.

Trim. This seems the weakest Ob of all
From Tory lips that ere did fall;
For how should Paul concerned be
In the Birthright of you or me?
In Holy Writ what do you find
Of Copyhold, or Gavelkind,
Tenure in capite, Feefarm;
To Paul and Peter Cant and Charm;
Who never tell how far extends
The power of Kings, and where it ends;
If Commonwealth and Anarchy
Differ in kind, or in degree;
What Is easy Government and mild,
And which it is galls till men run wild.
Could you from them the difference show
'Twixt Claim of Trajan and Nero;
Or Sequel from some Scripture draw
Against that vile pagan Salique Law;
And Argument raise from another,
To make Grandson precede the Brother
In wearing Crown, you would do much more
Than ever Tory did before.
Since then no Text shows who has got
A rightful Title, and who not;
When Subjects liberty's betrayed, or
Who Is an Usurper or Invader,
Herein we must directed be
By Maxims of State-polity,
And in such matters must proceed
As Laws and Custom have decreed;
And if in the case these silent be,
Ought to consult necessity;
Which, (since it for Self-preservation
Of straggling Herds made Civil Nation)
Still Power must have over Government,
To make it answer first Intent.
Now as to Christians using force
Against Law-subverting Governors;
I think the point may thus be cleared.
When Christ in human flesh appeared,
The Jewish Hopes were fixed upon
A Temporal Messiah's Throne.
That Nation of a King did dream,
Who should Mankind subdue to them;
And was to Rule with earthly sway
As far as e're the Sun made day.
From such a Prince each Jew expected
A Province to himself subjected;
Over which he should dominion gain,
And in full Power and Glory Reign.
Therefore to humble and bring down
Hearts swollen with such Ambition,
And frame them to receive a King
Born to triumph in suffering,
(And not a Ruler long to have
Who should the conquered world enslave,)
The Passive doctrine of the Cross
Both true and seasonable was.
But then the Rule of Non-resistance
Reaches to all men, as they are Christians,
Nor does't exempt the Magistrate,
Or him that sits at Helm of State;
Who by this Doctrine seems as far
Confined as meanest Subjects are:
For Gospel Precepts we well know
Bare Self-defence do not allow
To Followers of Christ, as such:
( Turn the other cheek imports as much.)
Not that Christ's Laws to be Slaves bind us,
But only leave us as they find us
In human Station, neither can
The Christian dispossess the Man
Of Civil Right or Natural,
Which equally belong to all,
So far as Nature and each State
By their respective Laws create
Property, and give Title to,
Christian or Pagan, Turk or Jew.
Now you grant us this Property,
But to maintain it Power deny;
And therefore are not half so kind
As you would seem, for ought I find:
For who allows me Right and Claim,
But no Right to defend the same,
Enclosure gives without a Fence;
And this I take to be Nonsense.
But pray this passive Doctrine why
Are you not always governed by?
When Mass or Ruin are your choice,
Your Non-resistance makes no noise.
With sworn Allegiance you dispense,
When made for Slavery a Pretense;
(Had you in the rigor but stuck to it,
Peeters e're this had made you rue it,)
You can distinguish then and limit;
Can moderate Notions find, and trim it.
No man, say you's supposed to swear,
Himself to hamper and ensnare;
Nor can men's Oaths bear such construction
As plainly binds to self-destruction.
Had Senate of Caligula
Established such an Oath by Law,
He Would had his wish, for thereupon.
Millions of Necks had been as one;
And though our Christian way more slow
Must be confessed, yet by one blow
The twisted lives of human kind
More certain period could not find.
These your late Notions were, though now
You Are pleased the same to disavow.
For when the dreadful danger's over
Treat straight, cry you, recall, restore;
And now your Rights seem safe and Lives,
Your old Allegiance Oath revives.
But were all people of your mind,
Where could you this dear safety find?
Shall we in earnest entertain
Boundless Prerogative again?
Or shall we still resist, that you
May safe be, and seem loyal too?
There it is; to James for should we fly all,
And of your Oaths make second trial,
From Him and Them again you would scamper,
And gladly with some Orange tamper;
Would beg for refuge and defense
From some delivering God-like Prince,
If such a one were to be found
Elsewhere, on European Ground.
Then let your zeal no more be misspent
On Notions wholly inconsistent;
While Schemes unpracticable deceive you,
And the world knows not where to have you.
But since good Tory thou do pass
For Poet of the highest Class,
In lofty strains the Achievements sing
Of restored England's glorious King;
Whose conquering to oblige a State
Stands single in the Book of Fate,
And matchless Exploit will appear
Throughout the whole Platonic year;
For when before did e're Kingdom
Triumph for being overcome?
Or shall hereafter Nation be
Saved by success of Enemy?
By foreign, kind Hostility,
Freed from domestic Slavery?
From homebred misery and woe
Delivered by Invading Foe?
This Action so amazing great
No Pen can duly celebrate,
Nor must thou venture to rehearse
What transcends all the powers of Verse.
Her utmost art thy Muse will need
To reach this Hero's meanest Deed;
Which would a large Poetic field
TO a Virgil or a Claudian yield:
While Trimmer only dares to chime
With one for sense and one for rhyme,
and humbly crowding in among
The half-inspir'd Phebean Throng,
With those whose Principles never vary,
Cries long may William Reign and Mary.

The HIGH TORY's Catechism.
Passive Obedience?

Passive Obedience is an absolute unconditional refignation of our Lives, Laws,
and Liberties to the Will and Pleasure of the Prince.

Passive Doctrine always binding?

Passive Doctrine obliges in the rigor, only when Whiggs and Trimmers are like
to suffer by it; but when the malignant effects of it turn upon us, it loses
its force and obligation.

then do?

then suspend and withdraw our obedience, and not only invite a Forreigner to
rescue and deliver us, but assist him with our prayers, purses, and persons.

suspend your Allegiance to your Natural Prince; pray therefore is it not
utterly extinguished in such a case, or does it ever revive and recover its
former obligation?

danger of ruin from an arbitrary Prince seems to be blown over, we ought to
declare again for Him, our opposition made against him being grounded upon his
Power no less than his to destroy us; now the former of these being once
removed, and the latter thereby disarmed, he again becomes our lawful
irresistible Governor, with exclusion of all others, though the obligations
they have put upon us be never so great.

all men returned to their allegiance as well as you, (which I suppose they are
equally obliged to do,) he would quickly recover that same power of destroying.
Pray in that case what methods are you to take?

Body of the people will never trust him again, but to the uttermost of their
power oppose his Restoration, which they are well assured would bring greater
calamities upon this Nation, than it ever groaned under since it was governed
by a Crowned Head: therefore we hope to enjoy the benefit of a Public
Deliverance, without losing the honor of our peculiar unpracticable Obedience.

station and repute,) what if your example should work upon some, and the
artifices of Papists, Atheists, and wicked designing Protestants prevail with
many more? What if our Protestant Allies, by discouragement from our divisions
and distractions as well as by other means, should be induced to fall off from
us, and the Popish Princes be brought to a confederacy against us; and these
with many other unforeseen accidents concur in favor of the late King, so that
he should recover his pernicious power by Force and Conquest: pray, how are
your passive Principles to operate in such circumstances?

we and our dear principles would be past operating at all to any purpose, and
we can then only have recourse to that insipid self-condemning exclamation,
with which in the like distress, occasioned by the like conduct, we did not so
really comfort as reproach our selves; that is, Good Lord, who imagined it
would ever have come to this!

FINIS.

