A POEM On that Execrable TREASON Plotted by the Papists on the 5th of
November, Anno 1605.

Flectere si nequeunt Superos Acheronta movebunt.

CAMBRIDGE, Printed by John Hayes, Printer to the University, for Robert
Nicholson Bookseller in Cambridge, 1670.

A Poem on that Execrable Treason Plotted by the Papists on the 5th of
November, Anno 1605.
1
'TWas in a day, whose smiling face
Might tempt with ravishing delight
Heavens dwellers down to take a sight;
Not that they it, but that it them might grace.
Flowrs, Phoenix like, from others ashes rise,
So fresh and fair,
As ready to prepare
A second Paradise,
Or marry lusty earth to the azure skies.
The sweet breathed Zephirus wooes
Coy Flora, and still showers,
Into her lap whole heaps of flowers,
Who flying pou'rs
Them on earth's face, while he poor Lover murmuring goes
Whispering out in warm sighs his woes.
The river that e're while
Curled up his face in frowns, fanned with a gentle gale,
Lets them shrink all
To the dimples of a smile.
The loving flowers did bow their heads to meet,
And with officious kindness kiss your feet.
'Twas in those checkered fields, where the crystal streams
Of reverend Cham do sweetly glide,
Calm as heavens face, when candid beams,
Not clouds, his face do hide:
Illustrious Cham (upon
Whose silver streams the graces train,
And all the Muses reign:
That one might truly call it Helicon.)
'Twas here in such a charming May,
(Not sympathizing with the day)
The melancholy HEYRICKE lay;
Lay down (I cannot say did rest)
For midst of such a joy his breast,
With strangest Hurricanes oppressed,
Those charms that never before
Wanted a conquering power,
Were then opposed: their subt'lest motions never could move
Or e're dispose his duller soul to love.
At last grief that had played his part,
And triumphed over his senses, and his heart,
To perfect his half gotten prize,
Locked up his eyes;
And as cold sleep employed his senses, so
A fluttering dream possessed his fancy too.
2
He thought 'twas night, and not one breath
Of whispering air durst stir abroad,
But fearful kept within their close abode,
Sleep then was the only God;
Sleep younger brother unto death,
To whom grand conquerers all
Humble themselves, and prostrate fall;
Sleep then had universal conquest made,
And those that just before durst vie
With death it self for victory,
Were in his fetters captive laid,
When a strange noise broke through the air,
A noise that froze the stoutest hearts with fear,
A noise that none would doubt to come
From hel's own womb.
The listening trees that just before
Prick'-d up their leaves to hear
Some news, struck with a fear
Turn Aspines all: heaven shrouds
Her but now shining eyes in clouds,
Never willing to restore
Her lamps for such a sight; nor strange
That peace to horror thus should change:
Hells Pursuivants cut through the air,
And bid foul spirits all repair
To Pluto's cell.
Strait none denied,
Only those that in Papists breasts reside;
For there they find a worse (which they term better) hell.
3
The Council met; Lucifer takes his Throne,
In The midst; yet lowest (for in hell
The highest is the lowest still)
And belching out an horrid groan,
So great that hell's self shook,
With pride he much, but more by far with wrath did swell.
And viewing heaven with lightning in his eyes,
At once from out his mouth words and a thundering broke;
Must heaven, quoth he (nay worse) must men despise
Our power? are we degenerate?
And though fallen from our heaven, and hopes, by fate,
Must our courages fall too? sure hel's fire
Might Chymically have refined,
The dross from each polluted mind:
And make those now-made-purer parts aspire.
Those calcined parts that dare to fly
And brush with their proud wings the sky.
Degenerate souls, go, basely go
Beg mercy from your foe.
Oh! how I Would tear and rend my heart,
Should there lie hid in any part
Such poisonous thoughts, should heaven now offer's grace,
I Would dart it back into his face.
Recall once more into your thought,
How I your Captain fought
Against heavens arms; and though I could not get
The victory, heaven never awed me yet.
In my own hell I Would fry to eternity,
Once but to try
With heaven again for victory.
Though I knew I could nothing gain,
But to sink down to hell again,
The enterprise would doubly pay my pain.
I Will do it: I Will Gyant-like his Palace scale,
And make his prison turn his Jail:
Let him to' said his stars go hire,
They Will serve for torches, and for's funeral fire.
Heavens great I must confess; and were it not so
I Would scorn to own it for my foe.
The greater is the foe 'twill be
(Once got) the greater victory.
But see (I break with spleen) that Isle in peace
That countermines our plots, and still at ease
Laughs at, and calms our tempests; and so well
As if not Rome but she, had the keys of hell.
Sure I Am a Prince, but still some higher power,
Gently does hover over
Their blessed abode; that let me play my part
Never so well it still diverts my dart.
That great Armada, rigged scarce at the cost
Of all the Indian mines; though blessed
By my good brother, and the rest
Of my own kindred there at Rome; nay more
Prayed for by me (that never prayed before)
In one day it, and with it all our hopes were lost.
And shall we here (poor harmless spirits) sit,
And never once be sensible of it?
Shall we in sleepish sottishness still lie,
As in a stupid Lethargy?
Shall all our conquests that e're while
Awed heaven, stay at one petty Isle?
No, let us break their peace,
And make them swim in blood, as now in seas.
Their now-Pacifick sea lets change
To the dead sea: let horror range,
And fill the wondering world with monsters strange.
Let drums out-roar the Lyre
And justice once again to heaven retire.
But why thus say I (let it) it shall come,
I in your faces read their doom.
4
This said an humming noise succeeds,
The speech had raised their spirits higher:
They now their former sottishness admire:
Their breasts glow not with hells but angers fire
That roused the seeds
Of wonted wrath; so fire does harmless lie,
Cloistered in ashes till some wind
Blows up the sparks, and makes it raging show its
By the effects of's wonted Tyranny.
At last from out the rest Romes fury came,
Unlike her sisters or the brood
Of swarming sins, that round her stood.
Her skin heavens milky way, her eyes
Seem those two tapers, that adorn the skies.
Such symmetry in every part
That loadstone-like they can attract the heart:
That Owls and such base birds of night
Are ravished at the sight.
Her smile sets up a Monarchy, her frown
As quickly pulls it down;
Nay Kings must owe to her proud feet their Crown.
Thus she deludes the ravished eye,
That could it spy,
What under that but-skin-deep beauty lie:
(Nay painted too) he would loath what he before,
With such blind worship did adore,
Yet to this whore;
Nations drink off Cyrcaean cups, and feast,
Turning from heaven to her, and so from man to beast.
Thus she came forth, but all the way,
Trampled on Emperors necks that groaning lay,
Hating her now as they before did day.
On still she came, but with a pride,
That yielded nor to Lucifer's, or any one beside.
For this a man may tell,
She that would rival heaven, would never yield to hell.
Then bowing with disdain thus spoke;
Great Monarch, to whom earth does homage do,
Air, sea, men and men's souls too,
It Is true we vex in vain, and this believe,
Both you, and I, have equal cause to grieve.
That Isle before drunk with my poisoned wine,
At once shakes off your yoke and mine.
A new born light dispels the clouds;
And with them our Religion, that shrouds
Her self in ignorance: they see,
And seeing hate, and hating sly
Our plots, and damned treachery.
Our Masks took off, we can no more
Deceive their senses as before.
Hypocrisy no longer takes,
Our Machiavilian Plots we draw
So subt'ly out, their fineness makes them break.
In vain we strive to keep the world in awe,
In vain we like Chamelions change
To the color of all objects where we range:
For spite of envy we, I fear,
Must like Chamelions too go live on air.
Come, then our forces lets unite:
And though our projects fail, let not our spite.
My wrangling Jesuit shall sow
Sedition, strife, and whatsoever
May a full harvest bear,
Of murder, rapine, theft, and woe.
-- Well, well!
I Have a new project, and as high,
As would not ill become a Deity.
And since heaven will not, help me hell.
I scorn to kill a King: it is base, and low,
Nor fits it my brave soul; I Will at one blow,
King and his Nobles mow,
But not the manner how, the quickest sighted know.
I Will (God-like) make the Sun stand still amazed,
As once when at it Israel gazed.
Old fearful Grandame earth shall quake, and flit,
As troubled with an ague fit.
Oh how I Will laugh to see their members fly
(As though they fought against the Deity)
In heavens own face: those that did scorn to move
In lower, then in higher orbs shall rove:
I Will blow them up to heaven, but this I Will tell,
(My comfort) they with you, and me, shall backward fall to hell.
Heavens self shall think we ope'd his door,
And stole from thence his chiefest power,
His wide-mouthed thunder; that even he shall fear,
Lest I should him with his own weapons tear.
That Hydra, that we never yet could mow,
But for one head cut off there sprang up two;
I Will cut the snake in parts so small,
That he shall never again together crawl.
Help, help, ye fiends; from you, and from the fire
I must require
A means on this damned crew to wreak mine ire.
It Is thus: under that stately frame
West minster
Adorned with Trophies of still living fame,
In caverns deep (that one might swear
They with your Kingdom correspondence bear)
In these, instead of wine, I Will thrust
Hells sooty dust,
That must
Not only hells color, but forces wear.
And when the King, and Nobles all shall meet,
And he shall them with hony'd phrases greet,
And when he shall
Perhaps invectively against us fall,
I Will snatch a brand from hell, made of the bones
Of some old Papist; and at once
Blow up three Kingdoms into naught; and send
Their King to hell, his half-spoke speech to end.
This breach once made, my Furie's all
Cloistered before, I Will soon disband,
And turn them on the already conquered land;
And with unheard of tortures on them fall.
Unto three Furies Poets give a birth,
I Will be the fourth on earth.
Hark, hark, methinks I hear
Some pleasant Music strike mine ear,
Better then whatsoever
Harmonious sounds, the deafned world counts dear.
Oh? it is the far-fetched groans of those,
Whose haughty spirits scorned our yoke,
And must be broke
By tortures and by blows.
5
This said the spirits all by a dumb Rhetoric show
By silence, they do of the Plot allow.
Yet they though nursed in blood,
And in the profession long had stood,
'Sham'd to be beat in their own art, they would
Have blushed (if through their black they could)
Yet struck they were with horror at the first;
But strait the thirst
Of sweet revenge these new bred fears did burst.
Oh! how their breasts do glow
With thoughts of this revenge; a Century of years
In hell, but the Epitome appears
Of one small minute now.
And sure some juster Nemesis had sent,
Only there thoughts for punishment:
For hells great pain
Is nothing to what they in expectation do sustain.
Impatient, out they fly, and fill the earth
With stranger Monsters, then e're took a birth
In slimy Egypt; and for fear some eye
Should them, and their Plot too espy,
They turn not Asses in
Lions, but Lions in an Asses skin.
For well they know Asses go free
When Foxes often suspected be.
Turned to a Jesuit here is one
That vaunts with strength of words
And not of swords
He can plant Romes Religion.
And it is not strange Rome can so subtly plead;
When that old Sophister's their head.
No wonder that Imposter triumphs thus
We are the sons of Eve,
And he that could deceive
Our mother, quickly conquers us.
An apple tempted her, but we
Are caught with shades, and empty Pageantry.
Mean while hells fiends work in their cell
(A man might safely call it hell)
Hating, as did their Plot, the light;
Keeping from men's, and so they thought, from Gods own sight.
And it is a wonder he that once durst vie
With God himself for principality,
Should force his pride to stoop so low
As in man's shape to go:
But hence, you see what envy's self can do.
England mean while, was lulled asleep
While her grand enemy did centry keep.
But watchful heaven still in their actions pries;
And never shuts her Galaxy of eyes.
England in the midst of day was in a night,
Wandering without a light.
England was turned a floating Isle,
And in a sea of misery did toil,
Wandering from's knowledge far
Without or sight of compass, or of Star:
When strait (me thought) a ray
Descends from heaven, and reduces day,
And at one blessed sight,
Brings them, and that damned Plot to light.
England was even
Sinking in woe; when strait an hand from heaven
It did (and still does it) from sinking keep:
And me thought, at once it rose from woe, and I from sleep.
Awaked I found my breast,
(Grief gone) with an unknown joy oppressed:
When my too swelling joy to assuage;
Raptured with a Poetic rage,
I burst out in these words, Oh! happy Isle,
That can like kingdoms rule stern fate,
That can outbrave whatever
Palsy strikes others, with a Pannick fear,
That one may style,
Without a wild Hyperbole, thee the only Fortunate.
See smiling peace, wars horror gone,
Does crown our (rightly named) Albion.
No Tragedies appall the eye with fear,
No thunder-imitating noise the ear:
The happy natives know not war,
Only from far,
They hear it named perhaps: pure Halcion days
Attends their blessed lives: that canker care
Corrodes not their blessed peace: but free as air,
They chant their lays.
Each field is pure Elizian; earth does seem
To rival heaven, and show
At once what all past ages e're did know: That one would deem
England her beautie's Magazine: where lie
Opposed to the ravished eye
Her sweets contracted in one point: that Jove
Seems with the earth in love,
And as to Danae powered,
Not gold, but flowrs, yet whatsoever
This Letcher seems by this to infer,
She is a virgin pure not yet deflowered.
O land thrice happy in thy blessed guide,
That at full tide
Of blood, and woe, did steer thy wandering course
And break thy greatest tempests force.
Thou sit'st above while winds do storm thy fort,
And they that once thy terror were, do now become thy sport.
Peace does not hover over,
Our no longer tempestuous shore,
But take her seat: scattering her joys amain
That one might swear, she had brought the golden days again.
And may thou still (blessed Land) embalmed in peace,
Securely sit, Queen Regent of the Seas:
And may thy wooden castles all about,
Keep sweet peace in; and enemies out,
And may thou be
In a true sense called Great Britanny.
And may thy glorious King laden with praise,
More then with years, when Fate shall end his days,
(But may't be long first) lay his down,
As in exchange for a celestial Crown.
FINIS.

