PLUTARCHS LIVES VOL. IIII.

depiction of Plutarch and Fama MBurgher delin. et sculp.


THE Fourth Volume OF PLUTARCH's LIVES.

Translated from the Greek, BY SEVERAL HANDS.

LONDON: Printed for Jacob Tonson at the Judges Head in Chancery Lane near
Fleetstreet. M. DC. XCIII.

The Lives contained in the FOURTH VOLUME.
Agesilaus, Translated by Dr. Needham. p. 1 Pompey, Translated by Dr. Oldish.
p. 73 Alexander, Translated by John Evelyn Esquire p. 245 Julius Caesar, Translated
by Mr. Smalridge. p. 385 Phocion, Translated by Dr. Fowke. p. 487 Cato the
younger, Translated by Dr. Waller. p. 554 Agis, Translated by Sir Rob. Thorold.
p. 659 Cleomenes, Translated by Mr. Creech. p. 690 Tiberius Gracchi, Caius
Gracchi, Translated by Mr. Warren. p. 782

A Chronological Table to the Fourth Volume of Plutarch's Lives.
The Olympiad. The Year of the Olympiad. After the building of Rome. After the
Worlds Creation. Before the coming of Christ The Julian Period. Agesilaus 95 1
353 3550 398 4314 Pompeius 174 3 672 3869 79 4633 Alexander overcame Darius 111
2 418 3615 333 4379 Julius Caesar Consul 180 2 694 3891 57 4655 Phocion 105 4
396 3593 355 4357 Cato Uticen 179 4 692 3889 59 4653 Agis 134 2 510 3707 241
4471 Cleomenes 138 1 525 3722 226 3722 Tiberius Gracchus 161 1 617 3814 134
4578 Caius Gracchus 163 4 628 3825 123 4589

THE LIFE OF PHOCION.
Englished from the Greek, By Ph. Fowke, M. D.

DEMADES the Orator, a powerful Man at that time in Athens, managing Matters in
favor of Antipater and the Macedonians, being necessitated to write and speak
many things below the Dignity and contrary to the Usage of the City, was wont
to excuse himself, by saying, He steered ouly the Shipwrecks of the
Commonwealth. This hardy Saying of his might have some appearance of truth, if
applied to Phocion's Government; for Demades indeed himself was the ruin of
his Country, living and ruling so dissolutely, which gave Antipater occasion
to say of him, (being now grown old) That he was like a sacrificed Beast, all
consumed save his Tongue and his Paunch. But Phocion's was a steady Virtue,
depressed only by too great a Counterpoise, the Fate of Greece conspiring with
that juncture of Time to render it more obscure and inglorious; yet Sophocles
too much weakens the force of Virtue, by saying,

Nor do our minds, with adverse Fate surrounded,
Maintain their tenor, but are shocked, confounded.
Thus much indeed must be granted to happen in the Contests between good Men
and ill Fortune, that instead of due Returns to their good Management, the
People, by unjust Surmises and Obloquies, often sully the Luster, and endeavor
to blast the Reputation of their Virtue. And although it be

AGESILAUS.
depiction of Agesilaus (...) sculp.

THE LIFE OF AGESILAUS.
Translated out of the Greek by W. Needham, M. D.
ARchidamus, the Son of Zeuxidamus, having reigned gloriously over the
Lacedaemonians, left behind him two Sons: Agis the elder was begotten of
Lamprido, a very Noble and Illustrious Lady. Agesilaus, much the Agesilaus his
Parentage. His Education.
younger, was born of Eupolia, the Daughter of Melisippidas. Agis being Heir
apparent of the Crown, was bred suitably to his Birth. Agesilaus, the younger
Brother, was educated according to the usual Discipline of the Country, which
was very hard and severe, but such as taught young Men how to obey their
Superiors. Whence it was that (Men say) Simonides called Sparta the Tamer of
Men, because by a customary strictness of Education, they inured the Citizens
to Obedience, and patient Subjection, as Horses are broke to the Saddle: The
Law did not hold so strict a Rein on the Heirs apparent of the Crown. But
Agesilaus, whose good Fortune it was to be born a younger Brother, was
consequently bred to all the Laconick Arts of Obedience, and thereby fitted for
the Management of the Government, when it fell to his share: Hence it was that
he became the most popular of the Spartan Kings, having learned how to temper
the Grandeur of a Royal Condition, with the Sweetness and Debounairness of
familiar Condescensions.

Whilst he was yet a Boy, bred up in one of the Schools or Colleges of Youth,
he contracted an Intimacy with Lysander, (a His Friendship with Lysander.
great Man afterward in Lacedaemon) who much admired a generous Modesty and
ingenious Shame he found in him: For tho And his Character.
he was one of the highest Spirits, and fullest of Bravery of any of his
Companions, always ambitious of Pre-eminence above them, toward which the
impetuous Vigor and invincible Fervor of his Mind irresistibly carried him,
maugre all Opposition or Difficulty he could meet with; yet on the other side
he was so easy and gentle in his Nature, and so apt to hearken to all rational
and friendly Proposals, that a good Word wrought more upon him than the
greatest Dint of Force; he being ready to do any thing upon ingenuous Motives,
but nothing upon Compulsion.

He had one Leg shorter than another; which Deformity he easily hid by a good
mien and briskness in his Behavior, he being the first always to pass a Jest
upon himself. And indeed it was a great Argument of his Love to Glory and great
Actions, that his Lameness was no Discouragement to him in the pursuit of them.
Neither his Statue nor Picture are extant, he never allowing them in his Life,
and utterly forbidding them to be made after his Death: He is said to have been
a little Man, of a contemptible Presence; but the goodness of his Humor, and
his constant Cheerfulness, and agreeable Conversation, always free from any
thing of Moroseness or Haughtiness, made him more amiable (even to his old Age)
than the most beautiful Men of the Nation.

Theophrastus writes, That the Ephori laid a Fine upon Archidamus, for marrying
a little Wife, For (said they) you will beget us a Race of Roitelets instead of
Kings.

Whilst Agis, the elder Brother, reigned, Alcibiades deba^cheth the Wife of
Agis, and begets Leotychides.
Alcibiades (being then an Exile from Athens) came from Sicily to Sparta; nor
had he staid long there, before his Familiarity with Timaea the Queen grew
suspected, insomuch that Agis refused to own a Child of hers, which (he said)
was Alcibiades's, not his. Nor (if we may believe Duris the Historian) was
Timaea much concerned at it, being herself forward enough to whisper among her
Servants, that the Infant's true Name was Alcibiades, not Leotychides. Mean
while it was believed, that the Amor he had with her, was not the effect of
his Love but his Ambition, that he might have Spartan Kings of his Posterity.
This Affair being grown public, it was time for Alcibiades to withdraw
himself: But the Child was forced to abide there, and to endure the Severity of
Agis, who never owned him for his Son, till upon his Deathbed he was overcome
with the Prayers and Tears of Leotychides, to declare him for such, in a
public Audience. But this could not fix him in the Throne of Agis; after whose
Death, Lysander, the great Lacedaemonian Captain, who had lately conquered the
Athenians in a Sea-sight, and was of great Power in Sparta, did promote
Agesilaus to the Leotychides put by the Throne as a Bastar^^
Kingdom, urging Leotychides*s Bastardy, as a Bar to his Pretensions. Many of
the Citizens soon betook themselves to Agesilaus his Party, being thereto
induced by the Opinion they had of his Gallantry, of which they themselves had
been Spectators, in the time that he had been bred up among them. Yet was not
his way so smooth as to be free from Rubs: one he met with very considerable
from a Fortune Tellers named Diopithes, who was of great Esteem among them for
his Skill in Divination; he alleged, That it was unlawful to make a lame Man
King of Lacedaemon, citing to that purpose the following Oracle:

Great is thy Empire, Sparta, yet beware
Lest thy Strength bend under an halting Heir;
Then Ills untried shall thy old Honor stain,
And Wars destructive Rage through thy whole Country reign.
But Lysander was not wanting of an Evasion, alleging, That if the Spartans
made any conscience of the Oracle, they must have a care of Leotychides; for it
was not the limping Foot of a King that the Gods were offended at, but the
bastardizing of the Herculean Family, into whose Rights if a spurious Issue
were admitted, it would make the Kingdom to Halt indeed. Agesilaus made Neptune
also a Witness of the Bastardy of Leotychides, proving that Agis was thrown out
of Bed from his Wife by a violent Earthquake, after which time he did not
Cohabit with her, yet Leotychides was born above ten Months after it. Agesilaus
was upon Agesilaus declared King.
these Allegations declared King, and soon possessed himself of the private
Estate of Agis as well as his Throne, Leotychides being wholly rejected as a
Bastard. Which being Is kind to the Relations of Agis.
done, he cast his Eye on the Kindred of Agis by the Mother's side, whom he
considered as Persons of good Worth and Virtue, but very poor: he gave them
half his Brother's Estate, and by this popular Act gained the good will, not of
them only, but of the Spartans in general, and stifled that Envy that was
growing against him upon the account of his Success. But whereas Xenophon says
of him, That by complying with, His Policy.
and as it were being ruled by his Country, he grew into so great Power with
them, that he could do what he pleased. This was by the Power he got with the
Ephori and Senate: these were of great Authority in the State; the former were
Officers annually chosen; the Senators held their Places during Life, both
instituted as Bridles to restrain the Licentiousness of the Kings, as it is
already more fully discoursed in the Life of Lycurgus. Hence it was that there
was always a Feud and Contention between them and the Kings. But Agesilaus took
another course; instead of contending with them, he courted them: he always
acted by their Advice, was always ready to go, nay almost to run, when they
called him: If he were upon his Throne hearing of Causes, and the Ephori came
in, he arose to them; whenever any Man was elected into the Senate, he did
always present him with a Gown and an Ox. Thus whilst he craftily made show of
Reverence to them, and a Deference to their Power, he secretly advanced his own
Wealth, and enlarged the Prerogatives of the Crown, by several Liberties which
their Friendship to his Person did grant him, or at least did wink at. To other
Citizens he so behaved himself, as to be less blameable in his Enmities than in
his Friendships: for toward his Enemy he behaved himself generously, scorning
to take any unjust Advantage against him; but to his Friends he was partial,
even in things manifestly unjust. If an Enemy had done any thing praiseworthy,
he scorned to retract any thing from his due Praises; but his Friends he knew
not how to reprove when they did ill; nay, he gloried in bringing them off when
they were obnoxious: He thought all Offices of Friendship commendable, let the
Matter wherein they were employed be what it will. Again, when any of his
Adversaries was overtaken in a Fault, he would pity them, and be soon entreated
to Pardon them, and show them Kindness, by which means he allured the hearts of
all Men: insomuch that his Popularity grew at last suspected by the Ephori, who
fined him as a Monopolizer of the Citizens, who ought to be the common Goods of
the Republic. For as it is the Opinion of Philosophers, that if you take away
Strife and Opposition out of the Universe, all the Bodies of it will stand
still, Generation and Motion will cease, by reason of the mutual Consent and
Agreement of all things. So the Spartan Legislator did seem to have mingled
Ambition and Emulation, among the Ingredients of his Commonwealth, as the
Incentives of Virtue, as thinking that mutual Compliance, in winking at one
another, in Cases that deserved Rebuke, was but a false sort of Concord, no way
useful to the Public, but rather a Corruption of it. This some Men think Homer
to have had an eye to, when he introduces Agamemnon well pleased with the Jars
of Ulysses and Achilles, and with the hard Words that passed between them;
which he would never have done, unless he had thought that Dissentions and
Factions of great Men had been of use to the State. Yet this Maxim is not
simply to be granted him without restriction, for if the Heats grow too big,
they are very dangerous to Cities, and of most pernicious consequence.

When Agesilaus was newly entered upon He is chosen General for Asia.
the Government, there came News from Asia, that the Persian King was making
great Naval Preparations, resolving with an high Hand to dispossess the
Spartans of their Maritime Greatness. Lysander was glad of this Occasion of
Succouring his Friends in Asia, whom he had there left Governors and Lords of
Cities, who for their Maladministration and Tyrannical Behavior, had been
deposed, and many of them put to death: He therefore persuaded Agesilaus to
undertake the Expedition, and by translating the War from Greece to the
Barbarous Country, to prevent all the Designs of the Persian. He also wrote to
his Friends in Asia, that by a Solemn Embassy they should demand Agesilaus for
their Captain. Agesilaus thereupon coming into the Public Assembly, offered
his Service, upon condition that he might have thirty eminent Captains adjoined
to him as Counselors; that he might also have 2000 of the newly Enfranchized
Helots, and of other Allies to the number of 6000. Lysander's Authority and
Assistance soon obtained his Request, so that he was sent away with thirty
Spartan Captains, of which Lysander was the Chief, not only in Power and
Reputation, but also in Friendship with Agesilaus, who esteemed his procuring
him this Charge a greater Obligation, than that of preferring him to the
Kingdom.

Whilst the Army was drawing to the Rendezvous at Gerastus, Agesilaus went with
some of his Friends to Aulis, where in a Dream he saw a Man approach him, and
speak to him after this manner: O King of His Dream.
the Lacedaemonians, you cannot but know that (before yourself) there has been
but one General Captain of the Greeks, viz. Agamemnon; now that you succeed him
in the same Office and Command of the same Men, leading them out of the same
Country to the War, you ought also to offer such a Sacrifice, as he made before
he weighed Anchor.

Agesilaus soon remembered that the Sacrifice which Agamemnon offered was a
Virgin, he being so directed by the Oracle: Yet was he not at all disturbed at
it, but as soon as he arose, he tells his Dream to his Friends, adding
withal, That he would worship the Goddess with such Sacrifices as would be
acceptable to her, and not imitate the rude Barbarity of that General. He
therefore ordered an Hind to be crowned with Chaplets; and delivered to his own
Southsayer, not to him whom the Baeotians did of course delegate to that
Office. When the Baeotian Governors understood The Baeotians quarrel about the
Sacrifice.
it, they were very much moved, and sent Officers to Agesilaus, to forbid his
sacrificing contrary to the Laws of the Country. These having delivered their
Message to him, immediately went to the Altar, and threw down the Quarters of
the Hind that lay upon it. Agesilaus took this very ill, and without further
Sacrifice, immediately hoised Sail, being ever after a great Enemy to the
Boeotians, and much discouraged in his Mind at the bad Omen, boading to himself
an unsuccessful Voyage, and a bad issue of the whole Expedition.

When he came to Ephesus, he found the Power of Lysander grow very great and
invidious, all Applications made to him, great Crowds of Suitors always
attending at his Door, all Men following and worshipping of him at so high a
rate, as if nothing but the Name of Empire was left to Agesilaus, the whole
Power of it being devolved The Ambition of Lysander.
upon Lysander. None of all the Commanders that were sent this Voyage into
Asia, was either so powerful or so formidable; no one rewarded his Friends
better, or was more severe against his Enemies. Which things made the greater
Impression in Men's Minds, because they observed the debonnair and popular
Behavior of Agesilaus, whereas that of Lysander was high and rigid. He took
Men up short, and by that fierceness of Carriage so subdued the Spirits of Men,
that they wholly submitted to him, giving little Regard to Agesilaus. This was
first stomached by the other Captains, who with Indignation resented it, that
they should be rather the Followers of Lysander, than the Counselors of
Agesilaus.

At length Agesilaus himself, though no envious Man in his Nature, nor apt to
be troubled at the Honors redounding upon other Men, yet being highly jealous
of his own Glory, began to apprehend that Lysander's Greatness would soon
eclipse his, It resented by Agesilaus.
and carry away from him the Reputation of whatever great Action should happen.
He therefore went this way to work: He first opposed him in all his Counsels;
whatever And suppressed.
Lysander advised, was rejected, and other Proposals followed. Then whoever
made any Address to him, if he found him a Retainer to Lysander, certainly lost
his Suit. Whoever was prosecuted by him in Judiciary Matters, was sure to get
off with Victory, and whoever was visibly favored by him, was used with all
Severity and Rigor. These things being not done by Chance, but constantly and
on set purpose, Lysander was soon sensible of them, and stuck not to tell his
Friends, that they suffered for his sake, bidding them apply themselves to the
King, and such as were more powerful with him than he was. Which Sayings of
his, when they seemed to be designed purposely to procure Envy to Agesilaus, he
stuck not to affront Lysander at a higher rate, imposing upon him the Office of
dividing the Flesh among the Soldiers, and would in public Companies speak
scornfully of him, bidding them go and pay their Observances to the Suttler of
the Camp. Lysander no longer able to brook these things, complained at last to
Agesilaus himself, telling him, That he knew very well how to Oppress his
Friends. To which Agesilaus answered, I know who they be that pretend to more
Power than myself. That, replied Lysander, is rather said by you, than done by
me; I desire only this Favor of you, that you will assign me some Office and
Place, in which I may serve you without incurring Envy.

Upon this Agesilaus sent him to the Hellespont on an Embassy, whence he
procured Mithridates, a Persian of the Province of Pharnabazus, to come to the
Assistance of the Greeks with 200 Horse, and a great Supply of Money. Yet did
not his Stomach so come down, but he fell to forming a Design of wresting the
Kingdom out of the Hands of the two Families which then enjoyed it, and make it
wholly Elective: and it is thought that he would have made a great Commotion in
Sparta, if he had not died in the Baeotian War. Thus ambitious Spirits are apt
to grow troublesome in a Commonwealth, and when they transgress their Bounds, do
more harm than good. Of this, Plutarch's Reflection upon both.
this Quarrel between two such great Men is an Example: for though Lysander's
Pride was unsufferable, and his ambitious Projects very inconvenient to
Agesilaus's Affairs, yet might the King have found out many ways of taming him,
less reproachful to a Man of his Quality, and ambitious Designs. Indeed in my
opinion they were both equally Guilty, both blinded with the same Passion, so
as one not to know the Power of his Prince, the other not to bear with the
Imperfections of his Friend.

Tisaphernes being at first afraid of Agesilaus, soon treated with him about
setting the Grecian Cities at Liberty, which was agreed on. But soon after
finding a sufficient Tisaphernes his Falsehood.
Force drawn together, he resolved upon War, for which Agesilaus was not sorry.
For the Expectation of this Expedition was great, and he did not think it for
his Honor, that Xenophon, with 10000 Men, should march through the heart of
Asia to the Sea, beating the King's Forces when and how he pleased, and that
Agesilaus, in the Head of a Spartan Army, (so terrible both by Sea and Land,)
should make so great a Voyage, and raise no Monument of his Fame by any great
Action: Therefore to be even with Tisaphernes, he revengeth his Revenged.
Perjury by a Stratagem: he pretends to go to Caria, whither when he had drawn
Tisaphernes and his Army, he suddenly turns back, and falls upon Phrygia,
taking many of their Cities, and carrying away great Booty. He took this
occasion of showing, that for Friends to break their Solemn Leagues, and betray
their Faith, was a downright Contempt of the Gods; but the Circumvention of an
Enemy in War, is not only Just but Honorable, and of great Advantage to the
Author of it.

Being weak in Horse, and withal terrified by some ill Omen in the Sacrifices,
( viz. a Calf's Liver wanted that little Lobe which the Southsayers call the
Head) he retired to Ephesus, and there raised them: He obliged Agesilaus his
Expedient for raising Horse at Ephesus.
the rich Men, that were not minded to serve in Person, to find Horsemen armed
and mounted; which being performed, Agesilaus his Army was soon changed, from
shabby Foot into many gallant Regiments of Horse: For those that were not good
at Fighting themselves, hired such as were more Martial in their Inclinations,
and such as loved not Horse-service, substituted in their rooms such as did. He
professed in this to imitate the laudable Example of Agamemnon, who took the
Present of an excellent Mare, to dismiss a rich Coward from the Army.

When by Agesilaus his Order, the Prisoners His Reflection on the Sardian
Slaves.
he had taken in Phrygia were exposed to Sale, they were first stripped of
their Garments, and then sold naked. The Clothes found many Customers to buy
them, but the Bodies being by the Ease they had always lived in, rendered white,
and tender-skinned, were derided and scorned as unserviceable: Agesilaus who
stood by at the Auction, told his Grecians, These are the Men against whom ye
fight, and these are the things for which ye ^ight.

The Season of the Year being come, he boldly gave out, that he would Invade
Lydia; which plain Dealing of his was mistaken for a Stratagem by Tisaphernes,
who by not believing Agesilaus, overreached himself: He enters Sardis.
He expected that he should have made choice of Caria, as a rough Country, not
fit for Horse, in which he deemed Agesilaus to be weak, and directed his own
Marches accordingly. But when he found him to be as good as his Word, and to
have entered into the Country of Sardis, he made great haste after him, and by
great Marches of his Horse, overtaking the loose Stragglers who were pillaging
the Country, he cut them off. Agesilaus mean while considering that the Horse
had out-rid the Foot, but that he himself had the whole Body of his own Army
entire, made haste to Engage them: He mingled his light armed Foot, that And
overcomes Tisaphernes.
wore Leather Shields, with the Horse, commanding them to begin the Battle,
whilst he brought up the heavier-armed Men in the Rear: The Success was
answerable to the Design; the Barbarians were put to the Rout, the Grecians
pursued hard, took their Camp, and put many of them to the Sword: The
Consequence of this Victory was very great, for they had not only their liberty
of Foraging the Persian Country, and Plundering at pleasure, but also saw
Tisaphernes pay dearly for all the Cruelty he had showed the Greeks, to whom he
was a professed Enemy: For the King of Persia soon sent Tithraustes,
Tithraustes sent to behead Tisaphernes, and to treat of Peace.
who took off his Head, and presently dealt with Agesilaus, about his Return
into Greece, sending to him Ambassadors to that purpose, with Commission to
offer him great Sums of Money. Agesilaus's Answer was, That the making of Peace
belonged to the Lacedaemonians, not to him: As for Wealth, he had rather see it
in his Soldiers hands than his own; that the Grecians thought it not Honorable
to Enrich themselves with the Bribes of their Enemies, but with their Spoils
only. Yet, that he might gratify Tithraustes for the Justice he had done upon
Tisaphernes, the avowed Enemy of the Greeks, he removed his Quarters into
Phrygia, accepting of thirty Talents toward the Charge of it. Whilst he was
upon his March, he Agesilaus made Admiral of Sparta.
received a Patent from the Council of Sparta, which did constitute him Admiral
as well as General. This Honor was never done to any but Agesilaus, who being
undoubtedly the far greatest Man of his Time, (as Theopompus witnesses)
gloried more in his Virtue, than in his Authority and Power: Yet he committed a
great Oversight in preferring Pisander to the Command of the Navy, when there
were many at hand both older and wiser, and more experienced Captains; in this
not so much consulting the Public Good, as the Gratification of his Kindred,
and especially his Wife, whose Brother Pisander was.

Having removed his Camp into Pharnabazus's Province, he not only met with
great plenty of Provisions, but also raised great Sums of Money, and marching
on to the Bounds of Paphlagonia, he soon drew Makes League with Cotys, King of
Paphlagonia.
Cotys, the King of it, into a League, to which he of his own accord inclined,
out of the Esteem he had of Agesilaus his Honor and Virtue. Spithridates as
soon as he fell off from Pharnabazus, did constantly attend Agesilaus in the
Camp whithersoever he went: This Spithridates had a handsome Boy to his Son, of
whom Agesilaus was enamoured, also a very beautiful Daughter, that was
marriageable; her Agesilaus matched to Cotys, and taking of him 1000 Horse,
with 2000 light-armed Foot, he returned into Phrygia, and there pillaged the
Country of Pharnabazus, who durst not stand him He conquers Pharnabazus.
in the Field, nor yet trust to his Garrisons, but getting his Jewels and rich
Commodities together, flitted up and down with a flying Army, till Spithridates
being joined with Erippidas the Spartan, beat him out of all his Holds, and
they possessed themselves of all the Spoil. Here Erippidas being too
Spithridates with the Paphlagonians revolts upon discontent from Agesilaus.
severe an Enquirer into the Plunder wherewith the Barbarian Soldiers had
enriched themselves, and forcing them to deliver it up with too much
Strictness, so disobliged Spithridates, that he changed sides again, and went
off with the Paphlagonians to the Sardians. This was no small Displeasure to
Agesilaus, not only that he had lost the Friendship of a valiant Commander, and
with him a considerable Part of his Army, but chiefly that he did it with the
Disrepute of a sordid Covetousness, of which he always took care to clear both
himself and his Country: Besides these public Causes, he had a private one,
viz. the excessive Love of his Agesilaus's Love to Megabates.
Son, which touched him to the quick, yet did he so much endeavor to master,
and especially in presence of the Boy, to suppress all appearance of it, that
when Megabates (for that was his Name) did address himself to him to Salute and
Kiss, he declined it. At which, when the young Man blushed and drew back,
saluting him at a more reserved distance, Agesilaus soon repenting his Coyness,
and changing his Mind, pretended to wonder why he did not salute him with the
like Familiarity as formerly. His Friends about him answered, you are in the
fault, who durst not stand the Kiss of a pretty Boy, but outrun it; he will
soon offer you the like Kindness again, if he may but find it welcome to you.
Upon this Agesilaus paused a while, and at length answered, You need not
encourage him to a repetition of that Kindness; I had rather be Master of
myself in the refusal of that Kiss, than see all things that are now before
mine eye turned into Gold. Thus he demeaned himself to Megabates when present,
but he had so great a Passion for him in his absence, that I question whether
if the Boy had returned again, all the Virtue he had, would have obliged him to
such another Refusal.

After that, Pharnabazus sought an opportunity A Conference between Pharnabazus
and Agesilaus.
of conferring with Agesilaus, which Apollophanes of Cyzicum, the common Host
of them both, procured for him: Agesilaus coming first to the appointed Place,
lay down upon the Grass under a Tree, lying there in expectation of
Pharnabazus, who bringing with him soft Skins and wrought Carpets to lie down
upon, when he saw Agesilaus's Posture, grew ashamed of his own Provisions, made
no use of them, but laid himself down upon the Grass also, though he had a fine
delicate richly-died Coat on, which was like to lose much of its beauty by the
action: Pharnabazus had matter enough of Complaint against Agesilaus, and
therefore after the mutual Civilities were over, he put him in mind of the
great Services he had done the Lacedaemonians in the Attick War, of which he
thought it an ill Recompense, to have his Country thus harrassed and spoiled,
by those Men who had been so obliged to him. The Spartans that were about
Agesilaus, hung down their Heads, as ashamed of the Wrong they had done to
their good Ally. But the King briskly answered, We, O Pharnabazus, when we were
in Amity with your Master the Persian, did behave our selves like Friends, now
when he has given us occasion of War, we behave our selves as Enemies. As for
you, whose kind Offices we are ready to acknowledge, we look upon you as his
Servant; we are fain to do these Outrages upon you, not intending the Harm to
you, but to him whom we wound through your sides. But whenever you will choose
rather to be a Friend to the Grecians, than a Slave of the King of P^^sia, you
may then reckon this Army and Navy to be all at your Command, to defend both
you and your Country, together with your Liberties, without which there is
nothing honorable, or indeed desirable among Men. Upon this Pharnabazus
discovered his mind, and answered, If the King sends another Governor in my
room, I will certainly come over to you, but as long as he trusts me with the
Government, I shall be just to him, and not fail to do my utmost Endeavors in
opposing you. Agesilaus was taken with the Answer, and shook Hands with him,
and (rising) said, How much rather had I have so gallant a Man my Friend than
mine Enemy.

Pharnabazus being gone off, his Son, staying Parnabazus his Son presents
Agesilaus, and makes him his Friend.
behind, ran up to Agesilaus, and smilingly said, Agesilaus, I make you my
Guest; and thereupon presented him with a Javelin which he had in his hand.
Agesilaus received it, and being much taken with the good Mien and Gallantry of
the Youth, looked about to see if there were any thing in his Train fit to
offer him in Return; and observing the Horse of Adaeus, his Secretary, to have
very fine Trappings on, he took them off, and bestowed them upon the young
Gentleman; nor did his Kindness rest there, but he was ever after mindful of
him, insomuch that when he was driven out of his Country by the Injury of his
Brethren, and lived an Exile in Peloponnesus, he took great care of his
Maintenance; and not only so, but also condescended to assist him in his
Amors; for he being in Love with a Youth of Athenian Birth, which was bred up
to his Exercises, in order to playing of the Prize in the Olympic Games, and
this Youth being, by reason of his great Bulk, and sour Looks, in some danger
of not being admitted into the List, the Persian betook himself to Agesilaus,
and made use of his Friendship: Agesilaus readily assisted him, and took great
pains in effecting his Desires. He was in all other things a Man Agesilaus' s
Behavior in point of Friendship.
of great and exact Justice, but when the Case concerned a Friend, to be
strait-laced in point of Justice, (he said) was only a colorable Pretense of
denying him. There is an Epistle written to Idrieus, Prince of Caria, that is
ascribed to Agesilaus; it is this: If Nicias be innocent, absolve him; if he be
nocent, absolve him upon my account, however be sure to absolve him. And indeed
this is the true Character of Agesilaus, as to his Deportment toward his
Friends: Yet was not his Rule without Exception; for sometimes he considered
the Necessity of his Affairs more than his Friend, of which he once gave a
great Example, when upon a sudden and disorderly Remove of his Camp, he was
forced to leave a sick Friend behind him; who when he called loud after him,
and implored his Help, Agesilaus turned his Back, and said, What an hard thing
is it to be merciful and wise too? This Story is delivered by Hieronymus.

Another Year of the War being spent, Agesilaus his Fame still increased,
insomuch His Repute in Persia and A^ia.
that the Persian King received daily Informations concerning his many Virtues,
and the great Esteem the World had of his Continency, his Candor and
Moderation. When he made any Journey with his private Train, he would usually
take up his Lodging in a Temple, and there make the Gods Witnesses of his most
private Actions, which others would scarce permit Men to be acquainted with. In
so great an Army, you should scarce find a common Soldier lie on a coarser
Mattress, or fare more hardly; he was so inured to the varieties of Heat and
Cold, that both seemed natural to him. The Greeks that inhabited Asia, were
much pleased to see the great Dons of Persia, with all the Pride, Cruelty and
Luxury, in which they lived, to vail Bonnet to a Man in a poor threadbare
Cloak, and to be governed by a Word or Nod, or a Laconick Sentence out of his
Mouth: It put them in mind of that Verse in Timotheus;

While Mars himself her firm Scepter hold,
Greece fears not the weak Charms of Foreign Gold.
Asia being now grown afraid of the Lacedaemonian Arms, was everywhere ready
to yield to them. Agesilaus in the mean time took order with several of the
Cities, and composed the Differences of diverse of the Republics without
Bloodshed, or Banishment of any of their Members: By these means having rendered
himself everywhere popular, he resolved to quit the Seaside, to march further
up into the Country, and to attack the King of Persia himself in Susa and
Ecbatane, not willing to let that Monarch sit idle in his Chair, whilst he made
Wars by his Lieutenants, and by his Money corrupted the Demagogues of Greece.
But these great Thoughts were interrupted by unhappy News from Sparta;
Epicydidas is Remanded Home.
from thence sent to remand him Home, to assist his own Country, which was then
involved in a great War.

The Fields of Greece no Barbarous Foe surrounds,
She bleeds (alas!) with more dishonest Wounds.
What better can we say of those Civil Wars, and Intestine Broyls, which did
destroy the Fortune of Greece, and call her back from her full Career of
Victory over the Barbarians, only to sheath her Sword into her own Bowels? For
I do by no means assent to Demaratus of Corinth, who said, That those Grecians
were deprived of a great Satisfaction, that did not live to see Alexander sit
in the Throne of Darius. That Sight should rather have drawn Tears from them,
when they considered, that they had left that Glory to Alexander and the
Macedonians, whilst they spent all their own great Commanders, in playing them
upon each other in the Fields of Leuctra, Coronea, Corinth, and Arcadia.

Nothing was greater or braver than the Behavior of Agesilaus on this
occasion, nor can a nobler Instance be found in Story, of a ready Obedience and
just Deference to His ready Obedience.
the Orders of the Senate. Annibal, though in a bad condition himself, and
almost driven out of Italy, yet stormed and raged when he was called Home to
serve his Country. Alexander made a Jest of the Battle between Agis and
Antipater, the Success of which required his looking back into his own Country,
laughing and saying, That whilst we are fighting Darius in Asia, it seems there
is a Battle of Mice in Arcadia. Happy Sparta mean while, in the great Justice
and Modesty of Agesilaus, and in the Honor he paid to the Laws of his Country;
who immediately upon receipt of his Orders, (though in the midst of his good
Fortune, and in full hope of so great and glorious Success) left his Work
unfinished, instantly departed, leaving his Friends in Asia very sorrowful for
the loss of him: Which great Kindness and Fidelity of his, that had obliged so
many to him in Asia, did sufficiently confute the Saying of Demaratus, the Son
of Phaeux, That the Lacedaemonians excelled in their Public Transactions, and
just maintaining of Leagues, but the Athenians were better Observers of private
Friendships.

The Coin of Persia was stamped with the Picture of an Archer; Agesilaus said,
That a thousand Persian Archers had driven him out of Asia; meaning the Money
that was laid out in bribing the Demagogues, and the Orators in Thebes and
Athens, whereby those two Republics were incited to a War with Sparta.

Having passed the Hellespont, he went by Passes home thr^' Thrace.
Land through Thrace, not begging or entreating a Passage any where, only he
sent his Envoys to them, to demand whether they would have him pass as a Friend
or as an Enemy. All the rest received him as a Friend, and used him with all
Civility: but The Trallians.
the Trallians (of whom Xerxes is said to have bought his Passage) demanded a
Price of him, viz. A hundred Talents of Silver, and a hundred Women. Agesilaus
in scorn asked, Why they were not ready to receive them? He marched on, and
meeting with Opposition from the Trallians, fought them, and slew great numbers
of them. He sent the Macedonia.
like Embassy to the King of Macedonia, who took time to deliberate: Why then
let him deliberate, said Agesilaus, we will go forward in the mean time. The
Macedonian being surprised and daunted at the Resolution of the Spartan King,
fairly sent him a Complement, and let him pass. When he came into Thessaly, he
wasted the Country, because they (...) Thessaly.
were in League with the Enemy. To Larissa, the chief City of Thessaly, he sent
Xenocles and Scythes to Treat of a Peace, whom when the Larissaeans had laid
hold of, and put into Custody, the Army was enraged, and advised the Siege of
the Town; but the King answered, That he valued either of those Men at more
than the whole Country of Thessaly. He therefore made Terms with them, and
received his Men again upon Composition. Nor need we wonder at that Saying of
Agesilaus, at a time when he had News brought him from Sparta, of several great
Captains slain in a Battle near Corinth, in which though the Slaughter fell
upon other Grecians, the Lacedaemonians obtaining a great Victory with small
loss, yet Agesilaus did not appear at all satisfied in it; He laments the Civil
War^ of Greece.
contrarily with a great Sigh he cried out, O* Greece, how many gallant Men
have thou destroyed, which if they had been preserved to so good an use, might
have conquered all Persia! Yet when the Pharsalians grew troublesome He routs
the Pharsalians.
to him, by pressing upon his Army, and incommoding his Passage, he drew out
five hundred Horse, and in Person fought and routed them, setting up a Trophy
at Narthacium: he valued himself much upon that Victory, that with so small a
Number of his own choosing, he had vanquished an Army of Men, that thought
themselves the best Horsemen of Greece.

Here Diphridas, the Ephore, met him, and delivered his Message from Sparta,
which ordered him immediately to make an Inroad into Baeotia; which though he
thought Inva^es* Baeotia, by Command of the C^^^cil of Sparta.
fitter to have been done at another time, and with greater Force, yet he
obeyed the Magistrates. He thereupon told his Soldiers, that the day was come,
in which they were to enter upon that Employment, for the performance of which
they were brought out of Asia. He sent for two Cohorts of the Army near Corinth
to his Assistance. The Lacedaemonians at home, in Honor to him, made
Proclamation for Volunteers that would serve under the King, to come in and be
listed. Finding all the young Men in the City ready to ofter themselves, they
chose fifty of the ablest, and sent them.

Agesilaus having gained the Thermopylae, and passed quietly through Phocis, as
soon as he had entered Baeotia, and pitched his Tents near Chaeronea, at once
met with an Eclipse of the Sun, and with ill News from the Navy, Pisander, the
Spartan Admiral, being beaten at Guidos, by Pharnabazus and Conon. He was much
moved at it, both upon his own and the Public account: Yet lest his Army,
being now near engaging, should meet with any Discouragement, he ordered the
Messengers to give out, that the Spartans were the Conquerors, and he himself
putting on his Crown, did solemnly sacrifice, out of a pretended Joy for the
News, and sent Portions of the Sacrifices to his Friends.

When he came near to Coronea, and was The Battle of Coronea.
within view of the Enemy, he drew up his Army, and giving the left Wing to the
Orchomenians, he himself led the right. The Thebans did make the right Wing of
their Army, leaving the left to the Argives. Xenophon, who was present, and
fought on Agesilaus's side, reports it to be the hardest fought Battle that he
had seen. The beginning of it was not so, for the Thebans soon put the
Orchomenians to rout, as also did Agesilaus the Argives. But both Parties
having News of the Misfortune of their left Wings, they betook themselves to
their Relief. Here Agesilaus might have been sure of his Victory, had he
contented himself not to charge them in the Front, but in the Flank or Rear;
but being too high in Mettle, and heated in the Fight, he would not stay the
Opportunity, but fell on downright, thinking to bear them down before him. The
Thebans were not behind him in Courage, so that the Battle was fiercely carried
on on both sides, especially near Agesilaus's Person, whose new Guard of fifty
Volunteers stood him in great stead that day, and saved his Life: They fought
with great Valor, and interposed their Bodies frequently between him and
Danger, yet could they not so preserve him, but that he received many Wounds
through his Armor with Lances and Swords, and was with much ado gotten off.
They making a Ring about him, did guard him from the Enemy, with the Slaughter
of many, and lost many of their own number. At length finding it too hard a
Task to break the Front of the Theban Army, they opened their own Files, and
let the Enemy march through them, (an Artifice which in the beginning they
scorned) observing in the mean time the Posture of the Enemy, who having passed
through, grew careless, as esteeming themselves past Danger: whereupon they
were immediately set upon by the Spartans, yet were they not then put to Rout,
but marched on to Helicon, vapouring, That they themselves, as to their part of
the Army, were not worsted. Agesilaus, sore wounded as he was, would not be
born to his Tent, till he had been first carried about the Field, and had seen
the dead Men of his Party carried off in their Armor. As many of his Enemies
as had taken Sanctuary in the Temple, he dismissed: for there stood hard by the
Temple of Minerva the Itonian, and before it a Trophy erected by the Baeotians,
for a Victory, which under the Conduct of one Sparton their General, they
obtained over the Athenians, who were led that day by Tolmides, and Tolmides
himself slain.

Next morning early Agesilaus, to make trial of the Theban Courage, whether
they had any mind to a second Encounter, did command his Soldiers to put on
Garlands on their Heads, and play with their Flutes, and raise a Trophy before
their Faces; but when they instead of Fighting, sent for leave to bury their
Dead, he gave it them, and so confirmed to himself the Victory. After this he
went to Delphos, to the Pythian He goes to the Pythian Games.
Games which were then celebrating, at which Feast he assisted, and there
solemnly offered the tenth part of the Spoils he had brought from Asia, which
amounted to an hundred Talents.

Being now returned to his own Country, the Eyes of the Spartans were upon him,
to observe his Diet, and manner of Living: But he (not according to the Custom
of other Returns to Sparta unchanged, as to his Manners.
Generals) came home the same Man that he went out, having not so learned the
Fashions of other Countries, as to forget his own, much less to nauseate or
despise them, but he followed all the Spartan Customs, without changing either
the manner of his Supping, or Bathing, or his Wifes Apparel, as if he had never
traveled over the River Eurotas. The like he did by his Household Stuff, his
Armor, nay, the very Gates of his House were so old, that they might well be
thought of Aristodemus's setting up. His Daughters Chariot (called the
Canathrum) was no richer than that of other People. Now this Canathrum, whether
Chariot or Chair, was made of Wood, in the shape of a Griffon, or of the
Goatdeer.
Tragelaphus, some antic shape or other, on which the Children and young
Virgins were carried in Processions. Xenophon has not left us the Name of this
Daughter of Agesilaus; at which Dicaearchus is angry, viz. that he can know the
Names neither of Agesilaus's Daughter, nor Epaminondas's Mother. But in the
Records of Laconia we find his Wifes Name to be Cl^ora, and his two Daughers to
have been Apolia and Prolyta; and you may even to this day see Agesilaus's
Spear kept in Sparta, nothing differing from that of other Men.

There was a Vanity he observed among the Spartans, about keeping running
Horses for the Olympic Games, upon which he He despises the Olympic Games.
found they much valued themselves. Agesilaus much despised it, as an
Ostentation more of Wealth than Virtue, deeming the Victory to be the Horse's,
not the Man's: He therefore to convince the Grecians of it, did put his Sister
Cynisca upon keeping a running Horse for that Public Solemnity.

To the wise Xenophon, his Friend, whom he much valued, he did propose the
bringing of his Children to Sparta, to be there bred up in the strictest way of
Discipline, and in the noble Art of Obeying and Governing.

Lysander being dead, and his Faction yet great and prevalent, which he upon
his coming out of Asia had raised against Agesilaus, the King thought it
advisable to expose He designs to expose Lysander and his Party.
both him and it, by showing what manner of a Citizen he had been whilst he
lived. To that end, finding an Oration among his Writings, that was (composed
by Cleon the Halicarnassean, but) intended to be spoken by Lysander in a
Public Assembly, to excite the People to Innovations and Changes in the
Government, he resolved to publish it, as an Evidence of Lysander's ill
Practices. But one of the Senators, having the perusal of it, and finding it
strongly written, advised him to have a care of digging But is dissuaded.
up Lysander again, and rather bury that Oration in the Grave with him. This
Advise he wisely hearkened to, and ever after forbore publicly to affront any
of his Adversaries, but took occasions of picking out the Ringleaders, and
sending them away upon Foreign Services. He also found out ways of discovering
the Avarice and the Injustice of many of them in their Employments; yet, when
they were by others brought into Question, he made it his business to bring
them off, obliging them by that means, of Enemies to become his Friends, and so
by degrees wore out the Faction.

Agesipolis, his Fellow-King, was under He makes his Interest in Agesipolis.
the Disadvantage of being Born of an Exiled Father, and himself Young, Modest,
and Unactive, and meddled not much in Affairs. Agesilaus took a course of
growing upon him, and making him yet more tractable. According to the Custom of
Sparta, the Kings, if they were in Town, always Dined together. This was
Agesilaus's opportunity of dealing with Agesipolis, whom he found apt to
Amorous Intrigues as well as himself. He therefore always discoursed him about
handsome Boys, egging him forward that way, and himself assisting in it, so far
as to become the Confident of the Amor. Yet were these Amors innocent,
according to the Custom of the Spartan Loves, which were always accompanied with
Virtue and Honor, and a noble Emulation; of which you may see more in
Lycurgus's Life.

Having thus established his Power in the City, he easily obtained that his
half Brother Teleutias might be chosen Admiral; His Expedition against Corinth.
and thereupon making an Expedition against the Corinthians, he made himself
Master of the long Walls by Land, through the Assistance of his Brother at Sea.
Coming thus upon the Argives (who then held Corinth) in the midst of their
Isthmian Games, he made them outrun their Sacrifices, and leave all their
Festival Provisions behind them. The exiled Corinthians that were in the
Spartan Army, desired him to keep up the Feast, and to appear Chief in the
Celebration of it. This he refused, but gave them leave to carry on the
Solemnity, if they pleased, and he in the mean time staid and guarded them.
When Agesilaus marched off, the Argives returned to their Sports again, with
this variety of Fortune, that some who were Victors before, became Victors a
second time, others lost the Prizes which before they had gained. But Agesilaus
reproached them severely of Cowardice, who having so great an Esteem of the
Isthmian Games, and so much valuing themselves upon the Victories there gotten,
yet durst not adventure to Fight in defense of them. He himself His Opinion of
public Sports and Games.
was of Opinion, that to keep a Mean in such things was best; he allowed of the
Sports usually permitted in his Country, and would not refuse to be present at
the Exercises either of the young Men, or of the Girls, being always ready to
take his share in them; but what many Men seemed* to be highly taken with in
these Games, he seemed not at all concerned in. Callipides the Stage Player,
being eminent in that Faculty through all Greece, meeting this King, did make
his Obeisance; of which, when he found no notice taken, he confidently thrust
himself into his Train, expecting that Agesilaus would take some notice, and at
least pass a Jest upon him. When all that failed, he boldly accosted him, and
asked him, Whether he knew him not? What (said the King) art thou Callipides
the Scaramonchio? and so turned from him. Being invited once to hear a Man
sing, who did admirably imitate the Nightingale, he refused, and answered, That
he had heard the Nightingale her self. There was one Menecrates, a Physician in
Laconia, who, having been famed for great Success in great and deplored
Diseases, was, by way of Flattery, called Jupiter: He was so vain as to take
it, and having occasion to write a Letter to Agesilaus, thus endorsed it:
Menecrates Jupiter, to King Agesilaus, Greeting. The King returned Answer,
Agesilaus to Menecrates, Health^ and a sound Mind.

Whilst Agesilaus was in the Corinthian Territories, beholding his Soldiers
Pillaging the Temple of Juno, the Theban Ambassadors came to him to treat of
Peace. He having a great Aversion for that City, He slighteth the Theban
Ambassadors, of which he soon repents.
and thinking it then advantageous to his Affairs publicly to slight them, did
it sufficiently, for he would not seem either to see them, or hear them speak.
But as if the express Vengeance of God had appeared against this Insolence,
before they parted from him, he received News of the Overthrow of one of his
Cohorts, by Iphicrates, with a greater Slaughter than he had received a long
time; and that the more grievous, because it was a choice Regiment of
Lacedaemonians well Armed, but overthrown by a parcel of light-armed
Mercenaries. Agesilaus made all the haste he could to their Rescue, but found
it too late, the Business being over. He therefore retired to Juno's Temple,
and sent for the Theban Ambassadors to give them Audience. They now resolved to
be even with him for the Affront he gave them, and, without speaking one word
of the Peace, only desired leave to go into Corinth. Agesilaus, being nettled
with this Overture, told them in scorn, That if they were minded to go and see
how proud their Friends were of their Success, they should do it to Morrow with
safety. Next Morning, taking the Ambassadors with him, he spoiled the
Corinthian Territories, up to the very Gates of the City; where having made a
Stand, and let the Ambassadors see, that the Corinthians durst not come out to
defend themselves, he dismissed them; then gathering up the small remainders of
the shattered Cohort, he marched homewards, always removing his Camp before day,
and always pitching his Tents after Night, that he might prevent the Acardians
from taking any opportunity of insulting over their loss.

After this, at the Request of the Achaians, he marched with them into
Acarnania, from whence he brought great Spoils, and overcame His Polic^
concerning the Acarnanians.
the Acarnanians in Battle. The Achaians would have persuaded him to keep his
Winter Quarters there, to hinder the Acarnanians from sowing their Corn; but he
was of the contrary Opinion, alleging, that they would be more afraid of a War
next Summer, when their Fields were Sown, than they would be if they lay
Fallow. The Event did justify his Opinion; for next Summer, when the Achaians
began their Expedition again, the Acarnanians immediately made Peace with them.

When Conon and Pharnabazus were grown Masters of the Sea, and had not only
infested the Coast of Laconia, but also rebuilt the Walls of Athens, at the
Cost of Pharnabazus, The Spartans make a dishonorable Peace with Persia.
the Lacedaemonians thought fit to Treat of Peace with the King of Persia. To
that end, they sent Antalcidas to Teribazus about it, basely betraying the poor
Asiatick Greeks, on whose behalf Agesilaus had made the War. But no part of
this Dishonor fell upon Agesilaus, the whole being transacted by Antalcidas,
who was a bitter Enemy of Agesilaus, and did therefore urge on the Peace,
because Agesilaus was so earnest for continuing the War, it being his Talent,
in which he always gained Reputation and Authority. Yet as ill as he liked the
Peace, when once it was on foot, he promoted it, and being told, by way of
Reproach, that the Lacedaemonians did now apply themselves to the Median
Interest, he replied, No, but the Medes applied themselves to the Interest of
the Lacedaemonians. And when the Grecians were backward to the Agreement, he
threatened them with War, unless they came up to the King of Persia's Terms.
Agesilaus had a particular End in this, viz. to weaken the Thebans; for it was
made one of the Articles of Peace, that the Country of Baeotia should be set at
liberty, which was then under the Dominion of Thebes.

This Pique of his to Thebes appeared further afterward, when Phaebidas in
full Peace Phaebidas breaks the Peace with Thebes.
did very dishonourably seize upon Cadmea, a Castle belonging to Thebes. The
thing was much stomached by all Greece, and not well liked of by the Laconians
themselves; those especially who were Enemies to Agesilaus, did require an
account of the Action, and by whose Authority it was done, laying the Suspicion
of it at his door. Agesilaus doubted not to answer on the behalf of Phaebidas,
that the profitableness of an Action was chiefly to be considered; if it were
for the Advantage of the Commonwealth, it was no matter by whose Authority it
was done. This was the more remarkable in him, because he was always observed to
be a great Lover of Justice, and would, in his private Discourses, commend it
as the chief of Virtues, saying, That Valor without Justice was useless, and
if all the World were Just, there would be no need of Valor. When any would
say to him, The Great King (meaning the Persian) will have it so; he would
smartly reply, How is he greater than I, unless he be Juster? He took the truly
Royal Measure of Greatness, which is to be computed by Justice, not by Force.

The Peace being concluded, the King of Persia wrote to Agesilaus, desiring a
private He refuses the King of Persia ^is Friendship.
Friendship and Correspondence; but he refused it, saying, That the public
Friendship was enough; whilst that lasted, there was no need of private. Yet
was he not always of that mind, it plainly appearing, That sometimes out of
Ambition, and sometimes out of private Pique, he brake that Rule. Particularly
in this case of the Thebans, he not only saved Phaebidas, but persuaded He
def^nds Phaebidas.
the Lacedaemonians to take the Fault upon themselves, and to retain Cadmea,
putting a Garrison into it, and to make Archias and Leontidas chief Governors of
Thebes, who had been Betrayers of the main Castle to them. This gave strong
Suspicion, that what Phaebidas did, was by Agesilaus's Order, which was
afterward made evident by the Consequences: For when the Thebans And warreth
with the Thebans.
had slain the Garrison, and asserted their Liberty, he accusing them of the
Murder of Archias and Leontidas, (who indeed were Tyrants, though in Title
Polemarchi, or Generals) made War upon them. He sent Cleombrotus on that
Errand, But not in Person.
who was now the other King, in room of Agesipolis that was dead, excusing
himself by reason of his Age: For it was 40 years since he had first born Arms,
and was consequently excused by the Law. Mean while the true Reason why he
withdrew himself from the War, was, that he was ashamed, having so lately
fought against the Tyranny of the Phliasians, to fight now in defense of a
Tyranny against the Thebans.

One Sphodrias of Lacedaemon, being of Sphodrias his Exploit.
a contrary Faction to Agesilaus, was Governor of Thespiae, a brisk daring Man,
one that had more of Courage than Wisdom. This Action of Phaebidas fired him,
and incited his Ambition to attempt some great Enterprise, which might render
him as Famous, as he perceived the taking of Cadmea had made Phaebidas. He
thought the taking of the Piraeum, and the cutting off thereby the Athenians
from the Sea, a Matter of far more Glory: It Is said, That Pelopidas and Gelon,
the Governors of Baeotia, put him upon it; they privily sent Men to him, that
pretended to be of the Spartan Faction, who highly commending Sphodrias, blew
him up into a great Opinion of himself, protesting him to be the only Man in
the World that was fit for so great an Enterprise. Being thus pricked forward,
he could hold no longer, but soon engaged himself in a Business, every whit as
dishonorable and treacherous as that of Ca^mea, but attempted with less Valor
and less Success; for the day broke whilst he was yet in the Plains of
Thriasium, whereas he designed the whole Exploit to have been done in the
Night. As soon as the Soldiers perceived the Rays of Light reflecting from the
Temples of Eleusine, upon the first rising of the Sun, it is said, that their
Hearts failed them; nay, he himself, when he saw that he could not have the
benefit of the Night, had not Courage enough to go on with his Enterprise, but,
having pillaged the Country, he returned with Shame to Thespiae. An Embassy was
upon this sent from Athens to Sparta, to complain of the breach of Peace; but
the Ambassadors found their Journey needless, Sphodrias being then under
Process by the Magistrates of Sparta. Sphodrias durst not stay to expect
Judgment, which he found would be Capital, the City being highly incensed
against him, out of the Shame they had of the Business, and the Resolution they
had to give the Athenians no cause of suspecting them, to be any way consenting
to so base an Action.

This Sphodrias had a handsome Youth to his Son named Cleonymus, with whom
Archidamus, the Son of Agesilaus, was deeply in Love. With him did Cleonymus
labor much for the preservation of his Father; but Archidamus durst not appear
publicly in his Assistance, he being one of the professed Enemies of
Agesilaus. But Cleonymus having solicited him with Tears about it, (as knowing
Agesilaus to be of all his Father's Enemies the most formidable) the young Man
did for two or three days, follow his Father with such Shame and Confusion
within himself, that he durst not speak to him. At last, the day of Sentence
being at hand, he adventured to tell him, that Cleonymus had entreated him to
intercede for his Father. Agesilaus, though well aware of the Love between the
Two young Men, yet did not prohibit it, because he looked upon Cleonymus as an
extraordinary Youth, and of great Hopes: Yet he gave not his Son any kind
Answer in the Case, but coldly told him, That he would consider what he could
honestly and honorably do in it, and so dismissed him. Archidamus being
ashamed of his want of Success, did forbear the Company of Cleonymus for some
days, a thing not usual with him. This made the Friends of Sphodrias to think
his Case desperate, till Etymocles, one of Agesilaus's Friends, did discover to
them the King's Mind, viz. That he abhorred the Fact, but yet he thought
Sphodrias a gallant Man, such as the Commonwealth much wanted at that time.
These were the frequent Sayings of Agesilaus, which gave Cleonymus sufficiently
to understand, that Archidamus had been just to him, in using all his Interest
with his Father; and Sphodrias his Friends grew brisk in his Defense. The truth
is, that Agesilaus was a very ^o^d Man of his Children, insomuch that it is
reported, That when they were little ones, he would make a Hobbyhorse of a
Reed, and ride with them. Being catched at this Sport by a Friend, he desired
him to say nothing of it, till he himself were the Father of Children.

Mean while Sphodrias being absolved of his Crime, the Athenians betook
themselves War with Athens and Thebes.
to Arms, insomuch that Agesilaus fell into great Disgrace with the People;
that to gratify the Amors of a Boy, would pervert Justice, and make the City
accessory to the Crimes of Two private Men, who, by dishonorable Actions had
broke the Peace of Greece. He also found his Colleague Cleombrotus little
inclined to the Theban War; so that it became necessary for him to quit the
Privilege of his Age, which he before had claimed, and to lead the Army
himself; which he did with variety of Success, sometimes Conquering, and
sometimes Conquered, insomuch that receiving a Wound in a Battle, he was
reproached by Antalcidas, That the Thebans had made him a good Requital, for
teaching them to Fight. And indeed, they were now grown far better Soldiers
than ever they had been, being so much harassed, and so much beaten into War,
by the frequency of the L^ced^monian Expeditions against them. Out of the
foresight of which it was, that anciently Lycurgus in three several Laws,
forbid them to make Wars often in one Place, which would be to instruct their
Enemies in the Art of it.

Mean while the Allies of Sparta were not The Allies murmur at the War.
a little discontented at Agesilaus, that this War was commenced not from any
just Offense taken, but merely out of his Hatred to the Thebans, and with
Indignation grumbled, that they being the Majority of the Army, should from
Year to Year be thus exposed to Danger and Hardship here and there, at the Will
of a few Persons.

Agesilaus being put to his Shifts, to obviate the Objection, devised this
Expedient, to try the numbers of both the Spartans and the Allies. He gave
Orders that all the Allies, of whatever Country, should sit down promiscuously
on one side, and all the Lacedaemonians on the other; which being done, he
Commanded an Herald to proclaim, that all the Potters of both Squadrons should
stand out; then all the Blacksmiths; then all the Masons; next the Carpenters;
and so he went through all the Handicrafts. By this time almost all the Allies
were risen, but of the Lacedaemonians very few, they being by Law forbidden to
learn any Handicraft-Trade: whereupon Agesilaus fell on Laughing, and told
them, ^e see, Gentlemen, how that our number of Soldiers is greater than yours.

When he brought back his Army from Baeotia through Megara, as he was going up
to the Town Hall, in the Castle of that Town, he was suddenly taken with Pain,
Falls lame of his better Leg.
and convulsive Motions on his better Leg, upon which a great Tumor and
Inflammation soon arose. He was treated by a Syracusian Physician, who let him
Blood below the Ancle: this soon eased his Pain; but then the Blood could not
be stopped, till it brought him to Fainting and Swooning; at length, with much
ado, he stopped it. Agesilaus was carried home to Sparta in a very weak
condition, insomuch that he recovered not Strength enough to appear in the
Field a long time after.

Mean while the Spartan Fortune was but ill, they having received many Losses
both by Sea and Land; but the greatest was that at Leuctra, which was the first
time that they were overthrown by the Thebans in a set Battle. The occasion was
this:

The Grecians were all disposed to a general Peace, and to that end sent
Ambassadors to Sparta. Among these was Epaminondas, A general Treaty of Peace.
the Theban, famous at that time for his Wisdom and Learning, but he had not
yet given proof of his Martial Virtues. He, seeing all the others crouch to
Agesilaus, and curry Favor with him, did himself, notwithstanding, keep up the
Port of an Ambassador, and with that Freedom that became his Character, make a
Speech in behalf, not of Thebes only, from whence he came, but of all Greece,
remonstrating that Epaminondas his ^ol^ Demand.
Sparta had grown great by War, to the great Grievance of all her Neighbors.
He urged, that Peace might be made upon equal terms, such a one as might be a
lasting one, which could not otherwise be done, than by reducing all to a
Parity. Agesilaus perceiving all the other Greeks to hearken much to this
Discourse, and to be pleased with it, presently asked him, Whether he thought
it fit that Baeotia should be set free, and be permitted to live by her own
Laws? Epaminondas briskly returned the Question, Whether it were sit that
Sparta should live by hers? Agesilaus being moved at this Reply, Bid him set
forth what ground he had for pleading such Immunity for Baeotia. Epaminondas
again asked him, What grounds he had for demanding liberty for Sparta?
Agesilaus was so enraged at this, that he immediately struck the Thebans out of
the League, and declared War against them. With the rest of the Greeks he made
a Peace, and dismissed them with this Saying, That what could be peaceably
adjusted, should; what was otherwise incurable, must be committed to the
Success of War, it being a thing of too great difficulty to provide for all
things by Treaty.

The Ephori did hereupon dispatch their Orders to Cleombrotus, who was at that
time in Phocis, to march directly into Baeotia, and at the same time sent to
their Allies for Help. The Confederates were A War with Thebes.
very resty in the Business, and unwilling to Engage, but as yet they feared
the Spartans, and durst not refuse. And although many Portents and Prodigies of
ill Presage, had appeared; and though Prothous the Laconian had labored all he
could to hinder it, yet Agesilaus would needs go forward, and prevailed so,
that the War was decreed. He thought the present Juncture of Affairs very
advantageous to it, the rest of Greece being wholly free, and in League with
them, the Thebans only exempted. But that this War was undertaken more upon
Passion than Judgment, the Event did prove: for the Treaty was finished but the
14th of May, and the Lacedaemonians received their great Overthrow at Leuctrae
Battle of Leuctrae.
the 5th of June within 20 days. There fell at that time 1000 Spartans, and
Cleombrotus their King, in the Company of many others of the most gallant Men
of that Nation; particularly Cleonymus, the Son of Sphodrias, that beautiful
Youth, was thrice knocked down at the Feet of the King, and as often recovered
it, but was slain at the last.

This unexpected Blow, which fell so heavy upon the Lacedaemonians, brought
greater Glory to Thebes, than ever was acquired by any other of the
Grecian-Republicks, in their Civil Wars against each other. The Behavior
notwithstanding of the Spartans, though beaten, was much greater, and more to
be admired, than The Spartan's Behavior under their Misfortune.
that of the Thebans. And indeed, if as Xenophon says* In Conversation good
Men, even among their Sports, and in their Wine, do let fall many remarkable
Sayings and Jests, that are worth the preserving; how much more worthy to be
recorded, is an exemplary constancy of Mind, appearing both in the Countenances
and Behaviors of brave Men, when they are pressed by adverse Fortune. It
happened that the Spartans were Celebrating a solemn Feast, at which many
Strangers were* present from other Countries, and the Town full of them, when
this News of the Overthrow came. The Ephori, though they were sufficiently
aware, that this Blow had quite ruined the Spartan Grandeur, and its Primacy
over the rest of Greece, yet gave Orders that the Dancing should not break off,
nor any of the Ceremonies of the Festival abate. The next Morning, when they
had full Intelligence concerning it, and every body knew who were slain, and
who survived, the Fathers of the slain came out rejoicing in the Marketplace,
saluting each other with a kind of Exultation; on the contrary, the Fathers of
the Survivors hid themselves at home among the Women, as wholly ashamed of
their Children. If Necessity drove any of them abroad, they went very
dejectedly, with down* Looks, and sorrowful Countenances. The Women out-did the
Men in it: Such whose Sons were Slain, openly rejoicing, and meeting
triumphantly in the Temples; they who expected their Children home, being very
silent, and much troubled.

But the common People being awakened by this Calamity, and withal terrified
with the News of Epaminondas his Design of Invading Peloponnesus, began to
think of the Oracle, which had predicted Woes to them, when they had a Lame Man
to their King, and grew mightily afflicted for the Rejection of Leotychidas,
who was both the right Heir, and strait in all his Limbs. Yet the regard they
had to the Wealth and Reputation of Agesilaus, so far stifled this Murmuring of
the People, that notwithstanding it, they threw themselves upon him in
Agesilaus invested with absolute Power, to remedy the present Difficulties of
State.
this Distress, as the only Man that was fit to heal the public Malady, by
being made sole Arbiter of all their Difficulties, whether relating to the
Affairs of War or Peace. One great one was then before them, concerning the
Runaways that had fled out of the Battle, who being many and powerful, it was
feared that they might make some Commotion in the Republic, to prevent the
execution of the Law upon them for their Cowardice. The Law in The Spartan. Law
against Cowar^ice.
that Case was very severe; for they were not only to be degraded from all
Honors, but also it was a Disgrace to inter-marry with them: Who-ever met any
of them in the Streets, might beat him if he listed, nor was it lawful for him
to resist: They in the mean while were obliged to go abroad in a nasty Habit,
with their Gowns patched of diverse Colors, and to wear their Beards half
shaved, half unshaven. To execute so rigid a Law as this, in a Case where the
Offenders were so many, and of those many Men of great Families and Interest,
and that in a time when the Commonwealth wanted Soldiers so much as then it
did, was of dangerous Consequence. Therefore they chose Agesilaus a Dictator,
or new Lawgiver, with full power of abrogating old Laws, or making new ones,
as he pleased. But he, without adding to, or diminishing from, or any way
changing the Law, came out into the public Assembly, and said, That the Law
should lie dormant at present, but be vigorously executed for the future. By
this means he at once preserved the Law from Abrogation, and the Citizens from
Infamy: And that he might take off the Consternation that was upon the young
Men, he made an Inroad He makes ^^ Inroad into ^rcadia
into Arcadia, where avoiding Fight as much as he could, he contented himself
to spoil the Territory, and to take a small Town belonging to the Mantineans,
thereby reviving the Hearts of Populace, letting them see that they were not
every where unsuccessful.

Upon this Epaminondas made an Inroad Epaminondas ^nvaded Sparta.
into Laconia, with an Army of 40000. besides light-armed Men, and others that
followed the Camp only for Plunder, so that Sparta 600 Years without an
Invasion.
in all they were at least 70000. It was now 600 Years since the Dorians had
possessed Laconia, and in all that time the Face of an Enemy had not been seen
within their Territories, no Man daring to Invade them: But now they made their
Incursions without Resistance, as far as Eurotas, and the very Suburbs of
Sparta; for Agesilaus would not permit them to engage against so impetuous a
Torrent, as Theopompus called it. He contented himself to fortify the chief
Parts of the City, and to place Guards conveniently, enduring mean while the
Taunts of the Thebans, who reproached him as the Firebrand of the War, and the
Author of all that Mischief to his Country, and bidding him defend himself if
he could. But this was not all: He was greatly disturbed at home with the
Tumults of the City, the Outcries and running about of the Old Men, who were
highly enraged at their present condition, and the Women much worse, being
terrified by the Clamours, and the Fires of the Enemy in the Field. But that
which cut him to the Heart, was the sense of his lost Glory; who having come to
the Crown of Sparta, when it was in its most flourishing Condition, and highest
Grandeur, now lived to see it laid low in Esteem, and all its great Vaunts
derided, even those which he himself had been accustomed to use, viz. That the
Women of Sparta had never seen the Smoke of the Enemies Fire. It is said, that
Antalcidas being in Dispute with an Athenian, about the Valor of the Two
Nations, the Athenian bragged, That they had often driven the Spartans from the
River C^phisus: Yes, said Antalcidas, but we never had occasion to drive you
from Eurotas. A common Spartan of less Quality, being in Company with an
Argive, who was vapouring how many Spartans lay buried in the Fields of Argus,
replied, But you have ^^^e buried in the Country of Laconia. Yet now the Case
was so altered, that Antalcidas being one of the Ephori, out of Fear, sent away
his Children privately to the Island of Cythera.

When the Enemy essayed to get over the River, and thence to Attack the Town,
Agesilaus betook himself to the high Places Agesilaus defends the Town.
and strong Holds of it. But it happened, that Eurotas at that time swelled to
a great height, by reason of the Snow that had fallen, and made the Passage
very difficult to the Thebans, not only by its depth, but much more by the Ice
that was upon it. Whilst this was doing, Epaminondas every where appeared the
foremost Man in the Army, insomuch that Agesilaus viewing the whole Action,
fell into admiration of his Gallantry. But when he came to the City, and would
fain have attempted something either upon it, or within the Limits of it, that
might raise him a Trophy there, he could not tempt Agesilaus out of his Hold,
but was fain to march off again, wasting the Country as he went.

Mean while there did a dangerous Conspiracy A dangerous Conspiracy in Sparta*
happen in Sparta, where 200 Men having gotten into a strong part of the Town
called Issorion, did seize upon the Temple of Diana and Garrison it. The
Spartans were enraged at it, and would have fallen upon them presently; but
Agesilaus not knowing how far the Sedition might reach, did command them to
forbear, and going himself in his Cloak, with but one Servant, when he came
near the Rebels, called out, and told them, That they mistook their Orders;
that by his Order they were to go, one part of them thither, showing them
another Place in the City, and part to another, which he also showed. The
Conspirators gladly heard this Discourse, thinking themselves no way suspected
of Treason, and readily went off to the Places which he showed them. Whereupon
Agesilaus placed in their room a Garrison of his own: Of the Conspirators he
apprehended 15. and put them to death in the night.

After this, a much more dangerous Conspiracy Another.
was discovered of Spartan Citizens, who had privately met in each others
Houses, to cause a Disturbance. It was equally dangerous, by reason of the
Greatness of the Party to prosecute them publicly according to Law, and to
connive at them. Agesilaus took another course, and by consent of the Ephori,
put them to death privately without Process; a thing never before known in
Sparta.

At this time also* many of the Helots, and The Helots run from their Colors.
other Hirelings, that were listed in the Army, ran away to the Enemy, which
was matter of great Consternation to the City. He therefore, caused some
Officers of his, every Morning before day, to search the Quarters of the
Soldiers, and, where any Man was gone, to hide his Arms, that so the greatness
of the number might not appear.

Historians differ about the time of the The time of the Thebans continuance
before Sparta.
Thebans Departure from Sparta. Some say, the Winter forced them; as also that
the Arcadian Soldiers Disbanding, made it necessary for the rest to retire.
Others say, that they stayed there Three Months, till they had laid the whole
Country waste. Theopompus is the only Author who gives out, That when the
Baeotarchae, or Council of War of the Theban Army, had resolved upon the
Retreat, Phrixus the Spartan came to them, and offered them, from Agesilaus,
Ten Talents to be gone; so hiring them to do, what they were already doing of
their own accord. How he alone should come to be aware of this, I know not;
only in this all Authors agree, That the Sparta preserved by the Wisdom of
Agesilaus.
saving of Sparta from Ruin, was wholly due to the Wisdom of Agesilaus, who in
this Extremity of Affairs quitted all his Ambition and his Haughtiness, and
resolved to play a saving Game. But all his Wisdom and Prowess was not
sufficient to recover the Glory of it, and to raise it to its ancient
Greatness. For as we see in Bodies, long used to strict, and too exquisitely
regular Diet, if they commit any great Disorder, it is usually fatal; so in
this City, which by the strictness of her Laws, and the severe Virtue, and
great Conduct of her Leaders, had flourished so long, one great mistake in
Policy undid all. Nor was this Fall wholly undeserved, since they so much
swerved from the Institutions of Lycurgus, to which their Ancestors were sworn,
who had formed a Republic, wholly fitted to the Ease, and Peace, and virtuous
Life of the Inhabitants, so that they might have lived happily within
themselves, without molesting their Neighbors, or seeking Dominion over them.

Agesilaus being now very Aged, gave over all Military Employments; but his Son
Archidamus, having received help from Dionysius of Sicily, did give a great
Overthrow The Arcadians beaten by Archidamus, Son to Agesilaus.
to the Arcadians, in a Fight remarkably known by the Name of The tearless
Battle, wherein there was a great Slaughter of the Enemy, without the loss of
one Spartan. This Victory did but too much discover the present Weakness of
Sparta; for heretofore Victory was esteemed so usual a thing with them, that
for their greatest Successes they seldom sacrificed any more than a Cock to the
Gods. Neither were the Soldiers much elated at the News when it came: yea, when
the great Victory was obtained at Mantinea, which is at large described by
Thucidides, the Messenger that brought the News, had no other Reward, than a
good piece of Powdered Beef sent him to his Lodgings* But at the News of this
Arcadian Victory, they were not able to contain themselves; but the old King
went out in Procession with Tears of Joy in his Eyes, to meet and embrace his
Son, and all the Council attended him. The Old Men and Women all marched out as
far as the River Eurota, lifting up their Hands, and thanking the Gods, that
they had washed off the Stain that had lately stuck upon Sparta, saying, That
now they could boldly appear in the Face of the Sun, who before, out of Shame
and Confusion, could not appear even to their own Wives.

When Epaminondas rebuilt Messene, and Messene rebuilt by Epaminondas.
recalled the ancient Citizens to it, they were not able to obstruct the
Design, being not in condition of appearing in the Field against them. But the
Spartans were very much offended with Agesilaus, when they found so large a
Territory, equal to their own in Compass, and for Fertility the richest of all
Greece, taken from them in his Reign. Therefore it was that the King broke off
Treaty with the Thebans, when they offered him Peace, rather than set his Hand
to the passing away of that Country, though it was already taken from him.
Which Punctilio of Honor had like to have cost him dear; for in the progress
of Epaminondas his Stratagem against Sparta.
the War he was overreached by a Stratagem, which had almost amounted to the
loss of Sparta. For when the Mantineans again revolted from Thebes to Sparta,
and Epaminondas understood that Agesilaus was come to their Assistance with a
powerful Army, he privately, in the night, quit his Quarters at Tegea, and
unknown to the Mantineans, marched toward Sparta, insomuch that he failed very
little of taking it empty and unarmed. Of this Agesilaus having Intelligence,
sent him by Euthymus the Thespian, says Callisthenes, but by some Cretan,
says Xenophon, immediately dispatched a Post to Lacedaemon, to advertise them
of it, and withal to let them know, that he was hastening to them. He did it
with that Expedition, that he prevented the Thebans, who came over Eurotas
after he was in the Town. They notwithstanding He is beaten back by Agesilaus.
made an Assault upon the Town, and were received by Agesilaus with great
Courage, he bestirring himself much beyond what was to be expected in his
years. For he did not now Fight with that Caution and Cunning which he formerly
made use of, but put all upon a desperate push; which (though not his usual
method) succeeded so well, that he rescued the City out of the Jaws of
Epaminondas, and forced him to retire. This Action deserved a Trophy, and had
one; at the erection of which, Agesilaus encouraged the Citizens, by showing
them how well they had paid their Debt to their Country in this Action, and
particularly took notice of the great The great ^^^^o^ts of Archidamus
Performances of his Son Archidamus, who had that day made himself Illustrious,
both by his Courage and Agility of Body, speedily shifting Places to all the
dangerous Passes, where the Enemy pressed hardest into the Town, every where
charging the Enemy, though with but few in his Company. But the grand Example
of an Heroic Valor was given by Isadas, the Son Greater of Isadas.
of Phaebidas, to the Admiration of the Enemy, as well as of his Friends. He
was a very comely, handsome, well-grown, proper Youth, just beginning to write
Man. He had no Arms upon him, scarce Clothes; he had just anointed himself at
home, when upon the Alarm, without further Ceremony, in that Undress, he
snatched a Spear in one hand, and a Sword in the other, and brake into the
thickest of his Enemies, bearing down all before him. He received no Wound,
whether that he were the particular Care of GOD, who rewarded his Valor with
an extraordinary Protection, or whether his Shape being so large and beautiful,
and his Dress so unusual, they thought him more than a Man. The gallantry of
the Action was so esteemed among the Spartans, that the Ephori gave him a He is
both rewarded and amerced.
Garland; but as soon as they had done, they fined him 1000 Drachms, for going
out to Battle unarmed.

A few days after this, there was another Battle fought near Mantinea, wherein
Epaminondas having routed the Van of the Lacedaemonians, was eager in the
pursuit of them, when Anticrates, the Laconian, wounded Epaminondas slain.
him with a Spear, says Dioscorides; but the Spartans to this day call the
Posterity of this Anticrates, Macheriones.
Swordmen, because that he wounded Epaminondas with a Sword. They so dreaded
Epaminondas, when living, that the Slayer of him was embraced and admired by
all; nay, they decreed Honors to him and his Posterity, to which latter they
gave Immunity from all manner of Taxes: This Privilege, Callicrates, one of
his Descendants, now enjoys.

Epaminondas being Slain, there was a general Peace again concluded, from which
Agesilaus's Party excluded the Messenians, as Men that had no City, and
therefore would not let them Swear to the League; to which, when the rest of
the Greeks admitted them, the Lacedaemonians went off, and continued the War
alone, in hopes of subduing the Messenians. For this Reason Agesilaus too much
given to War.
was Agesilaus esteemed a stubborn, refractory Man, and insatiable of War, who
took such pains to hinder the League, and to protract the War, at a time when
he had not Money wherewith to carry it on, but was forced to borrow of the
Citizens, and to oppress them with heavy Taxes, and all this to retrieve the
poor City of Messenia, after he had lost so great an Empire both by Sea and
Land, as the Spartans were possessed of, when he came to the Crown.

But it did more move the Indignation of all Men, when he put himself into the
Service He takes Pay of Tachos in Egypt.
of Tachos the Egyptian. They thought it too too much unworthy of a Man of his
Quality, who was then looked upon as the prime Commander in all Greece, who had
filled all Countries with his Renown, to let himself out to Hire to a
Barbarian, an Egyptian Rebel, (for Tachos was no better) and to fight for Pay,
as Captain only of a Band of Mercenaries. If at those Years of Eighty and odd,
after his Body had been worn out with Age, and enfeebled with Wounds, he had
engaged in some very Honorable Cause, as the Liberty of Greece, or the like,
it had been however worthy of some Reproof. To make an Action honorable, it
ought to be agreeable to the Age, and other Circumstances of the Person; for it
is Circumstance that does difference the Action, and make it either good or
bad. But Agesilaus valued not other Men's Discourses; he thought no public
Employment dishonorable; the ignoblest thing in his esteem was for a Man to
sit idle and resty at home, till Death should come and take him napping. The
Money therefore that he received from Tachos, he laid out in raising of Men,
wherewith having filled his Ships, he took also 30 Spartan Captains with him,
as formerly he had done in his Asiatick Expedition, and set Sail for Egypt.

As soon as he arrived at Egypt, all the great Officers of the Kingdom came to
pay their Compliments to him at his Landing. His Reputation being so great, had
raised the Expectation of the whole Country, which did flock in to see him; but
when they found, instead of the great Prince The Egyptians disappointed in
Agesilau^, as to the appearance of his outward Person
whom they looked for, a little Old Man, of contemptible presence, without all
Ceremony lying down upon the Grass, his Hair uncombed, his Clothes threadbare,
they fell into Laughter and Scorn of him, crying out, that the old Proverb was
now made good, The Mountain had brought forth a Mouse. They were much more
scandalized at his Stupidity, (as they thought it) who, when Presents were made
of all manner of Provisions, took only the Meal, the Calves, and the Geese, but
rejected the Sweetmeats, the Confections and Perfumes: When they did urge him
to the acceptance of them, he took them and gave them to the Helots that were
in his Army; yet he was taken with the Garlands they made of the An Egyptian
(...)t, of which Pap^^ was made.
Papyrus, because of their native Simplicity, and when he returned homewards,
he demanded one of the King, which he carried with him.

When he joined with Tachos, he found his Expectation of being Generalissimo
frustrated: Tachos reserved that place for himself, making Agesilaus only
Captain of the Band of Mercenaries, and Chabrias the Athenian Admiral. This was
the first occasion of his Discontent; but there followed others: Agesilaus
discontented in Egypt.
he (being daily tired with the Insolency and Vanity of this Egyptian) was at
length forced to attend on him into Phaenicia, in a condition much below his
Spirit and Dignity, which, notwithstanding, he was forced to digest for a
while, till he had opportunity of showing his Resentment. It was soon afforded
him by Nectanabis, the Uncle of Tachos, and a great He revolts to Nectanabis
from Tachos.
Captain under him, who took an occasion to fall off from his Nephew, and was
soon Proclaimed King by the Egyptians. This Man invited Agesilaus to his
Party, and the like he did to Chabrias offering great Rewards to both. Tachos
having smelt it, did immediately apply himself both to Agesilaus and Chabrias,
with great Humility to them both, beseeching their continuance in his
Friendship. Chabrias consented to it, and did what he could to sweeten
Agesilaus in the matter: but he gave this short Reply, You, O Chabrias, came
hither a Voluntier, and may go and stay as you see cause; but I am the Servant
of Sparta, sent hither on their Errand, and must take my Measures from them.
This being said, he soon dispatched Messengers to Sparta, who were sufficiently
instructed both in the Accusations of Tachos, and the Commendations of
Nectanabis. The Two Egyptians did also send their Ambassadors to Lacedaemon,
the one to claim Continuance of the old League already made; the other to make
great Offers for the breaking of it, and making a new One. The Spartans having
heard both sides, gave in their public Answer, That they referred the whole
Matter to Agesilaus; but priyately wrote to him, to act as he should find it
best for the Profit of the Commonwealth. Upon receipt of his Orders, he soon
changed sides, carrying all the Mercenaries with him to Nectanabis, prefacing
so foul an Action, with the plausible pretense of acting for the Benefit of his
Country, whereas the fine Veil being taken off, the Fact was no better than
downright Treachery. But the Lacedaemonians, who make it the first Principle of
their Actions to serve their Country, know not any thing to be just or unjust
by any Measures but that.

Tachos being thus deserted by the Mercenaries, fled for it. Upon which, one
Mendesius Tachos flies.
being designed his Successor, arose and came against Nectanabis, with an Army
Nectanabis ^s oppos^d by Mendesius.
of an 100000 Men. Nectanabis in his Discourse with Agesilaus, despised them as
new raised Men, who, though many in number, were of no Skill in War, being most
of them Handicrafts-men and Tradesmen, never bred to War. To whom Agesilaus
answered, That he despised their numbers, but was afraid of their Ignorance,
which gave no room for treating them by Finen^ss and Stratagem; for those are
to be used only with cunning and crafly Men, who, being themselves full of
Design, and suspicious always of yours, do give opportunity of putting Tricks
upon them; but a Foolhardy Man, that neither s^eth nor fears any thing,
gives no more opportunity to the Enemy, than he that stands stock-still
without putting out his Leg, gives to a Wrestler. This Mendesius was not
wanting in the Solicitations of Agesilaus, Agesilau^'^ A^vic^ makes him
suspectca by Nectanabis.
insomuch that Nectanabis grew jealous. But when Agesilaus advised to Fight the
Enemy, presently before either their Skill or their Numbers increased; it being
imprudent to protract a War with such Men, who (rude and inexpert as they were)
would so increase in numbers, as wholly to incompass them, and prevent their
Designs. This confirmed him in his Jealousy, and made him take the quite
contrary course, retreating into a strong Garrison, well Fortified with Walls
and Bulwarks. Agesilaus finding himself mistrusted, took it very ill, and was
full of Indignation, yet was ashamed to change Sides again, the other having
been so lately done; so that he was forced to follow Nectanabis into the Town.

When Mendesius came up, and began to draw a Line about the Town, and to
entrench, the Egyptian was resolving upon a Nectanabis being B^sieged,
resolves to Fight, but is opposed by Agesilaus.
Battle, thinking it much safer, than to be begirt round with a Ditch, and so
starved out in a long Siege. The Greeks were also of that mind, the Provisions
growing already scarce in the Town. When Agesilaus opposed it, the Egyptians
then suspected him much more, publicly calling him, The Betrayer of the King.
But Agesilaus (being now satisfied within himself) did bear all these
Reproaches patiently, and followed the Design close which he had laid, of
overreaching the Enemy, which was this:

The Enemy had entrenched with a deep Ditch and high Wall, resolving to shut up
the King and starve him. When the Ditch was brought almost quite round, he took
the Advantage of the Night, and Armed all his Greeks. Then, going to the King,
This, Agesilaus's Stratagem against Mendesius.
Young Man, is your opportunity, said he, of saving your self, which I durst
not all this while discover, lest the discovery should prevent it; but now the
Enemy has, at his own Cost, and the pains and labor of his own Men, provided
for our Security. As much of this Wall as is built, will prevent them from
surrounding us with their Multitude, the Gap yet left will be sufficient for us
to Sally out by: Now play the Man, and follow the Example the Greeks will give
you, and by Fighting valiantly, save your self and your Army; their Front will
not be able to stand against us, and their Rear we are sufficiently secured
from, by a Wall of their own making. Nectanabis admiring the Wisdom of
Agesilaus, immediately placed himself in the Grecian Army, and Fought with
them; which, upon the first Charge soon routed the Enemy. Agesilaus having now
gotten Credit with the King, began to use what Stratagems he thought good,
without being interrupted by him: He sometimes pretended a Retreat, otherwhile
charged furiously; by this means disordering the Enemy, and at last trolling
him into a Place enclosed between Two Ditches, that were The Mendesian*
Conquered.
very deep, and full of Water. When he had them at this Advantage, he soon
charged them, drawing up the Front of his Battle equal to the space between the
Two Ditches, so that they had no way of surrounding him, being enclosed
themselves on both sides. They made but little Resistance; many fell, others
fled and were dispersed.

Nectanabis being thus settled and fixed in his Kingdom, did with much Kindness
and Earnestness invite Agesilaus to spend his Winter in Egypt: But he made
haste home Agesilaus departs homeward.
to assist in the Wars of his own Country, whose Treasury he knew to be empty,
yet were they forced to hire Mercenaries, whilst their own Men were fighting
abroad. The King dismissed him very honorably, and among other Presents, he
presented the State of Sparta, with 230 Talents of Silver, toward the Charge
of their Wars: but the Winter-season being tempestuous, he was driven upon a
desert Shore of Africa, called The Haven of Menelaus, where, when his Ships
were just upon Landing, he expired, And dies by the way.
being then Eighty Eight Years Old, and having Reigned in Lacedaemon Forty One,
Thirty of which Years he passed in great Splendour, being esteemed the greatest
and most powerful Prince of all Greece, and being looked on as in a manner
General and King of it, till the Battle of Leuctra. It was the Custom of the
Spartans, to Bury their common Dead in the Place where they died, whatsoever
Country it was, but their Kings they Embalmed and carried home. Now the
Followers of Agesilaus, having not The manner of his Embalming.
wherewith to Embalm him, did, for want of Honey, which they used in their
Embalming, wrap his Body in Wax, and so conveyed him to Lacedaemon.

His Son Archidamus succeeded him in his Throne, so did his Posterity
successively to Agis, who was the 5th from Agesilaus. He was murdered by
Leonidas, for seeking to restore the ancient Discipline of Sparta.

CN. POMPEIVS MAGNUS
depiction of Pompey MBurg. sculp.

THE LIFE OF POMPEY.
Translated out of the Greek, By W. Oldys, LL. D.
THE People of Rome seem to have embraced Pompey from his Childhood, 1.
with the same Affection that Prometheus in the Tragedy of Eschylus, expressed
for Hercules, speaking of him, as the Author of his Deliverance, in these words,

Ah cruel Sire! how dear's thy Son to me!
The generous Offspring of my Enemy!
For on one hand, never did the Romans The Peoples Hat ^ to his Father.
give such a demonstration of their Hatred (a Hatred so implacable and savage)
against any of their Generals, as they did against Strabo, the Father of
Pompey. All his Lifetime, it is true, they stood in awe of his Martial Prowess
and Power, (for indeed he was a mighty Warrior) but immediately upon his
Death, (which happened by a Stroke of Thunder) they Treated him Barbarously,
dragging his very Corpse from the Hearse, as it was carried in Pomp at his
Funeral, with Villainy and Disgrace. On Their Love to him.
the other side, in Favor of Pompey, never had any Roman the Peoples Good Will
and Devotion more zealous throughout all the Changes of Fortune, either
springing up earlier, and aspiring together with him in Prosperity, or so
constantly Loyal in Adversity, as Pompey had. In Strabo, there was one great
cause of Hatred, his unsatiable. Covetousness; but in Pompey there were many,
whereby he became the Object of their Love; his Temperance of Life, His Virtues
Skill, and Exercise in Martial Discipline, Eloquence of Speech, Integrity of
Mind, and Affability in Conversation and Address; insomuch as no Man ever made
his Addresses with lesser Trouble, or gratified an Addressor with more Delight:
For in Presents, when he gave, 'twas without Disdain; when he received, 'twas
with Reverence and Honor.

In his Youth, he had a Grace in his His Favor.
Countenance extremely taking, seeming to anticipate his Eloquence, and win
upon the Affections of the People before he spoke; for in his Air there was a
Majestic Gravity, tempered with no less Candor and Humanity: And when as yet
he was but in the Flower and Dawn of his Manhood, there appeared in his
Deportment a sage and princely Genius, even in its Meridian. His Hair sat
somewhat hollow or rising a little: and the languishing motion of his Eyes,
seemed to form a resemblance in his Face, (though perhaps more through the
speech of People, than real likeness) to the Statues of King Alexander: Now
because many called him by that Name in his Youth, Pompey himself did not
decline it, insomuch that some in derision called him so; yet even Lucius
Philippus, a Man of Consular Dignity, when he was pleading in favor of him,
thought it not unfit to say, That there was nothing absurd or unexpected in
this, that he himself being Philip, should be a Lover of Alexander.

It Is reported of Flora the Curtezan, That His Amors with Flora.
in her latter time she took great delight in relating her Amors and
Familiarity with Pompey, and was wont to say, That she could never part upon an
Enjoyment, without a Bite or Satirical Reflection. And (...)
withal she would farther tell you, That one Geminius, a great Companion of
Pompey's, fell in Love with her, and made his Court with all the Arts
imaginable; but she refusing, and telling him, However her Inclinations were,
yet she could not gratify his Desires for Pompey's sake: He therefore moved
Pompey in it, and Pompey frankly gave his Consent, but never afterward would
touch her, or have any Converse with her, notwithstanding he seemed to have a
great Passion for her; which Flora resented, not with the Levity of a Strumpet,
for that she languish'd afterward under a tedious Sickness, through Grief and
Desire. Now, 'twas said, That this Flora became such a celebrated Beauty, that
Cecilius Metellus, when he adorned the Temples of Castor and Pollux with diverse
rare Pictures and Images; among the rest, he dedicated hers for her singular
Beauty. But Pompey was quite besides his natural Temper, in his Deportment
toward the Wife of Demetrius, his Franchis'd Servant (who had a great
Influence upon him in his Lifetime, and left an Estate of 4000 Talents) where
he demeaned himself neither gentilely nor ingeniously, fearing lest he should
fall under the common Censure of being enamored and charmed with her Beauty,
which was incomparable, and became famous every where. Thus though herein he
seemed to be providently circumspect and Cautious, yet even in Scandals of this
Nature, he could not avoid the Calumnies of his Enemies, but that upon the
score of Women, his Wives at least, they played the Sycophants with him, and
accused him, as if he had Connived at many Things, and Imbezil'd the public
Revenue to gratify their Luxury.

Then for his Sobriety, and Temperance His Temperance.
in Diet, there was one remarkable passage in his Sickness; when his Stomach
nauseated common Meats, his Physician prescribed him a Thrush to Eat; but upon
search there was none to be bought, (for they were not then in Season) and one
telling him, They were to be had at Lucullus's, who kept them all the year
round, Why then, said he, if it were not for Lucullus's Luxury, should not
Pompey live? Thereupon wishing Health to his Physician, he discharged him, and
accepted of what was in Season. But of that hereafter.

Now Pompey being as yet a very young Man, and upon an Expedition, (in which
his Father was appointed General against Cinna) had in his Tent with him one
Lucius Terentius, his Companion and Comrade, who, being corrupted by Cinna,
entered into an Engagement to kill Pompey, as others had done to set the
Generals Tent on Fire. This Conspiracy being discovered to Pompey at Supper, he
seemed no ways discomposed at it, but drank more liberally than usual, and
expressed an extraordinary Kindness to Terentius; then about Bedtime
(pretending to go to his Repose) he stole away secretly out of his own Tent,
and setting a Guard about his Father, went to his Rest: Terentius now thinking
his Enterprise ripe for Execution, rose with his naked Sword, and coming to
Pompey's Bedside, stabbed several Strokes through the Bed-Cloaths, as if he
were lying there. Immediately upon this there was a great Uproar throughout all
the Camp, arising from the Hatred they bore to the General, and an Universal
Inclination of the Soldiers to Mutiny, all tearing down their Tents, and
betaking themselves to their Arms; the General himself all this while durst not
venture out because of the Tumult, but Pompey running into the midst of them,
beseech'd them with Tears, and at last threw himself prostrate upon his Face
before the door of the Trench, and lay there in the passage, as a Bar at their
Feet, bewailing his Fate, and bidding those that were marching off, if they
would go, to trample upon him; whereupon every Man began to retreat, and all,
except 800, either through Shame or Compassion, repented of their Folly, and
were Reconciled to the General.

Immediately upon the Death of Strabo, Actio peculatus.
there was an Action commenced against Pompey as his Heir, for that his Father
had imbezil'd the public Treasure; But Pompey having well traced the Thief,
charged it upon one Alexander, a franchis'd BondSlave of his Fathers, and made
an undoubted Evidence before the Judges, that he had purloin'd and converted it
to his own Use. Afterward he himself was Arraigned, for that he had seized
upon the Toils, or Hunting Tackle, and Books, that were taken at Asculum. To
this he Confessed thus far, That he received them from his Father, when he took
Asculum, but Pleaded farther, That he had lost them since, which happened upon
Cinna's Return to Rome, when his House was broke open and plundered by those of
his Guards. This Cause was notably managed with his Adversary in the
Preparatories of Judgment, in which he appearing strangely subtle and
industrious beyond his years, gained great Reputation and Favor; insomuch,
that Antistius the Praetor, and Judge of that Cause, took a great Liking to
Pompey, and offered him his Daughter in Marriage, having had some Treaties and
Communications with his Friends about it. Pompey accepted of the Conditions,
and they were privately He Marrie^ with Antistia*
Contracted together in Marriage: However this Matter was not so closely
conveyed, as to escape the Multitude, but it was discernible enough, from the
Favors that were shown to him by Antistius in his Cause. Whereupon at last,
when Antistius pronounced the absolutory Sentence of the Judges, the People (as
if it had been upon a Signal given) made the same Acclamation as was anciently
used at Marriages, Talassio; the Original of which Custom is Reported to be
this: Upon a time, when the Daughters of the Sabines came to Rome, to see the
Shows and Sports there, and were violently seized upon by the Nobles for Wives,
it happened that some Goatswains and Herdsmen of the meaner Rank, were carrying
off a beautiful and proper Damosel, and lest any of the Nobles should meet
them, and take her away, therefore as they ran, they cried out with one Voice,
Talassio: Now Talassius was an eminent and acceptable Person among them,
insomuch, as all that heard the Name, clapped their Hands for Joy, and joined
with them in the Shout, as applauding and congratulating the Choice; Now, say
they, (because that proved a fortunate Match to Talassius) hence it is that this
Acclamation is jocularly used as a Nuptial Song at all Weddings. And this is
the most credible Story that I can meet with touching what is related of
Talassio.

Some few days after this Judgment, Pompey Married Antistia, and after that
went to Cinna's Camp, where finding some false Suggestions and Calumnies forged
against him, he began to be afraid, and presently withdrew himself in disguise
from the Camp; this sudden disappearance occasioned great Jealousies, and there
went a Rumor and Speech throughout all the Camp* as if Cinna had Murdered the
young Man; whereupon all that had been any ways disobliged, and bore any Malice
to him, resolved to make an Assault upon him: But he endeavoring to make his
Escape, was apprehended by a Centurian, that pursued him with his naked Cinna's
Death.
Sword; wherefore Cinna in this Distress fell upon his Knees, and offered him a
Seal of great value for his Ransom; but the Centurian checked him very
insolently, saying, I come not here to Seal a Covenant, but to Chastise and be
Revenged upon the Iniquity of a Lawless and Ungodly Tyrant; and so dispatched
him immediately.

Thus Cinna being slain, Carbo, a Tyrant Sect. 2. Carbo and Sylla cont^nd for
the Government.
more senseless than he, took the Administration of the Government, and all
Things upon him. But shortly after came Sylla, a Man by Reason of these
imminent Evils desired of most, but especially of those who placed no small
Ease and Satisfaction in the exchange of a Master: For the City was brought to
that pass by those grievous Oppressions and Calamities, that every Man now
being utterly in despair of Liberty, was compounding for himself, and laying
out for the mildest and most tolerable Bondage. About that time Pompey was at
Now the March^s ^f ^^^^^a.
Picenum in Italy, where he had spent some time in his Diversion, for that he
had a Country Inheritance there, though the chiefest Motive of his Abode in
that Country, was the Delight he took in the Cities thereabouts, where his
whole Family was nobly received, and treated with all the Offices of Humanity
for his Fathers sake.

Now when Pompey perceived, that the He sides with Sylla.
noblest and best of the City began to forsake their Fortunes, and fly from all
Quarters to Sylla's Camp, as to their Haven, he designed likewise thither among
the rest, yet he disdained to go as a Fugitive without a Passport, or for
Protection as one destitute of Aid, but like one rather that could make his own
Welcome, and merit Favor gloriously and with force. And to that end, he moved
and solicited the Peicentines for their Assistance, who as cordially embraced
his Motion, and rejected those that were sent from Carbo; insomuch that one
Vindius, a malepert Fellow of that Faction, taking upon him to say, That Pompey
was come with a Speech out of School, to make himself a Captain of the People:
They were so incensed against him, that immediately they fell upon this
Vindius, and slew him. From henceforward Pompey finding a Spirit of Government
upon him, though as yet not above Twenty three years of Age, nor yet deriving
an Authority by Commission from any Superior Magistrate, took the privilege
to grant himself a full Power and Jurisdiction; and in order to that, he caused
a Tribunal or Court of Judicature to be erected in the Marketplace of Auximum,
a populous City; Now it happened that two of the chiefest among them, (the
Ventidians Brethren) of Carbo's Faction, were grand Opposers of his Designs,
those he banished instantly commanding them by a public Edict to depart the
City. Then he fell to levying an Army, issuing out Commissions to Sergeants of
Bands, Centurions, and other Officers, according to the Form of Military
Discipline: And in this manner he went round, and modeled all the rest of the
Cities in the same Circuit; so that of all those that were Favorers of Carbo's
Faction, some vanishing away, and others cheerfully surrendering themselves, in
a little time he mustered up three entire Legions, having supplied himself
beside with all manner of Provisions, Ammunition, Beasts, Carriages, and all
other Implements of War. in this Equipage he set forwards on his March toward
Sylla, not with Whip and Spur, as if he were in haste, nor yet in a Cloud, as
if he coveted to be concealed, but by small Journeys, making several Halts upon
the Road, to distress and annoy the Enemy, designing to insinuate himself in
every part of Italy where e're he came, and to work them into a Revolt and
Defection from Carbo.

Now there arose together against him H(...) over ^^ M^^ian.
Three great Commanders of the Enemy, Carinna, Caelius, and Brutus, and drew up
their Forces, not all in the Front, nor yet together on any one part, but
encamping three several Armies in a Circle about him, they resolved to
encompass and devour him at once; Pompey was no ways amazed at this, but
drawing up all his Forces into one Body, and placing his Horse in the Front of
the Battle, where he himself was in Person, he singl'd out and bent all his
Forces against Brutus; now the Enemies Horse, consisting chiefly of Gauls, made
the first Charge, which Pompey received, and as readily returned it; for he
himself encountering Hand to Hand with one of the foremost and stoutest among
them, made a home Pass at him with his Lance, and slew him: The rest seeing
this, turned their Backs, and fled in great Disorder, falling foul upon
themselves, and breaking the Ranks of their own Foot, insomuch that it
presently caused a total Rout; whereupon the Commanders fell out among
themselves, and every one marched off, steering their course some one way, some
another, as their Fortunes led them: The Towns likewise round about came in,
and surrendered themselves to Pompey, concluding that the Enemy was dispersed
for fear. Next after these came Scipio the Consul to attack him, and with as
little Success; for before the Armies could join, or be within the Throw of
their Darts, Scipio's Soldiers saluted Pompey's, and came over to them, but
Scipio made his Escape by Flight. Last of all, Carbo himself sent down diverse
Regiments of Horse by the River Arsis, which Pompey assailed with the same
Courage and Success as those before; for having routed and put them to Flight,
he forced them in the pursuit upon moorish and boggy Places, altogether
unpassable for Horse, where seeing no hopes of Escape, they cried out Quarter,
yielding themselves, Horse and Armor, all to his Mercy.

Sylla was hitherto unacquainted with all this Action; but as soon as he had
Intelligence of his Engagements, he seemed extremely concerned, fearing lest
Pompey should be circumvented and oppressed by so many and such experienced
Commanders of the Enemy, whereupon he marched with all speed to his Aid. Now
Pompey having advice of his Approach, sent out Orders to his Officers for a
Campaign, commanding them to marshal and draw up all his Forces in Battle
array, that they might appear in the greatest Order and Bravery before their
Emperor, for that he expected indeed great Honors from him, but he met with
greater; for as soon as Sylla saw him thus advancing, his Army so well
appointed, and such goodly Men, adorned and elevated with all the Glories of
Youth and Victory, he alighted from his Horse, and being first (as became him)
saluted by the Title of Emperor, he returned the Salutation upon (...)
Imperator.
Pompey, in the same term and style of Emperor, contrary to the Expectations of
all that were present, who little dreamed that he would have imparted such an
Honorable Title to one of no greater Age, nor yet a Senator, especially
considering how desperately he himself had contended for that very Title and
Dignity, against the Factions of Scipio and Marius. And indeed, all the rest of
his Deportment was agreeable to his first Compliments; for when ^^re Pompey
came into his presence, he did some sort of Obeisance to him, either in ^^ing
and being uncovered, or the like, which he was rarely seen to have done to any
of the rest of his Nobles, notwithstanding there were diverse others about him
of great Quality and Honor. Yet was not Pompey puffed up at all, or exalted
with these Favors: and therefore when Sent in Aid to Metellus.
Sylla would have sent him with all expedition into Gallia Celtica, a Province
under the Government of Metellus, for that 'twas thought Metellus had done
nothing memorable, at leastwise worthy of that great Army he commanded there.
Pompey replied as modestly, That it could never be thought fair or honorable
for him, to extort a Province out of the hands of an ancient Captain, and one
of far greater Fame and Experience than himself; however, if Metellus were
willing, and would command his Service, he should be very ready to accompany
and assist him in the War. Which, when Metellus came to understand, he approved
of the Motion, and accordingly invited him over by Letter. Whereupon Pompey
fell immediately like Lightning into Gaul, where he did not only do wonderful
Exploits of himself, but also blew up and kindled anew that bold and warlike
Spirit which old Age had in a manner extinguished in Metellus, having the same
operation with molten o^ boiling Copper, which being poured upon that that is
cold and solid, seems to dissolve and melt it faster than Fire it self. But I
must observe the same course here as is done with a famous Wrestler, who,
though he has excelled all Men in those Games even from his Youth, and always
born away the Prize with Glory, yet it is not usual to account of his childish
Victories, or enter them upon record among the rest: So, for the Exploits of
Pompey in his Minority, though they were brave in themselves, yet because they
were obscured and buried in the multitude and greatness of his latter Wars and
Conquests, I dare not be particular in them, lest by trifling away time in the
lesser moments of his Youth, I should casually omit those grander Actions and
Enterprises, which best discover the natural Disposition and singular Genius of
the Man.

Now when Sylla had brought all Italy under his Dominion, and was proclaimed
Dictator, he began to reward the rest of his Followers, (enriching all his
Captains and other Officers*) whereof some he advanced to Honor, others to
Places of Dignity and Profit in the Commonwealth, largely and liberally
gratifying every Man according to his Talent and Desire. But for Pompey, he was
a great Admirer of his Valor and Conduct, and thinking that he might prove a
great Stay and Support to him hereafter in all his Affairs, sought by all means
to espouse and join him in Alliance to him, and having likewise the Antistia
divorced.
Approbation of his Wife Metella, they persuaded him to put away Antistia, and
Marry He marries Aemilia.
Aemylia, (the Daughter-in-law of Sylla, by Metella and Scaurus her former
Husband) she being at that very time the Wife of another Man, cohabiting with
him, and with Child by him. These were the very Tyrannies of Marriage, and much
more agreeable to the Times under Sylla, than to the Nature and Genius of
Pompey. That Aemylia great with Child should be, as it were, ravished from the
Embraces of another for him, and that Antistia should be divorced with
dishonor and misery by him, for whose sake she had but just before been bereft
of her Father; to be at once both a Widow and Fatherless by his means; for her
Father Antistius was Murdered in the Senate, because he was suspected to be a
Favourer of Sylla for Pompey's sake; and her Mother likewise, after she had
seen all these Indignities, made away with her self. These were the Tragedies
that attended that unhappy Marriage, and that there might be nothing wanting to
complete the last Act, by Heavens! even Aemylia her self not long after died at
Pompey's in Childbed.

About this time an Express came to Sylla, 3.
That Perpenna had possessed himself of Sicily, whereby that Isle was now
become a Refuge and Receptacle for the Relics of the adverse Party: That
Carbo was hovering about those Seas with a Navy; That Domitius was fallen in
upon Africa; and that many other likewise of the Nobles and great Men in Exile,
thinking to avoid his Proscriptions or Outlawries by Flight, were daily
flocking into those Parts. Against these therefore was Pompey sent with a great
Army; and no sooner was he arrived in Sicily, but Perpenna departed thence,
leaving the whole Island to him. Wherefore Pompey received the distressed
Cities into Favor, and treated all with great Humanity, except that of the
Mamertines in Messene; for when they protested against his Court and
Jurisdiction, alleging their Privilege and Exemption founded upon an ancient
Charter or Grant of the Romans, he replied as sharply, What! will you never
leave prating of Laws to us that have Swords by our sides? It Is thought
likewise, That he showed but little Humanity to Carbo, seeming rather to insult
over his Misfortunes, than to chastize his Crime; for if there had been a
necessity, (as perhaps there was) that he should be taken off, that might have
been done at first, as soon as he was taken Prisoner, for then it would have
been the Act of him that commanded it, and imputed to his Malice; but here
Pompey commands a Man (that had been thrice Consul of Rome) to be be brought in
Fetters to the Bar, he himself sitting upon the Bench in Judgment, examining
the Cause throughout all the Formalities of Law, and pronouncing Sentence of
Death, as upon a common Malefactor, to the Grief and Indignation of all that
were present; and afterward he ordered him to be taken away and put to Death.
Now, it is reported of Carbo, That as soon as he was brought to the Scaffold,
and saw the Sword drawn for Execution, it wrought so with him, that immediately
he had a looseness or pain in his Belly, insomuch that he desired a little
respite of the Executioner, and a convenient place to ease himself. But yet
farther, C. Oppius, a great Friend of Caesar's, tells us, That Pompey dealt as
barbarously with Q. Valerius, a Man of singular Learning, especially in
Philology and Mathematics few like him; for when he was brought to him, he
walked aside and discoursed with him, and after a long Conference and full
Resolution of all his Questions, having learned what he could, he ordered his
Officers to take him away, and put him to Death. But we must not be too
credulous in all the Narratives of Oppius, especially when he undertakes to
relate any thing touching the Friends or Foes of Caesar: This is certain, That
there lay a necessity upon Pompey to be severe upon many of Sylla's Enemies,
those at leastwise that were eminent Persons in themselves, and notoriously
known to be taken; but for the rest, he dealt with them after his own natural
Temper, conniving at the Concealment of some, and himself being the Instrument
in the Escape of others. And the like Argument of his Clemency was shown in the
Himeraeans; for when Pompey had determined a sharp Revenge upon their City, for
that they had been stubborn Abettors of the Enemy, there stepped out one Sthenes,
a great Leader of the People there, and craving audience of Pompey, told him,
That what he was about to do, was not at all consistent with Justice; for that
he would pass by the Guilty, and destroy the Innocent: Pompey demanding, Who
that guilty Person was that would father the Offenses of them all? Sthenes
replied, 'Twas himself who had wrought upon and engaged his Friends by
Persuasions, and his Enemies by Force: whereupon Pompey being much taken with
the frank Speech and Boldness of the Man, first forgave him his Crime, and then
pardoned all the rest of the Himeraeans. Pompey likewise hearing, That his
Soldiers were very disorderly in their March, doing Violence upon the Roads, he
ordered their Swords to be sealed up in their Scabbards, and whosoever kept
them not so, were severely punished.

Whilst Pompey was thus busy in the Affairs Sent by Sylla into Afric^ against
Domitius.
and Government of Sicilly, he received a Decree of the Senate, and a
Commission from Sylla, commanding him forthwith to sail into Africa, and make
War upon Domitius with all his Forces: For Domitius had rallied up a far
greater Army than Marius had not long since, when he sailed out of Africa into
Sicily, and extremely distressed the Affairs of the Romans, being himself, of a
fugitive Outlaw, become a Tyrant. Pompey therefore having prepared all things
of a sudden, and left Memmius, his Sisters Husband, Governor of Sicily,
embarked and set Sail with 120 Galleys, and 800 other Vessels, laden with
Provisions, Money, Ammunition, Engines of Battery, and all other Necessaries.
In this Equipage he arrived with his Fleet, part at the Port of Utica, part at
Carthage; and no sooner was he landed there, but that 7000 of the Enemy
revolted and came over to him, which besides his own Forces that he brought
with him (consisting of 6 entire Legions) made up an Army of 43000
Fighting-men. Here they tell us of a pleasant Passage that happened to him at
his first Arrival; for that some of his Soldiers having by accident stumbled
upon a Treasure, whereby they got a good Mass of Money: The rest of the Army
hearing this, began to fancy that the Field was full of Gold and Silver, which
had been hid there of old by the Carthaginians in the time of their Calamities,
and thereupon fell to work; so that the Army was useless to Pompey for many
days, being totally engaged in the SilverMines, he himself all the while
walking up and down only, and laughing to see so many Thousands together,
digging and turning up the Earth in a fruitless Harvest: But at last growing
weary and hopeless, they came to themselves, and returned to their General,
begging him to lead them where he pleased, for that they had already reaped the
just Reward of their Folly. By this time Domitius had prepared himself, and
drawn out his Army in Battel-array against Pompey; but there happened to be a
rapid Torrent in the Valley betwixt them, craggy and difficult to pass over,
which, together with the great Storm of Wind and Rain pouring down even from
break of Day, seemed to show but little possibility of their coming together:
Insomuch that Domitius not expecting any Engagement that day, commanded his
Forces to draw off and retire to the Camp. Now Pompey, who was watchful upon
every Occasion, taking this time to be appointed by Fortune as his own, ordered
a March forthwith, and having passed over the Torrent, they fell in immediately
upon their Quarters. The Enemy was in a great Disorder and Tumult, and in that
Confusion attempted a Resistance; but they neither were all there, nor yet
together; besides, the Wind having veered about, lay beating the Rain full in
their Faces. Neither indeed was the Storm less troublesome to the Romans, for
that they could not clearly discern one another, insomuch that even Pompey
himself being unknown, escaped but narrowly; for when one of his Soldiers
demanded of him the Word of Battle, it happened that he was somewhat slow in
his Answer, which might have cost him his Life.

The Enemy being thus routed with a His Victory over Domitius.
great Slaughter, (for it is said, that of 20000 there escaped but 3000) the
Army saluted Pompey by the Name of Emperor; but he declined it, telling them,
That he could not by any means accept of that Title, as long as he saw any of
the Forts or Garrisons of the Enemy standing, but if they designed to make him
worthy of the Honor, they must first demolish the Camp wherein they lay
entrenched. The Soldiers hearing this, went presently and made an Assault upon
the Works and Trenches, and there Pompey Fought without his Helmet, in memory
of his former Danger, and to avoid it; the Camp being thus taken by Storm they
were put to the Sword, and, among the rest, Domitius was slain upon the Place;
After that Overthrow, the Cities of the Country thereabout were all taken in,
some by Surrender, and others by Storm; King Jarbas likewise, a Confederate and
Auxiliary of Domitius, was taken Prisoner, and his Kingdom was given to
Hiempsal*

Pompey could not rest here, but being His Conquest of Africa.
ambitious to follow the good Fortune and Valor of his Army, he fell into
Numidia, and marching forward many days Journies up into the Country, he
Conquered all where ever he came, resolving, That by his Hand the Name and
Power of the Roman Empire (which was now almost obliterated among the barbarous
Nations) should be revived again, and appear as formidable as ever; he said
likewise, That the wild Beasts of Africa ought not to be left without some
experience of the Courage and Success of the Romans, and therefore he bestowed
some few days in hunting of Lions and Elephants: Now it is said, That 'twas not
above the space of 40 days at the utmost, in which he gave a total Overthrow to
the Enemy, reduced Africa, and established the Affairs of the Kings and
Kingdoms of all that Country, being then but 24 years of Age. When Pompey
returned back to the City 4.
of Utica, there were presented to him Letters and Orders from Sylla,
commanding him to disband the rest of his Army, and himself with one Legion
only to wait there the coming of another General, that should succeed him in
the Government of that Province; this grated inwardly, and was extremely
grievous to Pompey, though he made no show of it; but the Army resented it
openly, and therefore when Pompey besought them to depart home before him, they
began to revile Sylla, and gave out broad Speeches, That they were resolved not
to forsake him, neither did they think it safe for him to trust the Tyrant:
Notwithstanding this, Pompey endeavored to appease and pacify them by fair
Speeches; but when he saw that all his Persuasions were vain, he left the
Bench, and retired to his Tent with Tears in his Eyes; but the Soldiers
followed him, and seizing upon him by force brought him again, and placed him
in his Chair of State; where great part of that day was spent in Dispute, they,
on their part, persuading him to stay and Command them; he, on the other side,
pressing upon them Obedience, and the danger of Mutinies; but at last, when
they grew more importunate and clamorous, He swore that he would kill himself,
if they attempted to force him; and yet even this would scarce appease them.
However, this gave occasion and rise to some malicious Reports, whereby 'twas
suggested to Sylla, That Pompey was up in Rebellion, whereupon Sylla said to
some of his Friends, Well, then I see it is my destiny to contend with Children
in my old Age: reflecting likewise upon Marius, for that he being but a mere
Youth had found him Work enough, and brought his Affairs into extreme Danger.
But Sylla being undeceived afterward by a better Intelligence, and hearing
that the whole City, in a manner, had designed to meet Pompey, and receive him
with all Kindness and Honor, he himself endeavored to exceed them all in
Civility; and therefore going out foremost to meet him, and embracing him with
great joy, he gave him his welcome aloud in the Title of Pompey His Title of
Magnus.
the Great, and commanded all those that were present to call him by that Name:
Others say, That he had this Title first given him by a general Acclamation of
all the Army in Africa, but that it took its force and power from the
ratification of Sylla; but this is true, That he himself was the last that
owned the Title, for 'twas a long time after, when he was sent Proconsul into
Spain against Sertorius, that he began to subscribe himself in his Letters and
Commissions by the Name of Pompey the Great, even then when the envy of the
Title was worn off by being common and familiar. Hence may the Wisdom of the
ancient Romans be justly reverenced and had in Admiration, That did not only
reward the Successes of Action and Conduct in War with such honorable Titles,
but adorned likewise the Virtues and Services of eminent Men in the Civil
Government, with the same Distinctions and Characters of Honor; and therefore
the People styled two by the Names of Maximi, i. e. the Greatest, Valerius, for
that he reconciled the Senate to the People when they were at Variance; and
Fabius Rullus, for that he put out of the Senate certain Libertines that had
been elected thither for their Riches.

Upon this Pompey desired the Honor of Sylla opposes his Triumph.
Triumph, which Sylla opposed stiffly, alleging, That the Law allowed that
Honor to none but Consuls and Praetors, and therefore Scipio the Elder, who
subdued the Carthaginians in Spain in far greater and nobler Conflicts, never
so much as Petitioned for Triumph, because he had never attained to the Office
of Consul or Praetor: And if Pompey, ( who had scarce a Hair in his Face, nor
yet of Age to be a Senator should enter the City in Triumph, what a load of
Envy would it cast at once upon Sylla's Government and Pompey's Honor? These
were the Arguments Sylla used against Pompey, showing that he should not by any
means yield to his Request; but if he would persist in his Ambition, that he
was resolved to interpose his Power, and lay a Prohibition upon him, as a Lover
of Contention and Disobedience; Pompey was no ways daunted at this, but wished
Sylla to recollect with himself, That more worshipped the Rising, than the
Setting Sun: intimating thereby, That his Power was increasing, and Sylla's in
the wain; Sylla did not perfectly hear the words, but observing a sort of
Amazement and Wonder in the Looks and Gestures of those that did hear them, he
asked, What it was that he said? When it was told him, he seemed to be very
much surprised with the Boldness of Pompey, and cried out twice together, E'ne
let him Triumph. But when others began to show their Stomach and Disdain,
Pompey, as *it is said, to gall and vex them the more, designed to have his
triumphant Chariot drawn with four Elephants, (having brought over several from
the Spoils of those African Kings) but the Gates of the City being too narrow,
he was forced to desist from that Project, and make use of Horses; in the next
place, some of his Soldiers (who failed of some Rewards, or been some way or
other disappointed) began to clamor and interrupt the Triumph, but Pompey
regarded these as little as the rest, and plainly told them, That he had rather
lose the Honor of his Triumph, than flatter them. Whereupon Servilius (a
Person of great Quality, and at first one of the chiefest Opposers of Pompey's
Triumph) said openly, Now I perceive that Pompey is truly Great, and worthy of
Triumph; it is clearly manifest, that he might easily have been a Senator if he
would, yet he did not sue for that, esteeming Honor as a Paradox, and hunting
after it, (as it is said) not in the common Road, but even there where no Man
else ever did: For what wonder had it been for Pompey in his nonage, to sit in
the Senate before his time? but to triumph before he was of the Senate, that
was the excess of Glory to a Miracle.

This Contest of his with Sylla for Triumph did not a little ingratiate him in
the good Will of the People; for it could not but be extremely grateful for
them to see one of their own Order in Triumph and then to return to them again
and take his Place among the Roman Knights; on the other side, 'twas no less
ungrateful to Sylla to see how fast he came on, and to what a height of Glory
and Power he was advanced, yet being ashamed to hinder him, he smothered his
Grief and lay quiet; but when by plain force, and in spite of him, Pompey
procured the Consulship for Lepidus, having by his own Interest reconciled him
to the Favor of the People, Sylla could not contain himself any longer, but
spying him after the Election, as he was crossing the Marketplace with a great
Train after him, cried out to him, Well, YoungMan! I see thou rejoycest in thy
Conquest, and for what cause I pritthee? Is it not a generous and worthy Act
think you, that the priority of Consulship should be given to Lepidus the
vilest of Men, against Catulus, the best and most deserving Man in all the
City? and all this, forsooth, by your Influence upon the People: Well, this
I Will advise thee, and look to it, that thou do not sleep, but keep a vigilant
Eye upon thy Affairs, for thou have raised up a dangerous Enemy to greater
Power than thy self. But that which gave the clearer demonstration of Sylla's
Ill Will to Pompey, (and whereby his former Kindness appeared to have been
specious only) was his last Will and Testament; for whereas he had bequeathed
several Lega^ies to all the rest of his Friends, and appointed some of them
Guardians to his Son, he passed by Pompey, without the least remembrance;
however Pompey bore this with great Moderation and Civility; insomuch that when
Lepidus and others obstructed his Interment in the Campus Martius, denying
indeed any public Solemnity of a Funeral, he himself attended the Hearse;
thereby giving both Honor and Security to it, and having his Obsequies
performed with all the Pomp and Solemnity of a Roman-General.

Shortly after the Death of Sylla, that 5. Lepidus moves a Civil Wa^*
prophetic Speech of his to Pompey touching Lepidus came to pass; for Lepidus
usurping the Government and Authority that Sylla had, did not go about by
Fetches, nor yet colourably in specious Pretenses, but immediately took up
Arms, having stirred up again, and guarded himself with the corrupted Remains
of that Faction that had escaped the Vengeance of Sylla: Now Catulus his
Colleague, who was followed by the sounder part of the Senate and People, was a
Man of the greatest Esteem among the Romans, for his singular Wisdom and
Justice, but his Talent lay in the Government of the City rather than the Camp,
being no great Man of War, whereas the exigency* of Affairs in this Juncture,
required rather the Skill and Experience of Pompey: Pompey therefore was not
long, in suspense which way to dispose of himself, but joining with the
Nobility, was presently appointed General of the Army He is sent against
Lepidus.
against Lepidus: who had already overrun the greatest part of Italy, and
likewise brought Gallia Cisalpina in Subjection with an Army under the Conduct
of Brutus. As for the rest of his Garrisons, Pompey subdued them with ease, in
his March, but Now Mo^ena.
Mutina in Gaul engaged him in a formal Siege, where he lay a long time
encamped against Brutus: In the mean time Lepidus marched in all haste against
Rome, and sitting down before it with a mighty Rabble of People, demanded a
second Consulship, whereby he struck no small Terror into the Besieged; but
that Fear quickly vanished upon some Letters sent from Pompey, advertising,
That he had ended the War without a Battle; for Brutus, either betraying his
Army, or being betrayed by them upon the Revolt, rendered himself to Pompey, and
taking a Guard of Horse was conducted to a little Village in that part of Gaul
that lies upon the River Padu or Po; where he was slain the next day by
Geminius, in execution of Pompey's Commands: Upon this, Pompey was grossly
censured, for, having at the very beginning of the Revolt written to the Senate
how that Brutus had voluntarily surrendered himself; yet, immediately
afterward, he sent other Letters, containing matter of Charge or Accusation
against the Man, after he was taken off, which was somewhat unaccountable: Now
you must note, that that Brutus, who, together with Cassius, slew Caesar, was
Son to this Brutus, a Man neither in War, nor in his Death like his Father, as
we have described at large in his Life. Lepidus upon this being driven out of
Italy, fled to Sardinia, where he fell sick and died, having his Heart broken
with Sorrow, not for his Losses or Misfortunes, as they say, but upon the
receipt of a Letter, wherein he was assured that his Wife had played the Harlot.

There was yet remaining Sertorius in Sent in Aid of Metellus against Sertorius
in Spain.
Spain, a Man of War far different from Lepidus, and much more formidable to
the Romans, to whom there resorted all the Fugitives and Malcontents of the
Nation, flowing thither as Humors to the last diseased part of a Civil-War:
This Man had already cut off diverse inferior Commanders, and was now buckling
with Metellus Pius, a Man of Honor and a Soldier, though perhaps he might now
seem too slow, by reason of his Age, to second and improve the happier moments
of War, and might be sometimes wanting to those Advantages, which Sertorius, by
his Sharpness and Dexterity would wrest out of his hands: For he was always
hovering about, and coming upon him unawares, like a Captain of Thieves, rather
than Soldiers, pestring him perpetually with Ambuscadoes and light Skirmishes,
wherereas Metellus like a good old Wrestler was accustomed to nothing but
regular Conduct, and fighting in Battelarray with his Legionary Soldiers* well
armed. Pompey therefore having his Army in readiness, made it his whole Court
and Practice to be sent in Aid to Metellus; neither would he be brought to
Disband his Forces, notwithstanding that Catulus had commanded it, but by some
colorable Device or other he still kept them in Arms about the City, until the
Senate at last thought fit, upon the Report of L. Philippus, to decree him that
Government: At that time, they say, one of the Senators there wondering at this
Report, demanded of Philip whether his meaning was, That Pompey (...).
should be sent into Spain Proconsul, i. e. instead of a Consul: No, replied
Philip, but Pro-consulibus, i. e. instead of both Consuls; meaning that neither
of the Consuls for that Year was of any Value. Now when Pompey was arrived in
Spain, (as it is usual upon the Fame of a new Governor) Men began to be raised
with new Hopes, and those Nations that had not entered into a very strict League
and Alliance with Sertorius began to waver and revolt; whereupon Sertorius gave
out very arrogant and scornful Speeches against Pompey, saying in Derision,
That he should want no other Weapon but a Ferula and Rod to Chastise this Boy
with, if he were not afraid of that old Woman, meaning Metellus. Yet for all
his proud Words, in deed and reality he stood in Awe of Pompey, as appeared by
all his Actions and Conduct throughout the whole Management of the War, wherein
he was observed ever after to stand better upon his Guard, and engage more
warily than before: for Metellus (which one would not have imagined) was grown
very debauched in his Life, having given himself over excessively to Riot and
Pleasure; and yet of a sudden there was wrought in him a mighty Change, as well
in respect of his Pride as his Luxury: so that this very thing gained a
wonderful Reputation and Honor to Pompey, as an Example of Frugality, although
that Virtue was habitual in him, and required no great Industry to exercise it,
for that he was naturally inclined to Temperance, and no ways inordinate in his
Affections. Here Fortune, as it is common in War, showed variety of Changes, but
nothing came so near to Pompey as the taking of the City Lauron by Sertorius:
for when Pompey thought he had him safe enclosed, and had boasted largely of
raising the Siege, he himself appeared of a sudden to be encompassed, insomuch
that he durst not move out of his Camp, but was forced with sorrow to sit still
whilst the City was taken, and in Flames before his Face. However, afterward
in a Battle about Valentia he gave His Victory ^ver Herennius and Perpenna.
a great Defeat to Herennius and Perpenna, (two Commanders of those Fugitives
who came to Sertorius, and were now Lieutenants to him) wherein he slew above
10000 Men. Pompey being exalted and puffed up with this Victory, made all the
haste imaginable to engage Sertorius himself, and the rather lest Metellus
should come in for a share in the Honor of the Victory; so that in the Evening
toward Sunset, they joined Battle near the River Sucron, both being in great
fear lest Metellus should come, Pompey, that he might engage in the Combat
alone, Sertorius, that he might engage but with one alone. The Issue of the
Battle proved doubtful, for that a Wing of each side had the better; but of the
Generals, Sertorius had the greater Honor, for that he maintained his Post,
having slain and put to flight all that Battalion that was appointed against
him: whereas Pompey was worsted in his part of the Battle, and himself almost a
Prisoner, for being set upon by a mighty Man of Arms that fought on foot, as
they were closely engaged hand to hand, the strokes of their Swords chanced to
light upon each others Hand* but with a different Success, for Pompey's was a
slight Wound only, whereas he lopt off the others Hand: however it happened so
that many falling upon Pompey together, and his own Forces there being put to
the Rout, he made his Escape beyond expectation, by quitting his Horse and
turning him up among the Enemy; for the Horse being richly adorned with golden
Trappings, and having a Caparison of great value, the Soldiers quarrelled among
themselves for the Booty, so that while they were fighting with one another,
and dividing the Spoil, Pompey made his Escape. By break of Day next morning,
each drew out his Forces into the Field to confirm the Victory; but Metellus
coming up to them, Sertorius vanished away, having broken up and dispersed his
Army; for in such a manner did he use to raise and disband his Armies, so that
sometimes he would be wandering up and down all alone, and at other times again
he would come pouring into the Field at the head of a puissant Army, no less
than 150000 fighting Men, swelling of a sudden like a mighty Torrent or
Winterflood.

Now when Pompey was going after the Battle to meet and welcome Metellus, and
when they were near one another, he commanded his Sergeants to bow down their
Rods in honor of Metellus as his Ancient and Superior; but Metellus on the
other side forbid it, and behaved himself very obliging to him in all things
else, not claiming any Prerogative either in respect of his Consulship or
Seniority; excepting only, that when they encamped together, the Watchword was
given to the whole Camp, by Metellus. But generally they had their Camps
asunder, for that they were divided and distracted by the Enemy, that was in
all shapes, and being always in motion, would by a wonderful Artifice appear in
diverse Places almost in the same instant, drawing them from one sort of Fight
to another in perpetual Skirmishes: But at last Pompey intercepting all
Forage, plundring and spoiling the Country, and keeping the Dominion of the
Sea, rooted them out of that part of Spain that was under his Government,
forcing them, out of mere Want, to retreat into other Provinces.

Pompey having made use of and expended the greatest part of his own Revenue
upon the War, sent and demanded Moneys of the Senate, adding, That in case they
did not furnish him speedily, he should be forced to return into Italy with his
Army. Lucullus being Consul at that time, (though indeed he was an Enemy to
Pompey, yet) in contemplation that he himself was a Candidate for the War
against Mithridates, he procured and hastened the Supplies, fearing lest there
should be any Pretense or Occasion given to Pompey of returning Home, who of
himself was no less desirous of leaving Sertorius, than ambitious of
undertaking the War against Mithridates, as an Enemy where the Enterprise in
all appearance would prove much more Honorable and less Dangerous. In the mean
time Sertorius died, being treacherously Sertorius slain.
murdered by some of his own Party; insomuch that Perpenna was now become the
Chief Commander among them, and he that would undertake to Personate the
Actions of Sertorius, having indeed the same Forces, the same Ammunition, and
Means, yet there was still wanting the same Wit, Skill, and Conduct, in the use
and managery of them. Pompey therefore marched directly against Perpenna, and
finding him ignorant and perplexed in his Affairs, had a Decoy ready for him,
and so sent out a Detachment of ten Companies with Orders to range up and down
the Fields, and disperse themselves abroad, as if they were Foraging or in
quest of some Booty; this Bait took accordingly, for no sooner had Perpenna
quarried upon the Prey, and had them in Chase, but that Pompey appeared
suddenly with all his Army, and joining His Conquest of Perpenna.
Battle, gave him a total Overthrow; so that most of his Commanders were slain
in the Field, and he himself being brought Prisoner to Pompey, was by his Order
put to Death: Neither ought Pompey to be arraigned of Ungratefulness or
Oblivion, in that he had been unmindful of his Transactions with Perpenna in
Sicily, (as some would charge him) since it is clear that what he did in this
Case, was prudently determined upon solid Reason and deliberate Council for the
Security of his Country: for Perpenna having in his custody all Sertorius his
Papers, showed several Letters from the greatest Men in Rome, who (affecting a
Change and Subversion of the Government) had invited Sertorius into Italy;
wherefore Pompey, fearing lest by these he should stir and blow up greater
Flames of War than those that had been already extinguished, thought it
expedient, both to take off Perpenna, and likewise to burn the Letters without
reading of them.

After this Pompey tarried and spent so 6.
much time in Spain, as was necessary for the suppression of those greater
Tumults in that Province; and as soon as he had qualified and allayed the
violent Heats of Affairs there, he returned with his Army His Aid to Crassus in
the Servile War.
into Italy, where he arrived very luckily in the height of the Servile War;
wherefore upon his Arrival, Crassus the General in that War, made all the
expedition imaginable to give them Battle, which he did with great Success,
having slain upon the place 12300 of those Fugitive Slaves: Nor yet was he so
quick, but that Fortune had reserved to Pompey some share of Honor in the
Success of this War, for that 5000 of them, that had escaped out of the Battle,
fell into his hands; wherefore when he had totally cut them off, he wrote to
the Senate, That Crassus had overthrown the Fencers in Battle, but that he had
plucked up the War itself by the Roots. And thus it was commonly reported in
Rome among all those that had the least Kindness for Pompey; but for those
Actions in Spain, together with the Conquest of Sertorius, no Man ever, so much
as in jest, ascribed that Honor to any other than Pompey; and yet this great
Honor and Veneration of the Man was always accompanied with Fears and
Jealousies, that he would not Disband his Army, but affecting Monarchy,
designed clearly to follow the Policies of Sylla and govern by a standing Army;
wherefore in the Number of all those that ran out to meet him, and Congratulate
his Return, as many went out of Fear as Affection; but after that Pompey had
removed this Suggestion, by declaring beforehand, That he would discharge the
Army after his Triumph, there was yet remaining one great Cause of Complaint
more from the Envy and Malice of his Enemies, That he affected Popularity,
courting the common People more than the Nobility; and whereas Sylla had taken
away He restores the Office of Tribune.
the Tribuneship of the People, he designed to gratify the People in restoring
that Office; which was very true, for there was not any one thing that the
People of Rome did so wildly dote on, or more passionately desire than the
Restoration of that Government, insomuch that Pompey thought himself extremely
fortunate in this opportunity, despairing ever (if he were prevented in this)
of meeting with any other, wherein he might express his Gratitude in
Compensation of all those Favors which he had received from the People. The
Decree His second Triumph and first Consulship with Crassus.
therefore passed for a second Triumph, and the Consulship: and yet for all
this Power and Honor he did not seem to be admired or magnified for those
things; but this was the Signal and Test of his Grandeur, that even Crassus
himself, (the Wealthiest among all the Statesmen of his time, the most Eloquent
and Greatest too, a Man of that Pride that he despised even Pompey himself, and
all others as beneath him) durst not appear a Candidate for the Consulship
before he had made his Address to Pompey; which was done accordingly, and as
readily embraced by Pompey, who had often sought an occasion to oblige him in
some friendly Office; so that he solicited for Crassus, and entreated the
People heartily, declaring, That their Favor would be no less to him in his
Colleague, than in his Consulship; yet for all this when they were created
Consuls, they were always at variance and opposing one another; now Crassus
prevailed most in the Senate, and Pompey's Power was no less with the People,
for that he restored to them the Office of Tribune, Submits to the Censors.
and had suffered the Judicature again to be transferred upon the Knights by a
Law. But he himself afforded them the most grateful Spectacle, when he appeared
and craved his Discharge from the Wars: for it was an ancient Custom among the
Romans, that the Knights, when they had served out their legal time in the
Wars, should lead their Horse into the Marketplace before two Censors, and
having given an account of the Commanders and Generals under whom they served,
as also of the Places and Actions in their Service, they were discharged, every
Man with Honor or Disgrace according to his Deserts: there were then sitting
upon the Bench two reverend Censors, Gellius and Catulus, with great Gravity
taking a View of the Roman Knights who were then in Muster, and under
Examination before them; when Pompey was seen afar off to come into the
Marketplace, adorned in all things else with all the Marks and Ensigns of a
Consul, but himself leading his Horse in his hand: as he drew near, he
commanded the Vergers to make way, and so he led his Horse to the Bench; the
People were all this while in a sort of Amaze, and all in Silence, and the
Censors themselves showed him great Reverence, expressing a Modesty together
with Joy in their Countenance: Then the Senior Censor examined him, Pompey the
Great, I demand of thee, whether thou have served out all that time in the Wars
that is prescribed by the Law of Arms? Yes, replied Pompey with a loud Voice) I
have served all, and all under myself as General. The People hearing this, gave
a great Shout, and made such an Outcry for Joy that there was no appeasing it;
but the Censors rising from their Judgmentseat, accompanied him home to
gratify the Multitude, who followed after clapping their Hands, and shouting
with great signs of Joy.

Pompey's Consulship was now expiring, and yet the Difference with Crassus
increasing, whereupon on Gaius Aurelius a Knight, (but one that declined
Business all his Lifetime) stood up and addressed himself in an Oration to the
Assembly, declaring, That Jupiter had appeared to him in a Dream, commanding
him to tell the Consuls, That they should not leave their Charge of that
Government until they were Friends. After this was said, Pompey stood silent,
but Crassus took him by the hand, and spoke in this manner, I do not think, oh
ye Romans, that I shall do any thing mean or dishonorable, in yielding first
to Pompey; even that Pompey whom you were pleased to Ennoble with the Title of
Great, when as yet he scarce had a Hair in his Face; and granted the Honor of
two Triumphs, when as yet he had no Place in the Senate. Hereupon they were
Reconciled, and laid down their Government. Now Crassus kept on in his former
manner of Life as he began, pleading Causes; but Pompey declined his Practice
in a great measure, taking the Patronage of some few Causes, only so that by
degrees he withdrew himself totally from the Courts, and all Matters of
Judgment, coming but seldom in public; and whenever he did, 'twas with a great
Train after him; neither was it easy to meet or visit him without great
Attendance; but his delight was to appear guarded with such a Retinue,
designing thereby to advance the Reverence and Majesty of his Presence, and
preserve his Dignity (as he ought to do) entire from the Approaches and
Conversation of the Multitude: For Men that have risen and grown great by Arms,
are easily trayed into Contempt by a change of Life, when they shall betake
themselves to the Long-Robe, and plead Causes, in that they cannot fashion
themselves to that popular Equality or Familiarity that is common among
Citizens, expecting to be esteemed their Betters in the City, as they were in
Field; whereas on the contrary, the Pride and Folly of these Citizens is such,
That though they were Inferiors in the Camp, yet they will contend for
Precedence in the City, which is intolerable; and therefore it is that when a
noble Warrier (crowned with Victories and Triumphs) shall turn Advocate and ply
the Courts among them, they endeavor presently by a malicious Pedantry to
obscure his Glory, and depress him; whereas if he quits a public Patronage and
retires, they shall preserve his Honor and Authority beyond the reach of Envy;
as appeared not long after by the things themselves.

The Power of the Pirates first broke out of 7. The Pirates War.
Cilicia, having in truth but a rash and blind beginning, but was animated and
encouraged afterward in the Wars of Mithridates, where they hired themselves
out, and became Stipendiaires in the King's Service. Afterward whilst the
Romans were embroiled in their Civil Wars, being engaged against one another,
even before the very Gates of Rome; the Seas lay waste and unguarded, which by
degrees, enticed, and drew them on, not only to seize upon and spoil the
Merchants and Ships upon the Seas, but also to lay waste the Islands, and
SeaPort Towns: So that now there embarked with these Pirates, Men of great
Wealth, and Nobility, and of great Wisdom too, being incorporated into their
Society or Fellowship as into a commendable Faculty: They had diverse Arsenals,
or Piratick Harbors, as likewise Watch-Towers, and Beacons all along the
Seacoast; They had a mighty Fleet, well Rigged and Furnished with Galliots of
Oars, and as well Manned too, with all the Flower of Youth, with expert Pilots
and Mariners; there were their Ships of swift Sail also, and Pinnaces for
Cruising and Discovery; neither was it thus dreadful only, but as gloriously
set out too, so that they were more to be envyed in their Pride, than feared in
their Force; having the Poops and Decks of their Galliots all gilded, and the
Oars plated with Silver, together with their Purple Sails, as if their delight
were to glory in their Iniquity: There was nothing but Music and Dancing,
Banqueting and Revels all along the Shore, together with the Prizes of Kings
in Captivity, and Ransoms of sacked Cities, to the Reproach and Dishonor of the
Roman Empire. There were of these Corsairs above 1000 Sail, and they had taken
no less than 400 Cities; committing Sacrilege upon the Temples of the Gods,
and enriching themselves with the Spoils of diverse, undefiled before, such as
were those of Claros, Didyme, and Samothrace; and the Temple of Tellus, or the
Earth in Hermione, and that of Aeseulapius in Epidaurium; Those of Neptune, in
Isthmus, Taenarus, and Calauria; Those of Apollo, in Actium, and the Isle of
Leucades; and those of Juno, in Samos, Argos, and Leucania. They offered
likewise strange Sacrifices upon Mount Olympus, and performed certain secret
Rites or Religious Mysteries, whereof that to the Sun (which they called by the
Name of Mithres) was preserved down to our Age, having its Original and first
Institution from them. But besides these Piracies and Insolences by Sea, they
were yet more injurious to the Romans by Land; for they would often go ashore
and Rob upon the Highways; plundring and destroying their Villages and
Country-Houses near the Sea: And once they seized upon two Roman Praetors,
Sextilius and Bellinus, in their Purple Robes, and carried them off, together
with their Sergeants and Vergers: The Daughter also of Antonius, (a Man that
had the Honor of Triumph) taking a Journey into the Country, was seized upon,
and Redeemed afterward with an excessive Ransom. But this was the most
spiteful and abusive of all, That when any of the Captives declared himself to
be a Roman, and told his Name, they seemed to be surprised, and straightway
feigning a Fear, smote their Thighs, and fell down at his Feet, humbly
beseeching him to be gracious and forgive them: The credulous Captive, seeing
them so humble and supplicant, believed them to be in earnest; for some were so
officious as to put on his Shoes, others helped him on with his Gown, lest his
Quality should be mistaken again: After all this Pageantry, when they had thus
deluded and mocked him long enough, at last casting out a Ships Ladder, when
they were even in the midst of the Sea, they bid him march off and farewell; if
he refused, they threw him overboard and drowned him. This Piratick Power
having got the Dominion and Sovereignty of all the M^diterranean, and
perpetually roving up and down, there was left no place for Navigation or
Commerce, insomuch that no Merchant durst venture out to Traffic. The Romans
therefore, finding themselves to be extremely straightened in their Markets, and
considering that if this scarcity of Corn should continue* there would be a
Dearth and Famine in the Land, determined to send out Pompey to recover their
Seigniory of the Seas from the Pirates: Wherefore Gabinius (a great Creature of
Pompey's) preferred a Law, whereby there was granted to him, not only the
Government of the Seas as Admiral, but even the Monarchy of Rome as Sovereign,
having an Arbitrary and Unlimited Power over all Men; The sum of that Decree
gave him the absolute Power and Authority of all the Seas, even from the
Streights-Mouth or Hercules-Pillars; together with the Continent or Mainland,
all along for the space of 400 Furlongs, or 50 Miles from the Sea: Now there
were but few Regions in the World under the Roman Empire of a larger Extent,
and in that compass too there were comprehended great Nations and mighty Kings.
Moreover by this Decree he had a Power of electing fifteen Lieutenants out of
the Senate, and of assigning to each his Province in Charge; Then he might take
likewise out of the Treasury, and of the Publicans, what Moneys he pleased, as
also 200 Sail of Ships, with a Power to Press and Levy what Soldiers and Seamen
he thought fit, together with Galliots of Oars and Mariners: When this Law was
Read, the common People approved of it exceedingly, but the chiefest and most
powerful of the Senate looked upon it as an exorbitant Power, even beyond the
reach of Envy, and was now become worthy of their Fears; therefore concluding
with themselves that such an infinite and boundless Authority was dangerous,
they agreed unanimously to oppose the Bill, and all were against it, except
Caesar, who gave his Vote for the Law, not so much to gratify Pompey, as the
People, whose Favor he had courted underhand from the beginning, and hoped
thereby to compass such a Power for himself: The rest inveighed bitterly
against Pompey, insomuch as one of the Consuls, told him sharply, That if he
followed the Footsteps of Romulus, he would scarce avoid his End, but he was in
danger of being torn in pieces by the Multitude for his Speech: Yet when
Catulus stood up to speak against the Law, the People in Reverence to him were
very silent and attentive; He therefore, after he had, without the least show
of Envy, made large Harangues in Honor of Pompey, began to advise the People
in kindness to spare him, and not to expose a Man of his Value to such a Chain
of Dangers and Wars; For said he, Where could you find out another Pompey, or
whom would you have in case you should chance to lose him? They all cried out
with one Voice, Your self; wherefore Catulus, finding all his Rhetoric
ineffectual, desisted: Then Roscius attempted to speak, but could have no
Audience, wherefore he made Signs with his Fingers, intimating, Not him alone,
but that there might be a second Pompey or Colleague in Authority with him:
Upon this, it is said, the Multitude being extremely incensed, made such an
horrid Exclamation, that a Crow flying over the Marketplace at that instant
was struck blind, and dropped down among the Rabble; whereby it appears, That the
Cause of Birds falling down to the Ground, is not by any rupture or division of
the Air when it has received any such Impression or Force; but purely by the
very stroke of the Voice, which, being shot up by a Multitude with great
Violence, raises a sort of Tempest and Billows in the Air. The Assembly
therefore broke up for that day: And when the day was come, wherein the Bill
was to pass by Suffrage into a Decree, Pompey went privately into the Country;
but hearing that it was passed and confirmed, he returned again into the City
by Night, to avoid the Envy that might arise from that Concourse of People that
would meet and congratulate him: The next Morning he came abroad, and
sacrificed to the Gods, and having Audience at an open Assembly, he handled the
Matter so, as that they enlarged his Power, giving him many Things besides what
was already granted, and almost doubling the Preparation appointed in the
former Decree: For there were compleately 500 Sail of Ships fitted out, and he
had an Army of 120000 Foot, and 5000 Horse, assigned for his Muster: There were
chosen likewise for his Lieutenants, or Vice-Admirals, 24 Senators that had
been Consuls, Praetors, or Generals of Armies, and to these were added two of
the general Treasurers. Now it happened within this time, that the Prizes of
Provisions were much abated, which gave an occasion to the joyful People of
saying, That the very Name of Pompey had even ended the War. However Pompey in
pursuance of his Charge divided all the Sea, with each distance between the
Lands, into thirteen Parts, allotting a Squadron to each, under the Command of
his Vice-Admirals; And having thus dispersed his Power into all Quarters, and
encompassed the Pirates every where, they began to fall into his Draggs by whole
Shoals, which he seized and brought into his Harbors; As for those that
withdrew themselves betimes, or otherwise escaped his general Chase, they all
made to Cilicia, where they hid themselves as in their Hives; against whom
Pompey designed to go in Person with Sixty of his best Frigates: But first he
resolved to scour and clear all the Seas thereabout, as that of Tuscany,
together with the Coasts of Africa, Sardinia, Corsica, and Sicily; All which he
performed in the space of Forty days by his own indefatigable Industry, and the
Diligence of his Vice-Admirals. Now Pompey met with some Diversion in Rome,
through the Malice and Envy of Piso the Consul, who had put some stop to his
Affairs, by wasting his Stores, and discharging his Seamen; whereupon he sent
his Fleet round to Brundusium, himself going the next way by Land through
Tuscany to Rome; which as soon as it came to be known by the People, they all
flocked out to meet him upon the way, as if they had not sent him out but a
little before; But that which chiefly raised their Joy, was the sudden and
unexpected change in the Markets, abounding now with exceeding Plenty; So that
Piso was in great danger to have been deprived of his Consulship, Gabinius
having a Law ready Penned for that purpose; but Pompey forbid it, behaving
himself as in that, so in all Things else, with great Moderation, whereby
having brought to pass and obtained all that he wanted or desired, he departed
for Brundusium, whence he set Sail in pursuit of the Pirates: Now though he was
straightened in time, and his hasty Voyage forced him to Sail by several famous
Cities without touching, yet he would not pass by the City of Athens unsaluted,
but landing there, after he had sacrificed to the Gods, and made an Oration to
the People, as he was returning out of the City, he Read at the Gates two
Monosticks or single Epigrams writ in his own Praise.

One within the Gate,
Thy humbler Thoughts make thee a God the more.
The other without.
We wished and saw, we Honor and Adore.
Now because that Pompey had showed himself merciful to some of that Swarm of
Thieves, that were yet roving in Bodies about the Seas, (having upon their
Supplication ordered a Seizure of their Ships and Persons only, without any
farther Process or Severity;) therefore the rest of their Camrades in Hopes of
Mercy too, made their Escape from his other Commanders, and surrendered
themselves with their Wives and Children into his Protection; So tha^ Pompey
pardoned all that came in, and the rather because by them he might make a
discovery of those who fled from his Justice, as conscious that their Crimes
were beyond an Act of Indemnity: Whereof the greatest and chiefest part
conveyed their Families and Treasures (with all besides that were unfit for
War) into Castles and strong Forts about Mount Taurus; but they themselves
having well Manned their Galleys, embarked for Coracesium in Cilicia, where
they received Pompey, and gave him Battle; Here they had a fatal Overthrow, and
thereupon they retired to their Cities, where they were Besieged; At last,
having dispatched their Heralds to him with a Submission, they delivered up to
his mercy themselves, their Towns, Islands, and strong Holds, all which they
had fortified with Bulwarks and Rampires, whereby they became impregnable, and
almost inaccessible.

Thus was this War ended, and the whole Power of the Pirates at Sea dissolved
every where in the space of three Months: Wherein besides a great number of
other Vessels, he took Ninety Men of War with brazen Beaks; and likewise
Prisoners of War to the number of no less than 20000 Souls.

Touching the disposal of these Prisoners, he considered on one Hand, that it
would be barbarous to destroy them all; and yet it might be no less dangerous
on the other to disperse them, for that they might reunite and make Head again.
being numerous, poor, and warlike: Therefore well and wisely weighing with
himself, That Man by Nature is not a wild or savage Creature, neither was he
Born so, but becomes a bruit Beast by Practice, having changed his Nature by a
rude and vicious Habit: And again on the other side, That he is civilized and
grows gentle by a change of Place, Converse, and manner of Life, as Beasts
themselves that are wild by Nature, become tame and tractable to their Feeders
by Housing and a gentler Usage; Upon this Consideration he determined to
translate these Pirates from Sea to Land, and give them a taste of the true and
innocent course of Life by living in Cities, and manuring the Ground: Some
therefore were entertained in the small and unpeopl'd Towns of the Cilicians,
mixing and incorporating with those few Inhabitants there, whereby they
obtained an Enlargement of their Territories. Others he planted in the City of
the Solians, that had been lately laid waste and drained by Tigranes King of
Armenia: he seated likewise diverse in Dyme, a City of Achaia, a Place extremely
depopulated, but of a large compass of Ground, and as rich a Soil. However
these Proceedings could not escape the Envy and Censure of his Enemies; but for
his Practices against Metellus in Crete, those were disapproved of even by the
chiefest of his Friends: For Metellus, (a Relation to him that was Colleague
with Pompey in Spain) was sent Praetor into Crete, before this Province of the
Seas was designed for Pompey, Now Crete was the second Den and Receptacle of
Pirates next to Cilicia the Fountain, there Metellus apprehended diverse and put
them to Death; Wherefore those that were yet remaining, and Besieged, sent
their Supplications to Pompey, and invited him into the Island as a part of his
Province, alleging it to fall within that distance of the Sea limited in his
Commission, and so within the Precincts of his Charge; Pompey receiving the
Submission, dispatched an Express to Metellus, commanding him to leave off the
War; and another likewise to the Cities, wherein he charged them not to yield
any Obedience to the Commands of Metellus; And after these he sent Lucius
Octavius one of his Lieutenants, who entering the Town together with the
Besieged, and joining in their Defense, rendered Pompey not only* grievous and
hateful, but even ridiculous too, That he should lend his Name as a Guard to a
Nest of Thieves, that knew neither God nor Law, and make his Authority serve as
a Sanctuary to them, only out of pure Envy and Emulation to Metellus: For
neither was Achilles thought to act the Part of a wise Man, but rather of a
young giddy Fool, mad after Glory, when by Signs he forbid the rest of the
Graecians to strike at Hector:

Lest he too late should to the Battle run, Liad. 22.

When others had the Honor of it won.
But Pompey contended beyond himself to save the common Enemies of the World,
only that he might deprive a Roman Praetor, after all his Labors, of the
Honor of Triumph. Yet for all this Metellus was no ways daunted, neither would
he give over the War against the Pirates, but stormed them in their strong
Holds, and having totally subdued them, he took a just Revenge of their
Impieties: And for Octavius, he was publicly disgraced, and sent away, laden
with the Scoffs and Reproaches of all the Camp.

Now, when 'twas Reported in Rome, 8. The War against Mithridates and Tigranes.
That the War with the Pirates was at an end, and that Pompey was in a dead
Vacation, diverting himself in Visits only to the Cities for want of
Employment; one Manilius, a Tribune of the People, preferred a Law, whereby
'twas Enacted, That Pompey should have all the Forces of Lucullus, and the
Provinces under his Government, together with Bithynia, that was under the
Command of Glabrio; And that he should forthwith make War upon those two Kings
Mithridates and Tigranes, retaining still the same Naval Forces and the
Sovereignty of the Seas as before: But this was nothing less than to constitute
one absolute Monarch of all the Roman Empire; For the Provinces which seemed to
be exempt from his Commission by the former Decree, such as were Phrygia,
Lycaonia, Galatia, Cappadocia, Cilicia, the Over Colchis, and Armenia, these
were all grafted in by this latter Law, together with all the Army and Forces
wherewith Lucullus made War upon Mithridates and Tigranes. Now though this were
a notorious Injury to Lucullus, whereby he was robbed of the Glory of his
Achievements, (by having a Successor assigned him rather in the Honor of his
Triumph, than the Danger of the War;) Yet this was of no great moment in the
Eye of the Senate, because it was Personal only (though they could not but
Censure the People of Injustice and Ingratitude to Lucullus); But the source of
all their Grievance flowed from hence, That the Power of Pompey should by Law
be Established in a manifest Tyranny; And therefore they exhorted and
encouraged one another privately to bend all their Forces in opposition to this
Law, and not to cast away their Liberties and Properties at so tame a rate; Yet
for all their Resolutions, when the day came wherein it was to pass into a
Decree, their Hearts failed them, for fear of the People, and all the rest were
silent except Catulus, who boldly inveighed against the Law, and charged the
People home, but all in vain; for when he found that he had not brought over
one Man among the People, he turned and directed his Speech to the Senate in
great Passion, often crying out, and bidding them to seek out some Mountain as
their Forefathers had done, and fly to the Rocks where they might preserve
their Liberty. But all his Rhetoric was ineffectual, for the Law passed into a
Decree, as it is said, by the Suffrages of all the Tribes; And now was Pompey
even in his absence made Lord of almost all that Power, that Sylla made himself
Master of by Conquest, when by force of Arms and War he had brought even Rome
it self under his Dominion: Now when Pompey had Advice by Letters of the
Decree, it is said, That, in the presence of his Friends who came to rejoice and
give him Joy of his Honor, he seemed extremely displeased, frowning and
smiting his Thigh, and at last, as one overladen already, and weary of
Government, he broke out in great passion, Good Gods! What an endless Train of
War is here? How much better might my Lot have fallen among the inglorious
Crowd, unknown or unregarded? If there shall be no end of this Warfare but with
that of my Life? If my Fate be such that I must always despair of those happier
moments, wherein I might stem this Tide of Envy, and live at peace in a Country
Retirement, and the Enjoyments of a dearer Wife! But all this was looked upon
as Ironical, neither indeed could the best of his Friends endure such gross
Hypocrisy, well knowing, that he, whose Ambition was set on Fire by his
Malice, (having his Enmity with Lucullus, as a Firebrand to kindle that
covetous Desire of Glory and Empire that was implanted in his Nature) could not
but embrace the Province with Joy and Triumph; as appeared not long afterward
by his Actions, which did clearly unmask him: For in the first place he sent
out his Edicts or Proclamations into all Quarters, commanding all Soldiers to
resort to his Colors; then he summoned in all the tributary Kings and Princes
that were Subjects within the Precincts of his Charge; and, in short, as soon
as he had entered upon his Province, he left nothing unaltered that had been
done and established by Lucullus; to some he remitted their Amercements and
Penalties, and deprived others of their Rewards; And after this manner did he
act in all things, with this Design chiefly, That the Admirers of Lucullus
might know how that all his Power and Authority was now at an end, and he no
longer Lord of this Province. But Lucullus began to arraign these Proceedings,
and expostulate the Case by Friends, whereupon 'twas thought fitting and
agreed, that there would be a Meeting betwixt them, and accordingly they met in
the Country of Galatia: Now in that they were great and prosperous Generals,
both in Conduct and Action, they came in State attended with their Vergers and
Officers, bearing their Rods before them all wreathed about with Branches of
Laurel: Lucullus came through a Country full of green and shady Groves, but
Pompey's March was through large barren Plains both chill and naked; Therefore
the Vergers of Lucullus, perceiving that Pompey's Laurels were withered and
dry, helped him to some of their own, whereby they adorned and crowned his Rods
with fresh Laurels: This was thought somewhat ominous, and looked as if Pompey
came to take away the Reward and Honor of Lucullus's Victories: Lucullus
indeed had the priority in the course of his Consulship, and of his Age too;
but the Dignity of Pompey was the greater, in that he had the Honor of two
Triumphs. Their first Addresses His Quarrel with Lucullus.
in this Interview were made with great Ceremony and Complaisance, magnifying
each others Actions, and congratulating their Success: but when they came to
the Matter of their Conference or Treaty, there they observed neither Decency
nor Moderation, but fell downright a railing at each other; Pompey upbraiding
Lucullus of Avarice, and Lucullus again retorting Ambition upon Pompey, so that
their Friends could hardly part them. Now Lucullus had made a Distribution of
all the Lands in Galatia within his Conquest, and gave other Largesses to whom
he pleased; But Pompey encamping not far distant from him, sent out his
Prohibitions, whereby he forbid that any Man should yield Obedience to
Lucullus; He likewise commanded away all his Soldiers, except only 1600, which
he found were likely to be as unserviceable to him, as they were ill-affected
to Lucullus, being Proud and Mutinous. And to these Acts Pompey added some
Satirical Speeches and Invectives against him, detracting openly from the Glory
of his Actions, and giving out, That the Battles of Lucullus were but
imaginary, such as are represented in Landskips, or at best upon the Stage,
with Kings personated in Tragedies and Farces, where there was no more danger
than in painted Fire, whereas the real part or brunt of the War against a true
and well-instructed Army was reserved to him, for that Mithridates began now to
be in earnest, and had betaken himself to his Shields, Swords, and Horses:
Lucullus on the other side, to be even with him in spite, replied, That Pompey
came to fight with the Image and Shadow of War, it being his usual practice,
like a lazy Bird of Prey, to quarry upon Carcasses already slain, and tear in
pieces the relics of a War; For thus did he entitle and attribute to himself
the Conquest of Sertorius, Lepidus, and the Accomplices of Spartacus; whereas
this was the Glory of Crassus, that of Catulus, and the first was to be
ascribed to the Prowess of Metellus: And therefore it is no great wonder, if the
Glory of the Pontick and Armenian War, prove supposititious too, and be usurped
by a Man, who, by such subtle Artifices could insinuate and work himself into
the Honor of Triumph for a few runagate Slaves.

After this Lucullus went away; and Pompey Sect. 9.
having placed his whole Navy as a Guard upon all those Seas betwixt the
Province of Phaenicia and the Bosphorus, himself marched against Mithridates,
who had a Batalion of 30000 Foot, and 2000 Horse, yet he durst not bid him
Battle; but lay securely encamped upon a strong Mountain, fortified with
Trenches and Rampires almost impregnable, which he forsook not long after as a
Place destitute of Water; Now, no sooner was he decamped, but that Pompey in
the first place made himself Master of that Mountain, and observing well the
nature and thriving of the Plants there, together with the hollow Beds which he
found in several places, conjectured that such a Plot could not be without
Springs, and therefore he ordered them to sink Wells in every Corner; whereby
there was great plenty of Water throughout all the Camp in a little time;
Insomuch that he admired how it was possible for Mithridates to be ignorant of
this, during all that time of his Encampment there. After this, Pompey pursued
him to his next Camp, and there drawing a Line round about him, encamped
himself, and worked up his Trenches with Bastions and Rampires, whereby he
walled up Mithridates within his own Camp. But he having endured a Siege of 45
days, made his Escape privily, and fled away with all the Choice of his Army,
having first dispatched all the sick and unserviceable Persons in his Camp. Not
long after Pompey overtook him again near the Banks of the River Euphrates,
where he sat down and Encamped close by him; but fearing lest he should pass
over the River and give him the Slip there too, he drew up his Army in Battalia
against him at Midnight: Now, it is said, that at that very time Mithridates saw
a Vision in his Dream, that did prognosticate and foreshew what should come to
pass; for he seemed to be under Sail in the Pontick Sea with a prosperous Gale,
and just in view of the Bosphorus, discoursing pleasantly with the Ships
Company, as one overjoyed for his past Danger and present Security; when lo! of
a sudden he found himself deserted of all, and floating upon a little broken
Plank of the Ship in the mercy of Sea and Wind. Whilst he was thus laboring
under these Passions and Phantasms, some of his Friends came into his Tent, and
awaked him with the dreadful News of Pompey's approach, telling him, that he
was so near at hand, that now the Fight must be for the Camp it self: Whereupon
the Commanders drew up all his Forces in Battel-array; Pompey perceiving how
ready they were, and prepared for Defense, began to doubt with himself, whether
he should put it to the hazard of a Fight in the dark, judging it more
consistent with Policy to encompass them only at present, (lest they should
fly) and give them Battle the next day, because his Men were far the better
Soldiers; But his ancient Commanders were of another opinion, and by great
Entreaties and Encouragements wrought upon him, and obtained that they might
charge them immediately. Neither was the Night so very dark, but that (though
the Moon was declining, yet) it gave light enough to discern a Body: But this
rather deluded and put a Blind upon the Eyesight of the King's Army, for the
Romans coming upon them with the Moon on their Backs, the Moon (being very low
and just upon setting) cast the Shadows a long way before the Bodies, and
reached e'ne almost to the Enemy: This dazzled their Eyes so, that they (not
exactly discerning the Distance, but imagining them to be near at hand) threw
their Darts at the Shadows, without the least Execution upon any one body: The
Romans therefore perceiving this, ran in upon them with a great Shout; but the
barbarous People, all in Amaze, being unable to endure the Charge, were
fearfully routed, and put to Flight with a great Slaughter, insomuch that above
10000 were slain there, and the Camp taken, As for Mithridates himself, he, at
the beginning Mithridates hgis Flight.
of the Onset, with a Body of 800 Horse Charged through all the Roman Army, and
made his Escape; but immediately all the rest of that Regiment were dispersed
and gone, some one way, some another, and he left only with three Persons in
his Retinue; Among whom was his Concubine or Mistress, Hypsicratia, a Girl
always of Manly Hypsicratia.
and daring Spirit, (and therefore the King called her Hypsicrates:) She being
attired and mounted like a Persian Chevalier, accompanied the King in all his
Flight, never weary even in the longest Journey, nor ever failed to attend the
King in Person, and look after his Horse too; until they came to Inora, a
Palace or Castle of the King's, well stored with Gold and Jewels, and the
King's chiefest Treasure. From thence Mithridates took off his richest Apparel,
and gave it among those that resorted to him in their Flight; and to every one
of his chiefest Friends he gave a deadly Poison, that they might not fall into
the Hands of the Enemy against their Wills: From thence he designed to have
went to Tigranes in Armenia, but being prohibited there by Tigranes, (who had
put out a Proclamation with a Reward of 100 Talents to any one that should
apprehend him) he passed by the Head of the River Euphrates, and fled through
the Country of Colchis.

Now had Pompey made an Invasion into He goes against Tigranes.
the Country of Armenia, upon the Invitation of young Tigranes, for that he was
now in Rebellion against his Father, and had given Pompey a Metting about the
River Araxes: (which River rises near the Head of Araxes Fl.
Euphrates, but turning its course and bending toward the East, falls into the
Caspian Sea.) They two therefore marched together through the Country, taking
in all the Cities by the way, and obliging them to Homage and Fealty: But King
Tigranes (having been harassed lately in a tedious War by Lucullus, and withal
understanding that Pompey was generous in his Nature, and of a gentle
Disposition) put Guards into his Royal Palaces, and taking along with him
diverse of his Friends and Relations, went in Person to surrender himself into
the Hands of Pompey; He came as far as the Trenches on Horseback, but there he
was met by two of Pompey's Vergers, who commanded him to alight and walk on
Foot, for that no Man was ever seen on Horseback within a Roman Camp: Tigranes
submitted to this immediately, and not only so, but plucking off his Sword,
delivered up that too; And last of all, as soon as he appeared before Pompey,
he pulled off his Turbant or Royal Diadem, and attempted to have laid it at his
Feet; Nay, what is worst of all, even he himself had fallen prostrate as an
humble Supplicant at his Knees, to the Reproach of Majesty, had not Pompey
himself prevented it, by taking and placing him next upon his right hand, and
the Son upon his left; There Pompey took occasion to tell him, That as to the
rest of his Losses, they were chargeable upon Lucullus, for that by Lucullus he
had been dispossessed of Syria, Phaenicia, Cilicia, Galatia, and Sophene, but
all that he had preserved to himself entire till that time, he should peaceably
enjoy, paying the Sum of 6000 Talents as a Fine or Penalty for Injuries done to
the Romans, and that his Son should have the Kingdom of Sophene. Tigranes
himself was well pleased with these Conditions of Peace, and therefore when the
Romans, in a general Shout saluted him King, he seemed to be overjoyed, and
promised to every common Soldier half a Mina of Silver, every Centurion or
Captain ten Mina's, and to every Colonel or Commander of a thousand a Talent;
But the Son was highly displeased, insomuch that when he was invited to Supper,
he replied, That he did not stand in need of Pompey for that sort of Honor,
for he would find out some other Roman to Sup with: Whereupon he was clapped up
close Prisoner and reserved for the Triumph.

Not long after this, Phraates King of Parthia. 10. Phraates King of Parthia.
sent to Pompey, and demanded by his Ambassadors, That he should deliver up
young Tigranes, as his Son-in-Law; and that the River Euphrates should be the
Term and Bound of their Empires: To these Pompey replied, That for Tigranes, he
belonged more to his own natural Father, than his Father-in-Law; And for the
Bounds, he would take care that they should be set out according to the Rules
of Right and Justice.

So Pompey leaving Armenia in the Custody Pompey's Wars with the Albanians and
Iberians.
of Afranius, went himself in Chase of Mithridates; whereby he was forced of
necessity to march through several Nations inhabiting about Mount Caucasus; Of
these Nations, the Albanians and Iberians were two of the chiefest: The
Iberians stretch out as far as the Moschian Mountains, and to the Realm of
Pontus; The Albanians lie more Eastwardly, and toward the CaspianSea; These
barbarous People, the Albanians, at first permitted Pompey upon his Entreaty to
pass through their Country, but when they found that the Winter had stoll'n
upon the Roman Army whilst they were quartered in their Country, and withal
that they were busily exercised in celebrating the Festivals of Saturn, they
mustered up an Army of no less than 40000 Fighting-men, and set upon them,
having passed over the River Cyrnus; (which River rising from the Cyrnus Fl.
Mountains of Iberia, and receiving the River Araxes in its course from
Armenia, discharges its self by 12 distinct Mouths or Channels into the
Caspian Sea; although some others are of opinion, that Araxes does not fall
into it, but that they flow very near one another, and so discharge themselves
as Neighbors into the same Sea.) It Is true, 'twas in the power of Pompey to
have obstructed the Enemies Passage over the River, but he suffered them to
pass over quietly; and then drawing up his Forces and giving Battle, he routed
them and slew a great number of them in the Field: But the King sent
Ambassadors with his Submission, wherefore Pompey, upon his Supplication,
pardoned the Offense, and having entered into a League with him, he marched
directly against the Iberians, an Army no less in number than the other, but
much more Warlike, and withal under a solemn Resolution both of gratifying
Mithridates, and driving out Pompey: These Iberians were in no wise subject to
the Medes or Persians, and they happened likewise to escape the Dominion of the
Macedonians, in that Alexander was so quick in his March through Hyrcanid; but
these also Pompey subdued in a great and bloody Battle, wherein there were
slain 9000 upon the Spot, and more than 10000 taken Prisoners. From thence he
went into the Country of Colchis, where Servilius met him by the River Phasis,
having his Fleet (with which he guarded the Pontick Sea) riding at Anchor
there; Now this pursuit of Mithridates seemed to carry great Difficulties in
it, for that he had concealed himself among the Nations that inhabit about the
Bosphorus and the Lake of Maeotis; and besides, News was brought to Pompey that
the Albanians had revolted again: This made him divert his Course, and bend his
Forces against them with Resolutions full of Wrath and Revenge, insomuch that
he passed back again over the Cyrnus with great Difficulty and Danger, for that
the barbarous People had fortified it a great way down the Banks with Rampires
and Palisado's; After this having a tedious long March to make through a
thirsty and rough Country, he ordered 10000 Bottles to be filled with Water,
and so advanced toward the Enemy; whom he found drawn up in order of Battle
near the River Abas, to the number of 60000 Horse and 12000 Foot, ill armed
generally, and many of them covered only with the Skins of wild Beasts: Their
General was Cosis the King's Brother, who as soon as the Battle was begun,
singled out Pompey, and rushing in upon him, darted his Javelin into the Joints
of his Breast Plate; which Pompey received, and in return, struck him through the
Body with his Lance, and slew him. It Is reported, That in this Fight there
were several Amazons that came as Auxiliaries Amazons.
to these Barbarians, and that they came down from those Mountains that run
along by the River Thermodon; for that after the Battle when the Romans were
taking the Spoil and Plunder of the Field, they met with several Targets and
Buskins of the Amazons, but there was not the Body of a Woman to be seen among
all the dead; They inhabit those Parts of Mount Caucasus that look toward the
Hyrcanian Sea, (not bordering upon the Albanians, for that the Territories of
the Gelae and the Leges lie betwixt:) And with these People do they yearly, two
Months only, accompany themselves, and cohabit Bed and Board near the River
Thermodon; after that they retire to their own Habitations, and live alone all
the rest of the Year. After this Engagement Pompey was resolutely bent with his
Forces upon the Country of Hyrcania and the Caspian Sea, but was forced to
retreat after three days March, by reason of the Venomous Serpents that were
infinitely numerous in those Countries: And so he fell into Armenia the Less;
Whilst he was there, the Kings of the Elymaeans and Medes dispatched
Ambassadors to him, which he accepted of, and made his Returns as amicacably He
conquers the King of Parthia.
by Letter; But for the King of Parthia who had made Incursions upon Gordyne,
and despoiled the Subjects of Tygranes, he an Army against him under the
Command of Afranius, who put him to the Rout, and followed him in Chase as far
as Arbelitis.

Among all the Concubines of King Mithridates that were brought before Pompey,
he had not the Carnal knowledge of any one, but sent them all away to their
Parents and Relations, for that most of them were either the Daughters or Wives
of Princes and great Commanders; excepting only Stratonice, (who, of all the
rest, had Stratonice.
the greatest Power and Influence upon him, and to whom he had committed the
Custody of his best and richest Fortress:) She (it seems) was the Daughter of a
certain Musician, an ancient Man, and of no great Fortune; but she happening to
sing one night before Mithridates at a Banquet, struck his Fancy so, that
immediately he took her to Bed with him, whereby he sent away the old Man much
dissatisfied, in that he had taken his Daughter, without one kind word to
himself: But when he arose in the Morning, and saw the Tables within richly
covered with Plate of Gold and Silver, a great Retinue of Servants, Eunuchs and
Pages attending him with rich Garments, and withal a Horse standing before the
door richly caparison'd, in all things as 'twas usual with the King's
Favorites, he looked upon it all as a piece of Pageantry, and thinking himself
mocked and abused in it, attempted to have slipped out of doors and run away;
but the Servants laying hold upon him, and informing him really, that the King
had bestowed on him the House and Furniture of a rich Nobleman lately Deceased,
and that these were but the first Fruits or small Earnests of greater Riches
and Possessions that were to come, he was persuaded at last with much
difficulty to believe them; Thereupon putting on his Purple Robes, and mounting
his Horse, he rode through the City, crying out, All this is mine; And to those
that laughed at him, he said, There was no such wonder in this, but rather that
he did not throw Stones at all he met, he was so transported with Joy: Such was
the Parentage and Blood of Stratonice. Now she delivered up this Castle into
the hands of Pompey, and offered him many Presents of great Value, whereof he
received only such as he thought might serve to adorn the Temples of the Gods,
and add to the Splendour of his Triumph; the rest he left to Stratonice's
Disposal, bidding her to please her self in the enjoyment of them. And in this
manner did he deal with the Presents sent from the King of Iberia, who
presented him with a Bedstead, Table, and a Chair of State all beaten Gold,
desiring him to accept of them, but he delivered them all into the Custody of
the public Treasurers for the use of the Commonwealth.

In another Castle called Caenon, or NewFort, Pompey seized upon several secret
Writing of Mithridates, which he perused with no small delight, in that they
discovered in a great measure the King's Nature and Inclination; For there were
Memoirs whereby it appeared, That besides diverse others, he had made away his
Son Ariarathes by Poison, as also Alcaeus the Sardian, for that he had gotten
the better of him in a HorseRace: There were likewise several Judgments upon
the Interpretations of Dreams, some of his own Visions, and some of his
Mistresses; and besides these, there was a pleasant Intercourse of wanton
Love Letters with his Concubine Monime: Now Theophanes tells us, That there was
found likewise a sharp Oration of Rutilius, wherein he attempted to exasperate
him even to the slaughter of all the Romans in Asia; Though most Men justly
conjecture this to be a malicious Device of Theophanes, who hated Rutilius, for
that he himself in comparison was but a Counterfeit to him; or perhaps it might
be to gratify Pompey, whose Father is described by Rutilius in his History to
be the vilest Man alive.

From thence Pompey came to the City of Amisus, where his Ambition led him to
such odious Acts, as he himself had condemned in others before; For whereas he
had often and sharply reproached Lucullus, in that, while the Enemy was yet in
being, he had taken upon him to establish Laws, and distribute Rewards and
Honors, as Conquerors use to do only when the War was brought to an end, yet
now was he himself (while Mithridates was Paramount in the Realm of Bosphorus
at the Head of a puissant Army) as if all were ended, just doing the same
thing, regulating the Provinces, and distributing Rewards; Many great
Commanders and Princes having flocked to him, together with no less than 12
barbarous Kings; Insomuch as to gratify these other Kings, when he wrote to
the King of Parthia, he would not condescend (as others used to do) in the
Superscription of his Letter, to give him his Title of King of Kings.

Moreover he had a great Desire and II. Designed for Syria, to complete his
Conquests.
Emulation to take in Syria, and to march through Arabia to the Red Sea, that
he might extend his Conquest every way to the great Ocean, that does encompass
the whole Earth; For in Africa he was the first Roman that advanced his
Victories to the Ocean; and again in Spain, he enlarged the Roman Empire,
extending its bounds to the Atlantic Sea; Then thirdly, in his late pursuit of
the Albanians, he wanted but little of reaching the Hyrcanian Sea: Wherefore he
raised his Camp, designing to bring the Red Sea within the Circuit of his
Expedition, especially for that he saw how difficult it was to hunt after
Mithridates with an Army, and that he would prove a worse Enemy flying than
fighting; But yet he declared, That he would leave a sharper Enemy behind him
than himself, to wit, Famine, and therefore he appointed a Guard of Ships to
lie in wait for the Merchants that sailed to the Bosphorus, having prohibited
all upon pain of Death that should attempt to carry Provisions or Merchandises
thither.

Then he set forward with the greatest part of his Army, and in his March he
casually happened upon several dead Bodies of the Romans uninterr'd, which were
of those Soldiers that were unfortunately slain with Triarius in the Wars
against Mithridates, these he buried all splendidly and honorably; The neglect
whereof, it is thought, caused the first Hatred against Lucullus, and alienated
the Affections of the Soldiers from him. Pompey having now by his Forces H^
subd^^d the Arabians, and reduced Syria and Jud^a
under the Command of Afranius, subdued the Arabians that inhabit about the
Mountain Amanus, fell himself into Syria, and finding it destitute of any
natural and lawful Prince, reduced it into the form of a Province, as an
Inheritance of the People of Rome. He conquered Judaea, and altered the form of
Government there, having taken King Aristobulus Captive; Some Cities he built
anew, and others he set at liberty, chastizing those Tyrants that brought them
into Bondage. The greatest time that he spent there was in the Administration
of Justice, deciding the Controversies of Kings and States, and where he
himself could not be present in Person, he gave Commission to his Friends and
sent them: Thus when there arose a Difference betwixt the Armenians and
Parthians, touching the Title of a Country, and the Judgment was referred to
him, he gave a Power by Commission to three Judges and Arbiters to hear and
determine the Question: For the Name of his Power indeed was great; Neither
were His mild Temper.
the Virtues of his Justice and Clemency inferior to that of his Power,
whereby he covered a multitude of Crimes committed by his Friends and Familiars
about him; for although it was not in his Nature to check or chastise an
Offender, yet he would demean himself so to those that addressed with
Complaints against them, that the Party grieved went always away contented,
forgetting the Injuries, and patiently bearing even with their Covetousness and
Oppression. Among these Friends of his, there His Favorite Demetrius.
was one Demetrius, that had the greatest Power and Influence upon him of any;
he was a Bondman infranchiz'd, one of a very good Understanding, however
otherwise but a Youth, and somewhat too insolent in his good Fortune, of whom
there goes this Story: Cato the Philosopher (being as yet a very young Man, but
of great Judgment and a noble Mind) took a Journey of Pleasure to Antioch,
having a great desire in Pompey's absence, to see the City: He therefore, as
his Custom was, walked on Foot, and his Friends accompanied him on Horseback;
But seeing before the Gates of the City a Multitude all in white Garments, (the
young Men on one side of the Road, and the Boys on the other) he was somewhat
offended at it, imagining that it was officiously done in Honor of him, which
was more than he required; However he desired his Companions to alight and walk
with him: But when they drew near, the Master of the Ceremonies in this
Procession came out with a Garland and a Rod in his Hand, and met them,
enquiring, Where they had left Demetrius? and when he would come? Whereupon
Cato's Companions burst out into a Laughter, but Cato said only, Alas poor
City! and passed by without any other Answer: Now, it is clear, that Pompey
himself rendered Demetrius less odious to others, by enduring his Sawciness and
Insolence against himself: For, it is reported how that Pompey, when he had
invited his Friends to an Entertainment, would be very Ceremonious in attending
till they came and were all placed, whereas Demetrius would rudely seat himself
at the Table with his Head covered even to his Ears, before any one else could
sit down: Moreover before his return into Italy, he had purchased the
pleasantest Villa or Country-Seat about Rome, with the fairest Walks and Places
for Exercise, and the most complete Gardens, called by the Name of Demetrius,
notwithstanding that Pompey his Master was contented with a mean and thrifty
Habitation till his third Consulship. Afterward, it is true, when he had
erected that famous and stately Theater for the People of Rome he built (as an
Appendix to it) an House for himself much more splendid than his former, and
yet as much beneath the stroke of Envy; Insomuch as he that came to be Master
of that House after Pompey, could not but admire at it, and seem very
Inquisitive, Where Pompey the Great used to Sup? Thus are these things reported.

The King of Arabia Petraea, who had hitherto despised the Power of the Romans,
now began to think it dreadful; and therefore dispatched Letters to him,
wherein he promised to be at his Devotion, and do what he would Command;
However Pompey having a desire to confirm and keep him He marches for Arabia
Petra.
in the same Mind, marched forwards for Petra, an Expedition not altogether
irreprehensible, in the opinion of many; for by this 'twas generally thought he
did clearly decline the Chase of Mithridates, whereas they thought themselves
bound to turn their Arms against him as their inveterate Enemy, who now had
blown up the Coal again, and reinforced his shattered Troops with fresh
Preparations (as 'twas reported) to lead his Army through Scythia and Pannonia
into Italy: Pompey on the other side, judging it easier to break his Forces in
Battle, than seize his Person in Flight, resolved not to tire himself out in a
vain Pursuit, but rather to spend his time in diverting the War upon another
Enemy, as a proper Digression in the mean while. But Fortune resolved the
Doubt; for whilst he was yet not far from Petra, and had pitched his Tents and
encamped for that day, as he was riding and managing his Horse without the
Camp, there came an Express by Mithridates his Death.
the flying Post out of Pontus with good News, as was easily discernible a far
off by the Heads of their Javelins that were crowned with Branches of Laurel;
The Soldiers, as soon as they saw them, flocked immediately to Pompey, who
notwithstanding was minded to make an end of his Exercise; but when they began
to be clamorous and importunate, he alighted from his Horse, and taking the
Letters, went before them into the Camp; Now there being no Tribunal erected
there, nor yet any military Hillock, (such as they use to make by cutting up
thick Turfes of Earth and piling them one upon another) they through eagerness
and impatience heaped up a pile of Pack-saddles, and Pompey standing upon that,
told them the News of Mithridates his Death, how that he had laid violent hands
upon himself, upon the Revolt of his Son Pharnaces, and that Pharnaces had
taken all things there into his hands and possession, which he did (as his
Letters speak) in right of himself and the Romans: Upon this News the whole
Army expressing their Joy (as was fit) fell to their Devotion in sacrificing to
the Gods and Feasting, as if in the Person of Mithridates alone there had died
many thousands of their Enemies.

Pompey by this occasion having brought this War to an end, with much more ease
than was expected, departed forthwith out of Arabia, and passing cursorily
through the intermediate Provinces, he came at length to the City Amisus; There
he received many Presents brought from Pharnaces, and several Bodies of the
Royal Blood, together with the Corpse of Mithridates himself, which was not
easy to be known by the Face, (for the Chyrurgion that embalmed him had not
dried up his Brain) but those who were very curious to see him, knew him by the
Scars there; Pompey himself would not endure to see him, but to expiate the
Wrath of the Gods, he sent it away to the City of Sinope; He admired the Riches
of his Robes, no less than the greatness and splendour of his Armor; The
Scabbard of his Sword (that cost 400 Talents) was stolen by Publius, and sold
to Ariarathes; His Cidaris also or Crown, a piece of admirable Workmanship,
being begged of Caius the Foster Brother of Mithridates, was given secretly to
Faustus the Son of Sylla; All which Pompey was ignorant of, but afterward when
Pharnaces came to understand it, he severely punished those that imbezell'd
them.

Pompey now having ordered all things, 12.
and established that Province, he took his Journey homewards in greater Pomp
and State than ever; for when he came to Mitylene, he gave the City their
freedom upon the Intercession of Theophanes, and was present He Is a Lover of
Arts and Sciences.
at certain Anniversary Games or Exercises, where the Poets in a virtuous
Contention rehearse their Works, having at that time no other Theme or Subject
than the Actions of Pompey; but he was exceedingly pleased with the Theater it
self, and drew a Model or Platform of it, intending to erect one in Rome after
the same form, but larger and with more Magnificence; When he came to Rhodes,
he heard the Disputes of the Sophisters or Logicians there, and gave to every
one of them a Talent; And Posidonius has written the Disputation which he held
before him against Hermagoras the Rhetorician, wherein he was Opponent upon the
Question touching Universale. At (...)
Athens also he did the like, and showed his Munificence among the Philosophers
there, as he did likewise in bestowing 50 Talents toward the repairing and
beautifying the City: So that now by all these Acts he well hoped to return
into Italy in the greatest Splendour and Glory of any Mortal Man, having
likewise a passionate desire to be seen of his Family, where he thought he was
equally desired: But that God whose Province and Charge it is always to mix
some Ingredient of Evil even with the greatest and most glorious Goods of
Fortune, had privily provided a bitter Potion at home for him, whereby to make
his Return more sorrowful; for Mutia, during his absence, had dishonored his
Bed; Whilst he was abroad Mutia divorced.
at a distance, he gave little heed to the Report, but when he drew nearer to
Italy, where the Report grew warmer, and that his Thoughts were at leisure to
muse upon the Crime and Reproach, then he sent he a Bill of Divorce; but
neither then in Writing, nor afterward in Discourse, did her ever give a
Reason why he discharged her, but the Cause is mentioned in Cicero's Epistles.

Now there were various Rumors scattered Disbands his Army.
abroad touching Pompey, and were carried to Rome before him; so that there was
a great Tumult and Stir, as if he designed forthwith to march with his Army
directly into the City, and establish himself in a Monarchy; Thereupon Crassus
withdrew himself, together with his Children and Fortunes, out of the City,
either that he was really afraid, or that he counterfeited rather (as was most
probable) to give credit to the Calumny, and exasperate the malice of the
People. Pompey therefore, as soon as he entered into Italy, called a general
Muster of the Army, and having made an Oration suitable to the Genius of the
Time and his Soldiers, and rewarded them liberally, he commanded them to
depart, every Man to his Country, and place of Habitation, only with this
Memento, that they would not fail to meet again at his Triumph. Thus the Army
being disbanded, and the News of it commonly reported, there happened out an
admirable Passage; For when the Cities saw Pompey the Great unarmed, and with a
small Train of Familiar Friends only, (as if he was returning from a Journey of
Pleasure, not from his Conquests) they came pouring in upon him out of pure
Affection and Reverence, attending and conducting him to Rome, with far greater
Forces than he disbanded, insomuch that if he had designed any Stirs or
Innovation in the State, he might have done it without the Assistance of his
Army. Now, because the Law permitted no Man to enter into the City before the
Triumph, therefore he sent to the Senate, entreating them to prorogue the
Election of Consuls, and grant him the favor, that with his presence he might
countenance Piso, one of the Candidates at that time; but this was sharply
opposed by Cato, whereby he failed of his Design; However, Pompey could not but
admire that liberty and boldness of Speech in Cato, wherewith he alone above
all others, durst openly engage in the maintenance of Law and Justice; he
therefore had a great desire to win him over, and purchase his Friendship at
any rate; and to that end, Cato having two Neeces (Daughters of his Sister)
Pompey proposed one in Marriage for himself, the other for his Son; But Cato
suspected the Motion as a colorable design of corrupting and bribing his
Justice by Alliance, and therefore would not hearken to it; which was hainously
resented by his Wife and Sister, that he should reject an Affinity with Pompey
the Great; About that time Pompey having a design of setting up Afranius for
the Consulship, gave a Sum of Money among the Tribes for their Voices, some
whereof was received even in his own Gardens, insomuch that when this Practice
came to be bruited abroad, Pompey was very ill spoken of, for that he who had
had the Honor of that Government as a just Reward of his greater Merits,
should now make Merchandise of that very Honor, for one that had neither
Virtue or Courage to deserve it; Whereupon Cato took occasion to tell the
Ladies, Now, said he, had we contracted an Alliance with Pompey, we had been
allied to this Dishonor too; which when they heard, they could not but
acknowledge and subscribe to him, as one of a more piercing Judgment in Matters
of Prudence and Morality than themselves.

The Splendour and Magnificence of Pompey's His 3d Triumph.
Triumph was such, That (though it held the space of two days, yet) they were
extremely straightened in Time; so that of what was prepared for that Pageantry,
there was as much subducted, as would have set out and adorned another Triumph.
But in the first place, there were Tables carried, wherein were written the
Names and Titles of all those Nations over whom he triumphed, such as were, The
Kingdoms of Pontus, Armenia, Cappadocia, Paphlagonia, Media, Colchis, Iberia,
Albania, Syria, Cilicia, and Mesopotamia, together with the Countries about
Phaenicia and Palaestine, Judaea, Arabia, and all the Power of the Pirates
subdued by Sea and Land: And in these Countries there appeared the taking of no
less than 1000 Castles, nor much less than 900 Cities, together with 800 Ships
of the Pirates, and the Peopling of 39 Towns that lay desolate and depopulated:
Besides, there was set forth in these Tables, an account of all the Tributes
throughout the Roman Empire, and how that before these Conquests, the Revenue
amounted but to 5000 Myriads, whereas by his Acquisitions, 'twas advanced to
8500, and withal that for Advance at present he brought into the common
Treasury of ready Money, Gold and Silver, Plate and Jewels, to the value of
20000 Talents, over and above that which had been distributed among the
Soldiers, whereof he that had least* had 1500 Drams for his share, The
Prisoners of War that were led in Triumph, besides the Arch-Pirates, were the
Son of Tigranes, King of Armenia, with his Wife and Daughter; as also Zosime,
the Wife of King Tigranes himself, and Aristobulus, King of Judaea. The Sister
of King Mithridates, and her five Sons; and some Ladies of Scythia. There were
likewise the Hostages of the Albanians and Iberians; and the King of Comagena;
besides a vast number of Trophies, answering directly and deciphering out each
particular Battle, in which he was Conqueror either himself in Person, or by
his Lieutenants. But that that seemed to be his greatest Glory, and that no
other Roman ever attained to, was this, That he made his third Triumph over the
third part of the World; For many among the Romans had the Honor of Triumphing
thrice; but his first Triumph, was over Africa, his second, over Europe, and
this last, over Asia; so that he seemed in these three Triumphs, to have led
the whole World in Chains.

As for Pompey's Age, those who affect to 13.
make the Parallel exact in all things betwixt Him and Alexander the Great,
would not allow him to be quite 34, whereas in truth, at that time he was near
40: Oh that he had crowned his days, and breathed out his last, even then when
with Alexander's Age he had his Fortune too! But all the remainder of his
Lifetime was extremely unfortunate, wherein his Prosperity became odious, and
his Adversity incurable; His Change of Fortune.
For that great Power and Authority which he had gained in the City by his
greater Merits, even that was made use of only in Patronizing the Iniquities of
others, so that by advancing their Fortunes, he detracted from his own Glory,
till at last he was dashed in pieces by the force and greatness of his own
Power: And as the strongest Citadel or Fort in a Town, when it is attacked and
taken by an Enemy, does then afford the same Strength to the Foe, as it had
done to Friends before; so Caesar being exalted in the State by the Power of
Pompey, overthrew and ruined him by the same Force and Arts by which he had
trampled down others: And thus it came to pass.

Lucullus, when he returned out of Asia, Impeached by Lucullus.
where he had been despitefully treated by Pompey, met with an honorable
Reception from the Senate, and much more when Pompey was present; for then they
encouraged him to reassume his Authority in the administration of the
Government, whereas he was now grown old and unactive in Business, having given
himself over to his softer Pleasures, and then enjoyment of a splendid Fortune:
Hereupon he began presently to bear up against Pompey, and took him up sharply,
whereby he obtained those Acts and Decrees of his, which were repealed by
Pompey, to be re-established, insomuch that by the Assistance of Cato he had a
greater Interest in the Senate than Pompey: Now Pompey having fallen from his
Joins with the Commons.
Hopes in such an unworthy Repulse, was forced to fly to the Tribunes of the
People for Refuge, and make his Interest with the light young Men of the Town;
Among whom there was one Clodius (the vilest and most impudent Wretch alive)
undertook him, and exposed him as a Tool to the Rabble; for he had him always
at his Elbow, even beneath his Dignity, carrying him up and down among the
Throngs in the Marketplace, to countenance those Laws and Speeches which he
made to cajole the People, and ingratiate himself; And at last for his Reward,
he demanded of Pompey (as a thing no way dishonorable but beneficial) That he
should forsake Cicero his great Forsakes Cicero.
Friend, and one that had highly deserved of him as an Advocate in defending
his Causes and Affairs in the Commonwealth; Which he obtained afterward, for
when Cicero happened to be in some Danger, and implored his Aid, he would not
so much as admit him into his presence, but shutting up his Gates against those
that came to mediate for him, slipped himself out at a Backdoor; whereupon Cicero
fearing the extremity of Judgment, departed privately from Rome.

About that time Caesar returning from his Caesar's Artifice and Consulship.
Province, happened upon a politic Device that brought him into great Favor at
present, and much increased his Power for the future, but in the event proved
extremely destructive both to Pompey and the Commonwealth; For now he stood
Candidate for his first Consulship; and therefore well observing the Enmity
betwixt Pompey and Crassus, and finding how that in applying himself and
joining with one, he should make the other his Enemy, he endeavored by all
means to reconcile them, a Design in appearance very specious, savouring of
great Honesty and Civility, but in truth a very subtle and treacherous Practice
in him; for he well knew that opposite Parties or Factions in a Commonwealth,
like Passengers in a Boat, serve to trim and balance the unsteady motions of
Power there, whereas if they combine and run all over to one side, they make a
dead unweildy Weight, whereby it oversets and all falls to wreck; and therefore
Cato wisely told them, who charged all the Calamities of Rome upon the Civil
Wars betwixt Pompey and Caesar, That they were in a great Error, in charging
all the Crime upon the last Cause; For 'twas not their Discord and Enmity, but
their Unanimity and Friendship that gave the first and greatest Wound to the
Commonwealth.

Caesar being thus elected Consul, began Caesar c^^ts the People.
straightways to grow popular, and make an Interest with the poor and meaner
sort, by preferring and establishing Laws for the L^xagra^ia
planting of Colonies, and for dividing of Lands; whereby he debased the
Grandeur of his Magistracy, and turned his Consulship in a manner to a mere
Democracy, himself appearing rather a Tribune of the People than Consul: Now
when Bibulus his Colleague opposed him, and that Cato was prepared to second
Bibulus, and assist him vigorously; Caesar, to be even with A Friend to Caesar.
them, brought Pompey into the open Court, and there directing his Speech to
him before the Tribunal, demanded his Opinion touching those Laws, who gave his
Approbation; Why then, (said Caesar) in case any Man should offer violence to
these Laws, wilt not thou be ready in assistance to the People? Yes, (replied
Pompey) I shall always be ready, and against those that threaten the Sword,
I Will appear with Sword and Buckler: But nothing ever was either said or done by
Pompey to that very day, that seemed more insolent or odious to all Men than
that one Saying; Insomuch that his Friends endeavored to palliate the Offense,
and make an Apology for it, as a word slipped out of joint through Inadvertency;
but by his Actions and Practices afterward, it appeared plainly, that he was
totally devoted to Caesar's Service; For, of a sudden, Pompey, beyond all Men's
expectation, Married with Julia, the Daughter Marries Julia.
of Caesar, who had been affianced before, and was to be Married within a few
days to Caepio: And to appease Caepio's Wrath, he gave him his own Daughter in
Marriage, who had been espoused before to Faustus the Son of Sylla: But Caesar
himself Married Calpurnia, the Daughter of Piso.

Upon this Pompey made a Garrison of the City, and filling it with Soldiers,
carried all things by Force as he pleased; for as Bibulus the Consul was going
to Court, accompanied with Lucullus and Cato, they fell upon him of a sudden,
and brake his Rods, the Ensigns of Government; and some body threw a
Close-stool of Ordure upon the Head of Bibulus himself; but the two Tribunes of
the People, that went among his Guards before him, were desperately wounded in
the Fray: And thus by these means having cleared the Court of all their
Adversaries, the Lex Agraria, or Bill for the Division of Lands, was
established and passed into an Act: And not only so, but even the whole
Populacy being thus decoyed and taken with this Bait, became totally at their
Devotion, never regarding the Canvasses of the adverse Faction, but passing
quietly by Suffrage whatever they propounded: Thus they confirmed all those
Acts and Decrees of Pompey, which were questioned and contested by Lucullus;
and to Caesar they granted the Provinces of Gallia Cisalpina and Transalpina,
together with Illyricum for five years, and likewise a Battalion of four entire
Legions; Then they Elected Consuls for the year ensuing, Piso Piso and Gabinius
Consuls.
the Father-in-Law of Caesar, and Gabinius, one of the chiefest Parasites about
Pompey.

During all these Transactions, Catulus kept close within Doors, nor did he
appear publicly in Person for the space of eight Months together,
notwithstanding he were Consul, but sent out Proclamations full of bitter
Invectives and Accusations against them both; Cato turned Enthusiast, and as if
he had been possessed with a Spirit of Divination, did nothing else in the
Senate but foretell what Judgments should befall the Commonwealth and Pompey.
But Lucullus pleaded Dotage, and retired upon a Writ of Ease, as one already
grown Feeble and Superannuate in the Affairs of State, which gave occasion to
that Satirical Saying of Pompey, That the Fatigues of Luxury were much more
unseasonable for an old Man than those of Government: Which in truth proved to
be a Reflection upon himself, for not long after he himself grew Effeminate in
the Embraces of a young Wife, Courting and Caressing her daily up and down
through all the Gardens and Places of Pleasure in the Country, whereby he
neglected all the weighty Affairs of Courts and Councils: Insomuch that
Clodius, who was Clodius his Insolence to him.
then Tribune of the People, began to despise him, and engage in many bold
Attempts against him; For when he had banished Cicero, and sent away Cato into
Cyprus, under a colorable pretense of War; when Caesar was gone upon his
Expedition to Gaul, and that he found how the Populacy was Devoted to him, as a
Man forming all Things, and Governing according to their Pleasure, he attempted
forthwith to unravel and repeal diverse of Pompey's Decrees; thereupon he drew
Tigranes the Captive out of Prison, and had him about with him as his
Companion; he Commenced likewise Actions and Accusations against several of
Pompey's Friends, designing by these Measures to take the extent of his Power:
At last upon a time, when Pompey came to Court in a certain Cause, this same
Clodius, accompanied with a crowd of dissolute and desperate Ruffians, and
standing up in an eminent Place above the rest, uttered himself in these or the
like Questions, Who Is the Licentious General? What Man is that, that is to seek
for a Man? And who is it that scratcheth his Head so nicely with one Finger?
The Rabble, upon the Signal of shaking his Gown, with a great Shout to every
Question, as it is usual among Songsters in the Chorus or Burden of a Song,
Answered, Pompey: This indeed was no small Affliction to Pompey, a Man
unaccustomed to hear any thing ill of himself, and unexperienced altogether in
such kind of Rencounters; but he was most extremely grieved, when he came to
understand that the Senate rejoiced at this dirty Usage, and imputed it as a
just Revenge or Punishment upon him for his Treachery to Cicero: But when it
happened through this Tumult in the MarketPlace, that it was come even to Blows
and Wounds, and that one of Clodius his Bondslaves was apprehended, creeping
through the Crowd toward Pompey, with a Sword in his Hand, Pompey laying hold
of this Pretense, (though perhaps otherwise apprehensive of Clodius his
Insolence and Reproaches) never would go to any public Assemblies, during all
the time he was Tribune, but kept close at home, and passed away his time in
Consult with his Friends, by what means he might best allay the Displeasure of
the Senate and Nobles against him; Among other Expedients, Culleo advised the
Divorce of Julia, whereby he should meet with an easy passage from Caesar's
Friendship to that of the Senate; this he would not hearken to by any means:
Others again advised him to call home He calls home Cicero.
Cicero from Banishment, a Man that was always the great Adversary of Clodius,
and as great a Favorite of the Senate; to this he was easily persuaded, and
therefore he brought Cicero's Brother into the MarketPlace, attended with a
strong Party, to Petition for his Return; where, after a warm Dispute, wherein
several were wounded and some slain, he got the Victory of Clodius: No sooner
was Cicero returned home upon this Decree, but that immediately he reconciled
the Senate to Pompey; and withal, by his Rhetoric in defense of the Law for
Importation of Corn, did again, in effect, make Pompey Sovereign Lord of
Annonae prae^ectus.
all the Roman Empire by Sea and Land; For by that Law he had got within the
verge of his Jurisdiction, all Ports, Staples, and Storehouses; and in short,
all the Mysteries and Concerns both of the Merchant and Husbandman: Which gave
occasion to that malicious Charge of Clodius, That the Law was not made because
of the Dearth or scarcity of Corn, but the Dearth or scarcity of Corn was made,
that they might make a Law, whereby that Power of his, which was now grown
Feeble and Consumptive, might be revived again, and Pompey reinstated in a new
Empire: Others looked upon it as a Politic Device of Spinther the Cousul,
whose Design it was to oblige Pompey with a greater Authority, that he himself
might be sent in Assistance to King Ptolomy: However this is undoubtedly true,
That Canidius the Tribune preferred a Law to dispatch Pompey in the Nature of
an Ambassador, without an Army, attended only with two Lictors or Vergers, as a
Mediator betwixt the King and his Subjects of Alexandria. Neither did this Law
seem ungrateful to Pompey, though indeed the Senate cast it out upon a specious
Pretense, That they were unwilling to hazard the Person of so brave a Man:
However, there were found several Pamphlets scattered about the Market Place
and Senate House, intimating how grateful it would be to Ptolemy to have Pompey
appointed for his General instead of Spinther: But Timagenes relates it
otherwise, as if Ptolomy went away and left Egypt not out of necessity, but
purely upon the persuasion of Theophanes, who designed an Advantage to Pompey,
laying a Foundation for him of Wealth, and a new Command: Yet for all this, the
crafty Practices of Theophanes could not make this Report so credible, but that
it was rendered much more incredible by that nobler Genius of Pompey, which
would never allow of such base and disingenious Arts even in favor of his
Ambition.

Thus Pompey being appointed chief Provedore, and having within his
Administration and Management all the Corn Trade, sent abroad his Factors and
Agents into all Quarters, and he himself sailing into Sicily, Sardinia, and
Africa, made up vast Stores of Corn. And now being just ready to set Sail upon
his Voyage homeward bound, there arose a mighty Storm of Wind upon the Sea,
which raised a Doubt even among the Commanders themselves, whether it were safe
to break Ground or no; wherefore Pompey himself went first aboard, and
commanded the Mariners to weigh Anchor, declaring with a loud Voice, That there
was a necessity for them to Sail, but no necessity to Live: So that he by his
Spirit and Courage (having met with that Fortune which favors the Bold) made a
prosperous Return, whereby his Granaries were stored, the Markets all filled
with Corn, and the Sea with Ships; Insomuch that this great plenty and
abundance of Provisions yielded a sufficient Supply, not only to the City of
Rome, but even Foreigners too, dispersing it self, like a lively Fountain,
through many Rivulets, into all Quarters of Italy.

All this time Caesar grew great, and was 14. Caesar's Practices.
highly extolled for his Wars and Conquests in Gaul, and when in appearance he
seemed farthest distant from Rome, as if he had been entangled in the Affairs
of Belgia, Suevia, and Britany, than in truth was he working craftily by secret
Practices in the midst of the People, and countermining Pompey in his chiefest
Designs: For having his Army always about him as his Body, 'twas not his Design
to weaken or impair it in a formal War against the barbarous Enemy, but by
light Skirmishes only, no otherwise than in Sports of Hunting or Hawking, to
exercise and harden it, whereby he made it invincible and dreadful to the
World: Then for his Gold and Silver, (which was infinite) together with those
incredible Spoils, and other Treasures which he had taken from the Enemy in his
Conquests, all those he sent to Rome in Presents, and Bribes, tempting and
corrupting the Aediles, Praetors, and Consuls, together with their Wives,
whereby he purchased to himself a multitude of Friends; Insomuch that when he
passed back again over the Alps, and took up his Winter Quarters in the City
of Luca, there flocked to him an infinite number of the common People Men and
Women even in Strife, and likewise 200 Senators at least, among whom were
Pompey and Crassus; so that there were to be seen at once before Caesar's Gates
no less than sixscore Rods or Maces of Proconsuls and Praetors. As for the rest
of his Addressors, he sent them all away full fraught with Hopes and Money; but
for Crassus and Pompey, he entered into private Covenants and Articles of
Agreement with them, That they should stand Candidates for the Consulship next
Year: That Caesar on his part should send a good Company of Soldiers to give
their Votes at the Election: That as soon as they were Elected, they should use
their Interest to have the Government of some Provinces and Legions assigned to
themselves, and that Caesar should have his Charge now in being confirmed to
him for five Years more: But afterward when these Designs came to be
discovered and noised abroad, the Matter was hainously resented by many Persons
of the greatest Quality in Rome; and therefore Marcellinus once in an open
Assembly of the People, demanded of them both, Whether they designed to Sue for
the Consulship or no? And being urged by the People for their Answer, Pompey
spoke first and told them, Perhaps he would Sue for it, perhaps he would not;
But Crassus was somewhat more politic, and said, That for his part he would be
ready to do what should be judged most agreeable with the Interest of the
Commonwealth: However Marcellinus still inveighing against Pompey, and seeming
to reflect upon him more bitterly, Pompey replied as sharply, That this
Marcellinus was a most ungodly Wretch, without either Gratitude or Honor, for
that by him he was made an Orator of a Mute, and of a poor Starvling, one
glutted even to a Vomit.

Now notwithstanding diverse fell off from their Pretenses, and forsook their
Canvas for the Consulship, yet Cato persuaded and encouraged Lucius Domitius
not to desist, For that, said he, the Contest now is not for Government, but
for liberty against Tyrants and Usurpers. Wherefore those of Pompey's Party,
fearing that inflexible Constancy in Cato, (whereby he ruled and governed the
whole Senate) lest by that likewise he should pervert and draw after him all
the well-affected part of the Commonalty, resolved to withstand Domitius at
first, and prevent his entrance into the Marketplace; To this end therefore
they sent in a Band of armed Men, who, at the first Onset, slew the
Torch-bearer of Domitius, as he was leading the way before him, and immediately
put all the rest to Flight; last of all Cato himself retired, having received a
Wound upon his right Arm in defense of Domitius. Thus, by these means and
practices they obtained the Government, neither indeed did they behave
themselves with more decency throughout all the rest of their Actions; But in
the first place, when the People were choosing Cato Praetor, and just ready
with their Votes for the Poll, Pompey broke up the Assembly, charging his
Reasons upon the Augury, as if there had appeared something inauspicious in the
Heavens; and thereupon having corrupted the Tribes, they publicly proclaimed
Antias and Vatinius, Praetors: Then in pursuance of their Covenants with
Caesar, they published several Edicts by Trebonian the Tribune, whereby they
made an Enlargement of Caesar's Commission according to Agreement, measuring
out another five years Charge to his former Province; To Crassus there was
appointed Syria, and the Parthian War; And to Pompey himself all Africa,
together with both Spains, and four Legions of Soldiers, whereof two he lent to
Caesar, upon his request for the Wars in Gaul.

Crassus upon the expiration of his Consulship, departed forthwith into his
Province; But Pompey spent some time in Rome, upon the opening or dedication of
his Theater, Pompey's Theater.
where he treated the People with all manner of Games, Shows, and Exercises, as
well Warlike as those of the Muses; there was likewise the Hunting or Baiting
of wild Beasts, and Combats with them, wherein 500 Lions were slain; But above
all, the Battle of Elephants was a Spectacle full of Horror and Amazement.

These noble Entertainments brought him in great Esteem with the People,
whereby he was highly admired and beloved; but on the other side he created no
less Envy to himself, in that he committed the Government of his Provinces and
Legions into the Hands of Friends, as his Lieutenants, whilst he himself was
wantonly rambling up and down, and caressing his Wife throughout all the
Delicacies of Italy; whether he doated upon her as a real Lover, or whether he
could not find in his Heart to leave her, who was such a Lover of him? is
somewhat Julia's Love to him.
doubtful; But this is certain, that there was nothing more famous and common
in Discourse, than the passion of this young Lady for her Husband; not that she
was in Love with Pompey for the flower of his Age, but because of his assured
Chastity, as knowing no other Woman, but that one he had Wedded; Besides,
though in his Carriage he had a majestic Gravity, yet his Conversation was not
Morose, but extremely agreeable, and taking among the Women, unless we will
arraign the evidence of Flora the Curtezan. Now it happened in a public
Assembly, as they were at an Election of the Aediles, that the People came to
Blows, and diverse about Pompey were slain, so that he, finding himself all
bloody, ordered a change of Apparel; but the Servants who brought home his
Clothes, making a great Bu^tle and Hurry about the House, it chanced that the
young Lady (who was then with Child) saw his Gown all stained with Blood,
whereupon she dropped immediately into a Swoon, and was hardly brought to Life
again; however, what with her Fright and Passion together, she fell in Labor
and Miscarried: Wherefore even those who chiefly censured Pompey for his
Friendship to Caesar, could not reprove him for his Affection to his Lady, who
had such a Passion for him. Afterward she was great again, and brought to Bed
of a Daughter, but died in Childbed, neither The Death of Julia.
did the Infant outlive her Mother many days: Pompey had prepared all things
for the Interment of her Corpse at Alba, but the People seized upon it by force,
and performed the Solemnities of her Funeral in the Field of Mars, rather in
Compassion to the young Lady, than in Favor either of Pompey or Caesar; and
yet of these two, the People seemed at that time to pay Caesar a greater share
of Honor in his absence, than to Pompey, though he was present.

From hence, the City began to waver, Causes of the Civil War.
and feel new Commotions; for all things grew Tumultuous, and every Body's
Discourse tended to Sedition, as soon as Death had put an end to that Relation,
which hitherto had been a Disguise rather than Restraint to the Ambition of
these Men: Besides, not long after came an Express from Parthia with
Intelligence of the Death of Crassus there, whereby another manifest Obstacle
of a Civil War was taken away; for they had both an Eye thither, and that awe
of him kept them together in a fair Correspondence all his Lifetime; but when
Fortune had taken away this Second, whose Province it was to revenge the
Quarrel of the Conquered, you might then say with the Comedian,

See, how the Combatants begin!
How they anoint each others Skin,
And chafe their hands in dust again.
So inconsiderable a thing is Fortune, in respect of humane Nature! and so
little Content can it give to a Covetous Mind, That an Empire of that mighty
Extent and Sway could not satisfy the Ambition of two Men, and though they
knew and had read,

The Gods, when they divided out 'twixt Three,
This massy Universe, Heaven, Hell, and Sea,
Each God sat down contented on his Throne,
And undisturbed each God enjoys his own.
Yet they thought the whole Roman Empire not sufficient to contain them, though
they were but Two.

But Pompey, in an Oration to the People told them plainly, that he ever came
into Office before he expected he should, and that he always left it sooner
than they expected he would; and indeed the disbanding of all his Armies always
witnessed as much: Yet when he perceived that Caesar would not so willingly
discharge his Forces, he then endeavored to strengthen himself against him by
Offices and Commands in the City; neither indeed did he attempt any other
Innovation; and yet all this while he would not seem to distrust, but rather to
despise and contemn him; But when he saw how they bestowed the Places of
Government quite contrary to his opinion, because the Citizens were bribed in
their Elections, he left the City without any Government at all. Hereupon there
was mention straightway made, and the News ran current of a Dictator; Now
Lucilius, a Tribune of the People, was the bold Man that first adventured ^o
propose it, encouraging the People to make choice of Pompey for their Dictator;
but the Tribune was in danger of being turned out of his Office, by the
opposition that Cato made against it: And for Pompey, many of his Friends
appeared and pleaded his excuse, alleging, That he never was desirous of that
Government, neither would he accept of it. Cato therefore making a large
Harangue in commendation of Pompey, and exhorting him to be careful of good
Order in the Commonwealth, he could not for shame but yield to it, and so
Domitius and Messala were elected Consuls.

Afterward when there was another Anarchy or Vacancy in the Government, and
the Discourses of a Dictator were much hotter than before, those of Cato's
Party fearing lest they should make Pompey, thought it Policy to keep him from
that Arbitrary and Tyrannical Power, by giving him an Office of more legal
Authority; Nay, even Bibulus himself, who was Pompey's Enemy, first gave his
Vote that Pompey should be created Consul alone; alleging, That by these
means, either the Commonwealth would be freed from its present Confusion, or
that its Bondage should be lessened by serving the worthiest: This was looked
upon as a very strange Opinion, considering the Man that spoke it; and
therefore Cato standing up, every body expected that he would have opposed it,
but after Silence made, he told them plainly, That for his own part he would
never have been the Author of that Advice himself, but since it was propounded
by another, his Advice was to follow it, adding, That any form of Government
was better than none at all; (...)
and that in a time so full of Distraction, he thought no Man fitter to Govern
than Pompey. This Counsel was unanimously approved of, and an Act passed, That
Pompey should be made sole Consul, with this Clause, He is chose Consul alone
That if he thought it necessary to have a Colleague, he might choose whom he
pleased, provided it were not till after Two Months expired.

Thus was Pompey created and declared. 15.
sole Consul by Sulpitius, Regent in this Vacancy; Upon which he made a very
civil Complement to Cato, with many thanks for the Honor he had done him, and
desiring his Assistance in the Privy Counsel of his Government; To this Cato
replied, That Pompey had no reason to thank him, for all that he had said, was
in favor of the Commonwealth, not of Pompey; but that he would be always ready
to serve him in the quality of a privy Counselor, if he please to require it,
if not, yet he would be sure to speak in public what he thought was for the
Interest of the Commonwealth; So just was Cato in all his Actions.

No sooner did Pompey return into the City, Marries Cornelia.
but he Married Cornelia, the Daughter of Metellus Scipio, not a Virgin but
Widow, the late Relict of Publius, (the Son of Crassus) who died in Parthia,
and with whom she cohabited from her Virginity: This Lady, besides the Charms
of her Beauty, had many attractive Qualities from her Education, for she was
learned enough in most Sciences, played well upon the Lute, was skilled in
Geometry, and took great pleasure in hearing Discourses of Philosophy; To these
may be added her Graces in Morality, and in this she was extremely commendable,
that her Humor was free from Peevishness and Curiosity, Vices very common to
Ladies of such liberal Endowments. Her Father also was very considerable, as
well in the Honor of his Family, as that of his own Virtues; however, these
unequal Marriages were not very pleasing to some sort of People; for Cornelia's
Age was more agreeable with that of Pompey's Son than his own: But the wiser
sort thought the Concerns of the City quite neglected, when he (to whom alone
they had committed their broken Fortunes, and from whom alone, as from their
Physician, they expected a cure to these Distractions) went crowned with
Garlands, and was revelling in his Nuptial Feasts: never considering, that this
Consulship was a public Calamity, which would never have been given him,
contrary to the Rules of Law, had his Country been in a flourishing State. Yet
afterward he took cognizance of those that got into Offices by Gifts and
Bribery, and enacted Laws and Ordinances, setting forth the Rules and Judgment
by which they should be arraigned and impleaded; thus he regulating all things
with Gravity and Justice, gave Security, Order, and Silence to their Courts of
Judicature, himself giving his presence there with a Band of Soldiers. But the
Case was altered when his Father-inlaw Scipio was accused, there he sent for
the 360 Judges to his House, and entreated them to be favorable to him,
whereupon his Accuser seeing Scipio come into the Court accompanied by the
Judges themselves, let fall his Suit: Upon this Pompey was very ill spoken of,
and much worse in the Case of Plancus; for whereas he himself had made a Law,
wherein 'twas enacted, That no Man should speak in praise of an Offender, yet,
notwithstanding this Prohibition, he came into Court, and spoke openly in
commendation of Plancus; insomuch that Cato (who happened to be one of the Judges
at that time) stopping his Ears with his Hands, told him, He could not in
Honor hear an Offender commended contrary to Law; thereupon Cato was refused
and set aside from being a Judge before Sentence was given, but Plancus was
condemned by the rest of the Judges to Pompey's Dishonor: Shortly after
Hypseus, a Man of Consular Dignity, endeavoring to avoid an Impeachment,
waited for Pompey's Return from Bath to Supper, and falling down at his Feet,
implored his Favor, but he disdainfully passed him by, saying, That he did
nothing else but Spoil his Supper: This Partiality was looked upon as a great
Fault in Pompey, and highly condemned; however, he managed all things else
discreetly, and having put the Government in very good Order, he chose his
Father-in-law to be his Colleague in the Consulship for the last five Months:
His Provinces also were continued to him for the term of Four Years longer,
with a Commission to take 1000 Talents yearly out of the Treasury for the
payment of his Army.

This gave occasion to some of Caesar's Friends to think it reasonable, That
some Consideration should be had of him too, who had done such signal Services
in War, and fought so many bloody Battles for the Honor and Interest of the
Roman Empire, alleging, That he deserved at least a second Consulship, or to
have the Government of his Province continued, whereby he might command and
enjoy in Peace what he had obtained in War, and that no Successor might reap
the fruits of his Labor, and raise a fame upon the glory of his Actions. There
arising some Debate about this Matter Pompey took upon him, as it were out of
kindness to Caesar, to plead his Cause, and allay that Hatred of the People
that was conceived against him, telling them, That he had then received a
Letter from Caesar, wherein he desired a Successor, and to be discharged from
the War, but hoped withal, that they would give him leave to stand for the
Consulship though in his absence; But those of Cato's Party stoutly withstood
it, saying, That if he expected any Favor from the Citizens, he ought to leave
his Army, and come in a private Capacity to canvas for it: Wherefore Pompey
seeming so easily satisfied, in that he made no Reply, gave a greater suspicion
of his specious Inclinations toward Caesar, especially when under pretense of
his War with Parthia, he sent for his two Legions which he had lent him;
however Caesar, though he well knew for what Design sign he wanted them, sent
them home very liberally rewarded.

About that time Pompey recovered of a dangerous Fit of Sickness that seized
him at Naples, and there the whole City, upon the His Recovery a^ Naples
Persuasion of Praxagoras, made Sacrifices to the Gods for his Recovery; Those
of the neighboring Towns likewise happening to follow their Example, the
Humor was carried on throughout all Italy; so that there was not a City either
great or small, that did not feast and rejoice for many days together: And the
Company of those that came from all Parts to meet him was so numerous, that no
place was able to contain them, but the Villages, Seaport Towns, and the very
Highways, were all full of People, feasting and sacrificing to the Gods: Nay,
many went to meet him with Garlands on their Heads, and Flambeaux in their
Hands, casting Flowers and Nosegays upon him as he went along; so that this
Progress of his and Reception was one of the noblest and most glorious Sights
imaginable: And yet it is thought that this very thing was not one of the least
Causes Another Cause of ^^^ War.
and Occasions of the Civil War; for Pompey judging of the Peoples Affections
by their Actions, together with the greatness of their Joy, was grown to that
height of Pride and Conceit, that (having laid aside that prudent Conduct and
Caution which had hitherto secured and crowned all his Actions with good
Success) he entertained a most extravagant Confidence of his own, and Contempt
of Caesar's Power; insomuch that he thought neither Force nor Care necessary
against him, but that he could pull him down much easier than he had set him
up: Besides this, there was Appius (under whose Command, those Legions which
Pompey lent to Caesar, were returned) coming lately out of Gaul, very much
vilified Caesar's Actions there, and gave out scandalous Reports in derogation
of his Honor, telling Pompey, That he was unacquainted with his own Strength
and Reputation, if he made use of any other Forces against Caesar than his own,
for such was the Soldiers Hatred to Caesar, and their Love to Pompey so great,
that they would all come over to him upon his first* Appearance. By these
Flatteries was Pompey strangely pufft up, and his Confidence had wrought him
into such a careless Security, that he could not choose but laugh at those who
seemed to fear a War: And when some were saying, That if Caesar should bend his
Forces against the City, they could not see what Power was able to resist him,
he replied with a scornful Smile, bidding them take no care of that, for, said
he, Whenever I stamp with my Foot in any part of Italy, there will rise up
Forces enough in an instant both Horse and Foot.

Now Caesar on the other side was more. 16.
vigorous in his Proceedings, himself always at hand hovering about the
Frontiers of Italy, and sending some of his Soldiers continually into the City
to attend all Elections with their Votes; Besides this, he corrupted diverse of
the Magistrates, and brought them over to his Party by Pensions; whereof Paulus
the Consul was one, who was wrought over by a Bribe of 1500 Talents: And Curio,
a Tribune of the People, by a discharge of all his Debts which he had
contracted without number; together with Mark Anthony, who out of Friendship to
Curio, became bound with him in the same Obligations for them all. And it is
undoubtedly true, That a Centurion of Caesar's waiting at the Senate House, and
hearing that the Senate refused to give him a larger term in the continuance of
his Government, clapped his Hand upon his Sword, and said, But this shall give
it* and indeed all his Practices and Preparations were in order to this end.
Now Curio's Demands and Request in favor of Caesar were much more popular in
appearance, for he desired one of these two things, either That Pompey should
put away his Army, or that Caesar's should not be taken away from him; For if
both of them were private Persons common Humanity would keep them within the
bounds of their Duty; or if they were of equal Authority, they would be a
balance to each other, and sit down contented with their Lot: but he that
weakens one, does at the same time strengthen the other, and so doubles that
very Strength and Power* which he stood in fear of before. Marcellus the Consul
replied nothing to all this, but that Caesar was a Thief, and should be
proclaimed an Enemy to the State, if he did not disband his Army. However Curio
with the Assistance of Anthony and Piso prevailed, that the Matter in Debate
should be put to the Question, and decided by Vote in the Senate: So that it
being ordered upon the Question for those to withdraw, who were of opinion,
That Caesar only should lay down his Army, and Pompey command, the Majority
withdrew. But when 'twas ordered again for those to withdraw whose Vote was*
That both should lay down their Arms, and neither command, there were but 22
for Pompey, all the rest remained of Curio's side: Whereupon he, as one proud
of his Conquest, leapt out for Joy among the People, who received him with as
great tokens of Joy, clapping their Hands, and crowning him with Garlands and
Flowers: Pompey was not then present in the Senate* because it is not lawful
for the General of an Army to come into the City. But Marcellus rising up,
said, That he would not sit there hearing Speeches, when he saw that ten
Legions had already passed the Alps in their March toward the City, but that
he would send a Man of equal Authority against them in defense of their
Country: Upon this the City went into Mourning, as in a public Calamity, and
Marcellus (accompanied by the Senate) went solemnly through the City toward
Pompey, and spoke thus to him, Pompey, I command thee to appear in defense of
thy Country, with those Forces thou have at present in readiness, and to raise
more with all speed: Lentulus the Consul elect for the Year following, spoke
much to the same purpose; But Anthony* contrary to an Order of Senate, in a
public Assembly, read a Letter of Caesar's, containing many fair Overtures, at
leastwise very obliging to the common People, wherein he desired* That both
Pompey and he quitting their Governments, and dismissing their Armies should
submit to the Judgment of the People, and give an account of their Actions
before them; insomuch that when Pompey began to make his Levies, and muster up
his new-raised Soldiers, he found himself disappointed in his Expectations:
Some few indeed came in, but those very unwillingly; others would not answer to
their Names, and the generality cried out for Peace. Lentulus, notwithstanding
he was now entered upon his Consulship, would not assemble the Senate; but
Cicero, who was lately returned from Cilicia, labored for a Reconciliation,
proposing, That Caesar should leave his Province of Gaul and Army, reserving
two Legions only, together with the Government of Illyricum, and to be had in
nomination for a second Consulship: Pompey disliking this motion, Caesar's
Friends were contented that he should quit one of his Legions too; but Lentulus
still opposing, and Cato crying out, That Pompey did ill to be deceived again,
the Reconciliation did not take effect.

In the mean time News was brought, Caesar marches toward Rome.
That Caesar had taken Ariminum, a great City in Italy, and was marching
directly toward Rome, with all his Forces; but this latter was altogether
false, for he had no more with him at that time than 300 Horse and 5000* Foot,
and would not tarry for the Body of his Army, which lay beyond the Alps,
choosing rather by surprise to fall in of a sudden upon his Enemies, (while
they were in Confusion, and did not expect him) than to give them time to make
Preparations for War. For when he came to the Bank of Rubicon, (a River that
made the bounds of his own Province toward Italy) there he made a Halt,
pausing a little, and considering with himself the greatness of that Enterprise
which he had undertaken; then at last, (like Men that are throwing themselves
headlong from some Precipice into a vast Abyss) having blinded and withdrawn
his mind from the thoughts of Danger, he transported his Army, saying this only
to those that were present with a loud voice in the Greek Language, (...); that
is, Let the Die be Cast. No sooner was the News arrived, but there was an
Uproar throughout all the City, and a Consternation in the People even to
astonishment, such as never was known in Rome* before; all the Senate ran
immediately to Pompey, and the Magistrates followed: Now when Tullus made
enquiry touching his Legions and Forces, Pompey seemed to pause a little, and
answered with some hesitation, That he had those two Legions ready that Caesar
sent back, and for his new raised Forces, he believed they would shortly make
up a Battalion of 30000 Men; but Tullus replied with a loud voice, O Pompey*
thou have deceived us! and presently gave his Advice to dispatch Ambassadors to
Caesar. Favonius (who was no ill Man, otherwise than in his petulant and
abusive way of Talking, which he seemed to affect, in imitation of Cato's
freedom of Speech) he bid Pompey stamp upon the ground, and call forth the
Forces he had promised. But Pompey very patiently bore with all this
unseasonable Railery; so that Cato putting him in mind of what he had foretold
from the very beginning touching Caesar, he made this Answer only, That Cato
indeed had spoke more like a Prophet, but he had acted more like a Friend. Cato
then advised them to choose Pompey General, with absolute Power and Authority,
saying, That the same Men who do great Evils, know best how to Cure them. He
therefore went his way forthwith into Sicily, the Province that was allotted
him; and all the rest of the Senators likewise departed, every one to his
respective Government.

Thus all Italy, in a manner, being up in. 17.
Arms, it seemed very doubtful what was best to be done: For they that were
without, came from all Parts flocking into the City; and they that were within,
seeing the Confusion and Disorder so great there, went out and forsook it as
fast; They that were willing to obey were found too weak for Service, and the
Disobedient were found too strong to be governed by the Magistrates: Nay, it
was so far from being possible to allay their Fears, that they would not suffer
Pompey to follow his own Judgment, but every Man would have him act according
to his particular Fancy, whether it proceeded from Doubt, Fear, Grief, or any
meaner Passion; whereby they became so disordered in their apprehension of
things, that even in the same day they were often forced to make use of quite
contrary Counsels: Then again, 'twas altogether as impossible to have any good
intelligence of his Enemies, for what each Man heard by chance upon a flying
Rumor, he would report for truth, and take it hainously of Pompey if he did
not believe it,

Pompey at length seeing such a Confusion Pompey l^^^^s. Rome.
in Rome, determined with himself to put an end to their Clamours by his
Departure; and therefore commanding all the Senate to follow him, and
declaring, That whosoever tarried behind, should be judged a Confederate of
Caesar's; about the dusk of the Evening, he went out and left the City; the
Consuls also followed after in a Hurry, without offering any Sacrifice to the
Gods, as is usual before a War. But above all, Pompey himself was extremely
fortunate, that even in the midst of all these Calamities, he had the Love and
Good Will of the People; for though many condemned the War, and Office of a
General, yet no Man hated the General himself; insomuch as there were more to
be found of those that went out of Rome, for that they would not forsake
Pompey, than of those that fled for love of their Liberty.

Some few days after, Pompey was gone Caesar enters the City and purs^es him.
out, Caesar came into the City, and made himself Master of it, treating all
the rest with a great deal of Courtesy, and appeasing their Fears, all except
Metellus, one of the Tribunes; but when he refused to let him take any Money
out of the common Treasury, Caesar threatened him with death, adding a sharper
Sentence to his Threats* That it was far easier for him to do it than say it:
Thereupon, after he had turned Metellus out of his Office, and taken what
Moneys were of use for his occasions, he set forwards in pursuit of Pompey,
endeavoring with all speed to drive him out of Italy, before his Army, that
was in Spain, could join with him.

But Pompey arriving at Brundusium, and Pompey sends his Army from Brundusium
to Dyrrachium.
having provided a Fleet of Ships there, the two Consuls embarked immediately,
and with them there were shipped off 30 Cohorts or Regiments of Foot bound before
him for Dyrrachium: He sent likewise his Father-inlaw Scipio, and C^eus his
Son, into Syria, to provide and fit out a Fleet there; himself in the mean time
having barred up the Gates, and fortified the Works of the City, placed his
lightest Soldiers as Guards upon the Walls; and giving express Orders that the
Citizens should keep within door, he cast up diverse Trenches and Rampires
(which he fortified with Palisadoes or sharppointed Piles) throughout all the
Streets of the City, except only those two that lead down to the Seaside or
Haven.

Thus in three days space having with ease put all the rest of his Army on
Shipboard, he suddenly gave the Signal to those that guarded the Walls, who as
nimbly repairing to the Ships, were received and transported: Caesar, when he
perceived the Walls unguarded, imagining with himself that they were fled, made
haste after, but in the heat of the pursuit was very nigh falling upon the
Stakes and Trenches, had not the Brundusians prevented him; wherefore he
wheeled about, and fetching a compass round the City, made toward the Haven,
where he found all the Fleet under Sail, excepting only two Vessels that had
but a few Soldiers aboard.

Some are of opinion, That this Departure He is censured for leaving Italy.
of Pompey's is to be ranged among the best of his Stratagems* but Caesar
himself could not but admire that he (who was ingarrison'd in a City well
Fortified, who was in expectation of his Forces from Spain, and was Master of
the Sea besides) should ever leave and depart out of Italy: Cicero likewise
blamed him, in that he followed the Counsels of Themistocles, rather than of
Pericles, whereas the state of his Affairs was more agreeable to the
Circumstances of the latter, than those of the former: However, it appeared
plainly, and Caesar showed it by his Actions, that he was in great fear of the
Times; for when he had taken Numerius, a Friend of Pompey's Prisoner, he sent
him as an Ambassador to Brundusium, with offers of Peace and Reconciliation
upon equal terms; but Numerius sailed away with Pompey: And now Caesar being
Master of all Italy, in 60 days, without a drop of Bloodshed, had a great
desire forthwith to follow Pompey; but being destitute of Shipping, Caesar goes
for Spain.
he was forced to divert his course, and march into Spain, designing to join
those Forces of Pompey there to his own.

In the mean time Pompey had raised a Pompey's Army in Greece.
mighty Army both by Sea and Land; As for his Navy, 'twas altogether
invincible, for there were 500 Men of War, besides an infinite company of
Galliots, Foists, and Pinaces: Then for his Landforces, the Cavalry made up a
Body of 7000 Horse, the very flower of Rome and Italy, Men of Honor, Wealth,
and Courage; but the Infantry was a mixture of raw and unexperienced Soldiers,
and therefore he exercised and trained them up daily near the City Beraea,
(where he had quartered and lodged his Army) himself no ways slothful, but
performing all his Exercises as if he had been in the flower of his Youth: This
exemplary Conduct raised the Spirits of his Soldiers extremely, for it was no
small Encouragement for them to see Pompey the Great, 60 Years of Age wanting
two, one while trailing a Pike, and handling his Arms among the Foot in all his
Postures; then again mounted among the Horse, drawing out his Sword with ease
in full career, and sheathing it up as easily; And in darting the Javelin,
there he showed not only his skill and dexterity in hitting the Mark, but his
strength and activity in throwing it so far, that few of the youngest went
beyond him.

Several Kings and Princes of other Nations Of th^se that resorted to him.
came thither to him, but there was a glorious appearance of Roman Magistrates,
and so numerous, that they made up a complete Senate; Labienus forsook his old
Friend Caesar, (whom he had served throughout all his Wars in Gaul) and came
over to Pompey; And Brutus, Son to that Brutus that was put to Death in Gaul, a
Man of great Spirit, and one that to that day had never so much as saluted or
spoke to Pompey (looking upon him as the Murderer of his Father) came then and
submitted himself to him, as the defender of their Liberty: Cicero likewise,
(though he wrote and advised otherwise, yet) was ashamed not to be accounted in
the number of those that would hazard their Lives and Fortunes for the
safeguard of their Country: And last of all there came to him even into
Macedonia, Tidius Sextus, a Man extremely Old, and Lame of one Leg; others
indeed mocked and laughed at the Spectacle, but Pompey, as soon as he saw him,
rose and ran to meet him, esteeming it no small assurance of their Good Will,
when Men of such Age and Infirmities should rather choose to be with him in
danger, than in safety at home. Afterward in a Council of War there passed a
Decree, which was pronounced by Cato as President, That no Roman Citizen should
be put to Death but in Battle, and that they should not Sack or Plunder any
City that was subject to the Roman Empire: By these means Pompey's Party grew
into greater Reputation, insomuch that they, who were no ways at all concerned
in the War, (either because they dwelt afar off, or were thought incapable by
reason of their Infirmities) were yet in their opinions of his side, and did in
all their Discourses even fight for his Cause, calling it the good or just
Cause, esteeming those as Enemies to the Gods and Men, that wished not Victory
to Pompey.

Neither was Pompey's Clemency such,. 18.
but that Caesar likewise showed himself as merciful a Conqueror; for when he
had taken and overthrown all Pompey's Forces in Spain, he gave them Quarter,
leaving the Commanders at their Liberty, and taking the common Soldiers into
his own Pay: Then repassing the Alps, and making a running March through
Italy, he came to Brundusium about the Winter Solstice, and crossing the Sea
there, landed at the Port of Oricum: Now Caesar having Jubius (an intimate
Friend of Pompey's) with him as his Prisoner, dispatched him to Pompey, in an
Embassage, entreating, That they meeting together in a Conference, as one
should disband both their Armies within three days, and renewing their former
Friendship with solemn Oaths, should return together into Italy. Pompey looked
upon this again as some new Stratagem or Device; and therefore marching down in
all haste toward the SeaCoast, possessed himself of all Forts and Places of
Strength, (fit to encamp in, and secure his Landforces) as likewise of all
Ports and Harbors commodious to receive any that came by Sea; so that what
Wind soever blew, it must needs in some way or other be favorable to him,
bringing in either Provision, Men, or Money: But Caesar, on the contrary, was
so distressed both by Sea and Land, that he was forced to desire Battle, daily
provoking the Enemy, and assailing them in their very Forts; and in these light
Skirmishes for the most part had the better, only once he was dangerously
overthrown, and likely to have lost his whole Army: For Pompey having valiantly
reinforced the Battle, made a desperate Charge upon him, even to a total Rout
of all his Army, and the Slaughter of 2000 upon the Place; but either he was
not able to force their Camp, or he was afraid to fall in pell-mell together
with them: Insomuch as Caesar told some of his Friends, How that day had given
an absolute Conquest to the Enemy, if they had had but a Man that knew how to
Conquer. Pompey's Soldiers were so mightily encouraged by this Victory that
they would needs have it put to the decision of a Battle; but Pompey himself
(though he wrote to Foreign Kings, Princes, and States in Confederacy with him,
as a Conqueror, yet) was afraid to hazard the Success of a Battle, choosing
rather by delays, and distress of Provisions, to tire out those who had never
yet been Conquered by force of Arms, but had always, when they fought in a
body, been accustomed to Victory: Besides the Infirmities of their Age, which
now made them quickly weary of those other Hardships of War, (such as were long
Marches, and frequent Decampings, making of Trenches, and building of
Fortifications) made them willing to fight and venture the Battle with all
speed.

Pompey had all along hitherto by his Persuasions, pretty well quieted his
Soldiers; but after this last Engagement, when Caesar for want of Provisions
was forced to raise his Camp, and had passed through Athamania into Thessaly,
it was impossible to curb or allay the heat of their Spirits any longer; For
all crying out with a general Voice, That Caesar is fled, some were for
pursuing and pressing upon him; others for returning into Italy; some there
were that sent their Friends and Servants before hand to Rome, to hire Houses
near the Forum or Marketplace, whereby they might be in a readiness to sue for
Offices and Places in the Government: But several were so vain as to sail for
Lesbos, in a Compliment to Cornelia, with this joyful News, That the War was
brought to an end; (for Pompey had privately conveyed her thither from the
Tumults in Rome.) Hereupon a Council of War was called, and the Matter being
under debate, Afranius was of Opinion, That Italy should first be regained, for
that it was the grand Prize and Crown of all the War; and withal they who were
Masters of that, would quickly have at their Devotion all the Provinces of
Sicilia, Sardinia, Corsica, Spain, and Gaul; but what was of greatest weight
and moment, 'twas his own native Country that lay near, reaching out her Hand
for his Help; and certainly it could not be consistent with Pompey's Honor to
leave her thus exposed to all Indignities, and in Bondage under Slaves, and the
Flatterers of a Tyrant. But Pompey himself on the contrary, thought it neither
honorable to fly a second time before Caesar, and be pursued, when Fortune had
given him the Advantage of a Pursuit; nor indeed lawful before the Gods, to
forsake Scipio, and diverse other Men of consular Dignity dispersed throughout
Greece and Thessaly, who must necessarily fall into Caesar's Hands, together
with all their Wealth and greater Forces: Then as to his Care for the City of
Rome, that would most eminently appear, by removing the Scene of War to a
greater distance, whereby she, being every way insensible of those Calamities
that attend a War, might in Peace expect the Return of her Conqueror.

With this determination Pompey marched He follows Caesar into Thessaly.
forwards in pursuit of Caesar, firmly resolved with himself not to give him
Battle, but rather to Besiege and distress him, by keeping close at his heels,
straitning his Quarters, and cutting off all necessary Reliefs: Now there were
other Reasons that made him continue this Resolution, but especially a
Combination among the Roman Knights that came to his Ear, wherein they designed
as soon as Caesar* was overthrown, to humble him too; and therefore, some
report, it was for this Reason that Pompey never employed Cato in any Matter of
consequence during the whole War; yet now, when he pursued Caesar, he left him
to guard his Baggage by Sea, fearing, if Caesar should be taken off, lest, by
Cato's means, he likewise not long after should be forced to lay down his
Commission.

Whilst he was thus slowly attending the Motions of the Enemy, his Friends
began to charge upon him many Reproaches and Imputations, as if he did not use
this Stratagem to deceive Caesar, but his Country and the Senate, that he might
always continue in Authority, and never cease to keep those for his Guards and
Servants who themselves were worthy to govern the World; besides that scoffing
way of Domitius Aenobarbus, continually calling him Agamemnon, and King of
Kings, rendered him very odious: And Favonius his unseasonable Raillery, did
him no less injury, than those that took upon them a greater liberty of Speech,
when in Drollery he cried out* My Masters! you must not expect to gather any
Figs in Tusculan this year. But Lucius Afranius (who had lain under an
imputation of Treachery in Betraying the Army in Spain) when he perceived that
Pompey did industriously decline an Engagement, declared openly, That he could
not but admire, why those who were so ready to accuse him, did not go
themselves and fight that Merchant of their Provinces.

With these and many such like Speeches they wrought upon Pompey, (a Man of
that Honor and Modesty, that he could not bear a Reproach, neither would he
disoblige his Friends) and forced him to break his Measures, so that he forsook
his own prudent Resolution, only to follow their vain Hopes and Desires: Now if
such an unsteady Conduct is blameable in the Pilot of a Ship, how much more in
an Emperor, or the Sovereign Commander of such an Army, and so many Nations;
but he (though he has often commended those Physicians who did not comply with
the humorous Appetites of their Patients, yet) himself could not but yield to
the Diseased part of his Army, rather than he would use any severity in the
Cure; and indeed, who would not judge it Insanity, and want of a Cure in those
Men, who went up and down the Camp, suing already for the Consulship and Office
of a Praetor? Nay, Spinther, Domitius, and Scipio, made Friends, raised
Factions, and even quarreled among themselves, who should succeed Caesar in
the Dignity of his High Priesthood, esteeming all as lightly, as if they were
to engage only with Tigranes, King of Armenia, or some petty Na^athaean King,
not with that Caesar and his Army, that had Stormed a 1000 Towns, and subdued
more than 300 several Nations; that had fought innumerable Battles with the
Germans and Gauls, and always carried the Victory; that had taken a Million of
Men Prisoners, and Slain as many upon the Spot in pitched Battles.

But as soon as they came to the Fields. 19.
of Pharsalia, they grew very tumultuous, so that they forced him by their
Pressures and Importunities to call a Counsel of War, where Labienus, General
of the Horse, stood up, and first took the Sacrament, swearing, That he would
not return out of the Battle, until he had seen the Backs if his Enemies; and
all the rest took the same Oath. That Night Pompey Dreamed, That as he went
into the Theater, the People received him with great Applause, and that he
himself adorned the Temple of Venus, the Conqueress, with many Spoils: This
Vision partly encouraged, and partly disheartened him, ^^^^ing lest that
Splendour and Ornament to Venus should be made with Spoils taken from himself by
Caesar, who derived his Family from that Goddess; besides, there was a certain
Panick Fear run through the Camp, with such a Noise that it awaked him out of
his Sleep: And about the time of renewing the Watch toward Morning, there
appeared a great Light over Caesar's Camp, whilst they were all at rest, and
from thence a Ball of flaming Fire was carried into Pompey's Camp, which Caesar
himself said, he saw as he was walking his Rounds.

Now Caesar having designed to raise his Camp before break of day, whilst the
Soldiers were busy in pulling down their Tents, and sending away their Cattle
and Servants before them, with all their Bag and Baggage, there came in Scouts
who brought word, that they saw several Arms carried to and fro in the Enemies
Camp, and heard a noise and running up and down, as of Men preparing for
Battle: Not long after there came in other Scouts with farther Intelligence,
That the first Ranks were already set in Battle Array. Thereupon Caesar, when
he had told them, That the wished for day was come at last, wherein they should
Fight with Men, not with Hunger and Famine, he presently gave Orders for the
Red Colors to be set up before his Tent, for that was usually the Signal of
Battle among the Romans: As soon as the Soldiers saw that, they left their
Tents, and with great Shouts of Joy ran to their Arms; The Officers likewise on
their parts drawing up their Squadrons in order of Battle, every Man fell in^o
his proper Rank without any trouble or noise, as quietly and orderly as if they
had been in a Dance: Pompey himself led up the right Wing of his Army against
Anthony, and appointed his Father-inLaw Scipio in the middle against Lucius
Albinus. The Left Wing was Commanded by Lucius Domitius, and re-enforced with
several Regiments of Horse; for the whole Cavalry almost was placed there to
distress Caesar, and cut off the Tenth Legion, which was accounted the stoutest
in all the Army, and in which Caesar himself always fought in Person. Caesar
observing the Left Wing of the Enemy to be lined and guarded with such a mighty
guard of Horse, and fearing the Gallantry of that Battalion, he sent a
Detachment of six Regiments out of the Forlorn, and placed them in the Rear of
the Tenth Legion, commanding them not to stir, lest they should be discovered
by the Enemy; but withal, as soon as the Enemies Horse had made a Charge, and
began to press upon them, that they should make up with all speed to the Front
through the foremost Ranks, and not throw their Javelins at a distance, (as
it is usual among your valiant Warriers, that they may come to a close Fight
with their Swords the sooner) but that they should dart them upwards into the
Eyes and Face of the Enemy; telling them, That those fine young Dancers would
never endure the Steel shining in their Eyes, but would fly to save their
handsome Faces. This was Caesar's Device at that time: But while he was thus
instructing his Soldiers, Pompey on Horseback was viewing the Order of both
Battalia's; and when he saw how well the Enemy kept their Ranks, expecting
quietly the Signal of Battle; and on the contrary, how impatient and unsteady
his own Men were, waving up and down in great Disorder for want of Experience,
was very much afraid that their Ranks would be broken upon the first Onset; and
therefore he gave out strict Orders, that the Vanguard should make a Stand, and
keeping close in their Ranks should receive the Enemies Charge. But Caesar did
very much condemn his Judgment in this Stratagem, for that by taking away the
power of an Assault, it does not only take off from the strength and force of a
Blow, which is otherwise made with a spring upon an Incursion, but it does
likewise abate and blunt the edge of that Spirit and Fury which the Assailants
carry with them, (and which is improved by Shouts and Running on) so that at
last they become cold, unactive, and disheartened.

Caesar's Army consisted of 22000, and Po^^^^'s of somewhat above twice as
many: Now when the Signal of Battle was given on both sides, and the Trumpets
began to ^ound an Alarm, the generality of those present minded their own
Charge, and the Matters that belonged to themselves; only some few of the Roman
Nobility, together with certain Grecians there present, (as Spectators, without
the Battle, seeing the Armies ready to join) could not but consider in
themselves to what a pass the Ambition and Emulation of these two had brought
the Roman Empire; For the Weapons being of Kin, and the Bands Brethren, under
the same common Banners, together with the flower and strength of the same
City, clashing and falling foul upon one another even to the Destruction of
both, gave a clear Demonstration of human Nature, how senseless and void of
Reason it is when it is blinded with Passion: For if they had been desirous only
to Rule, and enjoy in Peace what they had Conquered in War, the greatest and
best part of the World was subject to them both by Sea and Land; but if there
was yet a thirst in their Ambition, that must still be fed with new Trophies
and Triumphs; the Parthian and German Wars would yield Matter enough to
satisfy the most Covetous of Honor: Nay, Scythia was yet Unconquered, and the
Indians too, where their Ambition might be colored over with the specious
pretense of Civilizing those Barbarous Nations; And what Scythian Horse,
Parthian Arrows, and Indian Riches, could be able to resist 70000 Roman
Soldiers, well appointed in Arms, under the Command of two such Generals as
Pompey and Caesar? whose Names they had heard of before that of the Romans; and
whose Prowess, by their Conquests of wild, savage, and brutish Nations, was
spread farther than the Fame of the Romans themselves: But now they having laid
aside the sense of their Honor, and with that their Piety too, not sparing
their own Country, were engaged in a Civil War, and dashing one another in
pieces, who had both been accounted invincible till that day; And for the
Alliance contracted betwixt them, the Charms of Julia, and that Marriage, those
were looked upon as Tricks of State, (only to palliate some sinister Design or
Confederacy betwixt them) rather than Pledges of any real Friendship.

Now therefore, as soon as the Plains of. 20.
Pharsalia were covered with Men, Horse, and Armor, and that the Signal of
Battle was given on either side, Caius Crastinus, a Centurion, (who Commanded a
Troop consisting of 120 Men) was the first that advanced out of Caesar's Army,
to give the Charge, and acquit himself of a solemn Engagement, that he had made
to Caesar: For Caesar as he was going out of his Tent in the Morning, saw
Crastinus; where after some Discourse, he asked, What his Opinion was touching
the event of that Battle? To which he stretching out his Right Hand, replied
aloud, Thine is the Victory, oh Caesar, Thou shall Conquer gloriously, and I my
self this day will be the Subject of thy Praise, either alive or dead: In
pursuance of this Promise he broke out of his Rank, and being followed by many
more, charged into the midst of his Enemies; there they came presently to a
close Fight with their Swords, and made a great Slaughter: But as Crastinus was
still pressing forward, and breaking the Ranks of the Vanguard, a certain
Soldier ran him in at the Mouth, so that the point of the Sword came out behind
at his Neck; wherefore Crastinus being thus slain, the Fight became doubtful,
and continued equal on that part of the Battle.

Pompey had no^ yet brought on the right Wing, but staid and viewed about,
expecting what Execution his Cavalry would do in the Left; now they had already
drawn out their Squadrons in form, designing to encompass Caesar, and force
those few Horse which he had placed in the Front, to give back upon the
Battalion of Foot: But Caesar, on the other side having given the Signal, his
Horse retreated back a little, and gave way to those Six Auxiliary Regiments,
(being 3000 in number) which had been posted in the Rear, as an Ambush or
Reserve, to prevent encompassing; these ran out, and fiercely charged the Enemy
upon the Flank; but when they came up to the Horse, there they darted their
Javelins upwards, according to their Instructions, and hit the young Gentlemen
in their Faces: Now these Gallants (as they were altogether unskilful in any
manner of Fight, so least of all expecting or understanding such a kind as
this) had not Courage enough to endure the Blows upon their Faces, but turning
their Backs, and covering their Eyes with their Hands, were shamefully put to
Flight, Caesar's Men did not follow the Chase, but turned their Forces back
upon the Foot, and attacked them on all parts of that Wing which lay naked and
unguarded by the Horse, whereby they were presently surrounded and environed on
every side; so that now being attacked in the Flank by these, and charged in
the Front by the 10th Legion, they were not able to abide the Charge, or make
any longer Resistance, especially when they saw themselves outwitted in their
own Stratagem, and circumvented in that Ambush, by which they designed to have
invested the Enemy: Thus these being likewise routed and put to flight, when
Pompey saw it, and by the Dust flying in the Air, conjectured the same Fate of
his Horse too, it were very hard to express his thoughts at that time, but he
looked more like one distracted and besides himself, than one that should have
called to mind that he was Pompey the Great; and therefore he retired slowly
toward his Camp, without speaking a word to any Man, behaving himself exactly
according to the description in these Verses,

When Jove from Heaven struck Ajax with a fear,
Ajax the bold, he stood astonished there,
And trembling gazed about without a Shield or Spear.
In this state and condition he went into his own Tent, and sat him down
speechless still, until some of the Enemies fell in together with his Men that
were flying into the Camp, and then he let fall only this one word, What? into
the very Camp? and said no more, but rose up, and putting on a Garment suitable
to his present Fortune, departed secretly.

By this time the rest of the Army was put to flight, and there was a great
Slaughter in the Camp among the Servants, and those that guarded the Tents; but
of the Soldiers themselves, there were not above 6000 slain, as it is reported
by Asinius Pollio, who was himself a Voluntier in this Fight of Caesar's Party.
When Caesar's Soldiers had taken the Camp, they saw clearly the Folly and
Vanity of the Enemy; for all their Tents and Pavilions were richly adorned with
Garlands of Myrtle, painted Carpets and Hangings, their Couches strow'd with
Flowers, and their Tables set full of Bowls and Glasses, and those even crowned
with Wine; nay, their foolish hopes had puffed them up with such vain
Confidence, that their whole Preparation and Furniture was of People going to
Feast and Sacrifice, rather than of Men well-arm'd and appointed for the Battle.

When Pompey had got a little way from the Camp, he dismounted and forsook his
Horse, having but a small Retinue with him, and finding that no Man pursued
him, walked on softly a foot, taken up altogether with thoughts, such as
probably might possess any Man of his Quality and Circumstances, a Man that for
the space of 34 Years together, had been accustomed to Conquest and Victory,
and was then at last in his old Age beginning to know the Calamities of War in
Slaughter and Flight: And it was no small Affliction to consider, that he had
lost in one hour all that Glory and Power which he had been getting in so many
Wars and bloody Battles, and that he, who but a little before was guarded with
such an Army of Foot, so many Regiments of Horse, and such a mighty Fleet, was
now flying in so mean a condition, and with such a slender Retinue, that his
very Enemies who sought him could not know him. Thus when he had passed by the
City of Larissa, and came into the Fields of Tempe, he being very thirsty,
kneeled down and drank out of the River; then rising up again, he passed
through those Valleys, until he came to the Seaside, and there he betook
himself to a poor Fisherman's Cottage, where he lodged all the remainder of the
Night: The next Morning about break of day he went into a little Boat upon the
River, and taking his Freemen along with him, dismissed the rest of his
Servants, advising them to go boldly to Caesar and not be afraid: As he was
rowing up and down near the Shore, he chanced to spy a great Ship of Burden
riding at Anchor, and just ready to set Sail; the Master whereof was called by
the Name of Petitius, a Roman Citizen, who, though he was not familiary
acquainted with Pompey, yet he knew him very well by sight: Now it happened
that this Petitius dreamed the Night before that he saw Pompey, not like the
Man he had often seen him, but in a despicable condition, and disconsolate, and
in that posture was discoursing with him: He was then telling his Dream to the
Passengers, (as Men commonly do that are at leisure, and especially Dreams of
that consequence) when of a sudden one of the Mariners told him, he saw a
little Boat with Oars putting off from Shore, and that some of the Men there
shook their Garments, and held out their Hands, with Signs to take them in:
Thereupon Petitius standing up, knew him immediately, seeing him in the same
disguise as he appeared in his Dream, and smiting his Hand on his Head, ordered
the Mariners to let down the Ships Boat, he himself lending his Hand, and
calling him by the Name of Pompey; in that he was already assured of his
Change, and the change of his Fortune, by that of his Garb: So that without any
farther Entreaty or Discourse, he took him into his Ship, together with such of
his Company as he thought fit, and hois'd Sail: There were with him, the two
Len^uli and Favonius; and a little after they spied King Deiotarus making up
toward them from ashore, so they stayed and took him in along with them: At
Supper time, the Master of the Ship having made ready* such Provisions as he
had aboard, Pompey, for want of his Servants* began to wash himself, which when
Favonius perceived, he ran to him, washed and anointed him; and always after
continued to wait upon, and attend him in all things, as Servants do their
Masters, even to the washing of his Feet, and providing of his Supper. Insomuch
that one there present, observing that free and unaffected Courtesy in his
Services, broke out into these words,

Lord! in the noble and the fair,
How graceful all things do appear!
Pompey sailing by the City of Amphipolis, coasted over from thence to
Mitylene, with a design to take in Cornelia and his Son; as Lesbos.
soon as he arrived at the Port in that Island, he dispatched a Messenger into
the City, with News very different from Cornelia's Expectation; for she, by all
the former Messengers and Letters sent to please her, had been put in hopes
that the War was ended at Dyrrachium, and that there was nothing more remaining
for Pompey, but the Chase of Caesar: The Messenger finding her in the same
Hopes still, was not able to salute or speak to her, but declaring the
greatness of her Misfortune by his Tears rather than by his words, desired her
to make haste if she would see Pompey, with one Ship only, and that none of his
own: The young Lady hearing this, fell down all along in a Swoon, and continued
so a long time senseless and speechless; she was scarce well recovered of her
Senses again, but being conscious to her self that this was no time for
Lamentation and Tears she started up and ran through the City toward the
Seaside, where Pompey meeting and embracing her in his Arms, (as she was just
fainting away and falling into a Swoon) she vented her passion in this manner:
This is the effect of my Fortune, dear Sir, not of yours, that I see you thus
dejected and reduced to one poor Vessel, who, before your Marriage with the
unfortunate Cornelia, was wont to ride Admiral of these Seas, with a Fleet of
500 Sail; why therefore should you come to see me, or why not rather have left
her to a severer Fate, who has been the Cause and Author of all your
Misfortunes? How happy a Woman had I been, if I had breathed out my last before
that fatal News from Parthia, of the Death of Publius, to whom I was wedded in
my Virginity? and how prudent, if I had followed his Destiny, as I designed?
But I was reserved for a greater Mischief, even the ruin of Pompey the Great.
Thus, they say, Cornelia spoke to him, and this was Pompey's Reply: Dear
Cornelia, Thou have hitherto known only one kind Fortune, which perhaps has
deceived thee in this, that she has been constant to me beyond her usual
Custom; but it behooves us* who are Mortals born, to bear with these
Afflictions, and try our Fortune once again; neither ought we to despond, and
rest hopeless, for that it is as possible to retrieve our former Happiness from
this unlucky state, as it was to fall from that, into this present Calamity.
Thereupon she sent for her Goods and Servants out of the City; the Citizens
also of Mitylene came out to salute and invite Pompey into the City; but he
refused, advising them to be obedient to the Conqueror, and fear not, for that
Caesar was a Man of great Goodness and Clemency: Then turning to Cratippus the
Philosopher, (who came among the rest out of the City to visit him) he began to
repine, and argue somewhat with him touching the Dispensations of Providence;
but Cratippus very modestly declined the Dispute, putting him in better Hopes
only, lest by opposing, he might seem too sharp or unseasonable: For when
Pompey had put him a certain Question touching Providence, and demonstrated how
necessary it was, that the Commonwealth should be turned into a Monarchy,
because of their ill Government in the State; he returned the Question, But
how, oh Pompey! and by what token or assurance may we be induced to believe,
that if the Victory had been thine, thou would have used thy Fortune better
than Caesar? But Providence is a point of Divinity belonging to the Gods, and
ought to be let alone to act after its own method.

Thus Pompey having taken his Wife and. 21.
Friends aboard, set Sail, making no Port, nor touching any where, but when he
was necessitated to take in Provisions, or fresh Water: The first Place he
arrived at was Attalia, a City in Pamphylia, and whilst he was there, there
came some Galleys thither to him out of Cilicia, together with a few Bands of
Soldiers, and there he had almost 60 Senators with him again: Then hearing that
his Navy was safe too, and that Cato had rallied a considerable Body of
Soldiers after their Overthrow, and passed with them over into Africa, he began
to complain and blame himself and his Friends too, in that they had forced him
to engage by Land, without making use of his other Forces, (in which he was
undoubtedly the stronger) and had not kept near enough to his Fleet, that
failing by Land, he might have reinforced his Troops from the Sea, and
presently drawn out a Power equal and able enough to encounter the Enemy; so
that in truth, neither did Pompey during all the War commit a greater
Oversight, nor Caesar use a more subtle Stratagem, than by drawing the Fight so
far off from their Naval Forces.

Now Pompey being at present constrained to attempt and act somewhat according
to his small Ability, he dispatched his Agents as Ambassadors to some of the
neighboring Cities, and himself sailed about in Person to others, requiring
their Aid in Money and Soldiers to Victual and Man out his Ships; however,
fearing lest the sudden Approach of the Enemy might prevent his Preparations,
he began to consider what Place would yield him the safest Refuge and Retreat
at present: Thereupon a Consult being held, it was generally agreed upon, That
no Province of the Romans was secure enough; and touching Foreign Kingdoms, he
himself was of opinion, That Parthia must needs be the fittest both to receive
and defend them in their present Distress, as well as to aid and furnish them
with the greatest Forces: Others of the Council were for going into Africa, and
to King Juba; but Theophanes, the Lesbian, thought it madness to leave Egypt
(that was but a Voyage of three days Sailing) and forsake Ptolomy (who was just
come of Age, and highly obliged to him for that Friendship and Favor which he
had lately shown to his Father) only to put himself under the Parthian, and
trust the most Treacherous Nation in the World: Or what is worse, to subject
himself to the Tyranny of Arsaces the King of Parthia, and make him his Lord (a
Power which he was not able to compass in the Lifetime of Crassus) rather than
try the Clemency of a Generous Roman, and one that had been his Father-inLaw,
to whom, if he would but yield to be Second, he might assure himself to be the
first and chief over all the rest: Besides, he thought it would be great
Cruelty to expose a young Lady, descended from the Noble Family of the
Scipio's, among such a barbarous People, who govern by their Lusts, and measure
their Greatness by their Power, to commit Affronts and Insolences; from whom,
though she suffer no Dishonor, yet it would be thought she did, being in the
Hands of those who had the power to do it: This Argument alone, they say, was
so persuasive, as to divert his Course, that was designed toward Euphrates, if
it were so indeed that any Counsel of Pompey's, and not his own Fate, made him
take this other way. As soon therefore as 'twas resolved upon, that he should
fly into Egypt, he setting Sail from Cyprus, in a Galley of Seleucia, together
with Cornelia, (and the rest of his Company, some in Long-Boats, and others in
Ships of Burden sailing by) passed over the Sea without danger. But when he
understood that King Ptolomy was sat down with his Army in the City of
Pelusium, making War against his Sister, he steered his Course that way, and
sent a Messenger before to acquaint the King with his Arrival, and humbly crave
his Protection: Ptolomy himself was a very young Man; and therefore Pothinus,
the principal Minister of State, (having the sole Administration of all Affairs
in the Government*) called a Council of the chiefest Men at Court (those being
the greatest whom he pleased to make so) and commanded them every Man to
deliver his Opinion touching the Reception of Pompey: Now, 'twas a horrid thing
to consider, That the Fate of Pompey the Great should be determined by such a
Crew, as Pothinus an Eunuch, Theodotus of Chios, a mercenary Rhetorician, that
taught Oratory, as a Schoolmaster, for Reward, and Achillas an Egyptian; for
these, with others of his Bedchamber, and some of those who had a share in his
Education, were the chief and leading Men in the Council; Pompey (who thought
it dishonorable to owe his Safety to Caesar*) riding at Anchor a great way
distant from Shore, was forced to wait the Result of this honorable Council:
It seems they were different in their Opinions* Some were for sending the Man
away, and others again for calling and receiving him; but Theodotus, to show
the power of his Eloquence and Rhetoric, undertook to demonstrate, That
neither the one nor the other was safe in that Juncture of Affairs; for if they
entertained him, they would be sure to make Caesar their Enemy, and Pompey
their Master; Or if they dismissed him, they might render themselves hereafter
obnoxious to Pompey for that inhospitable Expulsion, and to Caesar, for the
Escape; so that the most expedient Advice would be to send and take away his
Life, for by that means they would ingratiate themselves with the one, and have
no reason to fear the other; adding, as it is reported, with a Smile, That a
dead Man cannot bite. This Advice being approved of, they committed the
execution of it to Achillas: He therefore taking with him as his Accomplices,
one Septimius, a Man that had formerly commanded a Brigade under Pompey, and
Salvius, another Centurion, with three or four Officers more, made up toward
Pompey's Galley; in the mean time, all the chiefest of those who accompanied
Pompey in this Voyage, were come into his Ship to see the event of their
Embassy: But when they saw the manner of their Reception, that in appearance
it was neither Princely, nor Honorable, nor indeed any ways answerable to the
Hopes of Theophanes, or their Expectation (for there came but a few Men in a
Fisherman's Boat to meet them) they began to suspect the meaness of their
Entertainment, and gave warning to Pompey that he should turn back, whilst he
was out of their reach, and launch out into the main Sea: By this time the
Egyptian Boat drew near, and Septimius standing up first, saluted Pompey in
the Latin Tongue, by the Title of Imperator, or General: Then Achillas saluting
him in the Greek Language, desired him to come aboard his Vessel, telling him,
That the Sea was very shallow toward the Shore, and that a Galley of that
Burden could not avoid striking upon some Shelve or Quick-sand: At the same
time they saw several of the King's Galleys well manned, and all the Shore
covered with Soldiers; so that if they had changed their Minds, it seemed
impossible for them to escape; and besides, their Distrust would have given the
Assassinates a colorable pretense for their Cruelty. Pompey therefore taking
his leave of Cornelia, who lamented his Death beforehand, bid two Centurions,
( Philip, one of his Freemen, and a Slave called S^yn^s) go aboard of the
Aegyptian's Boat before him; and as some of the Ships Crew belonging to
Achillas, were reaching out their Hands to help him, he turned about toward
his Wife and Son, and repeated those Iambicks of Sophocles.

He that once falls into a Tyrants Power,
Becomes a Slave, though he were Free before.
These were the last words he spoke to his Friends, and so he went aboard. When
Pompey perceived that, (notwithstanding there was a considerable distance
betwixt his Galley and the Shore, and yet none of the Ships Company had spoke a
kind word to him all the way, he looked earnestly upon Septimius, and spoke to
him, Methinks I should know thee, Friend, have not we been formerly
Fellow Soldiers, and served together in the Wars? But he only nodded with his
Head, making no Reply at all, nor showing any other manner of Civility: Since
therefore they continued silent, Pompey took a little Book in his Hand (wherein
was written a Greek Oration, which he intended for King Ptolomy) and began to
read it; Afterward, when they drew near to the Shore, Cornelia, (together with
the rest of her Friends in the Galley, was very impatient to see the Event, and
began to take Courage at last, when she saw several of the Court coming to meet
him, imagining that it might be for a more honorable Reception; but, in the
mean time, as Pompey took Philip by the hand, to rise up more easily, Septimius
came first of all behind His Death.
with his Sword, and run him through; next after him likewise Salvius and
Achillas drew out their Swords. Wherefore Pompey taking up his Gown with both
Hands, hid his Face, and neither saying nor doing any thing unworthy of himself
(only groaning a little) manfully endured the Wounds they gave him; and so
ended his Life in the 59th Year of his Age, the very next day after the day of
his Birth. Cornelia, with her Company from the Galleys, seeing him Murdered,
gave such a Shriek, that it was heard to the Shore, and weighing Anchor with
all speed, they hoisted Sail, and fled: The Wind served them favorably from
ashore, and assisted their Flight with a brisk Gale, whereby they presently got
the main Sea, so that the Egyptians failing of their aim, desisted from
pursuing them. But they cut off Pompey's Head, and threw the rest of his Body
overboard, leaving it naked upon the Shore, to be viewed by any that had the
curiosity to see such a miserable Spectacle: Philip stayed by and watched his
Corpse, till they had glutted their Eyes in viewing it, and then washing it with
Seawater, and having nothing else, he wrapped it up in one of his own Shirts for
a Winding Sheet; then seeking up and down about the Sands, at last he found
some rotten Planks of a little Fisher-Boat, not much, but yet enough to make up
a Funeral Pile for a naked Body, and that not quite entire: As Philip was busy
in gathering and putting these old Planks together, an old Roman Citizen, who
from his Youth had served in the Wars under Pompey, came to him and demanded,
Who he was that was preparing the Funerals of Pompey the Great? And Philip
making Answer, That he was his Freeman; Nay, said he, but thou shall not have
this Honor alone, let even me too, I prithee, have my share in such a pious
Office, that I may not altogether repent me of this Pilgrimage in a strange
Land, but that in compensation of all my Misfortunes, I may obtain this
Happiness at last, even with my own Hands to touch the Body of Pompey, and pay
my Devotion at the Obsequies of the greatest General among the Romans: And in
this manner were the Funerals of Pompey performed. The next day Lucius Lentulus
not knowing what had passed, came sailing from Cyprus along the Shore of that
Coast, and seeing a Funeral Pile, and Philip (whom he did not know at first)
standing by, asked him, Who it was that was dead and buried there? But pausing
a little with himself, and fetching a deep Sigh, Perhaps, said he, even thou O
Pompey the Great,! and so going ashore, he was presently apprehended and Slain;
This was the unfortunate End of Pompey the Great.

Not long after, Caesar coming into Egypt, (that was then in very great
Troubles) showed a great abhorrence of the Person that presented him with
Pompey's Head, turning away from him as a most detestable Assassinate; but when
he received his Seal, (whereon was Engraven a Lion holding a Sword in his Paw)
he burst out into Tears. Achillas and Pothinus he put to Death; and King
Ptolomy himself being overthrown in Battle upon the Banks of Nilus, fled away
in disguise, and was never heard of afterward. Theodotus, the Rhetorician,
flying out of Egypt, escaped the hands of Caesar's Justice, but lived a
Vagabond in Banishment, wandering up and down, despised and hated of all Men,
till at last Marcus Brutus (after he had killed Caesar) finding him in his
Province of Asia, put him to Death, having first made him suffer the most
exquisite* Torments he could invent. The Ashes of Pompey were carried to his
Wife Cornelia, who buried them in a Vault at his Country House, near the City
of Alba.

THE PARALLEL OF POMPEY WITH AGESILAUS,
THus having drawn out the History or Lives of Agesilaus and Pompey, the next
thing is to compare them, and in order to the Parallel wherein they agree,
we'll take a cursory View, and touch upon some few Passages that make the
difference, showing wherein they chiefly disagree; which are these: In the
first place, Pompey attained to all his Greatness and Glory by the just
measures of his own Integrity, and so was advanced by himself; having often and
desperately engaged together with Sylla, in delivering Italy, from the
Usurpation of Tyrants: But Agesilaus appears to have usurped a Kingdom, not
without offense to the Laws, both of Gods and Men; Of these, by giving Judgment
of Bastardy against Leotychides, the natural and lawful Son of his Brother, as
appeared by undoubted Evidence; Of those, by putting a false Gloss upon the
Oracle of the Gods, and eluding the Prophecy in the point of Lameness.
Secondly, Pompey had a perpetual Veneration for Sylla all his Lifetime, and
expressed as much after his Death, by making an honorable Inrerment of his
Corpse in despite of Lepidus, and giving his Daughter in Marriage to his Son
Faustus: But Agesilaus upon a slight pretense cast off Lysander with Reproach
and Dishonor. So that in point of gratitude, Sylla received in return from
Pompey no less than he gave him, whereas Lysander made Agesilaus King of
Sparta, and General of all Greece: Thirdly, Those Transgressions of Pompey
against the State and Laws, were occasioned chiefly by his Relations (for that
most of his Errors had some Affinity, as well as himself, to Caesar and Scipio,
they being both his Fathers-inlaw:) But Agesilaus, to gratify the Amors or
Lust of his Son, saved the Life of Sphodria by Violence, when he deserved Death
for those injuries he had done to the Athenians; and it is manifest that he was
openly and cordially an Abettor to Phaebida, (in the breach of the League with
the Thebans) barely for the Iniquity of the Act it self. In short, what
Mischief soever might be charged upon Pompey, as done through Modesty or
Inadvertency against the Roman Government, the very same were committed by
Agesilaus against the Lacedaemonians, out of Obstinacy and Malice, he himself
being the Incendiary of the Baeotian War: And if by chance there was any thing
common in the Offenses of these two, that of Pompey was unexpected to the
Romans; whereas Agesilaus would not suffer the Lacedaemonians to avoid what
they foresaw and heard must attend a lame or decrepit Kingdom; For had
Leotychides been chargeable ten thousand times as foreign and spurious, yet the
Race of the Eurityontidae was still in being, and there never could have been
wanting one descended from that Line, to furnish Sparta with a natural and
lawful King, and one that was entire in his Limbs too, had not Lysander darkened
and disguised the true sense of ^he Oracle in favor of Agesilaus.

But as for State Affairs, never was there such a politic piece of Sophistry,
as was devised by Agesilaus, in that great perplexity of the People touching
the (...), (or those who had cowardly deserted their Colors at the Battle of
Leuctra, whereby they became obnoxious to the Law) when after that unhappy
Defeat, he decreed* That the Laws should sleep for that day: Neither indeed
have we the fellow of it in all Pompey's Story; but on the contrary, Pompey for
a Friend thought it no Sin to break those very Laws which he himself had made*
showing at once both the force of Friendship, and the greatness of his Power:
Whereas Agesilaus, finding that he must of necessity have dissolved the Laws,
to preserve the Lives of his Citizens, devised this Expedient, whereby the Laws
might not hurt them, though they were not dissolved. Then I must needs commend
this as an incomparable Act of civil Virtue and Obedience in Agesilaus, That
immediately upon the receipt of the Scytala (or scrowl of Parchment, with a
Countermand from the Ephori) he left the Wars in Asia, and returned into his
Country; for that he did not act generally, as Pompey did, (in those things by
which he made himself Great) for the interest and benefit of the Commonwealth;
who, for his Countries sake, laid aside as great Authority and Honor, as ever
any Man had before or since, except Alexander the Great: But now for some other
Head.

And if well take a view of Pompey in his Military Expeditions and Exploits of
War, in the number of Trophies, and the greatness of the Armies which he
Commanded, together with the multitude of Battles in which he triumphed as a
Conqueror, I am persuaded even Xenophon himself would not put the Victories of
Agesilaus in Balance with his, though he has this Privilege allowed him, (as
a singular Reward for all his other Virtues) that he may write and speak in
favor of his Hero what-e're he pleases. Methinks too there is a great deal of
difference betwixt these Men in their Clemency and Moderation toward their
Enemies; For whilst Agesilaus was attempting the Conquest of Thebes, and
Destruction of Messene, (this being the entire Lot of his own Sicily.
Country, and that the Metropolis of Baeotia) he had almost lost Sparta it
self, but did really lose the Government of Greece; whereas Pompey gave Cities
to those of the Pirates who were willing to change their manner of Life; And
when 'twas in his power to have led Tigranes, King of Armenia, in Triumph, he
chose rather to make him a Confederate of the Romans, saying, That he preferred
an eternal Honor before the Glories of one day. But if the Pre-eminence, in
that which chiefly relates to the Office of a General, (consisting of a steady
resolution upon the wisest Acts and Counsels of War) might be given to a
Commander of the best Conduct, the Lacedaemonian would not a little exceed the
Roman in that; for Agesilaus never deserted his City, though it was Besieged by
an Army of 70000 Men, when there were very few Soldiers within to defend it,
and those had been baffled too but a little before at the Battle of Leuctra:
But Pompey (when Caesar with a Body only of 5300 Men, had taken but one Town in
Italy) departed timorously out of Rome, either through Cowardice, when they
were so few, or at least through a vain imagination, that there were more; and
having conveyed away his Wife and Children, he left all the rest of the
Citizens defenseless, and fled; whereas he ought either to have conquered in
Fight for the defense of his Country, or yielded upon terms to the Conqueror,
for he was his Fellow-Citizen, and Allied to him: But now to that same Man, (to
whom he denied an Enlargement in the term of his Government, and thought it
intolerable to grant another Cousulship) even to him he gave a Power, (by
letting him take the City) to tell Metellus the Tribune, together with all the
rest, That they were his Prisoners. That therefore, which is chiefly the Office
of a General, to put the Enemy upon a necessity of Fight, when he finds himself
the the stronger, and to avoid it when he is the weaker; that Property being
singular in Agesilaus, he always kept himself Invincible: And this was Caesar's
Talent too, that when he was the weaker, he could at any time by fencing with
Pompey, decline the Danger; and when he was the stronger, he forced him to
Battle by Land, even to the hazard of all, whereby he became the Master of the
Treasury, Stores, and the Sea too, which were all in his Enemies hands, and by
which he had his constant Supplies without Fighting. Now, that which is
alleged as an Apology, in vindication of Pompey, is the greatest Crime in so
great a General; for it is a true, for a young Commander by Tumults and Noise to
be wrought into a Fear and Easiness, whereby he may forsake the safest
Counsels, is neither strange, nor altogether unpardonable; But for Pompey the
Great, whose Camp the Romans called their Country, and his Tent the Senate,
styling the Consuls, Praetors, and all other Magistrates, (that had taken upon
them the Administration of the Government at Rome) by no better Title than that
of Rebels and Traitors; for him, I say, whom they well knew, never to have been
under the Command of any but himself, (having nobly finished his course of
Warfare under himself, as sole General in all the Wars he made) who could
excuse him, that upon so small a Provocation (as the Scoffs of Favonius and
Domitius, and lest he should bare the Nickname of Agamemnon) should be wrought
upon, and even forced to hazard the whole Empire and Liberty of Rome upon the
cast of a Dye? In him, I say, 'twas intolerable, who, if he had so much
regarded a present Infamy, should have guarded the City at first with his Arms,
and fought valiantly in defense of Rome, not have left it as he did, coloring
his Flight over with the Stratagem of Themistocles; and yet after all this, to
imagine that there could be any Reproach in a wary Delay before the Battle in
Thessaly, was as inexcusable: For neither did God appoint the Pharsalian
Fields, to be the Stage and Theater upon which they should contend for the
Empire of Rome, neither was he summoned thither by any Herald upon Challenge,
with intimation, that he must either undergo the Combat, or surrender the Crown
to another; But there were many other Fields, thousands of Cities, and even the
whole Earth, that he might have had by the Advantage of his Fleet, and Forces
at Sea, if he would but have followed the Examples of Maximus, Marius,
Lucullus, and even Agesilaus himself; who endured no less Tumults within the
City of Sparta, when the Thebans provoked him to Battle for the residue of his
Country; He endured likewise many Calumnies and Accusations in Egypt, through
the Imprudence of the King there, entreating his patience constantly; but
following always what he had determined in his own Judgment upon mature Advice,
he did by that means, not only preserve the Egyptians against their wills, not
only keep Sparta constantly upon its Legs, even in those desperate Convulsions,
but set up Trophies likewise in the City against the Thebans, giving them
afterward an occasion of Victory, in that he did not at that time lead them
out, as they would have forced him, to their destruction; insomuch, that at
last Agesilaus was highly commended, even of those who provoked their own
Ruin, after they found he had saved their Lives against their wills: Whereas
Pompey (whose Errors had always some other Authors) found those to be his
Accusers, upon whom he had placed his chiefest confidence; and some say, that
he was deceived by his Father-inlaw Scipio, for that he, (designing to conceal
and keep to himself the greatest part of that Treasure, which he had brought
out of Asia) did press Pompey to Battle, upon this pretense, that there would
be a want of Money; however, admitting this to be true, yet such a General
ought not to have been so easily deluded, and led into an Error, even to the
hazard of all the greatest Concerns in the Commonwealth: And thus we have
taken a view of each, by comparing them together in their Conduct and Actions
in War. As to their Voyages into Egypt: One steered his Course thither out of
necessity in Flight; the other neither honorably, nor of necessity, but as a
Mercenary Soldier, having listed himself into the Service of a barbarous Nation
for Pay, that he might be able to wage War upon the Graecians: Lastly, That
which we charge upon the Egyptians in the Name of Pompey, the Egyptians
return again in an Accusation against Agesilaus; For one was barbarously
betrayed and murdered by those whom he trusted: The other betrayed his Trust,
and deserted them, having upon his Revolt gone over to the Enemy, (that was now
making War upon Egypt) notwithstanding he came at first, as an Auxiliary to
the Egyptians.

ALEXANDER.
depiction of Alexander:MBurgher: sculp.

THE LIFE OF Alexander the Great.
Englished from the Greek, By John Evelyn Esquire
IT being my purpose to write the Lives The Author's d^sign
of Alexander and Caesar, by whom Pompey was destroyed, the multitude of their
great Actions affords me so large a Field, that I were to blame if I should not
by way of Apology acquaint my Reader, that I have chosen rather to epitomize
the most celebrated parts of their Story, than to insist at large on every
particular Circumstance of it; especially when I consider my Design is not to
write an History, but Lives. Neither do the most glorious Exploits always
furnish us with the clearest discoveries of Virtue, or Vice in Men; sometimes a
Matter of less moment, an Expression, or a Jest, informs us better of their
Manners, and Inclinations, than the most famous Sieges, the greatest Armies, or
the bloudiest Battles whatsoever. Therefore as those who draw by the Life, are
more exact in the first Lines and Features of the Face, from which we may often
collect the Disposition of the Person, than in the other Parts of the Body: So
I shall endeavor by penetrating into, In writing Lives.
and describing the secret Recesses, and Images of the Soul, to express the
Lives of Men, and leave their more shining Actions and Atchievments to be
treated of by others.

It is agreed on by all Hands, that on Alexander's Family.
the Father's side Alexander descended from Hercules by Caranus, and from
Aeacus by Neoptolemus on the Mother's side. His Father Philip being in
Samothrace when he was young, fell in Love there with Olympias, with whom he
was initiated in the religious Ceremonies of the Country, and her Father and
Mother being both dead, soon after with the consent of her Brother Arimbas
married her. The night before the consummation of the Marriage, she dreamed
that her Belly was struck with Lightning, which kindled a great Fire, whose
divided Flames dispersed themselves all about, and then were extinguished. And
Philip some time Philip's Dream.
after he was married, dreamed that he Sealed up his Wife's Belly with a Seal,
whose impression, as he fancied, was the Figure of a Lion. Some interpreted
this as a warning to Philip to look narrowly to his Wife; but Aristander of
Telmessus considering how unusual it was to seal up any thing that was empty,
assured him the meaning of his Dream was, that the Queen was with Child of a
Boy, who would one day prove as stout and courageous as a Lion. Not long after
a Dragon was observed to lie close by Olympias while she slept; upon which
Philip's Affection to her sensibly abated: For whether he feared her as an
Inchantress, or thought she had commerce with some God, and so looked on
himself as unequal to such a Rival, he was ever after less fond of her
Conversation. Others say, that the Women of this Country having always been
extremely addicted to perform the Enthusiastic Ceremonies of Orpheus and
Bacchus (upon which account they were called Furious* and warlike*
Clodones, and Mimallones) did in many things imitate the Edonian and Thracian
Women about Mount Haemus, from whom the word (...) seems to be derived,
signifying superfluous and overcurious Sacrifices: That Olympias zealously
affecting these Fanatical and Enthusiastic Inspirations, to perform them with
more barbarick Dread, was wont in the Dances proper to these Ceremonies, to
have great tame Serpents about her, which sometimes creeping out of the Joy,
and the Mystic Fans, sometimes winding themselves about the sacred Spears,
and the Women's Chaplets, made it a dreadful Spectacle to those who beheld them.

Philip, after this Vision, sent Chaeron of He consults the Oracle.
Megalopolis to consult the Oracle of Apollo at Delphos, by which he was
commanded to sacrifice to, and most respectively adore Jupiter Hammon above all
other Gods; and was told he would one day lose that Eye with which he presumed
to peep through the Chink of the Door, when he saw the God in form of a Serpent
so familiar with his Wife. Eratosthenes says, that Olympias, when she brought
Alexander on his way to the Army, in his first Expedition, told him the Secret
of his Birth, and exhorted him to behave himself with Courage suitable to his
divine Extraction. Others again affirm, that she wholly declined this Vanity,
and was wont to say, Will Alexander never leave making Juno jealous of me?

Alexander was born the 6th of June, The Birth of Alexander.
(which month the Macedonians call Lous) the same day that the Temple of Diana
at Ephesus was burned; upon which occasion Hegesias of Magnesia has an
expression so mean and cold, as might have served to have extinguished the
Flames: Diana says he deserved to have her Temple burnt, for leaving the care
of it to play the Midwife at the Birth of Alexander. All the Priests and
Soothsayers who happened to be then at Ephesus, looking upon the Ruin of this
Temple to be the forerunner of some other Calamity, ran about the Town, beating
their Faces, and crying, that day had brought forth something that would prove
fatal and destructive to all Asia.

Presently after Philip had taken Posidea, he received these three Messages on
the same day: That Parmenio had overthrown the Illyrians in a great Battle;
that his Race horse had won the Course at the Olynpick Games; and that his Wife
was brought to bed of Alexander; with which being extremely pleased, as an
Addition to his Satisfaction the Diviners assured him, that a Son whose Birth
was accompanied with three such Successes, could not fail of being invincible.

The Statues that most resembled Alexander, His Person described.
were those of Lysippus, by whom alone this Prince would suffer his Image to be
carved; and these chiefly did most of his Successors and Friends afterward
imitate; the Artist having expressed the inclination of his Head a little on
one side toward his left Shoulder, and his (...).
melting Eye with incomparable exactness. But Apelles, who drew him with
Thunderbolts in his Hand, made his Complexion browner and darker than it was
naturally, for he was fair, having a mixture of ruddiness, chiefly in his Face,
and upon his Breast. Aristoxenus in his Memoirs tells us, that an admirable
Scent proceeded from his Skin, and that his Breath and Body all over was so
fragrant, as to perfume the Clothes which he wore next him; the cause of which
might probably be the hot and adust Temperament of his Body: For sweet Smells,
as Theophrastus conjectures, are produced by the concoction of moist Humors by
Heat, which is the reason that those parts of the World which are driest, and
most burnt up, afford Spices of the best kind, and in the greatest quantity;
for the heat of the Sun exhausts the superfluous moisture, which generates
Putrefaction in Bodies. And this hot Constitution it may be, rendered Alexander
so addicted to drinking, and so choleric.

His Temperance as to the pleasures of His Manners.
the Body, was apparent in him in his very Childhood, being with much
difficulty incited to them, and always using them with great moderation: Though
in other things he was extremely eager and vehement. In his love of Glory, and
the pursuit of it, he showed a solidity of Judgment and Magnanimity far above
his Age; For he neither fought, nor valued it upon every slight occasion, as
his Father Philip did, (who affected to show his Eloquence almost to a degree
of Pedantry, and took care to have the Victories of his Racing Chariots at the
Olympic Games engraven on his Coin:) But when he was asked by some about him,
Whether he would run a Race? for he was very swift-footed; he answered, He
would, if he might have Kings to run with him. He often appointed Prizes, in
which not only Tragedians and Musicians, Pipers and Harpers, but Rapsodists
also strove to outvye one another: And delighted in all manner of Hunting, and
Cudgelplaying, And Exercises.
but never gave any encouragement either to playing at Fisty-cuffs, or that
(...).
Sport in which all Weapons were to be made use of. While he was yet very
young, he entertained the Ambassadors from the King of Persia, in the absence
of his Father, and falling into Conversation with them, gained so much upon
them by his Affability, and the Questions he asked them, which were far from
being childish, or trifling: (For he enquired of them the length of the Ways,
the Passages into the upper parts of Asia, the Character of their King, how he
carried himself to his Enemies, and what Forces he was able to bring into the
Field: That they were struck with admiration of him, and looked upon the
Diligence and so much famed Conduct of Philip, to be nothing in comparison of
the forwardness, and great Spirit, that appeard so early in his Son. Whenever
he heard His Magnanimity.
Philip had taken any Town of importance, or won any signal Victory, instead of
rejoicing at it, he would in a deploring manner tell his Companions, that he
feared his Father would anticipate every thing, and leave him and them no
opportuntties of performing great and illustrious Actions. For being more
addicted to Virtue and Glory, than either to Pleasure or Riches, he esteemed
all that he shouid receive from his Father, as a diminution and prevention of
his own future Atchievments; and would have chosen rather to succeed to a
Kingdom involved in Troubles and Wars, which would have afforded him frequent
exercise of his Valor, and a larger Field of Honor, than to one already
flourishing and settled, where he must lead an unactive Life, and be as it were
buried in the sordid enjoyments of Wealth and Luxury.

The care of his Education (as it much His Education and Tutors.
imported) was committed to a great many Praeceptors and Tutors, over whom
Leonidas, a near Kinsman of Olympias, a Man of an austere temper, presided: He
declining the title of Praeceptor, though a Charge of sufficient Honor and
Reputation, because of his Dignity and Relation, was called Alexander's
Foster-Father and Governor. But he who took upon him the Place and Name of his
pedagogue, was Lysimachus the Acarnanian, who though he had nothing of worth to
recommend him, but his luck to call himself Phoenix, Alexander Achilles, and
Philip Peleus, was therefore well enough esteemed and ranked in the next degree
after Leonidas.

Philonicus the Thessalian brought the Horse He cames Eucephalus.
Bucephalus to Philip, offering to sell him for 13 Talents; but when they went
into the Field to try him, they found him so very vicious and unmanageable,
that he stood up an end when they endeavored to back him, and would not so
much as endure the voice of any of Philip's Attendants: Upon whose dislike, as
they were leading him away as wholly useless and untractable, Alexander who
stood by, would not let them, saying, What an excellent Horse do they lose, for
want of address and boldness to manage him? Philip at first took no notice what
he said; but when he heard him repeat the same thing, and saw he was troubled
to have the Horse sent away; Do you reproach, said he to him, those who are
elder than your self, as if you knew more, and were better able to manage him
than they? Yes. replied he, with this Horse I could deal better than any body
else. And if you do not, said Philip, what will you forfeit for your Rashness?
By Jove, answered Alexander, the whole price of the Horse. At this the whole
Company fell a laughing; but as soon as the Agreement was made between them
about the Money, he presently ran to the Horse, and taking hold of the Bridle,
turned him directly toward the Sun, having it seems observed he was disturbed
at, and afraid of, the motion of his own Shadow: Then letting him go forward a
little, still keeping the Reins in his Hand, and stroking him gently, when he
found him to be very brisk and fiery, he let fall his upper Garment softly, and
with one nimble Leap securely mounted him, and when he And backs him.
was seated, by little and little straightened the Bridle, and curbed him without
either striking or spurring. Afterward when he perceived his dangerous fury
and heat was abated, but yet not without great impatience to run, he let him go
at full speed, not only encouraging him with a commanding Voice, but pressing
him forward also with his Heel. All who were present beheld this Action at
first with silent astonishment, and inward concern: Till seeing him turn at the
end of his Career, and come back rejoicing and triumphing for what he had
performed, they all burst out into Acclamations of Applause; and his Father
weeping for joy, kissed him as he came down from his Horse, and in his
Transport said, O my Son, look the out a Kingdom equal to, and worthy of, thy
great Soul, for Macedonia is too little for thee.

After this, considering him to be of a Temper easy to be led to his Duty by
Reason, but by no means to be compelled, he always endeavored to persuade,
rather than to command or force him to any thing; and now looking upon the
institution and accomplishment of his Youth, to be of greater difficulty and
importance, than to be wholly trusted to those Masters who only taught him
Music, and other superficial and vulgar Sciences, and to require, as Sophocles
says,

The Bridle, and the Rudder too: He sent for Aristotle, the most knowing and
Aristotle, Alexander's Tuter.
celebrated Philosopher of his time, and rewarded him with a Munificence
proportionable to, and becoming the care he took to instruct his Son. For he
repeopled his native City Stagira, which he had caused to be deserted a little
before, restored all the Citizens who were in Exile or Slavery, to their
Habitations, and assigned them A College.
Nympheum for their Studies and Exercises, near the Town of Mieza, where to
this very day they show you Aristotle's stone Seats, and the shady walks which
he was wont to frequent. It appears that Alexander received not only the Rules
of Morality and Policy from him, but that more abstruse and solid part of
Learning which is seldom communicated to the Vulgar. For when he was in Asia,
and heard Aristotle had published some Treatifes of that kind, he wrote to him
with great freedom in the behalf of Philosophy in this manner: Alexander to
Aristotle, greeting. You have His Letter to Aristotle.
not done well to set forth your Books of select Knowledge, for what is there
now that I can surmount others in, if those things which I have been
particularly instructed in, be laid open to all: For my part I assure you, I
had rather excel others in the knowledge of what is excellent in its kind, than
in the extent of my Power and Dominion. Farewell. Aristotle, to appease and
comply with this noble Ambition of Alexander, answered him, That those
Treatises, which were his Metaphysics, were indeed published, but not plainly
exposed to every bodies Capacity. For to say truth, they are written in such a
style, that they are only an useful and instructive System to those, who have
been already long conversant in that sort of Learing. Doubtless it was to
Aristole's Precepts that he owed the inclination he had not barely to the
Theory, but likewise to the Practice of Physic: For when any of his Friends
were sick, he would often prescribe them their course of Diet, and Medicines
proper to their Disease, as we may find in his Epistles. He was naturally a
great lover His inclination to Learning.
of all kind of Learning, and mightily addicted to Reading; and Onesicritus
informs us, That he constantly laid Homer's Illiads, Corrected by Aristotle,
with his Dagger, under his Pillow, declaring that he esteemed them an exact
Institution and perfect Storehouse of all Military Virtue and Knowledge. When
he was in the higher Provinces of Asia, being destitute of other Books, he
ordered Harpalus to send him some, who furnished him with Philestus his
History, a great many of Euripides, Sophocles, and Aeschylus his Tragedies, and
some Dithyrambick Hymns composed by Telestes and Philaxenus. For a while he
loved and cherished Aristotle no less, as he was wont to say himself, than if
he had been his Father, giving this Reason for it, that as he received his
Being from the one, so the other had taught him to live well. But afterward
having some mistrust of him, yet not so far as to do him any Prejudice, his
Familiarity and friendly Kindness to him abated so much, as to make it evident
he was very indifferent to him. However his violent Thirst after, and Respect
for Learning, which were born, and still grew up with him, never decayed, as
appears by his veneration of Anaxarchus, by the Present of 50 Talents which he
sent to Xenocrates, and his particular Care and Esteem of Dandamis and Calanus.

While Philip made War against the Byvantines, His Courage and early entrance
upon Action.
he left Alexander, then 16 years old, his Lieutenant in Macedonia, committing
the charge of his Great Seal to him, who not to sit idle, reduced the
rebellious Medan, and having taken their chief Town by Storm, drove out the
barbarous Inhabitants, and planting a Colony of several Nations in their room,
called the Place after his own Name Alexandropolis. At the Battle of
Chaeronaea, which his Father fought against the Grecians, he is said to have
been the first Man that charged the Thebans sacred Band. And even in my
remembrance there stood an old Oak near the River Cephisus, which the Country
People called Alexander's Oak, because his Tent was pitched under it. And not
far off are to be seen the Graves of the Macedonians, who fell in that Battle.
This early Bravery made Philip so fond of him, that nothing pleased him more,
than to hear his Subjects call Alexander their King, while they allowed himself
no other Title than that of their General.

But the Disorders of his Family, chiefly His Differences with his Father.
caused by his new Marriages, and extravavagant Loves, (the whole Kingdom being
soon, in a manner, imbroil'd by the Women) raised many Quarrels and great
Breaches between them, which the ill Nature of Olympias, a Woman of a jealous
and implacable Temper, still made wider, by exasperating Alexander against his
Father. Among the rest, this Accident contributed most to their falling out. At
the Wedding of Cleopatra, whom Philip, in his Dotage had Married, she being
much too young for him, her Uncle Attalus, in his Drink, desired the
Macedonians would implore the Gods to give them a lawful Successor to the
Kingdom by his Niece. This nettled Alexander so, that throwing one of the Cups
at his Head, You Villain, said he, what am I then, a Bastard? Then Philip
taking Attalus his part, rose up, and would have ran his Son through; but by
good Fortune for them both, either his overhasty Rage, or the Wine he had
drank, made his Foot slip, so that he fell down on the Floor. At which
Alexander most reproachfully insulted over him: See there, said he, how low he
lies, not able to remove from one Seat to another, who was making such
Preparations to pass out of Europe into Asia. After this insolent Debauch, he
and his Mother Olympias went from Court, and when he had placed her in Epirus,
he himself retired into Illyria.

About this time Demaratus the Corinthian, Reconciled by Demaratus the
Corinthian.
an old Friend of the Family, who had the freedom to say any thing among them
without offense, coming to visit Philip, after the first Compliments and
Embraces were over, Philip asked him, Whether the Grecians lived in Amity with
one another? It ill becomes you, replied Demaratus, to enquire after the State
of Greece, who have involved your own House in so many Dissentions and
Calamities. He was so convinced by this seasonable Reproach, that he
immediately sent for his Son home, and at last, by Demaratus his Mediation,
prevailed with him to return. But this Reconciliation lasted not long; for when
Pexodorus, Viceroy of Caria, sent Aristocritus to treat a Match between Break
ont again.
his eldest Daughter, and Philip's Son Aridaeus, seeking thereby to enter into
a League offensive and defensive with him: Alexander's Mother, and some who
pretended to be his Friends, filled his Head with Tales and Calumnies, as if
Philip, by this splendid Alliance, and considerable Negotiation, intended to
settle the Kingdom upon Aridaeus. To prevent this, he dispatches one Thessalus,
a Player, into Caria, to dispose Pexodorus to slight Aridaeus, both as
illegitimate, and a Fool, and rather to accept of himself for his Son-in-law.
This Proposition was much more agreeable to Pexodorus then the former. But
Philip, as soon as ever he was made acquainted with this Transaction, went
directly to his Son's Apartment, accompanied only by Philotas, one of his most
intimate Friends, the Son of Parmenio, and there reproved him severely, and
reproached him bitterly, that he should be so degenerate, and unworthy of the
Crown he was to leave him, as to desire the Alliance of a mean Carian, who was
at best, but the Vassal of a barbarous Prince. Nor did this satisfy his
Resentment, for he wrote to the Corinthians to send Thessalus to him in Chains,
and banished Harpalus, Nearchus, Phrygius, and Ptolomy, his Sons Confidents and
Favorites, whom Alexander afterward recalled, and raised to great Honor and
Preferment.

Not long after this, a Youth named Pausanias, Philip murdered by Pausanias.
being forcibly abused, not without the knowledge and consent of Attalus and
Cleopatra: When he found he could get no Reparation for his Disgrace at
Philip's hands, watched his opportunity, and Murdered him. The guilt of which
Fact fell partly upon Olympias, who is said to have encouraged and exasperated
the enraged Youth to Revenge; and partly upon Alexander himself, w^^ when
Pausanias came, and complained to him of the Injury he had received, repeated
these Verses to him out of Euripides his Medea, where in her Fury she says --

She Will see that her Revenge be satisfied
On Husband, Wife, and him who gave the Bride.
However, he took care to find out and punish the Accomplices of the Conspiracy
severely, and was very angry with Olympias, for treating Cleopatra too
inhumanely in his absence.

Alexander was but 20 years old when his The beginning of Alexander's Reign
attended with great Difficulties.
Father was murdered, and not without great Envy succeeded to a Crown beset on
all sides with many dangers, and powerful Enemies. For not only the barbarous
Nations that bordered on Macedonia, were impatient of being governed by any but
their own native Princes; but Philip likewise, though he had been victorious
over the Grecians, yet, for want of time to finish his Conquests, and settle
his Affairs, had left all things in great Hurry and Confusion. Wherefore some
would have persuaded Alexander to have given over all thoughts of containing
the Grecians in their Duty by force of Arms, and rather to apply himself to
reduce the neighboring Nations by gentle means, and prevent Innovations in
their very beginning. But he rejected this Counsel as weak and timorous, and
looked upon it to be more Prudence to secure himself by Resolution and
Magnanimity, than by seeming to truckle to any, hazard the bringing all his
Enemies upon him at once. In pursuit of this opinion, he kept the Barbarians
quiet, by making a sudden Incursion into their Country, as far as the River He
overthrows the Triballians.
Ister, where he gave Syrmus, King of the Triballians, a considerable
Overthrow. And hearing the Thebans were ready to Revolt, and that the Athenians
held Correspondence with them, because Demosthenes, in disparagement of him,
had called him a Child while he was in Illyria, and the Country of the
Triballians, allowing him to be no more than a Youth, while he was in Thessaly:
To show how much he was improved, he immediately led his Army through the
Straits of Thermopylae, and said, they should find him a Man to some purpose
before the Walls of Athens.

When he came to Thebes, to show how willing he was to accept of their
Repentance for what was past, he only demanded of them Phoenix and Prothytes,
the Authors of the Rebellion, and proclaimed a general Pardon of those who
would come over to him. But when the Thebans on the other side, not only
required Philotas and Antipater to be delivered into their hands, but also
publicly invited all who would assert the Liberty of Greece, into an
Association with them, he presently applied himself to make them feel the last
Extremities of War. The Thebans indeed defended themselves with Alacrity and
Courage, far beyond their Strength, being much outnumbred by their Enemies. But
when the Macedonian Garrison sallied out upon them from the Citadel, they were
so hemmed in on all sides, that many of them fell in the Battle. The City it
self being taken by Storm, was sacked and rased, on purpose Takes Thebes, and
rases it.
that so severe an Example might terrify the rest of Greece into obedience.
However, to color this Vengeance, he gave out, he was forced to be so
extremely rigorous, by the pressing Complaints and Accusations of his
Confederates the Phocians and Plataeans. So that except the Priests, and some
few who had heretofore entertained the Macedonians kindly at their Houses, the
Family of the Poet Pindar, and those who were known The Family of the Poet
Pindar spared.
to have opposed the Rebellion, all the rest, to the number of 30000, were
publicly sold for Slaves; and it is computed, that upwards of 6000 were put to
the Sword. Among the other Calamities that befell this miserable City, it
happened that some Thracian Soldiers having plundered and demolished the House
of an Illustrious Matron named The Story of Timoclea.
Timoclea, their Captain, after he had lain with her by force, to satisfy his
Avarice, as well as Lust, asked her, If she knew of any Money concealed; to
which she readily answered, she did, and bid him follow her into a Garden,
where she showed him a Well, into which, she told him, upon the the taking of
the City, she had thrown what she had of most value. The greedy Thracian
presently stooping down to view the place where he thought the Treasure lay,
she came behind him, and pushed him into the Well, and then flung great Stones
in upon him, till she had killed him. After which, when the Soldiers led her
away bound to Alexander, her very Mien and Gate showed her to be a Woman of
Quality, and of a Mind no less elevated, not betraying the least sign of Fear
or Astonishment. And when the King asked her, Who she was? I am, said she, the
Sister of Theagenes, who fought the Battle of Chaeronea with your Father
Philip, and fell there for the liberty of Greece. Alexander was so surpised,
both at what she had done, and what she said, that he could not choose but give
her and her Children their Freedom to go whither they pleased.

After this he received the Athenians into He pardons the Athenians.
Favor, although they had showed themselves so much concerned at the Calamity
of Thebes, that they omitted the Celebration of their Festivals, and
entertained those who escaped, with all possible Humanity. Whether in this he
followed the Nature of Lions, his Rage being already satisfied, or that after
an Example of horrid Cruelty, he had a mind to appear Merciful, it happened
well for the Athenians; for he not only forgave them all past Offenses, but
commanded them to look to their Affairs with Caution and Vigilance, upon this
Consideration, that if he should miscarry in his Expedition, they were like to
be the Arbiters of Greece. Certain it is, that he often repented of his
Severity to the Thebans, and his Remorse had such influence on his Temper, as
to make him ever after less rigorous to all others. He imputed also the Murder
of Clitus, which he committed in his Wine, and the base unwillingness of the
Macedonians to follow him against the Indians, (by which his Enterprise and
Glory was left imperfect) to the Wrath and Vengeance of Bacchus, the Protector
of Thebes. And it was observed, that whatsoever any Theban, who had the good
fortune to survive this Victory, asked of him, he was sure to grant, without
the least difficulty.

Soon after the Graecians being assembled Is chosen General of the Grecians.
in the Strait of Peloponesus, declared their Resolution of joining with
Alexander in the War against the Persians, and made choice of him for their
General. While he staid here, many public Ministers and Philosophers came from
all Parts to visit him, and congratulate his Election: But contrary to his
Expectation, Diogenes of Synope, who then dwelt at Corinth, thought so little
of him, that instead of coming to complement him, he never so much as stirred
out of the Cranium or Suburbs, where Alexander found him lying along in the
Sun. When he saw so much Company near him, he raised himself a little, and
vouchsafed to look upon The Behavior of Diogenes the Cynick toward him.
Alexander, and when he kindly asked him, Whether he wanted any thing? Yes,
said he, I would have you stand from between me and the Sun. Alexander was so
affected at this Answer, and surpised at the Greatness of the Man's Soul, who
had taken so little notice of him, that as he went away, he told his Followers,
who were Laughing at the Moroseness of the Philosopher, That if he were not
Alexander, he would rather choose to be Diogenes than any other Man.

Then he went to Delphos, to consult Apollo He consults, and forces the Oracle.
concerning the Success of the War he had undertaken; and happening to come at
a time that was esteeem'd unlucky, and improper to give any Answers from the
Oracle, he sent Messengers to desire the Priestess to do her Office; but she
refusing, under pretense of a Law to the contrary, he went up himself, and drew
her by force into the Temple, where tired and overcome with Struggling, My Son,
said she, thou art Invincible. Alexander taking hold of what she spoke,
declared he had received such an Answer as he wished for, and that it was
needless to consult the God any further. Among other Prodigies that preceded
the March of his Army, the Image of Orpheus at Libethra, made of Cypress-Wood,
was seen to Sweat in great abundance, to the discouragement of many. But
Aristander told him, That far from presaging any Ill to him, it signified, he
should perform things so important and glorious, as would make the Poets and
Musicians of future Ages labor and sweat to describe and celebrate them.

His Army, by their Computation who Alexander's Army and Preparations.
reckon moderately, consisted of 30000 Foot, and 5000 Horse; and those who make
the most of it, speak but of 34000 Foot, and 4000 Horse. Aristobulus says, he
had not a Fund of above 70 Talents for their Pay, nor more than 30 days
Provisions, if we may believe Duris; and Onesicritus tell us, he was 200
Talents in Debt. However narrow and disproportionable the beginnings of so vast
an Undertaking might seem to be, yet he would not embark his Army, till he had
informed himself particularly, His Liberality.
what Estates his Friends had to enable them to follow him, and supplied what
they wanted, by giving good Farms to some, a Village to one, and the Revenue of
some Borough or Port-Town to another. So that at last he had wasted or engaged
almost all the Crown Lands, which giving Perdiccas an occasion to ask him, What
he would leave himself? He replied, Nothing but the Hopes of his future
Conquests. You will not then, said Perdiccas, take it ill, if we share with you
in those Hopes only, and refused to accept of the Estate he had assigned him.
Some others of his Friends did the like, but to those who willingly received,
or desired assistance of him, he liberally granted it, as far as his Patrimony
in Macedonia would reach, which was all spent in these Donations.

With such vigorous Resolutions, and He passes the Hellespont, and visits
Achilles his Tomb.
his Mind thus disposed, he passed the Hellespont, and at Troy Sacrificed to
Minerva, and Honored the Memory of the Heroes who were Buried there, with
solemn Funeral Libations; especially Achilles, whose GraveStone he Anointed,
and with his Friends, as ancient Custom was, ran naked about his Sepulcher, and
Crowned it with Garlands, withal declaring, how happy he estee^'d him* in
having while he lived, so faithful a Friend as Patroclus; and when he was dead,
so famous a Poet as Homer to immortalize his Actions. While he was viewing the
rest of the Antiquities and Curiosities of the Place, being told, he might see
Paris his Harp if he pleased, he said, He thought it not worth looking on, but
he should be glad to fee that of Achilles, with which he had celebrated the
Glory and Renowned Actions of so many brave Men.

In the mean time Darius his Captains having Martial'd great Forces, were
encamped The Battle of Granicus.
on the further Bank of the River Granicus, which was looked on as so
considerable a Pass into Asia, that there was an absolute necessity of Fighting
to win it. The depth of the River, with the unevenness and difficult ascent of
the oppositite Shore, which was to be gained by main force, was apprehended by
some; and others were so Superstitious, as to think it an improper time to
engage, because it was unusual for the Kings of Macedonia to march with their
Forces in the Month of June. But Alexander broke through these Scruples,
telling them, they should call it a second May. And when Parmenio advised him
not to attempt any thing that day, because it was late, he told him, The
Hellespont which he had passed would blush for him, if he should be baffled at
the passage of an inconsiderable River. And so without more saying, he
immediately took the River with 13 Troops of Horse, and advanced against whole
showers of Darts thrown from the other side, which was covered with multitudes
of the Enemy, Alexander passes the Granicus in despite of the Enemy.
notwithstanding the disadvantage of the Ground, and the rapidity of the
Stream; So that this Action seemed to have more of Rage and Madness in it, than
of prudent Conduct. However he persisted obstinately to gain the Ford, and at
last with much ado climbing up the Banks, which were very slippery by reason of
the Mud, he was fain to mingle among the thickest of the Enemy, and Fight hand
to hand for a while, before he could bring his Men, who were endeavoring still
to pass, into any Order. They pressed upon him with loud and warlike Outcries,
and charging him closely with their Horse, after they had broken and spent
their Javelins, they fell to it with their Swords. And Alexander being
remarkable for his Buckler, and a large Plume of excellent white Feathers on
his Helmet, was attacked on all sides, yet escaped wounding, though his Cuirass
was pierced by a Javelin in a faulty place. And Rhesaces, His dangerous
Encounter.
and Spithridrates, two Persian Commanders, falling upon him at once, he
avoided one of them, and struck at Rhesaces, who had a good Cuirass on, with
such force, that his Javelin breaking in his Hand, he was glad to betake
himself to his Sword. While they were thus engaged, Spithridates came up on one
side of him, and raising himself upon his Horse, gave him such a Blow with his
Battel-Axe on the Helmet, that he cut off the Crest of it, with one side of his
Plume, and made such a Gash, that the edge of his Weapon touched the very Hair
of his Head. But as he was about to repeat his Stroke, Great Clitus prevented
him, by And Preservation by Clitus.
running him through the Body with his Spear. At the same time Alexander
dispatched Rhesaces with his Sword. While the Horse were thus dangerously
engaged, the Macedonian Phalanx passed the River, and the Foot on each side
advanced to Fight. but the Enemy hardly sustaining the first onset, soon gave
ground and fled, all but the mercenary Graecians, who making a stand upon a
rising Ground, desired quarter, which Alexander guided rather by Passion than
Judgment, refused to grant, and charging them himself first, had his Horse (not
Bucephalus but another) killed under him. And this obstinacy of his to cut off
these experienced desperate Men, cost him the lives of more of his own
Soldiers, than all the Battle before, besides those who were wounded. The
Persians lost in this Battle 20000 Foot, and 2500 Horse: On Alexander's side,
Aristobulus says there was not wanting above 34, of which 9 were Foot, to whose
Memory he caused so many Statues of Brass of Lysippus his Hand to be Erected:
And that the Graecians might participate the Fruits of his Victory, he shared
the Booty among them. Particularly to the Athenians he sent 300 Bucklers, and
upon all the rest of the Spoils he ordered this glorious Inscription to be set:
Alexander the Son of Philip, and all the Grecians, except the Lacedaemonians,
won these from the Barbarians who inhabit Asia. All the Plate and Purple
Garments, and whatever else of any value he took from the Persians, except a
very small quantity reserved for himself, he sent as a Present to his Mother.

This Battle presently made a great change of Affairs to Alexander's advantage:
For Sardis it self, the chief Seat of the Barbarians Sardis taken.
Power in the Maritime Provinces, and many other considerable Places were
Surrendered to him; only Halicarnassus and Miletus stood, which he soon took in
by force, together with the Territory about them. After which he was a little
unsettled in his Opinion how to proceed: Sometimes he thought it best to find
out Darius as soon as he could, and put all to the hazard of a Battle; another
while he looked upon it as a more prudent course; to make an entire Conquest of
the Seacoast, and not to seek the Enemy till he was strengthened, by the
addition of the Wealth and Forces of those Provinces. While he was thus
deliberating what to do, it happened that a Fountain near the City of Xanthus in
Lycia, of its own accord swelled over its Banks, and threw up a Copper Plate
upon the Shore, in which was Engraven in ancient Characters, Being irresolute
is encouraged by an old Prophecy.
That the time would come, when the Persian Empire should be destroyed by the
Graecians. Encouraged by this Accident, he proceeded to reduce the Maritime
Parts of Cilicia, and Phoenicea, and passed his Army along the Seacoasts of
Pamphilia with such Expedition, that many Historians have described, and
extolled it with that height of Admiration, as if it were no less than a
Miracle, and an extraordinary effect of Divine Favor, that the Waves which
were wont to come rolling in from the Main, and hardly ever leave so much as
the Beach under the steep, broken Cliffs at any time uncovered, should on a
sudden retire to afford him passage. Menander, in one of his Comedies, alludes
to this wonderful Event, when he says,

How this Resembles Alexander's high
Exploits? This Fellow of his own accord is here.
Ask him to wade the Sea, and he will reply,
Even that to him does passable appear.
Alexander himself in his Epistles, mentions nothing unusual in this at all,
but says, he went from Phaselis, and marched through the Straits, which they
call the Ladders. At Phaselis he staid some time, and finding the Statue of
Theodectes, who was then Dead, erected in the Market Place, after he had
Supped, having drank pretty plentifully, he went and Danced about it, and
Crowned it with Garlands as it were in sport, Honoring the Memory of his
Friend, whose Conversation he had formerly enjoyed, when he was Aristotle's
Scholar.

Then he subdued the Pisidians who made Pisidia and Phrygia subdued.
head against him, and conquered the Phrygians, at whose chief City Gordium,
(which is said to be Seat of Old King Midas) he saw the famous Chariot fastened
with Cords made of the Rind of the Cornel Tree, which (...)
whosoever should untie, the Inhabitants had a constant Tradition, that for him
was reserved the Empire of the World. Most are of Opinion, That Alexander
finding himself unable to untie the Knot, because the ends of it were secretly
folded up within it, cut it asunder, with his Sword: But Cuts the Gordian Knot.
Aristobulus tells us, it was easy for him to undo it, by only pulling the Pin
out of the Beam which fastened the yoke to it, and afterward drawing out the
yoke it self. From hence he advanced into Paphlagonia and Cappadocia, both
which Countries he soon reduced to his obedience, and then hearing of the Death
of Memnon, one of Darius his best Sea-Commanders, who, if he had lived, might
have put a great stop to the progress of his Arms, he was the rather induced to
carry the War into the upper Provinces of Asia.

Darius was by this time upon his March Darius marches toward him.
from Susa, very confident, not only in the number of his Men, which amounted
to fix hundred thousand, but likewise in a dream which the Magicians
interpreted rather in flattery to him, than with any probability of Truth. He
dreamed that he saw the Macedonian Phalanx all on fire, and Alexander waiting
on him, clad in the same Robe which he used to wear when he was Asgandes to the
late King; A Messenger.
after which going into the Temple of Belus, he vanished out of his sight. By
this dream it was manifest in my opinion, that the Darius his Dream interpreted.
Gods designed to show him the illustrious Actions the Macedonians were to
perform, that as he from an Asgandes had arrived at the Crown, so Alexander
should come to be Master of Asia, and not long surviving his Conquests,
conclude his Life with great Glory and Reputation. Darius his confidence
increased the more, because Alexander spent so much time in Cilicia, which he
imputed to his Cowardice: But it was sickness that detained him there, which
some say Alexander falls sick.
he contracted by taking too much pains, others by Bathing in the River Cydnus,
whose Waters were exceeding cold. However it happened, none of his Physicians
would venture to give him any Remedies, they thought his case so desperate, and
were so afraid of the censure and ill will of the Macedonians, if they should
fail in the Cure; till Philip the Acarnanian considering his extreme danger,
and confiding in his Friendship, resolved to try the utmost efforts of his Art,
and rather hazard his own Credit and Life, than suffer him to perish for want
of Physic, which he confidently administered to him, encouraging him to take it
boldly, if he desired a speedy Recovery, in order to prosecute the War. At this
very time Parmenio wrote to Alexander from the Camp, bidding him have a care of
Philip, as one who was bribed by Darius to kill him, with great sums of Money,
and a promise of his Daughter in Marriage. When he had perused the Letter, he
put it under his Pillow, without showing it so much as to any of his most
intimate Friends, and when Philip came in with the Potion, he took it with
great cheerfulness and assurance, withal giving him the Letter to read. This
was an encounter well worth being present at, to see Alexander take the
draught, His confidence in his Physician Philip.
and Philip read the Letter at the same time, looking earnestly upon one
another, but with different Sentiments; for Alexander's looks were cheerful and
open, a demonstration of his kindness to, and confidence in his Physician,
while the others were full of surprise at the accusation, appealing to the Gods
to witness his Innocence, sometimes lifting up his hands to Heaven, and then
throwing himself down by the Bedside, and beseeching Alexander to lay aside all
fear, and rely on his Fidelity. The Medicine at first wrought so strongly with
him, that it overcame his Spirits, and brought him so low that he lost his
speech, and falling into a Swoon, had scarce any sense or pulse left; but soon
after, by Philip's By whom he is Cured.
means, his Health and Strength returned, and he showed himself in public to
the Macedonians, who were in continual fear and dejection till they saw him
abroad again.

There was at this time in Darius his Army a Macedonian Fugitive, named
Amyntas, one who was pretty well acquainted with Alexander's designs, This Man,
when he Darius rejects good Counsel.
saw Darius, intended to fall upon the Enemy in the Straits of an enclosed
Country, advised him rather to keep where he was, it being the advantage of a
numerous Army to have Field room enough, when it ingages with a lesser Force.
Darius instead of taking his Counsel, told him, he was afraid the Enemy would
endeavor to run away, and so Alexander would escape out of his hands. That
Fear, replied Amyntas, is needless, for assure your self that far from avoiding
you, he will make all the speed he can to meet you, and is now questionless on
his March toward you. But Amyntas his Counsel was to no purpose, for Darius
immediately decamped, marched into Cilicia, at the same time that Alexander
advanced into Syria to meet him, but missing one another in the Night, they
both came back again. Alexander mightily pleased with the Accident, made all
the haste he could to fight in the Straits, and Darius to recover his former
ground, and draw his Army out of so disadvantageous a place. For now he began
to perceive his error in engaging too far into a Country, which, by reason of
the Sea, the Mountains, and the River Pindarus running through the midst of it,
would necessitate him to divide his Forces, render his Horse almost
unserviceable, and only cover and supply the weakness of the Enemy. Fortune was
not kinder to Alexander in the situation of the place, than he was careful to
improve it to his advantage: For being much inferior in numbers, to prevent
being enclosed, he stretched his Right The Battle of Issus.
Wing much further out than his Left, and Fighting there himself in the very
foremost Ranks, put the Barbarians to flight. In this Battle he was wounded in
the Thigh by Darius (as Chares says) with whom he fought hand to hand. But in
the account which he gave Antipater of the Battle, though indeed he owns he was
run through the Thigh with a Sword, though not dangerously, yet he takes no
notice who it was that wounded him.

Nothing was wanting to complete this glorious Victory, which he gained at the
expense of above an Hundred and ten thousand of his Enemies lives, but the
taking the Person of Darius, who escaped very narrowly Darius escapes.
by flight. However, having taken his Chariot, and his Bow, he returned from
pursuing him, and found his own Men busy in pillaging the Barbarians Camp,
which, though to disburden themselves, they had left most of their Baggage at
Damascus, was exceeding rich. But Darius his Tent, in which were abundance of
Officers, a great deal of noble Furniture, and vast quantities of Gold and
Silver, they reserved for Alexander himself, who after he had put off his Arms,
as he was going to Bathe himself, Let us now, said he, cleanse and refresh our
selves after the toils of war, in Darius his own Bath. Not so, replied one of
his followers, but in Alexander's rather, for the Goods of the Vanquished are,
and always ought to be, reputed the Conquerors. Here, when he beheld the
Bathing Vessels, the Water Pots, Vials, and Ointment Boxes all of Gold,
curiously wrought, and smelt the fragrant odours with which the whole place was
exquisitely perfumed, and from thence passed into another Apartment, large and
well pitched, where the Bed, the Table, and the Alexander taken with the
Persian Luxury and Riches.
Entertainment were perfectly magnificent, he turned to those about him, and in
a kind of transport told them, This is to be a King indeed. But as he was going
to Supper, word was brought him that Darius his Mother, and Wife, and two
unmarried Daughters, being taken among the rest of the Prisoners, upon the
sight of his Chariot and Bow, were all in tears and sorrow, imagining him to be
dead. After a little pause, more touched with their affliction than with his
own success, he sent Leonatus to them, to let them know Darius was not Dead,
and that they need not apprehend any ill usage from Alexander, who made War
upon him only for Dominion; and that they should find themselves as well
provided for, as ever they were in Darius his most flourishing condition, when
his Empire was entire. This kind message could not but be very welcome to the
Captive Ladies, especially being made good by Actions no less humane and
generous: For he gave them leave to bury whom they pleased of the Persians, and
to make use of what Garments and Furniture they thought His generous usage of
Darius his Wife and Daughters.
fit out of the Booty. He diminished nothing of their Equipage, or of the
respect formerly paid them, and allowed larger Pensions for their maintenance,
than ever they had before. But the bravest and most Royal Part of their usage,
was, that he treated these Illustrious Prisoners according to their Virtue and
their Quality, not suffering them to hear, or receive, or so much as to
apprehend any thing that was indecent, or to the prejudice of their Honor. So
that they seemed rather lodged in some Temple, or holy Virgin Cloister, where
they enjoyed their Privicy sacred and uninterrupted; than in the Camp of an
Enemy. Not that he wanted temptation, for Darius his Wife was accounted the
beautifullest Princess then living, as her Husband the handsomest and properest
man of his time, and the Daughters were no less charming than their Parents:
But Alexander His Continence.
esteeming it more glorious to govern himself than to conquer his Enemies,
touched none of them, nor any other Woman before Marriage, except Barsina,
Memnon's Widow, who was taken Prisoner at Damascus. She was very knowing in the
Grecian Learning, of a sweet temper, and by her Father Artabazus, Royally
descended. Which good qualities added to the solicitations, and encouragement
of Parmenio (as Aristobulus tells us) made him the more willing to enjoy so
agreeable and illustrious a Woman. Of the rest of the Persian Captives, though
handsome and well proportioned enough, he took no farther notice than to say
merrily that they were great eye-sores. His Temperance and Chastity so much
surmounted the effects of their Charms, that they moved him no more than so
many liveless Statues. And when Philoxenus, his Lieutenant on the Sea coast,
wrote to him to know if he would buy two very fine Boys, which one Theodorus a
Tarentine had to sell: He was so offended, that he often He is angry with those
who would have Corrupted him.
expostulated with his Friends, what baseness Philoxenus had ever observed in
him, that he should presume to make him such a reproachful offer? And
immediately wrote him a very sharp Letter, commanding him to dismiss Theodorus,
and his vile Merchandise with disgrace. Nor was he less severe to Agnon, who
sent him word, he would buy a pretty Corinthian Youth named Crobylus, to
present him with. And hearing that Damon and Timotheus, two of Parmenio's
Soldiers, had abused the Wives of some Strangers who were in his Pay, he wrote
to Parmenio, charging him strictly, if he found them guilty, to put them to
Death, as Beasts that were good for nothing but to corrupt and ruin Mankind.
In the same Letter he added, that he had not so much as seen, or desired to see
the Wife of Darius, no, nor suffered any body to speak of her Beauty before
him. He was wont to say, that Sleep, and the Act of Generation chiefly made him
sensible that he was Mortal, withal affirming, that Pain and Pleasure proceeded
both from the same Frailty and Imbecility of humane Nature.

In his Diet he was most temperate, as His Temperance.
appears, omitting many other Circumstances, by what he said to Ada, whom he
adopted to be his Mother, and afterward created Queen of Caria. For when she
out of Kindness sent him every day many curious Dishes and Sweetmeats, and
would have furnished him with such Cooks and Pastry-men as were excellent in
their kind: he told her, He wanted none of them, his Praeceptor Leonidas having
already given him the best, which were Night-marches to prepare him for his
Dinner, and moderate Dinners to create an Appetite for Supper. And that he used
to open and search the Furniture of his Chamber, and his Wardrobe, to see if
his Mother had left him any thing that was nice or superfluous. He was much
less addicted to Wine than was generally believed; that which gave People
occasion to think so of him, was, that when he had nothing else to do, he loved
to sit long and discourse, rather than drink, and tell long Stories between
every Glass. For when his Affairs called upon him, he would not be detained as
other Generals often were, either by Wine, or Sleep, Nuptial Solemnities,
Spectacles, or any other Diversion whatsoever: A convincing Argument of which
is, that in the short time he lived, he accomplished so many and so great
Actions. When he was free from Employment, after he was up, and had Sacrifi'd
to the Gods, he used to sit down to Dinner, and then spend the rest of the day
either in Hunting, And manner of Life described.
or writing Memoirs, or composing Differences among his Soldiers, or Reading.
In Marches that required no great haste, he would practice Shooting as he went
along, or to mount a Chariot, and alight from it in full speed. Sometimes for
Sports sake, his Journals tell us, he would go a FoxHunting, and Fowling, and
when he came home, after he had Bathed, and was anointed, he would call for his
Bakers, and chief Cooks, to know if they had got his Supper ready in good
order. He never cared to Sup till it was pretty late, and was wonderful
circumspect at Meals, that every one who sat with him should be served alike.
His talkative Humor, as I noted before, made him delight to sit long at Table,
and then, though otherwise no Princes Conversation was ever so agreeable, he
would fall into such a vein of Ostentation, and Soldierly Bragging, as He is
given to bragging.
gave his Flatterers a great advantage to ride him, and made his best Friends
and Servants very uneasy. For though they thought it too base to strive who
should Flatter him most, yet they found it hazardous not to And subject to
Flattery.
do it; so that between the Shame and the Danger, they were in a great strait
how to behave themselves. After such an Entertainment, he was wont to Bath, and
then perhaps he would Sleep till Noon, and sometimes all day long. He was so
very Temperate in his Diet, that when any excellent Fish or Fruits were sent
him, he would distribute them among his Friends, and hardly reserve any for his
own Eating. His Table however was always Magnificent, the Expense of it still
increasing with his good Fortune, till it amounted to 10000 The Expense of his
Table.
Drachmas a day, to which Sum he limited it; and beyond this, he would suffer
none to lay out in an Entertainment, though he himself were the Guest.

After the Battle of Issus, he sent to Damascus to seize upon the Money and
Baggage, the Wives and Children of the Persians, of which the Thessalian
Horsemen had the greatest share; for he had taken particular notice of their
Gallantry in the Fight, and sent them thither on purpose to make their Reward
suitable to their Courage: Not but that the rest of the Army had so
considerable part of the Booty, as was sufficient to make the Fortune of every
private Soldier. This first gave the Macedonians such a taste of the Persian
Wealth, Women, and manner of Living, that they pursued and traced it with the
same eagerness and ardour, that Hounds do when they are upon a Scent. Alexander
before he proceeded any farther, thought Cyprus and Phoenicia yielded to him.
it necessary to assure himself of the Seacoast. Those who Governed in Cyprus,
put that Island into his Possession, and all Phoenicia except Tire was
Surrendered to him without a stroke. During the Siege of this City, which with
Mounts of Earth cast up, and He Besieges Tire.
battering Engines, and 200 Galleys by Sea, was carried on with all imaginable
vigor for seven Months together, he chanced to Dream, that he saw Hercules
upon the Walls, reaching out his Hand, and calling to him. And many of the
Tyrians in their Sleep, fancied that Apollo told them, he was displeased with
their Actions, and was about to leave them, and go over to Alexander. Upon
which, as if the God were a Fugitive, they took him in the Fact, chaining his
Statue, and nailing it to the Pedestal, withal reproaching him, that he was an
Alexandrist, or a Favourer of Alexander's Party. Another time Alexander
Dreamed, He saw a Satyr mocking him at a distance, and when he endeavored to
catch him, he still escaped from him, till at last, with much perseverance, and
running about after him, he got him into his Power. The Soothsayers making two
words of Satyros, assured him, (...), which signifies, Tire is thine.
that in all probability Tire was as good as his own. The Inhabitants at this
time show the Fountain near which Alexander slept, when he fancied the Satyr
appeared to him.

While the Body of the Army lay before Tire, he made a short Excursion against
the Arabians, who inhabit Mount Antilibanus, in which he hazarded his Life
extremely, to bring off his Master Lysimachus, who would needs go along with
him, bragging he was neither older, nor inferior in Courage to Phoenix
Achilles, his Tutor, whose Name he affected to bear. For when quitting their
Horses, they marched up the Hill on foot, the rest of the Soldiers out-went
them a great deal, so that Night drawing on, and the Enemy near, Alexander was
His care of his old Master*
fain to stay behind so long, to encourage and help up the lagging, tired old
Man, that before he was aware, he was gotten a great way from his Army with a
slender attendance, and forced to pass an extreme cold Night in the dark, and
in a very ill place. Till seeing a great many scattered Fires of the Enemy at
some distance, and trusting to his Agility of Body, and constant
Indefatigableness, with which he was wont to relieve and support the
Macedonians in their Distress, he ran strait to one of the nearest and personal
Valor, in extremity of danger
Fires, and with his Dagger dispatching two of the Barbarians that sat by it,
snatched up a lighted Brand, and returned with it to his own Men, who
immediately made a great Fire, which so terrified the Enemy, that most of them
fled, and those that assaulted them were soon routed, by which means they
lodged securely the rest of the Night. Thus Chares gives an account of this
Action.

But to return to the Siege, it had this Issue: Alexander that he might refresh
his Army, harassed with many former Encounters, drew out a small Party, rather
to keep the Enemy upon Duty, than with any prospect of much Advantage. It
happened at this time, that Aristander, after he had sacrificed, upon view of
the Intrails, affirmed confidently to those who stood by, that the City should
be certainly taken that very Month, which made them laugh at, and mock him
exceedingly, because that was the last day of it. But the King taking notice of
his Perplexity, and emulous Zeal, ever ambitious to have his Predictions take
place, commanded they should not account that the 30th, but the 3d day of the
expiring Month, and ordering the Trumpets to sound, attacked the Walls with
more Fury He takes Tire and Gaza.
than he at first intended. The briskness of the Assault so inflamed the rest
of his Forces who were left in the Camp, that they could not hold from
advancing to second it, which they performed with so much Vigor, that the
Tyrians retired, and the Town was carried that very day. The next Place he sat
down before was Gaza, the Metropolis of Syria, where this Accident befell him, A
great Fowl flying over him, let a Clod of Earth fall upon his Soulder, and then
settling upon one of the battering Engines, was suddenly entangled and caught
in the Where he is wounded by a str^nge accident.
Nets composed of Sinews, which protected the Ropes with which the Machine was
managed. This fell out exactly according to Aristander's Prediction, which was,
that Alexander should be wounded, and the City reduced.

From hence he sent great part of the Spoils to Olympias, Cleopatra, and the
rest of his Friends, not omitting his Praeceptor Leonidas, on whom he bestowed
five hundred Talents worth of Frankincense, and an hundred of Myrrh; prompted
to it by the remembrance of his forward hopes of him, when he was but a Child.
For Leonidas, it seems, standing by him one day while he was sacrificing, and
seeing him take both his hands full of Gums to throw into the Fire, told him,
it became him to be more sparing in his Offerings then, and not be so profuse
till he was Master of the Countries, where those sweet Gums and Spices were
produced. Upon this account, Alexander wrote him word, he had sent him a large
quantity of Myrrh and Frankincense, that for the future he might not be so
niggardly to the Gods. Among the Treasures and other Booty that was taken from
Darius, there was a very curious little Box, which being presented to Alexander
for a great Rarity, he asked those about him what they thought fittest to be
laid up in it; and when they had delivered their opinions, he told them he
esteemed nothing so worthy to be preserved in it as Homer's Iliads. His esteem
of Homer.
This passage is attested by many credible Authors, and if what those of
Alexandria, relying upon the credit of Heraclides, tell us be true; Homer was
neither an idle, nor an unprofitable Companion to him in his expedition. For
when he was Master of Egypt, designing to settle a Colony of Grecians there,
he resolved to build a large and populous City, and give it his own Name. In
order to which, after he had measured and staked out the Ground, with with the
advice of the best Workmen, he chanced one Night in his sleep to see a
wonderful Vision: A gray headed Old Man, of a venerable Aspect, appeared to
stand by him, and pronounce these Verses,

Girt with the surging Main, there lies an Isle,
Not far from Egypt, which they Pharos style.
Alexander upon this immediately rose up and went to Pharos, which at that time
was an Island lying a little above the Canobique Mouth of the River Nilus, though
it be now joined to the Continent by a straight Causey. As soon as he saw the
commodious situation of the place, it being a long neck of Land, of a
proportionable breadth, having a great Lake on one side, and the Sea on the
other; at the end of it making a spacious Hrrbour, he said, Homer, besides his
other Excellencies, was a very good Architect, and ordered the Plot of a City
He builds Alexandri.
to be drawn answerable to the place. To do which, for want of Chalk, the Soil
being black, they set out their Lines with Flower, taking in a pretty large
compass of ground in a circular Figure; the inside of whose circumference was
equally terminated by Right Lines like the edges of a Cloak. While he was
pleasing himself with his design, on a sudden an infinite number of great
Birds, of several kinds, rising like a black Cloud out of the River, and the
Lake, devoured all the Flower that was used in setting out the Lines; at which,
Omen Alexander was much troubled, till the Augur's encouraging him again, by
telling him, It was a sign, the City he was about to build, would not only
abound in all things within it self, but also be the Nurse of many Nations; he
commanded the Workmen to proceed, while he went to visit the Temple of Jupiter
Hammon.

This was a long, painful, and dangerous His Journey to the Temple of Jupiter
Hammon.
Journey in two respects: First, if their Provision of Water should fail in so
wide a Desert: And Secondly, If a violent SouthWind should rise upon them,
while they were Traveling through the deep gaping Sands, as it did heretofore
upon Cambyses his Army, blowing the Sands together in heaps, and then rolling
it in Waves upon his Men, till 50000 were swallowed up and destroyed by it. All
these difficulties were weighed and represented to him; but Alexander was not
easily to be diverted from any thing he was bent upon: For Fortune having
hitherto seconded him in his designs, made him resolute and firm in his
Opinions, and the greatness of his Mind raised a confidence in him of
surmounting almost invincible difficulties; as if it were not enough to be
always victorious in the Field, unless Places, and Seasons, and Nature her self
submitted to him. In this Voyage, the Relief and Assistance the Gods afforded
him in his Distresses, were more wonderful and worthy of belief, than the
Oracles he received afterward, which were valued and credited the more upon
this occasion: For first, the plentiful Rains that fell preserved them from
perishing by drought, and allaying the extreme dryness of the Sand, which now
became moist and firm to Travel on, cleared and purified the Air. Besides this,
when they were out of their way, and were In which he is w^nderfully guided and
preserved.
wandering up and down, by reason the marks which were wont to direct the Guides
were disordered and lost, they were set right again by some Ravens who flew
before them in their March, and would wait for those who lagg'd or were left
behind. But the greatest Miracle, as Calisthenes tells us, was, That if any of
the Company went astray in the Night, they never left croking and making a
noise, till by that means they had brought them into the right way again.
Having passed through the Wilderness they came to the City, where the
High Priest, at the first salute bade Alexander welcome from his Father Ammon:
And being asked by him whether any of his Father's Murderers had escaped
punishment, he charged him to speak with more respect, for his Father was not
Mortal. Then Alexander more plainly desired to know of him, if any of those who
murdered Philip were yet unpunished, and further concerning Dominion, whether
the Empire of the World was reserved for him? This the God answered he should
obtain, and that Philip's Death was fully revenged; which gave him so much
satisfaction, that he made splendid Offerings to Jupiter, and gave the Priests
very rich Presents. This is the substance of what Answers he received from the
Oracle: Although Alexander in a Letter to his Mother tells her, there were some
secret Predictions, which, at his return, he would communicate to her only.
Others Is flattered by a Priest.
say, That the Priest, desirous to express himself more kindly, and to call him
in the Greek Tongue Paidion, which signifies my Son, to avoid the barbarism as
he thought of the N, used the S instead of it, and said Paidios, or Son of
Jupiter, which mistake of his Speech, Alexander was well enough pleased with,
and it went for current, that the Oracle had called him so.

Among the Sayings of one Psammon a Philosopher, whom he heard in Egypt, he
most approved of this, That all Men are governed Alexander's opinion of the
Deity.
by God, because in every thing that which is Chief and Commands is Divine. But
what he pronounced himself upon this Subject, was more like a Philosopher; for
he said, God was the common Father of us all, but more particularly of Good
Men. To the Barbarians he carried himself very insolently, as if he were fully
persuaded of his Divine And politic use of being thought a God.
Original; but to the Grecians more moderately, and with less affectation of
Divinity: Except it were writing to the Athenians concerning Samos, where he
tells them, they held not that free and glorious City by virtue of his Gift,
but from the Bounty of him, who, at that time, was called his Lord and Father,
meaning Philip. However, afterward being wounded with an Arrow, and feeling
much pain, he turned to those about him, and told them, it was common Humane
Blood that fell from him, and not the Ichor,

Such as the Immortal Gods were wont to shed. And another time when it Thundered
so much that every body was afraid, and Anaxarchus the Sophist asked him, if he
who He is jeered by Anaxarchus.
was Jupiter's own Son were so too? Yes, that I am, answered Alexander
laughing, for I would not be formidable to my Friends, as you would have me be,
who despised my Table for being furnished with Fish, and not with the Heads of
Governors of Provinces. For it is certain, That Anaxarchus seeing a Present of
small Fishes which the King sent to Hephaestion, did express himself to this
purpose, to show his contempt and derision of those who take mighty pains and
run desperate hazards in pursuit of great matters, and yet after all, if we
examine things closely, have little more of Pleasure or Enjoyment than other
People. For what I have said upon this Subject, it is apparent that Alexander
in himself was not foolishly affected, or had the Vanity to think himself
really a God, but his Followers were captivated with an overweaning opinion of
his Divinity.

At his return out of Egypt into Phoenicia, The expense of Tragedies defrayed
by Kings.
he Sacrificed and made solemn Processions, to which were added circular Dances
and Acting of Tragedies, whose splendour appeared not only in the Furniture and
Ornaments, but in the noble Zeal and Contention of those who acted them. For no
less Persons than two Kings of Cyprus were at the charge of them, in the same
manner as it is performed at Athens by those who are chosen by Lot out of the
Tribes. And indeed they strove with wonderful emulation to outvie each other:
Chiefly Nicocreon King of Salamis, and Pasicrates of Soli, who were appointed
to furnish and defray the expense of Athenodorus and Thessalus, two of the most
celebrated Actors of that Age. Thessalus was most favored by Alexander, though
it appeared not till Athenodorus was declared Victor by the plurality of
Suffrages. For then at his going away, he said the Judges deserved to be
commended for what they had done, but that he would willingly have lost part of
his Kingdom, rather than to have seen Thessalus overcome. However, when he
understood Athenodorus was Fined by the Athenians, for being absent at the
Festivals celebrated in Honor of Bacchus, though he refused his request of
Writing in his behalf; yet he was so generous as to give him wherewithal to
satisfy the Penalty. Another time Lycon of Scarphia happened to Act with great
Applause in the Theater, and in a Verse inserted in his part, cunningly begged
Ten Talents of Alexander; who was so pleased with his Ingenuity, that he freely
gave him the Money.

About this time Darius wrote to him, and Darius his Proposals rejected.
his Friends to intercede with him to accept 10000 Talents, as a Ransom for
what Prisoners he had in his hands: And to purchase his Amity and Alliance,
offered him all the Countries on this side the River Euphrates, together with
one of his Daughters in Marriage. These Propositions he communicated to his
Friends, and when Parmenio told him, that for his part, if he were Alexander,
he should readily embrace them; So would I too you may be sure, said the King,
if I were Parmenio. Accordingly his Answer to Darius was, That if he would
yield himself up into his Power, he would treat him with all imaginable
Kindness, if not, he was resolved immediately to advance toward him. But the
Death of Darius his Wife in Childbirth, made him soon after repent of this
Resolution, not without evident Alexander's generous Usage of Darius's Wif^.
marks of Grief, for being so deprived of a further opportunity of exercising
his Clemency and good Nature, which he showed to the last, by the great Expense
he was at in her Funeral.

Among the Eunuchs who waited in the Queen's Chamber, and were taken Prisoners
with the Women, there was one Tyreus, who getting out of the Camp, fled away on
Horseback to Darius, to inform him of his Wives Death; which, as soon as he
heard, he could not forbear beating his Head, and bursting forth into Tears
with lamentable Outcries, said, Alas! how great is the Calamity of the
Persians? Was it not enough that their Kings Consort and Sister was a Prisoner
in her Lifetime, but she must, now she is dead also, be but meanly and
obscurely Buried? Oh Sir, replied the Eunuch, As to her Interment, or any
Respect or Decency, that was omitted at it, you have not the least reason to
accuse the ill Fortune of your Country; for to my knowledge, neither your Queen
Statira when alive, or your Mother or Children, wanted any thing of their
former happy Condition, unl^ss it were the light of your Countenance, which I
doubt not but the mighty Oromasdes will yet restore with greater Splendour and
Glory than ever: and after her Decease, I assure you, she had not only all due
Funeral Ornaments, but was honored also with the Tears of your very Enemies;
for Alexander is as merciful and gentle after Victory, as he is daring and
terrible in the Field. At the hearing of these words, such was the Grief and
Emotion of Darius his Mind, that although there was not the Makes him jealous.
(...)
least ground for them, he could not choose but entertain some absurd
Suspicions. For taking Tyreas aside into a more private Apartment in his Tent:
Unless thou likewise, said he to him, have deserted me, together with the good
Fortune of Persia, and art become a Macedonian in thy Heart; if thou bear me
yet any Respect, and ownest me for thy Sovereign Darius, Tell me, I charge
thee, by the Veneration thou payest the Deity of The Sun.
Mithras, and this Right Hand of the King: Do I not lament the least of
Statira's Misfortunes in her Captivity and Death? Have I not suffered something
more injurious and deplorable in her Lifetime? And had I not been miserable
with less dishonor, if I had met with a more severe and inhumane Enemy? For
how is it possible a young Man as he is, should treat the Wife of Darius with
so much Generosity, without passing the Bounds of a virtuous Conversation?
Whilst he was yet speaking, Tyreus threw himself at his Feet, and But without
Reason, of which he is convinced by Tyreus the Eunuch.
besought him neither to wrong Alexander so much, nor his Dead Wife and Sister,
as to harbor such unjust thoughts, which deprived him of the only Consolation
he was capable of in his Adversity, in a firm belief that he was overcome by a
Man, whose Virtues raised him far above the pitch of human Nature. That he
ought to look upon Alexander with Love and Admiration, who had given no less
Proofs of his Continence toward the Persian Women, than of his Valor among
the Men. The Eunuch confirmed all he said with solemn, horrid Oaths, and was
farther enlarging himself in the description of Alexander's Moderation and
Magnanimity upon other occasions: When Darius, not able to contain himself any
longer, broke from him into the next Room, where before all his Courtiers he
lifted up his Hands to Heaven, and uttered this Prayer. Ye Gods, said he, who
are the Darius his Prayer.
Authors of our Being, and supreme Directors of Kingdoms; above all things, I
beg of you to restore the declining Affairs of Persia, that I may leave them at
least in as flourishing a condition as I found them, and have it in my Power to
make some grateful Returns to Alexander, for the Kindness which in my Adversity
he has showed to those who are dearest to me. But if indeed the fatal Time be
come, which is to give a Period to the Persian Monarchy; if our Ruin be a Debt
that must be inevitably paid to the Divine Vengeance, and the Vicissitude of
Things: Then I beseech you grant, that no other Man but Alexander may sit upon
the Throne of Cyrus. The truth of these Passages is attested by most Writers.

But to return to Alexander, after he had The Event of a great Battle, gathered
from a ridiculous Accident.
reduced all Asia, on this side the Euphrates, he advanced toward Darius, who
was coming down against him with a Million of Men. In his March, a very
ridiculous Passage happened. The Servants who followed the Camp, for
Sports-sake divided themselves into two Parties, and named the Commander of one
of them Alexander, and of the other Darius. At first they only pelted one
another with Clods of Earth, and after fell to Fisty-cuffs, till at last,
heated with the Skirmish, they fought in good earnest with Stones and Clubs, so
that they had much ado to part them, till Alexander ordered the two Captains to
decide the Quarrel by single Combat, and armed him who bore his Name himself,
while Philotas did the same to him who represented Darius. The whole Army were
Spectators of this Encounter, with Minds prepared from the Event of it, to make
a Judgment of their own future Success. After they had fought stoutly a pretty
while, at last he who was called Alexander had the better, and for a Reward of
his Prowess, had 12 Villages given him, with leave to vest himself after the
Persian Mode. Thus we are informed by the Writings of Eratosthenes.

But the great Battle of all that was fought At the Battle of Gausamela.
with Darius, was not as most Writers tell us, at Arbela, but at Gausamela,
which in their Language signifies the Camels House, forasmuch as one of their
ancient Kings, having escaped the pursuit of his Enemies on a swift Camel, in
gratitude to his Beast, settled him at this place, with an allowance of certain
Villages and Rents for his maintenance. It came to pass, that in the month
August.
Boedromion, about the beginning of the Feast of Mysteries at Athens, there
happened an Eclipse of the Moon, the 11th Night after which, the two Armies
being then in view of one another, Darius kept his Men in Arms, and by
Torch-light took a general Review of them. But Alexander, while his Soldiers
slept, spent the night before his Tent, with his Diviner Aristander, performing
certain mysterious Ceremonies, and sacrificing to Apollo. In the mean Some
Copies have it (...)* to Fear.
while the eldest of his Commanders, and chiefly Parmenio, when they beheld all
the Plain between the River Niphates, and the Gordyaean Mountains, shining with
the Lights and Fires which were made by the Barbarians, and heard the rude and
confused Voices out of their Camp, the terror and noise of which resembled the
roaring of a vast Ocean, they were so amazed at the thoughts of such a
multitude, that after some Conference among themselves, they concluded it an
Enterprise too difficult and hazardous Alexander though infinitely inferior in
numbers, refuses to steal a Victory. His Reasons for it.
for them to engage so numerous an Enemy in the Day, and therefore meeting the
King as he came from Sacrificing, besought him to attack Darius by Night, that
the Darkness might conceal the Horror and Danger of the ensuing Battle. To this
he gave them the so celebrated Answer, That he would not steal a Victory: Which
though some may think childish and vain, as if he played with Danger, yet
others look upon it as an evidence that he confided in his present Condition,
and made a true Judgment of the future, in not leaving Darius, in case he were
worsted, so much as a pretense of trying his Fortune any more; which he would
certainly do, if he could impute his Overthrow to the disadvantage of the
Night, as he did before to the Mountains, the narrow Passages, and the Sea. For
it was not to be imagined, that he who had still such Forces and large
Dominions left, His Reasons for it.
should give over the War for want of Men or Arms, till he had first lost all
Courage and Hope, by the conviction of an undeniable and manifest Defeat. After
they were gone from him with this Answer, he laid himself down in his Tent, and
slept the rest of the Night soundlier than he was wont to do, to the
astonishment of the Commanders, who came to him early in the Morning, and were
fain themselves to give order that the Soldiers should Dine. But at last, time
not giving them leave to wait any longer, Parmenio went to his Bedside, and
called him twice or thrice by his Name, till he waked him, and then asked him,
How it was possible when he was to fight the most important Battle of all, he
could sleep so securely, as if he were already Victorious. So I am, said
Alexander, smiling, since I am now no more put to the trouble of wandering
after, and pursuing Darius, as long as he pleases to decline Fighting, in a
Country of so large extent, and so wasted. And not only before the Engagement,
but likewise in the extremest danger of it, he showed the greatness of his
Courage in Action, and the solidity of his Judgment in Counsel. For the left
Wing which Parmenio commanded, An Instance of his Conduct.
was so violently charged by the Bactrian Horse, that it was disordered, and
forced to give Ground, at the same time that Mazeus had sent a Party round
about to fall upon those who guarded the Baggage, which so disturbed Parmenio,
that he sent Messengers to acquaint Alexander, that the Camp and Baggage would
be all lost, unless he immediately relieved the Rear, by a considerable
Reinforement drawn out of the Front. This Message being brought him Just as he
was giving the Signal to those about him for the Onset, he bade them tell
Parmenio, That sure he was mad, and had lost the use of his Reason, and that
the Consternation he was in, had made him forget, that Conquerors always become
Masters of their Enemies Baggage; whereas those who were defeated, instead of
taking care of their Wealth or their Slaves, had nothing more to do, but to
fight gallantly, and die with Honor. When he had said this, he put on his
Helmet, having the rest of his Arms His A^mour described.
on before he came out of his Tent, which were a short Coat of the Sicilian
fashion, girt close about him, and over that a Breastpiece of Linen often
folded and plaited, which was taken among other Booty at the Battle of Issus.
The Helmet which was made by Theophilus, though of Iron was so well wrought and
polished, that it was as bright as the most refined Silver. To this was fitted
a Gorget of the same metal, set with precious stones. His Sword, which was the
weapon he most used in Fight, was given him by the King of the Citieans, and
was of an admirable temper and lightness. But the Belt which he wore also in
all Engagements, was of much richer Workmanship than the rest of his Armor; it
was made by old Helicon, and presented him by the Rhodians, as a mark of their
Respect to him. Whenever he drew up his Men, or rode about to give Orders, or
instruct, or view them, he favored Bucephalus by reason of his Age, and made
use of another Horse; but when he was to fight, he sent for him again, and as
soon as he was mounted, presently fell upon the Enemy. After he had made a long
Oration to the Thessalians, and the rest of the Graecians, who encouraged him
with loud Outcries, desiring to be led on to the Charge, he shifted his
Javeling into his left Hand, and with his right lifted up toward Heaven,
besought the Gods, that if he was of a truth the Son of Jupiter, they would be
pleased to assist and strengthen the Graecians. At the same time the Augur
Aristander, who had a white Mantle about him, and a Crown of Gold A good Omen
before the Battle.
on his Head, rode by, and showed them an Eagle that soared just over
Alexander, and directed his flight toward the Enemy; which so animated the
Beholders, that after mutual Encouragements and Exhortations, the Horse charged
at full speed, and were vigourously seconded by the Foot. But before they could
well come to Blows with the first Ranks, the Barbarians shrunk back, and were
hotly pursued by Alexander, who drove those that fled before him into the
middle of the Battle, where Darius himself was in Person, whom he saw over the
foremost Ranks, conspicuous in the midst of his Lifeguard; for he was an
handsome, proper Man, and drawn in a lofty Chariot, defended by abundance of the
best Horse, who stood close in order about it, ready to receive the Enemy. But
Alexander's approach was so terrible, forcing those who gave back, upon those
who yet maintained their Ground, that he beat down and dispersed them almost
all, but a few of the bravest and valiantest, who were slain in their King's
presence, falling in heaps upon one another, and in the very pangs of Death
striving by catching hold of the Men and Horses, to stop the Macedonians
pursuit. Darius now seeing all was lost, that those who were placed in Front to
defend him were broken, and beat back upon him, that he could not turn or
disengage his Chariot without great difficulty, the Wheels were so clogged and
entangled among the dead Bodies which lay in such heaps, as not only stopped, but
almost covered the Horses, and made them bound, and grow so unruly, that the
frighted Charioter Darius flies.
could govern them no longer: In this extremity he was glad to quit his Chariot
and his Arms, and mounting, as they say, upon a Mare that had newly foal'd,
betook himself to flight. But he had not escaped so neither, if Parmenio had
not sent fresh Messengers to Alexander, to desire him to return, and assist him
against a considerable Body of the Enemy which yet stood together, and would
not give ground* Upon this Parmenio was on all hands accused of Dullness and
Sloth, whether Age had impaired his Courage, or that, as Callisthenes says, he
inwardly grieved at and envied his Masters growing Greatness. Alexander though
he was not a little vexed to be so recalled, and hindered from pursuing his
Victory, yet concealed the true Reason from his Men, and causiing a Retreat to
be sounded, as if it were too late to continue the Execution any longer,
marched back And Alexander gains an entire Victory.
toward the place of danger, and by the way met with the News of the Enemies
total overthrow and flight.

This Battle being thus over, seemed to He is proclaimed King of Asia
put a period to the Persian Empire; and Alexander who was now proclaimed King
of Asia, returned thanks to the Gods in magnificent Sacrifices, and rewarded
his Friends and Followers with great sums of Money, and Palaces, and Governments
of Provinces. To ingratiate himself with the Grecians, he wrote to them, that
he would have all Tyrannies abolished, that they might live He courts the
Grecians.
free according to their own Laws, more particularly to the Plataeans, that
their City should be reedified, because their Ancestors permitted their
Countrymen to make their Territories the Seat of the War, when they fought with
the Babarians for their common Liberty. He sent also part of the Spoils into
Italy, to the Crotonians, to honor the Zeal and Courage of their Citizen
Phaylus the Wrestler, who in the Median War, when the other Grecian Colonies in
Italy disowned Greece; that he might have a share in the danger, joined the
Fleet at Salamis, with a Vessel set forth at his own charge. So affectionate
was Alexander to all kind of Virtue, and so desirous to preserve the memory of
laudable Actions.

From hence he marched through the Province Takes Babylon.
of Babylon, which immediately submitted to him, and in that of Ecbatane was
mightyly surprised to see Fire continually break like a spring out of a cleft
of the Earth; and not far from that a Foutain of Naptha, which stagnated in
great abundance. An Account of Naptha.
This Naptha, in other respects resembling Bitumen, is so subject to take fire,
that before it touches the flame, it will kindle at the very light that
surrounds it, and often inflame the interjacent Air also. The Barbarians, to
show the Power and Nature of it, sprinkled the street that led to the Kings
Lodgings with little drops of this Liquor, and when it was almost night, stood
at the further end with Torches, which being applied to the moistened Places,
the first presently taking fire, in less than a minute it caught from one end
to the other, in that manner, that the whole Sreet was but one continued flame.
Among those who used to wait on the King when he anointed and washed himself,
and divert his Mind with pleasant discourses, there was one Athenophanes, an
Athenian, who desired him to make an Experiment of the Naptha upon Stephanus,
who stood by in the Bathing place, a very ugly ridiculous Youth, whose Talent
was Singing well: For, said he, if it take hold of him and cannot be quenched,
it must undeniably be allowed to be of great and invincible strength. The Youth
readily consented With an Experiment of it.
to undergo the Trial, and as soon as he was anointed and rubbed with it, his
whole Body broke out into such a flame, and was so seized by the fire, that
Alexander was exceedingly perplexed and concerned for him, and not without
Reason; for nothing could have prevented his being consumed by it, if by good
chance there had not been People at hand with a great many Vessels of Water for
the service of the Bath, with all which, they had much ado to extinguish the
Fire; and his Body was so burned all over, that he was not our'd of it a good
while after. Not absurdly therefore do they endeavor to reconcile the Fable to
Truth, who say, this was the Drug mentioned by the Poets, with which Medea
anointed the Crown and Veil which she gave to Creon's Daughter. For neither the
things themselves, nor the And some conjectures.
fire could kindle of its own accord, but being prepared for it by the Naptha,
they imperceptibly attracted and caught the flame: For the rays and emanations
of Fire, at a distance, have no other effect upon some bodies, than bare light
and heat; but in others, where they meet with aerie dryness, and also
sufficient fat moisture, (...)
they collect themselves and soon prey upon and alter the matter. However, the
production of Naptha admits of diverse opinions: Here some of the Original is
lost.
Whether this liquid Substance that feeds the flame, does not rather proceed
from a Soil that is unctuous and productive of Fire, as that of the Province of
Babylon Concerning the Nature of it.
is, where the Ground is so very hot, that oftentimes the Grains of Barley leap
up, and are thrown out, as if the violent Inflammation had given the Earth a
pulse: And in extreme heats, the Inhabitants are wont to sleep upon Skins
filled with Water. Harpalus, who was left Governor of this Country, and was
desirous to adorn the Palace, Gardens, and Walks with Grecian Plants, succeeded
in the raising of all but Ivy, which the Earth would not bear, but constantly
killed: For being a Plant that loves a cold Soil, the temper of that mold,
which was violently hot, was improper for it. Such digressions as these, the
nicest Readers may endure, provided they are not too tedious.

At the taking of Susa, Alexander found Vast Treasures found at Susa.
in the Palace 40000 Talents in Money ready coined, besides an unspeakable
quantity of other Furniture and Treasure; amongst which was 5000 Talents worth
of Hermionique Purple, that had been laid up there an hundred and ninety nine
Years, and yet kept its color as fresh and lively as at first. The reason of
which they say, is that in Dying the Purple they made use of Honey, and of
white Oil in the white Tincture, both which being of equal Age, still preserved
their luster clean and refulgent. Dimon also relates, That the Kings of Persia
had Water fetched them from the Nile and the Danubius, which they laid up in
their Treasuries, using it as an Argument of the Greatness of their Power and
Universal Empire.

But the entrance into Persia being very Alexander enters into Persia.
difficult, by reason of the enevenness of the Ways, and that the Passes to
secure Darius, who was retired thither, were guarded by the best of his Forces,
Alexander happened upon a Guide exactly correspondent to what the Pythia had
foretold when he was a Child; That a Lycian should conduct him in his Journey
into Persia; for by such an one, whose Father was a Lycian, and his Mother a
Persian, and who spoke both Languages, he was led into the Country by a way
something about, yet without fetching any considerable compass. Here a great
many of the Prisoners were put to the Sword, of which himself gives this
account; That he commanded them to be killed, out of an apprehension it would
be advantageous to his Affairs: Nor was his Booty in Money less here than at
Susa, besides other Movables and Treasure, as much as 10000 pair of Mules and
5000 Camels could well carry away. When Alexander saw a vast Statue of Xerxes
thrown down on a sudden, by the multitudes of Solers that broke into the
Palace; he stood still, and accosting it as if it had been alive; His Speech to
Xerxes his Statue.
Shall we, said he, neglectfully pass thee by, now thou art prostrate on the
Ground, because thou once invadest Greece, or shall we erect thee again, in
consideration of the Greatness of thy Mind and thy other Virtues? But at last,
after he had paused a pretty while, he went on without taking any further
notice of it. In this place he took up his WinterQuarters, and staid four
Months to refresh his Soldiers. The first time he sat on the Royal Throne of
Persia, under a Canopy of Gold, Demaratus the Corinthian, a well-wisher to
Alexander, and one of his Father's Friends wept, Good Old Man, and deplored the
misfortune of the Grecians, that by Death were deprived of the satisfaction to
see Alexander Seated on Darius his Throne.

From hence designing to march against Darius, before he set out, he diverted
himself with his Officers at an Entertainment of Drinking, and other Pastimes,
and indulged so far as to have every one his Mistress sit by and drink with
them. The most celebrated of them was Thais an Athenian, Xerxes his Palace
burnt by Thais an Athenian Whore.
Ptolomy's Mistress, who was afterward King of Egypt. She sometimes cunningly
praised Alexander, sometimes played upon him and rallied him, and all the while
drank so freely that at last she fell to talk extravagantly, as those of her
Country used to do, much above her Character or Condition. She said it was
indeed some recompense for the pains she had taken in following the Camp all
over Asia, that she was that day Treated in, and could insult over the stately
Palace of the Persian Monarchs: But she added, it would please her much better,
if while the King looked on, she might in sport, with her own hands, set fire
to Xerxes his Court, who reduced the City of Athens to Ashes; that it might be
recorded to Posterity, that the Women who followed Alexander, had taken a
sharper Revenge on the Persians for the Sufferings and Affronts of Greece, than
all his Commanders could do by Sea or Land. What she said, was received with
such universal liking, and murmurs of Applause, and so seconded by the
encouragement and eagerness of the Company, that the King himself persuaded to
be of the Party, if arted from his Seat, and with a Chaplet of Flowers on his
Head, and a lighted Torch in his Hand, led them the way, who went after him in
a Riotous manner, Dancing, and making loud noises about the place: Which, when
the rest of the Macedonians perceived, they also, with all the Joy imaginable
ran thither with Torches; for they hoped the burning and destruction of the
Royal Palace, was an Argument that he looked homeward, and had no design to
reside among the Barbarians. Thus some Writers give an account of this Action,
and others say, it was done deliberately; however all agree that he soon
repented of it, and gave order to put out the fire.

Alexander was naturally very munificent, Several instances of Alexander's
Munificence
and grew more so as his Fortune increased, accompanying what he gave with that
courtesy and freedom, which, to speak truth, is absolutely necessary to make a
Benefit really obliging. I will give you a few Instances of this kind. Ariston,
the Captain To Ariston.
of the Paeonians, having killed an Enemy, brought his Head to show him, and
told him, That among them such a Present was recompensed with a Cup of Gold.
With an empty one, said Alexander, smiling, but I drink to you in this full of
Wine, which I give you. Another time, as one of the common Soldiers was driving
a Mule laden with some of the King's Treasure, the Beast tired, and the Soldier
took it upon his own Back, and began to March with it, till Alexander seeing
the Fellow so overcharged, asked what was the matter, and when he was informed,
just as he was ready to lay down his Burden for weariness: Do not faint now,
said To a poor Soldier.
he to him, but keep on the rest of your way, and carry what you have there, to
your own Tent for your self. He was always more displeased with those who would
not accept of what he gave, than with those who continually begged of him. And
therefore he wrote to Phocion, That he should not take him for his Friend any
longer, if he refused his Presents. To Phocion.
Nor would he ever give any thing to Serapion, one of the Youths that played at
Ball with him, because he did not ask of him, till one day it coming to
Serapion's Turn to play, he still threw the Ball to others, and when the King
asked him, Why he did not direct it to him? Because you did not desire it, To
Serapion.
said he; which Answer pleased him so, that he was very liberal to him
afterward. One Proteas, a pleasant, drolling, drinking Fellow, having incurred
his Displeasure, got his Friends to intercede for him, and begged his Pardon
himself with Tears, which at last prevailed, and Alexander declared he was
Friends with him. I cannot believe it, Sir, said Proteas, unless you give me
some pledge To Proteas.
of your Reconciliation. The King understood his meaning, and presently ordered
him to receive five Talents. How generous he was in enriching his Friends, and
those who attended on his Person, appears by a Letter which Olympias wrote to
him, where she tells him, He should reward and honor those about him in a more
moderate way; for now, said she, you make them all equal to Kings, you give
them power and opportunity to improve their own Interest, by obliging of many
to them, and in the mean time do not consider, that you leave your self bare
and destitute. She often wrote to him to this purpose, and he never
communicated her Letters to any body, unless it were one which he opened when
Hephestion was by, whom he permitted to read it along with him; but then, as
soon as he had done, he took off his Ring, and clapped the Seal upon his Lips.
Mazeus, who was To Mazeus
the most considerable Man in Darius his Court, had a Son who was already
Governor of a very good Province; but Alexander would needs bestow another
upon him that was better, which he modestly refused, and withal told him,
Instead of one Darius, he went the way to make many Alexanders. To Parmenio he
gave Bagoas his To Parmenio.
House, in which he found a Wardrobe of Apparel worth more thau 1000 Susian
Talents. He wrote to Antipater, commanding him to keep a Lifeguard about him,
for the security of his Person against Conspitacies. And to his Mother he was
very grateful, sending her many Presents, but would never suffer her to meddle
with matters of State or War, not indulging her busy Temper; and* when she
fell out with him upon this account, he bore her ill Humor very patiently. Nay
more, when he read a long Letter from Antipater, full of Accusations against
her: I wonder, said he, Antipater should not know, that one Tear of a Mother
effaces a thousand such Letters as these.

But when he perceived his Favorites He reproves the Luxury of his Farites.
grow so luxurious and extravagant in their way of Living and Expenses; that
Agnon the T^ian, wore silver Nails in his Shoes; that Leonatus employed several
Camels, only to bring him Powder out of Egypt, to use when he Wrestl'd; and
that Philotas had Toyls to take wild Beasts, that reached 12500 paces in
length; that more used precious Ointments than plain Oil when they went to
bathe, and that they had Servants every where with them, to rub them and wait
upon them in their Chambers: he reproved them with great mildness and
discretion, telling them, he wondered that they who had been engaged in so many
signal Battles, should not know by experience, that Labor and Industry made
People sleep more sweetly and soundly than Laziness; and that if they compared
the Persians manner of Living with their own, they would be convinced it was
the most abject, slavish condition in the World to be effeminate and
voluptuous, but the most generous and becoming a Great Man to take pains.
Besides he reasoned with them; how it was possible for any one who pretended to
be a Soldier, either to look well after his Horse, or to keep his Armor bright
and in good order, who thought much to let his Hands be serviceable to what was
nearest to him, his own Body. Are ye still to learn, said he, the End and
Perfection of our Victories is to avoid the Vices and Infirmities of those whom
we subdue? And to strengthen his Precepts by Example, he applied himself now
more vigorously than ever to Hunting and Warlike Expeditions, readily embracing
all opportunities of Hardship and Danger; insomuch that old Lacon, who chanced
to be by, when he encountered with, and mastered an huge Lion, told him, He had
put his Empire in Competition, and had fought gallantly with the Beast, which
of the two should be King. Craterus caused a Representation His Encounter with
a Lion, expr^ss'd in Figures of Brass dedicated to Apollo at Delphos.
of this Adventure, consisting of the Lion and the Dogs, of the King engaged
with the Lion, and himself coming in to his assistance, all expressed in
Figures of Brass, some of which were made by Lysippus, and the rest by
Leochares, to be dedicated to the Temple of Apollo at Delphos. In this manner
did Alexander expose his Person to Danger, whilst he both inured himself, and
incited others to the performance of brave and virtuous Actions.

But his Followers who were grown rich, The Ingratitude of his Favorites.
and consequently proud, longed to indulge themselves in Pleasure and Idleness,
and were perfectly weary of the Toyls and Inconveniences of War, and by
degrees came to be so impudently ungrateful, as to censure and speak ill of him
behind his back. All which at first he bore very patiently, saying, It became a
King well, to do good to others, and be evil spoken of. But to descend to some
Instances of an inferior nature, it is certain, that in the least
demonstrations How tender he was of his Friends Health.
of Kindness to his Friends, there was still a great mixture of Tenderness and
Respect. Hearing Peucestes was bitten by a Bear, he wrote to him, That he took
it unkindly, he should send others notice of it, and not make him acquainted
with it; but now, said he, since it is so, let me know how you do, and whether
any of your Companions forsook you when you were in danger, that I may punish
them. He sent Hephestion, who was absent about some business, word, How, while
they were fighting for their diversion with an Ichneumon, Craterus was by
chance run through both Thighs with Perdiccas his Javelin. And upon Peucestes
his recovery from a fit of Sickness, he sent a Letter of Thanks to his
Physician Alexippus. When Craterus was ill, he saw a Vision in his Sleep, after
which he offered Sacrifices for his Health, and commanded him to do so
likewise. He wrote also to Pausanias the Physician, who was about to purge
Craterus with Hellebore, partly out of an anxious Concern for him, and partly
to give him a Caution how he used that Medicine. He was so tender of his
Friends and Reputation.
Reputation, that he imprisoned Ephialtes and Cissus, who brought him the first
News of Harpalus his Flight, and withdrawing from his Service, as if they had
falsely accused him. When he sent the old infirm Soldiers home, Eurylochus the
Aegean got his Name enrolled among the Sick, though he ailed nothing; which
being discovered, he confessed he was in Love with a young Woman named
Telerippa, and had a mind to go along with her to the Seaside. Alexander
enquired, To whom the Woman belonged? and being told, She was an Whore at her
own disposal: I will assist you, said he to Eurylochus, all I can in your
Amor, if your Mistress Assists them in their Love*
be to be gained by Presents or Persuasions; but we must use no other means,
because she is freebo^n. It is surprising to consider, upon what slight
occasions he would write Letters to serve his Friends. As when he wrote one, in
which he gave Order to search for a Youth that belonged to Seleucus, who was
run away into Cilicia. In another he and domestic Affairs
thanked and commended Peucestes for apprehending Nicon, a Servant of Craterus.
And to Megabysus, concerning a Slave that had taken Sanctuary in a Temple, he
wrote, that he should not meddle with him while he was there, but if he could
entice him out by fair means, then he gave him leave to seize him. It is
reported of him, that when he first sat in Judgment upon Capi^al Causes, he
would lay his Hand upon one of his Ears, while the Accuser spoke, to keep it
free and unprejudiced in behalf of the Party accused. But afterward, such a
multitude of Accusations were brought before him, whereof many proving true,
exasperated him so, that he gave credit to those also that were false, and
especially when any body spoke ill of him, he would be so out of measure
transported, that he became cruel and inexorable, valuing his Glory and
Reputation far beyond either his Life or Kingdom.

His Affairs called upon him now to look A long March in pursuit of Darius.
after Darius, expecting he should be put to the hazard of another Battle; till
he heard he was taken, and secured by Bessus, upon which news he sent home the
Thessalians, and gave them a largess of 2000 Talents, over and above the Pay
that was due to them. This long and painful pursuit of Darius, (for in eleven
days he marched 412 Miles) harassed his Soldiers so, that most of ^^^^ were
ready to faint, chiefly for want of Water. While they were in this distress, it
happened that some Macedonians, who had fetched Water in Skins upon their Mules
from a River they had found out, came about Noon to the place where Alexander
was, and seeing him almost choked with Thirst, presently filled an Helmet, and
offered it him. He asked them to whom they were carrying the Water? They told
him to their Children, adding withal, that if his Life were but preserved, it
was no matter for them, they should have opportunities enough to repair that
loss, though they all perished. Then he took the Helmet into his Hands, and
looking round about when he saw all those who were near him stretched their
heads out, and gaped earnestly after the Drink; he returned it again with
thanks, without tasting a drop of it: For, said he, if I only should drink, the
A memorable instance of Alexander's Prudence and Self denial.
rest will be quite out of heart and faint. The Soldiers no sooner took notice
of his Temperance, and Magnanimity upon this occasion, but they, one and all,
cried out to him to lead them on boldly, and fell a whipping their Horses to
make them mend their pace; for whilst they had such a King, they said they
defied either Weariness or Thirst, and looked upon themselves to be little less
than Immortal. But though they ^^Spsn^^ all ^^^ally (...) not above threescore
Horse were able to keep up, and fall in with Alexander upon the Enemies Camp,
where they rode over abundance of Gold and Silver that lay scattered about, and
passing by a great many Chariots full of Women, that wandered here and there for
want of Drivers, they endeavored to overtake the first of those that fled, in
hopes to meet with Darius among them: And at last, with much ado* they found
him lying along in a Chariot, all over wounded with Darts, just at the point of
Death. However, he desired they would give him some drink, and when he had
drank a little cold Water, he told Polystrates who gave it him, That to receive
such a Benefit, and not have it in his Power to return it, was the highest
pitch of his misfortune. But Alexander, said he, whose kindness to my Mother,
my Wife, and my Children, I hope the Gods will recompense, will doubtless thank
you for your Humanity to me. Tell him therefore in token of my Acknowledgment,
I gave him this Right Hand: At which words he took hold of Polystratus his
Hand, and Died. The Death of Darius.
When Alexander came up to them, he was sensibly touched at the unfortunate End
of so Great a Man, and pulling off his own Coat, threw it upon the Body to
cover it. And to show how much he detested so horrid a a fact, as soon as
Bessus was taken, he ordered him to be torn in pieces in this manner. And
Punishment of Bessut.
They fastened him to a couple of tall strait Trees, which were bound down so as
to meet, and then being let loose, with a great force returned to their places,
each of them carrying that part of the Body along with it that was tied to it.
Darius his Body was laid in State, and sent to his Mother with Pomp suitable to
his quality, His Brother Exathres, Alexander received into the number of his
most intimate Friends.

And now with the Flower of his Army he marched down into Hyrcania, where he
saw a Gulf of the Sea, not much less than the Conjectures about the Caspian
Sea.
Euxine, and found its Water sweeter than that of other Seas; but could learn
nothing of certainty concerning it, farther than that in all probability it
seemed to him to be an overflowing of the Lake of Maeotis or at least to have
Communication with it. However the Naturalists better informed of the Truth,
give us this account of it many years before Alexander's Expedition; that of
four Gulphs which out of the main Sea enter into the Continent, this is the
most Northern, and is known by the Name both of the Hyrcanian and Caspian Sea.
Here the Barbarians unexpectedly meeting with those who led Bucephalus, took
them Prisoners, and carried the Horse away with them; which Alexander was so
offended at, that he sent an Herald to let them know, he would put them all to
the Sword, Men, Women, and Children, without mercy, if they did not restore
him: Which they immediately did, and at the same time surrendered their Cities
into his hands; upon which, he not only treated them very kindly, but also paid
a good Ransom for his Horse to those who took him.

From hence he marched into Parthia, Alexander puts on the Persian Habit.
where not having much to do, he first put on the Barbarick Habit, which
Compliance perhaps he used in order to civilize them; for nothing gains more
upon men, than a Conformity to their Fashions and Customs; or it may be he did
it as an Essay, whether the Macedonians would be brought to adore him, (as the
Persians did their Kings) by accustoming them by little and little to bear with
the alteration of his Dicipline, and course of Life in other things. However he
followed not the Median Fashion, which was altogether barbarous and uncouth;
for he wore neither their Breeches, nor their long Vest, nor their Tiara for
the Head, but taking a middle way between the Persian Mode and the Macedonian,
he so contrived his Habit, that it was not so flanting as the former, and yet
more pompous and magnificent than the latter. At first he wore this Habit only
when he conversed with Strangers, or within doors, among his intimate Friends
and Companions, but afterward he appeared in it abroad, and at public
Audiences. A Sight which the Which grieves the Macedonians.
Macedonians beheld with exceeding Grief; but they were so charmed with his
other Virtues and good Qualities, that they could not but think it reasonable
in some things to gratify his Humor, and his passionate desire of Glory: In
pursuit of which he hazarded himself so far, that besides his other Adventures,
he had but newly been wounded in the Leg by an Arrow, which had so shattered
the Shankbone, that Splinters were taken out. And another time he received such
a violent Blow with a Stone upon the Nape of the Neck, as dimn'd his Sight a
good while afterward. But all this could not hinder him from exposing himself
to the greatest Dangers, without any regard to his Person; insomuch that he
passed the River Orexartes, which he took to be the Tanais, and putting the
Scythians to flight, followed them above 12 miles in their Rear, though at the
same time he had a violent Flux upon him. Here many affirm, that the Amazonian
Queen came to give him a Visit: so report Clitarchus, Polycritus and
Onesicritus, Antigenes and Ister, Aristobulus and Chares, besides Ptolomy and
Anticlides, Philon the Theban, and Philip the Master of Requests. But then on
the other side, Hecataeus the Eretrian, Philip the Chalcidian, and Duris the
Samian say, it is wholly The Story of the Amazonian Queens coming to visit him
is a Fiction.
a Fiction. And truly Alexander himself seems to confirm the opinion of the
latter; for in a Letter, in which he gives Antipater an account of all
Passages, he tells him, that the King of Scythia offered him his Daughter in
Marriage, but makes no mention at all of the Amason. And many years after, when
Onesicritus read this Story in his 4th, Book to Lisimachus, who then reigned,
the King fell a laughing at it, and asked, How such a thing should happen, and
he know nothing of it, though he was present?

But it signifies little to Alexander whether He persuades his Men to pursue
the War.
this be credited or no: Certain it is, that apprehending the Macedonians would
be weary of pursuing the War, he left the gross of his Army in their Quarters;
and having with him in Hyrcania the choice of his men only, which amounted to
20000 Foot, and 3000 Horse, he spoke to them to this effect; That hitherto the
Barbarians had seen them no otherwise than as it were in a dream, and if they
should think of returning when they had only alarmed Asia, and not conquered
it, their Enemies would set upon them, and destroy them like so many Women:
However he told them, he would keep none of them with him against their will,
they might go if they pleased, but withal protested against those who should be
so mean-spirited as to desert him, and his Friends, and those who were willing
to fight under him still, in an enterprise so glorious as it would be, to make
the Macedonians Lords of the habitable World. This is almost word for word, as
he wrote it in a Letter to Antipater, where he adds, That when he had thus
spoken to them, they all cried out, they would go along with him, whithersoever
it was his pleasure to lead them. When he had in this manner gained the
Principal, it was no hard matter for him to bring over the multitude* which in
such Cases easily follows the Example of their Betters. Now also he more and
more accomodated himself in his way of Living to that of the Persians, and
brought them as near as he could to the Macedonian Customs; wisely considering,
that since he designed an Expedition, which would carry him far from thence, it
was better to settle affairs in his His Methods to preserve his new Conquests.
absence, by a mixture of their Constitutions, and mutual Society with Good
will, than by Compulsion. In order to this he chose out 30000 Boys, whom he
allowed Masters to teach them the Greek Tongue, and to train them up to Arms in
the Macedonian Discipline. As for his Marriage of Roxana, whose good Mein and
Beauty had charmed him, at a Drinking entertainment, where he first happened to
see her, it was perfectly the effect of Love, nor did it appear to be at all
prejudicial to his Interest, as things stood with him at that time: For it put
the conquered People in heart, and made them confide in him, and love him more
than ever, when they saw how continent he was, and that he forbore the only
Woman he was ever in Love with, till he could enjoy her in a lawful and
honorable way.

When he perceived that among his chief The politic use he made of his
Favorites.
Friends and Favorites, Hephestion most approved all that he did, and complied
with, and imitated him in his Habit, while Craterus continued strict in the
observation of the Customs and Fashions of his own Country: He made the best
use of them both, employing the first in all Transactions with the Persians,
and the latter when he had to do with the Greeks, or Macedonians. It is true,
he loved Hephestion best as a Favorite, because he loved Alexander, but then he
esteemed and honored Craterus most as a Friend, because he loved the King.
Wherefore these two great Men bore one another secret Grudges, and often
clash'd and quarreled so far, that once in India they drew upon one another,
and were going to it in good earnest, with their Friends on each side to second
them, till Alexander came up to them, and publicly reproved Hephestion,
calling him Fool and Madman, not to be sensible that without his Favor he was
but a Cipher. He chid Craterus also in private very severely, and then causing
them both to come into his presence, he reconciled them, at the same time
swearing by Jupiter Ammon, and the rest of the Gods, that he loved them two
above all other Men; but if ever he perceivd them fall out again, he would be
sure to put both of them to death, at least the Aggressor: After which, they
neither ever did, or said any thing, so much as in jest to offend one another.

None had more Authority among the Macedonians The Fall of Philotas, occasioned
by his Arrogance.
than Philotas, the Son of Parmenio: for besides that he was valiant, and able
to endure any Fatigue of War, he was also next to Alexander himself the most
munificent, and the greatest lover of his Friends; one of whom asking him for
some Money, he commanded his Steward to give it him; and when he told him, he
had not wherewith, Have you not Plate then, said he, and Clothes of mine? turn
them into Money rather than let my Friend go without. But he was so very proud
and insolent by reason of his Wealth, and so over-nice about his Person and
Diet, more than became a private Man, that he awkwardly and unseemingly
affected the Air and Character of Greatness, without the Civility and obliging
Temper which ought to accompany it, and so gained nothing but Envy and ill will
to that degree, that Parmenio would sometimes tell him, My Son, the meaner the
better. For he had long before been complained of, and accused to Alexander;
particularly when Darius was overthrown in Cilicia, and an immense Booty was
taken at Damascus, amongst the rest of the prisoners who were brought into the
Camp, there was one Antigone of Pydna, a very handsome Woman, who fell to
Philotas his share. The young Man one day in his Cups, like an arrogant,
bragging Soldier, told his Mistress, That all the great Actions were performed
by him and his Father, the Glory and Benefit of which, he said, together with
the Title of King, that Stripling Alexander reaped and enjoyed by their means.
She could not hold, but discovered what he had said, to He is betrayed by his
Mistress Antigone.
one of her Acquaintance, and he, as is usual in such Cases, ^o another, till
at last it came to the King. When Alexander had heard what she had to say, he
commanded her to continue her Intrigue with Philotas, and give him an account
from time to time of all that should fall from him to this purpose: Who being,
through Inadvertency, caught in this Snare, sometimes to gratify his Passion,
and sometimes his Vainglory, blurted out many foolish, indiscreet Speeches
against the King in Antigones hearing, of which, though Alexander was informed,
and convinced by strong Evidence, yet he would take no notice of it at present,
whether it was, that he confided in Parmenio's Affection and Loyalty, or that
he apprehended their Authority and Interest in the Army. About this time one
Dimnus, a Macedonian Dimnus his Conspiracy.
Native of Chalaestra, conspired against Alexander's Life, and communicated his
Design to a Youth whom he loved, named Nicomachus, inviting him to be of the
Party. But he not relishing the thing, revealed it to his Brother Balinus, who
immediately addressed himself to Philotas, requiring him to introduce them both
to Alexander, to whom they had something of great moment to impart* which very
nearly concerned him. But he, for what Reason is uncertain, went not with them,
pretending the King was taken up with Affairs of more importance: And when they
had urged him a second time, and were still slighted by him, they applied
themselves to another; by whose means being admitted into Alexander's presence,
they first laid open Dimnus his Conspiracy, and then represented Philotas his
Negligence, who had taken so little notice of their repeated Solicitations;
which extremely exasperated Alexander, especially when sending to apprehend
Dimnus* he understood that he defended himself and chose rather to be Slain
than Taken; for by his Death he thought he was deprived of the means of making
a full discovery of the Plot. As soon as his Displeasure against Philotas began
to appear, presently The Falsehood of Court Friends.
all his old Enemies showed themselves, and said openly, The King was too
easily imposed on, to imagine; that one so inconsiderable as Dimnus the
Calaestrian, should of his own head undertake such an Enterprise; that in all
likelihood he was but subservient to the Design, an Instrument that was moved
by some greater Spring; that those ought to be most strictly examined about the
Matter, whose Interest it was so much to conceal it. When they had once filled
the King's Head with these and the like Speeches and Suspicions, they loaded
Philotas daily with innumerable Crimes, till at last they prevailed to have him
seized, and put to the Question, which was done in the presence of the
principal Officers, Alexander himself being placed behind the Tapestry, to
understand what passed. Where when he heard in what a miserable Tone, and with
what abject Submissions Philotas applied himself to Hephestion, he broke out in
this manner: Art thou so mean-Spirited and Effeminate, Philotas, said he, and
yet engage The Death of Philotas, and his Father Parmenio.
thy self in so desperate a Design? After his Death, he presently sent into
Media, to take off Parmenio his Father, who had done brave Service under
Philip, and was the only Man, especially of his old Friends and Counselors,
who had encouraged Alexander to invade Asia. Of three Sons which he had in the
Army, he had already lost two, and now was himself put to Death with the third.
These Actions rendered Alexander formidable to many of his Friends, and chiefly
to Antipater, who thereupon to strengthen himself, sent Ambassadors privately
to the Etolians, to treat an Alliance with them; for they stood in fear of
Alexander, because they had destroyed the Oeniades, of which, when he was
informed, he said, The Children of the Oeniades need not Revenge their Father's
Quarrel, for he would himself take care to punish the Etolians.

Not long after this happened the deplorable The Murder of Clitus.
End of Clitus, which to those who barely hear the matter of Fact, may seem
more inhumane than that of Philotas. But if we take the Story with its
Circumstance of Time, and weigh the Cause, we shall find the King did it not on
purpose, but by evil Chance, and that his Passion and Drunkenness were the
occasion of Clitus his Misfortune, which came to pass in this manner. The King
had a Present of Grecian Fruit brought him from the Seacoast, which was so
very fresh and fair, that he was surpised at it, and called Clitus to him to
see it, and to give him a share of it. Clitus was then Sacrificing, but he
immediately left off, and came, followed by three Sheep, on whom the
Drink Offering had been already poured, in order to Sacrifice them; which when
Alexander saw, he told his Diviners, Aristander, and Cleomantis the
Lacedemonian, of it, and asked them what it meant: Who assuring him, it was an
ill Omen, he commanded them in all haste to offer Sacrifices for Clitus his
Safety, forasmuch as three days before he himself had seen a strange Vision in
his Sleep* of Clitus all in Mourning, sitting by Parmenio's Sons who were Dead.
Clitus however staid not to finish his Devotions, but came strait to Supper
with the King, who the same day had Sacrificed to Castor and Pollux. And when
they had drank pretty hard, some of the Company fell a Singing the Verses of
one Pranichus, or as others say, of Pierion, which were made upon those
Captains who had been lately worsted by the Barbarians, on purpose to disgrace
and turn them to Ridicule; which so offended the grave, ancient Men, that they
reproved both the Author, and the Singer of the Verses, though Alexander and
the Blades about him were mightily pleased to hear them, and encouraged them to
go on: Till at last, Clitus, who had drank too much, and was besides of a
froward, and willful Temper, was so nettled that he could hold no longer,
saying, It was not well done to expose the Macedonians so, before the
Barbarians, and their Enemies, since though it was their Unhappiness to be
overcome, yet they were much better Men than those who laughed at them. To
this, Alexander replied, That sure Clitus spoke so tenderly of Cowardice, when
he called it Misfortune, only to excuse himself. At which, Clitus starting up,
This Cowardice, as you are pleased to term it, said he to him, saved your Life,
though you pretend to be sprung from the Gods, when you were running away from
Spithridates his Sword; and it is by the expense of Macedonian Princes cannot
bear bold Truths.
Blood, and by these Wounds, that you are now raised to such a height, as to
despise and disown your Father Philip, and adopt your self the Son of Jupiter
Ammon. Thou base Fellow, said Alexander, who was now thoroughly exasperated,
do thou think to utter these Things every where of me, and stir up the
Macedonians to Sedition, and not be punished for it? We are sufficiently
punished already, answered Clitus, if this be the Recompense of our Toyls; and
esteem those happiest, who have not lived to see their Countrymen Ignominiously
scourged with Median Rods, and forced to sue to the Persians to have access to
their King. While he talked thus at Random, and those who were by, thwarted and
reproved him, the old Men endeavored all they could to compose the Business.
Alexander in the mean time turning about to Xenodochus the Cardian, and
Artemius the Colophenian, asked them, If they were not of Opinion, that the
rest of the Graecians, in comparison with the Macedonians, behaved themselves
like so many DemiGods among wild Beasts? But Clitus for all this would not give
over, desiring Alexander to speak out, if he had any thing more to say, or else
why did he invite Men, who were Freeborn, and used to speak their Minds openly
without restraint, to sup with him? He had better live, and converse with
Barbarians, and Conquered Slaves, who would not scruple to adore his Persian
Girdle, and his white Tunick. Which words so provoked Alexander, that, not able
to suppress his Anger any longer, he threw one of the Apples that lay upon the
Table at him, and hit him, and then looked about for his Sword. But
Aristophanes, one of his Lifeguard, had hid that out of the way, and others
came about him, and besought him to stay his Fury, but in vain; for breaking
from them, he called out aloud to his Guards in the Macedonian Language, which
was a certain sign of some great Disturbance toward, and commanded a Trumpeter
to sound, giving him a Box on the Ear for not presently obeying him; though
afterward the same Man was commended for disobeying an Order, which would have
put the whole Army into Tumult and Confusion. Clitus continued still in the
same quarrelsome Humor, till his Friends with much ado forced him out of the
Room; but he came in again immediately at another door, very irreverently and
confidently singing this Verse out of Euripides his Andromache.

Alas! in Greece how ill Affairs are governed?
Then Alexander snatching a Spear from one of the Soldiers, met Clitus as he
was putting by the Curtain that hung before the Door, and ran him through the
Body, so that he fell down, and after a few Sighs and Groans died. At sight of
which the King's Anger presently vanishing, he came perfectly to himself, and
when he saw his Friends about him all in a profound Silence, he pulled the
Spear out of the dead Body, and would have thrust it into his own Throat, if
the Guards had not held his Hands, and by main Force carried him away into his
Chamber, where all that night and the next day Alexander repents of Clitus his
Death.
he wept bitterly, till being quite spent with crying and lamenting, he lay as
it were speechless, only fetching deep Sighs. His Friends apprehending some
dangerous consequence of his Silence, broke into the Room; but he took no
notice of what any Both Priests
of them said, till Aristander putting him in mind of the Vision he had seen
concerning Clitus, and the Prodigy that followed, as if all had come to pass by
an unavoidable Fatality, he then seemed to moderate his Grief. They also
brought Calisthenes the Philosopher, who was nearly related to Aristotle, and
Anaxarchus of Abdera, to him. Calisthenes endeavored to alleviate his Sorrow
with moral Discourses, and gentle Insinuations without offending him. But
Anaxarchus, who was always singular in his Method of Philosophy, and was
thought to slight those of his own Time, as soon as he came in, cried out
aloud, Is this the Alexander whom the whole World looks upon with such
Admiration? See how meanly he weeps like an abject Captive, for fear of the
Censure and Reproach of Men, to whom he himself ought to be a Law, and measure
of Equity, if he would make a right use of his Victories, as Supreme Lord and
Governor of all, and not be a Slave to a vain, idle Opinion. Do not And
Philosophers ca^ flatter basly.
you know, said he, that Jupiter is represented to have Justice and Law on each
Hand of him? the meaning of which is, that all the Actions of a Prince are
lawful and just. With these and the like Speeches, Anax(...) ^^deed allayed the
King's Grief, but (...) corrupted his Manners, rendering him more dissolute and
violent than he was before. Nor did he fail by these means to insinuate himself
into his Favor, and to make Calisthenes his Conversation, which otherwise
because of his Austerity was not very acceptable, more uneasy and disagreeable
to him.

It happened that these two Philosophers meeting at an Entertainment, where the
Company discoursed of the Seasons of the Year, and the Temperature of the Air;
Calisthenes joined with their Opinion, who held, that those Countries were
colder, and the Winter sharper there than in Greece; which Anaxarchus would by
no means allow of, but contradicted with great Obstinacy. Sure, said
Calisthenes to him, Callisthenes his true Jest upon Anaxarchus.
you must needs confess this Country to be colder than Greece, for there you
had but one threadbare Cloak to keep out the coldest Winter, and here you have
three good warm Mantles one over another. This piece of Raillery not only
exceedingly exasperated Anaxarchus, but likewise piqu'd the other Pretenders to
Learning, and the crowd of Flatterers, who could not endure to see him so
beloved and followed by the Youth, and no less esteemed by the ancient Men for
his good Life, his Modesty, Gravity, and being contented with his Condition.
All which confirmed what he gave out of his Design in this Voyage to Alexander,
that it was only to get his Countrymen recalled from Banishment, and to
re-Build and re-People Abdera, where he was Born. Besides the Envy which his
great Reputation raised, he also by his own Deportment gave those who wished
him ill, opportunity to do him* Mischief. For when he was invited to public
Entertainments, he would mosttimes refuse to come, or if he were present at
any, he put a constraint upon the Company by his Moroseness and Silence,
seeming to disapprove of every thing they did or said; which made Alexander say
this of him:

That vain pretense to Wisdom I detest,
Where a Man's blind to his own Interest.
Being with many more invited to Sup with the King, he was Commanded to make an
Oration extempore, whilst they were Drinking, in praise of the Macedonians; and
he did it with such a Torrent of Eloquence, that all who heard it exceedingly
applauded him, and threw their Garlands upon him, only Alexander told him out
of Euripides,

I wonder not that you have spoke so well,
It Is easy on good Subjects to excel.
Therefore, said he, if you will show the force of your Eloquence, tell my
Macedonians their Faults, and dispraise them, that by hearing their Errors,
they may learn to be better for the future. Callisthenes presently obeyed him,
retracting all he had said before, and inveighing against the Macedonians with
great freedom, added, That Philip thrived, and grew Powerful, chiefly by the
Discord of the Graecians, applying this Verse to him:

Wherever Feuds, and civil Discords reign,
There the worst Men most Reputation gain.
Which so disobliged the Macedonians, that he was odious to them ever after.
And Alexander said, That instead of his Eloquence, he had only made his
Ill Will appear in what he had spoken. Hermippus assures us, That one Stroebus,
a Servant whom Callisthenes kept to Read to him, gave this account of these
Passages afterward to Aristotle; and that when he perceived the King grew more
and more averse to him, he muttered this Verse out of Homer two or three times
to himself, as he was going away:

Death seized at last on Great Patroclus too,
Though he in Virtue far surmounted you.
Not without Reason therefore did Aristotle The Character and Fall of
Callisthenes.
give this Character of Calisthenes, That he was indeed an excellent Orator,
but had no Judgment at all. For though we grant, it was resolutely and
Philosophically done of him, not to Worship the King, though by talking
publicly against that which the best and gravest of the Macedonians only
repined at in secret, he put a stop to their base Adoration, and delivered the
Graecians and Alexander himself from a great deal of Infamy: Yet in the close
he ruined himself by it, because he went too roughly to work, as if he would
have forced the King to that which he should have effected by Reason and
Persuasion. Chares of Mytilene writes, That at a Banquet, Alexander Who offends
Alexander by his Morosen^ss, and refusing to adore him.
after he had drank, reached the Cup to one of his Friends, who receiving it,
rose up toward the Domestic Altar, and when he had drank, first adored, and
then kissed Alexander, and afterward sat down at the Table with the rest.
Which they all did one after another, till it came to Calisthenes his Turn, who
taking the Cup, drank it off, when the King, who was engaged in Discourse with
Hephestion, did not mind him, and then offered to kiss him. But Demetrius,
sirnam'd Pheidon, interposed, saying, Sir, by no means let him kiss you, for he
only of us all had refused to adore you; upon which the King declined it, and
all the Concern Calisthenes showed, was, that he said aloud, Then I go away
with a Kiss less than the rest. The Displeasure he incurred by this Action, was
improved by Hephestion's affirming, That he had broke his word to him, in not
paying the King the same Veneration that others did, as he had faithfully
promised to do. And to finish his Disgrace, Lysimachus and Agnon added, That
this Sophister went about priding himself, as if he stood in the Gap against
Arbitrary Power; that the young Men all ran after him, and honored him, as the
only Man among so many Thousands, who had the Courage to preserve his Liberty.
Therefore when Hermolaus his Conspiracy came to be discovered, the Crimes which
his Enemies laid to his charge were the more easily believed, particularly that
when the young Man asked him, What he should do to be the most illustrious
Person on Earth; he told him, The readiest way was to kill him who was already
so. And that to incite him to commit the Fact, he bid him not be awed by his
Golden Bed, but remember Alexander was a Man equally infirm and vulnerable as
another. However, none of Hermolaus his Accomplices, in the extremity of their
Torments, made any mention of Calisthenes his being engaged in the Design. Nay
Alexander himself, in the Letters which he wrote soon after to Craterus,
Attalus, and Alcetas, tells them, That those who were put to the Rack,
confessed they had entered into the Conspiracy wholly of themselves, without
any others being privy to, or guilty of it. But yet afterward in a Letter to
Antipater, he accuses Callisthenes of the same Crime. The young Men, says he,
were stoned to Death by the Macedonians, but for the Sophister, meaning
Calisthenes, I will take care to punish him, with them too who sent him to me,
and who harbor those in their Cities who conspire against my Life. By which
Expressions it appears, he had no Aristotle himself suspected.
very good opinion of Aristotle, by whom Callisthenes was educated upon the
score of his Relation to him, being his Niece Hero's Son. His Death is diversely
related: some say, he was hanged by Alexander's Command; others, that he died
of Sickness in Prison; but Chares writes, he was kept in Chains seven Months
after he was apprehended, on purpose that he might be proceeded against in full
Council, when Aristotle should be present; and that being grown very fat, he
died of the lousy Disease, about the time that Alexander was wounded in the
Country of the Malli Oxydracae; all which came to pass afterward.

For to go on in order: Demaratus of Corinth, This Passage was mentioned before.
a Man of a great Age, was at this time very desirous to give the King a Visit,
and when he had seen him, said, He pitied the Misfortune of those Graecians,
who were so unhappy to die before they had beheld Alexander seated on the
Throne of Darius. But he did not long enjoy the Effects of his Bounty to him,
any otherwise, than that soon after falling sick and dying, he had a
Magnificent Funeral, and the Army raised him a Monument of Earth fourscore
Cubits high, and of a vast Circumference. His Ashes were conveyed in a very
rich Chariot drawn by four Horses to the Seaside.

Alexander now intent upon his Expedition Alexander burns all his own and his
Soldiers Baggage.
into India, took notice that his Soldiers were so charged with Booty, that it
hindered their marching; to remedy which, at break of day, as soon as the
Baggage-Waggons were laden, first he set Fire to his own, and his Friends, and
then commanded those to be burnt, which belonged to the rest of the Army. An
Action which in the deliberation of it seemed more dangerous and difficult than
it proved in the Execution, with which few were dissatisfied; for most of them,
as if they had been inspired with Zeal from above, with loud Outcries and
Warlike Shoutings, furnished one another with what was absolutely necessary,
and burnt and destroyed all that was superfluous, the sight of which redoubled
Alexander's Vigor and Alacrity.

He was now grown very severe and inexorable He grows cruel.
in punishing those who committed any Fault; for he put Menander, one of his
Friends to Death, for deserting a Fortress, where he had placed him in Garrison,
and shot Orsodates, one of the Barbarians who revolted from him, with his own
Hand. At this time a Sheep happened to yean a Lamb, with the perfect shape and
color of a Tiara An odd Portent.
upon the Head, and Testicles on each side; which Portent Alexander so
detested, that he immediately caused his Babylonian Priests, whom he usually
carried about with him for such purposes to purify him, and withal told his
Friends, he was not so much concerned for his own sake, as for theirs, out of
an apprehension that God, after his Death, might suffer his Empire to fall into
the hands of some degenerate, impotent Person. But this Fear was soon removed,
by a wonderful thing that happened not long after, and was thought to presage
better; for Proxenus, a Macedonian, who was the chief of those who looked to
the King's Furniture, as he was breaking Ground near the River Oxus, to set up
the Royal Pavilion, discovered a Spring of gross oily Liquor, A Spring of Oil
found.
which, after the top was taken off, ran pure, clear Oil, without any
difference either of Taste or Smell, having exactly the same smoothness and
brightness, and that too in a Country where no Olives grew. The Water indeed of
the River Oxus is said to be so fat, that it leaves a Gloss on their Skins who
bathe themselves in it. Whatever might be the Cause, certain it is, that
Alexander was wonderfully pleased with it, as appears by his Letters to
Antipater, where he tells him, He looked upon it as one of the most
considerable Presages that God had ever favored him with. The Diviners told
him, It signified his Expedition would be glorious in the Event, but very
painful, and attended with many difficulties; for Oil, they said, was bestowed
on Mankind by God as a Refreshment of their Labors. Nor did they judge amiss;
for he exposed himself to many Hazards in the Battles which he fought, and
received very deep and dangerous Wounds, besides the mouldring away of his
Army, through the unwholesomness of the Air, and for want of necessary
Provisions. But he still applied himself to surmount Fortune, and whatever
opposed him, by his Resolution and Virtue, and thought nothing impossible to
Sisimethres his Rock taken.
a daring, valiant Man. Therefore when he Besieged Sisimethres, who held an
inaccessible, impregnable Rock against him, and his Soldiers began to despair
of taking it, he asked Oxyartes, Whether Sisimethres, was a Man of Courage? who
assuring him, he was the greatest Coward alive; then you tell me, said he, that
the Place is our own, if the Commander of it be a Poltron: And, in a little
time he so terrified Sisimethres, that he took it without any difficulty. At an
Attack which he made upon such another steep place, with some of his Macedonian
Soldiers, he called to one whose Name was Alexander, and told him, It would
become him to behave himself gallantly for his Names sake. The Youth fought
bravely, and was killed in the Action, at which he was sensibly afflicted.
Another time seeing his Men march slowly and unwillingly to the Siege of a
Place called Nysa, because of a deep River between them and the Town, he
advanced before them, and standing upon the Bank, What a miserable Man, said
he, am I, that I have not learned to Swim? and then was hardly dissuaded from
endeavoring to pass it upon his Shield. Here, after the Aslault was over, the
Ambassadors, who from several Towns which he had blocked up, came to submit to
him, and make their Peace, were surpised to find him rough, and armed at all
Points, without any Pomp or ceremony about him; and when his Attendants brought
him a Cushion, he made the eldest of them, named Acuphis, take it, and sit down
upon it. The old Man charm,d with his Magnanimity and Courtesy Alexander's
Discourse with Acuphis.
asked him, What his Countrymen should do to merit his Friendship? I would
have them, said Alexander, choose you to govern them, and send 100 of the most
considerable and most worthy men among them to remain with me as Hostages: I
shall govern them with more ease Sir, replied Acuphis, smiling, if I send you
so many of the worst, rather than the best of my Subjects.

The Extent of King Taxiles his Dominions in India was thought to be as large
as Egypt, abounding in good Pastures, and above all in excellent Fruits. The
King himself had the reputation of a wise Man, and at his first Interview with
Alexander, he spoke to him in these terms: To what purpose, said he, with
Taxiles.
should we make War upon one another, if the design of your coming into these
Parts, be not to r^b us of our Water, or our necessary Food, which are the only
things that wise men are indispensably obliged to fight for? As for other
Riches and Possessions, as they are accounted in the eye of the World, if I am
better provided of them than you, I am ready to let you share with in^; but if
Fortune has been more liberal to you than me, I will not decline your Favors,
but accept them with all the grateful Acknowledgements that are due to a
Benefactor. This Discourse pleased Alexander so much, that embracing him, Do
you think, said he to him, your fair Speeches, and affable Behavior, will
bring you off in this Interview without fighting? No, you shall not escape so,
for as to matter of Benefits, I will contend with you so far, that how obliging
soever you are, you shall not have the better of me. Then receiving some
Presents from him, he returned him others of greater value, and to complete his
Bounty, gave him in Money ready coined 1000 Talents; at which his old Friends
His Friends r^pine at his Bounty to Strangers.
were exceedingly displeased, but it gained him the hearts of many of the
Barbarians. The valiantest of the Indians now taking Pay of several Cities,
undertook to defend them, and did it so bravely, that they put Alexander to a
great deal of Trouble and Fatigue, till having made an agreement with him, upon
the surrender of a Place, he fell upon them as they were marching away, and put
them all to the Sword. This one breach of his word was a perpetual Blemish to
him, tho on all other occasions he had managed his Wars with that Justice and
Honor that became a King. Nor was he less incommoded by the Indian
Philosophers, who inveighed bitterly against those Princes who were of his
Party, and solicited the free Cities ^^ oppose him, therefore he took several
of them, and caused them to be hanged.

(...) (...) in his own Letters has given us ^^ account of his War with Porus:
He says, His War with Porus
The (...) A^mies were separated by the River Hydaspes, on whose opposite Bank
Porus continually kept his Elephants in order of Bat^^l* with their Heads
toward their Enemies to guard the Passage. That he was forced every day to
make great noises in his Camp, and give his Men constant Alarms, to acc^sto^
them by degrees not to be afraid of the Barbarians. That one cold, dark Night
he passed the River above the Place where the Enemy lay, into a little Island,
with part of his Foot and the best of his Horse. Here there fell so violent a
Shower of Rain, accompanied with Lightning, and fier'y Whirlwinds, that seeing
some of his Men burnt and destroyed by the Lightning, he qui^ted the Island,
and made over to the other side. The Hydaspes, now after the Storm was so swolo
and grown so rapid, as to make a Breach in the Bank, at which part of the River
ran out, so that when he came to land, he found very ill standing for his Men,
the place being extreme slippery and He passes the Hydaspes.
undermined and ready to be blown up by the Currents on both sides. In this
Dist^ess On^^^crit^^ tells us He was heard to say, Oh ye Athenians: to what
incredible Dangers do I my self to merit your Praises? But to proceed,
Alexander says here, they left their little Boats, and passed the Bteach in
their Armor up to the Breast in Water; and then he advanced with his Horse
about 20 Furlongs before his Foot, concluding, that if the Enemy charged him
with their Cavalry, he should be too strong for them' if with their Foot, his
own would come up time enough to his Assistance. Nor did he judge amiss; for
being charged by 1000 Horse, and 60 armed Chariots, which advanced before their
main Body, he took all the Chariots, and killed 400 Horse upon the Place. Porus
by this smart Execution, guessing that Alexander himself was gotten over, came
on with his whoie Army, except a Party which he left behind, to hold the rest
of the Macedonians in Play, if they should attempt to pass the River. But
Alexander apprehending the multitude of the Enemy, and to avoid the shock of
their Elephants, would not join Battle with them in Front, but dividing his
Forces, attacked their left Wing himself, and commanded Coenus to fall upon
the right, which was performed with good Success. For by this means both Wings
being broken, they retired when they found themselves And defeats Porus.
pressed close to their Elephants, and then rallying, renewed the Fight so
obstinately, that it was three hours after Noon before they were entirely
defeated. This description of the Battle the Conqueror has left us in his own
Epistles.

Almost all Writers agree, That Porus Porus his Stature.
was four Cubits and an half high, and that when he was upon his Elephant,
which was of the largest size, his Stature and Bulk were so answerable, that he
appeared to be but proportionably mounted. This Elephant, during the whole
Battle, gave many proofs of wonderful Understanding, and a particular Care of
the King, whom as long as he was strong, and in condition to Fight, he defended
with great Courage, repelling those who set upon him; and as soon as he
perceived him ready to faint, by His Elephant.
reason of his many Wounds, and multitude of Darts that were thrown at him, to
prevent his falling off, he softly kneeled down, and then with his Probosois
gently drew every Dart out of his Body. When Porus was taken Prisoner, and
Alexander asked him, How he expected to be used? he answered, As a King ought
to be; for that expression, he said, when the same Question was put to him a
second time, comprehended every thing. And Alexander indeed dealt very
generously with him, for he not only suffered him to govern his own Kingdom as
his Lieutenant, but added to it a large Province of some free People whom he
had newly subdued, which consisted of 15 several Nations, and contained 5000
considerable Towns, besides abundance of Villages. Another Government, three
times as large as this, he bestowed on Philip, one of his Friends.

Some time after the Battle with Porus, most Authors agree, that Bucephalus
died under cure of his Wounds, or as Onesicritus says, of Fatigue and Age,
being 30 years old. Alexander was no less concerned at his Death, than if he
had lost an old Companion, or an intimate Friend, and built a City, which he
named Bucephalia, in memory A City built in memory of Bucephalus.
of him, on the Bank of the River Hydaspes, and another in remembrance of his
beloved favorite Dog Peritas, as Sotion assures us, he was informed by Potamon
of Lesbos.

But this last Combat with Porus took off the edge of the Macedonians Courage,
and hindered their farther progress in India. For having with much ado defeated
him, who brought but 20000 Foot, and 2000 Horse into the Field, they thought
they had Reason to oppose Alexander's Design of obliging The Macedonians refuse
to pass the Ganges.
them to pass the Ganges too, which they were told was Four Miles over, and an
hundred fathom deep, and the Banks on the farther side covered with multitudes
of Enemies. For they had intelligence that the Kings of the Gandaritans and
Persians expected them there with 80000 Horse, 200000 Foot, 8000 armed
Chariots, and 6000 fighting Elephants. Nor was this a false, vain Report,
spread on purpose to discourage them; for Androcottus, who not long after
reigned in those Parts, made a Present of 500 Elephants at once to Seleucus,
and with an Army of 600000 Men subdued all India. Alexander at first was so
Which grieves Alexander.
grieved and enraged at his Men's Reluctance, that he shut himself up in his
Tent, and in a desponding manner threw himself upon the Ground, declaring, if
they would not pass the Ganges, he owed them no thanks for any thing they had
hitherto done, and that to retreat now, was plainly to confess himself
vanquished. But at last, the prudent Remonstrances and Persuasions of his
Friends, who informed him truly how the Case stood, and the Tears and
Lamentations of his Soldiers, who in a suppliant manner crowded about the
entrance of his Tent, prevailed with him to think of returning. Yet before he
decamped, he would needs impose upon Posterity, by leaving What care he takes
to deceive Posterity.
behind some fictitious Monuments of his Glory; such as Arms of an
extraordinary bigness, and Mangers for Horses, with Bits of Bridles above the
usual size, which he set up, and distributed in several Places. He erected
Altars also to the Gods, which the Kings of the Persians even in our Time
highly reverence, and often pass the River to sacrifice upon them after the
Grecian manner. Androcottus, then a Youth, saw Alexander there, and has often
afterward been heard to say, That he missed but little of making himself
Master of those Countries; their King, who then reigned, was so hated and
despised for the viciousness of his Life, and the meanness of his Extraction.

Alexander decamping from hence, had a His Voyage down the Rivers.
mind to see the Ocean; to which purpose he caused a great many Vessels with
Oars, and small Boats to be built, in which he fell gently down the Rivers,
making Merry as he went, and ordered it so, that his Navigation was neither
unprofitable nor unactive; for by making several Descents, he took in the
Fortified Towns, and consequently the Country on both sides. But His Danger
among the Mallians.
at the Siege of a City of the Mallians, who are the valiantest People of
India, he ran great danger of his Life; for having beaten off the Defendants
with showers of Arrows, he was the first Man that mounted the Wall by a scaling
Ladder, which, as soon as he was up, broke, and left him almost alone exposed
to the Darts, which the Barbarians threw at him in great numbers from below. In
this Distress, turning himself as well as he could, he leaped down in the midst
of his Enemies, and had the good Fortune to light upon his Feet. The brightness
and clattering of his Armor, when he came to the Ground, made the Barbarians
think, they saw Rays of Light, or some Phantom playing before his Body, which
frighted them so at first, that they ran away and dispersed themselves, till
seeing him seconded but by two of his Guards, they fell upon him Hand to Hand,
and though he defended himself very bravely, wounded him through his Armor
with their Swords and Spears. One who stood farther off, drew a Bow with such
just Strength, that the Arrow finding its way through his Cuirass, stuck in his
Ribs under the Breast. This stroke was so violent, that it made him give back,
and set one Knee to the Ground, which as soon as he that Shot him perceived, he
came up to him with his drawn Scimitar, thinking to dispatch him, and had done
it, if Peucestes and Limnaeus had not interposed, who were both wounded,
Limnaeus mortally, but Peucestes stood his Ground, while Alexander killed the
Barbarian. But this did not free him from danger; for besides many other
Wounds, at last he received so weighty He is desperately wounded.
a stroke of a Club upon his Neck, that he was forced to lean his Body against
the Wall, yet still looked undauntedly upon the Enemy. When he was reduced to
this Extremity, the Macedonians breaking in to his Assistance, very opportunely
took him up, just as he was fainting away, having lost all sense of what was
done near him, and conveyed him to his Tent, upon which it was presently
reported all over the Camp that he was dead. But when they had with great
difficulty and pains sawed out the Shaft of the Arrow which was of Wood, and so
with much ado got off his Cuirass, they came to cut the Head of it, which was
three fingers broad, and four long, and stuck fast in the Bone. During the
Operation, he was taken with almost mortal Swoonings, but when it was out, he
came to himself again. Yet though all Danger was past, he continued very weak,
and confined himself a great while to a regular Diet, and the method of his
Cure, till one day hearing the Macedonians were so desirous to see him, that
they were ready to mutiny, he put on his Robe, and when he had showed himself
to them, and sacrificed to the Gods, without more delay he went on Board again,
and as he coasted along, subdued a great deal of the Country on both sides, and
took in several considerable Cities.

In this Voyage he took 10 of the Indian His Questions to the Indian
Philosophers, with their Answers.
Philosophers Prisoners, who had been most active in persuading Sabbas to
Rebel, and besides that had done the Macedonians abundance of Mischief. These
Men, because they go stark naked, are called Gymnosophists, and are reputed to
be extremely sharp and succinct in their Answers to whatsoever is propounded to
them, which he made trial of, by putting difficult Questions to them, withal
letting them know, that those whose Answers were not pertinent, should be put
to death, of which he made the eldest of them Judge. The first being asked,
Which he thought most numerous, the Dead or the Living? Answered, The Living,
because those who are dead, are not at all. Of the second, he desired to know,
Whether the Sea or Land produced the largest Beasts? Who told him, The Land,
for the Sea was but a part of it. His Question to the third was, Which was the
craftiest Animal? That, said he, which Mankind is not yet acquainted with. He
bid the fourth tell him, What Arguments he used to Sabbas to persuade him to
Revolt? No other, said he, than that he should live with Honor, or perish in
the Attempt. Of the fifth he asked, Which was eldest, Night or Day? The
Philosopher replied, Day was eldest, by one day at least: but perceiving
Alexander not well satisfied with that Account, he added, That he ought not to
wonder, if strange Questions had as odd Answers made to th^^* Then he went on,
and inquired of the next, What a Man should do to be exceedingly b^lov'd? He
must be very powerful, said he, without making himself too much feared. The
Answer of the seventh to his Question, How a Man might be a God? was, If he
could do that which was impossible for Men to perform. The eighth told him,
Life was stronger than Death, because it supported so many Miseries. And the
last being asked, How long he thought it decent for a Man to live? said, Till
Death appeared more desirable than Life. Then Alexander turned to him whom he
had made Judge, and commanded him to give Sentence. All that I can determine,
said he, is, that they have every one answered worse than another. No, that
they have not, said the King, but however thou shall die first, because thou
judge so ill. You will not deal so with me, Sir, replied the Gymnosophist, if
you intend to be as goad as your word, which was, that he should die first who
answered worst, which I have not done, for you have not asked me any Question.
In conclusion, he gave them Presents, and dismissed them. But to those who were
in greatest Reputation among them, and lived a private, quiet Life, he sent
Onesicritus, one of Diogenes the Cynicks Disciples, desiring them to come to
him. Calanus very arrogantly and rudely commanded The Arrogance of Calanus, a
Gymnosophist.
him to strip himself and hear what he said, naked, otherwise he would not
speak a word to him, though he came from Jupiter himself. But Dandamis received
him with more Civility, and hearing him discourse of Socrates, Pythagoras, and
Diogenes, told him, He thought them Men of great Parts, and to have erred in
nothing so much, as in having too great Respect for the Laws and Constitutions
of their Country. Others say, he only adk'd him the Reason, Why Alexander
undertook so long a Voyage to come into those Parts? Taxiles persuaded Calanus
to wait upon Alexander; his proper Name was Sphines, but because he was wont to
say Cale, which in the IndianTongue signifies, God save you, when he saluted
those he met with any where, the Graecians called him Calanus. He is said to
have shown Alexander an instructive Emblem of Government, which was this: He
His Emblem of Government.
threw a dry shrivel'd Hide upon the Ground, and trod upon the edge of it; the
Skin when it was pressed in one place, still rose up in another, wheresoever he
trod round about it, till he set his foot in the middle, which made all the
Parts lie even and quiet. The meaning of this Similitude was, That he ought to
reside most in the middle and Heart of his Empire, and not spend too much time
on the Borders of it.

His Voyage down the Rivers took up seven Months time, and when he came to the
Sea, he sailed to an Island which he called Scillustis, others Psiltucis, where
going Alexander's Prayer when he came to the Sea.
ashore, he sacrificed, and made what Observations he could of the Nature of
the Sea, and the Seacoast. Then having besought the Gods, that no other Man
might ever go beyond the Bounds of this Expedition, he ordered his Fleet, of
which he made Nearchus Admiral, and Onesicritas Pilot, to sail round about,
leaving India on the right hand, and returned himself by Land through the
Country of the Ori^es, where he was reduced to great Straits for want of
Provisions, and lost abundance of Men, so that of an Army of 120000 Foot, and
in ^000 Horse, What loss he sustained in his march back
he searce brought back above a fourth part out of India, they were so
diminished by Diseases, ill Diet, and the scorching Heats, but most by Famine.
For then March was through an uncultivated Country, whose Inhabitants fared
hardly, and had none but a little ill Breed of Sheep, whose Flesh was rank and
unsavory, by reason of their continual feeding upon Seafish.

After 60 days March he came into Gedrosia, where he found great Plenty of all
things, which the neighboring Kings, and Governors of Provinces, hearing of
his Approach, had taken care to provide. From hence when he had reinforced his
Army, he His rietous Progress through Carmania.
continued his March through Carmania, feasting all the way for seven days
together. He, with his most intimate Friends, Banquetted and Revell'd night and
day, upon a Stage, erected on a lofty conspicuous Scaffold, which with a slow,
majestic Pace, was drawn by 8 Horses. This was followed by a great many
Chariots, whereof some were covered with Tapistry of Purple, and other Colors,
and some with green Boughs, which were supplied with fresh as they withered,
and in them the rest of his Friends and Commanders drinking, and crowned with
Garlands and Flowers. Here was now no Target or Helmet, no Spear to be seen,
instead of Armor, the Soldiers handled nothing but Cups and Goblets, and
drinking Bowls of Thericles his Make, which they dipped into larger Vessels,
and drank Healths to one another, some sitting close to it, others as they went
along. All Places resounded with Music of Pipes and Flutes, with Odes and
Songs, and Women dancing, as in the Rites of Bacchus; for this disorderly
wandering March, besides the drinking part of it, was accompanied with all the
Looseness and Insolence of Bacchanals, as much as if the God himself had been
there to countenance and carry on the Debauch. As soon as he came to the Royal
Palace of Gedrosia, he again refreshed and feasted his Army, and one day after
he had drank pretty hard, (it is said) went to see a Prize of Dancing contended
for, in which A Prize of Dancing.
his Minion Bagoas, who defrayed the expense of it, having the Victory, crossed
the Theater in his Dancing Habit, and sat down close by him, which so pleased
the Macedonians, that they made loud Acclamations Won by Bagoas.
for him to kiss Bagoas, and never left clapping their Hands and shouting, till
Alexander took him about the Neck, and kissed him.

Here his Admiral Nearchus came to him, Alexander's great Preparations for a
Voyage to Sea.
and delighted him so with the Relation of his Voyage, that he resolved himself
to sail out of the mouth of Euphrates with a great Fleet, with which he
designed to go round by Arabia and Lybia, and so by Hercules his Pillars into
the Mediteranean; in order to which, he directed all sorts of Vessels to be
built at Thapsacus, and made great provision every where of Seamen and Pilots.
But it fell out unluckily for this Enterprise, that the Report of the
Difficulties he went through in his Indian Expedition, the danger of his Person
among the Mallians, the loss of a considerable part of his Forces, and the
general opinion, that he would hardly return in safety, occasioned the Revolt
of many conquered Nations, and made the Commanders and Lieurenants in several
Provinces, presume to oppress the People with extreme Injustice, Avarice, and
Insolence. So that there seemed to be an universal fluctuation and disposition
to Change. Olympias and Cleopatra raised a How hindered.
Faction against Antipater, and shared his Government between them, Olympias
seizing upon Epirus and Cleopatra upon Macedonia. When Alexander was told of
it, he said, His Mother had made the best choice, for the Macedonians would
never endure to be ruled by a Woman. Upon this he dispatched Nearchus again to
the Fleet, intending to carry the War into the maritime Provinces, and as he
marched that way himself, he punished those Commanders who had not behaved
themselves well, particularly Oxyartes, one of Abulites his Sons, whom he
killed with his own hand, thrusting him through the Body with his Spear. And
when Abulites, instead of the necessary Provisions which he ought to have
furnished, brought him 3000 Talents in Money ready coined, he ordered it to be
thrown to his Horses, who not meddling with it; What good does this Provision
do me? said he to him, and sent him away to Prison.

When he came into Persia, he distributed A Custom of the Kings of Persia.
Money among the Women, as their own Kings were wont to do, who, as often as
they came thither, gave every one of them a Crown, for which Reason some of
them came but seldom, and Ochus was so sordidly Covetous, that to avoid this
Expense, he never visited Persia all his Life, though it was his Native Country.

Then finding Cyrus his Sepulcher opened, Cyrus's Sepulcher rifled.
and rifled, he put Polymachus, who did it to death, though he was a Man of
Quality, and born at Pella in Macedonia: and after he had read the Inscription,
he caused it to be cut again below the old one in Greek Characters; the words
were these: O Man, whosoever thou art, and from whencesoever thou come, (for
I know thou will come) I am Cyrus, the Founder of the Persian Empire; do not
envy me this little quantity of Earth which covers my Body. The reading of this
sensibly Alexander moved at the Inscription.
touched Alexander, causing him to reflect seriously upon the incertainty and
mutability of humane Affairs. At the same time Calanus having been a little
while troubled with a Looseness, requested he might have a Funeral Pile erected,
to which he came on Horseback, and after he had said some Prayers, and
sprinkled himself, and cut off some of his Hair to throw into the Fire, as was
usual on such occasions; before he ascended it, he embraced and took leave of
the Macedonians who stood by, desiring them to pass that day in Mirth and good
Fellowship with their King, whom in a little time, he said, he doubted not but
to see again at Babylon. Having thus said, he lay down, and covering himself,
he stirred Calanus barus himself.
not when the Fire came near him, but continued still in the same posture as at
first, and so sacrificed himself, as it was the ancient Custom of the
Philosophers in those Countries to do. The same thing was done long after by
another Indian, who came with Caesar to Athens, where they still show you the
Indians Monument. At his return from the Funeral Pile, Alexander invited a
great many of his Friends and principal Officers to Supper, A drinking Match.
and proposed a Drinking-match, in which the Victor should be crowned.
Promachus drank 18 Quarts of Wine, and won the Prize which weighed a talent,
from them all; but he survived his Victory but three days, and was followed, as
Chares says, by 41 more, who died of the same Debauch, by reason of the severe
Frost which happened at that time.

At Susa he married Darius his Daughter Alexander marries Statira, Darius his
Daughter.
Statira, and celebrated the Nuptials of his Friends, bestowing the noblest of
the Persian Ladies upon the worthiest of them, withal making a very splendid
Entertainment for all the Macedonians who were married before; at which, it is
reported, there were no less than 9000 Guests, to each of whom he gave a golden
Cup, for them to use in their Libations of Wine to the Honor of the Gods. Not
to mention other Instances of his wonderful Magnificence, he paid the Debts of
He pays the Debts of his Army.
his whole Army, which amounted to 9870 Talents. But there was one Antigenes,
who had lost one of his Eyes, though he owed nothing, got his Name set down in
the List of those who were in Debt, and bringing one who pretended to be his
Creditor, to the Banquiers Table, received the Money. But when the Cheat was
found out, the King was so incensed at it, that he banished him from Court, and
took away his Command though he was an excellent Soldier and a Man of great
Courage. For when he was but a Youth, and served under Philip at the Siege of
Perinthus, where he was wounded in the Eye by an Arrow shot out of an Engine,
he would neither let the Arrow be taken out, or be persuaded to quit the Field,
till he had bravely repulsed the Enemy, and forced them to retire into the
Town. A Man of his Spirit was not able to support such a Disgrace with any
Patience, and certainly Grief and Despair would have made him kill himself, but
that the King Forgives Antigenes his Fraud.
fearing it, not only pardoned him, but let him also enjoy the Benefit of his
Deceit.

The 30000 Boys which he left behind him His Seminary of Soldiers.
to be taught the use of their Arms* and military Discipline, were so improved
at his return both in Strength and Beauty, and performed their Exercises with
such Dexterity, and wonderful Agility, that he was extremely pleased with them;
which grieved the Macedonians, and made them fear he would have the less Esteem
for them. And when he was sending away the infirm and maimed Soldiers The
Macedonians discontented.
to Sea, they said, they were unjustly and infamously dealt with, after they
were worn out in his service upon all occasions, now to be turned away with
Disgrace, and sent home into their Country among their Friends and Relations,
in a worse condition than when they came out; therefore they desired him one
and all to dismiss them, and to account his Macedonians useless, now he was so
well furnished with dancing Boys, with whom, if he pleased, he might go on, and
conquer the World. These Speeches so enraged Alexander, that after he had given
them a great deal of reproachful Language in his Passion, he drove them away,
and committed the Watch to Persians, out of whom He takes and Guard of Persians.
he chose his Lifeguard, and Sergeants at Arms. When the Macedonians saw him
attended by these Men, and themselves excluded, and shamefully disgraced, their
high Spirits fell, and upon Discourse with one another, they found that
Jealousy and Rage had almost distracted them. But at last coming to themselves
again, they went without their Arms, almost naked, crying and weeping to offer
themselves at his Tent, and desired him to deal with them as their Baseness and
Ingratitude deserved. However this would not prevail; for though his Anger was
already something mollified, yet he would not admit them into his presence, nor
would they stir from thence, but continued two days and nights before his Tent,
bewailing themselves, and imploring him The Macedonians submit.
their Sovereign Lord to have compassion on them. But the third day he came out
to them, and seeing them very humble and penitent, he wept himself a great
while, and after a gentle Reproof spoke kindly to them, and dismissed those who
were unserviceable, The old and disabled dismisi'd with (...)
with magnificent Rewards: And this Recommendation to Antipater; that when they
came into Greece, at all public Shows, and in the Theaters, they should sit on
the best and foremost Seats, crowned with Chaplets of Flowers, and ordered the
Children of those who had lost their Lives in his Service, to have their
Fathers Pay continued to them.

When he came to Ecbatana in Media, and had dispatched his most urgent Affairs,
he fell to divert himself again with Spectacles, and public Entertainments, to
carry on which, he had a Supply of 3000 Actors newly (...)
arrived out of Greece. But they were soon interrupted by Hephestion's falling
sick of a Fever, in which being a young Man, and a Soldier too, he could not
confine himself to so exact a Diet as was necessary; for whilst his Physician
Glaucus was gone to the Theater, he eat a boiled Cock for his Dinner, and drank
a large draught of Wine, upon Hephestion's Death.
which he grew worse, and died in a few days. At this Misfortune Alexander was
so beyond all Reason transported, that to express his Sorrow, he presently
ordered the Manes and Tails of all his Horses and Mules to be cut, and threw
down the Battlements of the neighboring Cities. The poor Physician he
Crucified, and forbad playing on the Flute, or any other Musical Instrument, in
the Camp a great while, till the Oracle of Jupiter Ammon enjoined him to Honor
Hephestion, and sacrifice to him as to an Horo. Then seeking to alleviate his
Grief in War, he set out as if he were to go a Man-hunting; for he fell upon
the Cussaeans, and put A whole Nation sacrificed to him.
the whole Nation to the Sword, not sparing so much as the Children. This was
called a Sacrifice to Hephaestion's Ghost. In his Sepulcher and Monument, and
the adorning of them, he intended to bestow 10000 Talents; and that the
excellency of the Artist, and the curiosity of the Workmanship, might go beyond
the expense it self, he rather chose to employ Stasicrates than any other,
because he always promised something very bold and lofty, and magnificent in
his Designs. For in Discourse before he had told him, That of all the Mountains
Stasicrates his extravagant design of a Statue.
he knew, that of Athos in Thrace, was the most capable of being contrived to
represent the Shape and Lineaments of a Man. That if he pleased to command him,
he would make it the noblest and most durable Statue in the World, which in its
left Hand should hold a City of 10000 Inhabitants, and out of its right should
pour a copious River into the Sea. Though Alexander declined this Project, yet
now he spent a great deal of time with Workmen, to invent and contrive others
far more absurd and expensive.

As he was upon his way to Babylon, Nearchus, Alexander war^'d not to go to
Babylon.
who had sailed back out of the Ocean, by the mouth of the River Euphrates,
came to tell him, he had met with some Chaldaean Diviners who warned him not to
go thither. But Alexander slighted this Advertisement, and went on, and when he
came near the Walls of the Place, he saw a great many Crows fighting with one
another, whereof some fell down just by him. After this being privately
informed, that Apollodorus the Governor of Babylon had sacrificed to know what
would become of him; he sent for Pythagoras the Soothsayer, who not denying the
thing, he asked him in what condition he found the Victim? and when he told
him, The Liver was defective in its Lobe; a great Presage indeed, said
Alexander! However, he offered Pythagoras no Injury, but was much troubled that
he had neglected Nearchus his Advice, and therefore staid a great while without
the Town, removing his Tent from Place to Place, and sailing up and down the
Eupharates. Besides this, he was disturbed by Several Presages of his Death*
many other Prodigies. A tame Ass fell upon the biggest and handsomest Lion
that he kept, and kicked him to Death. And one day undressing himself to be
anointed, and to play at Ball, when he was putting his Clothes on again, the
young Men who played with him, perceived a Man clad in the King's Robes, with
the Diadem upon his Head, sitting silently upon his Throne. They asked him, Who
he was? To which he gave no Answer a good while, till at last with much ado
coming to himself, he told them, His Name was Dyonisius; that he was of
Messenia; that for some Crime, whereof he was accused, he was brought thither
from the Seaside, and had been kept long in Prison; that Serapis appeared to
him, had freed him from his Chains, conducted him to that Place, and commanded
him to put on the King's Robe and Diadem, and to sit where they found him, and
to say nothing. Alexander when he heard this, by the direction of his
Soothsayers put the Fellow to Death, but from thenceforth desponded, and grew
diffident of the Protection and Assistance of the Alexander distrusts the Gods.
Gods, and besides very suspicious of his Friends. His greatest apprehension
was of Antipater and his Sons, one of whom, Iollas was his chief Cup Bearer,
the other named Cassander, was newly arrived out of Greece, and being bred up
in the freedom of his Country, the first time he saw some of the Barbarians
adore the King, could not forbear laughing at it aloud; which so incensed
Alexander, that he took him by the Hair with both Hands, and violently knocked
his Head against the Wall. Another time Cassander would have said something in
defense of Antipater, to those who accused him; but Alexander interrupting him,
What is it you say? Do you think People, if they had received no Injury, would
come such a Journey only to calumniate your Father? To which when Cassander
replied, That this very thing His Usage of Cassander
was a great evidence of their Calumny; Alexander smiled and said, Those were
some of Aristotle's Sophisms, which would serve equally on both sides; and
added, That both he and his Father should be severely punished, if they were
found guilty of the least Injustice toward those who complained; which, upon
the whole, made such a deep impression of Fear in Cassander's Mind, that long
after when he was King of Macedonia, and Master of Greece, as he was walking up
and down at Delphos, and looking on the Statues, at the sight of that of
Alexander, he was suddenly struck with Horror, and shook all over, his Eyes
rolled, A wonderful Effect of Fear.
his Head grew dizzy, and he had much ado to recover himself.

When once Alexander gave way to Superstition, his Mind grew so disturbed and
timorous, that if the least unusual or extraordinary thing happened, he would
needs have it thought a Prodigy, or a Presage, and his Court was thronged with
Diviners and Priests, whose business was to Sacrifice, and Purify, and foretell
the future. So horrid a thing is Incredulity, and Contempt of the Gods on one
hand, and no less horrid The nature of Superstition.
is Superstition on the other, which like Water, always creeping on the Ground,
invades us with servile Fear and Folly, as it did now Alexander himself. But
upon some Answers which were brought him from the Oracle concerning Hephestion,
he had laid aside his Sorrow, and fell again to Sacrificing and Drinking; and
having given Nearchus a splendid Entertainment, after he had bathed, as was his
Custom, just as he was going to Bed, at Medius his Request he went to Supper
with him. Here he drank all that night and the next day to such excess, as put
him into a Fever, which Alexander falls sick after a great Debauck.
seized him, not as some write, after he had drank of Hercules his Bowl, nor
was he taken with a sudden pain in his Back, as if he had been struck with a
Lance: for these are the Inventions of some Authors, who thought it became them
to make the conclusion of so great an Action as tragical and moving as they
could. Aristobulus tells us, That in the rage of his Fever, and a violent
Thirst, he took a draught of Wine, upon which he fell into a Frenzy, and died
the 30th of June. But in his Journals we have this account of his Sickness,
That the 18th of June, by reason of his Illness, he lay in his Bathing-room,
where it first seized him; that when he had bathed, he removed into his
Chamber, and spent that A Diary of his Sickness.
day at Dice with Medius. In the evening having washed and sacrificed, he eat
with a good Stomach, and had his Fever that night. The 20th after the usual
Sacrifices and Bathing, he kept his Bed in the same Room, and heard Nearchus
his Relation of He hears his Admiral relate his Voyage.
his Voyage, and the Observations he had made of the Ocean. The 21st he passed
in the same manner, his Fever still increasing, and had a very ill night of it.
The next day he had a severe Fit, and caused himself to be removed, and his Bed
set by the great Bath, and then discoursed with his principal Officers about
filling up the vacant Charges in the Army, with Men of tried Valor and
Experience. The 24th being much worse, he was carried out to assist at the
Sacrifices, and gave order that his chief Commanders should wait within the
Court, whilst the Colonels and Captains kept Watch without doors. The 25th he
was removed to his Palace on the other side the River, where he slept a little,
but his Fever abated not, and when the Commanders came into his Chamber, he was
speechless, and continued so the following day. Then the Macedonians supposing
he was dead, came with great Clamours to the Gates, and menaced his Friends so,
that The Macedonians admitted to see him.
they were forced to admit them, and let them all pass through unarmed along by
his Bedside. The same day Python and Seleucus being sent to Serapis his
Temple, to enquire if they should bring Alexander thither, were answered by the
God, that they should not remove him. The 28th in the Evening Hie Death.
he Died. This Account is most of it word for word, as it is written in his own
Diary.

At that time no body had any suspicion of his being poisoned; but upon a
discovery made six years after, they say, Olympias put many to death, and threw
abroad the Not without suspicion of Poison.
Ashes of Jollas, who was dead, as if he had given it him. But those who affirm
Aristotle counseled Antipater to do it, and that by his means wholly the
Poison was brought, produce one Agnothemis for their Author, who heard King
Antigonus speak of it, and tell us, that the Poison was Water, deadly cold as
Ice, distilling from a Rock in the Territory of Nonacris, which they gathered
like a thin Dew, and kept in an Asses Hoof; for it was so very cold and
penetrating, that no other Vessel would hold it. However most are of opinion
that all this is false, no slight evidence of which is, that during the
Dissentions among the Commanders, which lasted a great many days, the Body
continued clear and fresh, without any sign of Which is contradicted.
such Taint or Corruption, though it lay neglected in a close, sultry place.

Roxana who was now with Child, and upon that account much honored by the
Macedonians, being Jealous of Statira, sent for her by a Counterfeit Letter, as
if Alexander had been still alive; and when she had her in her power, killed
her and her Sister, and The Death of Statira.
threw their Bodies into a Well, which they filled up with Earth, not with out
the Privity and assistance of Perdiccas, who at this time, under the shelter of
Arideus, whom he carried about with him for his own security, bore the greatest
sway of any, Arideus himself, who was Philip's Son, by one Philinna, an obscure
common Strumpet, was a man of weak Parts, by reason of his Indisposition of
Body, which was neither natural to him, nor contracted of it self; for in his
Childhood he was quickwitted, and hopeful enough, but caused by Drinks that
Olympias gave him, which not only impaired his Health, but weakened his
Understanding.

C. JULIUS CAESAR.
depiction of Julius Caesar (...)

THE LIFE OF Julius Caesar.
Englished from the Greek by Mr. Smalridge of Christchurch.
AS soon as Sylla had made himself Master of Rome, he resolved to force
Cornelia, Daughter to Cinna (the late Usurper) from Caesar her Husband; but
being unable to compass it either by hopes or fears, confiscated her Dowry. The
ground of Sylla's hatred to Caesar, was the alliance between him and Marius;
for Marius the elder Married Julia, Caesar's Aunt by the Fathers side, and had
by her the younger Marius, who consequently was Caesar's Cousin-german. And tho
at first in the heat of his Tyranny and hurry of business, Caesar was
overlook't by Sylla, he could not lie still, but presented himself to the
People as a Candidate for the Priesthood, tho he was yet under Age. But Sylla,
by his underhand management, so carried it, that Caesar fell short of his
pretensions; and in a Consult of Friends to take him off, when it was urged by
some, that it was not worth his while to contrive the death of a Boy, he
answered, that They knew little, who did not see many Marius's in that Boy.
Caesar, upon notice of this lay concealed a long while among the Sabines, often
changing his Quarters; till one night, as he was removing his Lodging for his
health, he fell into the hands of Sylla's Soldiers, who were searching those
parts in order to apprehend such as had absconded. Coesar by a Bribe of two
Talents prevailed with Cornelius their Captain to let him go, and was no sooner
dismissed, but he put to Sea, and made for Bithynia. After a short stay there
with Nicomedes the King, in his passage back he was taken near the Island
Pharmacusa by some Pirates, who at that time with some great Ships, and a vast
number of smaller Vessels, infested those Seas. When at first they demanded of
him 20 Talents for his Ransom, he smiled at them as not understanding the value
of their Prisoner, and voluntarily engaged to give 'em 50. He presently
dispatched those about him to several places to raise the Money, till at last
he was left among those bloody Villains, the Cilicians, only with one Friend,
and two Attendants; Yet he made so little of them, that when he had a mind to
sleep, he would send to them, and command silence. For 38 days, with all the
freedom in the World he used Exercise, and Gamed amongst them, as if they had
not been his Keepers, but his Guards. He wrote Verses, and Speeches, and made
them his Auditors, and those who did not admire them, he called to their faces
illiterate and barbarous, and would often in raillery threaten to hang 'em.
They were mightily taken with this, and attributed his free way of talking to a
kind of Simplicity, and Juvenile Humor. As soon as his Ransom was come from
Miletus, he paid it, and was discharged; soon after which he Manned some Ships
at the Milesian Port, and went in pursuit of the Pirates, whom he surprised as
they were yet at an Anchor, and took most of them. Their Money he made Prize,
and the Men he secured in Prison at Pergamus, and presently applied himself to
Junius, who was then Governor of Asia, to whose Office it belonged, as Praetor,
to determine their Punishment. Junius having his Eye upon the Money, (for the
Sum was considerable) said, He would think at his leisure what to do with the
Prisoners; upon which Caesar took his leave of him, and went for Pergamus,
where he ordered the Pirates to be brought forth and Crucified; the Punishment
he had often threatened them with, whilst he was in their hands, and they
little dreamed he was in earnest. In the mean time Sylla's Power declined, and
Caesar's Friends advised him to return to Rome; but he went off to Rhodes, and
entered himself in the School of Apollonius, Molon's Son, a famous Rhetorician,
one who had the reputation of a welltempered Man, and had Cicero at that time
for his Auditor. Caesar was by Nature excellently framed for a perfect
Statesman, and Orator, and took such pains to improve his Genius this way,
that without dispute he might challenge the second place amongst Men of that
Character. More he did not aim at, as choosing to be first rather amongst Men of
Arms and Power; and therefore never rose up to that pitch of Eloquence to which
Nature would have carried him, being diverted by those Expeditions and Designs,
which at length gained him the Empire. And he himself in his Answer to Cicero's
Panegyric on Cato, desires his Reader not to compare the plain Discourse of a
Soldier with the Harangues of an Orator, who had not only fine Parts, but had
employed his whole Life in this one Study. When he was returned to Rome, he
accused Dolabella of Maladministration, and many Cities of Greece came in to
attest it. Dolabella was acquitted, and Caesar in return of the favors he had
received from the Grecians, assisted them in their prosecution of P. Antonius
for Bribery before M. Lucullus Praetor of Macedonia. In this Cause he prevailed
so far, that Antonius was forced to appeal to the Tribunes at Rome, alleging,
that in Greece he could not have fair play against Grecians. In his Pleadings
at Rome he appeared with all the graces of an Orator, and gained much upon the
Affections of the People by the easiness of his Address, and Conversation, in
which he was accomplished beyond what could be expected from his Age. His
Interest grew still insensibly greater by the open House he kept, and the
magnificence of his Entertainments; His Enemies slighted the growth of it at
first, in expectation it would soon fail, when his Money was gone; whilst in
the mean time it was firmly settled among the Common People. When his Power at
last was fixed, and not to be controlled, and now openly tended to the altering
of the whole Constitution, they were aware too late, that there is no beginning
so mean, which continued application will not make considerable, and that small
dangers by being despised at first become at last irresistible. Cicero was the
first who had any suspicions of his designs upon the Government, and (as a good
Pilot is apprehensive of a Storm when the Sea is calmest) saw the designing
temper of the Man through this disguise of good humor, and affability, and said
upon it; In all his other actions and intrigues I plainly discover the air of a
Tyrant; but when I see his Hair lie in so exact order, and him so often
adjusting it, I cannot imagine it should enter into such a Man's thoughts to
subvert the Roman State. But of this more hereafter.

The first Proof he had of the People's good Will to him, was, when he carried
a Tribuneship in the Army against C. Popilius. A second and clearer instance of
their Favor appeared upon his making an Excellent Oration in praise of his
Aunt Julia, Wife to Marius, publicly in the Forum: at whose Funeral he was so
bold as to bring forth the Images of Marius, which no Body durst produce since
the Government came into Sylla's Hands, Marius's Party having from that time
been declared Enemies to the State. For when some upon this Occasion exclaimed
against Caesar, the People on the other side were taken with the Action, and
received it with very great applause; admiring him for having revived in the
City those Honors of Marius, which for so long time had been buried. It had
always been the custom at Rome to make Funeral Orations in praise of Ancient
Matrons, but there was no precedent of any upon young Women, till Caesar first
made one upon the death of his own Wife. This also procured him Favor, and by
this show of Affection he got the Hearts of the People, who looked upon him as a
Man of great Tenderness and extraordinary good Nature. When he had buried his
Wife, he went Quaestor into Spain under one Votus, who was Praetor, whom he
Honored ever after, and made his Son Quaestor, when he himself came to be
Praetor. When he was out of that Office, he Married Pompeja his third Wife,
having then a Daughter by Cornelia his first Wife, whom he afterward matched
to Pompey the Great. He was so profuse in his Expenses, that before he had any
public Employment, he was in debt 1300 Talents. Some thought that by being at
so great a charge to be popular, he changed a real and solid good, for what was
short, and uncertain: But in truth he purchased what was of the greatest value
at an inconsiderable rate. When he was made Surveyor of the Appian Way, he
disburst besides the public Moneys a great Sum out of his private Purse; and
when he was Aedile, he provided such a number of Gladiators, that he
entertained the People with 320 several Duels; and by his great liberality and
magnificence in Shows, in Pomps, and public Feastings, obscured the glory of
all who went before him, and gained so much upon the People, that every one was
ready to invent new Offices, and new Honors, for him, in return to his
Munificence. There being two Factions in the City, one for Sylla, which was
very powerful, the other for Marius which was then broken, and in a very low
condition, he was desirous to raise it again, and to bring it over to his
Interest: To this end, whilst he was in the height of his Repute with the
People, for the magnificent Shows he gave as Aedile, he ordered Images, and
Statues, with Ensigns of Victory, to be carried privately in the night, and
placed in the Capitol. Next morning, when some saw them glittering with Gold,
and curiously wrought with Inscriptions of Marius's Exploits over the
Cimbrians, they were surprised at the boldness of him who had set them up, nor
was it difficult to guess who it was. The fame of this soon spread, and brought
together a great Concourse of People: Some presently cried out that Caesar had
designs upon the Government, because he had revived those Honors which were
buried by the Laws, and Decrees of the Senate; that this was done to sound the
temper of the People, whom he had prepared before, and to try whether they were
tame enough to bear his Humor, and would quietly give way to his Innovations.
However Marius's Party took courage; and it is incredible what a multitude of
them appeared on a sudden, and came shouting into the Capitol. Many of them
when they saw Marius's Picture cried for Joy, and Caesar was highly extolled as
the only Person, who was a Relation worthy of Marius. Upon this the Senate met,
and Catulus Luctatius, one of the most eminent Romans of that time, stood up,
and accused Caesar, closing his Speech with this remarkable saying; Caesar no
longer undermines the Government, but openly plants his Batteries against it.
But when Caesar had made an Apology for himself, and satisfied the Senate, his
Admirers were very much animated, and advised him not to depart from his own
thoughts for any one, since he was likely to get the better of them all in a
little time, and to be the first Man in the State with the Peoples Consent. At
the same time Metellus the High Priest died; and Catulus, and Isauricus,
Persons of known Reputation, and who bore a great weight in the Senate, were
Competitors for the Office; yet Caesar would not give way to them, but
presented himself to the People as a Candidate against them. The several
Interests seeming very equal, Catulus, who because he had the most Honor to
lose, was the most apprehensive of the event, sent to Caesar to buy him off,
with Offers of a great Sum of Money: But he said, He would provide a larger Sum
then that to carry on the Competition. Upon the day of Election, as his Mother
conducted him out of doors with tears, he saluted her, and said; Well, Mother,
to day you will see me either High Priest, or Banished. When the Votes were taken,
after a great struggle, he carried it, and by that gave the Senate and Nobility
reason to fear he might now draw on the People to the greatest height of
Arrogance. Whereupon Piso and Catulus found fault with Cicero for letting
Caesar escape, when in the Conspiracy of Catiline he had given the Government
such advantage against him. For Catiline, who had designed not only to change
the present State of Affairs, but to subvert the whole Constitution, and
confound all, had himself escaped, by reason the Evidence was not full against
him, they having not yet gone to the bottom of his Design. But he had left
Lentulus and Cethegus in the City to supply his place in the Conspiracy*
Whether they had any secret Encouragement and Assistance from Caesar is
uncertain; This is certain, that they were fully convicted in the Senate, and
when Cicero the Consul ask^ the several Opinions of the Senators, how they
would have them punished, all who spoke before Caesar sentenced them to Death,
but Caesar stood up, and made a set Speech, wherein he told them, That he
thought it without Precedent, and not just to take away the Lives of two
Persons of their Birth and Quality, before they were fairly tried, unless there
was an absolute necessity for it; but that if they were kept confined in any
Town which Cicero himself should choose till Catiline was defeated, then the
Senate might in peace and at their leisure determine, what was best to be done.
This Sentence of his carried so much appearance of Humanity, and he gave it so
good an air by his Speech, that not only those who spoke after him closed with
it, but even they who had before given a contrary Opinion, now came over to
his; till it came about to Catulus, and Cato's turn to speak. They warmly
opposed it; and Cato insinuated in his Speech some suspicions of Caesar
himself, and pressed the matter so far, that the Criminals were given up to
suffer Execution. As Caesar was going out of the Senate, many of the young Men
who guarded Cicero, ran in with their naked Swords to assault him. But Curio,
as it is said, threw his Gown over him, and conveyed him out, and Cicero
himself gave a Sign to his Guards, who watch't the motions of his Eye, not to
kill him, either for fear of the People, or because he thought the Murder
unjust and illegal. If this be true, I wonder how Tully came to omit it in the
Book which he wrote concerning his Consulship. Cicero was blamed afterward for
not making use of so good an opportunity against Caesar out of fear of the
Populace, who mightily favored him. Sometime after, when Caesar went into the
Senate to clear himself of some Suspicions he lay under, he found great
clamours raised against him, whereupon the Senate sitting longer then ordinary,
the People went up to the House in a Tumult, and beset it, demanding Caesar,
and requiring them to dismiss him. Upon this Cato much fearing a Mutiny from
the poorer sort, who are always the Incendiaries in a Rebellion, and who now
placed all their hopes in Caesar, persuaded the Senate to give them a Monthly
allowance of Corn, which put the Commonwealth to the extraordinary charge of
55000 Crowns a year. This Expedient removed all fears for the present, and very
much weakened Caesar's power, who at that time was just going to be made
Praetor, and consequently would have been more formidable by his Office. But
there was no disturbance during his Praetorship, only what misfortune he met
with in his own Domestic Affairs. P. Clodius was a Person well descended,
eminent both for his Riches and Eloquence, but in Lewdness and Impudence
exceeded the very worst of those, who were remarkable for their Debauchery. He
was in love with Pompeja, Caesar's Wife, and she had no aversion to him. But
there were strict Guards on her Apartment, and Caesar's Mother Aurclia, who was
a discreet Woman, being continually about her, made an Interview very
dangerous, and difficult. The Romans have a Goddess which they call Bona, the
same which the Greeks call Gynaecea: The Phrygians, who claim a peculiar Title
to her, say she was Mother to Midas; The Romans pretend she was one of the
Dryads, and Married to Faunus: The Grecians affirm that she is that Mother of
Bacchus, whose Name is not to be uttered: For this Reason the Women who
celebrate her Festival, cover the Tents with Vine-branches, and according to
the Fable, a Consecrated Dragon is placed by the Goddess. It is not lawful for
a Man to be bye, nor so much as in the House, whilst the Sacred Rites are
celebrated; but the Women by themselves perform such Holy Offices, as are much
a^kin to those used in the Solemnities sacred to Orpheus* When the Festival
comes, the Husband, who is always either Consul or Praetor, and with him every
Male-creature quits the House; the Wife then taking it under her care, sets it
in order, and there are great Solemnities all night, attended with Dancing, and
several sorts of Music. As Pompeja was at that time celebrating this* Feast,
Clodius, who as yet had no Beard, and so thought to pass undiscovered, took
upon him the Habit and Disguise of a Singing-Woman, having the Air of a young
Girl, and so came thither. Finding the Doors open, he was without any stop
introduced by a young Maid, who was in the Intrigue. She presently ran to tell
Pompeja, but being from him a great while, he grew uneasy in waiting for her,
and therefore left his Post, and traversed the House from one Room to another,
still taking care to avoid the Lights* till at last Aurelia's Woman met him,
and invited him to such Recreations as the Women use among themselves. He
refused to comply; but the presently pulled him forward, and asked him, who he
was, and whence? Clodius told her he waited for Aura one of Pompeja's Maids,
and as he said so, betrayed himself by his Voice: Upon which the Woman
shrieking, ran into the Company where there were Lights, and cried out, she had
discovered a Man. The Women were all in a fright; Aurelia presently threw a
Vail over the Ceremonies, put a stop to the Orgia, and having ordered the Doors
to be shut, ran about with Lights to find Clodius, who was got into the Maids
Room, that he had come in with, and was seized there. The Women knew him, and
drove him out of Doors, and presently, tho it was yet night, went home to tell
their Husbands the Story. In the morning it was all about Town, what an impious
attempt Clodius had made, and all agreed he ought to be punished as an Offender
not only against those whom he had affronted, but also against the Public, and
the Gods. Upon which one of the Tribunes accused him of profaning the Holy
Rites, and some of the Principal Senators came in, and witnessed against him,
that besides many other horrible Crimes, he had been guilty of Incest with his
own Sister, who was Married to Lucullus. But the People set themselves against
the Interest of the Nobility, and defended Clodius; which was of great service
to him with the Judges, who were at a stand, being afraid to provoke the
Commonalty. Caesar presently dismissed Pompeja, but being summoned as a Witness
against Clodius, said, He had nothing to charge him with. This looking like a
Paradox, the Accusers asked him, why he parted with his Wife? Caesar replied,
Because I cannot bear that my Wife should be so much as suspected. Some say that
Caesar spoke this as his thoughts; Others* that he did it to gratify the
People, who were very earnest to save Clodius. So Clodius got clear of the
Indictment, most of the Judges giving their Opinions in confused terms, that
they might not be in danger from the People by condemning him, nor in disgrace
with the Nobility by acquitting him. Caesar in the mean time being out of his
Praetorship had got the Province of Spain, but was in ill Circumstances with
his Creditors, who, as he was going off, came upon him* and were very pressing
and importunate; which made him apply himself to Crassus, who was the richest
Man in Rome, but wanted Caesar's vigor and warmth to set up against Pompey.
Crassus took upon him to satisfy those Creditors, which were most uneasy to
him, and would not be put off any longer, and engaged himself to the value of
830 Talents: Upon which Caesar was now at Liberty to go to his Province. In his
Journey as he was crossing the Alps, and passing by a small Village of the
Barbarians, which was stocked with but few Inhabitants, and those wretchedly
poor, his Friends smiled, and asked him by way of raillery, If there were any
canvasing for Offices there; any contention which should be uppermost, or fewds
of great Men one against another? To which Caesar made answer very seriously:
For my part I had rather be the first Man among these Fellows, then the second
Man in Rome. It Is said that another time, being retired from Business, and
reading the History of Alexander, he sat a great while very thoughtful, and at
last burst out into Tears. His Friends were surprised, and asked him the Reason
of it. Do you think (said he) I have not just cause to weep, when I consider
that Alexander at my Age had conquered so many Nations, and I have all this
time done nothing, that is memorable? As soon as he came into Spain he was very
active, and in a few days had got together 10 new Companies of Foot to those 20
which were there before: With these he marched against the Gallaeci, and
Lusitani, conquered them, and advancing as far as the Ocean, subdued those
Nations, which never before had been subject to the Romans. Having managed his
Military Affairs with good success, he was equally happy in the Course of his
Civil Government; For he established a good Understanding amongst the several
States, and took especial Care to heal the differences betwixt Debtors and
Creditors. He ordered that the Creditor should receive two parts of the
Debtor's yearly Income, and that the other part should be managed by the Debtor
himself, till by this method the whole Debt was at last discharged. This
Conduct made him leave his Province with a fair reputation; being rich himself,
and having enriched his Soldiers, who therefore Complimented him with the Title
of Emperor. There is a Law among the Romans, that whoever desires the Honor of
a Triumph must stay without the City, and expect his Answer: And another, that
those who put in for the Consulship shall appear personally upon the place:
Caesar was come home at the very time of choosing Consuls, and being in a strait
between these two opposite Laws, sent to the Senate to desire, that since he
was obliged to be absent, he might appear for the Consulship by Proxy. Ca^o
being backed by the Law, at first opposed his request; afterward perceiving
that Caesar had prevailed with a great part of the Senate to comply with it, he
made it his business to gain time, and wasted an whole day in Harangues: Upon
which Caesar thought fit to let the Triumph fall, and pursued the Consulship.
He advances therefore presently, and enters upon a project which deceived all
but Cato. This was the reconciling of Crassus, and Pompey, who then bore the
greatest weight in Rome. There had been a quarrel between them, which he
quickly made up; and by this means strengthened himself by the united power of
both; and so privately undermined the Government, under the covert of an Action
which carried in it all the appearance of a good Office. For it was not the
quarrel betwixt Pompey, and Caesar, as most Men imagine, which was the
foundation of the Civil Wars, but their Union; they conspiring at first to
subvert the Aristocracy, and quarrelling at last betwixt themselves, which
should be Monarch. Cato, who often foretold what the Consequence of this
Alliance would be, had then the Character of a sullen and busy Man, and
afterward the Reputation of a wise, but unfortunate Counselor. Thus Caesar
being doubly guarded with the Interests of of Crassus, and Pompey, was promoted
to the Consulate, and declared publicly with Calfurnius Bibulus. When he was
fixed in his Office he brought in Bills, which would have been preferred with
better grace by a bold Tribune, then by a Consul; in which he proposed
transplantation of Colonies, and Division of Lands, on purpose to oblige the
Commonalty. The best and most Honorable of the Senators opposed it, upon
which, having long waited for such a colorable pretense, he openly protested
how unwillingly he was driven upon applications to the People, and how
necessary it was to make his Addresses that way, and to enter into their
Interests, since he had received so many Affronts, and found so much Sullenness
in the Senate. When he had said this, he asked Crassus and Pompey, who sat on
each side of him, Whether they consented to the Bills he had proposed? They
owned their Assent, upon which he desired them to assist him against those who
had threatened to oppose him with their Swords. They engaged they would, and
Pompey added farther, that he would not only meet their Swords with a Sword in
his Hand, but that he would bring a Buckler with him besides. This Speech the
Nobles resented, as neither suitable to his gravity, nor becoming the Reverence
due to that Assembly, but such as had an air of levity and rashness: But the
People were pleased with it. Caesar that he might work himself yet deeper into
the Interest of Pompey, gave him his Daughter Julia, who had before been
contracted to Servilius Caepio, and told Servilius he should have Pompey's
Daughter, who was not unprovided neither, but designed for Sylla's Son,
Faustus. A little time after Caesar Married Calpurnia the Daughter of Piso, and
made Piso Consul for the year following. Cato exclaimed loudly against this,
and protested with a great deal of warmth, that it was intolerable the
Government should be prostituted by these Marriages, and that they should
advance one another to the Commands of Armies, Provinces, and other great Posts
by the Interest of Women. Bibulus, Caesar's Colleague finding it was to no
purpose to oppose his Bills, but that he was in danger of being murdered in the
Forum, as also was Cato, confined himself to his House, and there wore out the
remaining part of his Consulship. Pompey when he was Married, presently filled
the Forum with Soldiers, and so secured to the People their new Laws, and to
Caesar the Government of all Gaul, both on this and the other side of the Alps,
together with Illyricum, and the command of 4 Legions for 5 years. Cato made
some attempts against these proceedings, but was sent to Prison by Caesar, who
suspected he would appeal to the Tribunes. But when Caesar saw that he went
along without speaking a word, and that not only the Nobility disrelish'd it,
but that the People also out of their Veneration to Cato's Virtue waited on
him, and by their silence and dejected looks expressed a great concern for him;
he himself privately desired one of the Tribunes to rescue Cato. As for the
other Senators, some few of them attended the House; the rest being disgusted,
absented themselves. Hence Considius, a very old Man, took occasion one day to
tell Caesar, that the Senators did not meet because they were afraid of his
Soldiers. Caesar presently asked him, Why don't you then out of the same fear
keep at home? To which the old Man replied that Age was his guard against Fear,
and that the small Remains of his Life were not worth much Caution. But the
foulest thing that was done in Caesar's Consulship was his promoting Clodius to
be Tribune, that very Clodius who had attempted to dishonor his Bed, and who
contrary to all Piety had polluted the holy and mysterious Vigils. Now he was
preferred in opposition to Cicero, nor did Caesar take the Field, till they had
overpowered Cicero, and drove him out of Italy.

Thus far have we deduced Caesar's Actions before the Wars of Gaul. After this
he seems to have begun his Course afresh, and to have entered upon a new, and
different Scene of Action. The Progress of those Battles which he afterward
fought, and those many Expeditions in which he subdued the Gauls, show him to
have been a Soldier and General not in the least inferior to any of those great
and admired Commanders, who have appeared at the Heads of Armies. For if we
compare him with the Fabii, the Metelli, the Scipio's, and with those who were
his Contemporaries, or not long before him, Sylla, Marius, the 2 Luculli, or
even Pompey himself, whose Glory reached the Heavens* we shall find Caesar's
Actions to have surpast them all. One he excelled on the account of the
difficulty of the places where he fought: Another in respect of the large
extent of Country which he overran: Some in the Number and Strength of the
Enemies, whom he conquered; and some in the roughness and barbarity of their
tempers, whom he polished and civilized: Others yet in his Humanity and
Clemency to those he overpowered, and others in his Gifts, and Gratuities to
his Soldiers: All in the Number of the Battles which he fought, and the
Enemies, which he killed. For he had not pursued the Wars in Gaul full 10
years, before he took by Storm 800 Towns, subdued 300 States; and of the 3
millions of Men, which made up the gross of those, with whom at several times
he engaged, he killed one, and took a second. He was so much Master of the good
Will, and hearty service of his Soldiers, that those who in other Expeditions
were but ordinary Men, carried with them a force not to be resisted or shaken,
when they went upon any danger, where Caesar's glory was concerned. Such an one
was Acilius, who in a Sea Fight before Marseilles had his Right Hand struck off
with a Sword, yet did not quit his Buckler out of his Left, but gaul'd the
Enemies in the Face with it, till he defeated them, and made himself Master of
the Vessel. Such another was Cassius Scaera, who in a Battle near Dyrrhachium
had one of his Eyes picked out with an Arrow, his Shoulder pierced with one
Javelin, and his Thigh with another, and having received 130 Darts upon his
Target called to the Enemy, as tho he would surrender himself; but when two of
them came up to him, he cut off the Shoulder of one with a Sword, and by a blow
over the Face forced the other to retire, whilst with the Assistance of his own
Party he made his escape. Again in Britain, when some of the chief Officers
were accidentally fallen into a Morass full of Water, and there assaulted by the
Enemy, a common Soldier, whilst Caesar stood and looked on, threw himself into
the midst of them, and after many and signal demonstrations of his Valor,
rescued the Officers, and beat off the Barbarians. At last he took the Water,
and with much ado, partly by swimming, partly by wading, passed it, but in the
passage lost his Shield. Caesar admired him, and went to meet him with joy and
acclamation; but the Soldier very much dejected, and in tears threw himself
down at Caesar's feet, and begged his pardon, that he had let go his Buckler.
Another time in Afric, Scipio having taken* a Ship of Caesar's, in which
Granius Petronius, one lately made Questor was passing, he gave the other
Passengers as free prize to his Soldiers, but thought fit to give the Questor
his Life: But he said, it was not usual for Caesar's Soldiers to take, but give
Life, and having said so, ^an upon his Sword and killed himself. These
Principles and Notions of Honor were inspired into them, and cherished in them
by C^sar himself, who by his liberal distribution of Money and Honors showed
them that he did not from the Wars heap up Wealth for his own Luxury, or the
gratifying his private Pleasure, but that he took care to settle a sure Fund
for the reward and encouragement of Valor, and that he looked upon himself
only rich in that, which he gave to deserving Soldiers. There was no danger to
which he did not willingly expose himself; no labor from which he pleaded an
exemption. His contempt of danger was not so much admired by his Soldiers,
because they knew how much he loved Honor: But his enduring so much hardship,
which he did to all appearance beyond his Natural Strength, very much
astonished them. For he was a spare Man, had a soft and white Skin, was
distempered in the Head, and subject to an Epilepsie, which it is said first
seized him at Corduba. But he did not make the weakness of his Constitution a
pretext for his Ease, but used War as the best Physic against his
Indispositions, whilst by unwearied Travels, course Diet, and frequent lodging
in the Fields, he strugled with his Diseases, and prepared his Body against all
attacks. He slept generally in his Chariots or Litters, and employed even his
Rest in pursuit of Action, In the day he was carried to Castles, Garrisons, or
Fortifications in his Chariot, one Servant riding with him, who used to write
down what he dictated as he went, and a Soldier attending behind, with his
Sword drawn. He drove so briskly, that when he first set out from Rome he
arrived at the River Rhoan within 8 days. He had been an expert Rider from his
Childhood, for it was usual with him to hold his hands close behind him, and to
put his Horse to full speed. But in the Wars he had improved himself so far as
to dictate Letters from on Horseback, and to direct himself to two, who took
Notes at the same time, or as Oppius says, to more. And it is thought that he
was the* first who found out a new way of Conversing with his Friends by
Ciphers, when either through multitude of business, or the large extent of the
City, he had not time for a Personal Conference about such Incidents as
required a sudden dispatch. How little nice he was in his Diet, we have this
remarkable Instance. When Valerius Leo invited him one night to Supper, and
Treated him with a Sparagus, upon which in stead of Oil he had poured a sweet
Ointment, Caesar fed on it without any disgust, and reprimanded his Friends for
finding fault with it. For it was enough, said he, not to eat, what you did not
like; but he who reflects on another Man's want of breeding, shows he wants it
as much himself. Another time upon the Road he was driven by a Storm into a
poor Man's Cottage, where he found but one Room, and that such as would afford
but a mean Reception to a single Person, and therefore he told his Companions,
that the most Honorable Places ought to be given to the best Men, but the most
Necessary Accommodations to the weakest; and accordingly ordered that Oppius,
who was infirm, should lodge within, whilst he and the rest slept under a Shed
at the Door. His first War in Gaul was against the Helvetians and Tigurines,
who having burnt 12 of their own Towns, and 400 Villages, would have marched
forward through that part of Gaul, which was under the Roman Province, as the
Cimbrians and Teutons formerly had done. Nor were they inferior to these in
Courage; and in Numbers they were equal, being in all Three hundred thousand,
of which One hundred and ninety thousand were fighting Men. Caesar did not
engage the Tigurines in Person, but Latienus, who was Commissioned by him,
routed them about the River Arar. But the Helvetians surpised Caesar, and
unexpectedly set upon him as he was conducting his Army to a Confederate Town.
However he managed it so as to get into a place well fortified, where when he
had mustered* and marshaled his Men, his Horse was brought to him; upon which
he said, When I have won the Battle, I Will use my Horse for the Chase, but at
present let us go against the Enemy: Accordingly he charged them furiously on
foot. After a long and sharp Engagement he drove the main Army out of the
Field, but found the toughest work at their Carriages and Ramparts, where not
only the Men stood, and fought, but the Women also and Children defended
themselves, till they were cut to pieces; insomuch that the Fight was scarce
ended till midnight. This Action in it self very great, Caesar crowned with
another more glorious by gathering in a Body all the Barbarians that had
escaped out of the Battle, above 100000 in number, and obliging them to repair
to the Country which they had deserted, and the Cities which they had burnt.
Which he did for fear the Germans should pass the Rhine, and possess themselves
of the Country whilst it lay uninhabited. His second War was in favor of the
Gauls against the Germans, tho sometime before he had made Ariovistus, their
King, owned at Rome as an Allie. But they were very insufferable Neighbors to
those under his Obedience, and it was probable, when Occasion showed, they
would be uneasy under their present posture, and would make Incursions into
Gaul, and seize it. But finding his Commanders timorous, and especially those
of the young Nobility and Gentry, who came along with him in hopes of making
use of that Expedition to their Pleasure, or Profit, he called them together,
and advised them to march off, and not to run the hazard of a Battle against
their Inclinations, since they were so effeminately, and cowardly disposed;
telling them withal, that he would take only the 10th Legion, and march
against the Barbarians, whom he did not expect to find an Enemy more formidable
than the Cimbri, nor should they find him a General inferior to Marius. Upon
this the 10th Legion deputed some of their Body to pay him their Compliments of
Thanks, and the other Legions blamed their Officers, and with great vigor and
zeal followed him many days Journey, till they encamped within 200 furlongs of
the Enemy. Ariovistus's Courage was cooled upon their very approach; for not
expecting the Romans should attack the Germans, who were known to be Men likely
to stand a Charge, he admired Caesar's Conduct, and saw his own Army under a
great Consternation. They were still more discouraged by the Prophesies of
their Holy Women, who by observing the Whirl-pools of Rivers, and taking Omens
from the windings and noise of Brooks, foretold strange Events, and warned them
not to engage before the next New Moon appeared. Caesar having had intimations
of this, and seeing the Germans lie still, thought it expedient to attack them,
whilst they were under these Apprehensions, rather then sit still, and wait
their Time. Accordingly he made his approaches to their Fortifications and
Outworks, within which they were entrenched, and so galled, and fretted them,
that at last they came down with great fury to engage. But he gained a glorious
Victory, and pursued them for 300 furlongs as far as the Rhine; all which space
was covered with Spoils, and Bodies of the Slain. Ariovistus made shift to pass
the Rhine with the small Remains of an Army; for it is said the number of the
slain amounted to 80000. After this Action Caesar left his Army at their
Winter Quarters in the Country of the Sequani, and in order to attend his
Affairs at Rome, went into that part of Gaul, which lies on the Po, and was
part of his Province, for the River Rubicon divides Gaul, which is on this side
the Alps from the rest of Italy. There he sat down, and gained the favor of
the People, who made their Court to him frequently, and always found their
Requests answered; for he never failed to dismiss any without present pledges
of his favor in hand, and farther hopes for the future. During all this time
of the War in Gaul, Pompey never discovered, how on one side Caesar conquered
his Enemies with the Arms of Rome, and on the other side gained upon the
Romans, and captivated them with the Money which he had got from his Enemies.
But when Caesar heard that the Belgae, who were the most powerful of all the
Gauls, and inhabited a third part of the Country were revolted, and that they
had got together a great many thousand Men in Arms, he immediately directed his
Course that way with great expedition, and falling upon the Enemy, as they were
ravaging the Gauls his Allies, he soon defeated them, and put them to flight.
For though their numbers were great, yet they made but a slender defense; so
that the Marshes and deep Rivers were made passable to the Roman Foot by the
vast quantity of dead Bodies. Of those who revolted, all that lived near the
Ocean came over without fighting, and therefore he led his Army against the
Nervi, who are the most unciviliz'd and most warlike People of all in those
parts. These live in a close, Woody Country, and having lodged their Children,
and their Goods in a deep hollow within a large Forest, fell upon Caesar with a
Body of 60000 Men before he was prepared for them, and while he was making his
Encampment. They soon routed his Cavalry, and having surrounded the 12th and
7th Legions killed all the Officers; and had not Caesar himself snatched up a
Buckler, and forced his way through his own Men to come up to the Barbarians,
or had not the 10th Legion, when they saw him in danger, ran in from the tops
of the Hills, where they lay, and broke through the Enemies Ranks to rescue
him, in all probability his Army had been entirely cut off. But through the
Influence of Caesar's Valor, the Romans in this Conflict exerted more then
their ordinary Courage; yet with the utmost streins of their Valor, they were
not able to beat the Enemy out of the Field, but cut them off fighting in their
own defense. For out of 60000 Soldiers not above 500 survived the Battle, and
of 400 of their Senators not above three* When the Roman Senate had received
News of this they voted Sacrifices and Festivals to the Gods to be strictly
observed for the space of 15 days, which is a longer space then ever was
observed for any Victory before. For the danger appeared great, because they
were engaged with so many States at once, and the favor of the People to
Caesar made the Victory more esteemed because he was Conqueror. He was now
retired to his Winter Quarters by the Po, where after he had settled the Affairs
of Gaul, he resided in order to the forming his designs at Rome. All who were
Candidates for Offices used his Assistance, and were supplied with Money from
him to corrupt the People, and buy their Votes, in return of which, when they
were chose, they did all things to advance his Power. But what was more
considerable, the most eminent and powerful Men in Rome in great Numbers made
their Court to him at Lucca, as, Pompey and Crassus, and Appius the Praetor of
Sardinia, and Nepos the Proconsul of Spain; so that there were upon the place
at one time 120 Lictors, and more then 200 Senators, who held a Council, and
then parted. There it was decreed, that Pompey and Crassus should be Consuls
again for the following year; that Caesar should have a fresh supply of Money,
and that his Command should be renewed to him for 5 years more. It seemed very
extravagant to all thinking Men, that those very Persons who had received so
much Money from Caesar, should persuade the Senate to grant him more as if he
wanted, though indeed they did not so much persuade as compel the Senate, who
at the same time regretted what they were forced to pass. Cato was not present,
for they had sent him aside very seasonably into Cyprus; but Favonius, who was
a zealous imitator of Cato, when he found he could do no good by opposing it,
broke out of the House, and loudly declaimed against these Proceedings to the
People. But none gave him hearing; some slighting him out of respect to Crassus
and Pompey, others, to gratify Caesar, on whom depended all their hopes. After
this Caesar returned again to his Forces in Gaul, where he found that Country
involved in a dangerous War, two strong People of the Germans having lately
past the Rhine, and made Inroads into it; One of them called Ipes, the other
Tenterides. Of the War with this People, Caesar himself has given this Account
in his Commentaries; That the Barbarians having sent Ambassadors to treat with
him, did during the Treaty set upon him in his march, by which means with 800
Men they routed 5000 of his Horse, who did not suspect their coming; that
afterward they sent other Ambassadors to pursue the same fraudulent practices,
whom he kept in Custody, and led on his Army against the Barbarians, as judging
it would betray too much Easiness, if he should keep Faith with those who broke
their Promises, and could not be obliged by any League. Canusius says, that
when the Senate decreed Festivals, and Sacrifices for this Victory, Cato
declared it to be his Opinion that Caesar ought to be given into the hands of
the Barbarians, that so the guilt which this breach of Faith might otherwise
bring upon the Public, might be expiated by transferring the Curse on him, who
was the Occasion of it. Of those which past the Rhine there were 400000 cut
off; those few which escaped were sheltered by the Sicambri, a People of
Germany. Caesar took hold of this pretense to invade the Germans, being
otherwise ambitious of glory, and especially of the Honor of being the first
Man that should pass the Rhine with an Army. He presently laid a Bridge over
it, though it was very wide, and in that place deeper than ordinary, and at the
same time very rough and fierce, carrying down with its Stream Trunks of Trees,
and other Lumber, which much shocked and weakened the foundations of his
Bridge. But he drove great Planks of Wood into the bottom of the River above
the Bridge, both to resist the impression of such Bodies, and to break the
force of the Torrent, and by this means he finished his Bridge, which no one
who saw could believe it to be the Work of but 10 days. In the passage of his
Army over it, he met with no opposition, the Suevi themselves, who are the most
Warlike People of all Germany, flying with their Effects into the closest and
most woody part of the Vales. When he had burnt all the Enemies Country, and
encouraged those who had remained firm to the Roman Interest, he went back into
Gaul after 18 days stay in Germany. But his Expedition into Britain gave the
most signal Testimony of his Courage, for he was the first who brought a Navy
into the Western Ocean, or who sailed through the Atlantic with an Army to
make War; and though the Island is of so incredible an extent, that it has
given room to Historians to dispute, whether such an Island really be in
Nature, or whether it is a bare Name and Fiction, yet he attempted to conquer
it, and to carry the Roman Empire beyond the Limits of the known World. He past
thither twice from that part of Gaul, which lies over against it, and in
several Battles which he fought, did more disservice to the Enemy, than service
to himself; for the Islanders were so miserably poor, that they had nothing
worth being plundered of. When he found himself unable to put such an end to the
War as he wished, he was content to take Hostages from the King, and to impose
some Taxes, and then quitted the Island. At his arrival in Gaul he found
Letters which lay ready to be conveyed over the Water to him, from his Friends
at Rome to give him Notice of his Daughters death, who died in Labor of a
Child by Pompey. Caesar and Pompey were much afflicted with her Death, nor were
their Friends less disturbed* because that Alliance was now quite broke, which
had hitherto kept the Commonwealth in Peace and Amity; for the Child also died
within a few days after the Mother. The People took the Body of Julia by force
from the Tribunes, and buried it in the Campus Martius with all Solemnities
proper on that Occasion. Caesar's Army was now grown very numerous, so that he
was forced to disperse them into several Winter Quarters, and being gone
himself toward Rome, as he used to do, there was a sudden Rupture in Gaul, and
great Armies were on their march about the Country, who beat up the Romans
Quarters, and attempted to make themselves Masters of the Forts, where they
lay. The greatest and strongest Party of the Rebels under the Command of
Ambiorix cut off Cotta, and Titurius, with their Army. After that the Enemies
invested a Town, (where Cicero lay with his Legion) with an Army of 60000* Men,
and had almost taken it by Storm, the Roman Soldiers in it being all wounded,
and having quite spent themselves by a brisk and vigorous defense beyond their
Natural strength: But Caesar, who was at a great distance, having received
notice of this, quickly got together 7000 Men, and hastened to relieve Cicero.
The Besiegers were aware of it, and went to meet him, with great confidence
that they should with ease devour such an handful of Men. Caesar to nourish
their presumption seemed to avoid fighting, and still marched off till he found
a place conveniently situate for a few to engage against many, where he
encamped. He kept his Soldiers from making any Incursion on the Enemy, and
commanded them to raise a Bulwark, and to build strong Barricadoes, that by
show of fear, they might heighten the Enemies contempt of them; till at last
they came without any order in great security to make an Attack, when he made a
Sally, and put them to flight with the loss of many Men. This quieted many
Commotions in these parts of Gaul, and Caesar made his progress through several
parts of the Country, and with great vigilance provided against all
Innovations. At that time there were 3 Legions come to him by way of Recruits
for the Men he had lost; of which Pompey furnished him with two out of those
under his Command; the other was newly raised in that part of Gaul which is by
the Po. After this the Seeds of War, which had long since been secretly sown
and scattered by the most powerful Men in those Warlike Nations, broke forth,
and ripened into the greatest and most dangerous War that ever was in those
parts, both for the number of Men in the vigor of their Youth, and quantity of
Arms, which were gathered from all parts, and the vast Funds of Money laid up
for this purpose, and the strength of Towns, and situation of places by which
they were inaccessible. It being Winter, the Rivers were frozen, the Woods
covered with Snow, and the Fields overflowed; so that in some places the Ways
were lost through the depth of the Snow; in others, the overflowing of Bogs and
Brooks made the passage very dangerous: All which difficulties made it seem
impracticable to Caesar to make any attempt upon the Rebels. Many States had
revolted together; the chief of them were the Arverni, and Carnutes; the
General who had the Supreme Command in War was Vercingetorix, whose Father the
Gauls had put to death on suspicion he affected absolute Government. He having
disposed his Army in several Bodies, and set Officers over them, drew over to
him all the Country round about as far as those that lie upon Arar, and having
Intelligence of the Opposition which Caesar's Affairs now found at Rome,
thought to engage all Gaul in the War. Which if he had done a little later,
when Caesar was taken up with the Civil Wars, Italy had been put into as great
fears, as before it was by the Cimbri. But at this time Caesar who was of a
Genius naturally fitted to make a right use of all advantages in War, as soon
as he heard of the Revolt, returned immediately the same way he went, and
showed the Barbarians, by the quickness of his march in such a tempestuous
season, that the Army which was advancing against them was invincible. For in
time that one would have thought it scarce credible that a Courier, or Express
should have come so far, he appeared with all his Army; in his march he ravaged
the Country, demolished the Forts, and received into his protection those who
declared for him; till at last the Hedui opposed him, who before had styled
themselves Brethren to the Romans, and had been much honored by them, but now
joined the Rebels to the great discouragement of Caesar's Army. Wherefore he
removed thence, and past the Country of the Lingones, desiring to touch upon
the Territories of the Sequani, who were his Allies, and are situate next to
Italy upon the Confines of Gaul. There the Enemy came upon him, and surrounded
him with many Myriads, whom he was eager enough to engage; and had the
advantage of them upon all accounts, and at last through the length of time and
terror of his Name, quite defeated them. But he seems to have made some false
steps at first, and the Arverni show you a Sword hanging up in a Temple, which
they say was taken from Caesar. This Caesar saw afterward, and smiled at it,
and when his Friends advised it should be taken down, would not permit it,
because he looked upon it as consecrated. After the defeat a great part of
those who had escaped, fled with their King into a Town called Alexia, which
Caesar besieged, though for the height of the Walls, and number of those who
were in Garrison, it seemed impregnable. During the Siege he met with greater
danger without the Town, then can be expressed. For the choice Men of Gaul,
picked out of each Nation, and well Armed, came to relieve Alexia, to the
number of Three hundred thousand; nor were there in the Town less than 170
thousand: So that Caesar being shut up betwixt two such Armies, was forced to
raise two Walls, one toward the Town, the other against the new Supplies, as
knowing if these Forces should join, his Affairs would be entirely ruined. The
danger that he underwent before Alexia did justly gain him great Honor, and
gave him an opportunity of showing greater Instances of his Valor and Conduct,
than any other Battle ever did. One would wonder very much how he should engage
and defeat so many thousands of Men without the Town, and not be perceived by
those within: but much more, that the Romans themselves who guarded their Wall
which was next the Town should be Strangers to it. For even they knew nothing
of the Victory till they heard the cries of the Men, and lamentations of the
Women, who were in the Town, and had from thence seen the Romans at a distance
carrying into their Camp a great quantity of Bucklers adorned with Gold and
Silver, many Breast-plates stained with Blood, besides Cups and Tents made
after the Gallic mode. So soon was so vast an Army dissipated, and vanished
like a Ghost or Dream, the greatest part of them being killed upon the spot.
Those which were in Alexia having given themselves and Caesar much trouble
surrendered at last; and Vercingetorix, who was the chief Spring of all the War,
with his best Armor on, and well mounted, rode out of the Gates, and took a
Turn about Caesar as he was sitting; then quitted his Horse, threw off his
Armor, and laid himself quietly at Caesar's feet, who committed him to Custody
to be reserved for a Triumph.

Caesar had long since designed to ruin Pompey, and Pompey, him; for Crassus,
who had hitherto kept them in Peace, being slain in Parthia, the one wanted
nothing to make himself the greatest Man in Rome, but the fall of him, who was
so; Nor had the other any way to prevent his own ruin, but by being
beforehand with him whom he feared. But Pompey had not been long under such
apprehensions, having till that time despised Caesar, as thinking it no
difficult matter to crush him whom he himself had advanced. But Caesar had
entertained this design from the beginning against his Rivals, and had retired
like an expert Wrestler, to prepare himself for the Combat; He had improved the
strength of his Soldiery by exercising them in the Gallic Wars, and had
heightened his own glory by his great Actions, so that he was looked on, as one
that vied with Pompey. Nor did he let go any of those advantages, which were
now given him both by Pompey himself, and the times, and the ill Government of
Rome, whereby all who were Candidates for Offices publicly gave Money, and
without any shame bribed the Pople, who having received their pay did not
contend for their Benefactors with their bare Suffrages, but with Bows, Swords,
and Slings; so that they seldom parted without having stained the place of
Election with the Blood of Men killed upon the spot; by which the City was
brought to confusion like a Ship without a Pilot; so that the Wiser part wished
things which were carried on with so much Tumult and fury might end no worse
then in a Monarchy. Some were so bold as to declare openly, that the Government
was incurable but by a Monarchy, and that they ought to take that Remedy from
the Hands of the gentlest Physician, meaning Pompey, who though in words he
pretended to decline it, yet in reality he made his utmost Efforts to be
declared Dictator. Cato perceiving his design prevailed with the Senate to make
him sole Consul, that he might not aim at the Dictatorship, being taken off
with the offer of a more legal sort of Monarchy. They over and above voted him
the continuance of his Provinces; for he had two, Spain, and all Afric, which
he governed by his Deputies, and maintained Armies under him at the yearly
charge of 10000 Talents out of the public Treasury. Upon this Caesar also by
his Proxies demanded the Consulate, and the continuance of his Provinces.
Pompey at first did not stir in it, but Marcellus and Lentulus opposed it, who
had always hated Caesar, and now did every thing, whether fit or unfit, which
^^^ht disgrace, and expose him. For they took away the freedom of Rome from the
Neocomians, who were a Colony that Caesar had lately planted in Gaul, and
Marcellus, who was then Consul, ordered one of the Senators of that City, then
at Rome, to be whipped, and told him he laid that mark upon him to signify he
was no Citizen of Rome, bidding him, when he went back again, to show it
Caesar. After Marcellus's Consulate, Caesar presented largely all the great
Statesmen out of the Riches he had taken from the Gauls; discharged Curio the
Tribune from his great Debts; gave Paulus, then Consul, 1500 Talents, with
which he built a noble Palace joining to the Forum, in the place where that of
Fulvius had stood. Pompey jealous of these Preparations, did now openly
practice both by himself and his Friends, to have a Successor declared to
Caesar, and sent to redemand those Soldiers whom he had lent him to carry on
the Wars in Gaul. Caesar returned them, and gave each Soldier 250 Drachms.
Those who conducted them to Pompey spread amongst the People no very favorable
report of Caesar, and flattered Pompey himself with false suggestions that he
was wished for by Caesar's Army, and though his Affairs here were in an ill
posture through the envy of some, and the ill state of the Government, yet there
the Army was at his Command, and if they might pass into Italy, would presently
declare for him; so uneasy were they under Caesar, who had engaged them in so
many Expeditions, and so suspicious of him as aspiring to the Monarchy. Upon
this Pompey grew careless, and neglected all Warlike Preparations as fearing no
danger, but attacked him with Words only and Speeches thinking to conquer by a
Majority of Votes, which Caesar slighted. For it is said, that one of his
Captains, who was sent by him to Rome, standing before the Senate House one
day, and being told that the Senate would not give Caesar a longer time in his
Government, clapped his Hand on the Hilt of his Sword, and said, But this shall.
Yet the demands which Caesar made had the fairest colors of Equity imaginable;
for he proposed to lay down his Arms, and that Pompey should do the same, and
both together should become private Men, and each expect a Reward of his
Services from the Public; for that those who went to disarm him, and at the
same time confirmed Pompey's Power, only suppressed the one, to establish the
other in his Tyranny. When Curio made these Proposals to the People in Caesar's
Name, he was mightily applauded, and some threw Garlands toward him, and
dismissed him as they do Wrestlers, crowned with Flowers. Antony being Tribune,
produced a Letter sent from Caesar on this Occasion, and read it, though the
Consuls did what they could to oppose it. But Scipio, Pompey's Father-in-Law,
proposed in the Senate, that if Caesar did not lay down his Arms within such a
time, he should be voted an Enemy; and the Consuls putting it to the Question,
whether Pompey should dismiss his Soldiers; and again, whether Caesar should
disband his, very few assented to the first, but almost all to the latter. But
Antony proposing again that both should lay down their Commissions, all
unanimously agreed to it. Scipio was upon this very violent, and Lentulus the
Consul cried aloud, that they had need of Arms, and not of Suffrages against a
Robber; so that they were adjourned, and changed their Robes in token of grief
for the Dissension. Afterward there came other Letters from Caesar, which
seemed yet more moderate; for he proposed to quit every thing else, and only to
have Gallia Cisalpina, Illyricum, and two Legions, till he should stand a
second time for Consul. Cicero the Orator, who was lately returned from
Cilicia, endeavored to reconcile differences, and softened Pompey, who was
willing to comply in other things, but not to allow him the Soldiers. At last
Cicero prevailed with Caesar's Friends, who were now more flexible to accept of
the Provinces, and 6000 Soldiers only, and so to make up the Quarrel. Pompey
gave way to this, but Lentulus the Consul would not hearken to it, but drove
Antony and Curio out of the House with disgrace; by which they afforded Caesar
the handsomest pretense that could be to inflame the Soldiers, by showing them
two Persons of such Worth and Authority who were forced to escape in a common
Hackney-Coach, in the Habits of Slaves; for so they were glad to disguise
themselves, when they fled out of Rome. Now there were not about him at that
time above 300 Horse, and 5000 Foot, for the rest of his Army, which was left
behind the Alps, was to be brought after him by Persons Commissioned for that
purpose. But he thought the first Motion toward the design which he had then
on foot did not require many Forces at present, and that he ought to make his
first step so suddenly, as to surprise the adverse Party into an admiration of
his Courage; for he esteemed it easier to astonish them, if he came unawares,
then fairly to conquer them, if he had alarmed them by his Preparations; and
therefore he commanded his Captains, and other Officers, to go only with their
Swords in their Hands without any other Arms, and make themselves Masters of
Ariminum, a great City of Gaul, with as little Noise and Bloodshed as possible.
He committed the Care of the Army to Hortensius, and spent the day in public,
as a Stander by, and Spectator of the Gladiators, who exercised before him. A
little before night he bathed, and then went into the Hall, and converst for
some time with those he had invited to Supper, till it began to grow dusky*
when he rose from Table, and having complimented the Company, and desired 'em
to stay till he came back, gave private Orders to some of his Confidents that
they should follow him* not all the same way; but some one way, some another.
He himself got into an Hackney Coach, and drove at first another way, but
presently turned toward Ariminum. When he came to the River Rubicon* which
parts Gaul that is within the Alps from the rest of Italy, his thoughts began
to work, now he was just entering upon danger, and he waver'd much in his mind,
when he considered coolly the difficulty of the attempt. This stopped his career
for a while, and made him halt, while he revolved with himself, and often
changed his Opinion one way; and the other, without speaking a word. When he
could not fix his Resolution, he discust the matter very particularly with his
Friends which were about him (of which number Asinius Pollio was one) computing
how many Calamities his passing that River would bring upon Mankind, and what a
Relation of it would be transmitted to Posterity. At last carried on by an
extraordinary Impulse he lost of reasoning, and trusted to the event, using the
Proverb frequent in their Mouths who enter upon dangerous and bold attempts,
The die is cast; with which words he took the River. When he was over, he used
all expedition possible, and before it was day reached Ariminum, and took it.
It Is said, that the night before he past the River, he had an impious dream
that he was unnaturally familiar with his own Mother. As soon as Ariminum was
taken, there was as it were a wide Gate opened to a War by Sea, as well as
Land; and with the limits of the Provinces, the boundaries of the Laws were
transgrest* Nor would one have thought that the Inhabitants only, as at other
times, fled from one place to another in great consternation, but that the very
Towns themselves left their stations, and fled for succor into each other; so
that the City of Rome was over run as it were with a Doluge by the conflux of
neighboring People from all parts round about, and was neither easy under the
Government of its Magistrates, nor to be quiered by the Eloquence of any Orator
in this great hurry and confusion, but was in danger of sinking by its own
weight. For contrary passions, and violent motions possessed all places; nor were
those who were interested in these Changes wholly at peace, but frequently
meeting, as in so great a City they needs must, with such as showed themselves
fearful and dejected, brought quarrels on themselves by their great confidence
and presumption. Pompey sufficiently of himself disturbed, was yet more
perplexed by the clamors of others; some telling him that he justly suffered
for having armed Caesar against himself, and the Government; others blaming him
for permitting Caesar to be insolently used by Lentulus, when he made so large
Concessions, and offered such reasonable Proposals toward an Accommodation.
Favonius bad him now stamp upon the Ground; for once talking big in the Senate
he desired them not to trouble themselves about making any preparations for the
War; for that he himself with one stamp of his Foot would fill all Italy with
Soldiers. Yet still Pompey had more Forces then Caesar, but he was not
permitted to pursue his own thoughts, but being continually alarmed with
frightful and false reports, as if the Enemy was just upon him, and Master of
all, was forced to give way, and was born down by the common cry. In this
distraction, it is resolved to leave the City, and the Senators are commanded
to follow him, with an Order, that no one should stay behind who did not prefer
Tyranny to their Country, and Liberty. The Consuls presently fled without
making the usual Sacrifices; the same did most of the Senators, carrying off
their own Goods in as much have as if they had been robbing their Neighbors.
Some, who had formerly much favored Caesar's Cause, out of fear quitted their
own Sentiments, and without any prospect of good to themselves, were carried
along by the common stream. It was a very melancholy view to see the City tossed
in these Tumults like a Ship whose Pilot has given her over, and despairs of
hindering her from being struck on the next Rock. Those, who left the City,
though their departure was on so sad an occasion, yet esteemed the place of
their Exile to be their Country for Pompey's sake, and fled from Rome, as if
it had been Caesar's Camp. At the same time Labienus, a Person who had been one
of Caesar's best Friends, and his Lieutenant, and one who had fought by him
very vigorously in the Gallic Wars, deserted him, and went over to Pompey.
Caesar sent all his Money, and Equipage after him, and then sat down before
Corfinium, which was Garrisoned with 30 Soldiers under the command of Domitius.
He in despair ordered a Physician who attended him to give him Poison, and
taking the Dose drunk it in hopes of being dispatched by it, but soon after
when he was told that Caesar used a wonderful Clemency toward those he took
Prisoners, lamented his misfortune, and blamed the hastiness of his own
Resolution. His Physician comforted him, when he acquainted him that he had
took a sleeping, not a mortal Poison; with this he was very much pleased, and
rising from his Bed, went presently over to Caesar, and kissed his Hand, but
afterward revolted to Pompey. The report of these things at Rome sweetened
those who were there, and some who had fled thence, returned. Caesar took into
his Army Domitius's Soldiers, as he did all those, whom he found in any Town
listed for Pompey's Service. Being now strong and formidable enough, he
advanced against Pompey himself, who did not stay to receive him, but fled to
Brundusium, having sent the Consuls before with the Army to Dyrrachium. Soon
after upon Caesar's approach he set to Sea, as shall be more particularly
related in his Life. Caesar would have immediately pursued him, but wanted
Shipping, and therefore went back to Rome, having made himself Master of all
Italy in the space of 60 days. When he came thither he found the City more
quiet then he expected, and many Senators upon the place, to whom he addressed
himself with great courtesy and deference, desiring them to send to Pompey
about any reasonable Accommodations toward a Peace. But no body complied with
this Proposal, whether out of fear of Pompey, whom they had deserted, or that
they thought Caesar did not mean what he said, but thought it his interest to
talk plausibly. Afterward, when Metellus the Tribune would have hindered him
from taking Money out of the public Treasury, and produced some Laws against
it, Caesar replied, That Arms and Laws did not well agree, and if you are
displeased with what I do, at present, Sir, retreat quietly, for War does not
admit long Speeches: When I have laid down my Arms, and entered into Terms of
Peace, then come, and Harangue as you please: and this I tell you in diminution
of my own just Right, for indeed you are my Subject, as are all those who have
appeared against me, and are now in my power. Having said this to Metellus, he
went to the Doors of the Treasury, and the Keys being not to be found, sent for
Smiths to force them open. Metellus again making resistance, and some
encouraging him in it, Caesar threatened to kill him, if he gave him any farther
disturbance; And this, says he, you know, young Man, is harder for me to say,
then to do. These words made Metellus withdraw for fear, and at the same time
gave way to Caesar's being easily and readily supplied with all things
necessary for the War. He was now going to make War in Spain, with a Resolution
first, to remove Afranius and Varro, Pompey's Lieutenants, and to make himself
Master of the Army and Provinces under them, that he might more securely
advance against Pompey, when he had no Enemy left behind him. In this
Expedition his Person was often in danger from Ambuscades, and his Army by want
of Provisions, yet he did not desist from pursuing the Enemy, provoking them to
fight, and besieging them, till by main force he made himself Master of their
Camps, and their Forces: Only the Officers got off and fled to Pompey. When
Caesar came back to Rome, Piso his Father in Law advised him to send Men to
Pompey, to treat of a Peace; but Isauricus to ingratiate himself with Caesar
spoke against it. Caesar after this, being chose Dictator by the Senate, called
home the Exiles, advanced to Titles of Honor the Children of such as had
suffered under Sylla, and such as were in debt by retrenching some part of the
Interest, and touched upon some other Regulations like these, but not many: For
within 11 days he resigned his Dictatorship, and having declared himself Consul
with Servilius Isauricus, made haste to the Camp again. He marched so fast,
that he left all his Army behind him, except 600 chosen Horse, and 5 Legions,
with which he put to Sea in the very middle of Winter about the beginning of
the Month January, which the Athenians call Posideon, and having past the
Ionian Sea took Oricum, and Apollonia, and then sent back the Ships to
Brundusium, to bring over the Soldiers, that were left behind in the march.
These Soldiers, as they were upon the Road, being very much wasted in their
Bodies, and tired with the fatigue of so many Engagements, talked against Caesar
after this manner. When at last, and where will this Caesar let us be quiet? He
carries us from place to place, and uses us, as if we were not to be worn out,
and had no sense of labor. Even our Iron it self is spent by blows, and we
ought to have some pity on our Bucklers, and Breast-plates, which have been
used so long. Does not Caesar gather from our wounds, that we are mortal Men,
whom he commands, and that we are subject to the same Calamities, and Diseases,
as other Mortals are. It Is impossible for a God himself to force the
Winter-Season, or to hinder the Storms, when they rage: Yet he pushes forward,
as if he were not pursuing, but flying from an Enemy. This was their Discourse
as they marched leisurely toward Brundusium. But when they came thither, and
found that Caesar was gone off before them, they changed their Sentiments, and
blamed themselves as Traitors to their General. They now railed at their
Officers for marching so slowly, and placing themselves on the Promontories by
the Seaside over against Epirus, looked out to see if they could espy the
Vessels, which were to transport them to Caesar. He in the mean time was posted
in Apollonia, but had not an Army with him able to fight the Enemy, the Forces
from Brundusium being so long a coming, which put him into a great suspense,
and loss what to do. At last he entered upon a dangerous project, which was to
go in a Vessel of 12 Oars, without any ones knowledge, over to Brundusium,
though the Sea was at that time covered with a vast Fleet of the Enemies. He
embarked in the nighttime in the habit of a Slave, and throwing himself down
like some inconsiderable Fellow, lay along at the bottom of the Vessel. The
River Anius was to carry them down to Sea, and there used to blow a gentle gale
every morning from the Land, which made it very calm toward the mouth of the
River, by driving the Waves forward; but that night there blew a strong Wind
from the Sea, which overpowered that from the Land; so that betwixt the
violence of the Tide, and the resistance of the Waves against it, the River was
very rough, and so uneven and dangerous, that the Pilot could not make good his
Passage, but ordered his Sailors to tack about. Caesar upon this discovers
himself, and taking the Pilot by the Hand, who was surprised to see him there,
said, Go on boldly my Friend, and fear nothing; thou carriest Caesar, and his
Fortune along with thee. The Mariners when they heard that, forgot the Storm,
and laying all their Strength to their Oars, did what they could to force their
way down the River. But when it was to no purpose, and the Vessel now took in
much Water, Caesar finding himself in so great danger in the very mouth of the
River, permitted the Master, though much against his will, to turn back. When
he was come to Land, his Soldiers ran to him in whole Troops, and expressed how
much they were troubled, that he should think himself not strong enough to get
a Victory by their sole Assistance, but must needs disturb himself, and expose
his Person for those who were absent, as if he could not trust those who were
with him. After this, Antony came over with the Forces from Brundusium, which
encouraged Caesar to give Pompey Battle, though he was encamped very
advantageously, and furnished with plenty of Provisions both by Sea, and Land,
whilst he himself, who at first had been but ill stocked, was now at last
extremely pinched for want of Necessaries, so that his Soldiers were forced to
dig up a kind of Root which grew there, and tempering it with Milk to feed on
it. Sometimes they made Loaves, and in their Incursions on the Enemies
Outguards, would throw in those Loaves, telling them, that as long as the Earth
produced such Roots they would not leave off to besiege Pompey. But Pompey took
what care he could, that neither the Loaves, nor the Words should reach his
Men, for they would have been disheartened at the fierceness and hardiness of
their Enemies, and looked upon them as a Kin to the savage Nature of Wild
Beasts. There were continual Skirmishes about Pompey's Outworks, in all which
Caesar had the better, except one; when his Men were forced to fly in such a
manner, that he had like to have lost his Camp. For Pompey made such a vigorous
Sally on them, that not a Man stood his ground; the Trenches were filled with
dead Bodies; many fell upon their own Ramparts, and Bulwarks, being closely
pursued by the Enemy. Caesar met them, and would have turned them back, but
could not. When he went to lay hold of the Colors, those who carried them
threw them down, so that the Enemies took 32 of them. He himself narrowly
escaped; for taking hold of a big lusty Fellow that was flying by him, he bad
him stand, and face about; but the Fellow full of apprehensions from the danger
he was in, began to handle his Sword, as if he would strike Caesar, and had
done it, had not Caesar's Arm-bearer prevented the blow by chopping off the
Man's Arm. Caesar's Affairs were so desperate at that time, that when Pompey
either through fear, or his ill Fortune, did not give the finishing stroke to
that great Action, but retreated after he had shut up the Enemy within their
Camp, Caesar upon his return said to his Friends, The Victory to day had been
on our Enemies side, if they had had a General, which knew how to conquer. When
he was retired into his Tent, he laid himself down to sleep, but spent that
night the most melancholy that he ever did any, being perplexed in his thoughts
for his ill conduct in this War; for when he had a large Country before him,
and all the wealthy Cities of Macedonia, and Thessaly, he had neglected to
carry the War thither, and had sat down by the Seaside, whilst his Enemies had
such a powerful Fleet; so that he seemed rather to be besieged with want of
Necessaries, then to besiege others with his Arms. Being thus distracted in his
thoughts with the view of the ill posture he stood in, he raised his Camp with
a design to advance toward Scipio, who lay in Macedonia; for he hoped either
to draw Pompey where he should fight without the advantage he now had of
supplies from the Sea, or overpower Scipio, if not assisted. This animated
Pompey's Army, and Officers so far, that they were for pursuing Caesar, as one
that was worsted and flying. But Pompey was afraid to hazard a Battle, on which
so much depended, and being himself provided with all Necessaries for a
considerable time, thought to tire out, and waste the vigor of Caesar's Army,
which could not last long; For the best part of his Men, though they had much
Experience, and showed an irresistible Courage in all Engagements, yet by their
frequent marches, changing their Camps, assaulting of Towns, and long watches,
were so broken, and so much exhausted with Age, that their Bodies were unfit
for Labor, and their Courage cooled by their years. Besides, it is said that a
Pestilential Disease occasioned by their irregular Diet raged in Caesar's Army,
and, what was of greatest moment, he was neither furnished with Money, nor
Provisions, so that in a little time he must needs fall of himself. For these
Reasons Pompey had no mind to fight him, and was thanked for it by none but
Cato, who was pleased with it out of his zeal to preserve his Fellow-Citizens.
For when he saw the dead Bodies of those which had fallen in the last Battle on
Caesar's side to the number of a thousand, he went away, covered his Face, and
wept. The rest reproached Pompey for declining to fight, and called him
Agamemnon, and the King of Kings, as One that had no mind to lay down his
Sovereign Authority, but was pleased to see so many great Commanders attending
on him, and paying their ^^^endance at his Tent. Favonius, who affected Cato's
free way of speaking his mind, complained bitterly, that they should eat no
Figs that year at Tusculum by reason of Pompey's ambition to be Monarch.
Afranius, who was lately returned out of Spain, and by reason of the ill
Campaign he had made, was suspected by Pompey to have betrayed the Army for
Money, asked him, Why he did not fight that Merchant, who had made such
purchases? Pompey was compelled by this kind of Language to give Caesar Battle,
though against his own Sentiments, and in order to it, pursued him. Caesar had
found great difficulties in his march; for no Country would supply him with
Provisions, his Reputation being very much sunk since his last Defeat. But when
he came to Gomphi, a Town of Thessaly, he not only found Provisions for his
Army, but Physic too. For there they met with plenty of Wine, which they took
off very freely; heated with this, and fired with the God, they jollily danced
along, and so shook off their Disease, and changed their whole Constitution.
When the two Armies were come into Pharsalia, and both encamped there, Pompey's
thoughts ran the same way, as they had done before, against fighting, and the
more, because of some unlucky Presages, and an odd Vision he had in a Dream.
Yet some who were about him were so confident of success, that Domitius,
Spinther, and Scipio, as if they had already conquered, quarreled which should
succeed Caesar in the Pontificate; And many sent to Rome to take Houses fit to
accommodate Consuls and Praetors, as being sure of entering upon those Offices,
as soon as the Battle was over. The Cavalry especially were eager to fight, as
being well Armed, and bravely mounted, and valuing themselves upon the clean
shapes of their Horses, and the advantage of their numbers, for they were 5000
against 1000 of Caesar's. Nor was their Infantry better matched, there being
45000 of Pompey's, against 22000 of the Enemy. Caesar drew up his Soldiers, and
told 'em that Cornificius was coming up to them with two Legions, and that 15
Companies more under Calenu^ were posted at Megara, and Athens, he asked 'em,
whether they would stay till these joined them, or would hazard the Ba^^le by
themselves* They all cried ou^ against delaying, and were eager to engage as
soon as possible. When he sacrificed to the Gods for the lustration of his
Army, upon the death of the first Victim, the Augur told him, within 3 days, he
should come to a decisive Action. Caesar asked him, Whether he saw any thing in
the Entrails, which promised an happy Event? That, says the Priest, you can
best answer your self; for the Gods signify a great Alteration from the
present posture of Affairs; if therefore you think your self happy now, expect
worse Fortune; if unhappy, hope for better. The night before the Battle, as he
walked the Rounds about Midnight, he saw a Light in the Heaven very bright and
flaming, which seemed to pass over Caesar's Camp, and fall into Pompey's; and
when Caesar's Soldiers came to relieve the Watch in the morning, they perceived
a Panic fear among the Enemies. However he did not expect to fight that day,
but decamped as if he designed to march toward Scotusa. But when the Tents
were taken down, his Scouts rode up to him, and told him the Enemy would give
him Battle. With this he was very much pleased, and having performed his
Devotions to the Gods, set his Army in Battalia, dividing them into 3 Bodies.
Over the middle-most he placed Domitius-Calvinus: Antony commanded the Left
Wing, and he himself the Right, being resolved to fight at the Head of the 10th
Legion. But when he saw the Enemies Cavalry planted against him, being struck
with their Bravery, and their Number, he gave private Orders, That six
Companies from the Rear of the Army should advance up to him, whom he posted
behind the Right Wing, and instructed them what they should do, when the
Enemies Horse came to charge. On the other side, Pompey commanded the Right
Wing, Domitius the Left, and Scipio, Pompey's Father-inlaw, the Main Body. The
whole Weight of the Cavalry was in the Left Wing, who designed to attack the
Right Wing of the Enemy, and press that part most which the General himself
commanded: For they thought no Body of Foot could be so deep as to bear such a
shock, but that they must necessarily be broken to pieces upon the first
impression of so strong a Cavalry. When they were ready on both sides to give
the signal for Battle, Pompey commanded his Foot, who were in the Front, to
stand their ground, and, without breaking their Order* receive quietly the
Enemies first Attack, till they came within Javelins cast. Caesar blamed this
Conduct, and said, Pompey was not aware that the first Charge, if it were brisk
and fierce, gave weight to every stroke, and raised a general warmth of Soul,
which was easily kept alive and improved by the concurrence of the whole Army.
He was now advanced with his Forces, and just upon Action, when he found one of
his Captains, a trusty and experienced Soldier, encouraging his Men to exert
their utmost. Caesar called him by his Name, and said, What hopes, C.
Crassinius, and what grounds for encouragement? Crassinius stretched out his
hand, and cried in a loud Voice: We shall conquer nobly, Caesar; and this day
I Will deserve your Praises either alive or dead. With these words he immediately
ran in upon the Enemy, backed only with six-score Men, and presently cut down
the foremost, and still pressed on forwards with much slaughter of the Enemy,
till at last he was struck back by the Wound of a Sword, which went in at his
Mouth with such force, that it came out at his Neck behind. Whilst the Foot
were thus sharply engaged in the Main Battle, one Wing of Pompey's Horse
marched up confidently, and opened their Ranks very wide, that they might
surround the Right Wing of Caesar: But before they engaged, some Companies of
Caesar's made up to them, and did not dart their Javelins at a distance, nor
strike at their Thighs and Legs as they used to do in close Battle, but aimed
at their Faces; for thus Caesar had instructed them, in hopes that Young
Gentlemen, who had not conversed much in Battles and Wounds, but were in the
flower of their Age, and height of their Beauty, would be very apprehensive of
such Blows, and not care for hazarding both a Danger at present, and a Blemish
for the future. This Design took, for they were so far from bearing the stroke
of the Javelins, that they could not stand the sight of them, but turned about,
and covered their Faces to secure them. In this great disorder, they were at
last forced to fly for it, and by this Confusion ruined all; for those who had
beat them back, presently surrounded the Infantry, and falling on their Rear,
cut them to pieces. Pompey, who commanded the other Wing of the Army, when he
saw his Cavalry thus broke and flying, was no longer himself, nor did he now
remember that he was Pompey the Great; but like one whom the Gods had deprived
of his Senses, and struck with some fatal Blow, retired to his Tent without
speaking a word, and there sat to expect the Event, till the whole Army was
defeated, and the Enemy appeared upon the Works which were thrown up before his
Camp, where they closely engaged with his Men, who were posted there to defend
it. Then he first seemed to have recovered his senses; and when he had said to
himself, What, into my Camp too? he laid aside his General's habit, and putting
on such Clothes as might best favor his flight, stole off. What Fortune he met
with afterward, how he took shelter in Egypt, and was murdered there, we tell
you in his Life. Caesar, when he came to view Pompey's Camp* and saw some of
his Enemies dead upon the ground, others dying, said with a sigh, -- -- This
they would have; they brought me to this necessity, that I Caius Caesar must
have lost the credit of all my former Successes in War, if I had at last
dismissed my Army. Asinius Pollio says that Caesar spoke those words then in
Latin, which he afterward wrote in Greek; that those who were killed at the
taking of the Camp, were most of them Servants; and that there fell not above
6000 Soldiers. Caesar incorporated most of the Foot, whom he took Prisoners,
with his own Legions, and pardoned several Persons of Quality, and amongst the
rest Brutus, who afterward stabbed him. He did not immediately appear after
the Battle was over, which put Caesar into a great Agony for him; nor was his
pleasure less, when he saw him safe, and at the same time coming over to him.
There were many Prodigies that foretold this Victory; but the most signal was
that at Tralles. In the Temple of Victory there stood Caesar's Statue; the
Floor it self was very firm, and the Stone with which it was paved still
harder: yet it is said that a PalmTree shot it self up near the Pedestal of
this Statue. In the City of Padua, one C. Cornelius, who had the Character of a
good Augur, fellow-Citizen and Friend of Livie the Historian, happened to make
some Augural Observations that very day when the Battle was fought: And first,
as Livie tells us, he pointed out the critical time of the Fight, and said to
those who were by him, That just then the Action was hot, and the Men engaged.
When he looked a second time upon the Birds, and nicely observed the Omens, he
leaped as if he had been inspired, and cried out, Thou, Caesar, art the
Conqueror. This mightily surpised the standers by; but he took the Crown,
which he had on, from his Head, and swore he would never wear it again till the
Event should give Authority to his Art. This Livie positively affirms for a
Truth.

Caesar, as a Monument of his Victory, gave the Thessalians great Immunities,
and then went in pursuit of Pompey. When he was arrived at Asia, to gratify
Theopompus, who had made a Collection of Fatles, he enfranchised the Guidians,
and remitted one third of the Tax to all the Asiatics. When he came to
Alexandria, where Pompey was already murdered, he would not look upon
Theodotus, who presented him with his head, but took his Signet and wept over
it. Those of Pompey's Friends who had been taken by the King of Egypt as they
were straggling in those parts, he obliged, and made his own. He wrote Letters
to Rome, wherein he signified to his Friends, That the greatest Advantage and
Pleasure he found by the Victory was, that he every day saved several Citizens
Lives who had fought against him. As to the War in Egypt, some say it was
dangerous and dishonorable, and no ways necessary, but occasioned only by his
Passion for Cleopatra: Others blame the Ministers, and especially the Eunuch
Photinus, who was chief Favorite, had lately took off Pompey's Head, banished
Cleopatra from Court, and was now thought to be privately carrying on the
Destruction of Caesar; to prevent which, Caesar from that time began to sit up
whole nights, under pretense of Drinking, for the greater security of his
Person. It Is certain, that he was intolerable in his open Affronts to Caesar,
both by his Words and Actions; for when Caesar's Soldiers had musty and
unwholsom Corn measured out to them, Photinus told them, They must like it,
since they were fed at another's Cost. He ordered that his Table should be
served with wooden and earthen Dishes, and said, Caesar had carried off all the
Gold and Silver Plate, under pretense of Arrears of Debt. For the present
King's Father owed Caesar 1750 Myriads of Money; Caesar had formerly remitted
to his Children the rest, but thought fit to demand the thousand Myriads at
that time, to maintain his Army. Photinus told him, That he had better go then,
and attend his other Affairs of greater Consequence, and that he should receive
his Money at another time with Thanks. Caesar replied, That he did not want
Egyptians to be his Counselors, and soon after privately sent for Cleopatra
from her Retirement. She took a little Skiff, and one of her Confidents,
Apollodorus, along with her, and in the dusk of the evening landed near the
Palace. She was at a loss how to get in undiscovered, till she thought of
putting her self into the Coverlet of a Bed, and lying at length, whilst
Apollodorus bound up the Bedding, and carried it on his Back through the
Castle-gates to Caesar's Apartment* Caesar was first taken with this fetch of
Cleopatra, as an Argument of her Wit; and was afterward so far charmed with
her Conversation and graceful Behavior, that he reconciled her to her Brother,
and made her Partner in the Government. A Festival was kept for joy of this
Reconciliation, where Caesar's Barber, a busy pragmatical Fellow, whose fear
made him inqui^itive into every thing, discovered that there was a Plot
carrying on against Caesar by Achillas, General of the King's Forces, and
Photinus the Eunuch. Caesar, upon the first intelligence of it, set a Guard
upon the Hall where the Feast was kept, and killed Photinus. Achillas escaped
to the Army, and raised a troublesome War against Caesar, which it was not easy
for him to manage with so small a Force against so powerful a State. The first
difficulty he met with, was want of Water; for the Enemies had turned the
Pipes. Another was, that when the Enemy endeavored to cut off his
Communication by Sea, he was forced to divert that Danger by setting fire to
his own Ships, which when it had burnt the Harbor, spread it self so far as to
destroy the famous Library of Alexandria. A third was, that in an Engagement
near Pharos he leaped from the Mole into a Skiff, to assist his Soldiers, who
were in danger: When the Egyptians pressed him on every side, he threw himself
into the Sea, and with much difficulty swam off. He had then many Papers in his
hand, which though he was continually darted at, and forced to keep his Head
often under Water, yet he did not let go, but held them up safe from wetting in
one hand, whilst he swam with the other. His Skiff in the mean time was quickly
sunk. At last, the King having got off to Achillas and his Party, Caesar
engaged and conquered them; many fell in that Battle, and the King himself was
never seen after. Upon this, he makes Cleopatra Queen of Egypt, who soon after
had a Son by him, whom the Alexandrians called Caesarion, and then departed for
Syria. Thence he passed to Asia, where he heard that Domitius was beaten by
Pharnaces, Son of Mithridates, and fled out of Pontus with an handful of Men;
and that Pharnaces pursued the Victory so eagerly, that though he was already
Master of Bithynia and Cappadocia, he had still farther aims to take in Armenia
the less; in order to which, he invited all the Kings and Tetrarchs there to
rise. Caesar immediately marched against him with three Legions, fought him
near Zela, drove him out of Pontus, and totally defeated his Army. When he gave
Amintius, a Friend of his at Rome, an Account of this Action, to express the
smartness and dispatch of it, he used these three words, Veni, Vidi, Vici;
which Latin words having all the same Cadence, carry with them an air of
brevity, which in this place is very lucky and graceful. Hence he went for
Italy, and came to Rome at the end of that Year, for which he was a second time
chose Dictator, (though that Office had never before lasted so long) and was
elected Consul for the next. He was ill spoke of, because upon a Mutiny of
Soldiers, who killed Cosconius and Galba, who had been Praetors, he gave them
only that slight Reprimand of calling them Citizens, instead of
Fellow Soldiers, and after gave each Man a thousand Drachms, besides a share of
some Lands in Italy. He was also reflected on for Dolabella's Extravagance,
Amintius's Covetousness, Anthony's Debauchery, and Corfinius's Profuseness, who
pulled down Pompey's House, and rebuilt it, as not Magnificent enough; for the
Romans were much displeased with all these. But Caesar, for the carrying on his
Designs, though he knew their Characters, and disapproved them, was forced to
make use of such Instruments. After the Battle of Pharsalia, Cato and Scipio
fled into Afric, and there, with the Assistance of King Juba, got together a
considerable Force, which Caesar resolved to engage. In order to it, he passed
into Sicily in the very midst of Winter; and to remove from his Officers all
hopes of delay there, encamped by the Sea-shoar, and as soon as ever he had a
fair Wind put to Sea with 3000 Foot, and a few Horse. When he had landed them,
he went back privately under great apprehensions for the better part of his
Army; but met 'em upon the Sea, and brought them all to the same Camp. There he
was informed, That the Enemies relied much upon an ancient Oracle, That the
Family of the Scipioes should be always Victorious in Afric. There was in his
Army a Fellow, otherwise mean and contemptible, but of the House of the
Africani, and his Name Scipio Sallustio: This Man Caesar put in the Head of his
Army, with the Title of General; which he did either in raillery to ridicule
Scipio, who commanded the Enemy, or seriously to bring over the Omen to his
side. He was obliged often to set upon the Ememy, and skirmish with them; for
he wanted both Victualling for his Men, and Forage for his Horse: so that he
was forced to feed 'em with a Sea-weed, which he mixed with Grass, to take off
its saltness, and to give it a more agreeable Taste* He was forced to make this
shift, because the Numidians, in great Numbers, and well Horsed, commanded the
Country. Caesar's Cavalry being one day out of Employ, diverted themselves with
seeing an African, who entertained 'em with a Dance, and played upon the Pipe
to admiration: They were so taken with this, that they lighted, and gave their
Horses to some Boys, when on a sudden the Enemy briskly surrounded them, killed
some, pursued the rest, and fell in with 'em into their Camp; and had not
Caesar himself and Asinius Pollio came in to their Assistance, and put a stop
to their flight, the War had been then at an end. In another Engagement, where
the Enemy had again the better, Caesar took an Ensign, who was running away, by
the Neck, and forcing him to face about, said, Look, that way is the Enemy!
Scipio flushed with this Success at first, had a mind to come to one decisive
Action. Wherefore he leaves Afranius and Juba in two distinct Bodies not far
distant, and marches himself toward Thapsacus, where he built a Fort, which
might serve for a Security to them, and a Retreat to himself. Whilst Scipio was
taken up with this matter, Caesar with an incredible dispatch made his way
through thick Woods, and an unpassable Country, surrounded one Party of the
Enemy, and charged the other other in the Front. When he had defeated these, he
improved this Opportunity, and the course of his good Fortune so far, that in
one moment he took Afranius's Camp, and destroyed that of the Numidians, Juba
their King being glad to save himself by flight; so that in a small part of a
day he made himself Master of three Camps, and killed 50000 of the Enemy, with
the loss only of 50 Men. This is the Account some give of that Fight; Others
say, He was not in the Action, but that he was taken with his usual Distemper
just as he was setting his Army in Battalia. He perceived the approaches of it,
before it had too far disordered his Senses; and as soon as he began to shake,
took care to be removed into a neighboring Fort, where he reposed himself. Of
the Great Men that were taken after the Fight, some Caesar put to Death, others
prevented him by killing themselves. Cato had undertaken to defend Utica, and
for that reason was not in the Battle. The desire which Caesar had to take him
alive, made him hasten thither; upon notice that he had dispatched himself,
it is certain Caesar was much discomposed, but for what reason is not so well
agreed: yet this he said; Cato, I envy thee thy Death, because thou enviedst me
the honor of saving thy Life. Yet after all this, the Discourse he wrote
against Cato after his Death, is no great sign of his kindness, or that he was
thoroughly reconciled to him. For how is it probable that he would have been
tender of his Life, who was so bitter against his Memory? Yet from his Clemency
to Cicero, Brutus, and many others who fought against him, some have guessed
that Caesar's Book was not composed so much out of hearted to Cato, as in his
own Vindication. Cicero, it seems, had written an Encomium upon Cato, and
called it by his Name; a Discourse written by so great a Master upon so
excellent a Subject, was sure to be in every ones hands. This touched Caesar,
who looked upon a Panegyric on his Enemy, as no better then a Satyr against
himself: and therefore he made in his Anti-Cato a full Collection of whatever
could be said in that Great Man's derogation. Those Discourses had each of them
their several Admirers, as Men were differently inclined to the Parties.
Caesar, upon his return to Rome, did not forget to entertain the People with a
large Account of his Victory, telling them, That he had subdued a Country,
which would supply the Public every year with 200000 Bushels of Corn, and
3000000 weight of Oil. He was allowed three Triumphs, for Egypt, Pontus, and
Afrric; the last, not for the Conquest of Scipio, but Juba, whose little Son
was then led in Triumph, the happiest Captive that ever was, who of a barbarous
Numidian came by this means to be reckoned among the most Learned Historians of
all Greece. After these Triumphs, he distributed Rewards to his Soldiers, and
treated the People with Feasting and Shows: At one Feast he had 22000 Tables,
and entertained the People with Gladiators and Sea Fights in honor to his
Daughter Julia, long since dead. When those Shows were over, an Account was
taken of the people, who from 320000 were now reduced 150000. So great a waste
had the Civil War made in Rome alone, not to mention what the other parts of
Italy and the Provinces suffered. He was now chosen a fourth time Consul, and
went into Spain against Pompey's Sons; they were but young, yet had got
together a great Army, and showed they had Courage and Conduct to command it,
so that Caesar was in extreme danger. The great Battle was near Munda, in which
Caesar seeing his Men hard pressed, and making but a weak Resistance, ran
through the Ranks among the Soldiers, and crying out, asked them, Whether they
were not ashamed to deliver him into the hands of Boys? At last, with great
difficulty, and the best efforts he could make, he forced back the Enemy,
killing 30000 of them, though with the loss of 1000 of his best Men. When he
came back from the Fight, he told his Friends, that he had often fought for
Victory, but this was the first time he had ever fought for Life. This Battle
was won on the Feast of the Bacchanals, the very day in which Pompey, four
years before, had set out for the War. The younger of Pompey's Sons escaped,
and Didius some days after the Fight brought the elder's Head to Caesar. This
was the last Battle he was engaged in. The Triumph he made for this Victory
displeased the Romans beyond any thing: For he had not defeated foreign
Generals, and barbarous Kings, but had ruined the Children and Family of one of
the greatest Men of Rome, though unfortunate; and it did not look well to
triumph over the Calamities of his Country, and to rejoice in those things for
which no better Apology could be made to the Gods and Men, then their being
absolutely necessary. Besides, that hitherto he had never sent Letter or
Express of any Victory over his Fellow-Citizens, but had seemed rather to be
ashamed of the Action, then to expect Honor from it. For all this, the Romans
taking the same side with Fortune, gave the Rein into his hands, and hoping
that the Government of a single Person would give them time to breathe after so
many Civil Wars and Calamities, made him Dictator for Life. This was a
downright Tyranny; for his Power now was not only absolute, but perpetual too.
Cicero proposed to the Senate to confer such Honors upon him as were indeed in
some measure within the bounds of modesty; Others striving which should deserve
most, carried them so excessively high, that they made Caesar odious to the
most indifferent and moderate sort of men by the haughtiness and extravagance
of those Titles which they decreed him. His Enemies are thought to have had
some share in this, as well as his Flatterers: it gave them more advantage
against him, and laid him more open to their Calumnies, for since the Civil
Wars were ended, he had nothing else that he could be charged with. And they
had good reason to decree a Temple to Clemency, in token of their Thanks for
this mild use he made of this Victory; for he not only pardoned many of those
who fought against him; but farther to some gave Honors and Offices: as
particularly to Brutus and Cassius, who both of them were Praetors; Pompey's
Images that were thrown down, he set up again; upon which Cicero said, that by
raising Pompey's Statues he had fixed his own. When his Friends advised him to
a Guard, and several offered their Service, he would not hear of it, but said,
It was better to suffer Death once; then always to live in fear of it. He
looked upon the Affections of the People to be the best and surest Guard, and
therefore entertained them again with public Feastings and general
Distributions of Corn; and to gratify his Army, he sent out many Colonies to
several places, of which the most remarkable were Carthage and Corinth; which,
as before they had been ruined at the same time, so now they were restored and
peopled together. As for the Men of Quality, he promised some that they should
be Consuls or Praetors; others he satisfied with Offices or Titles; to all he
gave hopes of his Favor, as being desirons to rule by Love: So that upon the
Death of Maximus, one day before his Consulate was ended, he made Caninius
Rebellius Consul for that day. When many went to pay their Complements to the
new Consul, as is usual, ^icero said by way of raillery, Let us make haste,
lest the Man be gone out of his Office before we come. Caesar was born to do
great things, and had a love of Honor; nor did the many Noble Exploits he had
done invite him to sit still, and reap the fruit of his past labors, but were
Incentives and Encouragements to go on, and raised in his Soul the Ideas of
still greater Actions, and a desire of new Glory, as if the present were all
spent. This Passion was a kind of aemulous struggle with himself, as it had
been with another, how he might outdo his past* Actions by his future. In
pursuit of these thoughts, he resolved to make War upon the Parthians, and when
he had subdued them, to pass through Hircania; thence to march along by the
Caspian Sea to Mount Caucasus, and so on about Pontus, till he came into
Scythia; then to overrun all the Countries about Germany, and Germany it self;
and to return through Gaul into Italy, till he had finished the whole Circle of
his intended Empire, and bounded it on every side by the Ocean. While
Preparations were making for this Expedition, he attempted to dig through the
Isthmus on which Corinth stands. Afterthat, he had a Design to divert the
Rivers Apien and Tiber, and to carry them by a deep Channel directly from Rome
to Circaeum, and so into the Sea near Tarracina, that there might be a safe and
easy Passage for all Merchants who traded to Rome. Besides this, he intended
to drain all the Marshes by Nomentum and Setium, and gain ground enough from
the Water to employ many Thousands of Men in Tillage. He proposed farther to
make great Mounds on the Shore nighest Rome, to hinder the Sea from breaking in
upon the Land; to cleanse the Ostian Shore of such hidden Shelves and Rocks as
made it unsafe for Shipping, and to build Ports and Harbors fit to receive such
large Vessels as used to ride thereabouts. These things were designed without
taking effect: but his Reformation of the Calendar, in order to rectify the
irregularity of Time, was not only ingeniously contrived, but brought to
perfection by him, and proved of very great use; For it was not only in ancient
Times that the Romans wanted a certain Rule to make the Revolutions of their
Months fall in with the Course of the Year, (whereby their Festivals and solemn
days for Sacrifice were removed by little and little, till at last they came to
be kept at a Season quite contrary to what they had been formerly) but even at
this time, the People had no way of computing right the Course of the Sun; only
the Priests had the knack, and at their pleasure, without giving any notice,
clapped in an intercalary Month, which they called Mercedonius. Numa was the
first who put in this Month, but his Invention was too narrow and short to
correct all the Errors that rose from their Computation of the Year, as we have
shown in his Life. Caesar called in the best Philosophers and Mathematicians of
his Time, to settle this Point; and upon Principles there proposed, established
a more exact and proper Method of correcting the Calendar; which the Romans use
to this day, and seem to err less then any other Nation in the Reduction of
this inequality of Months to the Year. Yet even this gave Offense to those who
envied his Grandeur, and were weary of his Power; for Cicero the Orator, when
one of the Company chanced to say, The next morning Lyra would rise; replied,
Yes, by virtue of the Edict; as if Men were forced by Authority to receive this
new Scheme. But that which brought upon him the most apparent and mortal
hatred, was his affectation of being King, which gave the Common People the
first Occasion to quarrel with him, and proved the most specious pretense to
those who had been his secret Enemies all along. Those who would have procured
him that Title, gave it out, That 'twas foretold in the Sibylls Books, that the
Romans should conquer the Parthians when they fought against them under the
Conduct of a King, but not before. And one day, as Caesar was going from Alba
to Rome, some were so bold as to salute him by the Name of King; but he finding
the People disrelish it, seemed to resent it himself, and said, His Title was
Caesar, not King. Upon this, they forbore their Acclamations, and he past on
with an air that expressed much sullenness and dissatisfaction. Another time,
when the Senate had conferred on him some extravagant Honors, he chanced to
receive the Message as he was sitting on the Rostra, where, though the Consuls
and Praetors themselves waited on him, attended by the whole Body of the
Senate, he did not rise, but behaved himself to them as if they had been
private Men, and told them, His Honors wanted rather to be retrenched, than
increased. This Carriage of his offended not only the Senate, but Commonalty
too; for they thought the affront upon the Senate equally reflected upon the
whole Republic; so that all who could decently leave him went off much
dejected. Caesar perceiving the false step he had made, immediately retired
home, and laying his Throat bare, told his Friends, That he was ready to stand
fair for any man that would do him the kind Office: Afterward he excused his
sitting by his Distemper, under pretense that those who are affected with it
have their senses discomposed, if they talk much standing; that they presently
grow giddy, fall iuto Convulsions, and quite lose their Reason. But all this
was feigned; for he would willingly have stood up to the Senate, had not
Cornelius Balbus, one of his Friends, or rather Flatterers, hindered him. Don't
you remember, says he, you are Caesar; and will you abate any thing of that
Honor which is due to your Dignity? He gave still a fresh occasion of
resentment by his affront to the Tribunes. The Lupercalia were then celebrated,
a Feast at the first Institution peculiar, as some Writers say, to the
Shepherds, much of the same nature with the Arcadian Lycaea: Many young
Noblemen and Magistrates run up and down the City naked, striking all they meet
with leathern Thongs, by way of sport; Many Women of the best Quality place
themselves in the way, and hold out their Hands to the Lash, as Boys in a
School do to the Ferula, out of an Opinion that it procures an easy Labor to
those who are with Child, and makes those conceive who are barren. Caesar dressed
in a Triumphal Robe, seated himself in a golden Chair upon the Rostra, to view
this Ceremony. Anthony, as Consul, was one of those who ran this Course; when
he came into the Forum, the People made way for him, whilst he presented Caesar
with a Diadem wreathed with Laurel. Upon this, there was a small shout, made
only by those few who were planted there for that purpose; but when Caesar
refused it, there was an universal applause. Upon the second offer, very few;
and upon the second refusal, all again clapped. Caesar finding it would not
take, rose up, and ordered the Crown to be carried into the Capitol. Caesar's
Statues were afterward found with Royal Diadems on their Heads; Flavius and
Marullus, two Tribunes of the People, went presently and pulled them off; and
having apprehended those who first saluted Caesar as King, committed them: The
People followed them with acclamations, and called them Brutus's, because
Brutus was the first who cut off the Succession of Kings, and transferred the
Power which before was lodged in One, into the hands of the Senate and People.
Caesar so far resented this, that he displaced Marullus and Flavius; and as he
inveighed against them, at the same time ridiculed the People, telling them, He
confessed those Men were indeed properly call Bruti and Cumaei [Beasts and
Sots.] This made the Multitude place their hopes on M. Brutus, who by his
Father's side was thought to be descended from that first Brutus, and by his
Mother's side from the Servilii, another Noble Family; being besides Nephew and
Son-in-law to Cato. But the Honors and Favors he had received from Caesar,
took off the edge from those eager Desires he naturally had to subvert the
Monarchy; for he had not only been pardoned himself after Pompey's Defeat at
Pharsalia, and had procured the same Grace for many of his Friends, but was one
in whom Caesar had a particular Confidence. He had at that time the most
honorable Praetorship of the Year, and was named for the Consulship four years
after, being preferred before Cassius his Competitor. Upon the Dispute between
them, Caesar said, That Cassius had the fairest Pretensions, but that he could
not pass by Brutus. Nor did he afterward hearken to those who accused Brutus,
as engaged in a Conspiracy against him; but laying his hand on his Body, said
to the Informers, Brutus will stay for this skin of mine; intimating, that he
was worthy of Empire on account of his Virtue, but would not be base and
ungrateful to gain one. But those who desired a Change, and looked on Him as
the only, or at least the most proper person to effect it, durst not discourse
the matter with him, but in the Nightime laid Papers about his Chair of
State, where he used to sit and determine Causes, with Sentences in them to
this import: You are asleep, Brutus; you are no longer Brutus. Cassius, when he
perceived his ambitious Soul a little raised upon this, was more instant then
before to work him yet farther, having himself a private grudge against Caesar,
for some Reasons that we have mentioned in the Life of Brutus. Nor was Caesar
without suspicions of him, so that he took occasion to say to his Friends, What
do you think Cassius drives at? I don't well like him, he looks so pale. And
when it was told him that Anthony and Dolabella were in a Plot against him, he
said, He did not fear such fat, jolly Men, but rather the pale, lean Fellows;
meaning Cassius and Brutus. But neither was his Fate so much unexpected, as it
was unavoidable; for there were many strange Prodigies and Apparations which
were Presages of it. As to the Lights in the Heavens, the Phantoms which walked
in the Night, and the wild Birds which perched upon the Forum, these are not
perhaps worth taking notice of in so great a Case as this. Strabo the
Philosopher tells us, that many as they went along seemed to be all on fire;
and that a Soldier's Servant seemed to throw a great quantity of flame out of
his hand, so that they who saw it thought he must be burnt, but that after all
he had no hurt. As Caesar was sacrificing, the Victim was seen to want an
Heart, which was a very ill Omen, because a Creature cannot subsist without an
Heart. Many add, that a Soothsayer bid him prepare for some great Danger on the
Ides of March: When the day was come, Caesar as he went to the Senate met this
Soothsayer, and said to him by way of raillery, The Ides of March are come; who
answered him calmly, Yes, they are come, but they are not past. The day before
this Assassination, he supped with M. Lepidus; as he was signing some Letters,
there arose a Dispute what sort of Death was the best? At which he immediately,
before any one could speak, said, A sudden one.

After this, as he was in Bed with his Wife, all the Doors and Windows of the
House flew open together; he was startled at the Noise, and the Light which
brake into the Room, and sat up in his Bed, where by the Moonshine he
perceived Calpurnia fast asleep, but heard her utter in her Dream some
indistinct words, and inarticulate groans. She fancied at that time she was
weeping over Caesar, and holding him butchered in her Arms. Others say, This
was not her Dream; but that she dreamt a Pinnacle (which the Senate had ordered
to be raised on Caesar's House by way of Ornament and Grandeur) was broken
down, which was the occasion of her tears and groans. When it was day, she
begged of Caesar, if it were possible, not to stir ou^, but to adjourn the
Senate to another time; and if he slighted her Dreams, that he would be pleased
to consult his Fate by Sacrifices and other kinds of Divination. Nor was he
himself without some suspicion and fears; for he never before discovered in
Calpurnia any Womanish Superstition, whom he now saw under such terrible
apprehensions. Upon the Report which the Priests made to him, that they had
killed several Sacrifices, and still found them inauspicious, he was resolved
to send Anthony to dismiss the Senate. D. Brutus, whose Surname was Albinus,
(one whom Caesar had such confidence in, that he made him his second Heir, tho
at the same time he was engaged in the Conspiracy with the other Brutus and
Cassius) fearing, lest if Caesar should put off the Senate to another day, the
business might get wind, took care to expose the Pretenders to Divination, and
blamed Caesar for giving the Senate so just Occasions of quarrelling with him,
by casting such a slur on them; for that they were met upon his Summons, and
were ready to vote unanimously, that he should be declared King of all the
Provinces without Italy, and might wear a Diademin any other place but Italy,
by Sea or Land. If any one should be sent to tell 'em they might break up for
the present, and meet again when Calpurnia should chance to have better Dreams;
what would his Enemies say? or who could with any patience hear his Friends, if
they should pretend to defend his Government as not Arbitrary and Tyrannical?
But if he was possessed so far as to think this day unfortunate, yet it were
more decent to go himself to the Senate, and to adjourn it in his own Person.
Brutus as he spoke these words took Caesar by the hand, and conducted him
forth: He was not gone far from the door, when a Servant made toward him; but
not being able to come up to him by reason of the Crowd who pressed about him,
he made shift to get into the House, and committed himself to Calpurnia,
begging of her to secure him till Caesar returned, because he had matters of
great importance to communicate to him. Artemidorus, a Cnidian, who taught the
Art of Sophistry in Greek, and by that means was so far acquainted with some
about Brutus, that he had got into the Secret, brought Caesar in a little
Schedule the Heads of what he had to depose. He had observed that Caesar as he
received any Papers presently gave 'em to the Servants who attended on him; and
therefore came as near to him as he could, and said, Read this, Caesar alone,
and quickly, for it contains great Business, and such as concerns you. Caesar
received it, and went to read it several times, but was still hindered by the
Crowd of those who came to speak to him. However, he kept it in his hand by it
self, till he came into the Senate. Some say it was another who gave Caesar
this Note, and that Artemidorus could not get to him, being all along kept off
by the Crowd. All these things might happen by chance: but the place where the
Senate met, which was chose out for the Scene of this Murder* was the same in
which Pompey's Statue stood, and was one of the Edifices which Pompey had
raised and dedicated with his Theater to the use of the Public; which plainly
showed that there was something of a Deity which guided the Action, and ordered
it to be in that particular place. Cassius just before the Assassination looked
toward Pompey's Statue, and silently implored his Assistance* though he was an
Epicurean in his Principles: but this Occasion, and the instant Danger, shook
his former Notions, and made him a perfect Enthusiast. As for Anthony, who was
firm to Caesar, and a lusty Person, Brutus Abinus kept him without the House,
and entertained him with a long Discourse contrived on purpose. When Caesar
entered into the House, the Senate stood up in respect to him; of Brutus's
Confederates some came about his Chair, and stood behind it; others met him,
pretending to supplicate with Metellus Cimber, in behalf of his Brother who was
in Exile; and they followed him with their joint Petitions till he came to his
Seat* When he was sat down, he refused to comply with their Requests, and upon
their urging him farther, reprimanded them severally: when Metellus laying hold
of his Robe with both his hands, pulled it over his Neck, which was the Signal
for the Assault. Casca gave him the first Cut in the Neck, which was not
mortal, nor dangerous, as coming from one who at the beginning of such a bold
Action was probably very much disturbed. Caesar immediately turned about, and
laid his Hand upon his Dagger; and both of 'em at the same time cried out: He
that received the Blow, in Latin, Wicked Casca! what do thou mean? and he
that gave it, in Greek, to his Brother, Brother, help! Upon the first Onset,
those who were not conscious to the Design were astonished; and their Horror at
the Action was so great, that they durst not fly, nor assist Caesar, nor as
much as speak a word. But those who came prepared for the Business, enclosed
him on every side with their naked Daggers in their Hands: Which way soever he
turned, he met with Blows, and saw their Swords levelled at his Face and Eyes,
and was baited on all sides, like a Beast taken in a Toil. For it was agreed
they should each of them make a Thrust at him, and flesh themselves with his
Blood; wherefore Brutus gave him one Stab in the Groin. Some say that he fought
and resisted all the rest, and moved off from one place to another, calling out
for Help: But when he saw Brutus's Sword* drawn, he covered his Face with his
Robe, and quietly surrendered himself, till he was pushed, either by Chance, or
by Design of the Murderers, to the Pedestal, on which Pompey's Statue stood,
which by that means was much stained with his Blood; so that Pompey himself may
seem to have had his share in the Revenge of his Enemy, who fell at his Feet,
and breathed out his Soul through his multitude of Wounds; for they say he
received Three and Twenty. The Assassinates themselves were many of them
wounded by each other, whilst they all levelled their Blows at the same Person.

When Caesar was dispatched, Brutus stood forth to give a Reason for what they
had done; but the Senate would not hear him* but flew out of doors in all
haste, and filled the People with so much Fear and Distraction, that some shut
up House, others left their Counters and Shops. All ran one way or other; some
to the Place, to see the sad Spectacle; others back again, after they had seen
it. Anthony and Lepidus, Caesar's best Friends, got off privately, and
absconded themselves in some Friends Houses. Brutus and his Followers, being
yet hot with the Murder, marched in a Body from the Senate House to the
Capitol with their drawn Swords, not like Persons who thought of escaping, but
with an Air of Confidence and Assurance. As they went along, they called to the
People to resume their Liberty, and complimented those of better Quality, which
they met. Some of those went along with them, and joined Company with the
Conspirators, pretending to the Honor of the Action, as if they had born a
part in it. Of this number was C. Octavius, and Lentulus Spinther: These
suffered afterward for their Vanity, being taken off by Anthony, and the
younger Caesar; but they lost the Honor they desired, as well as their Lives,
which it cost them, since no one believed they had any share in the Action; for
neither did those who punished them revenge the Fact, but the ill Will. The day
after, Brutus with the rest came down from the Capitol, and made a Speech to
the People, who attended to it, without expressig either any Pleasure or
Resentment, but showed by their deep silence that they pitied Caesar, and
reverenced Brutus. The Senate made Acts of Oblivion for what was past, and took
healing Measures to reconcile all Parties; They ordered that Caesar should be
worshipped as a God, and that not any the least thing should be altered which
he had enacted during his Government; At the same time, they gave Brutus and
his Followers the Command of Provinces, and other considerable Posts: so that
all People now thought things were well settled, and put into a very good
Posture. But when Caesar's Will was opened, and it was found that he had left a
Considerable Legacy to each one of the Roman Citizens; and when his Body was
seen carried through the MarketPlace all mangled with Wounds, the Multitude
could no longer contain themselves within the Bounds of Decency and Order, but
heaped together a Pile of Benches, Bars, and Tables, which they placed the
Corpse on, and setting Fire to it, burnt them. Then they took* Firebrands, and
ran some to fire the Houses of the Assassinates, others up and down the City,
to find out the Men, and Limb them; but they met with none of them, they having
taken effectual Care to secure themselves.

One Cinna, a Confident of Caesar's, chanced the Night before to have an odd
Dream: He fancied that Caesar invited him to Supper; and that upon his Refusal
to go with him, Caesar took him by the Hand, and forced him, though he hung
back. Upon Notice that Caesar's Body was burning in the Marketplace, he got
up, and went thither, out of respect to his Memory, though his Dream gave him
some ill Apprehensions; and though he was at the same time Fevorish. One of the
Rabble who saw him there, asked another, Who that was? And having learnt his
Name, told it to his next Neighbor: It presently went for current, that he was
one of Caesar's Murderers; and indeed there was one Cinna a Conspirator: They
taking this to be the Man, immediately Seized him, and tore him Limb from Limb
upon the Spot.

Brutus and Cassius, frighted at this, within a few days retired out of the
City. What they afterward did and suffered, and how they died, is written in
the Life of Brutus. Caesar died in his Fifty sixth year, not having survived
Pompey above four years: That Empire and Power which he had pursued through the
whole Course of his Life with so much Hazard, he did at last with much
difficulty compass; but reaped no other Fruits from it then an empty Name, and
invidious Title. But that happy Genius, which was Propitious to him during his
Life, seems to have stuck to him after his Death, as the Revenger of his
Murder; for it pursued by Sea and Land all those who were concerned in it, and
suffered none to escape, but reached all who were either actually engaged in
the Fact, or by their Councels any way promoted it.

The most signal Accident of all here below, was that which befell Cassius, who
when he was conquered at Philippi, killed himself with the same Dagger which he
had made use of against Caesar. The most remarkable Appearance in the Heavens
was a great Comet, which shone bery bright for seven Nights after Caesar's
Death, and then disappeared. There was also a very faint Light in the Sun; for
the Orb of it was pale for the space of an Year, nor did it rise with its usual
Brightness and Vigor. Hence it gave but a weak and feeble Heat, and
consequently the Air was damp and gross, for want of stronger Rays to open and
rarifie it: The Fruits, for that Reason, were crude and unconcocted, so that
they rotted and decayed, through the Chilness of the Air. Above all, the
Phantom which appeared to Brutus, showed the Murder was not pleasing to the
Gods. The Story of it is this.

Brutus being to pass his Army from A^ydos to the Continent on the other side,
laid himself down one Night, as he used to do, in his Tent, and was not
a-sleep, but thinking of his Affairs, and what Events he might expect: For he
was naturally of a watchful Constitution* and very little inclined to Sleep. He
thought he heard a Noise at the Door of his Tent, and looking that way, by the
Light of his Lamp, which was almost out, saw a terrible Figure, like that of a
Man, but of an extraordinary Bulk, and grim Countenance. He was somewhat
frighted at first: but seeing it neither did nor spoke any thing to him, only
stood silently by his Bedside, he asked it at last, Who it was? The Spectre
answered him, I am thy Evil Genius, Brutus, and thou shall see me by Philippi.
Brutus answered very courageously, Well, I will see you there; and immediately
the Ghost vanished. When the time was come, he drew up his Army near Philippi
against Anthony and Caesar, and in the first Battle got the Day, routed the
Enemy, and plundered Caesar's Camp. The Night before the second Battle, the
same Ghost appeared to him again, but spoke not a word. He presently understood
his Death was near, and exposed himself to all the Danger of the Battle: yet he
did not die in the Fight; but seeing his Men defeated, got up to the top of a
Rock, and there presenting his Sword to his naked Breast, and assisted, as they
say, by a Friend, who helped him to give the Thrust, died upon the Spot.

FINIS.
(...) PHOCION.
depiction of Phocion (...)

MBurgh. sculp.

commonly said, That the Populace is most insulting and contumelious to great
men, when they are puffed up with Prosperity and Success, the contrary often
happens; Afflictions and public Calamities naturally eagering and sowring the
Minds and Manners of men, and disposing them to such Peevishness and Chagrin,
that hardly can any one carry himself so swimmingly in his words or actions,
but they will be apt to take pett: he that remonstrates to their Miscarriages,
is interpreted to insult over their Misfortunes, and even the mildest
Expostulations are construed Contempt: Honey it self is searching in sore and
ulcerated parts; and the wisest, though soft Counsels, may prove to be
provoking to distempered minds, that have not well prepared ears to entertain
them. This made the Poet express such applications, by a word signifying (...)
a grateful and easy touch upon the mind, without harshness or offense:
inflamed Eyes require a retreat into gloomy and dusky places, amongst Colors
of the deepest shades, unable to endure the vigorous and glaring light: So
fares it in the Body politic, when heated with Factions and Irresolution;
there is a certain Niceness and touchy Humor prevails in the Minds of men, and
an unaccountable jealousy of any person that with openness and freedom offers
to scan their actions, even when the necessities of their affairs most require
such plain-dealing. And surely such a condition of State is most ticklish, when
those who endeavor to stem the popular Torrent, are in danger to be run down
by them, and those who humor them, to be swallowed up with them in the common
ruin.

Astronomers tell us, the Sun's motion is neither exactly parallel with the
rest of the Orbs, nor yet directly and diametrically opposite to them; but
describing an oblique line, with insensible declination, he steers his course
so, to dispense his Light and Influence, in his annual Revolution, at several
Seasons, in equal proportions, to the whole Creation: so it happens in
political Affairs, that if the motions of Rulers be constantly opposite and
cross to the Genius and inclination of the People, they will be stomach'd as
arbitrary and tyrannical; as on the other side, too much Deference and
Indulgence to the Subjects Levity and Wantonness, has often proved dangerous and
fatal; but the gratifying them in reasonable and fair Requests, when they are
not masterly and insolent, may prove for the honor and safety of the
Government: yet it must be confessed, it is a nice Point, and extreme
difficult, so to temper this Lenity, as to preserve the Authority of the
Government, that it may not be exposed to the Peoples Affront and Contempt. But
if such a blessed Mixture and Temperament may be obtained, it seems to be the
most regular and harmonious of all other; for thus we are taught even God
governs the World, not (...)
by irresistible sorce, but persuasive Arguments and gentle Insinuations into
our Minds, bending them to compliance with his eternal Purposes.

Thus it befell Cato the younger, whose Manners were so little agreeable or
acceptable to the People, that he received very slender marks of their Favor;
witness his repulse in the Pretenses he made to the Consulate, behaving
himself, as Cicero observes, rather like a Citizen of Plato's Commonwealth,
than among the Lees of Romulus's Posterity: the same thing happening to him, in
my opinion, as we observe in Fruits ripe before their season* which we rather
gaze at and admire than use; so much was his old-fashioned Virtue out of
present mode, considering the depraved Customs, Time and Luxury had introduced,
that it appeared (indeed) sightly and splendid, but suited not the present
Exigencies, being so disproportioned to the Manners in vogue, and the guise of
the present Times. Yet his Circumstances were not altogether like Phocion's who
came to the Helm when the public Bottom was just upon sinking. Cato's Time
was, indeed, stormy and tempestuous, yet so as he was able to assist in
managing the Sails, and lend his helping hand to those that steered: his manly
resolution gave Fortune a task of Time and difficulty in ruining the
Commonwealth, in which he and his Friends had almost prevailed against her,
which yet, by other assistance, with long time and tugging, by slow degrees was
afterward effected.

Now we compare Phocion to him, not only in the common Resemblances that appear
amongst great Men and Statesmen; for indeed there is some difference among
Virtues of the same denomination, as the Valor of Alcibiades and Epaminondas,
the Prudence of Themistocles and Aristides, the Justice of Numa and Agesilaus.
But these men's Virtues are the same, even to the most minute differences,
having the same color, stamp and character impressed upon them, so as not to
be distinguishable; whether you look upon them in the exact mixture on the one
hand, with austerity on the other; their Gallantry upon some occasions, and
Caution on others; their extreme solicitude for the Public, and perfect
neglect of themselves; their fixed and immovable bent to all virtuous and honest
Actions, accompanied with an extreme tenderness and scrupulosity of doing any
thing might appear mean or unworthy: so that in these, as in two Instruments
exactly tuned to each other, he must have a nice Ear that can perceive any
Discord.

As to Cato's Extraction, it is confessed by all to be illustrious, (as shall be
said hereafter) nor was Phocion's (I Am well assured) obscure or ignoble; for
had he been the Son of a Turner, (as Idomeneus reports) it had certainly not
been forgot to his disparagement, by Hyperides the Son of Glaucippus, who
heaped up a thousand spiteful things against him: nor indeed was it possible
for him in such Circumstances to have had such liberal Education in his Youth,
as to be first Plato's, and afterward Xenocrates's Scholar in the Academy, and
in whatever gentile Accomplishments, to have been all along emulous of the very
best of his Contemporaries. His Countenance was so composed, that scarce was he
ever seen by the Athenians laughing, or in tears; he indulged not himself in
the luxury of the public Baths, (as Douris reports) nor ever had his Hands
without his Cloak, when he appeared dressed in public: Abroad and in the Camp
he was so hardy to go always thin clad and barefoot, except the Frost was
vehement and intolerable, that the Soldiers used to say in Merriment, that it
was a hard Winter like to be, when Phocion wore his Shoes. Although he was of
most easy Conversation and great Humanity, his appearance was morose and sour,
so that he was seldom accosted by any that were Strangers to him: upon which
occasion Chares, upon a time jeering his supercilious Look, and the Athenians
applauding him for it, Phocion replied My Sullenness never made any of you sad,
but these men's Jollity has given you sorrow enough. In like manner Phocion's
Discourse was grave and pithy, full of useful Remarks with a sententious
brevity, awful and austere, however unpleasant: after the manner as Zeno says a
Philosopher should speak, his words thoroughly tinctured with the inward sense
of his mind; such was Phocion's who crowded much into little room: and to this
probably Polyeuctus the Sphettian had regard, when he said, that Demosthenes
was indeed the best Orator of his time, but Phocion the most powerful Speaker;
whose words were to be estimated like smaller Coins from the intrinsic value
of the Metal, not from the bulk. He was observed sometimes, when the Theater
was filled with Spectators, to walk musing alone behind the Scenes, which one
of his Friends once taking notice of, said, Phocion, you seem to be thoughtful;
^es verily, replied he, I am considering wherein I may retrench what I am to
say to the Athenians. Even Demosthenes himself, who used to despise the rest of
the Haranguers, when he rose up, was wont to say presently to those about him,
Now mark, says he, the Pruning-hook (...).
of my Periods. But this perhaps may be referred to the Authority of the man,
since not only a word, but even a nod from a person had in reverence, is of
more force than the most studied and elaborate Speeches of others. In his Youth
he served under Chabrias, at that time General, whom he greatly honored, and
by him was abundantly instructed in military Knowledge; and in return, helped
to correct his Humor, which was odd and capricious: for being otherways
naturally heavy and phlegmatic, he was so fired and transported in heat of
Fight, that he threw himself headlong into danger beyond the forwardest; which
indeed cost him his Life in the Island of Chio, having pressed his own Ship
foremost, to force a descent into the Haven. But Phocion being a man of Temper
as well as Courage, had the dexterity at some times to warm the General's
Phlegm, and at others to moderate and cool the impetuousness of his unseasonable
Fury. Upon which account Chabrias, being a good natured man, loved him
extremely, and preferred him to Offices and Commands, and effectually
recommended him to the Athenians, using his assistance, and taking his advice
in all his Affairs of moment: particularly the Sea fight at Naxus made not a
little to Phocion's Reputation; for having the left Squadron committed to him
by Chabrias, he so managed the Matter, that the Controversy was quickly
decided in their favor by a speedy Victory: and this being the first
prosperous Dispute the City had with the Groecians, by its single force, since
it was under Hatches, Chabrias the General was mightily adored, and Phocion
magnified as a man worthy of the greatest Trust and Command. This Victory
happened at the great Solemnities, and Chabrias appointed an Anniversary to
commemorate it on the 16th. of August, on which it was obtained, and
distributed a Largess of Wine among the Athenians. Much about this time
Chabrias sent Phocion to demand their Quota of the Charges of the War from the
Islanders, and proffering him a Guard of 20 Sail, he told him, if he intended
him to go against them as Enemies, that force was insignificant; if as to
Friends and Allies, one Vessel was sufficient: so he took one single Galley,
and having visited the Cities, and treated with the Governors friendly and
apertly, he returned with a good number of Ships, sent by the Confederates to
Athens, with supplies for their maintenance. Neither did his Friendship to
Chabrias determine with his Life, but after his decease was religiously
maintained to all that related to him: chiefly his Son Ctesippus he labored to
bring into some decorum, and although he was a very stupid and unhewn young
Fellow, he ceased not, what in him lay, to correct and cover his faults and
follies; once when the Youngster was very impertinent and troublesome to him in
the Camp, about ordering the Army, still shooting his Bolt, interrupting him
with idle Questions, and documentizing Phocion with his silly Opinions in the
Matter, he could not forbear crying out, O Chabrias, Chabrias, this is the
greatest test of my Friendship to thee, to endure this Blockhead!

Upon looking into public Matters, and the Managers of them, he observed they
had shared the administration of Affairs among themselves, as it were by Lot;
the Swordmen, and those of the long Robe, so as not to interfere with each
other: these were to manage the Assemblies, register their Votes, and publish
their Acts and Edicts, of whom were Eubulus, Aristophon, Demosthenes, Lycurgus
and Hyperides; this was a gainful Trade among them, and the men of the Blade,
as Diopithes, Menestheus, Leosthenes and Charetas, by their military Emploies,
carved out fair Proportions for themselves out of the public Stock. Now
Phocion was o^ opinion, that such a model of Government as that of Pericles,
Aristides and Solon, wherein the same person acted both Parts, in propounding
Laws and ordering the Militia, was a more perfect, uniform and regular Mixture,
and would redound most to the common Good and Safety; each of these persons
being well qualified for both purposes, that I may use Archilocus's words

Mars and the Muses Friends alike designed,
To Arts and Arms indifferently inclined.
Minerva being styled the Patroness and Protectress of Arts both Civil and
Military.

Phocion having thus considered with himself, his Inclinations and Genius were
always for peace and quietness, yet was he engaged in more Wars than any of his
Predecessors; never indeed promoting or encouraging such Designs, nor, on the
other hand, shunning or declining any Enterprise when he was called to it by
the public necessity of the State. And thus much is well known, that he was no
less than 45 several times chosen General, when he was never once of those
times present in the Assembly; but the Command, in his absence, by common
Suffrage, conferred on him, and he sent for on purpose to undertake it:
insomuch that it amazed those that did not well consider, to see the People
always prefer Phocion, who was so far from humouring them, or courting their
Favor, that he always thwarted and opposed them. But so it was, as great Men
and Princes use their Buffoons and Jesters after Meals, for their Disport and
Merriment, so the Athenians upon slight occasions entertained and diverted
themselves with their spruce Speakers and trim Orators; but when it came to
dint of Action, they were so sober and considerative to mark out the gravest
and wisest for public Employment, however opposite to their Sentiments. This
he made no scruple to own, upon the occasion of the Oracle of Delphos being
read, which informed them, that the rest of the Citizens being unanimous, there
was one only person so presumptuous to abound in his own sense, which he
frankly told them was himself, bidding them look no further, for he indeed was
nothing satisfied in all their proceedings. Happening afterward to speak his
own opinion, to the General approbation of the Assembly, turning to some of his
Friends, he demanded of them, What foolish thing had escaped him unawares to
merit their Applause?

Upon occasion of a public Festivity, being solicited for his Contribution,
by the example of others, and pressing him much, he bid them apply themselves
to the wealthy, for his part he should blush to be so prodigal to throw away
any thing, whilst he was in the Usurer's Books, pointing to Callicles the
Scrivener. Being still clamoured on and importuned, he told them this Tale: A
certain white liver'd Fellow intending for the Wars, hearing the Ravens croak
in his passage, threw down his Arms, resolving to be quiet: recollecting
himself after, he adventured out again, but hearing the same Music, made a
full stop, saying, they might tear their Throats (if they pleased) for joy of
smelling a Feast, but for his part he was resolved to save his Skin.

The Athenians urging him at an unseasonable time to fall upon the Enemy, he
peremptorily refused, and being upbraided by them with Cowardice and
Pusillanimity, he told them, Gentlemen, we understand one another very well;
you cannot make me valiant at this time, nor I you wise. In time of security,
the people were very pert and severe upon him, demanding a strict account how
the public Treasure had been employed and the like: He bid them first be
assured of their safety, and after mind their good Husbandry: in effect, the
passions of the Mobile altered with their Affairs, being extreme timorous and
submiss in times of danger; when that was blown over, insolent and over*
bearing, clamouring upon Phocion as one that envied them the honor of Victory.
To all which he made only this Answer, My Friends, you are happy that have a
Leader knows your humors, or you had long since been undone.

Having a Controversy with the Boeotians about Boundaries, which he counseled
them to decide by Treaty, they inclined to Blows; he told them, Gentlemen, for
my part I think it advisable for you to have a trial of skill at the Weapons
you can best manage (your Tongues) and not your Hands, in which you are
inferior. Once when he was speaking, they run him down with noise, not
suffering him to go on, or enduring to hear him: Well, Sirs, quoth he, you may
overpower me to do what I would not, but you shall never force me to say any
thing contrary to my sense. The whole Crew of Haranguers upon a time bandying
against him, Demosthenes said, Phocion, the Athenians will tear thee piece-
meal, if once they grow enraged; and thee, says he, when they return to their
right minds. Observing Polyeuctus the Sphettian a very corpulent man, with
earnestness, till he wanted breath and dropped again with sweat, laboring the
Assembly for a War against King Philip; This indeed, says he, is a proper
person to persuade you to Action, and will doubtless behave himself notably in
back and breast, that with talking only has almost melted his grease. When
Lycurgus had spoken many reflecting and scurrillous things against him, closing
with that of his advising them to deliver ten of the Citizens for Hostages,
which Alexander had demanded; he coolly replied, That he had been the Author of
much safe and wholesome Counsel, which had not been followed. There was a man
called Archibiades, nicknamed the Lacedoemonian, affecting their Gravity, by
wearing an overgrown mossie Beard, an old leaguer Cloak, with a very formal
Countenance: Phocion being teased by the rest, made sure of this man for his
Advocate and Compurgat^r; but finding him when he began to speak, smoothing and
weadling with the predominant Faction, taking him by the Beard, he cried, Nay
Friend, if you turn Courtier, by all means off with your Gravity. Aristogeiton
the Sycophant, was a terrible man of War within the doors of the House, always
sounding to horse and inflaming them to Battle; but when the Muster-rool came
to be produced, where every ones Name was that was fit for service, he came
limping with his Crutch to the Meeting, with a world of Bandage on his Leg,
like a maimed Soldiers: Phocion spied him afar off coming in, and cried out to
the Clerk, Set down Aristogeiton too for a counterfeit Cripple. It was a little
to be admired, how a man so severe and smart upon all occasions as Phocion was,
should notwithstanding maintain his Respect and Reputation with the People; yet
though difficult, it is not impossible a man's Temper, like some Wines, may
have a sweetness mixed with some harshness also, not at all ungrateful; as on
the contrary, some are so extreme luscious, they are both untasty and
unwholsom. Hyperides who was sour and sarcastical, used to excuse it to the
Athenians, by saying, Consider, (...)
I pray, whether I have designed any advantage by my bitterness; as though a
covetous Design were the only unsupportable Grievance, and not also men may
justly render themselves obnoxious to Censure, by abusing their Authority, with
Pride and Passion to prevail upon the weakness, and awe the minds of the
Vulgur. But Phocion had no personal Pique nor Spleen to any man, nor indeed
reputed any man his Enemy, but who contravened his Proposals for the Weal
public; in which Argument he was most tenacious, sturdy and uncontrollable:
for his general Conversation, it was easy, courteous and obliging to all, to
that point, as to befriend all sorts in distress, and even espouse the Cause of
those who differed most from him, when they needed his Patronage. His Friends
reproaching him for pleading in behalf of an ill man, he told them, The
innocent had no occasion for an Advocate. Aristogeiton the Sycophant, we
mentioned before, having after Sentence passed upon him, sent earnestly to
Phocion to speak with him in the Prison, his Friends dissuaded him from going;
Why, by your favor, says he, where should I rather choose to make Aristogeiton
a Visit?

As for the Friends and Allies of the Athenians the Islanders, whenever any
Admiral besides Phocion was sent, they treated him as an Enemy suspect,
barricado'd their Gates blocked up their Havens, drove the Country of their
Cattle, Slaves, Wives and Children, and put them in Garrison: but upon
Phocion's Arrival, they went out to welcome him in their Shallops and Barges,
with Streamers and Garlands, and received him at Landing, with all
demonstrations of Joy and Triumph. At this time King Philip made a descent into
Euboea bringing thither an Army from Macedonia, endeavoring to gain the Cities
to his Interest, by the means of their Governors: Plutarch of Eretria (a City
in Euboea) was sent to pray Aid of the Athenians, toward the relief of the
Island, that was in imminent danger of being surprised by the Macedonians.
Phocion was sent thither with a handful of men, (in comparison) in expectation
the Country would flock in amain to him; but when he came, he found all things
in confusion, the Country betrayed, all corrupted by Bribery, and bought and
sold by the Pensioners to King Philip, insomuch that he ran the greatest risque
imaginable. To secure himself the best he could, he possessed himself of a small
rising Ground, which was divided from the Camp about Taminias, by a large
Trench, in which he enclosed the choicest of his Army: for the Praters and idle
Vagabonds that straggled from the Camp, and forsook their Colors, he bid his
Officers not regard them, for that they would not only be disorderly and
ungovernable themselves, but be a hindrance to the rest; and further being
conscious to themselves of the neglect of their duty, they would be less apt to
prate and misrepresent the Action, or bespatter them at their return home. When
the Enemy drew nigh, he commanded them to stand to their Arms, whilst he went
to sacrifice; in which he spent a considerable time, either by the te*
diousness of the thing it self, or on purpose to invite the Enemy nearer.
Plutarch interpreting this tardiness as a failure in his Courage, fell on alone
with the Auxiliaries; which the Cavalry perceiving, could not be contained, but
issuing also out of the Camp confusedly and disorderly, spurred up to the
Enemy. The Van by this means was worsted, the rest were easily dispersed, and
Plutarch himself showed a fair pair of heels, as judging the whole Army had
been routed. But by this time, the Sacrifice being over, those within the Camp
made a Head, and fell upon them that were got to the Ditch, putting them to
flight, and cutting many of them in pieces: and Phocion having ordered a
particular Squadron to watch their motions, and pursue those that first gave
way in the Skirmish, himself afterward, with a reserve of his best men,
engaged the whole Body of the Enemy in a sharp and bloody Fight, in which all
of them behaved themselves with remarkable Courage and Gallantry. Thallus the
Son of Cineas, and Glaucus of Polymedes, that fought near the General,
signalized themselves; so did also Cleophanes merit the Reputation of a brave
man, having every where laid about him, and called upon the Horse that were
wheeling, to succor the General, who was in danger, he made them face about,
so as to confirm the Victory already obtained by the Infantry. By which means
Plutarch was driven out of Eretria, and the commodious Castle of it was taken,
being situate in that part of the Island, where it is narrowed into a small
neck of Land, the rest of the Island being surrounded other-where by the Sea.

He would not permit them to take any of the Greeks Prisoners, for fear the
Orators at Athens should inflame the People against them, to determine
something to their prejudice.

This Affair thus dispatched and settled, Phocion set Sail homewards, having
given most manifest tokens of his Justice and Humanity to the Allies, and to
the Athenians indisputable proofs of his Courage and Conduct. His Successor
Molossus had worse fate to fall alive into the Enemies hands, which inspired
Philip with great thoughts and designs, to move with all his force into the
Hellespont, so to the Chersonesus and Perinthus, and on to Byzantium. The
Athenians raising Recruits to relieve them, the Demagogues made it their
business to prefer Chares to be General, who sailing thither, effected nothing
worthy of such an Equipage; nor would the Confederates harbor his Fleet,
having jealousy of him, so that he did nothing but pirate about, pillaging
their Friends, and despised by their Enemies. Upon this occasion, the People
being chased by the Orators, were in great Ferment, and highly enraged they had
been so fooled, to send any Succor to the Byzantines: whereupon Phocion rising
up, told them, My Masters, you have not so much reason to be concerned at the
Jealousies of your Friends, as the Unfaithfulness of your own Generals, who
render you suspected, even to those who yet cannot possibly subsist without your
Succors. The Assembly being moved with this Speech of his, changed their minds
on the sudden, and commanded him immediately to raise more Force, and assist
their Confederates in the Hellespont, which would be of the greatest moment for
the security of Byzantium.

At this time Phocion's Name was up, and an old Acquaintance of his, who had
been his fellow-Student in the Academy, Cleon, a man of highest renown for
Virtue among the Byzantines, having vouched for Phocion to the City, they
opened their Gates to receive him, not permitting him (though he desired it) to
incamp without the Walls, but entertained him and all the Athenians with entire
Respect; and they to requite their Considence, conversed with their new Hosts,
not only soberly and inoffensively, but behaved themselves on all occasions
with great cheerfulness and resolution for their detence. Thus came King Philip
to be driven out of the Hellespont, and despised to boot, who was till now
thought impossible to be matched, and even apprehended invincible. Phocion also
took some of his Ships, and retook some of the Places he had garrisoned, making
besides several Inrodes into the Country, which he plundered and overrun,
until such time as he happened to be wounded by some of them that came to his
Assistance, he made off toward home.

The Megareans at this time privately praying Aid of the Athenians, Phocion
fearing lest the Boeotians being aware of it, should prevent them called an
Assembly very early in the morning, and backing the Boeotians Petition, it was
put to the Question, and voted in their favor. As soon as ever it was done, he
made Proclamation immediately by sound of Trumpet, and led them off straight
from the Assembly, to arm and put themselves in posture. The Megareans received
them joyfully, they helped them to fortify Nisoea, and build two new Bulwarks
on each side, from the City to the Haven, and so joined it to the Sea; so that
being sufficiently defended on the Land side from the Assailants, it was
secured to the Athenians.

Now was the time that the Liberty of Greece was openly disputed with King
Philip, and at Athens such Chiefs chosen in Phocion's absence, that at his
arrival from the Islands he dealt earnestly with the Athenians, (being deeply
possessed what danger might ensue) that since Philip showed some peaceable
Inclinations toward them, they would consent to a Treaty, being contradicted
in this by a prating pick-thank Fellow of those sort of Vermin that haunt the
Places of public (...), Forum maximum Athenis sub dio.
Assembly, (this was a famous Place of the Athenians meeting open to the Air.)
This saucy Companion asking Phocion, if he durst presume to persuade the
Athenians to Peace now their Swords were in their hands? Yes, said he, I dare,
though I Am satisfied I shall be thy Master in time of War, and thou (perhaps)
mine in time of Peace. Since he could not prevail, and Demosthenes's opinion
carried it, advising them to make War, as far off home as possible, (that was
to the far side of Attica) Phocion argued, that in these Matters the Place was
not so much to be considered, as the probability of Success, for by this the
distance of War was to be measured; to be sure, those that were worsted, would
have it quickly brought home to theirs doors. Accordingly Matters succeeding
ill, the Innovators and Incendiaries haling up Charidemus to the Tribunal, to
be nominated to the Command, the best of the Senators were in a panick fear,
and called a Meeting of the People at Areopagus, where with Entreaties and
Tears they hardly prevailed to have Phocion preferred and entrusted with the
care of the City. He was of opinion that the fair Terms Philip proposed, were
to be accepted; yet after demades had propounded, that the City should receive
the self same conditions, that were tendered to the rest of the States of
Greece, he opposed it, till it were known what the Particulars were King Philip
had demanded. Being overborn in this Advice at that juncture of time, presently
after the Athenians sufficiently repented it, when they understood that by them
Articles, they were obliged to furnish Philip both with horse and Shipping:
This, Gentlemen, says he, I foresaw, and therefore opposed; but since you have
now articled, make the best on it, be courageous, and bear it as well as you
can, remembering that your Ancestors using their Fortune indifferently,
sometimes giving Laws, at other times truckling, performed each part with
decorum, and perserved not only their own City, but the rest of Greece.

Upon the news of Philip's Death, he would not suffer the People to make
Bonfires, or other public demonstrations of Joy and Jubilee, minding them how
ungenerous it was to insult upon such an occasion, and that the Army that had
fought them at Cheronoea was lessened by one man only.

When Demosthenes made Invectives against Alexander, who was now set down
before Thebes, he repeated those Verses of Homer:

What mean thou, Fool, with rage to swell his Breast,
Already full, with glorious hopes possessed?
What Is this but adding fresh fuel to the Fire, and pushing your selves
forwards into the Flames, that are already devouring the Neighborhood; for my
part (says he) I will not be consenting to your destroying your selves, though
you should court me to it, and for this end only have I continued my Command.

After Thebes was lost, and Alexander had demanded Demosthenes, Lycurgus,
Hyperides, and Charidemus to be delivered up, the whole Assembly turning their
eyes frequently and intently upon him, and calling on him also by Name to
deliver his opinion; at last he rose up, laying hold upon one of his most dear
and intimate Friends, that he loved and confided in above all others, telling
them, Sirs, you have brought things amongst you to that pass, that for my part
should he demand this my Friend Nicocles, I would not refuse him, and should
think it the greatest happiness my self, to sacrifice my own Life and Fortune
for your safety; for truly, says he, it pierces my heart to see those that are
fled hither for Succor from the desolation of Thebes; and surely it will be
more for the common Interest, that we rather deprecate the Conqueror, and
intercede for both, than run the hazard of another Battle.

When this was decreed by the Commonalty, Alexander is said to have rejected
their first Address when it was presented, throwing it back scornfully, and
turning his back on the Ambassadors, they departed; but the 2d. which was
presented by Phocion, he graciously received, understanding by the grave
Seniors, how much Philip always held him in the highest Esteem and Veneration;
and not only accepted his Memorial and Petition, but also permitted him to
advise him; which he did to this effect, that if his designs were for Peace and
Quietness, he should put a stop to his Career, if the glory of his Arms were
his aim, he should do well to divert them from Greece, and turn them on the
Barbarians. With diverse such insinuations, dexterously fitted to the Humor and
Genius of Alexander, he so won upon him, and softened his Temper, that he was
heard to say, The Athenians ought to value themselves, for if any thing amiss
betided him, they only were worthy of the Sovereignty. Conversing thus with
Phocion as his Friend and Confident, he did him that Honor, which few of those
that were next his Person ever received; insomuch that Douris reports, when he
grew great and high, after the Defeat of Darius, he left off the word Greeting
in all his Letters, except in only those that were directed to Phocion and
Antipater he condescended to use it, which also is confirmed by Chares. As for
his Munificence to him, it is well known he sent him a Present at one time of a
100 Talents, which being brought to Athens, Phocion demanded of the Bearers,
how it came to pass, that among all the rest of the Athenians, he alone should
be so highly obliged to his Bounty? and being told, that Alexander esteemed him
(only) a Person of Honor and Worth: May it please him then, (said he) to
permit me to continue so, and be still so reputed. Following him to his House,
and observing his simple and plain way of Living, his Wife employed in the
Pastry-work with her own hands, himself pumping Water to wash his Feet; they
pressed him to accept it, with some Indignation, being ashamed, (as they said)
that Alexander's Friend should live so poorly and pitifully. Phocion taking
notice of a poor old Fellow in a tattered Coat passing by, asked them, If they
thought him in worse condition than that poor Wretch? They begged his pardon
for the Comparison; yet, says he, this man has less to live upon than I and is
content; and in short, I must tell you, if this sum be more than I can use, it
is altogether superfluous; if I live up to it, I shall give cause of jealousy
both of your Master and my self to the rest of the Citizens. So the Treasure
was returned back from Athens, giving the Gracians an illustrious Example, how
much truly richer the man is, who by contracting his mind, has no occasion for
more, than him who by the largeness of his Fortunes is capable of the largest
Munificence. Alexander was displeased at this, and writ to him again,
acquainting him, That he could not esteem those his Friends, who thought much
to be obliged by him. Yet neither would this prevail with Phocion to accept the
Money, but he made use of his favor to intercede for Echecratides the Sophist,
and Athenodorus the Imbrian, as also for Demaratus and Sparton, two Rhodians,
that had been convicted of certain Crimes, and were in custody at Sardis, that
he would please to enlarge them: This was presently granted by Alexander, and
they were set at liberty. Afterward sending Craterus into Macedonia, he
commanded him to make him an Offer of four Cities in Asia; Cio, Gergetho,
Mylassis and Eloea, any of which, at his choice, should be delivered to him;
being instant with him, and declaing he should resent it, should he continue
obstinate in his refusal; but Phocion was not to be prevailed with at all, and
presently after Alexander died.

Phocion's House is shown to this day in a Village called Melita, beautified
with Tyles of Copper, otherways plain and homely. Concerning his Wives; of the
first of them there is little said, save only that she was Sister of
Cephisdotus the Statuary: The other was a Matron of no less Reputation for
Virtue and good Housewifery among the Athenians, than Phocion for Probity. It
happened once when the People were entertained with a new Tragedy, he that was
to rigg out the Queen and her Attendants, wanted some fine Habits and
Accountrements for the purpose, to make them appear splendid; which not being
provided, the Player was sullen and refused to act, but kept them in
expectation, till Melanthius the Master of the Revels, pushed him on the Stage,
crying out aloud, What, Sirrah, don't you take notice that Phocion's Wife goes
constantly attended with one only waiting Woman, but you must debauch the Sex,
and fill the Women's heads with nothing but pride and vanity? This free Speech
of his was received with wonderful Applause, and clapped by the Audience round
the Theater. The same plain Lady, entertaining at her House a Stranger, a
spruce Dame of Ionia, who showed her all her Finery of gold Embroidery, rich
Jewels, Bracelets, Necklaces, and the like: For my part, Madam, says she, all
my Ornament is my Goodman Phocion, who has commanded the Athenians now this 20
years. Phocion's Son had an ambition to make one at the Exercises performed at
Athens in honor (...)
of Minerva every 5th. year, which he permitted him to do, not so much to have
the Garlands of Victory, (if he approved himself) but for his Health, and to
invigorate his Body by manly Labor and Abstinence, the young man being at
other times intemperate and a Pot-companion. Having succeeded in the Sports,
many offered their service to treat his Son with the usual Complements to the
Victor, which Honor he refused to all, except one Gentleman. When he came to
the Treat, and found it very extravagant upon all accounts, even the Water
brought to wash the Guests Feet mingled with Wine and Spices, he reprimanded
his Son, asking him Why he would so far permit his Friend to sully the Honor
of his Victory; and endeavoring wholly to wean the youngster from such courses
and company, he sent him to Lacedoemon, and placed him among the Youth that
were educated according to the custom of that Country. This the Athenians took
offense at, as though he slighted and contemned the Education at home; and
Demades twitted him with it publicly, telling him, Why, Phocion, do not we
persuade the Athenians to receive the Laconian Manners and Discipline? If you
please to have it so, I am ready to propound such a Law. Yes indeed, said
Phocion, it would exceedingly become you that are so powdered and perfumed,
with that Revelling Habit on your back, to Speech it in praise of (...), (...)
caenae frugi apud Lacones.
Lycurgus, and invite the Athenians to College Commons.

When Alexander had demanded the Galleys they had agreed to furnish him withal,
the Orators opposed the sending them, and the Council demanding Phocion's
sense, he told them freely; Sirs, I would either have you make sure of a
Victory, or a Friend of the Victor. About that time one Pytheas, a confident
talking Fellow, begun to be very impertinent and troublesome with his often
prating: Him Phocion checked, telling him, That it would be better manners for
him to be silent, who was but of yesterday among them. At that time Harpalus
came from Alexander out of Asia into Attica, with a vast sum of Money; at whose
arrival the little people of those that use to be hangers on upon the Court,
flocked about him to get something of him: amongst whom he scattered some small
largesses to gain them, and tie them by the teeth: But to Phocion he made an
offer of no less than 700 Talents, and all manner of other advantages he
pleased to demand; with the Complement from Alexander, that he would entirely
commit himself and all his affairs to his disposal: To which Phocion answered
sharply, That if he took such measures, he should dearly repent his projects of
corrupting and debauching the Citizens: Upon which he desisted with regret.
After, while the Athenians were deliberating in Council about him, he found
those that had received Pensions from him, to be his greatest enemies, urging
and aggravating matters against him, to prevent themselves being discovered:
But Phocion who had clean hands, and whose chief aim was always the
Weal-publick, to have some regard also to his particular security. This
encouraged him once more to feel his pulse, and attack him; but he found him
like a strong Fortress, every way so defended, that even the Golden Key could
gain no admittance, on all sides inaccessible and impregnable: Yet having made
a particular Friendship with Phocion's Son in Law Charicles, and using him with
entire confidence in all his affairs, he brought him into some suspicion: Upon
the occasion of Pythonica the Courtesans dying, who was Harpalus's Mistress,
for whom he had a great fondness, and had a Child by her; he resolved to build
her a sumptuous Monument, and committed the care of it to his Friend Charicles.
This design, vain enough in it self, was yet further disparaged by the
workmanship, after it was finished (for it is yet to be seen in Hermio, as we
go from Athens to Eleusina, there appearing nothing answerable to the sum of 30
Talents, said to be accounted by Charicles as expended about it. After Harpalus
his own decease, his Daughter was educated by Phocion and Charicles with great
care; but Charicles being questioned by some of Harpalus his Relations about
his concerns, and entreating his Father in Law's Protection, and that he would
appear for him in the Court; Phocion refused him peremptorily, telling him, He
would espouse his cause, as his Son in Law, only in things worthy and
honorable.

About this time Asclepiades the Son of Hipparchus, brought the first tidings
of Alexander's Death to Athens, which Demades told them was not to be credited;
for were it true, the whole World would feel the stink of the dead Carkase.
Phocion perceiving his design of innovating and stirring the People to
Sedition, endeavored to prevent and restrain them, but many of them crowding
up to the Bench, and crying aloud that it was true what Asclepiades had
related; Well then, suppose it, says he, if it be true to day, it will be as
true to morrow and the next day; so that we have leisure quietly and treatably
to consult our security. Leosthenes had a design of imbarquing the Athenians in
the Groecian War, which Phocion could not brook, nor forbear him: He asked
Phocion scoffingly, what the State had been benefited by his Ministry now so
many years? Truly not a little, said he, methinks that the Citizens have been
quietly laid up in their own Sepulchers. But Leosthenes continuing to huff and
swagger in the Assembly, (...) in adagio.
Young man, says Phocion, your Language is like the Cypress Trees, tall and
topping, but without Fruit. After him Hyperides set upon him, demanding of
Phocion when the time would come, he would advise the Athenians to make War?
Why truly, says he, when I shall find the younger sort tractable and observant
of Discipline, the Wealthy forward in their Contributions, and the Lawyers
forbear pillaging and robbing the Public Exchequer. After, when many admired
the Forces raised, and the Preparations for War that were made by Leosthenes,
they asked Phocion how he approved of the new Levies? Very well, says he, for a
course, but I apprehend the success of a War, the Commonwealth being wholly
destitute both of Treasure, Shipping and Seamen for the expedition: And the
event justified his prognostic; yet at first all things appeared fair and
promising, Leosthenes gained Reputation by worsting the Boeotians in Battle,
and driving Antipater within the Walls of Lamia; and the Citizens were so
transported with the first successes, that they kept solemn Festivities for
them, and instituted public Sacrifices to the Gods of Victory: So that some,
to reproach Phocion for being of contrary sentiments, asked him whether now he
would not willingly be Author of this successful Action to the Public? Yes
verily, says he, most gladly but also of the former Counsel. When one Express
after another came from the Camp, confirming and magnifying the Victories, Nay
then, says he, sure we shall never have done killing and slaying. Leosthenes
died soon after, and those that feared lest if Phocion obtained the Command, he
would put an end to the War, dealt with an obscure Fellow in the Assembly, who
should stand up and pretend himself to be a Friend and old Crony of Phocion's,
and persuade the People to spare him at this time, and reserve him for a more
pressing occasion, having none comparable to him for Conduct at a pinch; but
now to send Antiphilus with the Command of the Army. This pleased the
Generality, but Phocion made it appear, he was so far from having any
friendship with him of old standing, that he had not so much as the least
familiarity with him: Yet now, Sir, says he, give me leave to put you down
among the number of my Friends and Familiars, having advised in my concerns, so
much to my advantage.

Still the Athenians being violent to engage against the Boeotians, Phocion was
the first opposed it, and his Friends telling him the People would kill him,
for always running counter to them; Truly, says he, it will be hard measure if
I advise them honestly, if not, let me suffer. Whilst they were loud and hot
upon it, he commanded the Crier to make Proclamation, that all the Athenians
from 16 to 60, should presently prepare themselves with 5 days provision, and
immediately follow him from the Assembly: This caused a great tumult: Those in
years were startled, and clamoured against the Order; he demanded wherein he
injured them, For I, says he, am now fourscore, and am ready to lead you. This
divreted them and pacified them for the present; in the mean time Micion, with
a great force of Macedonians and Mercenaries, was ravaging and pillaging the
Sea coast, making a descent into Ramnunta, and wasting the Country. Against him
Phocion was sent and drew out his Army, where some stragglers pragmatically
intermedling in the Marshalling of it, would needs be tutoring him how he
should possess himself of such an Hill, and dispose of the Cavalry in such a
place, and so and so to range the (...).
Battalions to the best advantage: O Hercules, says he, how many Generals have
we here, and how few Soldiers? Afterward having formed the Battle, one that
would seem forward, advanced out of his Order before the rest; but the Enemy
approaching, his heart failed him, and he retired back into his rank: Him he
reproached, telling him, Youngster, are you not ashamed twice in one day to
desert your Station, both where I had placed you, and you had placed your self?
But falling on the Enemy with great bravery and resolution, he routed them,
killing Micion and many more upon the spot, and afterward he overcame the
Groecian Army that was in Thessaly, wherein Leonatus had joined himself with
Antipater and the Macedonians, that came out of Asia: Leonatus was killed in
the Fight, Antiphilus commanding the Foot, and Menon the Thessalian, the Horse.
Not long after, Craterus coming out of Asia with a great Force, another
skirmish happened in Cranon, wherein the Groecians were worsted, but the loss was
not very considerable, nor the number of the slain; yet with their restiveness
to their Governors, who were young men, and too mild and indulgent. Antipater,
in the mean season, also underhand tampering with the Cities, the Groecians
utterly lost themselves, and shamefully betrayed the Liberty of their Country.

Upon the news of Antipater's approaching Athens with all his force,
Demosthenes and Hyperides deserted the City, and Demades, who was altogether
insolvent for any part of the Fines that had been laid upon him by the City,
(for he had been condemned no less than 7 times for false Judgments contrary to
the known Laws) and having lost his Reputation to that degree, that he was not
permitted to Vote in the Assembly, laid hold on this favorable juncture to
bring in a Bill for sending Ambassadors with Plenipotentiary Power to
Antipater, to treat about a Peace, but the people distrusting him and calling
upon Phocion to give his opinion, as the Person they only and entirely confided
in, he said: My Masters, if my former Counsels had been any thing prevalent
with you, we had not been reduced to such straits as we now labor under in our
deliberations about these matters. However, the Vote passed, and a Decree was
made, and he, with others, deputed to go to Antipater, who lay now encamped in
the Theban Territories, but intended suddenly to dislodge, and pass into
Attica. His first proposal was, that the Treaty might begin whilst he staid in
that Country: This was cried out upon as unreasonably propounded by Phocion (by
Craterus) to oppress the Country of their Friends and Allies by their stay,
since they might rather use that of their Enemies, for provisions and support
of their Army. But Antipater taking him by the hand, said, It Is true, but let
us grant this Boon out of respect to Phocion: And for the rest, he bid them
return to their Principals, and acquaint them that he would grant them no other
Terms than what he himself had received from Leosthenes, then General, when he
was shut up in Lamia.

When Phocion had returned to the City, and acquainted them with this answer,
they made a virtue of necessity at this Juncture, and complied, since it would
be no better: So Phocion returned to Thebes with other Ambassadors, and among
the rest, Zenocrates the Philosopher, the reputation of whose Prudence and
Wisdom was so great and celebrated among the Athenians, that they conceived
there could not be any thing of mankind so brutal and barbarous, or devoid of
common humanity, that even his mien and aspect would not gain upon and create a
respect for him: But the contrary happened by the insolence and ferity of
Antipater's disposition, who embracing all the rest of his Companions, passed
Zenocrates, by not deigning so much as to salute him, or take the least notice
of him: Upon which occasion, Zenocrates said, He was well satisfied he used him
so scurvily, since he had the same intentions to the whole City: As soon as
ever he began to speak, Antipater thwarted and interrupted him, not suffering
him to proceed, but enjoined him silence: But when Phocion had declared the
purport of their Embassy, he replied short and peremptorily, he would make a
League with the Athenians on these conditions and no others. That Demosthenes
and Hyperides be delivered up to him: That the ancient way of Raising Taxes in
the City be observed: That they should receive a Garrison from him into
Minichia: Defray the Charges of the War, and damages sustained, and put
themselves under Contribution for it. As things stood, these Terms were judged
tolerable by the rest of the Ambassadors: Zenocrates said, Truly if Antipater
reputed them as already his Slaves, they were indifferent; but if he considered
them still as Free, they were insufferable. Phocion pressed him with much
earnestness, only to spare the Garrison, and used many Arguments and
Entreaties: Antipater replied, He should find him compliant in any thing to his
request, that did not inevitably tend no the ruin of them both. Others report
it differently, that Antipater should ask Phocion, If he remitted the Garrison
to the Athenians, he would stand Surety for the City to demean themselves
peaceably, and endeavor no Innovations? To which when he demurred and made no
return; on the sudden Callimedon the Carabian, a hot man, and a professed Enemy
to Free States, rose up, asking Antipater if he would suffer himself to be
juggled withal, and have his confidence abused so far as not to act what he
thought most expedient? So the Athenians received the Garrison, and Menyllus
for the Governor, a fair conditioned man, and one of Phocion's Acquaintance.

This proceeding seemed sufficiently imperious and arbitrary, indeed rather a
spiteful insulting and ostentation of power, than that the possessing himself
of that Fortress, would be of any real advantage to his affairs. The resentment
of this usage was heightened by the time it happened in: For it fortuned the
Garrison was brought in in the Month of August, just at the time of the great
Festival, when Bacchus was carried with solemn Pomp from the City to Eleusina;
so that the Solemnity being disturbed, many began to recollect what had
happened at the time of those Rites both anciently and modernly. For of old, in
their greatest prosperity, there had been odd appearances seen, and Voices
heard at the time of their Celebration, which struck terror and amazement into
their Enemies; but now at the same season, the Gods themselves stood Witnesses
of the extreme oppressions of Greece; the Holy time being profaned, and their
greatest Jubilee made the unlucky date of their most extreme calamity. Not many
years before, they had brought an Advertisement from the Oracle at Dodona, That
they should carefully Guard the Promontory of Diana's Temple, and secure it
from the possession of Strangers: And about the same time when they dyed the
Ribbonds and Garlands, with which they adorned the Pageants in devotion to her;
instead of a Purple, they received only a faint dead color, and which added to
the Omen, all those things that were dyed for common use took the natural
color. Also a Sacrificer washing a Porket in the Haven, whilst it was calm, a
Shark seized on him, bit off all his hinder parts to the Belly, and devoured
them; by which they imagined the God gave them apparently to understand, that
having already lost the lower parts of their Territories, toward the Sea
coast, they should more carefully guard those toward the City.

Now the Garrison under Menyllus was no ways offensive to those of the better
sort, but of the meaner sort, the number of whom (who by reason of their
poverty were not taxed) were reckoned in the City to be above 12000; those that
remained in the City thought themselves oppressed and affronted, and those that
had gone away into Thrace, on whom Antipater had bestowed a Town, and some
Territories to inhabit, accounted themselves only as a Colony of Slaves and
Exiles. Demosthenes dyed at that time in Calabria, and Hyperides at Cleona, a
City of Greece, (as we have elsewhere related) which put the Citizens in mind
of the death of Philip and Alexander, and almost wishing the return of those
times. Just as after Antigonus was slain; and those that had taken him off,
afterward more grievously afflicting and oppressing the People; a Countryman
in Phrygia digging in the Fields, was asked what he was doing? I am, says he,
(fetching a deep sigh) searching again for Antigonus. So said many that
remembered those days, and the disputes they had with those Kings, whose anger,
however great, was yet generous and placable; whereas Antipater, with the
counterfeit humility of appearing like a private man, in the meanness of his
Habit and homely Fare, covered the haughtiness of his Mind, and insolently
abusing his power, was indeed insufferable to those under his Command being
extreme Lordly and Tyranical. Yet Phocion had interest with him to recall many
from Banishment by his entreaty, and prevailed also for those that fled away,
that they might not, like others, be hurried beyond Foenarus and the Mountains
of Ceraunia, but remain in Greece, and plant themselves in Peloponnesus, of
which number was Agnonides the Sycophant He no less studiously managed the
affairs within the City, with signal Equity and Moderation, preferring
constantly those that were Men of Worth and Temper to the Magistracy; keeping
out the factious and turbulent, lest they should abuse their power to raise
stirs, and those that were decayed, he advised to retire into the (...).
Country, and mind tillage. Observing that Zenocrates paid his Assessments as
a Foreigner, he would have persuaded him to accept of his freedom; which he
refused, saying: He could not receive it from that City, whose Liberties and
Franchises were doomed, when he himself was one of the Ambassadors. Menyllus
offered Phocion a considerable Sum of Money, who, thanking him, said, Neither
was he greater than Alexander, nor his own occasions more urgent to receive it
now, who then refused it from him: But still pressing him to permit his Son
Phocus to receive it, he replied; If my Son returns to his right mind, his
Patrimony is sufficient, if not, in the courses he now takes, all supplies will
be insignificant. But to Antipater he answered more tartly, who would have him
engaged in something dishonorable; Antipater says he, cannot use me both as a
Friend and a Flatterer. And indeed Antipater was wont to say, he had two
Friends at Athens, Phocion and Demades, the one would never suffer him to
gratify him at all, the other would never be satisfied: For Phocion's Virtue
made his Poverty appear reputable, having so often been Commander in Chief of the
Athenians, and admitted to the Friendship of so many Potentates, he had yet
grown old and poor in the service of the Commonwealth: But Demades prided
himself by lavishing his Wealth, to break in upon the Public Constitutions and
affront them: For there having been an Order that no Foreigner should be
entertained to Dance at the Public Shows, on the penalty of 1000 Drams to
be levied on him that should exhibit them; his vanity was so great to hire 100
Strangers, and paid the Fine for them all in ready Cash upon the Stage.
Marrying his Son Demeas at that time, he told him with the like vanity, Son,
when I married your Mother, it was done so privately it was not known to the
next Neighbors; but Kings and Princes show themselves forward to present you
at your Nuptials.

Still this Garrison was a grievous eyesore to the Commonalty among the
Athenians, and they ceased not clamouring upon Phocion, to prevail with
Antipater for its removal; but when he despaired of effecting it, or rather
observed the People more governable, and behaving themselves more orderly, by
the Awe that was upon them, he constantly declined that Office; yet as to the
Money-matter, effectually obtained of him, not to demand the Subsidy agreed on,
but prolonged the time of its payment. So the People, leaving him off, applied
themselves to Demades, who readily undertook the Employment and took along with
him his Son also into Macedonia; the Devil, as it seemed, owing him a shame, he
came just at that nick of time, when Antipater was seized with Sickness, and
Cassander taking upon himself the Command, had found a Letter of Demades's,
formerly writ by him to Antigonus in Asia, moving him to take upon himself the
Empire of Greece and Macedonia, which now stood upon an old and rotten Stalk,
so rallying Antipater.

So when Cassander heard of his coming, he seized him, and having caused his
Son to be brought before his Face, slew him, so ordering it, that the Son's
Blood should fly upon the Father, and bedawb him; after, bitterly taunting and
upbraiding him with his Ingratitude and Treachery, he dispatched him.

Antipater (having nominated Polyperchon General, and Cassander Colonel) being
dead, Cassander presently set up for himself, and immediately dispatched
Nicanor to Menyllus, to be his Successor in the Athenian Garrison, commanding
him to possess himself of it, before the News of Antipater's Death, should be
bruited abroad. Which being done, and some days after the Athenians hearing the
Report of it, Phocion was taxt, as privy to it before, and censured heavily for
dissembling it, as a Friend and Confederate of Nicanor's: but he slighted their
tittle tattle, and meeting often and conferring with Nicanor, made it his
business to render him civil and obliging to the Athenians, and not only so,
but persuaded him to some Expense upon them, and have some Shows at his own
charge to entertain the People. In the mean time, Polyperchon, to whose Care
the chief Affairs were committed, to countermine Cassander, writ a cunning
Letter to the City, declaring, that they were restored to their ancient
Privileges and Immunities, and were at entire liberty to govern their
Commonwealth, according to their ancient Customs and Constitutions. The bottom
of these Pretenses was mere Stratagem and Trick, levelled principally against
Phocion, as the Event manifested it self; for Polyperchon's design being to
possess himself of the City, he despaired altogether of bringing it to pass,
whilst Phocion lived, and in Credit: but the most certain way to ruin him,
would be again to bring into play the Demagogues, who had been put out of
Office for seditious Practices, and restore them to their Places of Trust, both
in the Courts of Judicature, and their Votes in Common Council. Thus the
Populace being let loose, presently great Commotions happened in Athens, which
Nicanor endeavoring to compose, called the Senate together into the Pyroeum,
and came thither himself, committing himself to Phocion for his security; Locus
5. vel 6. miliar. Ital. distans, ubi Templum Dianae Mynich.
but one Dercyllus, a Captain of the Train-bands in the Suburbs, attempting to
seize him, he having some hint of it, withdrew himself, giving out that he
would suddenly right himself upon the City for this Affront. Phocion was
accused for being near him, and not seizing him, as he was required; but he
defended himself, saying, that he had no manner of mistrust of Nicanor, nor the
least reason to expect any mischief from him; but should it prove otherways,
for his part he would have them all know, he had rather receive, than do an ill
thing to any Man. This Carriage of Phocion's, fairly and simply considered,
would appear extreme generous and Gentleman-like; yet looking upon a man
standing in relation to his Country, now endangered, and that in the highest
station of Power and Authority there is something (methinks) of prior
Consideration and original Obligation of Justice, in discharging the trust
reposed in him, to be regarded, much rather than such Points of Honor: for it
is not a satisfactory pretense to say, that he dreaded the involving the City
in War, by seizing Nicanor, nor that in Honor and Justice he could not lay
hands on a man, who had given him all the assurance and security in the world,
that he would no ways molest or disturb the Athenian State; but it was, indeed,
his Credulity and Confidence in him, and an overweening opinion of his
Sincerity, that imposed upon him: so that notwithstanding the sundry
Intimations he had from those that accused him of having Designs on the
Pyroeum, and sending numbers of Mercenaries into Salamina, besides his
tampering with, and endeavoring to corrupt those of Pyroeum, (where his
Garrison stood) he would (notwithstanding all this Evidence) never be persuaded
to belive it. Nay further, although Philomedes, the Son of Lampres, had got a
Decree passed, that all the Athenians should stand to their Arms, and be ready
to follow Phocion their General, he yet sat still and secure, till such time
as Nicanor had actually brought down Arms and Ammunition from Minichia to
Pyroeum, and begun to draw Trenches round it. Whilst these things were
transacted when Phocion (at last) would have led out the Athenians, they
mutined against him, and slighted his Orders.

Alexander, the Son of Polyperchon, was at hand with a considerable Force,
pretended to be for succor of the City against Nicanor, but intended nothing
less (if possible) than to surprise the City, whilst they were in Tumult, and
divided among themselves: for those that had been banished, getting into the
City, to whom the Foreigners joined themselves, and all the Rabble rout
thronging in to them, they made up an odd irregular mixed Convention, wherein
they presently divested Phocion of all Power, and chose to themselves other
Commanders; and if by chance Alexander had not been spied from the Walls,
alone, and in close Consult with Nicanor, and given the Athenians just cause of
Suspicion, certainly the City at that moment had run a great Risque.
Immediately the Orator Agnonides fell foul upon Phocion, and impeacht him of
Treason: Callimedon and Pericles fearing the worst, consulted their own
security by flying from the City: Phocion, with a few of his Friends that
stayed with him, went over to Polyperchon, and out of Respect, Solon of
Platoea, and Dinarchus of Corinth, accompanied him, being reputed Friends and
Confidents of Polyperchon. But Dinarchus enjoying ill Health, they remained
many days in Elatoea, a City of Phocis, situate near the Mountain Acrorium.
During which time Agnonides promoting it, Archestratus procured a Decree, that
the People should send Delegates thither to accuse Phocion: so both of them
waited upon Polyperchon, who was with the King viewing the Country, and was
then at a small Village of Phocis, Pharygas, now called Galate.

There Polyperchon having pitched a Royal Tent of Cloth of Gold for the King
and his (...).
Friends, caused Dinarchus to be brought without further Ceremony, and having
first tormented him, caused him to be slain; then he gave Audience to the
Ambassadors, who filled the Place with Noise and Tumult, peaching and accusing
one another; Agnonides approaching, entreated they might all be shut up
together in an iron Grate, and conveyed to Athens, there to decide the
Controversy: At that the King could not forbear smiling; but the Company that
attended, Macedonians and Strangers, that now had leisure enough, were eager to
see the Scuffle, and hear them pelt one another, made Signs to the Delegates to
go on with their Accusations. But it was far from a fair Hearing, nothing
equitable could be obtained; Polyperchon frequently interrupted Phocion, and at
last knocking with his Battoon on the Ground, refused him absolutely, and
commanded him Silence. Hegemon appealed to Polyperchon himself, as one that
well knew how studious he had been of the Interest of the People; to which he
replied furiously; Forbear to belie me before the King: the King starting up
was about to have darted him through with his Javelin, but Polyperchon
interposed and hindered him; so the Assembly was dissolved.

Phocion then and those about him were put into Custody; but those of his
Friends that were at some distance, observing this, hiding their Faces,
endeavored to save themselves by Flight: but Clitus perceived them, and
brought them back to Athens, pretendedly, to purge themselves, but in truth, as
men already sentenced, to die. The manner of conveying them was indeed extreme
moving; they were carried in Chariots through Ceramicum, straight to the Place
of Judicature, where Clitus secured them till they had called a Hall, which was
open to all Comers; neither Foreigners, nor Slaves, nor any of the Rascality,
being refused Admittance, but was free to all; Men, Women and Children, being
allowed to seat themselves in the Court; and even upon the Bench: where having
read the King's Letters, wherein he declared, he was abundantly satisfied that
these men were Traitors; however, they being a free City, he willingly indulged
them the Grace of trying and judging them according to their own Laws. Clitus
brought in his Prisoners. The men of highest Quality blushed at the sight of
Phocion, and hanging down their Heads, could not forbear Tears: One of them was
so hardy to say, Since the King was so gracious to permit them freedom in
Judgment, he thought it reasonable to dismiss the Strangers, and those of
servile condition, from the Assembly; but the Populace would not endure it,
crying out, They were Enemies to the Commonwealth, and Betrayers of the Liberty
of the People, and deserved to be stoned that sided with the Nobility; after
which no man durst offer any thing farther in Phocion's behalf. He was scarce
suffered to be heard, when he demanded, if they intended to put them to death
by form of Law or not? Some answered, According to Law: He replied, How should
that be done, except we have a fair Hearing? But when they were deaf to all he
said, approaching nearer, As to my self, says he, I confess the Crime, and
submit my self to the Judgment of the Law, but for these my Friends, O ye men
of Athens, what have they done to deserve the Sentence, having in nothing
offended you? The Rabble cried out, They were his Friends and Accomplices, that
was enough. Hearing this, he drew back as one struck dumb.

Then Agnonides read the Bill of Attainder, whereby the People were empowered
to have a Poll for majority of Voices, whether they judged them Guilty; and if
so it should be found, to be sentenced to Death. The Names being read, some
were so brutish to desire it might be added to the Sentence, That Phocion
should not only die a simple Death, but be tortured also, and that the Rack
should be produced with the Tormenters: but Agnonides perceiving even Clitus
himself to dislike this, esteeming it a thing most horrid and barbarous; says
he, If we can take that Villain Callimedon, O ye Athenians! let us serve him so
with all my heart, but I cannot consent Phocion should be used so: And one of
those that were better minded, rose up, saying, Thou art in the right, if
Phocion be tortured, what do thou deserve thy self? So the Sentence was
ratified, taking every man's Vote singly, no man sitting down, but all rising
up, and some with Garlands on their Heads condemned them all to death.

There were with Phocion, Nicocles, Theudippus, Hegemon and Pythocles: moreover
Demetrius the Phalaroean, Callimedon, Charicles, and some others, were in the
same Condemnation, being absent. After the Assembly was dismissed, they were
remanded to Prison, some of their Friends following them, embracing and weeping
over them, and making great Lamentation. Phocion's Countenance was not changed,
but went with the same undaunted Look, he used to be followed from the Court to
the Camp, whilst he was their General; that most men admired the Bravery and
Magnanimity of the man, yet some sneaking Fellows of his Enemies insulted over
him, reviling and abusing him as he passed: And one coming up to him, spit in
his Face; at which Phocion, turning to the Officers, only said, Will no body
correct this Fellow's Rudeness? Theudippus, when he observed the Executioner
tempering the Poison, and preparing it for them, was disordered, and began to
bemoan his condition, and the hard measure he received so unjustly to suffer
upon Phocion's account: What, says he, do thou not think it creditable to run
the same Fate with Phocion? One of his Friends that stood by, asked him, if he
would have any thing to his Son? Yes, by all means, says he, command him from
me to forget the Athenian's Ill Treatment of his Father. Then Nicocles, the
dearest and most faithful of his Friends, begged of him first to drink the
Poison: Ah! my Friend, says he, this is the most harsh and ungrateful Request
thou ever made me; but since through my whole Life, I have never denied thee
any thing, I must gratify thee in this also. Having all drunk, there wanted of
the due Proportion, and the Executioner refused to prepare more, except they
would pay him 12 Drams to defray the charge of a full Draught. Some delay
(...) (...)su(...) and pond. genus.
was made, and the time spent* Phocion called one of his Friends that stood by:
What, says he, cannot a man die on Free-cost among the Athenians? and bid him
give him a small spill of Money.

It was the 19th. day of the Month Mynichion, March.
when there was accustomed to be solemn Processions in the City, in Honor of
Jupiter: The Horsemen, as they passed by, some of them threw away their
Garlands, others stopped at the Prison-doors, bitterly weeping, and casting most
doleful Looks toward the Place of Execution; and as many of the rest, whose
Minds were not absolutely debauched by Spite and Passion, or had any spark of
Humanity left, acknowledged it to be most wicked and ungodly; at least, not to
have reprieved them that day, and purge the City from Blood and Slaughter at
the solemn Festival. But as if all this had been small Game, the Malice of
Phocion's Enemies went yet higher, to endeavor that his dead Corpse might be
thrown out of the Cityboundaries; none of the Athenians daring to light a
Funeral Pile, to burn the Body, after their manner; neither durst any of his
Friends presume to concern themselves about his Body, only one Conopion, a man
accustomed to those Offices, having procured the Body, at his own Expense, to
be carried beyond Eleusina, borrowed Fire from a Woman of Magoera, and burnt
it; the Woman her self, with her Servant-maids, being present and assistant at
the Solemnity, casting up a small Monument for him, performed the customary
Offerings; and gathering up his Bones in her Lap, and carrying them by night,
dug a Place by the Fireside in her House, saying, Dear Gods, Guardians of
(...).
this Place, here I deposite the Remains of this excellent Person, and you, I
beseech you, protect and restore them to the Sepulcher of his Ancestors, when
the Athenians return again to their right Minds.

And indeed, a very little Time, and their own sad Experience, soon informed
them, what an excellent Governor, and how great an example and Patron of
Justice and all Virtue, they had bereft themselves of: And now they decreed him
a Statue of Brass, and his Bones to be buried honorably at the public Charge;
and for his Accusers, Agnonides they took themselves, and caused him to be put
to death; Epicurus and Demophilus, that fled from the City for fear, his Son
met with, and took his Revenge upon them. This Son of his they report not
otherways to be considerable, only a man of Pleasure, that was enamored of a
Wench kept by a common Bawd; and happenning one day to hear Theodorus the
Atheist talking at this rate, That if a man might venture to rescue his Friend,
why not his Mistress? and if not one, why the other? The Argument hitting his
Humor, encouraged him to take away the Girl by force. But this Fate of
Phocion's, revived the Memory of Socrates among the Groecians, their Case being
exactly parallel, both their Deaths being alike, the most shameful Fault, and
heavy Misfortune of the People of Athens.

THE LIFE OF CATO the Younger.
Englished from the Greek, by Stephen Waller Dr. of Laws.
THE House of Cato derived its Luster and Glory from his Great-Grandfather
Cato; one that by his Virtue gained a very great Reputation and Authority among
the Romans, as we have written in his Life.

This Cato, was, by the loss of both his Parents, left an Orphan, together with
his Brother Coepio, and his Sister Porcia. Servilia

CATO JUNIOR.
depiction of Cato the Younger Ecce Parens verus Patrice: dignissimus aris Roma
tuis. -- Nil causa fecit in armis Ipse sua: Studiis Odiisque carens. At frustra
Leges et inania Jura tuenti Scire Mori Sors optima. Lucan:

M Burg. sculp.


also was his Sister by the Mother's-side. All these lived together, and were
bred up in the House of Livius Drusus, their Uncle by the Mother; who at that
time had a great share in the Government; for he was very Eloquent, remarkably
Just, and in Wisdom not inferior to any of the Romans.

It Is said of Cato, that he did, even from his Infancy, in his Speech, his
Countenance, and all his childish Pastimes, discover an inflexible Temper,
unmoved by any Passion, and firm in every thing.

He would force himself, much beyond the strength of his Age, to go through
with whatever he undertook. He was rough and ungentle toward them that
flattered him; but yet more stubborn and untractable to those who threatened
him. He was very difficultly moved to laugh; and was rarely seen to smile. Not
quickly or easily provoked to Anger; but if once incensed, he was no less
difficultly pacified.

When he began to learn, he proved dull, and slow to apprehend; but what he
once conceived, he very faithfully retained. And truly it is usual in Nature,
that men of quick Apprehensions have not the best Memories; but those who
receive things with most pains and difficulty, remember them with most
exactness: for every new thing that is learnt seems to make some new impression
upon the Mind. Hence the difficulty there was in Cato to be moved, made it the
more difficult for him to be taught; for to learn is to suffer a kind of
Alteration: and it happens, that those are most easily wrought upon, who have
least strength to oppose what is offered. Hence young men are sooner persuaded,
than those that are more in years; and Sick men, than those that are well in
Health: in fine where the Resistance is least powerful, the Impression is most
easily made. Yet Cato (they say) was very obedient to his Schoolmaster, and
would do whatever he was commanded; but he would also ask the Reason, and
enquire the Cause of every thing: and indeed his Schoolmaster was a very
courteous man, more ready to instruct, than to beat his Scholars; his Name was
Sarpedo.

When Cato was a Child, the Allies of the Romans sued to be made free-Citizens
of Rome. Pompoedius Sillo, one of their Deputies, a brave Soldier, and a man
of great worth, who had contracted a Friendship with Drusus, lodged at his
House for several days; in which Time being grown familiar with the Children,
Well, (said he to them) will you entreat your Uncle to befriend us in our
Business? Coepio smiling, seemed to consent; but Cato made no Answer, only he
looked steadfastly and fiercely on the Strangers: Then said Pompoedius to him,
And you young man, what say you to us? will not you, as well as your Brother,
intercede with your Uncle in our behalf? Cato Continued still unmoved; but by
his Silence and his Countenance seeming to deny their Petition, Pompoedius
snatched him up to the Window, as if he would throw him out: then he urged him
to consent, or he would fling him down; and speaking in a harsher Tone, held
his Body out of the Window, and shook him several times. When Cato had suffered
this a good while, unmoved and unconcerned; Pompoedius setting him down, said
softly to his Friends, What a Blessing is this Child to Italy? if he were a
Man, I believe we should not gain one Voice among the People. Another time, one
of his Relations, on his Birthday, invited Cato and some other Children to
Supper, who diverting themselves in a part of the House, were at Play all
together, the elder and the younger; their Play was to act the Pleading of
Causes before the Judges, accusing one another, and carrying away the Condemned
to Prison. Among these, a very beautiful young Child being bound and carried by
a bigger into Prison, he cried out to Cato; who presently run to the Door, and
thrusting away those who stood there as a Guard, took out the Youth, and went
home in great Anger followed by all his Companions.

Cato at length grew so famous among them, that when Sylla Designed to exhibit
the Game of young men riding Races on Horseback, which they called the Trojan
Course, having got together all the Youth of Quality, he appointed two for
their Leaders. One of them they accepted for his Mother's sake, which was the
Son of Metella, the Wife of Sylla; but for the other, which was Sextus, the
Nephew of Pompey, they would not be led by him, nor exercised under him: then
Sylla asking, Whom they would have? They all cried out, Cato; and Sextus
willingly yielded the Honor to him, as the more worthy Person.

Sylla, having had a Friendship with their Father, did often send for Cato and
his Brother, and would talk familiarly with them; a Favor which he showed to
very few, by reason of the great Power and high Station which he had gotten.
Sarpedo, considering the Advantage hereof as well for the Honor as the Safety
of his Scholars, did often bring Cato to wait upon Sylla at his House, which,
for the multitude of those that were slain, imprisoned, and tormented there,
looked like a Place of Execution. Cato was then about 14 years old; now seeing
the Heads of great Men brought thither, and observing the secret Sighs of those
that were present, he asked his Schoolmaster* Why does no body kill this Man?
Because (said he) they fear him, Child, more than they hate him: Why then
(replied Cato) do you not give me a Sword, that I may stab him, and free my
Country from this Slavery? Sarpedo hearing this, and at the same time seeing
his Countenance full of Anger and Fury, took care thence-forward to watch him
strictly, lest he should fall into any desperate Attempt.

While he was yet very young; to some that asked him, Whom he loved best? He
answered, His Brother: And being asked, Whom next? He replied* His Brother
again: So likewise the third time; and still the same, till they left off to
ask any farther. As he grew in Age, this Love to his Brother increased; for
when he was about 20 years old, he never supped, never went out of Town, nor
into the Forum, without Coepio; but when his Brother made use of Ointments and
Perfumes, these Cato rejected: And he was in the whole course of his Life very
regular and austere; so that when Coepio was admired for his Moderation and
Temperance, he would acknowledge, that indeed he might be accounted such, in
respect of some other men; but (said he) when I compare my self with Cato,
methinks I differ not at all from Sippius; one at that time notorious for
Softness and Luxury.

Cato, being made one of Apollo's Priests, changed his Habitation, took his
portion of their paternal Inheritance, and began to live yet more severely than
before. Having gained an intimate Acquaintance with Antipater, the Stoic
Philosopher, he bent himself chiefly to the Study of Moral Philosophy and
Politics.

He was carried, as it were, by a kind of Inspiration, to embrace every Virtue;
but most inclined, to delight in a sort of steady Justice, that was not to be
wrought upon by Favor or Compassion. He learned also the Art of speaking in
public; which he looked upon as a thing no less requisite for governing, than
the Art of War, for defending a City. But he would never recite his Speeches
before Company; nor was he ever heard declame: And to one that told him, Men
blamed his Silence; but I hope not my Life, (said he) and I will then begin to
speak, when I think I can say something that is worth being spoken.

There was a great Hall, which had been built and dedicated to the Public by
old Cato; here the Tribunes of the People used to keep Court: And because a
certain Pillar seemed not to stand well for the convenience of their Benches,
they deliberated, whether it were best to remove it only, or to take it away.
This Business first drew Cato into the Forum, though much against his will; for
he therein opposed the Tribunes, and at the same time gave an admirable
Specimen both of his Courage and his Eloquence. His Speech had nothing in it of
childish or affected, but was rough, vehement, and full of sense; besides he
had a certain grace in speaking, which charmed the Ear, and agreed well with
the shortness of his Sentences; and something of Mirth and Raillery mingled
with the Gravity of his Temper, was not unpleasant to his Auditors. His Voice
was full, sounding, and sufficient to be heard by so great a Multitude. His
Vigor, and the strength of his Body indefatigable; for he could speak a whole
day, and never be weary.

When he had carried this Cause, he betook himself again to his Study and
Retirement; where he accustomed his Body to Labor and violent Exercise: would
use himself to go bare-headed both in hot and cold Weather. When he went abroad
with any of his Friends, though they were on Horseback, and he on Foot, yet he
would often join now one, then another, and discourse with them on the way.

In Sickness, admirable was the Patience he showed in supporting; and the
Abstinence he used, for curing his Distempers. One time when he had an Ague, he
would be alone all day long, and suffer no body to see him, till he began to
recover, and found the Fit was over. At Supper when he threw Dice for the
choice of the Messes, and lost, the Company offered him nevertheless his
choice; but the refused, saying, Alluding to the lucky Chance, called Venus.
Venus forbids.

At first he was wont to drink only once after Supper, and then go away, but in
process of time he grew to drink more, insomuch that oftentimes he would
continue at Table till morning. This his Friends excused; for that the State
Affairs took him up all day, and he being desirous of Knowledge, did pass the
night at Table in the Conversation of Philosophers. Hence one Memmius saying in
Company, That Cato spent whole nights in Drinking; But you cannot say (replied
Cicero) that he spends whole days in Playing.

Cato esteemed the Customs and Manners of Men at that time so corrupt, and a
reformation in them so necessary, that he thought it requisite in many things,
to go contrary to the ordinary way of the World. Wherefore seeing the lightest
and gayest Colors were most in fashion, he would always wear the darkest: and
he would often go out of doors without either Shoes or Coat. Not that he
sought Vainglory from such Novelties; but he would accustom himself to be
ashamed only of what deserves shame and to despise all other sorts of disgrace.

The Estate of one Cato, his Cousin-german, (which was worth 100 Talents)
falling to him, he turned it all into ready Money, which he kept by him for any
of his Friends that should happen to want, to whom he would lend it without
use; for some of them, he suffered his own Land and his Slaves to be mortgaged
to the public Treasury.

When he thought himself of an Age fit to marry, having never before known any
Woman, he was contracted to Lepida, who had before been contracted to Metellus
Scipio; but he having quitted her, the Contract was dissolved, and she at
liberty: yet Scipio afterward repenting himself, did all he could to regain
her, before the Marriage with Cato was complete; and therein succeeded. At
which Cato was very much incensed, and resolved to go to Law about it; but his
Friends persuaded him to the contrary; however he was so moved by the heat of
Youth and Passion, that he writ Iambicks against Scipio, which had all the Wit
and Satyr of Archilochus, without his Impudence and Scurrility. After this he
married Atilia, the Daughter of Sorranus, which was the first* but not the only
Woman he ever knew; in this much less happy than Loelius, the Friend of Scipio,
who in the whole course of so long a Life never knew but one Woman.

In the War made by the Rebellion of the Slaves, (which was named from
Spartacus their Ringleader) Gellius was General; and Cato went a Voluntier,
for the sake of his Brother Coepio, who was a Colonel in that Army. But Cato
could find no opportunity to show his Courage, or exercise his Valor by reason
of the ill Conduct of the General; however admidst the Corruptions and
Disorders of that Army, he showed such a love of Discipline, so much Bravery
upon occasion, and so much Wisdom in every thing, that it appeared he would not
be any way inferior to the old Cato. Whereupon Gellius offered him great
Rewards, and would have decreed him considerable Honors; which he refused,
saying, He had done nothing that deserved them; and this made him be thought a
man of a very odd Humor.

There was a Law* That the Candidates who stood for any Office, should not have
Prompters to tell them the Names of the Citizens. Cato, when he sued to be
elected Military Tribune, was the only man that obeyed that Law; he took great
pains to salute those he met, and call them by their Names. Yet for these
things he was envied, even by those who praised him; for the more they
considered the Excellency of what he did, the more they were grieved at the
difficulty they found to do the like.

Now being chosen Military Tribune, he was sent into Macedon after Rubrius, who
was General there. It is said, that his Wife showing much Concern, and weeping
at his Departure, Munatius, one of Cato's Friends said to her, Do not trouble
your self, Atilia, I Will take care to keep him for you. Ay, by all means,
replied Cato. When they had gone one days Journey together; Well, said he to
Munatius, that you may be sure to keep your promise to Atilia, you must not
leave me day nor night; and then ordered two Beds to be made in his own
Chamber, that Munatius might lie there: so that he seemed rather to be kept by
Cato. There went with him fifteen Slaves, two Freed-men and four of his
Friends; these rode on Horseback, but Cato always went on Foot, yet would he
keep by them, and discourse with them on the way.

When he came to the Army, which consisted of many Legions, the General gave
him the Command of one; but Cato looked upon it as a small matter, and not
worthy a Commander, to make his own single Valor appear; therefore he desired
to make his Soldiers like himself. Yet he did not thereby lose the Reverence
due to his Command, but joined Reason to his Authority; for he persuaded and
instructed every one in particular, and on all bestowed Rewards or Punishments
according to desert.

At length his Men were so well disciplined, that it was hard to say, whether
they were more peaceable, or more warlike; more valiant, or more just: they
were dreadful to their Enemies, and courteous to their Companions; fearful to
do wrong, and forward to gain Honor. Thus Cato, though he never sought, yet
easily acquired Glory and Repute; was highly esteemed by all men, but entirely
beloved by the Soldiers. Whatever he commanded to be done, he himself took
part in the performing. In his Apparel, his Diet and Labor, he was more like a
common Soldier than an Officer; but in Virtue, Courage and Wisdom, he far
exceeded all that had the Name of Commanders. By these means he made himself
greatly beloved, and was therefore the more willingly followed: for the true
love of Virtue, is in all men produced by the Love and Respect they bear to him
that teaches it; and those who praise good men, yet do not love them may cry up
their Honor, but will never imitate their Virtue.

At that time there dwelt in Pergamum, one Athenodorus, surnamed Cordylio, a
Man very well versed in the Stoic Philosophy, who was now grown old, and had
always refused the Friendship and Acquaintance of Princes and great Men. Cato
understood this; so that imagining he should not be able to prevail with him by
sending or writing; and being by the Laws allowed two months absence from the
Army, he resolved to go into Asia, to see Athenodorus: and considering the
great worth of the Man, he hoped he should not lose his labor. When Cato had
discoursed with him, and persuaded him from his former Resolutions, he returned
and brought him to the Army, as joyful and as proud of this success, as if he
had done some heroic Exploit, greater than any of those of Pompey or Lucullus,
who at that time subdued so many Nations and Kingdoms.

While Cato was yet in the Army, his Brother, on a Journey toward Asia, fell
sick at Aenus in Thrace, and immediately dispatched Letters to him. The Sea was
very rough, and no convenient great Vessel to be had; yet Cato, getting into a
little Passage boat, with only two of his Friends, and three Servants, set Sail
from Thessalonica, and having very narrowly escaped drowning, he arrived at
Aenus just as Coepio expired. Upon this occasion Cato showed himself more a
fond Brother than a Philosopher, not only in the excess of Grief, bewailing and
embracing the dead Body, but also in the extravagant Expenses of the Funeral,
wherein a vast quantity of rich Perfumes and costly Garments were burnt with
the Corpse? besides, he erected in the Forum of the Aenians, a Monument of
Thassian Marble, which cost eight Talents. This some blamed, as not suiting
with Cato's usual Moderation in other things: But they did not consider, that
though he were steadfast, firm, and inflexible to Pleasure, Fear, or fond
Entreaties; yet he was full of natural Tenderness, and brotherly Affection.
Diverse of the Cities and Governors of the Country, sent him many Presents, to
honor the Funerals of his Brother; but he took none of their Money, only the
Perfumes and Ornaments he received, and paid for them also. Afterward, when the
Estate was divided between him and Coepio's Daughter, he did not require the
Funeral Expenses to be deducted. Notwithstanding all this, a certain Writer has
affirmed, that he made his Brother's Ashes be passed through a Sieve, to find
the Gold that was melted down with the Body: but surely that He means Julius
Caesar.
person thought, his Writings, as well as his Actions, should never be subject
to Examination.

The Time of Cato's Service in the Army being expired, he received at his
departure not only the Prayers and Praises, but the Tears and Embraces of the
Soldiers, who spread their Garments at his Feet, and kissed his Hand as he
passed; an Honor, which the Romans showed to very few of their Generals.

Cato having left the Army, resolved before he would return home, and apply
himself to the management of State Affairs, to travel over Asia, and there
observe the Manners, the Customs, and the Strength of every Province. He was
also willing to gratify the Importunity of Deiotarus, King of Galatia, who
having had great Familiarity and Friendship with his Father, did earnestly
invite him thither.

Cato took care to order his Journeys in this manner: Early in the morning he
sent out his Baker and his Cook toward the Place where he designed to lodge the
next night: these went civilly and quietly into the Town in which if there
happened to be no Friend nor Acquaintance of Cato or his Family, they provided
for him in an Inn, and gave no disturbance to any body; but if there were no
Inn, they went to the Magistrates, and desired them to help them to Lodgings,
and were always satisfied with what was allotted to them. His Servants thus
behaving themselves toward the Magistrates, without noise and threatening, were
often not credited, or neglected by them; so that Cato did many times arrive,
before any thing was provided for him. And indeed he himself was often
despised, and made little account of; for sitting silent by himself on his
Carriages, he was looked upon as a contemptible Man, and one of a mean Spirit;
therefore he would sometimes call the Townsmen together, and say, Ye
ill-natured Men, lay aside this inhospitable Humor; you should by Courtesy
endeavor to break the power of those Men, who desire but a pretense to take
from you by force, what you give with such Reluctance.

While he traveled in this manner, a pleasant Accident befell him in Syria. As
he was going into Antioch, he saw a great multitude of People without the
Gates, ranked in order on either side the way; here the young Men with long
Cloaks, there the Children decently dressed; others wore Crowns and white
Garments, which were the Priests and Magistrates. Cato, presently imagining all
this was to do him Honor, and for his Reception, began to be angry with his
Servants that were sent before, for suffering it to be done; then making his
Friends alight, he walked along with them on Foot. As soon as he came near the
Gate, a reverend old Man, who seemed to be Master of these Ceremonies, with a
Staff and a Crown in his Hand, comes up to Cato, and without showing him any
respect, asked him, Where he had left Demetrius, and how soon he thought he
would be there? This Demetrius was Pompey's Servant; and by all those who hoped
for any Favor from Pompey, he was highly honored, not for his own Desert, but
for his great Power with his Master. Upon this Cato's Friends fell out into
such a Laughter, that they could not restrain themselves, while they passed
through the Crowd; he himself much out of Countenance, cried, O unhappy City!
and said no more: yet afterward he used to tell this Story, and laugh at it
himself.

Pompey likewise after that made the People ashamed of their Ignorance and
Folly; for Cato, in his Journey to Ephesus, went to pay his Respects to him;
who was the elder Man, had gained much Honor, and was then General of a great
Army. Yet Pompey would not receive him sitting; but as soon as he saw him rose
up, and going to meet him, as the more honorable Person, gave him his Hand,
and embraced him very kindly. He said many things also in commendation of
Cato's Virtue, both in his presence, and when he was gone away. So that now all
men began to respect Cato, and admired him for the same things for which they
despised him before; having well considered the mildness of his Temper, and the
greatness of his Spirit. Moreover, the Civility that Pompey himself showed him,
appeared to come from one that rather honored, than loved him. For it was
observed, he was very kind to Cato while he was present with him, but very glad
when he was gone from him: And when other young men came to see him; he usually
importuned and entreated them to continue with him. Now he did not at all
invite Cato to stay; but as if his own Power were lessened by the other's
Presence, he very willingly dismissed him. Yet to Cato alone, of all those that
went for Rome, he recommended his Children and his Wife, who was also her self
allied to Cato.

After this, all the Cities through which he passed, strove and emulated each
other in showing him Respect and Honor. They invited him to great
Entertainments; at which he desired his Friends to be present, and take care of
him, lest he should make good what was said by Curio; who though he were his
familiar Friend, yet disliking the austerity of his Temper, asked him one day,
If when he left the Army, he designed to see Asia? And Cato answering, Yes, by
all means: You do well, replied Curio, and I hope you will return thence a
little more softened, and less an Enemy to Pleasure. Those were his words.

Deiotarus being now an old Man, had sent for Cato, with design to recommend
his Children and Family to his Protection: and as soon as he came, brought him
Presents of all sorts of things, which he begged and entreated him to accept.
This so displeased Cato, that though he came but in the evening, he stayed only
that night, and went away early the next morning. After he was gone one days
Journey, he found at Pessinuns a greater number of Presents provided for him
there, and also Letters from Deiotarus, entreating him to receive them; or at
least to permit his Friends to take them, who for his sake deserved something:
And indeed Cato's own Estate was not very great; yet he would not suffer it,
though he saw some of them were willing to receive such Gifts, and ready to
complain of his Severity: But he told them, That at this rate Corruption would
never want pretense; and for his Friends, they should share with him in
whatever he could get justly and honestly; so he returned the Presents to
Deiotarus.

When he took Ship for Brundusium, his Friends would have persuaded him to put
his Brother's Ashes into another Vessel; but he said, He would sooner part with
his Life than leave them: and so he set Sail. It Is said, he passed the Sea not
without some danger; though others at the same time went over very safely.

After he was returned to Rome, he spent his Time for the most part either at
home, in Conversation with Athenodorus, or at the Forum, in the service of his
Friends.

When the Office of Quoestor was allotted to him, he would not take the Place,
till he had perfectly studied the Laws concerning it, and diligently enquired
of experienced Men the Duty and Authority belonging to it. Being thus
instructed, as soon as he came into the Office, he made a great Reformation
among the Clerks and Underofficers of the Treasury. For they being well versed
in the Records and Methods of the Office, into which continually succeeded new
Quoestors, who for their Ignorance and Unskilfulness were fit only to learn,
and not able to manage the Business: These Officers therefore had taken to
themselves all the Power, and were in effect the Treasurers: Till Cato,
applying himself roundly to the Work, had not only the Title and Honor of a
Quoestor, but an insight and understanding of whatever belonged to the Office.
So that he used the Clerks and Underofficers like Servants, as they were;
reprehending them that were corrupt, and instructing those that were Ignorant.
Yet being bold, impudent Fellows, they flattered the other Quoestors his
Colleagues, and by their means made great opposition against Cato. But he caught
the chiefest of them dealing dishonestly in the division of an Estate, and
turned him out of the Treasury. A second he accused of forging a Will; who was
defended by Luctatius Catulus, at that time Censor; a Man very considerable for
his Office, but more for his Virtue; and was eminent above all the Romans of
that Age, for his Wisdom and Integrity: he had also an intimate Acquaintance
with Cato and much commended his way of Living. Catulus, perceiving he could
not bring off his Client, if he stood to the issue of a fair Trial, fell to
Prayers and Entreaties; but Cato would not suffer him to proceed therein: and
when he continued still importunate; It Is a shame, (said he to Catulus) that
you who are to Judge of our Lives, should thus let your own be dishonored, by
defending the Faults of our Servants. At this expression Catulus looked as if
he would have made some Answer; but he said nothing, and either through Anger
or Shame went away silent, and out of Countenance. Nevertheless the Man was not
cast; for the Voices that quitted him, were but one in number less than those
that condemned him: and Marcus Lollius, one of Cato's Colleagues, was absent by
reason of Sickness; to him Catulus sent, and entreated him to come and assist
his Client: so Lollius was brought into Court in a Chair, and gave his Voice
also for acquitting the Man. Yet Cato never after made use of that Clerk, and
never paid him his Salary, nor would he make any account of that Voice of
Lollius. Having thus humbled the Clerks, and brought them to be at Command, he
made use of the Books and Registers as he thought fit, and in a little while
reduced the Treasury into as good order as any other Court; and all men said,
Cato had made the Office of a Quoestor equal to the Dignity of a Consul. When
he found many indebted to the State upon old accounts, and the State also in
Debt to many private Persons, he took care that the Public might neither do
nor suffer wrong: for he severely and punctually exacted what was due to the
Treasury; but as freely and speedily paid all those to whom it was indebted.
This made the People much reverence Cato: when they saw those made to pay, who
thought to have escaped for nothing; and others receiving all their due, who
despaired of getting any thing. Whereas usually those who brought false Bills,
and pretended Orders of Senate, could through Favor get them accepted; Cato
would never be so imposed upon: And a certain Order being questioned whether it
had passed the Senate, he would not believe a great many Witnesses that
attested it, nor did admit of it till the Consuls came and affirmed it upon
Oath.

There were at that time a great many, whom Sylla had made use of as his
Executioners in the last Proscription, and to whom he had for that Service
given twelve thousand Drams apiece. These men every body hated as wicked
Wretches, but no body durst be revenged of them. Yet Cato called every one to
account, who had thus gotten the public Money; which he exacted of them, and
at the same time sharply reproved them for their cruel and impious Actions.
Having born this from Cato, they were presently accused of Murder; and being
already prejudged as guilty, they were easily found so, and accordingly
suffered. At this all People rejoiced, and hoped now to see the fear of Tyranny
taken away, and Sylla himself punished.

Cato's Assiduity also, and indefatigable Diligence, won very much upon the
People; for he always came first of any of his Colleagues to the Treasury, and
went away the last. He never missed any Assembly of the People, or Sitting of
the Senate; where he always took care strictly to observe those, who lightly,
or out of Ambition, voted for remitting or giving away the Fines and Customs,
that were owing to the State. And at length having freed the Exchequer from
Informers, yet filled it with Treasure; he made it appear, the State might be
rich, without oppressing the People.

At first he was uneasy and hateful to some of his Colleagues, but afterward
much beloved by them; for on him they laid the fault, when they could not
gratify their Friends with Pensions out of the Treasury, or corrupt Judgments
in passing their Accounts; and when pressed by Suitors, they readily answered,
'Twas impossible to do any thing, unless Cato would consent.

The last day of his Office he was very honorably attended to his House by all
the People; but by the way he was informed, that several Persons of great Power
and Familiarity with Marcellus, were about him in the Treasury, and earnestly
urging him to pass a certain Gift out of the public Revenue, as if it had been
a Debt. This Marcellus had been one of Cato's Friends from his Childhood, and
was one of the best of his Colleagues in this Office; but when alone, was easily
wrought upon by the importunity of Suitors, and of his own inclination very
ready to do any body a Kindness. Wherefore Cato immediately turned back, and
finding that Marcellus had yielded to pass the thing, he took the Book, and
razed it out. When he had done this, he brought Marcellus out of the Court, who
went home with him; and for all this, neither then, nor ever after, complained
of him, but always continued his Friendship and Familiarity with him.

Cato after he had laid down his Office, yet did not leave the Care of the
Treasury; for he had his Servants there continually writing out Accounts, and
he himself kept always by him certain Books, that contained the Accounts of the
Revenue, from Sylla's Time to his own, for which he gave five Talents.

He was always first at the Senate, and went out last; oftentimes while others
walked about there idly, he would sit and read by himself, holding his Gown
before his Book, and was never out of Town, when the Senate was to meet.

Pompey and his Party finding that Cato could never be, either persuaded or
compelled to favor their unjust Designs; they contrived to keep him from so
much frequenting the Senate, by engaging him in Business for his Friends,
either to plead their Causes, or arbitrate their Differences. But he quickly
discovering their Contrivance, to encounter it, fairly told all his
Acquaintance, that he would never meddle in any private Business, when the
Senate was assembled; since 'twas not for Honor or Riches, nor rashly or by
chance, that he engaged himself in the Affairs of State; but he undertook the
Service of the Public, as the proper Business of an honest Man: and therefore
he thought himself obliged to be as diligent for the good of his Country, as a
Be for the preservation of her Hive. To this end he took care to make his
Friends and Correspondents send him the Edicts, Decrees, Judgments, and most
considerable Actions that passed in any of the Provinces.

Clodius, the seditious Orator, practicing to stir up great Commotions, and
traducing the Priests and Vestals to the People, (among whom, Fabia Terentia,
Sister to Cicero's Wife, run great danger) Cato boldly opposed him, and made
him appear so infamous, that he was forced to leave the Town; and when Cicero
came to thank him for what he had done; You must thank the Commonwealth, said
he; for whose sake alone it was that he did every thing. Thus he gained a great
and wonderful Reputation: so that a certain Advocate in a Cause, where there
was only one Witness against him, told the Judges, They ought not to rely upon
a single Witness, though it were Cato himself. And it was grown proverbial
among the People, if any very unlikely and incredible thing were asserted, to
say, They would not believe it, though Cato himself should affirm it. One day a
debauched Prodigal talking in the Senate about Frugality and Temperance,
Amnoeus standing up, cried, Who can endure this, Sir, to hear you, that feast
like Crassus, and build like Lucullus, talk like Cato. So likewise those who
were wild and dissolute in their Manners, yet affected to seem grave and severe
in their Discourses, were in derision called Cato's.

At first when his Friends would have persuaded him to stand to be Tribune of
the People, he thought it not convenient; for that the Power of so great an
Office, ought to be employed only as the strongest Medicines, when things are
brought to the last necessity. But afterward in Vacationtime, as he was going,
accompanied with his Books and Philosophers, to Leucania, where he had a
pleasant Seat; by the way they met a great many Horses, Carriages, and
Attendants, of whom they understood, that Metellus Nepos was going to Rome, to
stand to be Tribune of the People. Hereupon Cato stopped, and after a little
pause, gave Orders to return immediately: At which the Company seeming to
wonder; Don't you know (said he) how dangerous of it self the Madness of
Metellus is? but now he comes assisted with the Counsel of Pompey, he will fall
like Lightning on the State, and bring it to utter ruin: wherefore this is no
time for Idleness and Diversion; but we must go and prevent this man in his
Designs, or bravely die in defense of our Liberty. Nevertheless, by the
Persuasion of his Friends, he went first to his Countrey-house, where he stayed
but a very little time, and then returned to Town.

He arrived in the Evening, and went straight the next Morning to the Forum,
where he began to solicit for the Tribuneship, in opposition to Metellus. The
Power of this Office consists rather in controuling, than performing any
Business; for though all the rest except any one Tribune should be agreed, yet
his denial or intercession could put a stop to the whole Matter. Cato at first
had not many that appeared for him; but as soon as his Design was known, all
Persons of the best Quality, and of his own Acquaintance, took part with him;
for they looked upon him not as one that desired a Favor of them, but one that
sought to do a great Kindness to his Country, and all honest men: Who had many
times refused the same Office, when he might have had it without trouble; but
now sought it with danger, that he might defend their Liberty, and their
Government. It is reported, that so great a number flocked about him, that he
was like to be stifled amidst the Press, and could scarce get through the
Crowd. He was declared Tribune, with several others, among whom was Metellus.

Now when Cato was chosen into this Office, having observed that the Election
of Consuls was grown very mercenary, he sharply rebuked the People for this
Corruption, and in the conclusion of his Speech protested, he would accuse whom
ever he should find giving Money: yet Passed by Silanus, by reason of his
Alliance, for he had married Servilia, Cato's Sister; so that he did not
prosecute him: but Lucius Murena, who was chosen Consul with Silanus, he
accused of Bribery. There was a Law, That the Party accused might set a Guard
upon his Accuser, to watch him lest he should use any indirect means in
preparing the Accusation. He that was set upon Cato by Murena, at first
followed and observed him strictly, yet never found him dealing any way
unfairly or unjustly, but always generously and heartily, going on in the just
and open Methods of Proceeding. So that he much admired Cato's great Spirit and
noble Nature, and easily trusted to his Integrity; for meeting him abroad, or
going to his House, he would ask him if he designed to do any thing that day in
order to the Accusation; and if Cato said, No, he went away, freely relying on
his Word.

When the Cause was pleaded, Cicero, who was then Consul, and defended Murena,
did so wittily expose Cato, and the Stoic Philosophers, and their Paradoxes,
that he raised great Laughter in his Judges. Whereupon, Cato smiling, said to
the Standers by Sirs, we have a very pleasant Consul. Murena was acquitted, and
afterward showed himself no passionate, but a very prudent Man; for when he was
Consul, he always took Cato's Advice in the most weighty Affairs, and in all
the time of his Office, gave him much Honor and Respect. Of which, not only
Murena's Prudence, but also Cato's obliging Humor, was the Cause: for though he
were terrible and severe, as to Matters of Justice, in the Senate and at the
Bar; yet he was very courteous and goodnatured to all men in private.

Before Cato took upon him the Office of Tribune, he assisted Cicero, at that
time Consul, in many things that concerned his Office; but most especially in
prosecuting Catiline's Conspiracy, which he did with great Courage and Success.

This Catiline had plotted a dreadful and entire Subversion of the Roman State,
contriving to raise great Seditions, and drive them into a Civil War; but being
detected by Cicero, was forced to fly the City. Yet Lentulus and Cethegus
conspired with several others, and blaming Catiline, as one that wanted
Courage, and had too much Caution for such desperate Designs, they themselves
resolved to set the whole Town on fire, and utterly to ruin the Empire of the
World, by Tumults at home, and War from abroad. But the Design was discovered
by Cicero, (as we have written in his Life) and the Matter brought before the
Senate. Silanus, who spoke first, delivered his opinion, That the Conspirators
ought to suffer the last of Punishments; and was therein followed by all that
spoke after him, till it came to Coesar who was very eloquent, and looking upon
all Changes and commotions in the State, as Matter for him to work upon,
desired rather to increase than extinguish them. Wherefore standing up, he made
a very merciful and persuasive Speech; That they ought not to suffer otherwise
than according to Law, by which they could not be put to death; and moved that
they might be kept in Prison: Thus was the House almost wholly turned by
Coesar. They were also afraid of the People; insomuch that Silanus retracted,
and said he did not mean Death, but Imprisonment, for that was the utmost of
what a Roman could suffer. Upon this they were all inclined to the milder
opinion; when Cato standing up, began to speak with great Passion and
Eloquence; blaming Silanus for his change of Opinion, and reflecting on Caesar
for his affectation of Popularity, who (he said) would ruin the Commonwealth
by mild words, and plausible speeches: yet endeavored to frighten the Senate,
where he himself ought to fear: for he might take it kindly, if he escaped
unpunished, or unsuspected, who did thus openly and boldly dare to protect the
Enemies of the State; seemed to have no compassion for so great and glorious an
Empire, brought so near its utter ruin; yet was full of pity for those men,
who had better never been born, and whose death must deliver the Commonwealth
from danger and destruction. This only of all Cato's Speeches, it is said, was
preserved; for Cicero the Consul had dispersed about the Senate house several
expert Writers, whom he had taught to make certain figures, which did in little
and short strokes express a great many words: till that time they had not used
those we call Shorthand Writers, who then first, as it is said, laid the
foundation of that Art. Thus Cato carried it, and so turned the House again,
that it was decreed, The Conspirators should be put to death.

Not to omit any the least strokes that may show Cato's Temper, and contribute
to draw the Image of his Mind; it is reported, that while Coesar and he were
disputing very earnestly in this Business, and the whole Senate regarding them
two, a little Note was brought in to Coesar; which Cato presently declared to
be suspicious; and some of the Senators moved it might be read. Whereupon
Coesar delivered the Letter to Cato, who discovering it to be a Love letter
from his Sister Servilia to Coesar, by whom she had been debauched, he threw it
to him again, crying, Take it, you Sot; and so went on with his Discourse. In
short, it seems Cato had but ill Fortune in Women; for this Lady was ill-spoken
of, for her Familiarity with Coesar: and another Servilia, Cato's Sister also,
was yet more infamous; for being married to Lucullus, one of the greatest Men
in Rome; and having brought him a Son, she was afterward divorced for
Incontinency. But what was worst of all, Cato's own Wife, Atilia, was not free
from the same Fault; and after she had born him two Children, he was forced to
put her away for her ill Conduct. After that he married Martia, the Daughter of
Philip, a Woman of good Reputation; who yet has occasioned much Discourse; for
this Passage in the Life of Cato looks like a Fable in a Play, and is very
difficult to be cleared, or made out with any certainty.

It is thus related by Thraseas, who refers to the Authority of Munatius,
Cato's Friend and constant Companion. Among many that loved and admired Cato,
some were more remarkable and conspicuous than others: of these was Quintus
Hortensius, a Man of signal Worth, and approved Virtue; who desired not only to
live in Friendship and Familiarity with Cato, but also to be united to his
Family, by some Alliance in Marriage. Therefore he set himself to persuade
Cato, that his Daughter Porcia, who was already married to Bibulus, and had
born him two Children, might nevertheless be given to him, as a fruitful Field,
from which he might raise an Offspring: For (said he) though this in the opinion
of men may seem strange, yet in Nature 'twould be honest and profitable for the
Public; that a Woman in the prime of her youth should not lie useless, and
lose the Fruit of her Womb; nor on the the other side would it be convenient,
she should burden and impoverish one Man, by bringing him too many Children.
Also by this Communication of Families among worthy Men, Virtue would increase,
and be diffused through their Posterity; and the Commonwealth would be united
and cemented by their Alliances. Yet if Bibulus would not part with his Wife
altogether, he would restore her as soon as she had brought him a Child,
whereby he might be united to both their Families. Cato answered, That he loved
Hortensius very well, and did much approve of uniting their Houses; but he
thought it very strange to speak of marrying his Daughter, which was already
given to another. Then Hortensius, turning the Discourse, did not stick to
acknowledge, that 'twas Cato's own Wife which he desired; for she was young and
fruitful, and he had already Children enough. Neither can it be thought, that
Hortensius did this, as imagining Cato did not love Martia; for, it is said, she
was then with Child. Cato perceiving his earnest desire, did not deny his
Request, but said, that Philip, the Father of Martia, ought also to be
consulted. Philip therefore being sent for, came; and finding they were well
agreed, gave his Daughter Martia to Hortensius in the presence of Cato, who
himself also assisted at the Marriage. These things were done afterward; but
since I was speaking of Women* I thought fit to make mention thereof in this
Place.

Lentulus and the rest of the Conspirators were put to death; but Coesar, by
reason of what was said against him in the Senate, betook himself to the
People, and stirred up the most corrupt and dissolute Members of the State to
follow him. Cato, apprehensive of what might ensue thereupon, persuaded the
Senate to win over the poor and disorderly Rabble, by a distribution of Corn,
the Charge of which amounted to twelve hundred and fifty Talents. This
Liberality did in appearance dissipate the present Danger.

But Metellus, coming into his Office of Tribune, began to hold tumultuous
Assemblies, and had prepared a Decree, That Pompey the Great should presently
be called into Italy, with all his Forces, to preserve the City from the danger
of Catiline's Conspiracy. This was the fair pretense; but the true design was,
to deliver all into the hands of Pompey, and give him an absolute Power. Upon
this the Senate was assembled; and Cato did not fall sharply upon Metellus, as
he used to do, but spoke many things full of great Reason and Moderation. At
last he descended even to Entreaty, and extolled the House of Metellus, as
having always taken part with the Nobility. At this Metellus grew the more
insolent, and despising C^to, as if he yielded and were afraid, let fall many
audacious Speeches, openly threatening to do whatever he pleased in spite of the
Senate. Hereupon Cato changed his Countenance, his Voice and his Language; and
after many sharp Expressions, boldly concluded, That while he lived, Pompey
should never come armed into the City. The Senate thought them both
extravagant, and not well in their Wits; for the Design of Metellus seemed to
be the effect of his Rage, who out of excess of Malice, would bring all to
Ruin and Confusion; and Cato's Virtue looked like a kind of Ecstasie, while he
with so great heat and passion contended for what was good and just. Afterward,
when the People were to give their Voices for the passing this Decree, Metellus
beforehand possessed the Forum with armed Men, Strangers, Gladiators and
Slaves, and all those that in hopes of Change followed Pompey, which was no
small part of the People; besides they had great Assistance from Coesar, who
was then Proetor. The best and chiefest Men of the City, were no less offended
at these Proceedings than Cato; but they seemed rather likely to suffer with
him, than able to assist him. In the mean time Cato's whole Family were in
dreadful Fear and Apprehension for him; some of his Friends did neither eat nor
sleep all the night, continuing in very great Perplexity: his Wife and Sisters
also bewailed and lamented him; but he himself, void of all Fear, and full of
Assurance, did comfort and encourage them by his own Discourse. After Supper he
went to rest at his usual hour, and was the next day waked out of a profound
Sleep, by Minutius Thermus, one of his Colleagues. So soon as he was up, they
two went together into the Forum, accompanied by very few, but met by a great
many, who bid them have a care of themselves. Cato, when he saw the Temple of
Castor and Pollux encompassed with armed Men, and the ascent to it guarded by
Gladiators, at the top whereof sat Metellus and Caesar together; turning to
his Friends, Behold (said he) that courageous Fellow who has raised so great
Forces against one unarmed naked man: and so he went on with Thermus. They who
kept the Passages, gave way to those two; but would not let any body else pass:
yet Cato, taking Munatius by the Hand, with much difficulty pulled him through
along with him. Then going directly to Metellus and Caesar, he sat himself
down between them, to prevent their talking to one another; at which they were
both amazed. And those of the honest Party, observing the Countenance and
admiring the Spirit and Boldness of Cato, went nearer, and cried out to him to
have Courage, exhorting one another to stand together, and not betray their
Liberty, nor the Defender of it. Then the Clerk took out the Bill, but Cato
forbade him to read it; whereupon Metellus took it, and would have read it
himself, but Cato snatched away the Book. Yet Metellus having the Decree by
heart, began to recite it without book; but Thermus clapped his Hand to his
Mouth, and stopped his Speech. Metellus seeing them fully bent to withstand
him, and the People inclining to their side, sent to his House for armed Men;
who rushing in with great noise and terror, they all dispersed and run away,
except Cato, who alone stood still, while the other Party threw Sticks and
Stones at him from below. Murena, whom he had formerly accused, could not brook
this, but came to him, and holding his Gown before him, cried out to them to
leave off throwing* in ^ine, persuading and pulling him along, he forced him
into the Temple of Caster and Pollux. Metellus now seeing the Place clear, and
all the adverse Party fled out of the Forum, thought he might easily carry his
Point so he commanded the Soldiers to retire, and going orderly to work, he
began to proceed in passing the Decree: But the other side, having recollected
themselves, returned very boldly, and with great shouting; insomuch that
Metellus his Adherents were utterly dismayed, and fled every one out of the
Place. They being thus dispersed, Cato came in again, and confirmed the
Courage, and commended the Resolution of the People; so that now the Multitude
were, by all means, for deposing Metellus from his Office. The Senate also
being presently assembled, gave Orders to stand by Cato, and to oppose this
Decree, which would certainly raise great Disturbance, and perhaps Civil War in
the Common wealth. But Metellus continued still very bold and resolute; and
seeing his Party stood greatly in fear of Cato, whom they looked upon as
invincible, he flung out of the Senate, and going into the Forum he assembled
the People to whom he made a bitter and invidious Speech against Cate, crying
out, He was forced to fly from his Tyranny, and this Conspiracy against Pompey,
that the City would soon repent their having dishonored so great a Man.

Cato was highly magnified, for having thus delivered the State, from the
dangerous Tribuneship of Metellus; and thereby in some measure diminished the
Power of Pompey: But he was more commended, for that the Senate intending to
disgrace Metellus, and depose him from his Office, Cato did altogether oppose,
and at length divert that Design. For which the Common People admired his
Moderation and Humanity, in not insulting on an Enemy whom he had overthrown;
but wise Men acknowledged his Prudence and Policy, in not exasperating Pompey.

After this, Lucullus returned from the War in Asia; the finishing of which,
and thereby the Glory of the whole, would in all appearance fall to Pompey.
Lucullus also was like to lose his Triumph; for C^ius Memmius traduced him to
the People, and threatened to accuse him: which he did rather out of Love to
Pompey, than for any particular Enmity to Lucullus. But Cate, being related to
Lucullus who had married his Sister Servilia, and also thinking this design
very unjust, opposed Memmius; and thereby underwent many Slanders and false
Accusations; insomuch that they would have turned him out of his Office,
pretending that he used his Power tyrannically. Yet at length Cato so far
prevailed against Memmius, that he was forced to let fall the Accusations, and
to desist from his Design.

Lucullus, having thus obtained his Triumph, did yet more carefully cultivate
Cato's Friendship, which he looked upon as a great guard and defense against
Pompey's Power.

Pompey the Great also returning from the Army, and considing in the Glory of
his Actions, and the Good Will of the People, thought he should be denied
nothing. Therefore he sent to the Senate, to put off the Assembly for the
choice of Consuls, till he could be present, to assist Piso, who stood for that
Office. To this most of the Senate presently yielded; only Cato, not thinking
that this delay would be of any great importance, but desiring to lessen and
cut off the Hopes and Designs of Pompey, withstood his Request, and so
overruled the Senate, that 'twas carried against him.

This did not a little trouble Pompey, who found he should very often fail in
his Designs, unless he could bring over Cato to his Interest. Therefore he sent
for his Friend Munatius; and Cato having two Neeces that were marriageable, he
offered to marry the eldest himself, and take the youngest for his Son. Some
say, they were not his Neeces, but his Daughters, whom Pompey would have thus
married. Munatius proposed the Matter to Cato, in presence of his Wife and
Sisters: the Women very much desired the Alliance of so great and worthy a
Person; but Cato, without delay or balancing, presently answered; Go, Munatius,
go tell Pompey, that Cato is not to be wrought upon by Women; though otherwise I
very much value his Kindness: And while he deals uprightly in the State, he
shall find in me a Friendship more firm than any Alliance; but I will not give
Hostages to Pompey's Glory, against my Countrey's safety. This Answer was very
grating to the Women; and to all his Friends it seemed somewhat harsh and
haughty. Afterward, when Pompey, endeavoring to get the Consulship for one of
his Friends, did give Money to the People for their Voices; and the Bribery was
notorious, for the Money was told out in Pompey's own Gardens. Cato then said
to the Women, They must necessarily have been concerned in these Faults of
Pompey, if they had been allied to his Family; and they acknowledged, that he
did best in refusing it.

But, if we may judge by the Event, Cato seems much to blame for rejecting that
Alliance, which thereby fell to Caesar. And then that Match was made, which
uniting his and Pompey's Power, had well-nigh ruined the Roman Empire, and did
at last utterly destroy the Commonwealth. Nothing of which perhaps had come to
pass, but that Cato was too apprehensive of Pompey's least Faults; and did not
consider, how he forced him into a condition of committing much greater;
however these things were yet to come.

Now Lucullus and Pompey had a great Dispute, concerning what had been
established in Pontus; each endeavoring that his own Ordinances might stand.
Cato took part with Lucullus, who was apparently injured; and Pompey, finding
himself the weaker in the Senate, took to the People. To gain them, he proposed
a Law, for dividing the Lands among the Soldiers: Cato opposing him in this
also, made the Law be rejected. Hereupon Pompey joined himself with Clodius, at
that time the most violent of all the popular Men; and was likewise united to
Caesar upon this occasion, of which Cato himself was the Cause.

For Caesar, returning from his Government in Spain, at the same time sued to
be chosen Consul, and yet desired not to lose his Triumph. Now the Law
requiring, That those who stood for any Office, should be present; and yet that
whoever expected a Triumph, should continue without the Walls; Caesar requested
the Senate, that his Friends might be permitted to canvass for him in his
absence. Many of the Senators where willing to consent to it; but Cato opposed
it; and perceiving them inclined, to favor Caesar, spent the whole day in
speaking; and so prevented the Senate, that they could come to no conclusion.
Caesar therefore resolving to let fall his Pretensions to the Triumph, came
into the Town, and immediately made a Friendship with Pompey, and stood for the
Consulship: so soon as he was declared Consul elect, he married his Daughter
Julia to Pompey. Having thus combined themselves together against the
Commonwealth, the one proposed the Agrarian Laws, for dividing the Lands among
the poor People; and the other was present to second the Proposal. Against
them, Lucullus, Cicero, and their Friends, joined with Bibulus the other
Consul, and did all they could to hinder the passing those Laws. Among these
none was more remarkable than Cato, who looked upon the Friendship and Alliance
of Pompey and Caesar as very dangerous; and declared, he did not so much
dislike the Advantage, the People should get by this division of the Lands, as
he feared the Reward these men would gain, by thus cheating the People. And in
this the Senate was of his opinion; as likewise many honest men without, who
were very much offended at Caesar's ill Conduct; That he now bearing the
Authority of Consul, should thus basely and dishonourably flatter the People,
practicing to win them by the same means, that were wont to be used only by the
most rash and heady Tribunes. Caesar therefore and his Party, fearing they
should not carry it by fair dealing, fell to open force. First a Basket of Dung
was thrown upon Bibulus, as he was going to the Forum: then they set upon his
Lictors, and broke their Rods; at length several Darts were thrown, and many
men wounded: so that all that were against those Laws, fled out of the Forum,
the rest making what have they could; but Cato last of all walking out very
slowly, often turned back and cursed those Citizens.

Now the other Party did not only carry this Point of dividing the Lands; but
also ordained, that all the Senate should swear to confirm this Law, and to
defend it against whoever should attempt to alter it; inflicting great
Penalties on those that should refuse the Oath. All the Senators, seeing the
necessity they were in, took the Oath; remembering the Example of old Metellus,
who refusing to swear upon the like occasion, was forced to fly out of Italy.
As for Cato, his Wife and Children with Tears besought him; his Friends and
Familiars persuaded and entreated him to yield, and take the Oath; but he that
principally prevailed with him, was Cicero the Orator, who urged and
remonstrated, How unreasonable it was, that a private man alone should oppose
what the Public had decreed: That the thing being already past remedy, it
would look like folly and madness, to run himself into danger, where it is
impossible to do his Country any good. Besides, it would be the greatest of
all Evils, to abandon the Commonwealth, for whose sake he did every thing, and
to let it fall into the hands of those, who designed nothing but its ruin.
This would look, as if he were glad of an opportunity, to retire from the
trouble of defending his Country: For (said he) though Cato have no need of
Rome, yet Rome has need of Cato; and so likewise have all his Friends. Of whom
Cicero professed himself the chief; being at that time aimed at by Clodius, who
openly threatened to fall upon him, as soon as ever he should get to be Tribune.
Thus Cato (they say) moved by the Entreaties of his Family, and the Persuasions
of his Friends, went unwillingly to take the Oath; which he did the last of
all, except only Favonius, one of his intimate Acquaintance.

Coesar, exalted with this Success, proposed another Law, for dividing almost
all the Country of Campania among the poor and needy Citizens. No body durst
speak against it but Cato, whom therefore Coesar pulled from the Rostra, and
dragged to Prison: yet Cato did not at all remit his freedom of Speech, but as
he went along, continued to speak against the Law, and advised the People to
put a stop to these Proceedings. The Senate and the best of the Citizens
followed him with sad and dejected Looks, showing their Grief and Indignation
by their Silence; so that Coesar could not be ignorant how much they were
offended; but being one of a fierce contentious Spirit, he still persisted,
expecting Cato should either supplicate him, or appeal to the People.
Afterward, when he saw that Cato would do neither, Coesar himself, ashamed of
what he had done, privately sent one of the Tribunes to take him out of Prison.

Thus having won the Multitude by these Laws and Gratifications, they decreed,
That Coesar should have the Government of Illyricum, and all Gaul, with an
Army of four Legions, for the space of five years: Though Cato still cried out,
they were placing a Tyrant in their Citadel. Publius Clodius, (who illegally of
a Patrician became a Plebeian) was declared Tribune of the People: And he had
promised to do all things according to their pleasure, on condition he might
banish Cicero. For Consuls, they set up Calpurnius Piso, the Father of Coesar's
Wife; and Aulus Gabinius, a Man wholly at Pompey's Devotion, as they Write who
best knew his Life and Manners.

Yet when they had thus firmly established all things; having mastered one part
of the City by Favor, and the other by Fear, they themselves were still afraid
of Cato: For they well considered, with how much pains and difficulty they had
oppressed him; and what disgrace they suffered, when they did violence to him.
This made Clodius despair of driving Cicero out of Italy, while Cato stayed at
home. Therefore, having first laid his Design; as soon as he came into his
Office, he sent for Cato, and told him, That he looked upon him as the most
incorrupt Man of all the Romans, and was ready by deeds to make good the truth
of his words: For whereas (said he) many have sought to command the Expedition
to Cyprus, and have much solicited to be sent thither; I think you only
deserve it, and therefore to you I will freely give that Command. Cato
presently cried out, This was a design upon him, and no Favor, but an Injury.
Then Clodius proudly and fiercely answered, If you will not take it as a
Kindness; yet you shall go, though never so unwillingly: and immediately going
into the Assembly of the People, he made them pass a Decree, that Cato should
be sent to Cyprus. But they ordered him neither Ships, nor Soldiers, nor any
Officers, only two Secretaries; one of which was a very Rascal, and the other a
Retainer to Clodius. Besides, as if the gaining of Cyprus, and conquering
Ptolemy, were not Work sufficient, he was ordered also to restore the Fugitives
of Byzantium: For Clodius was resolved to keep him far enough off, whilst
himself continued Tribune.

Cato, being in this necessity of going away, advised Cicero, (who was next to
be set upon) to make no Resistance, lest he should throw the State into Civil
War and Confusion; but to give way to the Times: And thus he might become once
more the Preserver of his Country.

Cato sent Canidius, one of his Friends, to Cyprus, to persuade Ptolemy to
yield, without being forced; which if he did, he should want neither Riches nor
Honor: For the Romans would give him the Priesthood of Venus in the Isle of
Paphos. He himself stayed at Rhodes, making some Preparations, and expecting an
Answer from Cyprus. In the mean time Ptolemy, King of Egypt, who had left
Alexandria, upon some quarrel between him and his Subjects, was sailing for
Rome, in hopes that Pompey and Coesar would by their Power restore him again to
his Kingdom: in his way he desired to see Cato, to whom he sent, supposing he
would come to him. Cato was about his necessary Affairs, when the Messenger
came; to whom he made Answer, That Ptolemy might come to him, if he thought
fit. When he came, Cato neither went forward to meet him, nor so much as rose
up to him, but saluting him as an ordinary Person, bid him sit down. This at
first amazed Ptolemy, who admired to see such Greatness and stately Carriage,
in a Man of common Birth and mean Appearance: But afterward, when he began to
talk about his affairs, Ptolemy no less wondered at the Wisdom and freedom of
his Discourse; for Cato blamed his Design, and showed him the Honor and
Happiness he had fallen from, the Disgrace and Troubles he would run himself
into; told him, what great Gifts and Presents he must bestow on the leading Men
at Rome, whom all Egypt turned into Silver would scarcely satisfy; he
therefore advised him to return home, and be reconciled to his Subjects,
offering to go along with him, and assist him in composing the Differences.
Upon this Discourse Ptolemy came to himself, as one recovered from a Fit of
Madness; and acknowledging the Wisdom and Sincerity of Cato, was resolved to
follow his Advice: But he was again over-perswaded by his Friends to the
contrary, and so according to his first Design, went to Rome. When he came
there, and was forced to wait at the Gate of one of the Magistrates; he began
to repent of his folly, in having rejected the Counsel of so good a Man, or
rather the Oracle of a God.

In the mean time the other Ptolemy, that was in Cyprus, (very luckily for
Cato) poisoned himself. It was reported he had left great Riches; therefore
Cato designing to go first to Byzantium, sent his Nephew Brutus to Cyprus, for
he would not wholly trust Canidius. Then having reconciled the Fugitives and
the People of Byzantium, he left the City in peace and quietness; and thence
sailed to Cyprus; where he found a Royal Treasure in Plate, Tables, precious
Stones and purple, all which was to be turned into ready Money. Cato resolved
to examine all very exactly, and to raise the price of every thing to the
utmost; to which end he was always present at selling the things, and took the
Accounts himself. Nor would he trust to the usual Customs of the Market, but
suspected all the Officers, Cryers, Prizers, and even his own Friends:
therefore he himself talked with the Buyers, and urged them to bid up; so that
most of the things were sold at great Rates.

This Mistrustfulness of Cato's offended most of his Friends; but especially
Munatius, the most intimate of them all, became almost irreconcilable. And this
afforded Caesar a plentiful Subject for Railing, in his Book against Cato. Yet
Munatius himself relates, that this falling out was not so much occasioned by
Cato's mistrust, as by his neglect of him, and by his own jealousy of
Canidius: for Munatius writ a Book concerning Cato, which is chiefly followed
by Thraseas. Now Munatius says, That coming last to Cyprus, and having a very
ill Lodging provided for him, he thereupon went to Cato's House, but was not
admitted, because he was in private with Canidius; of which he afterward very
mildly complained to Cato, but received a very harsh Answer: for he told him,
That too much Love ( according to Theophrastus) often causes Hatred; and you
(said he) because you bear me much Love, think you receive too little Honor,
and presently grow angry: but as to Canidius, I will employ him, both for his
Industry and his Fidelity, ^e has been always with me, and I have always found
him free from corruption* These things were said in private between them two:
but Cato afterward told Canidius what had passed* which Munatius understanding,
would no more go to sup with him, and when he was called to Council, refused to
come. Then Cato threatened to seize his Goods, as was the custom to deal with
those who were disobedient: but Munatius, not regarding his Threats, returned
to Rome, and continued a long time thus discontented. Afterward when Cato was
come back also, Martia, who as yet lived with him, contrived to have them both
invited to sup together at the House of one Barca: Cato came in last of all,
when the rest were at Table, and asked, Where he should be? Barca answered him,
Where he pleased: then looking about, he said, He would be near Munatius, and
presently went, and placed himself next to him; yet he showed him no other mark
of Kindness, all the time they were at Table together. But another time, at the
Entreaty of Martia, Cato wrote to Munatius, That he desired to speak with him.
Munatius went to his House one Morning, and was entertained by Martia; till all
the Company was gone; then Cato came and embraced him very kindly, and they
were perfectly reconciled. I have the more fully related this Passage, for that
I think the Manners and Tempers of Men, are more clearly discovered by things
of this nature, than by great and illustrious Actions.

Cato got together no less than seven thousand Talents of Silver; but
apprehensive of what might happen in so long a Voyage by Sea, he provided a
great many Coffers that held two Talents, and five hundred Drams apiece: to
each of these he fastened a long Rope, and to the other end of the Rope a piece
of Cork; so that, if the Ship should miscarry, it might be discovered where
about the Chests lay under Water: thus all the Money, except a very little, was
safely transported. Now Cato had made two Books, in which all his Accounts were
carefully written; but neither of them was preserved; for his Freed-man
Phylargyrus, who had the charge of one of them, setting Sail from Cenohrea, was
drowned, together with the Ship, and all her Lading. The other Book Cato
himself kept till he came to Corcyra; where he see up his Tents in the
Marketplace: and the Mariners being very cold in the Night, made a great many
Fires, some of which took hold of the Tents, so that they were burnt, and the
Book lost. Though Cato had brought with him several of Ptolemy's Servants, who
could testify his Integrity, and stop the mouths of his Enemies; yet this loss
troubled him: for he designed them not only for a proof of his own Fidelity,
but a pattern of Exactness to others.

News being brought to Rome, that Cato was coming up the River, all the
Magistrates, the Priests, and the whole Senate, with great part of the People,
went out to meet him: both the Banks of the Tyber were covered with People: so
that his Entrance was in Solemnity and Honor, not inferior to a Triumph. But
'twas thought somewhat strange, and looked like Pride; that when the Consuls
and Praetors appeared, he did not come toward them, nor stay to salute them,
but rowed up the Stream in a Royal Galley of six Banks of Oars, and stopped not
till he came to the place of Landing. However, when the Money was carried
through the Streets, the People much wondered at the vast quantity of it, and
the Senate being assembled, did in honorable terms decree him an extraordinary
Praetorship, and also the privilege of being at the public shows in a Robe
faced with purple. Cato refused all these Honors: but declaring what Diligence
and Fidelity he had found in Nicias, the Steward of Ptolemy, he requested the
Senate to give him his Freedom.

Philip, the Father of Martia, was that year Consul; but the Authority and
Power of the Office rested wholly in Cato: for the other Consul no less
respected him for his Virtue, than Philip did for his Alliance.

Cicero being returned from his Banishment, (into which he was Driven by
Clodius) and having again obtained great Credit among the People; he went one
day, in the absence of Clodius, and by force took away the Records of his
Tribuneship, which Clodius, had laid up in the Capitol. Hereupon the Senate was
assembled, and Clodius Complained of Cicero; who answered, That Clodius was
never legally Tribune, and therefore whatever he had done, was void and of no
Authority. But Cato interrupted him, and standing up, said, That indeed he did
not at all approve of Clodius his Proceedings; but if they questioned the
Validity of what had been done in his Tribuneship, they might also question
what himself had done at Cyprus: for the Expedition was unlawful, if he that
sent him had no lawful Authority. But, he thought Clodius was legally made
Tribune, who, by permission of the Law, was from a Patrician adopted into a
Plebeian Family: and if he had done ill in this Office, he ought to be called
to account for it; but the Authority of the Magistracy ought not to suffer for
the Faults of the Magistrate. Cicero took this very ill, and for along time
discontinued his Friendship with Cato: but they were afterward reconciled upon
this occasion.

Pompey and Crassus, by Agreement with Caesar, (who came over the Alps, on
purpose,) had laid a Design, That they two should stand to be chosen Consuls a
second time; and when they should be in their Office, they would continue to
Caesar his Government for five years more, and take to themselves the greatest
Provinces, with Armies, and money to maintain them. This seemed a plain
Conspiracy, to destroy the Commonwealth, and divide the Empire. Several honest
Men had intended to stand to be Consuls that year: but upon the appearance of
these great Men, they all desisted, except only Lucius Domitius, who had
married Porcia, the Sister of Cato, and was by him persuaded to stand it out,
and not abandon such an Undertaking; which (he said) was not only to gain the
Consulship, but to preserve the Liberty of Rome. In the mean time, 'twas
usually discoursed among the more prudent part of the Citizens, That they ought
not to suffer the Power of Pompey and Crassus to be united, which would then
grow beyond all Bounds, and become dangerous to the State; that therefore one
of them must be denied. For these Reasons they took part with Domitius; whom
they exhorted and encouraged to go on, assuring him, that many who feared
openly to appear for him, would privately assist him. Pompey's Party, fearing
this, laid wait for Domitius, and set upon him as he was going before
daylight, with Torches, into the Field. First he that bore the Light next
before Domitius, was knocked down; then several others being wounded, all the
rest fled, except Cato and Domitius: for Cato held him, (though himself were
wounded in the Arm) and crying out, conjured the others to stay, and while they
had breath, not to forsake the defense of their Liberty, against those Tyrants,
who plainly showed with what Moderation they were like to use the Power, which
they endeavored to gain by such Violence. But at length Domitius also no
longer willing to stand the Danger, fled to his own House; and so Pompey and
Crassus were declared Consuls.

Nevertheless Cato would not give over; but resolved to stand himself to be
Praetor that year, which he thought would be some help to him, in his design of
opposing them: that he might not act as a private Man, when he was to contend
with public Magistrates. Pompey and Crassus apprehended this: and fearing that
the Office of Praetor in the Person of Cato, might be equal in Authority to
that of Consul; they assembled the Senate unexpectedly, without giving any
notice to a great many of the Senators, and made an Order, That those who were
chosen Praetors, should immediately enter upon their Office, without attending
the usual time, in which, according to Law, they might be accused, if they had
corrupted the People with Gifts. When by this Order they were secure from being
called to account; they set up their own Friends and Dependants to stand for
the Praetorship, giving Money, and soliciting the People for their Voices. Yet
the Virtue and Reputation of Cato was like to triumph over all these
Stratagems: for many of the People abhorred, that Cato should be sold, who
ought rather to be hired to take upon him the Office: so he carried it by the
Voices of the first Tribe. Hereupon Pompey immediately frames a Lie, crying
out, It thundered, and straight broke up the Assembly. For the Romans
religiously observed those things, and never concluded any Matter, after it had
thundered. Against the next time, they had distributed larger Bribes; and did
also keep the best Men out of the Field. By these foul means they procured
Vatinius to be chosen Praetor instead of Cato. It Is said, that those who had
thus corruptly and dishonestly given their Voices, made what have they could
out of the Field: but the others staying together, and much grieving at what
was done, one of the Tribunes continued the Assembly; and Cato standing up,
did, as it were by Inspiration, foretell all the Miseries that afterward befell
the State: then he exhorted them to beware of Pompey and Crassus, who were
guilty of such things, and had laid such Designs, that they might well fear to
have Cato their Proetor. When he had ended this Speech, he was followed to his
House by a greater number of People than all the Proetors together.

Caius Trebonius proposed the Law for alloting Provinces to the Consuls;
whereby one was to have Spain and Lybia, the other Egypt and Syria, with full
power of making War and Peace, both by Sea and Land, as they should think fit.
When this was proposed, all men despaired of putting any stop to it; and
therefore said nothing against it. But Cato, before they began Voting, went up
into the Rostra, and desired to be heard; they would scarce allow him two hours
to speak. Having spent that time, in declaring many things that were passed,
and foretelling many that were to come, they would not suffer him to speak any
longer; but as he was going on, a Sergeant came and pulled him down: yet when
he was down, he still continued his Discourse; and many there were who
hearkened to him, and were much concerned for him. Then the Sergeant took him,
and forced him out of the Forum; but as soon as he got loose, he returned
again, crying out to the People, to stand by him. Cato having done thus several
times, Trebonius grew very angry, and commanded him to be carried to Prison;
but the Multitude followed him, and hearkened to him, who made a Speech to
them, as he went along. Whereupon Trebonius was afraid, and ordered him to be
released: thus was all that day spent, and the Business driven off by Cato. But
afterward, many of the Citizens being over-awed by Fears and Threats, and
others won by Gifts and Favors: Aquilius, one of the Tribunes, they shut into
the Senate house; Cato, who cried, It thundered, they drove out of the Forum;
many were wounded, and some slain: at length by open force they passed the Law.
At this many were so incensed, that they got together, and resolved to throw
down the Statues of Pompey: but Cato went, and diverted them from that Design.

Again, another Law was proposed, concerning the Provinces and Legions for
Coesar. Upon this occasion Cato did not apply himself to the People, but to
Pompey; and told him, He did not consider now; that he took Caesar upon his own
Shoulders, who would shortly grow too weighty for him; and at length, not able
to lay down the burden, nor yet to bear it any longer, he would fall with it
upon the Commonwealth: and then he would remember Cato's Advice; which was no
less advantageous to him, than just and honest in it self. Thus was Pompey
often warned, but still went on; never mistrusting Coesar's Change, and always
confiding in his own Power and good Fortune.

Cato was made Proetor the following year; but, it seems, he did not more
honor and credit the Office by his signal Integrity, than he did disgrace and
diminish it by his strange Behavior, for he would often come to the Court
without his Shoes, and sit upon the Bench without his Gown; and in this Habit
give Judgment in the greatest Causes, and upon Persons of the best Quality.
It Is said also, he would dispatch Business after Dinner, when he had drunk
Wine: but this was wrongfully reported of him.

The People were at that time extremely corrupted by the Bribes of those who
sought Offices; and many made a constant Trade of selling their Voices. Cato
was resolved utterly to root this Corruption out of the Commonwealth; therefore
he persuaded the Senate to make an Order, That those who were chosen into any
Office, though no body did accuse them, should be obliged to come into the Court,
and give account upon Oath how they had dealt in their Election. This very much
displeased those who stood for the Offices; but much more those who took the
Bribes: insomuch that one Morning, as Cato was going to the Place where he kept
Court, a great multitude of People flocked together, and with a mighty uproar
fell to reviling him, and threw Stones at him. Those that were about the
Tribunal, presently fled; Cato himself being forced thence, and justled about
in the Throng, very narrowly escaped the Stones that were thrown at him, and
with much difficulty got into the Rostra; where standins up with a bold and
undaunted Countenance, he appeased the Tumult, and silenced the Clamor: then
he began to speak, and was heard with great attention; so that he perfectly
quelled the Sedition. Afterward, the Senate commending him for this; But I
don't commend you (said he) for abandoning your Praetor in Danger, and bringing
him no Assistance.

In the mean time, the Candidates were in great perplexity: for every one
dreaded to give Money himself; and yet feared lest his Competitors should. At
length they all agreed to lay down an hundred and twenty five thousand
Drams apiece, and then go on to canvass fairly and honestly, on condition,
that if any one was found to make use of Bribery, he should forfeit the Money.
Being thus agreed, they chose Cato to keep the Stakes, and arbitrate the
Matter: to him therefore they brought the Sum concluded on, and before him
subscribed the Agreement; he refused to take the Money, but would have others
bound for them. Upon the day of Election, Cato stood by the Tribune that took
the Votes, and very watchfully observing all that passed, he discovered one who
had broken the Agreement, and immediately ordered him to pay his Money to the
rest: but they much admiring the Justice of Cato, remitted the Penalty, as
thinking the Dishonor a sufficient Punishment. This raised Cato as much Envy,
as it gained him Reputation: and many were offended at him, as if he did hereby
take upon himself the whole Authority of the Senate, Court of Judicature, and
other Magistracies. For there is no Virtue, the Honor and Credit whereof
procures a man more Envy, than that of Justice: and that because it acquires a
man great Power and Authority among the common People. For they only revere the
Valiant, and admire the Wise; while they truly love just men, and in these have
entire Trust and Confidence: but of the former, they fear the one, and always
mistrust the other. Besides, they think men rather beholding to their
Complexion, than to any goodness of their Will, for those Virtues: for they
look upon Valor as a certain natural firmity of the Mind; and Wisdom as the
effect of a fine Constitution. Whereas a man has it in his own power to be
Just; if he have but the will to be so: and therefore also Injustice is thought
the most dishonorable, because it is least excusable.

Cato upon this account was opposed by all the great Men, who thought
themselves reproved by his Virtue. Pompey especially looked upon the increase
of Cato's Credit, as the ruin of his own Power; and therefore continually set
up men to rail against him. Among these was the seditious Clodius, now again
united to Pompey; he declared openly, that Cato had conveyed away a great deal
of the Treasure that was found in Cyprus; and that he hated Pompey, only
because he refused to marry his Daughter. Cato answered, That although they had
allowed him neither Horse nor Men, he had brought more Treasure from Cyprus
alone, than Pompey had, after so many Wars and Triumphs, from the ransacked
World: that he never sought the Alliance of Pompey; not that he thought him
unworthy of being related to him, but because he differed so much from him, in
things that concerned the Commonwealth; for (said he) I laid down the Province
that was given me, when I went out of my Praetorship: on the contrary, Pompey
retains many Provinces to himself, and many he bestows on others; lately he
sent Caesar six thousand Men into Gaul, which were never asked of the People,
nor ever given by their consent. Thus unlimitted Powers, Men, Horse and Arms,
are become the mutual Gifts of private Men to one another. And Pompey still
keeps the Titles of Commander and General; but gives the Armies and Provinces
to others to govern: while he himself presides in the City; and stays at home
to model Seditions, and contrive Tumults in Elections: whence it is plain, he
aims at raising himself a Monarchy out of our Confusion. Thus did Cato take
occasion sharply to reflect on Pompey.

Marcus Favonius was an intimate Friend, and zealous Imitator of Cato; such as
heretofore Apollodorus Phalereus is said to have been of Socrates, with whose
Discourses he was wont to be so transported, that he would seem perfectly mad,
and as it were possessed. This Favonius stood to chosen Aedile, and was like to
lose it: but Cato, who was there to assist him, observed that all the Votes
were written in one Hand; and discovering the Cheat, appealed to the Tribunes,
who voided the Election. Favonius was afterward chosen Aedile, and Cato, who
assisted him in all things that belonged to his Office, did also take care of
the Plays that were exhibited in the Theater: to the Actors Cato gave Crowns,
not of Gold, but of wild Olive, such as used to be given at the Olympic Games.
Instead of the magnificent Gifts, that were wont to be bestowed on the People,
he gave to the Groecians Leeks, Lettices, Radishes and Pears; and to the
Romans, earthen Pots of Wine, Pork, Figs, Cucumbers, and little Fagots of Wood.
Some laughed at Cato for this; and others were well pleased with the Humor,
which they looked on as a relaxation of his usual Austerity. In fine, Favonius
himself mingled with the Crowd, and sitting among the Spectators, applauded
Cato, bid him bestow Honors and Rewards on those who did well, and assured the
People, that he had given all the Power into Cato's Hands. At the same time
Curio, the Colleague of Favonius, gave very magnificent Plays in another
Theater. But the People left his, and went to those of Favonius, which they
very much applauded, seeing him act the private Man, and Cato the Master of the
Shows; who did these things, in derision of the great Expenses that others
bestowed; and to teach them, that in Sports men ought to seek Diversion only,
and decent Cheerfulness, not great Preparations, and costly Magnificence; nor
should they employ too much Care about things of little Concern.

After this Scipio, Hypsaeus, and Milo, stood to be Consuls, and that not only
with the usual and common Disorders of Bribery and Corruption: but with Arms
and Slaughter were running desperately into a Civil War. Whereupon 'twas
proposed, That Pompey might be empowered to preside over that Election. This
Cato at first opposed, saying, That the Laws ought not to seek protection from
Pompey, but Pompey from the Laws. Yet this Confusion lasting a long time, the
Forum continually, as it were, besieged with three Armies, and no possibility
of putting a stop to these Disorders: Cato at length agreed, that rather than
fall into the last Extremity, the Senate should freely confer all on Pompey:
since 'twas necessary to make use of a lesser Evil, to prevent a greater; and
better to set up a Monarchy themselves, than to suffer a Sedition to continue,
that must certainly end in one. Bibulus therefore a Relation of Cato's, moved
the Senate to create Pompey sole Consul: For that either he would preserve the
present Government; or they should live quietly under the most powerful. Cato
stood up, and, contrary to all expectation, seconded this Motion, concluding,
That any Government was better than Confusion; and that he did not question but
Pompey would deal honorably, and take care of the Commonwealth, thus committed
to his charge. Pompey, being hereupon declared Consul, invited Cato to his
House in the Suburbs. When he came, he saluted and embraced him very kindly,
acknowledged the Favor he had done him, and desired his Counsel and
Assistance, in the management of this Office. Cato made Answer, That what he
had spoken heretofore, was not out of Hate to Pompey; nor what he had now done,
out of Love to him: but all for the good of the Commonwealth. That, in private,
if he asked him, he would freely give his Advice: but in public though he asked
him not, he would always speak his Opinion. And he did accordingly: for first
when Pompey made severe Laws for punishing, and laying great Fines on those who
had corrupted the People with Gifts, Cato advised him, To let alone what was
already passed and to provide for the future: for if he should seek into past
Crimes, it would he difficult to know where to stop; and if he would ordain new
Penalties, it would be unreasonable to punish Men by a Law, which they had
never broken. Afterward, when many considerable Men, and some of Pompey's own
Relations, were accused, he grew remiss, and let fall the Prosecution: but Cato
sharply reproved him, and urged him to proceed. Pompey had made a Law also, to
forbid the custom of making commendatory Orations, on behalf of those that were
accused: yet he himself writ one for Munatius Flaccus, and sent it, while the
Cause was pleading: which Cato seeing, he stopped his Ears with his Hands, and
would not hear it read, for he was one of the Judges. Whereupon Flaccus, before
Sentence was given, excepted against him, but was condemned notwithstanding.
And indeed Cato was the occasion of great Trouble and Perplexity, to almost all
that were accused of any thing: for they feared to have him one of their
Judges, yet did not dare to reject him: and many had been condemned, because,
refusing him, they seemed not to trust their own Innocence. To others it was
objected, as a great Reproach, the not accepting Cato for their Judge.

In the mean while, Caesar lay with his Forces in Gaul, where he continued in
Arms; and at the same time, by his Gifts, his Riches and his Friends, increased
his Power in the City. Hereupon Cato forewarned Pompey, and roused him out of
the negligent Security in which he lay, not imagining any Danger near: but
seeing Pompey very slow, and unwilling or afraid to undertake any thing against
Caesar; Cato resolved himself to stand for the Consulship, and presently force
Caesar, either to lay down his Arms, or discover his Intentions. Both Cato's
Competitors were persons very much beloved by the People. Sulpitius, who was
one, had by Cato's means acquired great Credit and Authority in the City;
therefore it was thought unhandsom, and ungratefully done, to stand against
him: but Cato did not take it ill; For it is no wonder (said he) if a man will
not yield to another, in that which he esteems the greatest Good. Now he
persuaded the Senate to make an Order, That those who stood for Offices, should
themselves ask the People for their Votes, and not solicit by others. This
very much offended the common People: for it took from them, not only the means
of receiving Money, but also the opportunity of obliging several Persons; and
so rendered them both poor, and less regarded. Besides, Cato himself was by
nature altogether unfit for the business of Canvassing: for he took more care
to preserve the dignity of his Character, than to obtain the Office. Thus by
following his own way of Soliciting; and not suffering his Friends to do those
things which take with the Multitude, he lost the Consulship.

Whereas, upon such like Occasions, not only those who missed the Office, but
even their Friends and Relations, used to be much grieved and out of
Countenance for several days after: yet Cato took it so unconcernedly; that he
anointed himself, and played at Ball in the Field, and after Dinner went into
the Forum, as he used to do, without his Shoes or his Coat, and there walked
about with his Acquaintance. But Cicero* Blamed him; for that when Affairs
required such a Consul, he would not take any Care, nor show the People any
Civility: as also that he afterward neglected to try again; whereas he had
stood a second time to be chosen Praetor. Cato answered, That he lost the
Praetorship the first time, not by any dislike of the People; but by the power
and corruption of his Adversaries: whereas in the Election of Consuls there had
been no foul dealing. So that he plainly saw, the People were offended at his
Manners; which an honest man ought not to alter for their sake: nor yet would a
wise man attempt the same thing again, while he lies under the same Prejudices.

Caesar was then fighting with many warlike Nations, whom he very bravely
subdued: Among the rest, it seems, he had set upon the Germans, (who yet were
in Peace with the Romans) and slew three hundred thousand of them. Upon which,
some of his Friends moved the Senate for a public Thanksgiving: but Cato
declared, They ought to deliver Caesar into the hands of those who had been
thus unjustly assaulted; that they might expiate the Offense, and not bring a
Curse upon the City: yet we have reason (said he) to thank the Gods; for that
they spared the Commonwealth, and did not take Vengeance upon the Army, for the
Madness and Folly of the General. Hereupon Caesar writ a Letter to the Senate,
which was read openly: 'twas full of reproachful Language and Accusations
against Cato, who standing up, seemed not at all concerned; and without any
Heat or Passion, but with a calm, and, as it were, premeditated Discourse,
exposed the Scurrility and Folly of Caesar: making it evident, that the
Accusations he had heaped together against him, were nothing but abusive and
ridiculous Railing. Then he began to rip up all Caesar's Practices; and laid
open his Designs from the beginning, as clearly, as if he never had been an
Enemy to him, but a constant Confederate with him: and told the Senate, That if
they were wise, they would not fear the Britains and Gauls, but Caesar himself.
This Discourse so moved and awakened the Senate; that Caesar's Friends repented,
they had made the Letter be read, which had given Cato opportunity of many
reasonable things, and such severe Truths against him. However, nothing was
then concluded: only 'twas hinted, that they would do well to send him a
Successor. Hereupon Caesar's Friends required, That Pompey also should lay down
his Arms, and resign his Provinces; or else that Caesar might not be obliged to
either. Then Cato cried out What he had foretold, was come to pass: now'twas
manifest he would come upon them with his Forces; and turn against the State
those Armies he had got, by deceitfully imposing on them. Yet Cato could not
prevail much out of the Senate House; for the People always magnified Caesar:
And the Senate were convinced by Cato; but were afraid of the People.

When News was brought, That Caesar had taken Ariminum, and was coming on with
his Army toward Rome: then all men, even Pompey, and the common People too,
cast their eyes on Cato, who had alone foreseen, and first clearly discovered
Caesar's Intentions. He therefore told them, If you had believed me, or
regarded my Advice; you would not now have been reduced to stand in fear of one
Man, and also to put all your Hopes in one alone. Then Pompey acknowledged,
That Cato indeed had spoken most like a Prophet; and that himself had acted too
much like a Friend. Now Cato advised the Senate to put all into the hands of
Pompey; for those who can raise up great Evils, (said he) can best allay them.

Pompey finding he had not sufficient Forces, and that those he could raise,
were not very resolute, he forsook the City. Cato resolving to follow Pompey,
sent his younger Son to Munatius, who was then in the Country of Brutium, and
took his eldest with him. But wanting some body to keep his House, and take
care of his Daughters; he took Martia again, who was now a rich Widow: for
Hortensius was dead, and had left her all his Estate. Caesar afterward made use
of this Action also, to reproach him with Covetousness, and a mercenary Design
in his Marriage: For (says he) if he had need of a Wife, why did he part with
her? and if he had not, why did he take her again? unless he gave her only as a
Bait to Hortensius; and lent her when she was young, to have her again when she
was rich. But in Answer to this, we may apply the Saying of Euripides,

First for Absurdities: and surely none
Will Hercules for want of Courage blame.
Now it is alike absurd, to reproach Hercules for Cowardice, and to accuse Cato
of Covetousness. Though otherwise, whether he did altogether right in this
Marriage, might be disputed: for as soon as he had again taken Martia, he
committed his House and his Daughters to her, and himself followed Pompey.

It Is said, that from that day he never cut his Hair, nor shaved his Beard, nor
wore a Garland: but always full of sadness, grief and dejectedness for the
Calamities of his Country, he continually bore the same Habit to the last,
whatever Party had Misfortune or Success.

The Government of Sicily being allotted to him, he passed over to Syracuse;
where understanding, that Asinius Pollio was arrived at Messana, with Forces
from the Enemy, Cato sent to him, to know the reason of his coming thither:
Pollio on the other side, demanded of him the cause of these Commotions. Cato
also hearing, that Pompey had quite abandoned Italy, and lay encamped at
Dyrrachium: he cried out, How dark and uncertain is the Will of Heaven! Pompey,
when he did nothing wisely nor honestly was always successful: and now that he
would preserve his Country, and defend her Liberty, he is altogether
unfortunate. As for Asinius, he said, he could easily drive him out of Sicily;
but there coming greater Forces to his Assistance, he would not engage the
Island in a War: wherefore he advised the Syracusians to submit to the
Conqueror, and provide for their own safety. Then he set Sail from thence.

When he came to Pompey, he constantly gave Advice to prolong the War: for he
always hoped to compose Matters, and would by no means that they should come to
Action. For the Commonwealth would suffer extremely, and be the certain cause
of its own Ruin; whoever were the Conqueror* Moreover he persuaded Pompey and
the Council of War to ordain, That no City should be sacked, that was subject
to the People of Rome: and that no Roman should be killed, but in the heat of
Battle. Thereby he got himself great Honor, and brought over many to the Party
of Pompey, who were much taken with the Moderation and Humanity of Cato.
Afterward, being sent into Asia, to assist those who were raising Men, and
preparing Ships in those Parts; he took with him his Sister Servilia, and a
little Boy which she had by Lucullus. For since her Widowhood, she had lived
with her Brother, and very much recovered her Reputation: having put her self
under his Care, followed him in his Voyages, and complied with his severe way
of Living: yet Caesar did not fail to asperse him upon her account also.

Pompey's Officers in Asia, it seems, had no great need of Cato. But he brought
over the People of Rhodes by his Persuasions; and leaving his Sister Servilia
and her Child there, he returned to Pompey, who had now gotten together very
great Forces both by Sea and Land. And here Pompey clearly betrayed his own
Intentions. For at first he designed to give Cato the Command of the Navy,
(which consisted of no less than five hundred Ships of War, besides a vast
number of Pinaces, Scouts, and Tenders) But presently bethinking himself, or
put in mind by his Friends; that Cato's principal and only aim, being to free
his Country from all Usurpation: if he were Master of so great Forces; as soon
as ever Caesar should be conquered, he would certainly oblige Pompey to lay
down his Arms, and be subject to the Laws. Therefore Pompey changed his Mind;
and though he had before mentioned it to Cato, yet he made Bibulus Admiral.
Notwithstanding this, it appeared, Cato's Affection to the public Good was no
way diminished. For when they were ready to engage in a Battle at Dyrrachium,
Pompey himself encouraged the Army, and commanded all the Officers to do the
like: yet the Soldiers hearkened to them but coldly, and with silence. Cato
spoke last of all; and discoursed to them out of the Principles of Philosophy,
such things as the Occasion required, concerning Liberty, Valor, Death and
Glory: all which he delivered with great vehemence of Affection; and concluded
with an Invocation of the Gods, to whom he directed his Speech, as if they were
present to behold them fight for their Country. At this the Army gave such a
Shout, as filled all their Leaders with Hope, and made them fall on without
fear of Danger. Caesar's Party were routed, and put to flight: yet his good
Fortune took such advantage of Pompey's Cautiousness and Diffidence, as rendered
the Victory incomplete. But of this we have spoken in the Life of Pompey.

Now while all the rest rejoiced, and magnified their Success; Cato alone
bewailed his Country, and cursed that fatal Ambition, which made so many brave
Romans murder one another.

After this, Pompey following Caesar into Thessaly, left at Dyrrachium a great
quantity of Munition, store of Riches and many of his Domestics and Relations;
the charge of all which he gave to Cato, with the Command only of fifteen
Cohorts; for though he trusted him much, yet he was afraid of him too: knowing
full well, that if he succeeded not, Cato would never forsake him; but if he
conquered, would never let him use his Victory at his pleasure. There were
likewise many Persons of eminent Quality, that stayed with Cato at Dyrrachium.

When they heard of the Overthrow at Pharsalia; Cato resolved with himself,
that if Pompey were slain, he would conduct those that were with him, into
Italy, and then retire as f^r from the Tyranny of Caesar as he could, and live
in Exile: but if Pompey were safe, he would keep the Army together for him.
With this Resolution he passed over to Corcyra, where the Navy lay. There he
would have resigned his Command to Cicero: because he had been Consul, and
himself only a Proetor: but Cicero refused it, and was going for Italy. At
which Pompey's Son being incensed, would rashly and in a heat have punished all
those who were going away, and in the first place have laid hands on Cicero:
but Cato reprehended him in private, and diverted him from that Design, Thus
apparently he saved the Life of Cicero, and preserved several others besides.

Now understanding that Pompey the Great was fled toward Egypt, or Lybia, Cato
resolved to hasten after him; and having taken all his Men aboard, he set Sail:
but first to those who were not willing to engage, he gave free liberty to
depart.

When they came to the Coast of Africa, they met with Sextus, Pompey's younger
Son, who told them of the Death of his Father in Egypt: at which they were all
exceedingly grieved, and declared, that after Pompey they would follow no other
Leader but Cato. Out of compassion therefore to so many worthy Persons, who had
given such testimones of their Fidelity, and whom he could not for shame leave
in a desert Country, amidst so many Difficulties; he took upon him the
Command, and marched toward the City of Cyrene, which presently received him,
though not long before they had shut their Gates against Labienus, Here he was
informed, that Scipio Pompey's Father-in-law, was received by King Juba; and
that Appius Varus, whom Pompey left Governor of Lybia, had joined them with
his Forces. Cato therefore resolved to march toward them by land, it being
Winter; and having got together a great many Asses to carry Water, he furnished
himself likewise with plenty of all other Provision, and a number of Carriages:
he took also with him some of those they call Pssilli, who cure the biting of
Serpents, by sucking out the Poison with their Mouths, and have likewise
certain Charms, by which they stupifie and lay asleep the Serpents.

Thus they marched seven days together. Cato all the time went on Foot at the
Head of his Men, and never made use of any Horse or Chariot. Ever since the
Battle of Pharsalia, he used to sit at Table; and added this to his other ways
of Mourning, that he never lay down but to sleep.

Having passed the Winter in Lybia, Cato drew out his Army, which amounted to
little less than ten thousand. The Affairs of Scipio and Varus went very ill,
by reason of their Dissentions and Quarrels among themselves, and their
Submissions and Flatteries to King Juba; who was insupportable for his Vanity,
and the Pride he took in his Strength and Riches. The first time he came to a
conference with Cato, he had ordered his own Seat to be placed in the middle,
between Scipio and Cato: which Cato observing, took up his Chair, and set
himself on the other side of Scipio; to whom he thus gave the Honor of sitting
in the middle, though he were his Enemy, and had formerly published a scandalous
Libel against him. There are some who approve not this Action of Cato's: and
yet on the other side blame him; for that in Sicily, walking one day with
Philostratus, he gave him the middle Place, out of the Respect he bore to
Philosophy. Thus did Cato pull down the Spirit of Juba, who before treated
Scipio and Varus no better than his own Subjects: he reconciled them also to
one another.

All the Army desired Cato to be their Leader: Scipio likewise and Varus gave
way to it, and Offered him the Command. but he said, He would not break those
Laws, which he fought to defend; and he, being but Pro-proetor, ought not to
command in the presence of a Pro-Consul; for Scipio had been created
Pro-Consul: besides that the People would take it as a good Omen, to see a
Scipio command in Africa, and the very Name would give Courage to the Soldiers.

Scipio having taken upon him the Command, presently resolved (at the
Instigation of Juba) to put all the Inhabitants of Vtica to the Sword, and to
raze the City; for having (as they pretended) taken part with Coesar. Cato
would by no means suffer this: but invoking the Gods, exclaiming and protesting
against it in the Council of War; he with much difficulty delivered the poor
People from their Cruelty.

Afterward, upon the Entreaty of the Inhabitants, and at the Instance of
Scipio, Cato took upon himself the Government of Vtica, lest it should fall
into Coesar's hands; for it was a strong Place, and very advantageous for
either Party: yet it was better provided, and more fortified by Cato, who
brought in great store of Corn, repaired the walls, erected Towers, made deep
Trenches and Outworks round the Town. The young Men of Vtica he lodged in the
Trenches; having first taken their Arms from them: the rest of the Inhabitants
he kept within the Town, and took great care, that no Injury should be done,
nor Affront offered them by the Romans. From hence he sent great quantity of
Arms, Money, and Provision, to the Camp, and made this City their chief
Magazine.

He advised Scipio, as he had before done Pompey, by no means to hazard a
Battle against a Man experienced in War, and encouraged with Success; but to
use delay: for time would cool the Heats and Passions of men, which are the
chief support and strength of Usurpers. But Scipio out of Pride rejected this
Counsel, and writ a Letter to Cato; in which he reproached him with Cowardice:
and that he could not content himself to lie secure within Walls and Trenches;
but he must hinder others, that they might not make use of the Courage and
Reason they have to lay hold an Occasions. In Answer to this, Cato writ word
again, That he would take the Horse and Foot which he had brought into Africa,
and go over into Italy, to give Caesar some Diversion there. But Scipio derided
this Proposition also. Then Cato openly avowed, He was sorry he had yielded the
Command to Scipio, who, he saw, would not use his Power wisely in the War: and
if (contrary to all appearance) he should succeed; doubtless he would use his
Success as unjustly at home. For Cato did then think, and so he told his
Friends, That he could have but slender Hopes in those Generals, that had so
much Boldness, and so little Conduct. Yet if any thing should happen beyond
Expectation, and Caesar should be overthrown: for his part he would not stay at
Rome; but would retire from the Cruelty and Inhumanity of Scipio, who had
already given out fierce and proud Threats against many.

But what Cato had looked for, fell out sooner than he expected. For about
midnight came one from the Army, who brought word, There had been a great
Battle near Thapsus: that all was utterly lost; Caesar had taken both the
Camps; Scipio and Juba were fled with a few only; and the rest cut to pieces.
This News (as it is usual in War, and coming in the night too) did so frighten
the People, that they were almost out of their Wits, and could scarce keep
themselves within the Walls of the City: but Cato went out, and meeting the
People in this Hurry and Clamor, did comfort and encourage them what he could
and something appeased the Fear and Amazement they were in; telling them, That
very likely things were not so bad in truth, but more than half augmented by
Report: thus he pacified the Tumult for the present. The next morning he
assembled the three hundred, which he used as his Council; these were Romans,
who traffick'd there in Merchandise and exchange of Money: there were also
several Senators, and their Sons. While they were coming together, Cato walked
about very quietly and unconcerned, as if nothing new had happened. He had a
Book in his Hand, which he was reading; in this Book was an account of what
provision he had for War, Armor, Corn, Weapons, and Soldiers.

When they were assembled, he began his Discourse: First with the three hundred
themselves: and very much commended the Courage and Fidelity they had shown,
and their having very well served their Country with their Persons, Money and
Counsel. Then he entreated them by no means to separate; as if each single man
could hope for any safety in forsaking his Companions: on the contrary, while
they kept together, Caesar would have less reason to despise them, if they
fought against him; and be more forward to pardon them, if they submitted to
him. Therefore he advised them to consult among themselves, nor would he
dislike, whatever they should propose if they thought fit to submit to Fortune,
he would impute their Change to Necessity; but if they resolved to stand to it,
and undergo some Danger for the sake of Liberty, he should not only commend,
but admire their Valor. And would himself be their Leader and Companion too,
till they had tried the utmost Fortune of their Country: which was not Utica
or Adrumetum, but Rome; and she had often by her own strength, raised her self
out of greater Difficulties. Besides, as there were many things, that would
conduce to their Safety; so chiefly this, that they were to fight against one,
who by his Affairs would be much distracted, and by several Occasions called
into many several Places. Spain was already revolted to the younger Pompey:
Rome was unaccustomed to the Bridle, and impatient of it; would therefore be
ready for Commotions and Insurrections, upon every Turn of Affairs. As for
themselves, they ought not to shrink from any Danger: and in this might take
Example from their Enemy. Who does so freely expose his Life to compass his
unjust Designs; yet never can hope for so happy a conclusion, as they may
promise themselves: for, notwithstanding the uncertainty of War, they will be
sure of a most happy Life, if they succeed; or a most glorious Death, if they
miscarry. However, he said, they ought to deliberate among themselves, and pray
to the Gods, that in recompense of their former Courage and Good Will, they
would direct their future Designs. When Cato had thus spoken, many were moved
and encouraged by his Speech: but the greatest part were so animated by his
Valor, Generosity, and Goodness, that they forgot the present Danger. And as
if he were the only invincible Leader, and above all Fortune, they entreated
him, To employ their Persons, Arms, and Estates, as he thought fit: for they
esteemed it far better to meet Death, in following his Counsel; than to find
their safety, in betraying one of so great Virtue. One of the Assembly proposed
the making a Decree, to set the Slaves at Liberty; and most of the rest
approved the Motion. Cato said, That ought not to be done; for it was neither
just nor lawful: but if any of their Masters would willingly set them free;
those that were fit for Service, should be received. Which diverse promised to
do; whose Names he ordered to be enrolled, and then withdrew.

Presently after this, he received Letters from Juba and Scipio. Juba, with
some few of his Men, was retired to a Mountain, where he waited to hear what
Cato would resolve upon: and intended to stay there for him, if he thought fit
to leave Vtica; or to relieve him with an Army, if he were besieged. Scipio
also lay at Anchor, under a certain Promontory, not far from Vtica, expecting
an Answer upon the same account: but Cato thought fit to retain the Messengers,
till the three hundred should come to some Resolution.

As for the Senators that were there, they showed great forwardness, and did
presently set free their Slaves, and furnish them with Arms. But the three
hundred being Men that dealt in Merchandice and Usury, much of their Substance
also consisting in Slaves; the Heat that Cato's Speech had raised in them, did
not long continue. As some Bodies that easily admit Heat, and as suddenly lose
it, when the Fire is removed: so these Men were heated and inflamed, while Cato
was present. But when they began to reason among themselves, the Fear they had
of Coesar soon overcame the Reverence they bore to Cato: For who are we? (said
they) and who is it we refuse to obey? Is it not that Caesar, to whom all the
Power of Rome has submitted? And which of us is a Scipio, a Pompey, or a Cato?
But now that all Men make their Honor give way to their Fear; shall we alone
engage for the Liberty of Rome? And in Utica declare War against him, from whom
Cato and Pompey the great fled out of Italy? Shall we set free our Slaves
against Caesar, who have our selves no more Liberty than he is pleased to
allow? No, let us, poor Creatures, know our selves; submit to the Victor, and
send Deputies to implore his Mercy. Thus said the most moderate of them: but
the greatest part were for seizing the Senators; that by securing them, they
might appease Coesar's Anger. Cato though he perceived the Change, took no
notice of it: but writ to Juba and Scipio to keep away from Vtica, because he
mistrusted the three hundred.

A considerable Body of Horse, which had escaped from the late Fight, were
coming toward Vtica, and had sent three Men before to Cato, which yet did not
all bring the same Message: for some were for going to Juba; others for joining
with Cato; and some also were afraid to go into Vtica. When Cato heard this, he
ordered Marcus Rubrius to attend upon the three hundred, and quietly take the
Names of those, who of their own accord set their Slaves at Liberty, but by no
means to force any body. Then taking with him the Senators, he went out of the
Town, and met the principal Officers of those Horsemen; whom he entreated not
to abandon so many worthy Roman Senators, nor to prefer Juba for their
Commander before Cato: but to seek the mutual safety of one another, and to
come into the City; which was impregnable, and well furnished with Corn, and
other Provision, sufficient for many years: the Senators likewise with Tears
besought them to stay. Hereupon the Officers went to consult their Soldiers,
and Cato with the Senators sat down upon the Works, expecting their
Resolution. In the mean time comes Rubrius in great Disorder, crying out, The
three hundred were all in Commotion, and raising Tumults in the City. At this
all the rest fell into Despair, lamenting and bewailing their condition: but
Cato endeavored to comfort them, and sent to the three hundred, desiring them
to have a little patience. Then the Officers of the Horse returned, with no
very reasonable Demands. They said, they did not desire to serve Juba for his
Pay; nor should they fear Caesar, while they followed Cato: but they dreaded to
be shut up with the Uticans, Men of a traitorous Nature, and Carthaginian Race,
for though they were quiet at present: yet as soon as Caesar should appear,
without doubt they would conspire together, and betray the Romans. Therefore if
he expected they should join with him; he must drive out of the Town, or
destroy all the Uticans: that he might receive them into a Place void both of
Enemies and Barbarians. This Cato thought very cruel and barbarous: but he
mildly answered, He would consult the three hundred.

Then he returned to the City, where he found the Men, not framing Excuses, or
dissembling, out of Reverence to him: but openly refusing to make War against
Coesar; which (they said) they were neither able, nor willing to do. And some
there were who muttered out something, about retaining the Senators till
Coesar's coming; but Cato seemed not to hear this, for he was a little deaf. At
the same time came one to him, and told him, The Horse were going away. Cato
fearing least the three hundred should take some desperate Resolution
concerning the Senators, he presently went out with some of his Friends; and
seeing they were gone some way, he took Horse, and rid after them. They, when
they saw him coming, were very glad, and received him very kindly, entreating
him to save himself with them. At this time ('it is said) Cato shed Tears; while
earnestly begging for the Senators, and stretching out his Hands, some of their
Horses he stopped, and hung upon their Arms, till he had prevailed with them,
out of Compassion, to stay only that one day, to procure a safe Retreat for the
Senators. Having thus persuaded them to go along with him, some he placed at
the Gates of the Town, and to others gave the charge of the Citadel. Now the
three hundred began to fear, they should suffer for their Inconstancy, and sent
to Cato, entreating him by all means to come to them; but the Senators flocking
about him, would not suffer him to go, and said, They would not trust their
Guardian and Savior to the Hands of perfidious Traitors.

At this instant (in my opinion) did most evidently appear to all in Vtica, the
Excellence, the Clearness, and admirable Simplicity of Cato's Virtue; how
sincere, untainted, and free it was from any mixture of Self-regard: that he,
who had long before resolved on his own Death, should take such extreme pains,
toil, and care, only for the sake of others: that when he had secured their
Lives, he might put an end to his own; for 'twas easily perceived, that he had
determined to die, though he did endeavor not to let it appear.

Therefore having pacified the Senators, he hearkened to the Request of the
three hundred, and went to them alone without any Attendance. They gave him
many thanks, and entreated him to employ and trust them for the future; but in
that they were not Cato' s, and could not come up to his greatness of Courage,
they begged, he would pity their weakness; and told him, they had decreed to
send to Caesar, and entreat him chiefly, and in the first place for Cato; and
if they could not prevail for him, they would not accept of pardon for
themselves, but as long as they had breath, would fight in his defense. Cato
commended their good Intentions; and advised them to send speedily, for their
own safety, but by no means to ask any thing in his behalf; for those who are
conquered, must submit, and those who have done wrong, beg pardon: for himself,
he was never overcome in all his Life, but rather so far as he thought fit, had
got the Victory, and had conquered Caesar, in what was just and honest. And
indeed Caesar might be looked upon, as one surpised and vanquished; for he was
now forced to discover and own those Designs, which he had so long denied, and
always practiced against his Country. When he had thus spoken, he went out of
the Assembly; and being informed, that Coesar was coming with his whole Army;
Alas! (said he) does he come against us, as against men? Then he went to the
Senators, and urged them to make no delay, but hasten to be gone, while the
Horsemen were yet in the City. So ordering all the Gates to be shut, except one
toward the Sea, he appointed Ships for those that were to depart, and gave
Money and Provision to those that wanted: All which he did with great Order and
Exactness, taking care to suppress all Tumults, and that no wrong should be
done to the People.

Marcus Octavius coming with two Legions, encamped near Vtica, and sent to
Cato, to treat about the chief Command. Cato returned him no Answer, but said
to his Friends; No wonder all goes ill with us, who are so much taken up with
Ambition, even upon the point of our Ruin. In the mean time word was brought
him, that the Horse were going away, and about to spoil and plunder the
Vticans. Cato ran to them, and from the first he met, snatched what they had
taken; the rest threw down all they had gotten, and went away silent, and
ashamed of what they had done. Then he called together the Citizens of Vtica,
and requested them, in behalf of the three hundred, not to exasperate Coesar
against them, but all to seek their common Safety together with them. After
that he went again to the Port, to see those who were about to imbark; and
there he embraced and dismissed those of his Friends and Acquaintance, whom he
had persuaded to go. As for his Son, he did not counsel him to be gone, nor did
he think fit to persuade him to forsake his Father. But there was one
Statyllius, a young Man, in the flower of his Age, one of a brave Spirit, and
very desirous to imitate the invincible Constancy of Cato, who entreated him to
go away, for he was a noted Enemy to Coesar; but he refused to go. Then Cato
looking upon Apollonides the Stoic Philosopher, and Demetrius the
Peripatetick; It belongs to you (said he) to bring down this young man's
Spirit, and to make him know what is good for him. Thus having dismissed all
the rest, he returned to his Affairs, gave Audience, and dispatched Business;
in which he spent that night, and the greatest part of the next day.

Lucius Coesar, a Kinsman of Julius Coesar's, being appointed to go Deputy for
the three hundred, came to Cato, and desired he would assist him to make a
persuasive Speech for them: And as to you your self, (said he) I shall not
scruple to kiss the Hands, and fall at the Knees of Caesar, in your behalf. But
Cato would by no means permit him to do any such thing: For as to my self,
(said he) if I would be preserved by Caesar's Favor, I should my self go to
him; but I will not be beholding to a Tyrant, for those very things that are
Marks of Tyranny: for it is an instance of his Usurpation to preserve men, as if
he were Lord of their Lives, over whom he has no right to reign; but if you
please, let us consider what you had best say for the three hundred. And when
they had continued some time together, as Lucius was going away, Cato
recommended to him his Son, and the rest of his Friends; and taking him by the
Hand, bid him farewell.

Then he retired to his House again, and called together his Son and his
Friends; to whom he discoursed of several things: Among the rest, he forbad his
Son to engage himself in the Affairs of State? For to act therein, as became
him, was now impossible; and to do otherwise, would be dishonorable.

Toward Evening he went into his Bath. As he was bathing, he remembered
Statyllius, and cried out aloud, Well Apollonides, you have brought down the
high Spirit of Statyllius; and is he gone without bidding us farewell? No, (said
Apollonides) I have discoursed much to him, but to little purpose; he is still
resolute and unalterable, and declares, he is determined to follow your
Example. At this ('it is said) Cato smiled, and answered, That will soon be tried.

After he had bathed, he went to Supper, with a great deal of Company, at which
he sat, as he had always used to do, ever since the Battle of Pharsalia; for
since that time he never lay down, but when he went to sleep. There supped with
him all his own Acquaintance, and several of the principal Citizens of Vtica.

After Supper, the Wine produced a great deal of Wit, and learned Discourse;
many Philosophical Questions were discussed: At length they came to the strange
opinions of the Stoics, called Paradoxes; and to this in particular, That the
good man only is free, and that all wicked Men are Slaves. The Peripatetick (as
it is likely) opposing this, Cato fell upon him very warmly; and somewhat
raising his Voice, he argued the Matter in a Discourse of some length, which he
urged with such wonderful Vehemence, that 'twas apparent to every body, he was
resolved to put an end to his Life, and set himself at Liberty. Hereupon, when
he had done speaking, there was a great Silence, and the Company much dejected:
but Cato, to divert them from any suspicion of his Design, turned the
Discourse, and fell again to talk of the present Affairs, showing great Concern
for those that were at Sea, as also for the others, who traveling by Land,
were to pass through a dry and barbarous Desert.

When the Company was broke up, Cato walked with his Friends, as he used to do
after Supper, gave the necessary Orders to the Officers of the Watch; and going
into his Chamber, he embraced his Son, and every one of his Friends, with more
than usual Ardour, which again renewed their suspicion of his Design. Then
laying himself down, he took into his Hand Plato's Dialogue concerning the
Soul: having read more than half the Book, he looked up, and missing his Sword,
(which his Son had taken away, while he was at Supper) he called his Servant,
and asked. Who had taken away his Sword? The Servant making no Answer, he fell
to reading again: And a little after, not seeming importunate, or hasty for it,
but as if he would only know what was become of it, he bid it be brought. But
having stayed some time, he had read over the Book, and no body brought the
Sword: whereupon he called up all his Servants, and in a hasty Tone demanded
his Sword. To one of them he gave such a Blow in the Mouth, that he hurt his
own Hand; and now grew more angry, crying out, He was betrayed, and delivered
naked to the Enemy, by his Son and his Servants. Then his Son with the rest of
his Friends, came running into the Room, and falling at his Feet, began to
lament and beseech him: But Cato raising up himself, and looking fiercely; When
(said he) and how did I fall distracted? Why does no body persuade me by
Reason, or teach me what is better, if I have designed any thing that is ill?
But must I be disarmed, and hindered from using my own Reason? And you, young
man, why don't you bind your Fathers Hands behind him, that when Caesar comes,
he may find me unable to defend my self? Nor do I want a Sword to dispatch my
self; I need but hold my Breath a while, or strike my Head against the Wall.
When he had thus spoken, his Son went weeping out of the Chamber, and with him
all the rest, except Demetrius and Apollonides; who being left alone with him,
to them he began to speak more calmly: And you, (said he) do you think to keep
a Man of my Age alive by Force? And do you sit silent here to watch me? Or can
you bring any Reason to prove, that it is not base, and unworthy Cato, when he
can find his Safety no other way, to seek it from his Enemy? Or why do you not
persuade us, to unlearn what we have been taught, that rejecting all the
Opinions we have hitherto established, we may now by Caesars's means grow
wiser, and be yet more obliged to him, than for Life only? not that I have
determined ought concerning my self, but I would have it in my power to
perform* what I shall think fit to resolve; and I shall not fail to ask your
Counsel, when I have occasion to use what your Philosophy teaches: in the mean
time, don't trouble your selves, but go tell my Son, that he should not compel
his Father, to what he cannot persuade him. They made him no Answer, but went
weeping out of the Chamber. Then the Sword being brought in by a little Boy,
Cato took it, drew it out and looked on it; and when he saw the Point was good,
Now (said he) I am Master of my self: And laying down the Sword, he took his
Book again, which, it is reported he read twice over. After this he slept so
soundly, that he was heard snore by those that were without.

About Midnight he called up two of his Freed-men, Cleanthes, his Physician,
and Butas, whom he chiefly employed in public Affairs: him he sent to the
port, to see if all the Romans were gone: to the Physician he gave his Hand to
be dressed, for it was swelled by the Blow he had struck one of his Servants.
At this they all rejoiced, hoping that now he designed to live.

But as, after a little while, returned, and brought word, they were all gone,
except Crassus, who had stayed about some Business, but was just ready to
depart: he said also, That the Wind was high, and the Sea very rough. Cato
hearing this, sighed, out of Compassion to those who were at Sea, and sent But
as again, to see if any of them should happen to return for any thing they
wanted, and to acquaint him therewith.

Now the Birds began to sing, and Cato again fell into a little Slumber. At
length But as came back, and told him, All was quiet in the Haven: Then Cato,
laying himself down, as if he would sleep out the rest of the night, bid him
shut the Door after him. But as soon as But as was gone out, he took his Sword,
and stabbed it into his Breast; yet not being able to use his Hand so well, by
reason of the Swelling, he did not immediately die of the Wound, but
struggling, fell out of the Bed, and throwing down a little Mathematical Table
that stood by, made such a noise, that the Servants hearing it, cried out. And
immediately his Son and all his Friends came into the Chamber, where seeing him
lie weltring in his Blood, great part of his Bowels out of his Body, himself
not quite dead, but looking ghastly, they all stood amazed. The Physician went
to him, and would have put in his Bowels, which were not pierced, and sowed up
the Wound: Cato hereupon coming to himself, thrust away the Physician, plucked
out his own Bowels, and tearing open the Wound, immediately expired.

In less time than one would think his own Family could have known this
Accident, all the three hundred were at the Door. And a little after the People
of Vtica flocked thither, crying out with one Voice, He was their Benefactor,
and their Savior, the only free, and only invincible man. At the very same
instant they had News that Caesar was coming; yet neither fear of the present
Danger, nor desire to flatter the Conqueror, nor the Commotions and Discord
among themselves, could divert them from doing Honor to Cato: for they
sumptuously set out his Body, made him a magnificent Funeral, and buried him by
the Seaside, where now stands his Statue, holding a Sword. Which being done,
they returned to consider of preserving themselves and their City.

Coesar had been advertised, that Cato stayed at Vtica, and did not seek to
fly; that he had sent away the rest of the Romans, but, himself, with his Son,
and a few of his Friends, continued there very unconcernedly; so that he could
not imagine what might be his Design: but having a great Consideration for the
Man, he hastened thither with his Army. When he heard of Cato's Death, it is
reported, he said these words: Cato, I envy thee thy Death, for thou have
envied me the preservation of thy Life. And indeed if Cato would have suffered
himself to be preserved by Coesar, it is like he would not so much have impar'd
his own Honor, as augmented the others Glory; yet what would have been done,
we cannot know, but from Coesar's usual Clemency, we may guess what was most
likely.

Cato was forty eight years old when he Died. His Son suffered no Injury from
Coesar; but it is said, he grew idle, and debauched with Women. In Cappadocia he
lodged at the House of Marphadates, one of the Royal Family, who had a very
handsome Wife, where staying longer than was decent, he was reflected on by
some, that made such Jests as these upon him; Cato goes to morrow, after thirty
days, and Porcius and Marphadates are two Friends, that have but one Soul, (for
Marphadates Wife was named Psyche, i. e. Soul:) and Cato is very well born, and
an illustrious Man, for he has a Royal Soul.

But all these Stains were clearly wiped off by the Bravery of his Death; for
in the Battle of Philippi, where he fought for his Countrey's Liberty, against
Caesar and Antony, when the Army was broken, he disdaining to fly or to escape,
called out to the Enemy, showed them who he was, and encouraged those of his
Party to stay; At length he fell, and left his Enemies in admiration of his
Valor.

Nor was the Daughter of Cato inferior to the rest of her Family, for Prudence
and greatness of Spirit. She was married to Brutus, who killed Caesar; was
acquainted with that Conspiracy, and ended her Life, as became one of her Birth
and Virtue: All which is related in the Life of Brutus.

Statyllius, who said he would imitate Cato, was at that time hindered by the
Philosophers when he would have put an end to his Life. He afterward followed
Brutus, to whom he was very faithful and very serviceable, and died in the
Field of Philippi.

AGIS AND CLEOMENES.
depiction of Agis and Cleomenes (...)

(...)

MBurg. sculp.

THE LIFE OF AGIS.
Translated from the Greek, by Sir Robert Thorald.
THe Fable of Ixion, who embracing a Cloud instead of Juno, begot the Centaurs,
was ingeniously enough invented to represent to us ambitious Men, whose Minds
doting on Glory, (which is a mere Image of Virtue) produce nothing that is
genuine or uniform, but born away by violent and contrary Passions, their
Actions being the offspring of such a Conjunction, must needs be deformed and
unnatural; and they may say with the Hersdmen in the Tragedy of Sophocles.

We follow those whom we ought to govern,
And they command us, though the are dumb.
That is indeed the true condition of those ambitious Men, who to gain a vain
Title of Magistracy, are content to subject themselves to the Humors of the
People: for as they who row in the forepart of the Ship, may seem to guide the
Motions of it, yet have continually an eye on the Pilot who sits at the Helm,
and must proceed in the Course he will steer; so these Men, steered as I may
say by popular Applause, though they bear the Name of Governors, are in reality
Slaves to the Mobile. The Man who is completely wise and virtuous, regards not
Glory, but only as it disposes and prepares his way to great Attempts. A young
Man, I grant, may be permitted to glory a little in his good Actions; for (as
Theophrastus says) his Virtues which are yet tender, and as it were in the bud,
cherished and supported by Praises, grow stronger, and take the deeper root:
but when this Passion is exhorbitant, it is dangerous in all men, and especially
in those who govern a Commonwealth; for being joined with an unlimited Power,
it often transports men to a degree of Madness, so that now they no more seek
Glory by Virtue, but will have those Actions only esteemed good that are
glorious. As Phocion therefore answered King Antipater, who sought his
Approbation of some unworthy Action, I cannot be your Flatterer, and your
Friend; so these men should answer the People, I cannot govern, and obey you:
lest it should happen to the Commonwealth, as to the Serpent in the Fable,
whose Tail rising in rebellion against the Head, complained (as of a great
Grievance) that it was always forced to follow, and prayed, it might be
permitted by Turns to lead the way; which being granted but for a day, quickly
discovered the Folly, by the Mischiefs which befell the whole Body, and
particularly to the Head, in following, contrary to Nature, a Guide that was
deaf and blind. The same we see does every day happen to many, who guided by
the Inclinations of an ignorant and giddy Multitude, must needs bring all
things to Confusion.

This is what has occurred to us to say of that Glory which depends on the
Vulgar, considering the sad effects of it in the Misfortunes of Caius, and
Tiberius Gracchus, Men nobly born, whose generous Disposition by Nature was
improved by an excellent Education, and who came to the Administration of
Affairs with very sincere Intentions, yet they were ruined, I cannot say, by
an* immoderate desire of Glory, but by a more excusable fear of Infamy; for
being excessively beloved and favored by the People, they thought it an
Ingratitude to deny them any thing, till the People and They mutually inflamed,
and vying with each other in Honors and Benefits, things were at last brought
to such a pass, that they might say accordingly to the Proverb,

TO engage so far we were to blame,
And to retreat it is now a shame.
This the judicious Reader will easily gather from the Story. I will now
compare with them, two Lacedoemonian Kings, Agis and Cleomenes; for they being
desirous also to please the People, by restoring their obsolete Laws of
Equality, incurred the Hatred of the Rich and Powerful, who could not endure
to be deprived of those Advantages, which did so gloriously distinguish them
from the Vulgar. These were not indeed Brothers by Nature, as the two Romans,
but they had a kind of brotherly Resemblance in their Actions and Designs,
which took a Rise from Beginnings and Occasions as I am now about to relate.

When Gold and Silver (the great Debauchers of Mankind) had once gained
Admittance into the Lacedoemonian Commonwealth 'twas quickly followed by
Avarice, baseness of Spirit, and all manner of Frauds in the possession, by
Riot, Luxury, and Effeminacy in the use. Then Sparta fell from her original
Virtue and Glory, and so continued till the days of Agis and Leonidas, who both
together were Kings of the Lacedoemonians.

Agis was of the Royal Family of Eurytion, Son of Eudamidas, and the sixth in
descent from Agesilaus, who being chief Commander of the Grecians, gained so
great Renown in the so famous Expedition into Asia. Agesilaus left behind him a
Son called Archidamus, who being slain by the Calabrians at Mardonium in Italy,
was succeeded by his eldest Son Agis; he being killed by Antipater near
Megalopolis, and leaving no Issue, was succeeded by his Brother Eudamidas; he
by a Son called Archidamus and Archidamus by another Eudamidas, the Father of
this Agis of whom we now treat.

Leonidas, Son of Cleonimus, was of the other Royal Branch of the Agiades, and
the eighth in descent from Pausanias who defeated Mardonius in the Battle of
Platea. Pausanias was succeeded by a Son called Plistonax; and he by another
Pausanias, who being banished, and leading a private Life at Tegea, his eldest
Son Agesipolis reigned in his place; he dying without Issue, was succeeded by a
younger Brother called Cleombrotus, who left two Sons: the elder was
Agesipolis, who reigned but a short time, and died without Issue; the younger
was called Cleomenes, who had also two Sons. Acrotatus and Cleonimus: the first
died before his Father, but left a Son called Areus, who succeeded, and being
slain at Corinth, left the Kingdom to his Son Acrotatus: This Acrotatus was
defeated, and slain near Megalopolis, in a Battle against the Tyrant
Aristodemus; he left his Wife big with Child, who being delivered of a Son,
Leonidas (Son of the abovenamed Cleonimus) was made his Guardian, and the
young man dying in his Minority, he succeeded in the Kindom.

Leonidas was a Man in no great Esteem with the People: for tho'there were at
that time a general Corruption in Manners, yet a greater aversion to the old
Institutions appeared in him than in others; for having lived a long time among
the great Lords of Persia, and been a follower of King Seleucus he unadvisedly
would imitate the Pride and Luxury of those Courts, in the limited Government
of a Grecian Commonwealth.

Agis on the contrary showed himself to all men obliging and affable, and did
in goodness of Nature, and greatness of Mind not only far excel Leonidas, but
in a manner all the Kings that had reigned since the great Agesilaus. For
tho'he had been bred very tenderly, and in abundance of all things, by his
Mother Agesistrata, and his Grandmother Archidamia, (who were the wealthiest of
the Lacedoemonians) yet before the Age of twenty, he so far overcame himself as
to renounce effeminate Pleasures. He was a very handsome Person, and of a
graceful Behavior; yet to give a Check to the Vanity he might take therein,
would go always plain and mean in his Clothes. In his Diet, Bathings, aad in
all his Excercises, he chose to imitate the old Laconian Frugality and
Temperance, and was often heard to say, He would not desire the Kingdom, if he
did not hope by means of that Authority to restore their ancient Laws and
Discipline.

The Lacedoemonians might date the beginning of their Corruption from their
Conquest of Athens, which was the first occasion of their Wealth and Luxury;
yet nevertheless the Agrarian Law remaining in force, (by which every one was
obliged to leave his lot or Portion of Land entirely to his Son) a kind of
Order and Equality was thereby maintained, which still in some degree preserved
them from Ruin. But one Epitadeus happening to be Ephore, a Man of a factious,
violent Spirit, and on some occasion incensed against his Son, he procured a
Decree, that all men should have liberty to dispose of their Land by Gift or
Sale, or by their last Will and Testament: which being promoted by him to
satisfy a passion of Revenge, and through Covetousness consented to by others,
an excellent Institution was abrogated; the effect whereof was, that the
moneyed men coveting to possess the Land, the right Heirs were by degrees
disinherited, and all the Wealth being in the hands of a few, the generality
were poor and miserable; Liberal Arts and Sciences were neglected, and the City
filled with a mean sort of Mechanics, always envious, and hating the Rich:
there did not remain above 700 of the old Spartan Families, of which perhaps
100 might have Estates in Land; the rest were an abject, low-spirited People,
who having no sense of Honor, were unwillingly drawn to the Wars, and ever
greedy of Novelty and Change.

Agis therefore believing it a glorious Action, (as in truth it was) to
repeople the City, and to bring them back to their first Institution, began to
sound the Inclinations of the Citizens. He found the young Men disposed beyond
his expectation; for being taken with the specious Name of Liberty they seemed
as ready to shift their Manners as their Clothes; but the old Men habituated
and more confirmed in their Vices, were startled at the very Name of Lycurgus,
as a fugitive Slave fears to be brought back before his offended Master: these
men could not endure to hear Agis continually deploring the present state of
Sparta, and wishing she might be restored to her ancient Glory. But on the
other side, Lysander, the Son of Lybis, Mandroclidas, the Son of Ecphanes,
together with Agesilaus, did not only approve his Design, but assisted and
confirmed him in it. Lysander had a great Authority and Credit with the People;
Mandroclidas was esteemed the ablest Man of his Time, to manage any Affair in
the Grecian Assemblies, and joined with skill, had a great degree of Boldness;
Agesilaus was the King's Uncle by the Mother's side, an eloquent Man, but
covetous and voluptuous; he was not moved by any Consideration of public Good,
but rather seemed to be persuaded to it by his Son Hypomedon, (whose Courage
and signal Actions in War had gained him a high Esteem among the young Men of
Sparta) though indeed the true Motive was, because he had many Debts, and hoped
by this means to be freed from them. As soon as Agis had prevailed with his
Uncle, he endeavored by his mediation to gain his Mother also, who being
exceeding rich, had by her many Creditors, Friends and Followers, a
considerable Power in the City. At the first proposal she was very averse, and
earnestly advised her Son not to engage in so difficult and so dangerous an
Enterprise; but Agesilaus endeavored to possess her, that the thing was not so
difficult as she imagined, and that it might in all likelihood redound to the
great Honor and Advantage of her Family. The King her Son earnestly besought
her, not to decline assisting him in so glorious a Design; he told her, he
could not pretend to equal other Kings in Riches, the very Followers and
Servants of Seleucus or Ptolemy, abounding more in Wealth, than all the Spartan
Kings put together: but if by Virtue and greatness of Mind he could outdo
them, and if by his means Sparta could be restored to her ancient Splendour, he
should then be a great King indeed. In conclusion, the Mother and the
Grandmother also were so taken with the young man's generous Ambition, that
they not only consented, but were ready on all occasions to spur him on to a
Perseverance, and did engage with him not only the men with whom they had an
Interest, but the Women also, knowing well that the Lacedoemonian Wives had
always a great power with their Husbands, who used to impart to them their
State Affairs, with greater freedom than the Women would communicate with the
Men in the private Business of their Families: which was indeed one of the
greatest Obstacles to this Design; for the Money of Sparta being most of it in
the Women's hands, 'twas their Interest to oppose it, not only as depriving them
of those superfluous Trifles, in which through want of Virtue they placed their
chief Felicity, but also because they knew their Riches was the main support of
their Power and Credit.

Those therefore who were of this Faction, had recourse to Leonidas,
representing to him, how it was his part, as the elder and more experienced, to
put a stop to the ill-advised Projects of a rash young Man. Leonidas, though of
himself sufficiently inclined to oppose Agis, durst not openly for fear of the
People, who did manifestly favor him, and were desirous of this Change, but
underhand he did all he could to incense the chief Magistrates against him,
and on all occasions craftily insinuated, that Agis having designed an
arbitrary Government, would divide among the Poor what belonged to the Rich, as
a Bribe for a future Service: That instead of so many rich Citizens of Sparta,
he might have a Company of Slaves to be his Guard.

Agis nevertheless little regarding these Rumors, caused Lysander to be chosen
Ephore; then took the first occasion of proposing his Rhetra or Decree to the
Senate, the chief Articles whereof were these: That every one should be freed
from their Lots: All the Lands to be divided into equal portions: Those that
lay betwixt the Valley of Pellene and Mount Tegetum, as far as the Cities of
Mallea and Sellasia, into 4500 Lots; the remainder into 1500; these last to be
shared by some chosen out of the adjacent Countries, men able and fit to bear
Arms: The first among the natural Spartans, admitting also of Strangers to
supply their Number, those who were young, vigorous and ingenious. All these
were to be divided into ten Companies, some of four hundred, and some of two,
with a Diet and Discipline agreeable to the Laws of Lycurgus.

This Decree being proposed in the Senate, occasioned a hot Debate; so that
Lysander doubting the Event, would not expect the Issue, but immediately
convok'd the great Assembly of the People, to whom he, Mandroclidas and
Agesilaus made Orations, exhorting them, that they would not suffer the Majesty
of Sparta to be brought into Contempt, to gratify a few rich Men, who by
specious pretenses endeavored to delude them, only that they themselves might
pass their time in Riot and delights. They bad them call to mind, how ancient
Oracles had forewarned them to beware of Avarice, as the very Plague and utter
Ruin of Sparta: That they should think of the Oracle lately delivered from the
famous Temple of Pasiphae in Thelamia. Some say, this Pasiphae was one of the
Daughters of Atlas, who had by Jupiter a Son called Ammon: Others are of
opinion, it was Cassandra, the Daughter of King Priamus, who dying in this
Place, was called Pasiphae, as who should say, clearly revealing Secrets, as
the Light discovers all things to the Eye: Others will have it, that this was
Daphne, the Daughter of Amiclas, who flying from Apollo, was transformed into a
Laurel, and honored by that God with the Gift of Prophecy. But be it as it
will, it is certain the People were made to apprehend, that this Oracle had
commanded them to return to their former state of Equality. As soon as these
had done speaking, Agis stood up, and said, He would not amuse them with vain
words, but contribute to what had been proposed for their Advantage by real
Effects. In the first place, he would divide among them all his Patrimony,
which was of large extent in Tillage and Pasture; he would also give 600
Talents in ready Money, and that his Mother, Grandmother, and his other Friends
and Relations, who were the richest of the Lacedoemonians, were ready to follow
his Example. The People transported with admiration of the young man's
Generosity, highly applauded, and loudly declared, there had not been for 300
years so worthy a King in Sparta.

But on the other side, Leonidas was now more than ever averse, being sensible
that he and his Friends would be obliged to contribute with their Riches, and
yet all the Honor and Obligation would redound to Agis. He asked him then
before them all, Whether Lycurgus were not in his opinion a vast and a wise
Man? Agis answering He was: And when did Lycurgus (replied Leonidas) cancel
Debts, or admit of Strangers? he who thought the Commonwealth not secure unless
they were excluded. To this Agis replied, It Is no wonder that Leonidas, who has
married, and has Children by a Wife taken out of a Persian Court, should know
little of Lycurgus or his Laws. Lycurgus took away both Debts and Usury, by
taking away Money, and excluded Strangers, such as would not conform to the
Laws of his Commonwealth, not for any Ill Will to them, but lest they should
infect the City with their Covetousness; for otherwise it is well known, that he
himself gladly kept Terpander, Thales and Phericides, though they were Strangers,
because he perceived they were of the same Mind with him. And you that use to
praise Ecprepes, who being Ephore, cut off two Strings from the Instrument of
Phrynis the Musician, and to commend those who did* afterward imitate him,
with what face can you blame me, for designing to cut off Superfluity and
Luxury from the Commonwealth? Do you think those men were so concerned only
about a Fiddle-string, or intended any thing else, than by checking the
voluptuousness of Music, to keep out a way of living, which might destroy the
harmony of the City.

From this time forward as the common People followed Agis, so the rich Men
adhered to Leonidas, who joining his Authority with their Interest, things were
so managed in the Senate, (whose chief Power consisted in preparing all Laws
before they were proposed to the People) that with much ado the designed Rhetra
of Agis was rejected, though but by one only Vote; whereupon Lysander, who (as we
said) was Ephore, and of Agis his Party, resolving to be revenged on Leonidas,
drew up an Information against him, grounded on two old Laws; The one forbids
any of the Race of Hercules to marry a Stranger; and the other makes it capital
for a Lacedoemonian to travel into foreign Countries. Whilst he set others on
to manage this Accusation, he with his Colleagues went to observe the Stars,
which was a Custom they had, and performed in this manner. Every ninth year the
Ephori choosing a Starlight Night, (when there was neither Cloud nor Moon)
sat down together in quiet and silence; and if they chanced to spy the
shooting of a Star, they presently pronounced their King guilty of some great
Crime against the Gods, and thereupon he was immediately secluded from all
Exercise of Regal Power, till he could be relieved by an Oracle from Delphos or
Olympus.

Lysander therefore assured the People, he had seen a Star shoot, and at the
same time Leonidas was cited to answer for himself. Witnesses were produced to
testify he had married an Asian Woman, bestowed on him by one of King Seleucus
his Lieutenants; that he had two Children by her, but there happening some
difference betwixt them, she did so mortally hate him, that flying from her, he
was in a manner forced to return to Sparta, where his Predecessor dying without
Issue, he took upon him the Government. Lysander not content with this,
persuades also Cleombrotus to lay claim to the Kingdom: he was of the Royal
Family, and Son-in-law to Leonidas, who fearing now the event of this Process,
was fled to the Temple of Juno, called Calcideos, together with his Daughter,
the Wife of Cleombrotus, for she in this occasion resolved to leave her
Husband, and to follow her Father. Leonidas being again cited, and not
appearing, they pronounced a Sentence of Deposition against him, and made
Cleombrotus King in his place.

Soon after this Revolution, Lysander (his year expiring) went out of Office,
and new Ephori were chosen of the contrary Faction, who immediately conspiring
to restore Leonidas, cited Lysander and Mandroclidas to answer, for having,
contrary to Law, cancelled Debts, and designed a new division of Lands. They
seeing themselves in danger, had recourse to the two Kings, and represented to
them, how necessary it was for their Interest and Safety resolutely to unite,
thereby to prevent the Designs of the Ephori, and put a stop to their
Encroachments. The Power of the Ephori (they said) was only grounded on the
Dissension of Kings, the Law having in that Case made them a kind of
Arbitrators; but when the two Kings were unanimous, none ought or durst resist
their Authority. Agis and Cleombrotus thus persuaded, went together into the
Senate House, where raising the Ephori from their Seats, they placed others in
their room, (of which Agesilaus was one:) then arming a Company of young Men,
and releasing many out of Prison, their Enemies began to be in great fear of
their Lives; but there was no Blood spilt. Agis on the contrary having notice
that Agesilaus had ordered a Company of Soldiers to lie in wait for Leonidas,
to kill him as he fled to Tegea, immediately sent some of his Followers to
defend him, and to convoy him safely into that City.

Thus far all things proceeded prosperously, none daring to oppose; but by the
sordid Avarice of one Man, these promising Beginnings were blasted. Agesilaus
(as we said) was much in Debt, yet had a fair Estate in Land: and though he
gladly joined in this Design to be quit of his Debts, he was not at all willing
to part with his Land: therefore he persuaded Agis, that if both these things
should be put in execution at the same time, so great and so sudden an
Alteration might cause some dangerous Commotion; but if Debts were in the first
place cancelled, the rich Men would afterward more easily be prevailed with to
part with their Land. Lysander also was of the same opinion, being deceived in
like manner by the Craft of Agesilaus: so that all Men were presently commanded
to bring in their Bonds, (or Deeds of Obligation, by the Lacedaemonians called
Claria) which being laid together in a Heap, they set Fire to it. The Usurers
and other Creditors come, one may easily imagine, beheld it with a heavy heart;
but Agesilaus told them scoffingly, His Eyes had never seen so bright and so
glorious a Flame.

And now the People pressed earnestly for a division of Lands: the Kings also
had ordered it should be done; but Agesilaus sometimes pretending one
Difficulty, and sometimes another, delayed the Execution, till an occasion
happened to call Agis to the Wars. The Achaeans, in virtue of a League
defensive, sent to demand Succors, for they expected every day when the
Aetolians would attempt to enter Peloponnesus by the Confines of Maegara: they
had made Aratus their General, and sent him with an Army to hinder this
Incursion. Aratus writ to the Ephori, who immediately gave order Agis should
hasten to their Assistance with the Lacedaemonian Auxiliaries. Agis was
extremely well pleased to see the forwardness of the young Men to this
Expedition; for though they were very poor, yet freed from Debts, and in hope of
being Masters of Land at their Return, they followed cheerfully, and in good
Equipage. The Cities through which they passed, were in admiration, to see how
they marched from one end of Peloponnesus to the other, without the least
Disorder, and in a manner without making any Noise: it gave them occasion to
discourse with one another, how great might be the Temperance and Modesty of
the ancient Lacedaemonians, under their famous Captains Agesilaus, Lysander and
Leonidas, since they saw such Discipline and exact Obedience under a King, who
perhaps was the youngest Man in all the Army. They saw also how he was content
to fare hardly, ready to undergo any Labors, and not to be distinguished by
Pomp or Richness of Habit, from the meanest of his Soldiers. But if by this
Moderation and Conduct he gained the Love of the Soldiers and the common
People, it made him still more odious to the Rich and Powerful, who were afraid
such an Example might work an Impression to their prejudice, in all the
neighboring Countries.

Agis having joined Aratus near the City of Corinth, a Council of War was
called, to debate whether or no it were expedient to give the Enemy Battle.
Agis on this occasion showed a great Forwardness and Resolution, yet without
Obstinacy or Presumption: he declared it was his opinion they ought to fight,
thereby to hinder the Enemy from entering Peloponnesus; but nevertheless he
would submit to the Judgment of Aratus, not only as the elder and more
experienced Captain, but as he was General of the Achaeans, whose Forces he
would not pretend to command, but was only come thither to assist them. I am
not ignorant, that Baton of Synope relates it in another manner: He says,
Aratus would have fought, and that Agis was against it; but it is most certain
he was mistaken, not having read what Aratus himself writes in his own
Justification; for he expressly tells us, That knowing the People had well-nigh
got in their Harvest, he thought it much better to let the Enemy pass, than to
hazard by a Battle the loss of the whole Country: And therefore giving thanks
to the Confederates for their readiness, he dismissed them. Thus Agis, not
without having gained a great deal of Honor, returned to Sparta where he found
the People in a Mutiny, and all things in Confusion, occasioned by the Avarice
and ill-Government of Agesilaus.

For he being now one of the Ephori, and by that Authority freed from the Fear
which Formerly kept him in some Restraint, forbore no kind of Oppression which
might bring in Gain: Among other things he exacted a thirteen Months Tax,
whereas before they had never paid more than twelve. For these and other
Reasons fearing his Enemies, and knowing how he was hated by the People, he
thought it necessary to maintain a Guard, which always accompanied him to the
Courts of Justice; and presuming now on his Power, he was grown so insolent,
that of the two Kings, the one he openly contemned; and if he showed any
Respect toward Agis, would have it thought rather an effect of his near
Relation, than any duty or submission to the Royal Authority; and being
desirous all men should be confirmed in a belief of his Power, he gave it out
he was to continue Ephore the ensuing year also.

His Enemies alarmed by this Report immediately conspired against him, and
bringing back Leonidas from Tegea, restablished him in the Kingdom, to which
the People (highly incensed for having been defrauded in the promised division
of Lands) easily consented. Agesilaus himself would hardly have escaped their
Fury, if his Son Hypomedon had not mediated in his behalf, and then privately
conveyed him out of the City.

During this Combustion, the two Kings fled; Agis to the Temple of Juno, and
Cleombrotus to that of Neptune. Leonidas more incensed against his Son-in-law,
left Agis, to pursue him with a Company of Soldiers; and being taken, he was
brought before Leonidas, who with great vehemence reproached to him his
Ingratitude; how being his Son-in-law, he had conspired with his Enemies,
usurped his Kingdom, and banished him from his Country: Cleombrotus having
little to say for himself, stood silent. His Wife Chelonis had been a Partner
with Leonidas in his Sufferings; for when Cleombrotus usurped the Kingdom, she
forsook him, and wholly applied her self to comfort her Father in his
Affliction: she often mediated in his behalf, and openly disowned and condemned
the Action as unjust; but now upon this Turn of Fortune, she was as zealous and
as assiduous in expressions of Love and Duty to her Husband, whom she embraced
with one Arm, and her two little Children with the other. All men were
strangely taken with the Piety and tender Affection of the Young Woman, who in
a loose neglected Mourning, with a pale dejected Countenance, and in a
suppliant Posture, spoke thus to Leonidas.

I am not brought to this Condition you see me in, nor have taken upon me this
mourning Habit, by reason of the present Misfortunes of Cleombrotus; it is long
since familiar to me: it was put on to condole with you in your Banishment; and
now you are restored to your Country and to your Kingdom, must I still remain
in Grief and Misery? or would you have me attired in my Festival Ornaments,
that I may rejoice with you, when you have killed within my arms, the Man to
whom you gave me for a Wife? Either Cleombrotus must appease you by my Tears,
or he must suffer a Punishment greater than his Faults have deserved: he shall
infallibly see me die before him, whom he has professed tenderly to love: to
what end should I live, or how shall I appear among the Spartan Ladies, when it
shall so manifestly be seen, that I have not been able to move to Compassion
neither a Husband nor a Father? I am only born to be an unfortunate Wife, and a
more unfortunate Daughter, not having the least Power or Interest, where I
ought to have been in the greatest Esteem. As for Cleombrotus, I have
sufficiently disowned his Cause, when I forsook him to follow you; but now you
your self will justify his Proceedings, by showing to the World, how Ambition
is a Passion not to be resisted: for a Kingdom, a Man may kill a Son-in-law;
nay even destroy his own Children. Chelonis having ended this Lamentation,
turned her weeping Eyes toward the Spectators, then gently reposed her Head in
her Husband's Bosom.

Leonidas touched with Compassion, withdrew a while to advise with his Friends;
then returning, condemned Cleombrotus to perpetual Banishment: Chelonis, he
said, ought to stay with him, it not being just she should forsake a Father,
who had grantted at her Intercession the Life of her Husband; but all he could
say, would not prevail. She rose up immediately, and taking one of her Children
in her Arms, gave the other to her Husband; then having performed her Devotions
at an Altar dedicated to Juno, she cheerfully followed him into Banishment. To
be short, so great was the Virtue and Generosity expressed by Chelouis on this
occasion, that if Cleombrotus were not strangely blinded by Ambition, he would
choose to be banished with the enjoyment of so excellent a Woman, rather than
without her to possess a Kingdom.

Cleombrotus thus removed, Leonidas thought fit also to displace the Ephori,
and to choose others in their room; then he began to consider how he might
entrap Agis. At first he endeavored by fair means to persuade, that he would
come and partake with him (as was his Right) in the Kingdom: the People, he
said, would easily pardon the Errors of a young Man, ambitious of Glory, and
deceived by the Craft of Agesilaus. But finding Agis was suspicious, and not to
be prevailed with to quit his Sanctuary, he gave over that Design; yet what
could not then be effected by the Dissimulation of an Enemy, was soon after
brought to pass by the Treachery of a Friend.

Amphares, Demochares and Archesilaus, did often visit Agis, and he was so
confident of their Fidelity, that after a while he was prevailed with to
accompany them to the Baths, which were not far distant, they constantly
returning to see him safe again in the Temple. Amphares had borrowed a great
deal of Plate and rich Household stuff of Agesistrata, and hoped if he could
destroy her and the whole Family, he might peaceably enjoy those Goods. To so
base an intent, he was ready to serve Leonidas in any treacherous way, and
being one of the Ephori, did all he could to incense the rest of his Colleagues
against Agis. These men therefore finding that Agis would never stir from his
Sanctuary, but only when he went with them to the Bath, resolved to make use of
that occasion. And one day in his return, they met and saluted him as formerly,
discoursing pleasantly by the way, as familiar Friends use to do, till coming
to the turning of a Street which led to the Prison, Amphares by virtue of his
Office arrested Agis, and told him, He must go with him before the other
Ephori, to answer for his Misdemeanors. At the same time Demochares, who was a
tall strong man, threw his Cloak over his Head, and dragged him after by the
Neck, whilst the others went behind to thrust him on; so that none of Agis his
Friends being near to assist him, they easily got him into the Prison, where
Leonidas was already arrived, with a Company of Soldiers, who strongly guarded
all the Avenues: the Ephori were also there with as many of the Senators as
they knew to be true to their Party, being desirous to proceed with some
resemblance of Justice. First they bad him give an Account, why he had gone
about to alter the Government To which Agis (only smiling at their Craft and
Dissimulation) answered not a word. Amphares told him, It was more seasonable
to weep, for now the time was come in which he should be punished for his
Presumption. Another of the Ephori seeming more favorable, (and offering as it
were an occasion of Excuse) said, He was confident Agis had been seduced, and
in a manner constrained to what he did, by Lysander and Agesilaus. But Agis
answered, He had not been seduced or constrained by any man, nor had any other
intent in what he did, but only to follow the Example of Lycurgus, and to
govern conformably to his Laws. They asked him, Whether now at least he did not
repent his Rashness? To which he replied, That though he saw unavoidable Death
before his Eyes, yet he could never repent of so just and so glorious a Design,
They had not the patience to hear him any longer, but commanded the Sergeants
to carry him into the Decade, (which was a place in the prison where they used
to strangle Malefactors.) The Officers refused to obey, and the very mercenary
Soldiers declined it, believing it an insolent and a Wicked Act to lay violent
hands on a King; which as soon as Demochares perceived, threatening and reviling
them for it, he himself thrust him into the Room.

By this time the News of Agis his Imprisonment having reached all Parts of the
City, had occasioned a great Concourse of People with Lanthorns and Torches
about the Prison-gates, and in the midst of them, the Mother and the
Grandmother of Agis crying out with a loud Voice, That their King ought to
appear, and to be heard by the People, and should at least be proceeded with in
the usual Forms of Justice. But this Clamor instead of preventing, hastened
his Death, his Enemies fearing if the Tumult should increase, he might that
very night be rescued out of their hands.

Agis being now at the point to die, perceived one of the Sergeants bitterly
bewailing his Misfortune: Weep not Friend, (says he) for me, who die innocent,
but rather grieve for those who are guilty of this wicked Act; my condition is
much better than theirs. As soon as he had spoken these words not showing the
least sign of Fear, he patiently stretched out his Neck to the Executioner.

Immediately after Agis was dead Amphares went out of the Prison-gate, where he
found Agesistrata, who casting her self at his Feet, he gently raised her up,
pretending still the same Friendship as formerly: he assured her, she needed
not fear any farther Violence should be offered against her Son; and that if
she pleased, she might go in and see him: she begged her Mother might also have
the favor to be admitted; and he replied, No body should hinder it. When they
were entered, he commanded the Gate should again be locked, and the Grandmother
to be first introduced: she was now grown very old, and had lived all her days
with great reputation of Virtue and Wisdom. As soon as Amphares thought she was
dispatched, he told Agesistrata, She might now go in if she pleased: she
entered, where beholding her Son's Body stretched on the Ground, and her Mother
hanging by the Neck, she stood at first astonished at so horrid a Spectacle;
but after a while recollecting her Spirits, the first thing she did, was to
assist the Soldiers in taking down the Body; then covering it decently, she
laid it by her Son's, whom embracing, and kissing his Cheeks, O my Son, said
she, it is thy too great Mercy and Goodness which has brought thee and us to
this untimely End. Amphares, who stood watching behind the Door, hearring this,
rushed in hastily, and with a furious Tone and Countenance said to her, Since
you approve so well of your Sons Actions, it is fit you should partake in his
Reward. She rising up to meet her Destiny, only uttered these few words, I pray
the Gods that all this may redound to the good of Sparta.

And now the three Bodies being exposed to view, and the Fact divulged, no fear
of Magistrates could hinder the people from expressing a detestation of it, or
from hating the chief Contrivers and especially Leonidas and Amphares. They
were not afraid openly to declare, that so wicked and barbarous an Act had
never been committed in Sparta, since first the Doriens inhabited Pelopennesus;
the very Enemies in War, they said, were always cautious of spilling the Blood
of a Lacedoemonian King, insomuch that in any Encounter they would decline, and
endeavor to avoid them, so great a Respect they bore to the Royal Majesty. I
must needs say, it is very remarkable, that in so many Battles fought betwixt
the Lacedoemonians and the other Grecians, none but Cleombrotus was killed,
being wounded with a Javelin, at the Battle of Leuctres, a little before the
days of King Philip of Macedon. I am not ignorant, that the Messenians affirm,
Theopompus was also slain by their Aristomenes; but the Lacedoemonians deny it,
and say, He was only wounded: Be it as it will, it is certain at least that Agis
was the first King put to death by the Epori, with a form and pretense of
Justice, and only for having endeavored to reduce them to their original
Institution, a Design well becoming the Courage of a noble Spartan.

Thus Agis had the Fortune to be ill treated by his Enemies, and worse by his
Friends; for if he had reason to complain of Leonidas, whose Life he had saved,
much more of Amphares, in whose Friendship he reposed the highest Confidence:
so unmercifully was he dealt with by others, who being himself of a most mild
and generous Disposition, did deserve to be beloved by all Mankind.

THE LIFE OF CLEOMENES.
Translated from the Greek, by Mr. Creech, Fellow of AllSouls College in
Oxford.
THus fell Agis. His Brother Archidamus was too quick for Leonidas, and saved
himself by a timely Retreat. But his Wife then newly brought to Bed, the Tyrant
forced her from her own House, and compelled her to marry his Son Cleomenes,
though at that time too young for a Wife; for he was unwilling that any one
else should have her, she being Heiress to her Father Gylippus's great Estate;
for Person, the finest Woman in all Greece, very goodnatur'd, of an exemplary
Life, and therefore, they say, she did all she could, that she might not be
compelled to this Match.

Being thus married to Cleomenes, she hated Leonidas, but to the Youth she
showed her self a kind and obliging Wife. He, as soon as they came together,
began to love her very much, and the constant Kindness that she still retained
for the memory of Agis, wrought somewhat of Concern in the young Man for him,
so that he would often enquire of her concerning what had passed, and
attentively listen to the Story of Agis's Designs. Now Cleomenes had a generous
and great Soul; he was as temperate and moderate in his Pleasures as Agis, but
not so very cautious, circumspect and gentle: a spur of Passion always galled
him, and his eargerness to pursue that which he thought good and just, was
violent and heady: to make Men willing to obey, he conceived to be the best
Discipline; but likewise to break the stubborn, and force them to be better,
was in his opinion commendable and brave. This Disposition made him dislike the
management of the City: the Citizens lay dissolved in supine Idleness and
Pleasures; the King minded nothing, designing, if no body gave him any
disturbance, to wast his Time in Ease and Riot; the Public was neglected, and
each Man intent upon his private Gain. 'Twas dangerous, now Agis was killed, to
mention the exercising and training of their Youth, and to set up for the
ancient Bravery and Equality, was Treason against the State. It Is said also
that Cleomenes, whilst a Boy, studied Philosophy under Sphoerus the
Borysthenite, who coming to Sparta, was very diligent in instructing the Youth.
Spoerus was one of the chief of Zeno the Citiean's Scholars, and it is likely
that he admired the manly Temper of Cleomenes, and inflamed his generous
Ambition. The ancient Leonidas (as Story says) being asked, What manner of
Poet he thought Tyrtoeus? replied, An excellent one to whet the Courages of
Youth, for being filled with Fury by his Poems, they daringly ventured on any
Danger: now the Stoics Philosophy is a dangerous Incentive to hot and fiery
Dispositions, but being mixed with a grave and cautious Temper, is very good to
fix and settle the Resolutions.

Upon the Death of his Father Leonidas, he succeeded, and observing the
Citizens of all sorts to be debauched, the Rich neglecting the Public, and
intent on their own Gain and Pleasure, and the Poor being crampt in their
private Fortunes, grown unactive, Cowards, and not inclinable to the Spartan
Institution and way of Breeding, that he had only the Name of King, and the
Ephori all the Power, was resolved to change the present posture of Affairs. He
had a Friend whose Name was Xenares, his Lover (such an Affection the Spartans
express by the word, (...)) him he sounded, and of him he would commonly
enquire, What manner of King Agis was; by what means, and by what Assistance he
began and pursued his Designs. Xenares at first willingly complied with his
Request, and told him the whole Story, with all the particular Circumstances of
the Actions. But when he observed Cleomenes to be extremely affected at the
Relation, and more than ordinarily moved at Agis's new model of the Government,
and begging a repetition of the Story, he at first severely chid him, told him,
He was frantic, and at last left off all sort of Familiarity and Conversation
with him, yet he never told any Man the cause of their Disagreement, but would
only say, Cleomenes knew very well. Cleomenes finding Xenares averse to his
Designs, and thinking all others to be of the same opinion, consulted with
none, but contrived the whole Business by himself. And considering that it
would be easier to bring about an Alteration when the City was at War, than
when in Peace, he engaged the Commonwealth in a Quarrel with the Achoeans, who
had given them fair occasions to complain: for Aratus a Man of the greatest
Power amongst all the Achoeans, designed from the very beginning to bring all
the Peloponnesians into one common Body. And to effect this, he undertook many
Expeditions, and ran through a long course of Policy; for he thought this the
only means to make them an equal Match for their foreign Enemies* All the rest
agreed to his Proposals, only the Lacedoemonians, the Eleans, and as many of
the Arcadians as inclined to the Spartan Interest, refused. Therefore as soon
as Leonidas was dead, he fell upon the Arcadians, and wasted those especially
that bordered on Achaia; by this means designing to try the Inclinations of the
Spartans, and despising Cleomenes as a Youth, and of no Experience in Affairs
of State or War. Upon this the Ephori sent Cleomenes to surprise the Athenoeum,
(dedicated to Minerva) near Belbina, which is a Pass of Laconia, and was then
under the Jurisdiction of the Megalopolitans: Cleomenes possessed himself of the
place, and fortified it; at which Action Aratus showed no public Resentment,
but marched by night to surprise Tegea and Orchomenium. The Design failed; for
those that were to betray the Cities into his Hands, doubted the Success; so
Aratus retreated, imagining that his Design had been undiscovered: But
Cleomenes wrote a jeering Letter to him, and desired to know as from a Friend,
whither he intended to march at night? And Aratus answering, That having
understood his Design to fortify Belbina, he resolved to march thither to
oppose him. Cleomenes returned, That he believed it, but desired him to give
him an account, if it stood with his Convenience, why he carried those Torches
and Ladders with him.

Aratus laughing at the Jeer, and asking what manner of Youth this was;
Democrites a Spartan Exile, replied, If you have any Designs upon the
Lacedaemonians, begin before this young Eagle's Talons are grown. Presently
after this, Cleomenes being in Arcadia with a few Horse, and 300 Foot, the
Ephori fearing to engage in the War, commanded him home; but upon his Retreat,
Aratus taking Caphuoe, they commissioned him again. In this Expedition he took
Methudrium, and spoiled the Country of the Argives and the Achaians: to stop
his Victory, and secure their Friends, sent 20000 Foot and 1000 Horse against
him, under the Command of Aristomachus. Cleomenes faced them at Palantium, and
offered Battle: But Aratus being dashed at his Bravery, would not suffer the
General to engage, but retreated, being cursed by the Achoeans, and hooted at,
and scorned by the Spartans, who were not above 5000, for a Coward* Cleomenes
encouraged by this Success, began to vaunt among the Citizens a Sentence of one
of their ancient Kings, who said, The Spartans seldom enquired how many their
Enemies were, but where they were. After this, marching to the Assistance of
the Eleans, upon whom the Achaians warred, and about Lycoeum falling upon the
Enemy in their Retreat, he routed their whole Army, taking a great number of
Captives, and leaving many dead upon the Place; so that it was commonly
reported amongst the Greeks that Aratus was slain. But Aratus making the best
Advantage of the Opportunity, presently after the Defeat, marched to Mantinoea,
and before any body suspected it, took the City, and put a new Garrison into
it. Upon this the Lacedoemonian*s being quite discouraged, and opposing
Cleomenes's Design of carrying on the War, he was eager to send for Archidamus,
Agis's Brother from Mesena, for he of the other Family had a Right to the
Kingdom; and beside Cleomenes thought that the Power of the Ephori would be
abated when the Kingly State was filled up, and equally poised between the two
Families. But those that were concerned in the Murder of Agis understanding the
Design, and fearing that upon Archidamus's Return they should be called to an
Account, received him coming privately into Town, waited on him, and presently
after murdered him; but whether Cleomenes was against it (as Phylarchus
imagines) or whether he was persuaded by his Friends, and winck'd at the
Contrivance, is uncertain; however, they were most blamed, as having forced his
Consent. But he still resolving to new-model the State bribed the Ephori to
make him General: and won the Affections of many others by means of his Mother
Cratesicloea, who spared no Cost, and was very zealous to promote the same
Interest; and though of her self she had no Inclination to marry, yet for her
Son's sake she wedded one of the chiefest Citizens for Wealth and Power.
Cleomenes marching forth with the Army now under his Command, took Leuctra, a
place belonging to Megalopolis; and the Achoeans quickly facing him with a good
body of Men commanded by Aratus, in a Battle under the vety Walls of the City,
some part of his Army was routed. But Aratus commanding the Achoeans not to
pass a deep Hollow, and stopping the Pursuit, Lydiadas the Megalopolitan
fretting at the Orders, encouraging the Horse which he led, and pursuing the
routed Enemy, fell into a place full of Vines, Hedges and Ditches, and being
forced to break his Ranks, was put into a great Disorder. Cleomenes observing
the Advantage, commanded the Tarentines and Cretans to engage him, by whom,
after a brave Dispute he was routed and slain. The Lacedoemonians thus
encouraged, with a great shout fell upon the Archoeans and routed their whole
Army. Of the slain, which were very many, some Cleomenes delivered upon
Articles, but the Body of Lydiadas he commanded to be brought to him and then
putting on it a purple Robe, and a Crown upon its Head, sent a Convoy with it
to the Gates of Megalopolis. This Lydiadas was the Man that resigned his Crown,
restored Liberty to the Citizens, and joined the City to the Achoean Interest.
Cleomenes being very much raised by this Success; and persuaded, that if
matters were wholly at his Disposal, he should quickly be too hard for the
Achoeans. He taught Megistones his Mother's Husband, That 'twas expedient for
the State to shake off the Power of the Ephori, and to put all their Wealth
into one common Stock for the whole Body; That Sparta being restored to its old
Equality, might be raised up to be Mistress of all Greece. Megistones liked the
Design, and engaged two or three more of his Friends. About that time one of
the Ephori sleeping in Phasiphae's Temple, dreamed a very surprising Dream; for
he thought he saw the four Chairs removed out of the place where the Ephori
used to sit and hear Causes, and one only set there; and whilst he wondered he
heard a Voice out of the Temple, saying, This is best for Sparta. The Person
telling Cleomenes this Dream, he was a little troubled at first, fearing that
he used this as a Trick to sift him, upon some Suspicion of his Design; but
when he was satisfied that the Relater spoke truth, he took heart again, and
taking with him those whom he thought would be against his model, he took Eroea
and Alcoea, two Cities of the Achoeans, furnished Orchomenium with Provisions,
besieged Mantinoea; and with long marches so harassed the Lacedoemonians, that
many of them desired to be left in Arcadia; and he satisfied their Request.
With the Mercenaries he marched to Sparta, and by the way communicated his
Design to those whom he thought fittest for his Purpose, and marched slowly
that he might catch the Ephori at Supper. When he was come near the City, he
sent Eurycleidas to the Sussitium, the eating-place of the Ephori, under
pretense of carrying some Message from him from the Army; Threicion, Phoebis,
and two of those which were bred with Cleomenes, which they call Samothracoe,
followed with a few Soldiers: And whilst Eurycleidas was delivering his
Message to the Ephori, they ran upon them with their drawn Swords, and slew
them. Agesilaus as soon as he was run through, fell, and lay as dead; but in a
little time he rose, silently conveyed himself out of the Room, and crept
undiscovered into a little House, which was the Temple of Fear, and which
always used to be shut, but was then by chance open; being got in, he shut the
Door, and lay close: the other four were killed, and above ten more that came
to their Assistance; to those that were quiet, they did no harm, stopped none
that fled the City, and spared Agesilaus, who came out of the Temple the next
day. The Lacedoemonians have not only Temples dedicated to Fear, but also to
Death, Laughter, and the like Passions: now they worship Fear, not as they do
those Deities which they dread, esteeming it hurtful, but thinking their Polity
is chiefly kept up by Law; and therefore the Ephori (Aristotle is my Author)
when they enter upon their Government, make Proclamation to the People, That
they should shave their Whiskers, and be obedient to the Laws, that they might
not be forced to be severe, using this trivial Particular (in my opinion) to
accustom their Youth to Obedience even in the smallest Matters. And the
Ancients, I think, did not imagine Fortitude to be plain Fearlessness, but a
cautious Fear of Infamy and Disgrace: for those that show most Fear toward the
Laws, are most bold against their Enemies; and those are least afraid of any
Danger, who are most afraid of a just Reproach. Therefore he said well:

A Reverence still attends on Fear.
And Homer,
Feared you shall be, dear Uncle, and revered,
And again,
In silence fearing those that bore the sway.
For it is very commonly seen, that Men reverence those whom they fear; and
therefore the Lacedoemonians placed the Temple of Fear by the Sussitium of the
Ephori, having raised their Power to almost absolute Monarchy.

The next day Cleomenes proscribed 80 of the Citizens, whom he thought
necessary to banish, and removed all the Seats of the Ephori except one, in
which he himself designed to sit, and hear Causes; and calling the Citizens
together, he made an Apology for his Proceedings, saying, That by Lycurgus the
Senate was joined to the Kings, and that that model of Government had continued
a long time, and needed no other sort of Magistrates to give it perfection. But
afterward in the long War with the Messenians, when the Kings being to command
the Army, had no time to attend civil Causes, they chose some of their Friends,
and left them to determine the Suits of the Citizens in their stead. These were
called Ephori, and at first behaved themselves as Servants to the Kings, but
afterward by degrees they appropriated the Power to themselves and erected a
distinct sort of Magistracy. An evidence of the Truth of this may be taken from
the usual Behavior of the Kings, who upon the first and second Message of the
Ephori, refuse to go, but upon the third readily attend them: And Asteropus,
the first that raised the Ephori to that height of Power, lived a great many
years after their Institution; therefore whilst they modestly contained
themselves within their own proper Sphere, 'twas better to bear with them than
to make a disturbance. But that an upstart introduced Power should so far
destroy the old model of Government, as to banish some Kings, murder others
without hearing their defense, and threaten those who desired to see the best
and most divine Constitution restored in Sparta, was unsufferable. Therefore if
it had been possible for him without Bloodshed, to have freed Lacedaemon from
those foreign Plagues, Luxury, Vanity, Debts and Usury; and from those more
ancient Evils, Poverty and Riches, he should have thought himself the happiest
King in the World, having like an expert Physician cured* the Diseases of his
Country without pain. But now in this necessity Lycurgus's Example favored
his Proceedings, who being neither King, nor Magistrate, but a private Man, and
aiming at the Kingdom, came armed into the Marketplace, and for fear of the
King, Carileus fled to the Altar: but he being a good Man, and a lover of his
Country, readily consented to Lycurgus's Project, and admitted an Alteration
in the State. Thus by his own Actions Lycurgus showed, That it was difficult to
correct the Government without Force and Fear, in using which, he said, he
would be so moderate, as never to desire their Assistance, but either to
terrify or ruin the Enemies of Sparta's Happiness and Safety. He commanded
that all the Land should be left in common, and private Claims laid aside: That
Debtors should be discharged of their Debts, and a strict search made, who were
Foreigners, and who not: That the true Spartans, recovering their Courage,
might defend the City by their Arms, and that we may no longer see Laconia, for
want of a sufficient number to secure it, wasted by the Aetolians and
Illyrians. Then he himself first, with his Fatherin-law Megistones and his
Friends, brought all their Wealth into one public Stock, and all the other
Citizens followed the example: the Land was divided, and every one that he had
banished, had a share assigned him; for he promised to restore all, as soon as
things were settled and in quiet; and completing the common number of
Citizens, out of the best and most agreeable of the neighboring Inhabitants,
he raised a Body of 4000 Men, and instead of a Spear, taught them to use a
Sarissa, (a long Pike) with both hands, and to carry their Shields by a String
fastened round their Arms, and not by a Handle, as before. After this he began
to consult about the exercising and breeding of the Youth, (many Particulars of
which, Sphoerus being then at Sparta, directed) and in a short time the Schools
of Exercise, and their Syssitia, (common eating Places) recovered their ancient
Decency and Order, a few out of necessity, but the most voluntarily applying
themselves to that generous and Laconick way of Living: besides, that the Name
of Monarch might give them no jealousy, he made Eucleidas, his Brother,
Partner in the Throne; and that was the only time that Sparta had two Kings of
the same Family. Then understanding that the Achoeans and Aratus imagined that
this Change had disturbed and shaken his Affairs, and that he would not venture
out of Sparta, and leave the City now unsettled by so great an Alteration, he
thought it great and serviceable to his Designs, to convince his Enemies that
he was eagerly desirous of a War: And therefore making an Incursion into the
Territories of Megalopolis, he wasted the Country very much, and got a
considerable Booty. And at last taking those that used to act in the public
Solemnities traveling from Messena, and building a Theater in the Enemies
Country, and setting a Prize of 40 l. value, he sat Spectator a whole day;
not that he either desired or needed such a Divertisement, but as it were
insulting over his Enemies, and that by thus manifestly despising them, he
might show that he had more than conquered the Achaeans: for that alone of all
the Greek or Kings Armies had no Stage Players, no Jugglers, no dancing or
singing Women attending it, but was free from all sorts of Looseness, Wantonness
and Foppery; the young Men being for the most part upon Duty, and the old Men
teaching them at leisure-time to apply themselves to their usual Drollery, and
to rally one another facetiously after the Laconick fashion; the Advantages of
which I have discovered in the Life of Lycurgus. He himself instructed all by
his Example: he was a living Pattern of Temperance before every bodies eyes,
and his course of Living was neither more stately nor more expensive than any
of the Commons. And this was a considerable Advantage to him in his Designs on
Greece; for Men when they waited upon other Kings, did not so much admire their
Wealth, costly Furniture, and numerous Attendance, as they hated their Pride
and State, their difficulty of Access, and scornful commanding Answers to their
Petitions. But when they came to Cleomenes, who was both really a King, and
bore that Title, and saw no Purple, no Robes of State upon him, no Chairs and
Couches about him for his ease, and that he did not receive Petitions, and
return Answers after a long delay, by a number of Messengers, Waiters, or by
Bills, but that he rose and came forward to meet those that came to wait upon
him, staid, talked freely and graciously with all that had Business, they were
extremely taken, won to his Service, and professed that he alone was the true
Son of Hercules. His common every days Meal was in a mean Room, very sparing,
and after the Laconick manner; and when he entertained Ambassadors or
Strangers, two more Beds were added, and a little better Dinner provided by his
Servants; but no Fricacies, no Dainties, only the dishes were larger, and the
Wine more plentiful; for he reproved one of his Friends for entertaining some
Strangers with nothing but Pulse and black Broth, such Diet as they usually had
in their Phiditia, saying, That upon such occasions, and when they treat
Strangers, 'twas not requisite to be too exact Laconians. After Supper, a Stand
was brought in with a brass Vessel full of Wine, two silver Pots, which held
almost a Quart apiece, a few silver Cups, of which he that pleased might drink,
but no Liquor was forced on any of the Guests. There was no Music, nor was any
required; for he entertained the Company, sometimes asking Questions, sometimes
telling Stories: And his Discourse was neither too grave, and unpleasantly
serious, nor vain and abusive, but merrily facetious; for he thought those ways
of catching Men by Gifts and Presents, which other Kings use, to be mean and
inartificial; and it seemed to him to be the most glorious method, and most
suitable to a King to win the Affections of those that came near him, by
pleasant Discourse, and unaffected Conversation: for a Friend and Mercenary
differ only in this, that the one is made by Conversation and agreeableness of
Humor, and the other by Reward. The Mantinoeans were the first that obliged
him; for getting by night into the City, and driving out the Achoean Garrison,
they put themselves under his Protection: he restored them their Polity and
Laws, and the same day marched to Tegea; and a little while after fetching a
Compass through Arcadia, he made a Descent upon Pheroe in Achaia, intending to
force Aratus to a Battle, or bring him into Disrepute, for refusing to engage,
and suffering him to waste the Country: Hyperbatus at that time commanded the
Army, but Aratus had all the Power amongst the Achoeans. The Achoeans marching
forth with their whole Strength, and incamping in Dumoeoe, about Hecatomboeum,
Cleomenes came up, and thinking it not advisable to pitch between Dumoeoe, a
City of the Enemies, and the Camp of the Achoeans, he boldly dared the
Achoeans, and forced them to a Battle, and routing the Phalanx, slew a great
many in the Fight, and took many Prisoners; thence marching to Lagon, and
driving out the Achoean Garrison, he restored the City to the Eloeans. The
Affairs of the Achoeans being in this desperate condition, Aratus, who was wont
to continue in his Government above a year, refused the Command, though they
entreated and urged him to accept it; and this was ill done, when the Storm was
high, to put the Power out of his own hands, and set another to the Helm.
Cleomenes at first proposed fair and easy Conditions by his Ambassadors to the
Achoeans; but afterward he sent others, and required the chief Command to be
settled upon him; and in other Matters he promised to agree to reasonable
terms, and to restore their Captives and their Country. The Achoeans were
willing to come to an Agreement upon those terms, and invited Cleomenes to
Lerna, where an Assembly was to be held; but it happened that Cleomenes hastily
marching on, and unreasonably drinking Water, brought up abundance of Blood,
and lost his Voice: therefore being unable to continue his March, he sent the
chiefest of the Captives to the Achoeans, and putting off the Meeting for some
time, retired to Lacedoemon. This ruined the Affairs of Greece, which was just
then ready to recover it self out of its Disasters, and avoid the insulting and
Covetousness of the Macedonians: for Aratus, whether fearing or distrusting
Cleomenes, or envying his unlook'd-for Success, or thinking it a disgrace for
him who had commanded 33 years, to have a young Man succeed to all his Glory
and his Power, and be Head of that Government which he had been raising and
settling so many years; he first endeavored to keep the Achoeans from closing
with Cleomenes; but when they would not hearken to him, fearing Cleomenes*s
daring Spirit and thinking the Lacedoemonian's Proposals to be very reasonable,
who designed only to reduce Peloponnesus to its old Model, he took his last
Refuge, in an Action which was unbecoming any of the Greeks, most dishonorable
to him, and most unworthy his former Bravery and Exploits: for he called
Antigonus into Greece, and filled Peloponnesus with Macedonians, whom he
himself, when a Youth, having beaten their Garrison out of the Castle of
Corinth, had driven from the same Country; beside, he declared himself an
Enemy to all Kings, and has left many dishonorable Stories of this same
Antigonus, in those Commentaries which he wrote. And though he declares, that
he suffered considerable Losses, and underwent great Dangers, that he might
free Athens from the Power of the Macedonians, yet afterward he brought the
very same Men armed into his own Country, and his own House, even to the
Women's Apartment. He would not endure, that one of the Family of Hercules, and
King of Sparta, and one that had reformed the Polity of his Country, as it
were a disordered Harmony, and tuned it to the plain Dorick measure of
Lycurgus, to be styled, Head of the Triccoeans and Sicyonians; and whilst he
fled the Pulse and short Coat, and, which were his chief Accusations against
Cleomenes, the extirpation of Wealth, and reformation of Poverty, he basely
subjected himself, together with Achoea, to the Diadem and Purple, to the
imperious Commands of the Macedonians, and their Satrapoe. That he might not
seem to be under Cleomenes, he sacrificed the Antigoneia, (Sacrifices in Honor
of Antigonus) and sung Poeans himself with a Garland on his Head, to the Honor
of a rotten, consumptive Macedonian.

I write this not out of any Design to disgrace Aratus (for in many things he
showed himself vigorous for the Grecian Interest, and a great Man) but out of
pity to the weakness of Humane Nature, which, in such a Person so excellent,
and so many ways disposed to Virtue, cannot attain to a State irreprehensible.
The Achoeans meeting again at Argos, and Cleomenes descending from Tegea, there
were great hopes that all Differences would be composed. But Aratus, Antigonus,
and He having already agreed upon the chief Articles of their League, fearing
that Cleomenes would carry all before him, and either win, or force the
Multitude to comply with his Demands, proposed, that having three hundred
Hostages put into his Hands, he should come alone into the Town, or bring his
Army to the place of Exercise, called Cillarabion, without the City, and treat
there.

Cleomenes hearing this, said, That he was unjustly dealt with; for they ought
to have told him so plainly at first, and not now he was come even to their
Doors, show their Jealousy, and deny him Admission: And writing an Epistle to
the Achoeans about the same Subject; the greatest part of which was an
Accusation of Aratus; and Aratus, on the other side, ripping up his Faults to
the Assembly, he hastily dislodged; and sent a Trumpeter to denounce War
against the Achoeans, but not to Argos, but to Aegium, as Aratus delivers, that
he might not give them notice enough to make Provision for their Defense. Upon
this, the Achoeans were mightily disturbed, the common People expecting a
Division of the Land, and a Release from their Debts; and the chief Men being
on many Accounts displeased with Aratus, and some angry and at odds with him,
as the Occasion of the Macedonians descent on Peloponnesus. Encouraged by these
Misunderstandings, Cleomenes invades Achoea; and first took Pellene by
surprise, and beat out the Achoean Garrison; and afterward brought over Pheneon
and Penteloeon to his side. Now the Achoeans suspecting some treacherous
Designs at Corinth and Sicyon, sent their Horse and Mercenaries out of Argos to
have an Eye upon those Cities, and they themselves went to Argos to celebrate
the Nemean Games. Cleomenes advertised of this march, and hoping (as it
afterward fell out) that upon an unexpected Advance to the City now busied in
the Solemnity of the Games, and thronged with numerous Spectators, he should
raise a considerable Terror and Confusion amongst them; by night he marched
with his Army to the Walls, and taking the quarter of the Town called Aspis,
which lies above the Theater, a place well fortified, and hard to be
approached, he so terrified them, that none offered to resist, but agreed to
accept a Garrison, to give twenty Citizens for Hostages, and to assist the
Lacedoemonians, and that he should have the chief Command. This Action
considerably increased his Reputation, and his Power; for the ancient Spartan
Kings, though they many ways endeavored to effect it, could never bring Argos
to be steadfastly and sincerely theirs. And Pyrrhus a most experienced Captain,
and brave Soldier, though he entered the City by force, could not keep
Possession, but was slain himself with a considerable part of his Army:
Therefore they admired the Dispatch and Contrivance of Cleomenes; and those
that before derided him for saying that he imitated Solon and Lycurgus in
releasing the People from their Debts, and in equally dividing the Wealth of
the Citizens, were now persuaded that he was the cause of the desirable
Alterations in the Spartan Commonwealth: For before they were very low in the
World, and so unable to secure their own, that the Aetolians invading Laconia,
brought away fifty thousand Slaves; (so that one of the elder Spartans is
reported to have said, That they had done Laconia a kindness by unburdening it)
and yet a little while after applying themselves to their own Customs, and
ancient Institution, they gave notable Instances of Courage and Obedience, as
if they had been under the Eye of Lycurgus himself; and quickly raised Sparta
to be Head of all Greece, and recovered Peloponnesus to themselves. Whilst
Argos was taken, and Cleonoe and Phlius sided with Cleomenes, Aratus was at
Corinth searching after some, who were reported to favor the Spartan Interest.
The News being brought to him, disturbed him very much; for he perceived the
City inclining to Cleomenes, and the Achoeans willing to be at ease; therefore
he called all the Citizens into the common Hall, and, as it were, undesignedly
retreating to the Gate, he mounted his Horse that stood ready there, and fled
to Sicyon; and the Corinthians made such have to Cleomenes at Argos, that (as
Aratus says) striving who should be first there, they spoiled all their Horses:
And Cleomenes was very angry with the Corinthians for letting Aratus escape:
And Megistones came from Cleomenes to him, desiring him to diliver up the
Castle of Corinth, which was then garrisoned by the Achoeans, and offered him a
considerable Sum of Money; and that he answered, That Matters were not now in
his Power, but he in theirs. Thus Aratus himself writes. But Cleomenes marching
from Argos, and taking in the Troezenians, Epidaurians, and Hermioneans, came
to Corinth, and blocked up the Castle which the Achoeans would not surrender;
and sending for Aratus's Friends and Stewards, committed his House and Estate
to their Care and Management; and sent Tritimallus the Messenian to him a
second time, desiring that the Castle might be equally garrisoned by the
Spartans and Achoeans, and promising to Aratus himself double the Pension that
he received from King Ptolemy: But Aratus refusing the Conditions, and sending
his own Son with other Hostages to Antigonus, and persuading the Achoeans to
make a Decree for delivering the Castle into Antigonus's Hands, Cleomenes
invaded the Territory of the Sicyonians, and by a Decree of the Corinthians,
seized on all Aratus's Estate. In the mean time Antigonus, with a great Army,
passed Gerania, and Cleomenes thinking it more advisable to fortify and
garrison, not the Isthmus, but the Mountains called Onia, and by a long Siege
and Skirmishes to weary the Macedonians, than to venture a set Battle, put his
Design in Execution, which very much distressed Antigonus; for he had not
brought Victuals sufficient for his Army; nor was it easy to force a way
through whilst Cleomenes guarded the Pass. He attempted by night to pass
through Lechoeum, but failed, and lost some Men; so that Cleomenes and his
Army, were mightily encouraged, and so flusht with the Victory, that they went
merrily to Supper; and Antigonus was very much dejected, being reduced to those
miserable straits. At last he designed to march to the Promontory Heroeum, and
thence transport his Army in Boats to Sicyon, which would take up a great deal
of time, and be very chargeable. The same time about Evening some of Aratus's
Friends came from Argos by Sea, and invited him to return, for the Argives
would revolt from Cleomenes. Aristotle was the Man that wrought the Revolt; and
he had no hard task to persuade the common People; for they were all angry with
Cleomenes for not releasing them from theirs Debts as they expected. Upon this
Advertisement Aratus with fifteen hundred of Antigonus's Soldiers sailed to
Epidaurus; but Aristotle not staying for his coming, drew out the Citizens, and
fought against the Garrison of the Castle, and Timoxenus with the Achoeans from
Sicyon, came to his Assistance. Cleomenes heard the News about the second Watch
of the Night, and sending for Megistones angrily commanded him to go and set
things right at Argos. This Megistones was the Man who passed his word for the
Argives Loyalty, and persuaded him not to banish the suspected. This Megistones
he dispatched with two thousand Soldiers, and observed Antigonus himself, and
encouraged the Corinthians, pretending that there was no great matter in the
Stirs at Argos, but only a little Disturbance raised by a few inconsiderable
Persons. But when Megistones, entering Argos, was slain, and the Garrison could
scarce hold out, and frequent Messengers came to Cleomenes for Succors, he
fearing lest the Enemy having taken Argos, should shut up the Passes, and
securely waste Laconia, and besiege Sparta it self, which he had left without
Forces; he dislodged from Corinth, and presently lost that City; for Antigonus
entered it, and garrisoned the Town. He turned aside from his direct March, and
assaulting the Wall of Argos, endeavored to break in; and having cleared a way
under the quarter called Aspis, he joined the Garrison which still held out
against the Achoeans; some parts of the City he scaled, and took, and his
Cretan Archers cleared the Streets. But when he saw Antigonus with his Phalanx
descending from the Mountains into the Plain, and the Horse on all sides
entering the City, he thought it impossible to maintain his Post, and therefore
with all his Men made a safe Retreat behind the Wall. Having in a short time
raised himself to a considerable height, and in one March made himself Master
of almost all Peloponnesus, and lost all again in as short a time: For some of
his Allies presently forsook him, and others not long after put themselves
under Antigonus's Protection. His Army thus defeated, as he was leading back
the Relics of his Forces, some from Lacedoemon met him in the Evening at
Tegea, and brought him News of as great a Misfortune as that which he had
lately suffered, and that was the Death of his Wife, whom he doted on so much,
that when he was most prosperous, he would ever now and then make a step to
Sparta, to visit his beloved Aegiatis.

This News afflicted him extremely, and he grieved, as a young Man would do for
the loss of a very beautiful and excellent Wife; yet his passion did not
debase the greatness of his Mind, but keeping his usual Voice, his Countenance
and his Habit, he gave necessary Orders to his Captains, and took care to
secure the Tegeans. The next day he retired to Sparta, and having at home with
his Mother and Children bewailed the loss, and finished his Mourning, he
presently appeared about the public Affairs of the State. Now Ptolemy, the
King of Egypt, promised him Assistance, but demanded his Mother and Children
for Hostages: this for some considerable time he was ashamed to discover to his
Mother; and though he often went to her on purpose, and was just upon the
Discourse, yet still refrained, and kept it to himself? so that she began to
suspect somewhat, and asked his Friends, Whether Cleomenes had somewhat to say
to her, which he was afraid to speak! At last Cleomenes venturing to tell her,
she laughed heartily, and said, Was this the thing that you had often a mind to
tell me; and was afraid? Why do not you put me on ship board, and send this
Carkase where it may be most servicable to Sparta, before Age wastes it
unprofitably here? Therefore all things being provided for the Voyage, thy went
to Toenarus on Foot, and the Army waited on them. Cratesicloea, when she was
ready to go on Board, took Cleomenes aside into Neptune's Temple, and embracing
him who was very much dejected, and extremely discomposed, she said thus, Go to
King of Sparta; when we are without door, let none see us weep, or show any
Passion below the Honor and Dignity of Sparta; for that alone is in our own
power; as for Success or Disappointments, those wait on us as the Deity
decrees. Having said thus, and composed her Countenance, she went to the Ship
with her little Grandson, and bad the Pilot put presently out to Sea. When she
came to Egypt, and understood that Ptolemy entertained Proposals and Overtures
of Peace from Antigonus, and that Cleomenes, though the Achoeans invited and
urged him to an Agreement, was afraid, for her sake, to come to any, without
Ptolemy's consent, she wrote to him, advising him to do that which was most
becoming and most profitable for Sparta, and not for the sake of an old Woman
and a little Child, always stand in fear of Ptolemy: this Character she
maintained in her Misfortunes. Antigonus having taken Tegea, and plundered
Orchomenum and Mantinoea, Cleomenes was shut up within the narrow Bounds of
Laconia, and made such of the Heilots as could pay five Attick pounds, free of
Sparta, and by that means got together 500 Talents; and arming 2000 after the
Macedonian fashion, that he might make a Body fit to oppose Antigonus's
Leucaspidoe (white-Shields) he undertook a very considerable and very
surprising Enterprise. Megalopolis was at that time a City of it self, as big
and as powerful as Sparta, and had the Forces of the Achoeans and Antigonus
incamping on its sides; and it was chiefly the Megalopolitans doing, that
Antigonus was called in to assist the Achoeans. Cleomenes having a design upon
this City, (no Action was ever more sudden and more unexpected) ordered his Men
to take five days Provision, and so marched to Sellasia, as if he intended to
spoil the Country of the Argives: but from thence making a descent into the
Territories of Megalopolis, and refreshing his Army about Rhoetium, he marched
through Helicon, directly to the City. When he was not far off the Town, he
sent Panteus with two Regiments to surprise the Mesopyrgion, (the Quarter
between the two Towers) which he understood to be the most unguarded Quarter of
the Megalopolitans Fortifications; and with the rest of his Forces he followed
leisurely. Panteus, not only surpised that Place, but finding a great part of
the Wall without Guards, he pulled down some places, and demolished others, and
killed all the Defenders that he found. Whilst he was thus busied, Cleomenes
came up to him, and was got with his Army within the City, before the
Megalopolitans knew of the Surprise: At last, as soon as it was discovered,
some left the Town immediately, taking with them what Money they had ready;
some armed, and engaged the Enemy; and though they were not able to beat them
out, yet they gave their Citizens time and opportunity safely to retire: so
that there were not above 1000 Persons left in the Town, all the rest flying
with their Wives and Children, and escaping to Messena. A great number of those
that armed and fought the Enemy, were saved, and very few taken, amongst whom
were Lysandridas and Thearidas, two Men of great Power and Reputation amongst
the Megalopolitans; and therefore the Soldiers, as soon as they were taken,
brought them to Cleomenes: And Lysandridas, as soon as he saw Cleomenes afar
off, cried out, Now, King of Sparta, it is in your power, by doing a most Kingly
and braver Action than you have already performed, to purchase a considerable
Glory. And Cleomenes guessing at his meaning, replied, What do you say,
Lysandridas, sure you will not advise me to restore your City to you again?
It Is that which I mean, Lysandridas replied, and I advise you not to ruin so
brave a City, but to fill it with faithful and steadfast Friends and Allies, by
restoring their Country to the Megalopolitans, and being the Savior of so
considerable a People. Cleomenes paused a while, and then said, It Is very hard
to trust so far in these Matters; but with us let Profit always yield to Glory.
Having said this, he sent the two Men to Messena with a Trumpeter from himself,
offering the Megalopolitans their City again, if they would forsake the Achoean
Interest, and be on his side. Though Cleomenes made these kind and obliging
Proposals, yet Philopoemen would not suffer them to break their League with the
Achoeans; and accusing Cleomenes to the People, as if his design was not to
restore the City, but to take the Citizens too, he forced Thearidas and
Lysandridas to leave Messena.

This was that Philopoemen who was afterward Chief of the Achoeans, and a Man
of the greatest Reputation amongst the Greeks, as I have made it appear in his
own Life. This News coming to Cleomenes, though he had before taken such strict
care that the City should not be plundered, yet then being in a Fury, and put
out of all patience, he rifled them of all their Coin, Plate and Jewels, and
sent their Statues and Pictures unto Sparta; and demollishing a great part of
the City, he marched away, for fear of Antigonus and the Achoeans: but they
never stirred, for they were in Aegium, at a Council of War. There Aratus
mountted the Desk, wept along while, and held his Mantle before his Face; and
at last the Company being amazed, and commanding him, to speak, he said,
Megalopolis is ruin*d by Cleomenes. The Assembly was presently dissolved, the
Achoeans being extremely surpised at the suddenness and greatness of the loss;
and Antigonus intending to send speedy Succors, when he found his Army to
gather very slowly out of their Winterquarters, he sent them Orders to continue
there still; and he himself marched to Argos with a considerable Body of Men.
The second enterprise of Cleomenes seemed to be carried on by extreme Boldness
and unaccountable Madness; but yet in Polybius's opinion, was done upon mature
Deliberation and exact Foresight: for knowing very well that the Macedonians
were dispersed into their Winter Quarters, and that Antigonus with his Friends
and a few Mercenaries about him wintered in Argos; upon these Considerations he
invaded the Country of the Argives, hoping to shame Antigonus to a Battle upon
unequal terms; or else if he did not dare to Fight, to bring him into Disrepute
with the Achoeans. And this accordingly happened; for Cleomenes wasting,
plundring and spoiling the whole Country, the Argives vexed at the loss, ran
in Troops to the Palace of the King, and clamoured that he should either fight,
or surrender his Command to better and braver Men. But Antigonus, as became an
experienced Captain, accounting it dishonorable, foolishly to hazard his
Army, and quit his Security, and not so to be abused and railed at by the
Rabble, would not march out against Cleomenes, but stood fixed to the Designs
which he had laid: Cleomenes in the mean time brought his Army up to the very
Walls, and having uncontroul'dly spoiled the Country, and insulted over his
Enemies, drew off again. A little while after being advertised that Antigonus
designed for Tegea, and thence to make an Incursion into Laconia, he hastily
marched with his Army another way, and appeared early in the morning before
Argos, and wasted the Fields about it: the Corn he did not cut down with
Reaping hooks and Sythes, as Men usually do, but beat it down with great Staves
made like Scymetars, as if with a great deal of Contempt and wanton Scorn he
spoiled the Fields, and wasted the Country in his March; yet when his
Soldiers would have set Cyllabaris, the School of Exercise, on fire, he
hindered the Attempt, reflecting upon serious consideration, that the Outrages
committed at Megalopolis, were the effects of his Passion rather than his
Wisdom. He pretended to make such little account of, and so much to despise
Antigonus, who first retired to Argos, and afterward placed Garrisons on all
the Mountains round about, that he sent a Trumpeter to desire the Keys of the
Heroeum, (Juno's Temple) that he might sacrifice to the Goddess. Thus with a
Scoff and bitter Reflection on Antigonus, and having sacrificed to the Goddess,
under the Walls of the Temple, which was shut, he marched to Phlius; and from
thence driving out those that garrisoned Hologountum, he marched down to
Orchomenum. And these Enterprises not only encouraged the Citizens, but made
him appear, to the very Enemies to be an experienced Captain and very worthy of
Command: for with the Strength of one City, not only to fight the Power of the
Macedonians, and all the Peloponnesians; not only to preserve Laconia from
being spoiled, but to waste the Enemies Country, and to take so many and such
considerable Cities, is an Argument of no common Bravery. He that first said,
That Money was the sinews of Affairs, seemed chiefly in that saying to respect
War: And Demades, when the Athenians had voted that a Navy should be made
ready, but had no Money, said, They should make Bread before they thought of
Sailing. And the old Archidamus, in the beginning of the Peloponnesian War,
when the Allies desired, that each Parties share of Contributions for the War
should be determined, is reported to have said, War cannot be kept to a set
Diet: For as well-breathed Wrestlers do in time weary and tire out the most
active and most skilful Combatant; so Antigonus coming to the War with a great
stock of Wealth, wearied out Cleomenes, whose Poverty made it difficult for him
either to provide Pay for the Mercenaries, or Provisions for the Citizens. For
in all other Respects the time favored Cleomenes; for Antigonus's Affairs at
home began to be disturbed: for the Barbarians wasted and overran Macedonia
whilst he was absent; and at that time a vast Army of the Illyrians came down:
to be freed from whose Outrages, the Macedonians sent for Antigonus, and the
Letters had almost been brought to him before the Battle was fought; upon the
receipt of which he presently dislodged, and left the Achoeans Affairs to
themselves. But Fortune, that loves to determine the greatest Affairs by a
Minute, in this Conjuncture showed such an exact niceness of Time, that
immediately after the Battle in Sellasia was over, and Cleomenes had lost his
Army and his City, the Messengers reached Antigonus. And this made Cleomenes's
Misfortune more to be pitied; for if he had forborne fighting two days longer,
there had been no need of hazarding a Battle, since upon the departure of the
Macedonians, he might have had what Conditions he pleased from the Achoeans*
But now (as I hinted before) for want of Money, being necessitated to rely
wholly on his Arms, he was forced with 20000 (this is Polybius's Account) to
engage thirty thousand; and approving himself an excellent Commander in this
Difficulty, his Citizens showing an extraordinary Courage, and his Mercenaries
Bravery enough; he was overborn by the different way of fighting, and the
weight of the Armed Phalanx. Besides, Phylarchus affirms, that the Treachery of
some about him was the chief Cause of Cleomenes's Ruin. For Antigonus gave
Orders, that the Illyrians and Acharnanians should march round by a secret way,
and encompass the other Wing which Eucleidas, Cleomenes's Brother, commanded;
and then drew out the rest of his Forces to the Battle. And Cleomenes, from a
convenient rising, viewing his Order, and not seeing any of the Illyrians and
Acharnanians, began to suspect that Antigonus had sent them upon some such
Design; and calling for Damoteles, who was to inspect, and to provide against
Ambushes, commanded him carefully to look after, and discover the Enemies
Designs upon his Rear.

But Damoteles (for some say Antigonus had bribed him) telling him, that he
should not be sollicitous about that matter, for all was well enough, but mind,
and fight those that met him in the front. He was satisfied, and advanced
against Antigonus; and by the Vigorous Charge of his Spartans, made the
Macedonian Phalanx give ground, and pressed upon them with great Advantage
about half a mile; but then making a stand, and seeing the danger which the
surrounded Wing commanded by his Brother Eucleidas, was in, he cried out, Thou
art lost, dear Brother, thou art lost, thou brave Example to our Spartan Youth,
and Theme of our Matron's Songs.

Eucleidas's Wing being thus cut in Pieces, and the Conquerors from that part
falling upon his Battle, he perceived his Soldiers to be disordered, and
unable to maintain the Fight, and therefore provided for his own safety. When
he came into the City, he advised those Citizens that he met, to receive
Antigonus; and as for himself, he said, which should appear most advantageous
to Sparta, whether his Life or Death, that he would choose. Seeing the Women
running out to those that fled with him, taking their Arms, and bringing Drink
to them, he entered into his own House, and his Servant, which was a freeborn
Woman, taken from Megalopolis after his Wife's Death, offering, as she used to
do, to make necessary Provision for him returning from the Battle; though he
was very thirsty, he refused to drink, and though very weary, to sit down; but
armed as he was, he clapped his Arm side-way to a Pillar, and leaning his
Forehead upon his Elbow, he rested his Body a little while, and ran over in his
Thoughts what course he should take, and then with his Friends went presently
to Gythium; where finding Ships fitted for the Purpose, they embarked.
Antigonus taking the City, treated the Lacedoemonians courteously, and neither
affronting, nor ruining the Dignity of Sparta, but permitting them to enjoy
their own Laws and Polity, and sacrificing to the Gods, dislodged the third
day: for he heard that there was a great War kindled in Macedonia, and that the
Country was spoiled by the Barbarians; besides, he grew sick of a Consumption
and continual Defluxion on the Lungs, yet he still kept up that he might return
and free his own Country, and fall more gloriously upon an heap of slaughtered
Barbarians. As Phylarchus says, and it is probable, he broke a Vein by shouting
in the Battle. In the Plays 'twas said, that after the Victory he cried out for
Joy, O fine Day! and presently bringing up abundance of Blood, fell into a
Fever, and died in a short time. And thus much concerning Antigonus.

Cleomenes sailing from Cytheroe, touched at another Island called Aegyalia,
whence as he was about to depart for Cyrene, one of his Friends, Therycion by
Name, a Man of an haughty Spirit in all Enterprises, and high and boasting in
his talk, came privately to him, and said thus; Sir, Death in Battle, which is
the most glorious, we have let go; though all heard us say that Antigonus
should never tread over the King of Sparta* unless dead; and now that which is
next in Bravery and Glory, is presented to us. Whither do we madly sail, flying
that which is near, and seeking that which is far removed? For if it is not
dishonorable for the Race of Hercules to serve the Successors of Philip and
Alexander, we shall save a long Voyage by delivering our selves up to
Antigonus, who, probably, surpasses Ptolomy as much as the Macedonians do the
Egyptians; but if we think it mean to submit to those whose Arms have
conquered us, why should we choose him for our Lord by whom we have not yet been
beaten? Is it that instead of one, we might appear meaner than two, whilst we
fly Antigonus, and flatter Ptolomy? Or, is it for your Mother's sake that you
retreat to Egypt? It will indeed be a very fine, and very desirable sight for
her to be shown her Son by Ptolomy's Women, now changed from a Prince into an
exile and a Slave. Are we not still Masters of our own Swords? And whilst we
have Laconia in view, shall we not here free our selves from this disgraceful
Misery, and clear our selves to those, who at Sellasia died for the Honor and
Defense of Sparta? Or, shall we sit lazily in Egypt enquiring what News from
Sparta? and whom Antigonus has been pleased to make Governor of Lacedaemon?
Thus spoke Therycion; and this was Cleomenes's Reply; By seeking Death, you
Coward, the most easy, and most ready Refuge, you fancy that you shall appear
courageous and brave, though this Flight is baser than thy former. Better Men
than we have given way to their Enemies, having been betrayed by Fortune, or
oppressed by Multitude; but he that sinks under Labor or Afflictions, the
Opinions or Reproaches of Men, is overcome by his own Effeminacy and Softness:
For a voluntary Death ought not to be chosen as a Relief from Action, but as an
Exemplary Action it self, and it is base either to live or to die only to our
selves. That death to which you now invite us, is proposed only as a release
from our present Miseries, but carries nothing of Bravery or Profit in it. And
I think it becomes both me and you not to despair of our Country; but when
there are no hopes of that left, those that have an Inclination may quickly
die. To this Therycion returned no Answer; but as soon as he could get out of
Cleomenes's Company, went toward the Shore, and ran himself through. But
Cleomenes sailed from Aegialia, landed in Libya, and being honorably conducted
through the King's Country, came to Alexandria. When he was first brought to
Ptolomy, no more than common Civilities, and usual Ceremonies were paid him;
but when; upon trial, he found him a Man of deep Sense, and great Reason, and
that his plain Laconick way of Conversation carried a free Pleasantness with
it, that he did nothing unbecoming the greatness of his Birth, nor bent under
Fortune, and appeared a more faithful Councellor, than those who made it their
business to please and flatter; he was ashamed, and repented that he had
neglected so great a Man, and suffered Antigonus to get so much Power and
Reputation by ruining him. Therefore he heaped up Honors and Kindnesses on
Cleomenes, and gave him Hopes that he would furnish him with an Army and a Navy
to recover Greece, and re-instate him in is Throne. Besides, he allowed him a
yearly Pension of four and twenty Talents; a little part of which Sum supplied
his and his Friends thrifty Temperance; and the rest was employed in doing good
Offices to, and in relieving the Necessities of those that fled Greece, and
retired into Egypt.

But the elder Ptolomy dying before Cleomenes's Affairs had received a full
Dispatch, and the Successor being a loose, voluptuous and effeminate Prince,
under the power of his Pleasures and his Women, his Business was neglected: for
the King was so besotted with his Women and his Wine, that Balls, Music and
Dancing, were the only Employments of his most busy and serious hours, and the
greatest Affairs of State were managed by Agathoclea the King's Mistress, her
Mother, and the Pimp Oinanthes. Therefore at the first they seemed to stand in
need of Cleomenes; for Ptolomy being afraid of his Brother Magas, who by his
Mother's means had a great Interest amongst the Soldiers, took Cleomenes into
his CabinetCouncil, and acquainted him with the Design of taking off his
Brother. He, though all were for it, declared his opinion to the contrary,
saying The King, if it were possible, should have more Brothers for the better
security and management of his Affairs: And Sosibius, the greatest Favorite,
replying, That they were not secure of the Mercenaries whilst Magas was alive;
Cleomenes returned* That he ne^d not trouble himself about that Matter, for
amongst the Mercenaries there were above 3000 Peloponnesians, who were his fast
Friends, and whom he could command at any time with a Nod. This Discourse made
Cleomenes for the present to be looked upon as a Man of Integrity and Power;
but afterward ( Ptolemy's Weakness increasing his Fear, and, as it usually
happens, where there is no Judgment and Wisdom at the bottom, placing his
Security in Jealousy and Suspicion) rendered Cleomenes suspected to the
Courtiers, as having too much Interest with the Mercenaries; and many had this
Saying in their mouths, That he was a Lion midst a flock of Sheep: for such he
seemed to be in the Court, slyly overlooking and taking notice of the
management of Affairs; therefore when he desired a Navy and an Army from the
King, his Petition was rejected. But when he understood that Antigonus was
dead, that the Achoeans were engaged in a War with the Aetolians, and that the
Affairs of Peloponnesus, being now in very great Distraction and Distress,
required and invited his Assistance, he desired leave to depart only with his
Friends, but could not obtain that, the King not so much as hearing his
Petition, being shut up amongst his Women, and wasting his Hours in Debauchery
and Frolicks. But Sosibius, the chief Minister of State, thought that Cleomenes
being detained against his will, would grow ungovernable and dangerous, and yet
that it was not safe to let him go, being an aspiring* daring Man, and well
acquainted with the Diseases and Weakness of the Kingdom; for no Presents, no
Gifts, could win him to a Compliance. But as the Ox Apis, though revelling in
all possible plenty and delight, yet desires to live as nature would provide
for him, to be at liberty, and frisk about the Fields, and can scarce endure to
be under the Priests keeping; so he could not brook their Courtship, and tender
Entertainment, but like Achilles.

Whilst there, his heart did wast with secret grief,
And he was eager for the noisy Wars.
His Affairs standing in this condition, Nicagoras the Messenian came to
Alexandria, a Man that deeply hated Cleomenes, yet pretended to be his Friend;
for he had formerly sold Cleomenes a fair Estate, but never received the Money,
because Cleomenes was either unable, (as it may be) or else by reason of his
engagement in the Wars and other Distractions, had no time to pay him.
Cleomenes seeing him landing, (for he was then walking upon the Key) kindly
saluted him, and asked, What Business brought him to Egypt? Nicagoras returned
his Complement, and told him, That he came to bring some excellent War-horses
to the King. And Cleomenes with a Smile subjoined, I wish you had rather
brought Pimps, Whores and Pathicks; for those now are the King's chief Delight.
Nicagoras at the present smiled at the Conceit; but a few days after he put
Cleomenes in mind of the Estate that he had bought of him, and desired his
Money, protesting that he would not have troubled him, if his Merchandise had
turned to that Account, which he thought it would. Cleomenes replied, That he
had not a penny left of all that had been given him: At which Answer Nicagoras
being nettled, told Sosibius Cleomenes's Scoff upon the King. He caressed him
for the Discovery, but desiring to have some greater Reason to excite the King
against Cleomenes, persuaded Nicagoras to leave a Letter written against
Cleomenes, importing that he had a Design, if he could have gotten Ships and
Soldiers, to surprise Cyrene: Nicagoras wrote such a Letter, and left Egypt.
Four days after Sosibius brought the Letter to Ptolomy, pretending it was just
then delivered him, and with a bitter Invective excited the Fury of the Youth;
upon this it was agreed, that Cleomenes should be invited into a large
Apartment and treated as formerly, but not suffered to go out again: this Usage
was grievous to Cleomenes, and by this unlucky Accident, his Hopes for the
future seemed to be quite dashed. Ptolomy, the Son of Chrysermas, a Favorite
of the King's, always carried himself fairly toward Cleomenes; they contracted
a near Acquaintance, and would talk freely together about the State. He upon
Cleomenes's Desire came to him, had some Discourse with him, upon a few and
inconsiderable Subjects, to avoid suspicion, and made some Excuses for the
King; but as he went out again, not knowing that Cleomenes followed him to the
Door, he very severely reprimanded the Keepers, for their Carelessness in
looking after so great and so furious a wild Beast. This Cleomenes himself
heard, and retiring before Ptolomy perceived it, told his Friends what he had
heard. Upon this they cast off all their former Hopes, and determined for
violent Proceedings, resolving to be revenged on Ptolomy for his base and
unjust Dealing, to have satisfaction for the Affronts, to die as it became
Spartans, and not stay till, like fatted Sacrifices, they were butchered: for
'twas both grievous and dishonorable for Cleomenes, who had scorned to come to
Terms with Antigonus, a brave Warrior, and a Man of Action, to wait an
effeminate King's leisure, till he should lay aside his Fiddle, and end his
Dance, and then kill him. These Courses being resolved on, and Ptolomy happening
at the same time to make a Progress to Canopus, they first spread abroad a
Report, that his Freedom was ordered by the King; and it being the King's
custom, to send Presents and an Entertainment to those whom he would free,
Cleomenes's Friends made that provision, and sent it into the Prison, thereby
deceiving the Keepers, who thought it had been sent by the King; for he
sacrificed, and gave them large Portions, and with a Crown upon his Head
feasted and made merry with his Friends: it is said, that he began the Action
sooner than he designed, having understood that a Servant of one of the
Accomplices lay abroad with a Mistress that he loved. This made him afraid of a
Discovery; and therefore as soon as it was full Noon, and all the Keepers drunk
and fast asleep, he put on his Coat, and opening the Seam on his right
Shoulder, with his drawn Sword in his hand he issued forth, together with his
Friends, provided in the same manner, making 13 in all. One of them, by Name
Hippotas, was lame, he followed the first Onset very well; but when afterward
he perceived that they were more slow in their Advances for his sake, he
desired them to run him through, and not ruin their Enterprise, by staying for
an useless, unprofitable Man. By chance an Alexandrian was then riding by the
Door, him they threw off, and setting Hippotas on Horseback, ran through the
narrow Lanes, and proclaimed Liberty to the People; but they, it seems, had
Courage enough to praise and admire Cleomenes's Daring, but not one had the
heart to follow and assist him. Three of them fell on Ptolomy, the Son of
Chrysermas, as he was coming out of the Palace, and killed him: Another
Ptolomy, the Lieutenant of the City, advancing against them in a Chariot, they
set upon, dispersed his Guards and Attendants, and pulling him out of the
Chariot, killed him upon the Place. Then they made toward the Castle, designing
to break open the Prison, and take the Prisoners to their Assistance; but the
Keepers were too quick for them, and secured the Passages. Being baffled in
this Attempt, Cleomenes with his Company roam'd about the City, none joining
with him, but all retreating from, and flying his Approach: therefore
despairing of Success, and saying to his Friends, That it was no wonder that
Women ruled over those Men that fled Liberty, he excited them all to die as
bravely as became his Followers, and Men of their glorious Performances. This
said, Hippotas was first, as he desired, run through by one of the young Men,
and then each of them readily and resolutely fell upon his own Sword, except
Panteus, that Panteus that first surpised Megalopolis. This Man being a very
handsome Person, and a better Companion* than any of the Youth, the King loved,
and bad him, when he had seen him and the rest fallen, die by their Example.
Panteus walked over them as they lay, and pricked every one with his Dagger, to
try whether any was alive; when he pricked Cleomenes in the Leg, and saw him
turn upon his Back, he kissed him, sat down by him, and when he was quite
dead, covered his Carkase, and then killed himself upon his Body.

Thus fell Cleomenes that great, brave Man, after he had been King of Sparta
sixteen Years. The News of their Fall being noised through the City,
Cratesiclaea, though a Woman of a great Spirit, could not bear up against the
insupportable weight of this Affliction; but embracing Cleomenes's Children,
made grievous Lamentations; but the eldest Boy, none suspecting such a Spirit
in a Child, threw himself headlong from the top of the House; he was bruised
very much, but not killed by the Fall, and was taken up crying, and expressing
his Resentments for not being permitted to destroy himself. Ptolomy, as soon as
an Account of the Action was brought him, gave order that Cleomenes's Body
should be flayed and hung up; that his Children, Mother, and the Women that
were with her, should be killed. Amongst those was Panteus's Wife, a very fair
Women, and of a stately Carriage, who had been but newly married, and suffered
these Disasters in the height of her Love. Her Parents would not let her embark
with Panteus presently after they were married, though she eargerly desired it,
but shut her up, and kept her by Violence at home; yet a few days after she got
an Horse and a little Money, and escaping by Night, made speed to Taenarus
where she embarked for Egypt, came to her Husband, and with him cheerfully
endured to live in a foreign Country. She led Cratesiclaea as she was going
with the Soldiers to Execution, held up her Train, and begged her to be
courageous, who of her self was not in the least afraid of Death, and desired
nothing else, but only to be killed before the Children. When they were come to
the Place of Execution, the Children were first killed before Cratesiclaea's
Eyes, and afterward she her self, with only these words in her Mouth; O
Children, whither are you gone? But Panteus's Wife girded her Garments close to
her, and being a strong Women, without any Noise or Lamentation, looked after
every one that was slain, and wound them up as well as her present
Circumstances would permit; and after all were killed, dressing her self, bound
her clothes close about her, and suffering none to come near, or be an
Eyewitness of her Fall, besides the Executioner, she courageously submitted to
the stroke, and wanted no Body to look after her, or wind her up after she was
dead. Thus in her Death the Modesty of her Mind appeared, and set that Guard
upon her Body, which she always kept when alive: And she in the declining Age
of the Spartans showed, that Women were no unequal Rivals of the Men, and was
on Instance of such a Courage as would not sneak to the Affronts of Fortune. A
few days after, those that watched the hanging Body of Cleomenes, saw a very
great Snake winding about his Head, and covering his Face, so that no Bird of
Prey would fly at it. This made the King superstitiously afraid, and set the
Women upon several Lustrations, as if he had been an extraordinary Man, and one
beloved by the Gods that had been slain. And the Alexandrians made Processions
to the Place, and gave Cleomenes the Title of Hero, and Son of the Gods, till
the Philosophers satisfied them by saying, That as Oxen breed Bees, putrefying
Horses Breed Hornets, and Beetles rise from the Carcasses of dead Asses, so the
Humors and Juices of the Marrow of a Man's Body coagulating, produce Serpents.
And this the Ancients observing, appropriated a Serpent rather than any other
Creature to Hero's.

THE LIVES OF THE GRACCHI, TIBERIUS and CAIUS.
Englished from the Greek, by John Warren, Fellow of St. Catharine's-Hall in
Cambridge.
HAving dispatched the foregoing History, we shall proceed to take a view of a
pair of Romans, not less remarkable for their Misfortunes than the former; and
compare with the Lives of Agis and Cleomenes, these of Tiberius and Caius. They
were the Sons of Tiberius Gracchus, who though he had been once Censor,

TIBERIUS and CAIUS GRACCHUS
depiction of Tiberius and Caius Gracchus MBurgher: sculp.


twice Consul, and twice had triumphed, yet was more renowned and esteemed for
his Virtue than his Honors. Upon this account after the Death of that Scipio
who defeated Hannibal, he was thought worthy to match with his Daughter
Cornelia; though there had been no Friendship or Familiarity between Scipio and
him, but rather the contrary. There goes a Report, that he once found in his
Bedchamber a couple of Snakes, and that the Southsayers being consulted
concerning the Prodigy, advised, That he should neither kill'em both, nor let
'em both escape; saying, That if the male Serpent was killed, Tiberius should
die; and if the Female, Cornelia: And that therefore Tiberius, who extremely
loved his Wife, and thought besides that it was much more becoming him, who was
an old Man, to die, than her, who as yet was but a young Woman; killed the male
Serpent, and let the Female escape: And soon after himself died, leaving behind
him 12 Children born to him by Cornelia.

Cornelia taking upon her self all the Care of her Family, and Education of her
Children, approved her self so modest a Matron, so indulgent a Mother, and so
constant and noble spirited a Widow, that Tiberius seemed to all Men to have
done nothing unreasonable, in choosing to die for so great a Woman; who, when
King Ptolomy himself would have married her, and proffered her his Crown,
refused it, and choose rather to live a Widow. In this state she continued, and
lost all her Children except one Daughter, that was married to Scipio the
younger; and two Sons, Tiberius and Caius, whose Lives we are now writing.

These she brought up with so great Care, that though they were without dispute
of the noblest Family, and had the best natural Parts among the Romans, yet
they seemed to owe their eminent Virtues, more to their Education than their
Birth. Now as in the Statutes and Pictures of Castor and Pollux, though the
Brothers resemble one another, yet there is a difference to be perceived in
their Countenances, between the one, who delighted in the Caestus, and the
other, that was famous for managing the Horse: so though there was a great
Agreement between these two noble Youths, in their common pursuit after
Fortitude and Moderation, after Liberality and Eloquence, and greatness of
Mind; yet in their Actions, and Administrations of public Affairs, a
Disagreement as great manifestly appeared. It will not be amiss before we
proceed, to set down the Difference between them.

Tiberius in the Make of his Countenance An exact Character of Tiberius and
Caius.
and his Looks, in his Gesture and Motion, was gentle and composed; but Caius
earnest and vehement: so that in their public Speeches to the People, the one
modestly used very little Action, nor changed his Place; the other would walk
about in the Rostrum, and in the heat of his Orations, pull his Gown off his
Soldiers, and was the first of all the Romans that used such Gestures: As
Cleon is said to be the first Orator among the Athenians, that pulled off his
Cloack, and smote his Thigh, in his Harangues to the Multitude. Caius his
Oratory was impetuous, and so pathetical, that it raised Horror in the
Auditory; but Tiberius was more mild, and apt to move Pity and Compassion: in
his Words he was pure and natural, yet laborious and accurate; but Caius was
pompous and figurative. So likewise in their way of Living, and at their
Tables, Tiberius was frugal, and no affecter of Variety; but Caius, if indeed
compared with other Men, moderate enough: but in respect of his Brother, too
curious a Lover of Rareties, and profuse; which Drusus objected to him, that he
had bought A Dram is seven pence half penny.
certain Dolphins of Silver, to the value of 1250 Drams, for every pound
weight.

The same difference that appeared in their Speaking, was observable also in
their Tempers: The one was smooth and sedate, the other rough and passionate;
and to that degree, that often in the midst of his Orations, he was so hurried
away by his Passion, even against his own Will, that he fell to give ill
Language; and so strained his Voice, that he could not proceed in the Speech.
For a Remedy to this Excess, he made use of an ingenious Servant of his, one
Licinius, who stood constantly behind him with a (...).
Pitch-pipe, or Instrument to regulate the Voice by; and when ever he perceived
his Master's Tone alter, and grow harsh with Anger, he struck a soft Note with
his Pipe, at the hearing of which, Caius immediately bated of the vehemence of
his Passion and Voice, grew mild, and was easily recalled to Temper. These are
the differences between the two Brothers; but their Valor against their
Enemies, their Justice to their Contrymen, their Care and well management of
their public Affairs, and lastly their Continency against Sensuality and
Pleasures, were equally remarkable and alike in both.

Tiberius was the elder by nine years, which occasioned that their public
Actions were divided, by the difference of the Times, in which those of the
one, and those of the other, were transacted. This was no small hindrance to
their Undertakings; for not coming at the same time to the administration of
Affairs, they could not join their Interests together, which between them both,
had they flourished at once, must needs have been very great, and almost
irresistible. We must therefore give an Account of each of them singly, and
first of the eldest.

Tiberius, tho's as yet but a young Man, Tiberius made Augur.
was so celebrated and esteemed, that he was soon admitted into the College of
the Augurs, and that with Respect had, more to his early Virtue, than his noble
Birth. This Appius Claudius made appear; who, though he had been Consul and
Censor, and was then the chief of the Roman Senate, and excelling in Wisdom
most of his Quality, at a public Feast of the Augurs, addressed himself openly
to Tiberius, and with great expressions of Kindness, offered him his Daughter
He marries Claudia, the Daughter of App-Claudius.
in Marriage; which with much satisfaction embracing, and the Wedding
Agreements being thus speedily concluded, Appius went straight home, and
calling out his Wife to the Gate, with a loud Voice cried out, O Antistia, I
have contracted our Daughter Claudia to a Husband. She being amazed, answered,
but why so suddenly? or what means this have? unless you have provided Tiberius
Gracchus for her Husband. I am not ignorant, that some apply this Story to
Tiberius, the Father of the Gracchi, and Scipio Africanus; but most People
relate it as we have done: And Polybius writes, that after the Death of Scipio
Africanus, the nearest Relations of Cornelia, preferring Tiberius to all other
Competitors, gave her to him in Marriage, not having being engaged or promised
to any one by her Father.

Now this young Tiberius serving in Africa under the Younger Scipio, who had
married his Sister, and conversing under the same Tent with his General, soon
observed and learned his noble Genius, which excited a great emulation of his
Virtues, and stirred him up to the imitation of his Actions, and in a short
time excelled all the young Men of the Army in his Regular Behavior and
Courage; and he at one Siege was the first that mounted the Enemies Wall, as
Fannius says, who writes, that he himself climbed up with him, and was partaker
in that Action. His presence created amongst the Soldiers an extraordinary
Affection, and his departure left a passionate desire of his Return.

After that Expedition, being chosen Paymaster He is chosen Quaestor. (...).
of the Army, it was his fortune to serve in the War against the Numantines,
under the Command of C. Mancinus the Consul, a Person no ways blameable, but
the most unfortunate of all the Roman Generals. Notwithstanding, amidst the
greatest Misfortunes, and in the most unsuccessful Enterprises, not only the
Discretion and Valor of Tiberius, but also (which was still more to be
admired) the great Respect and Veneration which he had from his General, was
most eminently remarkable: insomuch that even in the extremity of Danger, he
never regarded himself, as a principal Officer; for when he was overcome in
several desperate Battles, he would leave the main Body of the Army, and in the
Nightime sally out with the Forces under his particular Command. When the
Numantines perceived this, they immediately possessed themselves of his Camp,
pursuing that part of the Forces which was put to flight; slew all those that
were in the Rear, hedged the whole Army in on every side, and forcing them into
such intricate Places, as that there could be no possibility of an Escape.
Mancinus desparing to make his way through by force, sent a Messenger to desire
a Truce, and cessation of Arms; but they refused to conclude a Treaty with any
one except Tiberius, and required that he should be sent to treat with them.
This they earnestly insisted upon, not only in regard to the young Man's
Courage, (for he had a great Reputation amongst the Soldiers) but likewise in
remembrance of his Father Tiberius, who in his Expedition against the
Spaniards, had utterly destroyed several other Places, but granted a Peace to
the Numantines, which he commanded to be always kept punctually and inviolable.

Upon this Consideration Tiberius was He makes a Peace with the Numantines.
dispatched to the Enemy, whom he persuaded to accept of several Conditions,
and he himself complied with others; and by this means it is evident, that he
saved 20000 of the Roman Citizens, besides Slaves, and those that followed the
Army. However the Numantines seized upon, and destroyed all things that were
left behind in the Camp; amongst these were Tiberius's Books of Accounts,
containing the whole Transactions of his Questor-ship, upon which he set an
extraordinary value: And therefore when the Army was already upon their March,
he returned to Numantia, accompanied with only three or four of his intimate
Friends, and making his Application to the principal Officers of the
Numantines, he earnestly entreated, that they would return him his Books, lest
his Enemies should thereby take an occasion to upbraid him, for not being able
to give an Account of the Moneys received and disbursed by him. The Numantines
joyfully embraced this opportunity of obliging him, and kindly invited him into
the City; as he stood arguing the Case wish them, they approached toward him,
took him by the H^nds, and earnestly begged, that he would never again look
upon them as Enemies, but relying upon their Friendship, be confident for the
future of this their present Sincerity. Tiberius thought it convenient to
believe 'em, because he was desirous to have his Books returned, and was afraid
least he should disoblige them, by showing any manner of Distrust. As soon as
he entered into the City, they in the first place invited him to a public
Entertainment, and were very earnest that he would accept of it: Afterward
they returned his Books, and gave him the liberty to take whatever he saw most
acceptable of the remaining Spoils. He on the other hand would accept of
nothing but some Frankincense, which he used in his public Sacrifices; and
after he had kindly embraced them, and made his Complements, departed.

When he returned to Rome, he found the whole Transaction censured and
reproached, as a Business that was base and scandalous to the Romans; but the
Relations and Friends of the Soldiers, which were the greatest part of the
Populace, came flocking to Tiberius, whom they acknowledged the Preserver of so
many Citizens, and imputed all the Miscarriages which had happened, to the
General. They who were dissatisfied with the Proceedings, proposed The Peace
Broken.
the example of their Ancestors to be followed; for after the hasty Peace,
which had been concluded with the Samnites, upon conditions that the Romans
should march home without molestation, they stripped all such as had been any
way concerned in making that Peace, as well the Treasurers and Tribunes, as the
leading Officers; and in that manner delivered 'em up into the Enemies hands,
laying the Crimes of Perjury, and breach of that Peace, at their Doors. But in
this Affair, the Populace showing an extraordinary Kindness and Affection for
Tiberius, they indeed voted that the Consul should be stripped, and put in
Irons, and so delivered to the Numantines; but they granted a general Pardon to
all the others, out of Respect only to Tiberius. It may be probable also, that
Scipio, who at that time was a leading Man among the Romans, lent him his
Assistance; though he was nevertheless censured for not protecting Mancinus too;
and that he did not ratify the Articles of Peace, which had been agreed upon
by his Kinsman and Friend Tiberius. But it is evident, that the greatest part of
these Differences did arise from the Ambition of some designing Politicians,
who had a Kindness for Tiberius. However this (...).
Disorder never came to a malignant and incurable Disease; and truly I cannot
be persuaded, that Tiberius would ever have taken those Courses which he did,
if Scipio Africanus had had any hand in the management of his Affairs: for at
the time when he was engaged in the War against Numantia, Tiberius then
ventured to make Proposals of new Laws, for the better regulation of the
Government, upon the following occasion.

The Romans had by Conquest gained some Lands, adjoining to the Suburbs, part
whereof they sold publicly, and turned the remainder into Common; this Common
they assigned to such of the Citizens as were poor and indigent, for which they
were to pay only a small acknowledgment into the public Treasury: but when the
wealthy Men began to raise the Rents, and turn the poor People out of their
Possessions, it was enacted by Law, that no Person whatever should enjoy more
than 500 Acres of Ground. This Act did for some time restrain the Avarice of
the richer, and was no small supply to the poorer People, who possessed their
respective Proportions of Ground, as they had been formerly rented by them:
afterward the rich Men of the Neighborhood contrived to get these Lands again
into their Possessions, under other peoples Names, and at last would not stick
to claim most of 'em publicly in their own. The Poor, who were thus deprived
of their Farms, would neither list themselves in the Militia, nor take any care
of the Education of their Children: in so much that in a short time there were
few Freemen remaining in all Italy, which swarmed with a numerous company of
barbarous Slaves: these the rich Men employed about the cultivating their
Ground, for want of Citizens. C. Loelius, an intimate Acquaintance of Scipio's,
undertook to rectify this Abuse; but meeting with Opposition from Men of
Authority, and fearing lest a Riot should thereupon be committed, he soon
desisted; upon which account he was called, Loelius the Wise.

Tiberius being elected Tribune of the People, Plutarch styles him, (...),
having no other way to express the Latin word. Sapiens. He is chosen Tribune.
prosecuted that Design with all deligence, at the Instigation (as it is
commonly reported) of Diophanes the Orator, and Blossius the Philosopher.
Diophanes was one that had been banished from Mytilene; the other was an
Italian, of the City of Cuma, who was educated there by Antipater of Tarsus,
that afterward did him the Honor to dedicate his Philosophical Lectures to
him. Some are apt to think, Cornelia, the Mother of Tiberius, contributed
toward it, because she frequently upbraided her Sons, upon this account, that
the Romans as yet rather called her the Daughter of Scipio, than the Mother of
the Gracchi; but 'twas thought Sp. Posthumous was the chief occasion of this.
He was Contemporary with Tiberius, and very ambitious to gain the Reputation of
being the better Orator; whom, when Tiberius at his return from the Campaign,
found to be in very great Esteem and Authority, he was desirous to outdo him,
by attempting a popular Enterprise of this Difficulty, and of such great
consequence. But his Brother Caius left it us in Writing, that when Tiberius
went through Tuscany into Numantia, and found the Countries almost depopulated,
there being hardly any Husbandmen or Shepherds, and for the most part only
barbarous foreign Slaves; he from that time took into his serious
Consideration, the management of this Affair, which in the sequel proved so
fatal to his Family: though it is most certain, that the People themselves
chiefly excited him to be active and vigorous in the prosecution of this, by
their fixing public Libels upon the Porches, Walls and Monuments, humbly
beseeching him, that he would reestablish them in their former Possessions.

However he did not make this Law, without The Law concerning the division of
Lands.
the Advice and Assistance of those Citizens, that were then most eminent for
their Virtue and Authority; amongst whom was Crassus the High Priest, Mutius
Scoevola the Lawyer, (who at that time was Consul) and Claudius Apius his
Fatherin-Law. Never did any Law appear more moderate and gentle, especially
being enacted against so great an Oppression and Avarice: for they who ought to
have been severely punished for trangressing the former Laws, and should at
least have lost all their Titles to such Lands, which they had unjustly
usurped; yet they were ordered notwithstanding to receive a Gratuity, for
quitting their unlawful Claims, and restoring their Lands to those right
Owners, who stood in need thereof. But though this Reformation was managed with
so much Tenderness, and all the former Transactions smothered, the People were
never the less careful to prevent all Abuses of the like nature for the
future. On the other hand, the moneyed Men, and those of great Estates, were
exasperated, through Covetousness, against the Law it self, and against the
Lawgiver, through Anger and Obstinacy; they therefore endeavored to seduce
the People, insinuating to them, that Tiberius had introduced such a division
of the Lands, with a design only to disturb the Government, and put all things
into a Confusion.

But they succeeded not in his Project; for Tiberius being a Person always
resolute in the maintaining of an honorable and just Cause, and one whose
Eloquence was sufficient to have made a less creditable Action appear
plausible, was earnest, and not easily to be controuled. Upon this account,
being placed in the Rostrum, he made a Speech on the behalf of the poor People,
to this effect. The savage Beasts, says he, in Italy Tiberius's Speech.
have their particular Dens; they have their Places of Repose and refuge: but
the Men who bore Arms, and exposed their Lives for the safety of their Country,
enjoyed in the mean time nothing more in it but the fresh Air and Sunshine;
and having no Houses or Settlements of their own, were constrained to wander
from Place to Place with their Wives and Children. He told 'em, That the
Commanders were guilty of a ridiculous Error, when at the Head of their Armies,
they exhorted the common Soldiers to fight for their Temples and Altars; when
not any amongst so many Romans, is possessed of either Altar or Monument,
neither have they any Houses of their own, or Seats of their Ancestors to
defend: they fought indeed, and were slain, but it was to maintain the Luxury
and the Wealth of other Men: they likewise were styled also the Lords of the
Universe, but in the mean time had not one foot of Ground, which they could
call their own. An Harangue of this nature, spoken to an Enthusiastical and
tumultuous Rabble, by a Person of extraordinary Prudence and great Zeal; none
of his Adversaries at that time presumed to make any Opposition thereunto.
Forbearing therefore all manner of Disputes, they turned themselves toward
Marcus Octavius, his fellow- Tribune, who being a young Man, of a sober
Conversation, modest in his Behavior, and an intimate Friend of Tiberius's,
did upon that account decline at first the opposing of him; but at length,
over-perswaded M* Octavius opp^ses this Law.
with the repeated Importunities of some considerable persons, he was prevailed
upon to answer Tiberius; and he insisted chiefly upon the Abrogation of the
Law; it being a Custom, that the Tribunes have a power to hinder any Law from
passing and that the Commonalty can enact nothing, if only one of them dissents
from it. Tiberius being enraged at these Proceedings abolished presently this
mild Law; but at the same time preferred another; which as it was more grateful
to the Common People, so it was much more severe against Extortioners;
commanding them, To make an immediate Surrender all such Lands, which they,
contrary to former Laws, had got into their Possessions. From hence it was,
that there arose daily Contentions between him and Octavius in their Orations;
however, though they expressed themselves with much heat and earnestness, they
yet were never known to use any scurrillous Language, or in their Passion to
let slip any indecent Expression, so as to derogate from one another. From
whence it is observable, how much a good Temper, and an Ingenuous Education does
influence and compose men's Minds; not only in their Meetings for Pleasure and
Diversion, but likewise in their Contentions, and in their very emulation for
Preferments.

When Tiberius considered, that Octavius himself had offended against this Law,
and detained a great quantity of Ground from the Commonalty, he desired that
all manner of Disputes might be laid aside; and generously proffered for the
Public Good, though he himself had but an indifferent Estate to purchase
Octavius's share, at his proper Cost and Charges: But upon the refusal of this
proffer by Octavius, he then published an Edict, prohibiting all Magistrates to
exercise their respective Functions, till such time as the Law was either
ratified or rejected by Public Votes. He further Sealed up the Gates of
Saturn's Temple, in which the Public Treasury was kept, so that the Treasurers
could neither take any thing out from thence, or put any thing in. He
threatened to impose a severe fine upon such as should presume to disobey his
Commands, insomuch that all the Officers for fear of this Penalty, omitted the
exercise of their several Jurisdictions. Upon this account, the Gentlemen of
Estates put themselves into Mourning, went up and down Melancholy and Dejected;
thy entered into a Conspiracy against Tiberius, and procured Ruffians to murder
him; insomuch that he never went abroad without such a Tuck or Rapier as
Robbers use, which the Latins call Dolon.

When the day appointed was come, and the People Summoned to give their Votes,
the Rich Men seized upon the BallottingBoxes: And carried them away by force,
all things being Transacted in great Confusion. For when Tiberius's Party
appeared strong enough to oppose the contrary Faction, and were drawn together
in a Body. with Resolutions to do so; Manlius and Fulvius, two of the Consular
Quality, threw themselves at Tiberius's Feet, took him by the Hand, and with
Tears in their Eyes, humbly begged of him to desist. Tiberius considering the
inconveniences that were likely to arise, and having a great Respect for two
such Eminent Persons, demanded of them what they would advise him to do. They
acknowledged themselves Persons altogether unfit to advise in a Matter of so
great Importance, but earnestly entreated him to leave it to the Determination
of the Senate. When the Senate was Assembled, and yet could not bring the
Business to a Period, by reason of the prevalency of the Rich Faction, he then
betook himself to illegal and unjust Methods, endeavoring to deprive Octavius
of his Tribune ship; it being impossible for him without that, to get the Law
ratified and confirmed. At first he caressed him with most Obliging Language,
and taking him by his Hands, beseech'd him, that now in the presence of all the
People, he would take this Opportunity to Oblige them, in granting only that
Request which was in it self so Just and Reasonable, being but a small
Recompense in regard of those many Dangers and Hardships which they had
undergone for the Public Safety. Octavius would by no means be persuaded to a
Compliance; whereupon Tiberius declared openly, that seeing they two were
jointly concerned in the same Office, and of equal Authority, it would be a
difficult matter to compose this Difference without a Civil War; and that the
only Remedy which he knew, must of Necessity be the Deposing one of them from
their Office. He desired therefore that Octavius would Summon the People to
pass their Verdict upon him first, averring that he would willingly relinquish
his Authority if the honest Citizens would consent to it. But Octavius still
continued refractary* wherefore Tiberius told him plainly, That the People
should have liberty to vote against him, if upon mature Deliberation he did not
suddenly alter his Mind, and after this Declaration Adjourned the Assembly till
the next day. When the People were met together again, Tiberius placed himself
in the Rostrum, and endeavored a second time to persuade Octavius: But all
being to no purpose, he referred the whole matter to the People, Ordering them
to Vote whether Octavius should be Deposed or not; and when seventeen of the
Thirty five Tribes had already Voted against him, and there wanted only the
Votes of one Tribe more for his final deprivation, a short stop being here put
to the proceedings, Tiberius vouchsafed to renew his Importunities, embraced
and kissed him before all the Congregation, begging with all the earnestness
imaginable, that he would neither suffer himself to be exposed to such Infamy,
nor him to be reputed the Author and Promoter of such an odious Project.
Octavius (they say) seemed a little softened and moved with their Importunities,
and and with his Eyes full of Tears continued silent for a considerable time:
But afterward looking toward the Estates who were gathered together in a
Body, partly for shame, and partly for fear of incurring their Displeasure, he
generously bid Tiberius do what he pleased. The Law for his Deprivation being
thus Voted Tiberius Ordered one of his Servants, whom he had made a Freeman,
Octavius Deposed.
to pull Octavius out of the Rostrum, for he employed his own Domestic
Servants in the stead of Sergeants.

And this was a further addition to the Punishment, that Octavius was dragged
out in such an Ignominious manner. The People immediately assaulted him with
great violence, whilst the Rich Men ran in to his Assistance. Octavius
presently fled, and without any Attendant escaped the Fury of the Rabble,
tho'it happened that a trusty Servant of his, who had placed himself by his
Master, that he might assist him toward his escape, in keeping off the
Multitude, had his Eyes struck out, contrary to the intention of Tiberius, who
ran with all have (when he perceived the Disturbance) to appease the Rioters.

This being done, the Law concerning This Law was again Ratified.
the lands was Ratified, and Confirmed, and three Commissioners were appointed
to make a Survey of the grounds and see the same equally divided: The
Commissioners were Tiberius himself, Claudius Appius his Father-in-Law, and his
Brother C. Gracchus, who at this time was not at Rome, but in the Army under
the Command of Scipio Africanus, before Numantia. These things were transacted
by Tiberius peaceably, none daring to stand in Opposition to him; and besides
all this, he choose by his own Interest and Authority another Tribune, not as
formerly out of the Eminent Nobility, but Mutius, one of his own Domestic
Servants. Upon the account of these proceedings, the Rich were extremely
offended, and still dreaded, lest he should grow more Popular; they therefore
took all Opportunities of Affronting him publicly in the Senate House; for
when he desired, as was usual, to have a tent provided at the Public Charge
for his use, when he should begin his Expedition to divide the Lands, though it
was a favor commonly granted to Persons employed in business of much less
importance, yet was peremptorily refused An Obolus is a Penny Farthing.
to him; and they would allow him only nine Oboli to defray each days Expenses.

P. Narsica was the chief promoter of these Affronts, and was not afraid to own
how much he hated him* upon the account of his having formerly a very great
Estate in those Public Lands, and did not a little resent it, to be turned out
now by force. The People on the other hand were still more and more enraged,
insomuch that a little after this, it happened that one of Tiberius's Friends
dyed suddenly, and his Body being full of Malignant spots, the People therefore
ran in a Tumultuous manner to his Funeral, crying aloud that the Man was
Poisoned: They took the Coffin upon their shoulders, and carried the Corpse to
the Funeral Pile, really believing that the plain Symptoms of Poison were
easily discernable, for the Body swelled to a great bigness, and such a
quantity of Corrupt Humors issued out, that the Funeral-fire was extinguished
thereby; and when it was again kindled, the Wood still would not burn, insomuch
that they were constrained to carry the Corpse to another place, where, with
much difficulty, it took fire. Besides this, Tiberius, that he might incense
the People yet more, put himself into Mourning, brought his Children amongst
the Crowd, entreated the People to provide for them and their Mother, as if he
himself did now despair of his own Security. About this time King Attalas,
Surnamed Philopater, dyed, and Eudemus, a Pergamenian, brought his Last Will to
Rome, whereby he had made the Roman People his Heirs.

Tiberius, to ingratiate himself still more Tiberius disposes of King Attalas's
Legacy to the Common People.
with the Commonalty, immediately proposed making of a Law, that all the ready
Money which Attalas left, should be distributed amongst such poor Citizens as
were to be sharers of the Public Lands, for the better enabling of them to
proceed in the management and cultivating of their Ground; and as for the
Cities that were in the Territories of Attalas, he declared that the disposal
of them did not at all belong to the Senate, but the People, and that he
himself would ask their Pleasure herein; by this he exasperated the Senate more
than ever he had done before, and therefore Pompeius stood up instantly, and
acquainted the Senate that he was the next Neighbor to Tiberius, and so had
the Opportunity of knowing, That Eudemus the Pergamenian had presented Tiberius
with a Royal Crown and a Purple Robe, thereby intimating that Tiberius should
ere long be King of Rome.

Quintus Metellus also upbraided Tiberius, that when his Father was Censor, the
Romans never returned home from their Country Houses after Supper, but they
put* out their Torches, least they should be seen to have indulged themselves
in Banqueting at unseasonable hours. But instead of this decent Custom, his
common Practice was, to walk the Streets at Midnight, whilst mean and insolent
Fellows flocked to him, and made up his Retinue.

Titus Annius, a Man of no great repute either for his Honesty or Learning, but
a cunning Sophister in proposing cramp Questions and returning Answers, offered
to prove by undeniable Arguments that Tiberius had done unworthily in Deposing
a Roman Magistrate, whom the Laws ever esteemed Sacred and Inviolable. The
People immediately grew Tumultuous, and Tiberius Summoning a General Assembly,
commanded Annius to appear and maintain that which he had asserted: But Annius
being neither a good Logician, nor pretending much to Oratory, rather betook
himself to his old way of asking some cunning sort of Questions, and desired
that he would propose one or two to Tiberius, before he entered upon the Chief
Argument. This Liberty being granted, and silence Proclaimed, Annius proposed
this Question. If you, says he, had a Design to Vilify and Defame me, and I
should apply my self to any other Magistrate for redress, and he should come
readily to my assistance, would you for that reason fall into an extravagant
Passion, and put him out of Commission? Tiberius, they say, being much
surprised at this Question, was wholly silent, though at other times his
assurance as well as his Eloquence was always remarkable; yet now upon this
account he thought it convenient to dismiss the Assembly.

Afterward beginning to understand that his Behavior toward Octavius did
disgust the Populace as well as the Nobility (because the Dignity of the
Tribunes seemed to be violated, which had always continued till that day very
Sacred and Honorable) he made a Speech to the People in Justification of
himself, out of which it may not be improper to Collect some particulars, that
we may thereby discern what impression such Eloquence was able to make upon an
Auditory. A Tribune, says he, of the People Tiberius's Speech.
is Sacred indeed, and ought to be inviolable, because in a manner Consecrated
to be the Guardian and Protector of them; but if he degenerates so far as to
Oppress the People, to retrench their Privileges, and take away all their
Liberty of Voting, he then deprives himself of that Honorable Station by the
neglect of his Duty, for which the Honor was bestowed upon him; otherwise a
Tribune might not think himself obnoxious, though he should demolish the Capitol,
or burn the Naval Magazines.

Certainly when he that is only guilty of such Extravagances as these, cannot be
looked upon as a good Tribune; much less can he be so, that dares presume to
diminish the Privileges of the People, because he ceases from that time to be
the Peoples Tribune. Is it not very unreasonable, that a Tribune should have
Power to Imprison a Consul, if the People must have no Authority to Degrade him
when he uses that Honor which he received from them, to their detriment: For
the Tribunes, as well as the Consuls, are Elected to that Dignity by the
Peoples Votes. (But to proceed) the Kingly Government, which comprehends all
sorts of Authority in it self alone, is confirmed with the greatest and most
religious Solemnity imaginable, as being a Government which does most resemble
that of Heaven. But the Citizens notwithstanding this, deposed King Tarquin*
because of his tyrannical Oppressions, and for the Injustice of one single Man,
the ancient Government under which Rome was built, was abolished for ever. What
is there in all Rome so sacred and venerable, as the Vestal Virgins, to whose
care alone the preservation of the Eternal Fire is committed; yet if their
Charity be violated, and their Reputation stained, they are buried alive: for
when they presume to commit any Offense against their Gods, they instantly lose
that Veneration, which they claimed as Attendants in their Service; so likewise
a Tribune should no longer be respected by the People as a sacred Person, when
he offends against that Authority from whence he derived his own.

We always esteem that Person legally chosen Tribune, who is elected only by
the majority of Votes; and is not therefore the same Person much more lawfully
degraded, when by a general consent of them all, they agree to depose him.
Nothing is so sacred as religious Offerings; yet the People were never
prohibited to make use of them, but suffered to remove and carry them
wherever they pleased: they likewise, whenever it has been thought
convenient, have transferred the Tribuneship as a sacred Present, from one
Person to another; and if this had been an unusual thing, yet that Authority
could not have been thought unalterable, because several Magistrates have often
voluntarily surrendered their Commissions, or desired to be discharged.

Those were the principal Heads of Tiberius's Apology; but his Friends
apprehending the Dangers which seemed to threaten him, and those Conspiracies
that were secretly contrived against him, were of opinion, that the safest way
would be for him to petition, that he might be continued Tribune for the year
ensuing. Upon this Consideration he again endeavored to oblige the People with
other Laws, making the years of serving in the War fewer than formerly, in
granting the liberty of Appeals from the Judges to the People, and joining to
the Senators that were Judges at that time, an equal number of ordinary
Gentlemen, endeavoring as much as in him lay to lessen the Power of the
Senate; which proceeded rather from Passion and Prejudice, than from any
rational regard to Equity and the public Good. When it came to be debated,
whether these Laws should be ratified, he was presently sensible, that his
Adversaries had the most Votes, (the People as yet being not got together in a
full Body) and in such Cases, 'twas his Custom to raise some disputes with his
fellow-Officers, out of design only to gain longer time; but failing in that
Project too, he at length adjourned the Assembly till the day following.

Tiberius then went down into the Market place amongst the People, and made his
first Addresses to them in an humble posture with Tears in his Eyes; and
afterward told them, he had just reason to suspect, that his Adversaries would
attempt in the Nightime to break open his House, and murder him. This worked
so strongly with the Multitude, that several of them erected Tents round about
his House, and kept Guard all night for the security of his Person. By break of
day came one of the Several ill Omens happened to him.
Southsayers, who prognosticate good or bad Success by the pecking of Fowls,
and threw them something to eat: the Southsayer used his utmost Endeavors to
fright the Fowls out of their Coop; but none of them except one would venture
out, which fluttered with its left Wing, and stretched out its Leg, and run
back again into the Coop, without eating any thing. This put Tiberius in mind
of another ill Omen, which had formerly happened to him: he had a very costly
Headpiece, which he made use of when he engaged in any Battle, and into this
piece of Armor two Serpents crawled, laid Eggs, and brought forth young ones;
the remembrance of which, made Tiberius more concerned at this, than otherwise
he would have been. However he went toward the Capitol, as soon as ever he
understood that the People were assembled there; but before he got out of the
House, he stumbled upon the Thresh-hold with such violence, that he broke the
Nail of his great Toe, insomuch that Blood gushed out of his Shoe. He was not
gone very far, before he saw two Ravens fighting on the top of a House, which
stood on his left hand as he passed along; and though he was surrounded with an
infinite number of People, a Stone happened to fall just at his Foot, beaten
down (as it is probable) by the Ravens: which Accident put a stop to those that
were the boldest Men about him. But Blossius of Cuma, who happened to be then
present, told him, That it would be a shameful thing for Tiberius, who was the
Son of Gracchus, the Nephew of Scipio Africanus, and the Protector of the Roman
People, to refuse (for fear of a silly Bird) to promote the Interest of his
Countrymen, who might reasonably expect it from him; and that his Adversaries
would not only represent this, as the effect of a mean Spirit, but the trick of
a Tyrant, who had no other intension than to abuse the generous Kindness of the
common People. At the same time several Messengers came also from Tiberius's
Friends, to desire his presence at the Capitol, and to acquaint him, that all
things went there according to expectation. Indeed Tiberius's first entrance
there was very pompous, and he was honorably received; for as soon as ever he
appeared, his Friends welcomed him with loud Acclamations into the Capitol: and
when he had taken his Place, they repeated their expressions of Joy, and took
care that no Person whatever should come near him, unless those who were his
intimate Friends. Mutius then began to put the Business again to the Vote; but
nothing was performed with the usual Decency and Order, by reason of the
Disturbance which the Rabble made, by their pressing forwards to get into the
Capitol.

Whilst these things were carried on in this Confusion, Flavius Flaccus, a
Senator, standing in a Place higher than ordinary, but at such a distance from
Tiberius, that when he could not make him hear, by reason of the tumultuous
noise, signified to him by certain motions of his Hand, that he had a desire to
impart something of Consequence to him in private. Tiberius ordered the
Multitude to make way for him, by which means (though not without some
difficulty) Flavius got to him, and informed him, that the Senators, seeing
they could not prevail upon the Consul to espouse their Quarrel, had at length
come to this final Determination amongst themselves, that he should be
assassinated; and to that purpose had a great number of their Friends and
Servants prepared to accomplish it. Tiberius no sooner communicated this
Confederacy to those about him, but they immediately tucked up their long
Gowns, broke the Halberts which the Sergeants used to keep the Crowd off, into
pieces, and with those resolved to oppose all violent Assaultants. They who
stood at a distance wondered, and demanded what the occasion of that Disorder
should be; Tiberius knowing that they could not hear him at that distance,
lifted his Hand to his Head, thereby intimating the great Danger which he
apprehended himself to be in: his Adversaries taking notice of that Action, ran
presently to the Senate house, and declared, that Tiberius desired the People
to bestow a Crown upon him, and that he might be King of Rome. This being very
surprising, Nasica presently demanded of the Consul, that he would punish this
Tyrant, and defend the Government, as by Law established. The Consul mildly
replied, That he would not be Guilty of an unjust action; and as he would not
suffer any Freeman to be put to death, before Sentence had lawfully passed
upon him, so neither would he protect Tiberius, if by his Insinuation the
People should act any thing contrary to Law. But Nasica rising from his Seat in
a great passion, Since the Consul, says he, regards not the Safety of the
Commonwealth, let every one who will defend the Dignity and Authority of their
Laws, follow me. He then casting the skirt of his Gown over his Shoulder,
hastened to the Capitol; they who bore him company, wrapped their Gowns also
about their Arms, and forced their way after him: but upon the account that
they were Persons of the greatest Authority in the City, the common People
durst not obstruct their going thither, but were rather so careful in avoiding
'em, that they tumbled over one another in haste. Some had furnished themselves
with Clubs; others got up the feet of Stools and Chairs, which were broken by
the hasty flight of the common People. Thus armed, they made toward Tiberius,
knocking down all those whom they happened to meet with; so that the People
were soon wholly dispersed, and many slain, as they endervour'd to make their
escape.

Tiberius seeing these things, thought it his best way to save himself by
flight: as he was running, he chanced to be stopped by one who caught him hold
by the Grown; but he presently getting clear of that, fled in his
under-Garments only. In this hasty flight it happened, that falling over those
who before had been knocked down, as he was endeavoring to recover himself,
one Publius Satureius, a Tribune, was observed to give him the first fatal
stroke, by hitting Tiberius slain.
him upon the Head with the foot of a Stool: the next Man who struck him, was
Lucius Rufus, who afterward boasted of it, as an honorable Exploit. In this
Tumult there were above 300 Men slain, with Clubs and Staves only, there being
no Warlike Instruments made use of. This was the first Insurrection amongst the
Romans, that ended with the effusion of Blood, since the abrogation of Kingly
Government; for all former Seditions, which were neither small, nor about
trivial Matters, were always amicably composed, the two Parties constantly
submitting to one another, either the Senate for fear of the Commons, or the
Commons out of respect to the Senate. And it is probable indeed that Tiberius
himself might then have been easily brought to submission, if he had not been
proceeded against in such a rigorous manner; for he had not at that time above
3000 Men of his Party: but it is evident, that this Conspiracy was fomented
against him, more out of an aversion and malice which the rich Men had to his
Person, than for the Reasons which they commonly pretended against him: in
testimony whereof, we may allege the Cruelty and unnatural Insultings which
they used to his dead Body; for they would not suffer his own Brother though he
earnestly begged the favor, to bury his Corpse in the Night, but threw it
together with other Carkases into the River. Neither did their Cruelty stop
here; for they banished some of his Friends without legal Process, and slew as
many of the others as they could lay their hands on: amongst whom Diophanes the
Orator was slain; they murdered one Caius Billius, by shutting him up close in
a large Tun with Vipers and Serpents: Blossius of Cuma indeed was carried
before the Consuls, and examined touching what had happened; who freely
confessed, That he had never failed to execute what ever Tiberius commanded
him: What, replied Nasica, then if Tiberius had commanded that you should burn
the Capitol, would you have burnt it? His First Answer was, That Tiberius never
commanded any such thing: but being pressed with the same Question by several
others, he declared, That if Tiberius had commanded it, he would not have
thought it an inglorious action to have done it; for he never commanded any
thing but what he thought for the Peoples Advantage. Blossius at this time was
pardoned, and afterward fled to Aristonicus in Asia, whose Fortune being then
reduced to a desperate condition, he killed himself. However the Senate to
mollify the People after these Transactions, did not oppose the division of
the public Lands, and permitted them to choose another Commissioner for that
Business in the room of Tiberius: so they elected Publius Crassus, who was
Gracchus's near Kinsman, because his Daughter Licinia was married to Caius
Gracchus; although Cornelius Nepos says, that she was not the Crassus's Daughter,
whom Caius married, but Brutus's, that triumphed for his Conquests in Portugal:
but most Historians are of the same opinion with us. Afterward the People were
much concerned for the loss of Tiberius; and it was apparent, that they wanted
nothing but a convenient opportunity to be revenged, and already threatened to
bring Nasica to his Trial. The Senate fearing lest some Mischief should befall
Nasica, sent him Ambassador into Asia, though there was no other occasion for his
going thither. The common people did not conceal their Indignation even in the
open Streets, but railed at him, whenever they met him abroad, calling him a
Murderer and a Tyrant, one who had polluted even the Temple it self, with the
blood of a Tribune. Upon this Consideration Nasica left Italy, although he was
obliged, being the Chief-Priest, to officiate in all Principal Sacrifices: thus
wandering full of Discontent and Affliction from one Place to another, he died
in a short time after not far from Pergamus. It is no wonder that the People
had such an aversion to Nasica, when even Scipio Africanus, who, though
deservedly beloved by the Romans, was in danger of quite losing the good
opinion which the people had of him, only for repeating when the News of
Tiberius's Death was first brought to Numantia, this Verse out of Homer:

(...). So may he perish, who such Crimes commits.

And afterward being asked by Caius and Fulvius, in a great Assembly, what he
thought of Tiberius's Death; he answered, That he did not at all approve
Tiberius's way of Proceeding. Upon which account the People would begin to
interrupt him with their Hissings, in the middle of his Orations, which they
never presumed to do before that time; and he on the other hand was so incensed
at it, that upon this account he reflected very smartly upon the People. This
is a full Account of the most material Passages in the Life of Tiberius.

THE LIFE OF CAIUS.
Caius Gracchus at first, either for fear of his Brother's Enemies, or
designing to render them more odious to the People, absented himself from their
public Assemblies, and quietly retired to his own House, as if he was a
Person, to whom such private Circumstances were not only very agreeable at
present, but that he was content also to pass the remainder of his Life,
without affecting any public Action; which made some imagine, that he abhorred
and detested the Transactions of Tiberius: however he was now but very young,
being not so old as his Brother by nine years, who was scarce thirty, when he
was slain.

It was not long before he plainly discovered Gracchus his Character.
his Temper, having a natural antipathy to a lazy Retirement and Effeminacy;
nor in the least inclined to any sort of Luxury or Covetousness, but wholly
addicted himself to the study of Eloquence, as Wings whereby he might easily
aspire to public Business and Government; and it was very apparent, that he
did not intend to pass his days in obscurity. When Bettius, a Friend of his,
was impeached of high Misdemeanors, and he undertaking publicly to defend his
Cause, the People were in an Ecstasy, and transported with Joy, to find him at
the Bar, and Master of such Eloquence, that the other Orators seemed to talk
like Children in comparison to him. This created new Jealousies and Fears
amongst those in Authority, and their great design was, how to hinder Caius
from being made Tribune.

But soon after it happened, that he was He is chosen Quaestor.
elected Quoestor, and obliged to attend Orestes the Consul into Sardinia.
This, as it pleased his Enemies, so it was not ungrateful to him; for ^eing
naturally a stout Man, his Fame was equally remarkable in the Camp, as at the
Bar. And besides as yet he very much dreaded meddling with State Affairs, and
appearing publicly in the Rostr^^, which (because of the Importunity of
Friends) he could no otherwise avoid, than by taking this Voyage, therefore
readily embraced the opportunity of absenting himself. Notwithstanding which,
many are of opinion, that he was an humble flatterer of the common People, and
more ambitious than ever Tiberius had been, of popular Applause; but it is
certain that he was forced upon, not that he courted public Business. And
Tully relates this of him, That when he declined all those Concerns, and would
have lived privately, his Brother appeared to His Dream.
him in a Dream, and calling him by his Name, said, To what purpose, Caius, are
all these delays; there is no possibility of avoiding that Fate, which is
destined for us two, both to live and die alike, in vindication of the Peoples
Right.

Caius was no sooner arrived in Sardinia, but he gave exemplary Proofs of his
true Valor; for he not only excelled all the young Men of his Age in his early
Actions in doing justice to his Inferiors, and in showing all Obedience and
Respect to his superior Officer, but likewise in Discretion, Frugality and
Industry, he surpassed even those who were much elder than himself.

It happened to be a sharp and sickly Winter in Sardinia, insomuch that the
General was forced to lay an Imposition upon several Towns, to supply the
Souldiers' with necessary Cloths: the Cities sent an Express to Rome with a
Petition, to be excused from that Burden; the Senate found their Request
reasonable, and ordered the General to find some other way of new clothing the
Army. While he was long contriving what course to take in this Affair, the
Soldiers were reduced to great Extremities; but Caius went from one City to
another, and by laying before them the reasonableness of that Demand, he so far
prevailed with them, that of their own accord they clothed the Roman Army.
These Transactions being carried to Rome, and seeming to be only the
forerunners of popular Ambition, raised new Jealousies amongst the Senators:
and besides this, there came Ambassadors out of Africa from King Micipsa, to
acquaint the Senate, that their Master out of Respect to Caius Gracchus, had
sent a considerable quantity of Corn to the General in Sardinia; at which the
Senators were so much offended, that they turned the Ambassadors out of the
Senate House, and made an Order, that the common Soldiers should be relieved,
by sending others in their room; but that Orestes should continue upon the
Place, and Caius also, upon the account of his being Treasurer. But he soon
finding how things were carried, fell into a great passion, and immediately
took Shipping for Rome: his Appearance there was so unexpected, that he was
generally censured, not only by his Enemies, but also by the Commons, who
thought it an unreasonable thing, that he being Quoestor should desert the Army
before his Commander. When this Misdemeanor came to be tried before the
Censors, he desired leave to make his Apology; which he did so effectually,
that his Auditors quickly entertained a better opinion of him, believing that
he had been very much injured. He made it then appear, that he had served 12
years in the Army, whereas others are obliged to serve only 10; that he had
continued Questor to the General three years, whereas he might by Law have
returned at the end of one year; that none but he in that Expedition carried
his own Money to the Army, whereas others first took care to drink off the
Vessels of Wine which they carried with them, and then to have them better
filled with the Riches and Spoil of the Country. After this, they brought
other Accusations and Writs against him, for creating Differences among the
Allies, and being engaged in the Conspiracy that was discovered about Fregella;
but he having cleared himself of these things, he not only appeared wholly
innocent of the Crimes laid to his charge, but made what Interest he could to
be elected Tribune; in which though he was generally opposed by all Persons of
Quality, yet there came such infinite numbers of People from all Parts of
Italy, to vote for Caius, that many wanted Lodgings in the City; and the Field
being not large enough to contain the Company, there were several who gave
their Votes from Roofs and Battlements of Houses: however the Nobility did so
influence the People, and cross Caius's Expectations, that he was not returned
the first, (as was expected) but the fourth Tribune. When he came once to the
execution of his Office, it was seen presently who deserved to have been the
first Tribune; for he was a much better Orator than any of his Co-temporaries,
and the Concern which he still retained for the Murder of his Brother, made him
the bolder in speaking. He used on all occasions to remind the People of what
had happened in that Tumult, and laid before them the Examples of their
Ancestors; how they declared War against the Falisci, only for giving
scurrilous Language to one Genutius, a Tribune of the People; and sentenced C.
Vulturius to death, for taking the Wall of a Tribune in the Streets: Whereas,
said he, these Persons did in the presence of you all murder Tiberius with
Clubs, and dragged the slaughtered Body through the middle of the City, to be
cast into the River; even his Friends, as many as could be taken, were put to
death immediately, without any trial, notwithstanding that just and ancient
Custom, which was always observed among our Forefathers; that whenever any one
was accused of a capital Crime, and did not make his personal appearance in
Court, a Trumpet was sent in the Morning to his Lodging, to summon him by sound
of Trumpet to appear: and before this Ceremony was duly performed, the Judges
would never proceed to pass Sentence; so cautious and reserved were our
Ancestors about Business of Life and Death.

Caius having moved the People with such Speeches (for his Voice was loud and
strong) he proposed two Laws: The first was, That who-ever was turned out of
any His Laws.
public Office by the People, he should be thereby rendered incapable of
bearing any Office afterward. The second was, that if any Magistrate shall
condemn a Roman to be banished without a legal Trial, the People shall be
authorized to take cognizance thereof.

One of these Laws did manifestly reflect upon M. Octavius, who at the
Instigation of Tiberius, had been deprived of his Tribuneship; The other
touched Popilius, who in his Praetorship had banished all Tiberius's Friends;
whereupon Popilius being unwilling to stand the hazard of a Trial, fled out of
Italy. As for the former law, it was abrogated by Caius himself, who declared
his readiness to oblige Octavius for the sake of his Mother Cornelia: this was
very acceptable and pleasing to the People, who had a great Veneration for
Cornelia, both in respect to her Father and her Children; and therefore they
afterward erected a Statue of Brass in Honor of her, with this Inscription,
Cornelia, the Mother of the Gracchi. There are several Expressions in writing,
which he used perhaps with two much Affectation and Popularity concerning her,
to one of her Adversaries: How, said he, dare you presume to reflect upon
Cornelia the Mother of Tiberius? And because the Person who made the
Reflections, had been suspected for Sodomy, With what face, said he, can you
compare Cornelia with your self? have you brought forth such Children as she
has done? and yet all Rome knows, that she has refrained from the Conversation
of Men, longer than you your self have done. These and many other such
satirical Expressions may be collected out of his Orations: he afterward
proposed several other Laws, to raise the People's Authority, and to detract
from the Senate's.

The first was concerning the public Other Laws preferred by C. Grach.
Lands, which were to be divided amongst the poor Citizens.

Another was concerning the common Soldiers, that they should be clothed at
the public Charge, without any diminution of their Pay, and that none should
be obliged to serve in the Army who was not full 17 years old.

Another gave an equal Liberty to all the Italians in general, of voting at
Elections, as was granted to the Citizens of Rome.

Another was concerning the price of Bread-corn, which was to be sold at a
lower rate than formerly to the poor People.

Another was concerning Matters of Judicature, whereby the Authority of the
Senate was very much retrenched.

For only Senators were formerly Judges in all causes, by which means their
Authority was very much dreaded by the Roman Knights and the People: but he
joined 300 ordinary Gentlemen with the Senators, who were 300 likewise in
number, and ordained, that a judicial Authority should be equally invested in
the 600. While he was arguing for the ratification of this Law, his Behavior
was observed to be quite different from others: for all other Orators in their
Speeches, used to turn their Faces toward the Senate House, and the Place
called Comitium: but he, on the Contrary, was the first Man that in his
Harangue to the People, turned himself the other way toward them, and after
that time always observed the same posture. Which however insignificant that
Turn might seem, yet it was the cause of no small one in State Affairs; for he
in a manner converted the Government from an Aristocracy to a Democracy,
thereby intimating by that Action, that all Orators in proposing State Affairs,
ought to speak to the People, not the Senate.

As soon as the Commonalty had ratified this Law, and given him power to elect
Cajus's Power.
those whom he approved of, to be Judges, he was invested with such an absolute
Power, that the Senate submitted to consult with him in Matters of Difficulty;
and he always took care to advise nothing, that might any ways derogate from a
Person of his Quality; As for example, his Resolution about the Bread-corn
which Fabius the Propraetor sent from Spain, was very just and honorable; for
he persuaded the Senate to sell the Corn, and return the Money to the same
Provinces which had furnished them with it; and also that Fabius should be
censured, for having rendered the Roman Government odious and insupportable to
the Provinces abroad. This Proposal got him an extraordinary Respect and Favor
amongst the foreign Provinces; besides all this, he proposed ways for the
repeopling of several ruinous Cities, for reparing the Highways, and for
building public Granaries. Of all which Works he himself undertook the
Management and Superintendency, and was never wanting to give necessary Orders
for the quick dispatch of different and great Undertakings, and that too with
such wonderful Expedition and Diligence, as if they had been only one; insomuch
that all Persons, who either hated or feared him, stood amazed to see how
active and industrious he was in all his Designs. As for the People themselves,
they were strangely transported at the very sight of him, especially whenever
they saw him surrounded with crowds of Laborers, Artificers, Messengers,
Officers, Soldiers, and Scholars. All these he treated with an easy
Familiarity, yet always took care to support his Dignity, even in his greatest
Condescentions, accommodating his Carriage according to the Quality of every
particular Person; by which means he so far prevailed, that his Enemies were
looked upon no better than envious Detracters, whenever they presumed to
represent him either dangerous, rash or guilty of the least ill Nature.

He had that peculiar Art of insinuating himself, and gaining by degrees upon
the Commonalty, that he became rather more Popular by his common Conversation,
than by his public Harangues.

But his greatest Endeavor was to put the Highways into good condition,
always taking care to make them handsome and pleasant, as well as convenient;
for they were drawn by his Directions, through the Fields, exactly in a
straight Line, and paved with hewn Stone, founded upon great quantities of
Sand, brought thither from the Places adjacent for that purpose: when he met
with any Valleys or deep Holes occasioned by great Floods, he either caused
them to be filled up with Rubbish, or Bridges to be built over, so well
levelled, that they being of an equal height on both sides, the whole Work made
a beautiful Prospect. Besides this, he caused the ways to be all divided into
Miles, (each Mile containing The Italian Mile contains 8 Furlongs.
little less than eight Furlongs) and erected Pillars of Stone, to signify the
distance from one Place to another: he likewise placed other Stones at small
distances from one another, on both sides of the way, by means whereof
Travelers might get easily on Horseback without Stirrups. For these Reasons
the People highly extolled him, and were ready upon all occasions to express
their Affection toward him. One day in an Oration to the People he declared,
that he had only one Favor to request; which if granted, as he should think it
the greatest Obligation in the World, so if it were denied, he would never
blame them for the refusal: this Expression made the World believe, that his
ambition was to be Consul, and it was generally expected, that he would be both
Consul and Tribune at the same time. When the day for election of Consuls came,
and all in great Expectation, to see what would be the Event of that days Work,
he appeared in the Field with Caius Fannius, and made all the Interest he could
for him, that he might be chosen Consul. This Interest was so considerably
useful to Fannius, that he was immediately chosen Consul; and Caius likewise
was then elected Tribune the second time, without his own Caius chosen Tribune
the second time.
seeking or petitioning for it, but at the voluntary motion of the People.

When he understood that the Senators were his declared Enemies, and that
Fannius himself was none of the truest Friends, he began again to flatter the
People with other new Laws. He proposed that a Colony of Roman Citizens might
be sent to repeople Tarentum and Capua, and that all the Latins should enjoy
the same Privileges with the Citizens of Rome. But the Senate apprehending that
he would at last grow too powerful and dangerous, took a new and unusual course
to alienate the Peoples Affections from him, by their gratifying them in things
beyond what they could reasonably expect. Livius Drusus was fellow- Tribune,
with Caius, a Person of as good a Family, and as well educated, as any amongst
the Romans, and no ways inferior to those, who for their Eloquence and Riches
were the most famous and most powerful Men of that time. To him therefore the
chief Senators make their Application, exhorting him to fall upon Caius; and
that he would engage himself on their side in opposition to him, not by using
any force, or opposing of the common People, but in gratifying and obliging
them with such unreasonable things, as might otherwise very well deserve to be
detested.

Livius offered to serve the Senate with his Authority in this Business; and in
order thereunto, enacted such Laws as were in reality neither honorable nor
advantageous for the Public; his whole Design being to outdo Caius in
pleasing and cajoling the Populace, (as Comedians do) with obsequious Flattery
and Popularity: whereby the Senate gave plain Testimonies, that they were not
at all displeased with Caius's management of Affairs, but privately designed
either to ruin him utterly, or to lessen at least his Reputation. For when
Caius proposed the re-peopling of only two Colonies abroad, and mentioned the
most considerable Citizens for that purpose, they accused him for abusing the
People; but on the contrary were pleased with Drusus, when he proposed the
sending of twelve Colonies abroad, and each to consist of 3000 Persons, and
those too the most beggarly Rascals that he could find. When Caius divided the
public Fields amongst the poor Citizens, and charged them with a small Rent,
annually to be paid into the Exchequer, they were angry at him, as one who
pretended to gratify the People only for his own Interest; yet afterward they
commended Livius, though he exempted them from paying even that little
Acknowledgment. Besides they were displeased with Caius, for giving the Latins
an equal Power, with the Romans, of voting at the Election of Magistrates; but
when Livius proposed, that it might not be lawful for a Roman Captain to strike
a Latin Soldier, they promoted the passing of that Law: and Livius in all his
Speeches to the Mobile, always told them, That he proposed no Laws but such as
were agreeable to the Senate, who had a particular regard to the Peoples
Advantage. And this truly was the only Action during the time of his
Tribuneship, which proved advantageous to the Public; for the People were by
this inclined to show a more than ordinary Love and respect to the Senate: and
though they formerly suspected and hated the principal Senators, yet Livius
appeased and mitigated all their former Perverseness and Animosity, by
convincing them, that he had done nothing in favor and for the benefit of the
Commons, without their Advice and Approbation. But the greatest Credit which
Drusus got for his Kindness and Justice toward the People, was, That he never
seemed to propose any Law, either of his own Head, or for his own Advantage;
for he committed the charge of seeing the Colonies rightly settled, to other
Commissioners: neither did he ever concern himself with the distributions of
the Moneys; whereas Caius was always the principal Man concerned in such
considerable Transactions.

When Rubrius, another Tribune of the People, had proposed to have Carthage
again inhabited, which had been formerly demolished by Scipio, it fell to
Caius's lot to see the same performed, and for that purpose he sailed into
Africa. Drusus took this opportunity of his absence, to insinuate himself still
more into the Peoples Affections; which he did chiefly by accusing Fulvius, who
wa a particular Friend to Caius, and deputed a Commissioner with him for the
division of the Lands. This Fulvius was a Man of a turbulent Spirit, and
notoriously hated by the Senate; and besides, he was suspected by others to
have fomented a Difference between them and their Confederates, and underhand
to have persuaded the Italians to rebel; though there was no other way to prove
the truth of these Accusations, than by his being a suspicious Person, and of a
seditious Temper. This was one principal Cause of Caius's Ruin; for part of
the Envy which fell upon Fulvius, was derived upon him: and when Scipio
Africanus happened to die suddenly, and no outward cause The Death of Scipio.
of such an unexpected Death appeared, except some marks of Blows upon his
Body, which intimated that he had been violently murdered, (as we have related
in the History of his Life) the greatest part of the Blame was thrown upon
Fulvius, because he was his mortal Enemy, and that very day had reflected upon
Scipio publicly in the Tribunal; nor was Caius himself clear from Suspicion:
however such an horrible Murder, and committed too upon the Person of one of
the greatest and most considerable Men in Rome, was never either punished or
enquired into thoroughly; for the Mobile opposed and hindered the Proceedings of
Justice, for fear that Caius should be found accessory to the Murder; but these
things were sometime after. But in Africa, where at present Caius was engaged
in the re-peopling of Carthage, (which he named Junonia) many ominous Prodigies
which presaged Mischief, are reported to have been sent from the Gods. For the
First Ensigns Staff was broken with a violent Gale of Ill Omens happen to Caius.
Wind, notwithstanding all the Endeavors of the Ensign to the contrary.
Another sudden Storm blew away the Sacrifices which were laid upon the Altars,
and disordered the whole Platform, by which the bounds of the City were
described, and besides all this, the Wolves made an Incursion, and carried away
the very Marks that were set up, whereby they designed the Precincts of the
City. Caius notwithstanding all this, ordered and dispatched the whole Business
in the space of 70 days, and then returned to Rome, understanding how Fulvius
was prosecuted by Drusus, and that the present Juncture of Affairs would not
suffer him to be absent; for Lucius Hostilius, (one who sided much with the
Nobility, and of no small Authority in the Senate, who had formerly sued to be
Consul, but was repulsed by Caius's Interest, whereby Fannius was elected) was
in a fair way now of being chosen Consul, because he had a numerous company of
Friends; and it was generally believed, if he did obtain it, that he would
wholly ruin Caius's Interest, whose Power was already in a declining
condition; and the People were not so apt to admire his Actions as formerly,
because there were several others who every day contrived new ways to please
the People, with which the Senate did readily comply. After his Return to Rome,
he quitted his House on the Palatine Mount, and went to live in a certain Place
near to the public Court, thereby endeavoring to make himself more popular in
those Parts, where most of the pitiful and meanest Inhabitants were lodged. In
the next place he endeavored to propose other Laws, in order to have them
ratified by popular Votes; upon which account he convened a prodigious number
of people from all the adjacent Places: but the Senate persuaded Fannius the
Consul, to command all Persons, who were not Natives and Inhabitants of Rome,
to depart the City. A new and unusual Proclamation was thereupon made,
prohibiting any of the Allies or Confederates to appear at Rome during that
time. Caius on the contrary published an Edict, accusing the Consul for what he
had done, and setting forth to the Confederates, that if they would continue
upon the Place, they might be assured of his Assistance and Protection. However
he was not so good as his word; for though he saw one of his own familiar Friends
and Companions dragged to Prison by Fannius's Officers, he notwithstanding
passed by, without either assisting him, or taking any notice of him: which he
did, either because he was afraid to stand the test of his Power, which was
already decreased, or because he (as he himself reported) was unwilling to give
his Enemies an opportunity, which they very much desired, of making an
Insurrection. About that time there happened likewise a Difference between him
and his fellow Officers upon this occasion: A Prize was to be fought before the
People in the MarketPlace, and most of the Officers erected Scaffolds round
about, with an intention of letting them for Advantage. Caius commanded them to
take down their Scaffolds, that the poor People might see the Sport without
paying any thing. But no body obeying these Orders of his, he gathered together
some Laborers, and overthrew all the Scaffolds, the very night before the
Prize was to be played; so that by the next morning the Marketplace was
cleared, and the common People had an opportunity of seeing the Pastime gratis.
Upon this account, the Rabble esteemed him as a Man of great Generosity; but he
very much disobliged the Tribunes, and the Action was looked upon as a piece of
Rashness, and full of Presumption.

This was thought to be the chief Reason, that he failed of being a third time
elected Caius missed of his third Tribuneship.
Tribune; not but that he had the most Votes, but because his Colleagues out of
Revenge caused false Returns to be made. But as to this Matter there is not
much credit to be given: certain it is, he very much resented this Repulse, and
behaved himself with an unusual sort of Arrogance toward some of his
Adversaries, who were joyful at this Defeat of his, telling them, That all
their Mirth was a This saying is occasioned from a poisonous Herb in that
Country, which whoever tastes of, he presently seems to laugh, and in that
posture dies.
Sardonian Laugh only; they being wholly in the dark, as to those Intrigues
which he was carrying on.

As soon as Opimius was chosen Consul, they Opimius is the same Person, who in
this Life was before mentioned by the Name of L. Hostilius.
presently cancelled several of Caius's Laws, especially as to what he had
enacted, in reference to some Designs at Carthage, omitting nothing which was
most probable to enrage him, that from some effect of his Passion, they might
find out a colorable pretense to put him to death. Caius at first bore these
things very patiently; but afterward at the Instigation of his Friends,
especially Fulvius, he resolved to raise Forces, and oppose the Authority of
the Consuls. His Mother Cornelia also is reported by some, to have assisted him
in carrying on this Sedition, by sending privately several Strangers into Rome,
under pretense as if they came to be hired there for Harvestmen? and she
acquainted her Son with this Project, by writing Letters to him in Ciphers:
however it is confidently affirmed by others, that Cornelia did not in the least
approve of these Actions.

When the day came, in which Opimius designed to abrogate the Laws of Caius,
both Parties met very early at the Capitol; and the Consul having performed all
the Rites usual in their Sacrifices, on Quintus Attyllius, a Sergeant, carrying
out the Entrails of the Beast, spoke to Fulvius, and his Friends who stood
about him, Ye factious Citizens, says he, make way for honest Men. Some report,
that besides this provoking Language, he extended his naked Arm toward 'em,
which is reckoned, it seems, as a piece of Scorn and Contempt. Upon this they
presently slew him, with a sort of Bodkins or Pencils, which are used in
Writing; though some say, that at present they had furnished themselves with 'em
for this Employment only. This Murder caused a sudden Consternation in the
whole Assembly, and the chiefest Men in Authority had their different
Resentments of it: as for Caius, he was in a great Passion, and severely
reprimanded some of his own Party, because they had given their Adversaries a
colorable pretense to proceed against them, which they had so long hoped for.
Opimius gratefully embracing this occasion, stood up, and excited the People to
Revenge; but there happening a great shower of Rain on the sudden, it put an
end to the business of that day.

Early the next morning, the Consul having again summoned the Assembly, and
whilst he advised with the Senators in the Court concerning public Affairs,
the Corpse of Attyllius was laid upon a Bier, and brought through the
Marketplace, being there exposed to open view just before the Senate House,
every one expressing a great deal of Sorrow and Lamentation. Opimius was not at
all ignorant, that this was designed to be done; however he seemed to be
surprised, and wondered what the meaning of it should be: the Senators
therefore presently went out, to know the occasion of it; and standing about
the Corpse, some condoled the Person that was slain; all represented it is an
inhumane and barbarous Action. In the mean time, there were some then present,
who were sensible of, and very much resented this Partiality of the Senators;
considering, that when they themselves had not only assassinated Tiberius
Gracchus, as he was executing his Office in the very Capitol, but had also
thrown his mangled Body into the River; yet that now they should expose to open
view; that they should bewail and honor with their presence the Corpse of a
mean mercenary Fellow, (who though he might perhaps die wrongfully, was however
in a great measure the occasion of it himself) and by these means to undermine
him, who remains the only Defender and Safeguard of the People.

The Senators after some time withdrew, A Decree of the Senate against Caius
Gracchus.
and presently ordered, that Opimius the Consul should be invested with such
Power, whereby he might protect the Commonwealth, and suppress all Tyrants.
This being decreed, he presently commanded the Senators to arm themselves, and
that the Roman Knights should be in a readiness very early the next morning,
and every one of 'em to be attended with two Servants well armed. Fulvius on
the other side accoutred himself, and got together the Rabble. Caius at that
time returning from the Marketplace, made a stop just before his Father's
Statue, and fixing his Eyes for some time upon it, remained in a deep
Contemplation; at length he sighed, let fall a few Tears, and departed. This
made no small Impression upon those who saw it, and they began to upbraid one
another, that they should desert and betray so worthy a Man as Caius. They
therefore went directly to his House, remaining there as a Guard about it all
night, though in a different manner from those who were to take care of Fulvius's
Person; for they with a great deal of Drink and Noise passed away the night;
and Fulvius himself, being the first who was made drunk spoke and acted many
things, very unbecoming a Man of his Character: on the other side, the Party
which guarded Caius, were very diligent, relieving one another by Turns, and
prudently fore-casting, as is usual in all public Calamities, what the issue
of things might be. As soon as day light appeared, they rouzed Fulvius, who as
yet slep^ very secure, by reason of the Dose he took overnight; and having
armed themselves with the Weapons which hung up in his House, that were
formerly taken from the Gauls, whom he conquered in the time of his Consulship,
they presently with Threats and loud Acclamations made their way toward the
Aventine Mount.

Caius could not be persuaded to arm himself, but put on his Gown, as if he had
been going to the Senate House, only with this difference, that under it he had
then a short Dagger by his side. As he was going out, his Wife came running to
him at the Gate, holding him with one Hand, and with her other a young Child of
his; she thus tenderly Licinia's Speech to her Husband Caius Gracchus.
bespoke him: Alas Caius, I don't now part with you, as if you were going to
make Speeches to the People, either as a Tribune or a Lawgiver; nor as if you
were going to some glorious War, for though then you might perhaps have been
subject to that Fate, which all must sometime or other submit to, yet you had
left me this mitigation of my Sorrow, that your fall was honorable. But now,
Caius, you expose your Person to the infamous Murderers of Tiberius, and that
too unarmed, choosing rather to suffer the worst of Injuries, than be in any
capacity of doing the least your self; but what is yet far more than all, even
your very Death at this time cannot be anyways serviceable to the public Good.
Faction prevails; power and success of Arms are now the only measures of
Justice: had your Brother fell before Numantia, they would generously have
given back, what then remained of Tiberius; but such is my hard Fate, that I
probably must be an humble Suppliant to the Floods and to the Waves, that they
would somewhere discover to my view their sacred charge of your Relics; for
what trust is there now left for you, either from the Laws, or the Gods, since
they have slain Tiberius? Licinia thus bewailing, Caius by degrees getting
loose from her Embraces, silently withdrew himself, being accompanied by his
Friends; she endeavoring to catch him by the Gown, fell prostrate upon the
Earth, lying there for some time speechless, her Servants took her up for dead,
and conveyed her to her Brother Crassus.

Fulvius when the People were gathered Fulvius sent his youngest Son t^ tre^^
of a Peace
together in a full Body, by the advice of Caius, sent his youngest Son into
the Market place, with an Herald's Rod in his Hand. He being a very handsome
Youth, and modestly addressing himself, with Tears in his Eyes, and a becoming
Bashfulness, humbly offered Proposals of Agreement to the Consul and the whole
Senate. The greatest part of the Assembly were inclinable to accept of the
Proposals; but Opimius was of opinion, that it did not become them to send
Messengers, and capitulate with the Senate; but to be personally present, and
like good Citizens, by defending their own Innocence, and submitting themselves
to him, they might thus appease the Anger of the Senate. He commanded the Youth
not to return, unless they would comply with these Conditions. Caius, as it is
reported, was very forward to come, and clear himself before the Senate; but
none of his Friends consenting to it, Fulvius sent his Son a second time to
intercede for 'em, as before. But Opimius who chiefly designed that a Battle
should ensue, caused the Youth to be apprehended, and committed into safe
Custody; and then with a Company of his FootSouldiers, and some Cretan Archers,
set upon that Party which was under the Command of Fulvius. The Archers did
such Execution, and wounded their Enemies so mortally, that they were soon put
to flight. Fulvius absconded for a time in an old Bagnio; but shortly after
being discovered Fulvius and his eldest Son slain.
he and his eldest Son were slain together. Caius was not observed to encounter
any one; but laying these things very much to heart, retired to Diana's Temple;
he there attempted to kill himself, but was hindered by his faithful Friends,
Pomponius and Licinius: they took his Sword away from him, and were very urgent
that he would endeavor to make his Escape. It Is reported, that falling upon
his Knees, and lifting up his Hands, he prayed earnestly to the Goddess, that
the Romans, as a punishment for their Ingratitude and Treachery, might always
remain in perpetual Slavery; for as soon as a proclamation was made of a
Pardon, they presently deserted him.

Caius therefore endeavored now to make his Escape, but was pursued so close
by his Caius's Flight.
Enemies, as far as the wooden Bridge, that from thence he narrowly escaped.
There it was that his two trusty Friends begged of him, to preserve his own
Person by flight, whilst they in the mean time would keep their Post, and
maintain the Passage; neither colud their Enemies, till they were both slain,
pass the Bridge. Caius had no other Companion in his flight but one
Philocrates, a Servant of his. As he run along, it is true, every Body
encouraged him, and wished him Success, (as standers by may do to those who are
engaged in a Battle) but no body either freely lent him any Assistance, or so
much as furnished him with a Horse; though he earnestly desired it, because his
Enemies had gained Ground, and got very near him: however he had still time
enough to hide himself in a little Grove, consecrated to the Furies. In that
Place, Caius's Death.
his Servant Philocrates having first slain him, presently afterward killed
himself also, and fell dead upon his Master; though some affirm it for a truth,
that they were both taken alive by their Enemies, and that Philocrates embraced
his Master so close, that they could not wound Caius, till his Servant was
slain.

They say, that when Caius's Head was cut off, and carried away by one of his
Murderers, Septimuleius, Opimius's Friend, met him, and forced it from him;
because, before the Battle began, they had made Proclamation, that who*ever
should bring the Heads either of Caius or Fulvius, he should, as a Reward,
receive their weight in Gold. Septimuleius therefore having fixed Caius's Head
upon the top of his Spear, came and presented it to Opimius the Consul. They
presently brought the Scales, and it was found to weigh above 17 pounds. But in
this Affair, Septimuleius gave as great signs of his Knavery, as he had done
before of his Cruelty; for having taken out the Brains, he filled the Scull
with Lead. There were others who brought the Head of Fulvius too; but being
mean, inconsiderable Persons, were turned away without the promised Reward. The
Bodies of these two Persons, as well as of the rest who were slain, to the
number of 3000 Men, were all thrown into the River; their Goods were forfeited,
and their Widows forbidden to put themselves into Mourning: but they dealt more
severely with Licinia, Caius's Wife, and wronged her even of her Jointure; and
as an addition still to all their Inhumanity, they barbarously murdered
Fulvius's youngest Son; his Crime was not, that he took up Arms against 'em, or
that he was present in the Battle, but because he had proposed Articles of
Agreement: for this he was first imprisoned, then slain.

But that which enraged the common People beyond all these things, was, because
at this time (in memory of his Success) Opimius built the Temple of Concord, as
if he gloried and triumphed in the Slaughter of so many Citizens: wherefore
some body in the Night time, under the Inscription of the Temple, added this
Verse:

(...)
Folly and Discord Concords Temple built.
Opimius was the first, who being Consul, presumed to usurp the Power of a
Dictator, and condemned, without any Trial, not only 3000 Citizens, but Caius
Gracchus, and Fulvius Flaccus: One of whom had triumphed, and been Consul; the
other far excelled all his Co temporaries in Virtue and Honor. Notwithstanding
this, Opimius could not restrain himself from Extortion and Bribery; for when
he was sent Ambassador to Jugurtha, King of Numidia, he was there corrupted by
Presents, and at his Return being shamefully convicted of it, he was hated and
reproached by the common People; so that growing melancholy and his Spirits
Sinking, his Infamy still increased with his years.

It quickly now appeared to the World, what Respect and Veneration they had for
the memory of the Graccki. They ordered their Statues to be made, and fixed up
in public view; they consecrated the Places where they were slain, and thither
brought the first Fruits of every thing, according to the season of the Year,
for to make their Offerings. Many came likewise thither to their Devotions, and
daily worshipped there, as formerly at the Temples of the Gods.

It Is reported, that as Cornelia, their Mother, bore the loss of her two Sons,
with a noble and undaunted Spirit; so in reference to the Temples where they
lay interred, she only said, Their Memory deserved such Monuments. She removed
afterward, and dwelt near the Mount Mycene, not at all altering her former way
of Living. She was very much respected and beloved, and kept open house for the
Entertainment of all Strangers, having daily a great number of Grecians and
learned Men, who resorted thither: nor was there any foreign Prince but
received Gifts from her, and presented her again. Those who were most
conversant with her, were much diverted, when er'e she pleased to entertain 'em
with any Relation concerning her Father, Scipio African, or his way of Living.
But it was very surprising, to have her make mention of her Sons, without any
Tears or Sign of Grief; and to give a full Account of all their Deeds and
Misfortunes, as unconcerned, as if she had been relating the History of some
ancient Heroes. This made some imagine, that Age, or the greatness of her
Afflictions, had made her delirous, and wholly insensible of all her
Calamities: but they who were of that opinion, had no Notion at all, how much a
noble Birth, or a good Education, could conquer any Affliction; and though
envious The power of Education to conquer Afflictions.
Fortune may often be more successful, and may smother virtuous Actions; yet
with the worser Calamities, she cannot bereave us of that tranquillity of Mind,
by which we generously bear them.

The End of the Lives of the Gracchi, Tiberius and Caius.
THE COMPARISON OF TIBERIUS and CAIUS GRACCHI, with AGIS and CLEOMENES.
WE having given an Account severally of these Persons, it remains only, that
he should take a View of them, in Comparison with one another.

As for the Gracchi; the greatest Detracters, and their worst Enemies, could
not but allow, that they had a Genius to Virtue, beyond all other Romans, which
was inproved also by a generous Education. Agis and Cleomenes seemed to have
had better natural Parts, and a more solid Judgment; for though they wanted all
the Advantages of good Literature, and were neither instructed in Morality, nor
the well management of their Affairs, (from which, even those who were elder
than they, had already much degenerated) yet they were public Examples of
Temperance and Frugality.

Besides, the Gracchi happening to live, when Rome had her greatest repute for
Honor and virtuous Actions, might justly have been ashamed, if they had not
inherited the Virtues of their Ancestors: whereas the other two had Parents of
different Morals; and though they found their Country in a sinking condition,
and debauched, yet that did not quench their forward Zeal to what was just and
honorable.

The Generosity and the Integrity of the two Romans, was chiefly remarkable in
this, That in the administration of public Affairs, they kept themselves from
the imputation of Bribery: whereas Agis might justly be offended, if he had
only that mean Commendation given him, that he took nothing wrongfully from any
Man, being he distributed his own Fortunes, which amounted in ready Money to
the value of 600 Talents, amongst his fellow-Citizens; and surely extortion
must appear a Crime of a strange nature to him, who esteemed it a piece of
Covetousness, to possess, tho never so justly gotten, greater Riches than his
Neighbors.

Their Politics likewise, and Transactions, in reference to State Affairs,
were of a very different nature. The chiefest things in general that the two
Romans commonly aimed at, was the repairing of Cities, and mending of
Highways; and in particular, the most generous Design which Tiberius is famed
for, was his division of the Lands amongst the poor People; and Caius gained
his greatest Reputation, by the addition of 300 of the Commonalty to the same
number of Senators, investing them with an equal Authority.

Whereas the Alteration which Agis and Cleomenes made, was in a quite different
manner. They did not redress things by little and little, and cure small
Distempers; for that would have been (according to Plato) like cutting off one
of the Hydra's Heads, which was the only means to increase the number: but they
made a thorough Reformation, and at once freed their Country from all
Grievances; or to speak more truly, they took away those things, which were the
cause of all their Calamities, and so restored their City to its ancient
Grandeur.

However this must be confessed in the behalf of the Gracchi, That their
Undertakeings were always opposed by Men of the the greatest Quality. But on
the other side, those which were first attempted by Agis, and afterward
consummated by Cleomenes, were supported by the famous Authority of those
ancient Laws concerning Frugality and Levelling, which were instituted by
Lycurgus, ratified and confirmed by Apollo. It is also further observable, That
from the Transactions of the Gracchi, the City of Rome received no Additions to
her former Greatness; whereas by the Conduct of Cleomenes Greece presently saw,
that Sparta exerted the sovereign power over all Peloponnesus, and she still
sought to enlarge her Dominions, with the greatest Princes of that Age;
designing by all her warlike Actions, to set Greece at liberty, from her
subjection to the Gauls and Illyrians, and restore her Government, as formerly,
to the Race of Hercules.

From their different manner of Dying, we may also make some Observations, in
relation to their Courage. The Gracchi fighting with their fellow-Citizens,
were both slain, as they endeavored to make their Escape; but Agis willingly
submitted to his Fate, rather than any Citizen should be in danger of their
Lives. Cleomenes also after his being affronted and abused, though he did design
to be revenged, yet having failed of that opportunity, he then generously fell
by his own Hand.

But on the contrary we must consider, That Agis never did a great Action,
worthy a Commander, being prevented by an untimely Death. And as for those
heroic Actions of Cleomenes, we may justly compare with them that of
Tiberius's, when he was the first who attempted to scale the Walls of Carthage,
it being looked upon as no mean Exploit. To which may be added likewise the
Peace which he concluded with the Numantines, by which he saved the Lives of
20000 Romans, who otherwise had certainly been cut off. And Caius, not only at
this Place, but in Sardinia too, behaved himself very valiantly; that their
early Actions were no small Argument that afterward they might have been
deservedly compared with the chiefest of the Roman Commanders, if they had not
dyed so young. Agis proceeded very mildly in the management of public Affairs;
and meeting too with some Disappointments by the Craft of Agesilaus, he
frustrated the Expectations of the Citizens, as to the division of the Lands,
and was constrained to leave all his Designs imperfect and unfinished, only for
want of a manly Resolution. Cleomenes on the contrary acted more boldly and
rashly in all his public Transactions, and unjustly slew the Ephori, whom he
might by Conquest have gained over to his Party, or else might easily have
banished, not only them, but several others also of the City; for to cut off
any Members, unless in the extremest necessity, is neither the part of a good
Surgeon, nor a Politician, but argues unskilfulness in both. By this
therefore Cleomenes appears cruel, as well as unjust.

Neither of the Gracchi were forward to be engaged in a Civil War: and Caius is
reported to have avoided all manner of Revenge, even when his Life was aimed
at, showing himself always valiant against a foreign Enemy, but wholly unactive
in a Sedition. This was the Reason that he went from his own House unarmed, and
was present in the Battle; which makes it evident* that he had consulted
rather, not to do any harm to others, than not to suffer any himself. Even the
very flight of the Gracchi, must not be looked upon as an argument of their
mean Spirit, but an honorable Retreat from endangering of others; for if they
had stayed, they must either have yielded to those who assailed 'em, or else
have sought 'em in their own defense. The greatest Crime that can be laid to
Tiberius's charge, was the deposing of his fellow- Tribune, and that he
afterward substituted Caius in his room: and as for the Death of Attyllius, it
is falsely and unjustly attributed to Caius; for he was slain unknown to him,
and much to his Grief.

On the contrary, Cleomenes (not to mention the Murder of the Ephori) set all
the Slaves at liberty, and governed by himself alone in reality, having a
Partner only for show; which was the Reason he made choice of his Brother
Euclid, who was of the same Family. He also prevailed upon Archidamus, (who was
the next Heir to the Kingdom of the other Line) that he would venture to return
home from Messene; but after this being slain, because Cleomenes did not
endeavor to revenge his Death, he gave an occasion of being justly suspected,
that he was privy to it himself. Truly Lycurgus, whose Example he pretends to
imitate, after he had voluntarily settled his Kingdom upon Charilaus his
Brother's Son* fearing lest if the Youth should chance to die by Accident, he
might be suspected for it, he traveled a long time, and would not return again
to Sparta, till Charilaus had a Son, and an Heir to his Kingdoms. But we have
never another Grecian, who is worthy to be compared with Lycurgus; for amongst
the Deeds of Cleomenes, there were greater Innovations, and worse Faults than
these.

They therefore who strictly examine their different Manners, may observe, That
the two Grecians were warlike even from their Youth, and inclining to be
Tyrants; that Tiberius and Caius by nature had too great an Emulation after
Glory and Honors: and besides, they never stood in Competition for any thing;
but as soon as the Contention began with their Adversaries, their Heat and
Passions would so far prevail beyond their natural Temper, that by them, as by
ill Winds, they were driven afterward to all their rash Undertakings. What
could be more just and honorable, than their first Design, had not the Power
and the Faction of the Rich, by endeavoring to abrogate that Law, engaged 'em
both in those fatal Quarrels; the one, for his own Preservation; the other, to
revenge his Brother's Death, who was murdered without any Law or Justice?

From the account therefore which has been given, you your self may perceive
the Difference; which if it were to be pronounced of every one singly, I should
affirm Tiberius to have excelled 'em all in Virtue; that young Agis had been
guilty of the fewest Miscarriages; and that in Action and Boldness Caius came
far short of Cleomenes.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Jacob Tonson at the Judge's Head in Chancery Lane near
Fleetstreet.
History.
PLutarch's Lives in Five Volumes, translated from the Greek by several the
most Eminent hands, adorned with fifty five Copper Cuts. Mezeray's
Chronological History of France. Sir Paul Rycaut's History of the Spaniards
Conquest of Peru, with several Cuts, explaining the Natural Customs of the
Natives there. The most diverting Travels of Ferdinando Pinto. Camden's History
of the Life and Reign of Queen Elizabeth. The History of the Wars, etc. between
the League and the two Kings, Henry the III. and Henry the IV. of France;
Englished by Mr. Dryden upon the Command of King Charles the Second.
Poetry.
The Works of Jeffrey Chaucer with his Life, and a Dictionary explaining the
obsolete words. Mr. Edmond Spencer's Works, containing the Fairy Queen, and his
other Pieces formerly Printed, with some new Poems not extant till this
Edition. Mr. Milton's Juvenile Poems, with his Treatise of Education. Mr.
Milton's Paradise lost, adorned with Cuts. Mr. Milton's Paradise regained, with
the Poem of Samson Agonistes. The Works of Mr. Cowly, published by Dr. Sprat.
Mrs. Phillip's Poems with two Tragedies. Mr. Waller's Poems. The Maid's Tragedy
altered by Mr. Waller, with other Poems published since his Death. Dr. Donn's
Poems. Sir John Sucklin's Poems. Mr. Carew's Poems. Mr. Crashaw's Divine Poems.
The Earl of Rochester's Poems. Sir Tho. Fanshaw's Pastor Fido, with other
Poems. The Epistles of Ovid, Englished by the most Eminent hands. The Works of
Horace, Englished by Mr. Creech. Mr. Dryden's Poetical Missellanies in two
parts. Mrs. Behn's Poems. Letters and Poems Amorous and Gallant.
Plays Written by
Shakespeare Johnson Fletcher Dryden The Earl of Orrery Sir Robert Howard Sir G.
Etheredge Mr. Witcherly Mr. Otway Mr. Lee. And most single Plays.
Missellanea.
Seneca's Morals Abstractedly Translated, by Sir Roger L'Estrange. Sir Roger
L'Estrange's Tully's Offices. Sir Roger L'Estrange's Guide to Eternity,
Englished from Cardinal Bona. A Dialogue concerning Women. Sir W. Temple's
Works. Love Letters from a Noble Man to his Sister. Critical History of the Old
Testament.

