A POEM upon Mr. TYTUS OATS, The first Discoverer of the late Popish Plot.
TITUS OATS. Anagramma TESTIS OVAT.
This is the true Original taken from the Life done for HEN: BROM and RIC:
CHISWELL: All others are Counterfeit.


BEhold the Chief and Happy Instrument,
Whom Providence for Britain's Safety sent.
Westminster taught him, Cambridge bred him, then
Left him instead of Books, to study Men.
And those he studied with so true an Art,
As deeply dived into the very Heart
Of Foul Conspiracy. He smiled the while
To see the busy Jesuit vainly toil,
Contrive, design, and pamper his lewd Hate
Of Prince condemned for Excommunicate,
In hopes of his Cajoled Assassinate.
But here the far-fam'd OATS, for far his Fame
Is spread ere this, (to Odescalchi's shame)
By Acts that seemed Illegal, ventured on,
To make that Legal which himself had done.
Crimes cease to be so, where the main Intent
Shows the whole Act religiously meant.
No more than what brave Cushai did long since,
Against Rebel Son to Father and to Prince:
And in the Noble Persian well approved,
That far beyond himself his Sovereign loved.
The Wise Director showed his prudent art,
On such a Stage so well to act his part,
That cunning Loyola's more cunning Sect
Could not his true and lawful aims detect.
Submissive Constancy no less appeared,
And no less Courage that so little feared
The fatal Consequence of smart Revenge,
(Wherein the Jesuits are no Sons of Change)
With Bloody Hands and Minds prepared still,
If Kings themselves, the meaner OATS to kill.
For had they known his aim, be you secure,
They Had more Cravats than one to have made him sure.
Fools to deny the Fact! His very Name
Speaks the whole Truth in one short Anagram:
While TESTIS OVAT in an easy sense
Yields him the Triumph of his Evidence.
And lest that he should fail, Themselves provide
By raising Proofs in Crimson Murder died,
While the red Streams of Honored Godfrey's Blood
So mournfully convince, and cry so loud.
Who, had they their own Campanella read,
Would sure have weighed th'Imprudence of the Deed,
And nere have been so sillily unholy
To stain their vile Impiety with Folly.
But when the Fact was done, more fondly vain,
Not only to deny the Fact, but Man!
Makes their Foes smile, their Favorers despair,
While TESTIS OVAT sounds in every Ear.
But wonder not the Plot should be maintained,
An Act of Truth, where Jesuits have a hand:
They whose cursed Principles are such, that all
Mankind disputes their first Original;
Whether by savage Beasts or Men begot,
Since all Mankind abhors the Bloody Knot,
And where-soe'r they come, exterminates
Their fury from their Kingdoms and their States;
More Cannibals than Samoedes, that quaff
Whole Streams of Blood, and onel' at Ruin laugh
It Is not the first Attempt, so boldly made
Against the Hearts of Kings, by them betrayed:
Two Henry's (both of France) but lately fell
Deplored Victimes to this Brood of Hell:
But thus to attempt against the Sacred Breast
Of Him that nere disturbed their Hornets Nest,
The Prince of Piety, who governs so,
That his large Charity to all may flow!
Was that which all Hospinian far exceeds,
And his black Scroll of all their Impious Deeds.
But He that saved him in the Royal Oak,
Saved him again from this more dismal stroke;
While this, Triumphing Witness brings to light
Their dark Contrivances and Deeds of Night.
May this Triumphing Witness then go on,
Till the deep Bottom of the Plot be known;
And while he only the bold Truth declares,
Enjoy the Honor of his Loyal Cares,
FINIS.
London, Printed for Hen. Brom and Ric. Chiswell, in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1679.


