AN ANSWER TO THE SATYR AGAINST MANKIND.
WERE I to choose what sort of Corpse I Would wear,
Not Bear or Dog, Lord Monkey, or a Dear;
But I Would be Man, not as I am the worst;
But Man resin'd such as he was at first.
The speechless state of Brutes I would refuse,
For the same cause another does it choose,
For then the Reputation I should loose
Of Wit, Extravigance, and Mode, from whence
Reason is made to truckle under sense.
Or if to sense I did so much incline,
I Would rather be a Satyr, Goat, or Swine,
To help to break the Court-Physicians, who
Besides compounding Lusts have naught to do.
Nature (exceeding Broths) would then excite
Supplys to make a full-meal'd appetite,
No Bugbear Conscience dulling the delight.
But what needs such a Metamorphosis?
Man, being Man, can do even more than this,
Granting the Principle, that Reasons use
Is not to curb, but make Sense more profuse.
For though Man's Sense less vigorous is than Brutes,
His Pander-Reason can contrive Recruites
For its defects: What Sins the Sensual Man
Cannot do alone, the Reasonable can
With useful Wit; for sensuality
An half-unfashion'd Sinner does descry:
He Is Modishly debauched, who can tell why?
That spurs up slow-paced Lust by Argument,
Which to tired sense gives no divertisement,
But calls for more when all its sin is spent.
And though the flagging wretch would be content
(Dissabl'd for more Vice) now to Repent;
Upbraiding Reason checks the puny motion,
Bids it cheer up, and gives it the other Potion:
Till after all, when Nature has given over,
And Art can Buoy up Aged Sense no more.
Reason reserves this Remedy at last,
To think those Pleasures, which it cannot taste.
In this the thinking Fool may become wise,
And yet think on, so that his thinking lies
In Notions of Venerial Mysteries.
Hence sprang the Reasoning Art in former days
Of Spintriae Oscis: and the Modern ways
By Baths, Lascivious Pictures, Giggs and Plays.
If this be Reason's use, no more we will call
Clodius incontinent, but Rational,
And boast the Reason of Sardanopal.
Reason Nick-nam'd like Quaker's newfound Light;
One while called Spirit, alias Appetite.
A stupid Reason which none will defend,
But he that has with Brutes one common end.
Debasing Reason! Coupling every Ass,
Even with my Lord in the same reasoning class.
I Will be no Stud'ent in this Learned School,
I Would rather be the humane thinking Fool,
The Cloistered Coxcomb able to Converse,
(Although alone) with the whole Universe,
And reasoning into Heaven, mount from thence
Post Gazetts of Divine Intelligence,
And Sacred knowledge most remote from sense.
Might I be placed in that exploded Sphere,
I Would not alone forgive that witty Jeer,
But boast the Name of Reasoning Engineer.
But as for Man made perfect and upright,
Why not the Image of the Infinite?
Were this scandal to his Glory; must
We for his Honors sake his word distrust?
Or is an Image such a very same
With what it represents? that it must claim
It Is full Perfections? Sure my Picture might
Be Painted like me, and yet void of sight.
Must the first draught of Man be vilify'd,
Scorned and contemned, 'cause Man himself has strayed?
Or did not Eve sufficiently transgress,
And Bastardise Posterity? unless
Man, little as he is, be made much less.
Though he does not his higher end pursue
So well as does the more Ignoble Crew
Of Birds and Beasts (that little have to do.)
The difficulty of his lofty end,
Above the others does his cause defend,
And in the means a disproportion pleads,
Choice sways the one, instinct the other leads.
It Is not 'cause Jowlers wise he takes the Hare
But it is because Jowler cannot forbear,
Though in the Chair of State some lolling sit
That therefore none can sit upright in it,
Is an ill Consequence and void of wit.
But you your self have taught Man such a way
Unto his happiness, that he must stray,
For if his sense must usher in his rest,
And never be abridg'd of its request,
He may be drunk and Pockey, but never blessed.
As for Pride-gendering Philosophy
(A captious word) it is what you will have it be,
Its own distinctions have an art to show
It Is good or bad, or neither as please you.
Some Sects love Wrangling, others Pedantrie
Yet in the love of Wisdom all agree,
Wisdom which all acknowledge to be good,
But has the fate to be misunderstood;
Yet though Fools crowd among Philosophers,
The fault is not the Sciences but their's.
With all their flaws our ' Bedlam-schools I Would choose
Before the madder Taverns, lewder Stews.
Though both are Slaves, I rather do respect
The Stoic than Epicurean Sect.
If Sense or Reason, one must be denied,
Reason would tell me, Reason must abide
The less obnoxious and the surest guide --
But since kind Nature has designed them both,
For humane complement, I should be loath
To give up blindfold sense to its own Will,
Or grant a Tyrant Reason leave to kill
Such useful Faculties: My Reason shall
Govern my subject Sense, but not Enthrall.
Nor shall Officious Sense presume to act,
Till Justice Reason authorize the fact.
That Humane Naure is corrupt I grant,
But was it the use of Reason or the want,
That puff't out the warm breath of love? from whence
Sprang Murder first, but from malicious Sense?
Which having once Usurped Queen Reasons Throne,
Was not contented with one sin alone,
But falling headlong, plainly shows (alas)
By too too fatal proof, that that which was
The best, corrupted, to the worst does pass.
Hence the acutest Wits when they are defiled
Turn most extravagant, profane and wild,
Defend Debaucheries, and Sense advance,
To reason Reason out of countenance,
Making their knowledge worse than ignorance.
But must Humanity be quite erase't,
Because it is from what it was deface't?
Or must the little Reason men yet hold
For their improvement, be for Dogs-flesh sold?
Sometimes the Gamester whom ill Fortune crosses,
With his last stake recovers all his losses.
He Is but a weak Physician that gives over
His weaker Patient whom he might restore,
But may he suffer an Eternal Curse,
That dares prescribe a remedy that is worse
Than the disease it self; when Jowlers lame,
No one expects that he should kill the Game,
But that he may hereafter, I am sure
It Is best not to cut off his leg, but cure.
He that feels qualmes of Conscience in his Breast,
Let him not barter Reason with a Beast,
But purge out Guilt, with which he is oppress't
That honesty's against all common sense,
Is a good Argument for my defense,
If sense with that which has so great a fame
Be inconsistent, sense is much to blame,
And Reason will (spite of your rhyme and tide
Of Ink, Wit and Contempt) more firm abide
For having such a virtue on her side.
And valor too takes part with her, for sense
(As you contrive it) puts no difference
Between the Valiant that are so for fear,
And Cowards that would be, but do not dare;
Reason could never frame such a witty thing,
That men should fight for fear of quarrelling.
All men you say for Fools or Knaves must go
And he is a man himself that calls them so,
And being Man is at his own Choice free,
Or in the rank of Fools or Knaves to be,
Let him be either or else both for me.
But let me, Sir, request before you slip
Into your Dog, or Bear, or Monky-ship,
Whether you think their brutish form procures
Any advantages exceeding yours?
Both Dog and Bear as well as men will fight,
And (to no purpose too) each other bite,
And as for Puggy all his virtues lie
In Aping Man, the only thing you fly.
The wisest way these evils to redress,
Is to be what you are, nor more, nor less
(That is) not Man, Dog, Bear, nor Monky neither,
But a rare something of them all together.
FINIS.

