A COMMENTARY ON THE PROPHECY OF MALACHI,

By EDWARD POCOCK D. D. Canon of Christ-Church, and Regius Professor of the
Hebrew Tongue, in the University of OXFORD.



OXFORD, Printed at the THEATER, M.DC.LXXVII.

To the Right Reverend Father in God THOMAS LORD BISHOP Of EXETER.
MY LORD,
AMONGST the encouragements which I have had to proceed in explaining some of
the lesser Prophets, have been your Lordships persuasions, which deservedly
ought to have with me the force of commands. The same have given me boldness to
recommend this part of that Work to your Lordships Patronage: by whose
countenancing of it, others will be encouraged to look into it with hopes of
receiving some benefit by it. That which is presented to your hands is an
Exposition on Malachi, the last of the Prophets, as in order, so in time: and
even for that reason by me chosen to fix my thoughts on, before others, because
nearest, therefore, in conjunction with the Gospel; to which it leads us by
the hand, and delivers us over: for that begins where he ends; so that from
that, looking back, according to our Saviors own direction to search the
Scriptures of the old Testament, which testify of him, for confirmation of the
new; and to see how, what in this is recorded as done, was in that foretold as
to be done; we presently light on those things concerning Christ and his
forerunner John the Baptist, with report of which the Gospel begins, so
clearly set down by this last of the Prophets, as that we cannot but admire
that the Jews of those times did not at the appearance of them in their
offices, without more ado, confess, That what Malachi prophesied, was now come
to pass, and acknowledge, That both Elias, the Lords Messenger, whom he would
send to prepare the way before him; and the Lord of the Temple, whom they
sought, even the Messenger of the Covenant, whom they delighted in (they that
were to come) were come, and they were to look for no other: And no less is it
to be wondered, that their posterity should, even to this day, continue in the
like obstinacy, and shut their eyes against these manifest truths;
notwithstanding they have long since seen fully executed on their Nation all
those heavy things which in this Prophecy also were denounced against such as
should not embrace them. Yet do they, taking no notice of these things,
perversely still stand out, and seek all ways, by false glosses, absurd
misinterpretations and misapplications of these Prophecies so long since
fulfilled, as if they were things yet to come, to elude them, and deceive
themselves and their posterity. Their cavils I have endeavored, as God has
enabled me, to remove; and so by asserting the place for Christ's Birth designed
by Micah, and the time for his coming by Malachi, to clear the way for the
better understanding of all such other Prophecies as foretold of other things
in and by him to be fulfilled, and by the exact accomplishment of which the
Gospel proves him to be the CHRIST. These I thought convenient, therefore, to
begin with, as the Gospel does, as preceding in execution diverse others that
were before them uttered. The due fulfilling of these, and the nature of them
being vindicated from the Glosses of the Jews, the other will be better
understood; and such cavils also as are brought in the expounding of them, be
easier removed, the being and coming of him whom they concern being
established. What I have done in this kind, or any other which may conduce to
the true meaning of this Prophet, I must humbly submit to the judgment of your
Lordship and others. Whatever the Work be, I desire it may be a testimony of my
dutiful respects and gratitude to your Lordship, in many years enjoiment of
whose love and friendship I have been formerly happy, and now more in that I
see that the change of your Lordships condition to an higher degree of dignity
in the Church, has nothing altered your affections, of which I have real proof
in your Lordships favor showed to some of mine for my sake. Long may your
Lordship continue in health and happiness, to be an instrument of promoting
Gods glory and the good of the Church. So are the hearty prayers of

MY LORD, Your Lordships most humble Servant EDWARD POCOCK.

A COMMENTARY ON THE PROPHECY of the PROPHET MALACHI.
CHAP. I.
VERSE. 1. The burden of the word of the Lord to Israel by Malachi.


THE burden of the word of the Lord to Israel by Malachi.] Whereas there is
nothing elsewhere spoken of this Prophet in Canonical Scripture, it has given
occasion of several conjectures concerning him. His name being interpreted
signifying, my Angel, or my Messenger, has made See the Prologue to Mal. in
Bi^. Mag.
some to think, that he was an Angel appearing in form of a man, for the
delivery of Gods Message to the People of that time. But this opinion by
Hierom. Praesat. in Mal.
some ancient Christians of great authority entertained, is by others that
followed, deservedly rejected, as having no solid grounds. If any will make any
inference from the derivation of the name, he may rather think him designed as
a Chr. a Castro.
man of holy, Angelical, qualities, or in office resembling an Angel, rather
then a natural Angel. A man therefore he is taken to be; but who is that man?
An ancient Jewish See Abarbinel in Mal. e Talmud M^gillah, c. 1. p. 15.
Doctor would make him the same with Mordecai, but having no ground for it, is
not by others followed. That wherein Idem, and Kimchi. R. Solom. in cap. II.10.
Chapter a Castro.
more of them agree, and among them the Chalde Paraphrast also, is, that he was
the same with Esdras, to which diverse Christians also seem to incline. Ribera.
But the Arguments brought to prove it, on examination are no way convincing:
and therefore the truer and more probable R. Ab. Ezra. Kimchi. R. Tanch.
Abarbinel.
opinion is, that he was a distinct Prophet, called by this name Malachi; a
name well agreeing to, and attesting his function, as a Prophet sent by God in
his message. He prophesied after the return of the Jews from the Babylonish
captivity, and the rebuilding of the Temple, and was the last of the Prophets
that God sent to them, leaving them for the future to expect the coming of
Christ and to long after it, for farther manifestation of his will. Of Christ
and his forerunner John Baptist, he most evidently prophesied, and till their
coming God left them for directions to the Law of Moses, Chap. IV.4. The
Authority of his Prophecy is asserted in the New Testament, where it is cited,
Matthew. XI.10. Mark I.2. Luke I.16. and VII.27. Romans IX.13. and elsewhere. R.
Tanchum.
The Tradition of the Jews is, that Prophecy remained among them 40 years under
the second Temple: in which time Haggai and Zachary, and Malachi prophesied: of
which Malachi was the last: and so his Prophecy concludes the Books of the
Prophets; it ends with the Promise of him, with the history of whom the Gospel
begins, viz. John the Baptist, and his preaching Repentance.

His Prophecy is here called (...), Massa, The burden of the word of the Lord,
by which name Prophecy is Za^h. IX.1. and XII.1.
elsewhere often called, and usually glossed where it occurs, a burdensome
Prophecy, such as denounces heavy things. Drusius on Nah. I.1.
But I suppose this nicety, as concerning the signification of burden, and
burdensomeness is not to be insisted on in the Interpretation of the word. My
ground is, because the Israelites seem reproved for so using or understanding
it, Jerem. XXIII.34. etc. As for the Prophet and the Priest and the People that
shall say, The burden of the Lord, I will even punish that man and his house.
Thus shall ye say every one to his neighbor, and every one to his brother what
has the Lord answered? and what has the Lord spoken? And the burden of the
Lord shall ye mention no more, for every man's word shall be his burden: for ye
have perverted the words of the living God, etc. Here seems a prohibition for
taking the word in that sense: The occasion of which, according to the
exposition of diverse of the best R. D. Kimchi. R. Tanchum. Abarbinel.
Jewish Interpreters was thus. Whereas the word Massa (taken from a (...)
root that signifies to bear, carry, take up, and the like) is of ambiguous
signification; and signifies (among the rest) sometimes a burden, sometimes
what is born, or carried, or delivered from one to another, whether Genes.
XlIII.34.
thing, or word, and so was used for a Prophecy or Message from God, (as often
in Scripture) and for other speech or doctrine (as Prove. XXXIII.1.) the Jews
looking on the Messages received from God, and delivered to them by the
Prophets, as things grievous and burdensome, when they enquired of the Prophets
concerning them, used this word, and meant it in the worst sense, in scoff, or
contempt of them. God therefore seeing the evil meaning of their hearts (though
otherwise their language seemed to be such as was usual for signifying that
which they enquired after, and to have no harm in it) discovers their hypocrisy
to the Prophet, and charges them with perverting his word in their use of it,
and therefore forbids them any more so to abuse it, but if they would enquire
of the Prophet to do it in other words, viz. what has the Lord answered? or
what has the Lord spoken? which was as much as was by that word meant, when it
was used by the Prophets, and should have been meant by them when they used it,
but was perverted and abused by them to another meaning. Hence taking
directions we conceive that here (as in other places) the word is not strictly
to be taken in the harsh signification of a grievous or heavy burden, but
rather as a burden (if we may take the word in a gentler sense) or Message See
R. Sol. and the rest.
taken or received from God to be delivered to the People. That it does not
always import heavy or burdensome words or messages may appear by its use,
Zach. XII.1. where it is prefixed to the promises of good things to Israel, not
heavy things against them: as likewise Lament. II.14. where the pretended
Prophecies of their false Prophets are called (...) Masseoth shav, which is
rendered false burdens; whereas they appear to have spoken to them not heavy but
pleasing and flattering things, as he there complains that they did not
discover their iniquities: so that both real and pretended Prophecies are so
called whatsoever they contained.

The word therefore being of such latitude, we need not here press its
signification of what is burdensome, but in its larger notion looking on it,
take it as sufficient for the meaning of what is here delivered, that it is the
The Vision of the Word of the Lord. Sir. Arab. The Prophecy of the Word of the
Lord. Another Arab.
message or import of the word of the Lord: a Prophecy from him received, and
by his commission delivered by the hand or ministry of Malachi, to Israel.
Which Name, as before the division of the two Kingdoms of Judah and Israel, it
was common to the twelve Tribes, though afterward it became a peculiar title
to the ten Tribes: so here it is given to the two Tribes, and to all of the
other who joined themselves to them in their return from Babylon. These having
had late experience of Gods great favor in turning their captivity, and
restoring them to their own Land, and again settling his worship among them,
should have been very careful in reforming their ways, and sincere in their
obedience: but it was otherwise. Many enormities, and actions contrary to Gods
Law, and displeasing to him, and signs of their great ingratitude to him, and
unmindfulness of his benefits, were found among them: for which therefore,
seeking still their good, he sends this his Prophet to reprove them, and to
exhort them to repentance; and for the comfort of the godly among them, to give
them assurance of the coming of the promised Messiah in his due time, to set
all things right for their good: as will in order appear in what follows of
this Prophecy, which thus begins, 2 I have loved you, says the Lord: yet ye
say, Wherein have thou loved us? was not Esau Jacobs brother? says the Lord:
yet I loved Jacob.

3 And I hated Esau, and laid his mountains and his heritage wast, for the
dragons of the wilderness.



I have loved you, says the Lord.] Here seems intimated a reproof of Israel
for their great ingratitude and unkindness to the Lord, whilst he tells them,
that certainly they ought to have loved him, since that he had first loved
them, and ought therefore to have found grateful returns of love from them:
but how contrary behavior he found from them, he shows in that Question, which
he says, that instead of a ready acknowledgment of his love they were ready to
put; implying little less then an absolute denial of his kindness, Yet ye say,
wherein have thou loved us? So that he sees it necessary by a particular
instance or proof in the next words, to make evident wherein he had showed his
love to them. Was not, etc.

The scope and sense will be much the same, if with Chald. Paraph. and Arab.
Verse. MS. R. D. Kimchi. R. Tanchum.
others we interpret those words, yet ye say, by, And if ye say, wherein, etc.
it will still intimate their ingratitude, and that they were ready so to say;
and that it was necessary to prevent or answer that perverse Question, by
confirming by that instance given what he had said, I have loved you, viz. with
greater love then ordinary, and showed to you greater tokens of love then to
others. Another learned Abarb.
Jew reads the Question put something differently: not wherein, as if they
utterly denied Gods love to them, which was manifest to all, but wherefore have
thou loved us? as if they should intimate that there was some reason for it,
why he should love them; viz. in requital of their Father Abraham's love to
him; so that it was not a free love and mercy to them, but a love (as it were)
of debt, due to them for Abraham's sake, and then the instance given shows how
perverse this thought of theirs was. For if it had been only so much love as
was due in requital of Abraham's love to him, why then had not Esau, who was
descended as well of Abraham as Jacob, had as much right to it, and as great a
share in it as Jacob; his posterity, as they. Whereas by Gods loving Jacob, and
hating Esau his twin-brother, 'twas made manifest that there was more in it
then so; and that his peculiar love of Jacob, and especial favors to his
posterity, were not for Abraham's desert alone, but of free grace and mercy to
them, and therefore deserved all possible returns of love, gratitude, and
obedience from them. This he makes to be the meaning and connection of the
words, which though in his way it may seem plain, yet is there no need to leave
the former interpretation for it.

Was not Esau Jacob's brother? says the Lord; yet I loved Jacob, and I hated
Esau.] This the Lord gives as an instance of his free love to the Israelites,
the posterity of Jacob, that whereas Esau and Jacob were twin-brothers, one as
well as the other descended from Abraham, both sons of Isaac, by one mother,
twins, born at the same time, yet he loved one, and did not love, or hated, the
other, and so derived that love and hatred to their posterity, and accordingly
showed to them the tokens and effects thereof. The Apostle S. Paul in Romans
IX.11, 13. improveth this argument from hence, that this love to the one, and
hatred to the other was declared; when those children were not yet born,
neither had done any good or evil. So that it could not be said one had
deserved better then the other, and therefore his love to one above the other
must needs appear to be of ftee grace and choice, electing one and rejecting
the other; and the distinction or difference that he made between them may be
illustrated by the several advantages that by his love one had over the other
in several matters concerning both their spiritual and temporal estate. But the
literal explication of the words here intended, requires no more then the view
of the particular effect of his love to Jacob's posterity, and hatred to Esau's
here instanced in, viz. the utter desolation of Esau's Country, and the
restitution of Israel's, when he had given them both into the hand of their
Enemies to be punished for their sins; that punishment proving to the one for
their utter destruction, to the other but as a fatherly chastisement to make
them sensible of their errors, and to amend them, that so they might again be
reconciled to him, and taken into favor. Of Esau, therefore (or his posterity,
the Edomites) he says that he declared his hatred to him (or them called by
his Name, in that he laid his Mountains and his heritage wast for the Dragons
of the wilderness.

His Mountains.] In Deuteronomy. II.5. we read that God gave mount Seir unto Esau for
a possession, and so again Josh. XXIV.4. so that though the occasion of his
going first thither out of the land of Canaan be expressed, Genes. XXXVI.7. to
have been because their riches ( viz. his and his brother Jacob's) were more
then that they might dwell together, and the Land could not bear them both, yet
it appears to have been by Gods designation and appointment, that so Esau might
take that Country, which is described by naming its chief mountain, which was
Seir, for his possession, and to his posterity, and leave Canaan to Jacob,
which his posterity had after for their possession.

Mountains] Drus.
here put in the plural number, intimates that in it were more Mountains, or
that it was a mountainous Country. We need not here insist on that Note which
Kimchi.
some make, that Gods giving at first to Esau a craggy, mountainous Country,
and reserving for Jacob's posterity the more pleasant Country of Canaan, was
then a sign of Gods love to Jacob, and hatred to Esau, however true it be. That
which is here given us to look on particularly as a sign of his hatred to him,
being that those Mountains, and that heritage, that he then gave him, and his
posterity had hitherto possessed and flourished in, he had now laid wast, and
dispossessing them thereof, gave it to be inhabited by the Dragons of the
Wilderness.

Dragons.] So the Latin, and so the most, if not all latter Translations; and
so diverse of the R. Sol. Ab. Ezra, Kimchi in Rad.
Jewish Expositors seem to take it. But another learned Jew R. Tanchum
excepts against this rendering, and says, that the Creatures by this name
meant are not Serpents but Jackales, a wild howling beast that lives abroad in
desolate places: and that whether the noun be put (...) Tannoth in the feminine
form (as here) or (...) Tannim in the masculine, as Micah I.8. and elsewhere;
it is all one as to the signification. Compare this with Psalm. XLIV.19. where
is, The place of Tannim: and that with Psalm. LXIII.10. where we read, A portion
for Foxes, (for Foxes and Jackales are not far different in kind or nature.)
These Jackales will prey on dead bodies, yea, dig them out of their Graves, if
not well covered. So that these words, Psalm. XLIV.19. may have this sense, Thou
have caused or suffered us to be smitten in open, wast, unhabited Plains, the
place or habitation of Jackales, where such wild beasts prey on the slain
bodies, none hindering them: and so will it, in sense, be much like what is
said, Psalm. LXXIX.2.

A MS. A^ab.
Jew that in that place of Micah, in his Translation into Arabic, so renders
Tannim (the masculine) as the other would have it, viz. Jackales (...) Benat
Awi, yet here renders Tannoth (the feminine) by (...) Albume, Owls, why I know
not. Concerning the word, see it more largely discoursed there on Micah. But
however there be this difference concerning the kind of the creature by this
name signified, all tends to the same purpose; namely, to denote that their
Land should be so laid wast as that none but such creatures, as live only in
wast desolate places, should for the future inhabit it, and there should not be
men to afright them, or keep them thence. An expression, the like to which is
elsewhere also used to signify the utter desolation of a place that was
formerly well peopled and inhabited, as Isai. XIII.21, 22. and XXXIV.13. and
Jer. IX.11. and X.22. and II.27. And therefore several ancient Translators seem
to have thought it sufficient to give the meaning of the words by such
expressions which might import, that this Country should be laid wholly and
utterly wast, without particularly giving the signification of this word: as
the Chalde who renders it, into wastness of the Wilderness (or a wast
wilderness;) the Syriack into habitations of the Wilderness; the Greek, into
houses of the Wilderness, which the printed Arabic version following by a
plain mistake of the second letter of the word (reading (...) for (...))
renders, into gifts of the Wilderness: Not that they are to be supposed to have
read in the Text otherwise then we now do, Buxtorf. Vindic. p. 64.
but because (as we said) they thought it sufficient so in more general terms
to give the scope of the words.

A learned Capell. Crit. Sac. p. 255.
man conjectures the Greek Interpreter (or Interpreters) not to have read, as
it is usually in the Hebrew (...) Letannoth, but (...) Lechanuth, which
signifies a Shop, an Inn, a place where People sit and abide to work, or buy,
sell, or rest, or the like: but it is hard to follow such conjectures as
require a change of the received reading in the Hebrew Text: and here seems no
need of it, if we would justify the Greek Version. If what was before said will
not suffice, it will be easier and more probable to say that they took Tannoth
to signify Habitations, the same that Neoth elsewhere, as Jer. IX.9. and Joel
I.19. marg. and perhaps it might anciently be used in the Hebrew tongue in that
signification, as well as it (or what is very like it) is still in the Arabic
dialect, which is of so nigh affinity with it, that learned men, even the Jews
themselves, often have recourse to it, for finding out the signification of
some words which are of seldom use in the Bible; and in that (...) Tenaah, or
in Hebrew Letters (...) signifies a mansion, or habitation.

Like threats of destruction to the children of Esau, the Edomites, are
elsewhere also denounced, as Jerem. XLIX. from ver. 7, to ver. 22. and Ezech.
XXV.13. and the whole 35. Chapter, and in the Prophecy of Obadiah, which is
particularly directed against them; and Joel III.19. and all those things which
are there spoken of them, we cannot doubt were punctually fulfilled on them,
because by God spoken, the least tittle of whose words cannot fail, but as
surely be all performed as if it were already done, when spoken; although
remaining Histories should not leave on record every circumstance, when or how
it was done and made good; at least their being no more taken notice of, may
seem a part of fulfilling these Prophecies, that they should be small among the
Heathen, and despised among men, Jerem. XLIX.14. that he should not be, ver.
10. be as though they had not been, Obad. ver. 16. Grot. on Ezech. 25.14. and
Josephus, and the Books of the Maccabees.
yet will from story appear, what is here said to have been made good on them
by the Chaldeans, and what followed by the Jews in the Maccabees time. For this
Prophecy is said to have taken place, or been made good by the destruction of
the Edomites about Grot. when Nabuchadnezzar overcame also the Mo^b^t^s and
Ammonites. Josephus, l. 10. c. XI.
five years after the Jews were led captive. From which devastation it appears
by the words, that they flattered themselves with a recovery, as well as they
saw the Jews after 70 years captivity to be restored, but God shows that what
they promise themselves in this kind should be in vain. So he adds, 4 Whereas
Edom says, We are impoverished, but we will return, and build the desolate
places; thus says the Lord of hosts, They shall build, but I will throw down;
and they shall call them, The border of wickedness, and the People against whom
the Lord has indignation for ever.

Whereas Edom says we are impoverished, but we will return and build the
desolate places, etc.] R. D. Kimchi.
Some give the sense thus, If Edom shall say, Though we are now become poor and
low, and our Land laid wast, yet we will again return, and build the wast
places, as Israel have done: which seems nearer then what R. Sol. Jarchi.
others of the Jews give, From the beginning we have been poor, but
henceforward, being we are enriched with the spoils of Jerusalem, we will
return and build up our wast places. Another Jewish Abarb.
Doctor looks on the manner of speech to intimate as if they should say, See I
Sam. VI.9.
It is not his hand that smote us, but by (accident, or) the fortune of the
World we have come (or fallen) several times into a low condition and poverty,
and so have our Land laid wast, but we will (or shall) again return and build
our desolate places. This differs not much in sense from the first (which is
clearest) only in that he undertakes to give the grounds of their thoughts; but
whatever was the ground of their saying thus with themselves, Gods answer to
them is, They shall build, but I will throw down] their striving to recover
themselves shall be all in vain, he will so notoriously frustrate all their
endeavors in that kind, that all People seeing how ill things succeed with
them, and how irremoveably heavy Gods judgments and curse ly upon them, shall
call them, The border of wickedness, a Land of sinful People, cursed for the
sins of its Inhabitants; a People against whom the wrath of God is so incensed
and continued as never to be appeased; so that instead of that recovery of
prosperity, which they promised themselves they should still grow poorer and
poorer, and at last be utterly destroyed, as it is at this day, wherein there
is no memorial of them, no People owned by that name, except such, as we have
elsewhere showed, as are by the malicious Jews out of mere malice, without any
ground, so called, viz. Romans, and in general, Christians: and therefore they
expect this Prophecy yet on them to be fulfilled, as Abarbinel, minding nothing
but the destruction of the Christians.

The word (...) Rushshash^^^ rendered we are impoverished, is by other ancient
Translators rendered, are destroyed: as by the Greek and Latin. And so a learned
R. Tanch.
Jew, both here, and on Jerem. V.17. observes two significations to be fastened
on it, viz. according to some, we are impoverished; according to others, we are
cut off, or destroyed. And so in Miclal Yophi on this place, out of Kimchi, on
Jerem. V.17. The sense according to either will be indifferent.

5 And your eyes shall see, and ye shall say, the Lord will be magnified from
the border of Israel. And your eyes shall see, etc.] So evident, so fully shown
are these tokens of Gods love to you, and hatred to Esau's posterity, as that
your eyes, you being restored to your Country, and theirs continuing desolate,
you shall say [must needs say] The Lord will be magnified (or is magnified, or,
be the Lord magnified) from the border of Israel, R. D. Kimchi.
which still shall be called by their name; whereas the Country of Edom shall
be looked on as an accursed Land, and called The border of wickedness.

From the border.] In the Margin, upon, or from upon; and it is noted there
that so it is in the Hebrew, and so it is (...) Meal. But it is by a learned
Jew R. Tanchum.
noted that (...) Me, or the first letter, or the Preposition prefixed which
signifies from, is sometimes redundant in such cases, and that it may be all
one, as if it were without it, only (...) Al, upon, above, or over. The same
learned Jew farther adds for explication of the sense, more words, which
because his Book is not printed, nor common, it will not be amiss to give, or
the meaning of them, which is, [That the meaning of these words together in
connection with the former is, Ye have or (shall have) assurance of his love to
you, and providence over you, when you see that you your selves are returned to
your own Land, and have power of building and inhabiting it, but they have not
power to do the like, but they build, and I throw down, and ye therefore praise
(or shall praise) and magnify my name for it, saying, The Lord shall be
magnified on the border of Israel, that is, his greatness shall be always
manifest upon (or over) you; or else it may be supplied thus; The Lord shall be
magnified, who protecteth the border of Israel, or the like. Or the meaning is
said to be, It would have become you that you should so do, and have continued
so to do ( viz. to have taken due notice of this, and to have said, The Lord be
magnified, etc. but you have done the contrary; as in what follows is declared.
Or, says he, in the opinion of some, the words from the border of Israel, are
to be joined with, and ye; as if it were thus to be construed, And you that
reside on (or dwell in) the border of Israel, shall say, The Lord be
magnified.] Thus he, which we the rather take notice of, because it will arm us
against what another Marginal additions in Miclal Yophi.
Jew says that this may be interpreted, And your eyes shall see the
destruction of Edom in the end of days (or the last days) and then ye shall
say, The Lord be magnified from the border of Israel, that is to say, In all
the World shall his name be magnified; according to what is said, Then will I
turn to the People a pure language, that they may call upon the name of the
Lord, to serve him with one consent, Zeph. III.9. He seems to look upon this
Prophecy as not yet fulfilled, but hereafter to be fulfilled by the utter
destruction of Edom, (which certainly has been long since destroyed) and
settling Israel again in their Land. They willingly catch at any thing whereby
to cherish themselves in their fond error of expecting a Messiah yet to come,
who shall restore to Israel a temporal Kingdom, and subdue under them all their
Enemies, and cut off those whom they please to call Edom, by which name we have
showed whom they mean. He runs in this the same way that Abarbinol does. Yet
here Abarbinel, though he promise to himself a farther fulfilling of it in that
way, yet could not but confess it to be already fulfilled ( viz. under the
second Temple, and that restitution of Israel from their Babylonish captivity,
and the destruction of Edom in those times, and therefore says, Perhaps this
Promise was spoken concerning both times, viz. that so long since past, and
that which they expect yet to come. The Verbs being in the Text in the future
Tense, as of what was then to come, will not advantage those who would make
that use thereof, as if it were yet to be expected: for though their eyes had
already seen Edom subdued, and their Mountains laid wast, yet there was there
that which they were farther to see and admire, viz. that the Edomites should
again strive to recover themselves, and rebuild their wast, as Israel had done
theirs, but through the continued indignation of the Lord upon them should
never be able to do it.

What we read, The Lord will be magnified, Drusius.
some read Great is (or, be) the Lord, the Lord Tarnov.
does magnify himself over, or upon, the border of Israel, viz. by taking
especial care of it. Jun. Trem.
Your eyes shall see from the border of Israel, and you shall say, The Lord
does magnify himself. The Chalde expounds it, And ye shall say, Let the Glory
of God be multiplied, for he has enlarged the border of Israel, which Grot.
some well like of, and so it will well agree with what Drusius observes the
word (...) meal properly to signify beyond, but these small differences make no
great alteration in the sense and scope.

The inference from what has been said is plainly this, That seeing God had in
thus declaring his peculiar love to them above others, whom he might for the
same respects, they also being the seed of Abraham, have made objects of his
love, as well as them, certainly they ought to have requited him with more then
ordinary love, and testified it by their obedience to him, which seeing they
did not, they are justly reproveable. To show the justness of his reproof of
them, and aggravate the unreasonableness of their ingratitude and perverse
behavior toward him, he in the following words proceeds farther to explain
his benefits and relations that he stands in, to them, for which tokens of his
love to them they ought also to have showed such respects to him, as those
relations required, but did not. He adds therefore, 6 A son honors his
father, and a servant his master, If then I be a father, where is mine honor?
and if I be a master, where is my fear? says the Lord of hosts unto you, O
Priests, that despise my Name? and ye say, Wherein have we despised thy Name?

A son honoreth his Father, and a servant his Master, etc.] God had all along
showed such fatherly love to Israel and paternal care over them above all other
Nations, that they could not but acknowledge him their Father: not only by a
common right as he is Father of all, as Creator of all, but by a peculiar
right, as having adopted them unto a greater privilege, and nigher relation of
sonship then others: and so had he by his peculiar guidance and protection,
direction, and government of them, showed himself a Lord and Master to them,
that they could not deny him by a particular right of title to be so to them.
This they could not, they would not deny, but rather so challenge him to
themselves in these respects See how some of them explain Deuteronomy. IV.19.
, as if he were not so at all to other Nations, either a Father or Master to
them. The word If, therefore does not put or suppose it as a thing which they
doubted, or such as in words they would deny, but such as while with their
mouths they confessed, or could not but confess, they did not in their deeds
make good, but rather contradicted: for if they did look on him as a Father,
why did they not then duly honor him; or if as a master, why did they not then
reverence and fear him? and so includes a reprehension of them for not
attesting to their outward profession by their respective behavior, but by
that showed their heart not to be right with him.

For a son honors his Father, and a servant his Master.] It is their duty so
to do; and they transgress not only their duty, but the ordinary custom: they
who do not so, are unnatural sons, perverse, ill natured servants: unworthy of
those appellations, not doing what they require and suppose will be performed
by all that are called by them: and such the Questions here put, where is mine
honor? and where is my fear? show them to have been; as neither yielding to God
that honor which from sons is due, and is ordinarily performed to a Father; nor
that fear which servants ow, and usually show to a Master. The question imports
a denial, viz. that they did not this their duty: and because they would
perhaps deny themselves to be peccant in what is objected to them, he proceeds
by peculiar instances to convict them as guilty; directing what has hitherto
been said more generally, as to all the People, more particularly to the
Priests, who gave ill example in this kind to them, and should have taught them
better,

Says the Lord of Hosts unto you, O Priests that despise my Name. This reading
couples these words with the foregoing part of the verse, though that seem
spoken more generally to all the People, and this does not exclude them, though
See Chris. a Castro.
particularly directed to the Priests, as those who should have prevented such
ill behavior in the People, but now seemed to be occasions to them of
despising Gods Name by their despising it first; See Abarbinel.
as if his speech to the Priests began at, A son honoreth his Father, etc.
others putting a stop after where is my fear? or after, says the Lord of
Hosts, will have what is spoken peculiarly to the Priests to begin at The Lord
of Hosts says, or speaks, to you, O Priests, who despise my Name, viz. The
Lord accuses you for despising his Name. This punctation seems to follow the
Latin in some Copies; and Drusius.
others understanding, To you, O Priests, who despise my Name, I say these
things. But this nicety seems of no great import. That which the Priests are
accused of is, that they despise his Name, and have him in contempt, which is
R. D. Kimchi.
contrary to that honor which as a Father; and that fear and reverence, which
as he is a Lord, or Master, is due unto him. This were manifestly a great
fault; they seem not to think otherwise, or to justify it in themselves, but
rather would justify themselves as not guilty of it, and therefore to say, Be
it far from us, we have done no such thing, wherein have we despised thy Name?
Drusius.
surely in nothing that we know of. He answers them therefore in the next
words.

7 Ye offer polluted bread upon mine Altar, and ye say, Wherein have we
polluted thee? in that ye say, The table of the Lord is contemtible. Ye offer
polluted bread upon mine Altar, etc.] Of bread to be offered to God we read of
two sorts, the one called the Shewbread, to be set on a Table before the Lord,
of which mention is made, Exodus XXV, 30. as likewise of the Table on which they
were to be set in the foregoing verses, and directions for ordering this bread
are given, Levit. XXIV.5. etc. Of other bread, called, a Meat Offering, to be
brought to the Altar, and part thereof to be burnt on the Altar, either as a
voluntary oblation, we read Levit. II. or else as a necessary and commanded
oblation, of which is mention, Exodus XXIX.40. and Number. XXVIII.5. etc, Of the
former of these sorts, viz. the Shewbread, will Hierom. and others.
some have the bread mentioned understood. Against which Drus.
others object that this bread here is said to be offered on the Altar, whereas
that was set on a Table for that end ordained. But if there be no other
difficulty, a sufficient answer to this may seem, what is given by some, viz.
that Altar here is taken for Table, as manifestly elsewhere Table is the same
that Altar (as Ezekiel. XLI.22.) and here in this very verse what is called Altar
is likewise called Table. Yet do Grotius, Riber.
others choose to understand Bread here rather of that meat offering that was
offered with the daily Sacrifice, which was the second sort that we mentioned,
and was part of it burnt on the Altar: But both these go on the same grounds,
that bread here is taken in that proper notion by that word (...) Lechem
usually understood: but others look on it as in a larger signification, as it
peculiarly denotes, not only bread properly so called (and usually by that name
understood) but any food, or flesh, or meat that is eaten, as well as bread:
and so those parts of the Sacrifices, which were burnt on the Altar, are called
(...), the bread of the offerings made by fire unto the Lord, And see Number.
XXVIII.2. Levit. XXII.25.
Levit. III.11, 16. (that is, as ours in a word of larger signification render
it, The food) accordingly, as ver, 12. in this Chapter, in a more general term
he calls what is offered on his Table (...) Oclo, the food thereof: and so
those parts also of them which the Priests did eat, seem called, The bread of
their God, Levit. XXI.22. Looking on it therefore in this larger notion (not as
signifying only bread, which usually in the Hebrew and Syriack Languages it is
taken for, nor only flesh, as in the Arabic, but as it comprehends both, yea
all food or meat,) they take it here to denote any Sacrifice or Oblation
offered to God on his Altar, which was as his Table, and what was thereon
offered and burnt, called his food or meat: See Abarbinel and Tarnov.
so that under the name of polluted bread may come those blind and lame, and
sick Sacrifices in the following words mentioned: yet Ribera.
some like not this. We need not trouble our selves in deciding the controversy
between these differing opinions, or dispute which is to be preferred. An easy
way of reconciling them, and composing the matter seems that which is by a
learned R. Tanchum.
Jew suggested, viz. That there is no doubt but that the names Altar and Table
may be indifferently used for signifying either the Altar, or the Table of
Shewbread; and by polluted bread may be understood either bread properly so
called, or else the flesh of the Sacrifices; and then whether by this variety
of words he understand still the same thing, or else diverse, viz. the
Shewbread by some of them, and the Sacrifices by others, the scope will be the
same, viz. to show the contemt they had of his service, and that not in one
particular kind only, but in all; and to make good the accusation against them,
by instancing whether in one kind or more, and passing from one to the other.
Two faults See Abarbinel.
they seem here accused of; the first, that they accounted that holy enough,
which was not so, viz. offerings that were polluted, that is, not so ordered as
God had commanded such things as he would accept of as holy, to be ordered, and
therefore reputed in his sight as unclean. Secondly, in accounting that
contemtible which was in it self to be reverenced, and looked on as holy, viz.
the Table, or Altar of the Lord. R. Tanchum.
As for the first, viz. those offerings, there was the pollution or defect in
the things themselves manifest. As for the second, the fault was in themselves,
in their evil and contemtuous thoughts, in that they said, or would be ready
to say, at least thought in their minds, which was in his sight, or ears, as
much as if they openly spoke it, though perhaps they were not so impudent as
openly to profess it. By doing the first they are said to despise his Name, in
despising and setting light by his Ordinances, and the manner by him prescribed
for the right performance of them; by the second, they are said to pollute him
in contemning that which was hallowed to him, as despicable; the contemt of
that God looks on as redounding to himself.

The Question as in their person put, wherein, have we polluted thee? (as if
they should say though the bread or things that we offer be polluted, yet what
pollution or dishonor does thence arise to thee?) and then Gods answer, In that
ye say, The Table of the Lord is contemtible, plainly shows it, viz. That he
looks on it, as if they did, as far as in them lay, pollute him himself. The
contemt offered to his Table or Altar, or that whereby they declared themselves
to look on it as contemtible, seems to consist in this, that they thought any
thing though not qualified with those conditions that the Law required, good
enough to offer to him on it. Why they did so contemn it Hierom.
some give reasons, as that it was, because there was not in the Altar, now
under the second Temple, that richness and splendour, and therefore neither (as
they thought) that holiness that was under the first Temple, Chr a Castro,
Grot. Pelicanus.
or in that the things offered were but few, and so their gain or income but
small, or (as some Kimchi, and Abarb.
Jews) because there was offered on it fat and blood, and such things as they
looked on as despicable, not considering why God required them, or that it was
enough, that he commanded. But these are but conjectures: no ground for them in
the Text. It was manifestly a sign of irreligion, and disrespect to God, and
his worship in them, showed in this instance of their dealing with his Table,
and the things thereto belonging, (both here included together, the offerings
and the Altar) for which they are therefore reproved as contemners of God;
which their contemt is farther illustrated in the next verse.

8 And if ye offer the blind for sacrifice, is it not evil? and if ye offer the
lame and sick, is it not evil? offer it now unto thy governor, will he be
pleased with thee, or accept thy person, says the Lord of hosts. And if you
offer the blind for Sacrifice, is it not evil?] This question put, though with
a conditional particle, If, intimates that they did presume to offer such
things: therefore instead of, If, Chald.
others put That you do offer, etc. is it not evil? or, Syriac. Jun. Trem.
In as much, or, whereas ye offer, etc. is it not evil? Do you not hereby
manifestly profess your opinion that the Table of the Lord is contemtible? as
if they were the words of God, and so is the consequence of these words on the
former evident. But D. Kimchi, R. Tanchum, and see Drus.
others read without an interrogation, And when ye offer the blind, etc. it is
not evil, viz. in your opinion; or ye tell the People that bring them to you to
offer for them, that they are not evil, (as if they were their words,) they are
good enough to be offered on Gods Altar; clean contrary to Gods command, Levit.
XXII.22, etc. Deuteronomy. XV.21. And by this doing likewise they said, or showed that
they thought the Table or Altar of the Lord contemptible, and that they
despised him; for had they had any respect unto him, any reverence for his
Altar, they would not have presumed to offer thereon to him such things, as
they would not think to find acceptance for (or with) from any among men, who
was in place or honor, and whose favor they would seek. So says he, Offer it
now to thy Governor, will he be pleased with thee? etc. certainly not. Thou
would not think that he would accept thy person with a present so
disgraceful, so dishonorable, for him to take. He would look on it as a great
disrespect of his person, and disregard of his honor, and therefore be much
displeased with him, that should show so little esteem of him. How much more
shall the Lord, the great Governor of the World, from whom they have all that
they have, and who has no need of any thing that they have, look upon it as a
great contempt to himself, R. Tanchum.
if they shall presume to offer to him, what they would not dare to offer to
one, though in dignity and authority above them, yet a man like themselves?
especially seeing he had commanded the contrary, and declared that he would
have no such oblation brought to his Altar. For See Leviticus V.7, 11.
those that were not able to bring greater gifts, he had ordained less, and of
smaller value, yet still (as a learned Maimonides in Mo^eh l. 3. c. 46.
Jew observes) required that all of those offerings should be of the perfectest
in their kind, lest such things as were offered to him and his service should
become contemtible; as here it is showed that it was come to pass among them,
and he complains of them, and reproves especially the Priests for it. For
though the People were much in fault for presuming to bring such illegal and
undue oblations, yet much more See R. David Kimchi and Abarbinel.
the Priests in receiving them from them, and offering them; who should have
taught them what to bring, and denied to receive what was not fit, when they
brought any such, and to have refused to offer it: in that they did not this,
but rather tell the People it was good enough, they showed disrespect to God
and contempt of him. He reproves them for it, and expects they should repent of
it. So the Prophet shows in subjoining verse the 9th.

9 And now I pray you, beseech God, that he will be gracious unto us: this has
been by your means: will he regard your persons? says the Lord of hosts. And
now I pray you beseech God that he will be gracious unto us, etc.] A learned R.
Tanchum.
Jew thus gives the connection of these words with the preceding, He shows them
the remedy against their disease, stirring them up to repentance, and that they
would make intercession for Israel, that so wrath might be removed from them,
and they might find mercy (as he says that he will be gracious unto us) for
that belonged to the Joel II.
Priests, how much more, when their fault or sin was cause thereof, ( viz.
Kimchi.
of Gods wrath toward them, or curse on them) seeing the matter was in their
hand, and they occasioned it, and might have hindered it, as he says; this has
been by your means, or from your hand. Thus he; and then the words that follow,
will he accept your persons, must thus be supplied, except you so do, viz.
repent, and make supplications to him, but shall continue to do as you do, will
the Lord accept your persons? To the same purpose do others, both R. D. Kimchi,
Ribera, Chr. a Castro. Menoch. Grot*
Jews and Christians expound the words, as to denote, that if they did
sincerely repent, and seek by prayer for mercy from God, he would yet have
mercy on them; but if not, they ought not to think, that he who is no accepter
of persons would accept any of them, or spare to reprove them for their doings.
Or as Grot.
some of them, that they should thus earnestly pray, to see whether God, though
much displeased, would yet accept them, and be gracious to Israel; which is
agreeable with the old Latin Translation. R. Salomo Jarchi, Abarb. Drus.
Tarnov. etc. Dutch Notes.
Others prefer to look on these words as Ironically spoken, to this purpose;
Now therefore behaving your selves thus wickedly in Gods service, do what is
farther, your duty, ye Priests, to whom that office belongs, beseech the Lord
that he will be gracious unto us, for the evil is come upon us by your means,
and now see whether ye (being such as ye are) can prevail for your sakes to
have it removed. God has constituted you Intercessors for the People, and
promised to accept of your intercession, while you behave your selves in your
office as you ought; but will he now accept of your persons, and hear you for
them, or for your selves? surely ye will find your selves much deceived if you
think he will: your office so ill performed will not make you acceptable.

That he will be gracious unto us.] Here is R. D. Kimchi. Vat. Drus.
observed, that the Prophet, though not guilty of those sins which he reproves,
yet says not unto you, or unto the People, but unto us, as joining himself in
the number, either out of modesty, or humility, or sympathizing with them in
the evil, which should come upon them. So Moses, Exodus, XXXIV.9. praying for
the People that had sinned, says Pardon our iniquity, and our sin, though he
had no part therein; which way of speaking he learnt from God himself, who
finding fault with the People, joins with them Moses, who was not guilty of
that fault, How long do ye refuse to keep my Commandments, Exodus XVI.28.

10 Who is there even among you that would shut the doors for naught? neither
do ye kindle fire on mine altar for naught, I have no pleasure in you, says the
Lord of hosts, neither will I accept an offering at your hand. Who is there
even among you that would shut the doors for naught? etc.] (or that does shut,
etc.) Having showed the great fault of the Priests, in their negligence in his
service, and not taking care for the right ordering of things in it according
to the Law, he here seems to aggravate it, in that they receive abundant wages,
for what they should do, and are well paid for it, even for their least
services they do, as the very shutting of the doors of the Temple, and kindling
fire on his Altar. Did he require their Service for naught, as justly he might,
then they might have some pretense for their negligence; but now being so
plentifully rewarded by the portions in performing their several offices
allowed them, sure if they would not out of love do it, yet in justice they
ought to be careful in performing what was required of them, according as the
Law required it to be performed; and seeing they are not, he is justly
displeased at them, and has no pleasure in them, neither will accept an
offering at their hand. This seems to be the connection, and the meaning of the
words according to the rendering which our Translators give. But I have heard
exceptions taken against our Translators for it; but those that blame them for
it, should consider that they go not alone in it, but have the consent both of
other approved translations and learned Expositors, who seem to embrace it out
of choice and deliberation, not because they saw no other, or were not aware
that the words were by some, or might be, otherwise expounded. For to the same
sense the ancient Latin renders them, and so Junius and Tremellius among the
modern, whom together with ours they must tax, as likewise those Hierom. Cyril.
Riber. Menoch. Tyrin. Grot. Castalio. Dutch Notes, Tarnov.
Expositors, which go the same way, which are many and learned. Yet if any like
not this, nor be moved with those autorities, another Exposition, by many
likewise both Jews and Christians given, is this, Who is there also among you,
i. e. I would there were any, that would shut the doors against you, that you
might not bring in such illegal and unacceptable oblations, nor kindle fire on
mine Altar The word (...) Chinnam, signifies both, for naught and in vain, etc.
The Chalde parapras^th it, That you might not offer on mine Altar an abominable
offering.
in vain, or to no purpose, or profit to you, for I have no pleasure in you,
says the Lord of Hosts, neither will I accept an offering at your hand. Any
offering, though it were in it self good, you being such as you are, much less
such illegal offerings; these services were even better let alone, then be so
performed as they are by you. This sense being agreeable to the Chalde
Paraphrase, and given by several Jewish R. Sal. Jarchi, R. D. K^mchi, Abarb. R.
Tanch.
Expositors, sure those who, as we have seen, follow the same way that our
Translators do, and likewise our Translators themselves, so learned, attentive,
and diligent men as they were, could not be ignorant of, however they chose to
follow what they have done. The Reader seeing, and considering both (or if he
find any other) may take his choice too. He may only observe that in ours the
word, for naught, is for making the sense plainer twice repeated, whereas it is
in the Original only once, and that in the last place; and it is so likewise
repeated in the Translation of Junius and Tremellius. R. Sal. Jarchi,
Abarbinel, Yalkut. (We chiefly follow R. Salomo's reading as being plainest;)
out of Tora^h Coh nim.
Some of the Jews, though to this purpose which we have said, giving their own
meaning, yet tell us of another Exposition or Gloss given by some of their
ancient Doctors, as making it to include an argument a minori ad majus to this
purpose. Two things there are which a man will not refuse to do, yet have no
reward for them. If one man say to another, Shut the door after thee or me, or
light this candle for me, he for doing it, asks, or takes no reward: but who
among you has shut my doors for naught, neither have ye lighted mine Altar for
naught, how much less have you done for naught any of those things which use to
be done for reward? Therefore I have no pleasure in you. They give no farther
explication of their Doctors meaning: it seems to make for the first exposition.

11 For from the rising of the Sun, even unto the going down of the same, my
Name shall be great among the Gentiles, and in every place incense shall be
offered unto my Name, and a pure offering; for my Name shall be great among the
heathen, says the Lord of hosts. For from the rising of the Sun even to the
going down of the same, my Name shall be great among the Gentiles, and in every
place incense shall be offered unto my Name, and a pure offering, etc.] If God
will have no pleasure in those whom he had chosen for his People, and will not
accept of offerings from them, whom by his Law he had instructed concerning
such offerings as he would accept, and refused all others, Josh. VII.9. as some
of the Jews expound those words. R. Tanchum.
what then will he do unto his great Name? what People will he find, or make
use of to magnify his Name, and to bring to him such offerings as he may
accept? Thus might the Jews be ready to reply, but this objection does he
prevent, in these words, by showing that the greatness of his Name does not
depend on their magnifying it. The whole World, from one end to the other,
shall give witness to it, and celebrate it, though they despise it; and though
they offer polluted bre^d on his Altar, so that he will accept no offering at
their hand, yet he shall not want acceptable offerings: in every place incense
of a sweet savor, and a pure offering shall be offered unto his Name; See
Matthew. III.9.
so that he has no need of them, nor will be at a loss in his worship through
their denying it to him. The Jews differ among themselves in the expounding of
these words, Aben Ezra, R. D. Kimchi.
some taking them to include a supposition, thus, All the People of the World,
from the rising of the Sun even to the going down of the same, if I had
instructed and commanded them, as I have commanded you, would readily have
obeyed, and my Name should have been magnified among the Gentiles, while every
where they would have offered to it incense and a pure offering, and not have
polluted it as ye do, by offering polluted bread on mine Altar; R. Tanchum.
so that I should not have been at a loss. But the Text expresses no such
supposal or condition. Others therefore, without an such supply interpret it as
a description of what was done, and that say some by Israelites, though not by
these spoken to, and reproved for doing otherwise in their own Land, yet by
such of them who were dispersed in other parts of the World, among the
Gentiles, who did in all places where they were, magnify Gods great Name, whose
daily Prayers and constant Devotions, and study in the Law, were by God looked
on and accepted as incense and a pure offering. To this purpose speak Se
Yalkut, and R. Salomo ^arc^^i.
some of of their more ancient Doctors: and it is agreeable to the Chalde
Paraphrast, who gives this sense, For from the rising of the Sun, unto the
going down thereof, my Name is great among the Gentiles, and at all times that
ye do my will, I will receive your Prayers, and my great Name is sanctified by
you, and your Prayers are as a clean offerring before me, for my Name is great
among the Gentiles, says the Lord. But this is evidently liable to except^ons,
in as much as Israel is not mentioned in the words, but what is said shall be
done, is said shall be done among the Gentiles, and so consequently by them.
And for this reason is it by one of their own Doctors excepted against ( viz.
Abarbinel) and he with Maimon. Moreh. l. 1 c. 36* and see R. D. Kimchi, and R.
Tanchum
others find out another way, by which they say, it was then done among and by
the Gentiles themselves, viz. in as much as though they did worship Idols, or
the host of Heaven as inferior Gods, and as Mediators between them and the
chief God, yet him, and the magnifying of his Name they still chiefly intended,
and ultimately directed their worship and all their Oblations, the purest they
could think of, with pure zeal to him the chief and God of Gods, the cause of
causes, as they learn him to be (as he says) from ( i. e. by) the continual
motion and constant rising and setting of the Sun, and so in R. D. Kimchi, in
rad. and Mic^al Yophi.
serving their Idols aimed at serving him. So that the words may be a reproof
of them, who would not learn even from the Heathen to magnify his Name, but
contrary to what even they did, polluted and profaned it. See R. Tanchum, Aben
Ezra, R. D. Kimchi in rad. and see Akidah.
Others yet, something differently, make the meaning to be, that in reprooving
Israel for contempt of his worship and sacrifices, he says, My Name is great
among the Nations, and magnified by them, and their magnifying of my Name, is
accepted by me, as if they offered to me incense and a pure offerring, for as
much as it is not sacrifice that I require for it self. And therefore as long
as ye honor not my Name, which without doubt is great among all Nations
(however out of greater respect to me they fancy to themselves Mediators in
their approaches to me) I will not accept you. These two last Interpretations,
what are they less then even an excuse or Apology for (if not a commendation
of) Idolaters and Idolatry, as from the mouth of God himself, and so then
blasphemy against him, who in the Law and Prophets all along, has showed them
and their ways to be all, most abominable to him, such as he utterly seeks to
root out, and will have his People have nothing to do with. And can he be
thought here to say that he accepts of what is done to Idols, as a magnifying
of his Name, or what Sacrifices are offered to them, as a sweet smelling savor,
or acceptable Sacrifice offered to himself? Unworthy certainly is this
exposition even of Jews themselves, or any that acknowledge one God, and his
Name only great, and how jealous he is of the honor of it, so that he will not
be called by any name common with Idols, Hos. II.16. Another exposition yet
Aben Dana in Miklal Yophi, out of Meor ein^im.
some of them give, viz, that this is said in respect of all Kings of the
Nations, which brought their offerings to Jerusalem, and did honor and adorn
the Sanctuary of the Lord with their presents, in the time of the second
Temple, which offerings are called a pure offering. But how does this agree
with the words, which do not say that in Jerusalem, but in every place, incense
and a pure offering should be offered to his Name?

In sum, none of these Expositions given by the Jews come up to the words of
the Text, nor have we therefore recited them, as if any of them were to be
followed, but to show how, that we may have a full meaning of them, and see how
they are made good, they are of necessity to be understood, as Christians take
them, for a Prophecy of what should be done at, and after Christ's coming, when
by the preaching of the Gospel the knowledge of God should be communicated to
all Nations, and his Name should become great unto the utmost parts of the
Earth, be acknowledged by remote Nations, who before knew him not, and by them
all and every where he should be adored and worshipped with acceptable service,
the Jews, who despised his Name, being rejected, the Heathen shall succeed, who
shall acknowledge the greatness of it. This, however improbable in the eyes of
the Jews, who thought it incredible, that ever he would own any other People
but themselves, or be owned or magnified by any other, or would choose any
other place for his worship then Jerusalem, he will certainly effect, and
therefore for the better Calv.
assurance thereof repeats it, for my Name shall be great; that, which by you,
a handful of men, is now despised, shall be great among the Heathen, by all
acknowledged as such. These words were, when spoken, spoken of what should
after be, but by Christ's coming into the World were made good: so appears it by
what he says in his discourse with the Samaritan Woman, who thought of no
other p^a^e where men ought ^o worship God, but either the Mountain of the
Samaritans (mount Garizim) or Jerusalem, Joh. IV.21, etc. Woman believe me the
hour comes, when ye shall neither in this Mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem
worship the Father. And, the hour comes and now is, when the true worshippers
shall worship the Father in spirit and truth, for the Father seeks such to
worship him. God is a spirit, and they that worship him must worship him in
spirit and in truth. The consideration of which words will give us the true
import of these, and compared together they illustrate one the other: for his
saying that God did no longer confine his worship (i. e.) the outward
performance thereof, by such rites and ceremonies as were ordained, to
Jerusalem, or any other single place, what is that, but the verifying of what
is here said, that his Name should be great among the Nations, from the rising
of the Sun even to the going down of the same? and what he ^a^th, that the true
worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth, not only there,
but every where, shows that as his Name should be great and magnified among
them, by their acknowledging him as Father, so what is to be meant by that
incense and pure offering which they should offer unto his Name, viz. not such
as are literally signified by those words, and were then to be ordered
according to the prescription of the Law, but such worship as though expressed
by the names of those carnal things under the Law, then in continual use and
known to all, yet is indeed spiritual, Dr Hammond on Jo^. IV.24.
joining the Soul with the external performances, agreeable to the nature of
God who is a spirit; of which those ordinances of worship under the Law were
types and shadows. And indeed the change of the place necessarily imports a
change of the worship, or things offered for expression of it; for the incense,
and other offerings by the Law prescribed, were not to be offered any where
else but in the Temple at Jerusalem, after that was there settled for the place
of his worship, Deuteronomy. XII.13, 14, 26. Those therefore that he will have in
every place to be offered to him are manifestly of another nature; though
called by those names, which then included generally all the external worship
of God under the Old Testament, while the Jews were Gods peculiar People: they,
now Calv. and Vatab. in 8o.
figuratively understood, denote the whole spiritual worship of God under the
New Testament, since the calling of the Gentiles, and People of all Nations
unto Gods Church, the Kingdom of Christ. The incense therefore of the Gentiles
converted to Christ, and by the Gospel instructed in the true knowledge of
God, and taught to celebrate his great name, and their pure offering, are
devout prayers, Rev. V.8. holy praises, thanksgivings, and alms-deeds, and
works of charity, Heb. XIII.15, 16. their whole selves, Romans XII.1. Diverse of
the ancient Christian Fathers look on the words as an express and undoubted
Prophecy of the Christians solemn worship of God in the Eucharist or Sacrament
of the Lords Supper, called the Christian Sacrifice, to which how they are
appliable, is showed at large by the learned Mr Mede in his discourse on these
words: where he gives to note that under the name of the Christian Sacrifice,
by the ancient Church was understood, not the mere Sacrament of the Body and
Blood of Christ, but the whole sacred action, or solemn Service of the Church
assembled, whereof this sacred mystery was a prime and principal part; and
therefore defines it to be An oblation of thanksgiving and prayer to God the
Father through Jesus Christ, and his Sacrifice commemorated in the creatures of
bread and wine, wherewith God had been first agnized, viz. by them sanctified
by being offered and set before him as a present to acknowledge him the Lord
and giver of all.

This whole Service duly performed is (as at large he there shows) deservedly
styled incense and a pure offering, both in respect that it is purely or
spiritually offered, and in respect of the purity of the conscience, and
affection of the offerers, thoroughly persuaded of the greatness of God, and in
respect of Christ, whom it signifies and represents, who is a Sacrifice without
all spot and blemish: and by this being offered to his Name in every place, he
says, the time should come, when it should be great, magnified, and
acknowledged as great among and by all Nations, though the Jews did now profane
it, as he makes the connection by rendering that, though, which our Translation
renders, but. But the sense will be much alike in reading but, viz. to this
purpose, the time shall come when from the rising of the Sun, etc. my Name
shall be great among the Gentiles, who yet have not true knowledge of me, but
will when I shall see due time to reveal it to them, readily embrace it. Mean
while it ought to have been so among you, and duly magnified by you, to whom I
have from of old revealed it, and given you ordinances and ways of worship, by
observing of which you should have magnified it, but you on the contrary have
by despising those ordinances, and perverting those ways of worship, profaned
it.

When these words were spoken, and thence forward, (as all along before, since
the giving of the Law,) till the time of this diffusing the knowledge of God
and his Name, and this alteration and reformation of his worship here spoken
of, the Jews had for their direction the Law of Moses, and ought duly to have
attended to it, as they are warned, Chap. IV.4. but they did in all things go
so contrary to it, as that neither they, nor any service they did, were
acceptable to God. So notoriously, so obstinately peccant, were they both
Priest and People, that he sees it not sufficient to have once reproved them,
by reckoning up to them their faults, but again repeats them, that so they may
be sensible how greatly they have offended him, how displeasing it is to him,
that they should continue to do such things, having been warned of them, and
that it is worse then what the Gentiles, when he shall call them, will do.

12 But ye have profaned it, in that ye say, The table of the Lord is polluted,
and the fruit thereof, even his meat, is contemptible. But ye have profaned it]
viz. my Name, so verse 6. they are said to despise it, and verse 7. to pollute
him, contrary to acknowledging of it as great, or magnifying it. If they shall
be ready to ask as before, wherein have we profaned it? he tells them wherein,
viz. in that they say the Table of the Lord is polluted, so verse 7. ye say
that the Table of the Lord is So R. D. Kimchi makes that word and this here the
same in sense.
contemptible. Their Cyril, Ribera, Sa, Calvin.
ordering of the things that pertain to it, as common despicable things, and
without due reverence, shows that they esteem it so, and is as much as if they
openly said so in express words, though perhaps they were not so impudent as
openly to utter them.

The Table of the Lord is polluted] his Altar not so highly to be regarded, as
a sacred thing, or with so much care and reverence to be approached; and the
fruit thereof, even his meat, is contemptible, viz. his meat, or its meat, or
the meat thereof; for the affix is the same that in the former word, and may
therefore be referred to the same person or thing: and it will be all one
whether we refer it to the Table or to God; for as the Table or Altar is his,
so all belonging to it is his, the fruit thereof his, the meat his. But then it
may be questioned what is meant by the fruit of the Altar, and his meat, (or
its meat) whether that which was offered on the Altar as Gods part of the
Sacrifice, or that which he had out of the Sacrifices (by his right) given to
the Priests, as a reward for their serving at his Altar. The words so rendered,
as we read, are indifferently appliable to both; and therefore in as much as
both those may be called the fruit thereof, and his (or its) meat, as well what
God took to himself, as that which he allotted to the Priests; they are capable
of a double meaning, as they are looked on with respect, either to the one or
the other; 1. With respect to the first, as if their saying or thoughts of
their heart were, the fruit thereof, (i. e.) that which is allotted to the
Altar to be offered on it, and his meat ( Aben Ezra.
or its fruit, its meat, i. e. which is its meat) is contemptible, viz. being
the fat, and the blood, gross and despicable things (as R. D. Kimchi, and
Abarbinel.
some of the Jews expound it) and therefore not to be had in such great esteem,
and with such care to be ordered, as the Law requires. 2. With respect to the
second, or the portion of the Priests, as if they said, the fruit thereof, or
R. Tanchum.
of its meat (or Pisc.
as for its fruit, the meat thereof) that which is taken of it for meat or
allotted to us for our provisions, for our eating, is contemptible, little, and
of small value, not worth so much care and pains as we must take in our waiting
on it. Thus according to this rendering. But there are among the Jews who render
it otherwise as to the word (...) Nibo, which ours, with many others render the
fruit thereof, reading his word or saying. And here they differ in telling us
whose word they mean; Abarb.
some making it the Word of God, as if they said, The Table of the Lord is
polluted, and his Word concerning the meat thereof, viz. by which he commands
such gross things as fat and blood to be put on it, for his, or its meat, is
contemptible. [This would be strange impudence in them to have said, yet thus
Abarbinel among the Jews expounds it, and Montanus among Christians follows
him, as in many other things.] R. Salomo Jarchi, R. D. Kimchi, and see Abarb.
who differently cites R. Salomo's words from what is read in him.
Others make it the word of the Priest, or him that sacrificed, or others of
them, as if it sounded, Ye say the Table of the Lord is polluted, his Word or
Speech, or that which he, viz. the Priest, continually has in his mouth is,
that his meat, or its meat, viz. God's or his Table's, is contemptible, being
fat and blood, gross, nauseous things: Although Pelic. Oecol.
some take the ground of their complaint to be, because the Altar it self still
devoured the fat, and left nothing to them but lean contemptible meat. That the
word (...) Nib, may be taken for Word, or Speech, in a figurative signification
is no doubt, as it is the fruit of the lips, that which is put forth by them,
as it is used, Isai. LVII.19. yet that it should be so taken here, there is no
necessity; yea both the sense and See Calv.
construction will be more harsh if it be. And though there be Doctors of great
authority among the Jews that would have it so taken, yet Abu Walid, Aben Ezra,
and R. Tanchum.
others are there neither of less learning, nor authority, who think it ought
to be taken in the more proper signification of fruit. And so it appears to
have been taken by most of the ancient Translators. For so while the Chalde
expounds both the words, this and the other rendered meat put together, as
denoting the same thing, the gifts of it; it is manifest that he took them
both, as denoting the same thing, viz. those offerings which were brought to
the Altar. And so the Greek likewise while they render, the meats (or food)
that are put thereon, whom the printed Arabic likewise follows, and the
Syriack including both in one word, its meats, agreeable to what a learned Aben
Ezra.
Jew notes, that as if the two words were synonymous, or words denoting the
same thing, the putting both does but double or repeat the same thing. R.
Tanchum.
Another expounds the meaning of the words so put together, so as to import,
either, the fruit of its meat, though the affix its or thereof be joined with
the first of the words, as well as the latter; or else so as he before, taking
them for synonymous, Its fruit, its meat, i. e. its fruit, and its meat (or its
fruit which is its meat.) And as for the word that we speak of, its manifest
that the Author of the ancient Latin Version took it in the same meaning,
whilst he renders it, that which is laid thereupon which is that which is
meant, by the fruit thereof: but then he differs from all the rest, in rendering
that which is by ours rendered his meat, by, with the fire that devoureth it;
taking (...) Oclo that which is eaten or devoured, to be as much as (...)
Ocelo, i. e. that which devoureth it, which being the fire on the Altar, he
expresses it by name, though in the original it be not expressed; as if they
should say, that the Altar and all belonging to it were contemptible, Chr. a
Castro in his Paraphrase.
or that that which was offered at the Altar were contemptible, because serving
for no other use, then to be devoured by fire. In the Hebrew concordance the
word is put under both significations, as being doubtful, which is to be
preferred: but when all is done, that which ours follow, so as at first
expounded, seems clearest.

13 Ye said also, behold, what a weariness is it? and ye have snuffed at it,
says the Lord of hosts; and ye brought that which was torn, and the lame, and
the sick: thus ye brought an offering: should I accept this of your hands?
says the Lord. Ye said also] Proceeding in his reproof, whether of the
Oecolamp. Chapter a Castro.
Priests, or R. D. Kimchi, Abarb.
People, or rather both Calv.
jointly, for their perverse behavior in his service, he objects to them that
they said, Behold what a weariness is it? and ye have snuffed at it, (or as in
the Margin, whereas you might have blown it away, etc.) Of the words so read as
they (appositely to the original) are in the text of our Translation, a plain
and easy meaning may be thus paraphrastically given; that they said, or so
behaved themselves, as if they plainly said, What a deal of toil and labor are
we put to in ordering the offerings of the Altar, and the things pertaining
thereto, and our selves in respect to them, according to what the Law nicely
requires? And that they therefore snuffed (or puffed) at it, in token of
indignation and dislike, or displeasure at it: and therefore, or besides this,
the Priests to save themselves that labor, and (the People) that cost and
charges, which according to the prescription of the Law they should be at, took
any illegal Levit. XXII.20, etc.
thing, whether torn, or lame, and sick, for a Sacrifice; and Abarb.
brought with it their meat offering, as if this were sufficient to put off God
with it. But he (though nothing profited by what they offer, yet in respect of
his commandment, which they were bound to obey, and that reverence and honor,
which he required to be showed to his Name and Altar) shows that he takes due
notice of what they do, and how they do it, and will by no means accept or take
it at their hands: Should I accept this of your hands? says the Lord. The
Question imports a negation. This exposition seems plain, and very agreeable to
the words, and is warranted by the authority of learned Interpreters. As first
of a Jewish Doctor R. Tanchum, an Author as dextrous in expounding the
Scripture as any among them. He tells us that the word* (...) Mattelah being
compounded of (...) Mah, which signifies, what, and (...) Telaah, which
signifies, labor, affliction (or ill accidents) signifies, What affliction or
misery is this? and that their meaning is, (he taking it as spoken of the
Priests) what a toil or wearisomness is it (that we are put to) in purifying
and hallowing our selves for eating this small pittance or portion? So as that
the words are a reproof of them, for their looking on it as a toilsome thing,
that they should make or keep themselves clean for eating of the holy things,
and their rejecting it therefore, and contemning that portion; which is
expressed by what he says, and ye have snuffed (or puffed) at it. (...)
Vehippachtem oto, the proper signification of which word (says he) is, ye blow
it (or at it) the meaning whereof is, ye look on it as contemptible (or express
contempt of it,) as he that blows on his hand in token of contempt of a thing,
or when one takes a thing in his hand, and blows (or puffs) at it. Other
expositions also he mentions, but prefers this as most agreeable to the words
and place. And thus much have we mentioned of his words, because his Book is
not yet printed, and because it makes for confirmation of the meaning that we
gave, only that he restrains the reproof more particularly to the Priests, and
what concerned their ill behavior; whereas we rather extend it both to Priest
and People. And so do also among Christian Expositors, Calvin, and Lud. de
Dieu, who says, the sense of the words is, you complain that you are wearied
with the burden of my Commandments, and too much oppressed, in that ye are
bound to offer to me none but of the best and soundest Cattle, and therefore ye
snuff at it, and for your own ease offer to me any corrupt thing.

Having the sense that we gave thus warranted, we might well acquiesce in it,
but that our Translators in the Margin reflecting on another rendering, give us
to look into that too, and the grounds of it; which while we do it is no little
wonder to see how differently these words, which may (as before expounded) seem
plain, are by Interpreters understood, and so made difficult. That which in our
Margin is reflected on, seems to go on these grounds, which some, both R. D.
Kimchi.
Jews and Christians, suppose here intimated; viz. that they brought a lean
beast for Sacrifice on their shoulder, and then that they might make People
believe that it was fat and fleshy, they would cry, what a labor or
wearisomness has it been to me to bring this heavy beast? and would puff and
blow at it, Kimchi's Father, Jun. Trem. Vatab. Du^ch Notes, and Tarnov.
as if they had been heavy burdened with it; whereas it was indeed so lean and
light, that with an easy breath or blast they might have blown it down. This is
that which the Margin in our Bibles seems to point at. R. Kimchi.
Others, supposing the same, differently render the last words, and ye threw it
on the ground by way of contempt (or indignation) which Kimchi also would have
to be the meaning of the Chalde Paraphrast, See Lud. de Dieu.
though the word that he uses, otherwise signifies, ye strangled or choked it.
Abarb.
Others on the same supposition render them, and ye blew it up, viz. by blowing
puffed it up with wind, that it might seem fat. And besides this, ye bring that
which is stolen or torn, or lame or sick, things that have such blemishes in
them as by the Law make them unlawful for offerings, and together with them
you bring your meat offering. And shall I accept this of your hands, the
Sacrifice being illegal, shall I accept the meat offering brought with it? by
no means.

R. D. Kimchi, Miclal Yophi.
Others will have it supposed that what they thus brought, and pretended
themselves wearied with bringing, was some stolen Cattle taken by force from
the owner; and so render the words which we render; and ye have snuffed at it,
by, and ye have grieved him, viz. the owner for his loss. Abu Walid confirming
it by the use of the same word, Job. XXXI.39. caused to go away or expire.
Others, and ye have deprived its owner of it, or caused it to go from him by
force. Of this the forecited R. Tanchum making mention, prefers that already
cited before it. And whereas they that embrace it would confirm it by what
follows, and ye brought (...) Gazul, that which was stolen, so rendering that
which ours render torn; he says that these words have no reference to that.
Whether either of these things supposed were true or no, here is nothing in the
words, that proves them so. Others do yet give other rendrings, R. Salomo
Jarchi makes the word, which is rendered in ours, and by others, what a
weariness is it, to signify a lean Cattle, as if they said, Behold it is a lean
beast, but we are poor, and are not able to bring any choice Deuteronomy. XII.11.
vow: and then renders the words (...) Vehippacht^m oto, and ye have grieved
him, which ours render, and ye have snuffed at it. And he notes that this word
is one of the eighteen that are called (...) Tikkun Sopherim, the correction of
the Scribes, and that (...) Oto, him, is put instead of (...) And of this
reading S. Jerome takes notice.
Oti, me, and that for Aben Dana in Miclal Yophi.
reverence to God, (because he or his name should not be joined in the first
person with a Verb of so ill signification,) the person in the Pronoun was
changed, and instead of grieved me, put, grieved him: but this is a groundless
thing, and so to some of the more learned Aben Ezra, see Buxt. Lex. in (...).
Jews themselves seems. And here again R. Tanchum notes that they are far from
the truth, who refer the Pronoun it, or him in this place to God, as if it were
spoken of him, that they did afflict, or grieve him: yet Diodati seems to like
it. Aben Ezra expounding the word, as before, what a toil or wearisomness is
it, gives another reason of their saying so, viz. as if they said it by reason
of the curse and famine, that was in the Land, so that there was not bread (or
food) to put on the Table (or Altar:) as for the following words, he does not
sufficiently explain his meaning, saying only that (...) Hippachtem is from the
signification of (...) Piach Ashes, Exodus IX.8, 10. viz. that which is as
ashes, and there is not what is sufficient on it, perhaps he means, Ye put on
the Altar, what is no better then ashes to be blown away; or, and ye look on
it, or make it as ashes, nothing worth. This is all that is in the printed Copy
of him that we have: but Abarbinel seems to have had a Copy that had more in
it, whence he gathers, that he understood this word in the signification of
grieving. But besides that composition of the word (...) Mattelaah, according
to which it is rendered, what a weariness or labor, there is yet another given
by others, according to which it signifies as much as Mittelaah, from labor,
(which In radic. (...).
Kimchi shows to be justifiable by other examples, without thinking that those
that give this signification read the word with another vowel, then it is
ordinarily read, viz. Mittelaah with i, instead of Mattelaah with a, (as Capel.
Crit. page 222.
some think they did.) And this exposition follow many ancient Interpreters, as
the Chalde, what we bring is of our labor; and much alike the Greek, the
Syriack, printed Arabic, and vulgar Latin which has, Lo l of labor; which
perhaps might be so understood as to sound much one with what a labor, or how
great labor is here, but is usually expounded, Lo, what we bring is of labor,
or affliction, viz. the best that is left us by reason of our late affliction
in our captivity, which has impoverished us, and the wearisomness we and our
Cattle endured in our tedious way home. And so saying puff at it, or make it
fit for nothing, but to be puffed at by me (and so the Greek changes it into
the first person, and I have puffed at these things) or as by Grot.
others, Lo, what we bring is gotten by our labor, not given to us by the
People; it is out of those tenths, which should belong to us, and so the price
of our toil and labor. Thus by reason of the different reading given in the
Margin of our Bibles have we looked (perhaps more then enough) into the most of
other rendrings, which we have met with, out of any of which, or perhaps
altogether, will not be made up any meaning so facile and agreeable to the
words without any force or straining, as that in the first place set down. Out
of Aben Dana in Miclal Yophi.
[Their saying, what a weariness is it, seems contrary to what God says, Micah
VI.3. wherein have I wearied thee.]

And ye have brought that which was torn, etc.] By what has been said, appears
the word (...) by some to be rendered stolen, by others, torn, viz. by wild
Beasts, or the like, the later of which diverse prefer, and Calvin.
some except against the former, as improper for the place: yet I doubt whether
the word will elsewhere be found in the signification of torn: however either
of these would make the thing See Isa. lXI.8.
unfit for an offering to the Lord, as likewise those defects or blemishes
after named; as appears out of Levit. XXII. see ver. 20, 22, 24.

Thus ye brought an offering, etc.] viz. Drus.
these illegal things for an offering, or (according to others as we have seen)
together with these your Mincha, or meat offering, as if all were Doway Bibl.
Jerome. Ribera. Tirin. Menoch. etc.
done according to the Law, but it is contrary to it, and therefore shall not
be accepted at your hands, The Lord has said it.

14 But cursed be the deceiver, which has in his flock a male, and voweth and
sacrifices unto the Lord a corrupt thing: for I am a great King, says the
Lord of hosts, and my Name is dreadful among the heathen. But (or and) cursed
be the deceiver, etc.] Having reprehended them for their misbehavior in other
daily Sacrifices, he farther proceeds to reprove them for their misbehavior in
matter of vows, or such offerings as being not otherwise liable to, they did by
vow oblige themselves to. Concerning such we have what the Law requires, set
down Levit. XXII.18, etc. the oblation for a vow was to be a male without
blemish, ver. 19. perfect, ver. 21. whatsoever was otherwise should not be
accepted. ver. 20, 21, 23. But to that pass it seems were these People now
come, that there were of them such who deceitfully dealt with God (rather
indeed with their own souls) in this kind. Out of pretense of Piety, and
greater devotion, they would by vow bind themselves to offer an oblation to
God: but when they came to perform their vows would deal deceitfully, and
instead of a male, a perfect Beast, bring a corrupt thing, an imperfect one,
with such blemishes as made it illegal, and that (which aggravated their
offense) when they had in their hand such as the Law required, and might duly
have made and performed their vow: Abarb.
which had they not had, their pretense for bringing such as they brought,
though not fully such as the Law required, yet the best they had, might have
been more plausible, and been at least a seeming excuse, and lessened their
fault, although it had been more agreeable to the Law, if they had not had what
had been fit for a vow, not to have vowed at all, Deuteronomy. XXIII.21. but now
having vowed, and having wherewith to perform that vow according to the Law,
and yet dealing deceitfully with the Lord by offering in place of what they had
vowed, and what they had in their power to pay, a blemished illegal thing, as
if he could by such false dealing be deceived, must needs show great contempt
of him who is a great King the Lord of hosts, and whose Name is dreadful among
the Heathen, and therefore expects accordingly, to be reverenced as is his due,
which seeing they neglect to do, they that think so to deceive him, to his
dishonor, and the contumely of his Name, shall receive that reward which shall
show that he takes notice of their doings, and instead of that blessing which
by guile they thought to get from him, pull on themselves his curse.

Cursed be the deceiver, etc.] (...) Nocel, the fraudulent, R. Tanch.
hypocritical, false, or deceitful dealer, who makes a show of one thing, and
does, or intends another, or does not what he would seem to do, as here,
pretending devotion to God, when his heart is not sincere with him, nor does in
sincerity, and to the utmost of his power what he would make show of doing, as
if he could deceive God in doing in his service otherwise then he required, and
yet be accepted by him* It is from the root (...) Nacal which signifies to
think or deal deceitfully. The Greek (and printed Arabic following it)
rendering it, He that is able, seem to respect another root, viz. (...) Yacal,
which signifies to be able.

Which has in his flock a male] i. e. a perfect male,] the sense requires it,
though that Epithet be not here added, because the Law admitted no other for a
vow, Levit. XXII.19, 21. and so by a corrupt thing will be denoted whatsoever
is otherwise, R. Tanch.
whether not a male, or if a male, such as is not perfect, but had such
blemishes or defects that made it illegal. He that thus deals is cursed,
because he shows disrespect to, or contempt of the great Majesty, and dreadful
Name of God, the great King, who will maintain his own honor with more jealousy
then an earthly Prince. (See ver. 8.) and requires sincerity in those that
would seem to honor him, and that they testify their due reverence to him in
their serving him, by doing what they do according to the rule of his
Commandment, and to the utmost of their power. The consideration of this his
greatness ought to have made them, and ought to make all very careful,
sincere, and faithful in the performance of any duty and service to him, to do
the best they can do, that it may be a holy, perfect Sacrifice acceptable to
him.

My Name is dreadful among the Heathen.] How much more R. D. Kimchi.
then ought it to be so among you, whom I have loved and chosen for my peculiar
People, should you despise me, and not dread my Name, and show by your doings
that you truly reverence it? His saying that his Name is dreadful among the
Heathen, though spoken as of the time then present, and was then and always
true, (it being by his Tarnov. and Chr. a Castro.
judgments made often conspicuous to them) yet because they had not generally
then a clear knowledge of him and his Name, it is by Calv. Vatab. Edit. 4o and
8o, and Sa.
some not unfitly looked on, as a Prophecy of what should after be, by the
making it more clearly known to all Nations by the preaching of the Gospel.

R. D. Kimchi.
CHAP. II.
VERSE. 1. And now, O ye Priests, this Commandment is for you.
AND now, O ye Priests, this Commandment is for you.] Having before reproved
both Priests and People for such faults and enormities, as they were both
guilty of, and the things which follow likewise concerning them both, that the
Priests might not excuse themselves, as less guilty, by casting the fault on
the People, who brought such illegal things, seeing they could offer no other
then were brought (or by such like excuse) be here addresses his speech to them
by name, and tells them this Commandment, Riber. Menoch.
that which he is commanded now to speak, or this Commandment, viz. Tarn*
either that which has been already spoken concerning a due care in offering
such things only to God, and in such manner as are according to the Law, and
looking to it that his Altar be not polluted, profaned, or contemned, Vatab.
or else that which shall now be spoken concerning other enormities, which they
ought to reform, and are severely threatened, if they see not to it that they be
duly reformed. To them is this peculiarly directed, to show them that they are
chiefly accountable for what was done, R. D. Kimchi, and Ab^rb.
not only by themselves, but by the People also. Because matters concerning
Gods worship, and observance of the Law were committed to their charge, they
were to teach the People how to perform them, and to hinder them from
performing them in wrong manner: if they brought offerings which were illegal,
they should have refused them. R. Salomo Jarchi.
To them therefore peculiarly is this Command, that they offer not such things
on Gods Altar; and if they take not due care of it, are threatened as follows.

2 If ye will not hear, and if ye will not lay it to heart, to give glory unto
my Name, says the Lord of hosts, I will send a curse upon you, and I will
curse your blessings: yea, I have cursed them already, because ye do not lay it
to heart. If ye will not hear, and if ye will not lay it to heart, etc.] If ye
will not hear so as to lay it to heart, so hear as to take due notice of what
is said to you, and that you may obey, and do according to what is commanded (
Jam. I.25.
being not forgetful hearers, but doers of the work,) that so you may give
glory to my Name, give to me the honor due unto me, by worshipping me with holy
worship, offering duly to me such clean and perfect things, and in such manner
as in my Law I require, (contrary to that despising his Name, chap. I.6. and
polluting him, ver. 7. and profaning his great Name, ver. 12. for which they
are there reproved) I will even send a curse upon you.) The ancient Latin
reads, I will send upon you, want, or poverty, which not unfitly expresses the
meaning, according to that notion which the R. Tanch. R* D. Kimch. Rad. in
(...) and (...).
Jewish Doctors give of it, that it imports substraction or diminution of good,
and so is contrary to (...) Beracah, blessing; which imports increase and
addition of good, at least it expresses the the cause, which is Gods curse, by
its effect viz. want which it causes.

Upon you.] R. D. Kimch. Drus. Calv.
All of you, both those that bring such illegal abominable offerings, and you,
O Priests, that receive and offer them, say some: so that though the speech be
addressed to the Priests more particularly, who should prevent such
miscarriages, yet the curse thereby provoked is such as is denounced to all;
only the particular appellation of them warns them, that they shall not escape
by casting the fault on the People that bring such things, but that they shall
be looked on as guilty in the first place, and so the curse take hold on them
in eminent manner. Abarb.
Others look on these words as particularly concerning the Priests; and those
that follow, to concern the People. It will be a safe way to look on all as
concerning both, though chiefly the Priests in the nine first verses. 4

And I will curse your blessings.] In expounding what is meant here by
blessings, is some difference betwixt Interpreters, some, to this purpose
explain them your blessings, i. e. wherewith you bless, or pray for Tarn.
your selves or the People, Grot. Jerome.
as the Priests office was to do, those shall be turned into curses or have the
issue of curses, as to all those things that they blessed them in. So we have a
contrary expression, Deuteronomy. XXIII.5. of turning a curse into a blessing. This
Exposition Calv. See Drus. and Lu^. de Dieu.
some look on, as slender or not full enough, and understand it of all the
benefits and good things which by Gods blessing they did enjoy, and wherein and
wherewith he had blessed them, as plenty, peace, health, or the like, of which
he threatens, they should not find joy and profit in. Consonant is this to what
some also of the Jewish Expositors give. So R. D. Kimchi, who finding fault
with Abu Walid.
one before him, who restrains here Blessings to the signification of
offerings or gifts, which it sometimes has, expounds it, the blessings
wherewith I have blessed you since the building of the house: as if he said,
Seeing you have despised me in your offerings, I will turn the blessing into a
curse. And so Abarbinel, The meaning is, That, I will turn to you the blessing
where- Hagg. II.18, 19.
blessed you, since the foundation of the Temple was laid, into a curse. And
what this turning the blessing into a curse means, we may see by reading the
XXVIII. Chapter of Deuteronomy here cited in the Margin of our Bibles, wherein
are described the blessings for obedience, and curses for disobedience. Much
like in meaning is what R. Solomon Jarchi says, I will curse you in all which
has need that I should bless to you, your Corn, and Wine, and Oil. Another
learned R. Tanch.
Jew gives an exposition, wherein he seems to comprehend, at least to point at,
all these, thus explaining what is said, I will curse your blessings, that
inasmuch as the Priests office was to pray or intercede for the People, and to
teach them their duties, he threatens, seeing they despised his offerings, and
neglected to direct the People to what was fit and right in that kind, that he
would curse what they blessed, [or wherein they should be blessed] so as that
the punishment should extend to all, in that there should fall a dearth or
scarcity on their Corn and Cattle, and they should be straightened as concerning
what they should offer to God; and the Priests dues should be few also.

Yea I have cursed them already,] them, i. e. your blessings. The words thus
read, show that they should not deceive themselves in hope that the evil
threatened should be delayed, or put off; but if that they would take notice of
it, the curse was already gone forth against them, and had begun to seize on
them, from the time that they began to despise his Name, and he saw that they
did not lay it to heart to observe his Ordinances: so some of the Aben Ezra,
Kimch. and Abarb.
Jews. And to this purpose Call. Tarn.
diverse understand it. Others read it, yea I will also (or certainly, or
farther) curse them, or it, i. e. the blessing, or every one of your blessings.
[So they render it, because though the foregoing Noun be plural, the affix is
of the singular number and feminine gender, which way of construction is of
constant use among the Arabians, and seems not to have been unusual to the Jews
in those times.] So as that the repeating of the threat may add a confirmation
to denote the certainty of it. And this reading diverse Chald. Greek, Arab.
Vulg. Lat. and Arab. MS.
ancient Translations, and other R. Tanch. Ribera.
Expositors follow. R. Solomon Jarchi seems something more nicely to expound
the words, while he observes, that the words at first put with a condition, If
you will not hear, and if you will not lay it to heart, etc. I will send a
curse, etc. and here repeated without the condition intimate as much as if he
should say, But there is no need of suspending the curse on that condition: for
certainly you will not hear nor lay it to heart, and therefore from this time
will I curse your blessings. The cause of this curse already gone forth, or
certainly threatened to come, is because they do not lay to heart, what God has
spoken, and commanded concerning his service to observe to do accordindly: Calv.
such contempt of his word he will not bear.

3 Behold I will corrupt your seed, and spread dung upon your faces, even the
dung of your solemn feasts, and one shall take you away with it. Behold I will
corrupt, (Margin reprove) your seed, etc.] The word (...) Abu Walid, R. D.
Kimchi, in rad.
Gaar here used, is noted to signify both, to rebuke or reprove, and also to
corrupt or destroy. [with this difference, that in the former signification it
has the preposition (...) be following it; in the second only the noun, thing,
or person of which it is spoken, without a preposition (as here it is.) The
sense here will be much one in whether signification it be taken, the rebuking
or reproving it will import the hindering it Abarb.
from growth and increase: and so will the corrupting it, hinder it likewise.
And so the words include a curse on the fruits of the Earth, a threat of Calv.
dearth and scarcity. Your seed]. In the Hebrew, To you the seed, or as Drus.
others, The seed because of you, or for your sakes (because of your
wickedness:) but this makes no great difference. See Chr. a Castro. Dutch
Notes, Stokes.
Others by seed here understand, posterity, as if he should say, I will curse
or destroy your posterity: but however this would be a different meaning, yet
the reading in the Hebrew will still manifestly be the same. A greater
difficulty will be how to reconcile to our reading that of others, and that
ancient, who instead of seed, read Arm or Shoulder. For though the consonant
letters of the word (...) Zera, that signifies seed, and Zeroa, which
signifies an arm or shoulder, be both one, yet they differ in the vowels; so
that there will be nothing to be said, but that either they took them in these
different forms to signify the same thing, whereas now they are usually
distinguished according to the difference of their sound, or form, according to
the vowels, in signification also; or else that they read the word as to the
vowels otherwise then it is now ordinarily, and with joint consent read in the
Hebrew Text. This difference is ancient, for the Chalde and Syriack (both
ancient) take the same reading and signification that we now do. But the Greek
and vulgar Latin, with such as follow them, the other. What occasioned at first
these different readings or rendrings will be hard to say after so long time,
and as hard to compose them, there being on both parts such as eagerly defend
them. They who prefer that signification, which the Greek and vulgar Latin
give, (of which the first has) Behold I separate to you the shoulder, the
other, Doway Transl.
Behold I will cast forth to you the arm, think this best to fit this place, as
best Riber.
agreeing with what follows, and spread dung upon your faces, the dung of your
solemn Feasts, both having respect to those dues, or portions, which the
Priests had out of the Sacrifices that were offered, to whom were allotted the
Deuteronomy. XVIII.3.
shoulder and the maw, which they will have here denoted by the dung, which is
contained in it. So that by his saying he will cast to them the arm; Rib.
Menoch. Grot.
some will have to be meant, that he will with indignation, as it were, throw
it at them, as one angry with them, not out of favor as a blessing from him to
them. But then it may be questioned on what ground the word (...) Goar is
rendered, I will cast forth to, the significations of it else where used, being
as has been said, to rebuke, to reprove, or else to corrupt and destroy, which
observed has made Lyra, Chr. a Castro. Tirin.
some that follow the reading, which we are speaking of, to enlarge the
signification of the word projiciam, I will cast forth to, and to explain it by
I will cast forth from, or take from you; but then they change the meaning of
the words, as if he should say, I will take from you the arm, i. e. your
strength and sustenance, which you had by those portions of the Sacrifices
allotted to you, or by other means, as if the arm were spoken of their own arm,
or did include both their own, and that, i. e. the shoulder of the Sacrifice.
This meaning is far from the former, and will scarce be made to accord with it:
it may perhaps be easier reduced to that which the Greek has, I separate to
you the shoulder, although the Greek Father Cyrill otherwise expound that,
saying, that I do separate, is to be understood, I have separated to you, (viz.
allotted to you by the Law) that part, which custom I command again to be
observed (says he) as if they neglecting the former command, not being content
with that part, had taken of the flesh of the Sacrifice what liked them best.
But what is there in the words, that may be a ground for this supposition, and
supply of the sense? besides what warrant or example is there, for rendering the
word (...) Gaar, by separate? which makes another Greek Aquila. See Nobil.
Translator render it according to the known signification, Behold I rebuke you
with the arm. But in all these there is more of harshness and difficulty then
will easily be solved. If that make for liking the reading of shoulder, rather
then seed, because another part of the Sacrifice allotted to the Priests is
intimated, and joined with it in the next words, (as has been said.) The like
reason will as much make for, and be appliable to the rendering it, seed,
inasmuch as here is before made mention of the Mincha, or meat offering, which
was offered together with the Sacrifice, and was made of flower, and of which
after a part burnt on the Altar, the remnant was the Priests: and besides that
the first fruits of their Corn, Wine, and Oil, etc. they were commanded to give
to the Priests as well as the shoulder, and two cheeks, and maw of the
Sacrifice, Deuteronomy. XVIII.3, 4. and so the corrupting of the seed will be an
evident cursing of their blessing, a punishment to them; inasmuch as by these
means the People shall not have for the Sea Joel, I.13. and II.14.
Mincha, or meat offering, what to bring, nor plenty of first fruits for the
Priests to receive. So that the corrupting of the seed Abarb.
, in respect to the Mincha, will have as good connection (if it be to be stood
on here) with what is said of the scattering on their faces the dung of their
solemn Feasts, in respect to the Sacrifice, as the casting forth to them, or
throwing at them the shoulder, (or what else they will have meant by that
expression) by way of threat or denuntiation of a curse.

All things therefore being considered, there seems no reason, why the ordinary
reading in the Hebrew Text should be questioned, or not be preferred before any
other, that can be pretended, and none therefore why we should not embrace our
Translation, which is agreeable to it. That Exposition of a Arias Mont.
learned man who would take in both those notions, which we have mentioned,
viz. seed and arm, thus, as if God should say, I will repel with my arm that
gift, which with your hand stretched forth you offer unto me, and will cast
back in your faces the seed of which it is made: or as Christ. a Castro.
another correcting him would have it rather, I will cast forth that (your)
arm, with which you offer me a gift, and scatter the cake it self, or seed on
your faces, may be admitted perhaps as a wide Paraphrase, but will little help
in determining the reading or litteral rendering.

And spread (or scatter) dung upon your faces, even the dung of your solemn
Feasts] i. e. of your Sacrifices slain at such times. R. Tanch.
Because at their solemn Feasts many Sacrifices were killed, and offered,
therefore is the same name (...) Chag, which signifies a Feast, used also for
Sacrifice, as Psalm CXVIII.27. Bind ((...) Chag) the Sacrifice unto the horns
of the Altar: and in the same notion, Exodus XXIII.18. the fat of my Sacrifice
(...) Chaggi, and therefore in the Margin is put Feast, and so Isai. XXIX.1.
Spread dung upon your faces, even the dung, etc.] Instead of dung the Greek
read, the maw, which some Hierom. Riber. Grot. etc.
Expositors, both ancient and modern, look on as the thing signified, by naming
that which is contained in it, by way of greater reproach. So that there is no
great reason why a late learned Capell. and see Schindler in (...).
man should hence gather, that the Greek did read otherwise then we now do in
the Hebrew, viz. (...) Ceresh for (...) Peresh. And we may observe that though
the word Ceresh may signify the maw, panch, or belly, as Jerem. LI.34. yet that
is not the word used for the maw, where it is assigned to the Priests, but
(...) Kebah, Deuteronomy. XVIII.3. but here it will be more emphatical to take the
word Peresh in its proper signification of dung, though in a figurative
expression, the meaning of which may be given in different manners, but all
will tend to the same scope or meaning, and spread dung upon your faces, even
the dung of your solemn Feasts.] Your holiest of your Sacrifices, those that
you offer on your solemn Feasts, being such illegal ones as you offer, shall be
in my sight as dung, all as despicable, as loathsome Menoch.
as dung; and I will be so far from accepting them at your hand, that I will
reject you, and what you offer, with as much contempt as if I took the dung in
the panches of your Sacrifices, and threw it in your faces; or I will look upon
you as loathsome, and make you appear to be as loathsome in your most solemn
professions of holiness and devotions, as if I had took the very dung of your
Sacrifices, and threw it in your faces, which were the greatest note of
disgrace, that can be shown, and so would make all men look on them with
contempt, as on such whom God had by such an open affront showed himself to
loath and abominate, and exposed to the scorn of all, as things no more to be
regarded then to be taken away, and cast forth with dung. R. D. Kimchi so
expounds the words, as if God said to them, As you have contemned me in your
Sacrifices, so will I show contempt of you in or by them, by casting back in
your faces that which is most despicable in the Beasts, viz. their dung, as if
he should say, I will make you a reproach and contempt by reason of famine, in
that I will corrupt your seed which you sow, and ye shall be in want of bread,
and shall be for a reproach to the Nations, which are round about you; for so
shall they be in famine (according to the expressions used, Joel II.19. and
Ezekiel. XXXVI. and 30.) and behold you shall be for a reproach and contempt, as
if I had thrown dung on your faces. Abarbinel so explains it, as if he should
say, that those Sacrifices that they offered before his face, he would cast
back in their faces, as a Lord that rejecting a gift brought to him by his
servant, casts it back in his face. Whatever variety there is in applying the
words of the expression, the scope of the whole is manifest, R. Tanch.
that he declares that he will not accept of, or be pleased with what they
bring, inasmuch as it is contrary to what he required; but with indignation
reject both it and them.

And one shall take you away with it, in the Margin, or it shall take you away
to it.] These words, added to the former, are an aggravation of the contempt,
that he will pour on them, or a declaration of the issue of it to them. If it
be read as in the Text, the meaning according to Jun. Trem. Pisc.
some will be, That they shall be so filthy, all as bespread with dung, that he
that takes away the dung shall also take them away with it, finding no
difference between them, or take them away with him: an expression of extreme
vileness and contemptibleness. Aben Ezra, R. Tanch.
Others reading, one shall take you away with him, or to himself, by that one,
think understood, The Enemy, as if it were said, and the Enemy, or an Enemy,
shall take you, being by me set at naught, and rejected as dung, or what is
most vile, and I loath, away, etc. and so will it be the issue of Gods
rejecting them. And Grot. Tirin.
some by that Enemy will have particularly meant the Forces of Antiochus, or
(as Stokes.
others) the Romans. If it be read as in the Margin, it shall take you away to
it, then will it be, Pareus, R. Salomo MS.
It, i. e. the dung cast upon you, shall so cleave unto you, cover you, and
make you filthy, that you shall be reputed as it, and no better esteemed, but
as Lyra.
despicable, and loathsome, Calv.
deprived of all dignity and respect. A learned Lud. de Dieu.
Divine, because it is not expressed who or what shall take them away, looks on
it as to signify as much as, And ye shall be taken, and born unto it, as if it
were every one, or any body shall bear you to it, making the sense thus, Think
not that your faces shall escape that dung, which I threaten to scatter on
them: if See Abu Walid in (...).
Drus.
you seek to avoid it, every one shall carry you to it, that you may be
sprinkled with it. [He quotes R. Salomo Jarchi, as making to his purpose.
According to the printed Copy, which reads (...), they shall take or bear you
to it: it might indeed seem so to do, but in a Manuscript Copy it is (...)
Yissa, it shall take you to it, and so is the same that is read in the Margin
of our Bibles.] R. D. Kimchi gives an Exposition, which though it be not a
literal Version, is plainly enough the result of the meaning, viz. your
iniquity shall bear or carry you to this contempt, measure according to
measure, or proportionablely to your doings; ye have contemned me, and ye shall
be contemned or contemptible. The Greek, Syriack, and printed Arabic understand
it, as if it were God that should take them away, rendering it as in the first
person, And I will take you away together, or I will take you away with it,
viz. with the dung.

The Dutch Notes have as a 2d Exposition, The punishment shall take you away.
The Chalde paraphrasing it, I will revele the confusion of your wickedness upon
your faces, and will take away the magnificence of your Solemmnities, and your
part shall be restrained from it, (or your part of it shall be restrained;) may
confer somewhat as to the meaning in general, but makes not much to the
litteral interpretation.

4 And ye shall know that I have sent this Commandment unto you, that my
Covenant might be with Levi, says the Lord of hosts. And ye shall know] Jun.
Trem.
others, for ye know, Abarb. and Grot.
others, and know ye. That the word (...) Vidaatem, may either of these ways
be rendered, will not be much questionable, by reason of the usual change of
tenses as to their signification in the Hebrew tongue, the pretertense (of
which the verb here is) being frequently (especially with the letter (...) V,
as here prefixed) put in the signification of the future, and Glass. G^am. page
655.
the future signification used sometimes as Imperative, or bidding to do, ye
shall do, for do ye. But according to such different rendering will the meaning
of the following words be necessarily made, something (though not greatly)
different. If it be rendered in the first way (as ours and many others render
it) then the meaning will be to this purpose, And (or then) when this contempt
has been poured out upon you, this punishment inflicted, shall ye know, that
this commandment for not contemning me, this threat of punishment for your
breaking my Commandment, and dishonoring of me by offering illegal Sacrifices,
is sent unto you from me, that you repenting you of such your misdoing, R. D.
Kimchi, Vat. Munst. Rib. Tirin. Menoch. Dutch Notes, Stokes, Bishop Hall's
Paraph.
my Covenant which I made of old with Levi (the Tribe of Levi of which you are)
might stand firm, and you might not run on in your wickedness, to the
abrogating of it, and causing me to deprive you o the blessings and privileges
annexed to it: Calv.
Or, that my Covenant made with the Tribe of Levi, which you have neglected and
broken, may be observed and made good on my part, by my calling you to account
for it, and vindicating it on my part, by dishonoring you, because you on your
part violate it, by not honoring me, as in that was required at your hands.
This from me is not a breach of it, but a making it good, being on your part
broken.

Jun. Trem. and Tarn.
They that follow the second rendering, give their Exposition thus, as if God
for showing of his Justice in denouncing such punishments as he threatens to
them, did appeal even to their own conscience, inasmuch as they had his
Commandment, notwithstanding all which they did so transgress that Covenant
made to, and observed by, those their progenitors as to provoke him to this
just displeasure against them.

They that embrace the third, thus, Know ye that I have not sent this
Commandment to you, viz. that you should honor my Name, but because my
Covenant was with Levi, which was publicly made before all Israel, (speaking
this in reference to the rods which they laid up in the Tabernacle of witness,
Number. XVII.7.) and therefore it was meet that you should confirm (or keep
inviolable) this Covenant, as a learned Abarb.
Jew gives the meaning, or as a Grot.
Christian, Know ye that I have sent to you this Commandment by my Prophet,
because my Covenant is with Levi, by virtue of which Covenant I convent you for
not observing; not only that general Covenant which I made with the People, but
that peculiar one with the Priests and Levites, Number. VIII.14. etc. and
XVIII.19. The meaning according to this reading is perspicuous. There is a
difference in it from the former rendrings, not only in the first word, but
also in translating the word (...) Lihyoth, because it was, which they
translate, that it may (or might) be, or to be.

Aben Ezra.
Some of the Jewish Expositors look on these words as directed to the People,
to stir them up to show reverence and respect to the Priests and Levites, as
was due by virtue of Gods Covenant made with Levi, the whole Tribe separated
for attending on Gods Sanctuary and service, and more peculiarly belonging to
the Priests as chief among them, and then R. Tanch.
the meaning of the words, I have sent this Commandment unto you, to be, I have
commanded you in the Law so to do. But the connection of the words requires that
it be rather looked on as spoken to the Priests for reproof of them, and that
whether by commandment be meant the Commandment given of old in the Law, as
some understand it; or as others, the message now sent to them by the Prophet
to reprove them for the breach of it, and to call on them to reform their
misbehavior in Gods service, to a due and better observance of which they were
bound by virtue of his Covenant made with Levi: which their misbehavior is
aggravated, and his Justice in punishing them vindicated, by mentioning that
Covenant both in respect to the nature of it, and that observance of it which
was found in their Predecessors, and their contrary dealing, both to the tenor
of the one, and example of the other, as is in the four following Verses
declared.

5 My Covenant was with him of life and peace, and I gave them to him, for the
fear wherewith he feared me, and was afraid before my Name. My Covenant was
with him of life and peace, etc.] With him, i. e. with him that is here meant
by Levi, that whole Tribe; or more particularly Kimchi, Abarb. Drus.
Aaron and his posterity, to whom the Priesthood was appropriated, among whom
Phinehas was eminent for his zeal toward God and his worship, and who, Grot.
some think, is here particularly pointed out. One, says a learned Aben Ezra.
Jew, says that Aaron is the person here peculiarly spoken of; Another that
Phinehas is meant. But he concludes that both are here meant, and not only
they, but as many of their posterity as were holy Priests, as they ought all to
be, they are all comprehended under the common name of Levi their Father, and
so spoken of as but one person, all meeting in the same stock, all separated to
one holy function; and so as many as were such as he here describes are
together the Levi of God, to and with whom he says his Covenat was, My
Covenant was with him of life and peace, and I gave them to him for the fear
where with he feared me, etc.

The meaning of the words, thus rendered, seems plain and good, and this
rendering is backed by good authority, both of Kimchi.
Jewish and Vatab. in 4to and 8vo. Jun. Trem. Drus. Tarn.
Christian Interpreters; yet by Calv.
one of great authority too is it excepted against, as if it corrupted the
sense, but he again is by Drus.
another sharply reproved for his exception. Seeing therefore there is
difference betwixt Expositors in their Interpretations, it will be convenient
to see how the words barely and literally found in the original Hebrew, as
they lie, without any alteration, addition, or subtraction, that so we may
better judge of those differences, and of the grounds of them. The words then
thus found, My Covenant was with him life (or of life) and peace, and I gave
them to him fear, and he feared me: which words, though when they were spoken,
they were agreeable to the then common use of speaking, and doubtless well
understood, yet will now scarce make a full and plain sense, put into another
language, without something added or altered in them. For this reason therefore
our Translators (and those who go the same way) add the word, for, (in for the
fear) and change and for wherewith (in wherewith he feared me) which supply (as
we said) by a man of great note is excepted against, as marring the sense. The
meaning that he gives is this, My Covenant was with him of life and peace, and
I gave to him fear, and he feared me. (And in this rendering concurs the ancient
Latin Translation, and much like the Greek, and I gave to him to fear me with
fear, which the printed Arabic, that follows them, explains, My Covenant was
with him, to (or for) life and peace, and I gave him fear, that he might fear
me.) And by fear Calv.
he understands a rule, according to which he should serve God, and by what is
said, and he feared me, that he observed that rule, kept that Law, prescribed
to him; (and in this some Grot.
others agree with him, and the Chalde seems to have lead them the way, who
interprets, and I gave them the perfect Whether did he think (...) Mora to
signify Doctrine, as if it were from (...) Yarah.
doctrine of my Law that he might fear me, etc.) But he that except against
this Exceptor warns, that while he excepts against this supply, he leaves out
that which is expressly set down in the Text, viz. the Pronoun, them, for it is
said (...) Vaettenom lo, and I gave them to him, fear, and he feared me; which
he ought not to have left out, but to have showed to what, them, is to be
referred, what pointed to by it. So that he affirms that rendering to be
imperfect, and that, for, ought to be supplied to make the sense clear, viz. I
gave them i. e. life and peace, to him, for or because of the fear with which
he feared me.

Having taken notice of this difference that we may the better judge of it, and
see farther into the meaning of the words, it will not be amiss to look also
what others, who follow neither of these ways, say. Dutch Notes.
There be therefore who likewise supply the word, for, but in another sense
then ours and those who agree with ours do, rendering not, for the fear, but,
for a fear, not as if the Promises of the Covenant for life and peace followed
on that fear, but as if that Covenant were to effect and produce fear. Though
they both concur in this, that fear and reverence of God and his Name, and a
right performance of worship to him, is a necessary condition for obtaining and
receiving those benefits and privileges by virtue of Gods Covenant to be
expected. A learned R. Ta ch
Jew has on these words this Note, which because his Book was never yet
printed, we shall more at large set down. My Covenant was with him of life and
peace, etc. that is, I covenanted with them, to give to them as a reward of
their obedience to me, life in this World, and security (or safety) from evils,
or if you will say, happiness in this World, and happiness in the World to
come, which is true peace: and See in Aben Ezra.
some say the meaning is, I have made a Covenant with them concerning (or with)
such Precepts or Commands, by which they shall receive (or shall be received or
obtained) life and peace. And what he says, and I gave them to him, fear, is
said in respect to those Precepts, that he should fear to transgress them, or
to let slip the receiving of them. And others say that what he says, and I
gave them, is meant of Israel, viz. I gave them to be governed by him, So Aben
Ezra, I gave them that they should fear him, and he should fear me.
that they should reverence him, and fear him. Then says he, he proceeds, and
says, that he did so, viz. as I commanded him, which is that which he says,
and he feared me, etc. thus he. Then concluding, This is spoken of those
ancient righteous men, who bare the office of the High Priests, exciting those
who in those times bare it, that they should imitate (or be like them) by their
diligence in their obedience, and a good conversation.

R. Salomo Jarchi thus expounds the words. And I gave them to him fear, that he
should receive them in [or with] fear, and so he did. And he feared me, etc.
which words may suggest to us another rendering, viz. My Covenant was with him
of life and peace, that I would give them to him [in, or with, or on] fear,
viz. if he should fear me, [for so I suppose (...) Vaettenem may be rendered,
that I would give them, as the conjunction Va, is sometimes rendered by, that,
see Psalm. LI.16. (...) Veettenah, that I should give it, as in the Margin of
our Bible.] The same Author thinks this here to respect that Covenant which was
made with Phinehas, inasmuch as it is said of him, Numb. the XXV.12. Behold I
give unto him my Covenant of peace, though to his posterity also it was
intailed, as there follows, And he shall have it, and his Seed after him. And
there be R. D. Kimchi, yea and some say that he was Eliah. Abarb.
some of the Jews that look upon it as more signally made good to him, in that
his life was prolonged to him above three hundred years, as they gather from
that he was alive in that time when the War was between the Israelites and
Benjamites described, Judge. XX. where, ver. 28. it is said, And Phinehas the
son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron, stood before it [i. e. the Ark] in those
days, which from the place which that Story has in that Book, being the last
Transaction recorded in it, they conclude to have been the space of above three
hundred years after the first mention of Phinehas. And this some Vatab. and
Pareus.
Christian Interpreters also mention with some seeming assent. But a learned
Jew but even now cited, viz. R. Tanchum, in his Commentary on the book of
Judges, looks on this conclusion concerning the length of Phinehas his life
from these words, as very groundless, and thinks that very passage, that
Phinehas was then there, to be an evident proof that that transaction, though
placed last in that Book, yet was before several others things therein put
before it, and not long after the Israelites entering into the promised Land.
[Probably by the Penman of that Book set down, where it is as a story by it
self, and not having dependence on others, that he might not interrupt the
series and connection of the History.] The same also he says to be done in that
story of the Danites, and Micah, Judge. XVIII. both he thinks to have been
before that of Jephti; and that the like also may be observed in other places
where the Penmen of the Books of Scripture, for reasons best known to
themselves, and to avoid interruption in what they were about, placed such
things after others in their writing, which were done before them. The opinion
likewise of others, who say that Phinehas lived yet longer, and was Eliah, he
there confutes as very absurd. And in Chapter a Castro.
Aaron this may be said to be fulfilled, who lived an hundred and twenty and
three years, Numb. XXXIII.39. But it will not concern our present purpose to
examine such things; sufficient it will be to us from the present words, to be
instructed that God did, to those comprehended under the name of Levi, as well
as others, as Aaron, Eleazar, and Phinehas, make good on his part his Covenant
to them of life and peace, and all conducible to their prosperity and happiness
in the best manner, and still would to as many as should keep Covenant in
fearing, reverencing, and obeying him, as those their Ancestors did. If these
now find it to be otherwise with them, it is from their own, not his breach of
Covenant, by which they fondly expected to have him bound up to them, while
they would wickedly break it, and deal falsely in it toward him.

A late very learned L. de Dieu.
man gives this exposition of the words, that whereas they literally are, My
Covenant was with him of life and peace, and I gave them to him fear, etc. the
sense is to be made up, by supplying either, and, viz. And I gave them to him,
and fear, or else with, viz. And I gave them to him with fear, that the sense
may be, My Covenant was with him, or I made a Covenant with him of life and
peace, And as I promised them by Covenant to him, so I gave them to him: nor
gave I them alone to him, but also my fear, or them with my fear; and so
follows, and he feared me: This he prefers before those rendrings above
mentioned, either, and I gave them to him for a fear, or for the fear wherewith
he feared me. Thus we having set down how the words simply run in the original,
and most of what is said, and perhaps of what may well be said for exposition
of them, the Reader may judge what he thinks will best make for the meaning of
them; he will find that which our Translators give, backed with the authority
and consent of men of good judgment and learning, and to give a plain and
perspicuous meaning.

And was afraid before my Name.] The same with the former, and he feared me,
Aben Ezra.
doubled or repeated. R. Tanch.
He was broken or contrite, i. e. humbly and with fear or reverence behaved
himself before Abarb
me and my Name: with Grot.
great awe and reverence approached to the performance of my worship and holy
duties, Abarb.
not as ye who despise my Name, (c. I.6.) Pisc.
Others interpret it, he was broken, or grieved when he saw my Name profaned,
as in the matter of the golden Calf, Exodus XXXII. and the Midianitish woman,
Number. XXV. Du^ch Notes.
Others, he was bruised for my Names sake, i. e. has undergone, and suffered
all kinds of troubles and hardship for my Name's sake. There are Jun. Trem.
some of eminent note, who expound these last words, (as if they were contrary
to the former) of Levi's, being broken, brought down, deprived of the promised
life and peace, because they did not sanctify the name of God according to the
Covenant: but this is disapproved by Tarnov.
others, because he here speaks in commendation of the former good Priests, and
does not speak this of the impiety of the present wicked Priests, nor
concerning what had befallen, or should befall them.

6 The Law of truth was in his mouth, and iniquity was not found in his lips:
he walked with me in peace and equity, and did turn many away from iniquity.
The Law of truth was in his mouth.] In his mouth, i. e. the mouth of See R.
Salomo Jarchi and R. Tanchum.
Aaron, or Eleazar, or Phineas, or any, or all of those ancient holy Priests
successively, (the genuine Levi) was the Law of truth. Gods Law is the truth,
Psalm. CX*X.142. the true doctrine of this Law did he teach the People, and
instruct them in the true meaning and intent thereof, that according to that
right rule, they might frame all their actions, nothing of it did he conceal
from them, nor teach them any thing contrary to it, or false: this was in his
mouth, nothing contrary to it found in his lips. A learned R. Tanch.
Jew thus expounds it, He gave answer (or pronounced sentence) according to the
truth in it self, and did not respect the person of any in it, nor alter (or
pervert) it for any wordly respect. That is it which he says, and iniquity was
not found in his lips, he did not mean one thing in his heart, and say another
with his mouth, say Kimchi and Aba^b.
others of them. He did not take bribe, says Aben Ezra.
another, nor respect persons. Some of their ancienter Yalkut.
Rabbis more particularly instance, the Law of truth was in his mouth, i. e.
he did not pronounce that unclean, which was clean, nor that clean, which was
unclean, and iniquity was not found in his lips, he did not pronounce
unlawful, that which was lawful, nor pronounce that lawful, which was
unlawful.

He walked with me.] That we may know what is meant by walking with God, may be
compared with this place, Genes. V.22, 24. where it is said, Enoch walked with
God, and the VI.9. where it is said, Noah was a perfect man and walked with
God, See M^cah VI.8.
and Genes. XVII.1. where God says to Abraham, Walk before me and be thou
perfect, and Hebr. XI.5. where it is said, that Enoch had this testimony, that
he pleased God. By which we may understand, that to walk with God is so to
walk, as in all things to endeavor to please him, in a due observance of all
his will, and according to the rule of his Commandments. as always in his
presence, and therefore fearing to offend him in any thing, or to depart from,
or transgress, his righteous Laws, with respect in all things to him, and his
glory. How Levi so walked is expressed in the following words, in peace and
equity.

In peace.] R. D. Kimchi. Drus. Ribera, Grot. and Dutch Notes.
Some understand this of peace with God, as that by so walking, and doing what
was right, he kept in peace and friendship with God, and Tarnov.
did not provoke him by disobedience: so Calv.
that whereas Gods Covenant was with him of peace (ver. 5.) he did observe it
on his part, that so God might on his. Aben Ezra, and Vat^b
Others, of peace with men, Menoch.
others, with both: and no doubt both must go together; and he that will have
peace with God, must, as far as in him lies, live peaceably with all men, Romans
XII.18. And a ready way to have peace with God, is to keep peace with and among
men. Live in peace and the God of love and peace shall be with you, II Cor.
XIII.11. so, blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called the
Children of God, Mat. V.9. but keeping peace with God, is necessarily included
in the forementioned, walking with God, and these words describing the manner
of that his walking, and having reference to what follows likewise in
description of him, that he (by such means) turned many away from iniquity,
seems to respect not only his conversation with God, but before and toward
men, whom he was to bring, likewise with with himself, near to God. To this
purpose that Jewish Doctor, R. Tanchum, says, that here by peace are meant his
moral virtues, and the right ordering his conversation among men with
gentleness, because by that means will be occasioned peace among all. Then by
(...) Mishor, rectitude is meant the rectitude of works pertaining to Religion
and equity. So before him Aben Ezra, another of them, in peace, says he, that
is, with Israel; and in rectitude (or equity) i. e. by doing my Commandments.
And that thus by peace those more ancient did understand, may appear by that
saying, in that authentic Pirke Abo h, cap. 1.. 12.
book, wherein the sayings of their Fathers, or ancient Sages are recorded,
where is set down as a saying of Hillel, an ancient Doctor, who is thought to
have lived something before Christ's Incarnation, Be of the Disciples of Aaron,
who loved peace, and See Heb. XII 14
followed peace, and who loved men, and brought them near to the Law. In which
saying he manifestly seems to have had respect to this Text of Scripture, and
is by Abarbinel cited in his explication of it, who then for explaining what is
said, and in rectitude, adds, he rectified or directed them in their ways
(which seems to agree with the Greek Version which has, in peace, directing he
walked with me.) In explaining this word R. D. Kimchi a little differs from the
other forementioned Jews, as he likewise does in his exposition of the former
word, as we before intimated. The whole of his exposition of both is this, In
peace; Because he did cleave to me to do my will according to what is said, he
shall make peace with me, Isa. XXVII.5. And in rectitude (or equity) because he
walked in the (...)
ways of men (as the printed Copy has it,) or in the (...).
matters of men, or concerning men (as a Manuscript) in a right way; and in
both he was with me: Jer. IX.24.
for in these things I delight, viz. to exercise loving kindness, and
judgment, and righteousness in the Earth. Then proceeding to explain the next
words, And he did turn many away from iniquity, he says, because he taught the
Law continually to all, and many hearkened unto him, and he converted them from
iniquity. In explication of the same R Tanchum says, Because by such truths,
as he taught them, and his gentle behavior toward them, and what they saw of
his righteous works, which he exercised, they were necessarily directed, and
returned from their rebellions without difficulty, being both by his doctrine
and example wrought on. Aben Ezra's note is, Because when the Priest is
upright, many will be upright. Some of the Jews (as was before said) restrain
the things here spoken to Aaron, some to Phineas, and apply them particularly
to See R. Salomo.
things done by them in their times; but the words seem more generally spoken,
so as to concern any of those holy Priests of their race, who succeeded them in
their office, and rightly did, as they, behave themselves in it; as where it is
said that Aaron and his sons offered upon the Altar R. Tanch.
of burnt offering, etc. I Chro. VI.49. it must necessarily be understood not
of Aaron in person alone, and his sons then living, but of any of his race that
succeeded in his, and their room.

7 For the Priests lips should keep knowledge, and they should seek the Law at
his mouth: for he is the messenger of the Lord of hosts. For the Priests lips
should keep knowledge, etc.] Drus.
Some render do keep, Vulg. Lat. etc.
others, shall keep, Piscat. Grot.
others did keep. The word in the original (...) Yishmeru being the future,
properly signifies shall keep, but the Hebrews having not that variety of Moods
and Tenses that some other Languages have, do by one Tense and of one Mood
express that which those other Languages do by different, and that causes this
variety of rendrings, though most of them mean the same thing. They that render
do keep, cannot mean as if the Priests then spoken to, did so; for they are
reproved for the contrary: neither would it be to the purpose in hand, to
understand shall keep, so as if hereafter only the Priests lips should so do.
They therefore that either of those ways render it, or follow them, explain
themselves to mean what our Translation more clearly expresses; as also some
of the R. Tanch. R. D. Kimchi.
Jews expound it, viz. that they should so do, or ought so to do by virtue of
the office that the Priest did sustain; it was their duty so to do, and men
might expect it from them. And so the connection betwixt these and the foregoing
words will be, that those former holy Priests did behave themselves so as they
are commended for doing, because they considered what was their office and
duty, and that they might accordingly perform it. That it was their duty so to
do, and a command laid upon them for it, viz. to know the Law and instruct
others in the meaning of it, and to teach them his will, is clear out of the
Law, Lev. X.11. That by a perpetual statute they should teach the children of
Israel all the statutes which the Lord had spoken to them by the hand of Moses.
And so Moses says of them, They shall teach Jacob thy Judgments, and Israel
thy Law, Deuteronomy. XXXIII.10. And that the People should seek the Law at his mouth,
go to him as the Interpreter thereof, to know what was the right meaning and
intent thereof, that they might accordingly do it in an acceptable manner, and
were to stand to his sentence and judgment in any difficult point thereof; is
likewise plain out of the Law, Deuteronomy. XVII.8, 9. etc. and XXI.5. and out of the
Prophets, Ezekiel XLIV.23, 24. See Ecclus. XlV.17.
and Hag. II.11. they are bid to ask the Priests concerning the Law, for (says
he) he is (...) the Messenger or Ambassador of the Lord of hosts. one appointed
by God to declare his message, his will, and commands unto the People, and R.
Tanch.
direct them in the ways thereof. It is the same word that signifies an Angel;
and an Angel has that name from his office or emploiment, of being sent on
Gods message (from (...) in the Arabic Dialect in use, and signifying to
send.) So from his office does the learned Grotius Note, a Bishop in the
Revelations, chapter 2. etc. to be called (...). And the words by which here the
office of the Priest under the Law is described, well agree to the office of
such who are employed in the Ministry of the Gospel, and the teaching of that.
Saint Paul says of himself and others in like emploiment, that they are
Ambassadors for Christ, II Cor. V.20. (so that he that hears them, hears
him, Luke X.16.) that a Bishop is the Steward of God, Tit. I.7. and ought to
hold fast the faithful Word as he has been taught, [or in teaching, marg.]
that he may be able by sound doctrine, both to exhort and to convince the
gainsayers, v. 9. that he ought to be able to teach, II Tim. II.2. and apt, to
teach, ibid. v. 24. with many more things which might be said in parallel to
these words, in which the Priests office and duty, and so the Peoples duty, in
respect to him, are described. But it will not be to the understanding of the
present words to insist thereon, only this by the by, because of the ti^le here
given him.

That which from what has been said, makes to our purpose, is to show the
connection of the present words with the preceding, according to those who
render or expound them, that the Priests lips should preserve knowledge, etc. as
showing that what was before said, that he did, or concerning his behavior,
was that which his duty required, and by conscience thereof he was moved to do,
and did in observance thereof accordingly do. They that render, The Priests
lips did preserve knowledge, and they did seek the Law at his mouth, because he
was the Messenger of God, make it a continuation of the description of the
behavior of those ancient holy Priests, and how they walked worthy of their
office, and performed all that it required of them. Either of these supposes
and includes the other; the holiness of the office importing a holy
conversation, and a holiness of their conversation, adorning and setting forth
the holiness of their office which required it, and of the rule by which they
framed it. And so by a commendation of those of old, for their walking worthy
of their office, shows how culpable these at present spoken to, were in regard
to their behavior, contrary both to their duty, and to the examples of their
Predecessors, which he describes in the next words.

8 But ye are departed out of the way: ye have caused many to stumble at the
Law: ye have corrupted the covenant of Levi, says the Lord of hosts. But ye
are departed out of the way, etc.] But ye, contrary both to your duty, and to
the examples of your pious Ancestors, are departed out of the way, which the
Law prescribed for you, as well as it did for them, to walk in, and they did
diligently keep to and observe. They by their instructions directed, and by
their good examples led men in the right way of Gods Commandments, and turned
them from iniquity; but ye have caused many to stumble at the Law, (or as in
the margin, to Compare H^se. XIV. the last words.
fall in the Law.) Ye have Tarnov.
been occasion of ruin to them in things concerning the Law, either by
teaching them what is not agreeable to the Law, or not teaching them the right
meaning of it; or by your example contrary to it, ye have caused them, who
thought they might safely be guided by your instructions, and do as they saw
you do, to transgress the Law, and run on in false and evil ways to their
destruction; or, which will be agreeable to the words in the Text of our
Translation, (which Jun. and Trem.
others also give) Diodate's Notes, and Vatab.
give occasion to them by your wickedness to disdain Gods service: (agreeable
to that expression, Romans II.24. The Name of God is blasphemed through you, and
I Sam. II.17. That through the sin of Eli's Sons men abhorred the Sacrifice of
the Lord.)

The words spoken indefinitly give to under-several, or many things, they went
aside from, stand, that in or contrary to the Law of God, and were a cause of
scandal or offense to the People. But if we enquire after particulars, the
foregoing Chapter shows, that they did so in what concerned Gods Offerings and
Sacrifices: and the verses following in this Chapter, viz. 11, etc. that they
did so also in matters concerning Marriage. And Grot.
some, therefore, for explication of this place, refer to Nehemiah 13. from the
4th verse forward, where See Ezra. X.2.
are several offenses against the Law taxed, which seem by the fault of the
Priests to have been occasioned, as the introducing Strangers into the places
belonging to the Temple, and the profanation of the Sabbath, and marrying
strange Wives.

Ye have corrupted the Covenant of Levi, etc.] Agreeable to this expression is
said, Neh. XIII.29. They have defiled the Priesthood, and the Covenant of the
Priesthood, and of Levi. In verse. 4, 5. God mentions his Covenant with Levi.
This Covenant Ab^rb.
required that they should sanctify and honor God by a due observance of his
Ordinances, and teaching and causing others to observe them. By violating the
conditions on their parts they have corrupted and made void that Covenant, and
must not therefore expect from him that life and peace (v. 5.) and all those
benefits which he had on his part promised on keeping Covenant. They belong not
to such Covenant-breakers; and thence are those evils which have befallen, and
shall befall them, contrary to what they vainly, without redressing their
errors, and breach of Covenant, did expect. So he had before threatened them,
verse. 2, and 3. and in the next verse farther declares, 9 Therefore have I also
made you contemptible and base before all the people, according as ye have not
kept my ways, but have been partial in the Law.

Therefore have I also made you contemptible and base before all the People,
etc.] Therefore because they have thus corrupted the Covenant of Levi, etc. and
by their ill administration of their office, had R. D. Kimchi. Abarb.
showed contempt of God, and despised his Name, chapter I.6. therefore, says he,
have I also made you contemptible, or as T^^. Grot.
some render, will I make you contemptible, etc. It will be to the same pass in
such speeches, to speak in the same Language of what is past, and of what is to
come, that which has not been yet done, being as certain when God has said
it, as if it were already past.

According as ye have not kept my ways.] So rendering to them according to
their own dealings, and R. D. Kimchi.
measure for measure. It is that which God of old had declared, as the rule by
which he would go in judging and dealing with those who ought to take care of
honoring him, in looking to the due observance of his Commandments, I Sam.
II.30. Them that honor me will I honor, and they that despise me shall be
lightly esteemed. The Priests, by virtue of Gods Covenant with them, were to be
highly honored and respected by the People: and how zealously be would
vindicate their honor, appears in that Story of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram. But
upon breach of Covenant with him, if they find on the contrary disrespect and
contempt, it is by his just judgment, and by his just judgment they shall so
find, therefore have I also made (or will I make) you contemptible, etc.
according as ye have not kept my ways, but have been partial in the Law.] That
contempt which they cast on him and on his Law, by wresting it out of respect
to persons, that so they might gain favor and respect from them, so honoring
them more then him, and seeking to please them more then him; has he, or will
he, cast back on them, by making them contemptible, even in the eyes of them
from whom they thought to find by that means respect; yea, made or will make
them base before all the People. To this purpose a learned R. D. Kimchi.
Jew expounds the words: and Abarb.
others agree with him, that by being partial in the Law, is for men's sakes to
approve of that which the Law approved not of; and not to reprove men, when
they did contrary to it, as in particular, in that out of respect to those
great men that brought them, they did accept of, and offer illegal Sacrifices,
(as in the former Chapter is showed) and not reject and reprove them for
bringing such things contrary to the Law; whereas perhaps (as Munst. Vatab.
Tirin.
some add) from a poor man they would not have accepted them. But the words
Grot. Ri^. Menoch.
seem more general, and to comprehend any wresting of the law, either out of
favor to themselves or others, when in declaring the meaning thereof, or
determining any thing according to it, they did not deliver the truth, but
respect the persons, in whose case they were to deliver their judgment, and so
accordingly interpreted it in favor or hatred unto them; and, as Grot.
some think, more particularly in case of extortion and usury, they favoring
the oppressors: and this in any kind was contrary to what the Law commands,
Lev. XIX.15. Thou shall not respect the person of the poor, nor honor the
person of the mighty; but in righteousness shall thou judge thy neighbor. And
Deuteronomy. I.17. Ye shall not respect persons. And Deuteronomy. XVI.19. Thou shall not
wrest judgment, thou shall not respect persons. This is to be partial in the
Law: our Margin tells us, it is literally according to the Hebrew, ye have
accepted faces: it is usually elsewhere rendered, to respect persons. These
three expressions are in meaning all one: but our margin gives us likewise
another rendering, viz. Ye have lifted up the face against the Law, viz.
presumptuously done or taught what is contrary to it; which although by Jun.
Trem.
some Interpreters followed; and the word (...) Nasa, does doubtless signify as
well to lift up as to accept, and the meaning be good; yet is by Tarnov.
one found fault with, because the common and received use of the phrase is to
denote So here R. Tanch.
respect of persons, and not elsewhere taken in that sense of lifting up the
face.

10 Have we not all one Father? has not one God created us? why do we deal
treacherously every man against his brother, by profaning the Covenant of our
fathers? Have we not all one father? has not one God created us? etc.] Jun.
Trem.
Some, especially they who render the former words by lifting up the face
against the Law, will have this verse to be the words of the Priests or People,
apologizing for themselves, against that which the Prophet in the following
verses, accuses them for, and reproves them, viz. their contracting unlawful
marriages with Infidels, or Heathenish women: as if lifting up the face against
the Law, which forbad them so to do, they should say, why do ye tax us for our
unlawful marriages with Infidels? was not Adam one common Father to us all?
has not one God created us all? why do ye therefore charge us with treacherous
dealing with our brethren, and profaning the Covenant of our forefathers, in
that we do promiscuously match with our heathen Neighbors? as the learned
Bishop Hall paraphraseth the words according to their meaning. And they in
their Notes take notice of the grounds that these making their excuse do go on,
viz. in that all being from one common Father, and all by one created, they are
all equally lawful as for liberty of contracting marriages with them. And
again, as it is no treacherous dealing therefore with their brethren, so it
cannot be a profanation of the Covenant made by God with their Fathers,
inasmuch as by this means they called others into partaking of the Covenant,
which was a most just thing. Tarnov.
Another going along with them, as to the first part of the verse, and taking
for included therein all that they say, makes yet the latter part, viz. why do
we deal treacherously, etc. to be the Prophets answer unto them, by retorting
on them their own words, and putting it to their own conscience, bidding them
to ask themselves, why do we, that know Gods command for not marrying with the
Gentiles, deal treacherously every man against his [Jew] brother, by casting
off his sister or daughter, whom we have married, to take in her place a
stranger, so profaning the Covenant of our Fathers, by which God required that
they should not pollute themselves with Exodus XXXIV.16.
such marriages, and they did faithfully keep it. But as for the first of these
opinions, it is excepted against by a learned Pisc.
man, as restraining so these words to the Priests, to whom the foregoing words
were spoken, whereas the things, now taxed, were common to all; and the second
seems not much to mend the matter: both make the matter harsh, and require such
an abrupt change of persons in speaking, as the words seem to give no ground
for. They more plainly and clearly flow, if they be all taken as the words of
the Prophet, proceeding in his reproof, but not of the Priests only, as before,
but of all. Grot.
They that in the preceding verse understand by their being partial in the Law,
their partiality in determining in behalf of oppressors and exactors, think
that sin of exaction here especially taxed, and the iniquity of it showed, in
regard that they were all Children of one father Jacob, and so equally free,
and having equal right to justice, according to the Law, without respect of
persons, and by one God created, i. e. made his People: why then do we deal
treacherously every man against his brother, in oppressing him, and by unjust
usury exacting of him, which is a manifest profanation of the Covenant of our
Fathers, or that Law given to them, which forbad to lay usury on any of Gods
People, their brethren, as Exodus XXII.25. Lev. XXV.^6. Deuteronomy. XXIII.19, 20. And
for their ground of this exposition and confirmation of it, they refer us to
the History of the Jews, in those times about which this Prophet lived, as
particularly set down in Nehemiah, chapter V. verse. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, etc. where their
oppression of the poor by usury, and exactions, is described, and a reformation
thereof sought by Nehemiah. With these others agree, who will have here all
wrong dealing taxed. But others, the Jews generally, and diverse Cyril, etc.
Christians, follow another way of exposition, which seems more agreeable and
coherent to the following verses; and that is, (whether with respect to the
foregoing words, as Ribera.
some will, or without respect to them, as some of the Jews, who look on this
as a Ly^^, and see Christ. a Castro.
beginning of a new Prophecy, as R. Tanch.
one speaks, or a new matter of reproof, or a R. Ab. Ezra.
new Section;) that these words are the words of the Prophet reproving them for
what they did under the second Temple, after their return from the Babylonish
captivity, contrary to the Law in what concerned their marriages; in which they
were peccant in two regards. Id. and Abarb.
1. In taking Wives that were of another Nation and Religion. 2. In oppressing
and hard dealing with their Israelitish Wives, either by dismissing them, or
using them despitefully and contumeliously, and denying them what was due to
them, in favor of those strange Wives which they took with them, and preferred
before them: in which kind how peccant they were, both People, and Priests, and
Levites also, is showed at large, Ezra c. IX. This sin the Prophet coming to
reprove, argues, as R. Tanch. Abarb. Hieron. Montan. Ribera, Chapter a Castro,
Menoch.
some observe, and aggravates the hainousness and unreasonableness thereof, in
regard that it is the violation of the tie of a double relation, which should
have kept them from doing it. 1. In that they had all one Father, were of one
kindred and Family, have we not all one Father? and so in violating the rights
of that affinity, did deal treacherously every man with his brother. 2. In that
they were all of one Religion, the People of one God, all acknowledging and
professing to serve him alone, and to observe his Laws, has not one God
created us? and so in doing, as they did, contrary to his Law, profaned the
Covenant of their Fathers, that Covenant by God, who made them his peculiar
People, made with their Fathers; by virtue of which, Abarb. Deuteronomy. XXVI.17, 18.
as he was one God, so they were to be one People separated to him, and not
mingle themselves with the idolatrous Heathen, and particularly by making
marriages with them, Deuteronomy. VII.3. That this meaning may be made plain, it will
be convenient to observe something concerning some of the words; as first, who
is that one Father, which they all have. By him the Ab. Ezra. R Tanch. R. D.
Kimchi. Abarb.
Jews understand to be particularly meant Jacob, the more immediate Father of
the 12. Tribes, from whom they all sprung: and Cyrill, and most Christian
Expositors.
others (many Christian Expositors) understand Abraham, from whom also they all
came, with whom God first made that Covenant, by virtue of which, they, as his
Seed, were accounted his peculiar People, and heirs of the Promise. And of him
that they were wont to boast as their Father, we learn in several passages in
the New Testament, as Joh. VIII.38, 39. and Mat. III.9. Luke I.73.
else where. And Esa. LI.2. God bids them to look unto Abraham as their Father,
whom he called [one, or] alone. So that in respect of either of these it may be
said they had one Father. Nor will it make any difference as to what is thence
urged or concluded here to them: it will be as to the purpose all one which of
them be understood, as likewise if they should name also Isaac, who was between
Abraham and Jacob. Pisc. Diodate.
Others think by this one Father to be meant God, it following, has not one
God created us? and him may they truly so call; and we hear them saying in the
forecited Joh. VIII.41. We have one Father, even God. And thus taken, it would
make for inferring the same conclusion of not dealing treacherously, nor
violating the Covenant made with their Fathers; but as it is Calvin.
observed, would not bring it so close home, nor press it so far upon them, as
if it be understood of their one Father in the flesh, in whom they were by God
received into Covenant, and made his peculiar People, distinct from other
Nations; and ought therefore, by so preserving themselves without mixture with
other profane People, to observe that Covenant without violation of it. If it
should be understood of Adam, (as by Lyra vid. Chapter a Castro.
some it is) this way of arguing would be yet wider and looser, and not much to
conclude against that which seems here in the first place more especially
spoken against, viz. their taking Wives of other Nations, although against
those things joined with it, viz. their putting away the Israelitish Wives
which they had, or taking more strange Wives with them; it so would firmly
conclude according to our Saviors way of arguing, Mat. XIX.4, 5, etc. Yet seems
it most agreeable to the argument of this place, to understand either Abraham
or Jacob.

Has not one God created us?] It seems not ill observed by Chapter a Castro. Grot.
some, that the word of creating, is here not meant in that general
signification, whereby it is common to all men, all being created by God alike,
but in a more restrict signification of making, or framing, or constituting to
be a select People to himself, wherein it was peculiar to Israel his chosen,
whom for that purpose he brought out of Egypt, and did, as it were, form and
model anew. In which sense it is likewise used, Isa. XLIII.1. The Lord that
created thee, O Jacob, and so v. 7. And in the new Testament in much like use,
Ephesians. II.10. We are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good works: for
if any man be in Christ, he is a new creature, II Cor. V.17. Or if it be used
in the more usual sense, it will tend to the same purpose, and conclude with
the same force being thus understood, Has not one God created us? i. e. do not
we, the Jews, all R. D. Kimchi.
acknowledge one Lord, one God the Creator of us, and of all things, and
profess to serve him alone, contrary to other Nations, who do not so
acknowledge him, but serve false Gods? and how then should we all, agreeing in
the true Religion, and by it distinguished from others, violate those respects
and duties which that Religion binds us to observe one toward another, as
brethren and partakers of the same Covenant, which by dealing treacherously or
falsely one with another, we do profane.

Every one against his brother.] The matter according to the exposition we are
speaking of, rather Ab. Ezra. Drus.
seems to require, that it should be said his sister, viz. those Israelitish
women, whom by taking heathenish women with them, or instead of them, they
injured. The word, brother, may therefore be taken, either so as to include the
relation of kindred and family, (which was See Montan. Chr. a Castro, and
Hierom.
accounted brotherhood) whether males or females, sisters as well as brothers:
his wife is meant, (says Abarbinel) as if it sounded, a man against his wife,
Munst.
or else while they so wronged their Wives, they wronged those whose daughters
or sisters they wronged, and dealt treacherously with them.

Why do we every man? This intimates, that the fault spoken of, was very common
among them, many guilty of it; yet not so, that we may think every one was
guilty in that kind, nor the Prophet himself among them: though to show how he,
and all the rest that were members of the same body and community, were
concerned in those sins which were by many among them committed, he speaks in
general, and seems to include all, even himself too. We every man. There is
nothing in the original that expressly denotes every, but indefinitly a man
against his brother, or one against another. The Greek, therefore, as exempting
the Prophet, render not we but ye.

The sin wherein they dealt treacherously, and by it profaned the Covenant of
their Fathers, though not particularly expressed in this verse, yet is in the
next verse set down in express terms, so as to favor the last Exposition.

11 Judah has dealt treacherously, and an abomination is committed in Israel,
and in Jerusalem: for Judah has profaned the holiness of the Lord which he
loved, and has married the daughter of a strange God. Judah has dealt
treacherously, etc.] The People of Judah, or the Jews, together with those
Israelites of the other Tribes, which adjoined themselves with them in their
return from the Babylonish captivity, are accused for treacherous and false
dealing, and committing abomination, as in the other parts of the Land, so in
Jerusalem it self, the chief City R. D. Kimchi. Calv. Grot.
and place of the Temple: where they should have been most careful of their
behavior, and given good example to others, even there they profaned the
holiness of the Lord, which he loved, etc. The Lord is holy, perfect holiness,
his Name holy, and all things more particularly related, or pertaining to him,
holy. His Law, Covenant, and all his Ordinances and Institutions, holy; Israel
his peculiar People, an^ holy People: the Sanctuary or Temple* and all things
therein consecrated to him, holy; Jerusalem, the City of the great God, holy;
yea the whole Land of his inheritance, holy; so that whosoever does not observe
those due respects, which to any of these belong, and preserve with religious
care that holiness which belongs to them, may be said to have profaned the
holiness, which he loved, commanded and required: and so is it differently
expounded by Tig. Vatab.
some, of one of these, by others of another, as, of the Temple, of the People,
etc. But if we consider what is before said of their profaning the Covenant of
their Fathers, and here joined in the accusation of them, that they married the
daughter of a strange God, and what follows afterward concerning their ill and
false dealing with their lawful Israelitish Wives, called the Wives of their
Covenant; we may well assent to them, who by the holiness here said to be
profaned, understand more especially his holy institution of Matrimony among
them, not so much in general, as it was a holy institution at first made in
Paradise, as See Ribera.
some think, but as so limited and restrained among this peculiar People of
God, as that by observing his commands concerning it, they might sanctify him,
and preserve themselves a holy Nation to him, and v. 15. See Hieron. Ribera.
Pareus on verse. 10. Chapter a Castro. and see v. 16. infra.
seek, and propagate a godly Seed, by marrying within themselves, and cleaving
to those Wives as one flesh, and not mixing themselves with Heathens and
Idolaters, by taking wives of their daughters, although by their neglecting his
Commandment, and breaking his Covenant in this kind, all other things that had
the impress of his holiness were at once profaned; his holy People themselves,
by bringing in a mixed spurious generation of half Jews, half Ashdodites,
Ammonites or Moabites, or the like; ( Neh. XIII.24.) his Sanctuary or holy
Temple, by bringing into it such wives and such children; his holy Covenant
made with their lawful wives, while they either l put them away, or wronged
them for the sake of those illegal strange wives, taken either into their
places, or together with them; and so by necessary consequence his whole holy
Law, which he that willingly transgresses in one part Jam. II.10.
is guilty of the breach and profanation of all; and so his holy Name that was
called on them, and himself, who was their God, and commanded them to be holy
as he is holy: in sum, all the holy things of God, (as the Greek
comprehensively renders it) all that holiness which he loved, delighted in,
commanded and required.

Of these words, which he loved, we have in the Margin of our Bibles another
reading, viz. which he ought to love: this is a Translation which some Jun. Trem.
Piscat.
others of good account give, and explain it, which holiness Judah ought to
have so loved, as not to profane it by placing their love on any other to the
violating and profaning of it. And Genev. in d^ Dieu.
others render it otherwise, as, which, i. e. which Lord, loved her, i. e.
Judah. A Id. I. de Dieu.
later very learned man, which, i. e. which Lord, he, that is, Judah, had
loved, viz. formerly, and was espoused to, but now profaned his holiness, and
married the daughter of a strange God. The Spanish renders Judah has defiled
the holiness of the Lord by loving and marrying [or in that he loved and
married] himself to the daughter of a strange God. But among all, none seems
more genuin then that given in the Text of our English Bible, so understood as
we have said, in that so it is opposed to what follows, verse. 16. where he
says, The Lord hates putting away, and that any should take other illegal
wives to his lawful wife, according to that Exposition which there some
follow, those things are contrary to that holiness here spoke of; as those he
hates, so this he loves and requires.

The daughter of a strange God.] Of what Nations they that then transgressed in
this kind took wives, we read Ezra IX.1, 2, etc. from which place, and this, is
manifest, that the prohibition in the Law, Deuteronomy. VII.1. did not only make it
unlawful to take wives of those seven Nations there named only, but of any
other heathenish idolatrous Nation: and so the Maimon. in Issure bia^, c. 12..
1.
Jewish Doctors, by comparing the words of Ezra with that Command there given,
conclude. And such women of these Nations, which had not one Father, (verse.
10.) nor acknowledged one true God that created them, as Israel did, are called
daughters of a strange God. As those that acknowledge, worship, and serve the
true God, are called his sons and daughters, Deuteronomy. XXXII.19. so they that
worshipped any strange God, are by like reason here called the daughters of
that God: hence the Sea R. D. Kimchi and Abarb^nel.
Jews say, He that marries a heathen woman is as if he made himself son-in-law
to an Idol.

12 The Lord will cut off the man that does this: the master and the scholar
out of the Tabernacles of Jacob, and him that offers an offering unto the
Lord of hosts. The Lord will cut off the man that does this, etc.] So with ours
most Interpreters render it, as if the Lord here threatening to punish him that
did such things, and transgressed in that manner spoken of, threatened to cut
off and destroy him, whether such or such were his condition, as is here in the
following words described. But a learned L. de Dieu, and Vatab. 4o and 8o.
man well notes, that the word (...) La-Ish may according to the more frequent
use of the letter or preposition, (...) L, for a note of the dative case, be
rather rendered to the man, i. e. from the man, then by omitting it, as ours and
others do simply the man, as threatening to cut off not so much, or not only his
person, but those that were in such or such relation to him. And so the Chalde
Paraphrase renders it, The Lord shall destroy to the man that does this, etc.
Those that he threatens to cut off, whether we understand the person himself
sinning, or those related to him, are in the next words thus described, the
Master and the Schol^r (whether he be so or so) and in the Margin of our
Bibles, as another reading we have, or, him that waketh, and him that
answers, which (as a Jewish Expositor notes) is the proper signification of
the words, though diversely interpreted by others, Ab. Walid. and R. Tanch.
some rendering, him that calls, and him that answers, seeming to take the
word in an active sense, as Munste^. etc.
others do, him that wakeneth. Vulg. Lat. and Kimchi in Rad.
Others, the master and the Schol^r, Tig.
others, the Author and him that obeieth him; Calv.
the Lord and the servant, Stokes. (...)
Priest or Laic. The Chalde, son and son's son, and the like: of which may be
said, as that Jewish Expositor says of the Chalde, that they render Chald.
R.D. Kimchi, R. Tanch.
by way of Interpretation, or by giving the meaning, as they thought the words
to import, not as they literally signify. And as to the following words, and
him that offers an offering, Chald. R.D. Kimchi, R. Tanch.
some expound as a description of the Priests and their sons: as Castal.
others do the former words likewise, to be a description of the Priests and
other Levites, Diodate, Dutch Notes.
Officers about the Temple, as Porters and Singers, and the like. Jun. Tr^m.
Pisc. Grot.
Others render, when (or although) he shall offer a gift to the Lord to make
atonement for his sin. And so accordingly do they differently give their
Expositions of the whole; as Jun. Trem.
some, that the Lord will cut off both the man that transgressed in this kind,
and also his abettors and defendors, though he would seek to expiate his fault
by gifts and Sacrifices offered to the Lord by Drus.
himself or others. Pisca^.
Others that he would cut off from him, either himself that looked after such
women, or from him that defended him, those sons begotten of them, yea though
he offered gifts, etc. A Lud. de Dieu.
l^te very learned man, having considered the different Expositions of others,
gives thus his own opinion, that in this verse is threatened punishment to those
that were guilty of that treacherous dealing in the precedent verse mentioned,
viz. that God would cut off from them, 1. Such who should watch for (or over)
them in (or with) prayers and admonitions. 2. Such as should answer them, when
they should ask concerning the Law. 3. Him that should offer to God such
Sacrifices as they brought. So that together he may be understood to threaten
the Priests, (spoken of in the former verses of the Chapter) that they should
be removed from their office, and likewise all the People (spoken of in the
verse immediately foregoing) that they should be deprived of their Priests. But
to me there seems no more facile or perspicuous Exposition then that given by
that learned R. Tanch.
Jew, at first mentioned, (agreeable likewise to what R. D. Kimchi, Abarb.
others of the same Nation give) viz. that (he will destroy to or from them,
or) they shall (be destroyed, or) perish: so that there shall be none left
among them, to whom shall pertain (or agree) any of those Epithets that import
life, [such as are waking and answering, as if this were a Ch^is. a Castro.
proverbial kind of expression to denote as much as any living soul, as if he
should say, I will cut off every living soul, so that there shall be none in
his house, that may call or answer, none at all living.] And this imprecation
(or menace) says he, comprehends the transgressors in this kind of all Israel;
as he says, (first) out of the Tabernacles of Jacob, and then particularly
applies it to such of the Priests as did so, saying, and him that offers an
offering to the Lord of hosts, (or, and of him that offers,) viz. out of the
habitations, both of the common People of Israel, or the Laity, and also of the
Priests; which last Exposition comes nigh to what the Greek has, from or out
of the Tabernacles of Jacob, and from or out of those that bring an offering to
the Lord Almighty: although in the rendering the words immediately preceding,
they be very wide from any yet mentioned, rendering until he be brought down,
which Capell thinking they read (...) Ad yeunneh for (...) Er veoneh.
some ascribe to the reading it differently from what is now read in the
Hebrew: But whether so* or that they did it by way of Interpretation (as we
before said of others) thinking it a proverbial Speech, and that to be the
importance of it, which they set down, though no^ in a litteral rendering, it
will not concern us to enquire; our business chiefly being to see what meaning
the Hebrew Text as now read (which we doubt not to be the true and incorrupted
reading) will naturally bear, and to adjust with it our English Translation,
and sometimes, as occasion gives, others also, from it, as now read, derived.

Out of the Tabernacles of Jacob.] The Chalde Paraphrase renders, Out of the
Cities of Jacob. From the ancient and frequent use of living in Tents or
Tabernacles in those Countries, and the long custom of their Ancestors of
living in such, was the word afterward used for any habitations, Cities, or
Houses in which they dwelt: and sometimes Flac. Illyr.
for the Congregation o^ Company of the People themselves that dwelt together
in them. So that by cutting off these sinners out of the Tabernacles of Jacob,
may be understood the extirpating them out of the Land, the dwellings, or the
Bishop Hall.
Congregation of Israel. Dutch Notes.
Some thinking this spoken more particularly of the Priests or Levites, think
by this expression to be meant the casting them out of the Temple, or from the
Altar, so that they should not be admitted or suffered any more to serve there.
But this seems to be too narrow a restriction of this menace only to the
Priests, which (as appears out of the foregoing verse) is denounced against all
Judah and Israel. And though it appear out of the forecited books of Ezra and
Nehemiah, that some of the Priests were guilty in this kind by taking strange
wives, yet was the sin more general, and so the punishment menaced seems
extended to all of all sorts that had so done, whether Priests or Lay People.
By Oecolamp.
some the word Tabernacles is thought used to put them in mind of their
unsettled condition.

13 And this have ye done again, covering the Altar of the Lord with tears,
with weeping, and with crying out, insomuch that he regards not the offering
any more, or receives it with good will at your hand. And this have ye done
again.] Again (...) Shenith, secondly, or a second time, or in the second
place, or Piscat.
this second thing; so that he seems proceeding in his reproof to tax them of a
second crime added to a former. The former, to which this now to be spoken of,
is second, is by Aben Ezra, R. D. Kimchi, R. Tanchum, and several of the
Christian Interpreters.
diverse taken to be that in the foregoing Chapter, and the beginning of this,
taxed; their offering to God illegal Sacrifices, and in illegal manner, and
showing contempt of his Altar, and want of due regard to his service. R.
Salomo, Abarb. etc.
Others look on this as called second, in respect to that spoken of, verse. 11.
viz. their profaning the holiness of the Lord by marrying the daughters of
strange Gods, idolatrous wives; to which, though the sins after spoken of, have
respect, and be of the same kind, yet it is another additional degree of it, an
heightning and doubling of it: so that the word again or secondly may well be
referred to it. And it will not much matter which of the two opinions be
followed. [But the Greek, and such as follow them here, (as the printed
Arabic) render the word (...) Shenith much differently from both, viz. things
which I hated, See Schindler in (...).
taking, it seems, this word to be of the same signification with (...) Sane in
the 16. verse, which signifies hating, and is a different Root.] The fault with
which they are taxed is, that they covered the Altar of the Lord with tears,
with weeping and crying out, etc. which by the generality of the Jewish and
most of Christian Expositors, is understood of the effect of their treacherous
dealing with their lawful Israelitish wives, whom, by either dismissing them to
take others, or by taking with them strange women, to whom they showed more
respect, love, and kindness then to them, and with them dealt unkindly, and
otherwise then they ought, depriving them of what was due to them; they caused
to pour forth abundance of tears before the Altar of the Lord, as it were
covering it with them, Oecolamp.
from the sight of God, or which God looked on R. Tanch.
as if they fell on his Altar, and to utter there their sad lamentations and
doleful complaints for the injuries done them, as desiring help, redress, and
justice from God: by seeing and hearing of which he was so far moved and
provoked, that he would no more regard or receive with good will any offering
that was there offered by the Priests, Pelican.
either for themselves or others, who had committed such things. Yet this
Exposition, though by so many agreed on, Calvin rejects, thus rendering the
words, And this secondly have ye done, by covering the Altar of the Lord with
tears, with weeping and crying, because there is no more any respect had to the
offering, nor any good will or acceptable thing received at your hand: giving
then the meaning to this purpose, that the Priests by their ill behavior in
Gods service, so provoked him, as that he would no more respect any offerings
offered by them, nor accept them with good will and delight: which displeasure
of God the People perceiving, instead of coming with praises and rejoicing into
the Courts of God, now came only full of grief, with tears and cries, as
thinking all they did to no purpose for the pleasing of God. But in this his
way of interpretation, he seems not either to make the sense of the words, or
the connection of them so clear, as to persuade Pis^at. Diodate, Dutch Notes.
those, who otherwise have great respect for him, to follow him in it; but they
rather choose to embrace the former Exposition. There is another Interpretation
given by an ancienter Lyra.
Expositor, who understands these tears, etc. of tears shed by those who are
accused before, of such ill doings as are spoken of, as if they in show of
sorrow for their offenses, did approach Gods Altar with many tears and
lamentations, and cries, as desirous of pardon, yet still continued to do the
same wicked things, and would still retain their strange wives; for which their
false dealing, God refuses any more to respect or accept their offerings,
though they cry never so much and so loud. This would be no ill meaning: but
the first mentioned is more approved and followed, as best agreeing with what
follows. [Nor is that way followed which Cyril mentions, as if by the tears,
etc. were understood such as were drawn from the covetous offerers, Chapter I. ver.
13.
loath to part with those things which they were to offer, as sorry for the loss
they were to be at; wherefore he that loves a cheerful giver, could not with
good will accept things with so ill will offered.] There is yet another way by
a very learned L. de Dieu.
man (in the foregoing verse mentioned) given, which making it an aggravation
of the punishment in the foregoing verse denounced; as if having there,
according to his Interpretation, threatened to cut off from them the Priest that
should watch over them, give them answers out of the Law, and offer gifts for
them, he should here add, And this secondly shall ye do, ye shall cover my
Altar with tears weeping and cries: why? because there shall be no more respect
to any offering of yours, etc. But it will be safe to follow the first, and
more generally received Exposition.

14 Yet ye say, wherefore? because the Lord has been witness between thee and
the wife of thy youth, against whom thou have dealt treacherously: yet is she
thy Companion, and the wife of thy Covenant. Yet ye say, etc.] Yet ye Abarb.
are so impudent as to stand up in defense of your sin, and to say, Wherefore,
etc. or as others, if ye say, wherefore? i. e. wherefore is the Lord so angry,
that he will no more accept any offering from our hands? the answer is; because
the Lord has been witness of the contract, or matrimonial promises* made
according to his Law in his Name, viz. with invocations of it, and calling him
to witness, (and therefore called the Covenant of God, Prove. II.17.) between
thee and the wife of thy youth, i. e. which thou tookest in thy youth, with
whom thou now dealest treacherously, though she were thy companion, made so
according to the institution of God, that thou should Genesis II.24. Mat. 19 5.
cleave unto her as one flesh with thy self.

And the wife of thy Covenant.] By mutual covenant espoused to thee; the
conditions of which covenant God R. Tanch.
being witness to it, looks on as necessarily binding on both parts, and
requires the due performance of it from both: and therefore hearing her just
complaint of the breaking of it on your parts, moved with just indignation,
will not accept of you, or look on any offering from you such treacherous
Covenant-breakers, as pleasing to him. This seems a plain Exposition of the
words, and in which will be included or easily reduced to it what is by others
said; as what Kimchi says, that by, because the Lord has been witness between
thee, etc. is meant, that whatever they pretend, God sees, and is witness,
that they did not love their wives; their heart was not toward them, but they
dealt treacherously with them, and so gave them just cause of complaining to
the Lord: as likewise what Abarbinel says, who makes the import of the
question, wherefore? which impudently standing on their own justification they
asked, to be, wherefore do those women weep and complain? as if they knew no
cause they had: and then explains the answer much according to what was at
first said, that it was because God was witness to those rites and instruments
of matrimonial contract and covenants made between them, which the women having
kept unviolated on their parts, and behaved themselves as faithful companions
and covenanted wives to them, when they saw them violated by their husbands
taking other wives with them, did address themselves to the Lord their witness,
and complained of the wrong done to them: By which moved, he shows himself
justly displeased for such their treacherous dealing.

By Gods being witness, See Ribera, Chapter a Castro, etc.
some understand his precept or command for keeping Covenants inviolable
betwixt man and wife, according to the first institution of marriage, Genesis
II.24. By wife of youth, Grot.
some understand a wife taken in her youth or flower of her age, which being
now past, they set her at naught, and See Hierom.
either put her away, or took other strange wives, whom they more loved, with
her: and by companion and wife of covenant, a partaker of the same holy rites,
(or Religion) and in the same Covenant of God. And it is by Chr. a Castro,
Tirin, etc.
diverse observed that here are put, as several aggregations of their fault in
thus injuring their wives, 1. the witness of God, 2. the wife of thy youth, 3.
thy companion, and 4. the wife of thy Covenant. [ Kimchi observes that by these
expressions is denoted the dereliction of any Israelitish wife legally married,
whether in youth or age, inasmuch as the notion of companion and wife of
Covenant agrees to either.]

15 And did not he make one? yet had he the residue of the spirit: and
wherefore one? that he might seek a godly seed: therefore take heed to your
spirit, and let none deal treacherously against the wife of his youth. And did
not he make one? yet had he the residue [Marg. Or, excellency] of the spirit,
and wherefore one? etc.] This verse is confessedly difficult. It appears so by
the several different Expositions that are given of it. We shall in the first
place take notice of that which seems most agreeable to our Translation in the
Text. And did not he, i. e. that one God who created all, verse. 10. make one?
i. e. one man, and one woman, made out of the rib of that one man, one only
pair; so that that one man had only one wife, though he had the residue of the
spirit, Buxtorf. Vindic p. 568.
being the Father of spirits, and so could have at his pleasure created more
spirits or souls, and infused them into more women, so that that one man might
have had more wives if God had so pleased. But now he gave him only one, and
made only one couple, and that for this end, that they might in chaste wedlock
and sincere love, and undivided affection, propagate a godly seed or holy seed
to God: whose example, therefore, ye ought to look on as a perpetual Law set to
you: and therefore in imitation of that first man, take heed you also every one
to your spirit; that spirit by God infused into you, that ye impart and
communicate it only to one, and that with sincere affection, and let none of
you deal treacherously against the wife of his youth, by despising or
relinquishing her, or taking any other strange wife with her. This seems an
easy and very probable Interpretation, and the rendering is agreeable to the
words, without force or violence to any of them, or to the construction. And it
will be confirmed by our Savior's way of arguing against divorce, (and
consequently Polygamy,) Matt. XIX.4, 5, 6. Have ye not read that he which made
them at the beginning, made them male and female, etc. by which is well
expounded this expression here, did not he make one? that is one couple, which
by that relation, as he there adds, became one flesh, and are no more two but
one flesh, one man, as ( Genesis I.27.) they both together are called, and
therefore should be of one mind and one spirit also, the unity of which they
ought faithfully to preserve, without dealing treacherously one with the other,
to the making a division betwixt them, or by taking in strangers to corrupt
that holy Seed by God required, and introduce a spurious unsanctified
generation, like that by such means brought in, Genesis VI.2, etc. But though this
seem a plain and good Exposition, yet because far different ones are by others
given, it will be convenient to take notice of some of them at least, lest we
should be thought to take this because others were not considered.

In the next place, therefore, we may take notice of that reading, which the
ancient Latin Translation gives, Nonne unus fecit, and residuam spiritus ejus
est, etc. which, according to the Doway English Version of it, is, did not
(...) make, and the residue of the spirit is his? or, as it may sound, and [it]
is the residue of his spirit. They that follow this reading, wherein one is the
nominative case, differ in their Expositions; for if it be asked, what did one
make? ^ome understand one man, and one woman, Adam and Eve; which was the
residue of his spirit: of whose spirit? whether of the spirit of God or the
man? this Jerome shows to have been a doubt betwixt Interpreters even in his
time. If of God; then they expound it, that God having residue of the same
spirit, i. e. Ribera, Corn. a Lapide, Menoch. etc.
like in kind, and of the same nature to that which he had infused into the
man, infused it into the woman taken out of him, that so they might be of one
mind, and joined in mutual affection. And to the like purpose Chr. a Castro.
they that expound it, the remainder of the spirit of Adam, viz. that into the
woman was inspired the like spirit as into him. Sa, and see Chr. a Castro, and
Cor. a Lapide.
Others, by that which he made, understand Eve, into which he inspired the
remainder of the spirit, i. e. the like spirit, or of the same kind, that he
had inspired into Adam; and then proceed in like manner as the other, as to the
scope of the words: and then he adds, what does one seek but thee Seed of God?
i. e. for what end did God do so? so join them into whom he breathed the like
spirit, but for the propagation of a godly seed of men that might serve him?
which by your taking strange heathenish wives will not be preserved, but
necessarily adulterated. For caution, in which kind, he infers, keep ye then,
(or therefore) your spirit, i. e. say some of them, Chr. a Castro, Menoch.
your wives, which are the remainder of your spirit, as it were making one soul
with you, and wrong them not; or, ^irin.
your affection, which from that relation ought to be in you toward them: or
(as others more generally) your souls and spirits, from committing any such sin
by taking strange wives to the wrong of your lawful wives, which from your
youth you have had: or, Chr. a Castro, Verse. Tig. and see Tarnov.
as you love your own soul and spirit, take heed of doing so. Thus they who
follow that rendering. A learned L. de Dieu.
man, who does not farther follow it, yet if the words be so rendered, did not
one make? thinks this would be the meaning, That the one, viz. God, with whom
is the excellency of the spirit, yea so great abundance of it, that there is
still remainder of it with him, did make that which is in the end of the
foregoing verse said, That the wife should be a companion to the man, and in
covenant joined with him. And what in that does he look after? he seeks a Seed
of God, a divine or godly Seed, of which he may be called the Author and
Father. Therefore take heed to your spirit that you offend not against him,
(with whom is abundance of the spirit, and who by that abundance most wisely
ordered Matrimony,) by dealing treacherously with or against your lawful wives.
This Exposition he sets down, but does not acquiesce in it, but gives another
which he more approves of, which is thus; And not one, i. e. none does this to
whom there are any remainders of spirit: and how should any one do it, seeking
a Seed of God? take heed therefore to your spirit, that none deal
treacherously, etc. that the sense may be, Thou dealest treacherously against
thy wife, who is thy companion, and joined with thee in covenant. None does
this, See Chr. a Castro, Sens. 4.
who has any thing at all of the spirit of God remaining in him, and how
should any do it, who seeks a Seed of God? If therefore ye seek that, take heed
to your spirit that it deal not treacherously, etc. Another sense he also
mentions, viz. For he made not one alone, and abundance of the spirit is with
him: and why, or to what purpose, should he have made one seeking a Seed of
God? Take heed therefore, etc. the sense is; God would that the woman should be
a companion to the man, and his confederate; for he made not only man, not a
male alone, but a woman also, and that most wisely, inasmuch as he has the
remainder of the spirit; and to what purpose should he do it, whereas he sought
a Seed of God, which could not be born without wedlock? Therefore take heed,
etc. But this, he says, pleases him not so well, as that before it, inasmuch
as the word (...) Shear, signifies not excellency (abundance as it notes
excellency) but remainder only.

Having seen this variety of Expositions, (besides what we shall after see)
among Christian Interpreters, if we shall look into the Jews, we shall find yet
more, they almost all differing one from another. The Chalde Paraphrast, the
ancientest among them, thus paraphraseth the words: Was not Abraham one alone,
from whom was created (or procreated) the World, or a World? (It may be
supposed he respects the blessings promised to Abraham, that from him should be
a multitude of Nations, and in his Seed all the Families of the Earth should be
blessed, Genesis XII.3. and XVII.4, etc. and XXII.17. or, that by the World he
understands the People of Israel, God's peculiar in the World, Genesis XXXII.8,
9.) and what did that one seek, but that there might remain to him an offspring
from before God, or in the sight of God: Take heed therefore to your selves,
and deal not falsely with the wife of thy youth. R Salomo Jarchi, though after
him many ages, yet the eldest Commentator, gives an Exposition to this purpose,
according to his own words, See Buxtorf. Vindic. p. 568.
and as by Abarbinel explained; Did not God make one, i. e. one pair, Adam and
Eve, and not one man with two women? and the residue of the spirit was to him,
or was his, i. e, to, or in, Adam the first man: the rest of the spirits of men
were in him, from him they all proceeded. And if so, why does one, who is in
marriage, seek to find occasions against his wife, which is coupled to him, and
which is the Seed of God? why does he prosecute her so as to despise her? This
is his chief, or only Exposition, according to what is in the printed Copies,
and what is reported from him by Abarbinel. But in a Manuscript Copy there is
before this put another Exposition different from it, viz. to this sense, Did
not the holy God prepare a help for Adam (or man) and join to him his wife at
the beginning? and the remainder of the spirit was to him; (or, his spirit
remained unto him) but now another See Number. 5.14, and 30. and chapter 14.24.
spirit is come upon him to hate her, and he has chosen to him the daughter of
a strange God: and why one? he seeks, (or what does that one seek?) a
daughter of Israel, which is the Seed of holiness. This I must desire the
Reader to examine by some other manuscript Copy, if he meet with any; and for
that end I have put the Hebrew words, as they are in that Copy which I had use
of. (...)

Another Exposition he likewise mentions out of the ancient Rabbis, in which
the words are made, as it were, a Dialogue betwixt the People and the Prophet;
as if those that had married strange wives, coming together to the Prophet,
said, did not Abraham do so, who took to him Hagar with his wife? and he
answered, But the residue of the spirit (or excellency of spirit) was with him;
his meaning was not as yours; he set not his eyes upon her; he had another
meaning. They said to him, and what did that one seek, what was his meaning? he
says to them, That he might have a Seed of God. Another also in the manuscript
Copy to this purpose, as if the People did object, Did not one make us? did not
he that created Israel, create the Nations also? why does he make it unlawful
for us to join in marriage with them? are not also all the rest of the spirits
his? the Prophet did answer, And what does that one require? a Seed of God.
Take heed, therefore, unto your spirit, and let not thy spirit deal falsely
with the wife of thy youth.

The last but one of these is plainly the same with what David Kimchi gives, as
his Fathers opinion, (without mentioning either R. Salomo, or any other from
whom he took it,) only a little more explained, viz. That the first are the
words of the People to the Prophet, Did not Abraham, our Father, who was one,
do so as we do, who let alone his wife, and married Hagar his Maid, although
there was in him excellency of spirit, and he was a Prophet? then the Prophet's
answer in the next words, What did that one seek? a Seed of God: as if he
should say, When he married Hagar, he did it not but to seek a Seed of God,
because he had no Seed by Sarah his wife, See Kimchi on verse. 10.
and withal he did not deal falsely with his wife, because by her good will,
and her command, he did it. But do you take heed to your spirit, and let not
any of you deal treacherously with the wife of his youth, to leave her and
marry the daughter of a strange God. That which he gives as his own
interpretation is, Abraham, who was one, and the Father to all that come after
him, in his Faith, did not so as ye do: for he followed not his lust, neither
married any So a MS.
that was lawful to him, ( Buxt. Bibl.
no not Sarah, no not of his As other Editions.
own flesh, or kindred;) but that he might leave a Seed of God, as he commanded
to leave Seed, saying, Increase and multiply, Genesis I.28. And by the word (...)
Shear, he says is understood excellency, not as in other Expositions, residue
of the spirit. [To this opinion, of making Abraham the One here spoken of,
several See Calvin, Drus. Vatab. Paraeus, Stokes, etc.
Christians also incline: and amongst them Grotius, who yet in the expounding
the other words differs from them, by the words which they take to signify
excellency of spirit, he taking to be signified, that they, the Israelites,
were the residue of his spirit, i. e. all drew and derived their spirit from
his: and then what is rendered, Take heed to your spirit, understands, restrain
or refrain your Anger.] The changings of persons and numbers here in the
Hebrew, (as, Take ye heed to your spirits, in the plural number and second
person, then the wife of thy youth in the singular, then let him not deal
treacherously in the third person, without expressing who is meant, whereas it
might seem more agreeable to what precedes to say, do not ye or thou, which
some supply by putting in any, let not any, or let none deal, etc. So R.
Salomo, and Ab. Ezra,
others making the preceding word spirit the nominative case, that is, and let
not your spirit deal treacherously, etc.) are ways of change so usual in the
Dialect of the Scripture, that none that looks into the Original thereof, can
raise any scruples or difficulties from it.

Abarbinel having considered and recited Kimchi's Exposition, as likewise
showed how the opinion of those, who understand that One of Adam, is, as he
supposes, to be managed most agreeably to the scope of the words, ( viz. that
the first words be taken as an objection to the Prophet that reproved them for
their taking strange wives; We are all the children of the first man Adam,
children of one Father, and then none can be accounted a strange woman; which
is that which is said, did not one, i. e. the holy God at first create one man
alone? and the residue of the spirit was with him, i. e. the rest of the
spirits came forth of his loins, viz. of that first Adam, who was one: and then
that the other words be the Prophets answer; to this purpose: Will you make
your condition to be equal, or like that of the first man Adam, when he was
alone in the World? for he did not seek ought but a Seed of God, children that
should serve God; not following after his concupiscence as ye do, and therefore
it is meet that ye Take heed to your spirits, etc. which Exposition, how clear
it is, I will not examine:) yet seeing that neither Adam nor Abraham are
mentioned in the Text, thinks the words are capable of another more simple
Exposition, which he thus gives, And not one has done it, viz. not one only
among you has committed this evil. So that you may say, shall one man sin, and
will thou be wrath with all the Congregation? (as Number. XVI.22.) One man alone
among you has not done this; so as that to the rest, their spirit is with
them, i. e. they keep entire their soul and spirit, which shall return unto God
who gave it. And if it were but one alone among you, I would ask him what he
did seek by this marriage? whether he did seek that the children, which were
born unto him should be a Seed of God? this is not possible as long as their
mother is the daughter of a strange God. And seeing the matter is so, that ye
have all transgressed, not one only of you, and seeing that he that so
transgresses in this, knows of a truth, that his Seed will not be the Seed of
God, it concerns you, that ye take heed to your spirit, (for there is nothing
more precious to a man then his soul) and that you keep your spirit, that it
break not forth after its lusts, and then it will not, (or let it not, viz.
that spirit) deal treacherously with the wife of thy youth; Because, etc.

This is a literal Interpretation of his words: and this his opinion a learned
Arias Montanus.
Christian embraces; but a modern Aben Dana in Miclal Yophi, on the place.
Jew who cites it, having considered it, prefers another of his own, wherein he
takes by the One to be meant Israel, whom God chose to be to himself One
peculiar People among all Nations, a People that should dwell alone, and not be
reckoned among the Nations, (as Balaam speaks of them, Number. XXIII.9.) and were
therefore to preserve themselves a holy People, and to keep their Genealogy and
offspring entire, not mingled with other Nations, nor making marriages with
them, whereby the holy Seed, the Seed of God might be mingled with the daughter
of a strange God. So that the Prophets reproof here will run thus, Did not God
make Israel one Nation in the Earth, and to him was excellency of spirit, i. e.
did not God give to Israel, that one Nation, an excellent spirit above all
Nations? and what is it that that one seeks, or should seek? It is a Seed of
God, a Seed that God has blessed to take (or in taking) a wife of the
daughters of Israel, who are the Seed of God, children of the living God; and
not the daughter of a strange God, Therefore take heed to your spirit, lest
there be made a breach in that high degree and excellency which God has
imparted to you, in making you one holy People, separate from all other People.
And this Exposition he confirms, by looking back to the 10th and 11th verses,
Have we not all one Father, etc. which he will have to import, That God our God
is one, and he is our Father, who created us to be to him a peculiar People,
one People of one God, and if we take strange wives of the Nations of the
Earth, we shall deal treacherously every one against his brother, and profane
the holy Covenant of our Fathers, our Seed, which is the holiness of the Lord,
which he loves.

There are yet other Expositions ancienter then some of the forementioned,
which yet because the R. Tanchum.
Author, from whom I take them, is not yet printed, as the others are, and in
some consideration to the Expositions themselves, I put in the last place. He
tells us that the meaning of the words is said (by more perhaps, because he
names no particular, though the words in which he gives it, are expressly Aben
Ezra's;) to be, That there is not any among you but has done this, that the
construction of the words, with a supply of what is to be understood, may run
thus, There is not one of you that has done, (...) Cedat, according to the
Law, and his spirit (or whose spirit) remains to him, so as that it has not
been mingled with the daughter of a strange God. This Exposition, though he
approve not of, yet it may be observable in regard that it agrees with the
usual reading of the LXX, or Greek Version, which has (...) which being read
without an Interrogation, though it is usually read with one, would sound, And
he has not done that which is good, and there is remainder of his spirit:
where by he (seeing it is to be asked who is meant by it) it will be the
readiest and plainest way to understand any one, that by (...), he has not
done, may be meant the same as by (...), there is not that does, i. e. not one
that does good, Romans III.12. and so then there is not any one ((...) Echad,
one) that has done good, and there is a remainder of his spirit; (or reading
the last words only, with an Interrogation, and is there any remainder of his
spirit? i. e. so as that there is a remainder of his spirit, or his spirit is
entire. This being allowed, it will be all one with that Jewish Exposition
mentioned, the one's supply of Cedat, according to the Law well answering to
the others (...) good: and if so, all that I shall at present say is, That then
this Interpretation is not novel, and withal, that perhaps there is no reason
why (...), not good, should be changed into (...), as a late learned Lud.
Capell.
man would have it, that so he might have occasion of finding fault with the
ordinary reading in the Hebrew.

This Exposition R. Tanchum having cited, rejects, for this reason, because
that fault was not so general, as that all may be said to be guilty of it, but
only some particular persons, who are reckoned up in Esdras, chapter X.18, etc. and
Nehem. XIII.28. except they may therefore be all accounted guilty, because they
did not disapprove it. Another Exposition; therefore, he gives of his own, viz.
And there is not one who has done this, and has his spirit remaining to him,
i. e. but shall certainly perish in his sin. Then he asks, as by way of
derision, and what is the end or purpose of any one in doing this? does he
thereby seek a holy Seed that shall set it self to obey God therefore it
behooves you to look to your selves, as you would save (...) That ye keep your
Souls in (or, by) abstaining from that.
your spirits, that you abstain, (or to keep your souls, by abstinence from so
doing) and that he deal not treacherously; the third person being put for the
second, as in many places it is done, i. e. and do not thou, or you, deal
treacherously with the wife, of thy, or your youth, he speaking to them in the
second person.

There being this variety of Expositions irreconcilable between themselves, I
knew not how better to make way for the Reader to examine them, and judge of
them, and so to enquire after the truth, then by thus giving him the chief of
them at large: and for more facilitating yet the matter, it may not be amiss to
give the bare signification of the words, which are so diversely expounded, as
they stand in the original Text, which are (...) Velo Echad, and not one, (...)
Asah, has done, or made, (...) Vsear ruah lo, and the remainder (or, as some
will, excellency) of spirit to him (...) Vmah Haechad, and why, or what? one,
(...) Mebak-kesh, seeking, or seeks, (...) Zera Elohim, a Seed of God. From
the different putting together and construction of these words, and
distinguishing them, and reading them either with or without an interrogation,
arise these so different senses; which when the Reader shall have well
considered, he shall perhaps find the first, which is according to our English
Translation, in the Text or the last of the Jewish, which is R. Tanchum's, most
easily appliable to the words, and according to either of them, and indeed of
all, they will be a forcible argument against either their putting away their
legal Israelitish wives, or taking with them other strange wives; yea more
generally against either divorce, or Polygamy, all treacherous or unfaithful
dealing against the covenant of the Marriage bed; which is also farther
expressed in the following verse.

16 For the Lord, the God of Israel says that he hates putting away: for one
covers violence with his garment, says the Lord of hosts, therefore take
heed to your spirit, that ye deal not treacherously. For the Lord God of Israel
says, that he hates putting away, (or as in the Margin) to put away, etc.] In
this verse also are several Interpretations, and it has its difficulties, of
which our Translators give notice, by their putting in the Margin, as a
different rendering, of which the first words are capable, If he hate her, put
her away. And this marginal reading is agreeable to what most ancient
Interpreters, to omit modern, have it: so the Greek and ancient Latin, and
Arabic, If thou hate her, put her away; and so the ancientest among the Jews,
the Chalde Paraphrast. Yet neither is the other, which ours follow in the Text,
novel: they are both mentioned in the Tract. Gittin in the end,
Talmud, and since that, by such Expositors as have followed, so as you may
perceive they doubted which to prefer, though some inclining more to the one,
others to the other. Kimchi following that which the Chalde has, makes no
mention of the other; Aben Ezra following the other, as the truer in his
opinion, mentions not that. R. See the MS, for the printed Copy is imperfect.
Salomo only tells us of both without preferring either: and so does Abarbinel
and R. Tanchum. So that it will be necessary to take some notice of both, that
so the Reader may at last use his own judgment which he will follow; which will
be the better done when he shall have likewise considered the following words,
which are in our Translation rendered, for one covers violence with his
garment. Concerning the Exposition of which words there is likewise no little
difference betwixt Interpreters, both concerning the construction of them, viz.
who, or what one it is, that is said to cover, and what to be covered, or which
with which is covered, the violence with the garment, or the garment with
violence; and concerning the meaning of this expression. 1. As to the
Construction, that which our Translators follow in the Text, makes the person
spoken of, ( viz. he that does that wrong to his wife whom he puts away,) to
be him that covers; and violence to be that which he covers, and his garment to
be that with which he covers it. For one (say they) covers, i. e. He
whosoever he be that does this, as Bishop Hall well paraphraseth it, covers
violence with his garment: so taking the Preposition (...) Al, which otherwise
signifies, upon, or above, here to signify the same that usually the
Preposition (...) Be does in construction of Verbs, i. e. with. So do, besides
some other modern Tig. Jun. Trem. Piscat.
Interpreters, some ancient Jews also take it to do, as the Chalde Paraphrast,
and R. Tanchum; although the first of these does not render the former words as
ours do, but, If thou hate her put her away, yet in these he so takes the
particle (as we said) to signify with, rendering, and cover not sin with thy
garment. That he changes the person from he to thou, his to thy, is by the
liberty of a Paraphrast, that gives the meaning according as he takes the
intent to be, not of a litteral Interpreter. But whereas he puts in As likewise
the Syriack does.
not, which is not in the Text, this Grotius solves, by saying that he read it
interrogatively, And shall, or may any so doing cover his iniquity with his
garment? which may likewise be applied to what R. Tanchum says, who says that
the first words being interpreted, when a man hates his wife let him put her
away, ( i. e. it is permitted to him to put her away) viz. by a legal Bill of
divorce, that so another Israelite may marry her in a legal way, and he do not
deceive her, by taking another strange wife unto him; the construction of these
must be, and let him not cover violence with his garment: and so a Latin
Tigurin.
Version of good account renders it with an Interrogation, shall he therefore
cover violence with his garment? That which from what has been said we gain to
our purpose is, That our Translators in rendering, covers violence with his
garment, go not alone, but have others of good authority, concurring with them
in their opinion, that the words ought so to be rendered. Yet others do
differently render them, so as to make violence the thing covering, and their
garment the thing covered: so the ancient Latin, But iniquity shall cover his
garment, and so before him the Greek, as we may well suppose, though now in the
ordinary Copies it is read, impiety shall cover over thy thoughts, (...). But a
learned Schindler in (...).
man well supposes it anciently was read and ought to be read (...), thy
garments, which is confirmed by the printed Arabic, which he that was the
Author of following the Greek, appears so in his time to have read it, by his
rendering it (...) Thiyabeca, thy garments. And with these agree several others,
whom we need not name, because they go in their steps. A late learned L. de
Dieu.
man considering the ordinary use of the Preposition (...) Al, which we before
spoke of, affirms it to be the righter way of rendering, and so renders it, And
injury has covered his garment. Much the same construction of the Preposition
Dru^.
he observes, that renders, For he covers with violence his garment, it
sounding, he draws violence as a covering over his garment. But now all these
that go either of these ways, hitherto mentioned, take the verb (...) Cissah
to be the pretertense, whether rendered has covered, or for making the sense as
they would have it, shall cover, or the like. But a learned R. Tanchum, and see
Ab. Ezra.
Jew says, that according to that rendering of the former words he hates
putting away, it may and must be taken for the Infinitive Mood, which has the
force of a Noun, and may be rendered to cover, or the covering; as also the
foregoing Verb (...) Shallach, as it is by them taken, who render it to put
away, or as ours putting away, or shall put her away, or let him put her away.
As also See R. Salomo, Miclal Yophi, and Stokes.
Drusius in another rendering, whereas he hates putting away, he covers violence
with his garment, whereas others who render it, put thou her away take it for
the Imperative Mood; as also See Tarn.
such who render, because God hates that word of yours, put her away: And then
it being so taken, the whole will run thus, For the Lord God of Israel says
that he hates to put (or putting) away; and that he hates to cover, (or
covering of) violence with his (or ones) garment. And this perhaps will be the
clearest way of connecting the words of the former and latter parts of the
sentence together. But this now being said of the construction of the words, it
remains to be enquired what is the meaning of the expression, according to any
of these rendrings.

And first as to the Jews, by R. D. Kimchi, R. Tanchum.
some of them the violence here mentioned, is the refusing to put away his wife
by a legal way of divorce, whom yet in his heart and covertly he hates,
whereas by legally dismissing her, that so she might be married to another, who
would love her, he might have done her more right; his now retaining her, and
for coloring his hatred keeping her to himself, as a garment that he would not
put off from him, yet taking a stranger with her, is a great injury to her; or
as R. Salomo, Aba^b.
others of them, is a manifest injury covering his garment, openly conspicuous,
for all his pretense of doing her right in retaining her. Their words in
expressing their meaning, as a learned Pet. Fig.
man observes of some of them, are short and obscure: that which they aim at is
manifestly this, That if they hated their wives, they ought to put them away by
legal divorce; their not doing so, but retaining them, though in their hearts
hated by them, and taking in with them other strange wives, whom they more
loved, was a great injury, a violence done to them and to God's Law, whether it
be interpreted a violence covered with their garment, i. e. with a pretense; or
violence covering their garment and manifest to all. Then, according to that
Interpretation, which as we have seen, the Chalde and others follow, viz. If he
hate her, let him put her away, these will thus follow; For will he (or can he)
cover his iniquity in taking another strange wife, by his retaining still his
former Israelitish wife? i. e. let him not deal falsely with her, and think it
enough thus to cover his inward hatred of her, by making a show of respect by
retaining her, whereas his taking a strange wife with her, argues that in his
heart he hates her; or according to Aba^b.
others, it is a violence or injury that will not be hid, but appear to all, as
any thing that is above his garment. Is it at all meet, says R. Salomo, that
thou spread thy garment over her to retain her for a wife, when violence or
injury covers this garment, ( viz. under that pretense of retaining her, thou
do a continual wrong to her) hating her in thy heart, and always vexing and
afflicting her? for so I suppose R. Salomo's words must be read
interrogatively, or else they will make no clear sense. [In whose words Figuero
seems to mistake (...) Hogaata instead of (...) Hoganat rendering, Thou have
labored, etc. for Is it meet?]

In a Manuscript Copy of the same R. Salomo we have another Exposition, which
in the ordinary printed Copies we find not, viz. That he that puts away his
wife, draws a covering of violence over his other garments to himself;
agreeable to that expression, Hab. II.17. The violence of Lebanon shall cover
thee: the end will be, that the violence done to her shall be revenged on him;
his meaning seems to be, he makes himself guilty of violence, which God will
revenge. But this is to be applied to that other rendering of the preceding
words, viz. he hates putting away, which (as we have seen) others of the Jews
also follow, who yet as concerning these words, scarce give us enough, whereby
to discern what they thought of the meaning of them, as particularly R. Aben
Ezra, who has no more then only these words, He hates him that puts away
his wife that is clean, and he hates him that covers, or God sees his
violence, or injuriousness, which is in secret. By which words all that we can
see of his meaning is, that by covering violence with his garment, is meant
harboring in secret hatred of his wife, which God sees under what pretense
soever covered, and hates it. R. Tanchum also having declared for the meaning
of the words, what we have seen, as appliable to the other rendering of the
former words, does not add any other as particularly appliable to this
rendering, except out of his explaining them thus, That he hates putting away,
or divorce, in this kind, that a daughter of Israel should be put away for the
daughter of a strangers sake, i. e. that he may take in her room a strange
heathenish wife; we may pick out this meaning, that the putting away an
Israelitish wife for that reason is called a covering violence with his
garment. All therefore that I can say is that the Jewish Expositors in giving
the meaning of these words, are (as we said) somewhat perplex and obscure. Let
us see if the Christians speak more plainly.

They that render as ours in the Text, or to that purpose, for the Lord says
he hates putting away; for one (or and, or but he) covers violence with his
garment, must make this the meaning, that what he does is hateful, though he
has for a covering or pretense, that the Deuteronomy. XXIV.1. etc.
Law permitted to put away his wife, whom he did not like. For though God, to
prevent greater mischief of cruelty and Polygamy, did permit, or rather leave
unpunished by the Politic Magistrate the doing so, See Jun. Trem. Pisc. Bishop
Hall.
yet for all that, it was still hateful in his eyes, really violence and
iniquity, however, he might cover it with that cloak of permission in the Law.
And so if it be read (as in our Margin) if he hate her, put her away, to the
same meaning follows, Dutch Notes, Diodate.
yet the use of this permission is only a covering of violence with a politic
coverture; and not a thing pleasing to God. Or Brennius.
as others, and let him cover violence with his garment, i. e. with a bill of
divorce, which is likened to a garment, because as a garment defends the body
from the injury of weather, and covers the shame; so that served to defend her,
that was put away, from that cruelty, or hard usage which she should find, if
retained; and from that contumely and disgrace, which she would otherwise be
obnoxious too: and therefore Vatab.
some look on the putting their wives away, without that covering of a bill of
divorce, as the violence or injury here meant.

From what has been said will easily result what Calvin takes to be the import
of these words, That God does not in them show any approbation of divorce, yet
that seeing he had connived at it in his Law, And see Drus. in marg.
it would be a less fault then the taking in strange illegal idolatrous wives
with their lawful Israelitish wives. And the same meaning Oecolamp.
they seem to aim at, who by violence understand the Israelitish wife retained
for a cover, though hated and abused, and having another taken in above her,
though Calvin thinks that a very forced Interpretation. To these may be added,
because they follow the same order in construction of the words, such who yet
give a far different meaning of the phrase, by taking the Preposition (...) Al
in its most usual signification for upon or above, and so render the words as a
Pet. a Fig.
proverbial Speech, and he hides violence upon his garment, i. e. though he
pretend the l^berty of the Law in divorcing his wife, yet his doing so is a
mafest violence or injury, no more to be hid then what a man bears or holds on
the outside of his garment. But this will be much the same meaning which they
give, who clean differently order the words in the construction, which, as we
have seen, the vulgar Latin and others do, rendering, but violence shall cover
his garment, i. e. Menoch. Chr. a Castro's Paraph.
for all his bill of divorce, it is still open violence and an injury, which
will not, or cannot be concealed: or, taking with Riber.
others violence or iniquity for the punishment of violence; for all that, the
punishment of his violence or injury done to his wife, shall be made
conspicuous to all, Tirin.
both the fault and the punishment shall cover (or be overspread over) his
garment, and his body too (as Jerome by the garment understands the body, which
is as the garment of the soul;) and make him infamous to all. See Chr. a Castro.
Others, the iniquity of his wife (made known by his divorcing her) shall cover
his garment, defend him from that infamy which his wife did asperse him with.

This Exposition seems not much to the purpose; as neither that of Ibid.
theirs, who would have it, If he hate her, put her away, says the Lord, who
covers violence as with his garment, by permitting to put her away with a
bill of divorce. Lud. de Dieu, having considered these words, and asserted*
this construction of them, and violence (or wrong) covers (or has covered)
his garment, gives as his opinion for the meaning of them, That God here
reproves them, for that, whereas they with their garment ought to have covered
their wives; violence or wrong did cover their garment, whilst they did
treacherously hate their wives, and put away those whom they hated, that they
might marry strange wives: or else, that by these words, violence covers his
garment, is denoted the filthiness of adultery, wherewith he was wholly
covered, according as the garment spotted by the flesh is taken, Jude verse. 23.
To which his meaning he makes way, by observing, That in matters concerning
wedlock, the name of garment is used for fidelity and conjugal protection, as
Ezekiel. XVI.8. I spread my skirt over thee, etc. and Ruth III.9. Spread thy skirt
over thy handmaid: and so concerning the use of the marriage bed, is used the
expression, To discover the skirt of the garment, Deuteronomy. XXII.30.

In all this variety presented to the Readers view, he may judge what meaning
will best satisfy him, and seem to give the fullest sense of the words. For my
part I must profess my self not fully satisfied with any of them, and am of
opinion, that by this figurative and perhaps proverbial expression, (which then
when uttered was well understood, though not so at this distance of time) was
something meant, which none of our Expositors give: concerning which though I
have nothing confidently to affirm, yet I shall make bold to propose a
conjecture, which I suppose will, as concerning the use of the words, be easily
made probable. The conjecture is this, that by the words, taking that
construction of them which we have seen, Abraham Aben Ezra, and Rabbi Tanchum
to afford, and which seems to be among all that are given the plainest, viz, He
hates putting away, and he hates to cover (or rather to put, or that one
should put as a covering, or superinduce) violence over his garment; is meant
the superinducing or marrying an illegitimate wife, over (or with, or above)
his legitimate first wife. So that by violence may be signified a second wife,
with wrong to the former taken in with her, and by his garment, his former wife
lawfully taken. For making which use of the words probable, to begin first with
the last word, we may observe, besides what has been already mentioned of the
use, if not of the very word, yet of another of like signification in matter of
wedlock, that which (according to the simplest exposition of the words) is by
Abimelech said, Genesis XX.16. That Abraham was to Sarah his wife a covering of
the eyes, i. e. says the Chalde, a covering of honor. And by like reason that
the husband may be said to be to the wife a covering of the eyes, to keep her
from looking after others, or others from looking after her, may the wife be
said, to be to the husband a covering of the eyes, to keep him from looking
after any woman but her. If this be not enough to prove such accommodation to
man and wife of words signifying covering or garment, in the language of those
times; yet if one Eastern language may serve for illustrating and giving
testimony to the expressions of another of so nigh affinity to it, that they
may be accounted almost one, and one but a dialect of the other, as the Arabic
is to the Hebrew, so esteemed by the Jewish Writers, and therefore usually had
recourse to for finding out the use and signification of Hebrew words, where
any doubt or difficulty occurs; then here will the Arabic Tongue help us, and
teach us to pronounce boldly of such words, as signify a garment or covering,
that they are applied to signify man or wife respectively. So says a learned
Ebn Athir in his Dictionary.
Grammarian, that (...) Hollah, which signifies an upper garment or robe, is
used to denote a wife; and so likewise (...) Lebas (which answers to the Hebrew
word (...) Lebush here used) to denote either the husband or wife respectively;
and he cites a testimony out of the Cap. II.
Alcoran it self, (wherein he that compiled it endeavors very often to imitate
Scripture expressions:) as if God should say to the men (...) Honna lebas
lacom, waantom lebas lahonna, they, i. e. your wives, are a garment to you, and
you are a garment to them. And why might not this figurative signification also
be allowed anciently, to this and like words in the Hebrew Tongue, from which
the Arabic might borrow it? And if by his garment here be understood his wife,
'twill easily be thought, that by violence or wrong, may be denoted another
strange wife, with open injury taken in with, or above her. The name proper for
such a superinducted wife, is in the same Arabic language of nigh
signification to it, which is (...) Darrah, which, as other Nouns from the same
root, signifies hurt, affliction, oppression, force, and the like; as Morshed
in (...)*
also in the Hebrew Tongue, in which such a wife is called (...) Tsarah, one
that afflicts, is enemy to, or does injure, and oppress the other. Whence in
the Law is forbidden to take one wife to another, (...) Litzror, to vex her,
Levit. XVIII.18. Now that the Noun signifying violence or wrong, or oppression,
should in the abstract be taken for one that does violence or wrong, is no
marvel, it being very usual to put Nouns signifying goodness or badness, or the
like, in the abstract, for such as are eminent in those kinds good or bad,
profitable or hurtful: and so violence for a wife, that will certainly do
wrong or violence; or by taking of which, violence or wrong is necessarily done
to the former wife; with more reason, I suppose (though much the like) then
Oecolamp.
some by violence take to be meant the former wife violently retained, and not
dismissed, that she might be married by another. And if garment may be used for
a wife, then the Verb signifying to cover, or put on a garment, (as (...)
Cissah here) may by the same reason be well used for the taking a wife. And
these things being allowed (as I know not why they should not be) as to the
signification of the words, then will the meaning which we have given be plain,
as to the reading of the foregoing words, which is the Text of our Translation,
For the Lord says he hates putting away, and for a man to take a strange (a
wrongful injurious) wife, above (or with) his lawful former wife. For the
Particle (...) Al is Abu Walid.
noted to signify as well (...) im, i. e. with, as over or above, the sense
will be all one: and as to the marginal reading it will well agree with that
also thus, If he hate her, let him put her away: he may have some color from
the permission of the Law so to do, but he does not that, but retaining her,
though he hates her, takes over her, or together with her, another strange
idolatrous injurious wife, which is a greater wrong and violence offered to
her: or, but by him another wrongful wife is taken with or above his former
legal wife; to fit it to that construction, violence covers, etc.

Another meaning might be, according to the same notion, given agreeable to
that construction, let him put her away, and cover the wrong toward, or
against, his wife, called his garment, viz. by a Bill of Divorce; so that (...)
Al may signify toward or against.

The same meaning will be easily applied to such other rendrings, as are given
and warranted by the scope of the place, as coming fully home to it, which,
from the 10th verse to these inclusively, is a reproof of the Jews of that
time, for their injury done to their lawful Israelitish wives, by either
illegally putting them away, that they might take the daughters of a strange
God; or else if they did retain them, yet secretly hating them, and taking in
above them such strange idolatrous wives, whom, with manifest injury to their
former, they did show more affection to, and make, as it were, Mistresses over
them. And this the Sea R. D. Kimchi and R. Tanchum.
Jews think to be all that is meant, accounting both divorce, and taking more
Israelitish wives, not to be (for all that is said) any way prohibited, or
displeasing to God. But to us learning from Mat. V.30, 31. and XIX.3, etc. Luke
XVI.
Christ the true import of the Scriptures, it will be more absolutely a
prohibition from God, both of the one and the other, viz. both Divorce and
Polygamy; which having showed how hateful it is to him, he concludes with a
repetition of his injunction or Caveat given in the foregoing verse, Therefore
take heed to your spirit, that you deal not treacherously: take heed to your
selves as you love your souls, and the preservation of your spirits, that ye
offend not by indulging to your unbridled lusts in either of these kinds, and
prevaricate against the sacred tie of Wedlock, by God instituted for the
joining one to one, in an indissoluble knot of affection in legal manner. And
this till some plainer way be shown we embrace, as the fullest and properest
meaning of this verse, it being agreeable both to the construction and
signification of the words, and manifest scope of the place.

17 Ye have wearied the Lord with your words: yet ye say, Wherein have we
wearied him? when ye say, Every one that does evil, is good in the sight of the
Lord, and he delights in them; or where is the God of judgment? Ye have
wearied the Lord with your words, etc.] A Jewish Ab. Ezra.
Doctor notes this to be another Section, and the things therein spoken to
belong to the time to come, and so See Lyra, and Chapter a Castro.
some others make it the beginning of a new Chapter, as not having dependence
on the preceding words, but referring rather to what follows in the next
Chapter, in which is an answer to the doubts they raise, and a vindication of
Gods justice, which they seem here to call in question: yet may there well
enough be a connection made between them and the preceding words too, if we look
on them as a defense of their obstinacy in not harkening to God, or the Prophet
in his Name, reproving them for such faults as have been hitherto mentioned;
for that See Tarnov.
there seemed to them no such care taken by God of what men did, when they saw
those that did otherwise then he commanded, yea more plainly wicked and
disobedient, to prosper as much or more then others, that made more conscience
of their ways, and therefore there was no necessity to them of amending their
ways, or ceasing to do what they did. Or as Abarbinel makes the transition
from the former words to these, that, after he had reproved them for their evil
deeds, both Priests and People, he here proceeds to reprove them for their
words and thoughts, which were even worse and more wicked then their deeds; in
that the wicked ones of that generation did return in answer to the reproofs of
the Prophet, There is neither judgment nor Judge, God has left the Earth. His
reproof of them, therefore, for this he gives, saying, Ye have wearied the Lord
with your words. Here is by several of the Ab. Ezra, and R. D. Kimchi.
Jews noted (as well as by others) that this is spoken figuratively according
to the language of men, or in such as is passable among men, but cannot be
properly, said of God, who cannot be wearied. It denotes that their words were
such as would weary any man in authority, and provoke him to anger, and so did
provoke God to deal so with them, as that by the effects they might judge him
to be weary of hearing from them such words, and could no longer endure them:
which is that which the Greek expresses by rendering it, who have provoked the
Lord to wrath. Rabbi Tanchum thus expounds it, Ye have caused a restraint of
his (care and) providence, or caused him to withhold his providence from
ordering your affairs, by doing such things as he cannot bear, according to
what is said, I cannot away with it, etc. Isa. I.13. and again, I am weary to
bear them, v. 14. Abarbinel thinks there is no necessity of making any Mu^st.
Metaphor or figure in this speech, but that it may be understood, not that God
was wearied by their words, but that they in saying what they did, did ascribe
to him weariness and impotency, and defect in his power and providence: for if
he did not know what wicked men did, or did not regard it, or would not, or
could not hinder or punish it, this would argue him weary, impotent, and
deficient. Which of the two ways of expounding this word we take, will not be
much material, nor make any difference in the sense or coherence with the
following words. But there is no reason to depart from the first and more
followed way.

The Prophet thus reproving them as faulty in this kind, they are represented,
as impudently denying themselves so to be, or to have spoken any words, that
should be so offensive, Yet ye say, wherein have we wearied him? (or according
to the other way, whereby have we attributed to him weariness or impotency?) Or
if we interpret the words as others to include a supposition of what he knowing
their evil thoughts, saw they would be apt to say, If ye shall say, Wherein,
etc. He gives them an answer in which he declares what it was they said, or
thought to the affronting of God, and highly provoking him, when ye say, Every
one that does evil is good in the sight of the Lord, and he delights in them,
or, where is the God of Judgment? It is easily supposed, though not expressed,
that they, seeing the prosperous condition of some openly wicked men, not only
of the idolatrous Nations, as Hieron.
some would have it, but among themselves also, they being Grot.
preferred in dignity above others, and flourishing more then themselves, who in
their own conceits, were much better deserving; took thence occasion of
uttering these blasphemous words, R. Tanchum.
contrary to what the Prophets affirmed concerning God's Justice and Judgments
on sinners, thus retorting, and contradicting them, It is not certainly, as you
say, but on the contrary, such as do evil are good in the sight of the Lord,
and he delights in them, it so appears by their prospering; and where then is
the judgment of that just Judge, that you tell us of? which yet R. Tanchum
thinks not to imply that they utterly denied the being of such a Judge, (for
then it would not have been added, And where is, etc.) but spoke by way of
contradiction to what they heard from the Prophets, as a proof of God's slow
proceeding in his ordering and disposing of things. And in giving this sense,
he takes the particle (...) O, or, to be, as if it were, the Copulative (...)
Ve, and. By others, he says, the meaning is thus given, as if they did say,
thus or thus; sometimes every one that does evil is good in the sight of God,
and he delights in them; at other times, where is the God of Judgment? and
by others, If it be not so as we say, where then is the God of Judgment? In
these ways of exposition by him given, is comprehended most of what is said by
other Expositors ancient and modern, they following the same way in
construction of the words. But a late learned Lud. de Dieu.
man thinks it more convenient and agreeable to the nice rules of Grammar, to
render the former words, when ye say every one that Compare Isa. V.20.
makes evil, (or, the evil) to be good, i. e. with him that says of evil, or
of him that is evil, that it, or he, is good in the sight of God; God is
delighted; or, he that so says is acceptable to God. But this does not make
much difference, as to the scope or intent of what blasphemy they are charged
with: viz. that they should make God a favorer of wicked persons. He differs
from others likewise in his opinion, concerning the rendering of that particle
(...) O, which is rendered or (and R. Tanchum would have rendered And, as he
says it elsewhere signifies, viz. See Abu Walid in (...).
Lev. IV.24, and and 28.) and would have it to be taken for a particle of
exclamation, O; and so that and the following words to be the words of the
Prophet, admiring the patience of God, who so patiently bears with so great
impiety, and does not punish this their blasphemy. But though in his Notes on
Isa. XXVII.4. he make it probable that this particle may sometimes so signify,
yet whether it ought here so to be used (especially, making, as he does, the
following words, where is the God of Judgment? to be the Prophets words) may
seem questionable, inasmuch as then the Prophet would seem guilty in the same
kind that those whom he reproves were; viz. in questioning Gods justice, as
showing favor to wicked men, they did it because God seemed in their eyes to
favor others more wicked than themselves, more than he did them; he should do
but much the same, because God so much favored, or bare with them. But if any
will have it so rendered, I should rather think the following words should still
be the words of those wicked men, as others take them to be; and then the sense
will be but the same, as if it were rendered or, or and, only with a little more
vehemence; and either a denying or complaining of the slowness of Gods Justice:
They thus (probably, as we said, in defense of their own obstinacy in
persevering in those evil ways, for which the Prophets reproved them,) Tarnov.
arguing, What need we fear, though we go on in such courses, as you reprove us
for? do we not see those, that do that, which you call evil, prosper? so that
we may well conclude, either that their doings are well liked of by God; or
else, if it be not so, where is the God of Judgment? sure either there is no
such, (as Abarbinel notes this way of speaking to denote the not-being of a
thing;) or else he is very negligent and slow in his executing judgment: else
why does he suffer so long such things, and not punish them? (so those
scoffers, II Pet. III.4. where is the Promise of his coming?) so intimating,
that from the ill ordering of things in distributing of justice, Abarb.
they thought either that God saw the evil things that were done, and was not
displeased with them: or else did not see them, nor regarded them, and so was
not a God of judgment. Such impious sayings of theirs he shows that God was
highly offended at, for their undertaking to be judges of the Seasons and
circumstances, which he has reserved the Grot.
judgment of to his own knowledge and power, and to subject the depths of his
judgments to their own shallow reason; and with this reproof of them is this
Chapter concluded. But out of his great condescension in the next Chapter, he
returns such an answer to these their causeless objections, as may teach them
to discern between the righteous and the wicked, between him that serves God
and him that serves him not; as he speaks is the 18th verse of that Chapter.

Grotius interprets what is rendered, ye have wearied, etc. by ye will weary,
etc. and when ye say, by in that ye will say, etc. viz. so as to be a
foretelling of their behavior in that interval, that they should now be without
Prophets and Miracles for many years, between the time that this was spoken,
and the coming of that Messenger and Lord, in the next Chap. verse. 1. spoken
of. And it is but reason, and agreeable to the words, that we should take in,
together with what the Jews had done, since their return into their Country,
and with what at present they did, all that they should do in that time, God
foresaw what they would say or do, as already said or done. But to pass by all
that was in that time done, and to look on the words, as reporting by way of
Prophecy what is now by them done in their present dispersion, after the real
completion of these Prophecies, as some R. Tanch.
Jews do, (according to what R. Tanchum thinks convenient, both here and Chap.
III.14.) is wholly to elude this Prophecy; as then spoken, and to make void all
that we believe, and all that the history of the times testifies of the
completion of it, by the coming of Christ, and the destruction of the Jews in
the following words threatened, and to persuade us to look after that, which
they vainly do, as if Christ were not yet come, but we were to look for
another, to shut our eyes against what has been, and to look for what shall
never be, to take off the Prophets words from the times that they concerned,
and apply them to such as began not till all that he spoke was manifestly
fulfilled, so making by a perverse method the end to be the beginning. Though
they be now guilty of the same sin that the men of that generation then were,
yet are not they the men then particularly spoken of and designed.

CHAP. III.
VERSE. 1. Behold I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way before
me: and the Lord, whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to his temple: even the
messenger of the covenant whom ye delight in: behold, he shall come, says the
Lord of hosts.
BEHOLD I will send my Messenger, and he shall prepare the way before me, etc.]
How these words depend on those foregoing, with which the former Chapter is
concluded, has been already intimated, viz. that here is an answer given to
that blasphemous question of those perverse ones of that time, who from what
they saw of the prosperity and flourishing condition of such whom they looked
on, as deserving other usage, took thence occasion of questioning Gods Justice;
God assuring, that there should come a time, wherein they should perceive that
he was no favorer of wicked men, or their practices; a time, wherein he would
by his executing his just judgment on them, show that he took due notice all
along of what was done by them, though he might seem for a while to connive at
it; and that time should be at the coming of a righteous King, whom he should
raise up to set things in order, viz. the King Messiah: as I choose to utter in
the words of a Jewish R. Tanchum.
Expositor, that so it may appear, even by confession of his Enemies, That the
words are a most illustrious Prophecy of Christ, by which this last of Prophets
before Christ's coming, assured them of, and warned them to expect his coming:
for which to prepare them, they should have no more Prophets sent them, till a
Messenger, which should immediately before his coming, appear to prepare his way
before him. How this Prophecy was in its due time fulfilled, the History of the
Gospel clearly and fully shows: so that there is nothing in the cavils of the
Jews, or any other that acknowledge not the truth thereof, that can raise to us
any doubt, as to the scope and true meaning of the whole; though in the
explaining of the particular words may be some difference; which as far as may
seem convenient, we shall take notice of, in going them over as they lie in
order.

Behold [saith God] I will send.] Others translate, I do send, as more
agreeable to the letter; and so also is it recited in the New Testament; as,
Matthew. XI.10. Mar. I.2. Luke VII.27. Because the thing, though not done or in
present doing, when these words were spoken, yet was assuredly to be done; and
was therefore spoken of in the present tense. But ours, in regard that it was
after a time to be fulfilled, express it not unfitly in the future, I will
send, as agreeable to the sense, and not disagreeable to the letter, which will
well enough bear either; seeing the Participle, as is here (...) Sholeach,
sending (Behold I sending, i. e. am sending, or will send) is frequently used
to denote the present Tense, but Buxtorf. and other Grammars.
sometimes the future also.

(...) Malachi.] Which signifies either my Angel, or my Messenger, the word
signifying both an Angel and a Messenger, an Angel because a Messenger,
agreeable to the root of the word, of which see Chapter I.1. and II.7. from which
our Prophet had his name Malachi: it is here rightly rendered my Messenger.

My Messenger.] Who is designed by this title we Christians cannot doubt, it
being in those forecited places in the Gospel, expressly attributed to John the
Baptist: and he in two of them, viz. Matthew. and Luke, is plainly said by Christ
himself to be him of whom this was written. But the unbeleiving Jews denying
Christ, whose Messenger this was to be, are at a loss likewise concerning this
Messenger: and by disagreeing among themselves so far as they do* and by the
absurdity of what they affirm, show that they are either all ignorant of the
truth, or will none of them confess it, as by a brief view of them we may see.
R. Salomo Jarchi interprets it (if Abarbinel give us the meaning aright) of the Sea Moses Alsh^ich.
Angel of death, who shall take the wicked out of this life to be sent into
Hell torments. In the copies of him that we have, are no such words expressed,
but only My Messenger, to take out of the way, or cut off the wicked. (...),
and so accordingly interprets the Angel of the Covenant, an Angel that shall
revenge the [breach of the] Covenant. Which Exposition of his so understood,
the same Abarbinel thinks, though true in the general (that however the wicked
here may prosper, yet after death vengeance shall certainly be taken on them)
yet not to agree to this place, where is a Prophecy of a signal particular day,
and not that which is continually and necessarily seen, and always was, and
will be so, without any new remark to be ushered in with a Behold, as of a new
notorious thing: as is likewise intimated to be pointed out here in what
follows, But who may abide the day of his coming, etc. And he shall purify the
Sons of Levi, etc. which are not things properly and peculiarly denoting the
state of Souls after death.

Aben Ezra says that it is probable, that by this Messenger is meant Messiah
the son of Joseph. But it is so far from being probable so to be, that it is
most certain it is not so. For what is that Messiah the Son of Joseph, but a
mere figment of their own brain, whom they suppose to be of the Tribe of
Ephraim, on whom they may fasten those Prophecies, which foretell of the
sufferings of Christ, that so they may take them off from Messiah the Son of
David, to whom they will have none but glorious and triumphant things to
pertain? as if they could not belong to one person, who through Luke XXIV.26.
sufferings should enter into his glory. And this they do without any ground or
warrant from Scripture, only that they may deny our Christ to be the true and
only Messiah, by the Prophets spoken of: so that to us, who believe the
Gospel, this signifies nothing, nor has in it any thing that may make it
probable, so far as in this place to be embraced by others of their own
profession. R. D. Kimchi thinks that by this Messenger is meant an Angel from
Heaven; If, says he, ye ask concerning the judgment of the wicked in this
World, there shall come a time that you shall see, and then he will draw near
to you for judgment to consume the wicked that are among you: and that shall
be the day when I will send my Angel, and he shall prepare (or clear) the way
before me, and he shall be an Angel from Heaven, as it is written, Behold, I
send my Angel before thee to keep thee in the way, etc. Exodus XXIII.20. and he
shall clear the way before me: this shall be in the gathering (or restoring)
the captivity, so as that they shall not find in their way any adversary, or
evil occurrent. This Exposition of his appears, not to have pleased Abarbinel,
by his taking no notice of it, when yet of his Exposition of the other words he
does; and by that he himself gives another far different from that or the
others that have been mentioned: which is, That by this Messenger is meant the
Prophet himself that here utters these words from God, whose name is the same
word here used, viz. (...) Malachi, and being interpreted signifies, my Angel,
or my Messenger: which cannot but seem strange to any, that the Prophet
speaking of things to come, should be thought to prophesy of himself. But, to
put the best color he can upon his opinion, he would persuade men, that
Interpreters are out in interpreting these words wholly of the time to come,
but that they are to be understood partly of what was at present, partly of
what was to come, partly of what was past: of what was present, Behold I send
Malachi my Prophet; of what was to come, The Lord whom ye seek shall suddenly
come, viz. the Shecinah or majestatick glorious presence; of what was past, And
the Messenger of the Covenant, whom ye delight in (viz. the King of Persia)
has already come: as if, to stop their murmurings by reason of the prosperity
of the wicked, he had now sent the Prophet Malachi to tell them what punishment
is determined for those wicked hereafter; (as in the following part of the
Chapter he will show) and so to clear the way before him by solving their
question, Where is the God of Judgment? And seeing they murmured, because the
Shecinah, or glorious presence did not appear in the Temple they had now built;
(in which were wanting the Shecinah, and glory, and fire from Heaven, and
answer by Vrim and Thummim, which were in the former Temple;) and objected that
Gods Providence was removed from them, and all things were ill ordered;
therefore to assure them, that the Shecinah should assuredly come again into
the Temple that should hereafter be built, he says, And the Lord whom ye seek
shall suddenly come into his Temple, there shall his glory and majestatick
presence dwell, even that Lord which they now sought in their murmurings. And
for a proof of this, and that this promise should certainly be performed, he
instanceth in what they had already seen in what concerned the King of Persia,
who was the Lords Angel, or Messenger, and Messiah or Anointed, for destroying
of Babylon, and bringing back the dispersed of the Jews to Jerusalem, according
to what Esaias prophesied of him, and made with them a Covenant of peace: of whom
therefore he says, And the Messenger of the Covenant whom ye delight in, i. e.
to honor and love him, do you not see, that he came according as was promised
to you? so shall the Lord, whom ye seek, come suddenly and unawares, in the
time of redemtion and gathering of the captivity, etc.

This is his meaning, as far as I can make it out in his Commentary on this
place; and I suppose I have faithfully given it, and the giving of it is a
sufficient confutation of it: so does he distract the construction of the
words, so blend and intermingle them with strange notions; that as he rejects
the opinions of others of his own profession, so I suppose none of them will
embrace this of his. All that we can gather from this, or any yet named, is,
that they, not willing to see or acknowledge the truth, which the Christians
instructed by the Gospel embrace, do strive to go as far from it as they can;
mean while taking such different ways, and disagreeing among themselves, as
that it is manifest they had no one probable thing to insist on.

There is yet another opinion among them, (which Abarbinel glanceth on for a
reserve, as a possible one, if the other of his own be not thought sufficient,
although he does not so apply it as others do) and that perhaps much ancienter
then any of these we have yet seen; and such as by a right interpretation of
the words, though not according to their meaning, might be reconciled to the
truth. And that is, See Note on Micah, II.13.
That by this Messenger is meant he who, Chap. IV.5. is called Eliah, whom some
of them would have to be Eliah the Tishbite in person: others, not necessarily
so, but some great Prophet like him in degree, and therefore called by his
name. So the often cited R. Tanchum reports their opinion on that place, Chap.
IV. where will be occasion to speak again of it. That this opinion among them
was ancient we learn, not only out of their own records, but out of the Gospel
also, Mat. XVII.10. where we hear the Disciples asking Christ, Why then say the
Scribes that Eliah must first come? their opinion then was, that before Christ
Elias ought to come, as a Messenger and Forerunner: and Christ does not say
they were out in expecting such a one, as was to be looked on as Elias; but in
this that they did not acknowledge him that was under that name expected to be
already come, saying, Elias was truly first to come: but that indeed he was
already come, and they knew him not, etc. By which answer his Disciples
understood, that he spoke unto them of John the Baptist, of whom also he had
before told them, and the whole People, that he was he of whom it is written,
Behold I send my Messenger before thy face, etc. Mat. II.10. and the Elias
which was for to come. To those Jews, therefore, who are of the last opinion
mentioned, we have from those words of our Savior a ready answer, and to any
objection that they shall raise from it, against their believing this Prophecy
to be fulfilled, and the Messiah to be come. Whereas Trypho in Justin. Martyr,
p. 208. Edit. Comel. 1593.
some of them, making it an argument in that kind, say, that this Prophecy is
not fulfilled, because Elias is not in person come, and therefore neither the
Messiah; we refer them for answer to those of their own Sect, who confess that
neither these, nor those other words of Malachi, nor any other Prophecy,
require that Elias should come in person, but only some great Prophet or
prophetical man in degree like to Elias. And then to these, if they say that
not any such has yet appeared, we say, Yes, there has, and that John the
Baptist was he, for he came before the Lord in the spirit and power of Elias,
to make ready a People prepared for the Lord, Luc. I.17. He was by all that
then lived and beheld his works, counted and holden for a Prophet, Mat. XIV.5.
and XXI.26. yea, he was more then a Prophet, then whom there was not a greater
risen among them that were born of women, Mat. XI.9, 11. so great, that they
doubted whether he were not the Messiah himself.

What was required from this Messenger, and from him that was promised under
the name of Elias, viz. that he should prepare the way for the Lord, he did
fully make good by preaching repentance, Mat. III.2. by baptizing unto
repentance, verse. 11. by bearing witness to Christ, and pointing him out to the
People, that they might believe on him, Joh. I.29. etc. if there be any thing
in that ancient In the same place.
Tradition of theirs, that Eliah was to prepare the Messiah to his office; that
may be said to have been fulfilled by John's baptizing Christ before he began
to preach, at which baptizing the Holy Ghost descended on him visibly from
Heaven. But this is besides the expression of the Scripture, and so not to the
present words. John then being such as to his person, and so having performed
that office, for which it is said here that he should be sent, what can it be
but mere obstinacy to deny him to be the Lords Messenger here prophesied of?
and what can they expect in any, which was not in him found?

From the time of this Prophecy till the time of its completion by the Lords
sending him, was their opinion true; that such a one, who for his excellency
and the spirit with which he was to be endowed, might be called Eliah, was to
come as a Messenger and a forerunner of the Messiah, to prepare his way before
him: but since these things have been all fulfilled, still by virtue of the
same Prophecy, to expect another, denying him, is great perverseness. According
to their own rule, Maimon. in Yad, the last C^apter.
that Prophecies and promises of God are at their manifestation to be discerned
and acknowledged as fulfilled, they ought so to discern and acknowledge this,
and could not but so do, did they not willingly shut their eyes, because they
will not accept of Christ. God be thanked, who has opened our eyes by the
Gospel, so as to acknowledge this Messenger, who by what is therein declared,
is evidently approved to be John Baptist. He it is, without doubt, of whom he
here says, my Messenger. So our Translation renders it, others rendering my
Angel. The word is indeed that which is used to signify an Angel, but as well
likewise any other Messenger or Ambassador; (from a root that signifies to
send:) and that signification of Messenger is by our Translators well chosen to
put in this place, as taking away or preventing those needless questions, which
from rendering it an Angel, might be raised: as, How John was an Angel? or, Why
called so? which is See Ribera,
reported anciently to have given occasion, to some, of an erroneous opinion,
that he was not only so by office, but by nature also.

The word (...) Pinnah, which ours and others (agreeably also to what is in the
Gospels) render prepare, is from a root Panah, that has also the signification
of looking on, and is therefore by the Greek in this place, according to that,
rendered (...), shall look on; and so by the printed Arabic, which therein
follows them. Which certainly cannot be so agreeable to the meaning, except we
extend it so far as to understand by it, to look to it, so as that it be as it
should be, which then will be the same with preparing. But the word in that
form that it is here, is not used for to look and consider, or the like; but to
clear and make clean, to prepare by removing what is amiss or offensive: so
likewise used Esaias, XL.3. Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make straight a high
way: which words are likewise applied to the same John Baptist's office here
spoken of, Mat. III.3. and Mar. I.3. and Luc. III.4. and he showed to make good
what is thereby required, by calling to repentance, and by preaching the
Baptism of repentance, for putting away those sins which might hinder them from
receiving Christ, and so were obstacles in his way. And in that place it is
rendered by the Greek also prepare, and so probably they might here do.

Having observed these words to be cited by the Evangelists, we cannot but take
notice that in them they are cited something differently from what is read
here: for whereas here he says, my Messenger, and before me, or my face, in
the first person, as speaking of himself; there it is still said before thy
face, and thy way before thee, as speaking to, and of another. Which has
caused some question to be made, which of the persons of the Trinity here
speaks, whether God the Father, or Christ. But though it be true what Ribera.
some here observe, that such works of the Trinity, as are external and common
to all the persons, and not proper to one, may indifferently be attributed to
either; yet the plainest way of expounding these words here seems to be, to
look upon them, as spoken here (as well as in the Evangelists) by God the
Father concerning Christ; here of him, there expressly to him. And then the
saying here, my Messenger, before me; and there thy way, before thee, making
the same way to be called Gods way here, and See Dr Hammond on Mat. XI.
Christ's there, affords us an evident proof, that Christ is one God with the
Father, I Tim. III.16.
and that in Christ God came, and was manifest in the flesh.

For the proving the same, viz. That Christ is one with God the Father, some
Galatin. Jansen.
would take from what is here said, before my face, an argument, thence proving
that Christ is called The face of God: but See Chr. a Castro.
others observe, that according to the use of the Hebrew Tongue, before my
face, is no more then, before me. And therefore our Translators so rendering it,
show, that they thought not in the word my face to be included any argument for
proving the Divinity of Christ, on which any great stress ought to be laid: and
they that think it, ought to show See Ribera. and Chr. a Castro.
how then the words, as here uttered by the Prophet, and as cited in the
Gospels, may be reconciled. For if by my face be here meant that Christ is the
face of God, who then shall be there understood by thy face? who shall be
called the face of Christ? It follows,

And the Lord whom ye seek shall suddenly come to his Temple, etc.] Who by this
Lord is meant is agreed on, on all hands by Christian Interpreters: viz. that
it is Christ, whom God has made both Lord and Christ, Act. II.36. and who is
Lord over all, ibid. X.36. Joh. I.3.
by whom all things were made, by whom all things are sustained and governed;
who is (as the root of the word imports) the basis and foundation, not of any
private family, Tribe or Kingdom, but of all; by whom are all things, and we
by him, I Cor. VIII.6. and whose we are also by right of Redemption; and so he
is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, Rev. XVII.14. and XIX.16. deservedly
entitled The Lord.

Among the Jews there are some who understand it more generally of God; so R.
Salomo, The God of Judgment, R. Aben Ezra, The God of glory; and so Abarbinel,
The glorious Name, i. e. the glorious God, whose words may be by a Christian
well interpreted also of Christ, though not so by them meant. But others of
them more plainly agreeing so far with us, expressly say, he is the King
Messiah, so Kimchi; yea R. Tanchum on Chap. IV.5.
(...) Bela shaccin, that without doubt it is meant of the Messiah: and so say
we, though as to his person, and the right of his title to that appellation of
Lord, they will not agree with us. This Lord is described by that Epithet, whom
ye seek, which may be referred to what is before said, where is the God of
Judgment? as an answer to that question, and is therefore by Jun. Trem. Tarn.
some looked on, as if it were spoken in ill part, as much as to say, whom ye
scoffingly seek, saying, Where is he? Why does he not show himself? Although it
may be (as by many learned men it is) taken; as spoken of a serious
expectation, and seeking of the promised Messiah, by many, if not the
generality of the People, whom all along from of old they longed and Dr Hammond
on Mat. XI.
waited for, according as that saying of Jacob, I have waited for thy
Salvation, O Lord, Genesis XLIX.18. and what we read of Simeon, Luc. II.25. that
he waited for the consolation of Israel, and ver. 38. that Anna spoke of him
(being brought into the Temple) to all them that looked for Redemption in
Jerusalem, manifestly shows that there Grot.
was such a seeking, a waiting and longing for the promised Shilo among them by
such as seriously wished for it, as well as others did in scoff ask after him,
or murmr at his delay.

Of him that was so sought, it is said, as to the circumstance of time, that he
should suddenly come* i. e. suddenly after that his Messenger had come and
prepared the way before, as Christ did after John Baptist's preaching: or
suddenly, i. e. unawares, when men should not think on, or be aware of him, as
Kimchi takes the word here to signify; the time being not precisely in the
Prophets determined, according to what is said in Daniel, The words are closed
up and sealed, till the time of the end, Chap. XII.9. Whence perhaps it is that
the Jews reckon the Messiah among the things that come Buxt. Lex. mag. in (...).
unawares, or when men think not of them: and in this sense, as it is here said
of his first coming, so it is said of his second coming, which perhaps may be
comprehended under this here spoken of, that except they diligently watch for
it, it shall come upon them unawares, Luc. XXI.36. suddenly, Mar. XIII.36. in
such an hour as they think not, Mat. XXIV.44. So doubtless shall his last
coming at the day of Judgment be; which is that alone which the unbelieving
Jews, having overslipt the former, here mentioned, without taking notice of it,
can now (whatever they vainly promise to themselves, as if this Lord were not
at all yet come) farther expect; as farther appears by the circumstance of the
place, to which it is here said, He shall come, that is, his Temple. However,
by his Temple, some See Ribera, Chr. a Castro. Pareus.
have anciently understood Christ's human nature, or body, of which he spoke,
Joh. II.21. or his Church; or all faithful believers, who are called likewise
the Temple of God, I Cor. III.16. or the like; yet no doubt but here is meant
that Temple at Jerusalem, built then lately (when these words were spoken)
after their return from the Babylonish Captivity, which whatever alterations
were made in it, was still looked on as one, till the time that it was
destroyed by the Romans; and by the Jews called the second Temple in respect to
that former built by Solomon, and destroyed by the Chaldeans. To this Temple it
is here said that the Lord (here spoken of) should come; and so did Christ,
whom we say to be that Lord: and of his coming to it, and his appearances there
at several times, we read: He was there first presented by his Mother, Luc.
II.22. there again when he was twelve years old, found sitting among the
Doctors, ver. 46. where, in his answer to his Mother, who told him that they
had sought him sorrowing, he man seem to allude even to this Prophecy, How is
it that ye sought me? wist ye not that I must be (...), in my Fathers See Grot.
etc. on that place ^ut of Nic. Fuller.
house? Was it not foretold that he should come to his Temple? was not that the
proper place for him to be in, and for them to look after him in? Several
other times we read of his going to it, preaching in it, conducted to it, and
received with Matt. XXI.9. Luke XIX.47. Joh. II.14. and XIV. and VIII.2. and
often elsewhere.
Hosannah's, and Blessed be he that comes in the Name of the Lord: and in it
Matt. XXI.9. Luke XIX.47. Joh. II.14. and XIV. and VIII.2. and often elsewhere.
exercising his authority, as Lord of it, in purging it, and vindicating the
dignity of it, and driving out thence those that profaned it. Any of these his
appearances there, is sufficient to prove, in, and by him to have been made
good, that which we take to be the main drift of this expression in this
Prophecy: viz. that the Lord (Christ or Messiah) here spoken of, was to come
while the Temple (that Temple then built) was standing. Which is likewise
evidently foretold by the Prophet Haggai, Chap. II.7. that into it should come
the desire of all Nations, and it should be filled with glory, yea, that
thereby the glory of that later House should be greater then that of the
former, ver. 9. though it were then in their eyes as nothing in comparison of
it, ver. 3.

See Grotius on the place, and lib. 5^ de Veritate Rel. Christ.
By virtue of these signal Prophecies it is without question, that those
ancient Jews who lived before Christ's coming, did expect that he should come
while that Temple was standing. And it is evident that old Simeon, to whom it
was revealed by the Holy Ghost, that he should not see death till he had seen
the Lord's Christ, Luke II.26, etc.
who came by the spirit into the Temple, when Christ was thither first brought,
and taking him in his arms blessed God, and desired of him then to depart in
peace, because he had seen his Salvation; did so understand it; and that the
Lord was now, according to this Prophecy, come to his Temple: he desired to see
no more for the completion of it. And so holy Anna also, who coming in that
instant into the Temple, gave thanks likewise unto the Lord, and spoke of him
to all that looked for Redemption in Jerusalem. And what else is proclaimed by
all those multitudes, who at his going to the Temple, and at his being in it,
cried, Hosanna to the Son of David, Blessed is he that comes in the Name of
the Lord, Mat. XXI.9, and 15. but the same, viz. that the Lord was now come to
his Temple? and so it is witnessed that according to this Prophecy, and that of
Haggai, he was by the Jews of that time expected to come to that Temple then in
being. And so to us do they together afford an unanswerable argument against
the later Jews, all that have lived since that time, that that Temple was
standing, and deny the Messiah to be yet come, thus; Messiah was to come while
the Temple was standing, and therefore seeing the Temple has so long since
been destroyed, it is manifest that he is long since come, and in vain is now
by them expected. For what is it else but blasphemously to accuse God speaking
by his Prophets of falsehood? So poor a shift is it, which is all they have to
flee to, to say that there is yet a third Temple to be expected, under which
these Prophecies are to be fulfilled; as that it cannot any way shake our
Faith, but ought more to confirm it, while we see that they have for so many
hundreds of years above a thousand, expected what they without any ground or
warrant from Scripture look for. It cannot without wilful blindness and
obstinacy be denied, that the Temple here mentioned was that second Temple, and
more plainly when Haggai looking on, and describing that Temple then built,
says expressly, this house; by this house, to understand a house after this (as
Abarbinel does) is such a perverting of words and meaning, as we cannot without
loss of our own reason admit of. Yet this is the only salvo that they have, or
can have. And this their great Doctor In Yad lib. ult. cap. 11.
Maimonides seems to make use of, when finding no Temple for their yet vainly
expected Messiah to come to, says, That the King Messiah shall hereafter come,
and restore the Kingdom of the House of David to its old former estate, and
shall build a (...).
Sanctuary or Temple, etc. and that in the same place where formerly it stood.
And in that regard perhaps they will have it called his Temple (as here it is)
and so shift off another argument against the Jews, who deny Christ's divinity,
which is by Christian Vat. Riber. Chr. a Castro.
Interpreters hence usually taken, viz. that because the Temple is called his
Temple, it is thereby made manifest, that he who should come to it as a man,
was not only so, but God also; it being proper to God only to have Temples, or
Houses of worship erected, and appropriated to him: and so we know that at
Jerusalem to have been dedicated to the only true God. Here therefore it being
called Christ's Temple, it shows that he is true God, one with the Father. This
argument, though pious and conclusive to Christians, yet a learned Pet. a
Figueiro.
man would not have to be much insisted on, as to the signification of the word
(...) Heicul, inasmuch as it does not only signify a Temple, or House, of
worship, but also a Palace; and so he thinks the Jews may put it off by saying
it signifies only, the Messiah shall come to his Palace. But I suppose they
would not fly to that, I do not find any of them that do.

The ordinary Expositors that we have of them (as R. Salomo Jarchi, Aben Ezra,
David Kimchi, as likewise R. Tanchum) do not at all meddle with interpreting
this word: only Abarbinel (who, as we said, interprets the Lord, not of the
Messiah, but of the Shecinah or glorious Presence of God, or God himself)
explains it, to his (...) Heical, which is (...) Bebeith mikdasho, in his
Sanctuary: by which he will have to be meant (...) Habbeith haatid, that house,
or Temple, which is to come, or shall hereafter be built: or, as in his
Commentary on Haggai he calls it, (...) Beith shelishi, the third house. By it
then here I doubt not but they all understand it a Temple properly so called.
But however they may otherwise seek to evade the force of this argument (and
this I mean of them who confess by the Lord here to be meant the Messiah;)
whether by saying, it may be called his, because by him built (according to
Maimonides) or because he should frequent it, or otherwise; certainly the other
argument for proof of his being come, because the Temple, to which he was to
come, is so long since destroyed, is unanswerable, and their talking of a third
Temple, without any ground in Scripture, so long and still in vain expected by
them, under which this Prophecy is to be made good, (as if it were not long
since fulfilled, while that second Temple was standing, as we are assured that
it was) is a mere dream of men choosing to themselves strong delusions. Which
lest any of theirs by enquiring into it, should discover, they (weary, it
appears, or ashamed of the length of the time of their vain expectation, or not
knowing how they should satisfy such as should enquire into it;) have long
since, by a severe way interdicted all such enquiries, by saying Maimonides, as
above Chapter XII. and Talmud Sanhedrin.
(...) Tippach rucham (or Atsman) shel Mechashebe hakketsim, Let them burst
(or, breathe out their souls) that enquire after the ends (or periods) and
terms of time, viz. concerning the coming of the Messiah. And that perhaps may
be the cause why their Expositors in this place say so little of it, viz. how,
or when, the Lord should come to his Temple. Certainly without acknowledging
Christ the true Messiah, and him to be come in the flesh, and both God and man,
there cannot any thing be said that can give the true meaning, or show what was
requisite for the fulfilling of this Prophecy here, and that cited out of Haggai
of such affinity with it. And no wonder to see them who willingly and
obstinately decline the one only way of manifest truth, to run on in such
different tracts of error. It follows in the Text,

Even the Messenger of the Covenant whom ye delight in.] Where our Translators
rendering the copulative (...), which ordinarily signifies and, by even, give us
to look on these words as a farther description of the same person who was
called the Lord; and that is (as has been said) Christ Jesus, who though he be
one with his Father God eternal, yet humbled himself for men's sakes to be as a
Messenger from his Father to them, to declare unto them his will, and to be
unto him obedient in all things that he gave him to do. This proves not, that
he is not one God with the Father, though as a Son he yielded obedience to him,
and performed his work. Here is nothing in this that takes away either Polan.
lib. 3. c. 10.
unity of essence, or equality of power. So that we need not to depart from
this notion of Messenger, or Angel, to render it Prince, as a learned Lud. de
Dieu.
man, by the use of the word in another language viz. Aethiop.
, thinks it may be proved in the Hebrew, and here also to signify. It will come
but to one pass, he is Prince of the Covenant, for the same reason that he is
called Messenger, or Angel of it: which is because in him God founded the new
Covenant of Grace, and by him as Mediator of it, administered it; he, not only
declaring it, but ratifying it with his own Blood, and receiving into it as
many as lay hold on him; even that new Covenant (of which he is Mediator, Heb.
XII.24.) better then the old, and established on better promises, Heb. VIII.6,
8, etc. spoken of, Jer. XXXI.31. no more comprehending Jews alone, but Gentiles
also. In which regard God says of him, I will give thee for a Covenant of the
People for a light of the Gentiles, etc. Isa. XLII.6. in whom he was
reconciling the World unto himself, 2 Cor. V.19.

In this that we say, that it is b^t the same person who is called both Lord
and Messenger, we have most of the Jewish Expositors consenting. So R. Salomo,
and Aben Ezra and Kimchi, and R. Tanchum, and Abarbinel in a secondary
Exposition; but yet in this divided among themselves, that R. Salomo, and Ab.
Ezra.
some of them say by both is meant God himself, i. e. God the Father, by others
the Messiah. Against the former is hence an evident proof, that of God the
Father it cannot be meant, because a Messenger is necessarily a distinct person
from him that sends him. The Lord therefore and Messenger here spoken of, must,
as we affirm of Christ, needs be so. As for those who interpret both, as we do,
of the Messiah, though much differing from us, as concerning the nature of his
person; yet there is no occasion to dispute with them concerning that here, in
that they agree, that the person by both titles described is the Messiah. As
for others, who take by the Lord to be meant one, by the Messenger of the
Covenant, another; so vain and absurd are their fancies, that to name them will
be sufficient confutation of them, as not only that uncouth as well as novel
opinion of Abarbinel, making it to be the King of Persia, who had sent them
home from their Babylonish Captivity; but also that of some more ancient, who
would have to be meant Eliah, whom they would have to be called by that title,
because he always presides at the Rite of Circumcision, the sign of Gods
Covenant with them, which they thus make out, God seeing his zeal for
Circumcision, when those of the ten Tribes were negligent of it, gave him this
privilege as a reward of his zeal, that that Sacrament should never be
administered, but that he should oversee it, for which cause always at every
Circumcision they set a Chair of State for him, as being Angel, Messenger, or
President of the Covenant, and so here called. A pretty story, whereby to
delude themselves, and amuse the people from further enquiry after the truth,
which if it were found only in trivial fabulous Books might pass as a fancy,
but that it should be quoted by their serious and grave R. D. Ki^chi, and
Abarb. in locum.
Authors, as a thing pertinent to this place, and grounded on it, cannot but
seem as strange, as it is groundless and ridiculous.

What is added, whom ye delight in, shows that with great longing they expected
of old his coming, as a time that should bring much cause of joy and rejoicing
to them: and what follows as repeated, Behold he shall come (or comes) says
the Lord of hosts, shows the certainty of the thing, as sure as if it were
already done. God engages both his truth and power in it, he says it, and
every word of his is truth, and he that says it, is the Lord of hosts, God of
all power, and can and will effect whatsoever he says.

Behold he cometh] not as Abarbinel (as we have seen) would have it, has or is
already come, that so he might apply it to the King of Persia, who made with
them a Covenant of Peace; but (...) yabo, shall certainly come, (...) Bizmano,
in his time, as Kimchi truly explains it. And not only so, but if we look on
the place before named to which he should come, viz. his Temple, it will give
us necessarily to understand, as to the time too; that he was to come while
that Temple was yet standing, as Groti^s well observes.

And here before we proceed, it will be covenient to take notice what the same
learned man suggests to us on the next verse, viz. That Christ's coming, when
spoken to, and of the Jews, denotes not only his first manifestation in the
flesh, or the Temple; but all the time from his first preaching to the
destruction of the City of Jerusalem, and of the Temple. Otherwise, more
distinctly the word is applied to a Dr Hammond on Mat. 24. note b.
threefold coming of Christ, 1. His coming in the flesh, to be born among men.
2. His coming in Judgment for vengeance to his enemies, and deliverance of his
Servants in this World, as he did come at the destruction of the Jews. 3. At
the end of the World, at the day of Judgment. And so understanding it as
particularly respecting the Jews, we shall easily perceive here a full and
satisfactory answer to those murmurers and scoffers of those times, who seeing
the prosperity of some wicked men (as it is in the last verse of the preceding
Chapter) said, every one that does evil is good in the sight of the Lord, and
he delights in them, or, where is the God of Judgment? Though such who
impiously question Gods Justice, deserve no other answer then to feel it, yet
in much condescension he here vouchsafes them such an answer as to let them
know, that though he does not presently proceed, as they would have him, but
seem to neglect or wink at the doings of wicked men; yet he is not negligent,
but in his own appointed time will so order things, as shall make it manifest
to all, that he took notice all the while of what was done. This time, as to
them, he here expresses to be that coming of Christ, which is in these and the
following words described; in which time was his just judgment signally
executed before the whole World, as to what concerned their Nation: And so the
question, why God suffers the wicked, often, most to flourish? as to them of that
Nation, the People then by the Prophet spoken to and of, is fully decided by
what was in that space of time by him brought to pass, so as to stop the mouth
of any other, who shall in like blasphemous manner question his Justice; by
warning them to leave to him his own time to execute his just Judgments, and
rather to prepare themselves for that time, which certainly shall come upon
them, then in any way to doubt of it.

The things here spoken do more particularly concern the Jews, but are to all,
and to us, for 1 Cor. 10.6.
examples, and are written for our admonition, God having several ways of
executing his Judgments, but proceeding still according to the same rule of
Justice. They likewise concern rather more general and national impieties, and
judgments accordingly executed; yet so, as every particular man may thence
take instruction, that none who takes care of his ways, seeing such as are
openly wicked to prosper and flourish, should thence take occasion of murmuring
and questioning Gods Justice, nor any wicked man that prospers in this World,
should, because God suffers him so to do, for that justify himself, or think
himself good in the sight of the Lord, or that God delighted in him, but be
assured that a time will come, when God will execute just Judgment on him,
however for a time he forbear him, and so deal with him in particular, as he
here threatens to do with the wicked of those times. He has other ways of
coming, besides that here spoken of: to every man, at his death, and after
judgment, which though R. Salomo, as we have seen, does ill in making the
prime and literal meaning of this place, as he does, yet so far he is true,
that certainly God will by it come to every man in particular, and then judge
and distinguish them according to the things that they have done, not the
things that they have enjoied in this World. His deferring them till then is
not a sign of his liking to them, but shall make (if they by repentance prevent
it not) for their greater condemnation and misery, and so shall it appear that
they are out, who for what they see them here to enjoy shall account them
happy. See Luke XVI.25.

This may seem a digression, as not pertaining to the literal meaning of the
words, yet may be not impertinent, in regard that both the present words and
other passages after in this Chapter, cannot but suggest such consideration of
Gods just Judgment both for private persons, and whole Societies of men, to
us. That some See Ribera, and Chr. a Castro, etc.
Christians anciently should interpret the word, come, in the first place, of
Christ's first coming, and in this second, of his coming to Judgment, cannot
but seem strange. Doubtless, here is but one and the same coming spoken of, and
the repetition of the promise of it, does but confirm the certainty of it, and
that was the first coming of his, then, when these words were spoken, to be
expected by the Jews. The words will naturally bear no other sense.

2 But who may abide the day of his coming? and who shall stand when he
appears? for he is like a refiners fire, and like fullers soap. But who may
abide the day of his coming, etc.] By looking to what precedes in the last
verse of the former Chapter, and the first of this, the connection of these
words with the former seems thus, The Jews of those times seeing (as they
thought) all things out of order then amongst them, the godly oppressed and the
wicked exalted, murmured against Gods Justice, and having had promises from God
of one who should set all things to right, as doubting of the truth of those
promises, seeing them so long deferred, asked, 2 Pet. III.4.
Where is the God of Justice? where is the promise of his coming? He answers
them therefore, that he is not negligent of their affairs, nor slack concerning
his promise, but what they counted slackness was long-suffering toward them,
that they might be prepared for receiving that Lord whom they sought after,
that Messenger of his Covenant, whose coming they longed to see, as expecting
that then all things should go according to their desires, and they should have
great cause of rejoicing, in seeing the wicked severely dealt withal, and
themselves established in worldly prosperity and pleasure; mean while, not
examining themselves how they were fit for such things as they expected. He
therefore tells them, that certainly without any failing on his part, that Lord
should come at his appointed time; but that before him also should come a
Messenger to prepare his way before him, by calling them (that thought best of
themselves) to prepare for his coming; For that it should not be so easy to
them as they fancied to themselves, without more ado to give them what they
expected of wordly enjoiments, and without farther trial to give them what they
thought themselves worthy of; but that it should be with great severity, and so
as in strict Justice to proceed after trial made of all, for good to those who
should be found faithful and sincere, and for destruction to those that were
otherwise; so that the righteous should not without I Pet. IV.18.
difficulty be saved, but for the ungodly and sinners they should not be able
to appear. This is that which he says, Compare Rev. VI.17.
but who may abide the day of his coming, and who shall stand when he appears?

Who?] of the wicked, say Tarn.
some: which as it is most true, and the coming of that day shall be to them
most terrible and intolerable; yet may the question seem more generally put as
concerning all, even the best as well as the wicked, to show, that the time
spoken of shall be full of difficulties, such as will put all to a hard trial,
such as will prove them to the uttermost, though the issue thereof shall be
indeed for joy and Salvation, to those that are found faithful and sincere;
even they shall be saved, but so as by fire. For in that day many shall be made
white, i. e. tried, says Kimchi, in the words of Daniel, XII.10. even the
righteous shall pass a hard trial that they may be purified and made white,
though not consumed and destroyed as the wicked: so that even to them the day
of his coming should be terrible, though salutary. This that they might expect,
and yet among those difficulties find comfort, Christ himself having taken our
sins upon him, took on him the Cross, that he might enter by it into his
Kingdom, and show to his the way that they must also go, if they will enter
thereinto, viz. by taking up their Cross and following him. True peace and joy
he promises to them, but not without the preceding trial of Joh. XVI.33.
troubles, and afflictions, and so instructs them that they might know that
he came not to send peace on the Earth, Mat. X.34. not such peace as the Jewish
Nation generally expected at his coming; but that Ibid. 9.39.
for judgment he came into this World, (as is here prophesied that he should)
which, if we take his coming in that latitude as before we said, we shall see
with such severity to have been executed, as that in respect thereof we may see
there was good grounds for this expression of it by way of question, who, (not
only of the wicked, but of the best of men) may abide the day of his coming? or
who shall stand when he appears?

Though the generality of the Jews did, I suppose, then expect nothing but
present joy and prosperity at his coming, yet we may well think that those that
better considered the Prophecies, had other notions like those, that we have
expressed, of the day of his coming and appearance, by that Tradition which
those since report to us, as from them, of the (...) Cheblo shel Mashiach, The
pangs or dolors of the Messiah, such great afflictions as shall be to Israel at
the coming of the Messiah, spoken of in the Sabbath fol. 118. Sanhedr. fol. 98.
Talmud: which Abarbinel mentions, as here pointed at, if the words be
expounded (as we have showed they ought to be,) of the Messiah. And certainly
such Tradition may be as well founded on these words as any passage in the
Prophets, although this place be not cited, where it is mentioned in the Talmud
in the Tract of the Sabbath, c. XVI. fol. 118. but that which is repeated
concerning the same day that is here spoken of, Chap. IV.5. where it is called
the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord.

The same Abarbinel speaking of the same opinion of theirs in his Comment on
Daniel, fol. 68. col. 2. says, [That the Disciples of Jesus received from the
wise men of Israel (among other things that he there mentions) that in the
days of Messiah afflictions should be multiplied, which they call (...) Cheble
hammeshiach, the pangs or dolors of Messiah, insomuch that they said, Very
happy shall he be that shall not see them, and in whose time they shall not be.
And concerning them (says he) it is said in their Gospel, Woe (or alas) who
shall live with (or in the time of) those great afflictions which shall be seen
in the last days? which are the pangs or dolors of Messiah, which by Tradition
they had heard of.]

The words which he mentions, though they are not literally found in the
Gospel, yet may (as the sense) thence be collected, as a summary Inference out
of what our Savior says, as in Mat. XXIV. Mar. XIII. and Luke 21. It is well
observed by Buxtorfius that the word Mat. XXIV.8. Mar. X^II.8.
(...), by our Savior used in his description of those days of his coming in
Judgment to the Jews (that here called likewise, The day of his coming and
appearance) does properly and particularly answer to the Hebrew (...) Chebel,
or (...) Chabalim, or in construction (...) Cheblo, or (...) Cheble, as they
denote bitter pangs, as of a woman in travel, and so used for any great pains
or afflictions. So that, if that Tradition among them were ancienter then
Christ's coming, and the Gospel, it may not improbably be thought, that our
Savior did by such terms as were then in use among them, and in their mouths,
set forth those dolorous times which they did talk of and expect; so to warn
them to prepare for them, as now at hand; and a certain proof, that Messiah, of
whose being come they were, by their own confession, to be a sign, was now
come, and they ought to acknowledge it. And in expressions so full of dread
does he describe those pangs, sorrows, or afflictions, of that time and day of
his coming to the Jews (which were accordingly made good in that space of time,
which we said to be comprehended under the day of his coming, and his
appearing) as that nothing can surpass or equal them, but the day of his last
coming, at the terrible day of Judgment, to all People at the end of the
World; insomuch that it may even seem doubtful, whether that day were not
meant by diverse of them, in those Chapters of Mat. XXIV. Mar. XIII. and Luc.
XXI. which we have cited. At least, this is set forth as a type and figure of
that: insomuch that as well in respect to this time of such tribulation, as had
not been from the Creation, here spoken of, as of that, might be said, as well
concerning even the Elect among the Jews, (for whose sakes our Savior says,
those days should be shortened, whereas else no flesh should be saved, Mat.
XXIV.22.) to whom the issue should be Luke XXI.28.
salutary, as concerning the wicked, to whom it should be for destruction, Who
may abide the day of his coming, and who shall stand when he appears? which
in S. Id. XXI.36.
Luke is expressed by being accounted worthy to escape all those things, that
should come to pass, and to stand before the Son of man. What we, with most
others, render, who may abide, etc. is by the Vulgar Latin rendered, who shall
be able to think of the day of his coming, and who shall stand to see him? To
express emphatically, I suppose, the terror here intimated. For if none can
think of it by reason of the power or dreadfulness of his Majesty, who shall be
able to abide or bear it? says S. Jerome, including both significations. Not
that the word (...) Mecalcel, or its root does properly signify to think of (it
is no where else so found) the properer signification being to bear, or
sustain, which it has, Jer. XX.9. And so farther describing the terror of
those times, or giving a reason of the terror of them, he adds, For he is like
a Refiners fire, and like Fullers Soap. In words taken from things of known and
ordinary use, he describes the severity of those Judgments, which should then
come on all in that Country, for trial to all, and destruction to the wicked.
He is (says he) like a Refiners fire, or as the construction will also bear,
as Vulg. Lat. R. Tanch.
refining fire, though the other seems more proper. The use of that fire is to
melt metals and try them, that so what is pure may be by it self retained, the
dross being either consumed, or so separated as to be taken away from it. And
then the People being compared to mixed metal, that has in it what is pure and
what is dross; and the Lord that should come in Judgment, being compared to
fire, which shall thoroughly try that metal; the meaning will be plain (as R.
Tanchum expresses it) that he will consume or take away the transgressors and
rebellious amongst them, as the Refiners fire consumes or separates the Psalm.
CXIX.119.
dross of melted metals, and cleanses them from what is false and unsincere:
and this so, as that the good and sincere shall at once be put to severe trial,
every one in their own persons, as the good metal also, the sincere gold or
silver endures the hardship or trial of the fire, though preserved, and at
last coming forth more pure, refined and purged: So as this may be applied to
what concerns them in their particulars also, which by those trials and
afflictions shall be made sensible of their sins, and what is amiss in them,
that so purging themselves from them, they may become vessels of greater honor,
sanctified and meet for the Lords use, and prepared unto every good work, as
the Apostles words are, 2 Timothy II.21. But the words seem here more to concern
the whole mass or community of the People, all calling themselves by the same
name of Gods People; but many of them being not so, whom now by the refining
fire of his Judgments he would distinguish from the true Israelites, and by
the same means prove the one, and bring to destruction the other; as was
actually done by those heavy calamities, which ended in the destruction of the
Country, City of Jerusalem, and the Temple, by the Romans, about the 70th year
of Christ. The same is plainly likewise the meaning of the other similitude
added, and like Fullers Soap, the use of which is to scour wool or cloth, and
purge out all spots and stains in it, and take them away, leaving the wool or
cloth, though by the same means fretted and rubbed, the more white or brighter
colored. As that takes away all spots, so shall he take away all wicked ones,
says R. Salomo. The wicked may well be compared to spots in the garment of a
People, as S. Jude calls them in the Assemblies of the Christians spots in
their Feasts of Charity, Jude ver. 12. The word (...) Borith, which ours and
others render Soap, the vulgar Latin and others also render Fullers herb.
Concerning the primary signification of the word, there is doubt both among the
R. Tanch. and R. D. Kimchi in radic.
Jews and others: but, which is all that is to the purpose, it is by all agreed
on to be somewhat, which in those times and places the Fullers, or Scowrers of
Cloth, used to take away spots and stains, cleanse and whiten Cloth withal,
having (as Grammarians will) for its root (...) barar, which signifies to
cleanse, make white and clean, as Dan. XI.35. Now what our Translators, and
most others supply by, he, attributing it to the Lord spoken of, Kimchi does it
by, it, attributing it to the time called the day of his coming, and when he
shall appear; and takes refining for an epithet to fire, but then makes the
sense the same, thus, And that day shall be as fire which purges the dross
from silver; so shall that purge or separate the wicked from the good, and the
wicked shall be destroyed, and the just or righteous shall remain: and so in
the other similitude.

Here we may not pass unobserved that diverse Christian Ribera, Menoch. Tirin.
Quistorp.
Expositors interpret this, not of those visible judgments and afflictions
which we have spoken of, but of the irresistible force of Christ's word and
preaching, which may be compared indeed to fire, as Jer. V.14, and XXIII.29.
and is expressed by things of greatest force and power, which nothing can
resist, as Heb. IV.12. by a two-edged sword, piercing even to the dividing
asunder of soul and spirit, etc. and called a discerner of the thoughts and
intents of the hearts, which spared no sin or sinner; and of the efficacy of
his Diodat.
grace and spirit working on the obdurate hearts of men, and the like: which
may be added to what has been said, as the words seem to require it should.
Otherwise, I suppose the way that we have taken to give a fuller and more
proper meaning of the words, and such as will be of more use in dealing with
the Jews to convince them, that all here spoken has been fulfilled, all those
calamities, those pangs of the Messiah, which they expected that the coming of
Messiah should be accompanied with, did accordingly seize on them in that day
of his coming; including the time (as we said) from his preaching to the
destruction of the Temple, brought on them by their obstinacy in refusing to
hearken and turn to him: and so what is here said, to intimate what is more
fully declared by Christ in the Gospels concerning that time. The other In the
above cited, Mat. XXIV. etc.
Exposition alone perhaps will not gain much from them.

As to the expression here used, it may be compared with several others in the
Scripture: So (as Aben Ezra and Kimchi will) with what is said, Zach. XIII.9.
where God says, I will bring the third part through the fire, and I will
refine them as silver is refined, etc. as likewise, Isa. I.25. I will turn my
hand upon thee, and purely purge away thy dross, and take away all thy tin: and
Ezech. XXII.18, 19, 20, 21, 22. as they gather silver, and dross, and iron, and
lead, and tin into the midst of the furnace, and blow the fire upon it to melt
it; See Jer. XXIX.
so will I gather you in my anger, and melt you, etc. ( v. 20.) as silver is
melted in the midst of the furnace, so shall ye be melted, etc. ( v. 22.) and
Luke XII.49. I am come to send fire on the Earth, etc. and II These. I.8. See
Dr Hammond.
where he speaks of a time, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven
in flaming fire, etc. with other like places. Which what judgments they
concern will not be to our purpose at present to enquire; but only thus much,
that it is usual to compare Gods severity in proceeding against sin, to such
purging and refining fire, which melts and tries the whole mass, but purifies
the good, and See I Pet. IV.12. (...).
refines it, and separates and consumes the dross. So those judgments often
fall promiscuously on all both good and bad; but the end is different, and when
the wicked are destroyed, the godly are only purged and made more precious in
the sight of God, yet so as that in regard of that severe examination and
trial, which they shall endure; even in respect of them also it may justly be
asked, who may abide the day of his coming? etc. According to the same notion
he adds in respect of the present trial here spoken of, 3 And he shall sit as a
refiner and purifier of silver: and he shall purify the sons of Levi, and purge
them as gold and silver, that they may offer unto the Lord an offering in
righteousness.

And he shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver, etc.] R. D. Kimchi, as
before, so here also, what ours and others attribute to the person of the Lord,
takes as spoken of the time called the day of his coming, thus giving the
meaning of the words, As a Judge that sits to judge the People, and to
distinguish the offender from the innocent; so shall be that day, which shall
refine and cleanse the silver, and take away from it the dross, or refuse; and
they are the wicked. But the word (...) properly signifying to sit, may seem
more to agree to the person, then time, though it make not much difference in
the meaning. And it cannot be here strictly taken in the notion of sitting,
however it be attributed to the person; but rather to signify his set purpose
and resolution of so doing, as one that fits to a work. He shall set aside all
other works, that he may be as a refiner, says R. Salomo, scarce warily
enough; inasmuch as one work hinders not him from attending to others; except
we take his meaning to be, that he shall so fully do that business, as if he
attended wholly to it. The Chalde renders it, He shall be revealed, or reveal
himself, to melt and cleanse, as a man that melts and cleanses silver. He
means (says R. Tanchum) he shall try and cleanse Israel, or the People, as
silver, i. e. See the LXXII Version.
as silver is cleansed and purified, or, he shall sit, as one that refineth
silver. The letter or particle (...) C, which is a note of similitude, being in
either way omitted, because the meaning is clear.

And he shall purify the Sons of Levi, and purge them.] He shall cleanse them
as silver that is tried in a furnace of earth, purified seven times, Psalm.
XII.6. The Sons of Levi.] Of the Priests who were the Sons of Levi, we have in
the former Chapters heavy complaints, that they in nothing performed their duty
aright, but profaned Gods holy Name, his Altar, his Offerings, and Service; and
adulterated and violated his Law: of them therefore seems here particular
mention made, and promised or denounced, that he would take them (who should
have directed and been examples of good to others, but were wholly corrupt, and
ill examples to them) in the first place into a strict examination, and reform
what was amiss in his worship and their performance, so far that he lothed
their offerings, that hereafter he might in an acceptable manner be worshipped,
and have offerings offered to him in righteousness, such as should be pleasing
to him.

But who are meant by the Sons of Levi is not well accorded by Expositors. Who
of old were called by that name is manifest; but now the outward part of Gods
Service being altered, the persons also, by whom it is to be performed ought to
be so too, though under the same name set forth. The change of the Law, and the
change of the Priesthood or Ministers, necessarily accompany one the other,
Heb. VII.12. By the Sons of Levi here therefore Pareus Di da^^, Montan. See
Chr. a Castro.
some understand in general all Christians, who are all in Christ made a holy
Priesthood to offer up spiritual Sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ,
I Pet. II.5. all Priests unto God, Rev. I.6. and v. 10. Drus.
or the whole Church, by naming the Levites, who were anciently the chief part
thereof. Vatab. ed. 4o and 8o. Ribera. Sa, Chr. a Castro. Menoch. Bishop Hall.
Others understand the Priests or Ministers under the new Testament, who
succeed under the Gospel, in the place of those under the Law; as the Apostles
and Disciples of Christ, and their Successors: Grot. Tirin. Stokes.
Others, the Sons of Levi, properly so called, or the race of Aaron according
to the flesh, of whom this is verified; in regard that many of them by the
power of the word of God, were purged and purified from their former
corruptions and errors, and reduced to the acknowledgement of Christ, and true
worship of God, according to the perfect rule of the Gospel, as it is said, And
a great company of the Priests were obedient to the Faith, Act. VI.7. All these
may be true, and well joined. As to the last which understands it of the Sons
of Levi properly so called, as of that race; of such as were won to the
obedience of Christ by the word of his Gospel, and had their hearts purified
by faith in him; of them may it be truly verified, that they were purified and
purged as gold and silver by him sitting as a refiner and purifier of silver:
and it cannot be doubted, but that they had their parts in that sharp trial of
afflictions too in those days. And as for them who were all dross, and would
not be purified, but continued in their corruption, what became of them, the
sad story of the destruction of the City and Temple (which we take to be
deciphered by this day of his coming, and the trying and purifying here
described) shows, when so many of them together with the Temple, perished by
fire: as that if the expression here were properly meant of material fire, it
might be said to have been verified in them; although we do not here take it as
so meant, but only to express the strictness and exactness of the trial. It is
said that he shall so purify and purge them, that they shall offer unto the
Lord an offering in righteousness. In the times when this was spoken, that they
did not so, is showed in the preceding Chapters. Because they were so perverse
in their ways, so wicked in their doings, he tells them that he regarded not
the offering, (by which they thought to satisfy his Law, and do to him
acceptable service) nor received it with good will at their hands. As likewise,
Isa. I.19. etc. he calls the Sacrifices they pretended to do to him, while
their hands were full of wickedness, vain oblations; the incense they brought,
abomination unto him; their feast, iniquity and trouble to him, and that, when
they make many prayers, he will not hear. Before they can do any thing that
shall be acceptable to him, they must wash them, and make them clean, put away
the evil of their doing, cease to do evil, learn to do good, etc. The persons
must be first made such as he will accept, before their offerings can be Jer.
VI.20.
acceptable or their Sacrifices sweet unto him. That therefore among these that
are here called Sons of Levi, (whether be meant all Christians, or those that
are peculiarly separated to the ministering to God in holy things, or such of
the Jewish Levites that were converted to Christ) there may be such as may
offer to him an offering in righteousness, rightly, lawfully and acceptably,
not to the farther displeasing of him (as those in this Prophet reprehended
then did) he says that he will first purify them as silver, and purge them as
gold and silver, from all dross and corruptions that are in them, by such means
as he sees convenient, whether by the powerful efficacy of his Word* Grace,
and Spirit, or farther (if he see necessary) by the fiery trial of sufferings,
by the Isa. IV.4.
spirit of judgment and of burning, to separate the sincere of them from those
that are not such: and then they being so purged, and with sincere hearts and
pure hands, presenting their offerings in righteousness to him, shall be
accepted, both they and their offerings: so says he in the following words.

4 Then shall the offerings of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant unto the Lord,
as in the days of old, and as in formeryears. Then shall the offerings of
Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant unto the Lord.] Judah and Jerusalem are named
(says Kimchi) because there was the Temple or Sanctuary. It will be easy to
translate the names to the Church of Christ, of which that City was a type, and
which thence was to have its Tirin. and see Notes on Micah IV.1, 2.
rise and beginning, though since spread abroad through the World; so that it
will be all one to say the offerings of the Church. But what offerings are then
to be understood? not certainly such legal Sacrifices or Mincha's, as were then
under the Law offered. For this is spoken of what was to be after the coming of
the Messiah, by whose once offering of himself all such legal offerings had an
end put to them, and were for the future to cease. By the offerings (the Mincha
or offering, as it is in the singular number) of Judah and Jerusalem therefore
must be meant all the spiritual offerings and services of the Church, and the
faithful Members thereof; their Psalm. CXlI.2.
Prayers, Heb. XIII.15.16.
Alms, Praises, Eucharistical Sacrifices, their whole selves offered to God, as
a living Sacrifice, holy acceptable to God, Romans XII.1. all comprehended under
that pure Mincha, or offering, See the Notes thereon.
Chapter I.11. they being all made a holy Priesthood to offer up spiritual
Sacrifices acceptable to God, I Pet. II.5. Much of the service under the Law
consisting in offering oblations, that name is transferred to all Evangelical
services.

It is said they shall be pleasant as in the days of old, and as in former
years, in the days of the pious Patriarks, say Cyril. Vatab. Grot. etc.
some. Drus. Aben Ezra.
Others, in the time of the first Temple, and when the worship of God flourished
in Judea: or Abarb.
the time of the Tabernacle that Moses pitched.

But it will not concern particularly to design the time, the Text having not
so designed it, it will be sufficient to understand it, that the services in
the time here spoken of, by such and in such manner as he describes, done,
shall be as acceptable and pleasing to God, as any ever heretofore by holy and
pious men in due manner performed, were, and not loathsome and displeasing to
him, as those offerings of that present Age by wicked men, unduly and with
neglect and breach of his law offered, were.

But here is observable that from what he says, that the Sons of Levi shall be
purified, and then offer offerings in righteousness, and pleasant unto God, as
those of holy men of old, on, and after the coming and appearance of the Lord
the Messiah, there is an evident proof, that by that coming of his here spoken
of, is not meant his last coming to judgment (inasmuch as after that will be
no time for such services: they are to be performed in this life and this
World, not in the life and World to come) but a coming in this World, after
which it should yet last, in which is a time of purging; the other being a time
only of remuneration, according to what men have in this done. They are an
argument in this kind looked on, not only by Ribe^a. See Chr a Castro, p. 572.
some Christian Expositors, but by a Jew also. Abarbinel makes it as a proof
against R. Salomo's interpreting what is here spoken, concerning death, and the
punishments in another World, because, says he, that which is here said of
offering offerings, (...) is a thing that does not belong to Souls after death.
This is to be observed not only in respect to what has been already said, but
in respect of what follows also in the next verse, and other passages which are
betwixt this and the end of this Prophecy: by which, taken by themselves, the
judgment after this life and World may seem deciphered; and we ought to be put
in mind of it. Yet if we consider to whom, ( viz. the Nation of murmuring
Jews,) and on what occasion the words were then spoken, and how there is in
them (as this) that which agrees to things in this life and World, not so
properly to that; we shall see that they must have respect to such judgments as
God would exercise toward that Nation in this World, and taking the time
denoted by the day of the Lord, the Messiah's coming, for that time, which (as
we said) was from the first preaching of John Baptist, and Christ, until the
destruction of the Country, City, and Temple of Jerusalem; and considering what
was done in those times, we shall easily perceive that all by the Lord in this
Prophet spoken, was so far fulfilled, as that in regard thereof alone, not one
word of his may be said to have fallen to the ground: though, as then the words
might warn them, who were then in the Prophets time living, and should die
before the execution of such Gods public judgments on the Community or Nation,
of a certain account that they should after this life, if not before, be
brought to, for their doings; so they ought still to warn all, whether
particular persons, or whole Nations, to expect in Gods due time to be brought
to judgment, at least after this life, if not in it too: what happened to
them, being for example to all, and their concern so to make use thereof, that
purifying themselves before hand, and doing to God acceptable service, they be
not consumed as dross.

5 And I will come near to you in judgment, and I will be a swift witness
against the sorcerers, and against the adulterers, and against false swearers,
and against those that oppress the hireling in his wages, the widow, and the
fatherless, and that turn aside the stranger from his right, and fear not me,
says the Lord of hosts. And I will come near to you in judgment, etc.] An
answer to their former groundless murmurings and questionings in the last verse
of the preceding Chapter, he has in the former verses given, and in this and
the next verse continues it in terms coming close to the question there by them
made, where is the God of Judgment? he here answers, I will come near to you
to Judgment. Before he spoke as of a third person, The Lord shall come, etc.
and he shall sit, etc. and he shall purify, etc. viz. The Lord Christ, the
second person of the blessed Trinity; here in the first person, as of God the
Father, I will come near, etc. This alters nothing in the sense, but only gives
us to understand, that God will judge by the Messiah, God the Father in and by
the Son. For the Father has committed all judgment to the Son, John V.22. and
has given him authority to execute judgment, ver. 27. he coming, therefore,
says, I am come in my Fathers name, ver. 43. whether therefore this be looked
on as spoken in the Fathers name, or in the person of the Messiah, as Edit. 4o
and 8o.
Vatablus will, it is all one, for he and his Father are one, Joh. X.30.

He will come near to them in Judgment, to exercise judgment, which they
complained was not executed. Will come] at the end of the World, at the last
Judgment, says the same learned man, following See Chr. a Castro.
some others. Menoch.
Others expound them of both comings of Christ, that already past, and that to
be at the end of the World; as much as to say, I will come down in the flesh,
and enquire into the corrupt manners of men, I will come also at my last coming
to judgment.

Or, I will come in Judgment, first Tirinus.
to correct, and also as occasion shall serve, to punish; but will perfectly
complete it at the day of the last Judgment. But what to say of these see in
the note on the former verse, as likewise of R. Kimchi's note on the place: I
will come near, viz. in that day which he has mentioned, to you; that is, to
that generation which shall be in that day, and the generations that are past,
if they received not their judgment in this World, they shall receive it in
the World to come; and of what Abarbinel here says, who though he rejects R.
Salomo's opinion, as to the former verse, yet will have it here to take place,
viz. that by his saying I will come near, is meant that before those things so
far off to come, which Malachi should tell them of, he will more speedily come
to the particulars of them by death, which should send them to Hell; making
that the import of (...) I will be, or am near to you.

And I will be a swift witness, etc.] That none of the transgressors may think
to avoid his judgment, as in human Judicatures many do for want of evident
witness, against them, their crimes having been committed in secret, and often
sentence is delaied that See Abarb.
so enquiry may be made, and witnesses sought for; he tells them that here it
shall not be so, he himself that is the Judge will also be witness. And See R.
D. Kimchi.
all things being open to him, even those things which are done with greatest
privacy, as well known to him, as those that are done in the face of the Sun,
and before many witnesses, he will not delay for making farther search and
enquiry, as in doubtful matters, and where circumstances may not be plain, or
men's memories may fail, is by men done, but will be a swift witness, will
without more ado, convince them of their sins, and as speedily execute sentence
on them being convicted, none being able to stop or hinder his proceeding, when
once he takes the matter in hand, as he here assures, that in his appointed
time, (which shall then seem too sudden to them, though now they accuse him of
delay) he will do.

Against whom he will so proceed, he shows by reckoning up diverse notorious
sins, which his specifying shows to have been then common amongst them: and
besides that, he will in like manner proceed against all others guilty in other
like kinds of sins contrary to his Law; as these expressly are. These being
named, we cannot but think others included.

Against the Sorcerers.] Of this sin forbidden, Deuteronomy. XVIII.10, 11, 12. is
showed, that they were much guilty even under the first Temple, in Isa. c.
II.6. Jer. XXVII.9. Micah V.12. And how under the second, and in the later
degenerate times, they addicted themselves to the like vain diabolical arts,
(one here named comprehends the rest, which in the Law are distinguished by
several names) is proved by the learned Dr Lightfoot by several instances on
Mat. XXIV.24 And of the rest of the sins here reckoned up, the same will be to
be said, that as they of former times before the Babylonish captivity, and
destruction of the former City and Temple, were guilty of them, and by them
pulled on the whole Nation those heavy Judgments, besides those which in their
particular persons they were for them liable to, either in this life or the
other, so these also, after their return from that captivity, (not taking
warning by what had happened to their Ancestors, and they had either tasted of,
or could not but have fresh in memory,) casting off the fear of God (which in
the last words of the verse is assigned as the cause of their so doing) did
again give themselves up to the like, so far, that God again threatens them
with like national Judgments. In rendering the words, whereby the last sin here
spoken of is described, viz. and that turn aside the stranger from his right,
the words from his right being put in different characters, shows that they
are not expressed in the original Hebrew, but are supplied for making clearer
and fuller the sense; the words literally sounding only, that turn aside the
stranger: So do some of the R. D. Kimchi.
Jews think a supply for that end necessary, and therefore understand (...)
Mishpat, Judgment, as if it were (...) Vmatte mishpat hager, and that turn
aside, or pervert, the judgment of the stranger; which is in the text it self
put in, where a curse is denounced against this sin, Deuteronomy. XXVII.19. (and there
is the word (...) matteh, perverteth, in the singular number, and therefore
with the letter (...) H in the end, whereas it is here in the plural, and
therefore with ^ i in the end. Which I suppose is all that the Masorites, or
those that took care of the right writing and reading of the Hebrew Text, would
have here to be observed by that note of theirs, which Buxt. vindic. part. 2.
cap. 4. page 502.
some take notice of, viz. that it is not else where read with 'yod in the end;
not that they would have us think it ought here to have been written with (...)
H; for here it is in the plural, as the rest of the Nouns here are, as R.
Tanchum notes; of which yod in the end is a sign, and the letter (...) H of the
singular.

That among the sins here reckoned up as provoking God to come in judgment, is
not mentioned Idolatry (as great as any, and which the former Prophets under
the first Temple did often inveigh against) Abarbinel notes the reason to be,
because that under the second Temple that sin was not found amongst them. The
same Doctor on the last words, and fear not me says the Lord, notes, that he
intimates, that if they should fear him, and See Cyril.
repent of these sins; he would pardon them.

Says the Lord of hosts.] This intimates the certainty of what he says shall
be, that they may take due notice of it, which is also assured in what follows,
ver. 6. LXXII. Arab. Chr. a Castro, Pareus, Grot. etc.
Diverse connect the last words with the former thus, and against those that do
not fear me, Vat. Edi^. 4o and 8o.
including, with those guilty of the former sins, all others who fear not the
Lord.

6 For I am the Lord, I change not: therefore ye sons of Jacob are not
consumed. For I am the Lord, I change not; therefore ye sons of Jacob are not
consumed.] These words are very differently expounded, at least applied, by
Interpreters; especially as to the latter part of them. The connection of the
former part of them with the preceding, according to the way that we have gone,
will be easy; viz. That although he have so long forborne to take vengeance of
the wicked, yet they are not to think, that it is because he approves of their
doings, or is grown neglectful of those that take care to serve him; but that
he will in due time execute his judgments on the one, according to what he
has threatened against such as go on in evil ways, and show his care of the
other; inasmuch as he is still the same God of judgment, unchangeably the
same, a hater and certain avenger of evil, and a lover of good: and therefore
all his threats and promises, however seeming to be deferred, shall in their
due time certainly come to pass, and have their due effect. But how then does
what he subjoins, therefore, (or and) ye sons of Jacob are not consumed? follow
on these? Because (as we said) Expositors in giving the meaning of these words
much differ, it will be convenient to take some of their Interpretations
distinctly.

R. Salomo's note on this place is, Although I do defer my anger, I have not
changed my mind [or purpose] from what it was at first, as that I should love
the wicked, and hate the good. And ye Sons of Jacob, although [some of you] are
dead, or have died, in their iniquity, and I have not taken punishment of those
wicked in this life, yet ye are not consumed; ye are not consumed, or brought
to nothing, before me; I have left your souls to execute my Judgment on them
in Hell: according to Jonathan's Chalde Paraphrase which is, And ye of the
house of Jacob think that he who dies in this World, his Judgment cease: as
much as to say, Ye in your opinion say, my Judgment is frustrate, or cease,
because there is no farther time to take vengeance on him. But our ancient
Doctors, says he, otherwise expound it, I have not changed or returned, or
done a second time, I have not smitten any other Nation, and returned, [or In
the Concordance the word (...) is put in both these significations.
been changed, to it, or smitten it a second time.] But you have I preserved,
or caused, to abide after many punishments. Deuteronomy. XXXII.23.
My arrows are consumed or spent, but ye are not consumed.

R. D. Kimchi's Exposition is thus, for I the Lord change not, for whatsoever I
have spoken, though for a long time to come, shall certainly so come to pass;
for I change not, neither do my words change: and all the things to come, which
I have spoken to you by my Prophets, shall so be, or come to pass. The Verb
(...) Shaniti has the signification of changing, as if he should say, I change
not from word to word, from purpose to purpose, or liking to liking, i. e. that
I should one while say or like one thing, and another while another. And ye
Sons of Jacob are not consumed; as other Nations are consumed, of whose name no
memory is left, and who are destroyed from being a Nation: but ye are not
consumed, neither shall you be consumed; for ye shall always be separate among
the Nations, that ye may be one Nation in the Earth; although you be led
captive, and dispersed to every corner, your name remains, or shall remain,
in every place. The evil that I have done to you, I have done for your
iniquities. And as I change not, so ye also shall not be consumed, and in the
latter days ye shall return to your dignity, and shall be high above all the
Nations of the Earth. But Jonathan paraphraseth it thus, For I the Lord have
not changed my Covenant, which is from of old, but ye, O house of Israel,
think, that he that dies in this World, his Judgment cease. Thus Kimchi.

Abarbinel, though he dissent from R. Salomo on the 2d, 3d, and 4th verses, (as
we have seen) yet here agreeing with him, as separating, what is spoken in the
5th and this verse, from what is spoken in them, as belonging to a distinct
time and judgment, as not seeing in his way how well to join them, thus here
speaks; For I the Lord change not, i. e. I have always loved judgment and
righteousness, but if it be not in this World, it shall be in the World to
come, that is it which he says, and ye children of Jacob are not consumed, for
although you die, behold your souls remain to receive the recompense of your
doings.

These words and opinions of these Doctors we recite, not as if they conduced
to the right meaning of the place, for they are far from it; as R. Salomo's, in
that, what is spoken of a particular signal day and judgment in this World, he
expounds of that which continually did befall, and still does befall all men in
their times; viz. the day of death, and of the immortality of the Soul, which
things being common to all men, and before known to all the Jews, cannot be the
utmost meaning or conclusion of a new Prophecy directed to the Jews; and
particularly concerning their Nation, to show them some new thing that should
betide them, and satisfy that question then in their mouths, Where is the God
of Judgment? with some new answer. However, that which he says be in it self
true, it is not here, by it self, to the purpose, and it seems to proceed on
his former wrong supposal, that ver. 1. by the Lords Messenger is meant the
Angel of death, and by the Lord here spoken of, the God of Judgment, without
respect to the Messiah; and not to come home at all to the taking away the
murmuring of the People, of which he complains, and shows it to be causeless,
and through ignorance of what he now declares to them.

This objection against him Abarbinel suggests to us, in what he says on the
first and second verses, but here, where he falls in with him, it stands firm
against himself: for here we are not (as he does) to look on these words, as
spoken of a distinct time, or persons, or judgment, from those that are in
those former words spoken of, but as concerning still the same day or time, (as
Kimchi, as we have seen, well notes;) and all directing to some visible
judgment, whereby God in that appointed time should clear his Justice, which
they now looking on the prosperity of the wicked called in question, and make
manifest his immutability in his hatred of the wicked, though he do not
presently execute sentence on them, and his love to the godly; whom though he
suffer to endure for a while perhaps hard trial, yet he still takes care of
their final preservation, and will in his due time make it apparent, by what
shall be then visibly done by some distinguishing judgment: which to the
particular day of men's dying, and the judgment that they shall then be brought
to, invisible and unknown to others, (so that thereby Gods love and hatred to
the one or the other are not easily discerned, Eccles. IX.1.
one thing, as far as man can discern befalling them, and one dying as the
other dies,) is not so kindly appliable.

As for David Kimchi, neither can his Exposition here take place, it running
(as to the latter part) on a false supposition, which may not be granted, viz.
that the Lord and his Messenger, who were, as is evident ( ver. 1.) to come to
the Temple then standing, which is long since destroyed, and by whom the
judgment spoken was to be brought near unto them, ( v. 5.) are not yet come,
nor that judgment yet executed, but are yet (no man knows when) to be expected,
and that the judgment, with which that Nation is here particularly threatened,
was to be executed only on other Nations, there remaining for the Jews, only a
triumphant return to their ancient dignity, and a flourishing estate in this
World; which certainly are no way intimated in the words, but on the contrary a
destruction of all the sinners among them by a national Judgment, though the
godly among them were not to be thereby consumed. All which has been already
so fully completed in the destruction of that People, within few years after
Christ's coming, that to pass by what has been done, and look after things to
be done, not at all by God here, or else where promised, is to delude, and not
to give a true Exposition of this Prophecy.

From none of these Expositions therefore (as we said) have we certainly the
right meaning of these words, as to the scope of them; all that we may gain by
them to our purpose is a justification of the signification of some of the
words, as they are by our Translators rendered, and particularly of the two
Verbs, the first in (...) Lo shaniti, I change not; the other in (...) Lo
celitem, ye are not consumed: in the giving of the meaning of which, R. Ab.
Ezra, and R. Tanchum agree with those already named, only that the latter of
them thinks that both of them, though in the form of the preterperfect tense,
ought to be rendered in the signification of the future, I will not change, and
ye shall not be consumed; making the former to include a reason of the
returning of Gods Providence to them as it was of old, and giving for the
meaning, These promises shall certainly come to pass, although they be deferred
for a long while, for no change or failing shall happen to me: and likewise ye
shall remain by the remaining of my Law among you, neither shall you be
consumed or cease to be. Into which meaning we shall not further enquire, he
not fully expressing of it. If he mean the same that Kimchi does, the same
answer will serve. That which we take notice of, is, that according to these
the meaning of the first word is given, by saying that God does not, or will
not alter his purpose and Decree, concerning his hatred of the wicked, and in
his appointed time bringing to condign punishment obstinate sinners, or his
love to the good and care of them; so that however he delay the time of his
evidencing these things by open judgments, his Justice is not to be
questioned, as if he now liked or approved of such things or persons, which he
had formerly declared his dislike unto.

This while with them we look on, as the import of the word here, we cannot but
wonder at the impudence and folly of that railing Jew See Wagen^^l Correct.
Lipm.
Lipman, who says that Christians go contrary to the meaning of what is here
said, in affirming, that God, who before had not flesh and blood, was changed
to be flesh and blood, or, as another Copy has it, who was before only the
Father, and the Holy Spirit, was afterward changed to be the Son. In which
objection of his is only much malice and impertinency; inasmuch as by nothing
that the Christians say, nor by any consequence that can be drawn from what
they say, can it be concluded that they affirm any change or alteration in God
or the Godhead, with whom they profess to be no variableness, neither shadow of
changing, either in his nature or any of his attributes, all things remaining
in him, the eternal Trinity, one God in three Persons, as they were from
eternity; nor by Christ's taking the Manhood into God, was there any change of
God into Man, nor confusion of substance, or alteration of person. Again,
inasmuch as, that he might pick a cavil against Christians, he takes the word
which here denotes Gods immutability in his Will, Word, Decree, and purpose,
which with the Jews the Christians absolutely affirm, as if it imported here
immutability of nature or substance, (though that be most true also:) so that
it is a cavil sought, not offered to him, either by the word as here used, nor
any thing by the Christians affirmed. He had no occasion to say this, but he
having said it, it was convenient to take some notice of it, lest others of his
Sect might applaud him in it, and think to be true what he feigneth.

But of the concurrence of the other Jews, in rendering the latter Verb in the
same notion that our Translators do, who render it are not consumed, we take
more notice, because some learned Christians take it in another signification,
and would have it rendered, And ye sons of Jacob Stokes.
do not desist, or leave off to do evil: so in Munster and the Tigurin
Translations more lately: And the Septuagin^ of old seems so to have taken the
word to signify, reading this word with the two first of the following verse,
And ye sons of Jacob have not r^c^ded from the unjust dealings, or wickedness
of your Fathers: as likewise the printed Arabic Version following that, and
the Syriack also. And from the word in that notion rendered, would flow a very
convenient sense, taking the whole verse as a confirmation of what is before
said; and that they certainly must expect that judgment denounced to come in
its appointed time, inasmuch as the Lord is unchangeable in his purpose of
punishing incorrigible, unrepenting sinners, and they would not leave off their
evil courses, nor repent them of their sins, nor desist from them.

But others, and they the major part, viz. all that follow the vulgar Latin and
diverse others also of modern Interpreters, prefer, with the forementioned
Jewish Writers, the other notion of being consumed, as more usual to the Verb
in the Conjugation or form here used; according to which our Translators render
are not consumed: but then in giving the meaning and connection of the whole
verse, there is among those who embrace this signification of this word some
difference. Some taking it as speaking of the time past or present, make the
coherence with what goes before, and the meaning, to this purpose, as may be
collected out of them put together; that doubtless it shall be so as he said,
he will come in judgment to those sinners. For he (the Lord) who has
determined and pronounced that he will not leave impenitent sinners unpunished,
does not change his will and purpose. But how then is it that the Sons of
Jacob, whose Fathers and themselves have been great and obstinate sinners, have
not long since been, or are not yet consumed? It is from the same
unchangeableness in God, who as he is just, so is likewise merciful and long
suffering, not willing the death of sinners, but rather that they should come
to repentance: and therefore determined as to execute justice, so not to be
hasty in executing it, but to give space for repentance, that so the necessity
and equity of his judgments executed on such as would not lay hold on his
mercy by repentance, while they had time allowed for it, may appear: and
besides, that he might show how just he was in keeping promise, and his
Covenant made with their Forefathers, Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob in so long
sparing for their sakes their rebellious posterity, who would make no end of
sinning: So that it was not through any change in him, that they have not yet
been consumed, but shall now be severely punished; but from his mercy and their
obstinacy opposing and rejecting it. So that they cannot but say (if they will
rightly consider the matter) it is of the Lords mercy that we are not consumed,
because his compassions fail not. Great is thy faithfulness, Lam. III.22, 23.

This, however they differ in expressions, seems to be the scope that the most
of Pelican. Ribera, Chr. a Castro's Paraph. Tirin. Tarnov. Stock. etc.
Expositors will have these words to aim at. There are that read them by way of
interrogation or admiration, Sanctius.
For I the Lord change not, and are not ye, O Sons of Jacob, consumed? how
wonderful a thing is it that the Lord being immutable in his judgment against
refractory sinners, they should not yet be consumed! how has mercy prevailed
against judgment! This falls in with what has been already said, and requires
the same answer.

There may be proposed another way thus, Expect certainly the execution of the
judgment spoken of, and that I will in due time call to an account sinners,
for I the Lord change not: See Vatab.
Of which that you may not doubt, you have from a contrary effect and evidence
of my immutability a proof; for therefore ye Sons of Jacob are not consumed;
though the wicked have hitherto domineered, and wickedness reigned, yet you
true Sons of Jacob, that fear me, as Jacob did, have been preserved; by virtue
of my promise and mercy they have not been able to root you out.

But as we saw before, that by a learned Jew it is noted, that this Verb is to
be rendered rather in the signification of the future, and with respect to what
was to come, not to what was past or present; so it is by Castal Grot.
some of good judgment and learning among Christians also taken, that the
words may be rendered, Therefore, or and, ye Sons of Jacob shall not be
consumed, as part of the Prophecy of what should be to the godly, when the Lord
should come to execute his Judgment spoken of on the wicked: and for making
out the meaning to this purpose, they understand by the Sons of Jacob the godly
amongst the Jews, (they who being of the Faith of Jacob, and following his
steps, deserved peculiarly to be called his Children or Sons, according to what
we learn in like kind, whom properly to call Children of Abraham, Galat. III.7.
and Romans IX.7.) and then the coherence will appear thus, I will certainly come
near to you in judgment, against the sinners among you. For I am the Lord and
change not, but am still, as ever, inexorable to obstinate impenitent sinners,
one that will in due time take vengeance on them however for a long time I have
spared them; but ye true Sons of Jacob, ye whose heart is right with me, and
who lay hold on my Promise to him made, and by walking in his steps approve
your selves his genuine Children, heirs of his Faith; ye, as you are not
partakers of their sins, so neither shall ye be of the judgments brought upon
them: I will make a way for your escape, that ye perish not with them. And that
so he effected it, is made evident by the history. When the judgment here
prophesied of had its execution and completion in the destruction of the City
and Temple of Jerusalem, and the wicked obstinate sinners of the Jews in it;
God provided for the escape and deliverance of such as had embraced the
doctrine of Christ, and yielded obedience to him: so that they were not
consumed, as, if God had not taken a special care for them, they must
necessarily have been. And so taking by that day of the Lords coming to be
meant the space (as we have said on the first and second verses) betwixt John
Baptist's and Christ's beginning to preach, and the destruction of the Temple;
and by that swift judgment the destruction of the wicked among the Jews,
together with their City and Temple; and by the Sons of Jacob those that
believed in Christ, whom Jacob so long before waited for, and transmitted the
expectation of to his posterity; and by what is said that they should not be
consumed, their escape and wonderful preservation from that so universal a
destruction, by their being from God warned to go out of the City, while there
was an opportunity offered, which accordingly they did to a place called Pella,
so that there was not one Christian left in the City when it was destroyed, but
all escaped, as Eusebius testifies in the 3d book of his History, Cap. 5. and
Epiphanius de Ponderib. Cap. 15. Idem adversus Haereses page 123. And see Grot.
Dr Hammond on Mat. XXIV.16. Simson's Chron. par. 7. p. 46 Ao Christi 67.
we cannot but see all that is here spoken from the beginning of the Chapter to
the end of the 6th verse, to have been so fully made good by evidence of fact,
that there is no ground by virtue of this Prophecy, to look for any thing yet
to be expected, which has not been made good, as the Jews, that they may keep
up themselves in their willing error of denying Christ yet to be come, would
have us do: and that there is in them a full and satisfactory answer to that
blasphemous murmuring and questioning in the last verse of the preceding
Chapter, God delights in them that do evil, else why does he suffer them to
prosper? or, Where is the God of Judgment? So that, in respect to those who so
spoke, and to whom these things were then spoken, viz. the people of the Jews,
there is no need of looking farther. Mean while, what happened then to them is
to all others for example, to teach them that though God for a while in his
forbearance and giving time to repent, suffer the wicked to prosper, yet he
will doubtless in due time manifest his Justice in punishing them for their
evil doings; and if he do not in this life, whether by personal judgments on
particular persons, or national on wicked Nations, yet he certainly will after
death, and at that general terrible Judgment at the last day; of which that
severe judgment then on the Jewish Nation, was so lively a figure and emblem;
as that it cannot but put all that will consider things in mind of it, and warn
them to expect it, though it be not that which is here primarily meant. And
this seems the most plain and the litteral way of the expounding these words,
hitherto.

7 Even from the days of your Fathers, ye are gone away from mine ordinances,
and have not kept them: return unto me, and I will return unto you, says the
Lord of hosts: But ye said, Wherein shall we return? Even from the days of
your Fathers ye are gone away from mine Ordinances.] The connection of these
words with the former is by Expositors differently given, according to their
different Expositions of those. According to those that render the foregoing
Verb in the notion of desisting or ceasing [from evil] these words will be a
farther declaration of what was by it said, viz. that they continued still to
do, as all along from the days of their Fathers they had done, and would not
be brought to repent of their evil doings and forsake them, which now yet they
are exhorted to do, and in the following words some of those their sins
particularly enumerated.

According to those who render it in the notion of being consumed, and take it
in the sense of the time past or present, they will be an amplification of Gods
mercy in that they have not been, nor are yet consumed, by aggravation of their
sins from their long and obstinate continuance in them without repentance of,
or turning from them, which by the same unchangeable mercy they are called on
yet to do. But according to the latter way (which we prefer) of rendering it ye
shall not be consumed, there is not any such connection to be looked after, but
the former part of this Chapter containing an answer to what was, whether by
impatient murmurers or s^offers objected against Gods justice and immutability
of his methods in proceeding against wicked doers, being in the sixth verse
concluded, he passes to a Stock.
new matter, a distinct part of the Chapter, a new contest against the People
of that time for other sins, by which they had provoked him to send on them
already some previous judgments; for removing which, and preventing those more
terrible ones mentioned in the foregoing verses, and which he does again before
the end of this Prophecy put them in mind of, he shows them the only way to be,
to return unto him by repentance, and therefore in compassion to them calls on
them so to do.

So R. Tanchum says that though these words are not distinguished [from the
former] in the writing, yet in sense they are, being an address to the People
of that time alone. So Junius Jun. Trem. on c. I. v. 6.
and Tremellius look on it as a new contest or expostulation, added to those
former, against contempt and profanation of his worship ( c. 1. v. 6. and c.
2.10.) 2ly, Against illegal Marriages, Polygamy, and Divorce (thence to verse.
17.) 3ly. Against their murmuring, repining, or scoffing at his Justice and
Judgments, ( v. 17. of that second Chap.) with an answer hitherto. And now 4ly
here against sacrilegious detention of tithes and things belonging to God hence
to verse 13. where and in the following verses he adds another against their
slighting of his worship and of repentance. So Grotius looks on it likewise as
a distinct speech, saying that here leaving off to speak to whom he spoke in
the last words, he returns again to speak to the wicked. And according to this
supposition, that here is a transition to a new matter of expostulation,
without mingling this verse with the preceding, in construction or continuation
of sentence, will be the plainest way of proceeding to what follows.

Even from the days of your Fathers ye are gone away from mine Ordinances, and
have not kept them.] Abarbinel notes that in these words, ye are gone away from
mine Ordinances, God accuses them of breach of his affirmative Precepts, or
those that enjoined them to do such things, as he commanded: in the other, and
have not kept them, of the breach of his negative Precepts, or such as forbad
them to do such, or such things, which he says is agreeable to an observation
of their ancient Doctors, that the latter word (...) Shamar is usually applied
to negative Precepts: but without this nicety of distinction R. D. Kimchi gives
the meaning in plain and perspicuous words, thus. A long time is past since
that ye have not kept (or observed) mine Ordinances, both See Ezra. IX.7. and
Neh. IX.
ye, See Ezra. IX.7. and Neh. IX.
and your Fathers: therefore have I brought evil on them, and on you: But now
from henceforth return, etc. In much like manner Grotius; Ye now so live as ye
formerly lived when ye deserved to be carried away into captivity, and will
again deserve to suffer the like. That here, while he mentions their doings,
are intimated such evils and judgments, as they had already pulled down on
themselves, and should farther pull down if they continued in those ways, is
manifest by what follows; as in the subsequent verses, where such evils are
named, so in the next words of these, wherein he exhorts them to repentance, as
the only means to remove what they already suffered, or were further threatened
with, and to reconcile him whom they had provoked, to themselves, and regain
his favor. Return unto me and I will return unto you. Return unto me by
repentance, and I will return unto you in mercy and favor, and care over you,
by my good Providence. Remove you the evil of your doings, and I will remove
the evil of my Judgments, the effects of my displeasure for that evil. Calv.
God neither recedes nor returns, but when he shows tokens of his displeasure
he is said to turn away; when of his favor to return.

But ye said, wherein shall we return?] The import of these words is by R.
Tanchum, R. D. Kimchi, and Grot.
some here given (as of like expressions before in this Prophet) if ye shall
say wherein shall we return? and R. Tanchum well notes that the particle (...)
be, in, or with, in the word (...) Bammeh, in what, or wherein, has here the
force or signification of (...) from, as in some other places; for that the
sense is not in, or with, what thing shall we return unto thee? but from what
thing shall we return, etc.? Whether they openly and in words said thus, or
inwardly and in their thoughts, is all one; what they thought or said in their
hearts, being as well known to God, as what they uttered with their mouths; it
argues their Abarb.
great impudence, who being called on by God to return from their sin, would
not acknowledge themselves guilty of any thing that they should repent of, or
amend in themselves, but in justification of themselves, say, Grot.
what is there in us that needs to be reformed? Kimchi thus paraphraseth it, Is
there any other matter besides what thou have hitherto reproved us for, of
matters of illegal Sacrifices, and concerning women [or transgression in matter
of marriage] mentioned in the first and second Chapters? To this he returns
them answer by specifying what besides those things they were guilty in, viz.
in their defrauding him in tithes and offerings: and he so does it, as to give
them notice of the hainousness of that fault, saying, 8 I Will a man rob God?
yet ye have robbed me: But ye say, Wherein have we robbed thee? In tithes, and
offerings.

Will a man rob God? etc.] Of these words we find far different Translations,
as 1. That of the ancient Latin, Si affiget homo Deum, quia vos configitis me,
which the Authors of the Doway Translation in English, render, shall a man
fasten God? because you do fasten me, with which though a harsh sense, the
Tigurin Version also agrees; though noting in the Margin, that otherwise it may
be rendered, do violence to, and pierce, and otherwise, take away by force, and
that instead of God, may be rendered, Judicem, the Judge. 2ly, That of the
Greek, will a man supplant God? because ye have supplanted me. And 3ly of the
Chalde, will a man provoke a Judge to anger? because ye provoke me to anger.
And 4, the Interlineary Version, Will a man take away God by force, (which must
be understood of the things pertaining to God.) 5. Ought a man to snatch (or
take away by rapine) those things that are Gods? because ye snatch away those
things that are mine, as Pagnine. 6. As Munster, Will a man do violence to the
Judges? because ye do violence to me.

That we may judge between these, and if there be any other that differs in
sense from some of these, and clear the sense, it will be expedient to enquire
into the signification of the principal Verb in this expression, because on the
acception of that depends the main of the matter, either for preferring any of
these before the other, or reconciling them, if it be possible. That word (or
verb) rendered by ours, Rob, is (...) Kaba, of which we may observe, that it is
found but seldom in the Scriptures, viz. here in this and the following verse
four times, and in Prove. XXII. twice in the same verse, viz. the 23. verse, and
not elsewhere, I mean in the form of a Verb, for to look after some Nouns which
have the same radicals, which are but two neither, in Scripture, viz. (...)
Koba, a Helmet, and (...) Kubaath, Dregs, will not be much to our purpose. And
this seldom use of it makes the signification not to be so well known as that
of words oftener used. Diverse of the Abu Walid. R. Tanchum. R. Salomo. R. D.
Kimchi. Abarbinel.
Jewish Grammarians and Interpreters tell us that it signifies, to take away by
violence, to rob (as ours well here express it) or to spoil, as in the
forecited place, Prove. XXII.23. they render it: for in both places, viz. here
and there, it seems to have the same signification. R. Salomo.
Others looking on it as a Chalde or Syriack word, at least of more use in that
Language, thence would have us take or look for the signification of it: and in
that the most usual notion of it is, to fix, or fasten, to stick in, and the
like. If this, as the learned Nicholas Capit. Concord. MS.
Fuller observes, be looked on as the primary signification, then because this
is done by a violent percussion, or striking, the other which the Jews give of
oppressing, or taking away by force, or robbing, may be looked on as a
Metaphorical use of it, as agreeing in the act of violence or force with it.
But however they fall in together in this common notion, I know not why that
given by the Jews may not be thought as proper a signification of the word,
when that Tongue flourished in its latitude anciently among them; except we
shall think the notion of doing violence, to have been the more general and
ancient notion of it. Surely the places which it is found in, in the Hebrew
Text, which we have cited, do seem to require some other signification then
that of fixing or fastening. And the Doway Translators who here render it,
fasten, in the parallel forecited place of Prove. XXII.23. render it pearse. And
R. Salomo on that place, notes that in the Syriack Tongue it signifies also, to
rob, as he proves by an example out of the Talmud. However these two, of
robbing, or taking by violence from, and fastening, are the two main
significations attributed to the word, to which all others given to it ought to
be reduced, and what is spoken in exposition of it to be examined by.

Now of these significations, the Jewish Expositors more generally follow that
which, as we said, they give us, of violent, spoiling, taking from, or robbing.
And so does one of them, who translating this with the other Prophets into
Arabic, renders it by (...) Gasaba, which is violently to take away. But the
Latin, as we see, follows the second, of fixing, or fastening; which yet diverse
of those Expositors which follow that, will not have to be understood properly
of fastening, but rather of piercing and striking or sticking in; that so the
meaning may be, that by sinning against God, as they did, they did, as it were,
pierce and wound him, i. e. grieve and afflict him. So See Ribera, Chr. a
Castro, Menoch. and Tirin.
diverse learned men that follow the Vulgar Latin, giving to the word a
figurative signification. But if we were to follow this Translation, I should
rather choose to take the word fasten in a more proper notion, as it will
denote, to restrain, as what is fastened is restrained, bounded, or limited,
that it cannot go farther, and so is as it were shortened, or kept short,
stinted and stopped.

This notion may be illustrated out of the use of the word in the Arabic
Tongue, wherein the root (...) Ebn Athir, Kamus, etc.
Kabaa signifies to shrink in, or pull, or put in, as when a Tortoise shrinketh
his neck into his shell, or a man his head into his shirt, or garment, to hide
it; and to turn in, as when one turns in, or doubleth inward or outward the
mouth of a Sack, or Bag. According to this notion, to fasten God, in respect to
the matter of tithes and dues here spoken of, will be, to shorten that
proportion that was due to him, to restrain and stop his allowance, and detain
part of it from him, not giving the full of that which he by his Law required,
nor in its due time, but limiting and bounding it, according to what they
thought fit. And to this meaning seems Aben Ezra to incline, while he expounds
it, to retain, or detain that which is due, which will also be confirmed by
what follows, verse 10. Bring ye in all the tithes; intimating that part of
them were detained and stopped by them. And this being granted, these two
Translations, will a man rob God? and will a man fasten God? though at first
hearing they seemed very wide from one another, do meet in a middle notion of
straitning, or restraining; he that detains ought of a man's allowance, that
pincheth (as we say) or shortens him in it, and does not give him with a
cheerful eye his full due and proportion, does rob him, as well as he that by
force takes away from him what he has. And so to fasten, or fix God to their
allowance and stint him, not giving him his whole due, is to rob him.

And so these two Expositions, which seemed most different, being brought thus
far to agree, it will not be hard to reduce the rest to one of the
forementioned significations. As for the Latin or Modern Versions, it will be
plain. The ancienter Greek rendering the Verb by supplant, seems to have taken
it to have the same signification with (...) Akab (which consists of the same
letters though otherwise transposed) to supplant, defraud, or deceive (whence
Jacob according to Esau's interpretation, had his name, Genesis XXVII.36.) but it
falls in well with the first signification, according to which the other Greeks
render it more plainly, (...), will a man defraud his God. The Chalde rendering
it, by, provoke to anger, uses his liberty of a Paraphrast, rather then a
litteral Translator, the provoking of God to anger being an effect of what they
did, he expresses the sin by its effect and consequents; and so in rendering
Judges (wherein he is as we saw by some others followed) what we and most
others render God, takes the word in a signification in which it is also used
elsewhere in Scripture, viz. to signify Ex. XXI.6.
Judges, who supply the place of God, and not only God himself.

By this enquiry into the signification of that word which we proposed, have we
not only discovered the grounds of the different Translations of this place,
but in part also showed how they are between themselves more reconcilable then
at first sight or hearing might be judged. By what has been said will also
easily appear, that among all there is not a more convenient or justifiable
rendering then that of ours, who translate it to rob, which will express wherein
they sinned in defrauding God, either by taking away or abridging and detaining
what was due to him: And so from this necessary digression in looking into the
signification of the words, return we to consider the scope of them.

Will a man rob God?] This question thus put serves not only to convince them,
that they were guilty of the breach of Gods Ordinances, which they denied
themselves to be, but shows together the greatness of the sin wherein they
offended, as a thing which even the common consent of men, and their reason
showed most unfit to be done. Do ye not know that it is not fit that a man
should rob his God? says Abarbinel, his God, or Gods, for the word Elohim is
the plural number, in which though it be usually spoken of the one true God,
yet it is also other where so used as to comprehend also Idols and false Gods,
such as men made and took to themselves in the place of God, though they were
indeed no Gods. And Calvin.
some conceive, it ought here so to be taken, and that so there is a greater
Emphasis in the words and force, for convincing them of great impiety, by
showing that they who knew and acknowledged the only true God, and pretended to
serve him, did yet that toward him which any idolatrous, ignorant heathen
would not dare, or offer to do toward their false Gods. Would any of them rob,
or sacrilegiously defraud those whom they took, though falsely, to be Gods, of
such dues, as under that notion of God, were looked on as belonging or due to
them, though they were such as could do them no good? none of them, but would
abhor it as a wicked thing. Ye therefore are worse and more wicked then any of
them, for ye have robbed me, your Benefactor, from whom ye have all that ye
have. They also who take (as we before said) God here for Judges, or great men,
look on it as an argument concluding from the less to the greater. If men dare
not, or will not, or ought not to provoke such persons as are in authority
among them on Earth, by defrauding them of what is due to them, as it is plain
they will not, or ought not; how much more ought you to beware of offending
against me by robbing and defrauding me?

Yet ye have robbed me.] Ye have done it, yet ye deny it? They said, or were,
or behaved themselves as if they said, wherein have we robbed thee? seeing they
will not perceive or acknowledge wherein they had done it, he particularly
expresses it to them, saying, In tithes and offerings, in that they detained,
and did not duly and willingly bring in those dues, which he that gave them all
that they had, did require, that they in acknowledgement of his bounty, should
offer and return to him, as a portion by him reserved to himself for the
maintenance of the Priests and Levites, and such as waited on his service, and
for the relief of the poor, out of such increase of their Fields, and fruits of
the Earth, and the like which he gave them. In detaining these from the Priests
and Levites, to whom by his command they were to be given, and so robbing and
defrauding them, they, he says, robbed him himself. If they thought by this
means to have Abarb.
any ease or greater store to themselves, being, as it appears by what follows,
then under a judgment of famine or scarcity, he gives them to know that they
are in this deceived, and their penury, not their store, shall be increased by
the continuance of his curse upon them, saying in the next words.

9 Ye are cursed with a curse: for ye have robbed me, even this whole nation.
Ye are cursed with a curse, for ye have robbed me, etc.] The words thus read,
give us the effect, and ill consequence of that their sin of robbing God in
tithes and offerings, and so the coherence is plain, and is that, which by
many, if not most, Expositors is followed; and will be all one as to that,
whether it be read as by ours, and others, in the present tense, ye are cursed,
as speaking of a curse already on them, or (as Grotius takes it) in the future,
of a curse to come, or at least to be continued on them, ye shall be cursed;
viz. for this your sin, even because ye have robbed me, great evils (such as
appear to be in the following verses, So the Vulgar Latin Ye are cursed with
penury.
penury and scarceness) shall come upon you; as if he should say, because you
have scanted me, I will scant you, and repay you in your own measure. But a
late learned Lud. de Dieu.
man thinks the meaning to be mistaken in this rendering, and that to be put for
the effect, which was indeed the cause of their robbing God, viz. that
therefore they robbed him, because they were cursed with that curse of
s^arcity. He does not (says he) make the robbing of God the cause why they
were cursed, but his curse the impulsive cause why they robbed God: For they
pretended that it was not to be thought much that they detained the tithes and
offerings; seeing they were forced to it, by reason of the want of the fruits
of the Earth caused by the curse of God. But God required that though they had
scarcity, and his curse were on them, yet they should bring in his full tithes
of what they had, which if they did he promises to return and bless them. This
exposition he prefers before any, though he name another also, viz. by way of
Interrogation, ye are cursed with a curse, and do ye rob me? i. e. Is it not a
wonder that ye are not deterred by the punishments which I have sent on you,
but do rob me even when ye are cursed? or without an interrogation, ye are
cursed, and yet ye rob me, even this whole Nation: as if he should say, I
cannot but accuse you of great perverseness and stubborness, who when ye be
cursed by me, go on to rob me, and that your whole Nation. This he says,
excepting against the ordinary Translations and Expositions. But if we consider
the words in respect to what precedes, we shall find them to comprehend what is
by either said.

In the second Chapter, v. 2. we hear God threatening to send a curse upon them,
yea, telling them that he had already cursed them. The sins for which he there
threatens them are manifest out of the foregoing Chapter, to have been their
misbehavior in bringing their offerrings to God, in that they offered polluted
bread upon his Altar, and in that they brought to him, to whom the best of
their substance was due, that which was torn, lame, sick, and corrupt. There
was in that plainly a robbing of him, while detaining to themselves the best
things which were due to him, they gave him only the worst, and that which they
cared not for. And for that, he threatens, if they would not amend it, to send
a curse upon them; yea, tells them that the curse was already gone forth: they
that would rob him in that kind, would not stick to rob him in others also,
though not fully expressed till now, viz. in defrauding him by detaining their
tithes and offerings, which here mentioning, he mentions again that curse by
their evil dealing brought upon them, and tells them that it should not be
removed, till they brought in all the tithes into the storehouse; so that we
may conceive, the cause of the curse to have been their robbing him, and then
the curse being a curse of scarcity and penury, that to have caused them, that
they might make themselves whole, as much as they could, to detain what they
should have given him, which he shows to have been a wrong course, and a
farther cause to him of continuing the curse on them, which should not be
removed but upon their amendment of their doings; so that, if it be asked what
was the cause of the curse on them, we may say with ours and other
Interpreters, that it was, their robbing of God: if, what was the cause that
they pretended for their robbing of God, we may say with that learned man, that
it was the penury or scarcity which by the curse of God was brought on them:
they pretended that his tithes and offerings would be more then they could
spare out of that small store which he gave them, or their wicked thought (as
if they stood on even terms with him) was, that seeing he had stinted and
abridged them of what he was wont to give them, they would abridge him of what
they were commanded and ought to give him: If then it be further asked what was
the effect of this their proceeding to rob him; that it was a continuance of
his curse to them. So that though we look on what he says as true, in respect
of the cause which they pretended for the robbing of God, yet we cannot but
according to what others say look on that their fraudulent dealing, as a cause
provoking God to send his curse on them, and so to join both Expositions
together. And in this the Jewish Expositors show us the way. R. Salomo Jarchi
thus expounds them, Ye are cursed with a curse for this iniquity, because I
send a curse on the works of your hands, and yet notwithstanding ye do rob me.
Aben Ezra thus, Because ye say, How shall we give with a good eye (or
cheerfully) out of this little? but this is not good (or well) that ye rob me,
because of the curse and scarcity with which ye are cursed, and are in want;
but this do, Bring in all the tithe, and I will pour upon you a blessing, etc.
that they should not give with an evil eye. By the curse you ought to have been
corrected, (or amended) and not provoked to rob me. R. David Kimchi, thus, Ye
are cursed with a curse: for those transgressions which were before mentioned,
as he said, yea, I have cursed you. Yet farther, still you do add iniquity to
iniquity, and ye rob me out of that which you gather, in that you do not give
me of it the offering, and the tithes, and ye say he robs us of rain, and
sends a curse on the fruits, and shall we give him the offering and the tithes?
and lastly Abarbinel, Do ye think to get ease by denying to give to me the
tithe and offering, as ye ought? the matter is not so, for for this iniquity ye
are cursed with a curse by me. Yet notwithstanding ye rob me, and so the matter
is become hurtful to you, and hurtful to the Levites and Priests.

What is added, even this whole Nation, R. David Kimchi thinks to intimate,
that the whole Nation was not equally guilty of the other forementioned sins,
but of this they were. See Dutch Notes, and Stokes.
Some join these words with the former words, thus, ye are cursed with a curse,
even this whole Nation, because ye have robbed me: but the plainer construction
seems that which ours follow, ye are cursed with a curse, and (or for) ye have
robbed me, even this whole Nation, all of you have done it; joining them with
the immediately preceding words. The sense will be much the same, and one infer
the other, a general sin and a general curse; so that these words will
necessarily be referred to both, and show both the extent of the sin, and of
the curse, all the whole Nation being concerned in both. And for the punishment
they repined, but did not repent of the sin, but rather more obstinatly went on
in it, and thought to have stood it out with God; but they took not a right
course herein, they could not by this get the better of God. If they would be
eased of the curse, it must be by pacifying him, not by thinking to make
themselves whole out of his part; and therefore he shows in the next words,
what is the only way for them to take, even to amend in themselves their error.

10 Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat in mine
house, and prove me now herewith, says the Lord of hosts, if I will not open
you the windows of heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be
room enough to receive it.

11 And I will rebuke the devourer for your sakes, and he shall not destroy the
fruits of your ground; neither shall your vine cast her fruit before the time
in the field, says the Lord of hosts.

12 And all nations shall call you blessed: for ye shall be a delightsom land,
says the Lord of hosts.

Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat in mine
house, and prove me now herewith, etc.] Their sin it appears consisted, in that
they detained part of those tithes, which they ought, according to the Law, to
have paid, and did abridge God of his due; some (it seems) they brought in, as
much as they thought good, not so much as he had commanded. So that by this
means there was not sufficient maintenance for those who were to wait on his
Service, the Priests and Levites, and were by that his due to have been
maintained, that without distraction they might attend on their office; this
their doing is called robbing of God.

For illustrating the things here said, it will be convenient to look on what
we have of the History of those times recorded in the Book of Nehemiah, in
which we read, c. 5.3. that there was a great dearth among them. And this
curse, here spoken of, seems to have been a present dearth or scarcity, not
only one threatened for the future: then c. XIII. v. 10, etc. that Nehemiah
found that the portions of the Levites had not been given them, so that they
forsook their work, and fled every man to his field to get a livelihood. And
the occasion of this appears to be, because all the tithes were not paid, for
so upon Nehemiahs contending with the Rulers about it, it is said, v. 12. Then
brought all Judah the tithe of the corn, and the new wine and the oil into the
treasuries, or storehouses, as in the margin, and as here translated; the word
being in both the same, denoting such a room as was at the Temple appointed for
the laying up of those things brought in, as See cap. X.38.
v. 5. of that XIII. chapter is described, viz. a great room, or rooms, where they
laid the meat offerings, the frankincense, and the vessels, and the tithes of
the corn, the new wine, and the oil, which was commanded to be given to the
Levites, and the Singers, and the Porters, and the offerings of the Priests.
But those things were not duly given to them as it appears by reason of the
Peoples defect in bringing them in. Grotius thinks that the sin, here found
fault with, was, that whereas out of the Terumah or offering mentioned, Deuteronomy.
XVIII.4. and such other gifts as were due to the Priests, they ought to have
maintained the daily Sacrifices; they either did it not at all, or in such
illegal fraudulent manner as is reproved in the first Chapter, and that the
Priests took the whole tithes to themselves, and did not give to the Levites
what ought to have been distributed to them, viz. nine parts of them, and that
the whole Nation became guilty in robbing God, because that when they saw the
Levites were not maintained out of the tithes, they abstained from bringing
them, and so God was robbed; both because such things were not performed to
him, for which the offerings were given, and because the Levites were not
maintained, as they ought to be, but forsook his Service for want of
sustenance, and so he was deprived of their Ministry.

But neither here, nor in Nehemiah, is any thing specified in these kinds, but
only the People accused for not bringing in all their tithes, by which failure
in them, there was not meat in his house, i. e. maintenance, for his Altar and
those that ministered at it, and did Service in his House, whether Priests or
Levites. For which sin he is angry with them, and commands it here to be
redressed by the whole Nation, which were all guilty, by their bringing in all
the tithes into the storehouse; and so in Nehemiah it is said that that zealous
Governor caused all Judah to do, and that he then set treasurers over the
treasuries, to see them distributed as they ought. How long before that was
done, this was spoken by the Prophet, the History of the Scripture does not
make clear. But herein do these two Books well agree, in that both here and
there a dearth is spoken of: and as here the People are reproved for robbing
God in tithes and offerings, so there it is testified that they did detain
them; and whereas, here they are exhorted to redress that sin, by bringing them
all duly in, for removing the curse that was on them; so there we In the
forecited place, and in chapter X.35, 36, etc.
read that Nehemiah prevailed on them so to do, as perceiving that there was no
other way for averting Gods wrath from them. What was the issue on their doing
so, the History does not proceed so far as to declare, but here in the Prophet
we have assurance, that if with a willing and pious mind they should do so, it
should be good; God would remove the curse, and abundantly bless them. If they
would be so just to God, and kind to themselves as to put it to the trial, by
but doing what they ought to do, they should find that God would not fail in
any measure of his Promise, but would on their obedience do more for them then
by virtue thereof they might ordinarily expect. This he gives assurance of in
the next words, And prove me now herewith, says the Lord of Hosts, if I will
not open you the windows of Heaven, etc.

The connection of these words with the former verse, and the meaning of them,
as likewise with the following, Abarbinel thus gives, [And if ye shall say that
this curse on the fruits of the Earth, is not because of this, but that it is
an accident to you, come now let us make a trial, Bring ye all the tithes into
the storehouse, as much as if he should say, give the tithes and offerings in
full measure, and with a good eye, and bring them into the Lords storehouse,
that there may be meat, i. e. sustenance, and maintenance for the Ministers of
my House, the Priests and Levites, and prove me now by this. For (says he)
though the Law says, ye shall not tempt the Lord your God, Deuteronomy. VI.16.
Compare Esaias. VII.11, etc.
yet now for your information at this present (on this present occasion) prove
me, and tempt (or try me) if I will not open you the windows of Heaven, to give
the rain of your Land in its season, in such a manner as that I will pour out
upon you a blessing to (...) Beli dai, i. e. not to enough only, and such as
shall be sufficient, but more and more then enough, that is, a great addition:
(but R. D. Kimchi, says he, expounds it, till there be not vessels to put it
in;) and by this ye shall know that for transgressing in matter of tithes, this
curse has been on the corn (or increase of the Earth) hitherto. And because
the Locust and the Catterpillar came upon them* and devoured their fruits in
the Fields and Vineyards, therefore he says, and I will rebuke for you (or for
your sakes) the devourer, viz. the Locust which devoureth the increase, (or
fruits of the Earth) in such a manner as that he shall not destroy any more to
you the fruit of the ground, and of the Vine; O^, for when their ways please
the Lord. Prove. XVI.7.
for by the will of God are the ways of them; the Beast of the Field, and the
Fowl of the Air shall make peace with thee, and the Earth shall yield her
increase in full perfection, so that in respect of the abundance of the fruits
which you shall have, all Nations shall call you blessed. And whereas you have
been a reproach amongst the Nations, because of the famine occasioned by the
curse, with which I cursed you, for your iniquities; now when all the fruits
shall be blessed, ye shall be counted blessed, and prosperous in the eyes of
all Nations, and they shall say that your Land is a Land of delight, in which I
delight, and that therefore the fruits thereof are blessed.] Thus have we given
his words at large, because they give an entire and good Paraphrase and
Exposition of these three verses, viz. 10, 11, 12. without interruption, yet
because of some different Expositions of others, we shall again more
particularly reflect on some of the words and expressions.

Prove me now herewith, says the Lord of Hosts, if I will not open, etc.]
Pisc. Rib. Menoch. Stock. and see Chr. a C^stro. in Paraph.
Some look on this as an implicit form of Oath, and an imperfect speech to be
supplied, by adding after it, if I will not open, etc. then let me be accounted
worse then my word, or the like; because it is usual with the Scripture, when
things are to be expressed, which seem to denote something which may sound of
blasphemy, or contain any thing unfit to be said, to be silent, and rather
leave men to conceive them, then to utter them, or else to use some more comely
or honest expression. But however this rule may be elsewhere appliable, here
seems to be no need of it. According to those here is a stop made after, prove
me now here with, and a distinct member of the sentence to begin. But read all,
as in our Translation and others in a continued sense, and the meaning is plain
without any such supply, or any abruptness, in the speech, as if he should say,
you, in doing what you do, take a wrong course; neither your detaining my dues,
nor murmuring against my justice, shall any thing prevail for good or help to
you in this curse of penury, under which ye suffer; but if you will find
relief, do what I prescribe to you, Bring in all your tithes, etc. and thereby
prove me whether I will not quickly remove the curse, by giving all necessary
causes and means of a contrary blessing. And so it implies a Promise, that he
will do it, they shall certainly find it; Compare Hag. II.15. and forwards.
and that the parting with that which they detained, as fearing the parting
therewith, should diminish their store, shall be a way, the only way for great
increase of it.

To this purpose R. D. Kimchi explains the words, Bring in all your tithes,
etc. that there may be meat for those that serve me, and withal repent you of
the faults mentioned; if ye do not, I will punish you with other punishments;
but if you do bring in all the tithes and offerings as ye ought, I will give
you rain, and pour out on you a blessing.

Pelicanus a learned and serious man in this Exposition follows him, who also
from what is here said, with great reason urges on Christians under the
Gospel, a diligent care of due and willing paying such tithes and oblations, as
are for the maintenance of the Ministry, etc. As likewise On ver. 8.
Oecolampadius, saying, that Christian liberty exempteth none from tithes that
were wont to be paid. But to receive what either they or any other in like
kind, deduce and conclude from these words, will not be to our present purpose,
which is to clear only the litteral Exposition of the words, and show what
meaning they will bear.

If I will not open, etc.] That which is here promised, is generally agreed on
to be a plenteous rain, by restraint of which, there was occasioned a dearth in
the Land, and this the Lord says, he will give. Though the rain proceed from
natural causes constituted by God, as other things in the order of nature do,
yet the ordering of those causes and effects, as concerning rain have always
been looked on as an immediate act of God himself, whereby his power and mercy
toward men have been as visibly declared as in any thing, and as a particular
act of his Providence, in causing it to come, (or not come) whether for
correction, or for his Land, or for mercy, Job. XXXVII.13. It is therefore an
ancient saying among the Talmud in Sanhedrin. cap. Chelek. and in Taani^h. c. 1.
Jews, that there be three keys which God has reserved in his own hand, and
has not delivered to any Minister or Substitute, viz. the keys of life, and of
rain, and of the Resurrection of the Dead; in the ordering of the rain they
look on his great power to appear, no less then in giving life at first, or
afterward raising the Dead to it: agreeable to which S. Paul says, that God
left himself not without witness, in that he did good, and gave rain from
Heaven, and fruitful Seasons, Act. XIV.17. It was a manifest testimony always
to all Nations of his divine power, and so acknowledged; so that it will not be
necessary to look into those many places of Scripture, wherein he speaks of it
as so, either by promising to give it for a blessing, or restrain it for a
curse and punishment.

When he restrains it, he is in a figurative speech said to shut up Heaven, as
Deuteronomy. XI.17. and Luc. IV.25. and to stop the windows of Heaven, Genesis VIII.2.
equivalent to which is another expression of making the Heaven brass, Deuteronomy.
XXVIII.23. and staying it, Hag. I.10. When he gives it in abundance, he is
said, to open the windows (or as See Vulg. Lat. and Doway Engl.
others the cataracts or floud-gates) of Heaven, as here; and likewise, Genesis
VII.11. but there it was for a curse, (as sometimes he disposes it, as we have
seen out of Job XXXVII.13.) here for a blessing. Which way soever it be
intended, there is no doubt but that the expression is (as Aben Ezra notes) a
proverbial phrase for signifying Compare 2 Kings 7.19.
great abundance: and because abundance thereof may be (as we said) as well for
a curse at sometimes, as a blessing at others; and it is in the disposal of God
to order for which it shall be, to show that his Promise here is for good, he
adds, and pour you out a blessing, viz. of plenty, contrary to their present
condition of penury. Both the rain, and the making it a blessing, is from him
and his ordering. And he says of that blessing, that there shall not be room
enough to receive it. So according to our Translation; and so (as we already
noted from Abarbinel) R. D. Kimchi (reporting it as from his Father) says that
the meaning is, in such plenty that you shall not have vessels, or storehouses
sufficient to receive it. The words in the original are concise (...) Ad beli
dai, and literally signify only unto not enough, which being an expression not
so intelligible in other Languages, Interpreters differently render and explain
it in their own Tongues, which rendrings it will be to no purpose to recite,
inasmuch as they all agree in this, that it is an expression to denote great
abundance, which shall afford them not only enough to satisfy them, but more then
enough, that they shall have to spare, plenty without measure, or such as for
its abundance cannot be measured, as R. Tanchum expresses it. Instead of what
is in the Text of our Bibles, is put in the Margin, And so the Interlineary.
empty out, which either must be understood, as that in the Text, or else will
not be so clear an expression, inasmuch as it may seem to import, that Gods
store may be emptied, which can never be. L. de Dieu would have it understood,
as long as there is sufficiency, which is perpetually, for Gods sufficiency
cannot be exhausted. But for the completing to them a blessing contrary to the
curse under which they suffered, it would not be sufficient that they should
have rain and fruitful Seasons; these might make the Earth yield her increase,
and bring forth in plenty all manner of grain and fruits, and yet they by other
means be deprived of them, as by Locusts, Canker-worms, Catter-pillars, and the
like devouring creatures, which God calls his great Army, Joel II.25. which in
a short time often have destroyed the hope of the whole year, and occasioned
great famines, when there has been expectation of greatest plenty; and
probably these were part of that curse now upon them. For perfecting therefore
the blessing here promised on their amendment of their ways, he promises also
to secure them from these, and all hurt by them, saying, I will rebuke the
devourer for your sakes, (or to, or for you) i. e. that all things may prosper
to you. The devourer; because there were many sorts of such creatures, as may
devour and corrupt the corn and fruits, he puts a general name that comprehends
all; all of them will he rebuke, i. e. hinder from doing hurt. They are wont to
do hurt, not only to the fruits of the ground, the corn and herbage, but to the
fruit trees also, by causing them also not to be able to bring any fruit to
perfection, as appears by Joel I.7. according to what some there expound the
words. However that place be understood, the thing is known and manifest, and
therefore both Munster and the Tigurin Latin Version, instead of what ours
render, neither shall your Vine cast her fruit before the time in the Field,
etc. translate it, neither shall he ( i. e. the devourer) make your Vine barren
(or unfruitful to you in the Field,) and to that does that Exposition of
Abarbinel (which we have seen) seem to incline. The Verb (...) Teshaccel is of
that form, as that it signifies sometimes to cause to make abortive, to deprive
of, and the like in an active sense, as Deuteronomy. XXXII.25. The sword etc. shall
destroy, or bereave, and Ezekiel XIV.15. If I cause noisome beasts to pass through
the Land (...) Veshiccelattah, and they spoil it, or bereave it. And in the
same sense Hos. IX.12. (...) Shiccaltim I will bereave them, to omit other
examples: And sometimes again in an absolute sense, viz. to be abortive, to be
deprived of, or cast fruit before it be perfect, as Genesis XXXI.31. Thy Ewes and
thy she-Goats (...) Lo shiccelu, have not cast their young (or been abortive,)
and Job XXI.10. Their Cow calveth (...) Velo teshaccel, and casts not her
Calf. Those therefore mentioned take the Verb in the former signification; ours
and most others, both Jewish and Christian Expositors, in the latter, to which
we the more incline, because otherwise here will be a change of the Gender in
the Verb, speaking of the same thing, for that in the word destroy is
masculine, but here is feminine, so that they seem one to agree with the first
Noun Locust, which is of the masculine Gender, and the other with Vine in the
feminine, however such change of Genders may be admitted: and seeing though the
Locusts destroy not the Vines, yet there may be other means, as Blasts, or
Blights, and hurtful Winds, and like causes, whether from within or without,
which may make them loose or cast their fruit before it comes to maturity, even
after a great show and likelihood of plenty; from hurt by all such causes,
whether from such devouring creatures, or any other means, God here promises
to secure them upon their turning to him, and to give them both the increase of
the Earth, and fruit of the Vine, and so all necessary things in such plenty
and perfection, that all Nations seeing Gods great goodness showed unto them,
shall call them blessed, For ye (says he) shall be (...) Erets chephets, a
delightsome Land, or Land of delight, or desire; worthy to be desired, says
the Vulgar, i. e. (as Jerome. etc.
some will) a Land that men would desire to live in. So R. Tanchum, a Land to
be desired and chosen for its pleasantness, and excellency, to the same sense
that it is said, which is the glory of all Lands, See Dan. XI.16. and so Zach.
VII.14. (...).
Ezekiel. XX.6, 15. R. Salomo Jarchi, Aben Ezra, and Tirin.
Others with Abarbinel understand it, a Land of desire, or well pleasing to
God, i. e. such as he takes delight in, and shows extraordinary respect and
favor to, both to the People and the Land, (as Aben Ezra) as he says
elsewhere of Zion, that she should be called Hephzibah, Isa. LXII.4. i. e. my
delight is in her, because, says he, the Lord delights in thee: and the
comparing that place with this, seems to make for this Exposition, and it will
be well illustrated by what is said, Deuteronomy. XI.12. a Land which the Lord thy God
cares for, (or seeks,) the eyes of the Lord thy God are always upon it,
from the beginning of the year, even unto the end of the year, viz. to give it
its rain in due season, the first rain to make it spring up, and the latter
rain to bring it to perfection, and so to preserve the fruits of the Earth,
that they might gather in their corn, and their wine, and their oil, v. 14.
which is the same care, and the same blessing that is here promised. This
Exposition the Syriack follows, rendering it (...) Ar'o detzebyoni, A Land of my
delight, good will or pleasure, i. e. to which I bear good will, or have good
liking to. The Chalde likewise takes it in, rendering, And all Nations shall
praise you, because you dwell in the Land of the House of my Majestatick
presence, and do therein my pleasure. He suggests therein a double meaning or
respect to the word (...) Chephets, as first that they or their Land should be
called a Land of delight, or good will, because God delighted to dwell in it,
and secondly, because the Inhabitants thereof did the good pleasure of God and
delighted to do his will; and therefore he delighted in them, and to do good to
them, as appeared by his extraordinary blessings poured out upon them, more
then on other People, which they should all acknowledge and call them blessed
for it; so says the Lord of Hosts, of all the Hosts of Heaven and Earth, who
has power and command of all, and therefore so shall it certainly be, as he
says.

13 Your words have been stout against me, says the Lord: yet ye say, What
have we spoken so much against thee?

14 Ye have said, It is vain to serve God; and what profit is it that we have
kept his ordinance, and that we have walked mournfully before the Lord of hosts?

15 And now we call the proud happy: yea, they that work wickedness are set up,
yea, they that tempt God are even delivered.

16 Then they that feared the Lord, spoke often one to another, and the Lord
hearkened, and heard it; and a book of remembrance was written before him, for
them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his Name.

Your words have been stout against me, says the Lord.] These words may be
coupled with the former, as if they were a complaint of the Jews stubbornness,
that though God had reproved them for their sins (such as have been expressed)
and by some judgments warned them of his displeasure for them, and likewise
had invited them to repentance, and promised upon their repentance to remove
those judgments, and turn the curse, with which he had cursed them, into a
blessing, See Cyril.
yet this was so far from working in them repentance that they grew more and
more insolent, and instead of acknowledging their faults and ill deserts,
proceeded in speaking against him and his justice, as if he inflicted on them
worse then they deserved, not accepting of any service from them, and mean
while seemed to favor those that were notoriously wicked, and tempted him, and
despised him, See Abarb.
and so set at naught what by the Prophets was spoken to them for their good.
Wherefore he proceeds farther to reprove them, and mind them of the ill
consequents of such their ill behavior, which shall be occasion of more heavy
judgments, and final destruction, as between this and the end of the Chapter
he shows. Or we need not be sollicitous of the coherence of these words with
those immediately preceding, but may look upon them as a new reproof, or at
least a fresh resumed; and on what follows as a beginning or continuation of a
Prophecy As Aben Ezra notes, This Prophecy is (...) Leatid concerning the time
to come.
for the time to come, and of the terrible day of the Lord; after the former
words inserted for showing them what was the cause of that judgment of famine
at present upon them, and by what means they might remove it, for the fault
here objected to them, is much the same with that mentioned in the last verse
of the foregoing Chapter. However we make or judge of the coherence, the
meaning of the words in themselves will be the same, your words have been stout
against me, Abarb and see the Greek.
stout and great, or insolent words have ye spoken against me, says Abarbinel;
and that will be the sense however there be some little difference between See
Vulg. Lat. Chald. Syriac. etc. Ribera, etc.
Translators in expressing it. For all look upon it to denote that their words
were such as would be irksome, grievous, and burdensome to any man, and
overcome his patience, by casting hard and odious things on him undeservedly;
and so (God speaking in the language of men) looks on them as to himself; Vat.
and see Calv.
or, that their words were more and more insolent against him.

Yet ye say wherein have we spoken so much against thee. The words so much are
supplied or added above what is in the letter of the Hebrew Text; I suppose to
express what some (as namely See Abarb. here, and on Ezekiel. XXXIII.30.
Kimchi) observe that the word (...) Nidbarnu, being in a passive form though
active signification, implies more then in a simple active form, so as to
denote not only speaking, but a continual, reiterated, or much and frequent
speaking; and so here does the Chalde render, wherein have we multiplied
speaking, or spoken much, against thee? which way ours therefore take: others
seem not to lay any such weight upon it, but simply render it, what have we
spoken against thee? But generally they render it actively, as it is elsewhere
used, as Ps. CXIX.23. Princes (...) Binidbaru, spoke against me; and Ezekiel.
XXXIII.30. (...) Hannidbarim, which ours render still talking against. Yet here
Abarbinel thinks it may be more conveniently taken for a Verb passive, as well
in signification as in form, and be rendered, what are we spoken of to thee,
what is said of us to thee, or what are we reported by false accusers to have
said aganst thee, as men use to do when they are accused of some ill that they
have spoken in secret, to say to him that tells them of it, what false report
is this that has been brought to you concerning us? This way also Montanus
commends, though not mentioning whom he follows in it. The words either way
taken, include a denial of the fact, and show their folly in thinking that God
did not know what they thought and said in secret, even in their hearts, except
they spoke it openly and lowdly in the ears of all, or else some to whom they
spoke it should report it to God. He therefore to show that he knew, both what
was in their mouths and hearts, and to convince them of their guiltiness in
that which he accuses them of, answers them by a particular declaration of
what they said. If ye say, what have we spoken against thee? it is this, ye
have said, it is vain to serve God, etc.

Ye have said so, at least thought in your hearts, which is all one with
speaking, in the ears of God. It is vain to serve God (...) Shav abod Elohim.
The Greek and ancient Latin, He is vain that serves God, as if they had read
(...) Obed, he that serves, for Abod, to serve: but I do not suppose them to
have read so, but only to have given the meaning as they thought convenient,
for it is all one to say, It is in vain to do such a thing, or, He is vain that
does such a thing* the meaning of both being, It is to no purpose that he does
such a thing, or he loses his labor that does it, he gets nothing by it, as
the Chalde here paraphraseth it, He gains nothing which serves the Lord. It is
vain: to wit, to him that so does: though it may, as Abarb.
some think, be referred to him to whom it is done, i. e. no profit to God if
we serve him: according to what is said, Job XXXV.7. Read Job XXII.2, 3.
If thou be righteous, what give thou him? or what receives he of thine
hand? but the former is the plainer. The expression gives to suppose, that they
served God, and this supposition the Syriack taking in renders, In vain have we
served God, and so it well agrees with what follows, and what profit is it that
we have kept his Ordinance, what Mammon, or wealth, have we gained? says the
Chalde, (as if it were for Mammons sake only that they served God, and so
indeed not God at all, but Mammon.)

His Ordinance, or as in the Margin, his observation.] i. e. that we have
observed those things that he has commanded us to observe. What advantage have
we gained by it? yea though we have walked mournfully (or as the Margin has
it) in black, Drus.
which is the habit of Mourners: or, as others, with bowing down, or the like
submiss gesture, before the Lord of Hosts; and showed in our behavior all
signs of penitence, and Abu Walid, and R. Tanchum.
awful fear of him by mourning, fasting, and humbling our selves in contrition
of spirit (as the Chalde has it) before him, and the like. Which last words
Abarbinel seems to expound otherwise, viz. We have not only not gained any
thing, but withal, have been forced to walk mournfully and afflictedly before
the Lord, i. e. because we have kept his Commandments. But the former
construction seems plainer, in that the particle (...) Ci, that, or because,
with which the last foregoing member of the sentence is joined with what goes
before, is here again repeated with a copulative conjunction, that we have done
that, and that we have done this. Their complaint (according to him) was, that
there was no profit in serving God, either on Gods part or their own, no
advantage to either; and therefore that it was a vain labor: they were happier
that saved themselves that trouble; so it follows,

And now (or Vulg. Lat.
now therefore) we call the proud happy.] Proud, insolent, presumptuous men,
who will not be kept in by any bounds, nor observe Gods Ordinances, as we do,
nor walk humbly before him, R. Tanch.
but transgress all Laws of Religion and Justice. [The same word used Psalm.
XIX.13. substantively is rendered prides, or presumptuous sins; but here
adjectively, presumptuous sinners.] Such we look upon to be in a condition more
to be envied and desired, then pityed or feared for, inasmuch as they enjoy all
worldly pleasures and prosperity, nor are overtaken, or, as far as we can
perceive, like to be overtaken with any punishment or mischief, in their
persons, or any belonging to them; yea so far is it from that, that they that
work wickedness (set themselves purposely to do it) are set up (or built, as
the Margin has it, for so the word (...) Nibnu literally signifies) i. e. are
firmly established, like a new building, says Abarb.
one, not likely quickly to fall or decay. They flourish in their offspring,
say Grotius. See Rib. and Chr. a Castro.
others, alluding to the name (...) Ben, son, in respect to which the Verb that
signifies building is used for to obtain children, and so by ours rendered, Genesis
XVI.2. and XXX.3. i. e. they raise their houses and families, as Stokes.
one paraphrases it here: Ribera.
they are not cut off, but leave a numerous posterity to keep up their name; or
generally, they flourish and prosper more and more, all things thrive and
prosper with them, yea, farther yet, they that set themselves so impudently to
sin, as to tempt God, as if they did it on purpose to try and prove him,
whether he could or would punish sinners, and to provoke and dare him to do his
worst, to execute judgment if he be a God of judgment; even these are
delivered, and escape without any of those punishments in the Law, or by the
Prophets threatened against obstinate, impenitent sinners. These are the words,
or thoughts of those unsound ones in their Religion, and unsincere in their
practice, who, looking on what they saw at present, and not on what should
certainly in due time be made manifest for clearing Gods Justice, and his
perpetual love to good, and hatred of evil, did hence take occasion of
questioning whether there were any just Judge or judgment: and of repining and
murmuring against Gods ordering of the affairs of men, and so of contemning and
setting at naught what was by the Prophets, reprooving them for their sins, and
calling them to repentance for removing such judgments as were on them, or
preventing of others, said unto them. Who they were that said these words, and
when they said them, and concerning whom, is not particularly expressed. R.
Tanchum therefore, as he did also, c. 2.17. looks upon them as representing
words which should in time to come be spoken by Israel in captivity, such at
least, as if they did not speak or profess, yet might seem to have occasion to
do it. And that they are here recited for reproof to them that should be
impatient under the length of their captivity, and forsake their Religion, and
speak thus in respect to what they should perceive of the prosperity of
heathenish Nations notwithstanding their impiety: to which is added in the
following words a declaration, that those that endure patiently and stick to
the truth, shall in the end be rewarded in the best manner, as in the two
following verses, Then they that feared the Lord, etc. and then is added a
mention likewise of the punishment of those that are not so affected, and the
punishment of the wicked injurious Nations also, (as he says v. 18. and c.
4.1. then shall ye return and discern between the righteous and the wicked,
etc. Behold the day comes that shall burn as an oven, etc.) But as to the
former part of his words, it cannot be made out of what is here spoken, as
neither out of the last verse of the second Chapter, but is destructive to the
right meaning of them.

The words being directed to them that were returned from the Babylonish
captivity, manifestly concern the behavior of them now again settled in their
Country, which was not such as it ought to have been, and therefore they are
reproved for it; that which is here objected to them, appears to have been a
sin of impatience and blasphemy against God, and his Providence and Justice, of
which too many or most of them were guilty; yet not all, for while the
discontented ones among them spoke thus impiously of God and his Justice, there
were others that feared the Lord, and spoke among themselves otherwise, as is
manifest by the next words. But he seems to mean it of the time of the
captivity, that they are now under, and a future Judgment yet to come, wherein
he is manifestly wide of the matter, and passing over the times of the Prophet,
and the present People of which he spoke, transfers the words to such times as
they do not properly concern, times now present and yet to come: and taking no
notice of that day of the Lord, which was here prophesied of, as then indeed to
come, but which is long since come, would have another yet on earth to be
expected, if the Lord, the Messiah, whose coming was that day, were not yet
come, which is the common error of the Jews, which has been already
discovered, and will in considering the following words be farther discovered
if God permit.

As for what, therefore, is spoken by way of reproof and comfort, it must be
applied to the right persons concerned therein, which doubtless were in the
first place those of that present time, and then such as should succeed them
betwixt that and the destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans; the completion of
that day of the Lords coming, both before, ver. 2. and after c. IV.1. spoken
of. Those at that present for the most part of them murmured against Gods
Justice, in the manner here described, yet, then mean while (as it follows in
the next verse,) they that feared the Lord See Calv.
hearing what the Prophet said, spoke often one to another. The word, often, is
not expressed in the Hebrew, and therefore the words are by others rendered,
only spoke one to another. But our Translators thought good to supply it, as
being included in the word (...) Nidbaru, according to what we have seen to be
observed by some of the force of the Verb in this form on ver. 13. What they
spoke is not here expressed, except we render it otherwise, as Jun. Trem. and
Dutch Notes.
some do, spoke one to another, saying, certainly God hearkneth and hears,
etc. as if the words following were those that they spoke. But this See Piscat.
seems somewhat harsh, in regard that the copulative, and, which is in the
original, in (...) Vayaksheb, and the Lord hearkened, is wrested to another
signification. It is more easy to understand it thus to be meant, that as the
wicked spoke much among themselves, so these also did, but contrary things;
they against Gods Justice, See R. D. Kimchi.
these in vindication of it, believing what the Prophet said, and expecting the
completion of it: And what they said was not in vain to them, for the Lord
hearkened, and heard it.

But before we proceed to those words, we may here take notice that as
Abarbinel (as we showed) differs in the understanding of this word (...)
Nidbar, in the 13. verse, so here he goes much more wide from them, taking it
in clean another signification from that which he himself gave it there, and
others both here and there give it. For here he would have the words rendered,
as continued with the former, and part of what those blasphemers, before
mentioned, said, viz. that then they that feared the Lord were destroyed, from
another signification that the same root has, and is used in, as in other
places according to him and some others. So in II Chron. XXII.10. (...)
Vattedabber, and she destroyed all the Seed Royal; and from it is the Noun
(...) Deber, which signifies the plague, or such destructive sickness: so that
according to him the sense is, that when the presumptuous sinners, that work
wickedness, are set up, and though they tempt God by exposing themselves to the
greatest dangers, are yet delivered; then at that very time they that fear the
Lord perish, are cut off and destroyed, one together with another, (...) el,
to, being here the same that (...) Im, with, (or, are by evil accidents
intangling them, made destructive and causes of perdition one to another,) as
if the hand of God were upon them to confound and destroy them. Thus far he
would have the words of those that spoke against Gods Justice to reach, and
then the following words, the Lord hearkened, etc. to be an answer from the
Prophet to them; as if he should say to them, Know and consider that to all
this that you say, God hearkneth and hears it, and that both the
righteousness of the righteous, and the wickedness of the wicked are as
manifest before him, as if all were written in a book of remembrance, that it
might remain many days, till the time of due recompense and reward, etc.

And the same way of Exposition with him does Arias Montanus follow, and gives
it as his own conjecture or opinion, probably having seen Abarbinel, else he
would scarce have fallen in so fully with him here, as he does in many other
places, without mentioning him in Expositions singular to them: and this he
commends as most agreeable to the words, but I see no reason to be of his
opinion, but choose rather to follow that interpretation which our Translation,
with the most both of Jews and Christians, gives, not making these first words
a part of those stout words which the wicked spoke against God, but a
declaration of the behavior of those that feared God; and the following, of
the good consequence thereon. So R. D. Kimchi perspicuously expounds them and
the following. The former words were the saying of those who did not understand
the ways of the Lord and his Judgments; and when those that feared the Lord
heard those words from those men, who denied the Providence of God over these
things below, they spoke one with another and multiplied, or often repeated
those words, and argued the matter, till they found by their understanding,
that all his Deuteronomy. XXXII.4.
ways are judgment, that he is a God of truth and without iniquity. And the
Lord hearkened, i. e. God blessed for ever attended to their words, and gave
them their reward for this. And a book of remembrance was written before him, a
proverbial expression according to the language of men, among whom Kings write
a book of memorials; (for there is no forgetfulness with God,) according to
what is said, blot me out of thy Book, Exodus XXXII.32. and every one that shall
be found written in the book, Dan. XII.2.

These words of his we have set down at large, because they give exactly that
notion concerning the distinction of the words from the former and the
signification of the Verb (...) Nidbaru, which our Translators choose to
follow. And it is that wherein most both Jewish and Christian Expositors do
well agree; as likewise in what is meant by what he says, and the Lord
hearkened and heard it, and a book of remembrance was written, viz. that the
Lord took due notice of what was said, (both by bad and good, say See Chr. a
Castro, Menoch. Tirin.
some; which though it be true that he does so, yet here more particularly it
seems to be referred to the good,) and kept it in perpetual remembrance, in the
register of his memory, if we may so speak, as certainly as if it were written
in a book, according to the custom of men See Ester, VI.1, etc.
, who note down in writing, or cause to be registered, such things as they would
not forget, but be sure to call to mind, and show that they took due notice of,
as meet occasion and opportunity should serve; to reward those that had done
them any service or deserved well, or whom they had a mind to do good to. Of
Gods book, and things being written in it, there is we know often mention in
the Scriptures, besides those places which Kimchi recites, both in the Old and
New Testament; and every where is much alike to be understood, viz. that the
things spoken of are as surely known, and had in remembrance with him, as if
they were written down before him. And so where the books are said to be
opened, it is the making manifest his knowledge of those things, by his passing
sentence on men accordingly for good or bad: see Dan. VII.10. and Revel. XX.12.
and Isa. LXV.6.

The book of remembrance, is here said to be written for them that feared the
Lord, and that thought upon his name, viz. to give them assurance that their
faithfulness to him, R. Solomo.
however he did not presently reward them openly for it, yet was duly taken
notice of by him, and in due time he would make it known by his distinguishing
them from the wicked, and his great care of them to preserve them from those
heavy judgments, and that destruction which should seize on the others, as
will appear in the following words.

But before we pass to them, we may take notice of what is by some observed
concerning the signification or force of that word which is rendered, and that
thought upon his Name, viz. that it imports not a bare thinking of, but a due
esteem and awful regard of, so as with all care to avoid all things that may
tend to the dishonor of it; constantly to endeavor so to walk as beseems such
who profess to know God and to serve him, as always in his presence, and with
respect to him, and fear of him. Those, says Kimchi, are meant who always
think of, or meditate in the ways of the Lord, and the knowledge of his
Godhead, for his Name is himself, and he (himself) is his Name. Aben Ezra
understands it of the wise in heart, who know the secret (or the mystery) of
the glorious awful Name. He seems to allude to what is said, Psalm. XXV.14. the
secret of the Lord is with them that fear him. R. Tanchum says that the word
(...) Choshebe rendered that thought on, imports or includes honoring and
magnifying; according to the use of the word (...) Chashub, for one in dignity
and high esteem: so that it may be expounded, such as knowing the secret of
that glorious awful Name, do accordingly magnify it. The Greek, that reverence
his Name.

It will not be any great digression to look a little back, and see how the
Greek renders the word (...) Nidbaru, of which we have already spoken, because
they seem to differ from the Latin and other Translations, rendering it, (...),
which usually signifies to murmr or speak against, or to speak of with
derogation. These things (says that Translation) murmured they, that feared
the Lord. So that S. Hierom, to give their sense, says that they took the
words they that feared the Lord Ironically, viz. for such as made show of so
doing, but did not truly and really fear him; and so to belong still to those
who spoke those stout words before mentioned: except we should think that they
took it, as if even the righteous were, by what they saw of the prosperity of
the wicked, moved to speak otherwise, then they ought, of Gods Justice and
Providence, as the Psalmist by the same consideration was, as he confesses,
almost moved sometimes to do, Psalm. LXXIII.2, etc.

But besides this signification it has another given it, viz. Steph. Lex.
to speak much, to overwhelm with speaking, to speak one down, as we may say,
which if it be here taken, and may be used in a good sense, only for much and
earnest speaking, then will it be but the same which our Translation gives, and
some as we have seen observe to be the import of the word, viz. that those that
feared God, hearing what others impiously spoke, derogatory to Gods Justice,
did in zeal to his Glory speak much and often, and earnestly one to another in
vindication of it, and to cry down the folly of those blasphemous ones, and R.
Solomon.
hinder one another from doing as they did. But whatever may be thought of this
the plainest meaning will be that which we have given, agreeably to our own
Translation, and that way which most Expositors (as we have said) take; and
according to that way have we a clear passage to the next verse, wherein the
Lord having assured them that their words are had in remembrance, and their
reward with him in due time to be manifested; he proceeds farther to declare
it, and to assign a certain time of it.

17 And they shall be mine, says the Lord of hosts, in that day when I make up
my jewels, and I will spare them as a man spares his own son that serves him.
And they shall be mine, says the Lord of hosts, in that day when I make up my
jewels (or special treasures, as the Margin has it,) etc.] According to this
reading by ours and Jun. Trem.
some others followed, the meaning will be plain, that though God suffer his,
who are his jewels and peculiar treasure, to lie for a while mingled with the
rubbish and dross, without distinction made betwixt them, yet there shall come
a day of discrimination, in which he will sever them one from another, and make
up, and take into his peculiar care his precious jewels, and reject and cast
away what is vile and rubbish; and then shall appear who are his, and who are
otherwise; though till then it may not appear, yet by what befalls them as to
the ordinary affairs of this World, it may be judged that he rather owns the
wicked, and those that tempt him, then those that fear him, and duly think on
his Name: but then he will put a distinction between the Vessels of his wrath,
and the Vessels of mercy, Romans IX.22, 23. Vessels of honor, and Vessels of
dishonor, II Tim. II.20.

But if this rendering please not any (as a learned Drus. on the place, and in
Quaesit. per Epist. Ep. 1.
Critic seems to except against it, both for rendering mine, and likewise make
up my peculiar treasure, as harsh and unusual;) we have another by most of
Interpreters given, viz. they shall be to me, in the day that I shall make (or,
in the day that I shall do what I said,) a peculiar: so joining the last word
in order of construction with the first, (as Aben Ezra, and R. Tanchum.
some expressly note that it ought to be) and not joining it with the word make,
as if it were governed of it, viz. they shall be to me a peculiar in the day
that I shall make: and the sense is plain then too, there shall come a day of
discrimination by me designed, and then, though it does not yet appear that I
make any difference between the wicked and the godly, in that day there shall
be put a manifest difference between them, by my separating the godly to my
self, and by taking a special care of them, as peculiarly belonging to me, and
which I will preserve as carefully as men do what they most esteem, love, and
delight in.

The word (...) Segullah rendered by ours Jewels, and in the Margin special
treasure, is taken to denote any choice thing of great price and esteem to any,
and which he looks on as his own proper goods, and chief in his care; as Kimchi
in Rad.
of silver, gold, or precious stones* which he lays up in his treasure: and so
used for any thing which he takes special care of to preserve to himself. Such
it was promised to Israel for a special privilege and preeminence above all
Nations, that they should be unto God, as Exodus XIX.5. If ye will obey my
voice, and keep my Covenant ye shall be (...) Segullah, a peculiar treasure to
me above all People. And so Deuteronomy. VII.6. where is (...) Am segullah, a special
People. And Psalm. CXXXV.4. the Lord has chosen Jacob unto himself, and Israel
(...) Lisgullato, for his peculiar treasure. It is a privilege that they still
boast much of, all that can pretend to be of the race of Israel; but it appears
to be restrained by the same limits that the name of Israel is, and agrees only
to such who truly deserve that name, viz. the true Israel of God: as all are
not Israel which are of Israel, Romans IX.6. so neither are they all his (...)
Segullah, his Jewels, his special treasure, his peculiar People, but only such
who are Gal. VI.16.
the true Israel of God; so here out of all Israel does he say, that in that
day, only they that feared the Lord, and thought on his Name, should be to him,
(...) Segullah a special treasure or peculiar People. Which title, as well as
that of Israel, in the New Testament being transferred unto Christians in
Christ, who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and
purify unto himself a peculiar People, Tit. II.14. and so I Pet. II.9. we
cannot but likewise look on, as bounded with the same limitations, and
therefore they that will have comfort in it, must approve themselves not only
Christians in Name, but in Deed, by abandoning all iniquity, by being pure and
zealous of good works, by being an holy Nation, and so showing forth the
praises of him who has called them out of darkness into his mavelous light.
By having these conditions in them must they approve themselves his special
treasure. Ordinary stones will not pass for Jewels with him, nor rubbish and
dirt for treasure in the day of trial, though till then they may not be perhaps
discovered.

This distinction between the Jews here spoken to, is said should be, in the
day which he should make (or bring on them) or the day wherein he should do,
what he determined to do, or said he would do, for both these senses are the
words (...) Asher any Oseh, capable of, and so are by some in the one, by
others in the other way rendered, all much to the same purpose; In the day which
I shall make or bring to pass, so R. Tanchum, and some in Vatablus; and so the
Greek. In the day of Judgment wherein I shall execute judgment on the wicked,
says Kimchi. They shall be to me in the day wherein I do, or make, for a
peculiar, says the Deuteronomy. XIV.2.
Vulgar Latin, (not as the Doway Version renders, in the day that I do to my
peculiar.) The same way others take; and that so those words should be rendered
by themselves indefinitely, viz. in the day which I make (or shall make,) or
wherein I do, ( i. e. will certainly do.) And the word peculiar not governed of
that just in place before it, viz. do or make; but be referred to the
foregoing, viz. they shall be to me, may be confirmed by their coming again in
the same manner, c. IV.3. in the day that I shall do or make, without any thing
added after it. Yet does the ancient Syriack Version make the last word to be
governed of that immediately preceding it, as ours do, though rendering that
otherwise then ours, viz. a congregation, they shall be mine in the day when I
shall make a congregation. So the Latin Translator points it, although possibly
by otherwise distinguishing the words, it might be rendered, they shall be to me
in the day, which I make, a congregation. R. Salomo Jarchi seems to give an
Exposition different from all these, to this purpose, In the day which I make a
reserved treasure, i. e. which I have treasured and laid up with me, therein to
perform (or pay) my recompense. And if it were so understood, the expression
would agree with that, Act. I.7. wherein speaking of those times, in which they
expected that Christ should restore the Kingdom to Israel, he calls them
times and seasons which God had put in his own power.

But whatever differences may be betwixt Expositors, as to the rendering the
words, the day in them spoken of is still the same, viz. the day of the Lords
coming, mentioned before in this Chapter, in the second, third, and fifth
verses, and again in the following Chapter, in the first, second, and third
verses; namely, the day wherein God should execute his Judgments on the Nation
of the Jews, for working revenge upon his enemies, and redemption to those that
fear him, and revere his Name. Though such discrimination shall be fully made
between all the godly and the wicked at Christ's second coming, the general day
of Judgment, (to which, therefore, what is here spoken is by See Chr. a Castro.
diverse referred,) yet certainly here what is said, respects more particularly
the Nation of the Jews, and the time of that national judgment denounced
against them. What has been before said, and what is here said, and what shall
be after said in this Prophecy, will not be so properly applied, and clearly
understood by applying it to any other: mean while may the words well be
accommodated, to any other People with whom it shall be so, at any time, as it
was then with the Jews, and whom God shall in like kind visit with a national
judgment or excision; See Dr Hammond on Mat. XIII.49.
what to them happened being to others for example, and likewise to that great
day of discrimination, the day of the general judgment; yea, likewise to the
day of death, as for what concerns particular men; but still those whom the
words seem properly to concern as here spoken to, and of, are the Nation of the
Jews, then in being in their own Country, a Nation separate from others, and
bearing then the name of the Lords People. In that day when the Lord shall do
such things, he will show by making a manifest difference, who are his, and who
are not his: his shall be separated from the rest as his own R. D. Kimchi.
peculiar, from such as he will not own nor regard; and when he executes
judgment in fury on others, he will spare them, and keep them that those evils
which destroy the wicked shall not touch them, as a man spares his own son
that serves him.

These words are a farther declaration of Gods exceeding great favor, and
compassion to those whom he would own, and look on as his peculiar, in terms of
greatest elegance and height of expression. The compassionate affection of a
Father is great to any child, though he be unprofitable to him, yea hurtful to
him; how much more when he is profitable to him, and honoreth him? so notes R.
Tanchum, and to the same purpose Kimchi, and other Expositors Rib. Drus. Tarn.
etc.
also. There is another thing also here, by Pelic. and Calv.
some taken notice of in the expression, which may well be added, as making for
the amplification of Gods goodness, and the consolation of those that fear and
honor him, viz. that he says he will spare them, which imports that though
there be found in them defects, and they have done and spoken things that they
ought not, and which in rigor of Justice might deserve punishment, yet as long
as their hearts are right with him, and they sincerely honor and obey him, and
have reverent thoughts of him, he will forgive their transgressions, and in
great mercy save them, when he will show no mercy to the wicked, but according
to their deserts in severity deal with them.

18 Then shall ye return, and discern between the righteous and the wicked,
between him that serves God, and him that serves him not. Then shall ye
return and discern between, etc.] Then, when that day shall come, such an
alteration of things shall there be, that though you now think all things go
alike to all, or rather for the worse to those that most serve God, yet then
you shall change your minds, and discern that God did always observe the
actions of men, and put a difference between the righteous and the wicked,
those that served him, and those that served him not; though till now he did
not make it so apparent to men of corrupt judgments.

Some difference here is betwixt Interpreters in rendering, and expounding these
words, Grotius.
some following a reading that is in some Copies of the Vulgar Latin, ( viz.
and convertimini, and be converted, or return) give us to take it as an
exhortation to these wicked ones who spoke blasphemously of Gods Justice to
return and repent: and then they should discern that distinction between the
righteous and the wicked, which they would not now perceive. And with this
reading the Tigurin And Munster.
Version also agrees; so it will sound, now therefore return, etc. to which
will be reduced also that Exposition of Pelican, If ye shall repent, ye shall
discern. Others following another reading, which Ribera.
some observe to be more correct, and indeed comes closer to the Letter in the
Original, though that admit of both; viz. and convertemini; and ye shall
return, or be converted, understand it of the late and bootless repentance of
those blasphemers, See Lyra.
or a conversion which they shall be forced to, by what they shall then, nill
they, will they, necessarily discern and acknowledge of the Sea Wisd. 5.1. etc.
different condition of those that serve God, and those that serve him not.
With this rendering agree ours, and Jun. Trem. and Drus.
they also who render, then being converted, or returning, you shall discern. A
late very learned Lud. de Dieu.
man, would have it rendered, and ye shall again see; that the meaning may be,
Heretofore, when I blessed my Church with prosperity, then did appear a
manifest difference betwixt the righteous and the unrighteous; now because my
whole Church is under affliction you deny that difference, but I will make or
bring again a day wherein ye shall again perceive that difference. Now all
these look on the words as directed to the wicked, who thought it vain to serve
God, as if he took no notice of what was done by men, spoken to verse. 13, 14,
15. Pet. a Fig.
There are who think, they may be taken as directed to those that feared the
Lord, next before spoken of, as if the meaning were, that such a change of
things should be, that though now they could not perceive any difference
betwixt themselves and the wicked, yet then looking on what was come to pass,
they should evidently discern it, and perceive Gods especial care over them,
and that so here is a change of the person, which is not unfrequent in the
Scriptures: for whereas before they were spoken of, in the third person, they
are here spoken to in the second. But without nicer enquiry into the persons
spoken to, and the nature of the conversion or returning here mentioned, of
whom, or whether true or false, it may suffice as to the meaning, to take the
scope of the Sea Calvin. and Sanctius.
words, to be as at first we intimated, That such a conversion turning, or
change, shall then in that day be in the face of things, that all, both the
godly and the ungodly looking thereon, shall necessarily see that there is no
place for doubting of Gods Justice, in his ordering of things for the
punishment of the wicked, and preservation of the righteous, and that he
always does put a distinction between them, though to men judging by the
present outward appearance of things, it is not always so apparent. It shall
be made beyond all doubt apparent in that day. By this, says Edit. Steph. in
folio.
Vatablus, he points out the future Resurrection; and so think Oecolamp.
others, as well Christians as Jews, as expressly The last page but one of his
Comment. on the Prophets.
Abarbinel, who therefore interprets this returning of the souls of men,
returning to their bodies at that day; which the thing in it self is true, as
to a general distinction between all the righteous, and all the wicked that
ever were, or shall be in this World. At the resurrection of the dead, and the
general Judgment, there shall be an apparent difference made between them, and
the one separated from the other, though before in this World mingled one with
another, as when a Shepherd divides his Sheep from the Goats, Mat. XXV.32.
and we willingly grant that the words point at that day, so as to put us in
mind of it, and warn us to think thereon. But we do not look on that as the
primary and proper scope of this Prophecy, but that it describes to us in the
first place, and as its main intent, that national judgment which God
threatened to the Jews, and accordingly executed on them in this World, shortly
after the first coming of Christ, or at his coming; that word including all
that time from his first preaching to the destruction of Jerusalem. That was
the day in which the distinction here spoken of was to be made, and accordingly
was signally made, as has been already said, and will be in looking into the
next Chapter, wherein is both the certainty of the coming of that day, and the
nature or manner of it more fully declared, and described in Prophetical
expressions: in finding the true meaning of which, as well as of the present
words, as to the words and signification of them, we may still make use of the
Jewish Expositors, but not as to the sense and intent. For that day to be
meant, which we say, agreeably to the words and history of the times also, is
meant, they must by no means grant. That those things belong to the time yet to
come, and are to be fulfilled, either at a restoration of Israel, and subduing
their enemies, at the coming of their fancied Messiah, which with much
earnestness they long for, or at the day of Judgment, or to particulars at the
day of death, they will tell us; but that they were fulfilled (as manifestly
they were) at that long since past destruction of their Nation, and holy City,
and Temple, they must obstinatly deny, or else they must grant and acknowledge
as we do, that Christ is already come; in opposing and denying which the whole
of their Religion now consists. This therefore in their expounding this
Prophecy are they silent of, as if no such thing had been. This here spoken
(says Aben Ezra) was spoken to the men of that generation, because this is the
end of all the Prophecies. So say we too: for after Malachi was no other
Prophet sent to the Jews, till John Baptist, Christ's forerunner, and what is
said therefore concerned them, the People of the Jews then being, and all their
posterity, till that time that this Prophecy was fulfilled (as by succession
still one People) to warn them by repentance to prevent the judgment threatened
and declared for that end to them, 2 Pet. 3, 9. and see Mat. XXIII.34, etc. and
Luke XIII.34.
by the great mercy, and long suffering of God, not willing that any should
perish, but all should come to repentance. But seeing the generality of them
would not be brought to repentance, nor know the things belonging to their
peace, in that their day, as Christ complains of them, Luc. XIX.42, 44. the
judgment was, so as here described, then in Gods appointed time executed, and
such a distinction and discrimination, as is here spoken of, visibly to all the
World made, in the preservation of such among that People who feared God, and
believed in Christ, and the destruction of his enemies.

CHAP. IV.
VERSE. 1. For behold, the day comes that shall burn as an oven, and all the
proud, yea, and all that do wickedly shall be stubble: and the day that comes
shall burn them up, says the Lord of hosts, that it shall leave them neither
root nor branch.
FOR behold the day comes, etc.] The connection and necessary coherence of
these words with the former, as being, as we said, a declaration of the
certainty of the coming of that day in them spoken of, and a description of it,
is so apparent as that it may seem no reason why they should be severed from
them, and made the beginning of a new Chapter, and therefore by some are
continued with them. But we need not much insist on this, the distinction of
Chapters not interrupting the sense. As to the scope of them it is well given
by a learned Grot. and see Tarn. and Stokes.
man, viz. that they are a description of the final Judgment on the Jews (in
their destruction) and an image of representation of the last general Judgment
on all Mankind. That was certainly then to come on the Jews (if not prevented
by their repentance, as it was not,) when the Prophet then spoke this, but is
long since come; this is yet still to come, but shall in Gods appointed time,
as certainly come, as if it were already present. Of both, therefore, it might
then be said; Behold the day comes, i. e. shall certainly come, and the
description is so full of terror, as that it may well be applied both to the
one and to the other, yet certainly was it that former, which the primary
intention of the Prophet was here to describe, and to the latter are the words
appliable only by way of accommodation. For to the Nation of the Jews did he
then speak, as a Messenger peculiarly sent to them, to reprove them for their
sins, and declare to them, such things as concerned them, and not immediately
such things as were common to the whole World, though what things happened to
them were ensamples to all other People: and like judgments on like behavior
they may justly expect in this World also, besides that last general Judgment
which shall involve all, both Jews and other Nations, which ( viz. to what
People the Prophet was peculiarly sent, and spoke, and when) they did not seem
to consider who passing over what befell the Jews, according to this Prophecy,
expound these words, as primarily and properly belonging to that last general
Judgment (and taking in too the particular judgment of particular men at
their death, as some will,) as many do.

It Is the consent (says Ribera.
one) of Jews and Christians, that it should be so expounded of the day of
Judgment. Why the Jews must in their own defense and maintenance of their
other opinions so expound it, or else of some other time yet to come, has been
already showed; but why Christians should therein consent with them, there is
no reason, yea much to the contrary, that they may not thereby confirm them in
their error, as if Christ were not yet come. Yet what might move some
Christians so to do, we shall perhaps have occasion to see, when we come to the
5th verse. Mean while we take that which we have given, viz. that this concerns
primarily that national judgment on the Jews, not many years after Christ's
coming, (about 40. after his death) executed by the Romans, the instruments of
Gods wrath on them, in that terrible destruction of their City and People, to
be the truest and most proper way of expounding the words; and according to
that shall proceed: However by way of accommodation allowing them to be
applied, either to the particular or general Judgment, to be expected by all
other men. And though we cannot consent with the Jews in their opinion, yet may
we take notice of some things that they say for illustrating our own; or for
showing the incongruity of their opinion, or for enquiry into the signification
and literal meaning of some of the words. And by the way we say, that what is
said that the Jews all consent in this, that the peculiar day here designed is
the day of the last general Judgment, is spoken but at large. For indeed they
do not agree in it, as Abarbinel, who does himself say that it is meant of the
time of the Resurrection and the day of Judgment, plainly shows in his
Commentary on this place, and seeks to prove that some do agree with him in
it, but confesses that others of their Doctors do not, who refer it to the
punishment that seizes on the souls of the wicked immediately after death, and
that others speak so obscurely that it cannot be positively said of what time
they understood it, whether of the restoration of Israel which they look for,
or of the resurrection of the Dead. So that all that can be said, that they
consent in, is, that they do not expound it of that day which we do, as their
interest leads them, as we have said, to do, though among themselves not
agreeing in one opinion, and all erring from the right.

Nor do all Christians neither agree among themselves in the matter. Tarn.
Grot. and Stokes.
Some of good note and learning going the way that we take; with whom we may
rank Arias Mont. and Calv.
others also, who interpret the place, not of Christ's second coming at the end
of the World, but of his first coming, though they perhaps extend not that name
of his coming so far as we do, but in their explications of it, expound it
rather of his preaching, while he was on Earth, by which he convinced those
hypocrites of their impiety, not sparing their sins, while they do not expressly
mention his terrible Judgments executed on the Jews in the destruction of
Jerusalem. See Assembly's Annotat. and Tarnov.
Those also dissent from that opinion, which take this day to include all the
time from that wherein this was spoken to the first coming of Christ, and See
Dutch Notes.
they also, who understand it, that this day began with the first day of
Christ's Incarnation, and is to last until he shall again appear in the Clouds,
to the last Judgment, which certainly allow too large a time to that day,
which is so described by the Prophet, as to show it to belong to a (...) Abarb.
peculiar and particular day, Act. II.20
a great and notable day of the Lord, wherein he shall execute the signal
judgment here threatened; called again, v. 5. the great and dreadful day of the
Lord.

To proceed therefore to the explication of the words and expressions, which to
the way that, according to what has been said, we take, are plainly agreeable,
and according to it and no other, run in an equal tenor, he says, Behold the
day comes, that shall burn as an oven, etc. We had before an expression to the
same purpose, c. III. v. 2. especially according to their explication, who
there read, it, i. e. the day of the Lords coming, the day here again spoken of
shall be as a refiners fire, as we said Kimchi does. The words as here set
down, with behold for ushering in the strangeness of the thing, prefixed, sound
out the greatest horror that can possibly be expressed, and beyond which
nothing but the inexpressible terror of the conflagration of the whole World at
the last day (of which therefore it is, as we have said, usually interpreted)
can be imagined; and nearer to which no terrible judgment in the World ever on
any People executed, came (or can well come) then this here spoken of. While he
says that the day shall burn as an oven, what does it less then represent the
condition of those whom the judgment spoken of shall then seize, to be as if
they were surrounded with fire, without possibility of avoiding the fury and
dire effects thereof, then which nothing, we know, is to men more terrible; as
if the heavens were on fire over their heads, and made an hideous noise, and
the Elements melted with fervent heat about them, and the Earth and all the
works therein were burning; that we may take in, and so compare with these,
those not unlike expressions in II Pet. III.10, 12. by which usually the terror
of the day of the last general Judgment, is thought to be described: but in
the opinion of the learned Doctor Hammond, this that is here spoken of, viz.
that of the judgment threatened to the obstinate Jewish Nation.

The words (as there, so here also) are such as no figurative or hyperbolical
expressions that can be possibly used for setting forth a most dreadful
judgment can surpass, yet so great was the judgment according to this
prediction executed on them, as that we may look on them not as a figurative
but real description of what should be. What could be said less to express the
face of things, when their stately City, and magnificent Temple were all at
once on fire, and none could quench it? may it not well be said, that the day
there then burnt like an oven, and in words appositely here appliable, though
spoken to another sense, Isa. XXXI.9. that Gods fire was then in Zion, and his
furnace in Jerusalem? To show how in that day (that (...)
day of punishment, as an ancient Arabic Translator, not unfitly for
expressing the sense, renders it) that which he before said concerning a
certain discrimination to be made between the righteous and the wicked, should
be made evident, he describes in the following words the effects of it, and
first as concerning the wicked saying, and all the proud, yea and all that do
wickedly, all those that obstinately went on in wicked courses, and contemned
God and his Laws, shall be stubble, and the day that comes shall burn them up,
says the Lord of Hosts, etc. Where is now then any occasion to say, as they
did, c. III.15. we call the proud happy, yea they that work wickedness are set
up, yea they that tempt God are delivered, what shall now become of their
happiness, and of their glory, when they shall be, but as stubble before the
fire, which shall without delay or resistance be certainly consumed? where is
now that deliverance that they talked of? how shall they deliver themselves?
who shall deliver them? no escape shall there be found for them, such utter
destruction shall that day that comes in that dreadful manner bring on them,
as if they were clear burnt up, so that it shall leave them neither root, nor
branch, which is apparently contrary to that being set up, or built, c. III.15.

This also is a Drus. Compare Job, c. XVIII.16, 19.
proverbial speech to express utter destruction by a similitude taken from a
tree, destroyed not only by having its boughs and branches cut off, but its
roots also plucked up. The Chalde Paraphrast renders it, shall not leave them
son nor nephew: because, says Kimchi explaining it, the first son is as the
root, and his son is as the branch (but we may rather say, it shall leave
neither them nor their posterity: the Father being the root, the sons and
posterity branches from him. That interpretation of the Chalde being by most of
the Jewish Expositors followed, Abarbinel not seeing how that may be so
conveniently applied to the punishment of the wicked at the Resurrection, finds
out another explication which he thinks more convenient, viz. That what is
said, is concerning the good works of wicked men, for which because in this
World they receive their reward, God will not there leave to them any root, or
branch of any commandment by them performed, or any good work, for which they
may receive reward in the day of Judgment, according to a saying of their
Rabbis, That he the most of whose works are evil, and the least part good, he
is rewarded for his small righteousness in this World, that he may be wholly
punished in the World to come. This he gives as his own opinion, though a very
far fetched one, not knowing how to adapt otherwise the words of the Text to
that punishment of the day of Judgment, which he here thinks to be the day
spoken of. Other opinions he mentions also, as of some, that by branch is
understood the infants of wicked men, as if they should not be admitted into
the World to come; and otherwise that by root is understood the soul, and by
branch the body, with the like, Talmud. Aboda Zara, c. 1. fol. 4. col. 1.
neither root in this World, nor branch in the World to come.

Among Christian Expositors also they who expound the Text concerning the day
of Judgment, are at some See Chapter a Castro.
difference in applying the expression to the matter or thing signified, but to
them who go the way that we have chosen, of expounding the Text concerning the
day of the destruction of the Jews and their City by the Romans, there is no
difficulty; but the proverbial speech may be interpreted as nigh to the letter
as may be, to denote, Fathers and Children, the wicked and their posterity.
Well may that day be said to have burnt them up, and consumed them, so as to
leave them neither root nor branch; when at that time Histories testify, that
in the Siege and taking of the City, there perished of them by fire, famine,
and sword, no less then eleven hundred thousand; to which if we add those vast
multitudes, and many thousands of others which were immediately and within the
space of few years after by the same enemies destroyed (which all we may
account as consumed by the time, which is called that day, having the authority
of a Jew, Kimchi himself, so far to extend the notion of that day, and reckon
all for one continued day of destruction, while he says, although it be said,
that the day shall burn them up, yet their destruction shall not be all in one
day, but they shall go on in perishing, and in a short time be consumed): add,
I say, those great multitudes to the former, (if there be need,) and what less
can be said to express the greatness of the desolation and destruction, then
that they were cut off root and branch, so far that it is no small wonder that
there should be any remainder of them.

These things are manifest out of the Histories of those times, especially out
of Josephus's History of the Jewish War, in the sixth Book, according to the
Greek division, the seventh according to the Latin; and Eusebius lib. 3. c. 5.
as to the main and first part concerning the destruction of the City, and those
multitudes that were then there gathered together, and perished; and as to the
gleanings of that day, as we may call the following destructions of the Jews,
out of such other Historians as relate the great variety of miseries and
calamities which one on the back of another befell them, by their pride, as it
is here called, and obstinate behavior toward the Lord pulled on them. If any
have not opportunity of consulting those Histories, he may without farther
trouble find enough collected out of them by Dr See him in his Notes on Matthew
XXIV. and on Mar. XIII. note a, and on the second of Pet. 3. note g, and on
Revel. c. VI. note d, and note i, with other places.
Hammond, in his Annotations on the New Testament, (in which he applies several
things, which by reason of the dreadful expressions in which they are set down
or denounced, are usually by Interpreters applied to the last general
Judgment, and destruction of the whole World, particularly to this day of
Jerusalem, which we look on as here meant, to show, that if what is here said,
in the highest language that a scene of horror may be represented by, be
applied to what was then really done, there will be found no great hyperbole,
or figurative exceeding in it, but rather a plain draught, or description
before hand, according to which things were afterward acted.

By what has been said, appears what little reason there was to account the
proud happy, and those that work wickedness set up, and that God delighted in
them, because at that time they were suffered to prosper, but whether there
were any profit in serving God, and keeping his Ordinances, and what should be
done for them by which any might discern betwixt the righteous and the wicked;
that part of the question remains yet unanswered, for if they perish with the
wicked, be involved in one common judgment with them; what is their case yet
better then theirs? To this therefore a full answer follows in the next words.

2 But unto you that fear my Name, shall the sun of righteousness arise with
healing in his wings, and ye shall go forth, and grow up as calves of the
stall. But unto you that fear my Name shall the Sun of righteousness arise with
healing in his wings, etc.] In these words is safety and happiness assured to
the righteous, in the day that the wicked shall be miserably destroyed, so that
there shall be a manifest discrimination between them. What S. Peter says, The
Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of temptation, and to reserve the
unjust unto the day of Judgment to be punished, II Pet. II.9. which he infers
from two examples before given, viz. his saving Noah, when he brought in the
Flood upon the World of the ungodly; And his delivering just Lot, when he
turned the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrha into ashes, and brought them to utter
destruction by fire from Heaven, ver. 5, 6, 7. is here manifestly asserted, in
that the same day which shall come as a burning oven to the proud wicked ones,
to burn them up and destroy them, shall be to those that fear the Name of the
Lord, as a glorious day wherein the benign Sun shall arise with his best
influences of comfort to them, to cherish and refresh their drooping spirits.

It is well known that the word (...) Tsedakah here rendered righteousness, is
used to signify both justice or righteousness, and also benignity or mercy; and
both significations will to this place well agree: for that Salvation and
comfort, then to be reached forth to the righteous, is a demonstration both of
justice and mercy; by it shall be declared the righteousness of God, whose
justice those wicked ones questioned, saying, where is the God of Judgment, c.
II.17. in that he now rewards them for their obedience, when he punishes
those that would not obey, and by it also his mercy in sparing them, though
perhaps having many defects in them, in that day of Judgment, as a man spares
his own son that serves him, as he promises, c. III.17. And this would be a
clear sense if we should no farther press the letter of the words then so by
way of similitude, to denote that the same time which should be to the wicked,
a day of utter destruction, consuming them as fire, should be by the justice
and mercy of God to the godly, as a fair day wherein the Sun does kindly arise,
and benignly and largely impart his light (as Drusius explains the expression)
for the comfort of men and other creatures; a gracious and comfortable day, a
day of saving health to them: so Kimchi, not unaptly, notes that the words
import, that they should be delivered from all evil, and rejoice with a good
(or glad) heart. But Interpreters think it not enough to stop here, but farther
enquire who is meant by this Sun, and Christians generally agree that Christ
who is, See Dr Hammond on Luke I.78.
Luke I.78. called the dayspring or rising Sun, is by this title meant; and
this day, here spoken of, being the day of his coming (as it is, c. III.2.
called) he being entitled a Sun, his coming in it may be well called his
rising. Why Christ may be so called, many reasons may be, and are, brought by
Interpreters. But among them to our purpose in this place, and according to our
understanding of the time here spoken of, the most agreeable will be; because
as by the Suns rising those things, which before were covered in darkness, are
discovered and made apparent, so by his coming in this manner both See Calvin.
Gods justice, and his mercy to them that feared his Name, which before was not
so discernible while he suffered them to be mixed with the wicked, yea insulted
over by them, as if he did not own them more then others, nor take any peculiar
care of them, so that they sat as it were in the shadow of death, should now
be made conspicuous to all, in his freeing them from their oppressions,
delivering them from those judgments by which the wicked were destroyed, and
signally rewarding them for their obedience, so that they that sat before in
darkness now should see a great light, and joyfully walk in it. Such a
difference should be in their condition from what it was before, as that it
might well be said, The Sun of righteousness, of justice and mercy, was risen
to them, and that with healing in his wings, i. e. his comfortable rays or
beams, as all agree by wings here to be meant. The ordinary Sun kindly arising
in the morning, may at any time be said, to bring healing in his wings, to
diffuse and communicate health by his rays, both to men and other creatures,
which after his setting, and in his absence, all the night seem to droop,
languish, to be sick and out of order, and those that are so otherwise, in that
while to be more so. Whence the Jews have a proverbial speech, which may serve
something to illustrate this expression. Baba bathura cap. 1. fol. 16. col. 2.
The Sun arises, the infirmity decreaseth, that is, As the Sun rises, so
infirmities decrease. Much more of this Sun might it be said, that he did at
his arising to those that feared the Lord, bring healing with him in his wings
to them in that day of distress, worse then the darkest night, the shadow of
death it self, which without his arising to them would necessarily have
swallowed up them too in destruction, and could not but by the apprehension of
it, make them as even sick at heart according to what he said, c. III.2. who
may abide the day of his coming? So terrible should it be that all men's hearts
should Luke XXI.26.
fail for fear, in contemplation of those things that should come on them, yet
even then, in regard of his solitary effects that his coming should have toward
them that feared his Name, he bid them ib. 28.
, when these things, these terrible things should begin to come to pass, to
look up and lift up their heads, for that their redemption then drew nigh,
their deliverance from the persecutions by the unbeleiving Jews, which they had
endured, and from the dangers which threatened them, as, except by his
extraordinary Providence inevitable, and his making that which was for the
destruction of his enemies, occasion of comfort and prosperity to them, may
well be termed healing. But we may not confine it only to the rescue of their
persons, and preservation of their bodies, nor the outward joy that they should
find from that, but look on the inward spiritual comfort, and the healing of
their See Psalm. CXlVII.3.
broken hearts, and fainting spirits, in preserving them from failing by fear
and despair, as a greater part of it, and therefore not unfitly does Grotius
interpret this arising of the Sun of righteousness with healing in his wings,
of the Collation of the holy Spirit, which Christ should send to his to shine
in their hearts, and bring perfect health to their minds; that spirit of
comfort, the only true comforter. In regard of both these, viz. both his
rescuing and delivering those that feared his Name, and protecting and
delivering them from their outward fears and dangers, and persecutions, and his
inward illumination and comforting of them by his good Spirit, showing himself
in all ways a Sun and shield to them; was this Prophecy that he should arise
to them with healing in his wings, evidently and abundantly made good to them
in that day. And certainly in all respects does that title of the Sun of
righteousness agree to Christ the fountain of true heavenly light, who
enlightneth every man coming into the World, See Dr Hammond on that place, and
see Joh. VIII.12. and XII.46.
Joh. I.9. and whom God has set forth to declare his righteousness, Romans
III.25, 26. and the Author of all true comfort, who gives to his such joy, as
shall swallow up all worldly sorrow, Joh. XVI.20. such joy as no man can take
from them, v. 22. and never leaves his comfortless, Joh. XIV.18. but sends
to them from the Father, the comforter, the Spirit of truth. Joh. XV.26. to
abide with them for ever, and to dwell in them, and to be in them, Joh. XIV.16,
17. and in the same regard likewise may he be said to arise or come with
healing in his wings to them, as in all other ways also, diffusing health in
all kinds. When he was here on Earth, great multitudes from all parts flocked
to him to be healed of their diseases; and they that were vexed with unclean
spirits, and they were healed. And the whole multitude sought to touch him: for
^here went virtue out of him and healed them all, Luke VI.17, 18, 19. And the
woman which had been twelve years diseased with an issue of blood, did not doubt
but to find the effects of that virtue, who therefore coming behind him,
touched the hemme of his garment, for she said within her self, If I may but
touch his garment, I shall be whole, Mat. IX.20, 21. and she did accordingly
find it, for straightway she was healed of that plague. And Jesus perceived,
though he saw not the woman, that virtue had gone out of him, and she before
all acknowledged it, Mar. V.28, 29, 30. etc. and Luke VIII.44, etc. on which
passage in Mat. IX. Grotius notes, that it may well be looked on as having
reference to, at least good correspondence with, this place. The word (...)
Bicnapheiha rendered, in his wings, being capable of being rendered, in fimbriis,
in the hemmes or borders of his garment, as he observes it to be elsewhere
rendered: and it may be not unworthy of consideration. But withal, that healing
virtue in him showed it self, not more in the healing bodily distempers, then
the worse maladies of the Soul, as appears in his words when he cured some
bodily diseases, in saying, not, Be well or healed, arise and walk, but, thy
sins be forgiven thee, Mar. II. and Luke V.
Mat. IX.2, 5. that they might know that he had power to forgive sins, v. 6.
and was no less a Physician of sick distressed souls, then of diseased bodies.

In all regards then, as we said, does the title of the Sun of righteousness
arising with healing in his wings, well agree to Christ our Savior, and all
things that those words can give us to expect from him that is so described,
have been, and are, by him abundantly made good; ^o have those that faithfully
believe in him and rely on him always found, and shall find. But as to this
present place the words seem limited to those benefits of outward preservation,
and inward comfort which those that feared the Lord were in that day of
discrimination, which the Lord says he would make, to expect according to his
promise here made, and did accordingly find, with what more he adds in the
following words for expressing his goodness to them. But before we proceed to
them, we may here take notice of a strange conceit of the Jews, which they here
bring for explication of what is here said concerning that day that shall burn
as an oven, and devour the wicked, and that Sun of righteousness which shall
arise to them that fear the Name of the Lord, and how the discrimination shall
be made between them. The Sun, Talmud Nedarim. c. 1. fol. 8. col. 2. Abo ^a
Zarah c. ^. fol. 4. Bereshith rabb^, Sect. 6. See Buxtorf. Lex. Mag. in (...).
they tell us, is now enclosed in a case or sheath (besides that God, out of a
Pool before him, deads his force with water) that so he may not burn up the
World, but at the day of Judgment he shall be unsheathed, and so coming forth
in his full strength, shall (as he now does in melting some things and hardening
others,) show contrary effects, according to the difference of the subjects
that he has to work on, and so burn up the wicked as stubble, but heal the
godly of all those bodily defects and imperfections with which they shall then
arise; This is the (...) of what they say, as improved to its best meaning by
Abarbinel. But what tolerable meaning it may have at best, I cannot perceive;
sure it is such as has no ground at all from Scripture, nor agrees with it in
any meaning. To prove that the Sun is in a sheath or cafe, because it is said,
In them has he set a Tabernacle for the Sun, Psalm. XIX.4. and that in the last
day it shall be unsheathed, because it is here said, the day comes that shall
burn as an oven, are ways of proof that will have certainly no force with any,
but those of the Jews that must think all that their ancient Rabbis have said
to be true, how absurd and groundless soever, yea though both contrary to
Scripture and reason. What proof, mean while, for the Pool of water in which
the Sun is cooled? I should have passed this by, without taking notice of it in
this place, as thinking it only a conceit of their Doctors given in strange
terms, to amuse their Disciples when they would not speak plainly to them, with
some hidden meaning in them (as many in that kind they have, and in particular,
that which also may seem to refer to this place, Baba Bathra, c. 1. fol. 16.
col. 2. Y^lk^t.
that Abraham had a precious stone hanging about his neck, which when any sick
People looked on, they were healed, and when he dyed God fastened it in the Sun
by which means the Sun has healing virtue in him; by which On c. 1.11.
Abarbinel interprets to be meant that Abraham while he lived convinced men of
the unity, truth, and power of God by solid arguments, but after his death they
being deprived of such an orall Teacher, they had a visible one in the Sun by
his wonderful motion undeniablely demonstrating the same;) but that by the R.
Solomon. D. Kimchi, Abarb. and see Ma^mon. on cap. 10. of Sanhedrim, page 157*
in porta Mos^s.
gravest and most serious of them I see this cited as literally to be
expounded, and to give the true meaning of this place, from which, and from
being true in any kind, it is certainly most wide, and in it self very
ridiculous. As so therefore leaving it we pass on to the following words, in
which he farther describes the happy condition that those that fear his Name
shall be in.

And ye shall go forth and grow up as Calves of the stall.] Ye shall go forth,
i. e. say some of the Christian Jerome. Vat.
Expositors, who understand the time here spoken of, of the day of the last
general Judgment, out of this World, in which ye have hitherto been detained,
as in a prison. Ribera, Menoch. and see Christ. a Castro.
Others to much the same purpose out of your graves, and so enjoy that
happiness and joyful estate in the next words described. But this though
applied to that time undoubtedly true, and such as may well mind us of that
day, yet will not well agree to that way which we follow, taking the day spoken
of for that particular day of Judgment, wherein God proceeded to the
punishment of the Jews by bringing destruction both on the City and People.

In respect to that, the explication of a learned Grot.
man comes closer, which is, God shall as with his hand bring you out of the
City ready to be destroyed; according to that way of taking care for the
preservation of his faithful servants, when destruction is sent on the wicked
among whom they are, of which we have many examples. Our Savior gives us two,
Luke XVII.27. the one of Noah, at the general Deluge, whom he taught first to
make an Ark for his preservation, and brought not the Flood on the ungodly till
he was first by that secured, but as soon as Noah entered into the Ark, the
Flood came and destroyed them all. The other of Lot v. 29. to whom God
purposing to destroy Sodom, sent Angels to lead him by the hand out of the
City, by them telling him that he could not do any thing till he was escaped,
Genesis XIX.22. But the same day that Lot went out of Sodom it rained fire and
brimstone from Heaven, and destroyed them all. And a Vision there is presented
to the Prophet Ezekiel, c. IX.4, etc. to the same purpose, where by Gods
command a mark was set on the foreheads of such as feared the Lord, that they
might not perish in the common destruction of Jerusalem, and those that were to
destroy the Inhabitants thereof old and young, women and children, without
sparing any, were yet charged not to come near any man upon whom was Gods mark.
Not to look after more examples; this promise of deliverance to those here to
whom he says, Ye shall go forth, was manifestly made good to the Christians
that were in Jerusalem, when it was destroyed, by Gods miraculous Eusebius. h^st.
l. 3. c. 5.
warning them to go out of the City, affording them occasion so to do, by which
means they went forth and were preserved, as has been above said on c. III.6.

Calvin's words also for explaining this word will well fit the same purpose,
(though not fully by him directed to the same, but to the renovation of the
Church more generally) that the word going forth is opposed to the hard straits
they had been before in, but should now have liberty of going forth, and find
open matter of joy. But there may be other ways of expounding this word
without looking on it, as denoting properly a going forth out of the place
where they were: but being joined to the next word, and grow, to denote that
they shall Jun. Trem. and see Ta^n. and Stokes.
proceed to grow, etc. i. e. having received that healing, and salutary
influence of the Sun of righteousness, shall go on in prospering, according to
what the next words declare. Or as a learned Aben Ezra (...) and Abarb.
Jew says, it may be expounded, ye shall go forth to, or in, or by the light
of that Sun of righteousness arising to you; and in this sense may it be well
enough applied to that warning of them to go out of the City, which before we
mentioned; or as R. D. Kimchi.
another, Wheresoever ye go ye shall grow, etc. Which of these notions it will
be best to take, (if it be not indifferent to take either,) as to this word, it
will be better discerned when we shall have considered those joined to it, and
grow up as Calves of the stall: In rendering the first of which words, viz.
(...) Vpishtem (which ours render, and grow up, there is some difference among
Interpreters, some rendering it, and ye shall leap, so the Greek, (...), (using
here the same word, which is, Luke VI.23. where he bids his rejoice, when they
are persecuted, and leap for joy.) And so the Latin, and the Syriack: the
printed Arabic to the same purpose, ye shall move your selves, or leap for
joy, the Chalde Paraphrase also, ye shall do or go (...), see L. de Dieu.
wantonly: the same signification does the Greek give to it, Jer. L.11.
likewise the Syriack and the (...).
Chalde more plainly then here. So does R. Tanchum say, that it signifies here
playing and leaping for alacrity and joy, which he thinks also may most
conveniently agree to that other forecited place of Jeremy; that it may be
there rendered, because ye skip or leap. And not far from this signification is
that notion which the same root, viz. (...) Phasha has in the Arabic Tongue,
in which it signifies to vaunt or boast, to go struttingly or proudly, but See
Munst. Tig. Jun. Trem. and see Bootii Animad. l. 3. c. 4.. 3.
others prefer here to give it the signification of multiplying, waxing fat,
growing or increasing, whether in number, as some seem to understand it, who
render it Pagnin.
Multiplicabimini, ye shall be multiplied; or in strength, and well liking as
Munste. Tig. supra.
they who render it ye shall wax fat, or whether more generally in any way, as
others who use a word appliable to increase in any way, as Jun. Trem.
augescetis, or Pisc.
crescetis, with which our grow up agrees. This signification also R. Tanchum
recites, both in this place, and the forecited Jer. L. as likewise Nahum
III.18. and Habbak. I.8. and R. D. Kimchi both in this place, and that of
Jeremiah, puts it as the proper Exposition of it; here he expounds it, Ye shall
increase and multiply as Calves of the stall, which grow great in flesh and
fatness. It is confirmed by the common use of the same word in the Chalde
Tongue, and the learned Lud. de Dieu confirms it also by the use of the
Aethiopick Tongue, in which On Hab. I.8.
he notes the word to signify, to be sound, healthy and strong, and so would
have it here to signify ye shall be fat, lusty and strong, and because Calves
when they are fatted and lusty, use to frolic, and to leap and skip up and
down in wanton manner, therefore he says, it was that the Greek and Latin
render it, shall leap. But perhaps they looked on it as a proper signification
of the word distinct from the other, as well as besides them R. Tanchum, who
intimates that the word having different significations, that is to be taken
which the sense of the place requires, or best agrees to. Both indeed of the
forementioned significations well agree to this place, and that in Jeremy also,
and both are joined by Abarbinel, who says the meaning of the words to be that
the Sun of righteousness shall arise to them with healing, and they shall go
forth to (or in, or by) the light of that Sun, and (...) delight or sport
themselves and increase (or multiply or grow up) as Calves of the stall, which
will signify, as R. Tanchum well expresses it, according to that notion,
increase in happiness.

Another signification is attributed to the word, viz. of spreading or
dispersing, and in that sense Aben Ezra would have it here understood, as
appears by what he notes on Nahum III.18. where indeed that signification is by
many given to the word, and by ours rendered, is scattered, as likewise Habbak.
I.8. where ours and many others also render it, shall spread themselves,
although in those places also See Schind. Lex. and see in R. Tanch. on those
places.
there be who would have it to obtain the signification of multiplying and
increasing. But in this place he has not many that go with him, although R.
Tanchum in his Notes on Nahum, intimate that some do, viz. take the word here
to signify as it does there to spread or disperse themselves. But that
signification may be also referred to the former of multiplying. There is
another notion that the same root (...) See Bara Ali Lex.
Posh has in the Syriack Tongue, viz. to remain, to cease, to rest and be
quiet, and (...) Pusho, an interval, resting or intermission between any
motions. And to say that here according to that notion it might signify that
they should have rest and intermission from their troubles; and be secure and
quiet, as Calves in a stall, would be no wide conjecture, nor disagreeable to
the purpose. But the two former significations, viz. of leaping, or growing
strong and lusty, are the most followed; and both agree to the comparison taken
from Calves in a stall; by considering which words, guess is to be made of the
signification of this. As to the signification of those, I suppose there can be
no doubt made, but that they properly signify as they are by our Translators
rendered: nor is any made by any, although they have not all agreed Gre^k and
Arab.
in the rendering; for some render, as Calves loosed from bonds (they mean I
suppose let loose out of the stall.) Vulg. Lat. and Syriac.
Others, as Calves of the heard, not that they read instead of (...) Marbeck,
by transposition of a letter, (...) Mibbakar, as might more easily be
conjectured, then what a learned Capel. page 255.
man supposes that the Greek by change of a letter read (...) Meretak, because
(...) Rattok signifies bonds; but that the one took it for a See Chr. a Castro.
Calf taken out of the herd, and put into a stall to be fatted; the other
having rendered the Verb ye shall leap, thought it appliable to stalled Calves,
not while tied in the stall, but such which having been full fed in the stall
were grown lusty and wanton, and would, if let loose, frolic it and leap
about, and therefore thought it more apposite to the scope of that word to
express the other, by rendering Calves loosed from the bonds with which they
were tied in the stall. The same word is used, I Sam. XXVIII.24. and Amos VI.4.
and is doubtless a stall, or place in which Cattle are tied up and fatted,
though in the first place it be rendered by the Greek and Latin, a feeding or a
fed Calf; in the second by both an herd. Nor was it necessary that that
leardned man should have changed a letter to find in the word the signification
of bonds: the word as it is read would as easily afford it, if he had consulted
the Arabic, which is of great affinity with the Hebrew, in which R. Tanchum,
(on that And in his Diction. and Abu Walid in his.
place in the 1. Sam.) notes that (...) Rabko or rabak is a cord, with which
Calves or other Cattle are tied, that they may be fatted, and thence (...)
Marbek, a place wherein they are so tied for that end, a fatting house, a
stall. This by the way for justifying the reading of the word in the Hebrew
Text.

The comparison that is used in the forecited, Jer. L.11. is much like to this
as to the scope, viz. of expressing vigor and lustiness, or alacrity, but there
instead of the word (...) stall in this place, is (...) Dasha where (the Verb
of the same root being there, that here) ours render the expression, ye are
grown fat, (big, or corpulent, as in the Margin) as the Heifer at grass, but
Abu Walid. R. Tanchum, R. D. Kimchi, and R. Solom. and Boot. Animad. l. 3. p.
44.
some think better to render it as a Calf, or Heifer (the word may
indifferently be rendered, Calf or Heifer,) that treads in the floor; (and so
being permitted to eat what he would, grew lusty and wanton.) however the words
there be rendered, and however that expression differ from this here, the
meaning is much alike, and therefore the Chalde there also renders Calves of
the stall, regarding more the sense then the word. And however the words be
here rendered, according to any of those Interpretations that we have mentioned,
the scope will still be the same whether we follow those that render ye shall
leap, or those that render ye shall grow up, be lusty or fat and strong, like
fatted Calves. The scope will, I say, be still the same, viz. to be a promise
of great happiness and prosperity, and security and occasion of joy and
exultation to those spoken to, that they shall not only find healing by the
arising of the Sun of righteousness, but also find occasion of delight and joy,
as Tract. of Idolatry, c. 1. fol. 4. col. 1.
a Talmudical Doctor expresses it. And this prosperity and exultation so
comparatively described do they that by the day here spoken of, understand the
day of Judgment, and to concern all, apply to the joy and happy condition
which then the Saints shall be made partakers of: but certainly that is 1 Cor.
II.9.
such as neither eye has seen nor ear has heard, nor can by the heart of man
be conceived, nor by any similitude taken from earthly enjoyments, or any
expressions of joy, or alacrity in any Creature in this World be set forth.

This comparison may seem more to agree to something that shall in this life be
enjoyed, and so therefore do we apply it to denote the secure and happy
condition, which in that dreadful day of Jerusalem's destruction (which by this
day here we understand) God would of his mercy place those that feared his
Name, and sincerely embraced Christ's Doctrine, in. There is no doubt a promise
to them of safety and deliverance in that dreadful day: and that were great
kindness from God to them, and an evident sign of his love to them and
providencial care over them, if it were only so, and they needed not any thing
more for proof of it then their deliverance from so great and unavoidable
destruction, according to what he says to Baruch, Jerem. XLV.4, 5. That which
I have built will I break down, and that which I have planted will I pluck up,
even this whole Land. And seek thou great things for thy self? seek them
not, for behold I will bring evil upon all flesh, says the Lord: but thy life
will I give unto thee for a prey in all places whither thou go, (as likewise
to Ebed-melech he says, c. XXXIX.16, 17, 18.) And had his promise now to those
that feared his Name, been only so far, as that he would secure them and save
their lives, when so many perished, this had been, we say, evidence enough of
his peculiar love and fatherly compassion to them, by which they might
sufficiently discern between the righteous and the wicked, between whom there
appeared hitherto no difference, in the common opinion: but here is withal an
evident promise of greater things, of joy and prosperity, and well being as
well as being, set out in this comparative expression. But though righteousness
has the promise of the good things which respect this life, as well as those
which respect that which is to come, of outward as well as inward good things,
yet considering the nature of Christ's Kingdom and his promises, we cannot but
think respect to be had here also to that joy and comfort of spirit, and Grot.
peace of conscience, which in the inward man they should find through the
presence and assistance of the holy spirit, the comforter, by which they should
have occasion, according to our Saviors Luke VI.23.
Precept, to rejoice and leap for joy, whatever outward trouble they should
find; this inward joy should be so great as to express it self in vigor and
alacrity, of the outward man also, as it seems here by this comparative
expression intimated, and what they now felt, could not but be to them a pledge
and certain token of finding the like deliverance in that last general
Judgment also, when they shall not be as Calves of the stall, but as Angels,
their bodies being made like Christ's glorious body, and they by seeing God as
he is, be made like unto him, and instated in all fullness of joy for ever,
without any mixture of sorrow: though we do not with many look on that as the
thing primarily here meant (though put in mind of, and given to look up to it,)
but that liberty or happy condition, which in and by that fearful doom of the
Jews which hitherto persecuted them, they should be brought to. And this is not
only described by telling them in what happy plight and condition they shall be
in themselves, but amplified by declaring how it shall be with them in respect
to the wicked who before Lorded it over them, so as that now there shall be an
evident discrimination between them compared one with the other. That follows
in the next verse.

3 And ye shall tread down the wicked: for they shall be ashes under the soles
of your feet, in the day that I shall do this, says the Lord of hosts. And ye
shall tread down the wicked; for they shall be as ashes under the soles of your
feet, etc.] In the foregoing Chapter, ver. 15. the wicked are looked on by men
judging according to the present face of things, as happy men, men set up, and
Jer. VII.10.
delivered to do all those abominations whereby they tempted God, so that they
thought it in vain to serve God, no profit to keep his Ordinances, or to walk
mournfully before him: but see, in that day appointed by God for a
discrimination between them, what a strange alteration shall be. They which
before were kept under shall now tread down those that were so high, and the
proud ones being by that burning day brought to destruction be as ashes (or
dust) under the soles of their feet whom they thought to trample on. By this
expression is manifestly set forth the difference which should then be made by
God betwixt the wicked and the godly, so as that the one should appear to be
owned by him, and by that means not only in a safe but in an happy and
honorable condition, the other rejected by him, and given up to destruction,
and so in the vilest and lowest condition that any can be brought to, which is
expressed by comparing them to dust and ashes under the feet of others.

And it were sufficient thus much to understand by the phrase, as a figurative
expression concerning the difference of their conditions, by which should be
made good what is said, c. III. v. 18. Then shall ye return and discern between
the righteous and the wicked, etc. This is all that they who look on these
words as describing the day of the last Judgment, and what shall then be done,
Dan. XII.2.
when the just shall awake to everlasting life, and the wicked to shame and
everlasting contempt, can require for the making good of the expression, and as
much also as understanding it of the day of his proceeding in judgment against
the Jews at the destruction of Jerusalem, we need require, or Dutch Notes on
ver. 1.
they also who take this day to include all the time between Christ's coming in
the flesh, till his last coming at the day of Judgment. Yet the learned
Grotius thinks that the words literally, and as without any thing of figure in
them understood, may be looked on as made good at that time, inasmuch as after
the destruction of Jerusalem, wherein so many were consumed by fire, such of
the Christians as did after come thither, did really tread on their ashes. And
so some of the ancient Talmud. in Rosh hashana, c. 1. fol. 17. and some^hing
differently reported in ^alkut.
Jews who understood this day of the last day of Judgment, have found out a
device to tell us how this shall then also be literally made good, viz. in that
the bodies of the wicked (ordinary sinners at least) after they have been
tormented in Hell flames for twelve months shall then be consumed to ashes, and
the wind shall scatter them under the soles of the feet of the righteous,
according to what is here said. A pretty invention for such as will believe it
on their authority. But I do not see that the soberer among them do; otherwise
they would probably have made more use of it in their Expositions of this
place. Abarbinel indeed makes mention of it, but tells us that the simple
meaning in these words is to show; That if we see the way of the wicked to
prosper, and the righteous to go mournfully* behold that is it which happens
in this dark World, but when the Lord of Hosts shall arise a Sun and shield in
his divine day, and shall judge all living, he shall give to every one
according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doings. Neither R.
Salomo; nor Aben Ezra, nor David Kimchi mention it at all; the last of these
thus expounding the words, He says, that now the wicked bear rule over you,
but in that time ye shall trample them under the soles of your feet. What he
says ashes, is a proverbial or comparative expression, because he had before
said that the day that should come, should burn them up. It appears then that
he did not think that ashes here ought literally to be meant* but to denote the
vileness and contemptibleness of their condition. Neither find we any mention
of it in R. Tanchum, who though he differ from what we follow, in that he looks
on the things spoken as not yet fulfilled, but to come, yet affords us words
which we may well make use of in our way, which though he put at the end of the
Chapter, yet may here conveniently be put, as having respect to what has been
said already, more then to what follows; and they thus sound, [Consider (says
he) the great wisdom in the expression of the Prophetical revelation, however
it be to be understood, that whereas there is for the righteous a reward in
this World, and in the World to come, and for the wicked on the contrary
punishment in this World, and in the World to come, these passages of Scripture
are fitted to both intentions at once, according to an outward (or literal)
sense and an inward meaning. As to the outward meaning it expresses what shall
be in the days of Messiah, to wit, that punishment shall then encompass the
wicked, and they shall be consumed together and be burnt up, as he says,
Behold the day comes burning as an oven; but as for the righteous of Israel,
the light of divine Providence shall arise upon them, and they shall be healed
by the manifestation of truths, from that grief which they sustained by reason
of their being hidden from them; and that is it which he says, And there shall
arise to you that fear my Name, the Sun of righteousness, and healing in his
wings, etc. But as to the inward meaning, it signifies, as to those that feared
the Lord, and thought on his Name, viz. which sincerely did so after their
knowledge of him and walking in his ways, that there should be to them an
everlasting duration in his presence, which is that writing down of their
righteousness in a book of remembrance before him, and they should be a
peculiar to him among mankind, which is what he says, And they shall be to me,
says the Lord of Hosts, in the day which I shall make (or, when I shall do
this) a peculiar, etc. But as for the wicked, to them shall the day come
burning as an oven, which is the punishment of the World to come, accordingly
as our wise men have declared, as likewise what is said, and the day that
comes shall burn them up. And by Aben Ezra and others note by Sun ver 2. to be
signified, day, the rising of the Sun causing the day.
day he expresses* both happiness and misery, for two different meanings (or
reasons) 1. happiness, in regard of the light which is found in the day after
the darkness of the night, like that clearness of apprehension that shall
accrue to the perfected soul after its separation from gross matter, i. e. the
matter of the body; then misery, by reason of extreme heat, that is found in
the day proportionable to the grievousness of that condition, and the extremity
of the pain thereof, as he likewise compares it to fire, saying, burning like
an oven. And because the wicked shall be burnt with that fire, whereas the
degree of the righteous shall be exalted, he compares them also to ashes under
their feet, saying, and ye shall tread down the wicked, for they shall be ashes
under the soles of your feet. and he explains his comparing happiness to light,
in what he says, And there shall arise to you that fear my Name the Sun of
righteousness, etc. And that is an intellectual light which shall accrue by the
right disposition of the Soul, and the rectification of the deeds, by the
clearness of the shining of which the Soul shall find rest, and be healed from
the pains of the distraction of the senses, and their disturbance (or
struggling, or contrary motions;) that is it which he says, with healing in his
wings. And to like purpose, says Isaiah, c. LVIII.8. Then shall thy light
break forth as the morning, and thy health shall spring forth speedily; and thy
righteousness shall go before thee, the glory of the Lord shall be thy
rereward. We beg of the Lord therefore that he will assist us for attaining to
those inward (or hidden) promises, by hastening the outward (or visible) ones,
that our knowledge and worship of him may be sincere, and that may occasion to
us an increase of appropinquation to his Majesty, or, bring us nearer to him,
and that may be made good to us, which he says, Isaiah XXXV.3, 4. strengthen
ye the weak hands, and confirm the feeble knees, say to them that are of a
fearful heart, Be strong, fear not: behold your God will come with vengeance,
etc.]

These are his words (which if opportunity serve we shall at the end of these
Notes set down in his own language.) I thought convenient to give them at
length, (though perhaps not all to our present purpose) because though he be
out in the main matter of timing things, yet what he says applied to the right
time, will illustrate and confirm what we look on as the truest way of
expounding them, viz. that literally and primarily they describe to us a day
wherein God would proceed in judgment against the Nation of the Jews, for
making a discrimination betwixt the righteous and the wicked, which because it
was at that present, when this, Prophet lived and spoke to them, not so
discernible, they took thence occasion to question his Justice, and spoke stout
words against him, saying, It is vain to serve God, etc. and where is the God
of Judgment? That day it appears c. III.1, 2. should be at, or, by the coming
of Christ, and by his coming is meant (as we have showed) his coming in
Judgment to them at the destruction of Jerusalem. In that our forecited Author
is out, that he thinks Christ not yet come, and so that day not yet come:
whereas we (as the truth is) look on both as already come; and that being
granted, then we say that in that he is right, that here is described a day of
discrimination to be made in this World, as there was then made by the terrible
destruction of the wicked among the unbelieving Jews, and gracious rescue and
deliverance of those that believed in Christ; but withal, that by the
wonderful wisdom of God, that coming of Christ, to judge them then, is so
described, as to set before our eyes another coming of his to judge all the
World at the last day, wherein shall be made a perfect separation between the
righteous and the unrighteous, those being received into joy and glory, and
perfect happiness in the presence of God and the Sun of righteousness, Rev.
XXI.23.
the Lamb that shall be their light; the other adjuged to perpetual burnings
worse then of an oven, or furnace, to everlasting shame, and contempt, and
misery; however in this World they thought themselves happy, set up, and
delivered. The first of these days is here properly described in such
figurative expressions as necessarily suggest to us the condition of the
second, and cannot but put us in mind of it. To either of them is appliable
what is said in the next words.

In the day that I shall do [this] or, (according to the letter, and as the
Interlineary Latin here renders, as likewise See Sy^iac. and Arabic.
some others) in the day that I make, or shall make. The same expression which
we had before, c. III.17. and is an expression also elsewhere used, Psalm.
CXVIII.24.
This is the day which the Lord has made, (...), and that title may well be
applied to such a peculiar, signal, day wherein God has done some Moreh. l. 2.
c. 29.
extraordinary thing either for good or bad, for punishment to his enemies, or
Salvation and deliverance to his. Though, he made all days, yet such a day
might seem of a new make or singular creation, and be singularly attributed to
him as its Maker. And such may well be called the days of Christ's Incarnation,
his preaching the Gospel, his Resurrection, his coming to Judgment against
the Jews of that generation, which all may be (according to what we have before
said) looked as on one day, the day here spoken of, especially the last act
mentioned, and here peculiarly pointed out, wherein was brought a terrible
destruction on his enemies, and wonderful deliverance to his friends; and for
the same reason may the day of the last Judgment be so likewise called, which
(as we said) may well be looked on as here pointed out, though not primarily
meant as some seem to take it with omission of the other. In this day that they
might know what he had said should certainly come to pass, he adds his solemn
confirmation.

Says the Lord of Hosts,] He who has all power in his hand, at whose beck are
all Creatures in Heaven and Earth, as ready Ministers to execute his pleasure,
and therefore can make good whatsoever he says, and who is true in his
sayings, and will not alter the thing that is gone out of his mouth, he has
said it? the mighty, the faithful God has spoken, and who shall disannul it?
he has said it, and it is therefore as certain as if it were already done.
According therefore to what he said, did that day come on the Jews, the People
here spoken to, in the time appointed, and all those things here foretold, come
to pass. And as certainly shall that other day, here (as we said) typified or
intimated, come on all the World in the time appointed for it, because the Lord
of Hosts has though not expressly here said it, yet not obscurely intimated,
and elsewhere more plainly said it; so that all must expect that as certainly
to come on them all, as they have seen the former already to have come on the
Jews. They deny it indeed to have been yet come on them, and would have it to
signify some thing to come not on themselves, but on their enemies, but it is
because they wilfully shut their eyes against that which all the World besides
has seen, and with amazement acknowledge it. A strange thing that that
terrible destruction of their Country and Nation, such as was never yet
paralleled by any thing that happened to any Nation besides, nor can be
outdone by any thing imaginable, but the day of general Judgment and
conflagration of all the World, which it not obscurely represented, should work
no more on them. Our prayer for them therefore must not be in their own words,
that God would hasten the coming of that first day, that so they might with
better preparations expect the second, but that he would open their eyes to
see, and incline their wills to acknowledge, that to have come upon them, which
God here threatened, and so be turned and brought near to Christ; for rejecting
whom was all that came on their Ancestors, and themselves ever since, that so,
what shall come to pass of that last coming of his, may not be so terrible to
them, but he then may appear to them as the Sun of righteousness with healing
in his wings to their Salvation, who before came in flaming fire, as a burning
oven to destroy them, who would not receive and obey II Thessal. I.8.
his Gospel. So shall they prevent by their repentance the evil of that day,
though their Ancestors would not, though by God warned, seek to prevent the
evil of the other: would not, I say; for though God here shows the certainty of
the coming of that day, by saying, says the Lord of Hosts, and he knew what
they would do, yet that it implied a condition of their persisting to do as
they did, and that by their repentance and change of their ways it might have
been prevented, appears by what he adds (not certainly to no purpose) to move
them to it, by bidding them to remember the Law of Moses, etc. and promising to
send Eliah to seek to convert them, lest he should come, etc. to whom if they
would not hearken they should inevitably pull on themselves destruction.

4 Remember ye the law of Moses my servant, which I commanded unto him in Horeb
for all Israel, with the statutes and judgments. Remember ye the Law of Moses
my servant, etc.] Aben Ezra's Gloss on these words is not amiss, Remember the
Law of Moses, etc.] i. e. (says he) keep (or observe) it; for it will teach
you the way of the fear of the Lord, and so when the mentioned day shall come,
ye shall be delivered. But the other Jews go wider, as by considering their
words, we shall perceive. Abarbinel thus gives the coherence of these words
with the former, Forasmuch as the worship (or service of God) which should
bring them to that last true reward at the Resurrection, was the worship
according to the Law and Commandments, and that great rebellion which should
bring to that punishment, which he mentions, is the omission (or rejection) of
the Law, therefore he subjoyns to this which he has said, Remember the Law of
Moses my servant, to declare to them that by means of that they should attain
to the reward, and true prosperity. That in which he errs in this Exposition
is, in that he refers what is here spoken to the day of the Resurrection, which
belongs to that day of Jerusalems Visitation, the evil of which that they might
prevent, or in it find deliverance, he commends to them the remembrance and
observance, in the mean while, of the Law of Moses as a faithful rule, seeing
they should after this have no more Prophets to direct them, till his sending
to them Elias at the approach of that day. Much in like kind errs R. Tanchum,
viz. in mis-timing the things spoken of, saying, That this was given as a
Precept to those of the Captivity, he commanding it to Israel by the hand of
this Prophet, because after him Prophecy should cease from among them, by
reason of the obscurity of the Captivity; and the meaning (says he) is that he
that would attain to the happiness spoken of, and deliverance from punishment,
ought necessarily to obey the commands of the Law, continued (or delivered
down) among them. In which Exposition he passes over the time to which
properly belonged what is spoken, viz. that between this Prophecy, and the
coming of the Eliah here meant, wherein Prophecy (as he observes) should (and
did) cease among them, and so the coming of that day of Judgment and
discrimination; to fasten it on times, which did not begin till after the
completion of this Prophecy, according to its proper and primary meaning, viz.
since the destruction of Jerusalem. David Kimchi is not content to run on in
the like error, but strives to justify it by accusing Christians of error in
misinterpreting the words; his Exposition runs thus, He says, until the day
of Judgment come, remember ye in every generation the Law of Moses my Servant
to do all, or according to all, that is written in it. Which I commanded unto
him in Horeb, i. e. as I commanded him in Horeb, not according to the S^e Porta
Mosis, Not. Misc^l. c. 8. p. 342.
words of the Christians, which say that it was given for a time according to
the literal sense, but an Interpreter ( Jesus) came and interpreted it
spiritually; this Text is an answer to them. His meaning seems this, That here
is a command that till the last day of Judgment they should precisely keep the
Law of Moses, according to all that was written in it, and according to the
letter of what was written, just as it was given to him and from him to them,
and that therefore the words refute the Christians who say, that the Law was to
endure but for a time, according to the literal meaning of it, but that the
literal meaning was to yield to a spiritual meaning according to which Christ
interpreted it. But we say that this man frames an argument on false grounds,
and that the text makes not against us, as he would have it, and has in it an
answer to, and refutation of them, not of us, who embrace them, both according
to the letter, from which he departs, and the true meaning of them, which he
perverts. First, in that he says that here is a command that they should
remember the Law of Moses in every generation until the day of the last
Judgment. If he mean (as manifestly he does) the day of the last Judgment, it
is manifest that what is spoken has not primarily respect to that, but to that
day of Gods National Judgment to be executed on the Jews, continuing in
obstinate rebellion against him? that was the day of the Lord in this Chapter
of this Prophecy, and the foregoing, properly spoken of, as we have showed,
though so described as to represent to us, and necessarily to put us in mind of
the last general Judgment too. Besides, the words are indefinitly spoken
without referring to any set time: if we will enquire till what time they may
seem to bind; that will most conveniently be answered to, from the next
following words, viz. till he send Eliah the Prophet before the coming of the
day of the Lord; warning, that till his coming they should look to the Law of
Moses as their Director. So that hence is no evident ground from which to
conclude the perpetuity of the Law, against such as should deny it. That it
should last in force till that day, is as much as can from these words be
concluded, and that which our Savior says, The Law and the Prophets were
until John, since that time the Kingdom of God is preached, Luke XVI.16.
Farther, in that he says, according to all that is written in it, and as I
commanded him in Horeb; meaning that every thing in the Law was just as it is
written in it, and every thing punctually in that manner, and according to the
letter as it was commanded, is his gloss; whereas in the Text it is only (...),
which I commanded, and not (...) as; which though in it self it may seem to
make no great difference, yet according to his meaning it manifestly does,
according to what he adds, not according to what the Christians say, that it (
i. e. the Law) was given for a time only to be observed, according to the
letter (as it sounds) but that Jesus came and interpreted it spiritually, and
so hereafter it were to be observed or understood according to that spiritual,
and not its literal meaning. For answer to all this we might bid him only to
clear himself, by answering to what is said, Jer. XXXI.31, 32. Behold the days
come, says the Lord, that I will make a new Covenant with the house of Israel,
and with the house of Judah, not according to the Covenant which I made with
their Fathers, etc. whence we may conclude with the Apostle, Heb. VIII.8. that
in that he says a new Covenant, it is manifest that the first was to be made
old, that the new might take place. But to deal more distinctly with him; in
that he finds fault with the words of the Christians, let him take from Christ
himself what they say, think not that I am come to destroy the Law, and the
Prophets, I am not come to destroy but to fulfill. For verily I say unto you,
till Heaven and Earth pass, one jot, or one title shall in no wise pass from
the Law till all be fulfilled. Mat. V.17, 18. What is here spoken any way
derogatoty to the Law of Moses? is not here the perpetuity of the Law as
plainly asserted, as the Rabbin himself could assert it, but then his gloss
(...) all just as it is written, is not to be admitted as if every thing were
still so to be observed as at first it was, and just as it was given to Moses;
as if all things in it were of like moment and equally essential: for in it
were diverse things which were to be fulfilled, and being fulfilled, could
require no farther observance; such were those ceremonious parts of it, which
were types and shadows, and could not but by the coming of the substance, which
was Christ, have an end put to them, and necessarily be done away, not by being
mean while violated but completed. The other more substantial parts, viz. the
moral precepts are so far from being abrogated by him, as that being purged
from all those corrupt glosses, and Traditions of the Jews, by which they were
almost made void and of none effect, they have not only their true meaning and
extent given them, but are backed and confirmed anew by his authority, and
commended to the perpetual observance of all his followers. And for what he
looks on as a fault to be objected; that we affirm that Christ interpreted the
Law spiritually, as if it were no more literally to be understood, I know not
what he would make to be the force of his objection, but to conclude against
themselves that they are carnal, and so would not have any thing of the Law so
understood as to cross their carnal minds, or to require any more then the
carnal performances of the outward man, which to think, appears to have been
from of old their error, and such as they are willing still to continue in. For
the Law is spiritual, Romans VII.14. and always so was; that which made it not
to be so understood, and not to have answerable effects, was the carnality of
men, not the fault of the Law. If Christ vindicated it from the wrong by them
done to it by their gross and false understandings, and require the obedience
of the inward as well as outward man, shall that be accounted an injury to it,
or a destroying of it? if he mean that we say that the former types and shadows
directed to more then was by them outwardly performed, and that what was by
them really meant, was by and in him completed, and fulfilled in a more
excellent manner, when he appeared to put away sin by the Heb. IX.26.
Sacrifice of Himself, and so to make all other Sacrifices useless, and by the
sprinkling of his Blood to put an end to such other carnal ordinances as were
imposed on them till the Ejusd. V.10.
time of reformation only; if I say by what he calls interpreting the law
spiritually, he means any of these things; he speaks of that which was a
restoring the Law to its true meaning, and a perfecting, not a violating of it:
so that in these words is no answer (as he tells us it is) against any thing
that Christians say, but they show of him, and those of his Religion, that they
themselves do not duly remember the Law of Moses which God commanded by him,
nor consider or understand aright what that commanded them. If they would duly
look into it, and apply the Prophecies thereof to what they concerned and the
types thereof to what was signified by them, they could not but perceive that
by them they were directed to Christ, and belief in him against whom they now
urge them. This were sufficient for answer to him; even the bare setting down
the words of Christ, and his Apostles, which show that they taught nothing
derogatory to the Law of Moses, or by which they might be thought to violate
any command, given either here or elsewhere for due observance of it; if there
were here any occasion given to him of cavilling in that kind against them: but
we look on this, which by occasion of his objection we have hitherto said as a
mere digression, there being (however he has sought occasion) no occasion, as
we have already intimated by the words rightly understood, given to him, as
will appear by the scope of them duly considered, which we may in brief thus
sum up. The Lord having by this Prophet reprooved the Jews for many sins,
both by the Priests and People committed wherein they showed great contempt or
neglect of the Law by Moses given unto them, for which he delayed yet to punish
them, or did but lightly punish them, giving them time to repent, and for that
they for the generality, or most of them took thence occasion rather to applaud
themselves in their wicked courses, then to repent of them, and to speak stout
words against him, as if he delighted in sinners and their ways, and were not
a God of Judgment, nor had respect to them that served him, and therefore it
were in vain to serve him, and having told them that he would in due time make
it manifest, that he took all the while due notice of what they wickedly did
and said, and would for that end send both his Messenger to prepare the way
before him, and the Lord the Messenger of the Covenant, who should bring all
their doings to an exact trial, and so he would come near to them in Judgment,
and bring on them such a day of discrimination betwixt the righteous and the
wicked, wherein the wicked among them should be utterly destroyed, and the
godly (who hitherto seemed to be neglected) find Salvation and deliverance; and
to move them therefore to repentance, having described the terror of that day;
does here, as it were, warn them, that if this would not move them they should
not, as they had hitherto had, have any more Prophets to call on them, but be
left only to that Law, which they had hitherto so much neglected, for their
Director; which was indeed a sufficient Director to them, and had they duly
hearkened to it, as they ought, they had not hitherto had such need of other
Prophets to call upon them, and mind them of their duty. But now seeing he has
resolved to send them no more in that kind, till he send his Messenger, whom he
calls Eliah, to prepare the way before him at the approach of that great day of
discrimination which he has threatened, he urges on them a due remembrance of
that Law, and serious heed, and observance of all commanded in it, as the only
way whereby to prepare them for the receiving of his Eliah, that they might be
converted by him, and so prevent the evil of that day, wherein he would smite
with a curse those that did not prepare then to meet him.

This being plainly the intent of the words, to raise from them a question
concerning the perpetuity of the Law, or hence to think to prove it in all
parts unalterable, is quite besides the purpose. As they were given they are
manifestly a command to them of that time to an observation of all the parts
thereof, and the meaning of them is evident; thus: Look not henceforth for an
ordinary or continued succession of Prophets, as you hitherto have had; but
that you may prepare your selves for meeting the Lord in that day by Malachi
told you of, remember duly the Law of Moses, with the Statutes and Judgments
thereof; take that for your rule and direction, whereby to square your lives
and actions. Necessary was it that they should remember and duly attend to
that, all of them; for though it was delivered to them by the hand of Moses the
Servant of God, and therefore called his Law, yet was it by God himself
commanded unto him for all Israel, all of it with all the Statutes and
Judgments therein contained, all the parts thereof. By the Law Drus. Vatab. 4o
and 8o. Riber. etc.
some will have meant the moral precepts of the Law, by Statutes the
ceremonial, by Judgments the Judicial. Abarbinel (as the Jews commonly) by
(...) Chukkim, Statutes, will have to be understood such things for which no
other reason is to be given, but Gods command, by (...) Mishpatim, Judgments,
such the reason of which was manifest. But without farther enquiry into the
notion of the words we take to be in the words as here put, all the parts of
the Law whatsoever, and of what nature soever, even every jot and title thereof
(as our Savior speaks) to be comprehended, inasmuch as every one of them was
then (when this was spoken) in force, not any of them completed by having had
its due end. And therefore by being bid to remember them, they are told what
was a duty necessarily incumbent on them. For all of them were commanded to all
Israel, and they ought to observe all, and not forget or neglect any of them,
and as this was a duty necessary to them, so was it a thing that would be
greatly beneficial to them. So that it was the great kindness of God to call
upon them to remember that which he had made formerly their duty, and might in
justice without farther delay, or warning have proceeded in Judgment against
them for their many neglects and breaches of it, which by this Prophet he has
convinced them guilty of. The benefits of remembering of it, would have been the
rectifying of them in their ways, which they had greatly perverted, the
restraining them from, and warning them to repent of, those many sins, which he
has convinced them to be guilty of, whereby they had greatly provoked him as
he has showed, and to set them in such ways, wherein walking both they and
their services should be accepted by him: and farther, to instruct them,
concerning the Lord, the Messiah, whose coming he has here warned them of, and
how to receive him, and his Messenger that he would send to prepare the way
before him. And this especially Munster, and see Chr. a Castro.
some will have to be understood as that for which he would have them remember
the Law of Moses. That indeed did both point him out before hand in many types
and figures, and expressly command obedience to him, when he should come, as
Deuteronomy. XVIII.15. as that place is cited by S. Peter, and showed to be meant of
him, Act. II.22. and our Savior himself tells us that Moses wrote so plainly of
him, that if they had believed Moses, they would have believed him. And that
the cause that they believed not his words, was because they believed not the
writings of Moses, Joh. V.46, 47. The Law, (with which it may not be amiss,
with Calv.
some, to take in the Prophets as appendages for exposition thereof, as our
Savior joins them, They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them, Luke
XVI.29.) in these and other regards was plainly a Schoolmaster (as S. Paul
calls it) which attended to, would have brought them to Christ. And so the
remembering of it would have been eminently beneficial to them. But we look not
on this only (though of chief regard and including the rest) as that wherein it
would have been advantageous to them to have remembered the Law of Moses, but
with this on all the other mentioned. By so doing they should have been so
prepared for the coming of the day of the Lord so often before, and immediately
again spoken of, that it should not have for destruction come upon them: and
their not remembering it would (as in the event manifestly it did) bring it with
all its dreadful effects on them. It was then Gods great kindness to call on
them to remember it for their own good. Yet is not that the utmost of his
loving kindness. That they may see his mercies never cease, where men do not
obstinately reject them, and forsake them, though they may not expect any more
Prophets of an ordinary rank to warn them when they forget the Law, by
observing which they should prevent the terrors of his day; yet that they may
not have any excuse, or pretense at all to say that it came on them unawares,
he promises hard before the coming thereof, an extraordinary one, whom he
calls Eliah, to endeavor even then to convert them if they would be converted.
So follows it in the next verse.

5 Behold I will send you Elijah the Prophet, before the coming of the great
and dreadful day of the Lord. Behold I will send you Eliah the Prophet, etc.]
As to the connection of these words with the former in such manner as we have
said, Kimchi thus notes. Although I warn you to have recourse to the Law of
Moses in every generation, yet notwithstanding for your good I will send to you
Eliah the Prophet. But concerning the person, who is here meant by Eliah, is no
small controversy and difference betwixt Expositors. The Jews agree not among
themselves; the forementioned Kimchi with several others of them, think it
meant of that Eliah himself in person who lived and prophesied in the time of
Ahab King of Israel, I Kings XVII. etc. The meaning, says he, is, That he will
put again his soul which ascended into Heaven, into a body which shall be created
like his first body, because his first body turned to earth at his Ascension,
every Element to its like element; and after that he shall cause him to live in
his body, he shall send him to Israel before the day of Judgment; which is the
great and dreadful day of the Lord, and he shall warn both Fathers and
children together, to turn with all their heart unto the Lord, and they that
turn shall be delivered from the day of Judgment, as he says, etc. Aben Ezra
seems to be of the same opinion, but to think that Eliah continued still in the
same body, and to believe that he appeared sometimes in the days of their holy
wisemen, and prays God to hasten the time of his coming. So See Not. in Porta
Mosis, c. 6. p. 218. etc.
others of them. Abarbinel here thinks the same as to his person, though not
determining whether he shall come in a new raised body, or in his old body,
which he never put off, God, says he, shows them that the first which shall
arise at the Resurrection shall be Eliah the Prophet, whether he shall rise as
others do, if his body were consumed, when he was taken up, as some of the
modern Doctors affirm, or whether he miraculously remain in his body and soul
in the earthly Paradise, as our wise men thought, and that God will send him,
before the great and dreadful day of the Lord come, which is the day of
judgment for all liveing. All these think that here is a promise of sending
Eliah (the old Elijah) in person. Others of them of no less authority, think it
not necessarily to be so meant, but of sending some other great Prophet, who
because he should be like to Eliah in dignity, and knowledge, is called by his
name, as appears by what R. Tanchum notes on this place, whose words are in
their own language, partly set down in the Miscellaneous Notes in the book
called Porta Mosis, c. VI. p. 219. and translated into English, sound thus,
This without doubt, is a promise, that there should appear a Prophet in Israel
a little before the time of the appearance of the Messiah, and some of the
learned men do think that he is Elijah the Tishbite himself, and that is the
opinion that is found in most of the allegorical Expositions; others think it
meant that he should be some great Prophet like unto him in degree, and
occupying his place as for what concerns the knowledge of God, and the making
manifest of his name, and therefore called by the name of Eliah. So expressly
declares that eminent great Doctor Rabbi Moses, the son of Maimon viz. Tract.
Melakim cap. ult.
at the end of his great juridical work called Mishneh Torah (or the repetition
of the Law) and perhaps according to this opinion may he be understood to be
Messiah the son of Joseph, as he says also. These words seem to intimate that
that should be said by Maimonides in that place. But I do not find any such
thing in him there at all, either in any printed Copies or Manuscripts, which I
have seen. He mentions indeed in the preceding Chapter there, two Messiahs,
but the first he says was David who delivered Israel from their enemies, and
the second should be of the posterity of David who should save Israel from the
hands of the children of Esau (the Romans he means) according to that obstinate
error of theirs, expecting that Christ should come to restore a temporal
Kingdom to them, and destroy their enemies: but of a Messiah the son of Joseph
(by whom what they mean has been elsewhere shown, viz. such a one as should be
of the posterity of Joseph, and coming before the Messiah, the Son of David,
undergo all the suffering part of such things as are in Scripture spoken of
Messiah, and leave only the glorious, and triumphant part alone for the Son of
David,) I find not in him any mention.] R. Tanchum goes on and says, That here
is said the same that was above said, c. III.1. Behold I send my Messenger, and
he shall prepare the way before me, and that what he there says, And the Lord
whom ye seek shall suddenly come to his Temple, even the Messenger of the
Covenant, etc. is meant no doubt of the King Messiah: may he quickly be
revealed. But the truth of the matter as to these promises will be distinctly
known by their manifestation (or fulfilling.) For there is none that has any
certain Tradition concerning them, but every one speaks according to what
appears to him, and preponderates with him among the Interpretations of the
Texts of Scripture, as Melacim c. 2. 2.
there also the same Moses the Son of Maimon declares. Out of these words of
his appears that among them is this difference, that some understand Eliah in
person to be here spoken of, others not so, but some great Prophet in degree
and dignity like him. The same difference and doubt seems anciently to have
been among their Ancestors, as appears by their questioning John Baptist,
whether he were the Messiah, or Elias, or that Prophet, Joh. I.19, 20, 21. for
what can those words more probably seem to mean, then whether he were Eliah in
person, or that Prophet which was prophesied of, called by the name of Eliah.
And we may think that the Scribes mostly thought that it should be Eliah in
person, Matt. XVII.10. This difference and doubt he thinks cannot be determined
but by the event and fulfilling of the things themselves: no man (says Ibid.
Maimonides) can know how they should be, till they be fulfilled. This
therefore that we except against them for, is, why since they have been
fulfilled, the things concerning the Messenger, and See Notes on chapter III.1.
Eliah, in John Baptist, the things concerning the Lord, spoken of, in Christ,
they will not yet for all such demonstrations by the performance of their
offices, acknowledge them; but rejecting them, and shutting their eyes against
what has been already fulfilled, look on them as things not fulfilled, and
expect both Eliah and the Messiah; as here promised, yet to come. But perhaps
they will here be ready to retort, and ask why then do Christians yet dissent
among themselves, concerning the Exposition of this Prophecy, some of them
affirming that here is meant Eliah in person, and that he is yet to come, as
well as any Jews do? It is to be confessed that here is a wider difference
betwixt Christians then might be wished there were, though on other grounds
then the Jews go. The Jews whether they understand it of Eliah in person, or
any other great Prophet set forth by his name, all drive at this end to prove
that the Messiah is not yet come, because no such Prophet has yet appeared:
against whom we need not add to what has been said on c. III. v. 1. Their not
acknowledging them is no proof that they are not both long since come. The
Christians all in this agreeing that the Messiah or Christ is already come a
first time, and shall at the end of the World come a second time, and in this
also that John Baptist was the promised Messenger sent before him at his first
coming, and that he was deservedly called Elias, yet in this differ, that some
of them do not think that the Elias here mentioned is the same with the
Messenger before promised, c. III.1. nor the same coming of Christ spoken of,
that there: but that there, is to be understood his first coming, and John
Baptist his forerunner at that, but here his second coming to Judgment, and,
as Mr Mede thinks, either Eliah in person, or some other called by that name,
who shall come before him at that: Whereas others rightly take the Eliah here
mentioned to be the same with the Messenger there promised to be sent, viz.
John Baptist, and in both places the same coming of Christ to be meant, viz.
that usually called his first coming. And this we say is manifestly the truth.
It appears by what is spoken by Christ himself in the Gospel, Mat. XVII.9. etc.
and Marc. IX.11. etc. in the story of his Transfiguration, where the Disciples,
Peter, and James, and John, which he took up into the Mountain with him, after
they had heard what Moses and Elias talked with him (probably concerning the
fulfilling of the Prophecies in this Chapter of Malachi mentioned, concerning
the approach of the great and dreadful day of the Lord, wherein he should
destroy his wicked obstinate enemies, the unbelieving Jews, and deliver his
faithful Servants that believed in him, out of that destruction, before which
it is here said that he would send Elias to forewarn them of it, and to preach
repentance for the averting of it, whom they did not discern to be yet As Dr
Hammond proves on Mat. XVII. note a, and Luke IX. note b, and 2 Pet. I. note c.
come;) asked him, why then say the Scribes that Elias must first come, and
Jesus answered and said unto them, Elias truly shall first come, (or comes
first) and shall restore all things: But I say unto you, that Elias is come
already, and they knew him not (or acknowledged him not) but have done unto him
whatsoever they listed, etc. These words, I say, make it so plain that the
Elias here meant was then already come, and that no other for fulfilling this
Prophecy, on which that saying of the Scribes (or Doctors of the Law among the
Jews) was grounded, was to be expected before the coming of the great and
dreadful day of the Lord, that there seems to be no place for questioning it.
Yet do they, who would have Elias that ancient Prophet to be here meant, take
hence their chief argument to prove that he here spoken of is not yet come, and
therefore that the day here mentioned is likewise to be understood of the day
of the last Judgment, before which they expect he shall come, because, say
they, it is said in the future, Elias truly shall first come, and restore all
things, as if it were a thing yet to come, but surely the following words, But
I say unto you that Elias is already come, make it evident that that
Interpretation cannot be put on the former, so as to infer from them, that
Elias is not yet come, but that they must be expounded thus, It was truly said,
Elias shall come, etc. or, It is true that Elias should first come (or was
first to come:) and so it appears the Disciples understood it, of whom it is
said, verse. 13. Then the Disciples understood that he spoke to them of John the
Baptist, which is a plain proof that they, that understand it of any other,
understand it not aright. They, though the opinion be ancient, and have many
both of note and learning which follow it, (for what end it will not be to our
purpose to examine,) may seem (as a great learned Grot. on Mat. XVII.10.
man observes) to have taken it rather from some Tradition, that they had heard
from the Jews, then to have warrant from the Scripture, or any other good
ground for it. Sure the words of our Savior in the place cited, make not for
them, but evidently against them, while he concludes all, with affirming that
that Elias, which they spoke of, was already come, not saying that another was
to be expected, though one were already come. To the same purpose, as clearly
makes what he elsewhere says, concerning John Baptist, Matthew XI.10. this is
he of whom it is written, behold I send my Messenger before thy face which
shall prepare thy way before thee, and verse. 14. And if ye will receive it (if
ye will receive and believe the truth) this is Elias which was to come, ((...))
spoken there as of the future as well as in the forementioned words, which
shall come, to show that he was when the Prophet Malachi spoke, to come
afterward, not that when our Savior spoke he was yet to come: he plainly
shows, by saying thus, that he was already come. By all this our Savior
makes it manifest, that all that could in Malachi be interpreted of Elias was
made good in John Baptist, Luke I.17.
who came in the spirit and power of Elias, and was to be understood of him
alone, as much as if he had in express words said, that he only was the Elias,
that was to come, and they were not by virtue of Malachi's Prophecy, or any
other, to look for another. And of him because he is here styled a Prophet,
does he say, that he was more then a Prophet, Matt. XI.9. yea much more, Luke
VII.26. for (says he) verse. 28. I say unto you among those that are born of
women there is not a greater Prophet then John the Baptist. And in Luke I.76.
Zacharias says of him that he should be called the Prophet of the Highest, and
all the People were persuaded that he was so, Luke XX.6. his denying himself to
be that Prophet, who the People asked him if he were he, John I.21. shows only
that they were mistaken in their conceit, concerning that Prophet which they
asked after, as likewise they were in their question concerning Elias, which
likewise he denied himself to be, viz. Elias in person as they expected, but
not that he was he that is here called Elijah the Prophet.

Here the Greek Version instead of Prophet puts the Epithet of Tishbite, which
was the appellation of the Prophet Elijah of old, and by that Rib. Tirin.
they who would here have it to be understood of him in person, strengthen
their opinion: but sure that adds no strength to it, besides that this is a
manifest change of the word in the Original, which ought to be of greatest
authority, there is no doubt but that by the same reason, and Rainoldus de lib.
Apocr. praelect. 97. p. 1199
figurative way of speaking, he may as well be called Elijah the Tishbite, as
Elijah the Prophet, that only showing the Country of that Prophet, as the
other word his office; if he deserved to be called Eliah the Prophet, he
deserved to be called Eliah the Tishbite. For that Eliah the Prophet whose name
because he came in his spirit and power he was called by, was a Tishbite: in
this there is nothing of force to prove that here, and in the third Chapter,
verse. 1. are meant two different Eliahs. We conclude therefore from the express
words of our Savior, that he that is meant here by Eliah is John the Baptist
and no other, and remit the Reader for what is of him affirmed, and concerns us
to know more of what is said of his person, to what has been spoken on Chap.
III.1. That which is added in this verse concerns the time of his coming, viz.
that he should be sent before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the
Lord. That day is the same which is spoken of, chap. III.2. called there the
day of his coming and his appearing, and verse. 17. the day which the Lord shall
make (or according to our Translation) the day wherein he shall make up his
jewels, and in this Chapter ver. I. the day which shall come burning as an
oven, and shall burn up the wicked as stubble, but wherein to those that fear
the name of the Lord, the Sun of righteousness shall arise with healing in his
wings, and again ver. III. the day which the Lord should make, or wherein he
should do what he had spoken; so signal a day as that it may above others be
called S^e on ver. 3. out of Moreh l. 2. c. 29*
the day of the Lord, as showing more of his power and presence, then ordinary
days, though all his. And that day we look upon (as we have before showed) to
be that day or time which should end in the dreadful destruction of Jerusalem,
so comprehending under it (as we have said on chapter III.2.) all the time from
Christ's first beginning to preach to the Jews to that destruction of them and
their City. And all this may be called the day of his first coming, to
distinguish it from that which is usually called his second coming, viz. his
coming at the last day to judge all the World. Otherwise if we will more nicely
distinguish and confine the day of his first coming to his birth, and the
second to his coming at the day of doom to judge the World, this will be to be
accounted a middle day or coming between those two (as the learned Dr Hammond
calls it on Mat. XXIV. ver. 3. and Luke IX.31.) for vengeance on his enemies,
and deliverance of his Servants.

But it may seem convenient to comprehend, as we said, all that time from his
first manifestation till his executing that fearful National Judgment on the
Jews, under one notion of his first coming. For though that which makes these
titles of great and dreadful is most signally appliable to that day of
vengeance; yet all along in his preaching and foretelling, and threatening them
with that doom as certain to come, if they continued obstinate and would not
repent, as if it were already present, is that which may deservedly denominate
this whole time, a great and dreadful day to them. John the Baptists words,
wherein he describes it, and forewarns of it, found no less, as Mat. III.2.
where he begins his preaching with Repent ye, for the Kingdom of God is at
hand, and ver. 7. O generation of Vipers, who has warned you to flee from the
wrath to come, and ver. 10. Now the axe is laid to the root of the trees,
therefore every tree which brings not forth good fruit is hewn down and cast
into the fire, and ver. 12. where he tells them of Christ's coming with his fan
in hand. The day or time thus described is a day of terror, and that so
described is the day of Christ's first coming then already begun. Our Saviors
own preaching and behavior while he was on Earth was likewise very troublesome
to the unbelieving Priests, Scribes, and Pharisees; their quiet by both he
disturbes by continual minding them of, and sharply reproving them for, their
sins and hypocrisy, and denouncing to them many sad woes for them with severest
threats, ye Serpents, ye generation of Vipers, how can ye escape the damnation
of Hell, Matt. XXIII.33. and telling them Behold your house is left unto you
desolate, ver. 38. i. e. the Dr Hammonds Paraph.
desolation of your Temple, City, and Nation is irreversibly at hand, as
certainly shall it be as if it were already done. Again, when of that stately
admired frame of their Temple, which his Disciples showed him as a thing to be
wondered at, he says, Verily I say unto you there shall not be left one stone
upon another which shall not be thrown down, Matt. XXIV.2. and likewise that
the days should come upon Jerusalem, that her enemies should cast a trench
about her, and compass her round, and keep her in on every side; and should lay
her even with the ground, and her children within her, and should not leave in
he^ one stone upon another, because she knew not the day of her visitation, i.
e. because she would not repent upon all his calls, Luke XIX.43, 44. and that
generation he says should not pass till all these things were fulfilled, Mat.
XXIV.34. and Luke XXI.32. within the the life time of some that there were then
alive all that he said should be certainly fulfilled. That time in which these
and like dreadful things were spoken by him who spoke as one having authority,
as the People acknowledged, Mat. VII.29. the Lord himself then on Earth, whose
words were as things done, may well be called a great and dreadful day of the
Lord, at least an awful day, or day to be feared (as Drus.
some would have it rather rendered,) how much more when we shall look on it as
concluded before that generation was passed away, within a matter of 40. years,
Dr Hammond on Mar. XIII.30. and Luke XXI.32.
with the fearful and total destruction of Jerusalem? so that comprehending
all that time, both of Christ's being on Earth, come in the flesh, wherein he
threatened such destruction to the Jews, and of his coming in that short space
after his leaving the Earth, to execute what he had threatened under the name of
his first coming, we say that by the day here called the great and dreadful
day of the Lord, that is meant. If any shall so distinguish the parts of this
time as to call the time of his being on Earth, the day of his first coming,
and the destruction of Jerusalem, a distinct coming from it; that which we say
is, that by the great and dreadful day here meant, seems chiefly to be
understood that of Jerusalems destruction, though we think it better to join
both these together under the notion of one day, as we have said, and that
which we would evince is, that it is not literally and primarily meant of the
day of the last Judgment, as diverse would have it, especially they who will
have by Elias to be meant Elias in person; the one opinion depends much on the
other. A chief argument of such of them as are Christians, seems that taken
from the Epithet it self, given to this day, because it is called a dreadful
day, Bellarm. de Romano Pontifice, l. 3. c. 6. And see Chr. a Castro, and
Ribera.
which they say is proper to the day of the last Judgment, whereas the day of
his first coming is not so called, but an acceptable time and day of Salvation.
But sure, by what has been already said, it appears that the day of his first
coming taken as reaching to the destruction of Jerusalem (as we do take it) may
well so be called, and was indeed so.

To the same purpose may be added to what has been said, that which Simeon
said unto Mary when she presented Jesus in the Temple, concerning him, Behold
this Child is set for the fall and rising again of many in Israel, Luke II.34.
that is, as it is well and appositly to our purpose paraphrased by the learned
Dr Hammond, is appointed by God to be a means of bringing punishment and ruin
upon all obdurate impenitents, and on the other side to redeem, restore, and
recover those that will be wrought upon by him. He that was a chief corner
stone, elect and precious, precious indeed to those that believed, was at once
unto the disobedient a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offense, I Pet. II.6,
7, 8. such a stone as whosoever should fall on should be broken, but on
whomsoever it should fall, it should grind him to powder, Mat. XXI.44. and
whereas Bell. ibid. See Joh. III.17. and XII.47.
they urge in confirmation of their opinion, that Christ at his first coming
came not to judge but to be judged, not to destroy but to save, we may oppose
what he says, Joh. IX.39. for judgment am I come into this World, so as to
show that that cannot be so understood, as to contradict this. And that place
of Joh. XII.47. where he says he came not to judge the World, may, as Dr
Hammond observes, be well understood, that he came not to accuse; but certain
it is that the Father committed all Judgment to the Son, and gave him
authority to execute Judgment, Joh. V.22, 27. and that as he came for
Judgment into the World, so he did execute it being come, both by his
preaching while he was among men, laying the axe to the root of the tree, and
severely putting home the blow at the signal destruction of the unbelieving
obstinate Jews, in few years after his departure out of the World, when they
who before refused to be judged by him, and to be convinced by his preaching,
of their evil ways, and to repent of them, that so judging themselves they
might have prevented the farther judgment of the Lord, and thought to prevent
that, by judging him, and crucifying him, did by their obstinacy pull it on
themselves, and felt the sad effects in so dreadful a manner in that particular
Judgment on that Nation, that nothing but that fearful perdition of the whole
World expected at the last day, can be imagined more terrible: so that that
destruction of theirs being comprehended under the day of his first coming (in
the way that we have said,) makes it deservedly called, the great and dreadful
day of the Lord, as well as the last day of his coming to the general
Judgment may be so called. And whereas, as they say, that the day of his first
coming is called an acceptable day, a day of Salvation, it is to be considered
to whom it was so, viz. to such as received him with good will as a Savior,
believed in him, and obeyed him, but to others it was far otherwise, a day
burning as an oven to destroy them. In like manner also may that day of the
future Judgment be termed, and shall be to the righteous, a day of Salvation,
a welcome day, a day longed for by them, and in respect to the certain
expectation of which they hold up their heads against all the pressures and
persecutions, which from ungodly men they suffer before hand, and are by the
Apostle bid to comfort one another with those words, I Thessal. IV.18. so that
in these Epithetes here put to the day here spoken of, there is nothing which
makes why it may not be attributed as well to the one as to the other, to that
of Christ's first coming, as that of his second: and the other circumstances
make it evident that it ought to be understood primarily here of the first,
however appliable to the second.

In the Prophet Joel, c. II.31. we read of a day of the Lord described in the
very same terms, and concerning the day designed thereby is much the like
difference of opinions, as here. Rainold. de lib. Apocryphis prael. 95. and
Cameron on Matt. XVII.11.
But S. Peter in Acts II.20. manifestly interprets that also of the day of
Christ's first coming, and so from all which has been said we conclude that by
the great and dreadful day, before the coming of which the Lord bids them here
take notice that he will send Elijah the Prophet, is to be understood the day
of Christ's first coming, which includes his coming in Judgment particularly,
against the Nation of the Jews, and ended in the destruction of the unbelievers
amongst them and of their City, before which John the Baptist, designed here by
the name and title of Elijah the Prophet, was according to this Prophecy sent;
and not of his coming to execute the general Judgment on the whole World, at
the day of doom, which shall end in the destruction of the whole, farther then
as this was a Ibid.
type of that, before which that he will send an harbinger, as he did before
this, is but the conjecture of Meads discourse on Mar. I.14. etc.
those that affirm it, and that for which there is not from these words any
evident proof.

That which has made me so long to insist on the clearing of this Exposition,
even to tediousness, is because the expounding the words otherwise, and as of a
thing yet to come, would be to give up to the Jews an argument, which ought not
to be given up to them. For if it be granted to them that Elijah in person be
to be expected before the coming of Christ, here spoken of, and that the day
here spoken of be not yet come, they will think they have reason to say (as
they obstinately do) that the true Messiah is not yet come, and yet to expect
another Christ as well as another Messenger; whereas if it be made evident (as
we suppose it is) that that Elijah here foretold of, is already come, and the
day here meant, also come, they can have nothing more but mere obstinacy to
pretend why they should not believe in Christ, and forsake that error received
from their Fathers.

Farther arguments for confirming what we have said, the following words also
afford, as we shall see in taking them in their order; before we pass to which
we may take notice of the Greek rendering the word (...) hannora, which other
Translations render terrible, dreadful or awful by (...), as likewise in Joel
II.11, 38, illustrious or notable, as ours translate Act. II.20. where that
second place of Joel is cited, which has made Schind. Lex. in (...) and Capel.
Crit. p. 60. l. 2.
some to think that they read in the Copy, that they followed, (...) Hannir^ah,
from (...) to see; whereas (...) is from (...) yare, to fear: but another
learned L. de Dieu, on Act. II.20.
man is so far from their opinion, as that he thinks that the Greek word
mentioned is not there to be taken in its ordinary signification of illustrious
or notable, but rather for terrible, and so likewise to have that notion in the
title of Antiochus Epiphanes, who he thinks was not called so much illustrious
as terrible. But this neither makes much for or against our purpose in giving
the meaning. To the day spoken of may well agree, either of those Epithetes: it
was terrible and dreadful, and therefore notable, and perhaps there was
anciently that communication of significations between those roots in the
Hebrew as to justify both.

6 And he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of
the children to their fathers, lest I come and smite the earth with a curse.
And he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of
the children to their fathers, etc.] As in the former verse we had him whom God
in mercy would send to them for preventing their utter destruction, described
by his title of Eliah the Prophet, and by the time of his coming, before the
coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord, so in this we have him
described by his office, viz. that he should turn the hearts of the father^ to
the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers, to which are
added the good effects which should be produced by his performance of that
office, viz. the preventing of Gods coming and smiting the Earth with a curse.
These words are referred to by the Angel, Luke I.16, 17. with a farther
explication of them, and applied to John the Baptist thus, and many of the
children of Israel shall he turn unto the Lord their God, and he shall go
before him in the spirit, and power of Elias, to turn the hearts of the fathers
to the children, and the disobedient to the wisdom of the just, to make ready a
People prepared for the Lord. That these words are there referred to, is
manifest, and the person spoken of, so expressly declared to be John the
Baptist, called therefore Eliah, because he should come in the spirit and power
of Elias, that there can be no reason why that should be doubted or disputed of
among Christians; or Elias in person, or any other by that name called, should
be expected by virtue of them, as before we have said.)

As concerning the meaning of the words by which his office is expressed,
whatever they think concerning the person, it will be indifferent to all to
enquire. They must have the same meaning, whosoever they are applied to,
whether by Jews or Christians. For the meaning of them, therefore, we may look
what they do or ought to agree in, comparing them one with another. To which
enquiry it will be convenient to premise an observation concerning that word or
preposition, which in our Translation is rendered to, and is in the Hebrew (...)
Al, viz. that it is (as Abu Walid, and R. D. Kimchi in Radic.
Grammarians observe, and examples convince) of diverse uses and significations.
It signifies most usually above, over, on; but not only so, but withal, to,
with, for, by, near, against, in, and other like, of which examples accurre in
the Hebrew Text. And according to the words with which it is joined and the
thing spoken of, is the signification thereof to be discerned and
distinguished. Again, concerning the appellations and titles of fathers and
children, that they are not only attributed to those that are so by nature, but
to others also, who for other respects or relation one to another, have those
names given them; as older people that of fathers, younger that of children;
and so learned men, or teachers, are looked on as common fathers, in respect to
their disciples, or such as learn of them, or are instructed by them, and the
like.

This concerning the nature of those words being observed, will help us to
judge of such Expositions as are given of the whole sentence. The signification
of the forementioned preposition which our Translators choose to give it in
this place, is to, or unto, which it often manifestly has elsewhere, as Joshua
II.8. she came up, (...) Alehem, to them: and I Sam. II.11. went (...) to his
house, with many other See R. D. Kimchi in Radicibus.
places. And it is likewise embraced by most of Interpreters: but then
accordingly as they apply it to fathers and children, and their different
understanding of what is meant by them, do they differ in giving the meaning.
They that understand them of such as should be them together in present being,
whether natural fathers and children, or others who might be called by that
title (as ours seem to do) take his office, so as here described, to consist in
taking away such discords and differences as should be betwixt them, and
settling peace, and love, and charity among them, so as that their hearts
should be propense and kindly affectioned one to another, and they should be of
one heart and one soul among themselves, as it is said of the believers, Act.
IV.32. and with one consent hearken to God and receive the truth preached to
them. So that this disposition and behavior, which it is here said, it should
be the work of the promised Elijah to work in their hearts, may seem (as a
learned Aben Ezra.
Jew observes) contrary to that which in the Prophet Micah is described, as
being found among them in his time, Chap. VII.6. the son dishonors the
Father, or that which on their not harkening to him our Savior says, should
be in after times, the father shall be divided against the son, and the son
against the father, Luke XII.53. Such dissensions among them in those times
here spoken of, are See Grot. on the place, and on Luke I.17.
observed to have been caused and fomented by the several Sects that were among
them, as of Sadduces and Pharisees, and the like; which had such ill influence
as to banish those due respects which ought to have been betwixt parents and
children, superiors and inferiors (or whosoever under the title of father and
son may be comprehended;) and that love and charity, which should have been
betwixt all orders and degrees of men, whose hearts Eliah ( i. e. John Baptist
coming in the spirit and power of Eliah) should be sent to reduce (if possible)
to better order, to mutual agreement among themselves, and joint obedience to
God. This seems to have been the ancientest understanding of the words among
the Jewish Talmud. Tract. Edaioth cap. ult.
Doctors, who sum up the meaning of them in other words, saying That he
should be sent, (...) Lehashvoth hammachloketh, to compose dissension, or
reconcile differences, (...) Ibid. and Maimon. cap. ult.
Leasoth shalom binehem, to make peace between them, that they might all agree
in the profession of one Religion: and thus seem the Greek Interpreters to have
understood them, who instead of the second member of the sentence, and the
heart of the children to their fathers, put for the meaning of it, and the
heart of a man (or every one) to his neighbor. Against this Exposition I know
not what may be excepted; yet do others, taking the forementioned preposition
in the same sense, of to, give others: See Ribera, and Lightfoot.
some, he shall turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, etc. i. e. of
the Jews to the Gentiles, and of the Gentiles to the Jews; which though it may
be true, and that John did so, and it was as well an effect of his preaching
and baptizing, as of the Gospel, yet I suppose is not the literal meaning of
these words, which were spoken to the Jews, and more particularly concern them
between themselves. See R. Tanchum.
Others, he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, etc. i. e. of
God to Israel, and Israel to God; who is called their father, and calls them
sons. That this is comprehended within the latitude of these words we doubt
not, inasmuch as we hear the Angel, where he refers to these words, putting as
part of John's office, many of the children of Israel shall be turn to the Lord
their God; and indeed for that end was he to turn their hearts one to another,
that they might all with joint hearts, or one heart, turn to the Lord. Yet can
we not think that to be the literal meaning of the present words: God is called
their Father elsewhere, but I suppose fathers here put in the plural number,
cannot be properly used of him.

Another See L. de Dieu.
Exposition of Camerarius, who makes the meaning to be, that he should reduce
the hearts of the fathers to the children, and of the children to the fathers,
i. e. Should turn or bring back the hearts of the fathers, so as that they
should take care of the pious education of their children, whereas they had
been negligent in the right instructing and disciplining of them, and the
hearts of the children who had been disobedient to their fathers; so as to
yield due reverence and obedience to them, may be well reduced to the first.
But as to that which Rib. Menoch. Tirin. etc. and see Chr. a Castro.
others give, viz. that by the fathers should be meant the old Patriarks
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, etc. and by the children, those of that generation
when this Elias should come: I do not understand how it can be made good. To
say that the hearts of the children should be turned by their conversion to the
same faith that was in those ancient holy men is intelligible; but how the
hearts of those so long since dead should be said to be turned to those of that
generation, is not so easily conceived: these hitherto mentioned all take (...)
Al here in the signification of to. There are of the Jews who would have it
here to signify by, or by the hand, or means of; So R Solomon out of an
ancienter Doctor, shall turn the hearts of the fathers by the hand of the
children, i. e. Shall speak to the children to persuade their fathers to
embrace the way of the Lord, and on the other hand to the fathers to persuade
their children. The same signification of it takes Abarbinel also, and gives
this strange interpretation, making the time spoken of to be according to his
fancy after the Resurrection, which he will have to be before the end of the
World, If any be then at that time living who has children dead, he shall by
them, being raised from the dead at the coming of Eliah be converted to the
truth, and on the contrary such children as are living, by their fathers being
raised; that so before the end of the World all may be turned to the truth,
that all be not destroyed. But this is so uncouth an Exposition and so little
agreeing to the words, as that it will be much from the purpose to speak more
of it, nor does that by R Salomo mentioned agree with them, there being showed
in them what God would do by the hands of his Elias, not what Elias should do
by the hands of others.

But there is yet another acception of the word, which is by others, both Jews
and Christians, preferred, as giving the plainest meaning; and that is by
taking it here to signify not, to, but So an Arabic Transl. MS.
with, as manifestly in several other places it does. As for example (...) Al
merorim, with bitter herbs, Exodus XII.8. and verse. 9. his head (...) with his
legs, and Chap. XXXV.22. and they came (...) Al nasim with women, i. e. as ours
translate it both men and women; with several like instances. Thus R. D. Kimchi
here will have it taken, giving thus his Exposition, He shall warn or call on
both fathers and children together, with all their heart to turn unto God, and
they that turn shall be delivered from the day of Judgment; so that (...) is
to be looked on as signifying the same that (...) im, with, fathers with the
children, and of children with their fathers, all of them together. So likewise
R. Tanchum, the meaning (says he) is, That he shall seek to rectify (or reduce
into order) the Sect (or People) that they may be all of them of one heart, in
the obedience (or worship) of God, and the word (...) is in the signification
of (...), with, i. e. says he, he shall seek to rectify the hearts of the
fathers among them, with the hearts of the children; and the repeating (or
doubling) of the words, ( viz. and the heart of the children with their
fathers,) is for greater confirmation sake. Thus say those Jews, with whom do
concur (as we said) diverse Chr. a Castro. L. de Dieu, and Dr Hammond on Luke
I.17. in whose Notes, where he refers to this place, (...) is ill printed for
(...).
Christians also, and are urgent for it, so as that the words may denote that
he should convert or call to repentance all of them together, both old and
young, young and old, that so they might all be a People prepared for the Lord,
(as Luke I.17. he speaks) and readily receive him, and with joint hearts obey
him; This Exposition gives a clear and plain meaning, and is easily
reconcilable with the first mentioned; both even necessarily go together, viz.
the converting all together, one with another, and one to another, in obedience
to God, and love one to another: and therefore we may well look on the words as
comprehending both, and that for giving a full meaning of them, both ought
jointly to be taken in; and so are they taken in likewise in that one word, in
which our Savior elsewhere sums up that office of this Eliah here in more
expressed, viz. (...), shall restore all things, reduce all things to right
order, which could not otherwise be done then by turning them all one to
another, and one with another to the faith of Christ. In much like manner to
that of our Saviors, do some of the Maimon. Melakim, c. ult.
Jews likewise sum up the import of these words, concerning his office
whoever it be that is meant, saying that he was (...) Leyasher Israel velehacin
libbam, to rectify Israel, and to prepare or put in good order their hearts.

In the forecited place, Luke I.17. where these words of Malachi are plainly
referred to, the words, and the heart of their children to their fathers, are
not put as they are here read, but instead of them, and the disobedient to the
wisdom of the just, which the learned Dr Hammond, in his Notes on that place
shows to be as a Gloss or Paraphrase on the Prophets words, to explain his
expression; both importing that a general reformation should be endeavored to
be wrought by the person sent for that end, among the Jews, for fitting them to
receive the Lord Christ. From the same spirit did both expressions proceed, and
it will not concern us to be inquisitive why he should change his language or
expressions. By what he says by his Angel there in Luke, it is evident that
what Ma^t. XVII.11. and see Mar. IX.12.
he here spoke by his Prophet was spoken of John the Baptist, and not of Eliah
in his person. And with what Elias-like zeal John did set himself to perform
the office here designed for him, appears by what we read in the Gospel of his
Mission, and his preaching, and the time thereof, and the contents and effects
of it, as Matt. III. Mar. I. Luke III. and Joh. I. He that shall duly consider
what is in those places said of John, and what he did, and compare them with
what is said here of the Eliah promised, that he should do; will easily
perceive all that is here prophesied to have been already made good; that there
will be no ground left to him for expecting a farther completion of it, by
Eliah in person, or any other under that name to be expected before the coming
of the great and dreadful day of the Lord here spoken of. Here God says,
Behold I will send Elijah the Prophet; in the Gospel it is said, there was a
man sent from God whose name was John, Joh. I.6. and that that John was Elias
which was for to come, Matt. XI.14. Here, that he was to be sent before the
coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord. There the time of John's
coming is described that it was when the Kingdom of God was at hand, Matt.
III.2. when the day of wrath was coming, v. 7. when the axe was laid to the
root of the trees, and every tree that brought not forth good fruit should be
hewn down and cast into the fire, verse. 10. when He was now coming whose fan
was in his hand, and he would thoroughly purge his floor, and gather his wheat
into his barn, but would burn up the chaff with unquenchable fire, ver. 12.
which expressions (as we have before showed) are an evident description of the
great and dreadful day of the Lord here spoken of: Here, that this Eliah
should turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the
children to the fathers, preach to all sorts young and old conversion and
repentance; there in the Gospel, that John should turn many of the children of
Israel to the Lord their God, and the hearts of the fathers to the children,
etc. Luke I.16, 17. and that he did preach to all the Baptism of repentance,
Marc. I.4. Luke III.3. and that with such power and good effect that Jerusalem
and all Judea, and all the Region round about Jordan, went out to him, and were
baptized of him, confessing their sins, Matt. III.5, 6. and Marc. I.5. i. e.
multitudes of all sorts and conditions of People out of those places, Luke
III.7. of the common sort of People; ver. 10. of those that might seem to have
least of the fear of God before their eyes, least regard of, or charity for
other men, Publicans, ver. 12. Soldiers, ver. 14. and were at greatest
difference in opinion one from another, Pharisees, and Sadduces. Grot.
To all these did he instill Precepts of Charity, Luke III, 11. the hearts of
all these it is manifest that he did turn one to another, in that they
Lightfoot.
agreed and were united in one common Baptism by him. What can more punctually
agree then the Prophecy here, and the matter of fact set down in the Gospels
thus paralleled, do, to show that the person who is here so characterized in
respect to what was to be, and there to what was made good in him, is one and
the same, and that no other ought to be expected by virtue of this Prophecy?
Certainly when we consider how exactly all things do concur of what is
foretold of in the Prophet, and reported as done in the Gospel, in the one
person of John the Baptist, and how all things here designed to be done by this
person named Eliah, were by him in a signal manner performed; we shall perceive
that there is little grounds for that argument which is by Bellarm. de Romans
Pontif. lib. 3. c. 6.
some here taken to prove that Eliah in person is to be expected before the day
of the last Judgment, because (as they say) John did not fulfill all that is
here required, in the conversion of the hearts of the fathers and children one
to another, or as it is summed up by our Savior in restoring all things, Matt.
XVII. Not to enquire what other answers may be, or are, given to that
objection, abundantly sufficient for confirmation of that Exposition which we
have followed, as to the scope and meaning of them, and to show that they do
not afford any good grounds for any such argument, will be the consideration of
two things which would by those who draw that argument here from them, be
otherwise (I suppose) easily granted. 1. Grot. on Matt. XVII.10. Non tam
fructus operae, quam opera ipsa respicitur.
That words which are put to import that such or such a thing should be
effected by any, do often signify rather his endeavor, and the doing of what
would or might be sufficient for the effecting of them, then a full
accomplishment as to the effect, or consequents on his endeavor. So that what
is said that the person here spoken of should turn the hearts of the fathers to
the children etc. and Matt. XVII.10. that he should restore all things, may
well be said to be fulfilled, if he did diligently that which tended to the
producing, and was sufficient to have produced, such effects, though through
default in the subjects on which he was to work, the hearts of all were not
turned, nor all things, or men (as Hammond on Luke I. note c.
some think it may, though put in the neuter gender, be particularly applied to
them) fully rectified and reduced into right order. 2. See him on 1 Cor. note,
That the word, all, is not always to be taken in that extent as to comprehend
every particular (whether it be applied to persons, things, times, or places)
but only a great number, and to show Dr Hammond on Matt. III. note c.
the diffusive nature, of that which is said should have respect to all, to be
such as might be extended to more, even to all that should come in its way, or
be offered to it, or were rightly qualified to receive its operation, or
required to make good the truth of what is spoken of.

To omit other examples, which are frequent, one already mentioned, and which
is to our present purpose will make it evident. It is said, Matt. III.5. that
Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the region round about Jordan went out to
John, and were baptized of him. It will not by any be thought that every person
in those places did thus, but a great multitude or store of them, and if more
had come, or his preaching had prevailed on more, John was ready to perform his
office to them. This is thought enough to justify the expression, that all the
Country came unto him, and were baptized of him. Here is not in our Prophet
the word all expressed, but indefinitely, without any number mentioned, said,
shall turn the heart of the fathers and the heart of the children; but because
where Christ sums up what is here said, or gives the meaning of it, he adds
it, viz. and shall restore all things, it is by them looked on as here
understood, and the Bellarm. ut supra.
exceptions therefore taken, that by Elias is not here meant John the Baptist,
because to restore all things is to convert to the true Faith all Jews and
Heretics, etc. which John did not effect, and therefore Elias in person is yet
to come, and do it. But if we suppose that all is to be here understood, surely
that by all were to be meant no more then we have said, i. e. many of all
sorts, all that should hearken to his preaching and receive his Doctrine, we
may learn from the Angels describing of the same office of his that is here
described by this, that many of the children of Israel he should turn unto the
Lord their God, going before him in the spirit and power of Elias to turn the
hearts of the fathers to the children. The all and the many do then signify the
same thing in this matter. And these things being observed, surely by what we
read of John's performance, it is evident that the words here spoken of this
Eliah to be sent, were in, and by him, so far (even to wonder) made good, that
to expect another to fulfill them in greater measure, is not warranted by
virtue of this Prophecy. He was zealous in the highest degree in performing
what he was sent to do, and on very many did his endeavors take effect. That
they did not on more, on all among them without exceptions, prevail, was not
through any defect or default in him, but because, as the Scripture expressly
declares, concerning many of the Pharisees and Lawyers (many of which yet came
in unto him) they rejected the counsel of God against themselves, Luke VII.30.
the like effects which our Savior, who came to convert them all and to save all,
complains his own preaching to have had, among that same People through their
obstinacy, saying, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that killest the Prophets, and
stonest them that are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy
children together, even as an Hen gathers her Chickens under her wings, und
ye would not, Matt. XXIII.37. Ta^nov. Cameron on Matt. 17.
Some are so far from thinking that on these words can be grounded any argument
to prove that the Elias here meant was not John Baptist, and that it is one yet
to come at the end of the World, before Christ's last coming, as that they look
on them as an argument to prove the clean contrary; because this Elias is to
come before the great day of the Lord, and to call to conversion and
repentance; for which was a fit season at Christ's first coming: but at the last
day of his coming, the day of Judgment, is no farther time for repentance, but
for reward or execution of Judgment and punishment; therefore that day, not
this, must here be meant, and this Elias one already come, not one then to be
expected. What we have said will farther be confirmed by consideration of the
next words, in which is declared why he should be sent to convert them, viz.
lest (says the Lord) I come and smite the Earth with a curse.

As the former words concerning the Mission, the time and the office, of the
person here named Elijah the Prophet do (as we have seen) exactly agree to John
the Baptist, and so as that they cannot so be applied to any other, so do these
also which declare the end for which he should be sent at that time, to perform
that office, no less agree with those in which in the Gospel we are showed for
what end John did perform his, by preaching conversion and repentance, viz.
That being converted they might flee from the wrath to come, Matt. III.7. and
the axe being now laid to the root of the trees, they bringing forth good
fruit, might escape from being cut down and cast into the fire, ver. 10. that
they might be as Wheat, and gathered into the Lords Garner, and not as Chafe
which he should burn with unquenchable fire, ver. 12. Add how the Angel
explains it, Luke I.17. that he should, (and as appears, c. III. accordingly
did endeavor to do) turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the
disobedient to the wisdom of the just. For what end? to make ready a People
prepared for the Lord, a People fit to receive him, and to find mercy and
Salvation from him at his coming. Who will not at first hearing or reading
perceive, that those things said concerning the end of his preaching, Matt.
III.7
are the very same with what is said here of this person's performing the
office he is sent for, viz. that he should do it, to prevent, lest the Lord
should come and smite the Earth with a curse, or utter destruction. The same
words which are given, even by some of the Jews, for explication of this
expression of the Prophet, will as appositely be used for summing up the
meaning of those in the Gospel. Such is that Exposition of R. Tanch^m `The
meaning, says he, is, He shall fairly persuade them, that he may reduce any of
them who may possibly be reduced; to wit, such who have not evil habits so
firmly rooted in their minds, that they cannot return from them till the
punishment which shall seize on all the rebellious transgressors, overtake
them. Surely this which he gives for the meaning of what is here said of this
person here denoted by the title of Eliah, for showing for what end he should
perform his office, is manifestly the meaning of what is in the Gospel said,
concerning the end for which John was sent to preach repentance, and did preach
it, and baptize unto it. Not much different as to the purpose, is that meaning
which Kimchi.
another among them gives of these words, viz. Therefore he shall warn them,
that they may be brought to repentance against that day come, that he may not
smite the whole Land, (or the Land with a consumption) and it be a curse. Thus
far, well; and so as to show the end which this Eliah was to aim at, to be
altogether the same that John did aim at, and labor to effect, so far as that
we cannot but look on him as the person here designed, and have not reason to
expect any other for making good, as we have before said, this here spoken.
What this last Rabbin adds, They that will not be warned by his admonition,
shall be consumed and perish in the wilderness of the People, or at the day of
Judgment in the Land of Israel, does only show that he knew not well what to
say as to the curse, or destruction here spoken of, when, or how it should be,
not willing to understand it of that destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans, on
their rejecting both John's and Christ's admonitions, which it is (as we have
before showed) evidently meant of. He knows not on what to fix, and so speaks
at random that which signifies nothing, and leaves the Reader in a maze. But if
it be applied to that, all will run clear, not so if to any other. For against
that which (as we have seen) many concur in, that it should be meant of the
day of doom at Christ's last coming to judge the World, the form of the
expression (as is by Rainolds ut supra, p. 1201.
some observed) affords an evident argument, lest I come, says the Lord, and
smite, etc. that shows that this judgment might by their repentance and
conversion be prevented, which is confirmed by what our Savior says, Matt.
XXIII.37, 38. and Luke XIII.34, 35. that therefore their house was left unto
them desolate, because they would not be gathered when he would have gathered
them, nor be brought to repentance by his call: and that all those evils, and a
terrible destruction came upon them, because they would not know the things
that belonged to their peace, nor the day of their visitation, when they were
told of them both by John and himself, Luke XIX.42, and 44. But that general
Judgment is a day that cannot by any means be prevented, but shall in Gods
appointed time certainly come, so that lest I come cannot be applied to that.
For certainly he will come, without any peradventure. As for the explication of
the word, earth, viz. that by it is here meant the Land of Judea, the People
spoken to, and of, and not the whole Earth in general is evident. See Cameron
on Matt. XVII.11. and Hammond on Matt. V.6. and on Rev. VII. a, and XII. f.
That it is in that restrained signification for the Land of Israel and Judea,
peculiarly often used both in the Old and New Testament, is a thing so
confessed as that there is no need farther to insist on it.

Abarbinel seeming to take it more generally thence infers, That the
destruction that is here spoken of should be of things generable and
corruptible, such as are on the Earth, not of the Heavens and the Hosts
thereof, (or things therein,) so as it was at the universal Deluge, when God
destroyed Genesis VII.4, 23.
every living substance: In sum, all only that was in this lower World. What
he aims at in this inference he does not farther explain: if he would have it
that at the end of the World, only the Earth and the things that are therein
should be destroyed, we have to oppose against him that constantly professed
truth, that as well the Heavens as the Earth are reserved unto fire against the
day of Judgment, as S. Peter speaks, II Pet. III.7. and shall be dissolved
therewith; but otherwise, if there be weight in his way of argument, it will
make for our purpose, viz. that the day here spoken of is not that day of the
last Judgment, because it is a day of such destruction as was to be executed
on Earth only, and therefore in this World, viz. (as we have all along said)
the destruction of Jerusalem.

By the earth, or land, will easily be understood by a most usual notion, Ahlol
ardi, the People of the Earth, or inhabitants of the Land, (as an Arabic
Translation done by a Jew has it) together with the Land it self. See Jerome.
Menoch. and Tarnov.
They that expound it earthly minded men, such as follow earthly things, and
will not make use of the time of grace, and embrace Gods Salvation offered to
them, say what is true, but seem not to give the full latitude of the word.
Such of the People only were destroyed, and those that turned to God were
saved, yet for the sake of the many obstinate rebels, was the Land together
destroyed and made desolate. As for the last word (...) Cherem, which is
rendered a curse, it may be likewise (as it is by See Chald. Syriac. Arab. MS.
Tig. Castal. etc.
several) rendered, destruction or utter destruction. So R. Tanchum says, he
means an universal destruction according to the sense of the verb in that
place, Number. XXI.2. (...) veheeharamti, then I will utterly destroy their
Cities, and so do our Translators in Zacch. XIV.11. render the same word that
they render here a curse, by utter destruction; and the same verb that See v.
3.
Number. XXI.2. they render I will utterly destroy, do they render, Micah IV.13. I
will consecrate, and Levit. XXVII.28, 29. the nown, the same that is here used,
is rendered a devoted thing, and Deuteronomy. VII.26. a cursed thing. So that looking
into the Scriptures we shall find the root of this word to have these
significations, of cutting off, or destroying, and cursing, and consecrating,
(to omit another notion in which it signifies a net) The prime See Drus. and
of the use of this word see Seldom de Synedr. l. 1. c. 7. p. 128. etc.
signification seems to be that of cutting off, or destroying, which appears in
the other two; in that of cursing, which is a devoting to destruction,
manifestly; and not obscurely in that other of devoting or consecrating,
inasmuch as that is a R. Tanchum in lib. Morshed.
cutting off (as it were) and taking out of the way from common use that which
is so devoted. In this place it is manifest that they that render it curse,
mean the same with those that render it destruction; not such a lighter curse
for correction as is spoken of, chapter III.9. but a curse ending in a final
excision and utter destruction. For what is here meant by what is threatened,
the event and manner in which it was fulfilled on them to whom it was spoken,
makes evident; The generality of the Jews having rejected the admonitions of
John Baptist who was sent to warn them to flee from the wrath to come, by
embracing Christ and his doctrine, whom they not only refused, but procured to
be crucified, and pulled on themselves a curse by saying his blood be on us and
on our childhen, God seconded it with his curse and sent on them that curse
which ended in that fearful destruction of them, and their Land, from which
they could never recover, and which makes undeniably manifest to all the World
that this Prophecy had its full accomplishment in them, and in vain do they
seek to elude it.

Thus here ends this Prophecy, in the Hebrew Bibles and all that follow them;
but in many Copies of the Greek, the verses are so transplaced as that the
fourth verse being taken out of its place is put after this, viz. Remember the
Law of Moses, etc. and so made to conclude the Prophecy; on what occasion, or
for what reason I know not. Notes on the Greek Bible, Edit. Francf. 1597.
One says it was done in imitation of the superstition of the Jews, and to
conclude the whole (...) that all might end in good words, or words of a good
sound. The superstition of the Jews, which he mentions, is this, that whereas the
last words here, and smite the Earth with a curse sound harsh in their ears,
and seem to bode evil; that they might conclude with something more pleasing,
they repeat the words going before, again after them, viz. Behold I will send
you Eliah the Prophet before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the
Lord, and he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart
of the children to the fathers; or at least some of them, so as still to leave
out the last harsh words, which conclude with a curse. The like do they do in
some other Books for the same reason, as at the end of Isaiah, and of
Ecclesiastes, and the Lamentations, in which after the last verse, they repeat
again the verse going before it. And for warning thereof, casting the initial
letters of the names of these Books, viz. (...) I, T, K, K, into an artificial
word, so as to be a signal or memorial of them, I standing for Isaiah, T, for
(...) Tereasher, i. e. the twelve minor Prophets, of which Malachi is the last:
and the first K for Kinoth, i. e. Lamentations, the second for Koheleth, i. e.
Ecclesiastes, they usually write or print that signal together, with the words
which they would have to be repeated, all or some of them. How ancient this
custom was among them I know not: it savors of the humor of those of ancient
times among them, who said to Gods Prophets, prophecy not unto us right things,
speak unto us smooth things, Isaiah XXX.10. They seem to think that the putting
away from them the mention of Amos VI.3.
the evil day, that they might go on in their sins in security, should secure
them from it, so inverting and frustrating to themselves Gods gracious method,
who, that they might not perish in their security, caused those words in the
last place to be inculcated to them, that so they might sink deep into them,
and work in them repentance, whereby alone the evil mentioned might be
prevented, whereas their refusing to give that attention to them would pull it
on them to their unavoidable destruction, as in the example of these here
spoken to, it manifestly came to pass so as to be for caution to all in like
kind.

As for the present place, Rainold de lib. Apocryph. praelect. 95. page 1163.
some are of opinion that the Jews do here repeat those words, Behold I send
you Eliah ande. to strengthen themselves in their opinion and hope, that the
Messiah is not yet come, but is to come. If so, or out of what respect soever
they do it, we have from the Messiah himself, what to oppose to them, and add
to what they would conclude with, viz. Matt. XVII.12.
But I say unto you Elias is come already, and they knew him not, but did unto
him whatsoever they listed. The Messiah also is already come, and they would
not know him neither, but rejected him, and despitefully used him: for which
their obstinacy, that great and terrible day of the Lord is also come upon
them, and he has smitten the Earth, i. e. them and their Land with such a
curse, so terrible a destruction as makes good all that is here spoken, and
shows that not one word of this Prophecy is fallen to the ground, but has had
its full accomplishment on them; so that now they remain an ensample to all
others that shall despise or neglect the means of grace offered to them, as
they did, and putting far away the evil day, will not, whiles God gives them
space, Luke XIX.42, 44.
know the things which belong unto their peace, nor think of the time of their
visitation. For how shall any that reject the counsel of God against
themselves, as they did, (any People or Nation) but expect to be smitten with
the like curse as they were, even in this World; how shall the just God, which
spared not that his chosen Nation, his once peculiar People, the Seed of
Abraham his friend, spare others guilty in the like kind? So that though these
words were fulfilled in that destruction of Jerusalem and the Jewish Nation,
the People then peculiarly spoken to and intended, yet may all others see in
them, what may concern them also, even in this World. But if it should so
please God, that any obstinately wicked, and impenitent People should escape
the like judgment in this World, yet besides that prime and literal meaning of
the words, already (as we said) fulfilled, on them, we cannot but by them be
put in mind of that more great and terrible day of the Lord, and look on it as
by this typified; the judgment of which, none either whole Nations, or
particular persons that ever lived shall escape, and which shall unawares seize
not on any one Land only, but on the whole Earth and all therein, yea and the
Heavens too, with greater terror then that by which this concerning the Jews,
is here, v. 1. or elsewhere, described, or can by any words be expressed.
Wherefore seeing what God has done, and being thereby warned, and by his word
certainly assured what he will do, what manner of persons ought we to be in all
holy conversation and godliness? (as 2 Pet. 3.11 12.
S. Peter will teach us to infer) looking for and hasting unto the coming of
the day of God.

All those admonitions to the Jews, and all Gods methods toward them for
preparing them for that day of his coming here mentioned, equally concern us in
respect of that other day of his coming by it typified, and it will be
necessary for us to apply them to our own concerns, and to make use of them to
our selves, without expecting of another Elias, to be sent to forewarn and
convert us. We have not promise of any, and it would be to no purpose to have
any. We have Luke XVI.31.
Moses and the Prophets, we have the admonitions of John Baptist and Christ
himself, and the example of the miscarriage of the Jews for not harkening to
them; and if we will not hear, and be warned by these, neither will we be
persuaded if Elias or John Baptist should rise from the dead, or Christ should
come again in the flesh among us to convert us. Sufficient to us to make us to
prepare our selves for what we are certainly to expect, or leave us without
excuse, are those admonitions of his, extending to all Generations, Watch
therefore, for you know not what hour your Lord does come, Matt. XXIV.42. and
again v. 44. Therefore be ye also ready, for in such an hour as you think not
the Son of Man comes. There is no generation which can assure themselves but
that in it may be made good, as to that other day, what our Savior says to
the Jews concerning the day of their Visitation, Verily I say unto you this
Generation shall not pass, till all these things be fulfilled, Matt. XXIV.34.
The Lord is not slack concerning his Promise, as some men count slacness, but
is long suffering to usward, not willing that any should perish, but that all
should come to repentance, II Pet. III.9.

SOLI DEO GLORIA.
An Appendix.
Whereas we have by the Jews, in their Commentaries, both on this and other
Prophets, often mention made of a Messiah, the Son of Joseph, of the Tribe of
Ephraim, whose name they make use of for eluding many Prophecies which belong
to the true and only Messiah, Christ: and we have therefore occasion to
vindicate such places from their false Expositions, I thought it might not be
unfit to add this short discourse, on occasion made concerning that matter,
wherein I have endeavored to discover the grounds of that fond opinion, and
collect such things as are by them said of it, because they are not so commonly
found put together, I thought best to print it in Latin as it was at first
penned, seeing as much as may concern such as understand not that Language, to
know for the present purpose, is in such places of the Commentary as there is
occasion to make mention of it, said in English.
MAL. III. verse. 1. Ecce ego mitto Angelum meum, and praeparabit viam meam, and
statim veniet ad Templum suum Dominus, quem vos quaeritis, and Angelus
foederis, quem vos vultis, ecce venit, dicit Dominus Exercituum.


NON est mihi impraesentiarum animus singulas hujus commatis voces ad
Grammaticorum Canones exigere, sed nec genuinum verborum sensum pluribus
confirmatum vel illustratum dare, de quo dubitare nos non sinit divina
Evangelii veritas; quae hic dicta in Johanne Baptista Christi Anteambulone, and
in Christo novi foederis Angelo completa atque eventu comprobata esse ostendit.
Dicendorum materiam suppeditabit unum magni apud suos nominis Doctoris R. Aben
Ezrae glossema, quo prima statim verba corrumpit, Ecce ego mitto Angelum meum
(...) convenit (inquit) ut sit [Angelus iste] Messiah Ben Joseph. quod licet
absurdum plane atque atque a Scripturae veritate, and ratione maxim alienum
sit, paulo attentius considerandum and ad examen revocandum duximus, ne falso
ipsius aliorumque ejusdem farinae commento non hoc solum sed and alia
Prophetarum oracula corrumpi atque eludi, adeoque ea, quibus veritas propugnari
debuerat, arma nobis eripi, atque in hostium contra pugnantium manus tradi,
nescii atque incauti patiamur. Notissimum enim est apud Rabbinos in suis ad
libros Propheticos Commentariis aliisque ipsorum scriptis frequenter Messiae
Ben Joseph vel Ephraim (e Tribu scilicet Ephraim Josephi Patriarchae filii
oriundi) mentionem occurrere; idque eo potissimum fine ut quae de vero, eoque
uno, Messia Ben David Christo Domino nostro intelligenda sunt, si fieri possit,
alio detorquentes nondum ea completa esse, adeoque ipsum adhuc expectandum
probent. Quorum sententiam dum explodimus, ut merito id a nobis fieri constet,
necesse est, ut quem per Ephraimitam istum Josephi filium indigitant, atque
unde, quae de eo narrant, desumserint, prius inquiramus; ne de re nobis ignota
statuentes, temere, and sine justa ratione, part scilicet inaudita altera,
haud aequum statuere videamur. At in historia ejus pertexenda, quo tandem duce
utemur? Neminem sane reperimus, cujus autoritas tanti apud nos esse debeat, ut
ea permoti rem pro certa imo vel probabili habeamus; Ejusmodi enim est, quae ut
non luculento aliquo sacrae Scripturae textu, in quo Messiae istius mentio fit,
ita nec vel Paraphrase^n antiquiorum (Onkeli puta vel very Jonathanis) vel
ipsius Textus Talmudici, quem Misnaioth vocant, autoritate commendetur; adeo ut
primo loco novitatis suspicione laboret, nec dubitari possit, quin diu post
Christum in carne manifestatum and completa de eo vaticinia, malitia eorum, qui
ne, quem amplecti noluerunt, sine omni vel ratione vel autoritate adhuc
expectare viderentur, quo haberent, quod pervicaciae fuae obtenderent,
excogitata, and quasi a Patribus accepta posteris obtrusa fuerit. Antiquissima,
ni fallor, quae ei confirmandae adducunt, testimonia e Paraphrasi in Exodum
cap. 40. v. 11. Jonathani falso ascripta, and Paraphrasi in Cantica and unico
Talmudis tractatu Succah depromuntur. In ea ad Exodum mentio fit (...) Messiae
filii Ephraim, cujus open Israelitae vincent Gogum, and turmas ejus in fine
dierum. Cant. c. 4.5. verba illa, (...) and duo ubera tua sicut duo hinnuli
gemellae capreae, sic enarrat Paraphrastes (...), quae etiam c. 7. v. 3.
repetita) duo liberatores tui, qui liberaturi sunt te, Messiah filius David and
Messiah filius Ephraim, similes Mosi and Aharoni. Sed Paraphrases istas, sc.
Jonathani in legem falso tributam, and alteram in Cant. incerti authoris and
incertae aetatis, commentis scatere Rabbinicis observatum est a Doctis; nec
ejus sunt autoritatis, ut vel ipsos Judaeos in sententiam suam trahant; ideoque
nec R. Salomo, nec Aben Ezra in locis illis explicandis eam amplectuntur,
quorum ille verba, cap. 4. de Mose and Aharone vel de (...) binis legis
Tabulis, vel (ut cap. 7.) de Rege and Sacerdote summo; hic de duplici lege,
scripta and ore tradita, accipit, nulla Messiae filii Ephraim seu Josephi facta
mentione: quamvis Aben Ezra c. 7. (...) collum tuum sicut turris eboris, quod
statim sequitur de (...) Rege Messia, sc. Davidis filio exponat.] In Talmude
Tract. Succah c. Hachalil dicto, verba Zachariae e c. 12.10. (...) and
aspicient ad me quem transfixerunt and plangent super eum veluti planctum super
unigenitum; Doctorum aliqui, (alii enim aliter) de Messia Josephi filio (...)
qui in bello occidet, intelligi volunt. Eodem postea capite haec habentur,
tradunt Doctores nostri, Dixit Deus benedictus Messiae filio David, Fili mi
pote quid velis, and ego tibi dabo; secundum quod dictum est, Enarrabo
decretum, Dominus dixit ad me filius meus tu, etc. Pete a me and dabo gentes
haereditatem tuam and possessionem tuam fines terrae. Ille cum videret Messiam
filium Joseph occisum esse, dixit coram eo, Domine Mundi non peto a te nisi
vitam. Dicit ei Sanctus Benedictus, Antequam esses jam vaticinatus est de te
David pater tuus, Vitam petiit a te, dedisti illi. Ac rursus illud Zach. I.20.
and ostendit mihi (...) quatuor fabros, explicans. Quinam sunt inquit quatuor
fabri isti? Dixit Rabbi (...) dixit R. Simeon Sanctus, isti sunt Messiah filius
David, and Messiah filius Joseph, and Eliah, and (...) Sacerdos justitiae.

Nescio an alias in Talmude Messiae hujus mentio occurrat. In his, quae inde
excerpsimus, quaedam habemus fabulae istius vestigia, sed adeo obscura ut
queratur R. David Kimchi, Doctores: illos haud apertius ea de re egisse. Sic
enim ad Zach. 12. v. 10. Doctores nostri, inquit, haec interpretati sunt de
Messiah filio Josephi, qui in bello occidendus (...) i. e. Miror autem ego
interpretationem eorum, quod rem obscure tradiderint, nec totam explicaverint.
Ut ut egerint* hinc ipsos traditionem hausisse haud altius derivatam liquet,
tum e R. Salomone ad verba ista, and praedictum e capite primo locum, ubi
tractatum istum Talmudicum, non traditionem aliquam antiquiorem citat. Ex
lutulento igitur hoc rivo ad posteriores Rabbinos fluxisse videtur quicquid de
Ephraimi seu Josephi filio isto nugantur, cujus sparsim in ipsorum commentariis
fit mentio, dum fabricae haud altius fundatae facileque ruiturae fulcimenta
minime sibi constantia hinc inde quaerunt. Interim cum nihil hac de re clari
vel certi, ne ab ipsis quidem Doctoribus Talmudicis (nedum antiquioribus)
acceperint, ipsi in cerebri sui officina fabulam male concinnatam cudere, and
fragmentis undique conquisitis consarcinare coguntur; quam tamen si integram
audire cupias haud adeo facile in ipsorum scriptis reperies, Author quidem
libri Abkath Rocel, eum aliquatenus depingit lib. 1. part. 1. Signis 6o 7o 8o
and 9o, asserens, tempore Regis cujusdam Romani, qui novem mensibus universo
orbi imperabit, atque Israelitas graviter affliget, revelatum iri Messiam
filium Josephi, cui nomen Nehemias filius Husiel, cum Tribu Ephraim, Manasse,
Benjamin, and part filiorum Gad, aliisque paucis, qui ex omnibus provinciis
and urbibus ad ipsum congregabuntur, regemque illum superaturum, ipsumque
interfecturum: deinde vero surrecturum regem alium nomine Armillum, quem
Gentes, inquit, Antichristum vocant, monstrum hominis, quale nunquam finxerunt
nobis poetae, utpote, statua marmorea faedis libidinibus contaminata prognatum,
cui altitudo duodecim cubitorum latitudo totidem; contra quem etiam arma
movebit Nehemias iste filius Husiel sive Messiah Ben-Joseph, sed in praelio
occidet; postea Messiam filium David cum Elia venturum, qui Armillum istum e
medio tollet, and Messiam Ben Joseph e mortuis suscitabit, ac tum omnium
gentium Reges totius orbis Israelitas humeris suis impositos ad Deum
deducturos. Similia fere habet alter ille, quisquis tandem sit, cujus verba
Munsterus ad finem notarum suarum in Malachiam refert de Nehemia isto, quem
Messiam Josephi filium appellant. Sed and hi, ut and quos diximus, apud ipsos,
Scripturae interpretes, aliique eorum Scriptores plerique, ita rem narrant, ut
quae dicunt pro concessis haberi velint. Nihil probare satagunt. Nemo omnium,
quos videre mihi contigit, id facere conatus est, praeter R. Saadiam Haggaon
libro Emanoth cap. 8. nemo rem before quam ipse enarrat. Eam itaque, si operae
pretium videbitur, fusius and qua potuit art adornatam ipsius verbis accipite.
Novimus, inquit, nisi perfecta fuerit poenitentia nostra expectaturos nos donec
completum fuerit tempus captivitati nostrae a Deo praestitutum: cujus si
advenerit finis antequam poenitentiam egerimus, fieri non potest ut contingat
liberatio nobis peccare non cessantibus. Siquidem in captivitatem nos egit
propter peccata: cumque diu jam extorres fuerimus, nec paenitentiam egerimus,
nos nondum idoneos factos reducet? frustra hoc esset. Verum Majores nostri
tradiderunt eventuras nobis afflictiones multas and graves, quibus ad
paenitentiam adacti digni evadamus, qui redimamur. Hoc est quod dixerunt, Si
paenitentiam egerint Israelitae, redimentur; sin minus constituet Deus super
ipsos Regem, cujus decreta non minus gravia erunt, quam Hamanis, quo fiet, ut
resipiscentes liberentur. Cujus rei causam futuram dicunt, quod in monte
Galilaeae surrecturus sit e Tribu Joseph quidam, qui confluentibus ad ipsum e
popularibus nostris paucis quibusdam Hierosolymam, postquam in potestate Edom
(id est Christianorum) fuerit, profectus, ibi ad tempus cum ipsis subsistet;
post quod adveniens Rex Nomine Armillus bellum ipsis inferet captaque urbe
alios neci dabit, alios captivos abducet, maleque mulctabit: Eritque ille, quem
diximus Josephi tribu oriundus e numero occisorum. Hinc magnis opprimetur gens
nostra calamitatibus, inter quas non alia gravior futura, quam quod male se
habiturae sint res eorum apud omnes ubique populos, dum faetidi ipsis
reddentur, adeo ut in deserta ipsos ejecturi sint, ubi fame and siti
cruciabuntur. Ac prae gravitate, quae passurae sunt, malorum fiet, ut multi a
lege desciscant; erunt autem reliqui sordibus purgati ac mundati, quibus tum
manifestabitur Elias, venietque liberatio. Haec, inquit, cum de calamitatibus
istis dicta audirem, animum Scripturae adverti, atque in ea textum aliquem quo
singula confirmarentur reperi. Ac primo, quod tempore redemptionis Hierosylyma
in potestate Edom seu Idumaeorum (Romanos seu Christianos hoc Nomine
indigitant, quo quae ipsis visum fuerit vaticinia de istis interpretentur)
futura sit, inde probatur quod dictum sit Obad. 21. and ascendent servatores in
montem Sion ad judicandum montem Esau: deinde quod bellum cum iis gesturus sit
quidam e posteris Rachel (tribu scilicet Ephraim Josephi, ac proinde Rachelis,
filii) e Jeremiae 49. v. 20 propterea audite consilium Domini quod consultavit
super Edom, and cogitationes ejus quas cogitavit super habitationes Temam, si
non traxerint eos (...) Parvuli pecoris. Et quod pauci futuri sint qui ad ipsum
confluent, non admodum multi, ex eo quod dictum est Jer. 3.14. Et assumam eos
unum de civitate and duos de familia. Quodque qui contra illos ascendet ipsos
capturus sit and captivos abducturus atque interfecturus, e Zach. 14.1. Ecce
dies venit Domino and dividetur spolium tuum in medio tui, and congregabo omnes
gentes ad Jerusalem in praelium, and capietur civitas and diripientur domus.
Quodque ille (Josephi filius scil.) qui regnum occupabit futurus sit e numero
caeforum, ipsumque defleturi sint e Zach. 12. v. 10. (...) and aspicient ad
illum (sic enim pro (...) legit (...) pro me, illum) quem transfixerunt, and
plangent super eum veluti planctum super unigenitum etc. quodque afflictio
gravis futura sit tunc temporis genti (Judaicae) e Dan. 12. v. 1. and erit
tempus angustiae cujusmodi non est factum ex eo tempore quo fuit gens usque ad
diem hunc. Quodque odium magnum futurum sit inter ipsos and multos e gentibus,
adeo ut ipsos in deserta pellant ex Ezekiel. 20. v. 35. Et adducam vos ad desertum
populorum and ibi vobiscum judicio contendam: quodque famam and sitim and
angustiam passuri sint quemadmodum passi sunt patres eorum, ex ejusdem cap. v.
36. and judicio contendam vobiscum ibi facie ad faciem, sicut judicio contendi
cum patribus vestris: quodque futurum sit ut ibi expurgentur and explorentur,
Arab. sicut argentum and aurum, ut dignoscatur quomodo se habeat patientia, and
quomodo fides ipsorum
prout far poterunt, and secundum firmitatem fidei ipsorum e v. 37. and
transire faciam vos sub virga, and adducam vos in vinculo faederis: quodque
haec in causa futura sint illis, quorum fides infirma est, ut a religione sua
desciscant dicantque Arabo huc non expectabamus.
Hic est in quo sperabamus atque hoc est quod ab eo nobis contigit e ver. 38.
and repurgabo e vobis rebels and praevatricantes in me: quodque illis qui
supererunt manifestandus sit Elias, and corda eorum conversurus, e Malac. 4.5.
Ecce ego mitto vobis Eliam Prophetam, antequam veniat dies Dominimagnus and
terribilis, and convertet cor patrum super filios. En (inquit) (...) verborum
istorum sensus in scriptura perspicue traditos. Hoc autem addiderunt priores
seu majores nostri, quod singula in ordinem digesserint prout scripta sunt.
Celebretur autem qui magnam in nos misericordiam exercuit dum calamitatum
istarum nos praemonitos esse voluerit, ne nos improviso invadentes ad
desperationem adigerent: de quibus eventuris rursus dicit Is. 24.16. ab extremo
terrae cantus audivimus etc. usque ad finem capitis. His praemissis dico
(inquit) ob duas simul rations viz. vel, si non convertamur poenitentia, adeo
ut contingant accidentia filii Joseph, vel si convertamur and non evenerint;
subito nobis appariturum Messiam Ben David. Quod si ante ipsum venerit (ille
Josephi filius) erit ipsi instar nuncii and qui idoneam reddat gentem (ei
recipiendo) viamque ipsi paret (quemadmodum dixit Malac. 3. v. 1. Ecce ego
mitto angelum meum and praeparabit viam ante me: and ut qui explorat igne,
illis qui gravia commiserint peccata and ut qui abluit sordes smegmate, illis
qui leviorum rei fuerint, sicut postea dicit v. 2. and quis sustineat diem
adventus ipsius and quis poterit stare cum apparuerit? Nam ipse est tanquam
ignis conflantis, and tanquam smegma fullonum. Quod si non venerit, tum veniet
Ben David cito, sicut dixit, v. 1. Et statim veniet ad Templum suum Dominus
quem vos quaeritis, etc. adducetque secum populum Hierosolymam usque; and si
fuerit ea in potestate Armilli, ipso interfecto, eam capiet, and hoc est quod
dixit Ezekiel. 25.14. Et dabo ultionem meam in Edom per manum populi mei Israel,
vel si in alterius cujusdam potestate fuerit; erit etiam ipse ex Edom, and
quoniam non venit filius Joseph, ideo consecuturi sunt a filio David, quod cor
ipsorum stabiliat, and fracturam sanet, and animos erigat, sicut Isai. 61.1.
dixit, Spiritus Domini Dei super me, ea propter unxit Dominus me ad
Evangelizandum mansuetis, misit me ad ligandum contritos cord, ad praedicandum
captivis libertatem, etc. ad praedicandum annum beneplaciti Domini,

En vobis Messiae Josephi filii a Judaeis toties praedicati (dum venisse eum,
qui a Patribus expectatus fuerat, pertinaciter sibi negandum statuunt)
historiam, dicam, an fabulam Prophetice descriptam? i. e. corrasis undique
Prophetarum verbis contextam, quam qui veram crediderit, vel eventu comprobatum
aliquando iri speraverit; eadem facilitate, Quicquid inane Nutrit, Judaicis
quae pingitur India velis, fide dignum censeat. Gratulatur Haggaon majoribus
suis qui haec ordine tam concinno disponere potuerunt; sibi potius gratulari
debuit, qui quicquid vel ab illis, vel a se, fictum fuerat, testimoniis tam
luculentis e Scriptura petitis, probatum dare potuerit. Quis unquam Prophetarum
verba tam misere torsit, vel tam impudenter prostituit? Quid tandem tam
absurdum, tam a ratione alienum excogitari potest, quod non pari ratione e
disertis Scripturae verbis authoritatem sibi conciliet? Haud difficile foret,
pleraque ab eo allegata, aliter tam ab antiquis quam a recentioribus etiam
Rabbinis intellecta probare, nec ad Messiae ben Joseph, vel ex eorum sententia,
rem facere. Singulis ne immorer, quae vel recensuisse, abunde refutasse est,
illud, quo uno e posteris Josephi futurum aliquem, qui se ducem Israelitis
adversus hosts suos praebeat, quique ab illis pro Rege habeatur, probare
nititur, Jer. scil. XLIX.20. ubi a parvulis pecoris trahendi dicuntur (non alio
puto pixum fundamento, quam allusione ad nomen (...) quod ovem denotat) quam
futile? quam non modo aliorum apud ipsos Doctorum Interpretationibus, sed and
inconcussis fidei Judaicae fundamentis plane contrarium? Hoc enim, test Ad
Sanhed. c. 10. fund. 12.
Maimonide, inter fidei eorum articulos de quibus dubitare nefas est, locum
habet (...) Non futurum Israeli Regem nisi Davide oriundum, cumque e progeni^
Salomonis. Posito hoc fundamento, quis Regi e Josephi posteris locu^? Corruit
quicquid de Messia isto nugantur. Caute ergo hic agit Abarbinel atque, ideo in
bello occisum iri ait Regem istum Messiam Ben Joseph quod imperium sibi
vendicaverit, cum e Tribu Ephraim, non Judae, ad quam jure id pertinebat,
fuerit: adeo ut erroris sui moniti Judaei, cum illum in quo spes suas
colloc^verant periisse viderint, exclamaturi sint, Annon quod regnum familiae
Davidicae deseruimus, haec nobis mala contigerunt, o^ciditque Messiah iste? and
ad Dominum Deum suum and Davidem Regem suum se conversuri. At Messiam interim
istum Ephraemitam virum pium, Domini timentem, eique carum futurum, quique nec
ob pe^^atum suum neci dabitur, nec ob peccata eorum qui ipsi adhaeserint, cum
nec ipsi impii aut peccatores futuri sint, sed pii, si qui alii, ac sancti:
adeo ut ipsius caedem in omnes gentes ulturus sit Deus (ipsique hanc
repositurus mercedem (test R. Saadia capite jam laudato) ut primus ad seculi
futuri gaudia resurgat.) At quam sunt haec (...) and a ratione prorsus aliena,
ut morte mulctetur vi^ tam Sanctus, tam Deo carus unaque pereat virorum qui
(...) sanctitate Angelis pares, multitudo, quod illud fecerint, quod ante tot
secula Deus per Prophetas suos futurum praedixerat, quodque ut exitum
sortiretur, ille mittendus erat, ut dictum, Ecce ego mitto, etc. vel illum, vel
illos ita comparati cum essent, illud facturos quod legi contra^ium Deoque
ingratum esset? unumque ac idem facinus sceleri imputatum, ac mox vita aeterna
remuneratum iri? Nec minus mirandum quod Haggaon postquam tot vaticiniis
praenunciatum Messiam istum ostenderc conatus fuerit, rem in dubio tandem
relinquat, venturus unquam sit necne; si enim Judaei poenitentiam egerint non
venturum. Quo ergo tot illustres Prophetiae? omniumne eventus a Judaeorum
arbitrio pendet? si illi poenitentiam egerint frustra erit quod hic Malachiae
pr^econio publicatum, Ecce ego mitto nuncium meum, qui praeparet viam ante
faci^m meam; frustra illud Zachariae oraculum, Et asticient ad me quem
transfixerunt* and plang^nt super ^um veluti planctum super unigenitum, etc.
qui certe locus e praecipuis qui ipsos ad commentum hoc de Messia isto Ben
Joseph excogitandum impulit, videri possit. Nam cum in eo de Messia agi negare
non poss^nt, eoque transfigendo ac mala passuro, qualia Messiae Davidis filio,
cui omnia in hoc enam seculo prospera auspicantur, pati turpe and inglorium
putant, alium sibi finxerunt, cui and Messiae titulum and dignitatem Regiam
tribuerent, licet ^ tribu fastigii istius non capaci, quo Christianorum
argumenta contra ipsos vati^inio illo pugnantium, Christumque per adversa and
mortem ad regnum idque spirituale, non terrennum pervenire debuisse probantium,
eludant. Ac (...) Q^i^ concedat ut loco isto pro (...) Elai ad (...)
substituere liceret (...) Elau ad eum, and aspicient ad eum quem transfixerunt.
Quam illud percupiant, ex eo patet, quod tam in Talmude qua^ R. Saadia ita
citentur verba. Hoc eni^ pacto rec idem esset transfixus iste, cum eo qui
initio versus se super habitatores Jerusalem spiritum gratiae and deprecationum
effu^u^um dicit* (ac proinde ipse Deus; cum haec solius Dei sit, praestare)
ipsisque injuriae illi factae scelus a se ad alios amolirentur. At cum hoc non
liceat, frustra est quicquid moliuntur ne argumento hoc premi videantur, and
solutionem suam habet (...) Betziddo (ut vel ipsius Lipmanni verba contra
ipsos, ac suos populares retorqueamus) a latere sibi conjunctam. Neque enim
patiuntur Grammaticae leges, ut aliter exponamus verba quam aspicient ad me
quem transfixerunt, ut non ad illum quem ita nec ad me, propter eos quos
transfixerunt, ut David Kimchi ipseque Lipmanus.

Sed ut eo unde digressi sumus revertamur. Quam male interim (si in eorum
potestate situm sit) de se and Messia isto suo merentur. Judaei, quod mala sibi
ipsius adventu impendentia, maturata poenitentia praevertere nolint, cum (ex
Haggaonis sententia) si resipuerint nec venturus sit ille, nec ipsi gravia ista
passuri? si (quod senti ut nonnulli, and probare conati sunt Raimundus and
Galatinus, e libris pauois, sic ubi extant, Christianorum visis, (quique an
omnino extent dubitari possit) non alium Messiam, quem dixerunt Josephi filium,
ab illo Davidis voluerint antiquiores Judaei, non alia de causa illi nomen hoc
ab ipsis inditum putaverim, quam quo (...) describerent, quique Josephi Jacobo
filii instar male multandus esset, graviaque passurus. Nisi forsan qui primum
hanc fabulam confinxerunt ansam arripuerint a nomine Josephi Mariae sponsi,
Messiam, Josephi filium comminiscendi, quod mul^to probabilius, quam quod ait
Abarbinel Christi discipulos, multa de Messia Josephi filio a Patribus accepta,
dogmatis suis immiscuisse. Sed revera non hoc inter (...) dicta, nec vel inter
antiquiores traditiones numerandum censeo, sed magis nuperum sequioris aevi
commentum, multis post Christum ea passum annis, effictum, ob eas quas superius
innui rations, quodque nunquam universalis apud ipsos traditionis nomen
meruit. Huic adstipulatur etiam Maimonidis authoritas, qui de praecursore
Messiae verba faciens, quem Sapientum nonnullos Eliam fore, statuere ait, addit
(...) haec and quae eo spectant omnia nemo distinct noverit antequam exitum
habuerint: obscura sunt quae a Prophetis de iis dicuntur (...) nec apud
sapientes de illis traditio est, praeter illud quod ex scriptura necessario
infertur. Quae and sic ex ipsius mente enarrat c R. Tanchum (...) quomodo se
habitura fit res in istis promissis, tum demum distinct percipietur cum
extiterint, nec est cuipiam de iis traditio aliqua certa, verum unusquisque
profert quod sibi videtur ex iis, quae apud ip^um praeponderant, scripturae
interpretationibus. Sapientem illum Rabbinum (Maimonidem intelligo) alias
religionis Judaicae assertorem satis pertinacem, putidi isti us de Messia Ben
Joseph commenti puduisse videtur. Ad Malac. 4. ^ad, Melac. c. 11.
Ubi enim quaecunque ad Messiam spectant exponenda sibi proponit, ea quibus duo
Messiae innui videantur non de aliis intelligi vult quam de David* eoque qui
ipso oriundus sit, nulla Josephi filii facta mentione. Deque ipsius praecursore
(quem R. Saadias, and Aben Ezra ut vidimus, Messiam Ben Joseph autumant) licet
Eliae nomine appelletur, non tamen certo constare ipsum futurum Eliam, sed
saltem Prophetam aliquem viz. qui Eliae dignitate, gradu, and scientia par sit,
(explicante eam sententiam R. Tanchum) ac de hoc certe apud antiquiores Judaeos
olim disceptatum videtur, ex eorum verbis, qui ad Johan. Baptistam a synedrio
missi percunctatum quis esset, interrogarunt? essetne Christus? essetne Elias?
essetne Propheta ille? Messiam ergo expectabant illi unum, Davidis filium;
expectabant etiam, vel Eliam, vel prophetam aliquem in^ignem. Nihil de Ephraimi
aut Josephi filio quaerunt. Facessant igitur commenta hominum, indubitatae Dei
veritati, mendacia a se conficta praeferentium. Facessat (...) iste Messiah;
Hosanna filio David. Quisquis animo non praesumpta opinione corrupto,
prophetarum verba inspexerit, quicquid ab Angelo ante Domini faciem seu
Apparitoris vice, mittendo expectandum erat, in Johanne Baptista; quicquid ab
Angelo illo foederis, seu ipso Messia, in Jesu Christo exitum habuisse, adeo ut
extra dubium sit, illum fuisse qui venturus erat, nec alium expectandum, facile
perspiciet.

FINIS.

