Poeta Infamis: Or, a Poet not worth Hanging. Being A DIALOGUE, Between
Lysander Valentine, and Poet Pricket. With a Letter to the Author of the
Marriage-Hater matched, Written by his Friend.

Qui Bavium non odit amet tua Carmina Maevi

Martial. Difficile est Satyram non scribere nam quis inique,
Tam patiens Vrbis tam ferreus ut teneat se.
Juvenal. LONDON: Printed for B. C. and are to be sold by R. Baldwin, at the
Oxford Arms, in Warwick Lane, 1692.

To the always disingenuous Tom Pricket, Author of The Marriage-Hater matched.
I Am sensible the World esteems thy trifting Labors, according to their
Merit; for should a Man judge, with all the partiality imaginable, I doubt not
but he would find faults equal to his severe Censure: I must confess I have
read thy Play, but now it is with as much regret, as if I were to go five Miles
to hear a Fanatic Preach. I (as all other Men commonly do) began at the
beginning, I read over thy Epistle, and Mr. G -- n's; tho, by the way, I must
let the World know, thou were the real Genuine Author, the Mr. G -- n fathers
it: I must needs say you were a fit Person to write an Encomium of your own
Ingenuity, for if thou have any, it is sure best known to thy self; but the
Devil a word did I ever hear uttered by thee, that had the least glimpse of a
Jest, or any other thing like Wit or Ingenuity; but always a Mass of dull heavy
Nonsense, not at all diverting, but very extravagant; I was at first, when I
read thy Quotation out of Horace, extremely pleased, and my Expectation
glutted, with a desire of going on; for thus Horace says, Eupolis, atque
Cratinus Aristophanesque Poetae
Arque alii quorum Comedia prisca virorum est.
Si quis erat digni describi, quod malus aut fur,
Quod moechus foret, aut Sicarius, aut alioqui
Famosus, multa cum liberate notabant.


But at last my fancy was quite palled, and instead of a good Desription of
Man, I met with a very ill one of two legged Brutes, Fops and Butterflies,
beyond the extravagancies of Humane Thoughts: It makes one think now thou
quotest only to be thought a Scholar; for I Am sure thou have not followed
Eupolis, Cratinus, nor Aristophanes, in these words, quorum Comedia prisca
virorum est. I remember the same quotation is at the Title Page of thy Three
Dukes of Dunstable, (a Play almost as good as thy Marriage-Hater; it is true,
thy Play is altogether surprising, and very unnatural; the several neat turns
of a Play, I confess do keep the Minds of the Audience employed with
Expectation, Hope and Desire, but I Am sure they don't end in Satisfaction; but
let the instructive part be never so good, the Language never so fine (tho
thine is mere Billings-gate Discourse, instead of Poetical Adornments in
Conversation.) I must needs say, if the Action goes on without any Plot to
divert us, we see through the whole at first sight; in that I Am of your Mind,
but thy Plot and Language gratifies none of our Passions, without which there
can be no Pleasure.

By what I have said will appear that you set up like Mr. Bays, for a new way
of writing, and despise the Ancients, thinking nothing witty, but what proceeds
from your insensible Perecranium, I must confess, it is a base, and ill natured,
as well as Ignorant Age, when the Virtues of a Play shall be arraigned as
defects; but if the Vulgar had the understanding of those, of a more knowing
capacity, they would not have given that Plaudit to thy Marriage-hater as it
had; but these (and several other) Defects, in thy Play, are owing to a weak
understanding.

I cannot accuse you of being a Plagiary, because the greatest, and best part
of all thy Works are stolen; but I can never (with a safe Conscience) allow
thee to be a Poet, whose Genius inclines rather to making Songs, than
Theatrical Diversions; nay, I can never say thy Lyrick Part is without fault,
but equally Nonsensical. In fine, thou art as Terence says, Plumbeus Homo, and
wilt never be esteemed, as thou alone think thou deservest, but will still
be thought the worst of Scriblers, as thou art by me,

Charles G -- n.

Poeta Infamis: Or, a Poet not worth Hanging. Being A DIALOGUE, Between
Lysander Valentine, and Poet Pricket.
Valentine and Lysander meeting. Val. MY dear Lysander, best of Friends, and
Partner in Iniquity, how glad am I to see thee in London; I thought thou had
been retired in the Country, and would never have come to Sodom more: What Is
the Cause, a Mistress, hah?


Lys. No Valentine, I Am now come, with a full Resolution to continue with thee;
it is true, I loved the Country, till I found the difference in discoursing with
the ingenious, and the dull stupid Country Blockheads, whose Conversation tends
to nothing but Dogs, Horses, and stumm'd Ale; I am sensible that a Man may
live in this Town, as soberly, as in the Country; for all the old, godly,
secret Sinners, of this Age, exclaim against it so much.


Val. Well, and shall I, once more, enjoy the Society of my dearest Frien? --
faith, Lysander, I have been almost wearied, out of my Life, with a company of
Fops, worse than Summer flies, buzzing about ones Note, and far more
troublesome, for those one may destroy, these not without damage to ones self.


Lys. I have heard of these insensible Animals, and can but laugh at 'em; but
prithee tell me, (for thou were a constant Man at the Playhouse,) How go the
Vizard-Maskes? At what Rates may one enjoy, a little, pretty Dear, soft,
charming Creature; a Guinny, and a Treat, will that suffice?


Val. A Guinny, and a Treat; why what an extravagant Fellow art thou, to talk
of a Guinny, and a treat, when halt a Crown will do.


Lys. Why then the Market is fallen it seems?


Val. It Is with Whores, as it is with other Callings; there is so many of 'em
they can scarcelive.


Lys. Ay, but then your Ladies who sparkle it in the side Boxes, --


Val. Ay, They who are bound to bless God that he made some Fools, tho they
make 'em greater; Oh! what a Happiness is it, for to see a young Amourous
Coxcomb, lolling his Head in his Mistresses Lap, talking fine things to her,
but damned Intricate, and very Nonsensical.


Lys. I must confess, Valentine, there are Charms in Women that are
irresistible; to lie on her lost, snowy Breasts, hah! Well, say what thou will,
Women are delicious Creatures, that is certain; and if I must Sin, (as who from
Sin is free,) let it be a Sin that brings Pleasure with it; as for Swearing,
it is an ill Habit, and one receives no Benefit from it; lying is rather worse,
but if it be ever Lawful, it is when a Woman's Honor's in danger; for
Drunkeness, it is dangerous, and then how sick it makes one, and out of order,
next Morning.


Val. And Whoring is worse than all these; what Diseases it brings upon one;
wastes ones Body in this World, and ones Soul in the next: Let me tell you,
while you lie melting in a Woman's Arms, as you call it, your Money lies melting
in your pocket, so it is like lighting the Candle at both ends; -- but hold, --
Who Is this coming toward us, -- hah, -- by Heaven, it is Poet-Pricket: -- Now,
Lysander, I Will show thee some sport.


Enter Poet-Pricket, and his Man. Prithee do thee seem to applaud what ever he
says, and prefer his Works before any other Poets.

Po. P. Jack, Have you been at the Playhouse?


Jack. Yes Sir.


Po. P. And are all the Actors ready for the Rehearsal.


Jack. All but Mrs. B -- ler, she is not well, and cannot come; but she desires
you to give the Part to some body else, for she expects to lie in within this
Month, and that may be a hinderance to your Play.


Po. P. A pox of those Actresses, they are so fruitful; -- but the truth is, a
great belly'd-Woman, does not become the Stage, -- well, Mrs. Kn -- t shall.


Val. Hah, My dear Man of Wit, Tom. Pricket, prithee, how do thou do Man?


Po. P. Mr. Valentine, your most obedient humble Servant, -- a Friend of yours
this?


Lys. Yes, at your Service, Sir.


P. P. Your devoted Slave, --


Val. Where have thou been thus early, it is not Eight yet?


P. P. I have been medidating on a Lampoon, I am about Writing, it is to be a
Satyr against Critics, those snarling Fellows, who have no more sense, than so
many Jack-Daws; besides, they are a company of Cowardly Fools, for they dare
not let one know of their Malice, beforehand, for fear I should confront 'em;
did I but know any one that should Carp at my well accepted Labors, I would
make him a public Example, -- by the Parliament.


Val. I know, Tom, thou have reason to be severe; for, I must needs say, they
speak very disdainfully of thy Works; a Man of thy vivacity, quickness of
Patts, and nimbleness of Apprehension, to be used so scurvily.


P. P. Will you believe me, Mr. Valentine, I have taken more pains to find out
true Humor, then any Poet of 'em all; and for Plot, I Will leave you to Judge.


Val. Nay, who ever says thy Plays are not full of Plot, I Am sure, are
mistaken; -- but prithee what makes the Town speak so ill of thy Marriage-hater
matched?


P. P. Why Faith, 'twas too full of Wit, Humor, and Plot; the Three best
Ingredients of a Play.


Lys. Why, Sir, Was that your Play?


P. P. Sir, 'twas the Product of this Noddle.


Lys. Then I must confess your ingenuity; -- I believe there may be some Satyr
in it too.


P. P. Gad, Sir, you are in the right, and da-damme, if I have not exposed
Madam La Pupsey, and her Lap-Dog, very well, I think: -- I heard she was
damnanbly netled, but that is all one, -- then let the stricken Dear go weep, as
Hamlet says; 'gad, that Humor of dressing the Dog in Masquerade, was very
surprising, diverting, and new, and (tho I say it) a very good Humor.


Lys. Most admirable.


Val. Ay, but Tom, you know there was a Man some Years ago, who went about with
dancing Dogs, they had Doublets too, did you not steal the Humor from him, --
Come, discover, I am thy Friend. --


P. P. Why, egad, I had a little hint of it, from him, I confess, but you must
grant, I have improved it much.


Val. That thou have indeed Tom, -- I hope you will pardon my familiarity.


P. P. O dear Sir, your faithful -- but then for Van Grim's Part, that you must
allow to be new; and faith, I have drawn the Copy, as like the Original, as a
couple of Apples.


Val. That Part is good, for as the Rehearsal begins with a Whisper, his Part
begins with a Laughter, it is true, one's louder than the other, but for sense
they are equal; but remember, against next time, nequid nimis.


P. P. This is the cry of the Town, -- People may say what they will; but (I
vow to God) I took more pains, in writing that Part, then I ever had, in any
three Parts, I ever writ; I swear to you, I was seven days, one after another,
successively, to learn Toney Leigh, to Laugh, and I think there is a great deal
of humor, and variety, in his laughing -- Faith Sir, I called him Van Grim,
because of his laughing, I vow to God.


Val. I was thinking so.


P. P. A Pox of these Laureats, they are dull, stupid, senseless Fellows, when
once they come to be preferred; let me tell you a secret, Mr. Valentine, the
quondam Laureate is no better than the present Laureate, nor the present
Laureate is no better than the quondam Laureate -- both mighty sounding
nothings, I vow to God.


Val. I perceive Tom, your railing at the Laureates, is like David Iones's
railing against Pluralities, only because he is not burdened with 'em himself.


P. P. No faith, thou mistak'st me, but let that pass; but what lay you to my
Lord Brainless's Character, to you, I speak Sir, to Lys.


Lys. To me Sir, why I think it is an excellent Character.


P. P. Why, without vanity, I may say it is.


Val. But prithee Tom, learn to speak modestly of thy own Works; -- but, I Will
be sworn, thou have a great many Enemies, and when a Man has no Friend, he
ought to be one himself.


P. P. For Modestly, none out-does me; but prithee tell me how thou likest that
Part.


Val. I am your Friend, however, Tom, and am willing to applaud whatever you
write; but I Will tell you, what the Town thinks of it.


P. P. Prithee do, and let me see how some Block-heads will betray their
Understandings.


Val. First then, they say that your Lord Brainless, as you call him, is
partly, in imitation of Sir Fopplin Flutter; partly, Sir Courtly Nice, and
several other Characters, but not comparable to any one of 'em; a noisey,
impertinent, self-conceited, amorous, incipid Coxcomb; and that he utters as
much sense, as the Author was able to surnish him with; in short, that he was
more fit for the Conversation of a La Pupsey, then either of the Characters
were for a Comedy.


Lys. Pish, This is malice only.


P. P. Egad, and so it is, down right Malice, but hear me, was there no humor,
and thought, in the Stockings, one Red, the other Yellow? Was not that pretty.


Val. No faith, Tom, I Am always a plain Dealer, especially to my Friend; had
you advised with me, you should never have dressed him with party colored
Stockings, 'twas damned unnatural; I must confess, the vanities of our Fops,
are very great, but I never knew any one so great a Fop, as to wear such
Stockings; but, I Will grant you, a Madman might have such a fancy -- faith, they
say, there is nothing new in all thy Play.


P. P. How, nothing new! I have drawn more new Characters in my Play, then have
been drawn these seven Years, but if I had not, my Master Terence, would excuse
me, nullum est jam dictum quod; non dictum fuit prius; if he could say so, so
many years ago, I may well say so now.


Val. But don't you mistake that Sentence, it may be, Terence did not mean that
Sentence as you do? intimating, that it was impossible to write any thing new;
but what think you if it was because the Comedy was written originally in
Greek, and translated by Terence into Latin, and therefore says Nullum est jam
dictum, etc. because it had been acted before, tho in another Language.


P. P. Faith 'twill serve either way; -- but Sir, pray let me ask you one
Question, [ to Lys.] for I find your Friend is a little prejudiced to my Works,
-- How like you Solon, and Biaes, and Sir Lawrence Limber, their Father?


Lys. Extremely, I think they are not to be matched.


P. P. Why, I Am some thing of your mind, and I have been told as much before
now; my modesty will not let me speak in my own behalf, but they are good
Characters that is certain.


Val. Look you Tom, you are mightly beholding to Dogget for performing that
part so well, but a Harliquin, with all his grimaces, and tricks of Activity,
is full as well, and as acceptable. In fine, there is nothing but Nonsense in
the Three Parts, Solons bad, Bias worse, and the Father worse than either; but
one may be as long in expectation of Wit, in thy Play, as Sir Lawrence, and the
rest of them were for Van-Grim's jest, and I dare Prophecy when it comes will
be no better; -- you never writ a Part that would bear Reading, tho your Friend
says, haec semel placuit, haec bis repetita placebit; but his Judgment is no
better than thine, and therefore I shall not regard it: -- I will not go to
particularize your nonsensical Expressions, but in general, these Three Parts
are very ridiculous; besides, thou have a notable way of stealing from thy
self; Solon, Bias, and Sir Lawrence, are something like Captain Tilbury, and
Zekiel, and Toby, in Madam Fickle; and something like Sir Roger Petulant, and
Sneak, in the Fond Husband, or the Plotting Sisters. -- You know too, Tom. vou
can make one sorry Jest serve for two or three Plays, witness, the Cold Tea, in
Love for Money; and again, in the Marriage hater matched, and several other
very indifferent Quibbles (I shall omit naming) more fit for Bartholomew Fair,
than the Theater.


P. P. Now I see thou have the Spirit of Contradiction in thee; -- I wish I
could talk with you Sir, but I see your Friend is envious of my Parts to Lys.


Lys. I swear, he need not [ aside] Sir, I am sorry to see it.


P. P. I am your Servant, dear Sir; -- but now I Will put his Judgment in
question, with a Part ar two, in my Play; I Will try him further, Mr. Valentine,
pray tell me one thing, but one thing, I vow to Gad.


Val. That I will, if I can, What is it?


P. P. -- Why only how you like Sir Philip Frewit, Lady Subtle, and Phebe,
alias, Lovewell's Characters, for there lies the whole body of the Plot.


Val. O, is that all, why thus, the Plot is new.


P. P. Why egad, so it is.


Val. But, how is it new, to that I answer, because I never heard of any Man,
who made over his Wife, and Estate, by Will, or Agreement, before, that was
damned unnatural; besides, that between Van Grim, and Sir Philip, under the
name of Counceller Splutter, I don't like; I cannot think any one would send
the writings, by any one, unless they knew the Lawyer; Widows are commonly more
crasty; nay, she knew, before that. Sir Philip was contriving to undermine her
too, and therefore, I think, should have been more cautious; but for Sir Philip
to be cheated by Phebe, upon so slight an account, makes me wonder most, that
any man should let his Wench into his Closet, where the Writings, and Jewels
(too Man's glittering damnation) were, when he had fallen out with her just
before, on her asking him to perform his Promise, in marrying her; nay, there
is not an Expression tolerable, in the whole, but thou have stolen out of some
good Play; there are some that are thy own, I believe, or Mr. G -- n's, but
they are very bad ones, and nor worth taking notice of. -- One thing I Will say,
the Actors performed their Parts better then you did yours be half.


P. P. Nay, Mr. Valentine, the Players are beholding to me, for the excellent
Action, for I teach 'em, and, tho I say it, can Act as well as any of 'em all.


Val. Prithee, why do thou not turn Actor, thou might supply the Stage,
both ways, like a Shakespeare, a Batterton, or a Mountford; I have heard thou
delightest much in fine Clothes, there thou might be furnished with splendid
Vestiments, and pay nothing for 'em, and appear so gay, on the Stage, that
happy's the Woman that looks and lives, as a Brother says.


P. P. Nay, now you are either in jest, or else you mean to affront me, Mr.
Valentine.


Val. Most certainly, I mean one of 'em, do you take it which way you please
tho.


P. P. I Will take it for granted, you jest only, and therefore shall trouble my
self no more about it.


Val. Faith, now Tom. I, see thou art not exceptious, and thou begins to be a
good honest Fellow, that is, as honest as any of thy Tribe are.


P. P. I hope you don't rank me amongst a company of dull Thoughtless Idiots;
Sir, let me tell you, I am above 'em.


Val. So thou art Tom. I now begin to be converted, and may be brought to
believe thy Plays are good; -- but when the Devil knows. -- aside.


P. P. Faith and troth, I am glad you are.


Val. Prithee let us know the rest of the Characters in thy Marriage-hater, it
may be thou may convince me of my Error.


P. P. The Parts that I have not spoken of, are Captain Darewell, and Callow,
and Berenice, Margery, and my Lady Bumfiddle; but, before I speak of them, give
me leave to ask you how you like those Verses, when Sir Philip has got the
Writings from Van Grim.


Conclusion of the II. Act of the Marriage-hater.
So here they are, and the great feat is done,
Easily now the Widow may be won;
For what is a Widow, when her Fortune's gone.
Ay, what indeed; I vow to Gad, was not that pretty, faith I have good thoughts
--


For what is a Widow when her Fortunes gone.
Da damme, nothing at all; prithee, how do thou like it Man?


Val. That, I must confess, is very good sense, and very witty; -- but Tom. now
thou art talking of a Widow, what became of thy Buckssome Bona Roba, I mean the
Widow who lived at Chiswick. whom you were so greatly enamoured of?


P. P. O, I remember who you mean, -- I left her off, when I found her frailty,
I was resolved not to have her.


Val. I heard she was resolved not to have you; she would not accept of your
Visits, because you were a Poet, and consequently an Atheist, tho I believe you
had more occasion for her Money than her Person.


P. P. Sir your History is Erroneous, I can assure you, she almost broke her
Heart.


Val. What, for thy rugged Face; prithee give me leave to jest.


P. P. Ay, for my rugged Face, as you call it, there are Charms in this
Countenance, and something else too. -- III. Act, in the beginning. Berenice
(in my last Play) says, She likes the honest blunt Dog, well enough; and if she
would let any one of the two-legg'd Bears rub their Brissels on her Face, it
should be the blunt Captain, before any Milksop-Benu of 'em all: -- Well, that
Berenice is a parlous Queen, how she jilts the poor Captain; and he (tho such a
blustering Man of War) is fain to lay down his Arms, when the God of love
appears; but she has reason, which I have fully expressed in these Verses.


B. The time of Wooing is a Women's own;
But when she is Married once, her time is gone.

Val. Faith Tom. you say true, when she is Married once, her Wooing time is
over; there you are once in the right; -- but I must needs say those are silly
Verses, prithee let us hear them once more.


P. P. The time of Wooing is a Woman's own;
But when she is Married once, --

Val. Hold Tom. then consequently her time is gone, -- Is it not so.


P. P. Yes Sir, you have it.


Val. We are obliged to you for telling us that Secret.


P. P. We^l, I see you will persist in your ill Nature, and it is now almost
impossible to reclaim you; but I think there is a great deal of humor and
variety in Captain Darewell, and Bereniece's Characters; -- She Is a brisk,
freakish, humourous Creature, and tho she is in love with the Captain, is always
teazing him, and playing tricks with him; and he is an honest blunt Sea-Captain,
true to his Countries Interest, and the Government.


Val. That Is more than thou art Tom. I believe; I wonder how a Man that has
always been such a Grand Tory, should comply and turn Whigg at last; -- I never
like Turn Coats.


P. P. Your Servant for that Sir; -- but I shall not mind it, I say those Parts
agree very well.


Val. I grant it, tho thy humors are whimsical, and odd enough, -- and so are
those [ aside.] My Lady Bumfiddle too is worth ones Observations.


P. P. There I have drawn a running Bawd to the Life, and yet cheated the
Audience, to believe her almost honest. -- There Is a hungry, toping,
match-making-Bawd -- Lambeth Ale -- egad, -- did you not mind that.


Val. Yes, yes, that I did -- but what a beastly Name have thou given her, --
Bumfiddle, out upon it.


P. P. Why, you must know, I called her Bumfiddle, because of her Obessity.


Val. I am convinced, I only say that these two Characters behind, Callow and
Margery, are the very worst in the Play, I Will allow all the rest to be the best
of Nonsense -- aside.


P. P. No faith, I don't think so neither, I Am sure I drew Callow to the Life;
-- besides, the Rot-me-Sparks were nettled, and so they may for Tom.


Val. Thou have made a good Actor appear like a Block-head, I mean Bohen, by
giving him a Part no more fit for him, than I am to Act Alexander the Great. --
And for thy little lisping Queen, she Acts the Part, with a great deal of
Impudence, and for ought I know was improved by my Lady Bumfiddles Doccuments,
tho my Lady said her instructions were in vain. You know Callow says to her,
come my dear sweet-Creature, I must do it; and she answers, What do you make all
this bustle for, why don't you then? -- I would advise thee to write no more
Bawdy, unless you can wrap it up more cleanlily.


Lys. Faith Sir, my Friend has found out so many Faults, that are seemingly so,
that I begin to be of his mind, and think you are no better than a Block-head;
these Jests and Quibbles would have pleased us Country Gent. well enough, but I
see my Friend's ingenious.


P. P. Gad not so ingenious as you think for.


Val. Ha ha ha ha, poor Tom.


Lys. Ha ha ha ha.


P. P. Nay, nay, 'gad, laugh with Moderation, or I Am gone.


Val. Ha ha ha, a Poet, no a Scrivener, or a Scribler, but no Poet, and so,
dear Tom, your Servant; let your next Play be better, or never expose it to the
Critics Censures. Come, dear Friend, let us leave the Poet to his Thoughts, we
may hinder the Production of some excellent witty Song, or Lampoon, for he is a
great Enemy to the Critics -- ha ha ha, farewell Ballad-Maker, there is thy Man
too, get him a new Livery, and buy no more Diamond-Rings, but keep your Money
when you have it, -- ha ha ha.


Lys. Ha ha ha ha, farewell Poetaster.


Val. Farewell Tom. ha ha.

Exeunt.
P. P. Nay, since I am provoked to it, farewell, you Brutes, and Enemies to Wit
and Sense, nay, and all learning too. -- Jack, put on my Cloak, I Will make have
to the Playhouse, I fear I have stayed too long, prateing with these Buffoons;
I am of a very petulant Spleen, and now they shall find what an ingenious
Satyrist can do. -- Come Jack, follow me.


Exeunt. FINIS.

