A POEM, Upon the Transactions between A LANDLORD And His Tenant DAY, Who
privately departed from him by Night.
By a Gent. of Lincoln's-Inne.
HEre Night and Day conspire a secret flight:
For Day (they say) is gone away by Night.
The Day is past; but, Landlord where is your Rent?
You might have seen, that Day was almost spent.
Day sold, and did put off what ever he might,
Tho it was never so dark Day would be light.
All movables and Liquors that could pay
Your annual Rent are gone as clear as Day.
You had one Day a Tenant, and would fain
See, if you could one Day that Day again.
No, Landlord, no, you now may truly say,
And to your cost too, you have lost the Day.
Day is departed in the Night, I hear;
Nay Day is broke, yet does not Day appear.
Landlord, you see by Night retired is Day,
And you know well, time will for no Man stay.
From Sun to Sun is the fit time for pay,
But you should have been up by break of Day;
Yet, if you had, you had got nothing by it;
For Day was cunning, and brake over Night.
Day, like a Candle is gone out, and where
None knows, except the other Hemisphere.
Misfortunes now do Day in darkness shroud,
Truth is, at present, Day's under a Cloud;
And yet, who trusted him for any sum,
Might have their money, if that Day were come;
But Day being gone has left our hopes in Night.
Then Bel-man cry Lanthorn and Candlelight,
Well Honest Landlord, what is the matter pray,
What, cannot you sleep for longing for the Day?
I know what it is does discompose your Soul,
You Would fain see Day through a little hole.
Have you a mind, Sir to Arrest the Day?
There Is no such Sergeant as a Joshuah:
You must since Day is now gone out of sight,
Live comfortless in an eternal night.
Never expect on Day to wreak your spite,
It Is but in vain, you do but burn daylight;
He Is the Emblem of your life, a fleeting Day,
That Is gone and past, must not, nay cannot stay
Beyond the time prefixed by common Fate,
And to recall the Day once past's too late;
Yet in your fury you will not stick to say,
Cursed be the Day, whereon I lost this Day.
Lay by your passion though for a round sum,
You know, good Sir, that a pay-day will come;
Therefore cheer up, banish all care and sorrow,
I Will lay my life Day comes again to morrow;
Nay, should he come after this tedious stay,
I fear you would hardly give him the good day.
It was your fault, if you on him reli'd,
Against a rainy day you should provide.
You thought you a good Tenant had always,
But, like a Fool, I thought 'twou'd never be Day.
Landlord, you may with old Rome's Emperor say,
Once in your life, that you have lost a Day*
In your Ephemeris let it have no room,
Because to you it proved a day of Doom.
Day is departed and in truth, I fear,
You Will never see Day, till Doomes-day does appear,
But then, when Gabriel blows his horn, you may,
It Is very probable once more see Day.
Had you a wakeful Man, and early bin,
You might have come before day was shut in,
Defeated all those shuffling tricks outright,
Contrived and acted between Day and Night.
Every Dog has his day, and you may say,
'Twas a Dog's trick for Day to run away.
And now it is too apparent what I Am told,
Day craftily left you the Dog to hold;
Yet Day marched off with nothing but his own,
The Nest remains, although the Bird be flown.
Should all your Tenants serve you thus I Will swear,
The Dog's life, Hunger and ease, would be your share:
Too sure, ah lack a day! the Landlord cries,
I knew the day, when it was otherwise:
Never disturb your self at this, good Friend!
You know that longest day must have an end,
Or else the Proverb fails, never repine,
Though your Day's lost, and which is worse, his Wine.
Such petty wrongs manfully scorn and slight,
And civilly even bid good Day good Night.
Day now the operation of Wine feels,
Which makes in the Night light heads, in day light heels.
Day's not at all too blame; for should he stay
'Thad proved, to him an Execution-day.
The Day is broke, it is time for you to rise;
See how you like Day's Evening Exercise;
Yet it is the course of Nature's Sovereign sway,
That glooming Ngiht should yield t'approaching Day.
It Is a mere contradiction every way,
That you should be thus Night-mar'd by the Day;
Therefore conclude with me your daily Friend,
All Is but an idle Dream, and there is an End.
FINIS.
Books Printed for James Norris, at the Kings-Arms, without Temple Bar, 1684.
1. A Satyr against the Association, and the Guild Hall Riot, quarto. 2. The
Noble Stranger, a Curious Novel, octavo. 3. A Tract against the absolute Decree
of Reprobation, in Latin, octavo. 4. An Idaea of Happiness in a Letter to a
Friend, quarto. 5. A Murnival of Knaves, or Wiggism plainly Displayed, quarto.
6. The Accomplsh't Lady, or Disserving Gentlewoman, twelves. 7. The History of
the horrid Conspiracy of Cataline, against the Government of Rome, octavo. 8.
Core Radevius a Thanksgiving Sermon, quarto. 9. Rome's Rarities, or the Pope's
Cabinet unlocked and exposed to view, octavo. 10. Lucian's Ghost, or Dialogues
between the Dead, wandering in the Elyzian shades, twelves.
ADVERTISEMENT
In the Press are POEMS and Discourses occasionally written by John Norris,
Fellow of All Souls College in Oxford; which shortly will be published.

LONDON, Printed for James Norris, at the Sign of the King's-Arms without
Temple Bar. 1684.


