A PANEGYRIC TO His Highness Prince RUPERT, ON His present Expedition with His
Majesty's NAVY ROYAL against the DVTCH.
Arma VIRVMque cano --

GReat PRINCE! to whose unwearied Pains and Care
England Eternal Monuments must rear
Of Gratitude, as having found in YOU
At once her Nestor and Ach^lles too:
Whose Grave Advice does first our Factions c^se,
And then your Matchless Ar^ subdues our Foes.
Permit an Humble Muse your Fame to greet,
And with your Canv^se spread a Votive Sheet,
Predicting Victory: Assured no less,
RVPERT Commanding warranteth success.
RVPERT, that Glorious Name, wherein we have
Whatever's Prudent, Valiant, Great, or Brave;
In whom Nature all past Hero's does sum,
And Copies sets to those that are to come.
With such a Chief and such a Navy blessed,
As never yet the Oceans Surf^ce pressed,
For strength, for courage and for number too,
What is it we may not ^ai^ly hope to do?
Especially upon a Cause so Just,
As might to Providence and Cock^b^a^s trust:
Though thanks to Heaven a Moving Wood, we see,
Covers the bosom of our Narrow Sea;
A Floating Island, that seems to surpass
Denmark and Dantzick for full choice of Masts:
As if that Womb of Ships ( Forest of Dean)
Into the Ocean now had shisted Scene.
Fancy no more Fond Hogens to su^prise
Us with Fair Words and Foul Advantages;
Nor hope a doubtful Trea^ies sly pretense
Shall gull us to omit needful Def^nce.
We Will parley A^m'd, and if you Deaf remain
To Reason still, and our Just Terms disdain,
We Will Bore your Ears with Thunder, till you cease
Your haughty Pride, and humbly beg for Peace.
See how Fate to your Ruin does advance,
The English Valor, and Fury of France.
Vessel^ of such a bulk! we may maintain
That Wo^den M^unta^ns Dance upon the Main.
Their state^y R^gging charm the gazing eye;
But with what horror and stupidity
Must you receive that Dread Salute that comes
From gaping Entrails of their Numerous Guns!
Whose language speaks Confusion; and their breath
Impregnates Air with Sentences of death;
Outroaring Thunder with their Frightful Sounds,
Which ev'^y Wave to neighboring Shores rebounds,
Like to unhinge the Poles, and dash the Spheres,
In shatters about trembling Atlas ears.
Those Fatal Peals Heaven has designed well,
To ring your Hogen Mogen Stateships Knell.
Zerxes his Chains were but a Foolery;
Such Fleets alone the Seas in Fetters tie:
Manned with stout Seamen yielding to no stroke;
For (like their Ships) their Hearts are Trusty Oak.
Spains King, that formerly Surnamed His
INVINCIBLE, how would he Christen This!
To which that proud Armado was no more
Then Sholes of Fisher-boats crept from the Shore.
Let none repine that Bacons Art did fail;
His Brazen to these Wooden Walls must vail.
May Sa^red CHARLES have always such a Fleet,
Incroaching Foes to prostrate at his Feet,
And never want such Arguments as these
TO assert his Right unto the Narrow Seas.
FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for Jonathan Edwin, at the Three Roses in Ludgate Street, 1673.


