A POEM ON THE HISTORY OF Queen Hesther, AN ELEGY ON THE DEATH OF THE Lord
Chief Justice HALES, And other Occasional POEMS.

LONDON, Printed for William Leech, at the Crown in Cornhill.

OCCASIONAL POEMS.
A Poem on the History of Queen Hesther.
VAsti Deceased, the Beauties do convene,
Each of the fair Rivals hoping to be Queen;
Ahasuerus, as his Peers do move,
Most readily inclines to please his Love;
Hesther succeeds. Neither mean Birth, nor State
Prevents the Match, nor yet great Haman's hate:
The Nobler Virgins, and his Diadem
Are void of Luster, as he views this Gem.
Haman at this time was most high in Court,
None so in Favor, Splendour, Princely port,
To him the People bowed as he past by,
The Admiration of each Heart and Eye.
Poor Mordecai (meanwhile) lay in the Gate
In a forlorn and despicable State.
From him the lofty Courtier looked for more,
Seeing such Grandeur, and himself so Poor:
The cross-grained Captives knee would not conform;
So his sweet Calm ends in a dreadful Storm.
(Ambition, crossed, like to the Sea does rage,
Restless, and boundless, nothing can assuage.)
Slighted by one of the Captivity?
For this the Nation, Root and Branch, shall dye.
Caesar is thus incenst; There is a Sect
Mixed with your people, who perversely Act,
Foes to your Laws and stablisht Government,
Let them be slain, no Treasure there shall want.
('It Was Death enough for Jacob's Seed to be
In a strange Land, sad by each Willow-tree
Condoling there in heavy mournful Songs
Their own distress, their Nations Woes and Wrongs.)
Men, Women, Children, Babes of a span long,
And tender Mothers, both the Old and Young,
All must become one common Sacrifice*
So Haman counsels, and the King complies.
Unhappy Princes, it is too often their Fate,
Thus by surprise to shade the Ills they hate.
Like cunning Fowlers corrupt Statesmen walk,
They seek themselves, and make their Masters stalk.
Mordecai warned Counter-plots the Plot,
His Cause is good, the Enemies is not.
He Caesar saved: who so fit to bring
Help to the Church, as he that saved the King?
He saved his Life, and, in as true a sense,
No saves his Honor and his Innocence.
(Though the Seal Royal be to the Decree,
It Is Loyal, to resist Conspiracy.)
Clothed in Sackcloth he bewails the Harm,
Then in the Queens Ear sounds the sad Alarm,
Commands her to propitiate the King,
(She and her People both are perishing)
Puts her in mind of her once low Degree,
And how obliged by present Dignity.
It Is threatened Death, if Hesther do obey;
It Is worse than Death, if the make no Essay.
Distracting thoughts perplex her trembling breast;
Her feeble Sex can scarce hard words digest;
A frowning Look, and from a Royal Eye,
Is wound enough to make weak Woman dye.
Led by Example of the Ages past.
She and her Maids do keep a privy Fast.
Flesh suggests Danger, noble Faith says, Nay,
The Path of Danger is the safest Way.
Thus Armed, she boldly ventures, Fears not Death,
Nor the King's wrath, nor Haman's poisonous breath.
(How overcoming is a pleasing Face
When it is backed with the power of Grace?)
Great, like her Courage, proves the good success;
Fury is turned into a kind Embrace.
Another Edict now there is dispatched,
The fatal Blow must fall where it was hatched:
(Most righteous Sentence, They who mischief plot
Still, in the close, have mischief for their lot.)
Hesther is favored, Mordecai does Rise,
Proscribed Israel Lives, proud Haman Dies.
To the KING. On His Recovery from Sickness, and being expected to D^^^ at
Guild Hall the last Lord-Mayors-Day.
AFter dark, dismal, gloomy Winters day
Summer approaching, and bright Phoebus Ray,
Each Vegetable buds, the Trees look green,
Birds fall a-singing as the Sun is seen;
So does your welcome Royal Presence bring,
After Autumnal Grief, a Joyful Spring.
The Fogs and Clouds (Great Sir) offending you,
Caused an Eclipse on your great City too;
(Before Consumptive) then she lay even dead,
Dangers and Sickness threatening you the Head,
Fainted and pined, felt by sympathy
Malignant Rome, and your less Malady.
But now that your Majestic beams dispense
From your own Health a healing Influence.
('It Is as a Resurrection) she Revives,
Scorns to be Bedridden, Lives, and Hopes, and Thrives.
Verdure and Blossoms spring up in her Face,
Withering Time cease as you warm the place.
This turns October into pleasant May,
And makes my Lord Mayors as a Jub'lee day:
Your Sick Lands healed with your Majesty
Would raise the Comfort into Ecstasy.
Proel. for Parl. sitting next day after the Lord-Mayors-Day.
Auspicious Edict! Well it did portend,
Counsel to Enter as the Feast to End.
Kindness dissolves! Kings that are Ir'n to Force
Are won by Love to run their proper Course.
An ELEGY on the Death of the Lord Chief Justice Hales.
BRing your Oblations, Poet Laureat Wits,
Here is a Subject your best Art befits;
From me a meaner Offering must suffice,
Who want a Brain for such a Sacrifice.
But what needs an Encomium? Silly Verse
Does but debase this more deserving Hearse.
Is he Deceased? Hales the Learned, the Just?
Once the great Wonder, now but common Dust.
What heart droops not at his departing hence?
It Is as the Sunset, his Set Influence.
Like that great Light, rejoicing in his Sphere,
He ran his Circuit, profiting every where.
With an Impartial hand turned Justice Scale,
The poor man's Patron, helped where Fees did fail.
A Ruling great Example of the Gown,
True to himself, his Country, and the Crown.
But I offend! His own great worth expressed
And better proves, He knew most, and did best.
(Enameled worth! As he was Learned and Just,
High above praise, so low as very Dust.)
Hence petty Grief, Death here wounds a whole Nation,
It calls for more than common Lamentation.
Church and State put on black Mourn, friends Mourn all;
The loss is vast and Epidemical.
This worthy Pillar being fallen to ground,
Where is another Atlas to be found?
Where Is such a Healer? Where so right an Eye,
Sage to Discern, and faithful to Apply.
You of the Long Robe in each Inns-a-Court,
To Cooke's great Name add Hales his good Report;
May it prove Seminal of your Excellence,
In propagating Law and Conscience.
A thousand Phoenix (if it may be) rise
Out of his Ashes, good like him and wise;
To build up Justice, wrongs and vice assuage,
And reinforce the beggared Bankrupt Age.
In whom surviving, It may yet be said,
The Oracle of Law still Lives though Dead.
The Epitaph.
Ingenious Reader stay and drop a Tear,
England's great Darling and Defense lies here;
Weep Widowed Nation, weep till streams do fall:
Like a kind Bride, his Love was Conjugal.
To Sir George Jeffreys on his being Knighted.
NOt that you need this silly Offering,
Nor would I seem to Rival with the King;
'Twere bold and saucy, as absurd and vain,
After his Sword, to dare to praise again.
I have my Laurel, if my Rhyme express
A grateful sense of your great Worthiness.
That Worth which made you high in hearts before,
Now winning Caesar's makes you high much more.
So early Wisdom? Gray at such an Age?
Ripe in your Springtime? Who did not presage?
Arms to the Gown give place, such Cumbates cease,
The Learned in Honor much imports Peace.
No Battles but those bloodless at the Bar,
Where wise men Clash, as if 'twere time of War,
With Brandisht Tongues, like Weapons in the Field,
Each fierce for Conquest as with Sword and Shield.
Were Trophies proper in this Civil sense,
Triump conferred on Wit and Eloquence,
You might resemble Caesar's self of Rome,
And boast, as he, you come and overcome.
To Sir Thomas Fitch on his good Fortune and Public Works.
SO we in History behold
Brave Men and their brave Deeds Enrolled,
As here presented to our view,
The Pourtrait of your Art and you.
Worth that is derived from Ancestors
Is not so truly and so nobly ours,
As that which is like yours acquired,
This merits to be most admired.
By wise contrivance you Instruct
In building, and in Aqueduct:
Where Fabrics are of chief Respect,
Who will not guess you Architect?
You Grace the City every where,
By Land or Water Fitch is there:
So in a sense the Saying's true,
You London raise, as it raised you.
Weep Cloudy Suburbs, Widowed Flood,
Now Corn grows there where Troy once stood.
The Palace glory is pulled down
Which did give luster to the Crown.
The Owners Honor, as the place,
Grown Tenement like, mean and base.
You, Sir, seem to condole White Hall,
Which mourns for this Place Fall;
And kindly in your Sphere supply
That blemish of Nobility.
As they do Raze, you Rear a Pile,
Which both Convicts their practice vile
And helps a little to remove
The gloomy sad Eclipse above.
May it so live a lasting Monument:
You have by mind what they have by descent.
To the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor at the Anniversary Entertainment in
Guild Hall.
THE wise Apollo Laugheth once a year;
So the resembling mortal Gods do here
Deign to be jolly, and Triumph together,
Over their Cares, and over Romes foul weather.
As you (much Honored Sir) Ascend the Chair,
The Heavens so kind and so Propitious are.
Redeemed Religion happily supplies
Fresh Comfort to your former solemn Joys.
Let Popery dashed sound sweeter in your Ear
Than the sweet pleasing melody you hear.
And Hearts as with good Wine be cheered and warmed
With the good news His Majesty not harmed;
But this ought to your Joys Excess,
His Martyred Friend falls by the merciless.
Now Exit Babylon's Transubstantiation,
Infernal Plots and Hell Assassination;
Those Egypt Frogs no more Infest or Croak
Within the shadow of the Royal Oak.
(Avaunt Prodigious, Protean, Papal-State.)
Avaunt the cursed Raviliack Transmigrate.
The noise of Blood, The noise of Bankrupts cease,
The Nations Wealth, the Nations Fame increase.
This so bright dawning Providential Ray
Sweetly presageth Sunshine Halcyon day.
And you my Lord, within your Lower Sphere
Are a good Omen. Happy be your year.
On Sir Edmundbury Godfrey.
SVch is Man's Life and Fickle state,
Consumed with Care, exposed to Hate,
Rent by variety of Fate,
(At most but of a moments Date)
So here in this great Hearse we see,
The best of Mortals, what they be.
The wise and good worst harms molest,
The more of worth, the less of rest.
As in a Storm the Cedars fall,
And Shrubs survive their Funeral.
To Sir J. L. on his noble Entertainment at his going out Sheriff.
SO in your Bounty you appear
Not seen but in your sumptuous Cheer:
As Modesty hid in a Cloud
The Generous Sun does needy Mortals good.
The well fraught Dishes left behind
Impressions of your Noble Mind;
What needed further Eloquence,
Your welcome such by way of Influence.
Wine Bottles Volly-wise did fly,
Mess upon Mess two Stories high;
No Counter Scuffle in the Rear,
That plague of Mock Feasts plenty banished here.
If so Benign where only sat
Poor Livery-men of the Lowest Rate,
What were you to the upper Guest,
Who added Luster to your splendid Feast.
May the kind Cost you did impart
Bring a rich Income to your Heart;
Not of that Treasure which is told,
But Wealth more worthy your pursuit than Gold.
To a fair Lady at a Festival Dinner at Sir William Prichards.
THanks to the Sheriff for his free Feast,
And welcome to so mean a Guest;
Good Wine, good Music, and good Cheer
Did nobly act, each in their Sphere.
The untoucht Dishes in retreat
Sounded his Praise, and all Complete.
But, Madam, much more thanks to you,
Who did both Feast and heal me too;
Your Beauty was that delicate Mess,
Which as it moved did quell Excess.
How could I greedily pursue
The grosser Cates beholding you?
How could I but even pamper sense
Once tasting that rare Influence?
Your Sunshine made me blithe and Jolly,
Who came in Dead in Melancholy.
My Ice did Thaw, my Clouds did Fly,
My tongue grew loose which grief did tie.
If your more distant casual heat
Could make dull pulse so warmly beat,
How high and hot had been my Flame
Had those beams come from Love and Aim?
Thus freed, thus fettered by your Eye;
Your Captive, yours at Liberty. --
To a Fair Lady unknown. On a Kiss of her Shoe in the Shoe-makers Hand.
MAdam, though your Rare Beauty be
Magnetic, and so work on me:
Yet dare I not aspire so high
As to draw near your daunting Eye;
Not favored with his happy Chance,
Who may unto your feet advancer:
I thus do with a lowly hears
Pay Homage to your shadowy part.
No Idol you are made by this,
Were Romes but such, who would not Kiss?
The Income there is most unkind,
Both to be base, and to be blind:
But here (methinks) as I do bow
I grow more Man and Christian too.
I Conquer the whole Host off Folly
Encamped in my Melancholy.
If in a distant view there be
Such Pleasure so to touch to see;
Thrice happy he who may ascend
To your sweet Lips, to your fair hand.
To a Fair Lady in a Throng, On a Stop upon London Bridge.
IN my way I lately spied
A Fair Nymph within a Crowd,
She did shine like glittering Venus,
Mantled with that homely Could.
Darts did enter unresisted
As she glanced with her Eye,
I was Captived, I was pleased
With the sweet Captivity.
Love enforcing, I thus vetur'd,
Madam, If in Flesh you be,
Deign a smile on a poor Mortal,
That may heal which wounds me.
Then I boldly did Embrace her,
Favored with more near access.
While I held this noble Treasure
I both Indies did possess.
But, alas, my short Fruition!
She soon vanished out of sight,
And my hopes and Joys expired
Like a short-lived bliss by Night.
To a Fair Lady. On a Damask Rose presented to her.
NOt that I think you can need Ornament
Or Sweetness, I this Trifle do present;
Deign to accept it on the humbler Score
Of a poor, mean, Thank-off'ring, and no more.
As Pepper-corns are paid but to express
A Homage due, not their own Worthiness.
You grace Flower more than it does you,
Make it more lovely fair, and Fragrant too;
Each Vegetable grows in excellence,
As there is added your rare Influence.
The Rose it self lies prostrate at your feet,
Set in your Bosom then smells much more sweet.
Yet let this thought possess your lowly mind,
After your Spring an Autumn comes behind.
This pretty Bud which (like your self) to day
Is in its prime, will wither and deday.
If Roses Beauty fade, and fade it must,
The sweetest Face must also end in Dust,
On the Death of Mr. Tho. Edwards, a Young Accomptant in the Chamber of London,
who Dyed as he was to have Married.
SUch as are Artists, and do aim at Bays,
May their high Subjects in Heroicks praise:
Im my lower Sphere pay Ruder Verse,
To this more mean, and more proportioned, Hearse;
But I do wrong his Worth; Was he not High?
Virtue as well as blood does dignifie:
Toiled like the Be, had learned of the Ant:
Laid up in Summer for the Winters Want.
A faithful Steward, an obliging Friend;
Good in Bad times, best at his Latter-end.
A great Example in his Age and Place,
Did much, and well, and in a little space.
Viewed by the outside he appeared so green
As if (as yet) in Nonage he had been;
But if consulted in the grand Affairs
Of Camp, or City, then he spoke Gray Hairs.
A world of Business pass through his hand,
Figures, like Men, did move at his Command.
Yet in the Chamber so well kept his heart;
He carefully secured the better part:
Witness his last Act; Then it may be guest
Sore was the Conflict in his youthful Breast;
Earth presents Wedlock, Heaven forbids the Banes,
Life a fair Mistress, Death Salvation gains.
Beauty does Ravish, Riches does the same,
(When two Fires meet, the greater is the Flame)
But vain their Charms, he eyes the future State,
Treads on this sweet, and on the sour of Fate.
Farewell, (...) now harbored in thy Rest,
Crowned with Bliss, and Singing with the Blessed.
On a Loving Couple, Who died soon after one another, and Buried both in one
Grave.
UNder Monumental Stone
Here lies two whom Love made one,
As in Wedlock Knot combined,
So in Nature, Heart, and Mind.
His Soul Mounting up to Bliss,
Hers was Restless till with his;
To her Mate, deceased, so kind;
She would not, could not stay behind.
In this Spicy fragrant Bed
They do yet Embrace and Wed.
Even in their Dust still one,
Waiting Resurrection.
In Praise of Bowling.
LEt the Dons of the Town
In their Festivals drown
Their Wits in Canary and Sherry,
We cry Fly, we cry Rub,
And kick at the Tub,
No Fudler is half so merry.
No Politic matters
Breaks our Brains into shatters,
Yet we aim at a petty Dominion:
If we Bowl well, and gain,
No King does so Reign:
We are Princes in our own Opinion.
Our Sport and Toil wean us
From minding of Venus:
For Misses we are not at leisure;
All that see us may know
That Delight is below
Men taken up with so high Pleasure.
FINIS.

