POEM ON THE CONDEMNATION OF William Viscount Stafford.
Fantane Religio potuit suadere Malorum.
Aid me, Apollo, lay aside thy Lyre,
With Numbers high, yet sad, my Muse inspire;
In moving strains, assist me to repeat
A Noble's fall, (would he were Good as Great!)
Oh Stafford! Stafford! how could thou, when Death
Led in by Time, stood waiting for thy Breath;
By such ignoble ways and Methods strive,
To cut off those few Years thou had to live:
Alas! what Bliss could thou expect to come,
(O're-press'd with Age) when Nature's powerful doom,
Had left thee naught to hope for but a Tomb.
Why should thou then in such a horrid Cause,
Turn Traitor to Divine and Humane Laws?
Ah! how could thou, thou, so unnatural be
To him who was so good, so kind to thee?
How could thou plot against such a King as he?
One who had heaped such Honors on thy Head,
And yet could thou, ungrateful, wish him Dead,
Not only wish him so, but in that strife,
To act a part that was to take his Life;
Yet, 'cause thy Blood from noble springs does flow,
Would Error and not Malice made thee so!
Would thou were over-reached, that so the sin
Might be less thine then theirs that drew thee in:
Fain would I think it were with thee, as they,
An Ignis Fatuns leads out of the way:
Too credulous they follow the false Light,
And bless themselves for such a Guide in the Night,
And think where e're it leads they are still in the right.
And yet at last, (with toil and trouble crossed,)
They feel the Pain, but find the Labor lost:
They see the flattering Light o'th sudden gone,
And they to their Despair are left alone
In Fens, or Brakes, or Floods, to make their moan.
So thou O're-sway'd by the Pious-seeming Wits,
Of Hells chief Agents, (Juggling Jesuits)
(By specious Arguments, and pious fraud,
Such as Romes Pandemonium does applaud)
Were in that Hellish Brood drawn in to be
An Actor in that Dismal Tragedy,
That boldly aimed at Sacred Majesty;
But Heaven stepped in and saved the tottering Throne,
(Just when it could be saved by Heaven alone)
And all the Plots of Rome and Hell were known.
All did I say! Ah! no; yet such, so Vile,
So base, so dire, were found in Albions Isle?
As Scithia (where the Sun dares scarce appear,
Where Horrid Winter broods,) would blush to hear;
That those whom Heaven had placed so near the Crown
With Impious Hands should strive to pull it down.
Unhappy State of Monarchs, who do good,
Even to those that strive to shed their Blood,
And they not know it, but with gentle breath,
Speak those foul Serpents fair that plot their Death.
Ah! Stafford! how could thou so base become?
(So false to England! to be True to ROME?)
How could thou Plot his Death who always strove
Not to Command, but fairly win thy Love?
Ah! how could thou so base and Treacherous prove!
Could thou think Heaven asleep at such a time?
Or could believe it did approve thy Crime?
Or to such Treasons would Success have given?
Ah! no; a King's the Substitute of Heaven,
And Angels are his Guard.
The Giants so of Old waged War with JOVE,
Striving by Arms, to win the Seats Above:
Though Bold, yet vainly, in the Attempt they fell,
And for their hoped of Heaven, were plunged in Hell.
The Dreadful Thunder ruined their Designs,
And in their torments Heavens just vengeance shines.
Consider this, Oh! Stafford, and Repent,
Use well that little time that Heaven has lent;
That little time, (for long it cannot be,
E're thou must enter Vast Eternity.)
Oh! use it well, let it to Tears be given,
Be Penitent, and make thy peace with Heaven;
That when the fatal stroke shall end thy Days,
Its Mercy and Justice may have equal Praise.
FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for T. Benskin, in Green's Rents, near Fleet-Bridge.


