A POEM On the EFFIGIES of Sir EDMUND-BURY GODFREY, UUho was Barbarously
Murdered.
LICENSED, November the 20th. 1678.

A Lasting MONUMENT Erected To the Memory of Sr Edmond Berry Godfrey one of his
Majesty's justices of the Peace.

portrait of Sir Edmund Bury Godfrey

NOr shall Antiquity out-brave our Zeal
To Generous Patriots of the Public Weal.
Tho They with Massy Statues might contrive,
And Lasting Brass, to keep the Fame alive
Of well-deserving Hero's; -- This mean Plate,
Which to a Greater Worth we Dedicate,
Shall all their Glorious Monuments out-date,
And last till Bankrupt-Time's swallowed by Fate.
Let no bold Eye approach this Reverend Shade,
Till first a Tribute of Just Tears be paid
(The dear Resemblance of that Noble Knight,)
Who by Romes Restless Rage, and Barbarous Spite,
Did lately Fall, (Ah, Treacherous Surprise!)
Religion's Martyr, the State's Sacrifice!
Godfrey! A Name, that shall Embellish Story,
The Shame of Popery; But lasting Glory
Of Loyal Protestants: He that to save
Three Kingdoms, met with an Untimely Grave.
View here his Serious Look, and you may find
All the Fair Marks of a Judicious Mind;
A Solid Goodness, Temperate, and Grave;
Mixed with a Modest Sweetness, and yet Brave.
But, what is This? -- Alas! The Graver's Art
Pretends not to Express his Better Part:
Could we have Limn'd his Soul, then you had seen
All the Rich Gifts and Graces shine within,
In Native Luster; such as might Inspire
Next Age thought to Despair of, yet Admire!
But Best Men Here are not Most Fortunate,
Where Greatest Virtue attracts Greatest Hate,
And Just Rewards attend a Future State.
Whilst to Preserve his Sovereigne's Lise, h' had shown
His Zealous Care, basely he Lost his Own.
See how the Villains first Trepan him in!
Hypocrisy cloaks the most Horrid Sin!
But soon as in their Clutches he was got,
Those Bloodhounds Murder him upon the Spot:
With Barbarous Hands, they Stop his Generous Breath;
And that they might be sure to Effect his Death,
Strangle him too: Whence closely they convey,
And in a Ditch the Slaughtered Body lay,
Transfixt with his Own Sword: Ah, Barbarous Crew!
That thought to Stabb his Reputation too:
But that is beyond their Reach, and shall survive
As long as one Good Protestant's Alive.
The Cursed Fact is now Exposed; and All
Good Men for Vengeance on the Actors, Call.
See, what a Loyal Crowd attends to pay
Their last Respects unto his Martyred Clay.
His Mourner's, the whole Nation ought to be;
Whose Fate reversed a General Tragedy:
For, had their Malice not on him been shown,
Their Hellish Plot had not so well been known;
By Godfrey's Death, each Good Man escaped his own.
FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for Thomas Cross, in Little-Brittain, 1678.


