Moses and Aaron.

OR THE MINISTERS RIGHT AND THE MAGISTRATES DUTY

Vindicated from the Exceptions made against both, by Richard Kingsnoth, in a
late Book of his, Entitled The true Tything of the Gospel Ministers.

By DANIEL POINTEL, a servant of Jesus Christ, and Rector of the Church of
Christ at STAPLEHURST.

Prove. 18.17. He that is first in his own cause seems just; but his neighbor
comes and searches him. Romans 2.22. Thou that abhorrest Idols, do thou
commit Sacrilege? Psalm. 77.20. Thou leddest thy People like a flock by the
hand of Moses and Aaron. LONDON, Printed by T. C. for Samuel Gellibrand, at the
Golden Ball in Paul's Churchyard: 1657.

An Apologetick INTRODUCTION to my dear Brethren the Church and People of
STAPLEHURST.
I Have found this cause between me and my neighbor among the saddest things
that have befallen me since God brought me to this place: And of many things
deeply afflicting, this is not the least, that I am forced to a public
vindication for a public offense, and therein know not how to clear my self
without shaming an aged disciple, who is both the wrong-doer and the false
accuser. It is not much agreeable to my spirit to print upon any thing
(especially in this youth of mine) but to print upon this Subject has been
much more against my spirit then most things else; not but that the matters are
weighty, and greatly useful to the Churches welfare, and the debates of this
present time, so it will be a word spoken in season; But many others are
concerned in it; and who am I, that I should stand up as a Champion for the two
great Pillars of the Land, Magistracy and Ministry, in a time of shaking,
through so many fierce contradictions against them both? 2. Besides, this Cause
is fully pleaded already by sundry learned and judicious pens, never yet
answered, nor ever likely to be answered; whereas (as to the matter of Tithes)
though many indeed appear against the divine right, especially of our
beyond sea Divines, both Popish and Reformed; yet few or none of any judgment
appear against the lawfulness of them. 3. Because all undertakings of this
nature are likely to meet with misconstructions enough from those men that know
not how not to look asquint upon any thing we either say or do. That charity
that thinks no evil, how is it fled from the earth! it will be thought by
many a sufficient answer to all that is brought on the Ministers behalf, to cry
out covetousness; and to all on the Magistrates, to cry out persecution. 4. But
then when an unwelcome cause must be managed after an unwelcome manner, the
cause not to be handled in Thesi, but in Hypothesi, and that drawing in many
personal things, and mixing affections with judgments; so that we have now to
answer not Error only, but anger, peevishness, self-will, self-interests; and
as flowing from them, calumnies, false accusings, unfaithful dealings, etc.
Upon these thoughts I have been tossed up and down in my mind, sometimes for
replying, sometimes against it, till very necessity has compelled me.

At the first reading of this Book, I thought I might safely let it alone, and
that it needed no answer; but when I understood how it was cried up by that
party, and how prized by himself, and that this persuasion was entered into
others (not Anabaptists) that some things in it were not to be answered; and
seeing how unlikely it was that any Books, new or old, would ever be looked
after by them to remove this prejudice, unless some one were brought to their
hands from a person known to them, and fitted to this Book and Cause, in which
many things of fact are mixed with the matter of right, which no man's Book
could answer but mine, and which I have understood have and do lie in the way
of some (though I hope not of many) who have had a greater account of my
Ministry, till this unhappy debate sprang up: These things have resolve'd my
former doubtfulnesse, and produced this Treatise here presented unto you.

Dr. Tillesly's whole Book against Seldom is of this purposely.
It has added to my encouragement in this work, to see not much time needed in
this question, to turn over the writings of Ancients, they to whom I write
valuing them not; and that work being done to our hands already by many for
their sakes who do value them, and our Learned Adversaries of the Divine Right
of Tithes acknowledging what is pleaded upon that account, not only out of the
monuments of Heathens, they are said to have done it astutia Diaboli; more
probable, I think, what we find in the famous Law of Edward the Confessor,
That the withholding of Tithes was Instinctu Diaboli, then that the mere paying
of Tithes was: Some also enquire why the 7th of time among the Heathens should
not be as much astutia Diaboli, Rivet in Genesis 19.
as the tenth of goods. As for Fathers, they are after a cleanly ingenuous
manner put with patres excusari possunt, etc. So then Heathens and Fathers are
confessedly ours, Clem. Alex. Stro. 5. p. 600. (...). Similia 6 to. Strom. 685.
we must try out the rest by Scripture only; for they that will not be pressed
by us with the authority of Fathers, will not (I hope) press us with the
Authority of later Popish Monks, the Pontificial Schoolmen, who are all in this
cause (and good reason why) against us.

Had my neighbor spared injurious speeches, and not filled his Book with so
many unkind calumniations, but kept himself close to the question of right, I
should never have found fault with his omitting the narrative of matters of
fact; But seeing he has sprinkled his Book all over with so much of that
unsavory salt, I am forced to let you understand thus much, that covetousness
is a sin that has deep roots, and is not plucked up many times when we think
it is; and when it is stubbed up in the main root, it will yet leave many small
fibra's behind, which will often be a springing above ground, and require a
constant hand, watchfully and industriously employed in plucking them up; and
it would be more worth my neighbors time, now in his old age, among other
things, to enquire curiously into his own heart about this sin, rather then
spend his approaches to the grave in peevish quarrellings with, and revilings
of his neighbor, who would fain have lived at peace with him. Did I take any
joy in recriminations, it were no hard matter to evidence sore suspicions of
covetousness in him, even in the matter in debate between us. I offer to take
half the worth of what was (in my account) due to me, for peace sake; he
offered about half of that which I would have taken; and no man but will say he
might with as good conscience have offered enough as any thing; a greater
proportion then a tenth freely given, would have prevented this suspicion,
whereas a much less offered, and only to break off the agreement upon the
account of the sum to be paid, does not. I promised upon his entreaty to
forbear him, if he came in any reasonable time to pay me, and I kept my word
above three years together: He promised to compound with me by the pound rent,
consenting to my terms offered, and broke his promise, adding contempt to
boot, by laying me down twenty shillings for three years, who had laid me down
forty shillings for one year, as he said, because he had promised me. I dealt
with him fairly and openly, he dealt deceitfully with me; for after he had
chosen to compound with me by the yearly rent, liking that better, as he said,
then to compound by the Acre, for then he might use his Land as he pleased, he
offered to bring me his Lease, that I might see what rent he paid, whereas it
is known there are some pounds reserved of his Rent which are not specified in
his Lease: I am persuaded this was never done by his Landlord, my truly honored
friend, to abuse the Minister. The goods controverted I am ready to make good
my claim to, by that which determines all men's claims among men to things of
this nature, the just and righteous Laws of the Land; he avoids that trial,
even with contempt, and rebellion after contempt to the lawful commands of the
Supreme Magistrate, as not having any title at all to them that is pleadable in
any Court of England; and if the Law of God makes them his, I desire to see
that Law; such an evidence I hope will satisfy Magistrates and me too; If he
detain them by man's Law, let him plead it; if by Gods Law, let him show it; if
by neither, P..9
it plainly appears he has no right at all, and I should pray him to detain
them no longer; it is sin: I never doubted the lawfulness of receiving Tithes,
he never denied the payment of them, or a composition for them, to buy his
peace, till he had to do with me, whence I suppose he always held it lawful so
to do; neither has he given us one reason in his Book why his mind is changed.
Add that he saves his goods, by a deed of gift to his Sons, and ventures his
person, though a person of that moment to souls, as an Elder preaching freely
to a Congregation baptized many years. What truth there is in this pretense,
let his own heart judge; what honesty there is to convey a man's estate, to
defraud creditors, let others judge; but what piety it is for an Elder of a
Church, the freedom of whose person is of that precious value in the exercise
of his Ministry, to secure his goods in a contest, and venture his person, when
the debate was about the goods, not about the person, let the members of his
own Congregation judge.

These are sore suspicions in him, of the sin I am so often charged with, even
in this very business; yet I dare not with all this evidence name him so; I
know these dealings may be referred to other causes; of which some are not so
bad as coveteousness, and some are worse: I only should advise him to consider
his ways: Neither dare I wholely excuse my self from this sin, though I could
say much to clear my self in the day of man, and I know this man's accusations
are without proof: I hope, grace enabling me, to approve my heart to God, a
greater witness then man. I say no more then this, he is aged; and I, though
but in the thirty fourth year of my life, am weak, as being lately pulled back
by a powerful hand of God, from the very Brink of an Hectic Fever, and still
in a constant inclination thither again: we had need not accuse one another
rashly; Rev. 12.10.
there is one will shortly accuse us both more vehemently then we can one
another; and it will be our best wisdom to prepare both of us with all
seriousness, how to answer his accusations.

P. 21.
But how could this word drop from my neighbors pen, that Englands Priests
never yet learnt in every condition to be content? what not so much as one
excepted, and never? I could tell you neighbor of one, the least of ten
thousand, that professes in the sight of God, that the greatest discontent he
does, and has for a long time gone under, is his own, and yours, and other
men's sins, and yet not of so vast an estate as may be an eyesore to stir up
the plague of envy in any man. P. 18.
Oh Neighbor, in the fear of God consider what Spirit it is puts you upon
judging the hearts of so many alive and dead, known and unknown to you, many of
them such as have been the glory of the Churches of Christ all the world over.
I say not, the Lord rebuke you, but I say, the Lord give you repentance, and
make you know that a friendly admonition about the breach of Gods Law is no
threatening you, neither before in the eighth, nor now in the ninth
Commandment. Let profane wicked ones, who will not get out of the danger of
the Laws penalty, say they are threatened when they are told of a Law of God
(the Law is not against them that are lead by the Spirit, Gal. 5.23.
direct them it does) but you are an old Disciple; other apprehensions become
you, and a more willing conformity to the mind and will of God.

I used no sharp words then, neither do I now; do not put forth your hand to
take and keep your Neighbors goods against the lawful owners mind; it is
against the eighth Commandment; do not bear false witness against the hearts
of so many, multitudes of whom the world was not, is not worthy; it is against
the ninth Commandment; God is the Judge, he will require it; think of it, I
entreat you as a Father.

That expression of my resolution to recover my right from him, if he and I
lived together, as he proposes it, does savor at least of unadvised passion,
if not of revenge; but he professes he did not publish it with that intent,
and I accept of his profession, though his repeating it often, and especially
his leaving out my own explication of my self, that it was a resolution
grounded upon conscience of my duty, that I ought not to lose the Title to so
considerable a part of the public revenew given for the good of souls, of
which I have only the benefit during my present service in the place (which in
another place himself sets down) leave but small ground of credit to this
profession of his. Had he now set both together, P. 6.
I am most resolved to endeavor the recovery of my right, if you and I live
together, and added what follows; I say I am most resolved I shall sin if I do
not, etc. it would have took out all suspicion of revengefulness out of the
Readers mind concerning me; I being necessitated to write so openly, he
mis-interpreting my former soft and tender dealing with him, to be only a train
to draw him into danger, and that there was a Snake under the leaf of my former
smoother expressions; and the reasons of my choosing that form of expression
was, because his age and my weakness made it appear very likely, that one of us
might be taken out of this life before this debate should be ended, considering
his obstinacy and my duty: Which if it fall out either way, the question of
right would be taken up by others, and the question of the present profit now
due would fall to the ground, in case he died; if the pretended deed of gift be
true (at least I then thought so) and in case of my decease before him, I was
resolved to leave it free to those I should leave behind me, to do as God
should direct them; and this (now I am fallen upon that unpleasing task) is one
instance of unfaithfulness that his book is guilty of; he should not by setting
down doubtful words without my explication have rendered me obnoxious to the
censure of revengeful from those that do not know me; Though he professing to
me, it was done without any malicious intent upon that account, I contradict
not, but suppose it so as he professes.

2. But then when he tells the world in his Preface, he has adventured to
answer all my arguments that (to his remembrance) I ever brought for Tithes,
will need another confession from him, when he never had any from me, purposely
insisted on, but that of lawful Donation, yea I professedly waved all other
pleas to him; it being with me a general rule in this quarrelling age, that if
I can persuade men to practice their duty upon principles which no man
contradicts, I will never trouble them with those principles that are and; no
one thing of all he pretends to reply to for the right of Tithes, as mine was
mine indeed, except that of Donation. Here also I find him as becomes a
Christian Offender, acknowledging his wrong-doing, that he answers other men's
reasonings besides mine, and that he ought to have to the world as much: I add,
And to have faithfully distinguished mine from other men's.

3. In the same Preface he tells us his is but a mite in regard of what others
have done in this thing, as if the right of Tithes were such a forlorn cause as
had none to plead it, and multitudes had wrote largely against it, who when I
questioned with him about it, could name but one, besides Brownists and
Quakers, who rage more then they dispute.

P. 3.
4. I never explained the Law said to be changed, Heb. 7.12. by the portion of
Tithes, the Law or portion of Tithes; nay I professed the contrary, and it was
the only answer, which upon conference I gave him when he used that Scripture.

5. I never said it was but the Priesthood, nothing but the Priesthood is
changed; the Text tells us that besides, and with the Priesthood there is a Law
changed, in my account the Law of Ceremonial Worship, not Tithes: The National
Teacher said none of those things.

6. If the proportion be changed, be it so, words I never spoke, nor never
shall admit; for a change is the substitution of one thing for another removed;
if then the proportion of Tenth be changed, another is set up; a ninth,
eleventh, etc. which none affirms.

P. 4.
7. If Ministers have nothing but what their Flock in their Parish will freely
give them, they may starve; and for this he comes upon me with, P. 12.
Sir, you have said enough, and afterward calls this a strange Carnal
reasoning: But these words I never said, neither can he ever make them good. Oh
Sir, you have said too much; false slanderous speeches of your Brother are more
strange and Carnal then this reasoning is, though I had used it.

P. 5, 6.
8. Is. 49 23. brought as alleged by me, and a kind of an answer framed to it,
which Scripture I used not to him, whereas 2 Chr. 31.4, 5. and Neh. 13.9. which
I indeed used, have no answer at all given them.

9. I wonder not you labored so much the choice of such Parliament Men as have
Personages of their own (as they call it) that helping themselves they might
help you; P. 8.
untrue every word, I never labored much in that business, I never heard any
commend any Gentleman to the acceptance of the Country upon that account. I
have inquired among my Brethren, and none of us knows one Gentleman that has
any Impropriations; I have heard of some great Impropriatours cried up on the
other side; I do freely profess that, had I known of such a thing of any of
them, I should have known great worth in him to balance that evil, or else I
should never have given my voice for him.

I call it an evil and a great one, most needful, to be reformed. King James
calls the Act by which they were taken away a Vile Act; and yet neither he not
his Son take any effectual care to remedy that Vile Act. I hope after all our
needless quarrels, some at last will find out the way of setting about that
most necessary work, the buying in of Impropriations.

10. Though I said some did affirm, etc. I never said so; P. 9. I have since
seen this seemingly said by reverend Authors of a late very useful treatise:
but it is an oversight to be winked at.
that Explication of Hebr. 7.12. which makes nothing changed but the
Priesthood, can never come into the mind of a man in his wits.

11. Did you not undertake to prove the affirmative (that Ministers maintenance
ought to be under the Gospel, after the same manner as under the Law, from 1
Cor. 9.14.) No, I did not, I have more then once given it him under my hand
that I did not; wherefore then brought you the examples of Hezekiah, and
Nehemiah? not only my Papers once and again, but his own reasonings show him
why: he had affirmed it must be under the Gospel as it was under the Law, 1
Cor. 9.14. but under the Law it was free. Abraham's payment to Melchizedec was
free, Jacobs vow was free, etc. so it ought to be under the Gospel: to which
plea of his I denied not his reasoning out of 1 Cor. 9.14. but let him carry it
there, only denying it to be free under the Law; telling him it was unlikely
Abraham and Jacob should hit upon that proportion, without some signification
of Gods pleasure about it; for aftertimes the Law of God and man both are
manifest (and by the way, if Abraham's and Jacobs fact were free, yet the
Apostle in that place manifestly referring us in the similitude to the times
after Moses, yea after the building of the Temple, when there were certain
Laws, both of God and man, for the payment of Tithes, my Neighbors reasoning
he used, did most certainly cut the throat of his own cause) and for the Laws
of man, those two examples were given.

12. When I asked you whether you did demand it by the Law of God? you answered
no. I did not say so; only I waved that question, as being unwilling to trouble
him with it.

13. He adds immediately as from me; you were no Jew nor Levite, etc. This was
not in answer to the question about the Law of God in general, as he relates it
falsely: but in answer to the question of the Law of God, as it made Tithes due
to the Levitical Priesthood, (as such) for I was no Jew, Aug. 25. 1656.
etc. This he wrote out of the Narrative of the Conference word for word, from
whence he might have related the rest with faithfulness, for it was before him.

14. When I asked you, Do you require it by the gift of Indulgent Princes? you
say no. The quite contrary is most true; I always pleaded it to him by the
gift of Indulgent Princes and people, and never used to him any Argument but
that; and my similitude to make things plain to him was this: A Testatour dies,
and leaves me a Legacy; his Executor refusing to pay, is constrained to it by
order of Law; the Law here does not ground the Title, but the Testators will;
P. 13.
it only confirms the will, and affords a remedy to the injured person. This
he knows, and has confessed was my Language to him; see what he Prints.

15. Yet to deceive the simple, you plead both. I challenge him to name the
person, to whom I have said otherwise in this, or in any other point then I
have said to him, and then it will appear whether this be a slander or no.

16. Your Predecessor takes 20. l. per an. of you to let you have the living,
and comes once or twice a year for his money, and Preaches a Sermon to color
it over. Untrue, and incredible both! through the grace of God I am what I am;
I hope they that know me, do not believe that I need lay our money to purchase
a living; I was sought to from London at that very time, from a people there
after a free and full Election, as I have to show under their hands; this in
the midst of my relations and acquaintance; and was it likely I should wound my
Conscience so deep without cause, that I might place my self in the dirt, far
from my Friends, among a company of mere strangers; or if I were so vain as
well as wicked, could not this money matter be carried closely, as such manner
of purchases are want to be? were we all so many of us such sots, as to
proclaim our wickedness in the face of the Sun? No, no, there was no such
matter; if ever I saw Gods hand in any particular providence all my life, it
was in his overruling hand, disposing me for Staplehurst, and bringing me to
it; it was Gods work, I am most undoubtedly assured of it, and not the Devils:
had I not seen it most apparently, I had never staid here; what was done
between me and my Predecessor, was done before many witnesses: it was but this:
Two Ministers consenting to Preach to the same people, by consent likewise
share the proportion, both of time and maintenance which each should have, that
there might be no difference about these things afterward, a thing not only
lawful to be done, but in a manner necessary, on my part with all sincerity
undertaken and performed, God is witness; as for my truly honored
Predecessor, his integrity needs not my defense, he is able to do it himself in
a season and manner convenient, if need be.

17. More might be said from experience in this Parish, but I spare a most
merciful Reviler! we are guilty in things it seems not to be named, such is the
modesty and tender-heartedness of the man: For my part, where I walk out of the
way of my duty, I desire not to be spared, let him or any man reprove me in a
way of Gospel Charity: he that spares my sins, does not spare me, is cruel to
me; I desire for ever so to think: But if the concealed matters be of the same
nature as this which is expressed (and one would think impudent lies should not
be uttered, and things true hid) oh that he would at last learn to spare his
own soul, use no more false and uncharitable reproaches, and repent of these;
even the Saints God is a consuming fire.

18. They presently prepare war, Mic. 3.5. P. 19.
there is no presently in the Text either in word or sense; but its put in that
I after above three years patience may be the more deeply wounded by a false
accusation: how often have I been thanked by this man, and commended for my
long forbearance!

19. Like the Priests Boys. 1 Samuel 2.15, 16, 17. had my Neighbor pleased, I
might have had that name of scorn put upon me, without changing the translation
he uses into a worse, from a visitation Sermon; the Levites that Ministered unto
the Priests in holy things, did begin their service from 30. years age; Number.
4.3.
I have attained through Gods patience some years above that, and yet can well
enough bear that Title, without any injurious reflections upon the infirmities
of old age: Alas how childish are such Contests as these in Print, and how
unbeseeming the honor of Religion!

20. P. 7.
I add one more drawn from the very cause (all these are personal) a thing
more then once we are told of, and it tends to weaken the force of our civil
constitutions in the behalf of Tithes. That those Princes Laws that first
established Tithes in England, did also establish the Catholic Faith of the
Church of Rome, and all Traitors that denied it; whether this be a truth or no,
Though with an impudence to amazement he bring it in with, Be it known to you.
I am sure he knows it not to be a truth; for being desired where thee Laws
might be found; now he tells me of Henry the eighth, no great Establisher of
Tithes, I think, to be sure not the first: by and by he tells me of Magna
Charta, wherein Tithes are not at all mentioned (but included in general among
the rights of the Church) And whether ever there were any Law that makes it
treason, not to be of the Religion of Rome, let the skilful in the Law judge:
heresy likely, More of this nature hereafter.
but treason not likely. These uncharitable Censures, and plain Falsehoods, I
have privately demanded satisfaction for, and offered a fair debate of them
before indifferent men (matters of Fact, coming most of them within the compass
of an ocular demonstration, may admit of a speedy decision, if men will but see
what is before their eyes) and this I did that I might prevent this ungrateful
narrative, had it been accepted: and now I am still ready by the same means, to
make good the narrative I have given to prevent unnecessary replies to this
part of the discourse.

I might add a Sponge full of Vinegar, to wipe out the bitter taunts and
un-Christian mockings the Book is full of, P. 10. 1 Pet. 2.13.
I cannot omit one; a sad passage where he makes himself sport with the oath of
supremacy, and our praying for the King as such, and of Gods not hearing our
prayers for providence has disposed otherwise: the calamity of Princes (which
has been in our times to the amazement and astonishment of the whole world, so
great that I should suspect my heart much harder then I hope it is, if I did
not think of with horror and trembling every time it comes into my mind) this
man thinks fit to flout at. But these things are beside the cause I manage; the
Lord cover them, and I shall gladly draw my skirt over them, having no
engagement to speak to them but only to shame him openly; and that is not my
design: it would be more joyful to me, wherein we do amiss, either of us, to
endeavor mutually by all offices of mutual love, to bring each other to
repentance.

For you, my dear Brethren of Staplehurst, my glory and crown, whose conversion
and building up in the Truth, is of greater sweetness to me then all the Tithe,
either of poor or rich, however I am traduced (no shame almost could have been
so unhappily hit upon as this) if ever I felt any sweetness and true joy in any
thing all my life, it has been in Gods crowning my labors with some success
even among you, and in the assured hope of abundance more, his grace working
with me; For you, I say, I have this word of caution; Let not the esteem of
this injurious both speaker and doer, be vile in your eyes; much more let not
the name of godliness, which he has for so many years held out a profession
of, be for his sake despised: Remember how easy it is, for rash and heady
persons, to commit many things which are sorely to be repented of; and how hard
a thing it is for even good men (in whom pride is not thoroughly mortified) to
be willing to shame themselves, by an open confession of open miscarriages;
that you remember what easy passage there is from the head to the heart, and
with what care we are to keep the Devil out of our heads, as we would keep him
out of our hearts, and hands, and pens; That you beware of the beginnings of
contention; strife has no end, no measure, no moderation; it cares not how it
hitts, so by hitting it wounds: Set up an Angel of heaven for an adversary, and
after we have chased about him a while, he will be a Devil in our eye, fancy
blinding our judgment, and self-conceit perverting strait resolutions, that
whoever is not in all things on our side, is not thought to be on Gods-side;
and what evil may be in causes and persons, we strongly conceit is; so as no
evidence of things seen and felt can beat us out of it, because we are mightily
persuaded things cannot be otherwise then we have conceited them. So our
brethren are clothed in Bear-skins, and then worried by us; and as they do in
the hunting of noisome beasts, that is best play which most certainly and
speedily dispatches; and this is plain dealing without flattery; and whatever
is short of the utmost of our power, either in word or action, belongs to our
patience and mercifulness toward our and Gods enemies.

But learn we to overcome their evil with our good; if for our love men will be
our adversaries, Ps. 109.4.
be we prayers; when they mock us, let not us mock them; when they despise us
despise we not them; and let it not be said that we give them one reproachful
word, who give us many; so shall we inherit the blessing we are called to. For
the rest, Hold fast the form of sound words, 1 Pet. 3.9. 2 Timothy 1.13.
and build up your selves and your families in the most holy faith. Suffer not
ignorance or Atheism to dwell either in your hearts or houses. Labor to feel
truth as well as know it, especially that which concerns the preciousness of
Christ to a penitent believer. Get your Lamps lighted, and let them shine out.
Suffer not the Gospel to be dishonored by so much as one unsavory word from
you. Be jealous over those reasonings which take you off from Christian
fellowship; to do soul-good to, and receive soul-good from one another, makes
any society Christian, all the rest is Heathen; it is a precious Article of our
Faith, The Communion of Saints. Get those evidences of Faith which are the
parting duties where the unbeliever walks not with the believer,
heavenly-mindedness, self-denial, and (those hard duties) the mortifying of
revenge even in its lowest degree, and the love of enemies: do you more then
others for God, as you hope God shall do more for you then others. Be clothed
with humility toward one another, and toward all men: God has even in these
our days had terrible controversies with proud self-conceited ones. And the
very God of peace sanctify you throughout, through patience and comfort of the
Scripture give you hope; make you a leading example of piety to our
neighbor-people, and a real confutation of them who say Gods Spirit has left
our Assemblies: That I may have comfort in you at that day, and you in me, that
I may not have run in vain, nor labored in vain. The prayers, I doubt not,
of many of you, have preserved me a long time under deep languishings, and have
now, in a great measure, recovered me out of them. As you expect and hope for
any good by my Life and Ministry, be instant in prayer, and watch thereunto
with all perseverance, that utterance may be given to me, that I may speak as I
ought to speak; that God would give me the bow of Jonathan, that turned not
back, and the sword of Saul, that returned not empty: And that when I have
preached to others, I my self may not be a Castaway.

The Ministers first Plea for his Portion, The Divine Right of TITHES. To my
Neighbor truly loved in the Lord, RICHARD KINGSNOTH.
OMitting many things Doctrinal overly touched in your Book, which are nothing
to our present Cause, I find some things which are something and much to the
cause, are not so much as touched at by you; give me leave to put you in mind
of considering them. I find two very material questions wholly neglected.

1. Whether supposing Tithes not due by Gods Law, but prohibited rather; and
that our Laws for them are not only old, but corrupt, P. 22. P. 7.
like to the Law the Jews had Christ should die (by the way a soul mistake
this, they had no such Law, but wickedly pretended it; what? the Jews Law was
of Gods making, and did God make a Law requiring men to put Christ to death?)
Yet is not a sinful Law of the Magistrate to be suffered under? and if we must
suffer in one, may not, ought not a man to choose rather to suffer in his goods
then in his person, and expose them to buy his own peace, as a man delivers his
purse to a thief upon the way to save his life? (an honorable similitude your
friends are wont to use to set forth the authority of those good Laws, under
whose protection, next to Gods, you live) Why, neighbor, upon this ground you
have acted hitherto, in paying, and preaching, as I am informed, for the
payment of them; and is it not strange you should run over this foundation of
your former practice, not so much as speaking one word of it? My neighbor,
stay a while, and bethink your self; what has carried you off from your
former peaceable principle, resolution, and practice? Have you considered the
Apostles rule, That nothing be done through strife and vainglory? Let me put
some thoughts into your mind. It is not to be imagined that Jeroboam and his
Successors were so unpolitick as to take away the Levites Tithes: Priests he
must have, and they must have a maintenance; why not that which was Gods own,
They paid the third years Tithe, Act. 4.5. why not this too?
and which the people had been long accustomed to pay? He had no reason
unnecessarily to make provoking changes in matters of Religion; and there is no
mention of his or their doing any such thing: Doubtless this bait to tempt the
Lords Priests to stay and countenance the Schism and Idolatry would never be
neglected. Now did any Prophet forbid this payment, or any of the Lords people
scruple it? In the Family of David, instance in the long Apostasy under
Manasses and Amon, what wicked Kings and Priests were then? yet none of Gods
people were restrained from paying their Tithes. In Christ's time, when the
High Priesthood was, and for a long time had been bought and sold, he that
would give most undermining his fellow, many of them heretical Sadduces
besides; yet is any relaxation of this duty even then? nay, are they not bound
to it by Christ's own bonds, these ought ye, Mat. 23.23. In the Apostles times
not one word to forbid any the payment of Tithes to the Christ-forsaking, and
Christ-forsaken, blaspheming, persecuting Jewish Priests and Levites. Tithes
were paid under Heathens to the Priests of Idol-Temples by the then Laws, no
one Apostle, Father, Martyr, ever contradicting, and yet they were zealous
against compliance with Idols too. He that shall but read Tertull. de Idololat.
will find strictness enough, if not too much, that way; if Demetrius stood up
so fiercely for his craft, not directly opposed by the Apostles, would not the
Idol-Priests have stood up much more for their Tithes, if the Apostle had
raised questions about this thing among them? Acts 19.17. 1 Pet. 2.13.
Nay Peter's very ordinance will exact obedience active to all lawful commands;
passive to all unlawful ones; and this among the rest, when the World was
turned Arrian, Athanasius, Basil, etc. never taught that Tithes were unlawful
to be paid unto Teachers of Arrianism; and at this day it is the constant
resolution of all Protestant Divines to the quieting of scrupulous consciences
that have asked advice from them often and often. Rivets dissert. in Genesis 14.
That those Princes Laws which command Tithes to be paid to Popish Massing
Priests, are to be submitted to by those of the Reformed Religion that live
within the Dominions of such Princes: The like is the resolution of all Popish
Divines concerning their Catholics that live under the Dominion of Protestant
Princes, as appears by their general uncontradicted practice: But we must be
used so as no Ministers of holy things were ever used, how bad soever, who
enjoyed the countenance of public Authority; nay not so well as a thief that
takes a purse. I put this case. Tithes are no private man's propriety (I speak
of those paid to Ministers) let the user of land divide his own from what is
not his own, and carry in what is his, leaving what is not his upon the ground,
and then permit him that can bear it out in the Court of men (whether he have a
just right or no, whether those Laws are righteous or no) to enter upon the
land and carry it away. I ask now what Law of God this Farmer sins against, and
whether he do not his most apparent duty? if the Takers title be not good, the
Leaver has none at all, and cannot remedy the badness of the Takers title; he
is not made a Judge to punish an Idolatrous Priest, much less is he to mulct
the Priest, and take the fine to himself. Pray think of this question you have
overlooked, you make too much haste: Have you stood thus long upon this ground,
and do you now relinquish it, without being beaten off with the assault of so
much as one slight Argument?

2. Neither do I find any thing concerning the unlawfulness of a Tenth, P. 21.
supposing it freely paid and without compulsion. I meet indeed with Christ's
nailing ceremonies to his Cross, and Tithe reckoned among the rest, but you
seem not to mean that Tithes are a ceremony as Tithes, but as a forced
maintenance. Frequently you tell us of Tithe changed into a free gift, a tenth
into any proportion determined by the mind of the giver. In one place indeed we
have the proportion changed, P. 15.
but then it is from Levis to Melchisedechs and Jacobs, from a tenth commanded
to a tenth freely given and vowed at least; if theirs be the example, surely
the tenth is not alone excluded. But my good friend, why this confusion? you
found the questions distinguished to your hands, if Tithes be Ceremonies as
Tithes, P. 18.
tell us plainly; if as stinted sums, and this is that which is abolished as
sure as Christ is come in the flesh, tell us so plainly too, that we may deal
with you upon certainties. I see the main weight of your Book is against a
maintenance stinted by the Magistrates Authority; and I took notice of it among
the Brownists at the Conference at Hedcorne; and this is not done without great
and deep advice: They knew, that to satisfy some men's clamours, and other men's
scruples, consultations had been entered upon, to alter the present way into
some other supposed more commodious and free from contradictions: If therefore
they would fasten any thing to the Ministers disadvantage, they must let go
the debate of Tithes as such, and take better hold; the Magistrate has no
power to enjoin any proportion at all; that will do it; this Principle fits
their turn, it strikes home. Agreeable to this was the killing Argument in the
Remonstrance (or Petition) drawn up by them, and intended to be presented
either to the Protector or Parliament, had they sped in their choice: If they
build again what they have destroyed, they shall be found transgressors. They
had been, and were a destroying our Ministry as Popish and Antichristian (alas
that we should be such eye-sores to them for rescuing our people, not only from
Popery, but even from Hell!) and they would not build us up by paying any thing
to our relief (I was promised the sight of this Declaration when this was told
me by an Agent in it, but upon second thoughts it was denied) No, sess them,
tax them, exact first fruits and tenths from them in utmost rigor, eat them
up, consume them, beggar them, make them weary of their work by defrauding them
of that bread which should feed their families, and defray their extraordinary
charges. But what think you will become of this public maintenance? who shall
have it, the State, or the Landlord, or the Tenant? I have been answered to
this question with they care not what they did with it, so we have none of it:
well, and what when all is done? why, there is hope that some will join with
Spill-hils Congregation; others with this party, others with another; every one
will pull away something, when we are once removed out of the way.

Think of this ye Rulers, and let this Pamphlet, and others of the like stamp,
teach you what services you must do for these men before you can please them:
It Is not Tithes they stick at; if that would have served their turn, I had been
free from molestation this day. There is no man pays me the tenth of his
increase, and much short of that would have contented me from this man. This
you must do, you must make Laws against us, but none for us; that is the so
much pressed example of the Primitive Magistrates; you must be Heathens both
ways, or they are not contented; you must take that from us, yea from God
(Concessimus Deo) which you never gave us, and of which you are but Feoffees in
trust for Gods ends, and the souls of men, who would not have one of your
children left by you Orphans to be served so; and when you have taken this
away, you must give us nothing by way of recompense, not so much as stick up a
feather for the goose, as the proverb is. Strip us stark naked, and turn us out
of all, that you may be the abhorring of God and good men for so doing, and
then these giddy Masters will be pleased with you; you may guess how long; till
they shall think fit to level other men's propriety as well as ours, and pull
down Magistracy, after Magistrates have, to please them, pulled down their own
greatest supporting Pillar, the Ministry. As for me, (though I fear not so
great a perfidiousnesse from our present Rulers, yet who knows what devilish
Tyrants God may raise up in his wrat?) Then I doubt not but the Lord will stand
by me, and streng- me, and that he will beat down great mountains before me, I
shall see Error, Divsion and sin, fall down before Truth, Unity, and
Holiness: Me thinks I see them tumbling down in Staplehurst already; and in
this confidence, if the Lord has use of my Vast Estate, for his service, and
the good of souls, I hope he will give me grace to lay it down at his feet,
who gave it all to me, what ever it is: And I know multitudes of my brethren
will subscribe this resolution with me, even all that are faithful. This one
thing I add, that the Apostle never took this carnal way to overthrow either
Pagan, 2 Cor. 10.4.
or Jewish blaspheming Priests, by storming at their maintenance; and I am
assured it will never thrive with them that do toward us, who are neither
Jewish nor Pagan, I hope not in their account neither.

Those questions which are to the purpose, that have something said to them,
are some of them lightly passed over; yet what is said to them, I shall not
neglect to answer.

1. Concerns requiring maintenance from one that is not of our
Parish-Congregation, but is separated from it, and does not at all partake of
our Ministry. It seems, Sirs, a toleration of you in your sinful separation
will not serve your turn without special immunities above other men: Let men
but take up a dissenting opinion, and proclaim it to the credit of their
singularity, telling the world they can hold no union with the contrary-minded,
and presently all their Land must be Tithe-free: Would it not be a desirable
thing for Landlords Rents, and all other debts to be paid thus? Oh how sweet
would it be to drink away a Sabbath in a chimney-corner then! P. 3. 2 Cor.
8.13, 14.
But to the Reasons. 1 Cor. 9.7. The Planter must drink of his own Vineyard,
and the Feeder eat of his own Flock. Answ. Not to trouble you with that
brotherly assistance that Churches owe to one another in case of need; but this
I say, that this debt of maintenance takes not its ground from men's actual
subjection to the word, but from their duty so to do: And the duty once
stated, not attending on the word, is one sin; and not maintaiinng the
Dispensers of the Word, is another sin: Never did God provide that men should
spare their purses, by being prodigal of their souls. 2. Suppose your
Separation just, then indeed there will be no command of God to maintain that
Ministry you are duly separated from, out of your own goods; yet there will
lie a command of Gods to make another Separation, a Separation of that which is
not your own from that which is; and to carry no more into your barn then your
own goods, P. 20.
and leave the rest behind you. This (I hope) will satisfy you as to your
first Reason.

To the Second. Where it is demanded that I prove a command, or one tittle of a
command, to any Gentile, to pay Tithes to such as were not related to them in
covenant.

Answ. No need of any such command to be produced. A baptized Christian under
the Gospel, and an uncircumcised Gentile under the Law, hold no proportion to
them; first you, then yours, is a good order. But for you, you have been
related to the body of this people, at least in an implicit covenant, when you
joined with others in calling that faithful, holy, humble Minister of Christ,
Mr. Big, to Staplehurst, and subscribing toward his maintenance, which, among
other papers, I have had the perusal of, I have seen; and how you walked with
this people in way of seeking and enjoying God, in public, and in private,
your self and others can well remember: Separation imports a former union; you
cannot therefore be in the same case as the Philistines and Canaanites, etc. who
would dwell among the people.

2. Yet because you promise fair, that upon the discovery of such a command you
will submit, I shall offer you something toward the proof of it. I hope you
take the whole Land to be a type, both that which was subdued, and that which
was unsubdued; and that Tithes were a ceremonial tribute from a ceremonial
land; would you not reason your self thus? You know that no league was to be
made with the inhabitants of the Land; and that the Law for Tithing ran
universally of the whole Land before they had inherited it, not this part shall
pay, another not: all was to be subdued, and all was to pay. Now put those two
Laws together, Thou shall utterly destroy them, and thou shall duly Tithe all
thy increase, and then see whether this conclusion follow not, That the Tithe
of the whole Land was due to God by Gods own Law; the commandment supposing
none should live there but Brethren, Jews, or Proselytes; it is therefore of
their Brethren, Heb. 7.5. For the execution of this Law, there is no reason to
expect that, neither is this demanded of me. Neither one Law nor the other was
kept, and the Jews were not always in a condition to keep their own from the
hands of strangers: Yet it may be considerd, whether the Judges, when strong,
would serve the Commonwealth of them, and not the Tabernacle; and that King
Solomon should make a levy of their persons for the service of the Temple, and
not of their goods. There was doubtless as full a right for this, as that. But
will you indeed submit upon this Discovery? Admit it done, would you not say,
Though they were then bound, they and the Jews too, yet now we are freed from
that yoke of bondage? you would never do as you have said; your whole Book
drives at something else. Again, let me admit that not proved which you call
for; what conclusion will you draw hence to help your Cause? it must be no more
then this, Let a professed Pagan come and dwell at Staplehurst, who is, and
always was an Infidel, I may not demand Tithes of that man. Is this it you
call for so eagerly, as if the deciding of the whole controversy were turned
here? and promise so peremptorily that this done, you would submit? Fie for
shame of such heedless extravagant speeches; plainly, the clearing of that
question neither helps nor hinders; yet if it will do you any good, I think you
have something toward it however.

There is another question, which is more slighty touched by the former, the
suing and imprisoning them that refuse to pay. I will not say you anywhere
petemptorily deny it to be lawful in any case to use the Magistrates sword, for
the recovery of our own from them that unjustly detain it from us; and by no
other means will be brought to do their duty, though they be able; which is my
very case with you: Yet you have some suspicious words that way, as when you
call my using the Authority of Magistrates a Force; P. 20. P. 7.
and that word is suing for Tithes peaceable, sounds that way too much: Yet I
rather think (though you call me to mind this before you write them, and
express your mind after them, as if you hap thoroughly considered the
business, and at last resolved I think not) that you did not indeed mind what
you wrote your self: I am forced to conclude upon one, and I had rather
conclude against your wisdom, then against your honesty; I hope you are not
guilty of so wicked a doctrine: Unpeaceable to use the Magistrates help when
there is no remedy? P. 16.
If this be your mind indeed, tell me, you that so bravely conclude it. This
is the period of all, the Gospel must be free, and kept free from man's power;
for this is the ordinance of God. Just so a Paul or an Angel, were the thing
spoken of necessity to salvation, when this is not so much as true. It seems
then, in matters of the Gospel, Magistrates (I suppose they are the men you
mean, though Ministers also are men, and (I hope) have some power in the
Gospel) may not meddle, by your leave: If then they may not meddle in
money-matters, to de^ermine of them, but he that uses them is an unpeaceable
man; pray then what are they for? If you say this is no just debt, or that
though Magistrates may determine of other money-matters, but not of this: they
are the things mainly in question, and come now distinctly to be condesired.

There is a threefold plea for the Right of Tithes. That of Law Divine.
Humane. Free-gift.


I always contented my self with the third, though protesting always that I
denied not the two former; which peaceable way, seeing you interpret as my
giving of them up, and bend the chief of your strength against those weapons
were never brought out against you; I am forced to follow you, in defense of
those reasons you choose to deal with; wherein I hope to make that appear to
you which I then told you, That I was able to say more to both those grounds of
Right, then you knew how to answer.

And first, I shall let you see with what Scripture-evidence the divine Right
of Tithes may be defended: In which I shall first lay down what tends to assert
this Right, and then answer what you or others bring, so far as I know to the
negative.

I shall not fetch the Rise of Tithes from Cains bad Divident: let the Scholar
debate that with learned Mountague, if he please. I write not to the Learned,
whom I am not fit to teach; nor against the Learned, whom I am not fit to
grapple with. We will take it where we find it, without turning over any
Translation but our own. That is, Genesis 14.20. And he (Abraham Heb. 7.2.) gave
him Tithes of all.

We must here proceed distinctly, and step by step. P. 2.
And the first enquiry is, Whether this were a free will offering in Abraham,
or an act of obedience to Gods Statute Law? a freeewill offering, P. 15.
Neighbor, you think it, and upon this pin the main body of your frame hangs;
the change pretended being from Aarons proportion to Melchizedechs: Now you
know, from a tenth to a tenth, is no change in the maintenance; and if
Melchizedechs were due by a Statute Law as well as Levis, I hope we are agreed,
and your Book is answered.

Lets see now what you bring to prove this grand fundamental affirmation; what
is it? nothing; it is strange, but most true; verily nothing, unless you intend
the word gave in the Scripture recited for a proof; though I cannot think you
so very ignorant of Scripture Language; it is a word that indifferently
signifies either a free-gift, or a p^yment: had you consulted with me before
you printed (as you might easily have done, Lev. 7.36. Deuteronomy. 26.13.
we dwell but two fields asunder) I should have advised you to strengthen this
main foundation-pillar of your discourse a little better.

But see now whether we can say any thing for the Law; that has more
conviction then your just nothing, or as good as nothing for the free will
offering. First, I shall begin with the History, as it is laid down in Genesis

Can any reasonable man think that Abraham, a man so wholely moved by the
direction of God, as appears in the story of his life, should now on the
sudden determine in so singularly rare a passage without advice from God? To
find out that something is due to Melchisedech as a Priest, would need no new
consulting with God; we have that impression within us already: That this
something, must be a proportion out of every thing, perhaps no need to consult
with God anew about that neither; it is to sanctify the whole lump. But why
this something should be a tenth proportion rather then any other, will need a
new consulting with God about, unless you will suppose Gods mind known about it
already, either by nature, or by tradition (either of which ways gains the
cause for us) otherwise that this needful consulting with God was not made, but
that Abraham did it by his own private motion (God and he not being such
strangers) is very dishonorable to the Patriarch to affirm, Hebr. 7.
and cannot but overthrow the Apostles reasoning from thence to such weighty
truths; for what is to be made of this action if Abraham did it of his own head?

It cannot be therefore b^^ this action was done by the instinct of the Spirit
of God; and that this instinct was a commanding instinct, and the command
coming with that certain evidence to be of God, as would bind him as much as
Scripture does us, writing giving not the Authority, but the evidence to the
command. The conclusion then will be, Abraham had a command of Gods not to be
resisted, determining him, without any further enquiry, to the proportion of a
Tenth in what he gave to Melchisedech; and if this be it which Christ has
changed the Law to Melchisedechs free will offering, you will not gain much,
nor we lose much in the cause between us.

But still, though this will prove the Law to Abraham, yet it will not prove
the Debt to Melchisedech; he might be inspired to give an Alms; and this,
though a Law to Abraham, would have been no debt of justice to Melchisedech;
go on therefore, and see what is to be found in the Story for this also. At
first sight it seems improbable that the King of Salem should need an Alms; or
if you will not call it so, but an Honorary given out of respect to his office,
but not due in strict justice; yet why so great a proportion? the Tenth of all
was a matter of no small value; yea, though we should find no fault with our
Translators rendering the Apostles (...) by spoils. Such honorary observances
we find paid to Prophets, 1 Samuel 9.7, 8. 1 Kin. 14.3. Genesis 31.8, 9, 10.
but never to Priests; and to Prophets in far smaller sums then this. Tenth of
all was an high testimony of honor; and this no more then give and take,
without so much as any such ceremony of respect as passed between two far
meaner persons, Esau and Jacob. Sure though Melchisedech dealt like a King in
his bread and wine, yet he much forgot himself, if this were not a known common
due to his Priesthood, from others as well as from Abraham; this indeed would
shut out such passages of courtesy between them, and, I suppose, did.

Pretty fair this from so short a story toward the demonstration of our
conclusion, That Tithes were not given by Abraham to Melchisedech out of free
gift, but as a just due and right to Melchisedechs Priesthood. But go we on to
the Comment upon this Text to the Epistle to the Hebrews, Chapter 7. See whether
there is not enough to put the matter quite out of doubt, though a man should
be never so morose and hard to be convinced.

V. 4. etc. we find giving of Tithes a demonstration of Melchisedechs
greatness, and afterward v. 9. a demonstration of Levis Priesthood, being
inferior to that of Melchisedechs: Now, though every payment of a debt be not
a testimony of inferiority, yet no payment which is not of a debt, is so. A
gift of courtesy would never have proved such a thing, but if any thing, the
quite contrary.

V. 6. we meet with (...), he tithed Abraham, amiss rendered, he received Tithes
of Abraham. Beza's decimavit is better then the Vulg. decimas sumsit. Here one
would guess Tithes to be Melchisedechs due in strictect justice; else he was
over-bold with Abraham: The word imports jurisdiction and right, if any thing.

V. 8. we find Levis taking Tithes and Melchisedechs compared together; and the
difference stated; here men that dies; there he that lives; but in taking
Tithes both one; so one, that one word serves for both. (...), tithe: expressed
in the (...), to be understood in the (...): the thing so much the same, that
the Apostle judges it unnecessary to add any word in the second member, but
leaves us to borrow it from the former. Add that Melchisedechs (...) v. 6.
answers to Levis (...) v. 5. and his was by command, and is so expressed.

V. 9. we meet with Levi paying Tithes, and payment is of a debt; and one would
think as much from Abraham as well as Levi: It was but one act, and that
immediately Abraham's, but remotely Levis; and beyond doubt it was more a debt
from Abraham, then from Levi; for Abraham received the Benediction for which it
was immediately, and in his own person. Now if any can find an English payment
that is no debt in justice; yet the Greek will not suffer him to be so happy as
to make any evasion; (...), Levi was tithed, will constrain him to acknowledge
the debt beyond all hope of escape.

Whether thus much will satisfy you, my good Friend and Neighbor, that
Abraham's gift to Melchisedech was a just payment, and no free will offering, I
cannot tell; but I hope it will; and to that end I shall leave it with you.

But yet our work is not done: The most Judicious Adversaries of the Divine
Right of Tithes yield us the Law without all this ado; but differ from us in
the determining what Law it is. Join we then issue with them in this debate.

The Judicial Law cannot well come in dispute here; not only because the thing
we speak of is of the things that are between man and God, not between man and
man; but especially because Melchisedech was none of the stock of Abraham,
whoever he was; so he and his could not be concerned in a Judicial Law, but by
supposing Judicials universally to bind all mankind; and this is as much
Morality as we shall desire to find, a positive Law of Gods, binding other
Nations besides the Jews. If this be granted us, the rest that we would
infer will quickly follow, and the cause is ended.

But a branch of the Ceremonial Law it may be, as Circumcision, Sacrifices,
etc. sent before to usher in the whole Body of that Law, as given under Moses:
And if so, we shall find an expiration for it as for other Ceremonies at the
cross of Christ (and I, for my part, if so, think so too, as to that, or any
other Religious use, not appointed by Christ himself: It were a strange thing
to see fleshly sacrifices offered up religiously, and men to put the world off
with they do it to other uses and ends then for which it was done in the Law)
it remains only, that yielding the consequent of the supposition, we demand a
proof of the so. But here we press them too far; it may be, and it is possible,
must serve our turns: And this is all we can have from those that plead only
against the Divine Right, and from them that plead against the lawfulness of
Tithes too. Strange! A Law of Gods is produced between us, and confessed; only
the perpetuity of that Law is denied; yet no evidence at all given to prove the
temporary nature of it: He that says a known Law of Gods was in the nature of
it temporary, had need not only affirm it possible, but prove it certain. I
take it to be evident they have nothing to say here, because where they have
been often called upon to speak, and ought by such deep bonds of necessity,
yet they say nothing. I add, concerning those learned men that deny no more
then the Divine Right, That if this payment to Melchisedech may be truly and
properly a branch of the Ceremonial Law, it may be an unlawful payment also;
and if it be certain it was so, it is certainly unlawful also: Another man may
see the congruity of this answer to their own stating of the question; but
truly I cannot.

So then we proclaim a Law found out, they deny it not; we proclaim again we
find nothing in the Law why it should not be perpetual; they say not they do,
only it is possible that they may; we proclaim again, Attempt it, show it, but
they are silent.

Ye we will not leave them; we will try what we can say to the Negative (ex
abundanti) that payment of Tithes to Melchisedech was not by the force of a Law
ceremonial.

First, Melchisedech was a Priest of another Order, and not a Ceremonial
Priest, else he should not be higher then Levi, nor for ever; nor should our
Lord have been called a Priest after this Ord^^, rather then after the Order of
Aaron. And the service for which Melchisedech received Tithes, was not any work
of Sacrifice, but for his work of Benediction, as it is manifest in the Text,
and acknowledged by the famous Capel; Genesis 14.19, 20. in Thesibus Salmur.
though I know not what to make of his Parenthesis following (quanquam nec
ratio ista excludenda.) It is an high presumption to say positively that
Melchisedech offered any Sacrifice at all, when Scripture says nothing of it:
To be sure, as he is brought in (and so he is a type of Christ, and so he took
Tithes) he offered none. The Papists will never find out a Sacrifice in the
Bread and Wine, as busily as they hunt for it; a resemblance to our Eucharist
the Fathers indeed have found out, but not a Sacrifice: And in this place we
know Scripture silence is argumentative; Melchisedech being a Type, not as he
did, or was at other times, but as he is storied to have been, and to have done
then: and to this his Tithing does belong, and to nothing else. Add that we
find nothing Ceremonial in Melchisedechs Priesthood, to be verified a mystery
by some other thing in Christ, not in his name, King of righteousness, King of
peace; not in his Genealogy, without Father, and without Mother, not in the
end mentioned of his life and office; not in the work of his Priestly office;
all these were verified in Christ in the Letter; and it is wonderful that
Tithing alone should be verified in Christ by a mystery, which mystery I
think, is not yet expounded by any, that we may know what it is; much less
proved and made good.

If any shall say that the ceremonialness of Tithes, as paid to Melchisedech,
consists not in their respective consideration, as paid to such a Priesthood,
but in the absolute proper nature o^ them: This at the first sight is utterly
improbable, that a Priesthood not Ceremonial, should be maintained by a
maintenance essentially and in it self ceremonial: But let that pass; if a
Ceremony be defined A carnal Rite in Religion appointed by God to shadow out
Christ, or some spiritual grace in Christ, till it expire with the death of
Christ; I think it will pose the wit of man to show Tithes such a ceremony; for
either this ceremony must be found out in the Tenth, or in the Law, determining
any set proportion whatsoever.

If men say the Tenth as Tenth, is that which is essentially ceremonial, it
should be shown by what Scripture it is appointed by God so to be, that the
mere Tenth abstracted from either Priesthood, should be in it self designed to
a ceremonial use.

2. What ceremonial use it could have, being common to Levi with Melchisedech,
to whom it could not have that use; and whatever is Essentially Ceremonial,
has always a Ceremonial use.

3. How a Tenth could be more carnal then a 9th. or a 11th. Hebr. 7.8.


4. What there is in Christ which this Ceremony signifies.

5. What burdensomnesse there is in a tenth to Christians more then in a ninth,
or even then a twentieth, except that it is the bigger sum?

6. What other determinate proportion is shut up in its room, as it fared with
other Ceremonies?

Say we then the tenth as a maintenance by Law determined is the Ceremony. Then
I ask 1. What one tittle in Scripture to prove this?

2. How should this be more a ceremony then other stints, by name of time for
worship?

3. What answers this supposed Ceremony? not a free will offering, taken to
come in the room of a stinted sum; for that is not the body which answers
this shadow: Spiritual sacrifices come in the room of fleshly ones, but they
are not the body of them: no more can it be here, some other body must be found
out for them, and what is that?

4. Why a Law for maintenance should not be Ceremonious, but a Law for this or
that should.

Gal 6.6. 1 Timothy 5.17. 1 Cor. 16.2. Luc. 12.33.
5. Why Paul may determine it to something out of all men's goods that are taught
in the word without a Ceremony, but may not limit the how much under danger of
a Ceremony.

6. Why the double honor designed should not be a Ceremony, but the express
determination of the how much should.

7. What Ceremony there is in the Apostles, (...), what ever he has thriv him;
and whether that were not a determinate Law; why sell that you have, A
determinate command, be not equally a Ceremony as what we speak of: Why more
Ceremonious to say give a ninth with eleventh, etc. then sell all, and as it
seems give all; for they might as well keep it in land, as put it out to use or
trade with it. He that can give a plain Scripture answer to such questions as
these, that does not speak mere dreams of a man half asleep, and half awake,
will exceed my understanding, and I dare say my Neighbors either, though with
him this is the Ceremony, the Law, not the tenth.

It remains then a moral Law it must be, by force of which this payment was
made to Melchizedek: yet not so moral as that a tenth rather then a ninth or
eleventh should be sufficiently gathered from principles of nature left to it
self; numerical reasons are pretty things for a solitary fancy to delight it
self with: but the fineness of these inventions will never engage conscience to
practice, especially when the purses of men are concerned; yet this I will say
for them, they are as good as those that are brought for the seventh of our
time: in both which, the assigning, what proportion of our time and goods would
please God, the reason of man being utterly defective, and needing help from a
new Superior discovery, God has helped us in both by a positive Law, guiding
the blindness of reason, where it did not see its way; in matter of time indeed
most expressly, not so in matter of goods, yet sufficiently enough, as has
been proved against the Defendors of the free will-offering, and is supposed by
those we contend with now: yet if the tenth goods be in this respect
disadvantaged above the seventh time, in that it has not so express a
positive institution, it has the disadvantage abundantly made up, in that
there is much seemingly against the morality of the Sabbath in the New
Testament, whereas there is nothing against the morality of a tenth with any
color of sound reason produced, or to be produced, as I doubt not but when I
come to those times, with Gods help I shall be able to demonstrate.

But no such positive Law to be found in the New Testament: Dissert. in Genesis
24.20.
nay most excellent Rivet, neither is there any such to be found there for the
seventh of time, it is enough that we find both in the Old Testament, and that
by Law never yet repealed: and so great a Divine should not say, that the
Gospel has antiquated all the Old Testament constitutions at one blow, and
left them alone which are reestablished by a New Testament confirmation; no
sound proof or such a saying, and Christ's own most serious protestation is
against it; yet whether such a positive may not be concluded from the New
Testament also, Math. 5.17. etc.
shall be inquired into anon, so I dismiss for the present Melchizedeks
tithing.

The second time we meet with Tithes is in the Vow of Jacob: and this also is
made a free will-offering by you my Neighbor, whom I now return to again, but
without all show of reason, there being no appearance of any thing arbitrary in
this thing; the Vow being as well of having the Lord for his God, as of giving
the tenth; Genesis 28.21, 22.
and Jacob being trained up in the steps of his Father and Grandfathers piety,
had learnt without doubt that proportion to be acceptable to God; it is not to
be thought Jacobs tithing was more free then Abraham's; for why should the
Grandchild be less under a Law then the Grandfather was? Nay it your
reasoning be good, though it had been free to Abraham, it must be a Law to
Jacob, P. 2. P. 4.
unless Jacobs due be supposed to bind his posterity for so many Generations,
yea to this day if Christ had not changed it; whereas Abraham's payment binds
not so much as his Grandchild, Jacobs Vow was altogether as much personal as
Abraham's Fact.

Then if the Law stand good in Jacobs time; the question next will be what Law
it was, of which there being nothing determined about the persons that received
them, nor about the uses they were put to, in this or in any other Scripture, I
only conclude thus much, that there is no evidence of any thing ceremonial and
temporary in this Example of his, but that in the same channel, in which we
found Tithes running at first they run still, any thing from this instance
before us to be drawn notwithstanding.

Go on now to Moses time, where the statute Law is acknowledged: and from
whence the greatest conjectures against the morality of Tithes are drawn; yet
should we grant them as much as from their respect to the Levitical Priesthood
may be concluded an intervenient transient ceremonial use; yet this would no
way overthrow their first right originally, and (for what yet appears to the
contrary) perpetually due to God, and by him conferred upon another Priesthood.

Tithes have not their original from the Levitical Priesthood, for they ran a
long course before; neither have they their expiration with the Levitical
Priesthood, for they have run a longer course since: while they and the
Levitical Priesthood were in society, a respect they had to that Priesthood;
but now the same they are as they were before, without any respect to Levi and
his sacrifices at all. This would make short work of the cause, and would not
be disproved, but either by showing them not to have had any other Fountain but
the Leviticall Priesthood, which is manifestly false and disproved already;
they had a course long before, even by Law or that, Jordan like, they are
swallowed up in the dead Sea of the Levitical Priesthood, and ought not at
least to have appeared above ground ever after; which answer has in part been
overthrown, already, when it was shown that Tithes are not essentially, and in
themselves ceremonial: and shall be more fully examined here after when it
shall be made appear, that the Gospel has made no alteration in this matter,
nor changed the Law.

But that I may not be said to pass sleightingly over that where the main
stresse of the adverse cause is supposed to be, I shall view more exactly the
passages which are found in the Mosaical Law about this matter.

Those Laws of paying Tithes, were either such as bound the people, Number. 18.18.
or such as bound the Levites. Those that did bind the Levites, were to be paid
from them to the High Priest. These we inquire not after now; we find them not
before, and we find them not since, till the Pope had a mind to play the High
Priest, and our Princes since to receive the money: but we acknowledge no such
Officer since Christ's Reformation, therefore no such Tith due to any.

The Laws of Tithes from the people were of three sorts: One to Sacrifices and
Feasts, which was Ceremonial: Another to the Poor, Stranger, and Levite, which
was Judicial: A third to the Levites, which we suppose was Moral.

Number. 18.21. Deuteronomy. 14.23. Number. 18.31.
The tithing for Sacrifices, and the tithing for the Levites were two distinct
tithings: One was for Levis maintenance; the other for the Lords Feasts, to be
eaten by him that paid it. One was to be paid to the Levite where he dwelt,
there paid sure where eaten (I had almost said, that all the Antiquaries in the
world should never persuade me to so unreasonable a thing, that from all parts
of the inheritance of Gods people on this side, and on that side Jordan, the
Husbandman must carry his tith in kind unto Jerusalem, and that then I know not
who should carry it back again to the Levites respective habitations; the
Levites Cities were in all likelihood the Storehouses for the Fields near them)
the other was to be carried to Jerusalem: One was to be eaten in any place; the
other in the place which the Lord shall choose: Deuteronomy 14.6. Lev. 27.31, 32. Deuteronomy.
14.24.
One might not be redeemed, not the Tithe of the Hay, Corn. etc. but by adding
a fifth part, not of the heard at all; but the tith for the Feast might; so
these two were plainly two distinct tithings, and both paid by the people every
year.

The third years tithing was distinct from them both; not all one with the
tithing for the Feasts: for must the Feasts be neglected then? and the Law
broken every third year? Deuteronomy. 16.16, 17. and 14.28, 29.16.12.
is nor the third years tith to be laid up within thy Gates, and eaten within
thy Gates; whereas the tithes for Feasts were to be carried to Jerusalem, and
eaten at Jerusalem? and why should the third year be called the year of
tithing, if no more were done that year then at other times? plainly they are
two distinct Laws, and must have a distinct obedience.

The Tithes for Feasts were Ceremonial, and were never before, nor ever after;
only from the equity upon which they were grounded, will one Argument among
others be brought for our offerings, toward the furnishing of the Lords Table,
though a far less proportion will serve for that use; so on all hands no
ground of this Tithes continuance.

The third years tithing was Judicial, a Statute for the Poor; and so continues
in its equitable foundation, that a due provision be made by Law for the Poor,
whom we have always with us.

There remains now only that to the Levites to be inquired after, what
appearance there is in the Laws about it for us to conclude, either for, or
against the perpetual right of them; the Scripture that contains those Laws, if
I have not been strangly overseen in my Search, are three and no more, Lev.
27.30, 31, 32, 33. Number. 18.21, 24, 31. and Deuteronomy. 18.1. Not many leaves these
among the Levitical Satutes, though if many leaves had been found of them in
Moses Law, they would not therefore have been presently Ceremonial, unless it
were proved they were there as branches of the Ceremonial Law, and then one
leaf, yea one Verse would serve the same.

Now in none of these Scriptures do we find the Original Law, but only
resolutions about the disposal of them, supposed due to God by a former right,
and therefore the cessation of these Laws and how removed out of the way, will
only after this disposal of them, but never overthrow Gods right in them, which
they do not constitute but suppose. That in Lev. 27.30. tells us, it is the
Lords, it is holy to the Lord; therefore not to be alienated, Verse 31, 32, 33.
God challenges his right to them already in being, and the Statute forbids
encroachment upon that right; and this is, I think, the first time these Tithes
are mentioned in Moses Law: and here we are referred to an higher claim, in
which if nothing Ceremonial have appeared, then what ever becomes of these
Scriptures, Tithes must stand still, their foundation root being not plucked
up, though these after-authorities should lose their binding force.

What the other two Scriptures determine, is not material to this inquiry,
because though they should speak never so peremptorily in commanding them, yet
they can be only confirmations establishing what is on foot already, and so
must follow the Original one; for a thing can be Originally commanded but once:
we have found them before in the Law of Moses, and there also in the current,
not in the wellhead of them; for that we must seek higher then Moses if we
would find it out, and I am persuaded, no man can fix his foot with any
certainty of resolution sooner then the beginning of the world.

And yet neither in them have we any Law commanding them from the people; but
that supposed, and upon that the people offering them to the Lord (of debt now
at this time, it is on all hands resolved on, Number. 18.21, 29.
not of free gift) And God assigning them to Levi for his service in the
Tabernacle, as for Deuteronomy. 18.1. it is a short sum of Number. 18. The Priests to
eat the offerings of the Lord made by fire, as in the beginning of Number. 18. it
is at large declared; all the Tribe of Levi shall eat the Lords inheritance, as
is declared at large, Number. 18.21.

There are two rights found in these Laws; one from the people to God, and that
right is supposed; the other from God to the Levites, and that right is stated,
Number. 18.21.
and de novo expressed here: be it then that Levis service of the Tabernacle,
for which this assignement was made, is ceased, and so the assignement with it,
which is the later right; yet we want still the evidence of Gods giving up his
right from the people: surely it should be shown not only where they cease to
be Levis, but where they cease to be Gods; they come to Levi at the second
hand, and Gods right is a distinct right from Levis, was before Levi's, and it
would be inquired into, how it comes not to be Gods since; let the Detainers of
Tithes show where God has released them of this tribute.

Neitheir let the excellent Capell. object here that we owe our selves, and all
we have to God and Christ, quanti quanti jumus: for as this is most true now
(and we desire to acknowledge it most equal, that we make our all his, who has
made his all ours) so it was ever more most true; and yet God reserved unto
himself a special right to Tithes, Mal. 1.10.
as sufficient to testify our homage, and support his Worship, who would have
none shut the doors of his house for naught, nor kindle a fire on his Altar for
naught; there being enough left besides for the subsistence of them that used
the Land under God, and were to live upon it: so it was then needful, and it
appear^s that so it was done; so it is needful still upon the very same
grounds, and notwithstanding what this reason produces to the contrary, so it
is still. Besides should not the most learned man remember, that the reason
alleged is as strong in the point of time, as it is in the point of goods?

Neither let others object this special right to be from the Jews only, as who
held their Land of God by a peculiar gift, and because of the wonderful
Fruitfulness of the Land. I cannot see any truth in the assertion: for can any
man imagine that Abraham alone paid Tithes to Melchizedeck? and the same Law
that is to the Jew is to the Proselyte; and the reason is equal to all that
will have God for their God, that they should testify their homage to him, and
maintain his Worship as well as the Jews. And for the reasons of the assertion
they seem of no weight.

The first, in that all Nations hold their Lands of God as well as the Jews,
though not led to them by such mighty signs.

2. And Abraham paid his Tithes out of the spoils of war, if the word be duly
rendered.

3. Had not then a foot of promised land, which he could call his own when he
paid his Tithe.

4. Jacobs vow was out of all that God should give him.

5. All that is said for the right of personal Tithes, overthrows this pleading.

6. This reason is nowhere assigned by God for the payment of Tithes by the
Jews.

7. Others are.

8. If this were assigned, yet others are the principal, and of a perpetual and
universal obligation; so this is gratis dictum.

And the second reason has as little weight as the first; for admit it all, it
will only prove an Obligation to a lesser proportion, as lands are less in
Fruitfulness: and what Scripture encouragement can any have to give less then
a tenth? If New Testament Examples oblige us to any thing, it is sure to much
more then a tenth, as I shall show anon; what there was therefore of special
Fruitfulness in that land above others, had a charge of people answering it,
yea exceeding it; so there was as little to spare for the Levite as out of
other lands, where the increase might be less, and the people fewer indeed,
considering how few the Levites were, and what Provision was made for them in
the eight and forty Cities with their Suburbs, and the many ways that land was
otherwise charged by God, of which there is some taste given above; reason
would advise, let the Levite be contented with his settled Patrimony, wherein he
sareth much better then any of his Brethren, and let him relinquish Tithes
altogether; but so it seemed not good in the eye of God, but rather that
whoever served him in peculiar services, should have peculiar encouragements
beyond their Brethren, that his house may not lie wast, nor the Levites cry
what a weariness is it? But why in such a Fruitful land as through Gods
blessing ours is, should the Fruitfulness of Canaan be given as a reason, why a
tenth should not be paid among us as it was among them? God cease our
murmurings for the great plenty now for diverse years afforded us, and make us
never grudge God his portion, which we never gave him, else we may quickly hear
of a Fruitful land turned into barrenness for the wickedness of them that dwell
therein.

Ps. 107.34.
I never heard of any yet undone by paying of Tithes; very Heathens have thought
otherwise as well as Jews; I have heard of Families thought to be undone by
alienating from God to themselves, and from Sacred uses to common.

So then Gods they were and are from the people, be the Levites claim under God
never so Ceremonial: if he never gave them up, then are they his still.

Move we now a step further, and see into this very assignement of Gods to
Levi: we shall find a respect it bears to certain uses, and to certain
persons; Number. 18.21.
(or the respect it has to uses, what says the deed? for their service which
they serve, so in general; then it follows even the service of the tabernacle
of the Congregation; that bring what for the present they attended upon,
including in it al their temple services, much diverse from those under the
Tabernacle) ^herein they served God, 1 Chro. 25. and 26.26, 30, 33.
some in the Temple in several offices, others waited on the service of the
Lord in the Provinces, in all the business of the Lord, and in every matter
pertaining to God: And no sober man, I hope, will say, Tithes respected one
part of their service, and that the meanest, Deuteronomy. 33.10, 11.
and not all and every part: if any should, Moses himself will rectify him,
who makes Levis teaching judgments, and Gods Law the prime consideration for,
which he prays the Lord to bless his substance, before he menti^ns the
incense, and the whole burnt-offering.

And what were those judgments? only how to behave themselves in the
Ceremonies of Gods worship? so one, and he a Friend o^ Tithes too; but most
unadvisedly; there was not so great need to set L^vites in the Provinces for
that, and the poor people needed teaching in something else, which being more
excellent and difficult, would rather deserve honorable wages, then all that
they performed besides; 2 Chro. 17.8, 9.
and if God did not suffer any to kindle a fire on his Altar for naught, much
less was he ^ikely to (...) the Levites to take pains for naught in
endeavoring by the Doctrines of Faith, repentance, and a new l^^e or
obedience, to save the souls or people.

The conclusion of this matter is, that all the work of the Levites not being
Ceremonial; the cho^sest, and that which diserves greatest wages being, for the
substance of it, moral and perpetual Faith in the Messiah, and obedience to
Gods everlasting Laws: and there being no other reward for this service but
this common one of Tithes, and God nor likely to set them about a work, and
give them no present visible wages, which in no other service he ever did, and
it being no sufficient answer, to say that by other means for other servicer
they were provided already; therefore no need of a new assignement for this
moral service; for so they would have been in their eight and forty Cities with
their Suburbs, though they had no Tithes at all.

It follows that the use of Tithes in this assignement respected not only a
service of a temporary Ceremonial, but of a moral perpetual nature: and though
the temporary use is now done with, yet the Law will still abide in its
principal perpetual uses, though the accessory be vanished; especially when the
pains which is taken away by the ceasing of one, is abundantly added to the
Ministes of Gods holy things in the other.

And if any say, that because there was some respect to a Ceremonial service,
though that not the only nor the principal, that therefore it is fit they
should be nailed to Christ's Cross together with other Ceremonies;

I would advise him, to consider what one duty that is most moral in his own
account did not share in, and sympathize with the peculiar dispensation of
those times; instance in prayer, a moral duty if any; yet turning the body, and
lifting up the hand toward the holy land, toward Jerusalem, Dan. 6.10. 1 Kin.
8.29, 30, 33, 35, 38, 48. Ps. 5.7.
toward the house that is called by Gods name, and toward the holy Temple;
these and other things, even in prayer were Ceremonial; instance in what you
will; some thing will appear to have been appendant to it, though the body of
the duty be not so; we must therefore forbear nailing Tithes to the Cross of
Christ, among other Ceremonies upon this account, till we can tell how to
rescue all other duties from following them the same way. No; that whose use is
merely, or at least principally to shadow, let that cease as having its
consummation at the Cross of Christ; but let not that be dealt so with which
has another perpetual use for its principal design, and which alone is
sufficient to support its standing, because of some Ceremonialness annexed,
suiteable to the nature of those things; for then we deface all.

So then the right of God in Tithes remains yet firm, and the assignement of
them for such uses remains good, as to the principal uses; and the ceasing of
the rest overthrowes not the very assignement, much less the Original Law, by
which they are due to God.

Yet again consider we the assignement, Number. 18.21. P. 10. Ephesians. 5.3, 4.
in respect of the persons to whom it was made; I have given the Children of
Levi. To omit the merry jesting Triumphs we meet with here (only sayi^g thus
much in a serious cause against many that hold the same foundation with us
jesting, and that with bitterness is not convenient, and does ill become
Saints) yet thus much may with reason be affirmed;

That Tithes were not assigned to Levi as Levi, but as set apart for the
service of the Lord; let him be removed, and others set apart, the very reason
which gave them him, qua set apart, will give them that too: this service is
altered, a service remains; this service is altered in its inferior duties, in
its superior and most noble duties it is still the same; repentance toward God,
and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ (diversely indeed Preached, as the
diversity of times was, but the substance of the duty one) and the assignement
in reference to their service, was with such additions and alterations as it
should please God from time to time to make, as he did, both in what they were
to teach, first Moses, afterward the Prophets added: first Tabernacle service,
afterward Temple service (a great alteration) the maintenance in all changes
abiding the same.

The line of the Priesthood we find altered, but how? by losing the reward of
their Ministerial service, in case of receiving him whom they hitherto had
Preached, and being sent forth by him to teach others to receive him also: we
want a proof of this: the change was not in losing any thing they formerly
enjoyed; but by taking in others of other Tribes and Nations, Is. 66.21.
as it was Prophesied, and the time of fulfilling Types, and removing partition
Walls, being now come required; so others are joined with them to share in the
same service (for substance) by the same authority; why then they should not
share in the same reward, removing what is to be removed, and letling the rest
stand, I ask a reason: Let me put a case; suppose God had abrogated sacrifice,
and communicated the Priesthood, to chosen persons out of every Tribe, not
taking all of Levi, nor confining it to Levi, both these before the coming of
Christ in the Flesh, which he might have done; the Doctrine of Faith in the
Messiah to come still remaining, and had made no change of the maintenance, but
left it standing still: would any man say, that the still standing maintenance
must not be the portion of the now present Priests? especially if no new
provisions were made for them? No reasonable man, I think, would say so; that
which might have been done then, is done now; and therefore plain it is, that
so far as the assignement goes, we are not excluded from the benefit of it,
upon the reasons forementioned (with Master Seldens good leave) and whoever
will pluck Tithes out of our hands, must plead an alteration in the Gospel,
supposed to be made in this matter, and must not rest in any thing barely
producible out of this assignement to Levi. What is added about Tithes, in the
Old Testament, is little helpful to the cause of them that plead against
Tithes; being the confirmation of them by the voice of God, and the Edicts of
Kings and Governors, of which we shall speak in the second plea; we may then
draw all that has been said into these summary conclusions.

1. That when Tithes were first due to God, is nowhere to be found; we suppose
it was Gods reserved Rent from the beginning.

2. That Melchizedeck had a just right in Tithes from God, and not from the
free gift of man.

3. That this right was neither by Law Ceremonial, nor Judicial, but moral and
perpetual.

4. That Gods right in Tithes began not with the Levitical Priesthood, they had
only from him the assignement of the use of them.

5. That the expiration of this assignement to the Levitical Priest hood will
neither abrogate Gods right (if he have taken them from Levi, he has not
therefore given them away from himself) (...) revoke the grant to Melchizedeck
and his Priesthood.

6. That Gospel Ministers may claim Tithes from this assignement to Levi (at
least in the equitable construction of it) as appointed to serve God in his
house, though not as Levis race, nor for Ceremonial services from all that are,
or ought to be, taught by, and would be accounted the Israel of God, any thing
to be found in this assignemet to the contrary notwithstanding.

I shall but step aside, to consider in brief that question, whether Tithes
were not commanded under Moses by a Law Judicial? and then I shall follow our
Adversaries in this cause, to their pretenses for a change in New Testament
times. Our engagement with them that plead the Judicial Law, is not so
necessary, seeing to bring in a Judicial Law again, is not to deny Christ come
in Flesh; all that would have the Judicial Law rule all, upon this supposition
would yield us a Divine right in them; and none but upon the Foundation of
equity, upon which Judicials are built, would grant us rather more then less.
Yet let it not be injurious to the many great names of them at home and abroad,
who are of this persuasion, if I propound my doubts, though not very necessary
to the cause in hand. They seem to me not to have been due under Moses by a
Judicial Law, for these reasons.

1. They could not be Judicial, as paid by the people to God; Mal. 2.8.9.
whence it is called a robbing of God to detain them, nor yet as they were
given by God to Levi. Judicials order things from man to man, not from man to
God, nor from God to man.

2. Judicials began with Moses polity (such as were merely so) at least with
Abraham's Family becoming a people; for Political Laws suppose a body Politic
to be Governed by them; but no time to be found, wherein Tithes began to be
Gods, but the beginning of the world.

3. Judicials (properly so taken) concerned the Jews only, but Tithes not so;
it is not to be imagined, that Abraham only paid Tithes to Melchisedeck; he was
a Priest to many besides Abraham, and from them was this due as much as from him.

There is but one Politic reason, as I know of, given, why the Law for Tithes
should be Judicial, and first given by the old Scholemen; it is this, that by
this means a proportion might be found out for Levi, who else had no
inheritance among his Brethren; no great wonder this from the Schole-men; but
that Rivet should tell us among other reasons, this is (the forementioned) una
and praecipua, is to be wondered at; one and the Chief, and another reason
named? and this not named once? nay the quite contrary expressed? It was not
because they had no inheritance, Number. 18.21.
therefore they should have Tithes; Number. 18.21.
but because they had Tithes, therefore they should have no inheritance. I
would gladly know what politic reason would advise the Levites maintenance
rather thus, then by giving them a distinct share answerable to their numbers
among their Brethren. And if a maintenance this way were a matter of policy,
why such a maintenance as gave a tenth proportion to them who were just the 41.
Reynolds on Psa. 110. p. 477.
part, as some compute, scarce the 60, as Bellarmine, no consideration had of
the charges and labor of them that occupied the land? Rather one would think
upon that politic ground which respects the equal provision of the Tribes:
Tithes ought to have been wholly laid aside, they having 48 Cities with their
Suburbs, about a mile about, some of which were Royal Cities; which was a
proportion far exceeding any of the other Tribes, considering the smalnesse of
their numbers. So far is this reason from being praecipua, the chief, that it
is not so much as una, no reason at all, neither can it be.

We are now arrived at Gospel Times; hitherto Tiths are come along with us
without any stop or contradiction: It is now to be enquired what becomes of
them, whether they wax old now, and are ready to vanish, or abide in full
force and virtue. I shall lay down what I conceive to be the resolution of the
Gospel in the matter of Ministers maintenance in these following Conclusions.

P. 16.
1. That Gospel Ministers have a maintenance that is due to them of Right, and
not of Alms. This will pass now Nemine contradicente, I am sure not my
neighbor, who acknowledges a portion, though he stick at the proportion.

Capel charges other Anabaptists with this vile saying; but my Neighbor shall
stand acquitted of it for me. P. 4.
Nay he tells us, That it is to be feared, 1 Cor. 9.14. Gal. 6.6. 1 Timothy 5.8. 1
Cor. 9.7.
that that faith will not avail to salvation in Christ, which does not avail
to the maintenance of his Ministers: I fear so to, if the disobeying Christ's
ordinance, and the Apostles precepts; if highest ingratitude to them that show
us the highest mercy; if defrauding the labourer of his hire (the hire, not of
his work, but of his pains; and the soldier of his pay, the planter of his
fruit, and the shepherd of his milk; Neh. 13.10.
if robbing God of his tribute due to him out of the good things he has given
us (on all hands something reserved, though we differ about the how, and the
how much) if the ruining of our own, and many souls besides, while the
services of God are either wholly neglected, or contemptibly administered for
want of food in the Lords house. But if this, and much more, be enough to
ground such a fear; I think justly: and this the more, because it is a duty
without controversy; no sober man debates it; no error can excuse the
omission of it; a duty easily known; we reach it not by a long chain of curious
consequences which may tire a man of an ordinary understanding before he can,
come at his duty to discern it: it is as plain as the soldiers pay, the husband
man's bread, the shepherds fleece, the laborers hire: The neglect of it
therefore no ignorance can excuse, as well as no error; it must lie wholly
upon the will; its profaneness, or covetousness, or both. Yet if any, merely
out of a careless inadvertency of their duty, have fallen into this ^in, I
hope upon this joint admonition, they will be awakened to reform it, and will
know from hencforth, that God has his rent due to him as well as the Landlord;
and that the Ministers right is as much a debt as any man's: So may they expect
God should look down with a blessing on their habitations, as they bring out
thence that which is holy, Deu. 26.13, 15.
as something there is of that nature confessed on all hands.

Further, as Alms was not the appointed maintenance for Gospel Ministers de
jure, so neither was it the maintenance of the Apostolic Churches de facto;
they did not plead the Jus, and use a mere benevolence. Even Carleton here is
our, and his Instances are mistaken; for they concern not contributions to the
Ministry, Romans 15.26, 27. Acts 24.16.
but to the poor Saints at Jerusalem; and if of them his reason be admitted
good, that they of Macedonia, and Achaia, and Rome, were not bound in any other
duty then mere charity to maintain those at Jerusalem (it should be, not Rome,
as it is falsely printed) yet I hope he will not say so of the Minister; Romans
15.27.
and even of the poor Saints at Jerusalem the Apostle seems to mention another
debt besides that of charity. I always took the debtors there to be, not the
receivers, as he, but the payers for all it pleased them: and do so still;
neither can it be otherwise, the Gentile partaking of the Jews spiritual
things, ought to minister to them (the Jews) in their carnal things. To me it
seems a contradiction, to affirm a thing due in justice, yet paid of Alms; and
the foundation Carleton lays will not carry home the conclusion; for no man was
compelled to give any thing, but every man gave as he was moved: all this is
not sufficient to make an Alms. Suppose a Magistracy so corrupt, that an
honest man may not by suit recover upon a bond lawfully due; yet the Creditor
faithfully paying in this bond upon the force of a good conscience, may not be
rightly said to give an Alms: But if any will call this so, he may call the
other so too: Yet I should call both debts of justice.

2. Gal. 6.6.
That this due maintenance ought to arise out of all the goods of them that are
taught, none excepted; so neither the Tenants crop, privileged by sinful
customs, or unpriviledged, nor the Tradesmans gain, nor the Landlords rent
(the tenth increase being none of his goods; therefore though something, be
given out of the whole increase, yet that something is nothing out of the
Landlords goods, he must give a portion out of his Rent, if he give any thing.)
None of these exempted; the Apostles all goods forbids any thing to be
privileged from this duty, and cancels what is already. This Conclusion also
we have free from the contradiction of bad principles; could we easily free it
from the contradiction of bad practices, we should not have such eager
necessitous suing from all parts for Argumentations as we have. I desire
thousands to consider how well they acquit themselves of this plain confessed
Law of God. I say not that these things should be done to me; yet a Right it is.

3. That the quantity of the proportion which every man is to give out of his
goods, is not left to the mind and heart, the discretion and pleasure of him
that is to give. This Conclusion is contradictory to your whole Book, my Friend
and Neighbor, and therefore I shall pursue it thoroughly and closely. Let me
tell you, at the beginning, P. 18.
that the mind and will of the giver is a vile word, a very vile word, and
must be repented of, though it be the principle into which your whole Book is
resolved; the free will offering neither determined by God nor man, is no
otherwise; as it excludes man's determination, I shall deal with it hereafter, as
it excludes Gods, I have this place to deal with it in. And first I shall
assert my own conclusion, then remove out of the way what you have said in
defense of yours.

1. I take this to be a neccessary inference from the first Conclusion; for if
the mind and heart of the giver be the rule determining the something commanded
in its proportion; then whatever is given more then a small matter above
nothing, is mere Alms: For had we given out of all our goods the worth of a
single penny, and had a mind and heart to give no more, we had done what in
justice we are required, the Law being something, and the rule of measure our
own mind and heart: The rest then is mere Alms, a gift of charity.

Luke 10.7. 1 Cor. 9.7.
2. The similitudes Christ and Paul use in this matter, seem to me to import as
much: The Laborers hire, and the Soldiers pay are not left to the pleasure of
those they labor and fight for. Yet either is more reasonable then that
Ministers should be left to the pleasure of those sinners whose sins they fight
against; as soon leave the soldier for his pay to the pleasure of the enemy,
nay rather; for an enemy will love a gallant adversary; but the more able and
faithful Christ's soldier is, the more will the sinner hate him: I desire the
Gentlemen of the Soldiery to consider this.

3. The Excellency of the Ministry of the Gospel seems to bear out my
Conclusion. God never did yet leave his Ministers, of what Order soever, to the
pleasure of men, how much they would give them: And Christ's Ordinance is even
so; that is not (I hope) then commanded; how not commanded? that is a wild
Exposition of the even so, Neighbor, though it be yours. 1 Cor. 9.14. The
Archbishop reasoning with Thorp upon this ground is not to be contemned.


But what need we insist upon these things, when we have plain commands
determining other proportions, not this. And those determinations are either

1. On the people sides; not as they have a mind and will, but as they have a
power, 1 Cor. 16.2. 2 Cor. 8.3. or

2. On the Ministers side more then one. 1. He must live, 1 Cor. 9.14. And this
is more then the mind and heart of every giver will afford; many had rather
see the witnesses carcasses upon the ground, that they may be rid of their
Tormentors. 2. But they must not barely live as men, but as Christians, so
providing for their own, as that when that they are gone, their children and
widows may not be chargeable to the Church. None but will allow thus much out
of 1 Timothy 5.8. though many covetous wretches have filthily abused it (and do)
to most exorbitant boundless provisions for, not the lives, but the lusts of
theirs. 3. They must live as Ministers.

1. Answerably to the dignity of their Calling, 1 Timothy 5.17. not mere necessity
is to be regarded in the maintenance of him that labors in the Word and
Doctrine, but honourableness.

2. Answerable to the expensiveness of their Calling, which requires their
whole time, 1 Timothy 4.15. their whole endeavors, no intangling business of
life allowed to distract him from it, 2 Timothy 2.4.

3. A stock in Books must lie dead by him, sufficient to set up many a
considerable Trade; 2 Timothy 4.13.
even Paul had his parchments. None are busier in Printing, then those men who
quarrel so much against Ministers Books: It seems theirs must be bought up and
read, but no man's else; these men are unreasonably impudent.

4. Hospitality and mercy to the poor is enjoined him, and that not to be
shifted of with a Let him do as he is able; 1 Timothy 3.2.
for he ought to be able that he may do it. The poor will expect it from him,
whether he has it or no; and if he tell them he is not able, they will not
believe him; reason fills not hungry bellies, but food; and if we have it for
them, we shall marvellously further the entertainment of the Gospel by our
freeness in communicating; and if we have it not, or they receive it not, it
will be as great an hinderance.

5. He must speak, exhort, rebuke with all authority, Tit. 2.15.
and not let any despise him; which that Minister that depends upon the mere
pleasure of his hearers, for the bread he ears, is not like to do, at least
shall be in a great temptation to deal insincerely with wealthy Benefactors,
Priests Catech.
upon whose trencher he lives. That wretch whom Mr. Rogers of Dedham speaks of,
who offered at a Communion a brass farthing, communicated something of his
goods, and as much likely as he had a mind and a heart to; according to your
rule Neighbor that man sinned not: But God is not mocked.

So then certain it is that God has not left us to the mind and will of th^se
that are taught by us; God has set other bounds to a peoples duty then to do
as they list: It is to their Power, and if need be, beyond their power; on the
Ministers side, that he may live, and live honorably; that he may be furnished
with necessary helps to his Ministry, that he may mind hi service wholly, and
not be distracted with care how to get bread for his faml^y, that he may be an
example of charity to others, and an encourager of the poor in the love of
godliness that he may be free from the despisings of poor profane ones, and
from the proud insolences of the rich profane ones; that he may provide
honestly for his own, and not leave behind him those that shall be burdensome
to the Church when he is gone: So much as will answer all this are Gods bounds,
not the mind and heart of the g^ver.

Let us now see exactly and curiously all that is said for this monstrous
licentious Doctrine. I find some things taken to this purpose out of the Old,
and some things out of the New Testament.

Out of the Old Testament we have

P. 17, 18. Exo. 35.5, 21, 22, 29. 1 Chr. 29.5.
1. Examples. The people offering willingly for the Tabernacle, and for the
Temple.

Answ. True, we find free will offerings here, and many times elsewhere, even
in Sacrifices themselves; and we find stinted contributions also under the Old
Testament as well; must of necessity one ju^le out the other in the New
Testament, which stood so friendly together in the Old? Or if they cannot agree
now, one must give ground; Let Gods command maintain the field, and man's
Free Will go off; it is but good manners so to do: A voluntary act may expire
without much ado, but a command of Gods not so easily; especially when the
free will offerings mentioned were single extraordinary acts, once done, and no
more; whereas the Law was for a perpetual standing duty; and if a pattern be to
be drawn for Ministers maintenance under the Gospel from what was done under
the Law, it should rather be a standing provision, imitating a standing
provision, rather then what was special and extraordinary; Ministers
maintenance rather imitating Ministers maintenance, then something else, Moses
preparing for the Tabernacle, or David for the Temple; I will tell you my
Friend, what conclusion I should draw from these instances.

That there is nothing in a free will-offering more Evangelical then in a
Stint, that having been of use in the Tabernacle, in the Temple, and in
Sacrifices too, then which nothing more Ceremonial. And I will tell you what
manner of proof would have been to your purpose; could you have made it good,
that a free will-offering was never used in the Old Testament, and a Stint
always; whereas a free will-offering was always used in the New Testament,
and a Stint never: but if we find both under both administrations, it seems the
ways are in themselves indifferent to either.

2. 1 Chro. 28.9.
Your second Old Testament proof is from David's Command to Solomon, to serve
the Lord with a willing mind. And the third is like to this; Ps. 110.3.
a Prophesy that Christ's people should be a willing people in the day of his
power; a weighty proof, no less then six times repeated; what is the conclusion
thence? it must be this, that God has left his Ministers maintenance
undetermined to the free will of them that are taught; if any way of concluding
this out of these Scriptures, it must be thus: If God has left the greater to
the free will of men, much more the less; if no Law determining us in serving
the Lord, nor in submitting to the Rule of Christ, then not in maintaining the
Ministers; we admit the consequence; for should men be more under engagements
to us then they are to God? But we abhor the Antecedent; what? God not
determine us by his Command in the matter of his own service, and of subjection
to his Son: but leave us in such high things to our own minds and hearts? Many
Sons of Belial would fain have it so, and those men that cast off Scripture
guidance, and count nothing sin but what they think so, have found out a way to
persuade themselves it is so: But for you Neighbor, I do not think you to be
so wicked; it is an Hackney reason this, in every ignorant man's mouth, and you
took it up in the Highway, without examining it. The willingness in these
Scriptures has an opposition to constraint, not to a Command: Alas that you
should not see this! Come I know, you will rectify this mistake; you will not
dispute down all Gods and Christ's Laws, under pretense of disputing down
Tithes. I know you will not try now, whether any better success may be hoped,
for out of New Testament Arguments; they are

1. That Command of Christ, Math. 10.8. which we are thrice told of.

Answ. I. This Commission of Christ to the Apostles was not intended in all
things to be a standing Law to the Church; the charge Verse 9.10. was
extraordinary; the extent of their bounds to which they were confined was a
straightened Compass, Verse 5.9. and their Commission temporary, it being to be
with him, and that he might send them forth to Preach; occasionally in all
likelihood, Marc. 3.14,
and where himself did intend to come; others will tell you this, and it will
be hard to prove that this freely Verse 8. is not of the same nature as the
without Shoes, Verse 10.

11. But I give you this answer, that the Apostles were to heal the Sick, etc.
freely; and that freely was by neither demanding any thing for their Cures
wrought, nor yet taking any thing; had but thus much been permitted them, the
Apostles might have grown exceeding rich, and the miracles would have lost
their end, becoming a mere trade to get money by: it is daily seen that
multitudes of ordinary Physicians grow very rich by taking only, without ever
demanding any thing of a Patient, who often refuse, and never ask; the word
(...) imports it, and so they had received; Christ in the Communicating this
power to them neither asked nor took; you would not have this a rule for
Teaching too? if you would Christ's own express words at the close of Verse 10.
contradict you. I hope now you will let this Scripture go; the freely is
another thing then what you took it to be, and does concern another matter.

2. The rest of instances to establish your free will offering, are from the
History of the Acts, and the Epistles.

P. 3. Act. 24.17.
2 Cor. 8.1. They were willing to Contribute to Paul say you, nay do not thus
deceive men that are willing to trust you upon your word; the gift was to the
Saints, and Paul was but a Messenger among others, to convey it to them, Verse
4. of this speaks also Prove. 11.25. and which Scripture another mentions,
though you do not, Romans 15.27. it was to the poor Saints at Jerusalem: this it
seems a debt too, and it is well it pleased them to do their duty, to all which
I say only thus much, that Ministers are not the peoples Almes-men, and that
there is a wide difference between the poor of Churches, and the Rulers of
Churches. That matters of charity should be determined by the discreet
tender-heartedness of the giver may be allowed, but that matters of strict
Justice should be so left at liberty, will by no means be hence concluded, and
though the learned Capel. fetch the Ministers maintenance out of these
Contributions to the Poor; this will hardly be made good by a clear Scripture
proof in the Churches of the Gentiles (the Jewish had all things in common) and
yet it will not help the cause, it is produced for by him, and may be by
others; for though paid both at once, they are payments distinct in nature,
having several grounds, and several measures to direct, and determine
conscience, by as much as if they were paid never so much asunder.

P. 18.
Yet this instance is made a Rule for all Churches to walk by, and to this
purpose 1 Cor. 7.17. and 1 Cor. 4.17. are produced; neither of which speak to
the matter of maintenance particularly, if at all. Now (to see the unhappiness
of this man in all his reasonings) be all this granted that the Ministers
maintenance is no otherwise determined by God then the Poors; and that the
Apostles Ordinance about this, in one Church is a Rule for all Churches; it
will then deserve an inquiry, to know what that Ordinance was: this we must
take at the first Original Law about it, not upon an after-Act upon special
reasons varying in one particular from the first general constitution; That we
find a punctual Law indeed, and pretty general, 1 Cor. 16.1, 2. but this runs
quite in another strain; the Rule is determinate, and a very strait one too;
(...), Arian. Epict. l. 4.15. Proclaim that thou art at peace with all men,
(...), whatever they do to thee.
not as God has prospered him in (yet that is not the proportion of the heart,
and mind of the Giver) but whatever he has thriven in; the whole increase of
their stock in trading that week; uncertain, you will say that, and whether we
will or no, we must leave it to men's wills and consciences, unius cujusque
arbitrio and conscientiae; what shall we leave so, most Excellent Capel? not
the Law, that is determined in the Text, it must be his obedience to the Law;
and that the Apostle left indeed not to men's wills (that is unhansome, that word
arbitrio) but to their consciences, that they deal faithfully in obedience to
his Command, to the utmost of their knowledge; and for this (...), is a caveat
sufficient indeeed. Answer this to that learned man's exception about personal
Tithes, for which he brings those words.

This being the Laws in Corinth, it met with a proud sturdy covetous people,
with whom the whole increase of a great gainful trading that City flourished
in, would have amounted to too great a sum for an evil eye contentedly to
part with; the Apostle having notice of it, and their proneness upon every
occasion to division, through the influence false Teachers had among them,
takes quite another course in the second Epistle from what he used in the
first; not commanding them peremptorily without a reason, nor appointing them
what to give in any sense of the words; but because of the hardness of their
hearts, leaving them free in the sum, and endeavoring to raise them up
another way, by many most melting Arguments in two whole Chapters, which course
he had omitted altogether before; so it appears, this was a special indulgence
upon special causes, relaxing the rigor of a severe Canon to the Corinthians,
and to them only, as to all other Churches remaining in its full force and
virtue. You will say, this could not last long, for men to bear all the losses
in trading themselves, and others to carry away all the gain; true, no more it
did not, the order it self expresses its own expiration; when the Apostle came
to carry away their charity to Jerusalem, and for what I can see to the
contrary, it was but one weeks burden, so far is it from being a perpetual Law
for Ministers maintenance, that it was not so much as a perpetual Law for
Collections for the Poor; so exceeding inconsiderable is this allegation to the
purpose in hand; yet one place there is which speaks to the Ministers
maintenance indeed. Phil. 4.17, 18, 19. and we find diverse such in the Old
Testament (to Prophets especially) which were never therefore pleaded Rules,
that so it ought to be done always, and no otherwise; yet this is plainly and
fully to the instance.

Payments to Ministers are either out of duty to supply them, as God has
Commanded them to be supplied; these have their measures bounded, and not left
arbitrary to the discretion and will of the people: Other payments are out of
courtesy, as Testimonies of that love and kindness, which is comely good people
should, and many do bear to their Ministers; these are altogether arbitrary, a
little signifying love as well as much. Which of these two sorts the Philippians
were, does depend upon the knowledge of the Apostles then state; if not
necessitous, we may admit the free will-offering in this place, it being an Act
of courtesy and Christian care; if necessitous (as it seems by Verse 14. and
16.) the Gift was not free, but a matter of plain duty (will any deny this?)
bounded as has been forementioned, and smelt never the worse in Gods nostrils
for being Commanded, and having an other Rule and measure besides man's own will.

See v. 10.14.
The sum of this is, Contribution to the Apostle, in a necessitous condition,
was in it self a duty, in its measure so far as it had a correspondency with
Gods bounds, then pointed out and known, as has been declared, that was a duty
too; if in any thing their bounty exceeded, this will be referred to their
courtesy, and was indeed a free Gift; and as then, so it is now, the Stint does
not thrust out the free Gift, if men have hearts to exceed.

P. 2. P. 18.
But these are the Sacrifices alone which are accepted with God; that only, and
God accepts no other; it must needs be so then indeed, we have cause to look to
that; see what is brought to convince us.

1 Chro. 28.9. Again that? What will not serving the Lord be accepted, unless
without a Command? if will worship become the only acceptable worship in your
account, how at random do you write?

1 Chro. 29.5, 6, 9. Accepted no doubt these were, but the word only is
wanting; there were other Laws, acknowledged at that time, and were these
snares to men? they must obey them because Laws, but they could not be accepted
in their obedience to them, because Laws too? Oh do not write so reproachfully
to the goodness of God.

2 Cor. 9.14. and 8.1. Contribution is called a grace, and that to their power,
Verse 2. was a grace enabling them to do their duty, if the Apostle reason
well, Romans 15.27. beyond their power was grace, enabling them to an uncommanded
Act of mercy; obedience to just Commands is of grace: Where there is a Ye must
needs be subject; Romans 13.5.
this done for conscience sake is a grace, and accepted too: is it not so?
still here wants the only.

Phil, 4.17, 18, 19. The free Gift is an odor; phy, P. 2. P. 18.
why put you in the word free? it is the Gift, and that of duty; and yet the
word only is not here: yea though I heed it well, it is not here; there can
indeed be no safe account without we do our duty freely, as it has an
opposition to coaction and constraint; but as freely has an opposition to a
Law or Command (in which sense we dispute about it) that saying, there can be
no safe account without it, is not so true, though he that gives no more then
he must needs by the Laws of God and man, had need see that his
parcimoniousness proceed not from want of love, for that will render his
account unsafe.

Prove. 11.25. P. 18.
The covetous man gives neither one way nor other by his good will, and we need
not inquire how that will be accepted that is not; as for the liberal man's
superabundant charity to the poor, of which that Scripture mainly speaks,
accepted it will be no doubt; so also his hearty and willing Contribution, when
he is Commanded to it by Law of God or man: what you add, God accepts of no
other, nor will bless or water no other, is no conclusion from the Text; the
like of the liberal man's maintaining his Minister, which is no matter of
charity.

Is. 66.3. The Lord will have no Sacrifice but what himself chooses; who has
required this? Is. 1.11. Why these were all Commanded duties, and were
therefore not accepted, because unduely performed; the Texts themselves give
you the reason, why they were vain and hated. Is. 1.15. and 66.3, 4. And here
also we plead a Command, and you plead against it, by telling us God accepts
no service but what himself chooses: why man, you forget your side you are
engaged for; just so would you speak were you on our side, and we take the
Argument to be probable enough, and conclude therefore he has bounded it,
because he is most likely to know what will please himself, and most unlikely
in a thing that has so near a correspondence with his own worship, to leave
men to the lusts of their own hearts, or at best to the blindness of their own
reason, what a wilderness are you in here? you are to prove that no commanded
proportion in a Ministers maintenance is accepted by God in Gospel times; and
your reason is, no service uncommanded is accepted; you add also, going on as
in a Maze, but that which the Teaching of the Spirit brings forth in the
Faithful: Why the Teachings of the Spirit bring forth a conscientious obedience
to Scripture Commands, that we affirm in this very case, will not God accept
of it for the Scripture Laws sake? sure in writing these things you were not
well in your mind. And so much of Scripture grounds against the Commanded
proportion.

Your reasons follow why that was done which was never done; all Stints removed
and men left to their own minds and hearts. I might well spare them, for it is
in vain to examine the (...) when the (...) is not. But you and yours shall
never have cause to say that any thing produced stands unanswered; P. 19.
your reasons are not to ensnare his Ministers with lucre; a sin indeed
inconsistent with the duty of a Minister: but has God ever told us that a set
maintenance would make men Covetous? and that therefore he has removed it? not
a word; well, yet strong grounds for this are brought from reason; if any sound
one, we will hear that too: no such thing neither; how then answer you this?
show it if you can; why? by the experience of ages: nay that will not prove the
point; if Ministers be coveteous, the cause is not without, in evil Laws, but
within them, in evil hearts: take those hearts away, and let the Laws stand,
Ministers will not be covetous: take away the Laws, and let the hearts remain,
they will be coveteous still; nay more, for the more uncertainty of their
Provisions, the more will coveteousness distrust God; the more greedily will it
take where it has an opportunity; the more will it quarrel at the straitness
of men's purses; the more will it look upon other men's goods with an evil eye;
the more unlimited will desire range, having no bounds from God or man; the
more niggardly will it be in spending, as not having any certainty of more
coming in when this is gone. Every Minister will not do thus, should we be left
at uncertainties, but every covetous Minister would; yet what if your
experience of ages should prove partly frivelous, and partly slanderous?

For this man propound to make their Sons Scholars, and blessed be God, a
certain subsistence encourages then so to do; but do all design to make them
rich? assuredly they shall lay out five hundred l. upon that design this way
most unwisely, to make them serviceable to God, and live honestly they may, but
this no coveteousness, it is their flat duty.

If a Parson be sick what riding and running, etc. if from a people, blessed be
their hearts, who are so careful of their own souls; and blessed be the heart
of that Patron, who is as tender as such a people, as if he were in their
stead, if from Ministers and their Friends, 1 Timothy 3.1.
no such heinous crime neither, if the desire be well grounded: yet in my
Observation I have seen more good people inquire, where they shall find a good
Minister; then good Ministers where they shall a find good people, or a rich
either.

In our striving for Parliament men, the word was, Is he for Tithes? if he be,
let us all voice for him: and pray, was not your word, Is he against Tithes? we
may keep our own better without coveteousness, then you can pull away what is
not your own without coveteousness. Yet what Minister was so indiscreet as to
use those words, I know not; frivolous are these slanders, that you add of men
of vast estates (if I am concerned in this I am sorry) my vast Estate is such
an eye sore to you; I would you were less coveteous, then it would not be so;
yet if a Poor needy Farmer; I have taken you for a Farmer, but for a poor needy
one I never took you for: cannot in conscience; trust me, I doubt that yet if
you should tell your Landlord, you cannot in conscience pay him Rent, I doubt
he would not take himself bound to to accept of that answer; for the laying in
Prison, it is not come to that; show your Title to the goods you unrighteously
detain; and if the resolution of Justice go on my side, I shall afterward
consider what mercy to show you: in the mean time know, that the Warrants which
have been out against you, have been for contemning, and rebelling against the
Lawful Commands of Authority, requiring your appearance, to show cause why you
detain the goods in question in your hands, 1 Pet. 3.13.
which thing no wit of man can excuse from sin; the rest of being worse then
Judas, saying, thus much I will have (as if we may not be Masters of our own
courtesies, and define how much less then a due we will take, without being
worse then Judas) the Priests Boy, and the taking by force when a peaceable
appeal to them, who by God and man are appointed, to end strife, is only used.
Judas furnishing his table with what they freely gave not: what will you give
me? should he so? for what? for selling of Christ? all these are Ravings which
become not a sober Christian Pen; so men write when anger makes them weigh
nothing, but how they may bite deepest, and most vex an Adversary. But I am not
angry at the indignity of your comparison, much less shall I requite you
railing with railing: I tell you truly how I am affected with it. I grieve at
your sin, and pity your inconsiderateness; so I end your first reason, only
requesting you to remember, that a Stinted maintenance is acknowledged by you,
to have been Gods own maintenance; and you should take heed how you say that is
a snare to coveteousness.

Second Reason: P. 23.
Because compulsion should not be an obstruction, or hinderance to the Gentiles
embracing the Gospel. The Gentiles? why not the Jews too? put them both in, the
reason is the same; but it touches not the cause. The question is about a sum
Stinted, as you term it, not about the Ministers exacting the said sum, and
compelling the unwilling to pay; men must first understand what the
unsearchable Riches of Christ are, before they be persuaded to part with their
riches for Christ, by any law, general or particular, of God or of man; this is
well expressed by you that Ministers must forbear their own power, and lose
their own right, and all to make the people in love with the ways of Christ:
and this in challenging free contribution, yea and any other maintenance, it is
all one; a commanded Stint unseasonably required would hinder the Gospel no
more then a commanded free Contribution unseasonably required under penalty of
damnation. Put me in the Apostles case, and if I then obey not the Apostles
Example, let me lie under reproof: it were strange this to hear of Master
Edgot, and Master Preachers to the newly converted Indians that they converted
maintenance from those they Preach to; what is done for the support of such
Ministers must come from other Churches, and I hope does to them: should I
professedly forbear you, in order to the making you in love with the ways of
Christ you are turned aside from; would not you scorn the motion? I did it to
you for above three years, and to many others to this day, yet I see not that
you are the nearer to repentance for it.

Third Reason: Because that should be a badge by which Christ will have his
Church known, even their willingness; this with all its proofs is answered
already: the willingness of Christ's Subjects consists not in having no Command,
but in a free ready obedience to the Command: for the other, to call that the
badge of Christ's Subjects is no reason, is the very question between us.

P. 24.
Fourth Reason: Because it should be a band of love still between Ministers and
people; it will be hard to prove that a maintenance determined breaks love; no
though by the Laws of man, but of that hereafter; and as hard to prove that the
maintenance undetermined would remedy all: by no means, for will not the
charging them with their duty in general, that the Minister have a portion
under the penalty of damnation, telling them else they have not that Faith that
works by love; and that their Faith will not avail to Salvation; and this
continually urged upon them, till they repent, anger them that love their money
too well, as well as if we Preached, yea sued for any maintenance determinately?
Let this present maintenance be taken away, and people left to maintain their
Ministers by free Contribution out of the nine parts remaining, this being
diverted to other public uses, then suppose me but in a low degree covetous,
and what will they do? what contentious questions about what Ministers may live
upon; what apparel he, his Wife, and Children must wear; what services his
Children must be put to, to ease the Church; what Servants he must keep in his
Family; what Diet at his Table; what he may lay out upon Books; what Portion he
may give with a Child; what to the Poor: A hundred such contentious questions,
which when they shall come to be scanned by the Church, will make as much work
for strife, as the heart of the Devil can wish: For when the matter is brought
before the Church, what must they do? why they are according to God to
determine it, and according to rule; so the reverend and holy Hooker (this is
not according to the mind and heart of the Giver, Survey St. 3. P. 31.
no though Church Contribution be a free will-offering, in regard it should
willingly and with a ready heart be tendered unto God; yet neither in the Old
Testament, P. 37.
nor under the New the thing it self, nor yet the measure of it was left to a
man's own dispose or liberty; then according to the heart of God it must be
determined, and not according to the heart of man) but what is that proportion
that is according to God, and according to the Rule? if a tenth, the cause is
ended; if any other, we would gladly see it; if none, how is this like to be
determined, according to God, and according to the Rule? general bounds are
hardly hit at, when it comes to particulars, in defining either to the Minister
his double honor, or to the Brother his ability and this will be much more
difficult, when we consider what the end of this Church proceeding must be to
the peremptory Refuser; excommunication for refusing this particular proportion
defined by the Church, but now here defined by God. It is safely therefore
advised to prevent such a Scandal, that it may not come by each man's knowing
his proportion what he should do before he do it; and it is as safely practiced
in most of the Churches, Boston? excepted, that when these proportions will not
be taken notice of, that the Town determines the matter by destraining not the
Church by excommunicating; and well that too, only it would more cut off all
contradicting strife, to bottom the destraint upon a determination of Gods,
not of man's, it would doubtless if it were so determined in all (...) the less
is left to men's private determinations, the more are al doors to strife stopped;
all men know their own, and all are contented, or must be whether they will or
no.

And indeed that we may close this third Proposition by confronting reason with
reason, even for a special particular determination, and not only a general
one opposite to the mind and heart of the giver: It seems hard to be believed
that ever God should now at last leave his Ministers to the unconscionable
consciences of men, who had never done it before. Are Gospel-Ministes the only
persons likely to be neglected by God? or is the grace of the Gospel become so
universal, as that a Law is now unnecessary? why not in other things as well?
yea why not rather in any thing then in matters of money? Gospel Grace is not
given to take away Laws, but to enable men to keep them: It were a better
inference from the greater grace to conclude greater strictness of Laws then
greater looseness, as many do, especially Ancients; yet amiss that too, but
this far worse.

Gal. 6.6.
However this greater grace is not received by every one; and it is every one
that is taught is to communicate. God sends Ministers to multitudes, that
profess the Gospel in their mouths, but deny it in their lives; who, the more
holy the Minister is, will have him the more; and the more convincingly he
Preaches, will the more gnash upon him with their teeth, and be ready to run
upon him as they did upon Stephen; and if any severity of Discipline be
exercised upon them, will be ready to tear him also with their teeth: and is it
reasonable to think Gods Ministers left to the free-wills of these to
communicate what they please, according to the mind and heart of the giver? or
are such men fit Judges of their own abilities to give, and of a Ministers need
and worth? For my part, I had rather trust a wicked Magistrate with this, then
a wicked people; he would not be Judge in his own cause, and might have some
sense of honor guiding him to a righteous decision. Yet if Christ had left us
to such at people, I durst now judge Christ faithless and ignorant (O what
conclusions are there for a silly worm to draw from any supposition, P. 11.
though never so impossible!) but I should say his ways were (though wise) yet
most unsearchable and past my finding out.

But a Minister shall have better entertainment from the godly, yea and
sometimes from the wicked also; yet why should Christ lay a snare in godly
peoples way? If the rule now be according to a man's mind and heart, a small
matter may satisfy that rule; if we jude not so wildly, but allow as much as
in this conclusion I plead for; yet who sees not an hundred shifts for so witty
a sin as covetousness is to elude bounds but generally defined? And are not
Gods people liable to covetousness as well as other men? I love not to touch
these sores; yet the second conclusion may be instance enough well considered.

But admit people willing to their power, and beyond their power, and in great
tenderness of spirit should enquire what particularly must come out of their
purses; where might a scrupulous conscience find that in which it may rest
satisfied, as having done its duty? How hard is it for a man truly to know what
is to his power? what the mere necessity of a Minister is in general, what of
this Minister in particular? (We are most of us over-modest, or over-querulous)
we can far easier tell the poor man's necessity, which is a debt only of
charity, then the Ministers, which is a debt of the strictest justice that can
be between man and man, and so had need be more severely bounded then then the
other; and if conscience will be at a loss in judging of the necessity; how
much more in the honor, and the double honor? Doubtless, if God has not
determined this thing, and Magistrates may not, these two evils will follow: It
will be the way to bring Ministers to the mercy of hard stony consciences, who
have no sense of duty, gratitude, honor, or any thing, so they may but keep
their money: And it will be the only way to bring tender consciences to the
mercy of Ministers, as the only sure way to remove scruples. 1 Samuel 2.16.
Take as the soul desires; it not be easy to find any other ground that will
by firm, and not sink under him, without be taking himself to Gods pattern of
old, either as arule, or as an obliging example.

The very like scruples would have arose, if the proportion of our time due to
God had not been by himself determined, and if Gospel-freedome, and the
abundance of grace in it, has not left one uncertain, why the other? Fallen
Nature is more plentifully instructed about generals; and the more it draws to
Individuals, the more is it at a loss; and yet hither Nature bends, and
without it rests not; for action is not of generals, it needs therefore some
superior direction: Now to a man that views things only with the judgment of
reason, it would seem very strange that God should expressly determine in
Scripture A time, and a maintenance, in which nature can better discern what
its duty is without any new direction; and yet say nothing of How much time,
and How much maintenance, the thing Nature is at a loss, and needs help in.
That for our relief he should determine that which is least subject to doubt,
and leave that undetermined which is most. And what cause can any reason give
why time should be particularly determined, which will not call for the like in
maintenance? Gods will indeed would carry it; but that is in question, and I am
now led by example, from the reason, to conlud of the will; or rather supposing
the will as proved above, and yet to be proved to give the reason why.

It is the safety of a willing Christian to have his way plainly chalked out to
him in all things, not to live and obey God at random; I never yet know that
Christian that was willing to do his duty, but he was desirous to knew
distinctly and particularly what his duty was (as on the other side I have
known men that have been willing to shift off duty, love an uncertain doubtful
determination of their duty:) And it may seem strange that God should utterly
deprive this desire, which is of his own Spirits putting into them, of all
possibility of satisfaction in this point; especially when in no one thing God
has done the like: The most likely instance is Alms to the poor; but the case
is not like, the measure of charity being necessity, and that not possible to
come under a certain rate (as we see daily by experience) in general, but more
easy when it comes to the individual, the poor person that is to be relieved:
Here therefore the set proportion cannot, need not be determined: Besides, it
would do much to the overthrowing the very nature of charity, this
determination; but Justice admits, rather of the two requires set bounds. And
this Justice is capable of them, because it has for its measure honor, which
going beyond necessity, includes that, and all its ordinary varieties within
it, and is not moved up and down with them; which honor having a respect to
the excellency of the Evangelical service, and that Excellency being a standing
Excellency, it follows that the honor is capable of a standing measure,
which the poor man's box is not. And if the tender conscience wishes it so, and
the nature of the thing proclames it may be so, and the evidence of fact shows
it has been so, sober reason may require a cause why it should not be so
still; and finding none, may suppose it is so.

Especially considering yet further, That whatever special commendations may be
of the Free Will Offering, that is not at all excluded; though maintenance be
defined thus, men are left at liberty to go beyond it: The like here, as in
matter of time, Christians may redeem much (and ought) besides the seventh
commanded proportion.

So then we may have a stated proportion, and so have the conveniences one way,
and yet be at liberty to exceed and go beyond, as occasion is, and Christian
prudence shall direct; and so not lose whatever conveniences may be imagined
the other way. And this sure, seeing it pleases you Neighbor, for a Close to
harp upon this string, would be reasons resolution in this thing, if I know
what reason is.

Hitherto general bounds and no more; yet such as for ever exclude man's
free will from fixing its own bounds in this duty: For staid we here, and went
no further, all that could be concluded on that way would be but thus much,
That God had left the resolution of particulars under these general to the
faithfulness of men; whatever measure it is in particular that answers this
general, is Gods rule; and the work of discretion will be to apprehend aright
what that is, and of conscience to determine obedience, and of the will to do
it: Here is a latitude to man's judgment and discretion indeed (but no comfort
in that judgment, being bound to resolve aright under pain of Gods high
displeasure: If God say, Let the Elder have double honor; Discretion must not
say, This is double honor, when it is not; but what is so indeed, it must
determine; and it were better to have been defined to our hands; much paires
would be saved by it, and the possibility of Error prevented) But to the Will
there is no latitude at all, more then i^ the measure were by God himself
defined in particular. God says, Honor; Discretion says, This is honor:
shall the Will contradict? only so far as Discretion is entrusted; the Will
has this misery, it follows a blind guide in stead of a seeing one, that is
like enough to lead its self and it into the pit.

But see what there is further to be found out toward a particular
determination; I add therefore a Fourth Conclusion.

4. That there is no countenance given in all the Gospel to a proportion less
then a Tenth. We find no command of any under a Tenth; and no equitable reason
will take it lower, either comparing our Ministry with theirs under the Law, so
judging upon the account of Excellency; or comparing our Country, 2 Cor. 3.6.
or indeed any, with Canaan (with due respect this to the never dying memory of
that famous man of God Mr. Perkins) for where the Crops are more plentiful,
prices commonly are answerably low; where less plentiful, higher; which will
reduce such differences of Lands to an equality, so judging upon the account of
necessity, no equity of taking things lower either way. Neither is there any
certain example of less given by any; and there are certain examples many of
more given; the Apostles left all; Marc. 10.21. Luc. 12.33.
and Christ commanded the young man to sell all, and many to sell what they
had, give, and follow. The first Jewish Believers did so; and the withholding
but of a part, after it was devoted whole, Act. 5.5, 10. 1 Cor. 16.2.
cost Ananias and Sapphira their lives, and we have cause enough to fear their
souls too. Paul's Canon for the Churches (though extraordinary) contribution was
the whole increase of their stock; 2 Cor. 8.3, 4. Jam. 3.5, 7.
the Philippians went beyond their power, even beyond the Apostles Canon, else
no need of their praying him with much earnestness to receive the gift; and
the state of those times did necessarily require it, when the poor were mostly
wrought upon by the preaching of the Word. That man that gave so little to the
service of the Church as a Tenth in those times, was not like to be a faithful
steward of what God had given him. Though I suppose the Apostles made use of
much less when they had it for their own subsistence; and so (I hope) do many
of us, where niggardly provisions do not utterly tie our hands from remitting
any thing.

5. That in case a Tenth reach not Gods general measure defined, then an higher
measure is a duty. If you ask how far this higher measure must reach? even thus
far, That they bring not that evil certainly visibly upon themselves, which by
their contribution they are to remove from their Minister: For example, That we
do not destroy our own lives to preserve his; that we leave not our own to
certain Alms to prevent his leaving his so, etc. yea more, it will seem
agreeable to Christian duty for men to deny themselves in many conveniences of
life, and bind themselves up into a straiter compass then simply were fit,
that all hindrances being removed out of the wa^, the Word of the Lord may not
be bound, but may run, and be glorified; it being of far more importance to the
Gospel, that such a one be not hindered in the course of his motion, then that
any private man, at least, should not. And this is no strange resolution as to
the Ministers measure, when the very same resolution we have as to the poor
man's measure, the loss of his life through want of necessaries being to be
prevented by any thing short of the loss of our own and ours: Here therefore
much more, so far as the Ministers measure goes, it being far more necessary
that Gods truth and worship be upheld in the world, far more beneficial to our
selves and families to be instructed to salvation, for Gods eternal and
temporal blessings both to be bestowed on us and them, then that we leave great
estates to our children, to be a sin to us, in withholding sacrilegiously,
where it is due, and a snare to them soul and body as goods so derived commonly
prove to be. In case therefore of need how dare we give so little as a Tenth,
when all examples of New Testament Saints lead us higher? when God has
commanded the double honor, but no where commanded that we should enjoy the
nine parts entire and whole to our selves.

And who will chide if I turn aside to weep over the degeneracy of them that
call themselves Christians? How many riotous prodigals can find vast sums
for Gaming, Races, Cock-fightings, gilt Watches, great Buildings, and
multitudes of Followers, etc. when nothing can be found by them for the
Ministers of Christ, more worth then thousands of such empty Kickshawes, though
perhaps ready to perish for want? One suit of apparel made for one of our gaudy
gallants might clothe many a Ministers family a twelvemoneth, and one of their
riotous feasts might feed such a family another twelvemoneth. Yea when the
portion of many wealthy Citizens children shall be enough to provide honestly
for twenty Ministers children; yet this man will grudge to give twenty
shillings beyond the custom to supply his Ministers present need: Alas, he
has children of his own to provide for. Are these men Christians? are they not
men that take earth for heaven? Wretched world! Such a grudging at the Tenth,
when the first Christians thought not all too much to be laid at the Apostles
feet! The Lord soften hard hearts; it is not my own case I am sensible of; I am
better provided for then hundreds of Ministers that deserve far better then I;
neither do I accuse my people; I scarce know that Faithful Minister, whose
people are, for the generality, more loving to him then mine are to me: most of
them (some few only excepted, and I despair not but that love and patience will
melt them too) deal with me as well as I desire; for I can say it truly through
Gods grace, I seek not theirs but them: it is the great cries and pressing of
Ministers and people to procure Augmentions has wrested this from me; I am
sure that could never be if some did their duty beyond their power, or but any
thing near to their power. And let it not be offensive to any, if I said thus
much on the other side; that those Ministers who have considerable Estates of
their own, and are not satisfied with this, and what their places afford them,
but by importuning for Augmentations, divert that out of their Brethrens
Bellies which is intended to supply those that want, are likely to account
sadly one day for what they gain so uncharitably to leave their Children Rich:
Did Rich Ministers forbear this pressing in a time of straites, indeed not of
purses so much as of hearts, and Rich people provide honorably for their
Ministers above that small pittance, which devouring Impropriations in many
places leave Ministers to; we should then have the crowding less at the doors
of Commissioners for Augmentations, and Counsels of uniting Parishes laid
aside, rather too great populous Parishes divided, or assistance set up in
them, that especially in great Congregations we may once be restored to the
primitive Order of having more Teaching elders then one in a place. Do we our
duty in this thing, and see how long God will suffer us to want men; but Pardon
begged for this digression, I return.

6. It is most probable that the proportion answering those general ends,
defined in the 3. conclusion, is ordinarily a tenth; and therefore that
ordinarily a tenth is commanded still: he has commanded the general Rule; he
has given the particular president; both these acknowledged; and who will not
say, should we add no more, seeing Gods measure certainly obtains the general
end, and it being uncertain whether man's will or no, that it is fit Gods
Example should guide us, only the case wherein a larger Provision is visibly
necessary excepted? A very large step toward our conclusion, even from those
premises which no man can or does contradict: but I stay not here. Add, that
God has now here given up his ancient right in the tenth, nor exchanged them
for any other proportion determined or undetermined; determined none asserts,
and undetermined none can justify, though they do assert it; it is in it self
unreasonable to say, God has let go the certain, and taken up the uncertain,
you shall give me what you please? but so far as pretense; are made to set up
the free will-offering, the third conclusion undertook them; so far as
pretenses are made for the charge of a tenth into any thing else, it is this
conclusions talk to answer them. And here we are braved with an high
challenge; Who dare affirm that the Law of Tithe is not changed? P. 5.
Hebr. 7.12. Well, if it be that Scripture which supports this wonderful
confidence, that challenges thus the whole world, we shall follow you from the
5. P. where you but proclaim your challenge to the 14. and 15. where you
endeavor to make it good. There I find you buckle to it with all your might,
and to stir up our dull sluggish incapacity we are thrice called upon, heed
it well, mind it well, observe it well: in obedience to direction we are very
attentive; what shall we hear now?

I. It is the scope of the Spirit, to prove that as certain as Christ is come
in the Flesh, so certain is he a Priest, an High Priest, and so certain he
changed the Priesthood? true all this, the change of the Priesthood and Law
ceremonial is the Spirits scope, we heed it well.

II. He binds it up with an also: we see the word also; a Law is changed
as well as the Priesthood, and because the Priesthood, therefore the Law, but
that this or a part of this was Tithes (though you stoutly tell us so) we
cannot see, neither in words nor sense, no though we look over these again, and
mind it a thousand times over.

III. But another lift at it, and another Heed it well: he does not say, if it
be, but it is changed: just so; you are in the very right, and the change of
the Priesthood proves the change of the Law: very true; you have told us once
already, and the Apostle told us so before you in express words; but Tithes we
see not. O Neighbor, you that with this Scripture have so confidently
challenged the whole world, know very well that, I requested you to prove to
me, that the Law which is said to be changed, was the Law of Tithes, why have
you not done it is the whole body of the ceremonial Law so great a part of
Levi's service nothing? was it Tithes the Jews, and Judas king Gentiles were so
Zealous to maintain? find we not many other things, and find (...) that can any
man think, the Apostle employed in writing against ^ith^s all the Epistle over
(the change of this Law whatever it is, is that great design) and yet so
strangely to shoot besides the Mark; as but this one Verse should be found in
all his Epistle, to discover such a meaning, and in this no word of Tithes
neither spoken nor meant; yea so immediately after those Verses, from which
some so strongly, they think unaswerably, prove the Law of Tithes not changed?
A man would look for p^^^h demonstrations against so many prejudices, that
Tithes are an essential proper Branch of the Law of ceremonies, and have made
this good by forcible Arguments, that could not with a good conscience be
gainesaid. But behold, after so many solemn callings upon to mind it well,
here is nothing but the Law is changed; therefore the Law of Tithes; as if there
were no other Law could be changed but that; as sure as Christ is come in the
Flesh, so I hear men speak most confident then, when they can prove least: For
so says the word, Verse 12. Nay do not so impudently belie Scripture; the word
says not so, and that it means so, you do not prove.

2. Come we now to the next Scripture, 1 Cor. 9.14. What have we there? a
likeness of maintenance, one would think at the first sight; but heed it well,
and we shall find the quite contrary; well look upon it through the Glass of
your exposition: here we find the things of the Temple and Altar expounded by
Tithes, the living of the Gospel by Freely you have received, freely give; and
the even so expounded by not so; it was then under the Temple I am sure by a
Law, now without one; then something it was, and that something a determinate
something; now nothing (such was the freely as it has been proved, or
something indeterminate, Matthew. 10.8.
what men please, which is even as good as nothing. But not to pursue these wild
conceits, for what glory is it? to name them is to confute them: this I should
resolve, concerning this Scripture, as impartionally as I am able; that whereas
there were two sorts of Provisions under the Law for the Ministers of Gods holy
things: one out of doubt Ceremonial, as the Priests share in the Sacrifices of
the Altar; the other questioned whether it be ceremonial or no, the Levites
Tithes; Paul by the even so constitutes a like to the former (as oblations at
the Lords table) not the very same; not because the even so of it self will not
require it, but because the nature of the things spoken of, will not bear it;
but for the other provision doubted of, whether ceremonial or no, before we
know how to interpret the even so, we must resolve that doubt; if it appear
ceremonial as the rest, then the eve^ so is to be interpreted by a like
provision; if there appear nothing ceremonial in it, then the even so is to be
interpreted by the very same; there being no reason here that the words should
be straightened at all, so on both sides this Scripture will be yielded upon a
supposition; suppose we it proved by them, that Tithes are a proper part of the
Ceremonial Law; I shall yield this Scripture, and Heb. 7.12. to them, and the
whole cause: on the other side let them suppose Tithes never to have been a
part of that Law, and this duly proved by us (which I have endeavored to do)
they will have little cause to stand with us about this Scripture, or indeed
about the whole cause.

3. Christ and the Apostles now here have commanded tithes to be given. Answ.
We are now inquiring after the change of the old command, and the now new
command will not conclude that: but upon a very wicked principle, Matthew. 5.17.
that whatever Old Testament Law is not particularly commanded in the New
Testament, is void and of no force: a general confirmation we have, and all
Gods Laws stand till himself repeal them; but of the New Testament command
about Tithes more anon.

4. Neither Christ nor his Apostles ever took Tithes, yea they used another way
themselves. Impossible this to be proved, yea as certain as Christians at first
paid more then a tenth, which is most certain, so certain is it that they paid
a tenth, and what becomes of this reason already? but allow it its truth it
pretends to; what is the conclusion thence? Christ demanded not a tenth,
therefore he renounced it; the Apostles made not use of their right, therefore
they had none: inconsequent; who sees not it is so? yet to leave no appearance
of shelter to them from this their last refuge, see we all distinctly.

2 Cor. 8.9. Luc. 8.3.
1. Christ took no Tithes, be it so? he came to be poor, therefore to be
Ministered unto; he had a right to the Kingdom as the Son of David, yet he took
it not; to Tithes also as a Priest, yet in his own person he took them not,
humiliation was his present business.

2. But in his Ministers he then took them; the Levitical Priesthood standing
till the Crucifixion of Christ; so what was paid to Levi the Figure was paid to
Christ, as it is truly said, What was given to Melchizedech the figure was
given to Christ. P. 2.


The Apostles Example is considerable, either in Christ's time or after it. In
Christ's time be it that they took no Tithes, they were stated by Gods own
assignement to another Priesthood yet in being.

2. The State of Christ was such as to be poor in his followers as well as in his
own person.

3. If Christ took them not, how could they have them?

Act. 10.38. Matthew. 11.5.
4. The State of Christ and of his Apostles was a State of Peregrination, ever
in motion: he went about doing good, and that was not a State of gathering and
laying up of Tithes in kind.

5. The poor were mostly wrought upon by the Preaching of the Gospel, who many
of them had no Tithes to pay, the rest that had none to spare, having paid one
Tenth already.

Luc. 10.1, 19.
6. There was no need; Ministers being then few, twelve standing ones, and
seventy temporary ones, as appears by their commission, and their giving up
their account upon returning; for them there was enough Ministered, and an
overplus for the Poor, besides what help Christ brought in at several times by
miracles; Jo. 13.29. Luc. 19.13, 33.
and who will say Tithes not paid, and more in the value, that hears what the
Apostles did, what Zachaeus did, what Christ commanded the young man, others?
all this enough to give a reason, why Tithes in kind were not taken by the
Apostles in Christ's time without any purpose of repealing them.

See then what further may be said of the Apostles practice after Christ's time,
and that first among the Jews; be it that then they took no Tithes. The
Levitical Priesthood then received them; who as they remained still by
sufferance to an honorable burial, so they took Tithes by the same sufferance.
Act. 21.20.


2. It would have been exceeding scandalous to believing Jews, who were all
Zealous of the Law, to have the Ministry of it removed out of the way, and
Tithes taken from them.

3. The Apostle themselves kept the Law; so making use of the Ministry of it
must pay their Tithes to that Ministry, if they had any. Act. 2.44.


4. They were then so poor that they w^^e constrained to sell all, and lay the
price at the Apostles feet, for the Saints present supply, and more then once
needed they large contributions from the Gentile Churches.

As for the Gentiles themselves they had other burdens: Heathen Idol Priests,
at least in many places, took away their tenth; and though we find not their
whole Estates separated for the service of the Gospel, as for a time it was
among the Jews, Jam. 2.5, 7. 2 Cor. 8.3.
yet it is beyond doubt they paid a tenth and more; the number of Believers
being for the greatest part of the poorer sort, and they often sending relief
to the Saints at Jerusalem, and doing it to their power, and beyond their
power: if this was not done in kind, neither is it so with us in many places,
only with this difference; then they paid much more in money, then if they had
paid the tenth in kind; now they pay much less; yet what is this to the change
of the way? there is a special reason for it, they were then in a moving
condition through manifold persecutions; and though the Apostles in planting of
Churches, and ordaining of elders in every City did endeavor to bring them to
a se^ed fixed State, yet the rage of the Dragon gave them little rest; first by
the angry Jewish little Dog, then by the fierce Heathen Mastife, worrying them
out of their goods, and lives too. Cruel edicts doing them much mischief; and
the Licentious Plundering Soldiers much more. In such extremities there was no
time of orderly Gathering, and laying up Tithes in kind; what they had was for
the service of the Church; no man looked for more then from hand to mouth, all
preparing for present Martyrdom: yet even then, as there was any breathing,
some instances are of payments in kind, even of Tithes; though I suppose not in
the bulk, but by Peice-meales, as the necessity of those times required;
nothing then is to be drawn from these instances to prove Gods relinquishing
his right to Tithes; they paying more then a Tenth in value, and other reasons
being abundantly given, why they did not pay a tenth in kind.

What the great Lud. Capel. adds out of Matthew. 23.23. from Christ's opposing
Tithing Mint, and Anise, and Cummine to the weightier matters of the Law, which
would not be if the Law were Moral, is of small moment; the opposition being
not between the weightier matters and Tithe simply (would the Learned Man say
that to pay Tithes simply under the Law, was not a weighty thing?) but between
the weightier things and Tithes of mint, etc. so on the other side Christ's
ought here, is insufficiently alleged for the morality of them, because at
this time all three Laws were standing; so this Scripture may be let alone on
both sides.

Add we now for a close, for all that Tithes are Christ's Portion given, P. 2.
Hebr. 7.8.
says my Neighbor: but I say, paid by Abraham to Melchizedech, and in him to
Christ. Levi a Tith-taker that dies; Christ a Tith-taker that lives; and so is
Eternally due as long as such things are to be paid on Earth: if Christ be not
a perpetual taker of Tithes, the Opposition is of no advantage on Christ's side,
but Levi had it; for he was a Tith-taker many ages of Generations together; how
then shall Christ take this due, being now in Heaven, but by those that are in
his stead on Earth? 2 Cor. 5.20.
so he ever received Tithes, even when he was in Earth, and much more so now he
is in Heaven. This, and 1 Cor. 9.14. upon the supposition that Tithes are no
part of the Ceremonial Law, have we as positive evidence that the particular
determination of a tenth is still in force, besides all that has been said to
answer the pretenses for a repeal.

And what is the issue of all? are Tithes still of Divine right and to be
resolved so by the force of these reasons? I humbly submit them and my self to
the censure of them that are able to Judge, and will do it as becomes Christians
without bitterness and disdain. As for you, my good Friend, and truly loved
Neighbor, however I am dealt with by you, I only say thus much, do not scorn
the question of the Divine right, till you have distinctly and plainly
answered, what is here pleaded for it: I shall readily and thankfully receive
any light may be given me by them that can see further then my self, even by
you or any, communicated by word or writing: but mere words, and confident
assertions will not do it, much less bitterness, and wrath, and clamours, and
evil speaking. I may without arrogance affirm that nothing but plain Scripture
demonstration must carry it against the reasons given; and such I hope I shall
freely acquiesce in; there will be no need of reviling terms, as long as I am
ready to lay down my error, and my Tithes with it, as soon as it is proved to
be a Levitical Ceremony, and so a sin to take it, and not only nakedly
affirmed; one clear Scripture ground will go further with me then a thousand
empty affirmations; waspes without stings make an angry noise to fright
Children, but they hurt them not.

The Ministers second Plea for his Portion. The Magistrates Power and Duty in
making Laws for the Church.
I Am now to begin a new Web, but that which I hope we shall see come about
sooner, the power and duty of Magistrates to see Gods Laws for the maintenance
of his Ministers put in execution. A question wherein Magistrates have many
Adversaries: but it is a great cause of grief to see some Magistrates their own
Adversaries. The grand Adversary here is the Papist, whose usual reproach it is
that our belief follows the State, and that our Religion is Parliamentary; but
we can bear with such reproaches; it is more comfortable to see a Papist rail
against the truth then trample over it; but that within those walls there
should be found so many that think Religion an unfit thing to determine of, is
a thing greatly to be lamented. May Papists for ever fear the name of a
Parliament, under what cunning disguise soever they dress themselves, and may
Parliaments never turn their fears into despisings, by making themselves Vile
in their eyes; what are Magistrates less under Christ in the New Testament
then they were in the Old? Does not reason tell us that the scope of Politic
Societies is not merely to live, but to live well? and is there any living well
without the Soul be provided for? Has God declared and done so much against
the Idolatry of the people of Israel; and do we not yet think, that the care of
Gods Worship is of main concernment to the temporal welfare of a people? Do
such Magistrates think themselves keepers of swine, whose care is only that
they have Meat and Drink, that they gore not one another, and be not a prey to
them that invade them? Have not we Souls to provide a well-being for as well as
bodies? What a torture and plague would it be for a man of a Spirit Zealous for
Christ to be a Magistrate, if he must have great power put into his hands
enabling him to do much, and yet withal his hands bound that he shall do
nothing? I had rather be a Doorkeeper in the House of God in the meanest
Office wherein, as such, I may Act for Christ, then in the highest Office of
State wherein, as such, I may do nothing for Christ.

But leaving expostulations, however most just, let us see upon what principles
this power and duty stands.

To begin with the beginning, we find Adam a King and Priest; Melchizedech, a
King and a Priest; the Priesthood annexed to the Primogeniture, Hebr. 12.16.
which made Esau a profane person in selling his Birthright: Regal and
Sacerdotal power went together for many ages of the world: All that while their
Constitutions for the well ordering of Worship had the force of binding Laws,
if there were any such Constitutions, as such there must be, God then
propagating his revealed truths through their hands by tradition, not as now by
Scripture. I know him that he will Command, Genesis 18.19.
belongs to Abraham's. Princely and Paternal power, both in delivering down the
Ordinances of Gods Worship as Laws to his Children and Servants. And sure God
did not join those two Offices in one person, but that the Authority of the
Prince might win more awe from the then rude world, then if meaner persons
were employed in the Priestly Office. Hitherto the whole power about holy
things was in the Princes hand, and this from the beginning; a good Argument
that with such Alterations as God was pleased to make at several times, it is
to continue to the end; the Magistrate has power in Gods holy things, from the
beginning it was so. Matthew. 19.8.
Not but that the Offices were distinct, though the person was the same, and
the Acts several, and each deriving its functions immediately from God, but
being in one they joined hands, and mutually strengthened each other by their
several Interests; the Prince the Priest, by all Actions of a Prince; the
Priest the Prince by all Actions of a Priest; so it should be now they are in
several hands, and there is need both ways; we need not inquire which way
most, though it be easy to guess: So it was then, and it is most unnatural to
think it otherwise; every Authority will do it utmost to preserve it self.

So they run in one Stream till they came to Moses; then they divide; and what
is parted with at that division? So much will be removed to other shoulders,
the rest abiding where it was; the time, and manner of doing, this is found,
Lev. 8. where we find Moses the Magistrate executing the whole Priestly Office
in the Consecration of Aaron and his Sons, which Act was done by him as a
Magistrate as well as a Prophet; for then the Magistrate divested himself of that
power, which had rested upon him from the beginning of the world till now, and
communicating to another Order, the Government as to both duties growing now
too heavy to rest in one hand through the multitude of those that were
governed, and the variety of Laws they were governed by; and what is now parted
with? The exercise of the Priests function in all the duties of that place; the
intrinsecal power of that holy ministration, but no more: the extrinsecal power
of ordering both the people and his Sons in matter of Worship, commanding all
to do their respective duties, tithing, encouraging, etc. Lev. 10.3, 4, 12, 16.
This Moses parted not with, but exercised often afterward, as the Story
represents it to us, even quickly after the Consecration, though he never
offered up Sacrifices with his own hands more; if any say these after-attempts
of Moses ^ere merely Prophetical; and that the Princely power did not at all
put forth it self in them, he will say so gratis and without proof; it appears
no more was divested; the rest then was retained; and when we see it put forth,
why should we doubt whither to refer it? Moses Prophetical Spirit was not
necessary to direct about what God had already revealed, but about what was
further to be received from God: But this was a power anciently communicated,
long used; yea in new injunctions from God the receiving and communicating them
were Actions of the Office Prophetical: but the binding people to the
observance of them by a legal establishment, is the Action of the Office
Princely, and its legislative power had by Moses indeed after a manner
extraordinary; but belonging to that power, however Lawfully had and held of
God. And this difference is altogether the same in the Laws against Murder and
Adultery; Moses otherwise forbids them as a Prophet, otherwise as a Prince; and
although my Neighbor unadvisedly limit civil Laws to things indifferent, P. 11.
yet I hope this upon second thoughts will not be stood upon.

And this reserved power of Moses does yet further appear a certain and
perpetual branch of his Princely Government, in that all succeeding Magistrates
after him, Judges and Kings had it and used it; both those that were
Prophetically inspired, and those that were not: the good ones to establish
good things for the House of the Lord; the evil ones to neglect Gods House, and
draw people to Idolatry: the Priests never meddling with this matter; none but
Jehoida appearing upon this Stage; and he in a time of great distress, as by
right his wife next of kindred to the crown, the seed Royal being all destroyed
in the Kings Minority, as Guardian, 2 Kin. 11.17, 18. 2 Chro. 23.18. and 24.15,
16.
Tutor and Protector to the King in his Infant State; yet even he for all his
age, Authority, doing good in Israel both toward God and his House; yea, and
toward the House of the King too: yet the King grown up, is under command even
about the affairs of the Temple he was High Priest in; has matters put into
his hands, is called to account, reproved; 2 Kin. 12.4, 7, 8.
and business otherwise ordered, consents to all that is done without any
contradiction, as in a thing belonging not to his office, but to the Kings. If
this had been an encroachment, no person so fit as Jehoiada; no season so
opportune as under a young King so highly obliged for his life and Crown, to
attempt the recovery of this power, and restore it to its proper place; he that
had Authority and courage enough to keep in the Spirits of King, Princes, and
People, 2 Chro. 24.17, 18. 2 Kin. 12.2.
so strongly addicted to Idolatry all his days, would not have likely failed
in a meaner business, that had belonged to his trust. But this not the work of
one King or two, but of every one that was good, no way disallowed in them by
God but extolled; and the best Reformers having this constant Character, that
they did that which was good in the sight of the Lord. And whereas there was
but one of them that presumed to execute the Priests Office, 2 Chro. 26.17, 18.
the Priests valiantly resisted him here; they knew what was within the Kings
Commission, and what not; seldom do men, a whole rank and Society of men,
Generation after Generation, want courage to lay claim to, and vindicate their
just powers: yea, and God himself presently testifies his dislike of this
attempt, by smiting the Intruder with a Leprosy while he had a Censer in his
hand, Verse 19. Verse 21, 23.
and was wroth with the Priests; and this never cured upon him to the day of
his death; though a good King repenting doubtless, and pardoned, and many
prayers offered up for him by all the Faithful: God would make him a standing
example to after Princes, that they should not stretch beyond their commission
in matters of Religion. Now if what was done, and that so generally, were an
usurpation as well as this, likely God would have been jealous here too, and
not have suffered himself to be perpetually nosed in matters he is so exceeding
tender of; yet this never done, they not once blamed, but always commended,
and the Neglecters ever branded with a Note of Infamy for their neglect; yea
the thing so pleasing to God, that he delights to speak of the doing of so
acceptable a thing, and will make mention of the name of that blessed
Instrument he intends to make use of for this purpose, above three hundred
years before he was born: 2 Kin. 13.2.
yea, and an Heathen Cyrus shall be honored with the like favor about two
hundred years (compute the uttering of that Prophecy, Is. 44.28.
and the beginning of the seventy years how you please) before he was born for
this very thing, not only for saying to Jerusalem, Thou shall be built: but for
saying also to the Temple, This Foundation shall be laid; and God sure would
never set so large a Character of honor so long before upon that Action, which
if an unwarrantable exorbitancy from men's bounds of duty, could never have
pleased him.

Nay in this very thing we treat of Ministers maintenance, till Hezekiah's
time, it seems there needed no Laws under the reign of good Kings; and the
malice of bad ones afforded none, though like enough there needed then: but
then what an express one do we find? 2 Chro. 31.4. this before the captivity;
after the captivity another, Neh. 13.10, 11, 12. These I proposed to my
Neighbor as appears, to which he adds, P. 5.
Is. 49.13. a place never once by me mentioned to him; and this which I
mentioned not he frames an answer to, such as it is: but to that I did indeed
allege he says nothing; if this be fair dealing Neighbor in your serious
howrs, for conscience to confer with it self, do you judge; yet this must not
serve your turn: either therefore show us that these had no such power, it was
a mere usurpation; or show us plain evidence of Scripture, for the revoking of
this power, or yield to the unanswerable conviction of truth, for you may not
slyly carry away such a matter as this is, by saying nothing to it.

After Nehemiah's time the Priestly and Princely power meet again, not as at
first Princes becoming Priests, but Priests becoming Princes: so it was for a
time before under the Government of Eli, and so it continued, ^ill the Romans,
a third party, 1 Machab. 14.41.
between Brethren contending swallowed up all; whatever Authority those times
may afford, it is wholly ours in this cause.

Plain Resolutions these; for such a power in Magistrates once had, how came
they so considerable a Pearl in the Crown of Princes to drop out thence? a
plain express revoking is not pretended to, and consequences had need be very
manifest in a matter of this weight; it is easy to daily with such kind of
proofs, as he that found out a repeal for this power in Matthew. 5.38, 39. and
Genesis 49.10. such manner of proofs men may allege by the scores: but to do this
soundly, clearly, and convincingly will be an hard thing. This is the usual
plea that the power of Magistrates, in making Laws about Church matters, was
typical, and to cease upon the coming of Christ. Typical and Ceremonial are two
words, that help us at a dead list many a time when we have nothing else to
say; but pray Sirs, were Cyrus and Artaxerxes types of Christ too. Ezra 7.27.
And how is it proved that all the Kings of Judah were Types of Christ? And if
so in any respect, how appears it they were so as Lawmakers in matters of the
Church? and if so, why not as much in matters of State? Matthew. 28.18. Ephesians. 1.22:
Rev. 2.23.
all power is given to Christ, and he is the head of all things to the Church;
what else is killing Children with death but an execution of such a power?
Spiritual Weapons cut off after another manner; yet if Typical, must it needs
therefore be repealed? Melchizedech's benediction was Typical (most of any
thing in his Ministry) yet I hope not repealed therefore. I have my Neighbors
Testimony with me in this business, who pleading for free will-offerings, P. 17.
finds them out in the old Law, and adds, This was Typical: Therefore I
suppose to continue under the Gospel because Typical, if nothing else hinder;
not therefore to be abrogated; that Type of Christ, whose fulfilling was
mysterious, let that be abrogated by Christ; but that Type whose fulfilling was
literal, may, and I suppose must abide still. Be it then Typical yet, as Christ
blessed Abraham the Father of Believers by Melchizedech his Type; and now
blesses Believers the Children of Faithful Abraham by Ministers, who are in his
stead; so Christ may provide for the Church by Magistrates his Types under the
Law; so now may he do the same by Magistrates, who in the Acts of their office
are in Christ's stead too. I ask now, whether the mere consideration of a Type
can overthrow this? In fine therefore whatever things are contained in this
shift are uncertain, vain, empty all; and grant as much in courtesy as they can
ask, yet then unconcluding too.

I shall now see what may be said for the affirmative, that this power and duty
still continues in Magistrates hands, now under Gospel times.

Matthew. 5.17. 1 Timothy 1.
I hope it will not be denied that the moral Law is of force now as ever, as a
rule of duty; out of that there are two Commandments which resolve this power
to be in the Magistrate: The fourth wherein the Stranger is Commanded to keep
the Sabbath Day; and who shall engage him to this but the civil Magistrate?
every Stranger within their Gates, was not a Proselyte to be kept in by the
Authority of the word. Nehemiah's Example is a good exposition upon the Law in
this thing.

11. In the fifth Commandment none doubts but the Magistrate is concerned, and
that what a private Father has to do in his Family, that the public Father
has to do in the Commonwealth, so much at least, and more, and that man is a
sad Father, who thinks himself not engaged to Command his Children in first
Table duties as well as in second Table ones; they are not worthy to be called
the Children of Abraham, Ephesians. 6.4.
and have not learnt what the Apostles nurture and admonition means; why not
the same in second Table duties? The heart must be changed before an acceptable
obedience can be yielded to these; and paternal Laws can as little change the
heart in one as in the other: Instrumental causes must not be laid aside,
because they can do nothing without the concurrence and guidance of the
principal.

Isa. 60.10. Ps. 2.
2. Due regard I hope will be had of Old Testament Prophesies, that describe the
state of the New Testament to us; among many others take we that for instance,
that which of your own accord Neighbor, you set up to frame an answer to, as
supposing your self best able to deal with; Is. 49.13. P. 6.
They shall bow down, that is, they shall submit to Christ: well; but what is
the nursing Fathers and nursing Mothers? They shall bring them in the Arms of
love; let that be it; a man would look to find good Law in a Kings Arms:
wholesome Ordinances well and duly executed, making it a dangerous thing to
offend or wrong one of Christ's little ones. You add not scourge them with the
rod of power; what in no case though they offend and deserve it? You have many
such Anarchical expressions, I hope they droped from you unadvisedly:
Christians are for the Magistrates arms, his love, care, protection, defense;
from his person, State, Laws, Forces, every thing he has; he is not to count
any thing too dear for them, not his life: but he has a Rod to chastise their
wantonness; yea, and a Sword to cut off their temporal life, if they so deserve
it. They shall wait for the Lord, not make the Lord wait for them? very pretty
and Rhetorical! But where are the words that this interprets; it must be the
last in that Verse, for they shall not be ashamed that wait for me. But this is
not spoken of Magistrates, but of Christians who lay under heavy persecutions
from Heathens, and waited for deliverance and exaltation from Christ; these
have a promise not to wait in vain: Emperors that formerly sucked the blood of
Christians, shall now hold out the breast to them: did you not see this? or
would you not? Why do you apply the words to Kings and Queens? well as it is,
what sense has your exposition? They shall w^^^ for the Lord, attend to the
movings of the Lord in themselves (...) in their people; is it thus? But how?
without the use either of Ministry or Laws? or the Laws only excluded, but the
Ministry admitted? It may be so, you say; but good Laws may have a
subordination in their place, under the Lords moving as well as good Preaching:
then what is the not making the Lord wait for them? is it not hindering the
Lords motions in themselves, and their people? a good sense this, the Lord make
all men as well as Magistrates do so; but this has no oppositon to what is said
by us and you; but must hit us, or you shoot besides the mark. You would mean,
I suppose, they must wait for the Lords movings in their people, and not
constrain them by Laws before the Lord make them willing; but this is quite
contrary to making the Lord wait for them, for all the Musicalness of the
words; therefore it mistakes the sense of the place it interprets, and it is
hard to find what design is in it contradictory to us. But all this while my
very Elegant Neighbor, the Nurse is forgotten; the Arms are not the only
things make a Nurse (yet this is fair toward our cause from your own
exposition) Nurses are wont to have breasts too, and they are indeed the
essentials of a Nurse: now let our Magistrates have Arms by wholesome Laws to
defend from injuries, and let them have breasts too by wholesome Laws, to
provide sustenance for the Nurseling; we will think he play the Nurse well, and
not otherwise; yet we will allow him a Rod, and a Sword too, for bad
Christians, and for good ones also behaving themselves as the bad; though you
dare not trust him with edged tools.

Well, the Milk and the maintenance have a very near correspondence, we may
think them the same: but may not this ^ow from private devotion constraining
themselves, not from penal Laws constraining others, otherwise then as so good
an Example may provoke them? not so; the private devotion of Princes may reach
far, but this Nursery is too numerous to be provided for so; and such as the
Arms are, such are the breasts; a Prince both ways rules, when he rules by
his Laws. Besides it is not comely to straiten a promise without manifest
reason; promises love to be understood in the largest sense they may;
especially when we have the History of those Prophesies fulfilled, so largely
interpreting them, as we have most amply, when the Roman-Empire became Vassal
to the Throne of Christ; the Nurse then was very flush of Milk in both Breasts,
that of free Gift, and that of Laws too; and if promises be doubtful, let the
History expound them. So in other cases we are wont to say with good
acceptance; how far it will be admitted here, I cannot tell.

The next of our evidences is from several constitutions in the Gospel it self;
they are.

Matthew. 28.18. Prove. 8.15.16.
1. The Sovereignty of the whole world put into the hands of Christ. Whence it
follows, That all earthly powers are by and under him. By him Kings reign; and
so are to rule for him their Supreme Sovereign, John 17.2. Ephesians. 1.22.
as all inferior Offices are for the safety, honor, and welfare of the
Superior; and are bound as much to preserve the dignity of the power above
them, as inferiors are bound to preserve their dignity. And as this power of
Christ over all flesh, is with a peculiar reference to the good of his Elect;
so all officers under him are reasonably thought engaged to eye these
peculiarly, and tender them in their laws and government, whom their great
Head and Sovereign particularly eye's and tenders, so far as they are able to
know them from other men.

I durst not omit this Reason, because some friends in this cause are
unsatisfied with it, though, did not the weight of the whole Conclusion lie
much upon it, I should have forborne. Now it is enough to say that this
principle hinders not our Ass^^tion against the truth, against whoever that
defend the Erastian way, the Ministers of Christ having from Christ as
immediately and solely the power of Censure, Mark 16.19. and 1^.18. John 20.23.
1 Cor. 5.12, 13.
as they have the power of Preaching and Administering the Sacraments, as to
which acts no man can ever prove the Magistrate Vice Christi: we may safely
then allow him to be so as to acts that are in his owns Sphere. And as the
principle is not to the hinderance of our Assertion for Church Government; so
neither is it to the furtherance of the Erastian, unless it were proved that
this Vicegerency is in the acts of government controverted. Here that cause
sticks, and I think will do for ever; not in the Vicegerency simply and
universally, even as to those acts of power, which between us and them, do
undoubtedly belong to him.

2. Christ seems himself to acknowledge this power in the Magistrate standing
before Pilate, Joh. 19. and a power is here acknowledged, and that not to be
understood by way of extraordinary permission only to accomplish Gods great
council about man's Redemption; for that would have been no extenuation of
Pilates sin beneath the deliverers, who had such a power as that as well as
Pilate. Acts 2.23.
Permission, lessens no man's sin: It must therefore be another manner of power,
from whence the greater sin may truly be concluded: And what can that be but
the government being now since Pompey reduced them into a Province, well settled
in the hands of the Romans, God constituting Pilate a lawful Judge in such
matters as Christ was brought before him for; to which constitution of Gods, it
became Christ, Matthew. 3.15. Luke 2.51.
who was made under the Law, and to fulfill all righteousness, to submit
himself according to that dispensation of humility he then went through,
according as he did in other things, and particularly in his subjection to his
Parents, there being the same reason of obedience to the public Parent as
there is to the private. They now that against all law and justice delivered
him up, and maliciously insisted on false accusations, and (...) false
witnesses to depose against him, had the greatest sin: yet Pilates sin was
great too, though theirs greater, in that he gave sentence, out of fear and
popularity, against the truth and his conscience both; and so he condemned the
Lord of glory, from whom he had his government and his very life. Yet still the
power of judging about those things was from above: And what were they?
Blasphemy and Treason. And what Blasphemy was it, against God merely? John 19.7.
No, against Christ. Christ arraigned as a blasphemer against Christ, he makes
himself the Son of God, Matthew 27.63, 65, 66.
according to the High Priests own language, the Christ: I adjure thee by the
living God that thou tell us whether thou be the Christ, the Son of God. Upon
the acknowledgement of which (in sense, though not in words; so no doubt Christ
meant it, and so they took it) do they condemn him as a Blasphemer; he is
guilty of death. This was their charge then; He makes himself the Son of God;
he is a counterfeit Christ. Will any now say that Christ's acknowledgement of
this power in Pilate respects only the other charge of Treason, not of
Blasphemy? I doubt not but some will; for no shift shall be unessayed by which
prejudiced men may resist the truth: But what least show of ground is there for
such a thing? Pilate distinguishes them not in his Sentence, nor in his
Inscription upon the Cross, the King (the Messiah) of the Jews includes both:
And though Pilate had left out the Blasphemy at both times, yet this passage
was at the Trial before the Sentence, whilst both Charges were hot in debate;
yea it comes in immediately upon the charge of Blasphemy, v. 7. and Pilates fear
upon it, v. 8. going into the Hall, and questioning Christ about it, v. 9. Will
any man now limit Christ's general speech, which limits not its self to the
matter of Treason (which at the present was not spoken of, that is returned to
afterward, viz.) and altogether exclude the charge of Blasphemy, which wholly
and solely gave occasion to the speech? He must be a very wilful man that can
do thus. So then belong it does to the Civil Magistrate to judge of the
question about a counterfeit Christ, and that in the Sentence of Christ
himself, when he was accused so to be. Pilates sin was not in enquiring into
this question, but in passing Sentence against him as a counterfeit Messiah,
who ought to have passed sentence for him as the true Messiah. And in what kind
soever the Magistrate is to punish Malefactors, in the same kind is he to
encourage them that do well. He, the duty of whose place is to punish the
pretended Christ, and his followers, is by the same duty engaged to provide for
the true Christ and his.

3. Yet more: Of the Magistrate it is said, Romans 13.3.
He is the Minister of God, for the praise of them that do that which is good;
but a revenger to execute wrath upon them that do evil. 1 Pet. 2.14. Tim. 2.2.
So largely, and without limitation Peter; For the punishment of evil (...),
and the praise of them that do well: And in order to these end, solemn
prayers are to be made in all the Assembles of the Saints: Godliness and
honesty, and in them with quietness, are the ends proposed, if in the
commission the aimed at good of Magistracy be but generally expressed (that
(...) in all where the Law distinguishes not) yet in the prayer expounding the
Commission, they are distinctly expressed, godliness committed to the
Magistrates care as well as honesty; and first godliness, and honesty
afterward, no (...) being truly honest but the godly man, and the manner the
same in both, no binding of the Magistrates hands by distinctions feigned to
serve the cause, in the one end, that of godliness; but the other end, that of
honestly will be entangled therewith, they are set down in an equality, and
must run the same hazards both. This the then Magistrates did not for
godliness, no no^ yet for honesty, sincerely, and in all the parts of it: But
yet this they ought to do, and this Christians were to pray for them that they
might do, V. 4.
by coming to the knowledge of the Truth, that they might be saved themselves.
This means might take effect, and did; when they once obtained the mercy of
godliness and honesty for themselves, then they did their duty, by engaging all
their regal power to bring others to them both.

4. But of all matters that come within the compass often his Dispute, the matter
of Maintenance is least liable to contradiction, it being first the man that
eats and drinks, not the Minister as such: And what belongs to a Magistrate in
the judgment of these men, if not this, to see that every subject may live?
Nay, in order to this very thing must they not take notice of, and allow of
their ways of living by which they subsist? All governments Heathens, as well
as Jewish and Christian, have ever done this: If then Magistrates ought not to
take cognizance of the matters of the Church, how can they allow so many
thousand families under them to live without any calling allowed by them and
their Laws? Is it by mere connivence of Magistrates that we live? Why do they
not compel us, as other idle persons, to labor with our hands? It men grant
it lawful for Magistrates to vouchsafe us the allowance of Law, though not the
establishment, that they may take this for a way of living just, honest, and
useful for the Public, even as the day laborers, this will be enough to ground
a provision for a just subsistence for one as well as for the other: if our way
of life be such as may be allowed; they must see that we may live, and not
perish in i^. A very Heathen, tolerating the Christian Religion within his
Dominions, may, and ought to tell Christians, If you will be of this Religion,
and have Ministers wholly attending on this very thing, to me they are so many
dro^es, bring nothing to the hive; yet seeing ^o you they are necessary, you
shall maintain them; to you they are Ministers, to me they are subjects; if you
will use them, you shall keep them, they shall live among you. This would be
reasonable language, honorable, and of right to be expected from a very Turk.

But we have no Histories of any such thing done by Magistrates in the New
Testament for the Religion of Christ: Admit this, yet our cause stands more
firmly upon the forementioned pillars of right, then it could upon any examples
of fact; we have the best plea. The Magistrates neglect here was their sin, and
prayed against by the Church. Yet that nothing may be wanting which might be
desired in this cause, we have Magistrates favorers of the Gospel, and the
Apostles using them, and submitting to them: though not Supreme ones indeed,
yet subordinate ones (and the consequence from these to them is good a majore)
if the Rulers of the Synagogues were such. God never appointed any such Officer
to minister in holy things, neither ever did they; and scourging (the
punishment they used) is no Church-punishment. Luke 4.16, 17. Acts 13.15. and
18.8.
Now Christ submits to this power, never gainsaying them but when they executed
their Office amiss: The like we find the Apostles to have done after him; and
we may well think that Crispus, and other chief Rulers converted to the Faith,
had no less authority in their respective Synagogues then they had before; it
being no more then what the Kings of Judah had anciently practiced, and now
could not so fully, and with that authority be practiced in Judaea, the
government now being in the hands of Heathens: And in the several Plantations
of Jews it could not possibly be otherwise, the power of Kings thus parcell'd
and weakened, as it wont to be in the declinings of every Government. Such
there must be, if any thing done in these matters at all, others playing the
careless Gallios, and resolving not to be Judges in any such matters. And all
this may be well allowed without clashing of their Authority, of whose warfare
the weapons are spiritual. We acknowledge more in the Kings of Judah, then ever
can be proved to have been in the Rulers of the Synagogues, and yet no
diminution to those powers which Christ has immediately stated upon the
Ministers of his holy things.

Add now for a close of all, Rev. 17.12, 16.
that the Magistrates are they that shall have the whore, and make her desolate
and naked; and this not only as a bloody Whore, but as a Whore, a Spiritual
Fornicator from God: every one of them jointly in a most just engagement
against her, and severally in their respective dominions; and he that has
power to punish, has power to protect; he who is to pull down Antichrist, is
to set up Christ, if for Christ's sake he means to pull him down. Now why
should this Whore say to Kings, what have you to do with my Idols? Your
Commission is but in civil things (hardly in them, neither a reference to
Spirituals may hook them in too.) leave me to the Lords time; it is no wonder,
she knows they are the persons appointed by God, to make her desolate and
naked, and to eat her flesh, and burn her with fire; could she persuade them to
let her alone with her Adulteries, she were safe then: But for those who would
be thought the only through enemies of the Whore in the world, all having some
confederacy with her more or less, but they who hate her, and petition for
things purposely, as they say, that the Whores Flesh may be eaten, and she
burnt with Fire; these men, if they mean as they speak, deserve to be wondered
at indeed. O ye Rulers, pull down Tithes, that Antichristian yoke, and impose
nothing upon men's consciences in the room of them; let every one Worship God in
his own way, that so you may eat the Whores Flesh, and burn her with Fire; let
her alone, that you may destroy her; touch her not, that you may make her
naked; the most effectual means to ruin Antichrist this; they plot against us
with all their wit and malice continually, and put their plots in execution
unweariedly, sparing neither cost nor industry; and we are persuaded, the best
course against them is to let them alone, and take their course, tamely to give
up our throats to be cut by them; and this not only a duty from us, but the
most effectual means to ruin them. I shall not wish these men's Daughters may
play the Harlots, that they may learn by an home experience whether, let them
alone, be the only effectual means to reclame them. But such reasonings we must
expect from men when they are appointed to destruction. Quos Deus vult perdere
dementat prius.

Now my good Friend and Neighbor, what is it you have to lay in the Balance
against these many so strongly concluding reasons? one would expect nothing
less then down right New Testament Laws against us, who shall read your
peremptory conclusion, This is the period of all; P. 16.
the Gospel must be free, and kept free from man's power; for this is an
Ordinance of God. An Angel of God let down from Heaven, charging mankind to
fear God, and believe in Christ, could speak no otherwise, yea, and we are
threatened too; who? every one, the Protector, P. 7.
if he find not out the old Romish Laws that have commanded Tithes, his sin
will find him out; who else? the whole Nation, and Nations. It is no wonder
that Gods Judgments do impend Nations, whose Princes and Teachers hinder this
odor (the free will-offering) Marvailous confidence! especially if we add the
magnificent conclusion, More of this strain, P. 12.
as if it were an old Oracle out of Christ's own mouth; he that has ears to
hear, let him hear.

A man would think nothing less then the Denial of Christ came in the Flesh;
even the express Denial were threatened thus in these dreadful words; but it is
no more then this, That Princes may make no Laws to command the people, to give
the Spiritual Labourer his wages; they must do it of their own accord, or the
Labourer must have nothing, and be contented too; for they owe him no more then
what they please to give him; if this be all, we are pretty well pacified, no
great cause for such an outcry: yet if the evidence produced of Gods mind in
this thing be very plain and undeniable, that may do much, to bring us all into
the danger of that dreadful and universal curse, as we shall answer the
contrary at the day of judgment; P. 12.
We are pretty well used to bugbear words, and have observed where men speak
most weakly, they speak most confidently. I shall therefore take the boldness
to examine your reasons, as I can pick them out of that confused heap where
they lie.

Your reasons are either such as conclude against a command of God, or man in
general, or such as conclude against a command of man's in particular: the
Scriptures concluding generally, are Ps. 110.3. Exodus 35.5, 21, 22, 29. Phil.
4.17, 18, 19. 2 Cor. 8.1. 1 Chronicles. 28.9. 2 Cor. 9.7, 14, 18. These have been
answered distinctly and plainly above: P. 23, 24, 25.
Thither I shall refer you; for those reasons that are particularly directed
against the Magistrates power and duty, I shall answer them now.

1. It does dishonor Christ in his prerogative, whose royalty it is to prepare
for his Ministers. Matthew. 28.19, 20. P. 3.
To prepare you mean food and subsistence for them, among many other things
Christ prepares for his Ministers, that indeed is one; and we bless him for
his Faithful preparing; he has done according to his promise, by stirring up
the hearts of Princes and people to contribute; and then by stirring up
Magistrates, his Servants on earth, to establish and secure as Vigilant
Feoffees, what is so contributed to the use of the Gospel; and we believe it is
Christ's prerogative Royal, to chastise them that withhold from his Ministers
the Meat which he has thus prepared for them.

Will this serve your turn? No; it must be another exercise of prerogative, by
which he is supposed to prepare for his Ministers, only by stirring up peoples
hearts, without any establishment of man's; but does that Scripture prove such a
thing? or any Scripture? or reason? or experience? or any thing? I have thought
it the safest way to understand promises in the same sense, wherein we have
seen them fulfilled; and we have found in all ages Ministers provided for, some
this way, some another way; some in part this way, Act. 27.43, 44.
some in part another way; as the promise to Paul of the lives of all in the
Ship with him was fulfilled, to some one way, to some another way, to all
fulfilled: so here the promise is, I will be with you; and that includes
comfortable provisions for life in their Ministry, but he does not tell them
how, whether this way, or that; whether by Magistrates or without, whether by
contributions in diem or for ever; whether ordinary or miraculous: any of these
ways, or the like, he is as good as his word. It should therefore be
demonstrated, that Christ has reserved this royalty to himself solely and
only, and that he will have no Instruments so serve in it under him: but why is
this matter of money so sacred a thing that none but Christ may touch? has he
not committed greater matters then this to Instruments under him? Surely the
matter is less in the eye of Christ, then it is in the eye of man; Atheistical
man loves that the business of the purse should be heard only by the hearing of
Christ; let him escape till then, he will venture that: but let it not be so
with you my Neighbor; I would have you more afraid of the hearing of Christ
alone then so, and not to count it a desirable privilege, that your purse
matters may be reserved to that days Trial; pray does Christ work upon the
hearts of people to regeneration mediately? and is the parting with a little
money so choice a business, that this alone he should work immediately? why?
such a sole immediate preparation would exclude Church discipline, from
meddling in this matter as well as civil Laws; yea, and the Ministers Authority
commanding it in his place as well as the Magistrate in his; if those two ways
be admitted, then it is not altogether immediately, and it will rest to show how
the interposing of Magistrates under, and for Christ, in the executions of his
commands, does more entrench upon the Sovereign Royalty of Christ, then the
enterposing of a Church or Minister: if any say, these do it by Christ's
Authority, Magistrates not so; this is to beg the question, and the mere
Royalty of Christ here alleged, will not conclude it against us; we must see
what is further said for that.

P. 2.
The Lord will have no service but what himself chooses: Well, if this be a part
of service, God may have chosen this; but be it that a Tenth is not determined
by God, yet this reason fights equally against a determination, made by our own
mind and heart, as by another man's: you suppose, I hope, that the Creatures
will, be it whose it will be, ours, or another man's, makes Will Worship; did ye
not consider this? we must both answer it, in case a Tenth be not of Divine
right, nor any other portion determinately: I should answer it thus, that God
has made a portion due; if he have left the proportion undetermined, he will
never charge men with sin, our selves or any others, for meddling with that,
which he has imposed a necessity for them to meddle with; yea, though it were
nearer to the Worship of God then Ministers maintenance is; if you say that
man's own will may determine this undetermined thing of God; but the Magistrates
may not: still this is the question, and the mere consideration of will Worship
will not conclude against the Magistrate; follow on then further.

That procuring Laws from the Magistrate for our maintenance, and using them
(this is the utmost, I suppose, of what you would say, though you express it
not) is not to trust Christ to provide for us, said without proof, very easy
disputing this: but though you think us, P. 4.
bound to take your word, I shall not so impose upon you. I say therefore, we
dare, we do trust Christ to provide for us, he has done so, and we thankfully
accept it, acknowledging it to his praise; and so long as he is pleased to
continue this provision of his, we shall endeavor to use it in Faithfulness to
his honor, and not count our lives dear unto our selves, that we may finish
our course with joy; and if ever he shall alter this provision, or permit it to
be altered, whether by setting up another in its room, or by setting up none in
its room, doubt not but there will be found both Faithful Ministers, who will
dare trust Christ still; and Faithful people whose Faith will work by love, in
communicating out of al their goods unto him that teaches, whatever
remisseness there be in the Laws of men, and whatever feigned pretenses there
are of necessity, etc. to excuse from the duty; Gal. 6.6, 7.
yet God is not mocked.

In the mean time it is a principle of Religion, not to be unknown to a Teacher
of others, that our trust in Christ for our necessary preservation must be in
the use of honest means, that we may not tempt God; if God set Meat before us,
we must not say when we need it, We will not eat it, for we will trust God.
Indeed to leave the Lawful means of our preservation, and fly to unlawful means
that we may secure our welfare, is indeed not to trust God, we look for a proof
that it is thus in our present case, but we find it not here: Go on then.

Would you have Governors to do that which God never commanded them nor us to
do? P. 4.
What the Us has to do in this matter where the question is about civil Laws,
I could not readily find out; I will suppose the best sense of it; I can
imagine your meaning may be thus much, Would you have our Governors impose
that which God never commanded them to impose, nor us to pay? Then this begges
the question on both sides, of Gods command to us to pay; we have spoken in the
first Sect of Gods command to the Magistrate, to see those Laws of his obeyed
in this present.

Ministers maintenance is holy; P. 4, 6.
and Magistrates have power only in civil things: Suppose Ministers maintenance
determined particularly by God, then it is holy as appointed by God, and as
appointed to God both; yet even then would Magistrates have a power, though not
to make any original Laws, to make them de novo due, which is done to their
hands by the Law of God; yet to see Gods Law executed and obeyed, and to
redress the neglect of it: why not this as well now as under the Law? What
reason drawn precisely from the Holiness of the maintenance to the contrary?
Again, suppose Ministers maintenance not determined particularly, but only in
general; then holy it is as generally determined, and as separated to God and
his service, not to be alienated without Gods consent: but the particular
determination, whether by private devotion, or by public Sanction, is not holy
as such; only as it is the execution of a Law in general about maintenance, and
as it now respects an holy use; both which were not in it before the
consecration; else that would not be arbitrary; this then is civil, and
therefore by force of this Argument belongs to the Magistrate; Is 5.4.
it not being holy till after the consecration, as in the case of Ananias and
Saphiras sacrilege it is plain. And I would know what reason there is from this
Argument against a Magistrates determination, which may not be applied to a
private Christians as well? the hands of a Christian Magistrate may be as fit
to make a civil thing holy, as of an Heathen Magistrate, yea as of a private
Christian; for what does Magistracy ^ake men profane who were not so before?
Show me a reason of this difference, why a private Christian by his own
Voluntary determination may make a civil thing holy, when a Christian
Magistrate may not; and rest within the bounds of this Argument if you can. If
then the proportion determinate be not appointed by God; then before, and in
its determination it is civil, after its determination alone it becomes holy;
till then by your own reasoning it is fit for any hand, public as well as private
to meddle with.

But what if the principle on which this unconcluding reason is built, be
unsound also? I shall now try the strength of what you bring for the
proposition, That the Magistrates power is only in civil things; therefore it
was but in civil things; therefore Notes an Argument; let us see now what it is.
P. 4.
Because when Peter and Paul gave this command, there was not one Christian
King upon Earth; they knew not Christ; therefore what? that the commanded
obedience is only in civil things: why? civil and holy are terms
contradistinct, not civil and Christian: It is knowable without Gospel light
that there is a God; that this God is to be Worshipped; that some persons are
to be employed in his Worship as Ministers of his holy things; that to these an
honorable maintenance is due from those for whose sakes they Minister. Heathen
Magistrates might be bound to take care of these things though Christ had never
been Preached to them and these things are holy too, so your conclusion will
never be drawn from your premises, were they never so faultlesse, unless you
will say that the Magistrate has nothing to do to see that the name of God
himself be not openly and professedly blasphemed; if you think so, speak out.
But consider your therefore once again; if it be well inferred from the
premises, it must be thus; what the Mgistrates in Peter and Paul's time did not
meddle with, they have no power to meddle with now: but they did not meddle in
matters of Christian Religion to establish any Laws for it and its Ministers;
therefore, etc. A rare Argument for Papists and Sectaries to glory in! let them
add too careless Gallios Speech, 18.15.
who professed he would be a Judge of no such matters; yea, and if they please
the riot suffered by him before the very judgment seat! Acts 18.15.
most worthy Examples for believing Magistrates to take pattern by! But meddle
they did not, belike out of tenderness of conscience; Nero good man was afraid
to invade the Churches privileges, or to touch Christ's Royalty, to prepare for
his Ministers; what an oversight was this before Gallio and Nero reformed the
world in it? what meant David to make such provision for the Temple, when
Pharaoh meddled with no such things, when Israel was in Egypt (David's
inspirations about these things were Prophetical, but his Sanctions about them
were regal) nay and Nehemiah too stroke upon the same Rock of error, as all
the good kings of Judah had done before him, notwithstanding Pharaohs Example;
for he also ventured to make Laws about the Worship of God, when Nebuchadnezzer
had done no such thing when the people were in Babylon: Much in the same manner
was Constantine guilty, who durst make Laws for the Church of Christ, which
none of his predecessors ever did; Despise the laudable Examples of Pharaoh,
Nebuchadnezzer, Nero? an high insolence I assure you; pity we make not Neros
commissions exemplary as well as his omissions; and so engage Magistrates to
persecute Ministers as well as not provide for them. Oh how many are the things
those men never meddled with, not only toward Christ, but also toward God and
their own subjects, which it was their duty to have meddled with! It should be
such things belonged not their Office; therefore they did well in not meddling
with them; whereas you conclude strangely they meddled not with it* therefore
it belonged not to their Office. We reverence the Examples of holy men of God,
approved in Scripture; but the Examples of Heathen not appoved, yea condemned
in Scripture, as I have already proved abundantly, such Examples we desire may
not be imposed upon any for a rule of practice; and if that motion be embraced,
this Argument is vanished. Well, shut you up your Argument from Examples thus:
O ye Rulers be ye followers of Pharaoh, Nebuchadnezzer, Nero, Trajan, Severus,
Diocletian, etc. We on the other side will urge ours from Examples thus: O ye
Rulers be ye the followers of David, Asa, Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah, Josiah,
Nehemiah, Constantine, Theodosius, etc. And let them Judge of the patterns
which they like best, P. 7. 2 Cor. 11.8, 9, 11.
as most becoming that holy name that is upon them. The Apostles gave us no
such Example: true; the then Magistrates were not in a case to relieve them;
and the then Christians needed no complaints of that nature to be made against
them: or if any did as the Corinthians to Paul, a supply was made elsewhere as
to him from the Brethren of Macedonia, though they were apt to create a
jealousy, whether he loved them or no, from whom he would receive nothing,
which he prevents and removes; any of these will answer as strong an Argument
as this is. There are many that are so happy as never to need a Magistrate for
the recovery of any debt whatsoever (the Apostles never used them for this; 1
Cor. 6.1.
and when some Corinthians did so, they are checked for it) yet the Magistrates
have power to help such injured ones if need be, or they have power for nothing.

P. 9.
Christ gave no such Precept (to sue for Tithes) What then? therefore not
lawful? Christ gave no such precept to sue for any debt, therefore not lawful:
what think you? It is enough that Magistrates have a precept from Christ to
execute Judgment; and though all men ought to make use of Magistrates Authority
with much tenderness, as their last refuge, and Ministers especially above
others: yet when there is no remedy, the wrong cannot be suffered under, and no
mediation will serve the turn; it is then a liberty for them, and, as the case
may be, a Duty, to make use of this Ordinance of Christ; and Ministers are not
the only persons cut short of the benefit of this common relief; if we are,
show where: I think we lie under a peculiar duty above others, in as much as
what Title we lose, we lose not to our children, but to succeeding Ministers,
and in them to the Church of God for ever. And whatever we have only the use
of, we are bound to deliver it up as entire as we found it.

But is suing for Tithes peaceabe? I think not; and I think yea: But must the
matter go by your thinking and mine? Any that reads this, would take you to be
as utter an enemy to Magistracy as ever Anabaptist was. Why should suing for
Tithes be more unpeaceable then suing for any thing else? or a Ministers suing
more then another man's? Suing is then unpeaceable, when it is upon claims
known to be unrighteous (if I verily think what I sue for is not his that
detaines it, I am not unpeaceable, if I humbly submit my cause to the
determination of those Ministers of God who serve for that very thing; Romans
13.6.
no, though I be in a mistake, and it be his, not mine) if it be for trifles,
which may be put up without any great damage: if we run hastily to strive,
without trying all other remedies; if the free, fair, and speedy determination
of the cause like to go against us be hindered by our peevish revengeful
spirits: Such circumstances about suing may render it unpeaceable; but in its
self it is not so, but a most necessary remedy to keep men in peace, and not
to right wrongs received with their own hands.

P. 9. Of the untrueness of the Relation, see P. 5.
Lest we should say you are the Ministers of men, and so no Ministers of Christ,
you deny Princes gift. Strange! If it be Princes gift, will that make us more
the Ministers of men then if it be peoples gift? You should have put in laws
in stead of gift, so as I explained my self; Correct that now; it is the Laws
of men were then, and are now spoken of. Let us then see whether a maintenance
so had will make us Ministers of men, and so no Ministers of Christ. One proof
me thinks of this Argument might have been intimated at least, to make it
appear only so formidable, as that when it was a great way off only foreseen,
we should run away from it, and utterly deny that, which would have brought so
dreadful a consequence upon us. The truth is, I foresaw no such consequence at
all, much less was I afraid of it, neither do I yet, though you have told me
it: For, supposing such a Law, might not a man have gifts and grace from God
for the work of the Ministry, might he not be stirred up to the work? might he
not be invited to a people destitute of help, and accept of the invitation?
Might he not be ordained to the Office of a Minister of Christ by Pra^er and
Fasting with the laying on the hands of the Presbytery? Might he not act in
this Office as Gods Ambassador, Teaching, Exhorting, Commanding, Reproving,
Comforting, exercise all that belongs to him in the whole power of the Keys,
by binding and loosing all in Gods name, and in Christ's stead? Might he not be
still employed in bringing men from the power of Satan unto God, and in
edifying those that have been already called? Have not thousands been so since
these Laws have been in the world? Might they not receive all their
encouragements from Christ, even this of faithful Magistrates under Christ,
encouraging him in the work, as they commanded him to do his duty in the work?
How will this one thing dash all, he has his maintenance from Christ by the
hands of Christian Magistrates, who should have had it from Christ by the hands
of Christian people?

But if this be to be Ministers of men, to be under the Authority of the Civil
Magistrate; to be commanded by them to do our duty; to be liable to punishment
from them in case we neglect our duty; to be encouraged by them in our
faithfulness to our duty; We own our selves Ministers of men in such senses,
and hope to be found the rather Ministers of Christ for so doing: And we do
withal profess our selves bound thankfully to acknowledge all encouragements
we receive from the Magistrates protection; to pray for them, and contribute
our utmost endeavors to maintain their just Authority they have from God
against all heady seditious Principles in matters of State, as they are bound
to maintain that just Authority which we have from God against the like heady
principles in matters of Religion. And we see, men would not believe it sooner;
they that are giddy one way, are like enough to be soon giddy another way too.
And when both do our duties toward each other, we shall give Papists and
Atheists (that I include not you) leave to mock on with such jeers as this, or,
which they please, to gnash their teeth.

I say no more to this business then thus much, That Ministers and Subjects
are the same persons, though under different Relations, both in the duties that
belong to each agreeing very well together; and no good subject can from the
supposition of the one, infer the denial of the other. It is the very Argument
upon which Papists ground the Exemption of their Priests from the Jurisdiction
of Princes. Pray do you forbear it, lest you make your self as bad a subject as
they.

P. 17, 13.
If it be Civil, or Common, it may be done, or left undone, till the Magistrate
compel it; and then it must be done. What strange work have we here! a Civil,
or common thing; who would join those two words together to signify one and
the same thing, but my Neighbor? especially when the common thing is explained
by a thing indifferent, which may be done or undone, till the stamp of
Authority set upon it make it necessary? What, are all Civil things such? that
Ministers maintenance must needs be such among the rest, if it come under a
civil Sanction? Well fare your heart however, when you acknowledge that the
stamp of the Magistrates power added to indifferent things, makes them
necessary. But has the Magistrate no power to set the stamp of his Authority
upon things necessary? Are all things that come within his reach such as may be
done or left undone, till he make Laws about them? I had thought that the
great work of the Judicial Laws was to be a fence about the Moral; and that
the main work of Magistrates was To be a terror to evil doers, and to be for
the praise of them that do well; the Rule of which doing well or ill is the
Law of God. The best excuse for these things, is, that you wrote at random, and
mended not what you wrote.

And that will further appear, if we take notice that this very foul mistake
does most dangerously wound that very cause for which it is asserted. For, is
it not your Doctrine, That the determinate proportion of what is to be paid to
Ministers, is nowhere commanded by God: if so, then though a maintenance is
due, yet this, or that proportion is indifferent; may be done, or left undone,
and another chosen. Will not now the resolution of this quota pars according to
your very rule, belong to the Magistrate, as a thing indifferent? The
Consequence then to be heeded, will not be, if Magistrates please, Christ's
Ministers shall have a maintenance; and if they so please, they shall have
none: But if Magistrates please, they shall have this maintenanance in
particular; or, if this please not, another; the determination of which
indifferent thing (supposing it so to be) some men think will better become a
faithful upright Magistrate, then the very best of our people, who are the
persons must pay what is so determined. I hope we shall hear of this Argument
no more, which is apparently false, and destructive to civil government in the
proposition, and in the consequence cuts the throat of that cause for which it
is produced.

P. 11.
In the last place Scriptures are produced against compulsion, as they which
hinder the Gospel, and make it chargeable: to which purpose are alleged 1 Cor.
9.15, 16, 17, 18. 2 Cor. 9.7. and 2 These. 3.8, 9.

All which places speak not of the Magistrates power in making Laws; P. 23.
but of the Ministers duty of remitting his maintenance due any how from a
people, whether by a Law of man's, or by the free contribution of the people;
your self acknowledge they do immediately concern this, and so are not at all
material to our persent question; for they are two things; The stating of a
man's right by Law, which we speak of now; And the recovery of those rights so
stated by him whose they are. They are just Laws by which a Landlord may
recover his Rent of his Tenant, yet there may be many cases wherein the
Landlord may abuse his power in the use of it, to the hinderance of the Gospel:
So is it in an higher degree here. Yet he that would make Paul's example, even
as himself commends it to the Elders of Ephesus, who were not, so far as we
know, extraordinarily gifted, nor did receive help from other Churches, so far
as we know; both which are considerable differences in Paul's example) had need
consider well that he make the cases alike. Acts 20.34, 35.
He must suppose a people newly brought to the Faith of Christ, a Minister
contesting with false Apostles, whose glory it was to preach freely: Where
note, Neighbor, That it is the character of a false Apostle to Preach taking
nothing, and of it to glory; and a Minister enabled by skill in an ingenuous
Trade to earn his bread without destroying his bodily health. 2 Cor. 11.12.
Where no public maintenance is already set apart for this Service, which is
the Ministers propriety, and no man's else: this is our case, but was not Paul's,
P. 9. Acts 18.3.
nor the Elders of Ephesus. We covet no man's silver, but allow every man to
take a moderate share in what is ours, and allow it most contentedly, without
grudging it them: For my part, God knows my sincerity. Whether this be not
beyond Paul's Example, let others judge. And yet then, when the cases are made
the same (if it were possible) what would Paul's Example bind to? only thus
much, to deny our selves in the possession and use of our Right upon weighty
considerations for the Gospel sake; not in the right and title, that was
eagerly stood to by him, and not denied by them. Now it has been the matter of
Right has been in question between you and I, not the exacting of the use of
this right where it is acknowledged; and this is none of mine, the Apostle
durst not give up his right to a maintenance, neither dare I to this.

Add as the Close of all, that whereas 2 Cor. 8. and 2 Cor. 9. are chiefly
alleged against a constrained maintenance by the Civil Magistrates Authority;
they do directly belong to provisions for the poor, only by consequence, if
at all (of that above) provisions for Ministers. Now if the Magistrate
determine any thing, as to us whom the places concern not but by consequence,
you obey not: whereas if the Magistrate determine any thing, as to the poor,
of whom the places alleged speak directly, you resist not, so far as ever I
heard, none of you. Now what perverseness is this? Consider your ways.

I have with most punctual exactness considered all that has the least show
of a reason against the Power and Duty of the Civil Magistrate. The Lord help
you to a clear understanding, to discern the exceeding emptiness and
insufficiency of them; and to an humble heart, that you may be willing, upon so
plain and full a discovery, to lay aside your Error. The matter is of very
great weight; and obstinacy in any evil, to preserve the reputation of our,
wisdom, will be an heinous crime in any Cause, much more in this.

As a Conclusion of this Discourse, I shall add some general Answers to other
men's Exceptions against the Magistrates making Laws in matters of Religion; and
then I shall have done with the second Plea.

The first Pretense is the difficulty of defining to the Magistrate his due
bounds in such matters: All yield some infirmities of mind, as to the belief of
Truth allowable, as well as some infirmities of heart, as to the practice of
Duty: And where shall we set the bounds? why such a difficulty now more then
under the Old Testament? Has Christ given us the Gospel to obscure the Truths
of God, or to make them more illustrious? At least fix there; this at first
sight is reasonable, let the bounds that then were, as to matters moral and
perpetual, be now.

2. May we not agree thus far, to restrain men from trampling under their feet
that blood which must save them, and from doing despite to the Spirit of Grace,
keep men from committing that sin which shall never be forgiven them? 3. Can we
punish an Adulterer with death, and yet tolerate those filthy Principles
through which he was led to commit it? 4. If men hold principles formally
destructive of Civil Government; shall these by that Law be tolerated, by which
Civil Government is upheld? For my part I profess, though I am not so
self-conceitedly cruel as to wish nothing tolerated; yet I cannot but tremble
at an Act of Toleration for any thing that is evil: For what is that but to
make a State-allowance for men to sin? Should I hear of an Act of Toleration to
but an officious lie, I should think it an evil greatly to be lamented; yet I
would not have every such a one haled to the tribunal of public Justice for
it. If any thing be to be declared in the matter of Toleration, it were more
proper to declare severely what they will not tolerate, then what they will.

But this Conscience is a tender thing, and may not be forced; Religion is not
to be beaten, but persuaded into men; Genesis 9.27.
that is the way of the Gentiles Conversion Prophesied of. Why? Laws Politic
have for their end to revenge the evil done, by executing wrath upon the doer,
to the terror of others, the recovery and salvation of the offender, only so
far as is consistent with this. So in other matters, why not so here too? Romans
13.4.
Must Conscience be made a sacred Asylum for all manner of villainies to have a
refuge to, and there defy the justest Laws that are made against them? Thou
shall take him from my Altar that he die, says God. Every Malefactor may
escape thus.

But are Poenal Laws no helps toward the conversion of him that suffers them
unadvisedly; sure God whips men so often into pure Consciences by several
chastisements. A power indeed there goes with the Rod; but it would be a power
alone if the Rod did nothing: Nor so fitly sure is chastening children, so
often commanded unto Parents. All other Parents come to their children with a
Rod heavenly and earthly; and they suppose and find it to their childrens good
profit: Shall the public Father alone either have no Rod, or his an
unprofitable one? Rods do not change the heart, but they may awaken the secure
quiet sinner unto a consideration of his ways; they may soften the hearts
stubbornness, Eccl. 7.14.
though then it is another hand must set to the seal when the wax is softened:
when they do least, they may restrain the impudent profession of sin, though
they cannot remove the love of sin in the heart. Laws against Murder and
Adultery cannot take away the inclination of the heart to such sins; yet are
they not in vain. We cannot by law change a sinners heart; but we may change
his place by Law: Our Our Brethren in New England can banish them whom they
cannot reclaim. We cannot by Law change men's hearts; yet we may by Law
encourage them who by Christ are employed for that very purpose, and remove
from them those that seduce and pervert them; and this will go very far toward
the changing of their hearts. If conscience be a thing that cannot be forced;
why fear we making Laws about it? If Laws are good, they may direct, warn,
draw a bad conscience; and it were not much harm if they could force it: better
is a forced good, then a free evil: If Laws are bad, what fear we? they may
discover a bad conscience, but they cannot force the good.

But here is another sore Objection; Few men are good and great too, Not many
mighty. Buchanans message to King James, when he lay upon his deathbed is too
true, He was a going to that place whither few Kings would follow him. Will not
this rather hazard the persecution of the good conscience, rather then the
punishment of the evil? Were it not better that known Malefactors should be
spared now, that hereafter if ungracious Magistrates be set up in wrath, Gods
people may be spared under them? Doubtless a very subtle device; and pity that
Hezekiah did not wisely foresee what the conditon of Gods people might be under
his Son Manasses, and tolerate Idolaters under his Reign, that so Manasses
might tolerate the true worshippers under his. Nay let us enlarge the politic
counsel too: If Parents and Masters that are godly, should suffer sin in their
children and servants, in hopes that the many Parents and Masters that are
wicked, will do the like to their children and servants that are godly: would
it not be deep design too? especially the good Parents and Masters being so
few, and the bad so many? What care do men take sincere Christians may never
feel the Cross! Yet that was one of Christ's Legacies to his; it was the
Apostles glory, is that to which all they that will live godly are appointed:
and the first Christians counted them happy that endured; but with us, how
effeminate, and worldly, and ambitious a thing is the profession of Religion
grown to be! Grace shall spare sin, that sin hereafter may spare grace: Have we
this league within us too? or are we sure sin will stand to the terms? never
look that wicked ones will deal so gently with the good conscience as we
expect they should. Papists never yet gave us any such instances to hope so;
and if the witnesses be not yet slain by them (and far wiser men then I think
they are not) there is a sea of blood more to be added to what is under the
Whores skirts already: Pray how long is it since the Lion turned Lamb? Blood is
an essential ingredient in the Religion of a Papist; and let those who have
received the most deadly principles that Popery has in the Doctrinal part of
it already, add but the open profession of Popery; yea, let them but hold the
same things with other names, and go on with their serpents, vipers, filthy
beasts, dogs, and such names as these innocent meek ones please to give us, the
Magistrate in the mean time clapping all sides on the back, only holding a
sword between them to keep them asunder; and who can expect but these two Seas
should in time meet in one? and that then words should be turned to blows, and
we dealt with as those noisome creatures we are likened to are wont to be? This
they would do, becoming Papists, though they were meeker then they are: turn
the lamb into a wolf, and it will devour flesh, though it do not now: And if we
tolerate not the name of Popery, it will be smally to our relief, if we
tolerate the thing; names shed no blood. Look to it therefore ye Magistrates
supreme and subordinate; drive away those blood-sucking Leeches out of the
Nation, under what favored disguise soever you find them. Let not those frogs
of Egypt creep into your Lifeguard and Bedchamber. Papists have under every
government showed us where they intend to begin: Let not Queen Esther think to
escape when her fellow- Jews are massacred.

But why should we be enemies to the liberty of men's consciences? especially we
that are so lately come out of bondage our selves? what a tyranny is it to
bereave men of that precious freedom which is purchased for them by the blood
of Christ?

It is so indeed; and if this be such a freedom as is purchased by Christ's
blood, we have done, and shall never speak more against men's enjoying the sweet
benefit of it. But did ever Christ purchase a freedom for us from those
commands of men that require us to do our duty? did he do so to servants, or
children, or wives, that he should he thought to do so to subjects? 1 Pet.
2.15.
There were such ignorant and malicious ones that thought so in the Apostles
time too; but Christian freedom was not to be abused so. What, does the grace
of the Gospel intend to make us men of Belial, lawless, and without a yoke? to
believe what we list, and do and speak in matters of Religion what we list?
why not a freedom to murder, adultery, treason as well? Is it not as likely
that Christ's blood should be shed for these, as for blasphemy against his own
person? These are sad reasonings from men of wisdom; the Lord in mercy answer
them, that men may once learn the truth of such maxims as these, That it is
man's greatest slavery to be free to sin. That gevernment is in vain appointed,
if men may do and speak what they please under it. That there is a great
difference between execution of justice, and persecution. That Christ's blood
was shed to make us free to good, not free to evil. That Christianity
diminishes not the just rights of any lawful Superior, nor frees any from a
due subjection to the powers over them; as it finds in those things, so it
leaves: Saints must be subject, as well as other men. That though God alone
make Laws to bind men's consciences, yet men may guide men's consciences to the
obedience of those Laws, and punish the disobeying person, though they meddle
not with his conscience. That it will be no plea allowed at the day of God, in
matters of sin, to say, It was my Conscience: And if it will not excuse the
sinner from Hell, he should not have had such a conscience; much less ought it
to be a plea in the day of man, where the penalty is of a lower narure. That it
is far better to suffer for doing well, then not to be restrained from doing
ill. That Magistrates should have consciences as well as subjects; and if it be
according to their conscience to be a terror to evil doers (I am sure it
should be) why may not they plead this freedom of conscience upon the same
ground as evil doers plead it, that they may go unpunished? If Magistrates
omit a known duty, they wound their conscience; if the evil doer (suppose the
well doer) suffer under the mistake of Magistrates, his conscience is not
presently wounded here: who then should rather of the two be provided for? That
a Liberty to obey God without fear of man, is a choice mercy, not so a liberty
to disobey God. That when Magistrates lay more upon men, in matters of
Religion, then God has commanded, there Liberty of Conscience is a Jewel; but
where they lay no more then things necessary, not so. When they can say truly
It seems good to the Holy Ghost, no great harm if and to us follow, no not
from them. That it is a more fearful thing to fall into the hands of the Living
God, then of a mortal man; and that if we did judge our selves, we should not
be judged. We know the Story; The Mothers seasonable and sharp correcting her
son, might have prevented her unprofitable weeping for him when she saw him at
the Gallows. Therefor, That the allowing every man to worship God peaceably in
his own way, becomes them only that suppose every man may be saved in his own
Religion, living orderly, according to the Rules of it; and to such the Faith
of Christ owes little: If this were true, it were better be for Mahomet, for
his Rules afford greater liberty then Christ's do.

But we are as much Heretics in their eyes, as they are in ours: It appears so
indeed by the language they vouchsafe us. But the question is not what either
side is named, but how justly. The Prince is as much a Tyrant in the
Assassinates eyes, as he is a Traitor in the Princes: Strange! that we should
not transfer the reason of these things as easily, and with as little scruples
to matters of God, as we do to our own.

But such things are contrary to the light of nature; things whereof we speak,
are only contrary to revealed light, the light of Scripture. There is a
generation that reject this distinction; I hope they will expect no benefit by
it. For others, it is much that the gatherer of sticks on the Sabbath day could
not find out this distinction to save himself from stoning with. Have we not
as good evidences for the New Testament-doctrine, as they had for the old? The
Doctrine of the Gospel is revealed sufficiently to damn them that will not
believe it; and may not men be punished on earth for blaspheming it, for want
of a sufficient Revelation? Take heed, do not make God unrighteous, who takes
vengeance. It is as hard a matter to be assured of that Law of Nature, No woman
but one, that it is of God, as it is to be assured of that Law of Scripture, No
Mediator but one, that this is of God. Let any man compare the Evidences for
both, and he will quickly see this is truth; and yet the adultery of having two
wives is justly punished with death. What man can see so much of the Law of
Nature written in his own heart, as he may see of it written in Scripture? let
him add the help of all the great Masters of Nature that ever wrote in the
world. Romans 7.7.
Paul was of our mind in this thing, when he tells us he had not known sin but
by the Law. And Scripture is clearer in that which is knowable only by
revealed light, then it is in that which in part is also knowable by the light
of Nature, if in any thing it exceed its self in clearness.

True, but men know not Scripture so well as they might, and they must be
acquainted with this greater Light, else it will not condemn them. Not know
Scripture? we know them that scorn to be pleaded for thus; they will tell you
none know Scipture but they. But what do they not know? Not that there is but
one Christ; that we are purchased by the blood of God; that to lie against the
Holy Ghost, is a lie against God, etc. We speak not of things doubtfully
defined, or of tolerable differences in the less vital parts of Religion: Men
here may be ignorant of Scripture, and God forbid we should stir up Magistrates
against them, if they would hold peaceableness and unity; but are they ignorant
of such things as these? how dare they? how can they? will God take this at
their hands for a sufficient answer? and in their ignorance will they venture
to blaspheme too? May not some Ranter with as good Arguments plead that
Adultery is no sin? and Levellers, that to overthrow all propriety is no sin;
and Traitors, that to assassinate Magistrates, is no sin? will ignorance excuse
here? They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them. We are under the
highest dispensation for the attaining of knowledge, and by it eternal life
already: If therefore men hear not these, we may well conclude, Neither will
they be saved though one rise from the dead.

But these are innocent creatures, hurt no body with their evil; it is to
themselves, and there is none the worse for it. Most false this of the smallest
Error; that is, much more of those soul enormous ones against the first
Principles of the Gospel. Why should God be provoked, and his vengeance brought
upon the Nation? Is it not evil that the Word loses its Authority, upon
sinners, to their eternal undoing, through the perpetual violent clamours of
contradicting men? That Gods worship is visibly and professedly despised with
that impudence, as no Turk almost durst do the like? That thousands of
well-meaning people are drawn aside, to the hazard of their souls? That mutual
evil speakings, estrangements, oppositions, heart-burnings boiling up the more
for a State-connivance, prepare for civil Combustions, and letting one another
blood? That all offices of mutual love are forgotten? The great Gospel-law of
Unity broken; and we that live but two fields asunder, should be as far from
one another, when called to assist in any work of mercy for common good, as if
we lived at a hundred miles distance? Pray why was Hymenaeus delivered to
Satan? I would they were even cut off that trouble you. 1 Timothy 1.20. Gal. 5.12.
What a word is this against false Teachers? Surely Paul was too surly, he was
not merciful enough to tender Consciences. What need all that art in 2 Cor.
against false Teachers? good men they were for Christ as well as he, only for
Heresy and Division too: Why should Christ threaten the 7 Churches of Asia so
sharply? Teaching Jezebel, a Prophetess, what harm had she don, that her
children should be killed with death? See pray, False Doctrine was the sin of
those Churches; Christ himself was the Threatner, he has executed those
threatenings long since. Laodicea is not to be found upon the face of the earth,
it is swallowed up under ground, so spewed out of the mouth of Christ too. So
great an enemy to tender Consciences is Christ himself: To teach us all what a
kind of mercy it is to spare Jesuits, and such Malefactors as are worse then
Jesuits, for the whole Nation to be involved in the curse of God and Christ.

The Ministers third Plea for his Portion. The Right of Donation.
I Am now at last arrived at the last of our Pleas for the right of Tithes, my
Neighbors own beloved free will-offering: the Plea I have alone insisted upon
to him; it being with me a Rule, that if the same things may be obtained upon
p^inciples not controverted, I would never trouble men with those that were. I
have found success in so doing with other persons in other matters (blessed be
God) but have been extremely unhappy with my Neighbor in this: he it seems
interpreting my peaceable forbearance of things controverted, to be from an
inward conviction of the badness of the cause I was engaged in, and for filthy
lucres sake was resolved to persist in, and defend as well as I could; however
the relieving of him from those uncharitable thoughts has been the design of
what has been said upon the two former Arguments; that he may know there is
enough from both to bottom, a good conscience on it what I have done and do. I
have little to say to this third, because there is little said against it; P.
10.
if it were so, says my Neighbor, I must resign it; and yet himself shows us
not one word to prove it was so; (...) ^^mself gives us some instances public
and private to prove at was so; yea the most part of that little answer he
gives, runs upon the supposition that it was so; as that it was out of a Popish
persuasion, that they were given by the Law of God, etc. yet he resignes not,
though himself acknowledge he must if it be so, which he contradicts not by one
Argument to the contrary; nay he supposes, nay he proves.

To what purpose then my Christian Friend, that wild extravagant discourse of
Tyrant Kings, giving away what is none of their own? yet conquest upon a
righteous War is a just Title, though William was no Conqueror, held not his
Crown by that Title; much less does Oliver Protector: The Beast Rev. 13. and
the Whore, c. 17. what come they in for? Do they prove themselves the Beasts
offspring by freely giving their own, and the Whores by taking what is freely
given? Remember man, it is the Right of Donation is now stood upon, which you
reply to. Why should I mind King Henry VIII. suppressing the Popes supremary
and taking it to himself? or our reverend Fathers the Bishops, the Lords
Bishops? What Is all this to the Title of Free Donation? and what is this better
before God think you then the hood etc. This, what? Free Gift? Is this also
from that Holy Father the Pope? What have we here to do with Henry the VIII. P.
11. P. 11.
taking of Parsonages, with Princes Laws, or Popes workings: Our Flock if
Faithful, will be a willing people, they have been so, have freely given; it is
not left to the Magistrates pleasure, Princes and people have freely given;
what would you have more? the Donation does not confound it self, neither does
your confused writing nothing to the purpose confound it.

But we claim it as a free Gift! True, you told us so P. 10. P. 12.
but were sensible it seems of your wild running away from it, in that and the
next Page: so now you will return to it; no, not now neither; it is a Bears ear,
he dares nor touch it; then I have no right to it, Luc. 12.42. Hebr. 13.17, 24.
1 Cor. 16.16. 1 Timothy 4.11.
but as a Rector; be it so as a Rector I clame it; what is this Doctrine new to
you? Ministers are Servants, 2 Cor. 4.5. but for Jesus sake; and they are
Rulers too; their Rule is Ministerial, they have an high merciful end for which
they serve, and they Rule by directing and commanding to that way which leads
by Gods appointment to this end. Then I dare trust an old (the elder the better
Title) Popes Donation, Popes man? their own who were ownes of the Land; is it
not so in your Plea as your self relate it but three Lines before? Then Christ's
Ordination: why? we speak now of Free-gift, is not that Christ's Ordination? Now
being put from your Divine Plea, not by your reasons, I assure you: but be it
so, we now speak of Donation. I pray tell me what proportion it is; but the
Free-gift of the Giver? you have told the world twice, it is that very thing we
speak of, did you ever find it a tenth by Christ's appointment? why? You have
told men but just now we are put off from our Divine Plea; this is to stand,
and crow over us a while after you have beaten us from that ground, with come
hither again if you dare (you see I have ventured however) but pursue your
Victory; you see we have taken field again upon another ground, that of
Free-gift. I pray be not offended, I pray take it in good part, now speak to
the business honestly and fairly, and I will not be offended; but this is
tiresome, though not the first time you have exercised my patience, if not by
the Law of God; again that? will you never have done conquerings? Nor by the
Gift of indulgent Princes? we proclaim it by the Gift of indulgent Princes and
people, and your self have told the world as much for us twice already; what is
it you now answer to but this? but by some old Popish Statute. I tell you we
have done with Statutes now, Popish or not Popish: it is Free-gift we speak of.
After Austins coming into England, tenths were not required, but Free-gift was
the only maintenance: man, it is that you are now pressed with, Free-gift, and
that of Tenths; we prove it from about those very times: Watch men blind, and
in those days could but read a Homily; in those days? Austins? did they read
in the Book of Homilies then? and what if they did, then or since? what is this
to Donation? Yet now must they rather turn back again, as it were into Egypt
for onyons and garlic, then to feed upon Manna, the Lords Free-gift. Why, it is
that very Manna we plead for, the Free-gift you speak of. Therefore thus to
your Paper. For shame you should not have mentioned such a word, who have not
printed it when you pretend to answer it; you might have put it easily into the
empty page: But what to my Paper? It was Christ's Prerogative to provide for his
house; he has so done, and changed his Ministers wages into a Free-gift, and
not Tithe; into a free-gift of Tithe, let it pass so now. Twice you have told
men so, that thus we plead; and do not you yet know it your self? Yet you have
not done your wanderings; next come exceptions against Laws Civil, for the
recovering of Tithes; be it a carnal reasoning to say, if a Minister may not
sue, he may starve. What Is this to Free-gift? A Free-gift may be sued for, as
in the case of Legacies. P. 13.
Is it not strange (all things considered) well, you are a very considerate
man; but what is so strange? that ever National Teachers should desert the
Church of Rome, and yet love the Diana of Tithes so much. You that have
considered all things, tell us but one reason why this should seem strange: But
it is a Free-gift we love, it is that we now stand upon, your Diana, if that word
please you so well: Rome would not trust Princes with such a thing; and truly
it seems to me that this is that the National Teachers mainely want, to be
not only Bishops, but Lord Bishops. No, no, oh dispute not against that, that
cause will not now trouble you, you have another before you, he changed it into
a Free-gift: the very thing we speak of. He left it not to the pleasure of
Magistrates, then his faithful Ministers should hardly get a Livelihood; yes,
by Free Will Offerings, as well the Magistrate neglecting his duty, as if we
suppose him to have none at all. But we trouble not Magistrates now; it is the
Free-gift we speak of. Then the lying story (a most impudent slander) comes in,
of me and my Predecessor, of which before. Nothing at all to the Donation, for
four pages after an Answer to this Plea was undertaken.

Reader, I relate not all this for the considerableness of what is said by him,
or replied by me; nor yet to make my self and my Reader sport, to refresh us in
a debate of seriousness; there needs no fool in the play here: But this I
relate it for, that my Neighbor may see how little he has said to the
business against the only foundation I gave him for my Right in Tithes; and
that the world may see, that notwithstanding any strength in his Reasons
against my plea, we needed not have troubled our selves to print, nor others in
reading what we have printed.

But you have done your wanderings, and now you come the third time to the
business: You have played off and on long enough, you will fasten now. What say
you now? you have spent four pages in roming about, and now you come to it, You
cut us off at the end of the four with six lines, and then easily conclude: I
hope you will now desist. Why, the strength of your whole Book should have been
bent upon this, to overthrow this Donation. You know it was my only Plea to
you, and you confess as much; this you could not yield to, would venture any
thing rather then pay upon this ground: And are six lines enough for that which
has so great a stroke in the whole Cause? Were I as censoriously addicted as
your self, I should from these things infer, that Faction and Emulation, that
you may seem stout as well as others, has carried you on in this Cause against
your Conscience: But I do not so judge you; the Lord help you to judge your
self, and to be contented to shame your self for your many miscarriages in this
matter, by an humble reforming restoring Repentance, not only of your Brothers
goods, but your Brethrens good names, more precious to us then our goods. For
my part, I had rather impute this to the craziness of your head, then to the
malice of your heart.

But these six lines are full of weight however, and strike the matter dead at
a stroke: See what they are fraught with. P. 8.
I know no such thing, and therein you go beyond my memory and understanding,
and I now must take your word for it. Your Landlord will expect you should take
his word for his Title to the rest, and I may as well expect you should take my
word for my Title to the Tenth. Tenants are not wont to enquire into Titles; if
no stop according to Law, they pay their rent where it is pretended to be due.
Yet I shall not engage you to take my word; you had time enough given you to
search into the truth of my Plea. What if it be beyond your memory? that makes
the Title the better in all Law and Reason, if possession be held by virtue of
that gift all along; and why cannot you understand this? Is it so hard in other
cases, as to the poor, to Hospitals, to Colleges, to Schools? Can you
understand how gifts should be perpetually bequeathed to these, and is the like
to Ministers only not to be understood? Can you understand how a man may by
Will pass over his Estate to his children and their posterity for ever? and is
it not as easy to be understood how he may give gifts to other persons out of
those Lands, either for a time, or for ever? what thing more ordinary? How hard
is man to understand what he would not should be true!

But you know no such thing. Before you withheld your payment, you ought to
have known the contrary: It seems for what you know you have wronged me; and,
as it is certainly none of your, so it it may possibly be mine by as good a
Right as ever man enjoyed a Legacy for ought you know. P. 10.
This may be then; and if it be, you must resign, your self has said it: Now
what have you done to quiet Conscience in not resigning? have you consulted
with those Records which might give light about such ancient things? Have you
inquired of one able Lawyer, to know the truth of this pretended Right? Show me
one among so many friends and adversaries that will give it under his hand,
that the pretended Donation of Tithes in England is a mere forgery, a
Constantine's Donation: Oh Neighbor, surely conscience has been much asleep,
if you can withhold a payment due upon the supposition of such a gift, by your
own confession, without so much as once examining whether there were such a
gift or no. Is it possible that a tender conscience should not tremble to keep
goods in his hands, which for ought he knows, belong to another man, is, or
may be sure they belong not to him, and that with so much eagerness of
contention? I hope you are not altogether without such motions of fear; I would
not have you past feeling.

But it concerns me to prove such a gift who claim by it. By no means, no
owner of Land, who has enjoyed possession by descent for many generations,
would think it equal to be forced to show how they came first into the Family.
No Purchaser of Lands troubles himself with such a question; above 60. years
uninterrupted possession is enough. How many are able to show how their Estates
come to them from 450. History of Tithes, c. 10. P. 235.
years? Even Mr. Seldom, whose grant is counted most sparing, yields us so much
for Parochial Tithes, and for Tithes paid at large, much sooner. And must
Ministers be put to that which no man else is? are we persons incapable of
common Justice, the benefit of that which a Turk having possessions here might
enjoy? are we wild beasts, that may be destroyed any how, per fas and nefas?
Surely others will count it enough to justify a Title long enjoyed against any
thing may be alleged by any man to the contrary: yea, and others will provide
they bring their plea within the memory of man; otherwise they expect it should
not be admitted at all; no man being supposed to be so long negligent in his
own matters, if he be, currit lex contra negligentem; and there must be an end
of strife. But so shall not I deal with you; do you show how a Right to the
goods questioned, has descended to you by any Lawful meant, from any person
whosoever the owner of Spillshill farm, either within, or without the memory
of man: and if I do not prove mine a better Title, I will give over my right.

Suppose a Landlord, altogether unacquainted with the Laws of the Land, cannot
at all prove his Title to his goods or land he holds, must he therefore forfeit
them to him that uses the land, who has no title at all to them? Examining old
deeds of gift belongs to another profession, not to yours and mine. How many
deeds of gift were never entered upon Record? how many Records are worn away by
the injury of time, or consumed by several casualties? May we not verily
believe that to be true, which is verily affirmed by all knowing men, friends
and enemies, and that in a matter of fact, without further enquiry? I know no
man that ever denied that such Donations have been, no not those those that
prefessedly write against them.

Me thinks in a business that belongs to another calling, it might be a fair
Argument to suppose such a thing done, when we see things that are not likely
to have come to pass otherwise. Imagine the thing to be done now, if one or two
might be gulled, or forced, might al men be cheated out of so considerable a
part of their estates, let it go they know not how? or if this generation could
be so stupid, would the next be in so deep a sleep too? so universal a violence
upon that which our Forefathers were as tender of as we, their estates, pass
away in silence ages after ages, no man among the many thousand covetous
persons, haters of God, his Word, and the Ministry of it to this day not
opening his mouth to the contrary: especially when we find such tugging about
the manner of enjoying these deeds of gift, as about wood-land, new-broke
ground, etc. They that had courage enough to question the manner, would they
not much more have questioned the thing, if any just cause had been found?
Less matters then this would satisfy me that the thing was done by consent,
as their own act and deed; I know not what will you.

Yet I shall try a little further. Donations are either public or private; we
have both, if both will serve. Of the former you may peruse a Book entitled,
The Civil Right of Tithes, by C.E. sent down to me by the name of Elderfield,
among which the very first and most ancient hits our present Case. A deed of
gift related in that famous Law of Edward the Confessor about Tithing, made
long before under the first Saxon Christian King Ethelbert, Concessa sunt a
rege, Civil. Right, P. 62. About the year 600.
Baronibus and populo, they are granted by King, Barons, and people: this you
see not by tyrant Kings that thought every foot of land their own; but very
orderly, King, his Barons theirs, and peoples theirs, and this in Kent too; and
that I hope includes Spillhills Farm.

What need we now look for private Donations since made? they were indeed more
truly restitutions of what was sacrilegiously withheld through the calamity of
those hard times under the Danish and Norman Invasions: The long uncertain
fluctuating of Tithes, till they settled in a fixed Parochial Right,
demonstrates the first payments, as to any Laws of men were arbitrary.
a thing can truly be given but once. We have the Record for above 1000 years;
confirmed since, restored, pleaded, used, had, recovered since, to this very
day: will not this alone constitute a Right? Yet Seldom in his History of
Tithes, and ^illesly in his Animadversions upon the History in both C. 8. and
deinceps, give a reasonable number of such instances for private Donations out
of several Records, and the late Archbishop of Canterbury had many such
transcribed for him out of the Records of the Tower of London, as you may see
in the Diary of his life, set out by Mr Prynne: From whence, and other places
of Record, more may be fetched, though with some trouble (I suppose) and charge
to him that shall be so scrupulously inquisitive into that which no man almost
doubts of but my Neighbor.

But admit these many arbitrary private Consecrations (or restitutither of what
was long before consecrated) yet Staplehurst and Spillshill Farm will not be
included in them; as if men were not privileged here to bestow their own goods
(if yet they were their own) by free consent, as well as others were by troops
in other places. Did others freely elsewhere, and were men here forced? done it
was, possession has been delivered up to the Rectors of Staplehurst, by them
enjoyed many generations, none contradicting, who will say (though all Records
should have perished; or nothing ever Recorded at all) but that the
Consecration here was of the same nature as all elsewhere were, free and
voluntary: yea, so far were men from being forced to do it, that they were
forced to get leave to do it, and to sue that their said free donations might
be secured by regal confirmation; such need was there thought to be, that
bounds should be set to men's superaboundant bounty in those times.

Be not contentious, Neighbor, pray be not; let this satisfy you that such a
thing was done; it remains now to examine how well it was done. This more
modest adversaries in this Cause are contented with: and why not well done? No
man can lawfully give away the labors of another that is yet unborn; as if it
were lawful for men by Will to make slaves of their posterity for ever. Pray
look back to p. 2. Abraham gave it, and Jacob vowed it, the free vow of the
Parent did bind the children. Yet children are not mentioned in either
Abraham's gift, or Jacobs vow. (...) with us have expressed their will to stand
for ever; many of them with solemn imprecations against them that should ever
alienate what they have so consecrated: yet neither of them were owners of much
Land all their lifetime, were not owners of a foot of Land at the time of
those Dedications; yet they might bind their children to pay Tithe out of what
they never gave them. As for our Fathers, if they bind their children to pay
Tithe out of the Land they give them, they make their children slaves: I
suppose without labor no Tithe-corn was; true, then as well as now. I would
you would see how your pleading against our Donation confounds it self.

Well, this was a slip in your memory (that I say, not in your conscience, to
write any thing as it fits your present turn) which will you now part with,
that Observation, or this Argument? The Observation is one of the main Sinews
in your Book, P. 14.
Abraham and Jacob gave and vowed it freely; then God commanded it justly, and
gave it to Levi graciously. The Free gift going before, made the reason of the
equity of the command following after; which would have no force but upon this
supposal, that their posterity was bound by the Free-gift of their Ancestors.

What you will do here, I know not; I should advise you to let go rather this
Argument, for all your confident conclusion upon it: I hope you will now
desist. For pray tell me in seriousness, should your Landlord by a deed of
gift pass over to you and your heirs all his right and title to Spillshill, and
the Land about it, free from all encumbrances, even this of Tithes to the
Minister, only charging it with a rentcharge of Tithe to the poor of
Staplehurst for ever: would you cry out upon your Landlord as one that meant to
make a slave of you? you would think there was you know how much given you by
the year for ever, and a good penyworth to him that uses it; paying him well
for his stock and labor upon it besides. If the Rentcharge you are bound to
should be a 9, or 8. you would count so much less given you, as the Rentcharge
is increased; if he should set the Rentcharge higher then the land is worth,
so much as when it is paid, there will not remain enough to pay the user for
his pains; then I suppose you would entreat your Landlord to keep his gifts to
himself, and be contented to be his Tenant still. This would not be to make you
a slave; for here would be no violence; if you did not like his gift, you might
let it alone: you know how to apply. I hope you will desist your using this
Argument any more. And here is all I find against our Donation where it is
purposely spoken to. But I shall ^^ean up out of the whole Book what is to be
found to invalidate our plea. The next Exception is against the badness of the
principles upon which it is supposed to have been done: they indeed amiss i^*
will weaken the acceptance of such things with God, but not a good title among
men. But see what is said. P. 6. Acts and Monuments, Charter of England.
Tithing Table of England. P. 10.
They fetch all their ground for it out of the Mosaical Law of God. And again,
A King on his deathbed did give the tenth of all his Land to the Priests that
then were, but it was out of a Popish persuasion that they were due by the Law
of God, and all was Popish then. If this be not true, surely you have
overlashed too much. Examine we now the particulars. Were all Popish then?
what, no Martyrs? Look your Book and see: but all within the communion of Rome
were so. What Record have you for this? who says so besides your self? none
doubtless but they who are wont to ask us where our Church was before Luther.
Our common answer to that Popish taunt is point blank contradictory to this
Assertion of yours, it was where it is now; for all was not Popish then,
Anatomy of the Mass.
not in their form of worship: for did you never hear of the famous Peter
Moulins Confutation of Popery out of their own Mass Book? much less were all
Papists in that communion. Is it not known, that Luther rising up to preach
against the Pope, did it plaudente orb universo, the whole world applauding
him. Did not the Christian world groan under the burden of Popish tyranny, and
cry out for a free General Council, or any effectual means of Reformation? do
not al our Writers against Rome prove by sensible demonstrations, that Popery
that now is, was but a Faction in the Church, bringing in their innovations,
now one, then another, till they were advanced into that body they are now in
by the Council of Trent? yea, it was possible, that errors creeping in by
degrees, and not imposed upon any of necessity, should at once carry away all
like a flood before them, no man opening his mouth, nor so much as believing to
the contrary: where was the voice of the true Shepherd then? could Arminianism
rush in so upon us in the Bishops times, or can it now as it is brought in
again at the back door by Sectaries? yea, do not all know what moderation there
was in many of the Trent-Fathers, and how many of them were sent away in
disgrace, all overborn by the violence of the Romish party: If al was Popish,
what need the Pope fear so much a General Council as he did? what need that
packing and shuffling as was in Trent? why so many Italian Bishops, many of
them titular ones, thrust in, so much exceeding those from other Nations, that
they might overbalance all good motions by their numbers? what need things be
so strangely carried there, that their own friends cried shame of it, and the
French Nation for a long time rejected it as an unlawful Council? and yet this
a Conventicle packed for the nonce to carry on the Popish cause, otherwise
great fear lest their cake should have proved dough too. Nay when many, I know
not but all, of our Divines doubt not but God has his company in the midst of
Popery at this day, now that so considerable Bodies of Nations are departed
from them, and they as evil men and seducers are wont to do, wax worse and
worse; and they think Rev. 18.4. leads them plainly to be of that mind: yet
this man makes no bones of concluding concerning the former much better times
of Romish communion, that all was Popish then. Not likely such considerable
bodies should have fallen off from them at the time of Reformation; and no
doubt of them that shook their heads at the Romish abominations, yet durst not
depart from that Communion, Erasmus was not the man only neither. I have found
perverse men ready to say any thing rather then let go an error they have once
espoused: Let it not be so with you, Neighbor, I am assured you wrote this
inconsiderately, rashly, and headily, as you have many things in this Book
besides. It is certainly untrue, and most dishonorable to our common Faith; no
Papist but will be glad of such a concession; and no Protestant, I think,
knowing or ignorant, ever yielded it but you. Let it go for shame, and let no
more such frantic Assertions fall from you.

That the Acts and Monuments fetch all their ground for Tithes out of the
Mosaical Law, does not appear to me: I find little disputed for tithes; and
two Martyrs, Walt. Brate in Rich. 2. time, and William Thorp in Henry 4. time,
disputing against it; the former against the necessity of them, the later
against the lawfulness: in both little is said in their behalf, only one word
from the Archbishop to Thorp is of any weight, Thou would hereby make the
Old Law more free and perfect then the New Law, and this is a New Testament
Argument. I find also King Ethelstanes gift there Recorded, and for it
alleged Jacobs vow, a place in Matthew. and a sentence much used by the Fathers,
If thou withhold from God the tenth, he will withhold from thee the other nine:
or to that purpose. But the Mosaical Law I find not urged by any, much less
that only. Other things are said, that not at all; yet I may be deceived,
something may escape my hasty search, you may perhaps find that ground
elsewhere; yet that ground is not all, if anywhere at all; herein your relation
must be blamed. So when it is said a King at his deathbed gave to the Priests
that then were; I cannot certainly say no; yet I doubt this is not so, they
were wont to give to God and the Church, and that it was out of a Popish
persuasion that they were due by the Law of God. I want your proof for the
fact; you did ill you set it not down.

For the Charter of England, it only confirms the Rights and Liberties that
were then known and had, of which Tithes at that time were an undoubted part,
but expresses not them, nor any ground of them; much less was the Mosaical Law
the ground, and all the ground. What meant you to affirm an untruth, where it
is so easy to find you out? The Tithing-table of England is a Book I never
saw; and you have not seen this seven years, that in it the Mosaical Law should
be the only ground, is incredible; and if it should prove true, either you have
a very good memory, or write at random, true or false at a venture.

But be this so, they pleaded the Mosaical, and that only; yet all the
Mosaical Law is not Ceremonial; Tithes may be morally due out of the Mosaical
Law: and if so, for what you have demonstrated to the contrary, this may have
pleaded right. But that we have done with; suppose the ground of the Plea
(whatever it was) to be naught; yet it follows not that the obeyers of that
Council acted upon those grounds: I have not found any certain evidence of such
a thing; and the Laws about Woodland, etc. the prevailing customs in so many
places about the manner of Tithing, cutting the Minister short of a precise
Tenth, are evidences that the Divine Right of Tithes was not so much regarded
by the Donors and Confirmers of them.

Yet again admit Priests so pleaded for them, and people so gave them; will the
Donation therefore fall to the ground? frame it then into a general rule. All
those deeds of gift which are granted upon a mistaken persuasion, are ipso
facto void and of no force. Do you not see this a manifest untruth? power to
give, and power to receive, will make conveyances valid, be the principles
moving thereto what they will. So you have dealt in this Argument unfaithfully
with Authors, uncharitably, falsely, and dishonorably with the Churches of God;
and all most apparently to effect nothing by it when you have done.

P. 8.
But Tithes are a Popish thing; and we have covenanted against Popish
Innovations. So you speak, and so you write, God give the people hearts to make
conscience of their Covenant. We should have been glad to have seen this prayer
answered sooner; yet it will be better then worse, if but now. But then Tithes
must pack away among Popish Innovations; if an Innovation, P. 7.
it is a pretty ancient one; but how appears it to be a Popish one, a chief
Relic of Popery? have you consulted with any about the judgment of Popish
Writers? I am confident you have not. Never did I find men talk so peremptorily
of the things they knew not, till I met with men of your temper. Indeed
Neighbor, factious engagements make Professors do things sadly, to the
blemishing of that Holy Name that is upon them. Why? the Popish Divines are
generally against the Divine Right of Tithes. De Clericis l. 1. c. 25.
So Bellarmine, and he affirms that all the Schoolmen are on his side. Hear
what Rivet says, Baronium communis Pontificiorum Theologorum sententia
deserit: Baronius alone for the Divine Right of Tithes among the Popish
Divines. So Capellus; Plerique si non omnes Ecclesiae Pontificiae Doctores and
Theologi; the most, if not all, the Doctors and Divines of the Popish Church
go against the Divine Right of Tithes; and no wonder, when the Monkish party
(their chief Divines) did, and do suck so great a sweetness from them by
drawing them to their dens, which the divine right would have conveyed to other
men's doors. Whether Donations were Popish, P. 9.
or no, by this you may plainly see: That alienations were Popish, your self
acknowledge; antiquity does not clear it from iniquity, and I fear eternity
will not; they fed upon the stipend per se, but did the work per Vicarium, and
flung him the bone after they had picked off the meat. Be it for ever the brand
of that Religion that Popery began this: And may this shame once be wiped off
from our Reformation, that we have, and do continue in it.

Lastly, Though I find it not in express terms in your writing, yet I suppose
it is that you aim at, when you tell us the King on his deathbed gave it to
the Priests that then were: P. 10.
And with others it is a principal main exception against the deed of gift,
that it was not to such persons as we, but to Popish Priests.

That Is not so, Deo and Ecclesiae do the usual Grants run, to God and the
Church. The errors were personal, and die with the person; the next being free
from his Predecessors fault, will not be liable to his punishment: Yet a sober
adversary will not say that all the Ministers, even in communion with Rome,
when Tithes were first given, were Papists; yet if they were, suppose a gift be
given to the Church of Staplehurst, and let the present Minister be Arian or
Socinian, this man's heresy will not make the next Incumbent, a sound Orthodox
Teacher, uncabable of the gift; for the gift was to the Church, and the error
was the man's. So is it here.

But suppose the giver intended this gift that Arianism and Socinianism should
be sown among Gospel Truths, as tares among wheat. The case does not appear to
be so here; but admit it, shall the whole grant be void because some one use of
it is found unlawful? why then God has blotted these had uses out of the deed,
the rest remain, and as much need there is the gift should remain, to carry on
the still continuing uses as ever, when they were all supposed good: Yea, it
may charitably be supposed, that those very devout Donors, if they lived now,
would blot out such sinful uses with their own hands, if they should know them
displeasing to God, who therefore put them in because they thought them
pleasing. If this will not serve men's turn, but the deed, because of some uses
impossible to be fulfilled, appearing now unlawful, is to be accounted void as
to all the rest, It will then return into the hand of Kings and Princes again
(to the present Landlords and Tenants it cannot, whose it never was) and they
have confirmed it by several Acts since the days of Reformation, unto reformed
Ministers, as such, what was at first given to Popish Priests, as such (if yet
it were so.) So if this be a flaw, it is made by those, who, if any men on
earth, have power to heal it.

And yet I doubt not but as great matters as can be found in those deeds of
gift we speak of, will be found as well in most ancient conveyances, especially
of public charity; either Popish reasons of the Dedication ( pro remissione
animarum, as well elsewhere as here) or Popish uses of the thing dedicated:
Yea, in most old Wills of any that died any thing wealthy, we shall find
something that favored of the ignorant devotion of those superstitious times.
And why should this be an Exception against our Tenure only, which is against
no man's else, would be inquired into; unless this be it, that Ministers of all
men are the only fit persons to be made a prey of, who have more reason to
defend themselves against this plea, then any sort of persons whatsoever under
the same condition, in that those gifts designed in part to such unlawful uses,
were given to God and his Chuch, not to the person of any man: Now, though what
is given to God for unlawful uses, may, and must be taken from those uses, and
applied to other; Number. 16.38.
yet from God and his Church they cannot; no man can so firmly call that his
own which is given him, as God does that which is given to him, and to God the
things that are Gods, never to be alienated more.

The Conclusion.
Your Book I have done with: If any strength of reason has escaped careful
search, I am sorry for it; I hope none has. If in any thing I have mistaken
your mind, I shall be willing to be rectified: whether my Reply be
unsufficient, or full, judge you, but do it as an humble meek spirited
Christian should do: Let not any factious engagement to bear up a party, nor
vainglorious desire to preserve the credit of your Book you have appeared to
the world in, nor yet any scornful resolutions of pride, disdaining instruction
from a man so much younger then your self: Let not these, nor any thing else
pervert a right judgment in you. Recantations are hard things, even to godly
people; yet a greater man then either you or I, is more famous for Books of
that nature, then for almost any other that he has written: yet many of his
writings against the Pelagians are choice pieces too. Therefore pray remember,
that all error about Gods Truths is sinful, the knowledge of the truth being
as well commanded us, as obedience to it; and those errors are most especially
sinful, which are about matters of practice; for they necessarily defile the
whole man, and annoy others: And of these, if any more then others, they that
cut asunder those sinews of society which unite men into bodies together; such
as make us prey upon one another goods, unfaithfully break serious and
frequent promises, and then say all manner of evil falsely of those we have thus
injured; disdain them if they be younger then our selves; requite great
tenderness with highest contumely, and mock that patience that would fain live
at peace with us, put what we Please into their mouths to make them ridiculous;
proclaim words well meant, necessarily spoken, if but liable to any
misconstruction, concealing what would clear the suspicion, to make them
odious; resolve after all to have nothing to do with them, and stir up the
Saints to do the like. All this has your error been fruitful in unto very
unkind practices against me: lay now another such principle of error, to
produce such practices toward others, and you will not be fit to be either
Elder or member of a Church, nor yet to live in a society of men. If now you
should add obstinacy to all this, how sad will your account be! I pray do
not; and oh that any thing I could do might mollify you the Judge is at the
door. Shall I be forced to write that to you which we are wont to speak to
common profane persons to bring them to repentance? Nay, lee the love of Christ
constrain you: you are an aged disciple, however of late years sadly misled,
and misleading others. Why should the many palpable sins in this matter, which
none can open his mouth for, and your best friends are ashamed of, stand upon
Record to the ruin of souls? the Blasphemies, Heresies, Ambition,
Co^etousness, Covenant Breaking, Inconstancy, Unpeaceableness, Hellish
railings, and most bitter, yet false accusations, one against another, which
the Professors of this age are notoriously guilty of, have hardened multitudes
of profane ones, and sent them by troops into hell. Have compassion on your own
soul; have compassion on the souls of many others, whose ruin such language
and such dealings do most visibly endanger: The Lord deliver profane ones from
imitating you in that which you stir up Saints to imitate you in. As for me,
your unfaithful dealing with me cannot ruin my estate, nor your reproaches
wound my reputation among them that know my life, to be neither covetous nor
revengeful: And, as I am most assured I am set here of God for the good of this
people, so I am most resolved to continue in the Lords work to the end; for
which I beg his assistance, and in which I wait for his powerful presence unto
much success in my undertakings for the souls of those under my care; and I am
most confident in the help of God, that your and all men's oppositions, whoever
they be, will be as frustrate as theirs are wont to be who fight against God;
and in this hope and strength of assurance I rest.

In the mean time as to what concerns you, I would heartily advise you to
examine once again before you die, with all serious humble self-denying
industry, those principles which have led you to so high an opposition against
your Brethren, in these last years of your life. Lay aside your endeavors to
support the Arminian cause; all your skill cannot add to what others have said
for it before you: your attempts that way will but render you laughed at by
some, and pitied for your arrogance by others. Romans 16.17, 18. 1 Cor. 1.10.
etc. 3.13. 2 Cor. 13.11. Ephesians. 4.2, 3.
Look home as you draw to your long home; set before your eyes the many plain
Scriptures against division, and then compare them Faithfully with those
Scriptures you suppose call you to it: the exceptions from the general Rule of
Unity had need be as plain as the Rule it self is; you know what miseries have
followed, not only to others good and bad; the good discouraged, and the bad
hardened, but even to your selves; for one added to your assemblies how many
broken off, some of which prime leading men; you that have broken others, how
has God broken you? What vexation it has created you to keep your own in
Unity; what heartbreaking it is to see such Devilish Doctrines, and practices
broke out of the camp of your Friend, your own heart knows best; the little
success your way had in its first entrance into the world, to disturb and
disgrace the Reformation in Germany, what fearful sins it broke out into, and
what a shameful end it had, you have heard of. Now in these last days it has
removed it tents into England, and for a time bore a great sway; such men
almost the only employed men in places of service and gain in Army, Navy,
everywhere: it now is in its declining (pardon the confidence of the word) the
fearful sins we see daily, and I doubt not but we shall see the shameful end
too, though I hope not with that severity of the State upon you, God
restraining you from such outrageous attempts against the civil pe^ce. Me
thinks this should be looked upon as a seasonable admonition from God, to
consider your ways; that you may be sure this sad unprosperous path is yet of
Gods chalking out to you. Show me one instance of a truth of Gods, that has
had the like success, once and again: it was not so with the Reformation of
Religion at that time attempted in Germany; it is not so with our Reformation
here, though checked by manifold hindrances, yet it goes on, and want's only
a time of healing among dissenting Brethren, to Crown and complete it; and I am
most assured they, whose pride and faction hinders this (where principles are
not hard to be reconciled) shall bear their blame, and that evidently before
men, who ever they be; it never fell out with any truth thus as it is with your
cause, never since the world stood. Consider your ways; you had need have a
command as clear as any is in all Scripture, to secure you in such unprosperous
paths, from the fear of Gods fighting against you.

If yet having done this work of trying your ways with all serious
conscientious care, you find cause to setle in your received persuasion and
practice: let me then advise again, and request of you to believe of us, that
we are men that desire in all things to keep a good conscience, both toward
God and toward men; that we do not wilfully shut our eyes against any known
truth, nor resist any known duty; we speak our very hearts after much diligent
search, and do not dissemble; we tell you that it nowhere appears to us, where
God has cast our Believers Infants, from that special covenant they were once
received into, and from that Church membership that flows from thence; yea,
when we suppose the evidences for the contrary are full, and not only not yet
soundly answered by any, but not answerable, we in this speak our very mind:
And we desire you to believe us, when we profess our selves amazed to see what
miserable shifts you are put to establish the Foundations of the contrary side;
Timetis dicere non Baptizentur, ne non solum facies vestrae sputisinficiantur
virorum, verum etiam Capita Sandaliis muliercularum comminuantur. Aug. contra
Julianum l. 3.5. (...) enim illi trati lavacrum regenerationis and remissionis
peccatorum audent negare, ne hoc Christianae aures far non possint. 2. de
peccat. origin. 1 Timothy 4.8. Genesis 17.7, 8, ^0. Gal. 5.3.
it grieves us to see some of you for this end, to revive Pelegianisme, by
denying original sin (yet Pelagius durst not deny Infant baptism for all that,
though often put to it. Aug. tells us what would have become of him, if he had,
he would have been in danger of men's spitle and Women's Scandals if he had;
Christian ears could not endure such a thing) to see your self and many others
of you to hold original sin, universally remitted to al mankind by a general
Covenant; strange this to us that there should be a Covenant remitting sins,
which has no condition on man's side; and that all the damned should have one
sin remitted to them, when they have none else; the very best of you seem to
us, to be left to sad plunges by denying Infants the benefit of our special
Covenant, who with us and you hold original sin, and with us against you deny
its univeversal Remission, when they know not what to say concerning the hope
of any Infants salvation, but leave them to God, that is in effect contentedly
give them all up to Hell. That distinction of Spiritual promises to the
Spiritual seed, only Fleshly promises to the Fleshy-seed, is verily to us an
amazement; it overturnes the Foundations of Divinity; we verily believe that
the same thing that gives us a Covenant Title to the Kingdom of Heaven, gives
us a Covenant Title to a piece of bread; that Spiritual and temporal blessings
dispensed by way of promise, to a particular person flow from one and the same
Covenant; that it is Godliness has the promise of this life as well as of that
which is to come; that God puts them both together in the Covenant with Abraham
and his Seed; that I will be their God is exceedingly more then I will give
them the Land of Canaan: that God did not mock the Servant among the Jews and
the Proselytes, when he gave circumcision as a sign between them and him, when
he intended that on his part it should signify nothing: that God would never
make man a debtor to him in the sign of the mutual Covenant, who by the same
Covenant and sign of would make himself a debtor of nothing to man: that
unbelief would never have kept the Jews, Hebr. 3.19.
whose carcasses fell in the wilderness, from entering into the Land of Canaan,
and Idolatry with other sins would never have cast them out again, if Canaan
had belonged unto them, merely as the Fleshly Seed of Abraham: if the same
Faith which was the condition of the Heavenly Canaan, were not also the
condition of the Earthly: that Abraham is in vain made a pattern of
justification to all Nations, if what was done in him was singular, and rested
in his person; if circumcision were a seal of the Righteousness of Faith to
him, and to him only; Romans 4.11.
we conceive the Apostle excludes such phancies in his own express words; he
received that he might be a Father; and what is this that he might be a Father?
he explaines himself that righteousness might be imputed to them also. I would
hazard any ill consequent might be soundly drawn from the Doctrine of Infant
Baptism, then venture any one of these things; they are verily in our eyes
monstrous imaginations of dreaming men al of them, to us it seems a certain
truth, that spiritual promises to the Fleshly Seed of Abraham were a part and
the chiefest of Abraham's blessing, and that this is come on the Gentiles through
Jesus Christ: Gal. 3.14. Romans 11.16.
and that if the root be holy, so are the branches, is a truth universally
verified of Jew and Gentile; and where God puts our Childrens names into the
Sealed Indenture of Covenant between us and him, we dare not be so blasphemous
to God, and unnatural to our Children, as to blot out their names again; these
are our very thoughts: we shut our eyes against no light, but have weighed what
is alleged on the behalf of your cause in the balance of our most impartial
judgment, according to Scripture, and find it light: and our Request to you
is, if you must suppose us to err in judgment (the Lord reveal even this unto
you) that yet where our conversation is orderly according to the Gospel, you
would spare our hearts, which are to be judged by a Severer one that knows them
better and their secrets, then you do. Romans 2.16.
That you would remember what benefit your self once received in your most
zealous following of such as we are, and would conclude it possible, that
others may have the same benefit in their conscientious attendance upon us now;
and so out of gratitude, charity, and wisdom to stand out of the way of that
curse, which is wont to be the portion of them that heave at that burdensome
stone; Zech. 12.3. 1 These. 2.16.
who hinder the Preaching of the word to ignorant carnal ones, that they may be
saved, the objects of so much pity and compassion; and if it be their
stubbornenesse that they will not follow your assemblies, yet let them be
brought to Christ anywhere, and do you rejoice with us at such powerful
experiences of mercy, and do not envy us; why should you seek to destroy us by
Petitions, Remonstrances, Practices? Do not do so, it will not turn to your
account; if you must divide, carry it no further then needs must, if you cannot
have to do with us, P. 6.
as much as it were comfortable that you did, and we take it to be your duty;
yet resolve not to have nothing to do with us: nothing is a hard word, and
Actions suiteable to such words are harder; no dealing was high arrogance in
the Jews, Jo. 4.9.
even against Samaritans; Christ sets us there a more merciful Example; there
is love, pity, Prayer, doing good, speaking well, furthering one another in
what we agree, debating what we differ in with ingenuous opennesse, humility,
These are better then nothing to do. Romans 3.13, 14.
and meekness; if we must speak amiss of ways, be we tender how we speak
amiss of persons: a great sumptome of an high inward Fever is a black fowl
rough tongue. David and Paul both fetch the Character of the man who has no
fear of God before his eyes, in a great part from the viciousness of the
tongue; the Spear broke Christ's side, Ps. 64.20. Ephesians. 4.30, 31 Jude 9.13, 15.
but reproach broke his heart; among the grieving sins to the holy Spirit of
God we find bitterness and evil speaking; railing accusations are uncomely for
Angels; fit only for raging waves of the Sea, that foame out their own shame,
to whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever. Remember Neighbor,
that a day of Execution of Judgment is a coming for God to convince men of
hard Speeches as of hard deeds, who will not be convinced of them sooner; but
of you my Neighbor I shall yet hope better things, and shall be glad to see
them by the humble acknowledgement of the many such your Book is filled with.

As for mocking in matters that concern Salvation, and between persons whose
age and quality of life should make more serious in common things; for you and
I to get up into the seat of the Scorners, I cannot think of it without terror
how lamentable it is; Oh do not so any more; remember Christ weeping and
sobbing over Jerusalem almost every word he spoke; Luc. 19.41. etc. Jude 18.19.
do not in all things fulfill the Prophesy; Oh that it were fulfilled upon you
in nothing! Do you remember what sin cost Christ for the Elect? and what sin
must cost the Reprobates in Hell? and can you make a mock of sin? any sin?
Plead not Eliah's Example to Baals Priests; we are not the men, neither have
you the Spirit; you will not, I hope, do that which follows in the History:
The Lord soften my hard heart more and more, give me Jeremies Fountain of
waters, that I may weep day and night for my own, for yours, and for other
men's sins: This sure is the true Ministers temper; With a mocking Spirit we
shall Preach proudly, but with a weeping Spirit we shall Preach
compassionately: and you may judge which is like to be the more successeful.
Act. 20.31.
Paul that labored so abundantly, and whose Labors were crowned so
plentifully, was one that ceased not to warn every one night and day with
tears.

Romans 14.15.
It was thought by the Apostle a piercing word, now walk thou not charitably;
more almost could not have been spoken to the shame of a Christian; let us mend
the Characters of charity, and write them out in the hearts; 1 Cor. 13. Phil.
3.16.
and if our debates be not then ended, they will be bounded; wherein our
attainements are one, let us walk by the same Rule, mind the same things; and
this will be a means by Prayer, and the conscientious Study of Scripture with
humble conferences, 15.
according to Scripture, to have God reveal to us wherein we agree not.
Alienation of affections makes controversies endless more then the Intricacy
of them; where judgment Rents a little Christ's seamelesse Coat, Passion and
self Interest pursue the breach, and tear it from top to bottom: yea, most
common it is that what Passion begins, reason must defend and make good; let us
therefore walk together so far as we may, till we must needs part, then with
Friendly seriousness debate the rest; and let a Scripture Spirit sway in our
resolutions, not the Spirit of man which is proud and willful, and then I am
persuaded our much desired Peace may return to us.

To this aim I direct these Papers of mine, humbly beseeching God, the Giver
of that Wisdom which is pure and Peaceable, to prosper them, to accomplish what
they are directed to; to instruct the ignorant, convince the gainesayers,
comfirm the sound-minded; to mollify sharp and eager Adversaries, nor
exasperate them; and then it will not grieve me, nor offend others that so
unworthy a name as mine is has been in Print.

FINIS.
READER,
There should have been inserted p. 26. lin. 25. these few things following;
which though they were omitted in that place by the Printers overfight: I
desire thou would take notice of them here; they are as follows.

THis gives a fair reason against the morality of a tenth of the tenth, if it
was paid to the High Priest, for himself alone, and the other Priests shared
with the Levite in the rest: but in case the tenth of tenth was paid to the
High Priest for himself, and his fellow Priests; so make them sharers with him,
not with the Levites, as is thought by some out of Neh. 10.38. Then somewhat
more is to be said, why the tenth of tenth belongs not to our present inquiry,
as being confessedly Ceremonial, whereas the Levites tenth was not. The reasons
of this I humbly conceive, are from the great difference in the Officers under
the Law, from the Officers under the Gospel, in point of,

1. Number. Then the Priests, the Sons of Aaron were a small part of their
Brethren the children of Levi; and therefore were well provided for by a tenth
out of the tenth: Whereas it is otherwise under the Gospel comparing Bishops
and Deacons together; they began with twelve on one side (though we exclude the
seventy) and seven on the other side; and in all ages so it continued, Deacons
fewer then the Ministers of the Word and Sacraments; a tenth therefore of a
tenth cannot be observed now.

2. Service. The difference between the Priests service and the Levites being
wholely Ceremonial; consequently the difference of maintenance, which in part
was grounded on a different service (the Priests not being a tenth part of the
Levites, though they had a tenth part of their provision) must be Ceremonial
too; if the Priest prayed for, and blessed the people so did the Levite. Neh.
9.4, 5. 2 Chr. 20.19.
If the Priest taught the people out of the Law, so did the Levite. 2 Chro.
17.8, 9. If the Priest executed Judgment in matters of the Lord, so did the
Levite. 2 Chro. 19.8, 11. Take away Sacrifices and what was annexed to them,
and their service are altogether the same: but so it is not between Bishop and
Deacon under the Gospel (said in to God) the sum is, the Command of a tenth
from the people might be moral, Survey of discip. pt. 2. p. 31.
yet the distribution of it) between Priests and Levites in part civil,
referring to their different numbers; in part Ceremonial, referring to their
different services; so the Reverend Master Tho. Hookers conclusion; upon the
supposed morality of a tenth will not follow (Ergo the Ministers must have the
tenth of a Tenth.)

This foundation removed out of the way; the enforcement of this reason added
by that excellent holy man falls to the ground with it. It is this (then
Ministers must receive from them happily, who were never taught by them; as the
Levites who taught in the particular Synagogues paid to the Priest, and to the
Levites too, who administered in Jerusalem) this is supposed contrary to Gal.
6.6. but indeed is not; for cases may be where in they that are not taught are
bound to contribute to a Teacher as well as they that are: Master Hooker might
have observed one case at home in the Preachers to the convert Indians; we are
all, both Englands, New and Old, their Debtours of an honorable maintenance,
though they never Teach us. They that do common service for all (as the Priests
at Jerusalem did for the Levites as well as for the rest of the Jews) deserve a
common provision from all. But however to put all out of doubt, as there is no
such distribution of Offices for the people, as a part of the peoples service
to be performed by some Officers, where the people live; and a part by other
Officers elsewhere; so there is not that distribution of payments: but he that
is taught communicates to him that Teaches, and ordinarily to none else; none
else being constantly attending to serve him else where* Tenth of tenths
therefore on all hands are laid aside. That I may at once reply to what is
offered by that most reverend man of God, against the morality of a tenth (this
first Plea indeed the opposes; Pt. 2. p. 37. Pt. 4. p. 16.42.
but the second he is a fast Friend to) take a brief answer to his first reason
also as what is above is to his second; it runs thus, this (the Gospel way) is
raised out of all good things the person that is taught has; but those Tithes
in the old Testament were out of the seed of the Land, fruit of the Trees, or
of the herd of the Flock. Lev. 27.30, 31, 32. Deuteronomy. 14.22, 23.) the place in
Deuteronomy. speaks of Tithes for Feasts and Sacrifices; but let that pass: to the
Argument, this may be considered of that, setting that question aside, whether
personal Tithes were not due under the Law as well as predial; Doctor Burges
has offered something for it, and neither of these Scriptures say any thing
against it. Genesis 28.22. and 14.15. Hebr. 7.4.
This I say, which is clear, that Jacobs vow was of all; and Abraham's payment
was of all, and of spoils (personal Tithes) by name; if the Apostles (...) be
duly rendered) under the Law; Tithes are a right current; the measure of them
is not therefore to be taken thence, but from the evidences that are before, if
Moses Law do not mention personal Tithes, it is enough if they do not renounce
them; their duenesse otherwise is stated already, if Abraham and Jacob did what
they did by Law, of which hereafter. Here then is a wonderful agreement between
Law and Gospel, of all says Abraham and Jacob, in all good things says Paul.
This with all tender respect to the never dying memory of that blessed man,
concerning what in this debate his reasons seem to be defective in.

ERRATA.
P. 2. lin. 24. for also inquired, read also will inquire, in Marg. 19. r. 14.
l. 26. put with, r. put off with. p. 3. l. 3. offer, r. offered. p. 8. l. 3.
yet see what he prints. p. 10. l. 10. shame, r. slander. p. 13. in m. Act.
4.5. r. Am. 4.4, 5. Act. 19. r. Act. 29. p. 15. l. 37. streng, r. strengthen.
p. 17. l. antepenult, by, r. then. p. 18. Law Divine, Humane, Free-gift,
r. Law Divine. Humane.
Free-gift
p. 20. in m. Genesis 32. r. 33. p. 21. l. 12. dele (...). p. 23. l. 4. to be
verified a mystery, r. to be verified in a mystery. l. 31. shut, r. set. p. 24.
l. 16. with, r. tenth. p. 26. in m. Number. 18. 18. r. 28. and Deuteronomy. 14.23, 26. p.
27. in m. 16. 12. r. 26. 12. 30. how, r. now. p. 30. l. 12. bring, r. being. p.
31. li. 27. things, read times. p. 34. l. 5. I think justly, r. I fear so too.
p. 35. in m. Act. 14.16. r. 17. p. 38. in m. Priest Catech. r. practic. Catech.
l. 4. a Brass Farthing, r. a broken Brass Farthing. p. 41. in m. (...), r.
(...). l. 2, Laws, r. Law. p. 42. l. 32. if, r. is. p. 46. l. 18. converted, r.
requited. p. 48. l. 31. there, r. these. p. 49. l. 19. by, r. abide. p. 51. l.
34. watches, r. coaches. p. 54. l. 3. charge, r. change. p. 55. l. ult. now, r.
no. p. 56. in m. Luc. 10.1, 10. r. 17. p. 60. l. 5. a fine for his Sons, r. the
Priests a fine; for Tithing, r. threatening. p. 62. l. 27. this, r. thy: p. 64.
l 26. Is. 49.13. r. 23. p. 65. l. 12. but, r. you. l. 35. after rules add
best. p. 66. l. 16. against, r. of. in m. Mark. r. Matthew p. 67. in m. Matthew.
27. r. 26. p. 69. l. 12. after prayed against by the Church, 1 Timothy 2.2. add
this, that we find; we find also, an appeal to them in a case purely of
Religion, Act. 25.18.19. and this supposes a power in these cases; yea Paul
himself protests it, v. 10. when I ought. l. 34. of, r. with. p. 70. l. 1. why
should this Whore say, r. why this Whore should say. l. penult. came, r. come
p. 75. l. 5. a fine for thus, r. this. p. 77. l. 18. they and their, r. he and
his p. 78. l. 35. mended, r. minded. p. 84. l. 10. dele therefore p. 85. l. 35.
after letting add out. p. 86. l. 27. it, r. in l. 30. after was, add not. p.
94. l. 15. it was possible, re. was it possible. p. 97. l. 37. this, re. they.
p. 100. l. 14. scandals, r. sandals. l. 38. after sign of, add it. p. 101. in
m. Ps. 60.20. r. 69. 20. p. 102. lin. 1. after men add as well. lin. 26. mend
the, re. mind his ibid in the hearts, read in our hearts.


