A POEM Upon the Undertaking of the Royal Company of SCOTLAND, TRADING TO
AFRICA And the INDIES.

EDINBURGH, Printed for James Wardlaw, and to be sold at his Shop in the
Parliament Closs, 1697.

A POEM Upon the Undertaking of the Royal Company of SCOTLAND, Trading to
AFRICA and the INDIES.
LOng lay Great Britan in the Ocean's Arms,
Naked, Unseen, Undrest and void of Charms;
Unknown to Others, scarce to her self well known,
Content with half of what was then her own,
Rich only in her Native Innocence,
When other Nations brought their Riches hence.
The Wise Phaenecians, Neptune did adore,
Long e're the Warlik Romans knew his Power,
Mars was their God to him with Zeal they bowed,
And hardly maimed Rites to Jove allowed:
His Image did adorn their Capitol,
They styled him Mighty Jove, and that was all;
All other Altars, did neglected ly,
Whilst Mars his Temples smoakt continually,
No Victimes there did bleed to Neptunes Name,
They only heard of such a God by Fame,
And hated him by Nature mortally,
Because he did protect their Enemy,
Carthage their Rival did that God adore,
He loaded them with Wealth from every Shore.
But Mars delights to keep his People poor*
For Poverty does make all Mankind brave.
Few Value Life, who no Convenience have,
These from their birth were alwayse Rival Gods,
Neptune and Mars were ever more at odds?
These Mars prefers, wise Neptune still neglects,
As Albion now does find by sad efects.
Neptun's the God the Britans first did know,
His right to them did Carthaginians show.
In Carthage Ships which hither came for Tinn,
(As same reports) did Britans Trade begin.
Carbage the child of Tire, that Queen of Trade
Long courted Albion, but did never invade.
Then with their ships their chiefest god was brought
A God whose harmles Rites are easily taught.
A God whose ehief delight is liberty,
A God abhores all sorts of tyranny:
VVhither of one or many; matters not,
Hated Opression was in Hell begot:
But of all sorts with which the World's acurst,
The many Headed Tyrant is the worst,
Albion has felt them all* her wealth and ease
Makes them in liberty so hard to please,
There Is scarce an Age but brings her old disease,
And at the first Invasion Caesar brought,
Romes Arms, and Mars here first oppression taught.
With Fears and Jealousies in wealth they swell,
They seem to want Diversion when they are well.
In times like these they must their errors see.
Ah! may they for the future wiser be,
And throw no more away their Trade by Sea.
When Neptune first did to this Isle resort,
Pleased with its Site, he placed there his Court,
And seldom did his Presence thence withdraw,
But when his hated Rival gave the Law.
The Fates and Nature did divide the Land,
Albions two Daughters, each their Part command.
Two Nimphs of Equal Beauty, Twins by Birth,
Did eq^ally divide their Native Earth,
The Eldest South, the Youngest Northward Reigns.
This over Mountains, that over fertile Plains.
Neptune did Caledonia Court, disdainful She
Slighted his Love, would Mars his Mistress be,
That God who does in Human Blood delight,
Him She adored, and forced her Sons to fight.
First in domestic slaughters taught them Wars,
Then drove them thence to search for death and scars
On foreign shoars, they starving honor got
No Land but boasts the Tomh of some great SCOT
Thus to delight her cruel Lovers Eyes,
By Law she does her Children sacrifice,
An Army on his Altar yearly dies.
Worthies, who had they been in Trade employed
Had brought her Riches in at every Tide,
For Liberal Neptune, did present her Store.
Of Fishfull Harbors round about her Shore
No Nation in the World can boast of more.
Fame says two Weirds did there arive of old,
And bids the Natives search their Hills for Gold.
But blind unthinking Mortals sure they be,
Who turn up Rocks when they may plow the Sea
Fate the true source of Wealth to Neptune gave,
God Pluto is no more then Neptunes Slave.
He digs toward Hell, and from its Confines draws
Money, the Scales of Wealth, but not the Caus^
Riches proceed from Labor well employed,
When mutual Use of things does Men divide.
Money's the Standart does the Cause decide,
But it is its Name, not Nature which prevai^
Money and Money worth are equal Scales:
Trace but the World, you will find these Lands most poor
Abound in Mines and boast the richest Oar.
But every Nation which frequent the Seas,
Wallow in Wealth, and pass their time at Ease.
Trade needs no fertile Acres for Support,
Where ever Freedom lives, it makes its Court;
And only craves a safe and open Port;
Wherever it thrives, there Strangers do abound,
But where its wanting, Penury is found,
And makes such Land unhospitable Ground.
A proof of which is miserable Me.
Who never did an willing injury.
And yet have more then six years Prison found,
For setting foot on Caledonian Ground,
No wonder then that when I touch my Lyre,
My tunes runs low because they want their Fire.
The Theme I treat is Glorious, Great and Brave
But he that sings it a poor chained Slave,
Like caged Birds; he utters broken Notes,
These whistle loud, poor things and streach their throats
Putting Complaints in Tune and warblings Sighs,
To move some pity to their Miseries.
But all in vain; as vainly do I sing,
For none that hear me dare compassion bring;
To speak on my behalf proves bad intent,
But to assist me's Boot or Banishment
Ill must a Stranger surely pass his Time.
Where Pity's Sin, and Charity a Crime!
A wanting Stranger too despised by all,
Whose bare Complaints are counted criminal.
Cease then my Muse, and speak of this no more
But shift thy Fancy to the English Shore,
An Hospitable Shore by Trade refined,
To Strangers ever Equal, Just and Kind
Ah! Heaven that to their Kings they were the fame
In this they fail, in this they are to blame.
Their Errors on that head do Volumns swell,
Ah! might they ever in Oblivion dwell.
In that once happy Land, and may it be,
Happy again, which I scarce hope to see.
There lives a sort of Merchants might become
The wisest Council Board in Christendom.
Numbers of such who do as rightly know.
Men's interen in things as Man can do.
True Sons of Neptune, who have wonders done*
And think of all the World as one great Town.
Men whose consummat Understanding kno,
The rates of hazard, and what is safe to do.
How to join Stock, and how to share the Gain,
Such as all litigating tri^ks disdain.
Never o'r busy, never unimploy'd,
But between Care and Pleasure time divide.
New Undertakings hourly they devise,
Their very Table Talk would make one Wise.
In this great School, some Scots-men now are bred,
And there find out the Mysteries of Trade.
Whence as their Genius leads them, thence they will go,
To every Foreign Nation, English kno.
To Turkey, Italy, and Africa,
To India, Persia, and America:
Amongst the Many, visit every Shore,
Judicious Paterson, and many more.
Fraught with Experience, back again does come,
Striving to propagat their Skill at home:
Home where all Mankind wish to find their Rest,
A Charm which makes all Countries seem the Best.
Why it is so? Reason is at a stand,
But all Men wish their Graves in Native Land.
Should I those Worthies go about to Name,
'T were endless work, they will survive in Fame,
To times these creeping Lines shall never see,
To times after, which no time shall be.
That endless Glory nothing can prevent,
England Records their Names in Parliament.
Envy does ever Frantic Council give,
Envy that would destroy, shall make them live*
Envy that ugly Flag, with Sneakie Hair,
Which in her rage, does her own Intrals tear,
Envy that Child of Pride begot in Hell,
Oh! May she ever with our Neighbors dwell*
These Neighbors which so hate our British Isle,
They seek our Ruin, at our Losses smile.
That Fury which could wish no Land to thrive,
With scrieching Cries did the Alarm give.
As if some dreadful Fire again had laid,
Our Wealth in Ashes, and destroy,d our Trade,
Or, that some Potent Nation did Invade.
Haste, look about you, English Men, she cries,
The Scots will Trade, Scotland is growing Wise.
Her Senate does discern her Interest,
They Will choice Trade, by which you once were Blessed.
Free Trade to the Indies and America,
Will make them Rich like you, you poor as they.
The Poison drunk, soon the Infection spreads,
Malice, Disdain, and Mischief, filll their Heads.
Three Furies which do Envy still attend,
And never do distinguish Foe from Friend.
Now these that could silently sit, and see
Bantam surpised, Amboyna ruined be;
The Greenland Trade destroyed, the Baltic lost,
And Holland Fleets still Fishing on our Coast;
That could with Patience part with Suranam,
And let all Trading run to Amsterdam.
At a wise Thing at home enraged grow,
And by their Votes the outmost malice show:
As if that Scotland's ruin they designed,
As if the Lands were not together joined;
When joined they be, by Power and Nature to,
So that the ones fall, the other must undo:
Let Trade increase, no matter where is its Seat,
If either Thrieve, it is Britanny grows Great.
That Scotland's like to Thrieve is very plain,
They Have got a Law, and can that Law maintain;
A Law that sets all sorts of Trading free,
No Land, a Wiser Land did ever see:
The English anger proves it is Excellence,
They learn the Mighty Value of it thence:
Wise Paterson, or's Friends, could charm but few,
Tho all they said, was Potent, Just, and True,
They made it evident, that Trade by Sea,
Needs little more Support, than being free,
Freedom's the Polar-star, by which it steers,
Secure its Freedom, and it nothing fears.
No mighty Power it needs, no fertile Lands,
No Gold, nor Silver Mines, it all commands.
All that our Nature needs, or can desire,
All that for Pride or pleasure we require.
Free Trade will give, and teach us how to use,
Instruct us what to take, and what refuse:
Trade has a secret Virtue none can see,
Tho never so Wise, except they Traders be.
It is not ten per Cent, nor three times ten,
Makes a Land Rich, but many Trading Men.
Men Skilled, the Myster^es of Trade, that know
Its Springs, and how to stop or let them flow:
Freedo^ draws such, and where there is many found,
It is most certain, Riches will abound.
An hundred such, ten thousand do employ.
Who find their Wealth increase, but know not why,
And as they Thrive, their Members multiply,
The want of Money such joint Stocks supply,
When diverse gain by few Men's Industry.
To the Discourse the Senate lend an Ear,
Some vote the Cause, who the Effects do fear:
Tho one and all consent to the Design,
Not one in ten did mean therein to join.
In all Debates, where there are many speak,
The Ignorant still do most Objections make:
And not discerning where the matter lies,
Seek by much doubting to be counted Wise.
They answer when Right Reason proves they err*
You Will pardon me, it is my Opinion, Sir,
In all elected Councils these abound,
Such heads like empty Vessels make a sound:
The brainless gaping Vulgar hear the Noise,
And understanding nothing, vote them Wise:
These Envy's activ'st Agents alwise be,
They can spy dangers no Wise Man can see.
Alas! cry such, our Land you know is poor.
What mighty Stock have we to bring in more.
As wisely did the Ancient British cry,
We were born naked Romans, so we'll die.
We feel, the Cold, and know your Robes are warm,
Yet should we us them, they would but do us harm,
Make us grow Lazy, and in Ease delight,
Our Bodies tender, and unapt to fight.
So say these Talkers, mighty Trade would be
A sharper spurr to growing Luxury.
'Twould but increase our charge by Servants fees,
Make the Poor easy, they will grow ill to please.
Such Stuff as this, does cost but little thought,
Yet by such Stuff, all Vulgar Heads are caught.
Blinded by Custom, Reason they oppose,
And never see one inch before their Nose.
It Is not an easy Task to stemm the Tide
Of noisie Scoffers, which do still deride,
All that her brutal Senses have not tried.
I who know this, and see what here is done,
Admire the steady Soul of Paterson.
It is no common Genius can persuade,
A Nation bred in War, to think of Trade.
It is no less than Solomon could show,
Their Interest in it to the Warlick Jew.
'T was fi^ indeed, the Wisest thing on Earth,
Should to the Wisest Monarch owe its Birth:
Those people once Blessed, with that mighty Prince,
Have been a Trading Nation ever since.
Where ever dispersed, where ever they Strangers be,
They still do propagat this Mystery.
From Palestine, and its Phenecian Shore,
Wise Navigation spread the World all o'r.
The Jews where ever born, are Merchants all,
What Is Art in Us, in them seems Natural.
We must to Prentice, ever we learn to Trade,
They from their Infancy are Merchants bred.
They seem of Providence the special Care,
Of all great Things, they have the greatest Share,
And prove wise Merchants, never Exiles are.
Their Country lost, the World's all their own,
Where ever they live, they seem to be at Home.
Their Righteous Fathers Faith, was Blessed from Heaven,
To them the Law and Gospel both were given.
And tho by them defill'd, they yet were made,
The Instruments to spread these Truths by Trade.
Trade Navigations Spurr, dispersed Jews,
Indeed teach other Nations how to use,
Tho they its Genuine Candor most abuse.
False Coyns, Adulterat Wars, and all that is sha^m,
Or fraud in Trade, with them seems Lawful Gain.
Our most ungrateful Neighbors learned from the^*
To clip our Coin, and send it back again,
Whilst to save them, we all Invention rack,
The shameless Rascals run us in the back.
Now it appears, they have sent us five time more
False Money then of true, ever past the Tower.
Money it is called, and did for Money go,
Till it has made them high and brought us low,
How we shall rise, is past Men's skill to know.
So bold a barefaced fraud was never known.
We fall, and are with impudence undone,
Rogues not content with half of what was Good,
Clipped off so well, our folly understood.
They durst corrupt the Nations vitial Blood.
We (...) Money thence,
That two half Crowns will not sell for 18 pence:
Ah! That I durst their Dealings truly sho,
But it is not time, so let the Villains go.
It Is not impossible the day should come,
Our just enraged Vengeance may strike home;
And make them the Reproach of Christendom.
Justly till then we their contempt are made,
They Have only left us our Plantation Trade.
In that too by their Tricks they so much share;
We little more than their poor Factors are.
We drudge for Suggars, which it is they refine,
Their Drawbacks do our Profits undermine.
As wisely might we send our Wool from home,
As let them for our Moscovadoes come:
Bribe them indeed to come and fetch them hence,
Thus we Enrich them at our own Expense.
We magnify their Wisdom to the Skies,
When it is our folly only makes them Wise;
But since it is all foolish to complain,
I Will bring my Thoughts to Scotland back again;
Where all the Truths that Paterson has said;
Had in the end but small Impression made.
Had not the English Votes, and Noisie Fears,
Awaked the Land, and opened all their Ears,
Thus as one Man the Nation has combined,
And speedily a mighty Stock is joined:
A Stock so large, a Stock so very great,
As must infallibly the Work complete:
That the Design is Wise, I surely know,
Tho (...) may not ^^o^.
Wise Things when put in practice come in true,
Till then it is fit they should be known to sew:
^or Secrecie's the Soul of great Designs,
Made public once, the Enemy combines.
Nothing can be contrived tho never so Wise,
If once made known, but will find Enemies.
This much I Will say, those that oppose it most,
Will in the End, find all their Labor lost:
They need not Trade in Paths, were Trade before,
Of undiscovered Trade, the World has Store.
Many blessed Lands rich Nature can afford,
Which never yet beheld their proper Lord:
Lands which abound in Rivers, Meads, and Groves,
Where unaffrighted Birds do chant their Loves:
Where nu^erous Floks, and Herds of harmless Beasts,
Freely possess their undisturbed rests.
Where various Trees alse various Fruits produce,
Some yielding Food, and some delicious Juice.
Where rugged Winter never yet was seen,
Nor least defect in everlasting Green.
Where constant Course of equal Night and Day?
Gives an Eternal Spring without decay.
New fragrant Flowers, delightful to the Eyes,
Do every Morning with the Sun arise.
Who there to search the Earth does never stay,
But only wipes her Dewie Sweat away:
Whilst cooling Breezes fan her lovely Face,
And Aromatic Smells fill every place:
Such Lands the Sun does every day behold,
With Hills of Silver, Rivers paved with Gold
Lands never yet with charming Beauties Blessed,
Nor never yet with raging War oppressed.
Never by Blood of Man or Beast defiled,
Nor ^ever yet with Tricks of Law beguiled,
Thus ^ree from Guilt; happy in being Wild.
On some such Shore from all Preluctancy,
This Company designs a Colony.
To which all Mankind freely may resort,
And find quick Justice in an open Port.
To that the weary Labourer may go,
And gain an easy Wealth in doing so.
Small Use of tiresome Labor will be there,
That Clyme richly rewards a little Care,
There every Man may choose a pleasant Seat,
Which poor Men will make Rich, and Rich Men Great
Black Slaves like bussie Bees will plant them Canes
Have Juice more sweet then honey in their Veins
Which boiled to Sugar, brings in constant gains
They Will raise them Cotton, Ginger, Indigo.
Luscious, Potatoes, and the rich Coco.
Ships thence increase to fetch these Goods away,
For which the Stock will ready Money pay.
By Manufactures here the Poor will live,
So they that go and they that stay will thrive.
Then Caledonia by her Lovers won,
Will now Light Shining Nuptial Robes put on,
Sea Gods, and Nymphs will dance, and Tritons play
And yearly Celebrate her Wedding Day.
FINIS.

