A PANEGYRIC TO His Royal Highness.
Upon His MAJESTY'S late DECLARATION.
Especially drawn from Unio Dissidentium Page 2. Part 14. Page 3. Part 3. Page
4. Part 3. and 4.

OF a Just King, Eccl. 8.4.
the Powerful Words declare
Great James Presumptive and Apparent Heir:
(The words betoken one and selfsame Thing:
Though some, Them would under distinction bring)
Such Declaration, Henry Third of France
Wisely made use of, 906. F^. G^^* H^st. 881.
when some 'gan advance
Pretensive Heirs, Fourth Henry to displace,
(A lawful Heir, though much remote in Race.)
Such Declaration by both kings must be,
An Act impulsed by Divine Decree,
What good effects from first of these did flow,
The Gallick Chronicles at large do show:
Checked Henry after Care and War became
Eternally great in his Fame and Name.
Great Duke in this Declarement acquiesce,
In sweet repose and rest thy self possess.
This heavenly opening of thy Brothers Breast,
(With all due Reverence be it expressed,)
Math. 3.16.17.
Has likeness unto that in Sacred Text.
Save that a Brother's owned in stead of Son,
What more than this can in the Case be done?
Who dare henceforth this Kingly Act gainsay,
Who dare against Thy Royal Highness bray,
Surely the Mouths of the Tumultuous Crew,
Are stopped, or else to Means we bid Adieu,
Where a Kings word is, There is Power, (so says
The Sacred Writ on which we ground our Faith.)
Henceforth of just necessity must cease
Those Clamours which so much disturb Thy peace,
Henceforth no Voyage over British Seas,
Or cold Retirement under Scotch Degrees
Needst thou to take, but still abide where Birth
Thou first receiv'dst (passing time in Mirth)
By Sovereign beloved, by Friends carest,
Revered by all, and by the Heavens blessed,
Exactly making good that Expectation,
Of being mighty Pillar to this Nation:
A Stay of State, a strong supporting Prop,
Ordained to Scale the Point of Honors top:
Long since foretold of Thee, as we may see
At large expressed in day Fatality.
Nor can be spared from Serene Charles his side.
Being active vigilant, helpful to Guide
Affairs of State by land as well as Sea,
For last of which none more renown^d can be,
Let Arragon her Testimonial give,
And Thy Dutch Victory in Sixty five.
Which Higgons muse has so inspir'dly sung.
See the Fatality.
Making Thee Neptunes Hero's chief among.
Ashmold Ga^ter p. 119.
None may so well that glorious Motto claim,
Of being terror of the Ocean main,
(Which Louis did for Michael's Knights ordain.
As once a Servant of King Edwards went
With Royal Cup his Master to present,
One foot did trip; being quick he did prevent
With to other leg the Fall) Godwin of Kent,
Laughing, said to the King, Even thus, one Brother
We see is ready still to help another.
The King replied, Just so might Alphred me,
But, That removed by base Treachery.
The Belgic Sheaf and Aesops Moral Teach,
Betwixt own Brothers there should be no Breach.
The Scripture says, Psalm. 133.1.
They must together dwell,
Union's their Heaven, Disunion's their Hell.
Unworthy are They, Pro. 6 4.19.
whosoe'r they are
Fraternal Union to break that dare.
Then in despite of such as would disjoiyne
Your persons, live together says Eloigne.
When men are absent, their back friends dare say
And do those things which else they would never essay;
Divide and Impera we may English make,
First separate, and then Advantage take.
Long live Great Prince, who not desire to see.
Thy Lieges Funeral Solemnity,
But guided by an equal and just Soul,
Humbly submit'st unto Divine control,
Nor do expect, but stay to see the Fate,
Ordained above, Signed from Eternal Date.
We read of Louis a Montpensier Peer, Genesis H^st. Fram. 792*

Who th^^ugh his Father had been dead 5 year,
Yet took such Grief at seeing of his Grave,
As did straight after him of life bereave;
Even just so, James we may expect to Die,
When Charles submits to mortal Destiny:
Gods wondrous hand, after a long Exile,
Them hand in hand brought back to Native Isle,
When wisest men estee^ed their state forlorn,
They saw them stated in the Land where Born;
A strange agreement they have underwent,
Sometimes of Bliss, sometimes of Discontent:
Why may not then Fraternal Sympathy
Cooperate to dying Harmony?
When thinking what they have suffered in times past,
One cannot endure the other to out-last;
But as they have lived together so to die,
May be their Fate ordained by God on high;
The possibility of this is no doubt, Weav. mon. p. 598.

By various Authors we may make it out.
Let 'em both live until they have outdone,
That Age which David calls a wondrous one; Ps. 90, 10. in metro.

That Royal Prophet whose Afflictions were
So great, and with which James his may compare.
Those Clouds are cleared, the Sun is now brast out,
His Brothers Rays incompass him about;
Apollo's Rays, See the Swans Weilcourt p. 4.
That can alone dispell
All fumes and vapors though exhaled from Hell;
Those Rays late issued from the Declaration,
Forever making Calm and Still the Nation.
Abs-hinc Aethereas cessans volitare per aur as
(Optatus) placidae Tutus adesto Domi,
Audent absentis nonnulli rodere famam,
Cum fuerit praesens ora reclusa tenent:
Est inimica cohors. Dux inclite Cominus esto
Si forsan fueris Eminus ista ferit.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, Sold by J.G. 1680.


