(...) OR, THE Excise-Man. Showing The Excellency of his Profession, how and in
what it precedes all others; the Felicity he enjoys, the Pleasures as well as
Qualifications that inevitably attend him, notwithstanding the opprobrious
Calumnies of the most inveterate Detractor.

Discovering his Knowledge in the ARTS, MEN and LAWS.

In an Essay.

By EZEKIEL POLSTED, A.B.

-- Nor shall my Muse d^scend
To Clap with such who Knaves and Fools commend,
Their Smiles and Censures are to me the same,
I care not what they praise, or what they blame.
Dryden in Juvenal. LONDON, Printed and Sold by John Mayos, at the Golden Cross
in Thames Street near Queenhithe. 1697.

To the Honored Sir Stephen Evans, Kts. Sir John Foche, Kts. Francis Parry,
Esqs William Strong, Esqs Edward Clark, Esqs Foot Onslow, Esqs John Danvers,
Esqs Philip Medows, Esqs Thomas Everard, Esqs
Chief Commissioners and Governors for the Management and Receipt of His
Majesty's Revenue of Excise within the Kingdom of England, etc.
Honored Sirs,
WEre not your Candor and Clemency as eminently distributed to every Criminal,
as are Your piercing Judgments to discover him, he must be possessed with a
more than shivering Ecstasy, that should presume to accost You with the present
Dedication: For though the following Paper appears in great Necessity of such
Patrons, yet that it should be petitioned by so perfect a Stranger, and that
without a License, might create a Wonder beyond the belief of the most
Credulous. Notwithstanding, Ingratitude having been ever esteemed the Epitome
of all Vices, and, consequently, the Guilt of the former, being much more
eligible, with all imaginable Submission, I crave Leave to present You with the
grateful Sentiments of the Kingdom for Your Impartial Administration, whereby
You have taken a Charter of the Peoples Hearts, never to be cancelled.

I shall not be guilty of an Additional Presumption, by descending to
Particulars, but most humbly implore a Pardon for subjoining, that Your
Endeavors have been vigorous beyond a President, in Your equally asserting His
Majesty's and the Countries Rights, by encouraging any thing that has but the
Tincture of Probity and Ingenuity, and wholly exploding and discountenancing
that Rigor, which has been usually perpetrated under the specious Pretext of
Law: These are so publicly known, and such uncommon Actions, as will be
Registered in every unprejudiced Breast, till Time it self shall have an End;
by which we find You acquiesce in the Opinion of the Great Agesilaus, who dying
in his Voyage from Egypt, forbad any Statue in memorial of Him, saying, He had
left those Actions behind him, as would render it wholly insignificant.

These being such great Verities as admit not of a Contradiction, we have
Reason to be assured, That by Your extraordinary Management, the Excise, like
the Athenian Ship, by being so often mended, will in a short time arrive to
that perfection, that there never will be found a rotten or imperfect Stick:
And therefore pray, That Health (which gives the only Relish to all Your
outward Enjoyments) and Prosperity, may be Your constant Slaves and Lacquies;
That a continued Succession of all Terrestrial Felicities may ever court You;
And that You may ever move as Refulgent Stars in the Orb You are placed, for
the encouragement of Ingenuity, and destruction of every Action that might
carry the Epithet of Ill: And although it is usual to wish You many Years, yet I
shall wish You but ONE:

-- Sed Annus

Hic, mea si valiant Vota, Platonis erit.

I am (Honored Sirs) Your most humble and Obedient Servant, Ezekiel Polsted.
Land. Calend. Januar. An. 1697.
TO THE Gentlemen Employed in the REVENUE OF EXCISE.
Gentlemen,
THE many Reflections which have been cast on your Persons and Profession,
induced me to an exact Examination of their Merit, and finding them to be
wholly the Result of Malice and Ignorance, I could not avoid this Public
Confession of it.

But this is not all, Your particular Favors to me, command a much greater
Acknowledgment than Expression is capable of giving, yet I think, my self
sufficiently happy, that I have an opportunity of telling the World so, and
consequently, that your Favors and my Gratitude are equally illimitable; which
Consideration has wholly occasioned this Trouble, and therefore the innumerable
Censures that must inevitably attend it, are extremely below my Concern; for I
must own, that I shall receive them with an extraordinary Pride, since it must
be thought too, it was wholly for your sakes.

The following Vindication then, such as it is, I present you with, and tho it
might possibly be thought to want one it self, or that your Innocence is such,
as to render it altogether insignificant, yet I must aver, that I can very
calmly receive the former, provided the latter does not as unanswerably
intervene: Tho considering that the Illiterate make up the greatest part of
Mankind, I presume it not impertinent sometimes to answer them in their own
Terms; for all the Reflections in the following Paper, are only bestowed on
such, who are so maliciously extravagant in giving them.

I am extremely sensible of my detaining you too long from your Ravishing
Felcities, and therefore shall say nothing to the Gentle Reader, but only
acquaint him, and all the World, that your innumerable Obligations have created
such grateful Sentiments, as shall meet with a Duration that can never
terminate, as being

Gentlemen, Your humble Servant, Ezekiel Polsted.
Land. Calend. Januar. 1697.
ON THE Author and Subject.
Bravely begun, and bravely ended too,
The Arts receive their Character from you;
They gratefully attend you, since the EXCISE,
Exact Perfection in it self implies:
Arithmetic is short, in vain we strive
To find, that which no Rule could ever give;
Addition here a quick Substraction meets
As to the happy Persons, as the Sheets;
For by the bold Attempt we must submit,
That to your Fame whatever can be writ,
Like Decimal Arithmetic.
Right Hand Ciphers only lessens it.
John Morgan -- Junior de Wenalt in Com' Brecon. ALIVD, TO THE Officers of the
Excise.
WE owned your Power, and the Pleasures too
That, as their Center, ever meet in you;
But your monopolizing Sense affords
A Ravishment, beyond the Power of Words:
To Silence thus Consigned, I must obey,
And only (...) say, that I can nothing say.
Henry Vaughan ^ilurist. (...) OR, THE Excise-Man.
CHAP. I.
THere is nothing that is a greater Subject of Admiration, or has created more
Wonder in me, than the great Difference and Unreasonableness of some persons
attaining, and others again missing, Preferment; and the variety of Methods
conducing thereunto: it often waiting upon some without either Endeavor or
Merit, and as often flies those who are most excellently qualified in Both.

I confess I could never guess at the Causes of this so seemingly great a piece
of Injustice, unless they may be applicable to one of the two subsequent (I beg
pardon for calling them) Reasons.

First then, If you will believe the Astrologers, there are some that are
unfortunate even in their Nativity, or (as they call it) Diis inimicis atque
iratis, vel malo astro natus, born under an unlucky Planet; so that
notwithstanding all their Care and Industry, Misfortunes and they are yoked,
and under a necessity of being made inseparable Companions. This seems to be an
unreasonable Imposition, and the Persons that so unfortunately groan under it,
are not to be accounted culpable, since the rigor of their Fate has made it
indispensible.

Secondly, If the Cause is not thus infallibly obligatory, another may be the
result of Inadvertency or Fear, (either of which may be reckoned our own Crime)
which may occasion us the missing that Critical Minute, which the Philosophers
say if it be not embraced, never presents it self more -- Stat sua cuique dies.
Every one has his time.

Aest as non semper fuerit componite nidos -- Strike while the Iron is hot, and
you anvil our what you pleaese; whereas once cold, you meet with an
Impossibility to effect that, which before you might have perfected with the
greatest sacility.

Well then! our Excise-Man being thus much resin'd from common Earth, and
consequently having been so fortunate as to escape the first, and so prudent as
to seize the last, he is listed in the large (excuse me for the presumption of
Sensible) Roll of His Majesty's Officers: when he is no sooner accosted with
Expressions suitable to their Authors; That he is the perfection of Scandal and
Infamy, the general result of a Broken Shop, and Intellerable Burdens, which
the world has been already too much troubled with.

To satisfy the Rational part then, were the following lines thought of, that
they may be assured, that that Employment is not managed by those, who are
beyond exception contradictory to (at least) common sense; Or are such perfect
strangers to any pleasure the World is Capable of giving, but far Exceed any
particular sort (if not all) Mankind.

And this will instantly convince them, since it is never opposed but by the
Ignorant (Ars non habet inimicum praeter Ignorantem) who not only know them
not, but are not capable of doing it; and inded nothing less can be Expected
from those who are not unfitly compared to one of their Barrels, that is wholly
Empty, for they cannot come into Competition with an Eighth.

In short, these are the most capable of Magistracy in the Famous and Learned
Norcia (a Town in the Apennines 25 miles from Rome and belongs to a Cardinal)
of which Sup. to Dr. Burnets Let. p. 79.
a late Author gives this incomparable Character, That though it lies within
the Popes Territories, yet no Man can have a share in their Jurisdiction, that
can Write or Read: So that their Government, which consists of four Persons, is
always in the hands of (Li quatri illuerati) the four Illiterate.

Oh! Jam satis est o he! It Is certainly high time to conclude, and, were I
capable, ought to Apologize for pretending to characterize him, who cannot
without regret view any Man whom Fortune seems to favor; who cannot with any
Satisfaction endure the praising any but himself, whose torments are antarctiek
to all other Disturbances, since he makes felicity the cause of his Infelicity,
and any Man's welfare, the Occasion of his Sickness; whose good Opinion none can
purchase, but at the Extravagant Rate of being eternally undone; and shall
therefore conclude with the Epigrammatift --

Captivum Line te, tenet Ignorantia duplex, Scis nihil, and nescis te quoque
Scire nihil. Twice ignorant you are, it is Strange yet true, Nothing you know,
and yet most wretched you Know not, that ever yet you nothing knew.

CHAP. II.
AS it is very observable, there was never any Emhusiast that set up for
immediate Revelations, deriving thereby a pretended Authority to utter his
Nonsensical and Atheistital Notions, but has acquired some Proselues (either
weak Women or weaher Men) let them he ever so Absurd and Ridiculous; And as
there was never any Mountebank or Empyrick in Physic, let him be as Empty as
his Vrinal, and as void of Learning, as a Jockey of Honesty, yet this Catholic
Block-head, what by his French Mustacho's and broken English, has gained some
Patients^ to maintain the Plush-jacquet of the Cobling Doctor, so its
indubitable, that let an Aspersion be cast on any Officer, by the most insitid
Brute of the Creation, he shall not only meet with almost innumerable Abettors,
but be held in eternal Admiration for his ingeaious Pnn, whereas its connection
is the same our Poet speaks of.

So have I seen the Pride of Nature's Store,
The Orient Pearl chained to the Sooty Morr;
So has the Diamonds Bright Ray been set
In night, and wedded to the Nigro jett,
Like Dolphins ranging in the shady Wood,
And Savage Boars are Swiming on the Flood.
So that, although it meets with as great a Contrariety as the expectation of
the Smokes descending (it being a perfect contradiction, and Heterogeneous in
nature) yet it would make one stagger, to see how he values himself upon his
luckie thought, and happy reflection, whereas there was nothing a fitter
Subject for laughter and detestation.

I remember a Story of an Ingenious Gentleman, whose Coat happening to be made
something too short, our Wit immediately censured it, the Gentleman told him it
would be long enough before he should have another, which he admiring Nihil est
quin male narrando possit depravarier.
resolved to make it his own by a repetition in another Company; and told them,
it would be a great while before he should have another, leaving out the word
long, wherein the whole (if there was any) Wit lay; yet, I say, meets with no
small admiration, because it flows from such inspired Lips, whereas he
considers not the Rationale, which is indigna digna habenda sunt quae Herus
facit: So that it being generally the result of the flattery of an inferior (to
gratify a more ignorant Superior) we shall look upon it as such, and equally
value it as that King did his Councellor, who to humor his Sovereign, saw that
invisible Star.

Whether these merit the name of Men of Parts, that shall thus admit of such an
Imposition, we shall not here dispute; but that it generally prevails, may not
only be proved by what has been said, but even out of the Ancients themselves:
Aristippus by his Extraordinary Qualification in that Art, gained the good
Opinion of Dionysius far more than Dyon the Syracusan could by his Plain
dealing; as did also Cleo beyond Calisthenes with Alexander.

That these with the Androgeni in Pliny are as variable as Thought, or with Wax
receive any Impression, may be allowed of, if we consider, that they take even
a suggestion for granted tho it be Malice in the Abstract; and are so
prodigiously Weak, as not to know, that it is only pretended to by those, who
have an Eternal Dependence; nay, this often arrives to that excess, that it
frequently exposes them to the Epithet of Ridiculous: Thus Carysophus laughed
because his Master Dionysius did, though he knew not for what; which he seeing,
demanded the Cause: Carysophus replied, I think that which creates Laughter in
you, is worth Laughing at. Thus Clysophus when Philip of Macedon halted because
of the Gout, he dissembled the same Imperfection. Accordingly, what you deny he
forswears; what you affirm, he justifies; if you weep he is sad; if you laugh
he is merry; and all this while in reality neither, but in obliging those on
which insinuating observance their subsistence does depend.

It cannot but be acknowledged, that I have dwelt much too long on this
subject, but it so often and immediately concerning the Persons I am pretending
to vindicate, I hope an excuse will be easily admitted of, and shall therefore
Conclude with his Character in Brief: He is before hand with your thoughts, and
able to suggest them unto you. He will commend to you first what he knows you
like; and has always some absurd. Story or other of your Enemy, and then
wonders how your two opinious should so jump together in one Man.

These look upon their Betters with a Scorn,
And thus their Cloudy-heads are highly born,
And so by Straws are emptied heads of Corn.
CHAP. III.
THat there can be any thing more intolerable than unmerited Reflections is so
palpably True, that it would be altogether impertinent to enforce its
Demonstration: And although in such a large Community, it would be almost next
to an Impossibility to expect, that every one should be exempted from them; yet
since the Majority at least must be allowed to be so, he must arrive to a more
than ordinary Degree of Assurance, that should therefore conclude the same of
the Whole. So that a single (suppose a bad) Action perpetrated by a particular
Member, is no more to be attributed to the Society, than that the profligate
Life of one Person should be supposed to be allowed of, and tolerated by the
Religion he outwardly makes a Profession of; which continually explodes and
detests it, since he is hourly endeavored to be unmasked and detected, by all
the Care and Inspection Imaginable.

I shall therefore acquiesce, as suppose it allowed of, by the Unprejudiced,
that each one bears the Scandal that is the infallible Result of his own
particular Crimes. And here only observe, That the general Objection to their
Happiness is, that they are Vagabonds, Out-Comers, Ubiquitarians, etc. and
consequently think it not improper to affirm, that abstracting the Pleasures,
Profits and Qualifications hereafter specified, that inevitably attend our
Excise-Man; yet there is somewhat more to be said in his Vindication, and that
therefore the Objection is naturally Frivolous, False and Erroneous.

We all know that standing Lakes and Pools are never clear or wholesome, and
those destructive Fogs and Mists, which ever proceed from them, have always no
small influence upon the adjacent Inhabitants, whereas those pleasing (because
rapid) Streams, being in perpetual Motion, wholly remove the Cause which
infallibly ingenders their Contagion.

Again, we are positive, by ocular Demonstration, that Trees themselves cannot
possibly bear such delicious Fruit where they were Originally fixed, as when
they are transplanted; and the most bewitching Perfumes are wholly
insignificant, and render not their Odeurs without the motion of being rubbed
and chafed. And we also all know that the fixed Stars are not of that account
or esteem, as those that have continual Motion.

But our Excise-Man knows an additional Rejoinder in his own Vindication, which
being very pertinently expressed by the Epigrammatist, Owen l. 7. v. 100.
I presume there is no necessity of Apologizing for its Quotation.

Illa mihi Patria est, ubi pascor, non ubi nascor:
Illa ubi sum Notus, non ubi Natus eram.
Illa mihi Patria est, mihi quae Patrimonia praebet;
Hic, ubicunque habeo quod satis est, habito.
My Country is where're my Bread I get,
Not where I was Bred, but where I have Meat:
Where I am known not Christened; there I dwell
(And no where else) wherever I do well.
CHAP. IV.
BEfore we come to demonstrate the particular Excellencies that inevitably
attend the Person and Employment of our Excise-Man, above the lowest dregs of
Men, the Vulgar, and the Felicity he enjoys, notwithstanding the severest
Censures of the most Critically Censorious; it may not be amiss to observe,
that there might be something ab initio particularly respecting him; Haec Homo.
For as some compare his Head to the Round Heavens, his Eyes to the Sun and
Moon, his Hairs to the Trees and Grass; his Flesh to the Earth; his Veins to
the Rivers, and his Bones to the precious Gems, Metals and Minerals, which are
the Riches of the Earth; so some have been led to imagine, that his Body was
not made in all the Geometrical Proportions that are or can be thought of, but
as a Demonstration of the Excellency of our Excise-Man, who should make the
greatest use of them.

For all Numbers and Proportions of Measure, whether Inches, Cubits, Feet, etc.
are derived from the Members and Dimensions of Him, some few of which may not
be impertinently subjoined.

First then, Let us see how a Circle was thought of; for let but the Hands fall
somewhat stradling a little with the Legs, the Extremes of the Fingers, Head
and Toes, make as exact a Circle as you are capable of making with your
Unerring Compasses, where you may, if you please, make the Navel the Center.

Again, A Geometrical Square is a Superficial Figure made up of four equal
Sides or Angles: Now for a Demonstration of this Figure from Man's Body, it is
but stretching out your Hands as far and directly upon a Plane as possible from
each side, the Body being exactly upright, and the Feet closed together.

Lastly, A Triangle is a Figure containing three Sides: Now if the Body be
placed directly upright, and a Line drawn from each extended Hand, to the Feet
enclosed, it makes an exact Triangle.

Several other Geometrical Figures might be deduced from Humane Bodies, but
since Prolixity is never obliging, and not at all correspondent to my present
Design, (which wholly aims at Brevity) I shall now wave it, and leave the
curious Enquirer to his further Examination of the rest.

Thus ab Origin, we find
His Excellencies were designed:
Geometry must Him confess
The Center of each Happiness;
For as their Patron, Him alone
The Mathematics wait upon.
CHAP. V.
THere is nothing of Excellency but is attended with difficulty, for where any
thing is obtained without it, it forthwith ceases to be excellent; Could every
Mechanic be a Proficient in the succeeding Arts, who would esteem them
Excellent? And could every Illiterate be a Philosopher, its excellency would
quickly terminate in a mean Opinion: Could every ignorant Rustic attain to a
perfect knowledge in the Mathematics, its Excellency would be converted into
Contempt; So that difficulty being an inseparable Attendant on every Art that
can properly assume the Epithet of Excellent, it is the chiefest cause of its
Estimation; whereas otherwise, the Excellency that now deservedly waits upon
them, would quickly dwindle away, and they be rendered wholly despicable, if
not Scandalous, and altogether unworthy to be attained, much less to be had in
the least Esteem or Veneration.

For Demonstration then, that they have climbed over the chiefest Excellencies
that infallibly attend the following Arts, we do positively affirm, That if an
Excellent inspection into the general parts of the Mathematics will create
estimation, if an absolute knowledge of Vulgar and Decimal Arithmetic will
produce Commendation: Or, if a great proficiency in Geometry will merit
Admiration, our Excise-Man claims them all by Undeniable Prescription.

He can tell you that the Mathematics in General, Are those Arts and Sciences
which carry along with them the irresistible force of Demonstratien; which are
instanced in the following Particulars, viz. Arithmetic, Geometry, Music, and
Astronomy.

We cannot exclude him from a Competent knowledge in them all, but must aver an
excellency in the two first: And shall therefore only tell you here, that he
knows Arithmetic to be an Art of Numbering well; and if you would be fully
satisfied herein, Consult the Books already expo'sd by many Eminent Gaugers on
it.

As for Geometry, he can tell you that it is an Art of due proportion or
Measuring (the Earth) and that it contains three kinds of Magnitude (according
to that Exquisite Artist Mr. Hunt in his Gauger's Magazin) viz. Lines,
Surfaces, and Solids, Nature not admitting of any more; Length, Breadth, and
Depth, taking up the whole of Space.

He tells you a Line has only Length whose Boundaries are points; a Surface
has Length and Breadth, whose Boundaries are Lines; and that a solid has
length, breadth, and depth, or thickness, whose Boundaries are Surfaces.

He further informs you, that every of these three kinds of Magnitude is
Measured by some known kind of Magnitude, that is Homogenial, or like to it
self, viz. A line is Measured by a line, as one lineal Inch, etc. a Surface by
a Surface, as one Square, Inch, etc. and a Solid by a Solid, as one Solid Inch,
etc.

And when it is known how many Lineal Inches are contained in a Line, Square in
a Surface, or Solid in a Solid, then is the Quantity or Content of either of
these Magnitudes said to be known.

Thus far in General, and I must beg the Suspending of your Expectations of
Particulars, until I acquaint you, that notwithstanding our Excise-Man's
prudence, obliged him not to omit the grasping this critical opportunity, yet
he was not Ignorant of the impossibility of arriving to any allowable
proficiency in these incomparable Speculations, without a correspondent Genius,
and natural Inclination; for he knows very well, that what Cicero said of
Poetry (and which himself found too true in his Intolerable O Fortunatam natam
me Consule Romam) that it was not possible to be a Poet by Rule or Precept; so
is it here, for without an agreeable Instinct, he can never advance to any
perfection in them, in regard they carry Demonstration along with them; and
amongst all the Histories the world has ever produced, we can find very few (if
any) that have proved themselves any way eminent without it; for as they inform
us, that as Socrates after he had learned the Art of Poesy by Theorems, yet
was he not ever capable of making one verse: So cannot we find the incomparable
Euclid any way famous, take him out of his own Element. This we see also
sufficiently demonstrated in Mark the Son of the unparalled Cicero, who
notwithstanding his Father's severe Injunctions, admirable Instructions,
together with the assistance of Athens the then most Celebrated Academy of the
Universe; yet I say, not being possessed with this innate tendency, he proved
in the end but a Subject of Contempt and Scorn.

Our Excise-Man then finding this Sufficiently grafted in him, he Cheerfully
proceeds.

Tho Critics, like the Dog Snarl at the Stone,
Condemning that which is too hard a Bone
For their thin Chaps to deal with -- all withstand
Abusing most, what they least Understand.
I had here (according to promise) intended a particular Extract of his
Excellencies in the preceding Arts, Demonstrating his Management of
Common-Brewer, Distiller, and Victualler, out of the Incomparable Stentography
of the Honored Mr. Everard, the Exquisite Magazin of Mr. Hunt, the Ingenious
Gauger's Practice of Mr. Ward, and all others who have arrived to any Eminency
in those Inimitable Qualifications: But shall at present suspend my intentions
herein, in regard I find this part increasing too considerably on my Hands, and
only here observe, that were the knowledge of most of his Censuring Critics
herein questioned, their answers would be wholly as impertinent as the Question
of the following Norcian.

A young Gentleman in the time of Popery, coming from the University, his
Father had an extraordinary desire to know what Proficiency he had made, and in
order thereunto desires an Eminent Monk to satisfy his Curiosity therein by a
Particular Examination, who being (no doubt) very sensible of his own parts,
boldly accosts with,

M. What was Latin for a Priest?


S. Sacerdos, which was denied, and affirmed to be Sapientia, because of his
great Wisdom.


M. What is Latin for a Cat?


S. Felis, which was contradicted, and told Asper, because of her Sharp Nails.


M. What is for Fire?


S. Ignis, but he was assured it was Letitia, for what can produce more
Gladness in cold Weather?


M. What is for Water?


S. Aqua, no says the Monk, it is Abundantia, because of the abundance of it in
Sea and Land.


Lastly, he asked him what was Latin for a Barn? the Scholar replying Horreun,
was confronted and told Gaudium, for what greater Joy then a Barn full of Corn:
Well! this heat being over, the former was applauded for his profound parts,
and the latter discarded for his Ignorance; who thereupon took a Cat, and tying
a Firebrand to her tail, threw her into the Monk's Barn, and cried out, O
Sapientia, Sapientia, Asper currit cum Letitia, and si non veneris cum
abundantia, munquam intrabis in gaudium tuum; who for getting his Elaborate
Latin, was immediately ruined.

But not to be Impertinently prolix, I shall conclude, that since there is
nothing of Excellency but is attended with Difficulty, as has been
demonstrated, and that since he has wholly overcome the difficulties that wait
on the preceding Arts, I must not say he is therefore Excellent, but I must
aver (fiat Justitia and ruat coelum) he merits a far greater Character than he
or they desire, but Marmoreo Licinus tumulo jacet, at Cato parvo, Pompeius
nullo, quis putet esse Deos? Licinus does in Marble Sleep,
A Common Urn does Cato keep,
Pompey's Ashes may catch cold,
That there are Gods, let Dotards hold.


CHAP. VI.
HAving thus, with all the Brevity imaginable, run over some of those
extraordinary Qualifications that attend our Excise-Man, and his Excellency in
the preceding Arts, I shall subjoin some few Lines in relation to his knowledge
of Men; for he knows very well, that though the reading of Books cannot but be
owned to be extremely advantageous, if rightly understood, yet he also knows it
to be wholly useless, without putting the Notions it insinuates into practice;
which reading of Men consists chiefly (at lea^t in my Opinion) in a regular
Behavior on all Emergencies, that he does not ignorantly impose on others, and
that he is not impertinently imposed on himself: For the bare reading of an
allowed Maxim, is wholly throwing away those Minutes which an Heathen reckons
to be highly culpable Exordium Justini ad Antoninum Imperatorem.
; Otii mei reddendam rationem Cato putat. He might very well blush to hear
Vespatian tell him, Amici! diem perdidi. For it is not to understand, but to
perform; not to know, but execute; not to read, but practice, which one can be
properly called a Man for; the former being but the Shell, the latter the
Kernel. And as that Lethargick Soul must of necessity lie wholly fallow that
reads not at all, so it must be naturally consequential, that he that does, and
exerts not himself according to its authentic Dictates, and vigorously
prosecute that knowledge into Action, lies under an extravagant want of being
manured, and can be taken no otherwise than a Contemplative Blockhead.

Well then! As it is plain that ou^ Excise-Man knows what to do, so also is it
as plain that he does it too; and that this may infallibly appear, I shall
briefly instance in the great regard he has to (that contemned, and almost lost
thing called) Justice, which he hourly demonstrates toward (1) The KING. (2)
The SVBJECT.


He exercises the first in a continued and unsnaken Fidelity, on which as
neither Affection can prevail, so neither must Malice (which generally attends
Mankind) attempt an alteration in him: For (abstracting the guilt of that
hellish Vice called Perjury) the very baseness; of the Action, and thoughts of
being guilty of abhorred Ingratitude, (which is allowed to be the very Epitome
of all other Crimes) sufficiently terrifies him: For as he very well considers
with what detestable Ignominy Humphrey Banister lies, for betraying the Duke of
Buckingham, notwithstanding the many Favors the Duke had conferred on him, and
his Protestations of concealing him. So he also very well knows what Trophies,
and Immortalizing Fame attend the Ashes of Hubert Burgh Baker's Chronicle in
King John.
, who was Governor of Dover Castle to King John, when Lewis of France came to
storm it, and take the Town; who finding it difficult to be done by Foree, he
sent a Messenger to Hubert, whose Brother Thomas he had a little before taken
Prisoner, that unless he would surrender the Castle, he should presently see
his Brother Thomas put to death with exquisite Torments before his eyes: But
this Threatening moved not the Fidelity of Hubert at all, who more regarded his
Trust, than his Brother's Life. Then Lewis sent again, offering him a great Sum
of Money; neither did this move him, for he had resolved to preserve his
Loyalty as inexpugnable as his Castle.

But this Fidelity our Excise-Man boasts of in his Duty, implies also an
industrious performance of it; for he is very well satisfied, that to be
Faithful, and not Diligent, is a Contradiction: For though a Man may be honest
in all he does, yet he is not honest for not doing all, and consequently by his
falling short of industriously performing his Duty, he lies under the indelible
Character of being Unjust; and he knows that though others may command their
Time, it being, as they call it, their own; yet he is satisfied he cannot, in
regard he is paid for it, and consequently becomes accomptable.

Besides, he is not ignorant what Plautus assures him of, (for if he had, he
must not have ever pretended to the Name he bears) Qui e nuce nucleum esse
vult, srangit nucem; there is no Sweet without its Sweal; no Gain without Pain;
he must crack the Nut, that will ea^ the Kernel. And also what eternal Scandal
the Greeks Seneca bre^. vir.
lie under by Seneca, that spent their time in such unprofitable, as well as
impertinent Disputations, as, How many Rowers Ulysses had? Which Homer writ
first, his Iliads or Odysses? So that they spent their Lives laboriously in
doing nothing, their Conceits being such, that if they kept them to themselves
they could yield them no Fruit; and if they published them to others, they
would only appear more learnedly troublesome: Or, as Terence upbraids them with
Quid? Credis dormienti haec tibi confecturos Deos? Do you think to lie in Bed,
and have your work done?

To be short; He concludes that these are Lessons adapted only for those who
are subject to the Ferula, or Men much more ignorant, and consequently may be
tolerable in them, but in him it would be altogether unpardonable: For as some
Men have sinned in the Principles of Humanity, and must answer for not being
Men, so he offends if he be not more; Magis extra vitia, quam cum virtutibus
Dr. Browns Vulg. Err.
; No Luster is expected from the minor Stars: but if the Sun should not
illuminate, it were a Sin in Nature.

CHAP. VII.
HAving thus far considered our Excise-Man as a Servant, let us now take a
short Survey of him as a Subject, and here we shall find him an absolute Enemy
to the talking (the a great Lover) of the Government; For he knows the Persons
as well as the Government of Kings to be Sacred, and are not to be censured by
every Insect, that crawls only by the influence of their Rays, they being that
Primum Mobile that wholly occasions the moving of all Inferior Beings.

He knows it to be nice and Dangerous to think (much more talk) meanly of these
Earthly Deities, since they are sisted from that common Bran that wholly moulds
up other Mortals; He is positive in the Excellency of the advice a Gentleman
gave when Prisoner for not observing it, Vincula da Linguae, vel tibi Lingua
dabit.

Quae supra nos nihil ad nos, is of a long standing, and although spoken by an
Heathen, yet its observation had saved many Christian beads; he has read
Suetonius, and from thence tells you, that in the Reign of Tiberius Nero
Caesar, a certain Droll, seeing a Corpse passing by to Burial, he stopped the
Hearse, and lifting up the Dead Body, desired him to tell Augustus, that the
Legacies which he left the People were not yet paid; Whereupon Tiberius
commanded him to be brought, and having paid him his due, Executed him
immediately, and desired him to tell Augustus so himself.

Thus you see the Persons and Actions of Kings are not to be jested with, since
Destruction is the inevitable Consequent, which his continued observation of
the madness and folly of it in others, has fully covinc'd him off: Feliciter
Sapit, qui alieno periculo Sapit: The best way of buying Wit, is with other
Men's Money: He is satisfied the Country Man was very much in the right in the
following Story.

A Person of Quality walking the Fields, and staying too long, a considerable
Fresh increased a Brook (which he was necessitated to repass) beyond its wonted
Limits, and observing a Plowman in the adjacent Field, called for the
assistance of his Horse. Upon which the Plowman approached, and demanded what
he was? The Gentleman replied, He was Sir H. W. And what more? replied the
Rustic, The Gentleman subjoined, That he was Justice of the Peace,
Deputy-Lieutenant, etc. And what else? says our Countryman. Why, in short, says
the Gentleman, I am also Parliament Man for the County. Oh! Are you so, (says
the Plowman) then you shall stay there for me; For I will have nothing to do
with State Affairs.

And as our Excise-Man is wholly satisfied in relation to the Government in
general, so has he full Contentment under his present Circumstances in
particular; and thankfully embraces whatever his Superiors suppose necessary
for him. And indeed there is a necessity in a Man of Prudence for it; for
though we will allow Merit ought, yet is it altogether impossible it should
always meet Preferment: For as it is an allowed Axiom, Fortuitum est nasci a
Principibus; so is it here, he having (as is before mentioned) nothing but his
Critical Minute for it. Besides, the Numbers in this Age are extravagantly
numerous that lie under an Equality, and those of Places are no way answerable
to those of the Persons meritoriously pretending to them; so that for him to
repine, (who has already attained a considerable Form in it) would make him
beyond the degree of Ridiculous.

Again, We cannot allow of every Person that thinks himself deserving, to be in
reality so; for though in the Sphere he at present moves in, he does it with an
allowed Approbation, yet since none is so ignorant but knows, that there is a
considerable difference between Ruling and Obeying, the former requiring a
total alteration of the Man from what he was when the latter; which his
Superiors being sensible of, (who are much more competent Judges of Him, than
Himself) possibly at present think it not for his Advantage; hence is it that
many ingenious Men meet with a Stet. But our Excise-Man never thinks of
Advancement 'till his Commissioners do, and receives it then with an Ex Mero
Motu; and if they should, his chiefest Ambition is to climb up to their good
Opinion, on which only he values himself: So that he is not intoxicated with
that ambitious Madness, as to covet that which he is no way capable of
performing. Or, with Phaeton, rather hazard the burning of the whole World,
than miss the gratifying his wild and irrational Inclinations. He knows Solon,
one of the wise men of Greece, complains of a young Nobleman of Athens, That if
he could but have plucked out of his Head the worm of Ambition, and heal him of
his greedy desire to Rule, that then there could not be a Man of greater Virtue
than he.

And as he is not Ambitiously inclined, much less is he guilty of Envying the
good Fortune of others; nay, though possibly, less deserving than himself. Envy
is defined by some to be the hatred of another's felicity in respect of
Superiors, because they are not equal to them; in respect of Inferiors, lest
they should be equal to them; and in respect of Equals, because they are equal
to them: but our Excise-Man, Sort sue contentus, envies none of their Places,
but their Parts and Virtues; of which notwithstanding he becomes a daily
Emulator; and in all other things he follows the Advices of the Poet,

(...).

Contented is he with his Lot,
What others have, he covets not.
But lastly, (which indeed is high time to come to) he feeds not himself up
with that which is highly improbable, if not altogether impossible to come to
pass; and indeed it would make Heraclitus himself burst, to observe what
ridiculous Fancies some persons entertain of their future Grandeur, when the
possibility of it is no otherwise grounded, than that of the poor Priest's, who
being asked why he was going to Rome from his own Country? Replied, It was
because the Pope being dead, he did not know but that he might be chosen Pope.

CHAP. VIII.
HIther to have we (with all the Brevity we were capable of expressing)
considered our Excise-Man's Behavior, in relation to the KING; let us now take
a short Survey of that respecting the Subject, and that First, To those under
his Inspection. Secondly, To those who are not.


First, Concerning those under his Inspection, I shall briefly insinuate, That
our Excise-Man being assured, that as Justice is painted without Eyes, to
demonstrate that she never makes any distinction of Persons, so (as he has read
out of Quintilian) he knows there were several Images of Judges erected in
Athens without Hands, to show that they should not be corrupted with Vid.
Godwin.
Bribes. The first, he is sensible is prejudice to the Person offending, the
second to himself, unjust in taking, and both Perjury In justitiae paena comes.
in performing; which Consideration has such a powerful Influence over him,
that he is even shy of a Familiarity: For though Humanity obliges him to a
common Respect, yet Prudence denies an Intimacy; the Censure of the World being
now arrived to that extravagant pitch, as to draw positive Conclusions from
very uncertain Premises. I mean a bare word, a confirmation of its reality,
though indifferent in its intention. Besides, he knows if he should once prove
false, (as he highly must if thus guilty) the odds are very unequal, but they
will too; that lie not under such invincible Obligations: so that if that
Theological Maxim Male partum male disperit.
, That things wrongfully got, have a very uncertain Assurance, convinces him
not; yet that Political one of Seneca is absolutely prevalent, That it is a
great Fault to believe every one, and a great one too to trust One Credendum
nec omni, nec nulli.
, which makes him in this Case to acquiesce with Chaucer, when he tells us, --
As Proverbs do say,
Three may keep Counsel, if Twain be away.


For since he knows the generality of Mankind frequently verify the Adage of
Altera ma^u fert lapidem, panem ostendit altera, he is resolved to follow our
Poet's advice, -- Hic murus aheneus esto
Nil conscire sibi, nulla pallescere culpa. Hor.


Secondly, As our Excise-Man is not Rigorous, so is he not Timorous in the
execution of his Office: The first intimating an immoderate Severity, the last
a bale Degeneres animos timor arguit.
Pusillanimity. He is not to be biased by his excited Passions, nor hectored
by Affronts and Clamor. He considers the Loser, claims the privilege of
Speaking, but not of Prating. He allows their asking Questions moderately, but
not making Solutions scandalously: Such Persons ever calling all things into
question, but are not capable of approving any thing; which Consideration leads
him to the remembrance of the Adage, That he that will allow himself to be a
Sheep, must also allow himself to be eaten by the Wolves.

I would not be here mistaken, as if our Excise-Man should be guilty of
opprobrious and railing Terms, generally predominant, No; But he either
moderately convinces them with the severest Scrutinies of Reason, or (to those
not susceptible of such) answers them with Silence. He knows such Language
becomes only Billingsgate, and not any there, but the weaker Sex. He concludes
it very much beneath a Man (much more an Excise-Man) to be guilty of such
scandalous Actions, so extravagantly contradictory to those common Rules of
Civility, he is so strictly charged, as well as desires to be observant of. He
is satisfied those who offer such base Scurrility, appear absolute Reprobates
to every thing that can be called modest or good, and consequently dispense
with each Action that exhibits the Epithet of Scandalons. He is positive the
Undiscerning Crew, being incapable of satisfaction in rational Answers, he will
give them none at all: so that though he cannot deny but it must administer
disturbance to the Giver, yet he is resolved it shall not to the Receiver: And
when an Injury is done him, and it is not in his power to revenge himself of it,
he then dissembles, and takes no notice of it; but when it is, he generously
forgives it. He remembers the Story of the Earl of Carnarvan, who being in a
Coffee-house, and accidentally falling into discourse with a Doctor of Physic,
the Doctor told him he ly'd; The Earl, though a Person of much Honor and
Courage, without taking any offense at it, mildly replied, Doctor, I had rather
take the Lie of you a thousand times, than Physic once.

And also that of Bishop Cooper, who having a froward Wife, lest her Husband
should prejudice his health by his overmuch Study, when he was compiling his
famous Dictionary, one day (in his absence) got into his Study, and took all
the Notes he had been gathering in eight years, and burnt them; where of when
she had acquainted him, he only said, Woman, thou have put me to eight years
study more. So that he is resolved that nothing shall interrupt that Current of
Courtesy and Civility he at first imblb'd, which he knows, is not punctuality
of Behavior; I mean, that which consists in certain modish and particular
Ceremonies and Fashions in Clothes, Gesture, Mien, Speech, or the like, is not
using such Discourses, Words, Phrases, Studies, Opinions, Games, etc. as are in
fashion in Court with Gailants, Ladies, etc. this is a constrained Formality,
not Civility; a complying with the Times, not with Persons; and varieth with
the Age or Season frequently, according to the Fancy of mechanic Persons in
their several Professions: whereas the Rules of Civility, founded upon Prudence
and Charity, are to Perpetuity unchangeable; and consists Vid. Ob. on
Education, 222.
in not expressing by Actions or Speeches any Injury, Disesteem, Offense, or
undervaluing of any other, in being ready to do all good Offices, and ordinary
kindness for another, and receiving no Injuries or Offenses from others, i. e.
in not resenting every Word or Action, which may (perhaps rationally) be
interpreted to be Dis steem or Undervaluing. But, Jam fatis est -- ne me
Crispini scrinia Lippi
Compilasse putes, verbum non amplius addam. Horace.
But it is enough -- lest you should think that mine
Are Holland's Volumns, I Will not add a Line.


CHAP. IX.
BUT to return: As our Excise-Man trusts them not with a Secret, so dare he not
to venture them in relation to their Occupation; for Concealments are as
natural to a Retailer, as a Cittern is to a Barber, or Burnt-Brandy to Madam B
-- which rather than miss, he would hazard the Plagues of Europe, or (which is
the same thing) the mercy of the French King: And, I presume, it would be no
Solecism, or (I was going to say) an Affront, to affirm them terms Synonimous,
they ever reckoning it no breach of the Principles of Honesty to cheat the
Excise-Man, but rather a Duty incumbent to secure that which they call their
own. The result of this Consideration exerts his diligence, and consequently
concludes, Qui quaerit inveniet, He that will have an Hare for Supper, must
hunt in the morning. He knows Labor and Diligence to be the Mistresses of all
commendable Arts, without which, none ever yet arrived to any Character in the
Commonwealth that may be called considerable. Scaliger and Aquinus (two the
most considerable Pillars and Standards of Learning in the Universe) never got
that considerable Eminency, but by Watching and Labor. And Croesus himself got
not his Riches by lying still. Nay, it gives a great addition to its sweetness;
for as Hunger is the best Sauce, so Labor creates the best Palate.

-- Tu pulmentaria quare
Sudando --
-- Any Meat
Is Ven'son if obtained by Sweat.
Or (I beg pardon, but cannot avoid it) the consideration of the Ant's
diligence, is no small Incitement to him, thus described by Horace, Lib. 1.
Ser. 1.

-- Sicut
Parvula (nam Exemplo est) magni Formica laboris
Ore trahit quodcunque potest, atque addit acervo,
Quem struit, haud ignara ac non ineauta futuri.
Thus Englished by Mr. Brom.
Just like the Ant, (for that is their Pattorn) small
In bulk, but great in thrift, who draws in all
That e're she can, and adds it to her store;
Which she foreseeing Want had heaped before,
And in the Rage of Winter keeps within,
To feed on what her Providence laid in.
It is observed by the Naturalists, that Natura nihil fecit frustra, and from
thence Dr. Brow^e ^ulg. Errors.
contradicts the common Notion of the Camelion's living by the Air; for to what
purpose should that Animal be by Nature supplied with Guts, Stomach and Tongue,
if it fed upon that Airy Aliment which has not a necessity of, or indeed an
occasion for, them? So to what purpose should she have delivered a Soul into
the Body which has Arms and Legs, (only Instruments of Action) but because it
was intended the Mind should make use of and employ them; and though Atlas has
the whole World in possession, yet is he obliged to bear it too.

Another Inducement our Excise-Man has for exercising this Industry, is what he
has read in Plautus, Videte quaeso, quid potest pecunia! Assem habeas assem
valeas; He knows a Man shall be valued and esteemed according to what he has.
He has read the Story of one of the Emperors of Turkey, when some of his
Flatterers attempting to make him believe his Beard commanded Adoration, and
was worth the World. Upon which (to demonstrate the Almighty Power of Money) he
commanded it to be shaved, and sent to the Market with this Proclamation, That
the Grand Signior's Beard was exposed to a Barter; but (as the Historian tells
us) it went not so far as a Penny, and would not buy a Pound of Meat. I cannot
avoid Horace's account of its force, and if you will forgive me this once, I can
assure you I have almost done with my Fragments of Latin, etc.

-- Omnis enim Res,
Virtus, fama, decus, divina humanaque pulchris
Divitiis parent: quas qui construxerit, ille
Clarus erit, fortis, Justus, Sapiens, etiam and Rex,
Et quicquid volet. --
Horace, lib. 2. sat. 3.
For every thing, Divine and Humane too,
Virtue, Wit, Comeliness, and Honor, do
Submit their Necks to Riches splendid Sway;
Which whosoever heaps together, may
Be Noble, Valiant, Just, and Wise, nay King,
Or (if 'twere possible) an higher thing.
A third Encouragement for our Excise-Man's Diligence, is the Consideration of
the Mutability of all Sublunary Affairs, and since no Mortal is so firmly fixed
but may (nay frequently does) meet with Vicissitudes, he is certain of a much
more uncertainty: For though that wheeling Goddess is not unsitly compared to
the Moon, in her variety of Distributions to all, yet to him she is ever in her
last Quarter, immediately ready for her wonted Change. Public Places having
many Mutations incident to them, which miss all other ways of living, and
consequently he waits in a continual expectation of it. And as he remembers the
Advice of Juvenal Vulgus sequitur Fortunam and odit damnatos. --
, If once a Man falls, all will down with him; so is he not ignorant of the
Advice of Henry the Great of France, when having promoted a Person of low
degree to be Chancellor, who thereupon had his own lively Effigies (made in a
curious piece of Arras Hangings) standing upon the uppermost part of Fortune's
Wheel, which he having showed the King, You would do well, said the King, to
pin the Wheel fast, lest it should turn again.

This foresight of his Discharge, is no small Spur to him for the laying up an
honest Provision against it, and therefore is not unmindful of the Adages, That
as it is Mus non uni sides antro -- Eras.
good to have two Strings to one's Bow, so is it also to make Non semper erunt
Saturnalia. Sen.
Hay while the Sun shines. But there is a further Consideration that obliges
him to an indefatigable Diligence; for if Poverty drowns the most towering
parts, and makes even Youth Nil habet infoelix paupertas du^ius in se Quam quod
ridiculos komines faeit.
ridiculous, it must of necessity follow, that it must be the very abstract of
all Misfortunes, when accompanied with Infirmities and old Age, he being then
arrived to his Ne plus ultra, and consequently to an impossibility of
recovering his neglected Minutes. And he knows that since all Men are not born
under those fortunate Planets, as to have a Competency procured for them, he is
resolved creditably to secure one, before the vigor of his Youth shall meet
with an abatement, this being his only Harvest time, which he must wholly
depend on in the Winter of his Age; and in regard he remembers it a common
Conclusion, That a young Serving-man is generally an old Beggar; he sleeps not
without joining with the Opinion of Horace:

Ille gravem duro terram qui vertit aratro:
Perfidus hic caupo, Miles, Nautaeque per omne
Audaces Mare qui currunt: hac mente laborem
Sese serre, senes ut in Oria tuta recedant,
Aiunt, quum tibi sunt congesta cibaria --
Hor. Ser. 1.
Thus Englished by Mr. Creech -- as I remember

The Soldier sights, the busy Tradesman cheats,
And finds a thousand tricks, and choice deceits.
The heavy Plow contents the laboring Hind,
The Merchant strives with every tide and wind;
And all this Toil to get vast heaps of Gold,
That they may live at ease when they are old.
When they have gotten store for numerous Years,
They may be free from Want, and from its Fears.
These are some of those prevailing Arguments which induce our Excise-Man's
diligent performance of his Duty; and not questioning but the meanest Capacity
apprehends that by that word, I mean a faithful execution of it, as is
instanced before; I shail not trouble the Reader with Repetitions, but shall
descend to the last as well as chiefest Argument intended, and that is, that
his great Master (to whom he is responsible for his well-being) is not
defrauded; and though the former Reasons may in some sense be allowable, yet
they cannot in the strict Rules of Probity, unless they meet conjunctively with
this. It Is He only allows him that Competency he enjoys, by a frugal management
of which, he may not only live without any other dependence, but Add pdrum
parvo magnus accrwus eris.
secure an Asylum for futurity. And it would certainly be the highest piece of
Ingratitude (than which the Heathens Ingratum dixeris and omnia dixisti.
reckoned nothing worse) in him, if he made not this his chiefest Aim and
Resolution, since Ingratus, qui beneficium accepisse se negat quod accepit;
Ingratus, qui id dissimulat; rursum Ingratus, qui non reddit: at omnium
Ingratissimus est qui oblitus est.

CHAP. X.
Since then our Excise-Man is satisfied, that the generality of Mankind (I mean
those constant Defrauders) are what Aexander was wont to say of Antipater, That
outwardly he did wear a white Garment, but that it was always lined with
Purple; that is, fair in their Speech, but foul in their Actions. It follows
then, as a natural result of the Premises, that he only things of ease, but
works on; and though it may be his chance to succeed Industry it self, he
concludes not therefore that they ought to be confided in, since he knows no
Barber shaves so close, but another may find some work. Neither shall the
consideration of their having often commuted for it, be any Remora to his
Search, they having another Consideration too, viz. some hopes of retreiving
their former Losses, by continued Fallacies. Nay, though their refunding has
been succeeded with sufficient Admonitions of forbearing the like Practices,
yet they will not, or cannot hear, the former for the precited Reason, and the
latter (I mean still among those common Cheats) for that of the Epigramatist:
Non potis est Proclus digitis emungere Nasum
Namque est pro Nasi mole ^usilla marus:
Non vo^ ^ille Jovem sternutans, quippe nec audit
Sternu^ mentum tam procul aure sonat.
Proclus with his Hand his Nose can never wipe,
His Hand too little is his Nose to gripe:
He sneezing calls not Jove, for why he hears
Himself not sneeze, the found's so far from's Ears.


Being thus resolved, he embraces every Opportunity, and lets not any thing
miss him for want of Circumspection and Care. He is watchful to an Excess; and
if he sleep, it is as the Naturalists observe of the Hare, i. e. with his Eyes
open; for he always considers, that Foxes when sleeping have nothing fall into
their mouths.

He is satisfied this alone will not be sufficiently prevalent, and therefore
has ever an Assistant incognito, which he never discevers but when
necessitated; and he knows it a great piece of Imprudence, ( Quid non mortali
pectora cogis Auri Virg,
sacra sames?) as well as Ingratitude, not to return a suitable encouragement;
for he that gives thee a Capon, ought to have a Leg and a Wing. But though he
disputes not the frequent occasion of it, yet he knows there is not a continual
necessity, and therefore its allowance is agreed on with Restrictions: For
notwithstanding two Eyes is said to see better than one, yet he had rather
(considering the predo. ^inant Infidelity, especially in relation to an
Excise-Man's Secrets) trust one of his own, than thrice the number that are
not, if with a possibility it can be performed without them; and ever remembers
the Rule, That what thou sanst do thy self, rely not on another.

Our Sinner being thus detected, has made himself subject to the offended Law,
and consequently to the mercy of our Officer, who has ever a great regard to
distinguish between the Circumstances of the Person and Offense: This he makes
his chiefest study, he ever perceiving it an esteemed Qualification. He knows
Compassion a natural Attendant on Poverty, and it would be wholly unpardonable
in him (who ought to be a leading Example of it) not to give an unquestioned
Demonstration of it upon every necessitated Opportunity. He allows it
insignificant, to offer at a Supply from those, who have a daily occasion of
begging one He owns it ridiculous, to struggle for satisfaction from those who
cannot give it their own Belly. He is satisfied it is highly culpable,
warrantably to sink those who are already crushed, or to offer the making
himself fat, by their lean and inconsiderable Incomes. He concludes it very
impertinent, to patch up his Fortunes from those, who, to his hand, are out at
heels, or to cover himself with their Nakedness. He denies not but that Cruelty
is the rigorous effect of an evil-disposed Will, and the Fruit which is reaped
from Injustice: And if it is dormant in the cankered Breast, he is resolved it
shall not in his that is sound. He confesses the Offender has committed a
Fault, and he acknowledges he should commit a greater in not extenuating the
Mulct: And that it is equally scandalous to expect Impossibilities, I mean,
from the former in making, and the latter in expecting Reparation. He has read,
That the most Ignoble Beast is ever the most Cruel; and that the Noble Lion
passes by that submissive Prey, which the unpitying Tiger unmercifully
destroys. The frequent Observation of this in others, is sufficient to make any
but him an absolute Pythagorian, and allow a Metempsychos^ of Panther's Souls
into the Bodies of much more cruel Men: These he abominates, (...) will totally
abandon, since they are not adm^^^ted to have an humane Composition.

For Veins of Flint are everywh^^e dispersed,
In slender Branches through his Iron Breast.
Or, as Withers puns it: No Kind so Unkind to their Kind we find
As Mankind unto Mankind is Unkind.


Yet he knows too, that that which cannot be made into Butter, may be made into
Cheese: But since it is ever allowed, that it is as great Cruelty to spare all,
as to spare none, our Excise-Man is resolved upon his former Distinction, and
that therefore the Capable are not to be thrown into an immediate Oblivion,
knowing that thereby he would wholly contradict the very intention of the Law,
which exhibits Fines, Penalties and Forfeitures in Terroren^; Inops Aadacia
tuta est, having no relation to him, and will therefore prove a vain and
successle^s Excuse: For notwithstanding the Law pardons the Poor, (that is
tacitly, because they have nothing) yet it does not therefore follow that it
should forgive the Rich, or those who have enough, it falling not under the
Rules of Charity or Compassion, to an exact observation of which, our
Excise-Man lies under an indispensible Obligation. Besides, he supposes it
equally Criminal to hurt the Innocent, and to let the Nocent go free, where
there is something conveniently to be spared. He that dances must pay the
Fiddler, and he that conceals must produce. He that mixe^ ^ust pay for it, and
then no doubt will be witty, beyond the assistance of Cambridge or Oxford,
since Wit bought is better than Wit taught; so that as he that confesses may be
hanged, so he that denies must commute.

CHAP. XI.
HAving given you some few of those Remarks I have made on our Excise-Man's
Behavior toward those under his Inspection; I come now to instance his
Demeanor toward those who are not, which ought to be particularized in a
treble Capacity, viz. to his Superiors, Equals and Inferiors: But in regard
this would occasion a Volume alone, and consequently swell beyond the intended
Brevity of these Papers; and since also many of these Observations would
interfere with those already delivered, I shall refer the Reader to the
numerous Books on that Subject, especially that Complete Tract of Education of
Young Gentlemen Printed at the Theater.
, (which is our Exeise-Man's admired and inseparable Vade Mecum) and content my
self with the bare hinting some few he lies under a necessity of observing,
quatenus an Excise-Man.

Let Fortune throw him into what Company soever, he is sure not to be profane;
he knows it Capital to reflect on Earthly Majesty, and to have mean
apprehensions, much more expressions, of that tremendous Arbiter and Disposer
of us his speaking Worms, that can with the same ease reduce them to their
pristine Chaos, as he then allowed them a Creation. I say he is satisfied, that
he who thinks there can be no Jest, without the addition of an Oath, and
consequently the profaning his Name, who, in a minute, may cast the whole
Creation in an Ague-fit, is far beyond the assistance of Helebore it self, it
being a certain Indication of a confirmed madness: And instead of the Excise,
is fit only to be an Inhabitant of Poneropolis, a City built by Plut. Mor.
Philip King of Macedon, who having assembled the most profligate Wretches, and
those whom he imagined beyond the reach of Admonition, put them into this City
which he built on purpose, and called it the City of the Profane.

The Spanish Proverb says, Tell me his Company, and I Will tell you the Man; his
choice is ever for the best: For he knows, that as the Profane can only assist
him in his Damnation, so the Poor can never help him at all; and he concludes,
that as either of them are to be avoided, so is also the Company of Fools, who
can be no way serviceable toward the improvement of his Intellectuals, which
he presumes to be the designed Origin of Society. And although his Place may
inevitably cast him amongst them, yet he is ever upon his Guard, and, with the
Persians, fights flying; and indeed there seems a necessity of his being well
armed, to clear himself of the greatest part of the World's Composition; and it
is his whole study to make himself a Separatist herein, for he knows in
relation to the first, that Contamination is an infallible Incident, since the
defiled Fly that feeds on dung, has ever its correspondent color. To the
second he is satisfied against ordinary Company, since the meanness of the
Commodity makes it for every Bodies money. And in respect to the last, he
concludes, that as it is no advancement of his Qualifications, so must it of
necessity immerge those he was so happy in before, Scandal and Infamy being its
inseparate Attendant; nay, he is satisfied out of Seneca, It Is only keeping
Childrens company, who will never arrive to Men's estate, Nam inter catera mala
hoc quoque habet stultitia, semper incipit vivere --

He is very sensible of the Deference payable to those who move in an uncommon
Sphere, and though in strictness he may imagine he does, yet he is not so
extravagantly Ignorant, as to suppose his Intimacy with the Gentlemen of the
Country wherein he is sent (which is wholly occasioned by their Condescension)
should imply a parity: He is (it is true) a Gentleman by his Place, but they by
Descent, and he knows very well that one Post may destroy that Gentility he
pretends to, whereas theirs admits of a duration equivalent with time it self.
He is satisfied it lies in the Power of his Masters with or without Reason to
reduce him in statu quo; whereas an extenuation of their quality supposes an
Impossibility: and that it may be palpably evident that their Circumstances no
way admit of a Competition (abstracting the certainty that attends them, and
the incertainty that follows him) and consequently that a submissive regard is
perfectly obligatory; he considers, That (as it is allowed by all) it may
sometimes fall in the way of the most Indigent to do him a kindness, it must
certainly happen often in the Power of the Rich to perform that which he will
not imagine altogether acceptable.

And since this cannot admit of a Contradiction, our Excise-Man, of
consequence, allows of this Regard to be a part of Prudence as well as his
Duty; for it would be an Infallible Demonstration of a Soul totally Eclipsed
that should not offer a suitable respect to those who not only command it by
all the Injunctions both Sacred and Profane, but very frequently proves that
Tenth which gives Life and Motion to all inferior Orbs, and is the efficient
cause of the Elevation of those Persons and Parts, by a certain and progressive
Advancement, that have any way demonstrated themselves meritorious of it.

Besides, it has always been observed that an obliging submission and
condescension has been ever the discriminating Character and Distinction of a
Gentleman, for those of the greatest minds and best Extractions, are ever the
most obliging and humble; whereas those of the most abject Spirits are the most
Insulting and Imperious; Alexander the Ladies Calling. 66.
Great, though Terrible in the Field, yet was of a gentle complaisant
Conversation. Familiarly treating those about him: Yet Crespinus, Narcissus,
Nymphidius, and others Enfranchised Bond men we find insolently Trampling upon
the Roman Senators and Consuls. So that among the Innumerable other Arguments
for its observation, he pays it, to avoid the Censure of being imagined of the
Dunghill strain.

Who like so many Empty Pitchers may,
By the Lugg'd Ears be carried any way.
I say this Humility is so firmly fixed in him, that he might be thought
Superior to that that is Common, for he very well remembers the Roman History
from whence he is assured, That this winning virtue was so Conspicuous and
Charming in Cincinnatus, that though he concealed himself by digging in a
Garden, it sent him quickly thence and gave him the preferment of Dictator.

But this submission in his Behavior to Superiors ought to be carried much
further, it being his Duty in a double capacity, for as it is required from
every Person in general among Christian as well as Ethnic Communities; he has
a further obligation for the Performance of it, I mean the Injunctions and
Positive Commands of those Commissioners to whom he is obliged for his
Employment. It Is their reiterated orders to Demonstrate an obliging Complacency
to all, but an especial Submission to the Gentlemen they meet with in their
admired Perambulation; Nay, this particular has been so often inculcated by
private Orders and Printed Directions, that were we not apprehensive of a daily
necessity for its Remembrance, we should with Submission imagine it lay under
the Guilt of a Repetition. This then becoms his Duty under a double Notion, the
former as a Man, the latter as an Officer; and for the nonperformance of the
Dictates and Obliging Maxims of the First, he will find himself Discarded of
Humane Society; and his neglecting the orders of the Last, will infallibly
Discharge him of that Incomparable Dependence. Nam Pericula, Labores, Dolores,
etiam optimus quisque suscipere mavult, quam deserere ullam Officii partem.
Cicero.

CHAP. XII.
NOw although, as was intimated, those Gentlemen may be so Condescending as to
allow of, and encourage a Familiarity; yet our Excise-Man embraces it with a
great deal of Discretion and Caution; which produces a positive Resolution in
him, that it shall not administer an occasion of Negligence in his Duty; to
which he has a resolute regard, and of which nothing shall create a diminution.
He joyfully allows of the freedom they are pleased to admit of, but with a
reserved subserviency to that Absolute Necessarium to which he is cemented by
all the prevailing Obligations imaginable, and he is then (with his usual
Submission) subsequently Theirs. He has read Plutarch, and from him, remembers
it was a remarkable Instance of the Prudence of Ulysses, who going into the
Regions of departed Souls, would not exchange so much as one word with his
Mother there, 'til he had first obtained an Answer from the Oracle, and
dispatched the business he came about; and then turning to her, he afforded
some small time for a few Questions of much less moment and concern. He owns
the admittance to be no small addition to his Reputation, but when it
interferes with the Minutes he is accountable For in relation to his Duty, he
knows too, it is a great substraction from it, and which, as is prerecited,
would entitle him to the indelible Character of being unjust.

This Consideration produces a prevailing Argument against immoderate Drinking,
and moderate (I know not whether that Word can be allowed) Gaming; since they
wholly discompse him for the Duties of the subsequent day. I shall not rob my
Commonplace Book for Precepts or Examples against them in relation to him,
(for it is not our Concern to censure others) but cannot avoid the incerting
what Mr. Howell tells us in relation to the first Howell's Letters.
, That by the ancient Laws of Spain, if a Woman could have proved her Husband
to have been thrice Drunk, she might have immediately pleaded it as a
sufficient Argument for a Divorce. And what St. Augustine subjoins, Ebrietas
est blandus Demon dulce venenum, suave peccatum; quod qui habet scipsum non
habet, quod qui facit peccatum non facit, sed ipse est peccatum --

And although our Excise-Man, upon some emergent Opportunities, may be
prevailed to nibble at the former, yet he eternally shuns the latter; the
Inconveniences that inevitably attend it being innumerable, especially relating
to him, who hat neither Money or Time, to throw away upon such an unaccountable
and impertinent Vice; and shall therefore only insist with what Scandal and
Infamy it was branded with by the Ancients (not to question whether our Moderns
have not had much more reason) as appears by the Law of Aurelius Alexander
Emperor of Rome, That whatever Person should be taken Gaming, should be looked
on as a Recorded Frantic. as not having a competent discretion for
Self-government: And for some such Reason the Noble Cobilon being sent to
Corinth, for the obtaining a mutual League and Friendship Corn. Agrip. de Van.
Scien.
between them and the Lacedaemonians, when he saw the Captains and Senators
playing at Dice, he returned without doing any thing, saying, That he would not
so much defile the Glory of the Spartans, as that it should be said they had
made a League with Gamesters.

And since these Vices seem to imply all others, they being the Basis and
Foundation on which all imaginable Enormities raise their Superstructure, I
shall not mention any other, but briefly incert his Reasons of Abhorrence
against the last, which he observed out of the best Obadiah Walk^r.
Educator, and the worst Educated he has read; and are

First, It creates an acquaintance with low, base, unworthy Company.

Secondly, Learning from them sordid and unmanly Arts, as Sharking, Cheating,
Lying, Equivocating, which is by them called Outwitting.

Thirdly, Loss of Time and Money.

Fourthly, Great engagements of the Passions, which is the most effectual and
speedy means to obliterate any good Thought, and introduce the Superiority of
the Beastial Part.

Fifthly, Learning, or at least patiently enduring those abominable Swearings,
Cursings, Blasphemings, etc.

Sixthly, Danger from other Men's Passions, the general Result of Play-quarrels,
being Murders, Duels, etc.

And in fine, Est Ars Mendaciorum, Perjuriorum, Furtorum, Litium, Injuriorum,
Homicidiorumque Matter: and est vere malorum Daemonum inventum.

Another Caution our Excise-Man observes on the Friendship of his Superiors,
is, That it shall not administer an occasion of discovering a Con^ealment, I
mean of disclosing a Secret; and therefore he is sure of ever following the
Rule of Pythagoras, which was, to check the too early Loquacity of his
Scholars, by imposing on them five years silence from their first Admission.
And it is observable, that Nature has given us two Eyes and two Ears, and but
one Tongue, (and that doubly barracadow'd by Lips and Teeth) that we might hear
and see at least twice as much as we speak. He knows it would be the highest
piece of Injustice to declare that, which was not only attended with an
Injunction, but a promise too of a Reservation. He finds how infamous and
scandalous it was among the Romans, to be called Homo Rimarum; and particularly
remembers that Heroic Answer of Metellus their General, who being asked, What
his next Design was? Replied, That if he thought his Shirt was privy to any
part of his Council, he would immediately pluck it off and burn it: And though
their Capitol was preserved from the Gauls by the Geese that fed therein, yet
could they not be persuaded to carry a Goose Corn. Agrig. de Van. Scien.
for their Shield, by reason they were an Emblem of Eternal Prating: And he is
very well assured, that the Divulger of a Secret delivered by a Friend,
(especlally a Potent One) will be imagined the same as a Treasonable Discovery
to a Prince, Who always loves the Treason, but ever hates the Traitor: And
consequently, will find it attended with as direful Effects; which makes him
ever shy of receiving any, and consequently confirms him in the Opinion, that
it was well said by Plutarch's Morals.
Philippides the Comedian, who being asked by King Lysimachus, What he desired
might be imparted to him? Replied, Any thing but a Secret.

But as he is far from declaring Secrets, so he is much further from a
Repetition of the most common Conversation: for there is none that has
traveled a days Journey, but knows very well, That a Gentleman may express a
merry Reflection, without meaning any harm; whose Repetition would not only
create an everlasting Feud, and an immediate separation of the most intimate
Friendship, but has arrived to the degree of Murder it self: Such a loquacious
Person merits not the protection of any Civil Government, but a dwelling
(pardon the word) among the most Barbarous Infidels, if they would be so unwise
and unhappy to receive Him; so that herein he wholly remains in the Opinion of
Themistocles, who being offered to be taught the Art of Memory, replied, He
much more admired the Art of Forgetfulness.

His obliging Behavior, and charming Mein, being universally distributed, he
is sure to avoid the espousing any particular Party or Interest; the
Inconveniences of which are so extravagantly numerous, that they are far beyond
the Art of Rhetoric to discover: For he is assured upon their Reconciliation,
(which cannot be long deferred) to find them both unanimously joined to surther
his prejudice; as the presumed Origin of their Separation, and declension of
that Native Intimacy which otherwise (they pretend) might have met with an
Eternal Cement, for which Reason he ever shuns (though frequently provoked to)
that cowardly Vice, Detraction: For besides that it is the Reverse of Charity,
(the whole design of the first being to conceal, as well as that of the last,
to discover the Excellencies of any) he can conclude nothing his own that has
been once expressed, and consequently speaks well (or nothing) of those who no
way merit it; and cloisters up those Sentiments he conceives may admit of a
misrepresentation, or disobliging construction.

This Consideration must also induce him to resolve, That notwithstanding his
prevailing Circumstances even necessitate him to a large Acquaintance, yet he
is positive in his paucity of Friends, (and those chosen with the most mature
and sedate Deliberation and Judgment he is capable of) since they may
insensibly entangle him, and irrecoverably twist him in their Quarrels. This
sewness he observes has been highly recommended to him by the Ancients, since
at the most they never mentioned them but by Plut. Mer. Vol. 1.
Pairs: Thus Nisus and Vrialus, Hercules and Hylas; Achilles, Patroclus;
Pilades, Orestes; Titus, Gesippus, with innumerable others: So that though a
Friend is a sociable Creature, yet he affects not an Herd; and his being
usually called and esteemed another Self, is a convincing Argument that the
Number TWO, is the adequate and complete measure of Friendship: For as
Briareus, who with his hundred hands, was daily obliged for his bare
subsistence, to feed Fifty Stomachs, could thrive no better than our selves,
who supply a single one with Two; so no one of many Friends can boast of any
other Privilege, but that of being a Slave to many, and an equal Sharer in all
their Disquietudes.

I know this Paucity has been sufficiently censured by many, especially in the
Excise; it being (as they object) absolutely necessary, that an Officer have
many Friends, if it be only to keep him in, or reinstate him upon a Discharge:
But if it be considered, that the management of this Revenue lies wholly in the
hands of those who are positive in their Resolutions of encouraging Ingenuity,
and that Merit only shall recommend any to their good Opinion; I say, if it be
considered with what extraordinary Vigor they have turned off and expunged the
Ignorant and Dishonest; even against a prevailing Interest; no Man that is
endowed with the contrary Qualification, need doubt a Preferment from those who
have ever esteemed that the only Recommendation.

However, if upon distance of Place a Solicitor may be thought requisite, I
see not why he may not appear under the Notion only of an Acquaintance, and
consequently our Officer is no way necessitated to make an addition to his
confined Number of Friends, which commands an Intimacy that is altogether
Sacred.

CHAP. XIII.
THE next (though chiefest) Particular our Excise-Man resolves on, is, that he
runs not in Debt; he is satisfied that those extravagant Expressions of
Friendship he finds in his present place of Residence, meets with a
correspondent duration, and continues no longer than himself, a remove of 20
Miles making it to vanish, as if they had been stranger than strangers, and
utterly unknown before; for he that but a day since saluted him with -- SIR,
YOUR MOST, HVMBLE SERVANT, I should be extremely Ambitious of seeing you at my
House, where you will find a Glass of as good, though I say it, as any in Town,
wholly devoted for your Service; Why don't you come to my Shop? I protest I Will
use you very kindly, I will not desire to get a Farthing by you, Try me for
once: I have often admired at your great strangeness, your Predecessor and I
were extremely intimate, and I served him with the best Cloth, Stuff, etc. the
Country could afford, though there is a small Reckoning, between us still, an
inconsiderable Drib remaining; yet if I never see him again, it is not the first
Loss I have had -- But pray where is he -- I am sure he came to Town clad in
window'd Rags, which demonstrated him to spring from an Illustrious House, the
Sun sbining through him. Nay, he was so bare, that a Lowse might have broke her
Neck from the best Suit in his possession; whereas I trusted him in mere
Civility, when no Body would: And my Kindnesses were so excessive, that I vow I
got not a Penny by him, I letting him have my Goods as they cost me out of my
own Pocket. His Wife too had many things unknown to him, and was so ungenteel
as to go away, and never take her leave: But that small Sum my Wife lent her in
ready Money, vexes me really more than all the rest: For God's sake, Sir, when
did you hear from them? Can you put me in a way? I declare the best Gloves in
Town are so very much at your Service, that I will send for them immediately.

I say, He that but just now admired even the shadow of your Shoe-strings; nay,
that could never be himself, or enjoy the least Satisfaction upon your Absence,
and so much doated on your Person and Parts, that he was ever sure to secure
you at least for a Sundays Dinner, he certainly finds now to accost him with
Ungrateful Rascal, a Pitiful Beggarly Fellow. And, in fine, reiterates with all
his Elocution, the Rhetorical Flourishes he was graciously pleased to bestow
upon his Predecessor. All this being the Result of one of his Three Fundamental
Points, which he ever esteems as Sacred. The first is, because he supposes it
an Impossibility now to get any more from him. The second is, because they
think it their Duty to load the absent Excise-Man with all the scurrilous
Reflections their quaint Parts are capable of expressing: Or (which is
certainly his securest Reason) because he took not up his constant Discharge
upon every individual Payment, without which, our Excise-Man concludes it a
Doomsday-Book, and himself therefore in eternal danger: For this he is
certainly assured of, that his crossing the Book is no discharge of the Debt,
some keeping two Books, and one of them fairly Seven Years after he has seen
put in execution, upon his having no Acquittance, or upon the bare presumption
of its being lost: But this being detected by its Production, it would make a
Stoic burst to hear his Excuse -- I Vow, Wife, this Idle Boy, this Rascal of
an Apprentice of ours, has certainly abused this Honest Gentleman; I am sure I
remember something of it, he or you, my Dear, have forgot to cross the Book,
and consequently have necessitated me to commit an Incivility, which I was
never known (as all my honest Neighbors can attest) to perpetrate before.

The Result of the whole is, That our Excise-Man is even afrighted from being
Lavish in his Expenses, and therefore is sure to exercise a suitable moderation
in them; for he knows very well, That although the Goddess Diana gave
heretofore, in the City of Ephesus, to such Debtors as could fly into her
Temple, Freedom and Protection against their Creditors, yet he knows too that
Her Power having met with a Cessation, there remains not an Asylum for him, but
a Ludgate or a Compter. He has that positive regard to the worth of a Penny,
that nothing but Necessity shall extort it. The Misery, nay the Pleurisy of
Griefs, as well as the Scandal that always attend its Want, are infallible
Arguments for him to be more than parsimonious. A prudent Frugality is
recommended to all, but to him even Covetousness it self cannot be accounted
any Crime, since he has a Regiment of convincing Motives to it that do not any
way concern the rest of Mankind. And as it is observed that there are particular
Cates ordained by Nature as peculiar to the Temperaments and Constitutions of
the particular Inhabitants of that Climate under which they are fixed, so he
satisfactorily embraces an Earthen Cup, as most agreeable to his Mold, and
never aims at those (to him) insipid, because gilded Fopperies, which terminate
in a Gaol: For if his Drink but a cold Moisture have,
No other charming Qualities does crave;
And with a rich Contentment can resign
To others all the Pleasures of the Vine.


But knowing that the enlarging on this Topic, would interfere with what has
been, as well as what is to be said, I shall here reduce the whole, and
conclude with Two Particulars.

As a Man, he knows what Nature, by the smalness of his Mouth and Throat, has
entrusted with him, that he should eat but little, and has therefore given a
correspondent place of Reception; and, as an Officer, he is advised by
Providence to devour less, considering the Scantness of his Fortunes, and
(which is more) the frequent Vicissitudes that inevitably attend them, an
Ordinary therefore of 8 d. is esteemed by him Extraordinary, and he ever
departs with the same Satisfaction, as if with Heliogabalus, he had
impoverished the Seas, dispeopled the Air, and wholly extirpated the very
Species of all Terrestrial Animals, to gratify a sensual and insatiate Palate,
and therefore very much prefers a Dinner with Camillus, or the Curii, before
that of a Bestial and Intemperate Sardanapalus -- He knows it would be
Ridiculous in him to be Nice, whose Prudence expects a daily Revolution of in
Stain quo: And he is sure to perform himself what he finds commanded in
Suetonius by Julius Caesar, who, to repress extravagant Diet, not only set a
Guard upon all Butchers Shops, etc. but sent his Officers to particular Houses;
to take away (though at their Tables) such Dishes as either escaped them, or
were esteemed superfluous; and that even from those who were qualified for the
greatest Affairs of State, and this he concludes obligatory from him who has
nothing certain but uncertainty. In short, his Table is not furnished much
unlike to what the Poet describes of Oberon's: A little Mushrome Table spread,
Whose Viand's but of Barley Bread;
Or Yellow Corn of Parkie Wheat,
With some small Sandy Gritts to eat.
His choice Bits with and in a Trice,
He makes a Feast less Great than Nice;
And willingly takes what is sent,
He crowns the Grace-Cup with Content.


The second Excess our Excise-Man's Prudence commands him to avoid, is that of
Apparel. And here I shall not play the Divine, by offering those convincing
Arguments and prevailing Motives, which engage all Mankind to a strict
observance, it being much above my Province: But shall only insinuate some few
Notions which peculiarly relate to him, to keep within his proper Bounds and
Limits, and which even necessitate him to a Compliance, by all the Obligations
imaginable. Our Excise-Man remembers it is no small Addition to the great
Character of Augustus Caesar, when it is recorded, That he never wore any thing
about him but what was Home-made, and of the spinning of his own Family; and he
cannot think it a Diminution of his Credit, that his Attire suits with his
Circumstances, which are plain and simple. He knows how ridiculous he must
prove, if, with the Bird of Paradise, his Feathers should be much more valuable
than the Carcass; or with the Cinamon-Tree, that the Bark only is esteemed, and
the Tree it self of little or no use. A tolerable Gayety in others, would be
altogether intolerable in him; and his only Ambition is to front a Winter, and
arrive to the Character of Decent. He knows that Credit is compared to the
Chastity of a M -- which, if once broke, is ever after lost; and, if not kept
up, is like a Palace, which for want of Repair falls to Ruin. And as it is his
chief design to secure it, so he knows there is no way for the exact
performance of it, but to cut his Coat according to his Cloth, by which he
knows he shall be disengaged from Dependence, and lying at the Mercy of the
Merciless; for Providence has given us Frize, and courser Garments, when our
necessitous Circumstances cannot, or may not aspire to Sattins, and all to
continue us in our pristine Liberty and Freedom: For besides the Scandal and
Universal Censures that must attend the dressing beyond one's Quality, the
dread of being responsible in a Gaol sufficiently deters him; A place which is
the Grave of the Living, the House of meager Looks, and destructive Smells; a
place that teaches Wisdom much too late; the Dunghill of the Law, where the
Ruins of the Gentry, and heaps of decayed Bankrupts inseparably meet. In fine,
it is the University of Anonimus.
poor Scholars, where only Three Things are studied, to Pray, Curse, and Write
Letters.

I.
BUT stay -- Apollo with your Sacred Nine,
If Power ye have descend,
And your Assistance lend;
If as ye boast ye are Divine,
Inspire with an uncommon Line
(Uncommon! Nay, your chiefest Excellence,
Your chiefest Eloquence)
That it might with the Subject equally transcend.
II.
HE that never Pegasus bestrid
May show his untaught Skill;
And he that never did
Ascend the Sacred and admired Hill,
May sometimes stumbling wittily rehearse
The Excellencies of the Universe;
For he that trots in Prose, may surely walk in Verse.
III.
HEnce then ye sweating Pleasures of the Plow
That only Labor know,
Who Cheveron their Mother Earth,
And by their Furrows cannot grieve,
Like Nero, they behold their place of Birth,
And thus exclude
Filial Gratitude,
As never to believe
That she must them again receive.
IV.
ADieu ye Toyling Sons of Trade,
That only the Cursed Plague of Business find,
No Cultivating of the Mind,
When all the Arts they want
Which yet we cannot grant,
Are Impositions on the Ignorant,
These Statute-Slaves are made.
V.
HEnce ye Alarms of the Vermilion God,
Farewell the Crimson Shield,
And the loud Actions of the Field,
That lay the greedy Dust with drops of Blood,
Whose Excellence abounds
In dreadful Sounds,
And Summum Bonum is in Wounds.
VI.
WHile with inventive Brain
We must advance to an Harmonious Strain,
And since the Subject does inspire,
We only the EXCISE admire,
Where Business, Pleasure, Wit agree,
As if the Three
Here met with their admired Monopoly.
CHAP. XIV.
THus have I hinted to you some few Remarks in relation to our Excise-Man's
Qualifications in the ARTS and MEN, I should now demonstrate his Excellency in
the knowledge of the LAWS; without which, he is ^^t^^fied he is like those who
are eternally m^f^^ed up in Blindness, and are wholly ignorant how to direct
their motion, since they know not when they err. He knows this to be the
certain and infallible Guide, and to be ignorant herein, implies an Ignorance
in all. The Law is like a second Sun, which enlightens his Road, and hereby
wholly creates a Progression, which is both safe and pleasant: This, is it that
procures an undaunted Boldness in the prosecution of his Business; and this is
it that secures him from the treacherous designs of the most malevolent; so
that he is ever found an Intellectus Agens, till he has plan'd those knotty
Points which seemed to be his only Rubs, and rests n^^ with the least
satisfaction, 'til he has made that Conquest which should not admit of another
Rally: But for the preretited Reasons shall at present wave Particulars, and
descend to demonstrate some few of those Excellencies, as well as Pleasures and
Advantages, that inevitably attend the Employment of our Excise-Man, and
consequently shall bring him from his Study, and trace him abroad in all his
ravishing Felicities.

The first-Advantage then, which I shall insist on, that follows our
Excise-Man's Profession, is, That it is not to be purchased with Money: They
have a Competency (at least) without paying for it, a considerable Income for
nothing expended, and a Fortune very much above that which can be termed Mean,
for seeking it. It has been ever held, That nothing can be done without that
glittering as well as bewitching Oar, Gold, which is said to be that General
Charm, which nothing can resist; that absolute Necessarium, that nothing can be
begun or perfected without it. In short, It is allowed that there cannot be any
living, without that Saint-seducing Metal, which we here find perfectly
contradictory; Our Excise-Man having a Complete Maintenance without Charge; a
Sufficiency without Dependence; and a pleasant Subsistence without a Bribe.

But secondly, It is confessed that Poverty dejects the most Ambitious
Thoughts, and he that before could with Ovid's Giants (...).
, have stormed even Heaven it self, appears now the most contemptible on Earth.
He that could charm the World with the most Rhetorical Flourishes imaginable,
and, with Amphion, captivate and intrance the Dullest of Souls, is now become
mute. And he that just now blushed at the thoughts of an Ill Action, fears not
(...).
now its Perpetration, with all its dreadful Concomitants. On the contrary, it
is acknowledged, That Abundance and Contentment are very rarely yoked, but Care
is ever their inseparable Page; for whoever is possessed with it, is either
perplexed with the Avarice of acquiring more, or the extravagant trouble of
securing that already in their possession, so that we find a Mean the most
estimable; for Extremes have violent Ends, and in their greatest Glory are
destroyed, since like Fire and Powder, they are no sooner met but are consumed:
And as the most stately Hills produce but little, and are parched by the too
near vicinity of Phabus's scorching Rays, so must we own, that those Valleys
are but barren, whose distance from his reviving heat we find to be
extraordinary; so that they are as sick that surfeit with too much, as they
that starve with nothing; and consequently we may conclude, That as the East
and West upon the Globe are divided only by a Mathematical Point, so Happiness
and Misery with all Extremes are still contiguous, a Mean was ever held the
safest: And he was no Fool, that wished his Fate had confined him between an
High-Constable, and a Justice of Peace, that he might enjoy a perfect
Mediocrity; for the Rich are exposed to the Envy, and the Poor to the Contempt
of all. This is our Excise-Man's Felicity, who having neither Poverty or
Riches, cannot be dejected by the former, nor puffed up with the latter. This
is our Excise-Man's happiness, who being possessed of a true Mean, is above the
Plague that Penury attends, and below the gilded Miseries of Grandeur, who
having the desired Competency, is not troubled with the Afflictions of the
first, nor afflicted with the Troubles of the last.

This then being that state of Life which has been ever coveted by all the
thinking part of Mankind, we cannot deny but our Excise-Man fully enjoys: And
though his Fifty is not Five hundred, yet he is satisfied the difference is but
a Cipher, which he reckons of no value, especially since it exhibits not (that
which every one seems desirous of) Contentment, upon which Consideration he
has a great regard to and value for his Employment, and consequently does
wholly acquiesce in the Opinion of Horace, Lib. 2. Ode 10.

Wise they, that with a cautious Fear
Not always through the Ocean steer;
Nor, whilst they think the Winds will roar,
Do thrust too near the Rocky Shore:
To those that choose the Golden Mean,
The Waves are smooth, the Skies serene.
They want the Baseness of the Poors retreat,
And also the envied Houses of the Great.
CHAP. XV.
I Proceed to the Third Advantage that attends him, which is Travel; the
Excellency of which, and the great Encomiums on it, may be sufficiently seen in
almost innumerable other Books: For there is scarce any of our Voyagers, or
Foreign Itinerants, that have exhibited any thing of Memorables to the Public,
but have largely dilated on it, and some of them with that bewitching Language,
and captivating Arguments, that they have directly charmed many Proselytes, who
finding its Reality confirmed by Ocular Demonstration, have asserted again the
like to others, who are thereby willingly engaged to the same Performances, and
so ad infinitum.

I shall not expatiate upon every particular Advantage that immediately attends
it, as the procuring and continuing Health, Reading of Men, and the remarkable
Observables they continually meet; Nor the several Pleasures that infallibly
attend them, they having no relation here, and besides too troublesome in the
Transcription: But shall only observe, they generally have made that of Foreign
the greatest, if not the whole Subject of their Panegyricks, which has been
ever with me the great Product of Admiration, to see a Spark, after many years
Travel, to the extravagant Expense both of Money and Time, to have learnt
nothing but to Swear handsomely, Wh -- genteely, and Drink completely; and, if
they had ever any thing, forgot that, and return much worse than they went, for
want of a prudent management of their Time, and improvement of it by a
sufficient Bottom, before their admired Voyage: For Traveling creates no Sense
we know,
Dunces come back as genuine as they go.


And ask them a particular Description of any Rarity they met with, their whole
Discourse tends to no more than what is thus expressed by another Poet, There
was a Mouse went up a Wall,
When she fell down she had a Fall.


Not that I would pretend to a Diminution of the Excellency of Foreign Travel,
but allow it an extraordinary Form in the qualification of a Complete
Gentleman, not abstracting Domestic; which ought to have the first share, at
least, in it, and to be the very Prologue and Foundation to all his future
Accomplishments: For let any pretend to what Education they please, in my
opinion he will show himself but ignorantly bred, that shall only be capable of
giving an account (which very few can that) of another, and know nothing of his
own Country: For although the unknowing part of the World may imagine, that
there are no extraordinary Curiosities but what may be seen abroad, yet if they
please to suspend their present thoughts, and alleviate somewhat of their
innate Prejudice and Partiality, and take a narrow Scrutiny and Trial, they
will find it inferior to none: Insula praedives, quae toto vix eget orb, etc.
A wealthy Island which no help desires,
Yet all the World Supply from her requires;
Able to glut King Solomon with Pleasures,
And furseit great Angustus with her Treasures.


And again: Anglia, Mons, Pons, Fons, Ecclesia, Foemina, Lana.
England is stored with Mountains, Bridges, Wool,
With Churches, Rivers, Women Beautiful.


Or, to express it by a more modern Prose Author, she is the Churches first
Daughter, having the first Christian King, and out of whose Bowels sprung the
first Christian Emperor, that little World, so self-sufficient, (...).
that she seems to thrust away from her all the World besides, as being a
perfect Substantive, that can stand by her self. Besides, it may be positively
affirmed, That there is not any pretended Advantage that accrues abroad, or any
Observable, but may be equaliz'd, if not excelled, at home; for is he covetous
of the Company of Learned Men, no Foreign Place can pretend to a Competition?
Is he desirous to see the Miracles of Nature, it cannot be excelled by any; Or
is he ambitious of viewing Noble Structures, Fields, Gardens, Fruits, etc. he
cannot sind them so absolutely reign in their excellency any where, so great as
in England.

Nature her self does here in Triumph ride,
And makes this Place the ground of all her Pride,
Whose various Flowers cheat the rasher Eye,
In taking them for curious Tapestry.
A si^ver Spring down from a Rock does fall,
That in a Draught would serve to water all
Upon the edges of a grassy Bank,
A Tuft of Trees grow circling in a Rank;
So fair, so fresh, so sweet, so green a Ground,
The piercing Eye of Heaven yet never found.
So sweet the Air, so moderate the Clime,
None sickly lives or dies before his Time.
Heaven sure has kept this spot of Earth uncurs't,
To show how all things were created first.
O fortunata and omnibus Terris beatior Britannia! Te omnibus Coeli ac soli
ditavit Natura, Tibi nihil inest quod vitae offendat, Tibi nihil deest quod
vita desideret, ita ut alter Orbis extra Orbem poni ad delicias humani generis
videaris. Oh happy and blessed Britain! above all other Countries in the World,
Nature has enriched thee with all the Blessings of Heaven and Earth; nothing
in thee is hurtful to Mankind, nothing wanting in thee that is desirable:
inasmuch that thou seem another World plated besides, or without the great
one, merely for the delight and pleasure of Mankind. Thus also the Poet:
Quicquid amat luxus, quicquid desiderat usus,
Ex Te proveniunt vel aliunde Tibi.


Thus having given some small Hints of the great Advantages that attend the
knowing of our own Country, I shall as briefly acquaint you who is the only
competent Judge of it, and that excels any in this extraordinary Qualification;
for there is no Rarity, as Situation, Division, Honorable Titles, Historical
Remarks, or Character of any County in general, or Town in particular, but our
Excise-Man perfectly enjoys, and can give an immediate satisfaction and account
of; and that this cannot be denied, shall be proved by the following Instance,
among many others, that might have been as properly incerted.

CHAP. XVI. Gloucestershire
DIVISION.
IT is divided into Thirty Hundreds, and therein Twenty six Marke-Towns, Two
hundred and eight Parish-Churches, and in the Diocese of Gloucester.

PARLIAMENT MEN.
It elects Eight Members; for the County Two; for the City of Gloucesttr Two;
Tewksbury Two; Cirencester Two.

HONORABLE TITLES.
This City gave the Title to a Duke, the youngest Son of King Charles I. but he
expiring in the Year 1662. it now gives that Title to the eldest Son of George
Prince of Denmark; and Berkley Castle, gives the Title of Earl to George Lord
Berkley.

SCITVATION.
This County has Worcester and Warwickshires on the North, Oxford and
Wiltshire on the East, Somersetshire on the South, Herefordishre with the River
Wye on the West, the River Seaverne running through it.

Natural and Artificial Rarities.
(1.) There is not any exceeds the River Seaterne for Breadth of Channel,
Swiftness of Stream, or Multiplicity of Fish. There is in it (says M^^m^bury) a
daily Rage and Fury of the Waters, raising up the Sands, winding and driving
them into Heaps, and sometimes overflowing its Banks, covering the bordering
Grounds, though immediately retiring. Unhappy is the Vessel it takes full upon
the side, but the Watermen hearing it, they prepare themselves to meet it, by
which they cut the Waves, and avoid the danger. This encounter of the Salt and
Fresh Water is called the Higre or Eager, for the keenness and fie^^eness
thereof, which is occasioned (says Bruannia Baconica) by the several Tides,
which immediately meeting, force it up with that Extremity, that it very
usually swims (as I may call it) over the Water Six Foot, which comes in at
Gloucester all at once, of which hear an old Poet: -- Until they be embraced
In Seavern's Sovereign Arms, with those tumultuous Waves
Shut up in narrower Bounds the Higre wildly raves,
And frights the straggling Flocks, the neighboring Shoars to fly
Afar as from the Main it comes with hideous cry.
And on the angry Front the curled Foam does bring
The Billows against the Banks which fiercely it does fling.
Throws up the siimy Oar, and makes the scaly Brood
Leap madding to the Land, affrighted from the Flood.
Or'eturns the toiling Barge whose Steersman does not launch,
And thrusts the surrowing Beak into her dreadful Paunch.


(2.) The Cathedral Church of Gloucester is a beautiful Building, and consist;
of a continued Window-work, wherein is the famous Whispering-place, thus
described: If you speak here against a Wall softly, another shall hear you
voice (30 or 40 Feet) better than he that is near you: I suppose (says Sir
Francis Bacon) there is some Vault, or Hollow, or Isle behind the Wall, and
some passage to it, toward the further end of that Wall, against which you
speak; so as the voice of him that speaks, slideth along the Wall, and then
enters at some passage, and communicates with the Air of the hollow, for it
is somewhat preserved by the plain Wall, but that is too weak to give an
Audible Sound, till it has communicated with the Back Air.

HISTORICAL REMARKS.
In this Church lies Robert Duke of Normandy, eldest Son to William the
Conqueror, in a painted wooden Tomb, in the midst of the Quire, whose Eyes were
burnt out in Cardiffo Castle in Glamorganshire (where he was kept Prisoner 26
years) by Brass Basins. And here also the unhappy Ring Edward II. lies buried,
under a Monument of Alablaster, who, in the 20th year of his Reign, was deposed
by Parliament.

This County (says Dr. Fuller) did breed a Plaintiff and Defendant Worthies,
page 2.
, which betwixt them (with many Altercations) traversed the longest Suit I ever
read of in England; for a Su t was commenced between the Heirs of Sir Thomas
Talbot, Viscount Lisle, against the Heirs of the Lord Berkley, about certain
Lands in the County; the Suit began in the end of the Reign of Edward IV. and
was depending until King Jame the First's time, when it was compounded after
the expiration of One hundred and forty Years.

He finds that in the 17th Year of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, the 24th of
February, at Tewksbury in this County, a miraculous thing happened after a
Flood: In an Afternoon there came down the River Avon a great number of Flies
and Beetles, such as in the Summer Evenings use to strike Men on the face, a
Foot thick on the Water, so that in credible Men's Judgments, there were within
a pair of Butts length, about One hundred Quarters of those Flies; the Milis
were quite damm'd up with them for the space of four days; they were cleans'd,
by digging them out with Shovels: from whence they came is yet unknown, but the
day was cold, and an hard Frost.

These are some few of the many Observables our Excise-Man makes in his
pleasing Travels, and were it not for enlarging these Papers beyond their
intended Limits, I could from him exhibit the particular Description,
Government, Customs, Natural, as well as Artificial Rarities, of every
particular Village; and therefore shall only add, that of consequence he must
be the most competent Judge of making a Geographical Description of every Road,
that instead of Miles, can tell you the very Steps; and the most exact
Historiographer when nothing worthy of Remark can miss his Observation.

He is -- but Time denies to tell thee what,
Sum all Perfections up, and he is that.
CHAP. XVII.
HAving somewhat largely insisted on the Excellency of our Excise-Man in
relation to Domestic Travel, and his exact Knowledge of every particular Place
in his own Country, it may not be amiss to subjoin a few Lines of that Vtile
dulci, those Pleasures as well as Profits (which are supposed to be the Epitome
of all humane Wishes) that indubitably attend him as a natural Consequent of
the Premises.

No sooner is our Excise-Man possessed with all things that can properly make
him so, and Aurora's ruddy Cheeks produce the Childbirth of a day, but he
anticipates Sols more resplendent Rays, by suing out a Writ of Divorce against
the bewitching Charms of Death-resembling Morpheus, and is immediately caressed
with all the Pleasures of a Country Life -- No War disturbs his rest with
fierce Alarms,
No angry Seas offend,
He shuns the Law, and those ambitious Charms
Which great Men do attend. --


This is the Life with which the World began, and has been ever held in an
extraordinary Veneration; and has also been particularly observed to be more
natural and familiar with Us, than with any other whatsoever: And were it
possible to give it is prower Character, we ought to look on Calen and
Hypoorates impertinent, and their A^^o^ts^^ wholly unnecessary; Schola Salerni
might have burned their gingling Disticks, since here we find them altogether
useless: And if by chance a Symptom should appear, every Tree, Field or Hedge
produces a Panpharmacon, that Remedium in omnes Morbos, which the more Simple
Druggists never can. Nay, it is Demonstration, that it is so in the opinion of
the general part of Mankind, in regard that let their Avocations be ever so
urgent, their Circumstances ever so ordinary, yet they will cert^^^^^ attempt a
short enjoyment of it, as their proper Asylum for renewing that health (which
almost was arrived unto a desperation) by a much more lively Air.

Justice here left her last Impression when
She fled from the defiled Abodes of Men.
Ovid Metam. And as this Life extremely contributes toward that inestimable
Gem, Health; so its excellency would further appear, if we had leisure to
enlarge upon the several Topics, as their living in those unenvied Shades, and
the only retirement from the crowd and noise of thronged Towns and Cities,
(where nothing else is found but that which must be called confused) but I
cannot omit the saying something of the Pleasures our Excise-Man daily meets
with, in the fruition of such an happy Life.

It Is here (and only here) he meets those verdant shades that suffer (if not
force) him to think of himself, where he not only misses every thing that can
pretend to create an intermission of Thought without his License, but even
finds incomparable Inducements and Assistants toward its performance: The
sight of those pleasing Walks, the regularity of those ambitious Trees that
screen us from the Sun's most violent and scorching stays, and (with Ovid's
Giants) not only possess the Earth, but make a hold Attempt at Heaven.

These charming Woods exiling Phoebus Rays,
Where no rude Eawn, or wanton Sylvan plays;
No Beast makes here his Den, no Wind can blow
With all its force to hurt an hallowed Bough.
Together with the hearing the bewitching, though natural Harmony of those
flying Choristers of the Wood; I say, he that his Stars has (with our
Excise-Man's) been so propitious to, as to enjoy these Felicities of our
Earthly Paradise, and cannot glut his Five Senses, can never be allowed One,
but a place in the lowest Form with the Vnthinking Mob; but our Excise-Man even
hugs himself into an improvement of those Qualifications he had so happily
before.

But as the too long enjoyment of the most charming Varieties palls our
Appetite, which will quickly create our mean Opinion of them without a small
Divorce; so our Officer, if he had the greatest inclinations to a longer
possession of them to occasion this Surfeit, yet his Business even necessitates
him to a more unconfined fruition of larger Varieties.

He cannot advance himself, but he is instantly met with that general Gaol
Delivery of all the vigorous Seeds and Flowers, lately in custody of the
pinching Frost; the sight of whose bewitching hue, infallibly creates a
Ravishment, a much too mean a word for such Enchantments; these are also
attended with embroidered Fields and Meadows, paved with the beauteous Violet
and Primrose, wherein he quickly views poor Strephon descant on the great
Perfections of his too cruel Phillis.

(I.)
TELL me ye Heathen Deities above,
Can there be greater than the God of Love?
And oh! Commanding Cupid speak,
Is there any that you prize,
Like that in Celia's Eyes?
Within whose Bosom lies the Milky Way,
And in whose Smiles the Sunshine of the Day.
(2.)
Most Glorious Stamp of Humane Race,
We yet can see
Not one of them so Great as Thee;
All Hail then mighty Princess: Now
At the Altars of your Eyes,
I bleed a Sacrifice,
And were the Indies mine, I would submit
Quickly to lay its Treasures at your Feet.
(3.)
See how the Ruby Roses,
See how they upon your Cheek
A fresh Ingrafture seek;
See, see, how Gay they, Celia, look,
And all things Serene appear,
Only because you're here,
And though bright Sol be present, I must say
You are the Light and Splendour of the Day.
It Is here only he may perceive Bounteous Ceres in all her State and Glory, and
Sail with Pleasure in a prodigious Sea of Corn, without the hazard of drowning,
till its quality meets with a total Alteration. Here only we enjoy that Beatus
Ille which Horace so much doted on, and all admire but those that never had it:
Those crystal Fountains, stately Hills, embroidered Vales, and those muttering
as well as struggling Rivulets, are certainly able to create a Total Eclipse
upon the Dullest of Souls, and to entrance the meanest of Faculties into an
unaccustomed Admiration: Whose Streams on purling Pebbles Murinure keep,
Which may invite and summon Gentle Sleep;
Where Waves call Waves, and glide along in Ranks,
And prattle to the Water-edging Banks,
And gives a Gentle Kiss to every Sedge
She overtaketh in her Pilgrimage.


These the Bustling Town would fain pretend to also by their Gardens and
Rivers, which is no more than Aping the Country by a forced Hypochrisy; which
makes no small Addition to the excellency of our Rural Enjoyments, and serves
no more than a Foyl, to make a greater Illustration of her Beauty.

We might further insist on the many other Pleasures that attend a Country
Life, as Hunting, Hawking, etc. but these being wholly out of the way of our
Excise-Man, (to whom only we confine our Discourse) we shall wave it here,
though cannot avoid the description our Poet gives of that part of it, which
infallibly accompanies him.

-- The Country we behold
Decked in her Parl'ment Robes, and richest Mold
A Native Mint shines in each Marygold.
Behold the Earth made Paradise! Below
A Constellation does of Roses grow;
Whole Clouds of Violets wave, whose annual Spice
Offers an Everlasting Sacrifice:
Mantles of Pinks (like Rainbows) do display
Their Beams, and Lillies make a Milky-way.
See how th adopted Boughs are thatch't, whose Main
By Phoebus Curling Irons are crisp'd again:
And by the Cutwork which from thence it made,
Checquers the Ground thr^ Twilight of a Shade.
CHAP. XVIII.
AND as the Pleasures that attend this bewitching Life, are far above the mean
Description of a Pen that is not capable of admiring enough, much less the
describing; so the Profit, that is the infallible Result, ought at least to be
somewhat regarded, and a little insisted on.

Here is a Theme that requires a much more acurate Pen than mine, which as it
never pretended, so owns it self wholly incapable, even so much as insinuating
those Pleasures and Advantages that here daily court and follow him, but upon
the same account one speaks of, upon his attempt of describing that, which
would not (like our present Subject) admit of it.

Staffs cannot go, and yet enable him
That wants Assistance to his feeble Limb;
Tho Whetstones cannot cut at all, they may
Do service, and make Knives as sharp as they
Themselves are blunt; And they who cannot Ring,
By Jangling may Toll better Ringers in.
I shall therefore only briefly subdivide the Profit that attends him into two
Particulars, viz. First, That of the Person, in respect of Pecuniary
Advantages: And secondly, That of the Mind, respecting the exercising it in the
Art of Contemplation and Reflection, in both which you will find he exceeds the
rest of Mankind.

First, Our Excise-Man is the only Person that can possibly enjoy these
Pleasures without Expense; for what others purchase at a dear Rate, he receives
with Interest; for whereas they are necessitated to pay for their Pleasures, he
is paid for them: And whereas the generality of Mankind, who have an
extravagant fruition of them, are undone in their possession, you will
certainly find him made; so that he thrives, when others decay; he is happy,
when others are miserable; and Rich, where others receive a Beggary: So that he
only can be properly said to enjoy them without an Interruption, or grating
Dissatisfaction; or that which is much more intolerable, the being accountable
for them in a Goal

Secondly, The extraordinary Advantages he receives by Contemplation and
Reflection, are not to be forgotten; the Profits of which need not here be
enlarged on, since a Reverend and Learned R. D. Occasional Reflections.
Author has exactly performed it: so I shall only say here, that he improves
every Object, for he well knows that as Natura nihil ficit frustra, in relation
to their inward qualities for the good of Mankind, so he also considers, that
the least of them administers an improvement of the outward; for the most
minute Object affords naturally such Reflections, as are also extraordinary
advantageous to the improving the inward Faoulties of the Mind; He considers
how scandalous, as well as mean it is, to contradict the very Intention of his
Creation, which he undoubtedly does, that does not still persist in Knowledge,
and daily advance those Qualifications Providence has been so favorable as to
endow him with; for he that does not increase them, and passes his Life without
improving them. ought certainly to have the rest of his Life taken from him.
The World (says Dr. Brown) was made to be inhabited by Beasts, but studied and
contemplated by Man: it is the Debt of our Reason we owe to GOD: and the Homage
we ought to pay for not being Beasts, without this, the World is still as
though it had not been, or as it was before the Sixth Day, whereas yet there
was not a Creature that could conceive, or say there was a World. The Wisdom of
GOD receives small Honor from those Vulgar Heads that rudely stare about, and
with a gross Rusticity admire his Works; those highly magnify Him, whose
judicious enquiry into his Acts, and deliberate research into it is Creatures,
return the Duty of a devout and learned Admiration: For the bare sense of
Sight, makes no distinction between Us, and the irrational Brute; there being
no outward Object, but what is as visible to those (if not more) than to the
Rational; and it is the improving the Facul^i^^ of the Soul, that ought to give
us the discriminating Character or Men, which is ho^rly performed, and that (as
any considerate Man will find upon trial) from the most slight and meanest
occasions, and opportunities imaginable.

Among the innumerable Reflections on these outward Objects, which he da^ly
meets with, I shall ^^iefly in sinuate a few, that you may guess at the rest;
not (...), that you may conclude his Thoughts never to be idle, or the
excellency of his Jedgme^t (...) that is (...) capable methodically to digest
them; but that he does it too, and draws such natural Inferences and
Conclusions from this Art of Occasional Reflection, which he infallibly finds
both profitable and pleasure.

He sees not a Swallow, but it ^^ts him in mind of ungratesul Persons, who
(like that unacknowledging Birth) are of no use to us, but leave us, when they
have served their own turn.

He views not the Tulip, or Marygold, but he immediately has displayed a
Flatterer in his thoughts; for as it is the natural quality of those Flowers to
open and shut with the San, so it is with him, to follow its motions, and never
attend it but when shining prosperously.

A Mole he beholds not, without having a particular Eye to the Avaritious;
neither can he look on the Circle in a Stream, that never cease to enlarge it
self, without a Reflection on the same effects of Ambition.

He meets not the dispatching Post on his way, but he presently considers that
his Life hastens with an equal (if not greater) Expedition, and therefore
commands an Improvement of it: Neither does he look on a Glowworm, but he
presently shapes in his Imagination a true Idea of the most formal Hypotrite,
whom he concludes to appear with the same deluding Splendour.

These are some few of the many Inferences he continually draws from those
outward Objects that inevitably attend him, which we might enlarge on even to a
Volume.

But stay -- His Worth exceeds our Po^t's store,
I cannot commend 'till he deserves no more
It far transcends all our Magnetic Praise,
Who writes him well may well deserve the Bays.
CHAP. XIX.
BUT lest there should be any thing that is really charming in it self, or that
which can be properly said to be capable of yielding any Pleasure below, which
our Excise-Man does not enjoy in a very great degree; or least the rough and
tedious ways, and solitary course of living, should be said to extenuate the
Pleasures he meets with in a Rural Life; or that this satisfaction should be
somewhat palled by a continued enjoyment of them, and consequently that there
should be any variety the Fates allow of, as agreeable to the active
Inclinations of rational Mortals, that should not infallibly attend their
Favorite, we shall lead him from his Country, to his ambulatory Enjoyments of
the City.

Our Excise-Man in his late Privacy cannot lie long conceald; for what by his
obliging Behavior, and extraordinary Qualifications, hourly demonstrated in
these his Country Retirements, with a due observation of those Obligations he
lay under, by an exact performance. of the Trust reposed in him, he is taken
notice of above, and admired below, which produces an immediate Resolution of
his being no longer hid in Woods and Fields, but to be a more public Pattern
(I must not say less, and cannot more) for the rest of Mankind.

And here I might particularize the several Pleasures and Advantages that
inevitably attend him in it, as improving the Understanding by the Company of
^earned Men, etc. And though as (...) just now insta^e'd, the Advantages of
Contemptation: and Reading (which follow} a Country Life) are extraordinary,
yet this is the certain place for exercising it; the ^^st being but the
Theorick, and this the Practick Part: for Conversation (which is chiefly found
in a City Life) exhibits growth and perfection to that Understanding which was
but dung'd} in the Country. It might be further affirmed, That here only is
sound that (...) of Language, which qualifies a Person for the greatest of
Employments and Addressee, and that (as some are so unkind to ju^^^fy) they
live in the Country not only Unknown, but Unknowing too: Action (as I said
before) being the chiefest part of Knowledge, and that is no where to be
demonstrated more that in the City; which he will also find to be the chiefest,
if not the only place where a Porson can infullildy meet Preferment and Honor
(...) for the obscurity of a Rural Life, produces a very great ^resumption of a
Neaples Vltra, if happily he can keep himself there^ And it is most certain that
there are many extraordinary Qualifications lie ^usting and dormant in the
Country, which might find (as well as give) great Advantages to the Government
they live under, if they embraced a more ^ublick Character by a city Life.

But my natural Humor and Inclination command me net to proceed, which admires
only a Retirement, and abominates all things that look like Confusion; and
least the Reciting should wheedle me into another extravagant Ecstasy and
Admiration, I shall for bear enlarging any more in^t, and give it leave only to
insinuate, That although those advantageous Pleasures may merit and intrance
our Affection, yet Dr. Burnet's Travels. p. 188.
when one arises from a great Meal, no Delicacies, now much soever they may
tempt him at another time, can provoke his appetite; so freely confess, that
the late sight and remembrance of Rural Enjoyments, have so whetted my Defites,
that I cannot digest the admiring or describing any other, without Regret and
Surfeit. And indeed they have been so extravagantly intrancing, that though the
Diversions the City affords, might at some other time be tolerably captivating
in my opinion, yet upon this Hint, I cannot allow them the least room or
entertainment; which Suggestion obliges me to an Apology, and to atone for the
Injury done my Inclinations, but especially to the Country, by contradicting
the first, and by offering so much to the prejudice of the last; for the
intolerable Presumption that there should be any Life that could be admitted in
Competition with it: And supposing no greater Satisfaction can be given her,
(the former having been mentally performed) I shall conclude with her
Excellency in the words of the Poet: Nature does only here in Triumph vide,
And makes this place the ground of all her Pride,
Where every Tree a fruitful Issue hears
Of each Variety that Mortals chears:
And all the Shrubs with sparkling Spangles show
Like Morning Sunshine tinsilling the Dew;
Here in green Meadows sits Eternal May,
Pursling the Margents with perpetual Day;
And that so double-guil'd, as that no Night
Can ever Rust th^enamel of the Light;
The sportive Shepherds of rich Flocks rehearse,
And to their pleasant Pipes chant Rural Verse,
Seeking his angry Godhead to appease,
Whom only wealthy Flocks and Herds can please:
Here checkered Flowers in the Meadows spring,
And here the Birds their untaught Notes do sing
With Glory here, Flora the Earth arrays
With Violets she embroiders all the Ways.


CHAP. XX.
I Descend to the next Particular intended to be mentioned in relation to the
Excellency of our Excise-Man's Office, which is, that it even necessitates him,
or (if you will have it so) commands him to be diligent, and consequently he is
absolutely delivered from (that Devil's Cushion, and Banc of Mankind) Idleness,
whether he will or no; for though Necessity makes the Old Wife Trot, it will
make him Gallop for the exact performance of that Duty he is so well rewarded
for, by lying under a^ obligation of being good; for while our imag^^ations are
exercised by a continual Var^^, of differing Objects, they are entertained with
that which is at least very near it, if not excellent: so that this banishment
of Idleness, delivers them from all the beginnings, as well as steps and
degrees, of that which may be termed bad; for it is generally observed, that
there is often but very little space of time between doing of nothing, and
doing of ill.

And here I shall not imp^rtinently enlarge, by the robbing of Poet; of
Sentences, for the exposing of this Vice, as that of Pho^ylides: (...)
Of all Mankind it is the Belief,
That every I dle Man's a Thief.


Or that of Hesiod: (...).
-- 'Twas ever sed,
The Idle Man deserves no Bread.}


With many others that might be easily instand'd; but shall only here observe,
that it was held so notoriously scandalous by the Ancients, that we find in
Justin Lib 32.
, that the Dacians, as an eternal Stamp of Infamy, were necessitated by a Law
of Oler their King, to expiate their Sloth, by laying their Feet where they
should rest their Heads; and to perform those Offices and Services to their
Wives, which their Wives were accustomed to do to them. He knows that Erasmus
in his Adages, calls a Slothful Man, Mulieris Podex: What a shame then is it to
be worse than Animal Irrationale! Nihil est sordidius (says Antoninus Pius)
nihil cruddius quam si Rempublicam ii arrodunt, qui nshil in eam suo labor
conserunt.

Again, Charity has been ever esteemed the Principal of Virtues, both by
Ethnicks and Theologists; and though the Church of Rome, th^o the extremity of
her Blindness, pretend; to engross that Heaven-engaging Virtue to her self, yet
if her Inducements, by Merit, be considered, our Excise-Man's and Hers, will
not any way admit of a Competition, since we find his Principles are founded on
the true Notion and Ends of Charity, by his spontancous Contributions: So that
although he has not, with Her, erected Colleges, and other Pompous Structures,
whose Grandeur outvies the most eminent Pieces of Architecture in the Universe;
yet his Asylum for the Afflicted, his Competency for the Distressed, and his
Relief for the Aged, who any way deserved it in their Vigor, are to all
conspicuous, and will reinain as Trophies to their Honor: Whilst the Celestial
Orbs in Order roll,
And turn their Flames about the steadfast Pole.


But lastly, If we consider Man in his Complex, in his best and worst Sense,
and take him in his Youth or Age, he will not merit Estimation; for it matters
not whether the Eyes of Reason were never opened, or whether they have been and
are closed, since they cannot see; and it is evident that is of no validity, if
the Chin be white, whether it be with, or without Hair; since the Madness and
Folly of 16, and the Dotage and Distempers of 60 are equivalent. Man we own to
be that rational Commander of all Terrestrials, that Universal Monarch, who
almost annihilates those Individuals with a Glance, who therefore cringe, and
most spontaneously obey; Man is not denid to be that Spark of Heaven, that
mortal Angel, that commands a Dread upon appearance, yet must it be allowed
that this only is a Dept to him that boldly justifies himself to be so, and
therefore, though he is a glo^ious Qrb, yet lies he under an Eclipse in Youth
and Age, in which he ever must conceal his Glory.

If then Mankind contains the Excellencies of the whole Universe in Epitome, it
must consequently exhibit an amazing Excellency to the Excise, that receives
only the most excellent part of Him, by rejecting the Impertinencies of Nonage,
as useless Animals fit only for the Cradle, by admitting none but the robust
and sensible, and by excluding that weak and decrepid Clas, who only claim the
privilege of being troublesome.

But had I Virgil's Verse, or Tully's Tongue,
Or raping Numbers like the Thracian's Song,
I have a Theme would make the Rocks to dance,
And surly Beasts that through the Deserts prance,
Hie from their Caves, and every gloomy Den,
To wonder at the Excellence of Men.
CHAP. XXI.
THus have you had a brief and lame Account of the Excellencies of our
Excise-Man in the knowledge of the Arts, Men and Laws; together with the many
Advantages, as well as Pleasures, that naturally result from that Employment,
and consequently are inseparable Attendants on Him; I must now crave leave to
subjoin some sew Queries, and shall make no other Apology, then

-- Non seri^ semper.

Quest. 1. Whether he ought not to be supposed a great Scholar, since he is
continually poring on his Book? Quest. 2. Whether there is not some Assinity
between him and Diogenes, since they equally affect the Tub? Quest. 3. Whether
he understands not Art Notoria, since he brings all things to a Circle? Quest.
4. Whether he is not a great Admirer of the Old Philosophy, since he utterly
abominates a Vacuum? Quest. 5. Whether he must not be a very grave Person, that
affects Solidity? Quest. 6. Whether he must not be a prosound Man, that takes
the depth of every thing? Quest. 7. Whether he must not be extremely happy,
that so well knows that which is called Content? Quest. 8. Whether our
Excise-Man is not an extraordinary honest Man, since he does all things upon
the Square? Quest. 9. Whether he can be said to be extravagant, that ever walks
within Compass? Quest. 10. Whether he ought not to be thought an excellent
Astronomer, since he so often consults the Stars? Quest. 11. Whether he can
Err, that ever walks by Rule? Quest. 12. Whether he ought not to be reckoned
well-skill'd in Geography, that instead of Miles, can tell you the very Steps?
Quest. 13. Whether if in Luto there is Pluto, he ought not to be supposed very
Rich, since he is continually searching the bottom of it? Quest. 14. Whether he
is not excellently skilled in Music, since he so well understands the Base?
Quest. 15. Whether he can do any thing amiss, since he does all things by
Warrant? Quest. 16. Whether he affects not the Clergy, since he infallibly
allows a Tenth? Quest. 17. Whether he is not a good Philosopher, since he must
be an allowed Peripatetick? Quest. 18. Whether he can be banished, that is
never at home? Quest. 19. Whether he can want, that has Victuall^rs enough?
Quest. 20. Whether he can be thought Idle, that is always in Motion? Quest. 21.
Whether he can be an ordinary Man, that is a Man of Figure? Quest. 22. Whether
he ought not to be highly esteem^d, since he is a Man of great Account? Quest.
23. Whether he is not a qualified Poet, that is so excellently versed in
Measures? Quest. 24. Whether if a Mean be the most desirable in all our
Actions, he is not extremely qualified, that is conversant therein continually?
Thus in jocose and serious Terms we find
The Excise-Man far transcends all human kind;
For he that every charming Science knows,
Can never the triumphant Garland lose.
CHAP. XXII.
I Have now finished my intended Essay on the Excellency of our Excise-Man, and
although it be far short of what might have been done in more time, and by a
better Pen, and consequently an Apology might be here expected both by himself,
as well as the Reader, (the former for performing it no better, and the latter
for attempting it a^ all;) yet I shall only tell the first, that although my time
would not suffer me to discover more, nor my Ability all, yet I have delivered
some of his Perfections; which if true, then I must inform the last, that it
was a Law among the Parthians, that whenever a Notorious Malefactor was brought
on the Stage, a severe Scrutiny was made into the Actions of his whole Life;
and if, upon the total, the number of his good Deeds exceeded those of his ill,
he was ipso facto quitted: If therefore this demands a Pardon, I shall not
endeavor an additional Trial of the Reader's Patience, but only subjoin some
few Lines, relating to our Excise-Man's Demeanor under the greatest of his
Afflictions, I mean when his Unhappiness has arrived to that Extremity, as the
receiving his Discharge, and that under a double Notion, viz. when he is.

1. Guilty. 2. Innocent.

In relation to the first I shall only say, that he is extremely sersible of
his Miscarriages, and his innate M^desty is so extravagantly prevalent, that he
immediately chalks out a new (tho honest) way of subsisting, not having the
Brow to make his appearance for, and consequently dares not attempt, a
re-establishment.

But secondly, Our Excise-Man (as is prerecited) boasts of an Accomplishment,
which he ever highly esteems, and is this, That no Misfortune can be a
Sorprize: He knows that Tottering Goddess (who glories chiesly in her
Fickleness) delights in nothing but Vicisatudes; he has read the Poets, who
assure him, that She is the Rectress of all our Actions, and Arbitress of all
sublunary Affairs, and is therefore in a continual preparation for Her Motion;
for since Diadems themselves find no duration, but are frequently attended with
variety of Mutations, he cannot expect an Exemption; for our Life is compared
to a Game at Dice, where we ought to throw for what is most commodious for us,
but to be content with our Casts, let them be never so unfortunate; we cannot
make what Chances we please turn up, if we play fair, this lies out of out
power: that which is within it, is to accept patiently what Providence shall
alot us, and so to adjust things in their proper places, that what is our own,
may be di^posed of to the best advantage; and what has happened against our
Will, may never give occasion of offense to us: Nay, he is satisfied it
frequently proves most advantageous to him; for although Innocence may be
attacqu'd, yet can it never be vanquish^d. He knows the Cypres the more weight
is imposed on it, the more it grows, and flourishes by being depress'd^ and the
fragrant Camomile retitlers a great increase of her bewitching Odors, by being
trod and trampled on. Examples amongst the Ancients he finds to be numerous:
Thus the banishmort of Diogenes was the occasion of his being a Philosopher;
and when Zeno heard that the only Ship he had left, was sunk by an unmerciful
Tempest, with all the rich Cargo that was in her, he brake out into this
Exclamation, Fortune! I applaud thy Comrivance, who by this means have reduced
me to a Threadbare Cloak, and to walk in the Piazza of the Stoics. He knows
our Bodies are compounded of those Materials which command a daily Revolution,
and we should never know the real and intrinsic value of that first and
choicest of Blessings, Light, did it not sometimes meet with a Cessation, and
continually attended with a subsequent Darkness. If these Alterations then are
daily represented to us, they are therefore become familiar, and consequently
cannot admit of a Surprise but to the Vulgar, who are not qualified with any
Perception but what is instantly ocular: How then can it be rational to admire,
if that melts, whose Nature is Liquefaction? if that burns, which is
combustible? if watery Humidities conglaciate? if the determination of
Quicksilver is Fixation? that of Milk, Coagulation? and that of Oil, or all
unctuous Bodies, Incrassation? And so by a parity of Reason, if that perishes,
whose Law of Constitution was to be made, that it might be attended with
Contingencies; nothing therefore can seize him that can contradict his
expectations, nay, they are never frustrated but when they meet him not.
Theseus in Euripides seems to be excellently well prepared for Events: This
wholesome Precept from the Wise I learn,
To think of Misery without Concern:
My meditating Thoughts are always spent
Either on Death, or else on Banishment.
Foresight of Evils does employ my Mind,
That me without Defense they may not find;
And tho in Ambuscade the mischief lies,
Kill me it may, but shall me not surprise.


To prosecute this a little farther: It Is plain, Industrious Nature instructs
us, and inculcates this fixed and steady preparation, and that from the most
minute Objects imaginable; the very Trees, Plants and Vegetables evidently
demonstrate this wheeling Instability; since its visible that not any of their
Leafs remain, but in Autumn lose their Verdure, and are swept away by every
Blast of Boreas: Thus their Sap retires, which immediately commands a deadness,
and dejected nakedness in the most glorious of their Limbs; which by the
Approach and sweet Caresses of the Spring, are attended with all their pristine
life and splendour: And we yearly see the embroidered Summer, that exhibits
those bewitching Pleasures which appear so grateful to Humane Race, to be
continually succeeded by the Snowy Peruque, and the most dismal Concomitants of
a melancholy and barren Winter.

These Accidents then being inevitable and universal, our Excise-Man's
Resolutions are irrevocably sedate and ready; and consequently to him they
never can prove unexpected or novel: He is extremely sensible of the mutability
of all Terrestrials, and joins with Euripides, when he tells us, From small
Beginnings our Misfortunes grow,
And little Rubs our Feet do overthrow;
A Smile is quickly changed into a Frown,
Low things go up, and lofty things go down.


The natural Consequent of the Premises our Excise-Man knows to be, that they
shall not therefore in the least deject him, since conscious thoughts can never
attack him, nor possesses he a tainted Breast: Innocence is the noblest Remedy,
and the greatest comfort in, and infallible Cure of our innumerable
Afflictions; and though his Fortunes may (nay must) be checkered, yet his Life
and Actions are all white and innocent, which therefore create a boldness not
any way to be extenuated. He fronts the Perfecution with an undaunted and
unalterable Brow, and smiles at the severest Censures of the Malevolent; this
is it that buoys him up in the most impetuous Tempest, and makes the Castle of
his Breast to be ever inexpugnable: He knows these Changes to be naturally
incident, and therefore as he is in a continual expectation of them, so does he
unchangeably receive them, and remembers that none but the unthinking Crew can
be hereby east down, and none but Fools repine. Thus Pindar: The Gods unequal
have us Mortals vexed,
For to one Good, two Evils are annexed:
They pay a single Joy, with double Care,
And Fools such Dispensations cannot bear.


If then these Revolutions must of Necessity attend him, he concludes too they
must of Necessity be born with: He knows it then to be a most excessive
weakness, to lie impatiently concerned under a Load that is not (nor was not)
any way to be avoided; and therefore submissively receives them without an
alteration, and consequently adheres to Plutarch: If Fortune prove
extravagantly kind,
Above its Temper do not raise thy Mind;
If She disclaims thee like a jilting Dame,
Be not dejected but be still the Jame;
Like Gold unchanged amidst the hottest slame


Our Excise-Man's being thus prepared for all imaginable Events, produces also
this consequential Inference, That he is not poor or miserable. He foresaw the
Happiness was not to be durable, and did therefore prepare for its departure.
He embraced the Critical Minute so, as to survive when it vanished. He
concludes that that Person must be very stupid, that while Fortune smiles lays
not up a Reserve (since it is as much virtue to hear a good Fortune as an ill)
for its Reverse; and to be now in want, is a demonstrative Argument of his want
of Sense before; so that to be out at Heels at last, was to be out of his Wits
at first; since he is thereby become miserable, and consequently the subject
only of disdain and scorn: For it is daily visible, that Poverty creates a
separation of the greatest Acquaintance, and the total destruction of the most
cemented Intimates; for he that a month before wanted to know your Commands,
utterly shuns you now, as if that Corpse must be infected with the Plague, that
is accompanied with Rags; and you may as well go naked, as to have Breeches,
and nothing in them: it is in this only the Friendship of the Age consists. And
this he is assured of, that if once he is thus reduced, not one (nay not one of
those on whom he has heaped the utmost of his Favors) will be seen with him,
or speak in his Vind cati^n: so it seems, that he that is poor, must be
consequently bad, and guilty of all the intolerable Enormities imaginable. If
you are once bruised, you must heal your self; and your Groans will be drowned
with their transporting Acclamations. If you are shipwrecked by a storm of
Tears, you may have your own Sighs to blow you right again. If you are once
levelled with the ground, you must raise your self, or lie there, and be
trampled on; so that if once the Destinies do triumph over us, not any Mortal
fails. If once our Stage of Life proves Tragical, we shall never change the
Scene by the assistance of any adjacent Actor, or Spectator, but be miscrable
to the latest Epilogue; and only thereby become the fittest Object for that
poor comfort of Calamity, Pity. But I have sufficiently dilated on this Topic
in the preceding Discourse, and already largely showed you our Excise-Man's
Sentiments herein, so I shall here wave its further prosecution.

The conclusive Deduction is, That our Excise-Man is not abusive to those who
even occasioned his most Unjust Discharge; nor has he hard thoughts of those
Gentlemen who thereupon performed it: Respecting the former, he knows, that
though they have done him an Injury far beyond any Reparation, a Prejudice
above the reach of Satisfaction, and a Wrong which could not be supported with
Patience by any but himself, and no one's Charity but his could pardon; yet his
unspotted and unstained Innocence fortifies, and is the universal Arsenal which
infallibly provides him with the most powerful Arms to hinder his being
vanquished. He smiles at the petty Intrigues of these Diminutives, who
therefore dread his Presence, which creates a Sweat beyond a Bagnio, and whose
Knees are mutual Anvils, that beat a Desperation, whilst be triumphantly sits
unsullied like the Lilly, and thus enthroned, reigas in untainted Innocence.

In relation to the latter, he concludes, That as no compacted Dust can be
infallible, so the most towering parts and knowing Mortal, have not escaped an
Imposition from the subtle, tho abominable Artifices of those who no way merit
the Character of Men; and since their Intentions are always guided by the
striclest Rules of Probity and Justice, he therefore cannot censure the result,
though it is not immediately attended with the real Consequent of it. Besides,
he sees them frequently detected, and consequently a small space of time will
produce its desired Effects, and himself therefore re-established. In the mean
time his Behavior is ever modestly submissive, and with a sedate Contentment
waits a suitable Retaliation of his most inoffensive Behavior, and survives,
in hope of its being crowned with an agreeable success. And indeed it is the
only happiness of him that is deprived of all other; for Hope is the greatest
Antidote against Despair, and the infallible Cordial against all impending
Miseries; and although it be exceedingly deceitful, yet it is of this good use
to us, that while we are traveling through this life, it conducts us an casier
and more pleasant way to our Journies END.

FINIS.

