TO All the Noble and VVarlick Nation of Great Britain.
Reader,
I Have spent forty years in a continual practice of Chemical Remedies, and
the Rare and great Experiences I have showed publicly in London in the Year,
1629, 1630, 1631. are yet in Remembrance with many thousands of you; and the
last Year, that I have again publicly produced my self in Smithfield open
place, and to my thinking pleased many of you in my last Experiments; I cannot
doubt of your acceptance of this Last Endeavor of mine, which is to requite
so many Kindnesses from you during Thirty Two years of mine abode in England,
and chiefly from this Noble and Great City of London, these few Remedies being
truly good whereof I do present unto you the Composition in this Sheet will be
a Monument of my Love to the Public in after-Ages; (and chiefly to your
valiant Soldiers, to whom these Remedies will be very useful and cheap) and
shall (I hope) put in your Memory the Name of

In London, April. 2. 1656. Your Loving Friend and Servant, John Puntaeus.
The Tenth Edition.



The Artificial Balsamum for new Wounds, cold Aches, Strains, Bruises, Gouts,
etc. As it was made publicly upon Smithfield place before many hundreds of
good people the 20, and 21. of October, 1651.
By John Puntaeus, A Chemical Physician.
TAke of your Garden herbs of good and strong smell, namely Sage red and green,
Wormwood, Herbgrasse, Penny real, Marjoram, Hyssope, Neep, Motherwort, tansey,
time-savoury, as also Rosemary and Bay leafes, abrotanum, clare, balm, mince,
etc. as also of those hot herbs of the fields, as mugwort, calamentum, white
Horehunt, Origanum, melilot, serpillum, camomil, germandry, Nettleseed, Fennel
seeds and leafs. Item, of the vulnerary or healing herbs rs the season of the
year will afford, as your Panacea or Clownswort, Camphory of all sorts, Bugula,
Prunella, St. John's wort, golden rode, perwinkle, Sanicle, Long plantain, etc.
take of as many sorts as you can have, of each a like quantity, and put all
being neatly cleans'd in half Sallet Oil, and half Linseed Oil, as much as
conveniently you may guess to be enough to hold your herbs, adding a quarter
part of good Sack to it, meaning a quart of Sack, if your Oil be 4. quarts,
steep all together warm a whole night, and afterward boil it till the Sack and
moisture of the Herbs be consumed, then strain it, and in the oil so strained
for every pound of it add two ounces of Beeswax, clear Turpentine one ounce,
black pitch, white pitch, Gum Elemy, Rosen and Goose-grease, of each half an
ounce, red Oil of Turpentine, or colophony, jonce storax liquid, Spick oil
Rosemary oil, Amber oil, spirit of Salt, of each a quarter of an ounce, Gum
ammoniacum first dissolved with white wine about also a quarter of an ounce,
and as much of Sagapenum and Opopanax, Benjamin styrax calamites, myrrh and
aloes, of each a dram, and of the Oils made of the herbs abovesaid, the more
the better, within a quarter of an ounce for every pound of the former Sallet
and Linseed Oils, observing to put to an account all the Oil first and last,
that you may be sure to compass your wax and gummes, and pitches to the weight
of all the Liquors weighed together, as well as your Sallet and Linseed Oil,
otherwise your Balm should be too liquid and not healing enough; and if you put
Chemical oils of your herbs aforesaid so much the better, wax oil, and brick
oil be also excellent in it, a dram in the pound, Sugar Loaf and Honey I have
often put in it, but it will not mix among the herbs before the straining two
drams also of each in the pound; How to use this excellent Composition, the
printed Pape shows it.

The Ointments for Burnings and Scaldings, as it was tried upon Smithfield
place, October. 17. 1651.
Take according to the time of the year more or less of the herbs
underwritten, as Nightshades, Umbilicus veneris, hemlock, white and black poppy
leafs, porcelan, Laituces, Sorrel of all sorts, Henbane, green Colworts,
Housleek great and small Laenticula pallustris, Violet and Mallows leafs, wild
tansey, ^^ramonium, and Mandragora leafes if possible could be, to have all
together green, and the like. Item, of the green inward ring of the Elder tree,
of all a like quantity, and as much fresh butter as may serve to boil easily
the aforesaid herbs, and a little (...) in every pound of butter, with as much,
or a little (...) of an Asses dung; or for the want of it, take horse dung,
^oyl all together till your Butter be very green, which will be the sooner, if
you bruise or chop your herbs very small, boil it till you see the moisture of
your herbs almost vapour'd, and strain it in a napkin, adding for every pound
of the said Ointment half a dram of salt of Lead, or Saccharum Saturnii
dissolved in a little water and wine vinegar, stirring it with a stick when
your ointment is almost cold, and so keep it close to be used according to the
printed Note.

An Excellent Remedy for Sore Eyes.
Take Roche Alum, dissolve it in plantain water upon an easy fire, and when
it is cold, put the white of an Egg to it, and stir it much with three or four
sticks together, then filtre it by the brown paper, or at the least strain it
softly by a napkin, and then by evaporation in an earthen vessel dry your allom
softly, and begin the same work again with eyebright, or sweet Fennel water;
then when your Allom is so dried again, add as much Ireos or Oris in powder,
and that powder so mixed when you have any occasion to use it, steep it in
Rose Water; a dram of the powder is enough for two ounces of Rose water, etc.

The Sear-cloath for Corns.
Take Gum Elemy, white Pitch, and black pitch, Beeswax, Rosen and Turpentine,
of each a like quantity, only the black pitch may be doubled; melt all
together upon a soft fire, and so make Sear-cloath according to Art.

The Medicine for Toothache procee^^^^ (...)old can(...).
Take Angelica roots, Spanish Pelleto^^ ^lov^^^ (...) Ginger, of each a like
quantity, and with the Muscilage of Gum Tragagant dissolved in Mugwort water,
adding a little starch, ma^^ (...) paste and pastilles to hold upon the aching
Teeth, etc. (...) if the pain proceeds from a hot cause with infl^^^ (...),
then take the root of Henbane, slice it, and boil it in wine Vinegar, then
strain it, and hold in your mouth the said vinegar warm, and it will put you in
admiration how quickly it will cure you; the seed of the same Henbane may be
used alike* but the root is better.

FINIS.

