QUO WARRANTO; OR, A Moderate Enquiry INTO THE VVARRANTABLENESSE OF THE
PREACHING OF GIFTED and UNORDAINED Persons. Where also some other Questions are
discussed: VIZ. Concerning

MINISTERIAL Relation, ELECTION, ORDINATION.
BEING A VINDICATION Of the Late Ius Divinum Ministerii Evangelici, So far as
concerns those Points; From the Exceptions of Mr. John Martin, Mr. Sam. Petto,
Mr. Frederick Woodal: Ministers in Suffolk, in their late Book, Entitled THE
PREACHER SENT.

By MATTHEW POOLE, At the desire and appointment of the Provincial Assembly
of London.

LONDON, Printed by I. H. for I. Rothwell, at the Fountain in Goldsmiths-row in
Cheapside* and S. Thomson, at the Bishops Head in Paul's Churchyard. 1659.

The EPISTLE to the READER.
IT is the great unhappiness of most men, that they judge of things by
appearance, and not according to truth; That those ways and doctrines which
are most specious in show, which seemingly look most to the promotion of Gods
honor, the advancement of holiness, and the liberties of Gods people, are
most taking with many of that sort of persons, who have a due sense of those
excellent things upon their spirits: and such an opinion, I take this to be,
which is the principal subject of this following Treatise, which is asserted
by our Brethren; Viz. That Gifted persons may Preach publicly: An opinion
wherein there is a double compliance, with the apprehensions and affections of
men, whereby it gets entertainment among them: Either, because it gives an
opportunity for the declaration, and demonstration of a man's abilities to
others, (a disease incident to good men) or because it puts a man into a
capacity of honoring God in a more eminent way: (which a gracious soul is very
apt to thirst after) And, if, to these be added, and upon these do follow a
third thing, to wit, an experience of some honor brought to God, and some good
done upon others, this puts it out of doubt, with diverse good men, and makes
them sit down with a confident persuasion of the truth of it. And on the other
side, when a Minister undertakes to refute and overthrow that opinion, he lies
under this great prejudice, of minding his own interests, of envying the Lords
people this glorious privilege, and desiring to monopolize it to himself; And
so, whatever he says upon that account, is rather taken as the issue of his
own passions, then the sense of the Scripture: But, because I have learned to
judge of things otherwise then by events and appearances, and the humors or
censures of men. I dare not decline a necessary work upon the account of any
reflections which may be cast upon me thereby, but shall leave the vindication
of my credit, and the bringing forth of my righteousness to God, and (as in
duty I ought) engage for the assertion of the truth in this particular: Which I
am the more willing to do, because (if the providence of God may be observed,
and if the tree may be judged by the fruit) there is hardly any one principle,
which has been more scandalous to thousands of the most judicious of Gods
people, (both Ministers and others) and more unhappily isntrumental to the
introduction, and propagation of all those loose, false, vain, frivolous and
pernicious doctrines (which abound in the Nation) then the profession and
practice of this specious opinion of liberty of prophesying. Nor does this
only flow from the abuse of that principle, (as our Brethren would insinuate)
but from the very principle it self, as they state it: For so long as they
hold, that, It is the duty of every gifted man, as such, to exercise his gifts,
(which they assert page 32.) and that, if he have received gifts to teach
publicly, he must use them also publicly; (which they avow, page 47.) and
that, he himself may judge of his gifts, and may preach, though it be not so
expedient, without any further Call: (which they profess, page 20.) What can
be expected, but that this Doctrine should be a Trojan Horse, whence the
adversaries of the Truth may break out, and destroy the City of God, A
Pandora's Box, from whence all sorts of mischievous and foul poisoning opinions
may fly out, and that without remedy. It must be here seasonably remembered,
that the point here discussed is no trivial point, but one that nearly
concerns the very vitals of the Church, to whose welfare nothing under God and
his Word, is more necessary and conducible, then the Ordinance of the
Ministry; And therefore nothing requires greater care in the disposal of it,
then that does, and in nothing were the Apostles more solicitous then in
committing this Office and work to fit persons, and nothing would have been
more incongruous to the wisdom and faithfulness of the head of the Church,
then to prostitute them to the fancies and humors of every invader, nothing
more unbecoming the carfulness of our great shepherd, then to suffer any
wolf (that says or thinks he is fit for it) to take the office of the
shepherd, or to do his work, both which come to one, and are utterly
pernicious, to the flock. The consideration of these and such like things,
occasioned the Provincial Assembly to take it into their serious thoughts, not
only to assert the Office of the Ministry, but also to regulate the work of
the Ministry, and to confine it within those just boundaries which God and man
have set for it: This was done in that late piece called Jus Divinum Ministerii
Evangelici, a piece which as it has through Gods blessing been satisfactory to
the consciences of many persons, so has it had a contrary effect upon others,
(as might in reason be expected) to draw forth and derive opposition upon it,
from diverse hands, and among others, those of our Brethren, with whom I have
now to do: And although it is not fit, nor usual for Assemblies to take notice
of the contradictions of particular persons; yet, because our Brethren have
with united force undertaken the refutation of part of that Treatise; and
because they have endeavored to manage it with Scripture Arguments and
evidence, (which justly bear most sway in these times) and because diverse
well-meaning persons, (and that not only such as being injudicious, are
inconsiderable, but also such as seem to be pillars in their way) have declared
their high approbation of it, and asserted the unanswerablenesse of it. It was
therefore thought fit that something should be done by way of reply: And
accordingly the Provincial Assembly was pleased to lay it upon my shoulders,
and I engaged in the work, and as I love not unnecessary delays, so I hoped
long since to have given the World an account of it: But it pleased that
Supreme Providence (which orders all affairs) unexpectedly to surprise me,
with a sad and dangerous convulsion, which being seated in the head, did not
only disinable me for the present, but a pretty while after overawe me, so
that I was dissuaded from meddling in any thing, whereby the brain might be
exercised, and discomposed: and moreover, it is not unknown to many, that a
work of far greater concernment, and pains, and trouble, and care, did lie in
my hands all along, interfering with this, which indeed required the whole man;
besides many other occasions not inconsiderable, which is needless and
impertinent, for me here to speak of: Only thus much I have here mentioned by
way of Apology, why this Reply comes forth no sooner, and it may further
Apologize for the frequent defects which may be observed in it, because I was
so continually encumbered with distracting cares, about other affairs, whereof
I have many witnesses. This delay therefore the Reader is entreated to pardon,
and to accept of the service, as it is now tendered, wherein, though I doubt
not, it will be easy to the wise to observe many weaknesses, yet God and my
conscience are my compurgators, that I have managed it with sincerity, and I
hope my Reader will witness that I have handled it with the same candor and
moderation which our Brethren have shown, and which I think ought to be shown
in such differences as these. For the success of this work, as I am not
without hope, that there will be found some, ex meliore luto, who laying aside
partiality, will own the evidence here brought, and yield to it, (for I may
without vanity say, that there is some evidence and cogency, at least in some
things in difference) so I must confess, when I consider, how weak and
injudicious most are, and unable to discern between things that differ, how
supine and careless the generality even of good men are, in the weighing of
things of this nature, (and yet usually such as are least knowing, are most
confident and heady) how apt the most are to be led by the reputation of some
particular men of their party for ability and piety, how deeply men's interests
are concerned herein; and in particular their honor in not seeming to be
bafled, and deserting that way they are once engaged in: I say, when I consider
these things, I am full of fears, lest what is here said, and whatever is
spoken hereafter, will vanish into the air, without any success. However this
is sufficient encouragement to me, that I have born witness to the truth of
God in these declining times, and hope it may be useful, if not for the
reduction of such as are gone astray, yet for the confirmation and settlement
of others, who may be wavering herein.

There are three sorts of Readers, principally which I expect to meet with.

1. Weak and well-minded souls, who are in this much to be pitied, that being
insufficient to see by their own eyes, and to look through the vail of holy
pretenses, and pious ends, are apt to be abused by others, and to be carried to
and fro, by every wind of doctrine: These, I wish they had followed the
Apostles direction, and never given way to doubtful disputations. But having
once entertained them, and being overthrown by them, if they do not give very
diligent heed, and receive not more then ordinary assistance, are never like to
recover themselves.

2. Proud, wilful, and self-conceited persons, the pride of whose hearts, has
led them into ways of singularity, and will oblige them to make good their
ground. Their Motto is, Cedo nulli. And because a recesse from their received
persuasions would import something of weakness, and humane frailty, they,
being conscious to themselves, of their own great worth, are resolved, and
unmovable from their present apprehensions.

3. There are an intelligent and ingenuous sort of men, who being sensible of
their own weakness, dare not suppose themselves beyond a possibility of
mistake, and therefore always have an eye open to discern further conviction,
when ever it is offered, and keep one ear open for the adverse party, whose
language is that of Jobs, That which I know not, teach thou me, and wherein I
have thought amiss, I will do so no more. It is for the sake of those, that I
have taken this trouble upon my self, and I hope as to persons of this allay,
my labor may not be in vain in the Lord.

But I shall detain thee no longer in the porch, but let thee into the house,
desiring the God of Truth, to lead us into all Truth, which is the hearty
prayer of

Thine in the Lord, Matthew Poole.

Touching the Relation of the MINISTRY.
COncerning the Epistle prefixed by our Brethren to their Book, I shall say
nothing, because they run out into impertinent Controversies concerning the
Catholic visible Church, the matter of a Church, Church Covenant, etc. And
indeed it is needless I should say any thing about them, they having been so
fully ventilated by so many Learned Authors, as Hudson, Rutherford, Wood,
Cawdrey, and many others; and Dr Collings in particular has Answered this
Epistle, whither I refer the Reader: and therefore I come (...), to the
Answer of the Book.

Wherein I shall crave no more liberty then our Brethren took, and I shall use
their own words, Page 1. Though I intend not to Reply to every particular, yet
I shall give such Animadversions upon the most considerable things, as will
leave it unnecessary to speak to the rest. This I shall solemnly promise, that
I will not willingly decline any thing, which is either strong, or plausible,
or considerable, but only such passages, as, the foundations being shaken, do
fall of themselves: And under this promise I hope I may be excused from
following our Brethren (...)* (which commonly occasions personal reflections,
and heterogeneous excursions.) And, although it were easy to cast the work
into a more convenient mold, yet, that the Reader may with greater ease compare
their Book and the Answer, I thought fit to observe their order, and to
distinguish it according to their Chapters.

CHAP. I.
1. THey Question, What is meant by the Ministry? And here (to pass by
impertinencies) because a Minister is called so from ministration, they infer,
That gifted men, whose ordinary work or calling is to Preach, may properly be
called Ministers of the Gospel; page 3. For my part I shall never blot paper
with contending about words: Our Question is not about Names, but Things; And
if the word Minister may be applied to twenty persons, we are not concerned in
it; for the Question is not, Whether a Gifted brother, whose work or calling is
to preach, may be called a Minister? (for even he who never preaches, if he any
other way minister to the Gospel, may be called a Minister of the Gospel,
according to their own arguments) but Whether such a Gifted brother may preach?
and Whether the title Minister, in its special and distinct acception may be
applied to him? And in both these we hold the Negative.

2. Their second Question is not much more important, viz. Whether the Office
of the Ministry be a relation to the Work of the Ministry, or to the Church?
And here they tax the Assembly, for saying that the Office of the Ministry is
better defined by relation to the Work, than to a particular people. Where I
desire it may be observed, that the Assembly did not say, The Office of the
Ministry is better defined by relation to the Work, than to the Church in
general, but than to a particular Church: It was not the design of the
Assembly to deny the Ministry to be a relation to the Church, nor yet was it
their business accurately to insist upon the notions of relate and correlate;
they never called the Work of the Ministry, the correlate, but only obiter and
(...), they asserted the Office of the Ministry to be better defined by
relation to the Work, than to a particular Church, which our Brethren have not
here disproved; but only endeavored to prove that the Office of the Ministry
rather consists in relation to the Church in general, than to the Work; so
that all their labor, as to that particular, might have been spared. To which
may be added, that we must distinguish between the abstract Ministry, and the
concrete a Minister.

And although the Minister in the concrete have the Church for his Correlatum,
yet that the Ministry in the abstract should have relation to the Work, is no
more absurd, then that the Office of a King should have relation to ruling,
which, I think, no sober man will deny; and especially when such a thing is
brought in occasionally by a person not minding, nor obliged to mind the (...)
of words; it were a vanity in any man to batter down such an expression by a
quaternion of Arguments, which our Brethren have attempted to do.

To which may be added, that that rule upon which their first Argument hangs,
viz. Relata sunt simul, and do mutuo se ponere and tollere, is true only of
Predicamentall, but not of Transcendentall relations, such as this is; whose
being is not wholly respective, Suarez Metap.
as the Masters of the Metaphysics inform us.

And the same answer also may serve for the second Argument (which indeed is
but the same) viz. That relations must be together, but the Office is a means
to the Work as an end, and so the Office must needs be first, and therefore
they are not relatives. To which I answer, 1. As before, The rule holds not of
Transcendentall relations. 2. A potentiall being is sufficient in relations: My
knowledge of a Rose to be in the spring is related to that Rose even in winter;
and yet the Rose does not actually, but only potentially exist in winter.

The other two Arguments are trivial, and therefore I shall dilate no further
about them, because this is a Logical and no Theological Controversy.

CHAP. II. and III.
Qu. Whether Ministers are only Ministers to their particular Flocks?
IN handling of this I shall 1. State the Question plainly and faithfully. 2. I
shall offer some Arguments for the Negative. 3. I shall enquire what our
Brethren have to say for the Affirmative.

For the state of this Question we must take notice of another Question, whence
it has its rise and being, to wit, Whether besides particular Congregational
Churches, there be any other visible Political Churches mentioned in Scripture?
It has till these last times been universally received in the Church of God,
that, Besides that union and communion, whereby the members of a particular
Church meet together in a Congregation for the Word and Sacraments, there is
another union and communion, whereby particular Churches do by their Delegates
(because in their persons they all cannot) meet together, combine, consult and
conclude in common, as they judge most expedient for the good of their
particular Churches.

This sufficiently appears from the constant practice of the Church in all
ages, even from the Apostles times, Acts 15. and so downwards; which was, when
ever necessity required and opportunity was offered, to meet together in
Synods, and in common to govern all their Churches. And as these meetings were
greater or less, so they received a differing denomination, being called
Synods Oecumenicall, Provincial, etc.

And this is at this day the judgment of all the Reformed Churches in the
world, some few amongst our selves being excepted, and our dear Brethren in
New England, both known by the name of Congregationall men, so called from this
their first principle, That the Scripture owns no visible Church but one
Congregation. From hence it must needs follow, according to our Brethrens mind,
That Ministers are Ministers only to their own Congregations.

As on the other side, they that own another Church, besides Congregational, do
assert, that Ministers have a double relation, the one to their own particular
Flocks, the other to the whole Church. And thus much for the rise of the
Question.

For our Brethrens mind we shall not need to go far, they affirm possitively,
that Officers stand in relation to a particular Church only, and they deny
them to be Officers to a Church universal, or to any but their own Flocks,
Page 8. But here I cannot but take notice of a weighty difference amongst our
Congregational Brethren, in which they should do well to be reconciled before
they endeavor too eagerly to obtrude their Notions upon the world; It is this:
Mr. Shepherd and Allen in their answer to the nine questions assert, that
though Ministers are Officers only to their own Flocks, yet they may perform
acts of their Office toward others, Page 133. And Learned Mr. Norton (...)
concludes, that a Minister preaches to another Congregation non tantum virtute
donorum and charitatis, sed ex vi vocationis, etc. i. e. not only as a gifted
Brother, but as an Officer; And it is sufficiently known that it is the
judgment of persons of greatest note in that way among us in England. Now on
the other side, Reverend Mr. Hooker expressly affirms that when a minister
preaches to another Congregation, he preaches not as a Pastor, but as a
gifted man, Survey Part 2. P. 32. And our Brethren in this Book fall in with
him, and will not allow Ministers either to be Officers, or to act as Officers
toward any, except their own Congregation.

For the better clearing of the present Question I shall premise two
Considerations which indeed do strike at the root of all their Objections.

I. That there are two ways whereby a Minister may be a Minister to the whole
Church.

1. Actu secundo, actually, immediately, absolutely and independently, so that
he may without any other warrant undertake to teach and govern the whole
Church, if it were possible; This was peculiar to the Apostles, and surely this
is abundantly sufficient to distinguish them from ordinary Pastors.

2. One may be an Officer to the whole Church actu primo, habitually,
aptitudinally, mediatly, conditionally, and dependingly, so that he has a jus
or power to teach every where ( Go preach the Gospel to every Creature) but may
not exercise that jus or power, every where, but by the consent of the Church
or Rulers, not as if there was any defect in his authority, but only because
there is a manifest inconveniency and disorder in such a promiscuous and
unlicensed exercise, which therefore is unlawful because it is repugnant to
Order, and obstructive to Edification: and this is the case of ordinary Pastors.

II. I shall premise another Consideration, which being well digested is
sufficient to enervate all that is said by our Brethren as to this point: it is
this, A general respect to the whole Church is not inconsistent with a
peculiar respect to some one Church.

Suppose one having a vast number of sheep, needs and chooses twenty
Shepherds to look to his sheep, and these shepherds because each of them
cannot possibly look to all, do therefore distribute the sheep into twenty
parcels, and each undertakes to look to his share, yet so, as that in things of
common concernment to all the sheep, they all meet and consult together, etc.
but in matters of private concernment every man looks to his own parcel: In
this case every shepherd has a double relation, the one general to the whole,
the other particular to his own parcel, which he does more especially take care
for, and feed, and keep, and watch over, etc. And in case any of those sheep
which properly belong not to his charge go astray, if he see them and can keep
them in, he is obliged by virtue of his office to do it, and if through his
neglect they miscarry, he does not only sin against Charity but against his
Office. This is the case of the Church, and so it was out of doubt with the
Apostles, unto whom Christ committed the care of his sheep indefinitely: And
because each of them could not look to all, therefore the sheep were divided
into parcels, and every Apostle takes upon himself a special relation unto some
one parcel, and had his proper line; 2 Cor. 10. And because the sheep
multiplied so fast, that to look to them all was a work too heavy for the
Apostles shoulders, therefore the Flock was divided into more parcels, and they
ordained more shepherds, who although peculiarly entrusted with their proper
Charge, yet were not freed from their Care of the whole, but in things of
common concernment did meet together with the Apostles in their days, Act. 15.
And afterward among themselves.

Or as it is in Germany, where every Elector and Prince of the Empire sustains
a double relation; He is related more especially to his own peculiar Territory
to which he is an Officer, acting ordinarily, and constantly, etc. But over and
besides his, he has a general relation to the whole Empire, and is an Officer
to the whole, not singly and by himself, but together with others, being
entrusted with a joint-power of governing the whole, as in case of choosing of
an Emperor, or other weighty affairs of the Empire, as the necessities and
occasions of the Empire require. Just so it is in the Church, which is one
entire body (as the Empire is) governed by one Systeme of laws, and molded
under one Government, every Minister has a double relation, the one special
and peculiar, to his own Flock which he is to feed constantly; the other
general to the whole Church, which he is to feed occasionally, as far as his
ability will reach, and as the Churches exigencies command, and which he
together with others has a power to govern.

This will be put out of doubt by considering more fully that which even now
was intimated of the Apostles themselves, who also had this double relation,
one to the whole, whereby they were Pastors of the whole Church, and yet
because they could not possibly each of them look to all the Churches,
therefore the work was divided among them, and they undertook a special
relation to some particular parts, as Peter to the Jews, and Paul to the
Gentiles, James to Jerusalem, etc. Which division did not proceed from any
defect of authority in the Apostles to feed the whole, but from the
impossibility of the thing in regard of the vastness of the work, and because
they were to carry on all Church-work as most suited with edification.

In like manner we that are ordinary Pastors, sequimur patres, non passibus
aequis; and though every Minister is a Minister of the whole Church, and has
an Authority extending to it suo modo, yet because it is impossible for every
one to look to every Church, and all things are to be managed with special
respect to the Churches edification, therefore Ministers are forced to divide
the work, both as to Teaching and Ruling; yet so, as that there still remains a
relation to the whole, whereby he is obliged to teach, and with others to rule
other Churches, so far forth as his ability reaches, and the Churches
necessities require.

And by the way, I cannot but take notice of a remarkable difference between
Teaching and Ruling, in point of the possibility of the thing, and the
edification of the Church (which is the great Rule in all
Church-administrations) for a Minister may jointly with others rule a far
greater proportion than he can teach. David as a King, could rule all Israel,
but David as a Prophet, could not viva voce, teach all Israel, at least not
ordinarily and constantly. And the Apostles, though it was impossible for every
one of them actually to teach every Church, (they neither could do it, nor did
it) yet it was possible for each Apostle jointly with the rest, to govern every
Church, and they did actually rule all the Churches, at least all the Churches
there mentioned, in that famous Synod, Acts 15. (in which, whether they acted
as Apostles, or as ordinary Elders, all is one to the present Question.) And
this may serve for Answer to that specious Argument so much insisted on by the
Reverend and Learned dissenters, taken from the conjunction of Teaching and
Ruling.

These things premised, I shall now come to the Arguments: And here I shall
have a double work;

1. To lay down an Argument or two, to prove that Ministers are Officers, and
act as Officers to more than their own particular Churches.

2. To Answer their Arguments, and to justify those inconveniences objected by
the Provincial Assembly to the contrary Opinion.

For the former, I shall not here dilate, only I shall propound three Arguments.

The first Argument is this, If Ministers are Officers, and act as Officers
toward convertible Heathens, then they are not Officers only to their
particular Congregations: But Ministers are Officers, and act as Officers
toward convertible Heathens. The Minor is the only Proposition that can be
denied, and that I shall now endeavor to prove.

1. The case is plain in the Apostles: That Apostles were constituted Officers
before the visible Gospel Church was erected, is undeniable, and appears
plainly from Mat. 28. The Apostles, at that time, were Officers for they had
actually received their Commission; they being relata, must have a correlatum:
A correlate there was none, but those who were to be made Disciples, who were
to be converted: So that, one of these two must necessarily be granted, either
that the Apostolical relation wanted a correlatum (which to say, is grossly
absurd) or that the Heathens and Jews to be converted, were the correlatum to
them.

There is but one thing that can be said, to wit, that at that time there were
diverse already converted Christians, who were a sufficient correlatum to the
Apostolical Office. To which I Answer, If we suppose that all such Christians
had died, or forsaken the profession of the Faith, (which might have fallen out
without any detriment to the perpetuity of the Church, seeing the essence of
the Church had been preserved in the Apostles, if they only had continued in
the faith) I say, suppose they all had thus fallen away, yet had the Apostles
been Officers, and therefore the Heathens had been their correlatum.

2. And such indeed are clearly expressed, Matthew. 28. 19, 20. to be the primary
and immediate object of the Apostolical Office and relation. From whence will
follow, that a Minister may be a Minister, though he have no particular Church
to which he stands related: Just as the Eunuch was a member of the Church
visible, though there was no particular Church into which he was admitted, Acts
8.

The only probable Answer which I can apprehend is this, That the Argument no
way holds from Apostles to ordinary Ministers: But in this case I conceive it
does. For,

1. The Apostles as well as Pastors (say our Brethren) are Officers only to the
Church. Chap. 3. p. 18. they say of Ministers, That it is lawful for them to
go and preach to unbelievers; and they instance in the Apostles preaching to
Heathens, Acts 11. and 16. and yet (say they) they are no Officers to such
unbelievers: Whereby it is plain that they deny not only ordinary Pastors, but
also Apostles to be Officers to Heathens; which also further appears by the
reason they add, why such Ministers are no Officers to Heathens (which is
common to Apostles with other Ministers) viz. Because they cannot as Officers
exercise Church Government toward them; which holds true even of the Apostles;
What have we to do to judge them that are without, 1 Cor. 5. Now if the
Apostles, who were (according to our Brethren) only Church Officers, yet acted
as Officers toward such as were wholly without the Church, and toward
Heathens, much more is it true of ordinary Pastors, that, albeit they are
Officers in special to their particular Flock, yet they are Officers, and act
as Officers, toward other Churches.

2. Apostles and Pastors are paralleld in this case, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. And he
gave some Apostles -- and some Pastors and Teachers, For the perfecting of the
Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ.
From whence it is most evident, that the object of the Apostolical and Pastoral
Office is one and the same, both of them being by Office related to the Saints,
not only that are actually brought in, but also to those that are to be
gathered: And the Offices were appointed, and the Officers bestowed for this
very end, for the edifying of the body of Christ: By which Body of Christ, we
must with judicious Interpreters, necessarily understand the whole collection
of all Christ's members in all ages of the Church; all which, in Scripture
phrase, go to the making up of Christ's body, so that if one of them were
lacking, Jesus Christ should want his fullness (as he is pleased to express
himself) Ephesians. 1. 21.

And answerably to this the word (...), or edifying, is not to be understood,
as in some other places, for building up of such as are brought in only, but
also for the bringing in of those who are yet without; for that indeed was the
great end why the Ministry was instituted, Mat. 28. 19, 20. And the very phrase
of building, implies as well the gathering together of stones for the building,
and the laying of the foundation, as the raising up of the building; and the
nature of the body, as we have now explained it, necessarily requires, that
this edifying should be understood extensively, as well as intensively.

I shall contract all this into a short Syllogism, The body of Christ in its
latitude is the correlatum, or the object of the Pastoral Office; But the body
of Christ includes Heathens: Therefore Heathens to be converted are the object
and correlate of the Pastoral Office. The major is plain from the Text, and
what has been said; the minor also is no less evident, that Heathens are a
part of Christ's body: They are called his sheep, John 10. 16. Other sheep I
have which are not of this fold. Heathens to be converted Christ laid down his
life for (else they had never been converted) and yet he laid down his life
only for his body, Ephesians. 5. And therefore they are his members and part of his
body, and therefore they are the object and correlate of the Pastoral Office.

And as the whole Church in all ages (to wit, including persons yet uncalled,
Predestinati nondum congregati. Aug.
but by election belonging to it) is the correlatum of the Ministers and
Ministerial Office in all ages, so the whole Church in one age (including such
as by predestination, though not yet by actual vocation and congregation,
belong to it) is the correlate of the Ministers and Ministerial Office in that
one age: So that not only a particular Church is the correlate of a Minister,
but also such as are not yet members of any particular Church, nor of any
Church at all.

The second Argument may be taken from 2 Cor. 5. 20. where the reconcilable
world, which consists of such as are yet without and no members of the Church,
are made the chief object and correlatum of the Office of the Ministry; and
from thence I shall thus argue, To whom Ministers act as Ambassadors, to them
they act as Officers: But Ministers preach as Ambassadors to Heathens
convertible and to be converted, Ergo. The Proposition is evident from the
terms, To be an Ambassador, is nothing else but to be an Officer; and it may
receive further light and strength from this consideration, that Ministers are
not Ambassadors a pari ad parem, from one King to another as equal, but a
superiori ad inferiorem, from one superior in authority to all; from a Prince
to his subjects, whom he is calling in; from one who may and does require all
Heathens, as well as others, to hear and obey his Ambassadors, I mean from the
Lord Christ. For the Assumption, that Ministers preaching to Heathens, do
preach as Ambassadors (where all the doubt lies) I proceed to make good.

1. If the Scripture makes no difference between a Ministers preaching to his
own Church and to others; then there is no difference, Ubi lex non distinguit,
non est distinguendum. But the Scripture makes no difference, etc. Wherever a
Minister preaches, he is to preach with all Authority. Strangers are as well
obliged to obey him as his own people.

2. Even Heathens are bound to hear Ministers preaching to them, and that not
only ex vi materiae, because of the matter they treat of, but virtute muneris,
by virtue of their Office. He that hears you, hears me, and he that
despises you, despises me, Luke 10. 16. And therefore as the Jews and
Heathens were bound to hear Christ, not only in regard of his message which he
brings, but also in respect of his Office as he was the Mediator and the great
Prophet in the Church, Deuteronomy. 18, 15, 19. So also it is with Ministers, who act
as in Christ's stead, they are to be heard even by Heathens, for their Office
sake, as well as for their Doctrine. And those Jews or Heathens which disobeyed
the Doctrine of the Apostles, are not only charged with the guilt of rejecting
the truth, but also of contemning the Persons and Offices of the Apostles,
which could not have been, if the Apostles had not preached as Officers to
such. And surely it must needs be reputed strange doctrine, to say, that a
Minister, yea an Apostle, preaching to Heathens, does preach no more
authoritatively, than any woman or child that is occasionally discoursing to
such of the things of God. The Apostles might challenge Maintenance of those
Heathens to whom they preached, Mat. 10. 10. 1 Cor 9. which such women and
children could not pretend to; which clearly demonstrates that the Apostles
preached not as gifted persons, but as Officers to them. The Apostles preaching
to such had a power authoritatively to pronounce pardon, or to denounce wrath
to them, upon their believing or disobeying, (which are the two acts of the
Keys) and which to do requires an Office-relation to them.

If it be objected that this may be true of the Apostles, that they were
Ambassadors, and preached as Ambassadors to Heathens, and yet not true of
ordinary Pastors. I answer; either ordinary ministers are Ambassadors, or else
Christ has not had any Ambassadors in the world since the days of the
Apostles, But Christ has had, and has Ambassadors still in the world;
therefore Ministers are ordinary Ambassadors: the Major is plain, for if only
extraordinary Officers be Ambassadors; then where there are no such
extraordinary Officers, there are no Ambassadors: The Minor also is no less
clear, that the Office of Gospel Ambassadors was a continuing Ordinance, and it
is most ridiculous to think, that while the design and work of the Ambassador
lasts his Office should not continue; and besides, Christ has perpetuated the
Office, Mat. 28. 19, 20. If it be said they are Ambassadors indeed, but it is
to their own people, not to Heathens: I answer, yes rather they are Ambassadors
to Heathens: for as the great work of other Ambassadors is to make peace, so
also Gospel-Ambassadors their great business is to beseech men to be
reconciled to God, and therefore their principal object is not the Church who
are already supposed to be reconciled, but Heathens and Strangers who are yet
unreconciled: and seeing ordinary Ministers preaching to Heathens, have a power
upon their repentance to remit sin, i. e. To declare their sins remitted
officially, it must needs follow, that they are Ambassadors to such: And the
Apostle in this place ascribes both the name and work of Ambassadors unto
ordinary Ministers, speaking in the plural number, We then as Ambassadors, etc.
And he attributes the name to himself, upon a ground common with him to
ordinary Ministers, i. e. because he besought them as in Christ's stead to be
reconciled to God: and as we rightly infer the assurance of salvation of
ordinary believers from the Apostles assurance, because he fixes his assurance
not upon any peculiar revelation, but upon grounds common to all Christians; so
may we that are ordinary Ministers, justly take to our selves the Name and
Office of Ambassadors, because the Apostles assumed it upon such grounds as are
common to all Ministers: and not upon such as are peculiar to the Apostolical
Dignity.

And this may suffice for the enforcement of this second argument: but there is
one block that must be removed. It is plausibly objected by Mr. Allen and Mr.
Shepherd, in there answer to the nine Questions, That Ministers, though
Officers to their own Flock, yet may do the acts of their Office toward
others, as a Steward of an house acts as an Officer in the entertainment of
strangers, etc. And thus Ministers may preach as Officers to others, and yet be
only Officers to their own Congregations. To this I answer, 1. This concerns
not our Brethren here, who do possitively determine, that Ministers preaching
to others, do preach only as gifted men, not as Officers, p. 18. So that I
might without disparagement wave this Objection. 2. This is a mere fallacy, the
resemblance it self is misunderstood or mis-applied: for a Steward of an house,
it is true, he acts as a Steward in the entertainment of strangers, but how? he
acts as the Steward of that house, not as a Steward to them whom he entertains:
But a Minister preaches as an Officer with authority, not only in relation to
his own Church, but any others that occasionally hear him, as has been proved.
And yet 3. If the similitude were well laid, there is a further dissimilitude
in the case in hand; for a Steward of an house is a Steward only to that
particular Family, but Ministers are Stewards to the whole Church, all which is
called one family, and one household, 1 Timothy 3. 15. How thou should behave thy
self in the house of God. Gal. 6. 10. Do good to all, especially the household
of faith. Ephesians. 2. 19. You are fellow Citizens of the Saints, and of the
household of God. And the reason why the Steward of an house is no Officer to
strangers, is because the Lord that makes him a Steward has no authority to
make him a Steward over strangers, nor further then his house or jurisdiction
reaches. But Christ, who makes Ministers Stewards, has authority to make them
such over the whole Church, yea, over Heathens; and indeed so he has done, as
the former Arguments have proved: and he requires of the world to own his
Ministers as Ambassadors, and will severely punish their rejection and contempt
of them.

The third and last argument shall be this; If the conversion of Heathens, etc.
be the principal ground and end why the Office of the Ministry was instituted,
and the principal work of the Ministry, then the Office of the Ministry is
related to Heathens: But the conversion of Heathens, etc. is the principal end
why the Office of the Ministry was instituted, and the principal work of the
Ministry so instituted, Therefore the Office of the Ministry is related to
Heathens. For the major it is evident from the very terms; every Minister is
unquestionably related to those among whom his work lies. And as it is plain in
Christ Jesus, our great Bishop, that the Church or his sheep, are his
correlatum, because his end and his work was their salvation; so also must it
needs be in Ministers, that their relation must be toward those among whom
their great work lies. For the minor no man can doubt of it that has read the
Scriptures, especially those forecited places, Mat. 28. and Ephesians. 4.

If it be said, Conversion indeed was the great work of the Apostles, but not
so of ordinary Ministers; those were to build up what the Apostles brought in:

I answer 1. Both those places do evidently relate as well to ordinary
Ministers, as to the Apostles: For Ephesians 4. they are equally named; and for Mat.
28. it is clear, because those Ministers who are there spoken of, and set apart
for that work of the conversion of Heathens, they are assured by God that they
shall continue to the end of the world, which is not true of the Apostles in
their own persons, unless to them you add their successors, the ordinary
Ministers. And 1 Cor. 3. 5. Who is Paul, and who is Apollo, etc. but Ministers
by whom ye believe. And that text will continue true to the end of the world,
Faith comes by hearing, Romans 10. of ordinary Ministers, as well as the Apostles.

2. If conversion be a work common and necessary in these days, as well as in
the Apostles days, then Ministers are now appointed for that work as well as
formerly they were: For while the cause and reason remains, the effect also
must needs remain: But conversion is a work common and necessary now as well as
then; For though men are not Heathens now as they were formerly, yet many are
but professors and titular Christians, by virtue of their Church Membership,
and so do need a work of conversion.

3. Either the ordinary Ministers of the Church were appointed for conversion,
or else Christ has appointed no Officers to take care of the greatest and most
principal work, which is the conversion of sinners: But this is highly absurd
that Christ should take least care, where there was most need: and therefore
ordinary Ministers were instituted for conversion.

And thus I have done with the first thing, which was to prove, that Ministers
are Officers and act as Officers to others besides their own Congregation.

The second thing propounded was, To Answer their Arguments, and to vindicate
the Arguments offered by the Provincial Assembly against that contrary opinion,
that Ministers are Officers only to their own Congregations.

And for the better methodizing of it, I shall first with all brevity propound
the Assemblies Arguments, then our Brethrens Answers, and then add a Reply:
And this I choose to do in this place, although these things are discussed by
them under another Head, p. 227, etc. because they properly concern this
Question. But I shall pass them over with more brevity, because it is but a
collateral Question, and our Brethren are less accurate in this, than in the
other point.

1. This opinion is unheard of in the Church of Christ, before these late
years. Provinc.

Ans. It suffices that it is heard of in the Scripture.

Reply. But you know that is denied; and for the Churches judgment, as it is
not to be advanced into Gods throne, so it is not easily to be slighted, where
there is an universal consent of all Churches (as there is in this case) which
it is hard to show in any Error: Nemo pacificus contra Ecclesiam.

2. This opinion is contrary to our Br^threns practice, who hold the
administration of the Sacrament to be a Ministerial act, and yet give it to
members of other Congregations. Provinc.

To this there is a double Answer given by our Brethren.

1. The main Answer where they lay most stresse which therefore I propose
first, is this, that In ministerial acts some things are common to men as men,
as the Word and Prayer; some are common to them as Church members, or as
confederates with any particular Church, not considering this or another
Church, as the Sacraments; other things as special and proper to a particular
Church, etc. as Excommunication, Election, etc. So that a man may claim the
Sacrament as a confederate with any Church: And as a father giving instruction
to his children and servants, teaches them as a Father and Master; but, if
strangers come in and partake of the instruction, he teaches them not by
virtue of any such relation; so if a Pastor preach and give the Sacrament
occasionally, he acts not as a Pastor and Officer to them. This is the strength
of what our Brethren say, p. 278, 279, 280.

Reply 1. If our Brethren perceive not how they have overshot themselves, I
question not but any judicious Reader will quickly discern it, how they are
fallen from their own principles. Indeed the Answer were tolerable, if
preaching and giving the Sacrament were of the same nature and quality, and did
proceed pari passu, but seeing it is generally granted by our Congregational
Brethren, That Preaching is not always an act of Office, and that it is an act
which may be done by Gifted men; and that the administration of the Sacrament
is always an act of Office, and cannot be done but by one in Office, it is
most incongruously done to jumble these two together, and to make them alike in
this very case where they acknowledge the difference.

2. To the Sacrament two things are required, which are warily to be
distinguished; 1. A right in the Receiver to claim, and that indeed we have in
the supposed case, according to our Brethrens principles. 2. A power in the
Giver to administer, and this none has but an Officer, and none can do it but
as an Officer, and therefore no man can give it to any, but to them to whom he
is an Officer, and acts as an Officer, and therefore they cannot give it to any
member of other Congregations.

And this acute Mr. Hooker is so sensible of, that he grants it in terminis,
using these words; Touching the partaking of the Sacrament by some of one
Congregation in another, it has been a course which I have ever questioned,
and against it I have alleged many Arguments, professing the course
unwarrantable, for this reason (among others) because the administration of the
Sacrament is a Ministerial act, and cannot be done but by a Pastor or Teacher,
and what authority has he to do it, and they to receive it from him to whom he
is no Pastor; as he is cited by Cawdry, Inconsistency of Indep. Way, p. 203.
Nor do I see how this can be fairly avoided by any that stick to Congregational
principles, and I think such a strange paradox as this, asserted by so
considerable a person, and flowing from such principles, may justly render them
suspected to all impartial judges.

And whereas our Brethren here imply the contrary, and talk of a Pastors giving
the Sacrament to strangers not as a Pastor; 1. Let all men take notice that in
this they have deserted their own principles, and have through incogitancy
precipitated themselves into the gulf of Anabaptism, which, I doubt not, in
their next, either their prudence or their ingenuity will ob^ige them to
retract. 2. The Provincial Assembly were not obliged to take notice of the
excentrical opinions of every particular Congregational man, but of those which
were owned by the generality of them, and by such as seemed to be Pillars among
them; and sure I am, such will reject this notion of a man's giving the
Sacrament as a Gifted brother. They know the rule, Quod competit rei qua tali
competit omni tali; If a Pastor gives the Sacrament to strangers not as a
Pastor or Officer, but as a Gifted brother (for that is the other member of the
distinction) then every Gifted brother may administer the Sacrament, which I
suppose our Brethren will tremble to grant, and therefore they must call back
their own words too loosely delivered.

2. But however (say they) this is an argument against our practice, not the
assertion.

Reply. Yes, it may give just cause of suspicion of the truth of that
assertion, which inevitably draws along with it such a strange conclusion as
this, that no man may receive the Sacrament any where but in his own
Congregation, which is in a great measure to cut the sinews of Christian and
Church Communion; and yet for ought either I or Mr Hooker see, either this
conclusion must be embraced, or the principle rejected.

I pass on to the Reasons. There are (say the Assembly) seven ill consequences
which follow this assertion, That a Minister can perform no Pastoral act out
of his own Congregation: I shall reduce them to two or three.

1. Then a Minister at the same time preaches to his own members as a
Minister, and to others as a Gifted man only.

2. Then a Minister baptizeth only into his own Congregation, not into the
Catholic Church, contrary to 1 Cor. 12. 13. and so a Minister can baptize none
but those that are members of his own Congregation, and so there is no way to
baptize Heathens converted, nor the children of such parents as cannot be
members of any Congregation. And here our Brethren bring in that Argument
mentioned by the Provinc. That a Minister Ministerially admits into and ejects
out of the Church-Catholick, and therefore is a Minister of the
Church-Catholick, and not only of his particular Congregation, p. 281, etc.

Let us now hear what our Brethren have to Answer.

1. They say, We see no absurdity in saying that a Minister preaches to some
as an Officer, and at the same time preaches to others not as an Officer.

Reply 1. This is a conceit for which there is no shadow in the Scripture: Nay
it is not only (...) but (...), not only without, but against the evidence of
Scripture. Ministers wherever, or to whomsoever they do the work of
Ambassadors, whomsoever they beseech to be reconciled, to them they act as
Ambassadors: And whose sins soever they remit Doctrinally (which is an act of
Office) they are remitted; and whose sins soever they retain, in preaching,
they are retained, whether their hearers be strangers, or of their own
Congregation: And this they do by virtue of their Office. Surely it is very
harsh to say that all strangers which hear a Minister, are no more bound to
hear and obey him, then to hear or obey any woman discoursing privately of
those things; and that a stranger rej^cting his message, is no way guilty of
the contempt of his Office, (it will be an happy thing if that will be a
sufficient plea at the last day.) Nay by this rule the very Apostles themselves
(as we have more largely seen) must, when preaching to Heathens, be cantoned
into the order of Gifted men; and if that be true, it was no act of their
Office to disciple Nations, and to gather in the Saints: And all those Heathens
which are now converted by Ministers, are not converted by virtue of the
Ministers Office, nor was the Office of the Ministry appointed for the
gathering in of souls, but only for the building up of such as are brought in,
contrary to Mat. 28. and Ephesians. 4. as has been argued.

2. They argue against that position, That a man is made a member of the Church
by Baptism, p. 284. whereas indeed it is none of our assertion, and so all that
labor, both of theirs and Mr Hookers is lost. They cannot but know that we
allow Infants to be born Church Members, and make their Church Membership the
ground of their Baptism, and a par, a Heathen converted, and professing the
faith, is a Churchmember inchoate before Baptism; this only we say, That the
solemn, public and visible way of admission of members into the Church, is by
Baptism; and this cannot be easily denied by any one that looks either to the
Jewish or Christian Church: For as since the New Testament began, it has
always been the door of admission, so was it also unto Proselytes in the Old
Testament, who used to be admitted into the Jewish Church by Baptism, right
foot. Hammond. Seldom.
as diverse Learned Men have proved. Or if our Brethren question that, yet at
least, Circumcision (to which our Baptism answers) was the door of admission
into the Jewish Church. But of this more hereafter.

3. They deny that a Min^ster ejects out of the Catholic Church. Not the
Minister, but the person renouncing his profession ejects himself out of it; He
may be ejected with, and not by Excommunication And how can a man's being
ejected out of a particular Church, make him no member of the Catholic Church;
if being ejected out of Office in a particular Church, does not make a man no
Officer to the Catholic visible Church. p. 285.

Reply 1. Here two things are opposed which may be conjoined; For both the
person ejects himself, and the Minister ejects him: He ejects himself
meritoriously, the Minister efficiently and juridically.

2. Either a Minister ejecting a man justly out of his own Church, ejects him
out of all other Churches (and that cannot be but by virtue of a Catholic
Church, etc.) or he is not juridically ejected out of other Churches, and so he
is in a capacity of being received into other Churches, (which what horrid
confusion it would introduce into the Church of God, and how incongruous it is
unto his wisdom, in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, to
appoint a remedy so short and insufficient for the disease, I leave to all
sober men to judge.) And this is not a bare suggestion, for experience shows
that the effect of this principle is such, and persons juridically and justly
ejected out of one Church, have been admitted into another Church (who it may
be, apprehend him to have been unjustly dealt with) and according to this
principle there is no remedy, but so it must be.

3. For the ejecting of Officers, I say, 1. That a Church in their sense, i. e.
the body of the people, has no power of ejecting of Officers, as our Brethren
suppose. 2. That when a Minister is juridically ejected out of Office in a
particular Church by deposition, he cease to be an Officer to the Catholic
Church.

4. They say, according to our way also we cannot baptize Heathens, for if
there be a Catholic Church, Ministers are only Officers in the Church, and not
to the Heathens converted, so cannot baptize them.

Reply. Ministers are Officers not only to those that are actually members of
the Church, but to all that shall be brought in, as we have shown; they are
Officers even to Heathens, in the sense before explained, as they do ex officio
offer them a pardon, and give it upon their repentance, so they do ex officio
admit them into the Church.

5. They say, in such a case Heathens may join as members to some Church, and
so be baptized.

Reply. Our Brethren should not obtrude such uncouth notions upon the world
without evident proof. Their answer implies as if there were some other way
whereby a man might be made a complete Churchmember, without Baptism, whereas
in Scripture there is ne (...) quidem of any other door of admission: If there
be, let our Brethren show it; sure we are the New Testament way was by Baptism.
But of this more by and by.

And this is all of any moment which our Brethren have to say by way of Answer
to the foregoing Argument.

3. Another Argument used by the Provincial Assembly, was this, that From hence
it will follow, that when a Minister leaves, or is put from his particular
Charge, he cease to be a Minister; and so when he takes up a new Charge, he
needs a new Ordination, which is absurd, because every Minister is seated in
the Catholic Church, 1 Cor. 12. Ephesians. 4. And as a private Christian removing
from his Church, does not cease to be a member of the visible Church (for then
his Baptism should cease, for every baptized person is a Churchmember) and
needs not to be baptized a new; so a Minister going from a Congregation, needs
not to be Ordained a new.

To this our Brethren Answer diverse things.

1. They say, This runs into direct Anabaptism, for by this rule, an
Excommunicate person ceasing to be a member, his Baptism cease, and so he
needs to be rebaptized when he is readmitted. p. 292.

Reply I. But this follows not for a double reason.

1. It may be said, that an Excommunicate person ordinarily is a member, though
a diseased member, 2 Thessalonians. 3. -- Admonish him as a brother. He toward whom I
owe the duty of a fellow-member, is a fellow-member: But I owe the duty of a
fellow-member, viz. fraternal admonition to such an one. Again, He who is under
a Church Ordinance appointed for his good, is a Churchmember, though diseased,
and under cure: But such an one is under an Ordinance, Ergo.

2. Though his Baptism cease at present actual^y and really, as to all the
actual privileges of it, and so cease, that while he repents not, he is to
be looked upon after a sort, as an unbaptized person, or as an Heathen; yet
when he does repent and renew his Covenant, and re-admit himself to the Church,
he needs no new Baptism, for as much as God is pleased to impute to him his
former Baptism, and the Church accepts of it; And this is the benefit of his
repentance, that God looks upon his sins repented of, as if they had never been
committed, and so in that case he looks on him, as if he had never fallen from
his Baptism; and so he needs no new one: Just as it was in the case of
Circumcision, when any turned Heathen or Idolater, and renounced his
Circumcision, he was to be reputed as an Heathen, while such; and yet whenever
he repented, he needed no new Circumcision, but his former Circumcision was
accepted by God for him.

II. The Argument falls upon our Brethrens principles, not upon ours: For to us
(who assert that Baptism is the door of admission into the Catholic Church) it
is uncontroverted, that a man removing from one Church, may be admitted to any
other, because his Baptism gave him a complete visible and political
membership, not only with that Church he was admitted into, but with all
others: And this membership and Baptism, though they were lost in the sense
before spoken, yet upon his repentance are recovered. But our Brethren, who
make Baptism only the door of admission into a particular Church, they must own
this conclusion, That upon every removal there must be a new Baptism. Even as
it is in civil Corporations, which because they are distinct from one another,
and there is no general Corporation of which each of these are members,
therefore whenever a member passes from one to another, he needs to be
admitted a new, by what way soever they use in the admission of members. And to
save them from this intolerable inconvenience, they have no shelter but one,
which comes in the next place.

2. They say, Baptism does not admit, or make a man to stand in relation to any
Church, either general or particular, but it is a solemn sign of a persons
taking the Name of Christ upon him, and therefore that remains wherever he
removes. page 293.

Reply 1. Our Brethren granted even-now, that Baptism was a sign of a man's
admission to the Church.

2. This may well stand with its being a sign of a persons taking the Name of
Christ, nay indeed it is the same thing in substance, for what is a Church but
a company of men professing the Name of Christ? and what then is it to be a
solemn sign of a man's admission into the Church, but to be a solemn sign of his
being a professor of the Name of Christ?

3. What a monstrous paradox is this, Baptism makes not a man to stand in
relation to any Church: This should not have been dictated without any proof,
but demonstrated by clear evidences, it being against the judgment of the
whole Church. Surely the Apostle was not of this mind, when he said, We are all
baptized into one body, 1 Cor. 12. 13. By which it is most evident, that
Baptism gives a man relation to some Body, and it is also plain that he speaks
of a visible body, because it is an organical body, having the distinction of
teachers and taught, etc. And this Body, if it be the Church Catholic, (as we
say, and as the place proves, for as much as Jews and Gentiles are all members
of it) then we have our desire: If it be a Church particular, then Baptism
makes us to stand in relation to such a Church. And if this were meant of the
invisible body, and this Baptism of internal Baptism, yet it rationally
follows, that as the inward Baptism makes a man stand in relation to the
invisible Church, so does the external Baptism make him stand in relation to
the visible Church. Again, That which makes a man visibly stand in relation to
Christ, that makes him visibly to stand in relation to the Church: But Baptism
makes a man visibly to stand in relation to Christ, Ergo. The major is plain,
because the Church and the Church only, and the members of it, stand in visible
relation to Christ: The minor is evident from Rom 6. 3. Know ye not that so
many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ, were baptized into his death.
Gal. 3. 27. For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ, have put on
Christ; Therefore Baptism makes a man stand in relation to the Church. Again,
That which makes a man visibly to stand in a Covenant relation, makes a man to
stand in relation to a Church: But Baptism makes a man visibly to stand in a
Covenant relation; Ergo. The major cannot be denied, because of the identity of
a Covenant and Church relation: All and only they that are really in Covenant,
are really members of the invisible Church: And all and only such as are
visibly in Covenant, are members of the visible Church: The minor must needs be
granted by every one that understands the nature of Baptism: Baptism is the
seal of the Covenant; and to say the seal of the Covenant makes not a man to
stand in relation to the Covenant, is a contradiction. Lastly, That which makes
a man capable of Church Priviledges, makes him stand in relation to a Church:
But Baptism makes a man capable of Church Priviledges, v. g. of the Supper,
etc. (which unbaptized persons are not capable of) Ergo it makes a man stand in
relation to a Church. So then this paradox being disproved (that I may reduce
these things to my main scope) and it being evident that Baptism makes a man
stand in relation to some Church, and that visible too (which all grant) it
remains either that there is a Catholic visible Church, to which Baptism makes
a man to stand related; or if the Church into which it admits a man be only a
particular Church, then upon every removal, there must be, as a new admission,
so a new Baptism.

3. They say, An Officer may be said to be set in the whole Church, though his
authority reaches only to a part: as it may be said, There are set in the
Commonwealth, Justices, Constables, etc. and yet this proves not that besides
their relation to their Precincts, they have a relation to the Commonwealth,
and a power to act there.

Reply 1. That phraseology sufficiently implies that the Commonwealth, wherein
they are set, is one Political body, and so a pari, that phrase, God has set
in the Church, whatsoever that Church is, it proves it to be one Political body.

2. The case wholly differs, for Justices, Constables, etc. have limited
Commissions, confined to their particular Precincts; whereas the Commission of
Ministers is large and universal (as has been proved.) If our Brethren would
choose a fit resemblance, let them take it from that of the Empire before
mentioned, wherein the Princes are set in and over the whole Empire, and he
that shall say, In the Empire are set Princes, States, etc. shall imply that
such Princes and States, besides their special relation to their particular
Territories, have another relation to the whole Empire.

3. It is not barely the phrase we rest upon, but the sense and the explication
of the phrase given us by other Scriptures, and which necessity requires in
this place, as plainly appears from the Apostles, who were so set in the
Church, that they were also set over the Church; so are not Justices, they are
in, not over the Commonwealth; and who, besides a special relation to their
particular parts (which we have before discoursed of,) have also a relation to,
and over the whole Church: And so have other Ministers to, suo modo, as has
been proved; and both Apostles and Ministers are equalized in this, that they
are in and over the whole Church, and so have a relation to it.

4. They say, The Church, in 1 Cor. 12. may be taken for this or that Church;
and so the body to be edified, for this or that particular body, Ephesians. 4.

Reply. That cannot be, for it is one Church in which all the Apostles and
Ministers are set, 1 Cor. 12. It is one body which all the Apostles and
Pastors, etc. were given to edify and perfect. It is that body into which we
all are baptized, both Jews and Gentiles, 1 Cor. 12. 13. It is that one body
which is Christ, i. e. mystical, which is made up of all the members of Christ,
v. 12. It is that one body which is called the whole body, Ephesians. 4. 16. From
whom the whole body fitly joined together, etc. And surely he had need have a
good confidence of his abilities, that will assert, that all this is true of a
particular Church.

Another Argument used by the Provincial Assembly was this, That hence it
follows that if a people unjustly through covetousness, starve a Minister from
them, or through heresy or schism vote him down, in that case it is in their
power to nullify the Office of a Minister.

To this our Brethren answer (...), That

1. Though the people sin, yet indeed they do nullify the Office of a
Minister, as if they should murder a Minister, they nullify his Office, and
if they may debar him from the exercise of his Office, why may they not make
void his Office?

Reply 1. Our Brethren confound two things vastly differing, to wit, the
nullifying of the Office, and the hindering of the exercise of the Office; It is
true, the peoples opposition, nay indeed one man's violence may hinder the
exercise, but cannot nullify the Office.

2. I demand whether this hold of the Apostles or no: The Apostles were made
Officers to the Church only, (say our Brethren) and they say they were
constituted Officers by the Church, alleging Acts 1. (although the Scripture
tell us the Apostles were neither of man, nor by man*) Well then, this being
premised, Suppose when the Catholic Church was confined to one Congregation,
this Congregation had proved heretical, and voted down the Apostles: I only
suppose it, and suppositions are allowed by all, and to deny that liberty is a
tergiversation: Nor does this supposition imply any contradiction to that
promise that God has made, that he will preserve his Church, for that might
have been preserved in the Apostles alone. I now Quaere, Whether in this case
the Apostolical Office had been null or no?

If they affirm it, as it is a strange assertion, so it is also false: For 1.
The Apostles were not constituted by man, and therefore their Office could not
be nullified by man. 2. The Apostles in such a case had a power officially and
authoritatively to denounce the wrath of God against them, Mat. 10. 14. And
whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear your words, when ye depart -- shake
off the dust of your feet. 3. They were Apostles even to Heathens to be
converted, as we have proved.

If they deny it, I prove it thus, that it must needs follow from their
principles: For

1. The Church being, according to them, the adequate correlatum of the
Apostles, the Church ceasing, they must needs cease also.

2. Ejusdem est instituere and destituere, and seeing they allow the
institution and constitution of the Apostles to the people.

3. I thus disprove that monstrous paradox: That which renders it in the power
of men's lusts or humors to nullify the promises of Christ, the authority, end
and use of Christ's Ambassadors, is most absurd. That which makes it in the
power of men, whether there shall be any Officially to preach peace, to remit
sins, etc. is highly dangerous; But such is this doctrine. I prove the minor by
these steps; 1. There are now none but ordinary Ministers in the Church. 2. The
essence of a Minister (say our Brethren) consists in relation to a particular
Church, which is his correlatum, and sublato uno relatorum tollitur alterum, so
that when that relation cease, his Ministry cease. 3. It is in the power of
the people to dissolve that relation, to eject a Minister; so say our Brethren,
and it is generally asserted by Congregational men. 4. That which one
Congregation may do, another may do, and so every one may do: Suppose then that
there are twenty, and but twenty Congregations in the world, if each of these
resolve severally to eject their Ministers, through covetousness, heresy,
etc. I say, then it is in the power of these men to falsify Christ's word, and
destroy the authority, end and use of Christ's Ambassadors. But you will say, it
is in the power of men to kill these Ministers, one as well as another, and so
thereby, as well as by our way, it is in the power of men to disanull the
promise of Christ. And therefore as it would be answered in that case, that the
bones of Christ were breakable, yet by divine providence were kept from being
broken; so though it is remote in the power of men to kill all those Ministers,
yet God will restrain them from the act of killing them, that he may keep his
promise; in like manner though it is in the power of such Churches to depose
them, yet God will hinder the act, etc.

I Answer the case is wholly different, the one is an act of horrid violence,
the other a juridical act, and here is the great inconvenience for a man to
assert, that Jesus Christ has given to every Congregation a juridical power to
depose their Ministers when ever they please, for the power of judging is left
by our Brethren in their hands; and to disanul an Ordinance of Christ, and to
punish an Officer and Ambassador of Christ without his fault, and without all
hope of remedy: In what a sad condition were Gospel Ministers, if it were in
the power of their people upon every Capricio, when ever the humor takes them,
to rob a godly Minister, it may be for the faithful discharge of his duty among
them, of that which he accounts better than a world, and that without any
possibility of redress, forasmuch as he has none to make his appeal to. How
secure might a people be in their wickedness, if when a Minister reproves them
sharply for their sins, they might take away from their Minister the power of
reclaiming their sins, or officially denouncing wrath against them.

But they have a second Answer to relieve them. If such a rejection of their
Officers do not nullify his Office, the reason is, because he is de jure, and
of right still over that Church as their Officer, though hindered from the
exercise of his Office.

And this indeed is much more tolerable than the other, but our Brethren have
lost the benefit of this refuge, forasmuch as they positively acknowledge, that
the people have a power to annull his Office: And besides it helps them not at
all; for if the people, and they only, they beyond appeal, have a full
juridical power of deposing and rejecting their Ministers (as our Brethren
hold) then they only have a power to judge whether the cause of the deposition
be just or unjust, and be it just, or unjust, the Minister has no way but to
acquiesce in their sentence; for if once this gap were opened, either in Church
or State, that a person judged and censured might thwart the judgment of the
supreme Court, by his private opinion, it would introduce intolerable
confusion: It is true in such a case he may appeal to God, and find comfort in
this, that in fero Dei his cause is good, but as for the forum humanum he is
gone irrecoverably: And however neighboring Churches, or Ministers may
endeavor to convince and rectify such a Church, and to persuade them to own
him as their Minister, yet, if they will persist, they must all be contented,
and he must not be owned for a Minister. And thus much may serve for the
Vindication of those Arguments which were urged by the Assembly.

I shall now take notice of two or three of their Arguments.

Their chief Argument is this: A Minister is a Pastor only to his own Flock:
But it is only a particular Church which is his Flock; Ergo He is a Pastor
only to his particular Church: The minor is proved thus, All that is a man's
Flock, he is commanded actually to feed, and to take heed to, and he sins if he
do not, Acts 20. 28. But no Bishop is commanded actually to feed the whole
Church, Ergo the whole Church is not his Flock, p. 8.

Ans. 1. The major of the first Syllogism is untrue: A Minister is a Pastor
to his own Flock especially, but not only.

2. The major of the second Syllogism is denied, A Minister is not obliged
actually to feed all his Flock; and I suppose I shall give an unanswerable
reason for the denial of it: Every Apostle was a Catholic Pastor, and so had
the whole Church for his Flock, Mat. 28. 19, 20. Here our Brethren are
consenters: But every Apostle was not obliged actually to feed the whole
Church, and all Nations, they neither did it, nor was it possible for them to
do it, and therefore their work was divided among them; the Circumcision being
more especially committed to Peter, and the uncircumcision to Paul: And yet,
although by this distribution, Paul had a special relation to the Gentiles, and
was obliged to feed them more especially, yet he had upon him the care of all
the Churches, and it was his duty, as far as his ability and occasions reached,
to feed the whole Church, and no farther: And so it is with ordinary Ministers,
though they are especially obliged to feed their own Flocks, and indeed can do
no more constantly, yet according to their ability and opportunity they are
bound to feed the whole Church, by teaching, and consulting, etc. And this is
the only Argument urged formally in this place against our Assertion. But
because there are some other passages which seem to be argumentative, though
scattered elsewhere, I thought fit to do them that right, as to bring them in
here, that so the Reader might see all their strength together.

Their second Argument is this; This makes the power of ordinary Ministers as
extensive and large as that of the Apostles.

Ans. I Answer plainly and clearly, that the difference between Apostolical and
Pastoral power lies not in the extent of their relation (If any assert it, let
them prove it) but in the independency, superiority, and singularity of
jurisdiction, which, if it be not sufficient to distinguish between Apostles,
and ordinary Ministers, besides their excellent and infallible gifts, I dare
make our Brethren Judges.

Their third Argument is this; Ministers are only Pastors to them whom they
can govern, as well as teach: but Ministers cannot exercise Church Government
toward Heathens, for they are not their Flock; and therefore in preaching to
Heathens they act not as Officers, but as gifted brethren, p. 18.

The Answer to this is not difficult; If the not exercising of Government be a
sufficient foundation for this assertion, that a Minister preaches not to such
as a Pastor, then the Apostles did not preach as Officers to Heathens, for
toward such they could not exercise Church Government: What have I to do to
judge them that are without, 1 Cor. 5. 12. But the Apostles did preach as
Officers to Heathens, which has been already fully proved.

Their fourth Argument is; That this brings in Episcopacy, to make one man an
Officer over many Churches. And this Argument I have often wondered to meet in
all sorts of anti-Presbyterians, Greeks, and Barbarians, wise and unwise,
learned and unlearned, all agree in this charge; and they prosecute it with so
much confidence, and eagerness, that if a man had so much charity, or so
little judgment as to believe them, he would think there were no difference
between Geneva and Canterbury.

For Answer, to omit other differences which might be insisted on, as 1. That
the Episcopal way leaves to inferior Ministers nothing but the Name and Title
of Officers, all power of jurisdiction being engrossed into the Bishops hands;
whereby all other Ministers are made a strange kind of men, being Officers
without Office, Rulers without rule, etc. Whereas in the Presbyterian way,
every particular Officer is confessedly invested with, and has liberty for the
exercise of his Office, and power as need requires.

2. That Government by Bishops, is a Government by foreigners, as it were, the
power of Ruling being neither in the hands of the people, nor of any chosen by
them, (as it is in the Presbyterian way) but in the hands of persons wholly
extraneous to most of the Churches they rule, and generally, neither knowing
of, nor known to those whom they undertake to govern. But I wave these things
and many other, as being extravagant in this place: This only I observe for the
present purpose.

The formality of Episcopacy lies in this, in the superiority of one Pastor to
another, and to many other; and of one Church to all the rest in a Diocese;
not in the superiority of a College of Pastors, or convention of Churches over
one Pastor or Church: Will any indite the Apostles for introducing Episcopacy,
because all the Apostles met together, Acts 15. did assume a superiority over
Paul, (who was there met, as the rest, in the capacity of an Elder) and examine
and judge of his Doctrine? Shall any man say the united Provinces in the
Low Countries are under a Monarchy, because every particular Governor, etc. is
subject and accountable to the rest of the Governors, the States General?
this no man will say but he that understands not the difference between
Government by one, and by many: And therefore it is equally absurd to charge us
with Episcopacy, because we would have every particular Officer and Church
subject (not to any one man, that, and that alone is Episcopacy) but to a
convetion of Officers, etc. And therefore for the future I shall desire our
Brethren to forbear such frivolous and intemperate accusations. And this is all
that I shall say to this present Question, closing only with this intimation,
that I principally recommend the serious and impartial consideration of what is
here said, unto such, who though they profess they will be ordained (and we
are obliged to believe their professions) yet for the present refuse it,
because they are not called to any particular charge; I hope what has been
said will satisfy some at least, that although it is convenient that every
Minister should have relation to some one Church, yet he has also a relation
to the whole, and his relation to a particular Church as a Lecturer is
foundation fully sufficient for his Ordination.

CHAP. IV.
THe principal Question is this:

Whether Gifted persons may preach ordinarily without Ordination.

State of the Question.
I shall not need to take much pains about the stating of the Question, that
being fully done in the Assemblies. Book. These things only I shall say,

1. We speak of persons truly gifted, not every one that conceits himself to be
gifted; not of them, who, however in their own conceits they are gifted, yet
indeed have need to be instructed in the Principles of Religion: And that is
the true case of many of our gifted preachers in England: For such our Brethren
say they do not plead, and yet I cannot tell what to make of this, if it look
not that way, when they say, Though one that is really gifted, for ought we
know may lawfully preach without approbation, from the Church or others, yet it
may be inexpedient; so that hereby it is left to every man (as to the
lawfulness of it) to judge of his gifts, and to preach, if he think himself
fit. This also must be said, that the assertion of this Doctrine was that which
opened the gap unto all that crew, and which has been the unhappy occasion of
involving this poor Church and Nation in those crowds of errors and confusion
which are now too rise amongst us.

2. We dispute not what may be done in cases of necessity, either in preaching
to Heathens, etc. or in preaching in order to trial, (which is necessary to
take an account of a man's sufficiency for the Work.)

3. We do not in this place restrain Ordination to our way of Ordination:
Whether it belongs to the Presbytery or to the people to ordain, we are not
concerned in this Question, which is barely this: Whether a solemn mission or
setting apart be necessary for a man's ordinary preaching? Our Brethren deny. We
affirm.

But for the full understanding of the Question, I refer the Reader to our Ius
Divinum; wherein, because out Brethren acquarrell some things, I shall take
notice of what deserves Animadversion.

The main thing is this, They find fault with the definition given of
Preaching, and they say, Any publishing, opening or applying Gospel Truths to
any persons for the uses and ends they serve to, yea though it be but to a
single person, is Preaching. By this rule we are all Preachers, bond and free,
male and female, wise and unwise, seeing this is frequently done by persons of
all sorts, and in this sense, both men and women are said (...), such preaching
we dispute not against, but enjoin it to people of all sorts. In that sense we
do, as Moses, wish that all the Lords people were Prophets: This is that which
upon all occasions we press private Christians to; that they would instruct the
ignorant, admonish the unruly, etc. privately. And truly this business
conscienciously managed, would so take up the gifts and time of most
Christians, that they would never be charged at the last day for wrapping their
Talents in a napkin, though they never assumed the public work of the Ministry.

It is then public Preaching that we dispute against, we will not quarrel
about words: If that shall be Preaching which our Brethren will call so, be it
so; then in that sense we dispute not against Preaching, but Preaching
publicly.

There is another thing which they cannot digest, to wit, the distinction which
we made between Preaching, and the speaking of a General to his Army, etc.
wherein the object is a Congregation, not sacred, but merely civil, etc. To
this they say, It is preaching, though the object of it be a Congregation not
sacred, but profane and Idolatrous, for Infidels are to be preached to: And if
the General of an Army open and apply Scriptures, not for a civil end chiefly,
but for the instruction and edification of those he speaks to, and this, not in
an intermixed way to qualify civil actions, how this can be denied to be
preaching, we know not.

To which I Reply, 1. In that case we must distinguish between finis operis,
and finis operantis; the end of the work in its own nature, and the end of the
worker. Suppose a Philosophy Professor is reading a Philosophical Lecture of
the existence of God, or the immortality of the soul, (wherein he takes
occasion to open and apply diverse Scriptures) possibly he being a good man, may
aim at the spiritual and eternal good of his hearers, yet none will call this
preaching, because though the end of the Reader was, their salvation, yet the
end of the Reading was quite of another nature. So if a religious General in
speaking to his Army, when going to fight, principally aims at the salvation of
their souls, yet this is not preaching; for though his end in speaking be their
salvation, yet indeed the end of the work in it self (and that is it by which
all actions must be estimated, for the end of the actors may be various and
infinite) I say, the end of the work is to encourage them to the battle.

2. A company of Heathens met together in the case supposed, though they are
not a sacred Congregation, yet the end of their meeting (suppose to hear Paul
preach to them) is sacred, I mean, the end of the work, though not the end of
the workers; and however it is with the hearers, yet the end of the actor or
speaker is purely and solely the salvation of their souls; and so it is truly,
and may properly be called Preaching.

3. But in this case, I say, a General may not publicly open and apply
Scriptures to his Army, unless in a case of necessity, or in order to a civil
end, i. e. their encouragement to battle.

There is one thing more in the stating of the Question, which they trouble
themselves much about, concerning our sense in the use of that phrase of
authoritative preaching, and how they tell us, that Authority is sometimes
taken for a right or power to do some public work; sometimes for the majesty*
fervor and gravity which is to attend the dispensation of the Gospel; sometimes
for that power which an Officer has over his people; and (say they) we judge
that our Brethren take authoritative preaching in this sense, because they
oppose it to brotherly charitative preaching. But this is to seek a knot in a
bulrush, for our meaning was sufficiently plain, and we did not speak of an
authoritative preaching, as if we did allow any public preaching which is not
authoritative, but only put it as a character of, and convertible with public
preaching (unless in cases of necessity) and so the Assembly expressed
themselves clearly and fully; We distinguish, say they, between a private,
brotherly teaching, etc. and an authoritative publick-teaching.

And this is all I shall say for the stating of the Question, which now I come
to discuss, and I shall do it (...), in this method:

1. I shall propound and Answer their Arguments.

2. I shall propound and Vindicate our Arguments. And this method (though
somewhat preposterous) I choose, because I would follow the order of their book
as far as I can with any convenience.

CHAP. V.
THeir first Argument is this:

Election must go before Ordination: But a person must preach, yea preach
frequently and ordinarily, before Election, for without this the people cannot
discern his gifts, etc. Ergo Persons not Ordained may ordinarily preach.

Ans. 1. They know their major is not beyond exception, but I let that pass,
because afterward we shall handle it more fully.

2. For their minor, if it be true, then preaching frequently and ordinarily in
that case is necessary, i. e. for the trial of their gifts, and that we dispute
not about, but whether out of a case of necessity one may preach ordinarily
without Ordination.

But this first Argument I suppose they intended only for Velitation: Their
second Argument is the Achilles, which I must now come to grapple with. There
are two pillars of their cause, Scripture precept, and Scripture example
alleged; and indeed either of these shall serve turn: But we must not take
them upon their bare word, but weigh what they have said in the balance of the
Sanctuary. It is Scripture precept which is here discussed.

Their second Argument then is this:

Such as are commanded to preach may preach: But some men not Ordained are
commanded to preach; Ergo. The minor they prove thus; All that are apt to
teach, are commanded to teach: This they attempt to prove from 1 Pet. 4. 10,
11. but by their favor let us add v. 9. to it, for our Brethren represent the
place imagint lusca, with an half face. The whole (...) is this, v. 9. Use
hospitality one to another without grudging. V. 10. As every man has received
the gift, even so minister the same one to another, as good stewards of the
manifold grace of God. V. 11. If any man speak, let him speak as the oracles of
God; if any minister, let him do it as of the ability which God gives. Where
any indifferent Reader will observe the words mainly insisted upon, to be like
a little Isthmus of land between two seas, to either of which it may be
related: Or like a tree standing in the confines of two Counties, it being hard
to determine to which County it belongs. It may look backward and relate to
hospitality; It may look forward and relate to speaking and ministering; and the
words will bear either sense, but both senses it cannot bear, that being an
undoubted truth, that Sensus unius loci literalis non est nisi unicus; and to
demonstrate that it must relate to this, and cannot relate to the other, will
be found very difficult, if not impossible: And yet upon this doubtful place
our Brethren hang the weight of their Cause.

I find a threefold sense given of these words: Some refer it to the gift of
speaking by any, etc. Others, to the Office of speakers. Others, to the giving
of Alms: Of these I shall speak in order, premising only one thing, (which is
well suggested by Dr Collings) i. e. that whatever the sense of the place is if
it be a command to preach, yet this Epistle being written to strangers, and in
a scattered estate of the Church; that might be lawful to them in that case of
necessity, which otherwise is unlawful: But I will not press that too far.

First then, Their sense is this; That whatsoever gift a man has he is
required to exercise it; if he has a gift to preach, and that publicly, he
must preach, etc. And to prove this sense, I observe they use three Arguments,
which I shall propound and consider.

1. It is a gift indefinitely, and therefore it may extend to all gifts. p. 32.

Ans. 1. And suppose it do extend to all gifts, it is a truth granted by us,
that whatsoever gift a man has, he ought to exercise it, but still, as he is
called to it, and in his own sphere.

2. Nothing more usual then for an expression indefinite in words, to be
definite in sense, and to be limited pro subjecta materia, according to the
matter in hand. It would be vanity to multiply instances in a case so known. If
our Brethren were discoursing with an Arminian, about the extent of Christ's
death, who should urge the word world, and mankind, and infer as they do, that
the word being indefinite, it is to be taken of all mankind, they would quickly
find an answer, that such indefinite expressions are to be compared with, and
explained by other places, where they are restrained; and the same Answer may
stop the mouth of this Argument: So that to argue from the indefinitenesse of
the phrase is but loose reasoning.

2. They say, This general expression must be interpreted and limited by that
which follows, If any man speak, etc. page 33.

Ans. 1. It may every whit as well be limited and interpreted by the foregoing
words, and if so, then all that our Brethren say from these words falls to the
ground.

2. If it must be limited by the following words, so it may, without any
prejudice to our cause, in this manner, v. 10. he lays this down in the
general, that every man that has a gift must use it; then in the 11th verse,
he instanceth in two sorts of men that have received gifts, to wit, Ministers
and Deacons, who must be careful to use their gifts, and therefore in like
manner all others are obliged to use the gifts that God has given them: Or if
they will not allow these to be Officers, it may be limited, according to their
own apprehensions, that as every man in general is to use his gifts, so in
particular every man that has preaching gifts is to use them; but how? i. e.
as far as God does call him forth to the use of them, but no further; and to us
there appears no ordinary way now of Gods calling forth men to this work, but
by Ordination.

3. They argue from the particle As; As he has received, i. e. according to
the nature of his gift, he that has private gifts, must use them privately; he
that has public gifts, i. e. gifts fit for public use, must use them
publicly, p. 33.

Ans. 1. The word (...) may well be understood causally, because he has
received it.

2. And if it be meant thus (which we say is a truth) that God expects an use
of talents, proportionable to what he gives, yet every one must act in his
order, and in his place and sphere, and as God calls him forth, as we shall see
more fully by and by.

3. But what if this proportion be meant of Almes-giving? then all that they
say falls to the ground.

Thus we have seen how our Brethren sense this place, and what are the reasons
that prevail with them so to do, which whether they be of that consequence as
to justify them in the holding of an opinion so offensive to thousands of
sincere Christians, and so introductory of all confusion, I leave to sober
Readers to judge. And yet their own sense does draw after it such gross and
manifest absurdities, that they dare not abide by it absolutely, but qualify
it with an exception sufficient to invalidate all their Argument.

They say, By this text all gifted persons are commanded to preach, unless
there can be shown some Scripture-prohibition to forbid their preaching. p. 35.

To which I reply two things; 1. Hereby the plea is removed to another Court,
and the Question lies here, Whether elsewhere there be any prohibition? which
must be judged afterward, by comparing our Arguments and their Answers.

2. It lies not upon us to show a prohibition to restrain them from preaching,
but upon them to show a warrant for preaching (seeing for instituted worship we
must have a positive warrant) which this place we see affords not, and whether
any other place affords, we shall see hereafter. But we must not yet part with
our Brethrens Argument from this place. There are three or four difficulties
with which it is gravel'd.

The first is that urged by Dr Collins, Here is not only a liberty granted, but
a duty enjoined, so that by this Text, gifted persons not only may, but must
preach, and that without election or calling, for the Churches neglect of their
duty, must not make him neglect his.

The full vindication of this, I shall leave to that reverend Author, but I
cannot wholly let it go untouched: I shall form the Argument thus, They who are
by virtue of a divine precept to preach the Gospel, are to do it necessarily,
Necessity is laid upon me, yea, woe is unto me if I preach not the Gospel, they
are to do it in season and out of season, they are to give themselves wholly to
these things, they are not to leave the Word of God to serve tables: But all
that have preaching gifts are not under such obligations, our Brethren being
Judges. Ergo, they are not obliged to preach the Gospel.

The major I prove, Ubi lex non distinguit, non est distinguendum. The
Scripture takes no notice of two sorts of preachers, whereof the one may preach
seldomer or oftener as they please, and as the Church desires; and the other
must preach frequently, constantly; and even those upon whom the lest
obligation lies in our Brethrens opinion, are commanded. It is true no
preachers are in Scripture obliged to preach in such or such a place, nor to
preach so often (the determination of these and other like circumstances, is
left to the rules of prudence, and general direction of the word) yet all are
obliged to be instant and diligent in the work: And as the service of the
Church is unspeakably to be preferred before the best merchandise, and Gods
glory before their own wordly interest; so when a man has received gifts for
the service of preaching, if these commands oblige him to preach, they oblige
him to throw off all the impediments of that noble work, and to give himself
wholly to these things: And the rather, because of our Brethrens own Argument;
A man must exercise his gift as he has received it. Now if a man have ability
to preach ordinarily and constantly every Lords day, if he would use sufficient
diligence, such a man discharges not his trust in preaching sparingly and
occasionally only.

Obj. But they say, that the case of a Minister and a gifted brother are alike
in this, A Minister sins not, if he be put out of employment, and cast into a
place where his gifts are not desired, etc. And so it is with gifted men, etc.

Ans. Will our Brethren then say, that others not desiring a man to exercise
his gifts, will justify him in the not exercising of it? Can any man dispense
with another wrapping his Talent in a napkin? What if Paul had come to a place
where he was not desired to preach, (which often was his case) was he then free
from his necessity of preching? Or what if a Church grow weary of hearing and
preaching, so that they desire not their Pastor to preach among them, Will
this excuse him, if he throw off preaching? For my part I must profess, were I
in that case, though I might think it more advantageous to the Church to
dispose of my self in some other place. yet should I by no means look at it as
a dispensation from the work of preaching, though no man should desire me,
(were there but any that would hear me.) Nay more, where the Apostles were not
only, not desired, but forbidden to preach, yet they accounted it their duty to
continue in that work. Whether that hold in ordinary Ministers, I shall not now
dispute; this only I shall say, (and that is fully sufficient for our purpose)
that if a Minister be put out of employment, or be in a place where he is not
desired to preach, yet if he may be permitted to preach, and the affairs of the
Church require it, he ought to do it, or to employ himself in some other way,
which may be equivalent for the Churches service.

I shall add but one Argument to our Brethren, taken from their own words;
Whatsoever duty a man may lawfully do, that he is bound to do: But one that is
really gifted for preaching (for ought we know) may lawfully preach without
approbation from a Church, or from others, say they; Therefore, one that is
really gifted is bound to preach, although neither the Church nor others do
approve it, much less desire it. The major is most clear, and it were a
contradiction to say, that such a thing is a duty, which may in such a case be
lawfully done, and yet that it is not his duty, or that he is not bound to it:
The minor is their own words. And this is the first inconvenience their sense
of this place runs upon.

A second is this, That hereby it will follow that women may, nay must preach.

A third is, That by the same rule, every one who has a gift to be a General,
Magistrate, etc. may undertake those places: To these our Brethren say
something by way of Answer; but the Reply I must leave to him who is more
concerned in them: they are so fully and largely discussed by diverse already,
that it is needless to say any thing more of them, and we may have occasion to
speak of them hereafter.

But the fourth and principal thing is this: It is true, every one is to
exercise his gift, but in his own sphere, public persons publicly, private
persons privately; and so did Aquila and Priscilla, Acts 18. and those women,
Phil. 4. 3.

And because here the shoe pincheth, our Brethren make a strong attempt against
this assertion, and endeavor to batter it down by diverse Considerations.

For the examples of Aquila and Priscilla, they say, 1. It appears not whether
they were apt to preach publicly or no. p. 42.

Ans. 1. It appears that they were excellently gifted, in such a measure that
Paul calls them his co-workers, or fellow laborers (for so much the word (...)
imports) in the work of the Gospel, Romans 16. 3. Nor is it in the least
intimated that they were not gifted to speak in public; and therefore seeing
the excellency of their gifts is mentioned, without any note of restraint or
diminution, it is most ingenuous and reasonable, to conclude they were apt to
speak publicly.

2. They instructed Apollo privately, for that was most expedient. p. 42.

Ans. It is true it was most fit to do it privately, yet not so, as that it was
inconvenient to advise Apollo to be a diligent hearer publicly: They might
have taught Apollo (with others) publicly, without any reflection upon him:
Seeing therefore we read of their doing it privately, not a word of their
doing it publicly; it is a certain truth which we assert, that they instructed
privately, and but a mere supposition that they did, or might do it publicly.

2. As to the main Objection they say many things: To take notice of all they
say will be needless: The strength of what they have, lies in these things:

1. Private men may do the same work with preaching, i. e. they may open and
apply Scriptures, exhort, rebuke, etc. p. 44.

And because they know we grant this, and say they may do the same work, but
not in the same manner, not publicly, they add

2. That every Churchmember is obliged to teach and admonish every fellow
member, as occasion requires, p 46.

Ans. If they mean that every member is bound to do this publicly (else it is
nothing to the purpose, for to do it privately we allow) then not only gifted
brethren, but all the brethren, yea and sisters to, not only may, but must turn
public preachers.

3. A public gift cannot be fully improved, if it be not used publicly, but
privately only, p. 47.

Ans. 1. If therefore any really have public gifts, and desire to use them
publicly, let them with the household of Stephanas, addict themselves wholly to
the work of the Ministry, and not interlope betwixt two Callings.

2. I would know of our Brethren, whether this general rule (upon which their
Argument hangs) be true or false, to wit, That the bare having of a gift fit
for public use, is of it self a sufficient ground for that public use of it,
without any other call. If they say that it is not true in the general, but
only true in this particular case, then they discover to all the world, that it
is but an hypothesis of their own, merely taken up for the defense of a
prae-conceived opinion: If they say it is true in the general, then, what if a
woman is gifted to teach? or a man gifted to rule? The Argument is every whit
as strong. I will return their own Argument upon them thus. Every man ought
fully to improve the gift he has, and if he have a public gift, he ought to
improve it publicly: But many private men have the gift of Ruling, Judging,
Leading an Army, etc. and this gift cannot be fully improved, but by the
public exercise of it: Therefore such private men ought publicly to exercise
such gifts. There is no way to avoid this conclusion, but by saying that
besides these gifts a call is required, which till a man has, he is not
obliged to exercise his gifts publicly. And the same Answer (if our Brethren
will be candid) may satisfy them, That besides preaching gifts, there is a
call required (whatever that call be) and till a man has that call he is not
to exercise his preaching gifts publicly, nor do his gifts oblige him or
warrant him thereunto.

4. They say, Publicknesse in acting is not so material a thing, it does not
make an act to be an act of Office, the publickness of the act does not make it
preaching; private men spoke publicly, Acts 15. 12. Any private men may give
Alms publicly in the Assembly, which is the Deacons Office. p. 49.

Ans. 1. Though bare publicknesse of speaking makes it not preaching, yet that
is one main ingredient of that preaching which is now in Question, and (as we
judge) a property of Authoritative preaching: And so material is the difference
between public and private teaching or preaching (call it what you will, for I
hate logomachies) that although this latter is allowed to women, and was
performed by Priscilla, yet public teaching, or teaching in the
Church-Assembly is forbidden to women upon this account, because it is an
authoritative act, as is most evident from 1 Cor. 14. 34. and 1 Timothy 2. 11, 12.
where the very reason given why they must not teach in public, is because they
must not usurp authority; concluding beyond contradiction, that to preach
publicly is an act of authority, and inconsistent with a state of subjection,
and therefore not to be performed by any who are in a state of subjection, and
under obedience to Officers, whether men or women. Yea further, whereas some of
our Brethren contend, that although preaching constantly in public be
unlawful to gifted men, yet preaching occasionally may be lawful. I offer it
to their consideration, that it is not only preaching constantly, which is here
forbidden to women, but also preaching occasionally, though but once in
public, seeing even such preaching is accounted an act of authority: And
therefore by a parity of reason gifted men are forbidden to preach, not only
constantly, but also occasionally (further then necessity requires, etc)

2. For Acts 15. we allow private men, though not to preach, yet to speak
publicly in diverse cases, as at Vestries, Synods, etc. sometimes propounding
questions, desiring to be further satisfied, etc.

3. For the last clause it is a mere fallacy; for though in that case a private
man give his alms publicly, yet indeed he does not give the Public Alms
(which is the Deacons office) but only his own private alms he gives in a
public way.

5. They say, It is usual for a man being requested, to do the work of another
man's calling; one that is no Schoolmaster may tend a School occasionally for a
few days, and yet he does not go out of his sphere. p. 50.

Ans. The parallel no way holds, for, though for other reasons the gift of some
Schoolmasters places is limited, yet indeed in it self, neither the Office nor
Work of a Schoolmaster is restrained, either by Divine or Humane Law; any man
that is fit, may manage it, and we see ordinarily persons uncalled set up
Schools without any authority, and yet without any blame. If they would have a
fit parallel, take that of a Magistrate; What if a Justice of the peace request
another man to sit for him upon the bench? may he do it? I trow not.

6 They say, A man may choose it as his calling to preach, and fit himself for
it, etc. (though he do not own Ordination as that which gives him a call) now
in this case, he does not go out of his calling to preach. Men who have other
callings, may leave them and become teachers, Heb. 5. 12. Nor does the 1 Cor.
7. 20. forbid a change of callings, but only command a man in his calling to
abide with God, v. 24. p. 51.

Ans. I. Designation of a man's self to a calling, is one thing, and a solemn
inauguration into that calling is another thing: Suppose a man design himself
for the service of a state, etc. until he be by authority installed into some
Office of State, he is but a private person (notwithstanding all his intentions
and preparations for that work) and if he should undertake to do the acts of an
Officer of State, before he receive a civil Ordination (as I may call it) he
should go out of his sphere. In like manner, whosoever designs himself for the
Ministry, and intends that calling, yet, if he undertake to do the acts of the
Office before he be called to it, he goes out of his place.

II. For Heb. 5. 12. I must needs declare that I am sorry to see good men take
such liberty to wrest the Scripture to serve their conceits: O how great is the
power of prejudice! But I Answer,

1. Do our Brethren indeed believe that it was the duty (duty I say, for Paul
speaks not what they may do, but what they ought to do) of all the Hebrews, men
and women (for to both he writes promiscuously) to be public teachers?

2. Say that all must endeavor to be teachers, what then? must they needs be
public teachers? A genere ad speciem non valet illatio affirmativa. They ought
to be able to teach their families, to teach Heathens, to teach babes in
Christ, and this will run smoothly and take in all. It is the duty of all men
and women to grow in knowledge, and to be able to teach others, according as
their place and opportunity inables them.

Obj. But he speaks of such teaching as babes in Christ do not attain to, and
such as is attained by long time, and such as belongs to grown Christians, v.
12, 13, 14. whereas all believers and babes in Christ are teachers in that
private brotherly way, and therefore this cannot be meant of private, but of
public teaching, p. 52.

Ans. It follows not: The teaching here spoken of, though private, yet was not
attained unto by the Hebrews, by babes in Christ, they were (according to the
Apostl's description) unable to teach their families, or to instruct an Heathen
privately, if he had desired information from them, for he tells us, they had
need that one should teach them again, which be the first principles of the
oracles of God. Our Brethren perplex themselves by confounding two things much
differing, to wit, the duty and the ability: For babes in Christ it is their
duty to teach, i. e. privately, yet they may want ability to teach.

3. Teachers are here taken for such as are apt to teach, (...) for (...), not
that the Apostle injoyns it upon all the Hebrews, as their duty actually to
turn public teachers ( If the whole body were the eye, where were the
hearing?) but only to be fit to teach, id est, in the sense explained: As Gal.
2. 11. he was (...), id est, word for word, condemned, blamed, that is, he was
to be blamed. So Tully, Quis te damnatior? that is, who is more to be blamed
than thou.

III. For 1 Cor. 7. 20. Although I conceive not that every man is so obliged to
continue in his calling, that he may not upon weighty reasons change it for
another; yet surely that text forbids a rash and groundless removing from one
calling to another: As it is true, whether a man keeps his old calling or
enters upon a new one, he ought to do it with God (which is all that can be
collected from the 24th verse) yet v. 20. servants, and so others a pari, are
plainly commanded not to change their callings, i. e. rashly and causelessly.

7. They cite a command, Heb. 10. 25. But exhorting one another, i. e. in those
Church Assemblies, to which the opposition clearly referres it: Not only
Officers, but all Christians are to do it, p. 54. And whereas they know it will
and may justly be replied, that by this rule all Christians are commanded to
exhort publicly, they endeavor to take that off by saying, only those that
were able to do it are intended, as if a father bid all his children go to
work, he does not include the child in the cradle: But here is a manifest halt;
for all the grown Christians were able to teach, though not all alike, (as of
the grown children some could work better, some worse, yet by their supposition
all that can work quovis modo, are commanded to work.) Some had better, some
had meaner gifts, but the very meanest could provoke to good works, and might
say something to admonish, to counsel and comfort others, to persuade them to
persevere, etc. nay to that purpose a sincere hearted man, though of very mean
abilities, might speak more effectually then some able Teachers: So that if
this place prove any thing to our Brethrens purpose, it will prove that it was
the duty of every one, gifted or not gifted, to preach in the public Assembly,
which is not only false, but contrary to their own opinion.

But I Answer further; Their assembling together is not the modification of the
exhortation (as if they were to do it in the public Assembly) but the matter
of the exhortation, they were (every one according to his place privately or
publicly) to exhort one another, to what? even to this, that they would not
forsake the assembling of themselves together, i. e. that they would not
apostatize from the Christian Religion, and Christian Worship, and Christian
Assemblies, nor relapse to Judaism, but that they would persevere to the end,
that they would hold fast the profession of their faith without wavering, v.
23. And this concerns the first sense put upon the place, as if it obliged all
gifted men to preach.

In the second place the Assembly take notice, that by gift, may be understood
the Office, he that speaks, i. e. the public Office-preacher, let him do it,
etc. and he that ministers, i. e. the Deacon: And thus also others unconcerned
in this quarrel, understand the words. But against this our Brethren offer
diverse exceptions.

1. They say, Neither the context nor subsequent verses refer to Officers,
but to Christians in general, therefore this does not, p. 57.

Ans. Nothing is more common in Scriputre, than for general and special
exhortations to be joined together, and for the Apostles to make a transition
from a general to a special exhortation, and from a special to a general, as
almost every interpreter of Scripture observes.

2. They say, (...) are far more usually taken for gifts, than for an Office,
p. 59.

Ans. 1. It suffices that sometimes it is taken for an Office, and therefore
so it may be taken here.

2. And if it be granted that gift is taken in their sense in this place, it
avails them not, for the 10 verse may be a general rule, wherein every man is
commanded to exercise whatsoever gifts he has received, and to exercise them
in a right manner; and in the 11 verse he comes to instance in two particulars;
the Public teacher, says he, as he has received gifts for teaching, and the
gift of the Office, so let him speak, etc. and so the Deacon, etc. And this
shall suffice to speak of the second sense.

A word now of the third, which is this, That this gift is meant of estates,
etc. which a man is to use for Gods glory and the good of others, for so the
dependence upon the foregoing words carries it; Use hospitality, etc. and then
he adds a reason, because they have received it, and so may and ought to lay
it out; or (if you will) as a rule to guide persons in the management of it,
that they should lay out according to what they receive in. To this there are
but two things objected:

1. They are here called stewards, not of this worlds goods, but of the grace
of God, and not of one grace only, to wit, charity, but of the manifold grace
of God, p. 35.

Ans. The grace of God which properly signifies an attribute of God, is
commonly in Scripture taken for the gracious effects and actings of that grace
toward men. And whereas these effects and actings of grace are of two sorts,
some concerning this life, and some concerning the other life, either of these,
or any effects of grace may be called the grace of God Metonymically, and in
respect of such temporal effects (as well as spiritual.) God is frequently said
to be gracious, Exodus 22. -- It is his raiment -- and when he cries unto me,
then I will hear, for I am gracious: So also Amos 5. 15. 1 Samuel 12. 22. 2 Kings
13. 23.

And indeed, although this may possibly seem strange to him that is
praepossessed with the common use and acception of the word Grace in the
English tongue; yet can it not seem improbable to him who knows the use of the
Greek word (...) (and that is the language which the holy Ghost used) which is
indeed nothing else but a favor or blessing, so that, all that we are here
exhorted unto, is to be good stewards of the manifold favor of God, or of the
manifold blessings which come from the grace and favor of God. And thus far
our Brethren agree with us, that by the grace of God we are to understand the
effects thereof toward us; only here lies the difference between us, that they
will needs expound it of the spiritual and internal acts of this grace (because
that seems to favor their cause most) when, as we say, it may be understood of
the external and temporal effects of that grace, for of such things he spoke in
the foregoing verse: And in that sense the word grace is taken in relation to
men, viz. for the temporal effects of their grace or favor toward others, 2
Cor. 8. 19. Who was chosen to travel with us, with this grace which is
administered unto us, i. e. with this charitable contribution, as all
Interpreters agree. So that no man can justly stumble at that sense of the word
here. And for the addition of the word, the manifold grace of God, who knows
not that Gods temporal favors (of all which we are to be good stewards) are
manifold? There is as great multiplicity and variety in temporal as in
spiritual blessings.

2. They say, This will destroy the connection of this verse with the rest.

Ans. 1. What more common then for exhortations of diverse sorts, in Paul's
Epistles, to be joined together without any coherence.

2. This does not dissolve the connection, but only varies the connection, for
whereas they annex it to the following verse, this sense joins it to the
foregoing verse.

And this may fully serve for the Vindication of this place of Scripture;
wherein, though I have not taken notice of every word said by our Brethren, yet
any ingenuous Reader that compares theirs and mine together, will discern that
I have not omitted any thing which is either considerable or plausible, and for
other things I have not so much spare time as to throw it away upon them.

And thus much for their second Argument.

CHAP. VI.
THe third Argument will not call for much labor.

They argue from a Gospel promise, Mat. 25. 29. Unto every one that has shall
be given: Whatsoever gifts a man has, if he improve them, God will increase
his gifts.

Ans. It is true, every one is to exercise his gifts, but every one suo modo,
and debito ordine, as has been frequently said, according to his capacity and
place, and after a right order. What if a man be prudent and very fit to manage
the Deacons work, and to distribute the Church-alms? must he undertake it (upon
pretense of exercising his gifts) before he be called to it? No surely; 1 Timothy
3. 10. Let them first be proved, then let them use the Office of a Deacon. Or
if a man has gifts to rule a State, must he take upon him that work, before he
be called to it? Surely no: And therefore a Preacher also, however gifted, yet
must not publicly exercise his gifts till he have a call, some call I say or
other, for I meddle not now with particulars, what that call is; only I say,
besides gifts a call is required, without which he sins not, in the not
exercising of his gifts in such a way (although exercise them he may diverse
ways.) And if our Brethren allow this in the Office of the Ruling Elder and
Deacon, that how well soever they are gifted for those works, yet without a
call, a call (I say) distinct from that which may be pretended by virtue of
their gifts, they may not exercise those gifts, why should they not allow it in
the Preaching Ministry? Why should not only the Offices, but also the works of
these inferior Offices be enclosed, and that higher and much more difficult
work of the Ministry lie in common? And this shall suffice for their second
Argument, wherein though diverse things are said, yet nothing of strength is
added, which has not been considered and enervated under the foregoing
Argument.

Their third Argument is taken from Gospel presidents or examples: They
instance in two, 1. In Apollo. 2. In the scattered Saints, Acts 18. 24.

1. In Apollo, and the marrow and strength of what they say of him is this; He
preached publicly, etc. and yet was not ordained, for he knew only the Baptism
of John (not the Baptism of Christ) to which the institution of Ordination was
subsequent; he had but an imperfect knowledge of the doctrine of Christ.

Unto this instance diverse things are said, which our Brethren take notice of,
and attempt to confute.

1. Whereas some Answer, That Apollo was an extraordinary Officer, that he is
ranked with Paul and Peter, 1 Cor. 1. 12. that he is called a Minister, 1 Cor.
3. 5.

To this they Answer, 1. Let him prove it that will assert it: All that the
text says of him is, that he was eloquent and fervent, etc. which a man may be
without those extraordinary gifts, p. 71.

Reply If this place does not, yet others do imply that he was an extraordinary
Officer, 1 Cor. 1. 12.

Exc. But that was afterward, when he went to Corinth; He might be a gifted man
first, and yet afterward an Officer etc. p. 73.

Ans. That Apollo had extraordinary gifts is very probable from that 1 Cor. 1.
12. being ranked with persons so qualified, but when he received them, the
Scripture is silent: The Scripture intimates that he had them at Corinth, but
that he received them not before, ne (...) quidem. The distance of time is not
so great between his being at Ephesus, that is Acts 18. 24. and in Achaia, that
is v. 27. of the same Chapter: And therefore it is most probable he had those
extraordinary gifts when he was at Ephesus.

If it be objected against this, that he was ignorant in many truths,
instructed by Aquila and Priscilla, p. 71. The Answer may be this, that this is
not inconsistent with his being a Prophet: God revealed not all his mind at
once to all his Prophets. Those Prophets, 1 Cor. 14. were to hear and learn of
others, as well as to speak themselves. The Apostles had extraordinary gifts
when Christ lived, though not in such a plentiful and glorious manner as
afterward, and yet were ignorant of those great and glorious truths of Christ's
death and resurrection, etc.

Inst. But after his departure the people of Ephesus were ignorant of those
gifts of the Holy Ghost, Acts 19. 1, 2.

Ans. That might be, neither they nor Apollo might know distinctly what these
gifts of the Holy Ghost were, and yet Apollo might have them; his face might
shine and he not know it: As a man may be converted and yet not know that he is
converted, nay possibly he may not clearly understand what the work of
conversion is.

2. Whereas it is further said, that Apollo's might have a Commission from John
to preach. They say, Let them prove it that can, the Gospel is silent as to
that, p. 71.

Reply 1. Our Brethren must remember the proof lies upon them to make good that
he was not ordained, not upon us to prove that he was ordained: For if we lay
down this position, That merely gifted men ought not to preach, etc. if they
offer any instances to the contrary, they must make this good, that such were
only gifted men, and not ordained: They are not so unacquainted with the laws
of disputation, as not to know that the proof lies on the opponents part, which
they manage in this place.

2. The Gospel is silent as to the Mission and Ordination of diverse others: We
read nothing of the Ordination of Titus, of Epaphroditus, of the Pastors of
the seven Asian Churches, Rev. 2, and 3. Shall we therefore conclude they were
not ordained?

3. Whereas it is said he preached only where there was no Church: They say,
Let them prove that it is more unwarrantable to preach where a Church is, than
where no Church is.

Reply This will easily be proved by that ingens telum necessitas: I hope there
is a far greater necessity of gifted men's preaching where Ministers are not,
than in a Church where they are.

4. To these I may add, that we do not find Apollo's preaching in a Christian
Church, but disputing in a Jewish Assembly, a liberty which we as readily allow
to gifted men, as to write in defense of the truth.

5. Say that Apollo's were not ordained (which is all our Brethren can extort
or desire) yet this gives them no help at all, for the extraordinarinesse of
his gifts might well supply the defect of an Ordination, and that is no
president for such whose gifts are but ordinary.

And thus much for their first example.

The second is that locus (...), that famous instance of the scattered Saints,
Acts 8. about which I shall not engage my self, nor detain the Reader with
repeating those various Answers that are given to it by the Provincial
Assembly, which might easily be vindicated from their exceptions. I shall not
stand upon this; That the persons scattered were, if not solely, yet mainly the
Officers of the Church, who might therefore preach, etc. But that which wholly
invalidates this place as to their purpose, is that which is commonly said,
that this was an extraordinary case, a case of necessity. And mark the weight
of our Brethrens deduction from this place: Because the scattered Disciples in
a persecuted state of the Church, in a time when all Church Order was broke,
preached and taught Jesus Christ to Heathens and unbelieving Jews, occasionally
(it may be in private, or with Paul in the market places etc. or in their
Synagogues disputing with them) therefore now unordained persons may preach
publicly and solemnly to a Christian Church settled and constituted, wherein
are plenty of able and godly Pastors, and where as their preaching is not
necessary, so to many fearing God it is highly scandalous. This is the true
state of the Argument, and if our Brethren be not sick of this consequence, I
shall say they have good stomachs.

But this must not pass so, and therefore they make an assault upon it, and
there are three or four things which they say (lest they should say nothing)
which stand in the room of Answers, with which I must profess I wonder how
sober ingenious and conscientious men (such as I hope our Brethren are) can
satisfy themselves. But such as they are we shall give them a fair hearing.

1. They say, Persecution laid no necessity upon them to preach, p. 85.

Ans. Yes, it laid a necessity upon them, i. e. in order to Gods glory, and the
salvation of souls, which could not be had without preaching, Romans 10. and
preaching could not now be had in an ordinary way; upon this supposition, that
in those times God would have all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge
of the truth, it was necessary that they should preach, for as much as there
can be no salvation without preaching, Romans 10.

2. They say, It is questionable whether necessity can make that lawful, which
is in it self unlawful, as to forswear a man's self, p. 86.

Ans. There are two kinds of evil and unlawfulnesses, Some things are simply
and absolutely evil, and prohibita quia mala, forbidden because they are
intrinsecally evil; as to forswear, to blaspheam God, etc. and these no
necessity can excuse: But there are other things which are in themselves
indifferent, and only mala quia prohibita, are therefore only evil because they
are prohibited, and because they are against positive precepts. Now those
things which are only evil this latter way (and such is preaching without
Ordination) they may, though not ordinarily, yet in cases of necessity do. Thus
in a case of necessity, David might eat the Shewbread, the rest of the Sabbath
might be violated, Periculum mortis pellit Sabbathum: And of this kind is order
in a State or Church, which is a duty to be observed ordinarily, and yet in
case of evident necessity may be violated. And, as in a State, in such a case,
every man is a Constable, so in the Church, in such a case, every man may be a
Preacher.

3. They say, It is an extraordinary case when Ordination cannot be had in Gods
way, i. e. when Election does not go before it, p. 86.

Ans. 1. That Election must necessarily and continually go before Ordination,
is but one of their (...), and suppositions to be confuted hereafter.

2. And if ordinarily Election must go before Ordination, yet, as we say of
preaching, when Ordination cannot be had, it may be done without it; so it is
true of Election when it cannot be had, Ordination must be taken without it;
and when Ordination cannot be had exactly in Gods way, as to all the
particulars, it must be had, as it may. The Shewbread was ordinarily according
to Gods way, to be eaten by the Priests alone, but in cases of necessity it
might be eaten out of Gods way, it might be eaten by others.

3. It is not every extraordinary case that carries it, it must be a case of
necessity, such as this is not; for what if neither Election nor Ordination can
be had by them in Gods way? There is no necessity of their preaching in a
Church which is constituted. And thus we see how firmly this Answer stands
against all their exceptions, and that all their assaults are but like the
beating of a storm against the wall. So that there is one flaw in their
Argument which will for ever condemn it of insufficiency.

But that is not all: Mark how the Argument is laid by our Brethren; Those who
were scattered abroad they preached: But many unordained men were scattered
abroad; Therefore many unordained men preached, p. 74.

Ans. 1. You shall see what an hopeful Argument this is: I will make use of
their own Argument against them, and I desire no other Umpire.

They who were scattered abroad they preached: But many ungifted persons were
scattered abroad; Therefore such preached: And because this example they bring
as a president for us, therefore ungifted persons may now preach publicly;
which because it is not only false, but contrary to their own sense, therefore
(that we may not be put to deny the Conclusion) we must find fault with one of
the premises, and that can only be done our way, i. e. by saying that, not all
that were scattered preached, but only some of them preached: Only here is the
difference, these some that preached, say we, were Officers; say they, they
were gifted men, which yet they cannot prove, and if they could, it reaches
not our case, nor our times, for it was a case of necessity, as has been
argued.

If they like not this, I will put it in another dress: They who were
scattered, preached: But women as well as men were scattered, so they say, the
scattering was subsequent to Paul's haling men and women, etc. and that the All
that were scattered, were not all the Officers, but all the Church. So that by
this Argument here is a warrant for women-preachers, if this example be a
president: Nor let them fly to their usual refuge, that women are elsewhere
forbidden, for although they were ordinarily prohibited, yet in cases of
necessity (such as this was) they might do it, as that woman did who preached
to the Iberians, and converted them.

To this I may add, that all that can be extorted from this place is this,
that they preached; which we may grant without any prejudice to our cause, for
there are diverse kinds of preaching or teaching, they might do it diverse ways.
It might be true of all, that they preached and taught Jesus, but not all
alike, nor all in the same capacity; the Officers might teach publicly, the
rest privately; the Officers constantly, the others occasionally; the Officers
might preach officially in a Christian Church, the rest might discourse to a
company of Heathens, or dispute with them; and all these may be called teaching
or preaching. So that our Brethrens Argument is a genere ad speciem
affirmative, which will not hold water.

For what they say, that It is indefinitely said that they that were scattered,
preached.

Ans. They know that indefinite propositions, in materia contingenti, in a
contingent matter (such as this unquestionably is) are not equivalent to an
universal: Supposing that Officers and people were scattered, I say, that if
the Officers alone had preached, that had been sufficient ground to say of the
whole they preached, as oftentimes that is said to be done by all Israel, which
was done by the Officers of the Congregation.

And thus we have seen those two great topics of our Brethren, from Scripture
precept, and Scripture president overthrown. And so much for the third Argument.

Their fourth Argument is that principal place and pillar of their opinion,
which if I shall satisfactorily Answer, there will be little ground left for
our Brethrens confidence in this cause. 1 Cor. 14. 29, 31. whence they draw
this Argument,

All that are Prophets may publicly preach: But some men who are not ordained
Officers, are Prophets; Therefore some men who are not ordained Officers, may
publicly preach.

Which Argument may be cut off in a word, for their Conclusion may be granted
without any detriment to our Cause; and our Brethren might have known, and
ought to have considered, that we grant, that persons unordained may preach, in
a double case; 1. In the case of necessity. 2. In case of extraordinary gifts,
and an immediate Commission from God, which we take to be the case of these
Prophets, of which more hereafter. In the mean time let us follow them: For
their major it is granted on all hands: For their minor, it is this, That some
men who are not ordained Officers are Prophets; where there is a double defect
and insufficiency to the proof of what they intend. For 1. The Prophets might
be Officers, though not ordained; so were the Apostles, neither of man nor by
man. 2. If the Prophets were not Officers at all, yet the extraordinarinesse of
their gifts was a sufficient warrant for the public exercise thereof: But
neither of these are to be found in the case of those unordained preachers we
plead against, but they differ (...) from them, for neither are they Officers
at all, ordained or not ordained, nor are their gifts extraordinary; so that
the minor might be granted, and yet the truth not wronged. But let us see how
they proceed: I fear it will prove ominous to them, thus to stumble in the
threshold: They argue thus, to prove their minor, All that have the gift of
prophecy are Prophets: But some men who are not ordained Officers have the
gift of prophecy; Ergo, Some men, who are not ordained Officers are Prophets.
For the major, though we grant it, yet, according to our Brethrens principles,
it might be denied; for, if it were as they say, that those prophesiers here
spoken of had the gift, but no Office, I should deny such to be Prophets,
because the name of Prophet, both in vulgar acception, and in Scripture use,
connotes an Office; Caiaphas did prophecy, Ioh. 11. -- and yet I believe our
Brethren are not so hardy, as to say that Caiaphas was a Prophet. The minor
will lead us to the main point, which is this, Some men not ordained Officers
have the gift of prophecy; which they attempt to prove by three steps:

They say, this prophecy 1. is a gift, not an Office. 2. That it is a gift
still continuing. 3. And which some unordained persons have, p. 90. And if
these things be proved, they say something to the purpose; but let it be
considered, if there be a flaw in any one of them, their whole Argument falls,
and how much more, when every one of them will be taken tardy. The last
Proposition they place first, and use three Arguments to prove it, whereof the
last is that which the other propositions treat of, the two former are these
which follow.

1. (Say they) Some not ordained have this gift of prophecy, because we find
no Scripture warrant for the ordaining of Prophets.

Ans. 1. What if there be no particular warrant, it is sufficient that there is
a general rule for the ordaining of all Church Officers, Pastors, Teachers,
Elders, etc. and (at least, if these be ordinary Officers, as our Brethren make
them) a parity of reason (which is a sufficient Argument to sober minded men,
such as I take our Brethren to be) will prove that they also are to be ordained.

2. But if they be extraordinary Officers (as the Provincial Assembly affirm)
preferred before the Evangelists, and having this privilege above the
Evangelists (for ought we read) to be immediately and infallibly endued, etc.
then what wonder if in this they partake with the Apostles, who as they were
not of men, so neither by men, and needed no Ordination, nor had it, unless in
relation to some special work, as Acts 13. 1.

2. (Say they) They must be discerned to have the gift before they be ordained,
and therefore some not ordained may have the gift of prophecy.

Ans. This Argument is built upon the former mistake, as if there were a
necessity of such a Prophets Ordination; whereas, I say, Gods indowment of him
with extraordinary gifts, is a kind of Ordination, and supplies the defect of
an Ordination by men. But (complying thus far with our Brethren, to own these
Prophets to be unordained persons, and their gifts but ordinary) I further
Answer, that this is wholly impertinent (as was intimated before) for in the
case of a Pastor, the question is not, Whether one not ordained may have
Pastoral gifts, which we assert he may have, nay he must have, and must be
known to have them before he be ordained; but the question is, Whether a man
not ordained may commonly and ordinarily exercise those Pastoral gifts, which
is quite another thing: It is one thing to have gifts, another thing to
exercise gifts. A man may lawfully have diverse gifts, ( v. g. of ruling an Army
or a State, etc.) which yet he may not lawfully exercise.

But let us now come to their next Proposition, which is more to the purpose,
viz. That this prophesying is not an Office but a gift. If this be proved, it
amounts to something, but I doubt the premises will fall a mile short of the
conclusion. I pass by the (...) they run into, which Dr. Collins takes notice
of, and shall rather consider how they attempt to prove it; which they do by
two Arguments.

1. All who have the gift of prophecy are Prophets: But all that have the gift
are not Officers.

Ans. If these Prophets were ordinary persons, I deny the major, for then
besides the gift, they must be ordained (as in other ordinary cases:) But if
these Prophets were extraordinary persons, I deny the minor, for the very
having of such a gift extraordinarily inspired, is an immediate call, and makes
them extraordinary Officers, as it was in the Prophets of the old Testament.

Arg. 2. That which ought in duty, and might in faith be coveted by every
member of the Church of Corinth, was not an Office but a gift: For 1. God no
where promised to make every one an Officer there. 2. This was impossible, for
then all the body had been the eye; and if these were extraordinary Officers,
much less might they covet to be such: But now this prophesying they ought and
might covet in faith. v. 1. 39.

Ans. 1. The major is denied: 1. An Office might be coveted as well as a gift,
1 Timothy 3. 1. If a man (Gr. (...), if any man) desire the Office of a Bishop, he
desires a good work. Yea an extraordinary Office might be coveted, as is
evident from the desires and endeavors of the sons of the Prophets in the old
Testament.

2. Let our Brethren show where God promised to every member of the Church of
Corinth these extraordinary gifts, and I will show them where God promised to
every one of them to be Officers.

3. If extraordinary gifts might be desired, (as our Brethren say) why not an
extraordinary Office? If an extraordinary Office might not be desired, this is
either because this is an Office, or because it is extraordinary; not because
it is an Office, that hinders not but it may be coveted, as we have shown; nor,
because it is extraordinary, for then extraordinary gifts might not be desired.
That extraordinary gifts might be desired, appears from the very words cited by
our Brethren, 1 Cor. 14. 1. Desire spiritual gifts, but rather that ye may
prophecy; whence it is most evident, that not only prophesying, but the other
gifts mentioned there, i. e. of tongues, interpretation, etc. were to be
desired: So that our Brethrens Argument is feeble to prove this to be an
ordinary gift, because it was to be desired.

4 For every member in the Church of Corinth to be an Officer was not
impossible: True, it was impossible for all to be Officers there in that
Church, but not to be Officers in other places: And this I would desire our
Brethren to ruminate upon, whether, supposing, that all the members of the
Church of Corinth might in faith desire, and so obtain gifts fitting them for
Office (which our Brethren grant) and supposing that the exigencies of the
Church required their Office-relation, which might well have been in those
times, and that their being in other callings ought not to hinder it (as our
Brethren sufficiently intimate, page 53.) I say, whether, supposing these
things, it were either impossible or unlawful for every member of the Church
of Corinth to desire to be an Officer, where he might be serviceable to the
Church: That in this case it is unlawful or impossible, I suppose our Brethren
will not readily say; and if they say it, nothing more easy then to disprove
it: And if they grant it to be possible and lawful, then all their Argument
falls to the ground, then every member ought in duty, and might in faith, covet,
as to have gifts necessary for an Office, so (in due order and fit time) to be
Officers, though not in that Church, yet in some Church, which is enough to our
purpose. Add to this that if this prophecy be an Office, this is no more then
that wish of Moses so much insisted upon, at least according to their sense of
it, I would that all the Lords people were Prophets.

And thus I have shown the insufficiency of their proofs alleged for the
defense of their first and most considerable Position, That the prophesying
here spoken of, is a gift, not an Office: This Position they uphold only by two
Arguments, which I hope any ingenuous Reader will discern to be so far
answered, that they have no great reason to be confident upon these grounds:
And yet I must entreat the Reader to consider, that here lies the great stresse
of the cause; for if it be not a bare gift, (which you have seen our Brethren
cannot prove) but an Office, then the preaching of these Prophets is no warrant
nor example for the preaching of any that are not Officers: Now although I
might acquiesce here, for as much, as, if any assert that these were barely
gifted men, it lies upon them to prove it; yet, ex abundanti, there is a reason
given, whereby it does more then probably appear, that these Prophets were
Officers. In the mean time, let this be remembered, that if we could not prove
that these preachers, 1 Cor. 14. were Officers (no more then they can prove
that they were only gifted persons) yet our cause stands unshaken, and all that
would follow in that case would be this, that this place must be laid aside,
both by our Brethren, and by us, as not demonstrative to the point in hand.

This being premised, I come to our Argument, which is taken from 1 Cor. 12.
Ephesians. 4. where the Prophets are enumerated amongst Officers, and (which is most
considerable) placed before the Evangelists. I know our Brethren think to blow
away this with a breath.

They say, Nothing can be gathered from the order of the words; seeing
oft-times the worse is placed before the better, as Priscilla before Aquila,
the woman before the man, p. 93.

And thus far it is true, that the bare order is no sufficient argument to
prove a priority in dignity; and that the same things are sometimes in
Scripture placed first, sometimes last, so that in all cases the order is not
to be regarded, and yet in some cases it is not to be slighted, especially when
it is punctually observed, that wherever Prophets in concrete are mentioned,
they are placed next after the Apostles, and that this is done so solemnly, and
with such emphaticall words, 1 Cor. 12. 28. (...), first Apostles, secondarily
Prophets, etc. And as it may fairly be collected, that the Apostles are the
chief of these Officers, because generally they are placed first, and that the
Pastors and Teachers are the lowest of them, because generally they are placed
last, so also it is considerable (and I doubt not our Brethren would make good
use of it, were it for their cause, as much as it is against it) that Prophets
are generally placed in the second order.

For what they add, If Prophets be Officers, 1 Cor. 12. Ephesians. 4. then those
places must be understood of extraordinary Prophets, who did foretell of future
events, as Acts 11. yet this hinders not, but this prophesying, 1 Cor. 14. may
be only by gift, etc.

Ans. 1. It was not the sole work of Office-Prophets, (that I may accommodate
my discourse to our Brethrens conceptions) to foretell future events; for Judas
and Silas as Prophets, did exhort, Acts 15. 32.

2. To say that there should be two sorts of New-Testament-Prophets, the one by
Office, the other by gift, as it is but a begging of the question, so it will
by wise and indifferent Readers, be looked upon but as subterfuge, and why may
we not as well make two sorts of Apostles, two sorts of Evangelists, etc. the
one by Office, the other by gift? It had been somewhat tolerable, if these in
1 Cor. 14. had been said to Prophecy, but not called Prophets ( seeing, as our
Brethren say, the doing of some Acts occasionally, as v. g. ones teaching
occasionally, does not denominate a man a teacher) but seeing they are also
called Prophets; impartial men will easily gather, that they are the same
which are known by that name in other places. Thus much for the first
Proposition; which being dispatched, I now come to the second, and shall try
whether that succeed better in our Brethrens hands; and that is, That
Prophesying is an ordinary gift, and still continuing in the Church. This they
undertake to prove as follows:

Arg. 1. Prophesying was in use, and no Gospel Rule can be showed for the
repeal or ceasing of it, p. 96.

Ans. A gift may cease in the Church two ways. 1. Either by a positive act of
God in his Word forbidding it: or 2. By a privative act of God in his
Providence withdrawing it. Who knows not that the gift of Tongues, praediction,
and infallible explication of the Scripture is ceased? and yet it would be a
most vain Argument to dispute against the cessation of it thus, because there
is no Gospel-rule for the repeal of them.

Arg. 2. This Prophesying is ordinary, Ergo still continuing.

Ans. The proposition is altogether needless, for if it be ordinary that is
sufficient, and indeed that is the Antithesis of the assertion of the
Provincial Assemby (that this Prophesying is extraordinary) And therefore let
us hear what they have to say, or what they allege to prove it ordinary.

For the self-contradiction they say God has left us to, p. 97. I shall only
say this, Wise men before they had made such a bold charge (especially making
use of the dreadful Name of the Lord) would have understood the grounds of it,
which indeed are none at all: for the Authors of the Ius divinum regiminis
Ecclesiastici, were only three or four reverend City Ministers, whereof one or
two are since gone out of the City; and, not one of them was a member of the
Provincial Assembly when the Ius divinum Ministerii came forth: And being
different persons, though agreeing in the main of this controversy; it is no
disparagement to any of them to differ in some circumstance: however all of
them do agree in that which our Brethren here oppose, i. e. that the gift was
extraordinary. Besides, I suppose, our Brethren would be hard put to it to
prove that there is any contradiction, for these two may very well consist
together, to say that these Prophets were extraordinary Officers in respect of
their gift, and yet the ordinary Pastors of Corinth in regard of their Office
and relation: And seeing there was a competent number of extraordinary Officers
residing in that Church, it was most fit they should be the ordinary Pastors
of that Church quoad exercitium muneris: And in this sense we may safely
embrace both what the worthy Authors of that excellent piece Ius divin. regim*
affirm, and also what learned Mr Rutherford asserts, i. e. that these Prophets
were the ordinary Pastors of that Church and yet both grant, that for their
gifts they were extraordinary; and that is the thing now in question: So that
in stead of a contradiction feigned, here is a real agreement found out; all of
us agreeing in the two principles which our Brethren here oppose: and all
asserting, 1. That these Prophets were Officers. 2. That they were
extraordinary as to their gifts: To which their special relation to Corinth,
and residence there, and doing the acts of Pastors is no more a prejudice,
than it was to the Apostles, who though they were extraordinary Officers, yet
some of them at some times were as Pastors to some Churches, etc. which
occasioned that apprehension that James was Bishop of Jerusalem, etc.

That this Prophesying was ordinary, our Brethren offer some Arguments to prove.

Arg. 1. The rules to regulate the work are ordinary, p. 100.

Ans. I see no rule but what may very well agree to extraordinary Officers.
Extraordinary Officers, 1. Must act orderly. 2. Must speak in a known language,
3. Must speak to edification. 4. Must be subject to the trial of other
Officers, yea people also, as the Provincial Assembly fully proves; of which
our Brethren take no notice: Paul commends the Beraeans for examining his
doctrine.

Arg. 2. The work of these Prophets is ordinary, i. e. to speak to edification
and exhortation, and comfort.

Ans. 1. This also was the work of Apostles. 2. The work indeed was ordinary,
but the manner of doing it was extraordinary, in as much as these did it
infallibly, and by immediate revelation.

Arg. 3. But here is no mention of extraordinary work, of a gift of
praediction, which is required to all extraordinary Prophets, but the contrary
is intimated, and this prophesying is here said to be, not a sign for them that
believe not (which praediction of events is) but for them that believe.

Ans. 1. Date non concesso, that these Prophets had not the gift of prediction,
that no way hinders but they might be extraordinary Officers, for besides this
they had another extraordinary gift, to wit, a gift of infallible teaching by
immediate revelation. Diverse of the Apostles had not this gift of praediction,
that we read of, and yet I hope our Brethren will give them their pass for
extraordinary Officers.

2. For my part I am prone to conceive (and let our Brethren disprove it) that
the praediction of future events was rather a privilege indulged to some New
Testament Prophets, than common to all Prophets: The gift of miracles was a
gift bestowed upon Prophets, and yet some wanted it; for John (though a
Prophet) yet did no miracle, Ioh. 10. 41. However, the great and principal work
of these New Testament Prophets (and the old also) was preaching, etc. and
therefore (although these Prophets, 1 Cor. 14 had the gift of praediction) yet
it is no wonder that the title of prophesying should be appropriated to the
most common principal, Analogum per se positum sum^^ur pro famosiore analogata.
and famous part of the work, which is preaching.

3. And how poor an evidence is this to prove, that these Prophets could not
foretell future events, because it is not mentioned in this Chapter? the rather
because he here speaks of the Prophets, not in relation to unbeleevers (for
whose-sake the gift of prediction was given) but in relation to believers, and
to the Church, and concerning the ordering of the work of prophesying or
preaching in and to the Church-assembly.

4. We readily grant all which can be proved from this place, which is only
this, that the preaching of these Prophets (for it is that act of the Prophets
which is here called prophesying) is not for them that believe not, but for
them that believe: It is not said, that these Prophets were given not for a
sign to them that believe not, etc. (which had been more to the purpose) but
that, that act of their Office there spoken of was not for a sign, etc.

5. If they had not that particular extraordinary gift of praediction, yet had
they diverse other extraordinary gifts, as that of Tongues, and the
interpretation of them, etc. and that was sufficient to make the persons
extraordinary, though they wanted some other extraordinary gift.

Arg. Public Prophesying extraordinary was allowed to women, Luke 2. 36, 38.
But this public Prophesying was not allowed to women, v. 34. let your women
keep silence; Therefore this public Prophesying was ordinary p. 102.

Ans. That extraordinary Prophesying was allowed to women in public, either in
the old or new Testament, has been often said and supposed; but never yet
could I see it proved; nor can one instance be given of it, that I know of, to
wit, that any woman did preach in a public Assembly; and there lies the
stresse: Anna might speak to all, i. e. severally, as they came by turns to
the Temple, and so might Priscilla occasionally speak privately, as she had
opportunity: And indeed we read that when she preached, she chose to do it
privately, Act. 18. But neither of them in a public Assembly.

But that Argument is so fully handled by others, that I shall not need to
dilate upon it here.

And thus we have seen how infirm our Brethrens Arguments are, which are
brought to prove that this Prophesying was ordinary.

In the next place I should come to lay down Arguments to prove that it was
extraordinary: I shall not insist upon all the Arguments used to prove it: Some
were proposed by Dr. Collings, and are by him vindicated in his last piece;
others I dare venture to stand upon their own legs, and refer the comparing of
them and the Answers here given to any indifferent Reader: And besides, Dr.
Collings has eased me of that burden.

This only I take notice of, that this Prophesying was by revelation, v. 26.
Every one ( i. e. of you Prophets) has a Psalm, a Doctrine, a Tongue, a
revelation, an interpretation. And v. 30. If any thing be revealed to another
that sits by, let the first hold his peace.

To which our Brethren answer two things.

1. They say, All these enumerated were not extraordinary: A Doctrine is
ordinary; the ordinary Elders have a Doctrine, p. 103.

Reply. It is true of ordinary Officers, they had a Doctrine; it is true also
of extraordinary Officers, they had a Doctrine, but not both in the same way;
in the one it was extraordinary, in the other ordinary, so that from the bare
mention of a Doctrine, it can neither be collected that that Doctrine was
ordinary, nor that it was extraordinary, but that must be gathered from the
circumstances of the place; and for this place, whereas the Office here spoken
of is extraordinary (as we have proved) and the word Doctrine is at least
ambiguous: It is more probable that this Doctrine is meant of an extraordinary
kind (as the rest are which are there enumerated) than that it is meant of an
ordinary Doctrine, when nothing else here spoken of s ordinary.

2. They say that the word revelation is sometimes taken for a revelation in an
ordinary way, that is by the word, etc.

Ans. That is readily granted, and needed no proof, but it must be added that
sometimes also it is taken in an extraordinary sense; so that now we are to
enquire which way it is to be taken here, and which way the circumstances of
the text restrain that common word: Now that it is meant of extraordinary
revelation four things will procure belief with unbyassed Readers. 1. That the
word is of the present tense, (...), if it be revealed, not if it have been
revealed, as it should have been, for the revelation of the word was past. 2.
The posture in which it is revealed, when he sits by. 3. The effect of such
a revelation, that it gives a stop to the others discourse: 4. That this
revelation was not common to all the Church, but peculiar to these Prophets,
and not common to all the Prophets neither, but peculiar to one, (...), some
one that sits by, and therefore surely it cannot be the revelation by the
Word, which is common to all the Prophets, yea, all the Church. Nor is there
any weight in what is further objected by our Brethren, that if this revelation
should command silence to a Prophet speaking by immediate revelation, then the
same Spirit should clash with it self: For though these Prophets did speak by
immediate revelation, yet not so as that they did not at all exercise their
ordinary gifts, or that they never spoke as ordinary men: For even the Prophets
and Apostles themselves, sometimes spoke their own private opinions: And why
might not these Prophets after the delivery of their revelation amplify it,
and open it according to their private opinion, by the help of their excellent,
though ordinary gifts? which (though they were much to be valued and respected)
yet well might be corrected by some immediate revelation manifested to another.

But ( say they) this requiring the first to hold his peace, does not
necessarily forbid his proceeding so far as he intended, or command a sudden
silence, etc. but only commands so to contract a man's discourse, as there may
be opportunity for others.

And I confess nothing is more easy then to dictate; This is soon said, but
if you ask our Brethren for a proof, I am afraid they will stick in the mire:
In the mean time, they having offered no proof for it, must needs allow me to
rely as much upon my affirmation, which yet is not mine, but the Apostles, as
they upon their negation. It is plain from the words, that it was a thing that
fell out beyond expectation, and therefore is brought in conditionally, If any
thing be revealed, which condition was needless, if the revelation spoken of
was ordinary and common. And this may be abundantly sufficient for the
Vindication of this place, from which I may justly expect this fruit, that
ingenuous men of a contrary mind to us, may abate some of their confidence, and
see cause to make a further enquiry into this point then yet they have made.

And this may suffice for Answer to their Arguments, whereby they attempt to
prove that gifted persons may preach. Let us now see, whether we have not more
convincing Arguments to prove that they may not preach: Albeit this must needs
be said, that in course of disputations, it is not incumbent upon us to prove
the Negative, but upon them to prove the Affirmative, Asserenti incumbit
probatio. So that I might here take take up, and having shown the invalidity of
their Arguments, I might supersede further trouble: And this memorandum I shall
leave upon the file, that this Assertion of our Brethren, That unordained
persons may preach ordinarily, is neither commanded by any Gospel precept, nor
countenanced by any Gospel example (which hitherto has been alleged.) But
because our Arguments, whereby we have proved our Assertion, are assaulted by
our Brethren, it will be convenient to say something by way of Vindication.

CHAP. VII.
THe first Argument is put into our hands by the Apostle, and it is Romans 10.
15. How shall they preach except they be sent? i. e. How can they do it
lawfully?

The sum of our Brethrens Answer lies in this, That the mission here spoken
of, is not Ministerial, whereby they are constituted in their office; but
providentiall, whereby they are sent into any place: and that this mission is
indeed necessary to preaching, i. e. naturally, not morally; As it is true, How
can a man preach except he have health, strength, etc. And besides, it may be
morally necessary, and yet not constitutive of a Minister: For it is morally
necessary to a Ministers preaching, i. e. lawfully, that he have all the Gospel
qualifications required to a Preacher, and yet though he want some of these, he
may be constituted a Minister.

To which I Reply, 1. To the last clause, there is an apparent fallacy, which
will plainly appear by this one distinction, That a man's preaching may be
unlawful two ways; 1. Circumstantially, when there is a defect in the
principles, or in the manner of acting, etc. 2. Substantially, when there is a
defect in the substance of the act, both as to the matter and manner of it:
When a Minister wants some necessary qualification, etc. he preaches lawfully
for the substance of the act, though he sins in the manner of acting; but when
one that preaches wants mission, the very substantial act of preaching is
unlawful. As when a Magistrate acts vaingloriously, he sins in the manner of
his acting, but his act is lawful in it self; but when a man usurps the power
of a Magistrate, there he sins in the substance of the act, because he wants
authority, etc. Or as it is in the case of the Lords Supper, it is wholly
unlawful for a scandalous sinner to receive it, but it is lawful for a
regenerate man (though weak in grace) to receive it, though he sins in the
receiving of it. In a word, the act is lawful, quoad specificationem actus,
for the kind of it, and per se; though it is sinful, quoad exercitium actus,
in the exercise of it, and per accidens.

2. It must be granted that the word sending is vocabulum (...), taken
variously in diyers places: Sometimes it is taken for the mission of a person
already authorized to any place or people, but sometimes also it is taken for
the authorization of a person to a work or office, yea, so it is frequently
taken as Ioh. 20. 21. As my Father has sent me, so send I you, i. e. As the
Father authorized and sealed me to the Office of a Mediator, so do I authorize
you to be Apostles, etc. 1 Cor. 1. 17. Christ sent (i. e. commissionated me)
not to baptize, but to preach. John 1. 6. A man sent of God. Thus Christ often
said, that he was sent, in Answer to that Question of his enemies, By what
authority do thou these things?

3. This providential mission, and Ministerial mission need not to be opposed
to one another, but may well consist together: A providential sending of a
Minister to any place (such as that of Paul, Acts 16. to Macedonia) does not at
all exclude, but rather presuppose a Ministerial' mission, that Paul was an
Apostle before hand. Nay indeed upon further search these will be found to be
much coincident: How can they preach unless they be sent? Sent, by whom? They
say, by God: Well then, we must enquire in the Scripture how God sends
Preachers: Thus much is apparent, that God sends them by some call (distinct
from the gifting of them.) Whether this call be by people, or by Officers, that
is another dispute, which now I shall not meddle with; this is sufficient to
our purpose, A call authorizing men to preach, is that whereby God sends men to
the work of preaching: If they were extraordinary Officers, then God sent them
oft-times immediately; if ordinary, then God sent them by the ministry and
mediation of men: And all those that were providentially sent by God to any
place, were called either one way or the other; And this calling or designation
of them to their office and work, is that which is commonly known by the name
of Sending. This authorization of Isaiah, is called the sending of him, Isa 6.
So it is called sending by Moses, Exodus 4. And this sending is that which is
denied to the false Prophets, Ier. 23. 21. I have not sent them; were this
meant of a providential sending, this were not true, for so God did send them;
and therefore the meaning is, I did not authorize them. In this sense also
Christ bids us pray the Lord, that he would send forth laborers into his
harvest: How send them? for that, let Christ's example interpret Christ's
words, He sent forth the twelve, Matthew. 10. i. e. by giving them Command and
Commission: So Luke 10. 1. After these things the Lord appointed other seventy
also, and sent them -- And conformable to this, was the example of the
Apostles, who used to send men into the Ministry, by fasting and prayer, and
laying on of hands; and this way of Sending is granted on all hands, our
Brethren cannot deny it: But for another way of sending that remains yet to be
proved. Hitherto we have had no example of it, as has been seen.

4. Let it be considered that our Brethren observe that this is brought in as a
justification of the calling of the Gentiles, and of the sending of Preachers
to them by the Apostles, which the Jews grumbled at: Upon which I ground this
inference, That the cannot here, How can they preach unless they be sent, must
be understood of a moral impossibility, and not of a natural impossibility, as
our Brethren would have it: For if it be taken of a natural impossibility, it
is false, for though the Apostles had not sent them, they might have gone of
their own accord, or some other way: But if you take it for a moral
impossibility, it runs smoothly; Whereas you Jews grumble at us for sending
Preachers to the Gentiles, we do no more then what is necessary; for seeing God
has promised that the Gentiles shall be saved by calling upon the Lord, and
they cannot call on God without believing, nor believe without hearing, nor
hear without preaching, nor preach without sending, i. e. not preach lawfully,
unless they be sent, either by an immediate call, or else by us or others, who
are authorized by God for that work, and therefore we are not to be blamed for
sending of them.

Exc. But ( say they) all the other interrogations are to be understood of a
natural impossibility; It is naturally impossible for one to call upon him on
whom he believes not, or to believe on him of whom he hears not, etc. and that
this only is meant of a moral impossibility, will be hard to conclude.

But the Answer is easy, That it is a very frequent thing in Scripture, for
the same word to be used in diverse senses; as, Let the dead (i. e. spiritually)
bury the dead (i. e. corporally.) And (to keep to the very phrase) the word
cannot is thus used, Ier. 13. 23. Can the Ethiopian change his skin? etc.
There is a natural impossibility, then may ye also do good that are accustomed
to do evil, there is a moral impossibility: So in that comparison of our
Savior, A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt tree
bring forth good fruit, there is a natural impossibility; How can ye being
evil, speak good things, here is a moral impossibility.

5. If this be only a providential mission, by which these Preachers are here
said to be sent, then none at all are excluded; nay the very devils themselves,
if they should preach Christ (as they did sometimes in possessed persons) must
necessarily be taken into the number of the Preachers here spoken of, (for even
such would be providentially sent) then which what can be more absurd. And I
wish our Brethren would duly consider that there is a necessity of granting one
of these two things; either that the devils may be the Preachers here spoken
of, or that the mission here spoken of is not providential.

I shall add no more upon this account, only there are some Arguments which
they offer to prove that this mission here spoken of is not constitutive of a
Minister.

1. They say, The Apostles were Officers and yet had mission afterward, Mat.
28. 19.

Ans. 1. Officers indeed they were while Christ lived, they were constituted
Preachers, Matthew. 10. but they were not Apostles of the Gentiles until Matthew.
28. and therefore it is not strange that when they were inaugurated to that new
and solemn work, they had a new and solemn mission.

2. This Argument is founded upon the ambiguity of the word sent, or mission,
which sometimes is taken for a man's authorizing to a work, and so they had but
one mission to one kind of work; sometimes for a bare disposal of them to this
or that particular place or work, and in this case they might have a hundred
missions: God sent Paul to Macedonia, and to Corinth, and to Rome, etc. yet
surely our Brethren will not make all these to be several missions in the sense
of the present dispute.

2. Mission (they say) may be repealed (so cannot a call to an Office:) Mat.
10. and 28. compared.

Ans. That is taken off already: The Apostles had in each place a distinct call
to a distinct work.

3. They say, The seventy Disciples had mission to preach, who were not
Officers that we find.

Ans. 1. This is a contradiction, for if they had a mission from Christ, that
made them Officers, at least protempore; for what is the making of one an
Officer, but a solemn designation of him for that work, by a person empowered to
authorize him.

2. They might be Officers, though we do not read of it.

4. They say, Then the instructions of none can be useful to work faith, but
of Officers only; for this hearing is necessary to believing.

Ans. That follows not, for though the only ordinary means of begetting faith,
is the hearing of a Gospel-Minister, yet God is not bound up, he may and does
often times use private instructions of private men to that end: And as it
follows not, that it is simply impossible for a man to believe that hears no
Preacher, because the Apostle says, How shall they hear without a Preacher?
(seeing God may work faith by immediate inspiration) so it follows not that it
is simply impossible for any man to be converted by hearing of one who is not
ordained, etc. because the Apostle says, How shall they preach unless they be
sent? But this only follows from both, that the hearing of a Preacher sent, is
the only ordinary means of working faith and salvation.

But we must not part thus, our Brethren add that this text is not cogent,
because though it did prove a necessity of a mission, yet it does not prove a
necessity of ordination (which was the thing to be proved) seeing this mission
is not Ordination.

Ans. I shall not contend about words, nor is it pertinent to enter into a
particular dispute about Ordination. This is sufficient for our purpose, this
mission is not the bare gifting of them, but it is an authorizing of them to
the work, or the giving of them commission to preach: Now there are but two
Scripture ways of giving men commission to preach that we know of, the one
extraordinary, from God immediately (which our Brethren have too much modesty to
pretend) the other ordinary, by men setting them apart to that work (whether
the Officers set them apart in the Name of Christ, or in the Name of the
Church, all is one as to this question) it suffices us that some solemn
designation or setting apart is necessary, and that gifted men may not preach
merely because they are gifted, unless they have some further call or mission;
which although our Brethren here seem to grant, (in saying that the bare
gifting of men is not the sending of them) yet indeed they are obliged to deny
by virtue of their interpretation of that Text, 1 Pet. 4. 11. where the mere
having of that gift is propounded as a sufficient ground to put a man upon the
use of it.

But however let us hear what they have to prove that this mission is not
Ordination.

1. They say, We cannot find it.

Ans. If you cannot find it in express terms, yet others have found it in
clear consequences.

2. Then Deacons are sent, for they were ordained, Acts 6. 6.

Ans. Very true, Deacons were sent and had mission: What advantage can our
Brethren pick out thence?

3. Mission may be repeated.

Ans. That was answered before.

4. A Parochial Presbytery, if sufficient, etc. may ordain one for that Church,
but they cannot send one to themselves.

Ans. 1. That Presbytery does not send an Officer in such a case to themselves,
but to the Church, and so there is a sufficient distinction between the person
sending, and the person sent.

2. A local distinction is not necessary between the person sent, and the
persons to whom a man is sent. Isaiah was sent to the whole house of Israel;
now put case Isaiah be in the Temple when he is sent, and with him diverse Jews,
I say, he is in Scripture phrase sent as well to those that are locally
present, as to those that were absent.

5. They add, That mission is propounded at the end of Ordination, Mark 3. 14.
And he ordained twelve, that -- he might send them forth to preach.

Ans. 1. The strength of this Argument lies in the ambiguity of the word Sent,
which, as we readily grant, sometimes it signifies a local mission to a place,
so again, at other times it signifies a constitutive mission to an Office.

2. Though the words in the English make some show for them, yet indeed if one
look into the Greek, it is but a mere show, for it is not (...), but (...),
acquisivit, comparavit, he got, procured, took twelve into his family, bred
them up under his roof, that he might fit them for, and so send them into the
work of the Ministry; so that indeed the word whereby their Ordination is
signified, is plainly that of sending; and the other, however it came to be
rendered by our Translators, he ordained (who neither meant it in such a sense
as our Brethren do, nor ever dreamed that it would be so made use of) yet
indeed signifies nothing but barely the taking of them into his family, his
constituting of them members of his family, and not his ordaining of them to be
Officers in his Church. And thus I have dispatched all that has any moment,
which is alleged by our Brethren, as to this place.

There are diverse other things they add, which being less material, I may
trust the judgment of any common Reader with them; as when they say, It is not
a Church, nor a Presbytery, but Christ who sends Ministers: Which if they
understand thus, that Christ only does it (...) soveraignly, authoritatively,
they have not us for their adversaries; but if they so mean it (as they must,
or else it is nothing to the purpose) that men cannot send (...) Ministerially,
it is too gross to be believed by any man that reads the New Testament, and
therein finds so many rules and examples of Gods sending by the Ministry of
men, as Acts 6. Acts 13, etc.

So when they say, That the mission of Ministers is not by a Presbytery, but by
the Word; and that Christ's command to go and preach, is a mediate calling to
all lawful preachers, though no Presbyters should urge it upon them; and that
a Presbytery only sends in a Doctrinal way, as a private Christian also may do,
by saying, Go and Teach.

Where we have almost as many absurdities as words.

1. Two things are opposed that ought to be conjoined, to wit, the Agent and
the Rule, the Presbytery sends, but this they must do according to the Word.

2. All manner of calling, either by a Presbytery, or by a Church, is made
wholly superfluous; For they here plainly assert, that Christ's saying, Go
preach, is a calling and a mediate calling to all lawful Preachers, and that
gifted men are lawful Preachers, is their great business to prove; and if
they say a call is further necessary, here is a call reaching to all gifted
men: I am much mistaken if many of their own Brethren of the Congregational
way, will not reject and abhor such loose assertions as these.

3. They allow as much to a private Christian, as to a Presbytery, both of them
send in a doctrinal way. But the very mention of these Paradoxes is an ample
Confutation.

And thus much for the first Argument.

CHAP. VIII.
THe second is taken from Heb. 5 4, 5. No man takes this honor, etc. but he
that is called of God --

To this they Answer two things.

1. If this prove a call, yet it proves not a call by imposition of hands,
which is that they contend for.

Ans. We are not now meddling with that particular kind of call, nor is this
place alleged to prove it, but only to prove this in the general, that
notwithstanding the highest gifts and qualifications fitting them for any
Office, they must also have a call and designation to that Office, and that
remains unshaken by all that they have said.

2. They say, he speaks not of Gospel Ministers, but of Priests, and of the
high Priests only, which are an higher order than Ministers, and prefigured
Christ, and it follows not, because a call was necessary to the highest order
of Officers, therefore it must be necessary to an inferior order.

Reply 1. Let me take the boldness to question whether the Gospel Ministers
are an inferior order to the high Priest or no? If it be affirmed upon this
ground, because they are types of Christ, then upon that account the inferior
Priests were of an higher order. (That I say not, the goats, and sheep, and
bulls, etc. which also were types of Christ.) If this be the reason, because
they expiated sin, they did it only Ministerially and Declaratively, and by
typifying and applying the true expiatory sacrifice; and that also is the
Office of a Gospel-Minister, Ioh. 20. 23. Whose soever sins ye remit, they are
remitted. -- However it is, sure I am the Lord Jesus doubts not to prefer
John the Baptist before all the old Testament Officers, and that in regard of
his work, and to prefer the meanest New Testament Minister before him.

2. If the work of the high Priest was higher, and that must be weighed on the
one hand, then let it be weighed on the other hand, that the gifts of Christ
were more glorious. And this assertion I may venture to lay down, that Jesus
Christ had more warrant to undertake the highest Office in the Church without a
call, than one who is but (...) a mere man has to take the meanest Office
without a call.

The third and fourth Arguments I shall omit, because there is nothing that I
find in our Brethrens Answer, which will need a Reply.

The fifth Argument is taken from those rules laid down about the calling of
men into the Ministry, and about the trial of their qualifications, and one
main reason of it was this, that false Doctrine might be prevented, 1 Timothy 1.
3, 4. Tit 1. 5, 9, 10.

To this they Answer, 1. This concludes for the ordaining of Officers only, not
against the preaching of gifted brethren, who lay no claim to the Office.

Reply. The best clew for the guiding of us in the interpretation of every Law
is the reason of the Law: Now if one great reason why the Apostle was so
careful to try and approve of Officers, etc. was this, to prevent false
Doctrine; then upon the same account, he was obliged to be as careful to try
all Preachers, for else he had made a hedge about the sheep, and yet left one
gap open, which indeed was enough to frustrate the design of the hedge: What if
none be allowed to be shepherds by Office, but such as are called, will it not
be of as bad consequence, if the wolves be allowed to take upon them the
exercise of the shepherds work? We see by experience, some gifted men
preaching occasionally and disseminating their pernicious opinions, have done
more to poison the people, than an able Minister by his instant and diligent
labors could do to preserve and nourish them. What is the ground of the
Apostles strictness in admitting men into the Ministry ( Lay hands suddenly on
no man) but this, the difficulty and importance of the work? And what work is
more difficult and important than that of preaching, to do it as becomes the
Gospel? Paul prefers it before the rest, 1 Cor. 1. And in regard of this work,
it is that he cries out, Who is sufficient for these things? 2 Cor. 2. 16. So
that it were a strange incongruity and self-contradiction for the Apostle to
use so much care in the constitution of Office-Preachers, and yet to be wholly
careless as to another sort of Preachers, who may preach frequently (yea as
often as the other, according to our Brethrens Principles) without coming under
such a harsh and ungrateful examination and ordination.

2. They say, There ought to be care to choose Officers that are sound in the
Faith, but this the people must look to in election.

Ans. But this relieves them not, for what care shall be taken as to their
gift-Preachers, who may preach without the Churches election, nay are under a
command to preach, as they are pleased to expound 1 Pet. 4. a command of God I
say, which no man can dispense with: I know our Brethren say, that to a man's
exercise of his gifts in this or that place, there is required a call from the
people or the Magistrate, p. 149. But this will not help them; for I demand,
whether in case the Apostles had neither been called by people nor Magistrate,
Whether that had been a sufficient discharge to them from the execution of
their Office? I trow not: Nay they preached when they were forbidden; and why?
but for the reason now mentioned, to wit, that they were under a command of
God, which no mortal man could dispense with: And therefore if gifted men are
under a like command, pressed with the highest penalties, to preach (as our
Brethren say) they may and must preach, though they have no call, neither from
people nor Magistrate.

The sixth Argument I am sure will stand upon its own legs, taken from that
confusion which will necessarily come into the Church by this means, which
indeed the sad experience of our Church in these days does so unquestionably
demonstrate, that I shall need to confute him that denies it, only as the
Philosopher did confute him that said there was no motion by walking before
him; so I shall only point him unto real Arguments, and desire him to make use
of his own eyes, reason and observation, and he will quickly be of the same
opinion.

But these Arguments were not directly levied against our Brethren, (whom we
acknowledge to be more sober) but against such as pleaded for a promiscuous
assumption of the Office. The next Position laid down by the Provincial
Assembly indeed does more nearly concern them, which is this, That none may do
the work of the Ministry without Ordination.

CHAP. IX.
ANd to this purpose they urge eight Arguments, which to me still seem very
considerable, and my persuasion is, that if any judicious man of another mind,
could but redeem himself from the prevailing power of prejudice, and duly
ponder our Arguments and their Answers, he will find that all the assaults they
make against them are vain and ineffectual: But it shall not be taken upon my
word.

I will 1. propound our Arguments. 2. Take notice of their Answers; wherein I
promise them not disingenuosly to conceal or neglect any thing wherein their
strength lies. 3. I shall add something (where it is needful) for the
vindication of those Arguments.

Arg. 1. That work, for the doing of which, God has designed special Officers
of his own, neither ought, nor may be done by any others; But God has designed
special Officers for this work of preaching.

The minor is granted; but all the doubt lies about the major, and that is the
Proposition which our Brethren deny, and they give three instances to the
contrary; Prayer is the special work of Ministers, Acts 6. 4. We will give our
selves to prayer: And so is exhorting and reproving, etc. Tit 1. 5, etc.
Distribution of worldly goods is the Deacons work, and yet others may Pray,
Exhort and Rebuke, give Alms, etc.

Reply 1. For Prayer, it is true, it is the duty of all men, and of Ministers
more than others, but that it was a work for which the Office of the Ministry
was appointed, neither does this text assert, nor did ever any man dream, and
so that is wholly impertinent to the case in hand: One may as well say, that
the Office of the Ministry was designed for the work of hospitality, because
they especially must be given to hospitality, 1 Timothy 3. 2. as to say, that it
was designed for the work of prayer, because they especially must give
themselves to prayer.

2. For the Deacons work, that is not barely the distribution of worldly goods,
but the distribution of the Churches goods (which our Brethren here do either
subtly or unwarily, which I rather think, confound) and this latter none but
the Deacon may do, so that this may be retorted upon them, that as the
appointment of the Deacon for that work of distributing the Churches alms, is
a sufficient reason to prove that no private man ought to do it, so also is the
appointment of a Minister, for the work of preaching, a sufficient intimation
that other persons may not undertake that work.

3. For that work of reproving and exhorting, they may do it, but privately, not
publicly.

Against this our Brethren object two things.

1. If an Officer rebukes a member in private, this he does as an Officer, so
that the publicknesse of an act is not necessary to make it an act of Office.

Reply. This depends upon a mere mistake. It is one thing to say the
publicknesse of the act of exhorting, etc. makes it an act of Office, or that a
public act is an act of Office, that we affirm. It is another thing to say
that no act but a public act is an act of Office (as our Brethren mistake it)
this we affirm not, nor is it for our purpose to assert it; nay, we assert that
an Officers private rebuke is an act of Office.

2. They say, If it be the different way and manner of acting, that makes an
act to be an act of Office, then their Argument concerns not the work it self,
but the manner of working, and so all which it proves is this, that none ought
to do the Officers work in the same manner as he does it, i. e. not officially,
and this we readily grant.

Reply. Our Argument concerns the work, but then it must be the work in
question, and that our Brethren well know was not exhorting in general, but
public exhorting: But of this more hereafter. It must now be remembered, that
the Provincial Assembly confirmed the major by three Arguments.

The first was this, Because God has severely punished such as have done those
works, for which he has appointed special Officers, as Saul, Uzzah.

To this our Brethren Answer two things.

1. That these were cases of necessity, and so if they prove any thing, they
prove that gifted men may not preach, no, not in a case of necessity, which is
allowed by your selves.

Reply. The case is not parallel, nor is the necessity alike, of Preaching and
Sacrificing; Preaching (as our Brethren will grant) is absolutely necessary to
salvation, so is not Sacrificing; nor was Sacrificing necessary in that case
for Isreal's deliverance (if God had denied an opportunity of sacrificing) I
conceive the parallel will lie right between their sacrifices and our
Sacraments, neither of which are necessary to salvation, necessitate medii. And
hereby the Argument will receive further light and strength, i. e. Because God
has appointed peculiar Officers for the administration of our Sacraments (as
well as their Sacrifices) therefore they ought not to be administered by persons
out of Office, no, not in any case of a pretended necessity (forasmuch as there
is no absolute and real necessity of either Sacrifices or Sacraments to
salvation.) And thus far our Brethren must consent with us, unless they will
turn gross separatists, and allow a liberty also for gifted men to administer
the Sacraments, which I am confident they will not.

2. They say the case is not alike; for there was an express prohibition of
these acts to any, except Officers, Number. 4. 15. and 16. 40. Numb. 1. 5. and
Numb. 18. 22, 23. The preaching of gifted men is not thus forbidden: And
besides not only the manner but the matter of these works were forbidden to
others.

Reply. A thing may be prohibited two ways, either in express terms, or by
solid consequence: I suppose our Brethren are far from that dotage which diverse
Anabaptists and Socinians run into, that we are not to be satisfied with
Scripture consequences, but to look for express Scripture, as if men must not
believe what God says, unless he speak it in their way: There are many things
confessedly unlawful, which are not prohibited in express terms, but only by
some general rules and Scripture consequences: What if I should keep to the
instance of Uzzah? who was punished not principally, at least not solely,
because he did touch the Ark with his hands, but because he did not bear it
upon his shoulders; which the Levites were to do: Now (I say) as in this case,
Gods command that the Ark should be carried upon the Levites shoulders, was a
command that it should be carried so only, and it was a prohibition to the
Levites or any other, to carry it any other way; so in our case, Gods
appointment of Officers to preach, is a prohibition to others to invade that
work. Again, let me make this supposition (which no ingenuous man can disallow
of,) Suppose that Paul had not expressly prohibited women to preach, I desire
our Brethren to answer me, whether, in that case, it had been lawful for
gifted women to preach publicly or no: If they say yea, then I argue thus
against them, that Paul does not establish a new Law, but revives and
interprets an old Law, 1 Cor. 14. 34. Let your women keep silence -- for it is
not permitted unto them to speak, but they are commanded to be under obedience,
as says the Law. So that it was forbidden by the Law before that time, and had
been unlawful, though Paul had never prohibited it. If they say, no, then I
argue thus, that an express prohibition is not necessary, for such there had
not been in the case supposed, nor had women been prohibited any other way but
thus, Preaching was committed unto certain men in authority, commissionated for
that work: Ergo, it was prohibited to persons under authority, and because all
women are under authority, therefore are they universally excluded from this
work: I add further, that it is a granted case in the business of the
Sacraments, the administration whereof is prohibited to all un-officed persons
(our brethren themselves being Judges) and how prohibited? There is no more an
express prohibition to restrain men from administering the Sacraments, then
from preaching, but only it is therefore judged prohibited, because God had
appointed Officers for the doing of that work, and therefore implicitly
prohibited the doing of it by others; and surely the prohibition does equally
concern both preaching and administering the Sacraments by others, forasmuch as
both the manner of prohibition is the same in both, and the reason of the
prohibition, to wit, because Officers were appointed by God for those works:
And thus I have vindicated the first proof of the major, wherein I have been
the larger, because it is a principal point, and because what our Brethren
excepted had some color of reason, although I am not without hope, that our
Brethren themselves by this time may see, that it was a color only, and no
substance.

2. The major was proved thus, That otherwise the Officers God has appointed
are made void, or at least unnecessary and insufficient.

To this they say, This will prove as strongly that Officers are unnecessary,
at least to the work of private exhortation, seeing private Christians may do
it.

Reply. It is very true, and naturally follows, that because private Christians
may reprove privately, therefore there needed no peculiar Officers to be set
apart for that work of private reproving, and if that were the whole work of a
Minister, there would need no Officers for the work of the Ministry: But
because there is another, and an higher work of the Ministry, which private
Christians may not do, i. e. the work of public preaching, therefore it is
that there are Officers appointed for it.

3. Hereby the order instituted by God in the Church is confounded.

To this they say, It is not. As a Fathers teaching of his children does not
destroy the order of Schoolmasters, nor take away the distinction between
Master and Scholar, etc.

Reply. It is true that a Father teaching privately, does not destroy the
relation of a Schoolmaster and Scholar, but if Fathers did, and might
promiscuously teach in a public way, this would destroy, or at least much
prejudice that comely order. In like manner, that a Father or any Christian
teach others privately, is no way prejudicial to public teaching, but eminently
subservient to it, and we heartily wish it were more conscientiously and
diligently practiced; but if public teaching were promiscuously allowed to all
gifted men (whether Masters or Scholars) surely this would be repugnant to the
order instituted by Christ, that one member of Christ's body should usurp the
acts of another. And thus much shall suffice for the vindication of the first
Argument used by the Provincial Assembly.

The second Argument was this, No religious service may be performed by any
persons not appointed, nor warranted thereunto: But persons gifted are not
appointed nor warranted thereunto.

Our Brethren deny the minor, they say, gifted persons are appointed to preach.
Against this, was argued as follows, If they are appointed to preach, then
every gifted man that preaches not is guilty of a sin of omission. To this
they answer, he is not guilty, if he want an opportunity, a call from others to
exercise his gifts.

Reply. I would gladly know whether the Apostles had been excused if they had
refused to preach at all, for want of a call from men to preach; What if both
Magistrates and people had not desired them to preach, whether did this give
them a supersedeas or no? If they say it did, I suppose many are not of their
mind, I am sure for one, that was Peter, when he was not only not called to
preach, but forbidden to preach, yet he accounted it his duty to preach, Act.
5. 29. We ought to obey God rather than men. If they say it did not discharge
them from preaching, then I demand why it did not; surely all the account which
can fairly be given of it must be this, They were by God appointed and obliged
to preach, and therefore no men can dis-oblige them: And upon the same ground;
if gifted men were appointed by God for that work, the negligence of men not
desiring them, (provided they would permit or hear them) would not dis-ob^ige
them: Add to this, that whatever gifts a man has, he is bound to exercise them
wherever he can (where he is not restrained, and put under some kind of
impossibility of doing it) whether he be desired or no: A Christian having
received a gift of private instruction, he is obliged to instruct persons not
only when they desire him, but when they do not, whenever he can have
convenience and opportunity so to do: And in like manner (if our Brethren say
true, that all gifted men as such, are appointed by God to preach) if a man
have a gift of public instruction, he is obliged to use it whenever he can be
permitted so to do, and not only when others call him to the exercise of his
gift. And this is the more forcible against them, because they reduce those
preaching gifts unto the talents spoken of Mat. 25. which talents whoever uses
not, is under a most dreadful curse and commination: Now, as it is in other
talents, if a man have received riches, honor, parts, interest, etc. he must
use and exercise them for Gods glory, whether he be desired or no; so in like
manner according to their hypothesis, his preaching talent must be laid out,
whether the people desire it or no.

Our third Argument was this, No man may do the Office of a Magistrate or
Deacon, who is not called to it: Ergo none may do the Office of a Minister, who
is not called thereunto.

To this Argument they Answer diverse things.

1. If this Argument hold, then, as no man that is no Magistrate, may do one
act of the Magistrates, so no man that is not ordained, may do one act of the
Minister, he may not preach once, though as a probationer, which is against our
Brethrens own principles.

Ans. There is a double flaw in this discourse; For,

1. There is not Par ratio; there is not equal necessity of men's trials in
order to both works: It is necessary a Minister should do the work of a
Minister, viz. Preach in order to his Trial and Ordination to that work. But it
is not necessary a man should do the work of a Magistrate in order to his
trial, for his abilities may be fully known other ways.

2. In cases of necessity private men may do the work of the Magistrate: It is
proper to the Magistrate to take away a man's life, and yet in a case of
necessity, as if a private man be assaulted by a Rogue upon the highway, it is
lawful for him, if he can, to take away his life.

2. They Answer, Care may be taken otherways, there may be approbation without
Ordination.

Reply. It is true, men may devise twenty ways of their own, as indeed there
is a mavelous pronenesse in men to set up their own devises in Gods worship;
and whenever they are convinced of the necessity of using any means in order to
an end, rather to contrive means and ways of their own, than to use such as
God has already appointed, which, I fear, is our Brethrens miscarriage here:
God has appointed an Ordination, and an examination and approbation in order
to Ordination, and of Ordination the Scripture speaks more clearly and
frequently, than of any other approbation; nor do I remember that ever it
speaks of the approbation of any Preachers, but in order to Ordination; our
Brethren have forsaken this Institution of God, and introduced a new device, of
approbation without Ordination. And because the occasion here leads me to it, I
cannot but take notice of one thing, whereas I am informed some persons,
through carelessness or oscitancy, or wilfulness, or ignorance, have taken up
this conceit, that an Approbation from the Commissioners appointed for the
trial of Public Preachers, is a kind of Ordination, and may serve in stead of
it: I would have them here to take notice, that this is not only false in it
self, but against the very words of that Act whereby they are constituted,
wherein an express protestation is made (as elsewhere has been observed) That
they themselves do not intend that this shall be taken as an Ecclesiastical
call, but only a Civil dispensation of the Magistrates right to particular
places.

And whereas it was urged, that The work of the Ministry being a work of
greater consequence and difficulty, than the work of the Magistrate or the
Deacon, it requires greater care.

They Answer, Men may perform some works of greater consequence, who yet may
not perform works of less consequence. To believe is an act of higher
consequence, than to do the work of a Deacon, yet every Christian may believe.

Reply. This is a mere fallacy, for though believing is a work of greater
difficulty and consequence in relation to a man's self, yet not in relation to
the Church and other men, and that is it we are treating of; so that the work
of believing is altogether impertinent in this place, for we are speaking of
such works as relate to others, and wherein there is a care required in
relation to others, but believing is a work confined to a man's self.

Our fourth Argument was this, None may administer the Sacraments who is
uncalled; Therefore none may preach who is uncalled, for these two are joined
together in that Commission, Mat. 28. 19, 20. and preaching is the greater
work, 1 Cor. 1. 17.

Our Brethren make many exceptions against this Argument.

1. They say it makes against us, For you ( say they) separate between
preaching and baptizing, you allow men to preach probation-wise, not to
administer the Sacraments probation-wise.

Reply. The reason of the difference is apparent, Preaching probation-wise is
simply necessary in order to their Approbation and Ordination, for the trial of
their gifts, and so this preaching is in a case of necessity, and therefore
allowable; but there is no necessity at all of trying their gifts by
administering the Sacraments, seeing there are none of their gifts exercised
there, but such as are fully discovered by their trial in preaching, etc.

2. They say, Matthew. 28. is no Commission authorizing them either to preach or
baptize, (that Commission they had before, Mark 10. and Joh. 4.) and therefore
could not now be constituted afresh.

Reply. 1. Give me leave however to propound it as my private opinion, though I
shall not be positive in it, and I know there are some difficulties in the way,
that the Apostles were indeed Officers before, but not Officers of the same
kind, and therefore might well require another commission: If a man be a
Captain in an Army, he is an Officer; but if he be made a Colonel, he must
have a new Commission: If a man be a Deacon in a Church, he is an Officer; but
if he be made a Minister, he needs a new Commission: If a man had been made a
Pastor and Teacher in the Apostles days, this man had been an Officer; but,
if he had afterward been made an Apostle, he had needed a new Commission: And
this I take to be well-nigh a parallel to our case: For the Apostles it is
true, were Officers before this, but I humbly conceive they were not Apostles
before this; which I think will be probable by these three Considerations. 1.
That an Apostle strictly so called, was a new Testament Officer, and therefore
such an Office was not in being before the new Testament began: But the new
Testament did not begin till the death of Christ (as all intelligent Divines
grant) for that was it which rent the vail, and abolished the Jewish pedagogy.
2. They were not Apostles properly and formally, until they had Apostollicall
gifts: But these gifts they had not before the death of Christ. 3. They wanted
universality of jurisdiction (which was the constant character of an Apostle)
nay indeed, so far were they from having a jurisdiction over all Nations before
that time, that they had not jurisdiction over all the Jews, nor (to speak
strictly) over any of the Jews, for as much as they were, till Christ death,
subject to the jurisdiction of the Jewish Priests, that being not taken away
but by the death of Christ: And surely it is something strange to fancy them to
be Apostles without any jurisdictions. I conclude therefore, they were rather
Prophets, or extraordinary Teachers, than Apostles, (and so Mr Firmin affirms
of Paul before Act. 13. Mat. 10.) and had not their Commission as Apostles,
till Matthew. 28. 19, 20.

2. Put case that Mat. 28. is not a formal Commission, yet it must needs be
granted, that it is a renewing and confirming, and enlarging of their former
Commission, and therein their work is afresh proposed to them, and enjoined
upon them, and that is sufficient for our purpose; for this work is double,
preaching and administering the Sacraments, which being equally imposed upon
them, must by like reason be equally restrained to them, unless better grounds
can be shown to the contrary, than have yet been given.

3. They say, It is denied by some that preaching is a greater work than
baptizing. The sealing of a Deed is a greater work than the writing of it;
every Clerk may write it, but only the Conveyancer can seal it.

Ans. The Question is not, whether preaching or baptizing be greater in regard
of the dignity of the work? but in regard of the difficulty of it: As in the
instance proposed; The sealing of the Deed is a work of greater dignity, but
the writing of the Deed is a work of more difficulty, and therefore belongs to
him who is appointed for such works, and who has more skill in the management
of such works: So in this case, preaching which answers to the writing of the
Deed, being a work of far greater difficulty, than the applying of the seal, it
was requisite that greater or at least equal care should be taken in it, and
that it should be managed by none but such as are both fitted for, and
appointed to the work.

The fifth Argument was this, To usurp authority is a sin; But Preaching is an
act of Authority, and therefore for persons not in Office to preach, is to
usurp Authority, and so to sin, 1 These. 5. 12. Heb. 7. The loss is blessed of
the greater: Women must not preach, because they must not usurp Authority, 1 Timothy 2. In Preaching the key of the kingdom of Heaven is used, which is an
authoritative act.

Against this our Brethren offer diverse exceptions, some whereof are
impertinent, and some frivolous: All that has any appearance of probability, I
shall take notice of.

1. They say, Preaching is no act of Authority, for if a man preach to
Heathens, where no Church is; How can he usurp authority over the Church?

Reply. True, he cannot usurp authority over the Church, but authority he uses
toward them to whom he preaches, when Paul preached to Heathens, it was an
authoritative act, no less than when he preached to the Church: He preached as
an Ambassador to one as well as to the other: And seeing that Paul or any
other Minister preaching to Heathens, or such as are yet unreconciled,
preaches as in Christ's stead, it can be no other than an act of authority.

2. They say, There may be other ways to give authority to men to preach,
besides Ordination.

Reply. Our Brethren should do well to remember that Golden saying of Ignatius,
(...), to bring in nothing without Scripture evidence: Ordination, we know, and
there are clear Scriptures warranting that, and much more clear and undoubted
for that, than for Election (as has been often observed) but for a Scripture
warrant for another way of authorizing men to the work of the Ministry without
Ordination, we know none, and if our Brethren know any, they should do well to
inform us.

3. For Heb 7. They say, Indeed he that blesses by an original, inherent
power, as Christ does, he is greater than he that is blessed, and of such a
blessing the Text speaks; but he that blesses Ministerially, and
instrumentally is not always greater than he that is blessed.

Reply. This is very gross, and contrary to the Text, which evidently speaks
of Melchizedek, who blessed only Ministerially (and not by any original power)
and yet that kind of blessing the Apostle alleges as an evidence of his
superiority over Abraham as the party blessed, and if this were not spoken of
Melchizedek, it were wholly impertinent to the present cause, which was to
prove that Melchizedek was greater than Abraham.

4. They say, There is a plain difference between teaching and usurping
authority over the man, so the Text runs: But I suffer not a woman to teach,
nor to usurp authority over the man, but to be in silence, 1 Timothy 2. 12.

Reply 1. This should not have been said by such as pretend to know any thing
which belongs to the interpretation of Scripture, wherein it is so familiar a
thing, to use a conjunction disjunctive, or a word disjoyning one thing from
another, when indeed the one explains the other: Shall any, who reads Rev. 22.
15. For without are dogs, and sorcerers, and whoremongers, thence infer that
these sorcerers, etc. are not the dogs there intended, because they are
distinguished from them? This would be plainly childish. And (to give an
instance in the very same kind of conjunction) Gal. 1. 12. speaking of the
Gospel, he says, For I neither received it of man, neither was I taught it,
but by the revelation of Jesus Christ; where the latter is not distinct from,
but expositive of the former, for how could he receive it from man, any other
way then by being taught it?

2. For their phrase in this place, the Apostle has so hemmed it in on both
sides with an exegesis, that no rational man can doubt of it: On the one side
of it teaching is forbidden; on the other side silence is enjoined: and nothing
can be more evident, then that he speaks of that usurpation of authority which
consisted in teaching, and is opposed to silence. And for what they add, That
the Apostle speaks of her usurping authority over the man, i. e. her husband,
not over the Church. Answer, This is indeed to seek a knot in a bulrush: For,
the man here is not to be understood singularly, for her husband (there is
nothing in the Text which either commands or warrants such a sense) but
indefinitely, for any man: For the Apostle is comparing sex with sex in the
general, not husband and wife in particular: And if this Text concerns such
women also as have no husbands (which I believe our Brethren will not deny)
then the Apostle speaks of usurping authority over the male kind in the Church,
not over an husband. To which may be added, that the authority here spoken of,
is not an Oeconomicall, but a Political, an Ecclesiastical authority; not an
authority in the Family, but in the Church; not an authority assumed in some
Family administration, but in a Church affair. If it be further said (for I
shall improve their Argument to the highest) that the Apostles forbidding this
usurping of authority to the women, allows it to the men; I Answer, It no way
follows, no more then it follows, that the French Laws, when they prohibit
women from usurping authority, or wielding the Scepter, do allow it to all men;
or then it would follow, if a Law were made, that no woman should usurp
authority in a corporation, that therefore every man ought to do it, which is
so far from being true, that on the contrary such an act would not only forbid
women also, but all others until they were called to it.

3. To shut the door to all such cavils and unhandsome wrestings of the Text, a
parallel place will put an end to it, 1 Cor. 14. 34. Let your women keep
silence -- it is not permitted for them to speak, but to be in subjection, as
says the Law: Whence the inference is plain and undeniable, that to speak, i.
e. in the Church, is unlawful for those who are in a state of subjection: And
because all unofficed persons are in a state of subjection as well as women,
therefore by the same reason they are forbidden to preach, for my part, this is
so clear, that he that shall resist such evidence, I shall despair of ever
seeing him convinced by man.

I shall pass over this only taking notice of two things, which concern our
present controversy.

1. That it is not only constant preaching, but even occasional preaching
which is here forbidden them: And so, by a parity of reason, gifted men unless
in case of necessity, and with order to trial for Ordination, which also is
necessary, as has been argued, may not so much as preach once and their
preaching though sparingly, is as clearly, though not so grossly contrary to
this prohibition, as to preach constantly.

2. That it is the work, and not the manner of working, which is here
forbidden: The very work of public preaching is here forbidden them: This I
say, to prevent a common evasion of our Brethren, that gifted men may not and
cannot preach in the same manner as ordained persons, i. e. they cannot do it
authoritatively, yet the work they may do: And why may not I have the same
liberty, and apply it to the case of women, and say that they may do the work,
although they cannot do it in the same manner, i. e. with authority: If I
should say so, it would be easy to silence me, by saying, that the very act of
preaching is spoken of, as an act of authority, and that may justly silence
them too.

The sixth Argument was this, The Scripture reproves uncalled men for
preaching. Jer. 23. 21, 22. They are reproved not only for preaching false
doctrine, but for preaching without a call, for running without being sent.

To this our Brethren return this strange Answer; That these were Prophets
rightly called by God; and they are blamed for this that being Prophets they
did not prophecy right things page 128.

Reply. This is a little too gross, to say, they are by God called to be
Prophets, of whom God professes, They ran but he sent them not: Whether shall
we believe God or our Brethren? And this is the more considerable, because it
was not with Prophets as it is with ordinary Gospel Ministers (who besides the
delivery of a message to them from God, must also have a solemn mission and
authorization for the work) for the Prophets had no other call then this, or at
lest, this was Gods usual way of calling them, he immediately inspired them
with an extraordinary message: And when God vouchsafed to send such a message,
that was taken for an authorization of them, or a call to be a Prophet, as
plainly appears in the case of Samuel, 1 Samuel 3. where after God had delivered
a message to and by Samuel, it follows, v. 20. And all Israel knew that Samuel
was established to be a Prophet of the Lord: And therefore on the contrary
seeing these Prophets were such as had not any message at all from God that we
read of) thereby it is evident that they were not Prophets, and he that faith,
they were such, as he asserts it gratis, so it is plain, it is but an opinion
taken up (...) to gratify their cause. And I am persuaded had not our Brethren
been hurried into this fancy by the favorable aspect it has to their
doctrine, they would have rejected it as wholly ridiculous. Whereas they urge
that saying, If they had stood in my counsel, and had caused my people to hear
my words, then they should have turned them from their evil way, but the Lord
would not have entailed his blessing upon the labors of false Prophets. I
answer. 1. As the words are here rendered, they no way oppose our doctrine, for,
The standing in Gods Counsel, and speaking Gods Words, implies a call, as has
been showed; as if he had said If they had waited till I had sent them, and
delivered my message to them, then they might have expected a blessing. 2. It
must be observed that there is another reading proposed by some learned men,
which as it is very conformable to the Hebrew Text, so it is more probable in
it self, and more consonant to the context, to read it thus, If they had stood
in my counsel, i. e. if they had stood till I had sent them, etc. they would
have profited this people and they would have turned them from their evil way;
whereas now they did encourage them in it; so that he brings in this as an
evidence, that they were false Prophets.

The seventh Argument used by the Provincial Assembly was this: The Ministers
of Christ have been as careful to make proof of their mission as of their
doctrine, Call. 1. Joh. 3. 27, 28. Luke 20. 2.

To this they say: 1. If it prove a call, yet it proves not that this call is
ordination.

Ans. That is not the business, to speak of this or that particular call,
(that is proved in another proposition) but only in the general to show, that
over and besides gifts, some other call, mission, or designation from God,
either immediate, or mediate, is required; and this is sufficient against our
Brethren, who assert, that any man having gifts, is eo nomine, called by God to
preach, and his gifts alone sufficiently warrant him, though he have no other
call.

2. They say, The reason why Paul proves his mission, was but for his doctrines
sake, and although it was necessary for Paul to prove his immediate call; and
to prove the divinenesse of the doctrines of the Gospel, yet there is no such
reason to make it necessary to prove a mediate call.

Reply. 1. I do not understand that the proof of Paul's extraordinary mission
was necessary to prove the divineness of his doctrine, for then, those ordinary
officers that preached in that time could not have proved the divinenesse of
their doctrine. Besides, there are, and were diverse other excellent and
sufficient mediums to prove his doctrine by, he proved it out of the Law and
the Prophets, by miracles, by ocular witnesses of Christ's resurrection, etc.

It is true he proves his mission for his doctrines sake, and that makes not
against us at all, but for us, seeing if Paul had preached without a call, he
had given just occasion to suspect his doctrine and to doubt of the certainty
of it, (because they that reject Gods warrant to the office, have no reason to
promise to themselves Gods blesin the work) And therefore it follows strongly,
that much more ought Ministers, who have far less gifts then Paul had, to
prove their mission and call, or else they must give men leave to doubt of the
certainty of their doctrine. It is true (what our Brethren say) that, the
proof of an ordinary call is no sufficient argument to prove the truth of the
doctrine, seeing ordinary lawful Ministers may err: But yet when a man cannot
prove his call, that may render his doctrine doubtful, and the reason is,
because, Bonum oritur ex integris, malum ex quolibet defectu.

To make a man's preaching regular many things must concur, he must be called,
he must preach agreeable to the Word, etc. But the want of any one of these
will make it irregular.

Other things they say, but because they are trivial, I wave them, as not
having such store of time as to throw it away to no purpose.

The eighth and last Argument was this. That work may not be performed which
cannot be performed in faith: But preaching by a gifted Brother, not called,
etc. cannot be done in faith; for, 1. Such have no precept to preach. 2. There
is no precept for people to hear them or maintain them. 3. They have no
promise of assistance, of protection, of success, etc.

To which our Brethren say something: But because they add nothing of any
weight, except that which has been said by themselves before, and by us
answered; to avoid Tautologies, I shall ease my self, and Reader, of the
trouble of following them: There is one thing only which is very observable,
that they say nothing as to that which is most considerable in the argument,
which is the matter of maintenance; which I must desire them seriously, and
conscientiously to peruse, and let them take it in this form, and give me leave
to improve it.

All Scripture-Preachers may challenge maintenance: But all gifted men (though
preaching) cannot challenge maintenance, Therefore they are no
Scripture-Preachers.

The Major is the maine thing liable to doubt, and therefore I shall prove it.
Either all Scripture-Preachers may challenge maintenance, or only such
Preachers as are in office-relation to those to whom they preach, and of whom
they challenge maintenance: But not only such Preachers may challenge
maintenance as are in office-relation to them; Therefore all
Scripture-Preachers may challenge this maintenance.

The Minor (for that only is liable to exception) I prove thus: The Apostles
(say our Brethren) were only in office-relation to the Church, and other
Teachers are only in office-relation to their particular Churches (as they
assert) But these might challenge maintenance from others.

The disciples Luke 10. had no office-relation to them to whom they preached;
they were no officers in the Jewish Church, and the Christian Church was not
then erected, and yet for their very work they may require maintenance. v. 7.
And in the same house remain eating and drinking such things as they give, for
the labourer is worthy of his hire.

And Paul, where ever he sowes spirituals (though it be among heathens) he may
require carnals, 1 Cor. 9. And generally in Scripture, the maintenance is
rather thrown upon the work then upon the office. The double honor, 1 Timothy 5.
17. and the high estimation, 1 These. 5. 13. is for their works sake. And the
ox that treads out the corn (though it may be he treads not out his own
Masters but another man's corn) ought not to be muzled: I would desire our
brethren to answer me this question: Suppose a man will go into Wales to preach
the Gospel, Whether in that case, they do not believe the people are obliged to
give him carnalls for his spiritualls? If they affirm it (as I believe they
have too much ingenuity to deny it, and the foregoing places fully evince it)
then we have gained thus much, that the maintenance is not due only to such as
are office-wise related to those to whom they preach, but to all
Scripture-Preachers, which was the thing to be proved, and so we have secured
the Major.

For the Minor, it is needless to spend time about it, for our brethren grant
it, and besides it speaks for it self: For if all gifted men be bound to
preach (as our brethren assert) and if in Churches, many men are, and all ought
to covet to be so gifted (which also they assert) then the maintenance of such
would be both absurd and impossible.

And thus much shall suffice for the vindication of the Provincial Assemblies
Arguments, to prove that none ought to Preach without Ordination: And so I have
done with the principal Question: Only that the Reader may be able more
judiciously to compare things together I shall present him with an (...), or
enumeration of the Arguments on both sides.

The Arguments alleged by them to prove that unordained men may preach.
I am the more willing to propound all their Arguments together, because I
would not take them at advantage, but set the best gloss upon their cause,
for, it often times falls out, that, quae non prosunt singula, juncta juvant,
those Arguments which when they are pulled asunder, have but little strength in
them, being united together, seem considerable; so that if their cause have any
real strength in it, we shall see it here, when the arrows are all put
together in one bundle, or else we may conclude, that there is neither strength
nor truth in it.

Their first Argument is this. Election must go before Ordination (which they
take for granted, though it never was proved) But a person must Preach before
Election and therefore before Ordination, and so one not yet Ordained may
Preach: So that their Argument is this: Because a man unordained may Preach in
a case of necessity, i. e. when he is to be tried for Election or Ordination,
therefore he may Preach where there is no necessity.

Arg. 2. Gifted men unordained are* commanded to Preach. And here because
Peter, 1 Pet. 4. 9, 10, 11. commands every man to exercise his gift they
infer from thence, that this gift must needs include preaching (though it may
as well relate to hospitality) and that this gift must needs be exercised in a
public way, by such as have no further call thereunto.

Arg. 3. They argue from examples, Because Apollos (who was a man
extraordinarily endowed, and an Officer 1 Cor. 1. 12.) spoke publicly to
diverse Jews, though not gathered together in a Church assembly; and because the
scattered Saints (who it is doubtful whether they were officers or no) in a
case of persecution and necessity spoke occasionally of the things of God to
persons they met with, therefore any gifted men may ordinarily, and without a
case of necessity preach publicly in a Church Assembly.

Arg. 4. Because some persons, who are called by the name of Officers,
Prophets, and therefore may well be concluded to be in Office, because such
being enriched with extraordinary gifts did Prophecy, therefore persons who
are unquestionably no Officers, and whose gifts are but ordinary, may preach.

And this is bona fide the whole strength of their opinion, which, whether it
be of sufficient force to transport a man beyond the sentiment or judgment of
the Church, in all ages, of the generality of the reformed Churches of the
present ages, of the far greater part of learned and godly divines among us: I
desire our brethren, and all that are concerned in it, in the fear of God to
consider.

And now let us see whether we cannot give a better account of our assertion,
and whether it does not stand upon a firmer basis.

The Arguments alleged by us, to prove that unordained men may not Preach.
Arg. 1. None may Preach lawfully, unless (besides their gifts) they have a
mission from God, Romans 10.

Arg. 2. Neither Aaron, no nor the Lord Jesus would undertake their offices,
nor-do any work of their offices, until; over and above their excellent gifts,
they had received from God a call and designation thereunto. And therefore
persons far inferior in excellency and gifts ought not upon the account of
their gifts, either undertake any office, or any work of any office, without a
further call thereunto; nor are they by 1 Pet. 4. or any other place obliged to
it.

Arg. 3. Gospel-Preachers are called by names importing an office: Ambassadors,
Stewards, etc. And therefore such Preachers are only officers, for names must
answer to things.

Arg. 4. Gifts and calling, are constantly distinguished.

5. Diverse rules are laid down to guide and caution men in the admission of
persons to the office of Preaching the Gospel, all which, are superfluous, if
gifted men are, eonomine, warranted to Preach.

6. To allow the Preaching of unordained men, opens a door to all confusion.

7. God has punished such as (though sufficiently gifted and qualified for the
work they did) undertook to do a work, to which they were not called, as Uzzah,
Saul, Uzziah.

8. None may perform any religious service to God, but such as are appointed,
or otherwise warranted thereunto: But all gifted men are not appointed to
preach, for then they sin if they neglect it, etc.

9. None may do the work of a Magistrate or a Deacon, who is not called to it,
and therefore none may, without a call, do the work of a Minister, which is a
work of far greater difficulty and more importance.

10. None may administer the Sacraments, because he is gifted, unless withal
he be solemnly set apart for the work. Ergo none but such an one may preach,
for as much as God has joined both these together.

11. Preaching is an act of authority, and therefore must not be done by such
as are under authority, by such as are not officers.

12. Scripture reproves uncalled men for Preaching.

13. Christ's Ministers have been always careful to prove their Calling as
well as their Doctrine.

14. Gifted men uncalled cannot Preach in Faith, neither are they commanded to
Preach, nor People to hear them, etc.

15. All Scripture-Preachers may challenge maintenance, But all Gifted men,
though Preaching, cannot challenge maintenance: Therefore they are not
Scripture-Preachers.

The Tenth Chapter concerns Doctor Collings, and is by him answered.

CHAP. XI.
THus we have dispatched our main work, now it only remains that somewhat be
spoken as to the business of Election and Ordination; and here a threefold
question should be ventilated.

1. Whether Election by divine right belong to the people.

2. Whether the essence of the Ministerial call consists in Election or
Ordination.

3. Whether Ordination may be done by the people.

For the First, Whether Election by divine right belong to the people, there is
no need to say any thing about it, because it has been so fully ventilated by
others; only for those three places alleged in favor of this Election, and
answered by the Provincial Assembly, which they have here undertaken to
vindicate, it will be convenient to say something, as also of the absurdities
objected by the Assembly to the Affirmative.

The first place is Acts 1. 23. It was answered:

1. These words, they appointed two, do in all probability relate to the
Apostles, v. 5, 17, 21, 22. To this our Brethren reply, The exhortation about
choosing was given to the 120 brethren and therefore they did choose.

Reply. It was not an exhortation to choose, nor a direction in choosing (here is
not a word of the knowledge, piety, prudence, etc. of the person to be chosen,
which uses to be the subject of the Apostles discourse, when he exhorts to, or
directs in choosing) but only a declaration that one must be chosen, which was
very congruous and convenient, whether the Apostles or people did appoint; and
however the Apostles might and did appoint, yet it was fit the People should
consent and be satisfied.

I forbear other things as to this place, because they will recur in the next
place, whither I refer them; only this I leave to the consideration of
ingenuous men, that it is at least doubtful who it was that are here said to
appoint two; the Grammatical construction and Logical connection possibly will
bear either; I am sure it will beat the Apostles, and therefore great stresse
cannot be laid upon this place.

The next alleged Text is that, Acts 6. 3. concerning the choice of Deacons.

To which it was said, That the people were guided and limited in their choice
by the Apostles; so that if they had swerved from the Apostles directions, the
Apostles would not have ordained them.

To this they Answer, That Laws and Rules directing in the choice, hinders not
the entireness of the choice: A Corporation have entire power of choosing and
yet are limited by Laws.

Reply. It is true, Regulation by dead Laws and Rules is no prejudice to the
peoples sole power in election, but a regulation by living Judges does destroy
it, to wit, the regulation being such, as here it is, wherein the Apostles (or
their vicegerents the Ministers) have not only a bare vote in the election, but
a negative voice, whereby it is in their power either to choose or refuse: So it
was here, and therefore surely the Apostles had a share, yea, the great share
in the choice, and therefore the people had not the whole and sole power in the
choosing of Deacons, which was to be proved: This case is not unlike our
Colleges, when the Fellows have a power to choose, etc. yet under the
direction and regulation of the Master, who has a power to choose or refuse the
person chosen by the Fellows: Can any sober man in this case say that the sole
power of choosing is in the Fellows? Is it not in the Master also? And so it
was in the Apostles.

3. Our Brethren forget the maine thing that was driven at which by their own
acknowledgement was this, that, The essence of the call consists not in
Election, and that plainly appears from this place: For if the Apostles had
refused any of those chosen by the people upon just grounds, I desire our
Brethren to Answer whether they think they would have been Deacons
notwithstanding, whether the Apostles would or not. If they say, yea, that is
so injurious to the Apostles, and their jurisdiction, that they will have few
followers; if they say no, then the essence of the call to the office of the
Deacon (and so of the Minister by their own Argument) consists not in Election,
unless they will say, that a man can be a Deacon and yet want the essence of a
Deacon.

Excep. If this Election had been frustraneous it had not been for want of
Ordination but for the neglect of observation of Gospel-Rules in choosing.

Ans. Nay, on the contrary, it had been the want of Ordination* For suppose the
people had proceeded according to Go^pel-Rules, in the Election and choosing a
person visibly fit, and the Apostles by the spirit of discerning, seeing
something in him which renders him unfit, had denied Ordination; In this case,
the Election had been null, though according to Rule, Ergo, The want of
Ordination makes it null, efficiently, or rather deficiently, though the want
of fit qualification makes it null meritoriously.

And again, let us suppose that both the people and the Apostles had not
exactly kept to the Rule in choosing (for the Apostles might err in matters of
fact though not in matters of doctrine) and the people had chosen, and the
Apostles ordained a man not fit for the office according to rule, in that case,
to say that this call had been null, would be a venturous assertion: It is
harsh to say, of every man chosen to the office of a Deacon who is not full of
the holy Ghost and wisdom, (for those are the required qualifications) that
his choice is null. I am confident our brethren have too much modesty to
affirm it, and if they do not affirm it, then that which in this case had
made the election null, had not been the not observing of Gospel-Rules, but the
want of Ordination.

2. It was said, that, though the people might have the sole power of choosing
Deacons, yet not of Ministers. A minore ad majus non valet argumentum
affirmative.

To this they Answer, That we use that kind of arguing, when we argue thus; We
use Ordination in the choice of Deacons; Ergo, of Ministers much more, so
Christ argues from the less to the greater; God takes care of Lillies, Ravens,
etc. Ergo, he will much more take care of you. Mat. 6.

Reply. Our Brethrens answer runs upon a gross mistake, for they
inconsideratly confound two Canons which vastly differ (though both of them
belong to the same Topic.)

1. Their Argument is fetched from this Canon: Cui competit minus, competit
majus: If a power of choosing Deacons, which is the less, belongs to the
people, then a power of choosing Ministers, which is the greater, belongs to
them.

To this the Assembly well answered: A minori ad majus, non valet affirmative.
It is very false to argue thus: The power of choosing a Captain belongs to the
Colonel, Ergo, the power of choosing a General belongs to him: Or thus, The
members of such a Company have a power to choose their own Officers (which is
the less) and therefore they have a power to choose the City Officers, which is
the greater. It is a true Rule, A majori ad minus, valet affirmative. i. e. Cui
competit majus, competit minus: But it is false to argue, A minori ad majus
affirmative, or thus, Cui competit minus, competit majus.

2. But there is another Canon, much differing from the former, and that is
this; Quod competit minori, competit etiam majori: If Ordination was required
to the meaner and less considerable Office, which is that of the Deacons, much
more is it required to that which is the greater and weightier Office. And this
was the Argument used by the Assembly. And to this belongs the Argument, Mat.
6. 26. If the care of Gods Providence reaches to lillies (which are the less)
much more will it reach to you, which are the greater.

The third Text alleged for the peoples election, was Act. 14. 23. When they
had created them elders by suffrages, ( for so they say the word, (...), is
generally used) in every City: And this they say, may have reference to the
disciples, as well as to Paul and Barnabas, for they were spoken of before.

Reply. One would think nothing more can be said, or desired by any sober man
for the elucidation and vindication of this Text, then the making out of these
two things.

1. That the word (...), is frequently used for a simple choosing or appointing,
though without suffrages.

2. That it cannot be taken here for choosing by suffrages.

From these two, it follows most evidently, and irrefragably, that this place,
(which is alleged as a pillar to prove the peoples election, etc.) does no
ways enforce it, but rather overthrow it.

For the first, that the word (...), are not always used for a choosing by
suffrages, but often times, for a simple choosing, or appointing, etc. is most
plain, from Acts 10. 41. and may be made good by a multitude of instances, for
which the Provincial Assembly, referred you to other Authors, and especially
Seldom de Synedriis, it being needless to transcribe.

3. How often the use of words varies from the etymology, no man can be
ignorant, that is not wholly a stranger to the Greek tongue.

But our Brethren say, it is strange, that Luke should use the word in such a
sense as was different from the custom of all that writ before him.

I answer. 1. It is so used by others, as was now said.

2. It is no new thing, to find a word, used in Scripture in a different sense,
from that which it has in other Authors. And if our Brethren acknowledge that
Luke uses the word, (...), Acts 10. 41. in a sense, never used in any Author
before him; Why may we not expect the same favor for (...)?

2. Although this (if nothing else could be said) were sufficient to answer
their Argument, which is taken from the word (...), and it be incumbent upon
them to show, that the word must needs be so understood in this place, yet, ex
abundanti, we assert; That this word cannot be taken in their sense: And in
this case by their own allowance, we may recede, from the native signification
of the word, because it is repugnant to the context.

And for proof of this, I shall but desire any candid Reader, diligently to
read the whole context, especially in the Greek tongue, And I persuade my self,
he will judge it but a few removes from an impossibility to understand it in
our Brethrens sense.

1. They are said to ordain to them, (...), not to themselves, (...), as it
should have been, if the people had done it. And although it be true, that
(...), is sometimes taken for (...), yet that is but seldom (and then also it
is, for the most part, aspirated, (...)) and the common use of the word, (by
which our Brethren will have us guided in the word (...), and therefore we
expect the like from them in the word (...)) I say, the common use of the word
is otherwise, and especially this is considerable, if you take notice of other
circumstances, which oblige us to this sense, as namely:

2. The same persons are said to ordain in several Cities and Churches:
Therefore it must needs be meant of them that had an authority over several
Churches.

3. They ordained, etc. who going away, commended the people to the Lord, and
surely that was the Apostles: it is a lamentable shift to say, That the
disciples are spoken of in the foregoing verse, and therefore it may be
understood of them. True, they are spoken of and so are the Apostles spoken of,
and, seeing both are spoken of, we must inquire, to whom this must be referred,
and for that, the very first rudiments of Grammar will determine, that the
reference must be towords of the same case. Now then, in the 22. verse, the
disciples are spoken of in the Accusative case, and as passive under the
Apostles confirming, (...) and (...), with which (...), by no means agrees, as
being active, and of the Nominative case: But now if you understand it of the
Apostles, all things run handsomely. The same persons are brought in as (...),
verse. 21. (...), v. 22. (...), v. 23. (...), v. 24. (...), v. 25. etc. all of
them of the Nominative case, and the active signification: And whoever take out
the word (...), from all the rest, wherewith it is hedged in on both sides, as
they offer manifest violence to the Text, so they will be judged by indifferent
persons, merely to take it up in favor of a praeconceived opinion.

And therefore our Brethren, do well take up, and at last come to this faint
conclusion; Though this do refer to the Apostles, yet the people may be
comprehended in it: So that whereas in the first canvasing of this Text, we had
much ado to get in the Apostles; and this Text has been often alleged by our
Brethren to show, not that the people may, but that the people must, ordain
and choose themselves Elders, now all that it amounts to, is a may be, they may
be included here. All the answer it deserves, and that I shall give is this;
The people may not be included here: At lest non liquet, it appears not from
the Text at all, that they are comprehended here. However, let the question lie
here, between us and our Brethren, whether this Text, and this Ordaining belong
to the Apostles (who are here expressly said to do it) or to the people (of
whose (...), not a word is spoken here) and I suppose impartial Arbitrators
will quickly end the difference.

But, (say they, who ever did (...) yet) this (...) cannot be meant of
Ordination, seeing it is mentioned as distinct from Ordaining by prayer and
fasting, when they had chosen -- and had prayed with fasting, and if Ordination
were intended, here were a Tautologie.

Reply. I would ask our Brethren this question, whether in case the people were
they who are here said (...), to choose Elders, whether they did not manage that
work with prayer and fasting, and whether this Text does not sufficiently speak
for it self, that this prayer and fasting was used in relation to the choice of
Officers: If they assent, then the Tautologie remains on their part as well as
on ours.

2. But indeed, we must take heed of calling it a Tautologie, when ever we find
the same thing expressed in diverse phrases, which is a familiar practice in
Scripture.

3. Albeit the word (...), when put by it self, did signify, to ordain by
fasting, and prayer, and laying on of hands, yet common reason and frequent use
will teach us, that when fasting and prayer are expressed, then, (...) should
be understood only of imposing of hands.

4. Our Brethren forget the present work, we did not allege this place, or
this word, to prove that Ordination is to be done by fasting, prayer, and
laying on of hands, nor were we drawing any argument from this Text; But we
were upon the defensive part, and our work was only this to maintain, that
(...), does not here signify a creating by the suffrages of the people, which
being proved, our Brethrens attempt from this Text is frustrated, and the place
sufficiently vindicated.

These three places being cleared, and redeemed from misinterpretation, there
is but one thing remains to be done, which is a little to enforce those
absurdities objected by the Provincial Assembly against their opinion. I shall
take notice only of the first, as being most material, which is this:

Every one that is to be made a Minister, must first be tried, 1 Timothy 3, 10.
whether he be apt to teach* able to convince gain sayers. Now in many
Congregations, the major part are very unfit to judge of Ministerial abilities.

To this they answer: That true Churches are fit to judge of Ministerial
abilities, Christ's sheep know his voice, John 10. and the Church could judge of
the qualifications of Deacons, Act. 6.

Reply. 1. I dare venture the question upon this point, and although I shall
not determine it concerning every congre^ation (whereof possibly some learned
men may be members by accident) yet, for the generality of Congregations
(including such as are constituted according to our brethrens principles) I say
they are not able to judge of a man's soundness in the faith, and his ability
to convince gaine-sayers. I will only suppose that (which generally is true) a
Congregation to consist of such as are unacquainted with the affairs of
learning, and I will suppose a crafty heretic to come before them, I say, he
may most easily conceal his heresies, so that they shall never discover it,
nor be able to try his soundness in the faith.

I might instance in diverse cases, suppose a Socinian is to be tried by the
people, they ask him whether he believe Christ to be God, he will Answer yes, I
believe him to be the true God, to be one with the Father, to be equal with
God: How apt would a company of honest souls be to be cheated with such
pretenses and how readily would they be his compurgators; whereas, if this man
were to be called by Ministers, they know that these are but words, and that
though he acknowledge Christ in word, yet in deed he denies him, and allows
him to be God, only as the Magistrate is a God; so there are many other
weighty points, wherein it is impossible for the people to try a man's
soundness in the faith. How many gross errors are there about the providence
of God, the Person and Natures of Christ, the fall of man; which any learned
man may so hide under ambiguous expressions, that it shall be impossible for an
ordinary Congregation to discover them, unless they plow with the heifer of
Ministers or Scholars: So for a man's ability to defend the truth, and convince
gainsayers, how unfit people are to judge of that* no man can be ignorant,
that considers how sadly, and frequently, the judgments of people of all
sorts, and opinions, and ways, are misplaced, applauding some highly for their
sufficiency that way, who are known to understanding men, to be miserably
defective therein, and vilifying others, who are unquestionably far more
sufficient. To convince gainsayers, is a great part of learning, and that
unlearned men should be able to judge of a man's learning, will then be
believed, when it will be credited, that a blind man can judge of colors, or,
a deaf man of sounds, or an ordinary ignorant man, of the great affairs of
State.

2. For that in John, I hope our Brethren will be ashamed to allege it to this
purpose, when they shall consider that it is a character given by Christ to all
his sheep, My sheep know my voice. It is true of wise men and weak men, of men,
women, and children, which are the sheep of Christ: So that, unless they will
say, that the silliest woman in a Congregation, who is godly, is able to judge
of a Ministers ability to convince gainsayers, (then which nothing can be more
highly absurd) they must confess this Text was impertinently alleged.

3. For the peoples fitness to judge of the Deacons abilities it is a strange
instance, that because people are able to judge of a man's prudence,
faithfulness, piety, etc. therefore they are able to judge of his learning,
and sufficiency. And you may as well argue thus, that such a man is able to
build an house well, therefore he can mold a State.

And thus much shall suffice, to speak of the first Question; which, when a
judicious, and candid Reader, has duly weighed, I may groundedly hope, that
he will be thus far convinced, that the necessity of Popular Election is not so
clear, as has been conceived, nor indeed so manifest, as Ordination. And sure
I am, if we had no better evidences for Ordination, then such as these, we
should have sufficiently heard of it from our Brethren.

CHAP. XII.
THE second Question is this: Whether the Essence of the Call to the Ministry,
lie in Election or Ordination. And here also I must take the same liberty I
have used, and that is not to transcribe every word nor to take notice of such
passages as are inconsiderable, but only such as have most strength, and most
appearance of truth in them. In the doing of which, as I have the witness of
God, and my own conscience, so I doubt not I shall have the attestation of any
disinterested person, who shall compare both together.

But, before I come to handle the point, I must needs do my Brethren that
right, as to let the world know, how far they are from that generation of men
that despise and deride Ordination; they say, we do highly esteem of Ordination
as an appointment of Jesus Christ, p. 275. Only here they differ, They give
Election the praecedency to Ordination, and they place the essence of the
Ministerial call in Election, not in Ordination. But good reason, we should
not condemn them unheard: I shall therefore do them the justice as to consider
what they offer by way of Argument, and that is only this: Ordination does not
give the essence; Ergo, election does (for their first Argument from Acts 14.
verse. 23. has been discussed before.) That the essence of the Call lies not in
Ordination, they endeavor to make good by three Arguments.

Their first Argument is this, That which does not set a man over a Church of
Christ, or commit it to his charge, that does not give the essentials of the
Ministerial office: But Ordination does not set a man over a Church of Christ,
etc. because without Election a man cannot be over any flock.

I answer to the Minor, and the proof. 1. That it is but a begging of the
question, and has been before disproved, that without Election a man cannot be
over any flock.

2. Although a man could not be over a flock without Election, and Election
were necessary to his Call, yet the Essence of the Call may lie in Ordination:
Election may be necessary, as the causa, sine qua non, and yet Ordination may
be the causa formalis of the Call to the Ministry. Suppose by some ancient
Charter, the People of such a City, are invested with a right to choose their
own Minister; So that without their Election, he is not their Minister; Yet so,
as that it belongs to some Gentleman, to present the person so Elected, unless
he can show reason to refuse him, in this case Election is necessary, and yet
the Essence of the eivil Call, lies in his Presentation. Or suppose (...) of
Canterbury, had been to choose the A(...)shop of Canterbury, yet,
notwithstanding the n(...) of their Election, the Essence of the Arch Bishops
C(...) did lie in another thing, to wit, civilly in the gift of the King,
Ecclesiastically, in his consecration by the Bishops: So, though the Election
of the people were necessary, yet the Essen^e of the Call, may lie in the
Ordination of the Minister^

3. Although Election determine a man's employment to this or that particular
place, yet Ordination sets him over a Church of Christ, viz. over the whole
Church: His Ordination sets him over a Church indefinitely: his ^^^^tion sets
him over this or that particular Church. As the Act of the University, makes a
man a Doctor of Physic, but the choice of such a City, or such a noble Family,
makes him the Physician of that City, or Family.

The second Argument is this: Ordination is to be consequentiall unto a man's
having the whole Essence of the Call to the office, Acts 13. 3. Paul and
Barnabas had the Essence of their Call before from God, they were not of men,
Gal. 1. And this example is a binding rule to us.

Answ. 1. I might say, as Divines say of Vocation, That there is a Calling, ad
foedus, to the Covenant, and ad munus, to an Office. So likewise for
Ordination, there is a double Ordination, the one, ad munus, to an Office, the
other, adopus, to a Work. The Ordination which we spoke of, and wherein the
Essence of the Ministerial Call does consist, is an Ordination to an Office;
and such an Ordination the Apostle never had, Gal. 1. 1. And such an
Ordination, this Text, peradventure, speaks not of, but of an Ordination to a
Work, nor is there any ground to wonder, that men should be solemnly Ordained
to such a work as this, a work so great, so uncouth, so difficult, so much
exposed to contradiction, nor was it unusual in the Church either of the Old
or New Testament, to use fasting and prayer, or laying of hands, as well in the
designation of a person to a work, as to an Office.

2. This Argument will fall as heavy upon Election as Ordination: It must be
remembered that they assert that the essence of the call lies in Election; and
to prove this, they urge the Election of an Apostle, Acts 1. Now from hence, I
thus argue against them: If this was the prerogative of the Apostles, that they
had their call neither of man nor by man, etc. then the essence of their call
does not lie in Election: But this was the prerogative of Apostles, that they
were neither of men nor by men; so that although Ordination and Election were
both used in reference to the Apostles, yet the essence of the call did lie in
neither of them: And it is certain that in Acts 1. the essence of Matthias his
call, did not lie in the election of the people (for that Barsabas had, as well
as Matthias) but in the designation of God: And therefore, as our Brethren
would say for themselves, in that case, that we are to distinguish between what
is ordinary and what is extraordinary, between what was peculiar to the
Apostles, and what was common to other Officers; and that this was common to
the Apostles, with other Officers to be admitted by Election, which therefore
is a president for us in the call of other Officers, but that the essence of
their call should not lie in Election, but in Gods designation, this was
peculiar to them, and so is no rule to us; the same Liberty, I hope they will
allow us, to say, that in this Ordination here was, 1. Something ordinary and
common to the Apostles, with other Officers, which was to be ordained, which
therefore does strongly justify the use and necessity of Ordination to other
Officers. 2. Something extraordinary and peculiar, to wit, that the essence of
their call did not lie in this Ordination, but in the immediate appointment of
God, which therefore cannot be applied to ordinary Officers.

To say nothing of that which peradventure may be said, that Paul had the
essence of his Call from this Ordination, and yet no prejudice to that other
assertion that Paul had his Office neither of nor by man, Gal. 1. for though
men were used as instruments in the dispensation of the rites belonging to
Paul's Ordination, yet to speak properly it was not men but God, that was Paul's
Ordainer, for the holy Ghost said, separate me, etc. It was not men that
nominated Paul to be an Officer, but God did it, from heaven.

Their third Argument is taken from the nature of Ordination, Ordination (say
they) is nothing else but the solemn separation of an Officer by prayer and
fasting (they after add, and laying on of hands) to the work whereunto he is
called: It can be imagined to consist but of three things. 1. Fasting, and that
is no act of worship. 2. Laying on of hands, and that was not essential to
Ordination then, and it is questionable, whither it be still continuing or not.
3. Prayer, which therefore must be the act giving essence to Ordination seeing
the others do not.

Now upon all this, they build a double argument.

1. Ordination consists in an action performed to God only, i. e. in prayer,
therefore it cannot give the Essence of an external call to office, from men.

2. That action which cannot be performed in faith, before a man have his
outward Call to office, cannot give him that outward call: But Ordination is
such an action, etc. For how can a man pray in faith, for his blessing upon a
person in a work of an office, before he can conclude, that he is so much as
outwardly called to that office.

For Answer. 1. For the last clause, I also would ask our Brethren one
question; Suppose the Essence of the Ministerial Call did consist in Election,
and that Prayers are to be used for the person to be Elected, before his
Election (which I know our Brethren will not diflike) in this case I ask them
their own question How can they pray in faith for a blessing upon that person
in the work of his Office, before he have the Call to the Office? Whatsoever
they shall reply with reason, will serve for our use as well as theirs.

2. In such cases, our prayers have (as most frequently in many other cases) a
tacit condition, that God would bless him in the work, viz. if he shall be set
apart for it. I may pray in faith, that God would go with me in a journey, that
God would bless me in the exercises of the Lords day, etc. Although I do not
certainly know that I shall live either to go one step in my journey, or to do
one exercise upon the Lords day.

3. All their Argument proceeds upon a gross mistake and unacquaintednesse
with our principles: In a word, we hold that the Essence of Ordination,
consists in none of those three things mentioned, neither in fasting, nor
prayer, nor laying on of hands, (all which are only the modifications of the
work) but in something else, to wit, in this, the designation of fit persons by
Officers unto the work, which designation indeed, is signified by imposition of
hands, and deservedly introduced, with fasting and prayer, as being a work of
greatest weight, yet still the Essence of it lies not in this.

4. For imposition of hands, it is granted by most Presbyterians, that I know
of, that it is not so Essential to Ordination, as that they will pronounce
that Ordination null, which wanted it, although they conceive in being a rite
instituted by Christ, cannot without sin, be neglected by men. Whether
imposition of hands ought to continue in the Church, is excentricall to our
present question, and therefore I shall wave it, leaving only this Memorandum
for the Readers consideration.

That the great Argument used for the abolition of it, because it was used in
those days for the collation of the extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost,
has to me, very little cogency in it; both because by the same reason,
Preaching must be now laid aside, because when Peter preached, the holy Ghost
fell upon them that heard him, Acts 10. 44. And because it continued all along
in the old Testament, notwithstanding this, that sometimes it was used in those
times for the collation of extraordinary gifts, as Deuteronomy. 34. 9. And Joshua was
full of the spirit of wisdom, for Moses had laid his hands upon him. But I must
recall my self, and remember that it is not now my task to meddle with that
point, but only to show that our Brethrens Arguments are not unanswerable.

And now that we have seen the weakness of their Arguments alleged to prove
that the essence of the Ministerial call consists in Election, not in
Ordination, I shall consider whether we cannot find stronger Arguments to prove
the contrary, That the essence of the call does not lie in the Election of the
people, but in the Ordination of the Ministers.

CHAP. XIII.
I Shall confine my self to one Argument, which I shall desire our Brethren to
chew upon, which is this.

The essence of the call to the Ministry, must lie in the act of those only,
who by divine appointment are and ought to be in a capacity to give it: But the
people neither are, nor by divine appointment are necessarily required to be in
capacity to give the essence of the call to the Ministry: Ergo, The essence of
the call does not lie in the act of the people, i. e. not in Election.

For the Major, it is a plain case: Wherever God puts a man upon a work, he
requires that he be fit for it. God will have no man to undertake any work, of
Magistracy, Ministry, etc. for which he is not fit. The Teacher must be apt to
teach, etc. And if it be one of the works of a Minister to send forth other
Ministers, then God requires this of him, that he be in a capacity to do it.
And so doubtless, if Election be the privilege of the members of the Church,
as such, and the Essence of the Ministerial Call lies in it, then by divine
appointment this is a necessary qualification for every Churchmember to be in
a capacity to give it.

For the Minor which is this, That the people neither are, nor by divine
appointment are necessarily required to be in a capacity to give the essence of
the call to the Ministry: This I shall prove from those things which are
requisite to put men into such a capacity. And thus I argue: Authority and
ability to judge of the fitness of a Minister, are necessary to make a man
capable of giving the essence of the Ministers call: But people neither have,
nor is it necessarily required that they should have these: Ergo they are not
capable of giving the Essence of the Ministerial Call: I shall prove both
propositions.

1. For the Major, there are two ingredients, etc. of both I shall speak in
order. 1. I say, to give the Essence of the Ministerial Call is an act of
authority, I think this is unquestionable in all other cases; wheresoever the
power of calling to any office lies, there is an authority in relation
thereunto: For instance, in a Corporation, If it belongs to the Court of
Aldermen to give the Essence of such an Office, it is an act of authority in
them: So if it belong to the Court of Common council to do it, it is an act of
authority in them. Et sic in caeteris. It is true a man may give an Office to
another, which he himself has not. But if he have it not formally, he must
have it virtually. In democraticall governments, where the officers are chosen
by the body of the people, there, I say, the authority resides, and upon that
very ground, the people taken collectively, are superior in authority unto the
Officers to whom they give the Call. And as the Apostle says, The less is
blessed of the greater, so may I say, the less is called of the greater. And
as it is in civil respects, in some Parishes where the People are Patrons of
the place, and give the Essence of the civil call to a Minister, to be the
Minister of the place, as to all legal rights, etc. there, I say, the People
are, eo nomine, invested with authority, for that work, and their collation of
this place upon that Minister, is an act of authority: So in like manner, if it
belong to the people to give the essence of the Ecclesiastical call unto a
Minister, then the people hereby are empowered with an authority, and their act
is an act of authority. And this is the first branch. Authority is necessary,
etc. The use of this we shall see when we come to the Minor; In the mean time
we must prove the other branch of the Major, or rather, that is proved already,
that ability to Judge of a Ministers fitness is necessary to put a man into a
regular capacity to give the essence of the call to the Ministry. And therefore
I now come to the proof of the Minor, where I must show;

1. That people have no authority, etc.

2. That they neither have nor by divine appointment are required to have
ability to judge of a man's fitness for the Ministry.

1. That people have no authority nor can do any act of authority in the
Church, is plain from hence, because they are by Gods appointment placed in a
state of subjection, at lest it is a clear case concerning women, who are
forbidden to do an act of authority ( i. e. to preach publicly) because they
are in a state of subjection: And this is the more considerable, because in
that instance which our brethren so much insist upon, Acts 1. in that election
of an Apostle, not only the men, but women also did concur, which they could
not have done, if election were an act of authority, or if it were that act
which gives the essence to an Officer.

2. As they want authority, so they want ability. And here there are two
branches.

1. They have not 2. they are not required to have ability to judge, etc.

1. The people have not ability to judge of a man's fitness for the Ministry;
This we have proved before, and thither I refer the reader; and indeed, if our
brethrens principles did not oblige them to the contrary, it would be out of
doubt that for the body of almost all the congregations in the world, they are
exceeding unable to judge of diverse of those abilities which are required to
the Ministry.

It is little less then a contradiction to say, that unlearned men should be
fit judges of another man's learning (and that learning is of necessary use to a
Minister, neither will our brethren deny, nor can any one doubt, but he that is
wholly a stranger to it) and it is no less absurd to think, that those persons
who are unacquainted with the stratagems and subtilties of gainsayers and
heretics, should be competent judges of a man's ability to convince gainsayers.

If it be said, it is true, the people are not able to judge of these things
themselves, but they should and may call in the help of neighboring Pastors. I
answer. They may do it, and they may forbear it: According to our Brethrens
mind, this is not necessary to the being, but to the well being of it: It is
the people that have the whole and sole power of giving the Essence of the
Ministerial Call; So that if they will perversely or proudly refuse the help of
Pastors, (as some of our brethrens mind have experienced the giddiness and
unrulinesse of Congregations, even when they have had Ministers to guide them,
and much more when they have been left to themselves) they may do it: Or what
if a Congregation be in an Island, or where there are no Pastors to help them?
in that case they want ability to judge.

2. Who ever they are, that are entrusted with a power to give the Essence of
the Ministerial Call, they are to see with their own eyes. And surely they
that blamed the Bishops, because they delegated the Pastoral work to others,
which they ought to have performed personally, cannot excuse the people (if
they were indeed entrusted herewith) that they manage it by others care and
wisdom. Or else,

3. This great inconvenience will follow, that Christ has entrusted this great
power in such hands, as are unable of themselves to manage it. And thus I have
dispatched the first branch, and showed that the people are not able to judge.

The second branch is this? The people are not necessarily required to be able
to judge of a Ministers abilities, as they ought to be, if it did belong to
them to give the essence of the Ministerial Call. I say, if it does belong to
every Churchmember, as such, as his privilege, to have a joint power to give
the essence of the Ministerial call, then it belongs to every Churchmember as
his duty, and he ought by divine appointment to be fit to judge of a Ministers
abilities, and this would be a necessary qualification in every Churchmember,
not only that he be pious, but also judicious, and prudent, etc. and in all
respects able to judge of a man's fitness for the Ministry, so that if a man
were never so godly and desirous of Church Membership, etc. if he were
apparently unfit to judge of a Ministers abilities (as many hundreds of godly
people, unquestionably are) he ought not to be admitted a Churchmember,
because he wanted one necessary qualification for that relation: Which because
it is a gross and manifest absurdity, therefore it is not necessarily required
that Church Members should be able to judge of a Ministers fitness, and by
consequence, it follows that the people are not entrusted with giving the
essence of the Ministerial Call (...), which was the thing to be shown; And
thus much might serve for that point.

Only, whereas there were diverse Arguments urged by the Assembly, to show,
that the Essence of the Call did not lie in Election, which our Brethren here
praetend to answer: I am under some necessity of attending their motion: But
because, some of them do manifestly refer to such things as have been fully
discussed before, I shall not need to follow them (...), but only take notice
of such things, as have hitherto been omitted, or are now more strongly
fortified.

1. It was argued from Acts 6. Where the Apostles are said, (...) i. e. to
constitute appoint, Acts 7. 10. Deuteronomy. 1. 13. Exodus 18. 21.

They answer, If (...), be taken for the constituting act in some places, so is
the word choosing taken for the constituting act, in other places. Luke 6. 13.
And of them he chose twelve, whom he named Apostles, and the people here are
said to choose, and that expresses the putting of a man into office.

Reply. It is true when choosing, is put by it self, it may signify an
appointing, if it be ascribed to one that has a power to appoint, as it is,
Luke 6. But it is far otherwise, where choosing and appointing are distinguished
from, and opposed to one another, and the act of choosing, ascribed to the
inferiors, the people, and the act of appointing, asscribed to the superiors,
the Apostles, in such a case to say choosing is appointing, or to say, that the
constituting act, was that which was done by the inferiors, is but one remove
from impossible, that I say not ridiculous.

2. It was argued from Tit. 1. 5. I left thee in Creet to ordain, etc. what
was he left there to give an adjunct of their call? It must be considered, in
what state the Church then was, and how useful the pains of Titus might have
been in other places, which necessarily called for his help; so that we may
rationally conclude, if the people could have given the Essence of the Call
without him, and if Ordination had been but an unnecessary Adjunct, it is no
way credible that the Apostle would have diverted Titus from so great,
essential, and excellent a service, for the doing of a business, which was
but circumstantiall.

The only answer they give, that signifies any thing is this: That Titus was
left in Creet, not only to ordain Elders, but also to set in order the things
that are wanting.

But that relieves them not, for the setting of things in order (it which
concerns only the well being of the Church) was not to be put in competition
with those other glorious services, which Titus might have done in the mean
time, (and which concern the very Essence of the Church.)

^2. It was argued from the nature of Election of a people* which is not the
making of a man a Minister, but their Minister: The people Deuteronomy. 1. 13. did
look out men, but it was Moses that made them Rulers: If the people have not
office power, neither formally nor eminently, they cannot make an Officer, for,
nihil dat quod non habet.

They answer many things. 1. That Election makes a man a Minister.

Reply. That is a mere begging of the question.

2. The act of Moses is not parallel either with Ordination or Election, but
rather with Christ's act in making Church Officers, because only Christ is the
King of the Church; as only Moses was the supreme Magistrate.

Reply. 1. To speak strictly, not Moses, but God was the supreme Magistrate of
the Jews, and that policy was not a Monarchy, but a Theocrasy, as Josephus
well calls it, and Moses indeed had no regal nor arbitrary power at all, but
was only Gods Secretary, to write his mind, and Gods instrument, to publish
and execute Gods laws: And look what Moses was to the Jews, that are
Ministers unto the Church: Moses was the public interpreter of Gods Law, and
Gods Vicegerent, who in Gods Name, and according to Gods Word was to govern
the people, and they were to be ruled by him; and albeit in some cases the
people might have the power of Election, yet indeed it was Moses his act which
was the constituting act in the creation of Officers: Just thus it is in our
case, Ministers are the public interpreters of Christ's laws, and Christ's
Vicegerents, who in Christ's name, and according to Christ's word, are to govern
the people, and they are to be ruled by them; And albeit the people have a
power of Election, yet indeed it is the act of the Ministers, which is the
constituting act of an Officer: So that here is no difference at all in the
power and authority of Moses and Ministers (in both it is depending and
limited) only the one is Civil, the other Ecclesiastical.

3. That rule (they say) is not universally true, nihil dat quod non habet, for
freeholders by choosing, may make Burgesses and Parliament men. The freemen of a
Corporation give the essentialls of their call to a Bailiffe, and why may it
not be thus with the Church.

Answ. There is dispar ratio, Because all things are to be regulated by law and
institution, Civil things by a civil institution, and Ecclesiastical things
by a divine institution: Now what such freemen, etc. do, they have a charter,
and a warrant for, whereby they are quantum ad hoc authorized for the work. If
our brethren can show a parallel divine institution, for the peoples being
authorized to give the Essentials of the call to a Minister, then they do their
business: But that they have not been able to do: In these cases the people
have such office-power eminently in them, though not formally: And though each
of the people considered distributively, are inferior to such a Magistrate
after he is chosen, yet, all the people taken collectively, are (as to that
act) superior to him who is to be chosen.

Another Argument was this. That if the essence of the call lie in Election,
then it will follow, that a Minister is only a Minister to his particular
charge, and that he cannot act as a Minister in any other place, which is a
strange and false assertion.

And this the Assembly prove by diverse considerations and Arguments, to which
our brethren answer. But because all that is here said does more properly
belong to that former question i. e. whether a Minister be a Minister only to
his own particular Church, etc. I thought it more meet to bring it in there,
and thither I refer the reader for a reply to all that here they say, which
has any sinews or substance in it.

Again the Provinc. urged this: That thence it will follow that there must be
Churches before Ministers, which cannot be, for every Church must consist of
persons baptized, and baptize them none can, but he that is a Minister. Christ
therefore chose Apostles before Churches, and the Apostles ordained elders to
gather Churches.

To this they answer, 1. A Church must needs be before an officer, because he
that is an officer is made an officer only to a Church, and therefore the
Church is presupposed.

Reply. This is a mere begging of the question* and we have already at large
confuted it, and shown, that a Minister is an officer, and acts as an officer
even to such as are no Church.

2. The Apostles were extraordinary officers, and therefore that instance
proves not that ordinary officers must be before Churches.

Reply. Our brethren must take heed of denying the exemplarinesse of the
Apostles to ordinary Ministers in the administration of Church affairs. They
themselves do often make use of it: And it cannot be denied by any rational, or
ingenious man, that the Apostles, as in some things they did act as
extraordinary officers, and are no president for us, (as in single, and
absolute, jurisdiction, etc.) so in other things, their acts were ordinary, and
there examples binding as to us, as their preaching, baptizing, etc. And that
this case is of the same nature, may appear from hence because the same reason
which made it necessary for Apostles to be before Churches, made it also
necessary for other Ministers to be before them: For the reason why the
Apostles were to be before Churches, was this, because, by them Churches were
to be gathered and baptized* And thus it was with the ordinary Ministers of
those times, they also were instituted then, and are so now (by that lasting
institution Ephesians 4* 11. etc.) not only for the building up of Churches already
constituted, but also for the bringing in of those who are not yet gathered,
and therefore it was and is necessary still that Ministers be before Churches.

3. They say, Acts 14. 23. When they had chosen them elders in every Church,
the Churches therefore were before the choosing of elders.

Reply. 1. That instance does not at all enervate our assertion, for although
some Churches may be before some elders, (which we never denied) yet in the
general, a Minister must needs be before a Church. And thus much shall suffice
for the vindication of those arguments which the Assembly used to show that the
essence of the call does not lie in election. It now remains that I undertake
the defense of those arguments which they used to show that the essence of the
Ministerial call does consist in ordination: Wherein I must still crave the
continuance of the liberty I have used, i. e. not put my self or the reader to
unnecessary trouble in animadverting upon every passage, but only to observe
such things as are argumentative and have not yet fallen within our cognizance.

CHAP. XIIII.
THE Assembly urged 2 Timothy 1. 6. and 1 Timothy 4. 14. They answer, 1. It is
questionable whether laying on of hands be here meant of ordination, for that
ceremony was used in the collation of gifts also.

Reply. But forasmuch as this laying on of hands was done by an ordinary
Presbytery, which had not such a power of conferring gifts by the laying on of
hands (that being the peculiar privilege of extraordinary officers) therefore
it cannot here be rationally supposed to be so used in this place, but only
for ordination: And therefore this (...) here said to be conveyed, must needs
be rather concluded to be an office (which we often read to have been conferred
by ordinary officers) then a gift (which we never read that an ordinary officer
was entrusted to convey) But that our brethren will not bear with: For,

2. They say this (...) is not an office, and here they repeat Mr. Hookers
reasons, so that in answering one I shall answer both, and I must needs
acknowledge that what is spoken upon this place is said very plausibly.

1. (...) most commonly signifies gift, not office.

2. A man is not said to forget the office that is in him (he is in his office,
rather then his office in him) a man is said to stir up his grace, not his
office.

3. An extraordinary office (such as this was) could not be collated by
ordinary officers.

Lastly, they observe that this gift is said to be given, not (...) by the
laying on of their hands as the cause, but only (...) with, noting only the
concurrence and connection.

To all which I reply, 1. That both (...) and (...) are used in scripture for
office as well as gift, our brethren themselves will grant, so that the word
being indifferent, we must see which way other considerations will determine it.

For the second (where most difficulty lies) I reply.

1. A man may properly be said to neglect his office, or to disregard (...), to
be careless in his office, or in the execution of his office: I know no
absurdity in it, either in the English, or in the Greek Tongue: If a
Magistrate be slothful, careless, etc. we may properly say he neglects that
Office that God has put him in, he neglects his place. And as a man is said to
neglect himself, when he neglects those things, and those actions which
concern himself; so a man neglects his office, that neglects the works of his
office: So for the word (...), strip it of the metaphor, and it is no more but
this, put forth, actuate, exercise thine office. Paul's bidding him stir up
his Ministry, is no more then what elsewhere he bids him, fulfill thy Ministry,
do the work of an Evangelist. He that neglects the work of his Ministry,
invalidates his office, disuseth, neglects his office, and he that fulfils the
works of his Ministry, stirs up his office: For that other criticisme, that a
man is in his office, not his office in him, the office is ad^oyned to him, not
inhaerent in him: that is hardly worth taking notice of, because the
preposition (...) is used so variously, sometimes for one preposition,
sometimes for another, sometimes for that which is inherent in him, sometime
for that which is adjoining to him (as all know that are not wholly strangers
to the Greek Tongue) that it is a vanity to lay any stresse upon it: Sometimes
it is taken for (...), sometimes for (...), sometimes for (...), etc. and
sometimes in for apud, (...), is for a man to be apud se, for a man not to be
besides himself; so here the Office, (...), for (...), apudte, with thee, which
is committed to thee: And as men are said to be in sin, though indeed it is sin
that is in them; and they are said to enter into their masters joy, though to
speak properly their masters joy enters into them, and a man is said to be in
drink, though drink be in him: So it cannot seem strange if an office be
said to be in a man, though in propriety of speech he be in his office.

For the third branch: 1. An extraordinary office might be conveyed in this
case by ordinary officers: For 1. It is commonly thought that Paul did concur
in this ordination with that Presbytery.

2. They ordained him by divine direction: And as it was no dishonor to Paul
and Barnabas that they were ordained to that work Acts 13. 1, 2. by persons
inferior to them, seeing those persons did it by the immediate appointment of
the Holy Ghost, so neither is it any prejudice to the extraordinarinesse of
Timothies office, that it was conferred by ordinary officers, seeing they
conferred it by the conduct of prophetical designation.

3. What more ordinary both in state and Church, then for a person to have an
office conveyed to him, viz. Ministerially, by such as are inferior to him, as
the King by some of his subjects, the Archbishop, by Bishops, the officers of
a Church in our brethrens way by the people, whom I hope they will allow to be
inferior to their officers, at lest they profess that they do so.

For the last clause, I say two things.

1. That (...) is used for (...) in other places besides this; Acts 13. 7. God
brought Israel out of Egypt, (...), with, i. e. (...) by an high hand, as it is
elsewhere phrased: So Acts 19. 27. They told what things God had done (...)
with them, i. e. by them; especially seeing the (...) here, is expounded by
(...) in the other place, which our Brethren suppose to be parallel, that puts
it out of doubt: And the reason wherefore the Apostle rather uses the word
(...) then (...), was only for better sound sake, (which the Apostles were not
neglective of) it had been unhandsome to have said, (...), and therefore he
elegantly varies the word, and puts in (...) in stead of (...): But if you will
needs have the word (...) to be taken in another sense then (...), viz. for
with, and the word (...) to be understood of a gift, then why may we not
acquiesce in this sense, (which will both fully take off all your objections,
and yet no way praejudice our cause) neglect not the gift, etc. with the laying
on of hands: i. e. neglect not the gift, etc. nor the laying on of hands used
in ordination, whereby thou wast solemnly set apart for, and obliged to the
discharge of thy Ministerial gifts, and office; Do not slight, forget,
disregard that injunction etc. And this sense I am sure the Greek will bear
very well, and the English does not exclude it.

Again, if this satisfy not, it may be further added, that the word (...) may
be understood of the gift in 2 Timothy 1. 6. (forasmuch as the power of conferring
such gifts was the privilege of Apostles and extraordinary Officers) and the
same word 1 Timothy 4. 14. may be understood of the office, the conveyance of
which did fall within the verge of the ordinary Presbyters: And if you take it
thus, then you may groundedly suppose, that the laying on of Paul's hands, was
not done at the same time, nor to the same end, with the laying on of the hands
of the Presbytery, but that this latter did convey the office at one time
(which is said most properly to be neglected 1 Timothy 4. 14.) and the former did
convey a gift at another time, which he is called upon to stir up, 2 Timothy 1.
6. And this fully takes off all the difficulty. Nor can any wonder at the
different sense of the same word, and same phrase, for that is so common a
thing, not only in diverse Epistles, but in the same Epistle, yea the same
Chapter, yea the same Verse sometimes, that one and the same word or phrase is
differently to be understood, that none can justly stumble at it here. But
lastly, it must be remembered that (if this place were to be understood in their
sense, and did not contribute any thing to our cause) the truth we assert does
not so depend upon this place, that it must needs fall, if this place do not
uphold it, forasmuch as it is founded upon diverse other important places, as
has bin showed.

The Assembly argued further: The persons ordaining, were Apostles, Prophets,
Evangelists, and Presbyters, whom it is not likely that Christ would appoint to
convey only the adjunct of the Ministerial call, and leave the great work of
conveying the Office-power to the people.

To this they say two things. 1. In stead of giving an answer, they offer an
argument; that because one relate gives being to another, therefore the people
must needs give being to the Minister.

Reply. This is a mere fallacy: Relata, are considerable two ways, as I may
say, in esse constituendo, and in esse constitute, either as they are to be
constituted, or as they are completely constituted: It is true, Relata
considered in esse constitute, do give being one to another, the Father is not
a Father unless he have a son. But then consider, relations in esse
constituendo, as they are to be constituted, and so somewhat else gives being
to them, when they are relata, the one gives being to the other, but there must
be some other person or thing, which puts them into that relation, and it is
that which we speak off: For instance, The husband gives being to the wife, and
the wife to the husband: But there is something else which legally constitutes
them in that relation, to wit the Act of the Justice, or the Minister: A Vice
Chancellor is the Correlate of the University, yet the Chancellours act does
constitute him in the relation, and gives him the essence of his call.

2. They say, Though Ordination be but an adjunct, yet, it consisting chiefly,
if not only, in prayer, Christ might employ the Elders in adding such an
adjunct.

Reply. But what sober man can imagine, that if this were all, The Apostles
should take so many journeyes about Ordination; and should leave Titus, (who
could ill be spared) in Crete to ordain elders: What, would he leave him only
to pray for a blessing upon persons to be constituted by others? It is strange
he should leave him to a work no way peculiar to his office, and a work which
a brother might perform as effectually as an officer?

And this shall suffice for the second Question.

CHAP. XV.
THE third and last question is this, Whether ordination may be done by the
people? Wherein I shall need to say little, because indeed they say little to
the purpose, and what they do say, is for the most part, either nothing else
but a repetition of their disproved principles, or so infirm, that I may
safely leave things to any ingenuous reader, who shall compare our arguments
and their Answers.

Nevertheless I will not wholly omit this task also, but, where I can pick up
any thing that requires an answer, and has not been already dispatched, I
shall here take notice of it:

They offer diverse arguments to prove this proposition: That in a Church which
wants officers, some believers may lawfully ordain without officers.

1. Else ordination were unattainable, for there is neither precept nor
president of an ordinary officers acting in ordination out of the particular
Church he is over. In the places which speak of ordination, to wit Acts 6. and
13. 14. 1 Timothy 5. 22. 2 Timothy 1. 6. the persons ordaining were all
extraordinary, and so no president for ordinary officers: And for 1 Timothy 4. 14.
we see nothing to convince us that it was an ordinary Presbytery.

Answer. 1. There are diverse practices lawfully used (even in our brethrens
judgment) which yet we find no president for, but such as extraordinary persons
are concerned in: I will instance but in one, and that is excommunication,
which we never read practiced but by the authority and concurrence of an
extraordinary Officer. Paul practices it; I have delivered him to Satan. And
the Church of Corinth practices it, but not without Paul's express command,
and positive warrant and concurrence, 1 Cor. 5. 3, 4. For I verily as absent in
body, but present in spirit having judged already, etc. -- when ye are gathered
together, and my spirit: And yet our Brethren allow, and infer this as a
president for the practice of excommunication by ordinary Churches, and
ordinary persons: And therefore good reason they should allow us the same
liberty.

2. And the rather, because this makes against our Brethren as well as us; It
is their own grant, that Ordination is an Institution of Christ now in force,
and that it is to be managed by the Officers of the Church, where there are
such: So that both they and we are thus far agreed, that ordinary Officers
may ordain. Now if what they say be true, then there is neither precept nor
president for the Ordaining of Officers, and so it follows from hence, not
only that none but Officers may ordain (which we assert) but also that
Officers may not ordain at all (unless they will say Officers may do that for
which they have neither precept nor president) so that our brethrens argument,
either does not praejudice us, or else it enervates their own principles.

3. The true way therefore to discern what acts of extraordinary Officers are
presidentiall to ordinary, and what not, is this: Those actions which were
proper to those times, those actions which were the results of extraordinary
gifts, those actions which were appendants to an extraordinary jurisdiction;
those are no presidents for us. The Apostles healing the sick by anouncing with
oil, their preaching without study, their ordering of the Church affairs by
their single jurisdiction, these things are unimitable by us. But now on the
otherside; Those actions of extraordinary Officers which are common to all the
ages of the Church, those, which may be transacted by ordinary gifts, and
ordinary jurisdiction, those are presidents for us: The Apostles public
praying, and preaching, administering the Sacraments, authoritative rebuking,
ruling, censuring, etc. I say, their acting of those things, is and was ever by
the Church taken to be a president for ordinary Officers acting the same
things. Now forasmuch as Ordination is allowed by our Brethren, to be one of
those New Testament practices yet to be continued, by virtue of these
instances, etc. It follows that the practice of the Apostles therein (though
they were extraordinary Officers) is a president for us, only here is the
difference (wherein I am willing any indifferent man should be umpire) whether
it is a president for the peoples ordaining, (who, though in things belonging
to them, they did act distinctly from, and concurrently with the Apostles, as
in the business of Election, yet never do we find them ordaining or joining
with the Apostles in the work of Ordination) or whether it be not rather a
president for Ministers Ordaining, who are the undoubted successors of the
Apostels, and who did act with them in such works.

4. And Lastly, for that 1 Timothy 4. 14. how faintly and impertinently do they
speak? What if you meet with nothing that convinces you, that this was an
ordinary Presbytery? sure I am you meet with nothing that convinces you they
were extraordinary: And it is a great deal more rational for us to think they
were ordinary persons (of whom we read nothing which was extraordinary) then to
fancy them to be extraordinary, (of which we have no evidence at all) the proof
lies upon their side. I need no positive proof to persuade me to take a man for
an ordinary person, he is justly presumed so to be, till some indicia, or
discoveries of an extraordinary state break forth: But now, if one will assert,
that another is an extraordinary person, he must have positive proof for it,
which if our brethren can bring, to prove this Presbytery to be extraordinary,
we shall submit to them, but, till then, they must not take it ill, if we
believe them to be ordinary. Thus much for their first and principal Argument.

2. They argue thus; Those that may act in making Decrees in a Synod, they may
Ordain; But Believers (who are not Officers) may act in a Synod, etc. Acts 15.
2, 22, 23.

I answer to both Propositions.

1. The Major may be questioned, because all those things are to be regulated
by Scripture, now if we have Scripture precept or example for the one, i. e.
for acting in a Synod (which they say here is) and not for the other, which we
have proved there is not, then believers may do the one and not the other.

2. For the Minor, I deny, that the brethren may act in making Decrees in a
Synod, I deny they did so in this place, we read not a word of it: All that we
read is, that the whole Church consented to the decrees, and resolved upon the
execution of them, which they might do, though they neither acted nor were
present at the making of the Decrees: Even as thousands consent to Acts of
Parliament, that have no hand in the making of them. And if our brethren think
to prove this, they must bring better Arguments then any they have yet brought.

Another Argument they urge is this; That Ordination consists in such Acts is
may be done by the people; The people may fast and pray, and ( which may seem
to be most doubtful) they may impose hands if that be a rite still to continue,
as appears from Numb. 8 10. where the children of Israel laid their hands upon
the Levities.

To this Instance, the Assembly gives such satisfying Answers, that I wonder
how our Brethren could resist the evidence of them; and indeed their Replies
are so inconsiderable, that I count it but lost time to make a rejoinder, and
all that I shall desire of the Reader is this; That he would but use his
reason, and lay aside his passion and prejudice, and compare what is said on
both hands together, and I doubt not he will see, that all their assaults
against them, are but like the dashings of the waves against a rock, whereby
they break themselves to pieces.

But if all that satisfy not, I shall add two Answers more.

1. Extraordinary instances are no presidents for ordinary cases. This was
apparently an extraordinary case. The Levites and Church Officers were not yet
instituted: and to argue thus, that, because the people did lay on hands before
those Church Officers were created (who were afterward to do it) therefore
they might do it when such Officers were created and appointed for that work;
It were as if a man should argue, Gifted men may preach where there are no
Apostles nor Ministers to be had, therefore they may do it where there is
plenty of Ministers: Or thus, David might eat the shewbread when he could get
no other, therefore any man may eat it when his table was spread with other
bread.

2. Forasmuch as it is ridiculous to think that all Israel did lay their hands
upon the heads of the Levites, therefore this was only some of them, and those
some (no doubt) were the firstborn. Now it must be remembered, that as the
Levites were taken instead of the firstborn, Number. 8. 16, 17. so the firstborn
till then were in stead of the Levites, and till God instituted the
Ecclesiastical Offices and Officers in Israel, the firstborn were Officers;
and so it concerns not the people at all, nor proves any right in them to do
the same thing.

In the next place they come to answer some Arguments which are urged by the
Assembly, to prove that Ordination did not belong to the people.

Their Answers to the two first, are nothing else but repetitions of what has
been already discussed, and therefore I here wave them.

For the third, the Assembly observed; That all that is written in the Epistles
concerning the Ordainers and the qualification of the party ordained, is
mentioned in the Epistles to Timothy, and Titus, who were Church Officers; not
in those Epistles which are written to the Churches.

They answer. 1. Charges may be directed to Officers, and yet the people
required to concur, as Rev. 2. and 3. If Timothy and Titus were to act these
alone as Evangelists, then they are no presidents for us, if, with others, why
not with the people as well as the Officers?

Reply. They were to act alone in Ordination as Evangelists, and yet are a
president for us. For, here are two things to be considered.

1. The work, viz. of Ordination, which was common and ordinary, and this is
imitable.

2. The manner of doing it which was extraordinary; i. e. by their single
power, and this is inimitable.

You will say, If the manner of this Ordination was extraordinary, then
Timothy's practice in Ordination is no more a president for ordinary Officers
Ordaining, then for the people Ordaining.

I answer, Yes; There is a different reason, because Timothy was one of the
Officers or Persons ruling; and an extraordinary one, who alone might stand in
the room of all other Officers; it may be there were no Officers present when
Timothy did ordain; however his acting in this as an Officer, though
extraordinary, may well be president for his successors, such as are Officers
for the doing of the work (which is ordinary) though not for the doing of it by
his single jurisdiction, which was extraordinary.

But now on the other side, for the people or the persons rulled, Timothy was
not one of them, but sustained a distinct person from them, and there were
people at that time unquestionably present, when ever Timothy and Titus
Ordained; and the people even in the days of those extraordinary Officers, did
retain their distinct liberties, and exercise those things, which did belong to
them as people, as is plain in the case of Election, which they enjoined and
practiced.

And had Ordination belonged to the people as well as Election, certainly
(notwithstanding the agency and presence of the Apostles therein, yet) we
should have heard somewhat, at least, concerning the peoples concurrence; which
because we hear not a syllable of, we therefore justly conclude, that Election
did, and does, belong to the people, but Ordination does not.

I add only this; That look what reasons our Brethren have to look on the
Apostles, etc. Baptizing, etc. to be a president for Ministers Baptizing, and
not for the peoples baptizing; the very same reasons have we to conclude, that
their Ordaining is a president for Officers Ordaining, not for the Ordination
of the people.

2. They say, All may be written to Timothy and Titus, because they were to
direct others how to act in them. And therefore the Apostle writes to them
about other things (which yet were not to be acted by them alone, but by the
people) as the making of prayers for Kings, clothing of women in modest
aparrel, etc.

Reply. By this Rule, all things should have been written only in the Epistles
to Timothy and Titus, for they were to direct the people in all other things.
But it is not simply the putting of a thing in this Epistle, which makes that
act peculiar to Officers; But this is it which is justly insisted on, and which
our Brethren should do well again to consider, that, Paul, who was so careful
to order the affairs in every Church; yet in all his Epistles to those
Churches, speaks not a word about the business of Ordination. Surely the
Scriptures silence is argumentative as well as its speech, and it is often urged
in Scripture: Melchisedek is said to be without Father, etc because the
Scriture is silent as to his geniallogie, so Heb. 6. -- our Lord sprang of Judah
of which tribe Moses spoke nothing concerning the Preisthood.

And surely, it is not to no purpose that the Scripture is so silent, as to the
point of direction about the mission of Ministers, in all those Epistles to
people, but insinuates thus much to impartial Readers, that the Holy Ghost
looked upon the people, as persons not entrusted with that work.

The last thing urged by the Assembly was this; That Ordination is an
authoritative mission, an act of jurisdiction, an act which gives the
essentialls of the Call. Private persons can no more conveigh power to another
to administer Sacraments, then they can do it themselves.

They answer. That Ordination is no act of jurisdiction, nor would it be so
though it did convey the Office-power: Freemen do convey Office-power to their
Bailiffs, etc. yet do no act of jurisdiction.

Reply. 1. This has been answered before, to wit, Freemen have that power by a
Constitution, but there is not any Constitution for the peoples conveying the
Office-power to Ministers.

2. If the word jurisdiction be taken strictly, there is a difference made
between Ordination and Jurisdiction, but if by an act of Jurisdiction they mean
nothing else but an act of Authority (for that is the thing in question) then
we have before proved that it is an act of Authority, and it were easy to make
it good by Arguments.

We never find Ordination practiced either in the Old or New Testament, but by
persons in authority toward their inferiors. Moses Ordained Aaron; Aaron his
sons, Christ his Apostles, the Apostles other Ministers: And if in all these it
be granted to be an act of Authority, surely to deny it to be so in other
Ministers, carrying on the same work, is an assertion neither true nor probable.

Again, Ordination is that act which constitutes a man in Office, and therefore
must be an act of authority: But I must remember my work is not now to prove,
but to answer, and therefore I forbear, and shall give my self and the Reader a
writ of ease.

Only that the Reader may see the fruit of our Brethrens opinion (as indeed
posito uno absurdo, sequuntur mill) I shall present him with a list of some
novel and strange assertions which they have been hurried into by the force of
their principles.
Novel and strange passages.

1. They implicitly deny Jesus Christ to have preached to the Jews as a teacher
by Office, for thus they say, p. 13.

A man is not a teacher by Office to all that he may preach to: If he preach to
Heathens -- such as will not receive iustruction, yet they are said to be
taught, though they stumble at the Word, Mat. 13. 54. He (i. e. Jesus) taught
them, and yet v. 57. they were offended at him. But a man is not a teacher by
Office unto such heathens.

And the Apostles, according to them, were no Officers to Heathens; for they
thus argue, page 18. That such are no Officers to people as cannot exercise
Church Government over them: But (say I) the Apostles cannot exercise
Church Government over heathens. What have I to do to judge them that are
without. 1 Cor. 5. 12. Ergo.

2. One that is really gifted for preaching (for ought we know) may lawfully
preach without approbation from a Church, or others, p. o.

3. It is the work of God and Christ only, to send Preachers, let it be proved
wherever a Presbytery was empowered to send. page 126. And the Church is in no
better case with them; for they say, The person sending is Christ, neither a
Church nor a presbytery, page 125. And afterward.

Sending is nothing else but Christ commanding to go and preach, not by a
Presbytery, but by the word. And how a Presbytery can send, but by exhorting to
follow the command of Christ, we know not. And in such a doctrinall way (for
ought we see) a private Christian may exhort to go and teach, page 130. So that
now both Presbytery and Church are thrust out of Office, and every one that is
apt to teach, is commanded to preach, though neither Presbytery nor Church send
him; And every private Christian has as great a power to send Ministers, as
either Church or Presbytery, which who can read without wonder?

4. If the Major part of a Congregation be wicked, we suppose then it is no
true Church; and if once it were a true Church, yet now it cease to be so, or
is unchurched. page 237.

5. They talk of Pastors administering the Sacraments not as Pastors; for thus
they say, If Pastors preach and give the Sacraments to their own flock, they
act as Pastors, but if they perform these acts to any, not of their own
Congregation, they do it not as Pastors, page 280. Then they do it as
gifted-men, for that is the other branch of the distinction. He that preaches
to strangers not as a Pastor, preaches as a gifted-brother (that they grant).
And therefore he that administreth the Sacraments to any not as a Pastor, does
it as a gifted-brother.

6. We see no inconvenience in asserting that heathens converted to
Christianity may be a Church, before they be baptized, page 288.

7. A minister as often as he changes his place and people, needs a new
ordination, page 290.

8. They say, It is our mistake, when we assert that Baptism does admit, or
make a man stand in relation to a Church, whereas baptizing is not into a
Church, but into the name of Christ, page 292.

9. They say, If a people turn heretical, or starve a Minister, or combine to
vote him out; the sin of the people does nullify the office of the Minister,
page 296.

And, that I may tread in our brethrens steps who were so ready to catch at the
appearance of a contradiction in the Provincial Assembly, I shall put them in
mind of two or three (...) or seeming repugnancies at least, if not gross
contradictions.

Self contradicting passages.

They say, page 20. that one that is really gifted for preaching may (for ought
we know) lawfully preach without approbation from a Church or others, page 20.

And they urge 1 Pet. 4. 11. to prove it the duty of gifted persons to preach,
and surely if it be a duty, then it obliges whenever a man may do it
lawfully.

And yet, page 149. they say, We grant, that to a man's exercise of his gifts in
this or that place, there is praerequired a call from the people, or
Magistrate: And how can any man preach but he must preach in this or that
place? Quod nusquam fit non fit.

2. They say, When an ordained Minister removes from one charge to another,
They choose him not as one that is to be made a Minister, but as one already
made and now to be made their Minister, page 300. And yet, page 302. They say,
when he removes, he is to have a new Ordination, and a new Election. The Gospel
knows no difference between making a man a Minister, and making him their
Minister. page 302.

3. They say, Men to be sent to the heathens to convert them, should be
Ordained, because the conversion of souls is a proper work of the Ministry;
page 300. And yet, page 302. they say; When men are sent to heathens, if they
be Officers, yet they preach not as Officers: The conversion of souls is the
work of the Ministry, not the proper work.

FINIS.

