The Pathway to perfect SAILING. Showing briefly the six principal Points or
Grounds of NAVIGATION.

Written by Mr. RICHARD POLTER, one of the late principal Masters of the Navy
Royal. And now published for the Common good of all Masters, Pilots, and other
Seamen whatsoever.

Whereunto is added, A NAVTICALL DISCOVRSE necessary to be known of all
SEAMEN to prove the way of a Ship (upon the Superficies of the Sea) outward
and homeward to be both one, returning by the opposite Point of the Meridian
Compass: And also to prove the East and West directed by the Meridian Compass
to lead in a Magneticall parallel. First penned by JOHN BASSET deceased, a
Teacher of Navigation at Chattam in Kent. And now put forth to public view
with some Addition, By HENRY BOND.

LONDON, Printed by T. FORCET for GEORGE HURLOCK, and are to be sold at his
shop near St. Magnus corner. 1644.

compass rose

THE PATHWAY to perfect SAILING.
Showing the six principal Points or Grounds, concerning Navigation. 1 The
Card, 2 Compass, 3 Tide, 4 Time, 5 Wind, 6 Way.


TO deliver the opinions (concerning the Card and Compass) of a great sort of
Sea-Matters and others, even in these times such is their knowledge, being
altogether ignorant even vain and frivolous, that I will not spend the time
once in nominating any such their knowledge, but will proceed to the matter.

The Compass to be rectified two ways.
FIrst, there is to be delivered two ways for a man's farther knowledge, that
the Compass is to be rectified, as felloweth.

The Compass is said to be rectified when the wire is set right under the
Flower-deluce, for the Flower-deluce and his opposite point delivers the true
Meridian.

Also, the Compass is said to be rectified, when the Wire is set right under
the Flower-deluce, the Flower-deluce and his opposite point, delivers the
true Mutation or Variation of the Compass.

Further, there are four opinions concerning the Compass: which four
opinions and ways conceived of the Compass, being rectified from the true
Meridian that it is presupposed to lead in, which I will give a taste of for
this present, and so leave them to more convenient places.

The first Opinion of the Compass.
THe most Absurdest way of the Compass, is according to flat Cards-used in
Navigation: which some sort of men (and the greatest number hold opinion, that
the Compass leads no otherwise then according to these usual Plats or Cards
right lyned, whose lines generally are parallel each to other, and that the
East and West of the Compass leads in a parallel, which opinion is absurd:
for how can the thing that is false deliver the way of truth, as hereafter
follows.

The 2 Opinion of the Compass.
This way of the Compass (in deed) which is more perfect then the former
(according to the judgment of Astronomers) is called the Astronomicall
deducture of the Compass and by other sort of men called the paradoxall
Compass, because the lineaments are spirall: which spirall lines by some are
called Helicall lines. This Astronomicall deducture (as above said) some sort
of men hold to be principallest. In this judgment the Meridians have their
coartation, but the Compass (the East and West thereof) is said to lead in a
parallel, therefore though nearer the truth then the former, yet absurd.

The 3 Opinion of the Compass.
Is the demonstrature of the Compass, which is more excellent then the two
former, being knowns aright: which demonstrature of the Compass, some sort of
men sees (but with heads filled with infirmities, etc.) and wanting knowledge,
knows not the meaning thereof, and but very few understand the goodness that
is to be delivered thereby, yet the way of a Ship is not according to the
present view thereof.

The 4 Opinion of the Compass.
Last of all (which fewest or none know) is the only true and excellent way,
the way of the Compass according to the difference never yet delivered by any,
nor known unto those that make themselves most artificiallest.

I am now to deliver my reasons or examples concerning these four opinions
(above said) which are to condemn the small knowledge, opinion or judgment of
men, concerning them: and to justify and mainetaine the good knowledge that
hereafter shall be delivered.

The Card and Compass handled together.
WHereas, before I have delivered a taste of the four opinions concerning the
Compass, the first opinion relying only upon the truth of the Card, Therefore
it is most necessary for me, next of all to deliver the absurdities of the
Card, or to lay the Card open in his colors, that when the truth thereof is
seen and known, then that the way of the Compass (according to the Card used
in navigation) may be left, and a more true way taken how of etc. Now to
proceed as follows.

The 1 Absurdity.
A general Card straight or right lyned, as it is, represents, yea
delivers the whole universal world at the view thereof, as a plain flat or
level and not otherwise, and maintains a scale correspondent thereunto, and
how absurd this delivery is, hereafter is proved.

The 2 Absurdity.
This general Card maintains a Compass in the midst that shall extend it
self, and the points thereof to the extremes of the Card, and so delivers
courses by one Compass to sail to the extremes of the world, delivered
thereby if it were navigable, even to any part thereof, and to return the same
way again: which is absurd, as by the demonstrature and way of the difference
following is proved.

The 3 Absurdity.
This Card will direct by half a Compass made on the side of the Card, over
the whole world, and the return to be the same way, which is more absurd.

The 4 Absurdity.
Yet this Card will direct farther, that is by a quarter of the Compass made
in one of the corners of the Card over the whole world, which will be made most
absurd and monstrous by the grounds before spoken of.

The 5 Absurdity.
This Card also maintains from the Poles themselves an East and West line, a
Meridian and seven points of either side, whereby the North Pole delivers
from it a Southeast quarter and a Southwest quarter, and the South Pole the
like, which is absurd: my reason to prove it to be so, is this, because there
passes no lines imaginary from the Poles, but only Meridians according to the
sphere.

The 6 Absurdity.
This Card also maintains all the paralells of the East and West therein, to
be of one length, which is absurd: for paralells are less toward the Poles:
likewise y Card justifies she paralells to make right angles with the
Meridians even to the Poles, which is absurd, for paralells are inferior
Circles unto the Meridians, which are great Circles, therefore cannot make
right Angles with them.

The 7 Absurdity.
This Card also maintains all Meridians to be paralells each to other, and
thereby makes a polar line of East and West in the Pole it self as long as
the Equinoctial, which is an error of 360 degrees, or 21600 miles, which is
most absurd: my reason is this, because the Pole it self is but an imaginary
point.

The 8 Absurdity.
Again, there cannot be a right sign (for the way of a Ship) delivered from
the plain of a Meridian in the Card, for the delivery of the longitude the
Meridians being paralells each to other (and wrested from their nature) as they
be, neither can there be a second right (...) (for the way of a Ship delivered
from the East and West of a Card) for the delivery of the Latitude: because the
paralells therein cannot deliver neither the plain of a great Circle nor
small: therefore the Card absurd.

The 9 Absurdity.
Likewise this presupposed way of the Compass, according to the Card
delivers upon any point of the Compass, for any Segment in Navigation a
less way in Longitude and Latitude then the Astronomicall deducture of the
Compass, or way upon the difference does but if the Longitude of this first
way be compared and reckoned after the coarting of the Meridians for any
segment in Latitude and Longitude: then it is more swifter in Longitude then
any opinions else delivered of the Compass: therefore absurd.

The 10 Absurdity.
All the lines in a Card are supposed to be Segments or pieces of great
Circles, which is absurd and false: for example, great Circles must cross
themselves at opposite points of necessity, and therefore cannot be paralells
each to other: likewise I am sure they count them not spirall lines, for
spirall lines are not parallel either to other.

The 11 Absurdity.
The Equinoctial and Meridian, in a Card graduated as they be by even degrees,
both in Longitude and Latitude, being in plano not lawfully projected, is
absurd.

The 12 Absurdity.
Likewise, the Card delivers this rule for his truth, upon what point of the
Compass soever, the points being of one quality, in what Latitude or Longitude
soever you are in like distantes for the differences of degrees in Longitude:
which is absurd, and confuted by the Astronomicall deducture, and by the way
upon the difference.

The 13 Absurdity.
Also the Card delivers this for his truth, upon what point of the Compass
soever, the point being of one kind, in what Latitude or Longitude soever:
like distances for the raising or laying of a degree in Latitude, which is
absurd and false, as shall be delivered by examples upon the difference.

The 14 Absurdity.
This Card delivers no truth in Longitude: nor so near the truth as is to be
delivered, therefore in places that are distant from other, the difference of
time in no sort is to be delivered thereby, therefore more absurd, then that
which will deliver the time more certain.

The 15 Absurdity.
Whereas one Compass (as before) in the midst of the Card, the point thereof
being extended to the extremes thereof, and widest there, it is as contrary to
the truth as falsehood is; for the points of the Compass being extended in
delatation but to the Quadrant, which is 90 degrees. according to the demonstrature
in plano, not lawfully projected, is absurd.

But some of the points to be extended (without) or beyond the Quadrant 105
degrees. too much, and continued in delatation, is absurd, but a half Compass in
the East or West part of the Card, as the Card delivers, some of which
points, from his half Compass being extended from the Quadrant in delatation
276 degrees. 45 min. too much, is more absurd. Nay a quarter of the Compass
delivered from one corner of the Card, as the Card delivers, some points
thereof are extended in delatation beyond the Quadrant 300 degrees. (of a great
Circle) too much, which is most absurd, as the 15 part in the Astronomicall
deducture, and first part of the demonstrature justifies.

The 16 Absurdity.
Whereas in this Card, the Compasses in the midst, sides or corners thereof,
extending their delatation and coartation accordingly beyond the quadrant, as
aforesaid, which is absurd: yet the delatation and coartatio^ within the
quadrant, is also absurd: as for example; Prove from the center of any of the
Compasses in the Card, at 30 degrees, delatation, and see whether the degrees
there, be half so big as they are in the quadrant (as they should be) or no,
and you shall find 3 of the degrees. there, at 30 degrees. delatation, to make but a
degree in the quadrant, which is part false: but it delivers at 45 degrees.
delatation 2 degrees. there, to be 1 degrees. on the quadrant, which delatation is 15
degrees. false, or out of his due place.

The 17 Absurdity.
It is a great matter, how absurd the Card is: for let a Ship in her navigation
in any Longitude or latitude whatsoever, sail in the line of North-east or the
like points, as North-west and South-West, before she can accomplish one
Quadrant, she must use so much way in her navigation, as comes to 127 degrees. 15
min. of a (...) Circle, which is 37 degrees. 15 min. too much only in that
distance: but a quadrant according to the Sphere is about 90 degrees. of a great
Circle, which is the truth: therefore the Card absurd.

The 18 Absurdity.
A Ship in her navigation differing in longitude according to the Card alters
the pole from the first place on the polar line to the mer^d^an on the Card
which the Ship is said to be in, which is absurd, as by the 18. part in the
Sphere is justified.

The 19. Absurdity.
It is a ^erva^le that the Card (being so monstrous) flowing with nothing but
absurd ties that one ^rror thereof being (...) myle^ (as aforesa^d) should be
so greatly ^n request as it is being no life or help in the world ^n it to
that which is (...) in navigation: how it is pos^ble for the ^smography,
Geography o^ (...) thereof to be true: surely in this Card the one is as true
as the ^ther and no tr^er therefore all false and ^bsurd.

So that the Compass is (...) from the good nature it has (...) t^sel^e or
the delivery of a ^hips way, by the absurd opinion delivered to be or received
from the Card.

If I could alleadye more condemnations for the Card and the opinions of the
compass (being accordingly) ^et enough suf^ceth. ^^lesse the matter in the
Card and knowledge thereby received) were better: And thus I lea^^ the Card and
the judgment by it at the Compass.

The Sphericall Description of the Globe, with the Astronomicall deducture of
the Compass accordingly which by some sort of men, is called the paradoxall
Compass.
NO is will I proceed with the Astronomicall deducture of the Compass: and
because it depends upon the lineaments of the Sphere which is the ground
thereof, as the Card is of the Compass used thereby in navigation therefore I
will entreat somewhat concerning both the Sphere and deducture of (...) compass
upon it: and as there are 19 absurdities before delivered, for the confuting or
delivering the Card in his colors: so many parts I will touch in this
Astronomicall deducture, that the difference (between them) may be seen. But
this in brief by the way: The Astronomicall deducture clears a way from it
many absurdities, by cearting of the Meridians (only) it maintains absurdly
the East and West of the Compass, to lead in a parallel as herafter shall
appear.

The 1. part.
THis whole description of the world, in Globe or round form spherically lyned
with meridians (one being graduated) likewise with paralels and spirall lines,
which by some men are called Rhombes, by others called Helicall lines, and by
some called Parado^all lines, (...) down with the Geographie, the scale
thereof being the graduated meridian, which is correspondent thereunto, is very
profitable to the knowledge thereof, and confuteth the flat Card.

The 2. 3. and 4. part.
This Globe maintains a Compass, being in the Zenith of the earth and water,
to ertend it self according to the domon^^rature in delatation to the Horizon
and no farther: deviding it into 32 parts or points correspondent thereunto,
but makes the way of a Ship out and home to be all one, and spirally according
to this Astronomicall opinion, that the East and West of the Compass leads
in a parallel is absurd, and causes great difference, which in this place and
time cannot be delivered.

The 5. part.
This Globe maintains the Poles of the world, to be but imaginary pricks or
points, delivering or from which points pro^eedeth only meridians, which is
true.

The 6. part.
This Globe maintains all the paralels of Latitude therein, to be in their
d^e form, proportion, or Magnitude biggest nearest the equator, and smallest
nearest the Poles dis-allowing paralels, to make right angles with meridians,
which is true.

The 7, part.
In which Globe, likewise the meridians has their delatation and Coartation,
admitting no polar line, which is true.

The 8. part.
This Globe, according to the East and west, leading in a Parallel, delivers
one right sign (for the way of a Ship) from the plain of the meridian (as it
should) for the delivery of the longitude the difference respected, and the
other right sign, from the plain of the parallel for the delivery of the
latitude, which is absurd: for if the plains of a great Circle and a small to
deliver the place of a Ships being, agrees not, neither is true, as the
difference justifies.

The 9. part.
The way of the compass, according to this astronomicall delivery, for any
sagments in navigation upon what Point soever, is more swifter in latitude, and
more flower in longitude, then the delivery used in navigation by the Card,
delivering the point of a Ships being, by the signs as aforesaid, which is
absurd.

The 10. part.
This opinion of East and West, leading in a parallel, delivers no sagments
of any spirall lines, to be sagments of great circles, which is absurd.

The 11. part.
The Equinoctial and meridian, in the Globe graduated as they be, by even
degrees both in longituds and Latituds, being in round Globe form, is very
true.

The 12. part.
This opinion delivers upon any Spirall line (of one quality) which are the
points of the Compass, according to this judgment, not like distances for the
difference of degrees in longitude, but is different in every place between
the equator and the poles yet not the truth, as the difference justifies.

The 13. part.
And for this Astronomicall delivery by any the spirall points thereof, to
raise or lay degrees in latituds: it difforsth little from thecard, which is
absurd.

The 14. part.
This Globe, the meridians thereof deli^ereth or distinguishes it self into
degres of longitude, by which degrees is delivered the difference of time
between any two places or distances, yet not very true, as in the delivery of
the time shall appear.

The 15. part.
As by this Globe (before) the compass according to the demonstrature from any
one place, delivers delatation to the Horizon where it is greatest, so from
the Fonitor or horizon to the Nadir, all the Arches of depression suffer
coartation so that the intersections or crossings of those points of
demonstrature, are in the Zenith and his Nadir, which is true: therefore the 15
absurdity in the Card proved by this to be most absurd.

The 16. part.
By this Globe a compass in the Zenith thereof delivering the Azimuthes to the
horizon which is at 90 degrees from the zenith you shall find these Azimuths at
30 degrees delatation, There a degrees makes 1 degree in the horizon, and all
the rest of the Azimuthes or degrees of them, is delivered with truth, either
in delatation or coartation, therefore the 15 absurdity in the Card is
acknowledged.

The 17. part.
This Globe delivers by any point of demonstrature, 90 degrees and no more to
the quadrant, therefore confuteth the Card according to the 17 absurdity.

The 18. part.
This Globe maintains the poles of the world to continue in their places
which is true.

The 19. part.
The Cosmography, Geography and Geometry, of the Globe, is far more perfect
then that in the card, yet if the Cosmography and Geography were set down
according to the difference, it would be more perfect: but then there must be
more descriptions then one: and thus I leave the Astronomicall deducture of the
Compass. This always to be noted, look what Lineaments is said to be in the
Sphere of the Heavens, as meridians for the delivery of the time, and a help
for the delivery of the Longitude the equinoctial and all the paralels, for
the delivery of the latituds, the horizon, and all the Almicanters of Altitude,
for the delivery of heights, the vertical circles or Azimuthes, for
horizontall distances, spirall lines according to the difference for the
delivery of a Ships way and such like: is imagined to be in the earth and
waters correspondent to these in the Heavens, for the travailers help and
comfort: the conceit of which aright, is mo^ excellent.

Here follows the demonstrature of the Compass, which is a notable
knowledge and light in Navigation, being rightly conceived and used as it ought.
The 1. part.
IN any latitude and longitude whatsoever, the demonstrature of the Compass
representing as it does, the Zenith of the earth and water, and divides the
horizon, not only into 32 parts, as in the 2. 3. and 4. absurdities of the
Card is set down, but also into 360. parts, nay rather into infinite parts
called vertical Circles or Azimuths going with delatation from the Zenith or
Vertical point to the horizon where the delatation is greatest, and from this
horizon or Fenitor to the Nadir (as is said in the 15 part of the Astronomicall
deducture) these Azimuthes or Vertical circles (in the Hemisphere, not seen,
being arches of depression) suffer coartation, so that the intersections or
crossings of these Azimuthes one another, is only in the Zenith and his Nadir.

The 2. part.
This demonstrature is moneable or alterable, according to a Ships differing in
longitude and latitude, because a Ship caristh her Zenith with her, so that the
devision of the horizon according to this demonstrature is variable, according
to the distance (from any one place) that the Ship is remeved: etc. A^confuting
of the 2. absurdity of the Card.

The 3. part.
The devisson that the Zenith, horizon and Nadir has, or is divided withal,
is only by almicanter circles, which otherwise are called circles of Altitude
or height (being above the horizon) all which are paralels to the horizon, but
those from the Horizon to the Nadir, notwithstanding parallel to the Horizon
are circles of depression, any one of which Almicanters, may be delivered upon
any degree or minute of the height above the Horizon, likewise taken (in some
working spherically) in profundity and depth under the Horizon.

The 4. part.
This demonstrature delivers upon any Azimuth whatsoever, the distance from
the Zenith to the Horizon to be but 90 degrees.

The 5. part.
The East and west of this demonstrature (from the zenith) 90 degrees in
longitude, touches the Equinoctial, in the horizon at opposite points.

The 6. part.
Now the quality of the Globe is this, the pole thereof being elevated or set
to his purposed latitude in his horizon, according to this demonstrature,
delivers the obliquitie of the Sphere, which in truth is a confuting of the
East and west to lead in a parallel: as for example.

The 1 Example.
The Globe set to the parallel of 50 degrees north latitude, then a
perpendienler line imagined to descend, from this Zenith of 50 degrees North
latitude, delivers his Nadir to be in 50 degr. south latitude, so that it
delivers the opposite part of the parallel to be from the Nadir or the arch of
the meridian, contained between the opposite part of the parallel and the
nadir, to be a 100 degrees oblique or different, and from the place of being in
the zenith upon the meridian, to the oposite part of the parallel directly, is
but 80 degrees. of a great circle, so that this opposite part of the paralells is
10 degrees. above the Horizon, which is oblique to the zenith and Nadir, also 90
degr. North from the east and west of the demonstrature, in the equinoctial. So
that a Ship being in (or having) this zenith before spoken of, the
perpendicularity of the ship, being in this Zenith and Nadir line, and the
opposite part of this Parallel so oblique unto her, as before how is it
possible, for the East and west of the compass to lead in a parallel.

The 2. Example.
Likewise when the ship, the right line of her caping in the vertical circle
of east and west extended both the ways, crosses the equator at opposite
points, 90 degr. different in longitude, and the Ship being a segment of that
great circle, and no sagment of a small circle as paralels are how is it
possible, then for the east and west to lead in a parallel; it is not possible
as the way of the difference justifies. etc.

The third Example.
Being in the parallel of 80 degrees North latitude, If the (...) sail upon
vertical (...) of East o^ that the (...) pass does (...) when ye she gins its
co^ but as the (...) is guided b^ magnetica^ Wiers or (...) dle, so tha^ Line
or its (...) makes eq^ Angles wi^ very mag^ call Merid^ The way (...) ship
leadin^ the East o^ does descri^ magnetica^ ralell.
a perpendiculer line delivers the Nadir to be in 80 degrees. S. latitude, so
that the arch of the meridian contained between the nadir and the opposite
part of the parallel is 160 degrees.

But the arch of the meridian, contained between the point of being, and the
opposite part of the parallel is but 20 degrees.

So that the opposite part of the parallel is 70 degrees above the horizon: and
likewise 90 degrees. North from the east and west, according to the demonstrature
in the equinoctial: Here you see the obliquity of the opposite part of the
parallel to the zenith, and his nadir; showing how unnatural it is to deliver
the way of a Ship, leading in the east and west to describe a parallel.

And whereas before I have delivered the East and west of the demonstrature of
the Compass in the horizon, and that the north and south is likewise very
plain to be delivered; therefore I will omit them: and will give examples of
the demonstrature in the latitude 51 degrees 30 min. and 80 degrees North
latitude, only of the north-east, south-east, south-west, and north-west to the
Horizon, as bereafter follows.

North-east in the Latitude 51 Degrees 30 Minutes.
FRom our point of being in our Meridian, which is the beginning of our
longtitude, our Zenith being in the parallel of 51 degrees 30 min. north
latitude: I am to demonstrate 3 sagments of a great circle containing 30
degrees a piece by the demonstrature north-east: the end of which first sagment
of 30 degrees, shall touch the Meridian in longitude Eastward, 54 degrees from
the first, and there likewise shall touch the parallel of north latitude 64.
degrees.

And the end of the second sagment of 60 degrees in longitude shall touch the
105 degrees 30 min. or Meridian in longitude eastward from the first, and
there likewise touches the 50. degrees. 30. min. parallel north.

Likewise the end of the third sagment, at 90 degrees in longitude, shall touch
the 128 degree or Meridian in longitude Eastward from the first, and there
likewise touches the 26 degree ward 13 min. parallel North: also it there
touches the horizon 45 degrees. either from the cardines East or North.

North-west.
Likewise the demonstrature of the North-west cutteth the Meridians and
paralels in longitude West-wards as the demonstrature of North-east cutteth
them East-wards, only that it cutteth the Horizon 45 degrees. either from the
cardines West or North.

South-east in the same Latitude 51 degrees. 30 min.
IN our place of being (as aforesaid) I am to demonstrate three sagments of a
great Circle containing 20 degrees. a piece by the demonstrature South-east, the
end of which first sagment of 30 degrees. shall touch the 23 degrees. 30 min. or
Meridian in longitude Eastward from the first and there likewise touches the
27 degrees 20 min. parallel North.

And the end of the second sagment of 60 degrees. in Longitude. wall touch the 3
degrees. 40 min. or meridian in longitude Eastward from the first and there
likewise touches in (...) degrees. 25 min. N. latitude.

Likewise the end of the third sagment at 90 degrees in Longitude, shall touch the
51 degree 40 min. or meridian, in Longitude eastward from the first and there
likewise touches the 26 degrees. 15 m. parallel south: Also there touches the
Horizon 45 degrees either from the cardines East or south.

South-west.
Likewise the demonstrature of the South-west touches the meridians and
parallel in longitude westward as the demonstrature of south-east touches
them eastward, only that it cutteth the horizon 45 degrees. either from the
cardines south or west.

Examples in the Parallel of 80 degrees. North latitude beginning with the first
example of North-east in the north latitude 8 degrees.
FRom our point of being in our meridian which is the beginning of our
longitude our zen^th being in the parallel of 80. degrees. north latitude I am to
demonstrate; sagments of a great circle, containing ^0 degrees. apeece by the
demonstrature north-east the end of which first sagment of 30 degrees, shall
touch the meridian in longitude eastward 119 degrees 30 minutes from the first
and there likewise shall (...) the parallel of North latitude 60 de^r.

And the end of the second sagment. 160. degrees. in longitude, wall touch the 130.
degrees. ^. min. or meridian in longitude eastward from the first, and there
likewise touches the 36. degrees. 45. mi. parallel north.

Likewise t^t end of the 3. sagment at 90. degrees. in Longitude shall touch the
134 degrees. 30 min. or meridian in longitude eastward from the first and there
likewise touches the 7 parallel north Also there touches the horizen 45 degrees.
either from the cardines east or north.

North-west.
Likewise, the demonstrature of north-west cutteth the meridians and paraellls
in longitude westward, as the demon^rature of north east, cutteth them
eastward only, that it cutteth the horizon 45 degrees. either from the cardines
west or north.

Example of the South-east in the same Latitude 8. degrees.
IN our place of of being, (as aforesaid) I am to demonstrate three sagments of
a great circle, containing 30 degrees. apeece, by the demonstrature south-east, the
end of which first sagment of 30 degrees. shall touch the 35 degrees. 40 mi. or
meridian in longitude eastward from the first and there likewise touches the
52 degree 10 min. parallel north.

And the end of the second sagment of 60 degrees. in longitude wall touch the 41
degrees 40 min. or meridian in longitude Eastward from the first, and there
likewise touches the 22 degrees ^ min. parallel north.

Likewise, the end of the third sagment at 90 degrees. in longitude wall touch the
45 degrees. 30 min. or meridian in longitude eastward from the first, and there
likewise touches the 7 parallel South. Also there tuecheth the horizon 45 degrees.
either from the cardines East or south.

South-west.
Likewise the demonstrature of south-west, cutteth the meridians and paralells
in longitude westward, as the demonstrature of the south-east cutteth them
eastward, only that it cutteth the horizon 45 degrees. either from the cardines
south or west.

And as for the arches of depression, from the horizon or senitor to the nadir
of these points before spoken of, the delivery of them is even as easy as the
former, and so is the arch of altitude, or arch of depression upon any Azimuth
whatsoever. Only this following to be respected as a preparative: before I
deliver any nice examples according to the difference, it is necessary for me
to explain in a more familiar sort (at large) some part of the difference only
according to the demonstrature, for the more confuting of the Card, and the
opinion holden thereof for the way out and home to be all one. It is delivered
in the 15 absurdity of the Card, that upon some points of the Compass, the
Card delivers a way outward, to be 390 degrees of a great circle, and to
return homeward (to the first place) again, the like distance upon the same
line, which shall be proved most false by the examples following: which
examples shall be from the latitude of 50 degr. and from the first example, as
before in the latitude 51 degrees 30 min. yet these deliver not the truth
neither, as by examples upon the difference, hereafter follow.

The 1 Example in North Latitude 50 degrees.
IN which latitude, our zenith or place of being in one meridian, where we make
our beginning of longitude and place of departure; I am now to deliver from
this our zenith or place of being, the demonstrature of north-west for one
sagment of 30 degrees in longitude: which sagment end of 30 degr. North-west,
there cutteth the 11 degr. 30 minutes or meridian westward in longitude, and
the 63 degree parallel north.

Our Zenith now being altered and the latitude 63 degrees as aforesaid, we will
make proof to return back again to our first place by the line south-east
the like sagment of 30 degrees in longitude, where this sagment end cutteth the
26 degree 20 minutes or meridian in longitude eastward, and there likewise
cutteth the 37 degree 40 minutes parallel north.

So that this line of north-west extended to 30 degrees as aforesaid, and from
thence returning south-east to 30 degrees likewise there is difference in
longitude westward, from the first meridian or place of departure 25 degrees 10
minutes or meridians, and in latitude southward from the first 12 degrees. 20
minutes.

Here you see the difference of the way out and home, only for 30 degrees
according to the demonstrature, and only for the lines of northwest and
southeast, the rest of the points, has their like difference in their kind.

The 2. example in north Latitude 51 degrees. 30 min.
I Am now to deliver from this our zenith or place of being, the demonstrature
of the northeast to 90 degr. which line of north-east there cutteth the 128
degree or meridian in longitude eastward from the first, and there likewise
cutteth the 26 degrees. 15 minutes parallel north, as in the demonstrature is
delivered.

Our Zenith now being altered, and in the latitude 26 degr. 15 minutes as
before said, we will make a proof to return back again to the first place, by
the demonstrature south-west to 90 degr. where this line of south-west cutteth
but the 65 degr. 30 minutes meridian in longitude westward and there likewise
cutteth the 39 degree 30 minutes parallel south. So that this line of
north-east extended to 90 degrees as aforesaid, and from thence returning
southwest to 90 degr. likewise, there is difference in longitude eastward from
the first, 62 degrees 30 minutes, and in latitude southward from the first 91
degrees.

Here you see also the difference of the way out and home, only for 90 degr.
according to the demonstrature, and only for the lines of North-east and
south-west, and all the rest of the points is the like in their kind. And so I
leave the demonstrature.

Now will J deliver Example worthy the noting, of the way of the Compass
according to the difference.
THe East or west of that Compass, rectified to the true meridian upon the
difference, makes a spirall line in delatation to the equinoctial from what
parallel soever, by sagments (of great circles) correspondent for this purpose:
which sagments makes right angles with the meridians, and which sagments
delivers a right sign from the plain of the vertical circle of east and
west for the way of a Ship in her navigation, and the meridian according to
this difference delivers the other. This part of the difference only
confuteth the general Card and the lines of inclination, with the Geography of
the Globe.

This difference, the east and west thereof delating as aforesaid, rules
notwithstanding the variation of the Compass, generally spoken of, as for
example: the Compass here with us at London, is set at half a point variation
Eastward, where it should be 10 degrees 38 minutes 45 seconds by my own
observations, (which was made in the year 1586.) which makes the west to be
half a point to the northward of the west: therefore in go^ng from Silly
(which is in latitude 50 degrees 15 minutes or there abouts) west by the
Compass (which is in truth west half north) with Cape Race, in New Foundland
the places distant some 600 leagues from other causes a falling more southerly
into the latitude 46 degr. 30 minutes or thereabouts, which shows the way of
the difference to rule in this distance.

And by a Compass rectified to the truemeridian that is a Compass that the
north and south thereof, delivers or points according to that true meridian
of Silly on which meridian is delivered the arch of altitude or almicanter of
the Suns height at n^ne, by which or such Compass, Cape Race hears from
Silly due west and by north and there touches the parallel of north latitude
46 degrees 30 minutes, likewise touches the meridian in longitude westward
from Silly the 45 degrees 40 minutes according to the coarting of the meridians
in this distance.

And to speak the truth, in this distance there is but little or novariation of
the Compass to be respected for the compass at Silly set at the whole
variation as it ought to be, yet in sailing by that compass, you run some
400 leagues before the north and south points thereof, delivers the true
meridian: and in sailing the other 200 leagues, the compass is varied westward
a point and a half or there abouts, which is no more then will answer the
variation eastward, as before, so that in this distance, the nutation of the
Compass, eastward, and westward, considered aright, is as nothing to be
respected, (but the one set against the other,) as by the examples following is
proved.

The first Example.
Let a compass be rectified to the nutation and sail from Silly therewithal
to Cape Race, west: and when you come on the coast of Newfoundland you shall be
delated from the parallel of Silly, only according to the difference, and not
otherwise.

The second Example.
Let the compass be set at half a point nutation, as most commonly it is and
sail by the Compass from Silly west with Cape Race, and you wall perforce
(keeping that course directly) fall into more southerly latitude, which is into
46 degrees 30 min. or thereabouts, according to the difference, and not
otherwise.

The third Example.
Let the Compass be rectified to the true meridian, and sail by that Compass
from Silly west with; Cape Race and you shall likewise fall into the latitude
44 degr. or thereabouts, according to the difference.

And as for this way (above said) is delivered a delating from the parallel in
going west: so likewise in returning east from thene again, you shall likewise
delate from that parallel again, according to the difference: which delivery
overthrows the whole Card.

Again, look how the difference of the east and west rules in the distance
and differedce in longitude (as aforesaid) so in any other distance and
difference in longitude, it is likewise to be respected. Also this difference
of the east and west, is the ground from whence the difference is delivered,
for all the rest of the points of the Compass.

So that you see, this way upon the difference, delivers way outward to any
place, different unto the way homeward, being not both alike, as by the
examples of the north-east, and returning south-west: likewise of the
north-west, and returning south-east, as hereafter appears.

The 1 part of the 1 example from the Equator.
Being in the Equinoctial in any one meridian, I will there make my beginning
of longitude: from which equator and meridian of longitude, I will deliver the
line of inclination, northeast continuing it to the latitude 75 degr. 6 minutes
14 seconds according to the difference.

The 2 part of the 1 Example.
The line of the north-east continued to the latitude 75 degrees 6 minutes 14
seconds, according to the difference, ends in the longitude 131 degrees from
the first, reckoned according to the meridians in this distance coarted.

The 3 part of the 1. Example.
Being in the latitude 75 degrees 6 minutes 14 seconds, and in the longitude
131 degrees as aforesaid, I am now to return back again by the line of
inclination, south west to the Equinoctial.

Conclusion of the 1 Example.
Being returned to the Equinoctial as aforesaid, I do and the length of the
line of inclination south-west homeward, to be shorter then the line of
north-east outward, by 130 leagues, and I am in longitude eastwerd from the
first place on the Equinoctial 70 leagues, therefore the way out and home not
all one.

Another Example North latitude 50 degrees.
I sail north-west 50 leagues, at the 50 leagues end I have altered my
longitude from the first, 2 degrees 38 minutes, and my latitude 1 degree 40
minutes.

I return back again south-east 50 leagues, and being returned, I find my
self in less longitude or westward from the first, 3 minutes, and in latitude
more then the first 6 minutes.

Another Example in the North latitude 60 degrees.
I sail north-west 50 leagues, at this sagment end, my longitude from the
first is 3 degrees 30 minutes, and latitude from the first 1 degree 50 minutes,
I return back again south-east 50 leagues, and being returned, I find my
self in less longitude or westward from the first, 5 minutes, and in latitude
more then the first 10 minutes.

And for the more confuting of the way out and home to be all one, and the more
justifying the delating from the parallel to be true, I will deliver some more
examples upon the east, for a sagment of 20 leagues, in the latitude 51 degrees
30 minutes, and 75 degrees, delivering the horizontall distance between the
east (according as is said) to lead in a parallel, and the way of the east
according to the difference, as follows.

In Latitude 51 degrees. 30 minutes, my first place.
From any one meridian of longitude, I take a sagment of the parallel in this
latitude of 20 leagues, presupposed by some to be East from the first place:
and again, I do depart from my first place of being 20 leagues eastward
according to the difference: now at this 20 leagues end, I am delated from the
parallel according to the way upon the difference, which makes my place (now
of being) to hear from the first place, two Azimuthes, and (...) more
southerly.

As for Example.
To explain it more briefly, I imagine one line from the first place east,
according to the parallel 20 leagues: imagine another line from the first place
East by the Compass, according to the way upon the difference: now the
horizontall distance between these two lines at 20 leagues end, from the first
place, shall be (as before) two Azimuths (...).

In the latitude 75 my first place and meridian of longitude, I take a sagment
of the parallel in this latitude, of 20 leagues, presupposed likewise by many
to be East from the first place: and again, I do depart from my first place
of being (...) leagues east, according to the way upon the difference: now at
this twenty leagues end, my horizontall distance between my place of being,
and place (as aforesaid) on the parallel, from the first place, in 3 azimuths
(...).

Likewise this way of the difference delivers upon any Aziemuth, or point of
Compass, sagments of great Circles, different from other, correspondent as
they ought to be for the difference in longitude as hereafter by three
examples of the North north-west following appears, which confuteth the 12
absurdity of the Card.

Three Example of the North North west, for the difference of the length of the
Sagments in longitude from the Equinoctial, to 80 degrees in latitude, as
follows.
The first Example from the Equator.
BEing in the Equinoctial in one meridian, the sagment of N. north-west to
reach to the next Meridian which is one degree in longitude, is in length 52
leagues.

The 2 Example from 40 degrees. of latitude.
Being in 40 degr. of latitude, and in one Meridian, the sagment of north
north-west, to touch the next meridian, is in length 17 leagues.

The 3 Example from 80 degrees of Latitude.
Being in 80 degrees of Latitude, and in one meridian, the sagment of north
north-west, to touch the next meridian, is in length (...) leagues.

Also, this way of the difference delivers upon any Azimuth or point of the
compass, sagments of great circles, different from other, for the laying or
raising of a degree in latitude whatsoever, as by 3 examples of the west, north
west following appears, which confuteth the 13 absurdity of the card.

The 1 example from the Equator.
I Being in the equinoctial, am required to deliver a sagment of the west
north west, only to raise a degree in latitude, which according to the
difference is 52 leagues and.

The 2 example from 40 degrees. of Latitude.
I being in 40 degrees of latitude the sagment of west northwest to raise a
degrees. in latitude upon the difference is 56 leagues.

The 3 example from 80 degrees. of Latitude.
I being in 80 degrees of latitude the Segment of a west north-west, to raise a
degrees. in latitude upon the differ once is 60 leagues.

And thas will I leave the way of the Compass upon the difference for this
time.

And because the variation, or nutation concerns the compass and is a thing
delivered in print, meant belike to some purpose: therefore I will touch this
variation, or nutation, in some few words as hereafter follows.

If a man for his delivery of the variation in print, would observe by a needle
touched by some, who makes the common or ordinary Compasses, I take it,
precise fellows, would soon be delivering forth, that the variation so set in
print, were wide from the truth.

Because with some men in the touching of a Needle, or Compass, though the
stone they touch withal, be not, the best, neither shall an inch in breadth of
the north part of that stone, break any square with them, by whose compasses
many time shipping at the Seas be endangered.

It were better for a man for the security of his charge, or that purposed to
set down the variation in print, to take a needle touched by a better stone
and a more perfect man to handle the touching thereof: truly when Robert
Norman dyed (who had a good stone) Sea man had a great loss, yet Master
Mullinux of Lambeth, who having a better stone was as careful and as precise
in hi^ (...) concerning the touching of Needles, and Compasses, as over Master
Norman was.

Notwithstanding the variation (by such a good Needle) set down in print and
delivered as a general thing, This (...) to pass (...) mistakin g^ true place
(...) the Poles c^ Stone, f^ Master G^ brand, an^ there is with (...) observing
(...) variation (...) two severa^ Needles to (...) ed with tw^ verall Sto^
found the (...) riation to (...) the same, (...) the like I (...) seen before
since. H.B^
would be but ^ested at: and made a thing indeed that a man might spend much
time to no purpose and less edifying to the Seamen as some have done: my
reason is this, because this Stone (though a notable one) and I have not seen
a better, and good to make abservations withal to be kept to a man's self, or
out of print or for the amplyfying of some note in writing: It cannot deliver
the variation of another Stone; for in truth the Variations delivered by many
stoues are different: you shall not have two Stones alike qualited, or that
will deliver one or a like Variation, but the variation of every stone
differs from other: there cannot generally be set down a certain variation
for any one place, which let suffice for this time.

Therefore, that man that was conceited to set the Variation in print, as a
general thing: though it were my self, all things to nothing, I would there
in my deliverie, likewise he condentning all men's knowledge saving my own, to
justify my doings.

But to the matter, the variation or nutation of the compass as it shall at
any time or place be found, is a thing to be noted, yet my delivery is of it,
that it is not surpassing all other knowledge, neither the overthrow of good
knewledge, neither will I accept of it as a thing notable above all the rest,
my reason is this, because the way upon the difference, being more excellent,
over rules it, which indeed they impute to variation, which is untrue: and
thus will I leave the nutation of the Compass.

And whereas before in my delivery of the nutation, I had forgotten to give a
taste of the error, which is likewise set in print, and conceives the nice
delivery of the said nutation: I thought it now therefore good (though late)
not to overpasse it but to give knowledge thereof: it is said that the middle
point between any two Azimuthes observed upon equal elevations in forenoone
and afternoon, is the true Meridian.

For the confuting hereof I will deliver you an example in the north Latitude
51 degrees 32 minutes as follows.

The Sun being in her swift declination, in or near the Equanor, I purpose to
make two observations: the former observation to be 2 min, before 8 of the
clock in the forenoone, the Almicanter delivered then by the center of the Sun,
being 18 degrees. in elevation, and the horizontall distance eastward from the true
meridian delivered by the Azimuth of the Sun to be 66 degr. 38 min.

The second observation in the afternoon, the Sun having the same Almicanter
18 degrees: the declination increasting respected, for 8 hours, which is 8
min. North declination, makes the time to be 3 min. after 42 clock in the
afternoon, wherein there is a min. of time different from the South and the
horizontall distance westward from the south, to be 66 degrees. 53 min. So that I
find this last observation to be farther from the true Meridian, then the
former by 15 min. but if the declination were decreasing, then the last
observation will be nearer the true meridian then the former by 15 minutes,
which makes a difference of variation, sometime too much, or sometime too
little, by 15 minut. good, which is an error and therefore not the truth.

Concerning the Tides.
EVen as men's minds for the most part are settled in the absurdities of the Card
and compass accordingly, so are they settled likewise in an absurd reckoning of
their Tides, as hereafter by the grace of God shall appear, divided into two
parts, first by the delivery of the Cpact, next according to the time observed,
by the point of the Compass, as follweth.

The first part.
These men does not only know the prime by ye date of our Lord, and the Epact
by the prime, and the day of conjunction by the epact which is tolerable,
according to the order of the Epact, allowing 30 days to every Moon: or on
the 30 day end, to be Conjunction, which is notwithstanding partly at random,
being without respect of the precise time of the conjunction.

But they justify also the departure of Sun and Moon in 24 hours to be
continually 48 min. as though the motions of the Sun and Moon continued all
one, or that 48 minut. were their mean departure.

For they bring the 32 Points, every point being a 11 degr. and (...) a sunder,
the whole being 260 degr. to 30 whole days, allowing to every 24 hours the
departure to be (as aforesaid) 48 min. for 30 times 48 minutes is 24 hours:
and 4 minutes of time is ^nswerable to one degree of the equator: therefore the
departure is 12 degrees in 24 hours, allowing the just revolution of the
Equator to be in 24 hours, neither more nor less, for 30 times 12 degrees is
360 degrees, in which their reckoning in my conceit, the course of the Sun in
those 30 days, which is about 29 degrees 30 min. is forgotten or not
respected, but either they must of necessity, grant that the revolution of the
Equator, and the departure of the Sun and Moon, to be as hereafter shall be
delivered: or else they must allow the Moons error in her yearly course, to
be 5 days 15 hours 2 minut. too much, which is an absurdity, and makes the
sinodicall error more then it should be by 11 hours, 15 minut. 56 sec. 49
thirds, but if they do acknowledge, (which I take it, is in few or none of
their heads) that the whole revolution of the Equator is turned about in 24
hours, (as hereafter wall be delivered) and so do reckon the odd time, to be
for the mean course of the Sun in the 30 days, yet they must acknowledge by
that reckoning, that the conjunction of the Sun and Moon, must happen almost
at like times of every year, or at leastwise, make the difference sooner of
the yearly period of the conjunction, to be but 5 days 6 hours 9 minutes,
which indeed should be 10 days, 21 hours, 11 minutes, as hereafter shall be
delivered.

The 2 part.
1 Also these men I justify in reckoning their Tides, in what place and time
soever: that where it flows a southeast moon in conjunction or opposition
(and possible by a false Compass) then it flows till 9 a clock: or where it
flows an East Moon in conjunction or opposition then it flows 6 a clock,
and so its their judgments generally of all the rest of the points of the
Compass.

2. And to justify my sayings to be true, they have set forth, printed tide
tables thereof, and in those tables also, have set their judgments, that in
conjunction or opposition it flows 48 min. after the time upon any point as
aforesaid, which is absurd.

Therefore these their judgments, for the security of their charge, had as
much need of refining as the East and west of the Compass, as is said before,
to lead in parallel.

Now to the matter, for the refining of the first part as aforesaid, let this
first part following suffice.

To know the times of the Conjunction otherwise then by the Epact, is delivered
by Ephemerides, or Alminacks, but rather known by that man that has the
knowledge himself in the Theorickes of the Sun and Moon: which knowledge
ought to be in a man that would be artificall to refine these absurdities.

In Mesl^nes Astronomy the metions of the Sun and Moon are distinguished
into three parts; Slow, swift, and mean: that is to say; in Apogaeum slow,
when they are farthest from the earth: in Perigeun, swift, when they are
nearest the earth: and in their mean between the Apogaeum and Perigenm,
notwithstanding by these three motions there is knowledge understood, that the
motions of the Sun and Moon are always different, that is to say, the Sun
from this place in Apogeum, to his Perigeum: likewise the Moon from her
Apogeum and Perigeum of her epicicle, and from her Apogeum in her almost an
oval form of the center of her Epicicle, to her Perigeum thereof being the
like qualited.

To justify the Motions to be the truer: it is also delivered in this
Astrouomy, that the Sun has three Orbs or particular Spheres, as follows.

First an Excentricke which is called the difference of the body of the Sun.
second is called the difference of ye Apogeum of the excentrick the which 2
does contain the excentrick between them: and 3. makes the whole spheere of
the Sun to be concentrick. I could delate more of this theorick then I purpose,
but it would be to small effect concerning the tides, only respect this that
follows.

Three reasons to be delivered for this Hypothesis as aforesaid to be true.
1 First reason which causes the Sun to be in an excentricke, is the
difference of the Suns motion: which is prooved sometimes swift, sometimes
slow, as aforesaid.

2 Second reason is, because the Diamiter of the Sun, is prooved sometime
bigger (as in Perigeum 33 min. 44 sec.) then at some other time by 2 minutes 6
seconds, therefore nearer at sometimes then at other times.

3 The third reason is the inequality of the Epicicles because it is proved
that the Sun farthest from the earth causes the Eclipses to be longer and
nearer the earth to be sooner.

Mesline delivers also in his Astronomy, that the greatest excentricity of
the Sun is 48 semidiamiters of the earth.

And the least excentricity which is near in this our age about the 9 degree
of Cancer, is 37 semidiamiters of the earth.

So the difference is a 11 semidiamiters of the earth, and the semediamiter of
the earth is 3436 miles and (...).

So that the sun is nearer unto us at some time, then at some other times by
74 semediamiters of the earth.

Mesline delivers likewise, one yearly Period of the sun to have 365 days
6 hour. 9 min. 39 sec. and this year he calls Sideriall or starry, the
diurnall mean motion of the Sun accordingly to be 59 min. 8 sec. 11 thirds 22
fourths 16 fifths.

The motions of the Sun as follows.
Her swift motion in 24 hours, is -- 1 degrees. 1 min. 16 second. Her mean motion
in 24 hours, is -- 0 -- 59 -- 8 Her slow motion in 24 hours, is -- 0 -- 57 --
0
Mesline delivers likewise in his Astronomy, that the Moon has five Orbs or
particular Spheres as follows: 1 First, an Excentricity. 2 Second, the
difference of the Epicicles center. 3 Third, the difference of the excentricity
in Apogeum and Perigeum. 4 Fourth is the Epicicle which carries the body of
Luna. 5 Fifth, which is Concentrick called aequans Luna.


Four reasons following to prove this Hypothesis to be true.
1 First reason which causes the Moon to be in an excentrick, is the
difference of the Moons motion, which is proved sometime swift, sometime slow.

2 Second reason, is because the Diameter of the Moon is prooved sometime
bigger as in Perigeum 35 miu. 38 seconds then at some other time by 5 min. 38
sec. therefore nearer at some times then at other times.

3 Thirdly, the inequality of the Eclipses, because the moon farthest from the
earth, causes the Eclipses to be longer, and nearer the earth to be sooner.

4 Fourthly, the inequality of the Paralax, because the Moon sarthest from the
earth, causes the Horizontali paralax, to be the less, and nearer to be more.

And the greatest excentricity of the Moon is 10 semidiamiters of the earth,
and (...) a little less.

And the semidiamiter of the Epicicle is 5 semidiamiters of the earth and
(...). So that the Moon is nearer unto us at sometime, then at some other
times by 30 semidiamiters of the earth, and (...), and likewise by the whole
diamiter of the Circulus parvus: which is 20 semidiamiters and (...).

For the Moon makes a Circulus parvus, (contrary to her own motion) about
the center of the world, according to the semidiamiter of the excentrick, which
is 10 semidiamiters, and 8 min. 30 seconds.

Likewise the Moon has latitude of the Ecliptic on either side 5 degrees,
which for the tides is greatly to be respected.

Mesline delivers one mean periodicall period of the Moon to have 27 days,
7 hours 24 minutes.

Also delivers the mean time to make up the periodicall period to a mean
sinodicall period to have days, 2 days, 5 hours 20 minutes.

So that the mean sinodicall month of the Moon to be in conjunction again
with the Sun has days, 29 days 12 hours, 44 minutes 3 sec. 11 thirds.

The motions of the Moon as follows.
The swift motion of the Moon, sometimes in 24 hours is 15 degrees 0 min.

The mean motion in 24 hours, is 13 degrees 30 minutes.

And her slow motion in 24 hours, is 12 degrees 0 minutes.

Now having delivered so much as needs of the Theoricks of the Sun and
Moon concerning the Tides, we are come to the point to know their departure,
which is as follows.

The departure of the Sun and Moon.
The Moon presently after the conjunction departs Eastward from the Sun in
Apogeum in 24 hours 11 degrees. 3, min. which is answerable in min. to 44 min. 12
seconds.

The Moon presently after the conjunction, departs from the Sun in
Perigeum in 24 hours 13, degrees 58 minutes 44 seconds answerable in minutes,
to 55 min. 55 seconds.

The Moon presently after the conjunction departs from the Sun in mean
motion, in 24 hours 12 degrees, 30 min. 52 seconds, answerable in min. to 50
min. 3, seconds (...).

Sometimes the departure of the Sun and Moon, when the Sun is in her slow
motion, and the Moon in her swift motion, in 24 hours, is 14 degrees, 3
minut. which makes the departure in minutes answerable to be 56 min. 12
seconds.

And sometime the departure of the Sun and Moon, when the Sun is in his
swift motion, and the Moon in her slow motion, in 24 hours, is but 10
degrees, 58 min. 44 seconds, which makes the departure in min. answerable to
be 43 min. 55 sec.

And the mean motion, between both these motions, next above in 24 hours, is
50 min, 2 seconds, 30 thirds.

Which motion is justified twice, as above: therefore I conclude the mean
departure of the Sun and moon in 24 hours to be 50, min, 3, seconds 30
thirds.

And the hourly departure accordingly to be 2 min. 5 secon. 8 thirds, 45
fourths.

Stadius affirms in his Ephemerides, that in 24 hours the whole equator and
50 minutes 8 seconds is turned about, which is most certain.

Likewise in a mean be affirms that the conjunction of the Sun and Moon
in one period, at any one time in the year, shall differ from the same time
the next year, and be sooner 10 days, 21 hours 11 min. as for example:

In the 12 mean sinodicall months, the time that wants of 12 times, 30
days, is 5 days 15 hours 2 minutes, which makes 360 days, the remainer of
the days of the whole year, is 5 days, 6 hours, 9 minutes, which both
together is 10 days 21 hours 11 min.

Now for the refining of the first 2 parts, let these last 2 parts following
suffice, concerning their error in reckoning their tides delivering the time by
the points of the Compass: for the confuting hereof. I will deliver six
examples, three examples in the north latitude 30 degr. and the other 3
examples in the north latitude 51 degrees 32 minutes.

North latitude 30 degrees, the Sun in Capricorn.
1 The Sun at southeast, it is then. before 9 a clock in the morning, but if
the Moon has 5 degrees South latitude, then it is 24 minutes before 9 a
clock: if the Moon have 5 degrees. North latitude, then it is 16 min. past 9 a
clock.

Sun in the Equator.
The Sun at Southeast, it is then 14 min. past 10 aclock in the morning: but
if the Moon have 5 degrees south latitude, then it is 7 min. before 10: if the
Moon have 4 degrees north latitude, then it is 30 minutes past 10 a clok

Sun in Cancer.
The Sun at southeast, it is then 32 min. past a 11 a clock in the morning,
but if the Moon have 5 degr. south latitude, then it is 15 minut. past a 11:
if the Moon has 5 degr. north latitude, then it is 54 minutes past a 11 of
the clock.

And at an east Sun, it is then 18 min. past 9 a clock in the morning, but if
the Moon have 5 degrees South latitude then it is 24 min. past 8 a clock: if
the Moon have 5 degr. north latitide, then it is 40 min past 10 a clock. So
that in this north latitude of 30 degrees, there is difference of time in the
Moons being sentheast and, 3 hours. 18 min. and in the same latitude,
difference from 6 a clock in the east 4 hours 40 min.

The other 3 Examples in the North Latitude 51 degrees. 32 min. the Sun in
Capricornus.
1 The Sun at the Southeast and, it is then 20 minut. before 9 a clock in the
morning: but if the Moon has 5 degrees south latitude, then it is 18 minutes
past 8: if the Moon have 5 degrees. north latitude, then it is 51 min. past 8 a
clock.

Sun in the Equator.
The Sun at the southeast, it is then 28 min. past 9 a clock in the morning:
but if the Moon have 5 degrees south latitude, then it is 18 min. past 9: if
the moon have 5, degr. north latitude then it is 38 min. past 9 a clock.

Sun in Cancer.
The Sun at the southeast, it is then 18 min past 10 a clock in the morning:
but if the Moon has 5 degrees south latitude, then it is 6 minut. past 10. If
the Moon have 5 degrees north latitude, then it is 30 min. past 10 a clock.

But at an East sun it is then 22 min. past 7 a clock in the morning, but if
the Moon have 5 degrees South latitude, then it is 2 minutes past 7. If the
moon have 5 degrees north latitude: then it is 42 minutes past seven a clock:
likewise in this north latitude 51 degrees 32 minutes, there is difference of
time in the Moon being southeast 2 hours, 2 minutes.

And in this same Latitude, difference in the east from 6 a clock 1 hour 42
minutes: the mistaking of so much time, from the high water, may overthrow
their charge in going into a harbor, where it is to be respected.

2 And whereas they deliver in their Tide Tables, a hoying of the tide in
conjunction, aspect or opposition, to 48 m. after the order in that Tide Table,
it is not so, but in a river or in-draft, where the Tides in their prime
runs quick, there Tides of floods will run 48 minutes after high water;
and thus I will leave the delating of the Tides.

Concerning the Time.
SUch is the conceit or knowledge of the Seamen in these times, they take a
common Compass, little respecting the error thereof, being touched with a
Stone of no strength, and made wise by a man of no knowledge: which Compass
they devide into 24 hours, to deliver unto them, (they observing the Sun
therewith) the time they look for, which is as lame a delivery of the times as
may be, and is somewhat touched before in the delivery of the Tides, and
likewise as hereafter follows.

Also, they observe the time by an hour, or half hour glass, made by as
careful a man, as the Compass before spoken off, who indeed cares but little
what error more or less, is delivered in those glasses in 24 hours, nay in
half an hour, with whom (as the proverb is) an inch breaks no square.

Which Compasses and glasses had need to be carefully respected, nay rather to
be reformed, for the security (as aforesaid) of the Navy of England, which is
greatly endangered by them: and although these appendances for Navigations be
mere false, yet the Market-folkes being not experienced by them, in
consideration of the cheapenesse of them, holding themselves thereby,
profitable servants to the owner.

And although the time generally from one Moon to the other, cannot be
perfectly delivered by any man, as hereafter shall be showed: yet by precise
Instruments carefully made the time may be delivered more truly which is the
greatest help we have in Longitude, and for a man most careful in making of
his Compases, and running glasses, I commend Master Emerie Mollineux of
Lambeth (while he lived) as for my conceit, which I have learned concerning the
time, it is as hereafter follows.

First, for the confuting of the time delivered by the compass, as aforesaid,
which Compass is delivered by 360 degrees, which indeed are Azimuths, and they
justify as many Azimuths, which is 15 for one hour, as for another which is
contrary, therefore I will deliver three examples to that effect in the
Latitude 51 degrees 32 minutes as follows.

Sun in Capricornus.
From the Sun rising to one hour of time, there is 12 Azimuths and a, and
from a 11 a clock to 12 at Noone, there is 14 Azimuths.

Sun in the Equator.
From the Sun rise to one hour of time, there is 12 Azimuthes, and from a 11
a clock, to 12 at noone, there is 18 Azimuths and.

Sun in Cancer.
From the Sun rise to one hour of time, there is a 11 Azimuths and. and from
a 11 a clock to 12 at noone, there is 28 Azimuths.

Also follows two examples, the one in the north latitude 51 degrees 32
minutes: the other in the north latitude, 66 degrees, concerning the difference
of time, as follows.

The 1 Example in Latitude 51 degr. 32 min.
Aries whole sign, has declination a 11 degrees 20 min. which reaches in
longitude Eastward, according to the degrees on the Equator to the 28 meridian
likewise this whole sign of Aries does lengthen the days 1 hour and 58 min.

Taurus, his whole sign, has declination 8 degrees 50 min. which reaches in
longitude Eastward according to the degrees on the Equator, to the 29 and a
half Meridian: also this whole sign of Taurus does length the days one hour
and 44 minutes.

Gemini, his whole sign has declination 3 degr. 18 min. which reaches in
Longitude eastward, according to the degrees on the equator to the 32 and a
half Meridian, also this whole sign of Gemini does length the days 1 hour
40 minutes.

The 2 Example in North Latitude 66 degr.
Aries whole sign, lengthen the days, -- 3 hour. and 46 min. Taurus whole
sign, lengthen the days, -- 3 hour. and 38 min. Gemini his whole sign
lengthen the days, -- 3 hour. and 0 min.
But seeing that general time from one Noone to an other, cannot be delivered
certain, but there shall be error, so that one 24 hours shall be longer, or
shorter then an other by 1 hour and 28 min. as hereafter shall be delivered:
what certain time then can be delivered by any Instruments for that purpose,
which delivers but a second error.

Now will I deliver some causes, why the time from one noone to another cannot
be of like time.

Mesline in his Astronomy, delivers that there is three Ecliptickes as
follows.

First the ecliptic of the 10 Sphere which is fixed.

Second, the ecliptic of the 9 Sphere which is mooveable.

Thirdly the ecliptic of the 8 Sphere which is the true ecliptic of the
starry firmament.

Likewise he delivers that the Sun in Aries of the 9 Sphere, is gone to the
Eastward of the Sun in Aries of the 10 sphere, 27 degrees and better, but
directly under it, in the same plain.

Also that the Sun in Aries of the 8 spears never is nearer to the Sun in
Aries of the 9 Sphere, then by the semidiamiter of the small circle, which is
9 degrees.

Now Mesline delivers the difference of the judgments of the Astronomers,
and that Ptolomy makes the 8 and 9 Spears all one, delivering the opinion of
Prolomy and others, as follows.

The opinion of Prolomie concerning the motions of the fixestarres, comparing
the observations made 400 years before him, with his own: he finding thereby
that the fixed Stars had moved in consequence 4 degrees. therefore Prolomie all
owed to the whole revolution of the fixed stars, to accomplish one period,
according to the rate of 36000 years, that was for every 100 years, one degrees.

Mesline delivers also that the opinion of the Alfonfines, concerning our
revolution, or accomplishing of one period of the 9 Spheere is in 49000 years,
but according to Copernicus his observations, one periodicall revolution is in
25816 years, delivering that an hour of the longest day is 63 minut. 40
seconds, such as an hour of the shortest day is only 60 min.

Copernicus makes (likewise) the year 365 days, 5 hours, 49 min. 15
seconds, 46 thirds, which he calls the year Tropicall, equally supputated,
or counted to the middle Equinoctial.

The Aifonsines in their account, wants in their yearly period 13 thirds.

Mesline makes the year 365 days, 6 hours, 9 minutes, 39 seconds, and this
year he calls syderiall or starry, numbered under the Spheere of the fixed
Stars, which is more then the year delivered by Copernicus by 20 min. 23
seconds 14 thirds.

Delivering the causes of this difference to be this, making these beginning of
the years to be in one point of the 10 and 9 spheeres and the 9 Spheere
(before the year end) being remooved Easterly from the 10 spheere, the year
end coming to that point of the 12 Sphere again, is to proceed from it to
that point of the 9 sphere also before the year ends.

Mesline delivers (the Sun being in the Apogeum part) that from middle
motion to middle motion, the sun passes 176 degrees. 20 min. of the ecliptic: And
the sun being in the Perigeum part from middle motion to middle motion, passes
183 degr. 40 minutes of the ecliptic, which makes a difference of 7 degr. 20
minutes.

But from the points of true motions, the halfes are equal, each 180 degrees. of
the Ecliptic: and the arch of time between the middle and middle motion of
the Sun in Apogeum part, is 182 days and 6 hours.

Also the Arch of time between the true motion and true motion of the Sun in
the Perigeum part, is 179 days, which makes the arch of time between the
middle and the middle motion of the sun in Apogeum; more then in Perigeum by
three days and 6 hours.

Also makes the arch of time, between the middle and true motion of the sun
in both the mean motions, to be 4 days, and the arch of time different from
the true motion, to the true motion of the sun in Apogeum, from the same
points in his Perigeum to be 7 days and 6 hours.

And as for the rest of the Theoricks of the Sun and Moon I have delivered
sufficient in my delivery before, concerning the tides.

But to conclude, Stadius in his Ephemerides, folio 57, of the Equation of the
natural days, delivers as follows, concerning the time.

We have computed all the places of all the Planets, and also of the Sun and
Poone in this our Ephemerides, for the natural days (to wit,) for the space,
in the which the whole equator is turned about, and moreover 59 minutes and 8
seconds: but because the apparent, and true day now and then does exceed this
time, and now and then is less: to wit,

Partly when the Sun goes swifter, or flower, by reason of his
Prosthopherisis.

Partly for that equal times of the Equator, in the diurnall coartation, or
revolution, do not answer to equal sagments, or parts of the Zodiac, it
comes to pass, that this inequality of time also needs a prosthopherists,
the which notwithstanding cannot be always equal nor certain.

For the conversion of the Circle of the Equator, though unto the middle and
equal Equinoctium, which is the year divided into four equal parts, is
evermore equally constant, yet nevertheless, unto the apparent Equinoctium
which are the true equinoctiis which the excentrick yields, is found not equal.

Neither does the Suns Apogeum occupy a stable seat, because the Apogeum
flecteth in the ecliptic every 13 years 1 degree 27 minutes: moreover the
Sun in his excentricity does some hurt by his shifting for the excentricity
is more and less by a eleven semidiamiters of the Earth, as aforesaid, and
goes about with the ecliptic.

Wherefore also no limit can be appointed perpetually to this insquallity, but
in this our Age all these causes conferred one with another, and added
together, do show that the greatest day and less day do differ one from an
other, one hour and 28 minutes, that is to say, 22 times (or Meridians) and 20
minutes of the Equator.

But seeing that this inequality of days cannot missever the rest of the
motions, therefore it is necessary that we should admit them to be equal, unto
the which equal days, the Tables of the motions should be both made and set
together, the which course we have taken in this our Ephemerides, and for that
cause we have borrowed the Canon of equation of days out of Erasmus
Rheinholdus which agrees nearest with our age, until the year 1600.

Therefore according as you find the number in that cannon to add or
substract: that is the time that the day is either longer or shorter, then the
equal day, or the day of the Ephemerides, that is the first equated day, or
day equated upon the difference of 88 minutes, whereas the second equation is
of days once equated, and now does equate them upon the difference of 44
minutes, whose half is 22 minutes, the greatest number within the cannon.

Seeing there is a first error concerning the time delvered, even in the
motions of the Heavens, as aforesaid, therefore these running Glasses
delivering but a second error: the reason is this: because they cannot be made
without their imperfections, had need to be most carefully made, and by the
precisest workman: that the time delivered by them, may be but according to the
second error, for the delivery of the Longitude, by which running glasses, next
hereafter nominated, the longitude is better delivered then by any other
Instruments.

A glass whose sand is metal and the metal said by some will not rust,
notwithstanding in my opinion, it will rust somewhat, and be sometimes moyster,
then at other times, likewise the hole that the sand runs thorough, will
grow wider with the force of the sand, the rather being violated by the surges
of the sea: which impersections considered, the glass must needs deliver the
time, sometime shorter, and sometime longer, according to the weather,
therefore a second error: yet this glass is more tolerable then the rest for
this delivery, and is to be used before all other, of which glasses there may
be diverse sorts, for the delivery of more and less at pleasure.

And because the running glasses with sand is more grosser, and that clockes
and watches has their more imperfections, then the former glass, I will omit
them, and leave the delivery of the time for this present.

Concerning the Winds according to Experience.
DIfferences or diversities of winds, I have seen at sea, in some calm day
(in Summer time) among diverse shipping, being of one fleet, so that some six
of them or more, have all had contrary winds till the wind was settled.

Likewise in Summer time I have known in places of small distance, as at
Hambrough, the wind at west south west, so much winds, that we have rid with
our topmast down, and at Lee the very same time, the Ships then bound for
Hambrough, had as much wind (by report) at east north east, but both those winds
continued not long, and between which winds no doubt it was calm for the
time.

Also in Winter time, I have seen it often in being at sea, the wind being at
South southeast, much wind and upon a sudden the wind has altered to the
northwest, or north northwest, very much wind, and so alterations of winds I
have likewise seen upon other points of the Compass.

And in sailing toward Head-lands, or in sailing about Headlands I have found
the wind sometime too large unto us, and other times again too scant unto us:
Therefore the wind very difficult to delate upon, my farther reason is this,
because it is delivered in the Scriptures that the wind blows, but from
whence it comes or whether it goes no man knows.

Yet notwithstanding, many times in Summer time, but especially in winter time,
when grown stormy winds are settled, we may conjecture that they extend
far, and in my opinion (which opinion I hold for a truth) ye wind then
blows in a great circle, therefore cannot be parallel to any great circle of
that nature, my reason is this, because great Circles does cross themselves at
opposite points, as in the demonstrature of the compass is delivered.

Therefore this delivery confuteth the flat Cards, my reason is this, because
the flat cards delivers the winds to blow in paralells, according to the
lineament thereof.

Likewise by the Card the wind at East, and a Ship going west, either in the
latitude 33 degrees, 35 minutes, and latitude 60 degrees, or in the north
latitude 40 degr. 15 minut, or in what latitude else soever, it is said to lead
in parallel, notwithstanding, the Card delivers the going West to make right
angles with the Meridians which is very absurd, and that the wind continuing,
they shall go west still asore the wind.

Concerning the Wind by Sphericail working. The 1 Example.
PResuppose a first place (which I will call our place of departure) in any one
degree of Longitude whatsoever, and in the North latitude of 33 degrees, 35
minutes, in which place the east and west of the Compass, according to the
demonstrature, is a Tangent unto this parallel, and crosses the equator at
opposite points 90 degrees in longitude Eastward and westward, which east and
west points in the Equinoctial keep in mind.

I purpose from this first place (as aforesaid) to sail to a second place
according to the way of the west upon the difference, which shall be in
Longitude from the first place 90 degrees, which 90 degrees, in these paralells
is 75 degrees of a great circle or little more: now in this second place which
is at this present my place of being, I find my self delated from the parallel
according to the difference, where I purpose to deliver the East and west
(likewise) according to the demonstrature, being also a Tangent unto this
parallel, and crosses the Equator at opposite points according to the former,
but 90 degrees different in longitude, which two demonstrated semicircles do
cross each other in 24 degrees 15 minutes of Latitude, 46 degrees in longitude
from the first place, and 44 degrees in longitude from the second place.

Now from my first place of departure, the second place does bear according to
the demonstrature of the Compass, west northwest, and 5 degrees Northerly,
upon which point the two places are distant 73 degrees 15 minutes of a great
circle, which is a nearer way then the way upon the West according to the
difference as aforesaid, by 1 degree 45 minutes.

And from my second place of being, the first place of departure does bear
according to the demonstrature of the Compass East northeast, and 7 degrees
northerly, upon which point likewise the two places are distant 73 degrees 15
minutes.

So by this delivery having continued the Ships caping or course west from the
first place of departure to the second place, I do conclude that the wind
being constant and stable in blowing from the first place to the second place,
that at the second place the wind is altered of you two points and 7 degrees to
the Northward, as aforesaid, though it were at East in the first place, which
delivery in my judgment is the truth.

But if the wind being at the first place, be at East, and in sailing to the
second place, be variable and alterable, as the East and west by the
demonstrature is variable by crossing the equator according to the difference
in Longitude, then you shall go from the first place to the second place west
as aforesaid (the wind being at east) right before the wind, but this way in my
judgment is impossible and not the truth.

A second Example.
Being in 60 degrees North latitude and in one Meridian of longitude, which is
my first place, which has his demonstrature of East and west accordingly,
being a tangent unto this parallel, and in crossing the equator at opposite
points, after the manner in the first Example, from whence I sail West
accordingly to the difference to 90 degrees in longitude, which 90 degrees in
longitude in these paralells is 45 degrees of a great circle, little more,
which is my second place: in which second place I find my self there to be
delated from the parallel according to the difference, and in which second
place likewise I purpose to deliver the east and west according to the former,
but 90 degrees different in longitude; and these two demonstrated semicircles,
do cross each other in 50 degrees of latitude 46 degrees 20 minutes in
longitude from the first place, and 43 degrees, 40 minutes in longitude from
the second place.

So that from my first place of departure, the second place does bear
(according to the demonstrature of the Compass) Northwest and by west 5
degrees 20 minutes northerly, upon which point the two places are distant 42
degrees 35 minutes of a great Circle, which is likewise a nearer way then the
way of the west according to the difference, as aforesaid, 2 degr. 25 minutes.

And from the second place of being, the first place of departure, does bear
according to the demonstrature of the Compass, northeast and by east and 8
degrees. 20 minut. northerly, upon which point the two places are also distant 42
degrees, 35 minut. of a great circle.

So that by this delivery being at this second place, the wind is altered of me
three points, and 8 degrees 20 minutes Northward, though it were at the East in
the first place.

The 3 Example.
Being in 80 degrees 15 minutes North latitude and in one meridian of
longitude, which is my first place, which has his demonstrature of East and
west accordingly, being a tangent unto this parallel, and in crossing the
equator at opposite points, after the manner in the first example, from whence
I sail west according to the difference to 90 degr. in longitude, which 90
degrees in longitude in these paralells, is 15 degrees of a great circle,
little more which is my second place: in which second place I find my self
there to be delated from the parallel, according to the difference.

And in which second place, I purpose to deliver also the East and west,
according to the demonstrature, which likewise crosses the equator at opposite
points according to the former, but 90 degrees difference in longitude, and
these two demonstrated semicircles do cross each other in 75 degrees, 45
minu. in latitude, 48 degrees in longitude from the first place, and 42 degrees
in longitude from the second place.

So that from my first place of departure, the second place does bear
according to the demonstrature of the Compass northwest and by west, and 8
degrees northerly: upon which point the two places are distant 14 degrees of a
great circle, which also is an nearer way then by the west as aforesaid by one
degree.

And from my second place of being, the first place of departure does bear
according to the demonstrature of the Compass north-East, one degree 20
minutes northerly, upon which point the two places are distant 14 degrees of a
great circle.

So that by this delivery being at the second place, the wind is altered of me
4 points and one degree 20 minutes to the northward, though it were at the East
in the first place.

A thing worth the Noting.
In all the three examples, as aforesaid this thing worthy the noting might be
delivered, yet I will deliver but one of them according to the second example
in latitude 60 degrees. in which second example or delivery, the intersection or
crossing of these two semicircles of east and west according to the
demonstrature from the first place of departure and second place, is in
latitude 50 degrees, which intersection is from the first place west, and from the
second place east.

Yet being in this intersection, the first place bears from it northeast by
east, and 5 degrees, 38 minutes northerly, and distant 27 degrees 32 minutes of
this great circle.

And the second place bears from it northwest and by west, 1 degree 40
minutes northerly, and distant 26 degrees, 20 min. of this great circle
according to the demonstrature of the compass: and thus much concerning the
wind.

Concerning the way of a Ship or Shipping at Sea.
FIrst, there is to be understood and likewise to be respected by him that has
the charge (whatsoever in navigation) that there is two lawful and good
navigable courses to be used at the Seas, and no more, either of which courses
is very artificial (the keeping of them aright) and rests in the good
descretion of the said Master. being likewise artificial, which of them he
will use.

But if the said Master be not artificial, but a man of great conceit, the
manner or way of these courses be too deep for his understanding, and
therefore he not worthy to take charge at all.

My reason is this, because all other courses whatsoever more then these two,
are absurd, frivolous and false: the names of which two courses follows.

First the course upon the great Circle being the nearest way from place to
place.
The first course is to sail upon a great Circle which is after this manner:
being in any one latitude and longitude whatsoever, which is your first place,
and do purpose to sail from thence upon any Azimuths of demonstrature
whatsoever, which are great circles, until you come to 90 degrees in
longitude, which is unto the Horizon of your first place, in which way you are
to respect every day at noone your Latitude (if you may) and likewise your time
as before, or hereafter shall be delivered. For the delivery of your longitude,
you are likewise to respect your Sagments, being of what length soever upon the
Azimuths you sail, how you are, (upon any distance) to cross the meridians
and paralells: for if you find your self in such a latitude, as you should be
in, and not in the right longitude, which the Azimuths you should sail upon
gives, then are you also wide and to seek reformation: also if you find your
self in such a longitude and not in the right latitude which your Azimuthes
gives, then are you also wide and to seek reformation, therefore being a
harder way or course to sail upon the great circle (notwithstanding this way
the nearest way, or course from place to place of all other ways) requiring
always reformation with great Judgment, I will only deliver 6 examples from
one meridian of longitude and latitude 51 degrees. 32 min. upon the demonstrature,
northwest and by north, continuing it from the first place to the Horizon by
Sagments of 15 degrees. of a great Circle a piece, only for a taste and your
farther knowledge of this way and so will leave it, and hereafter will deliver
the remainer of the second course or way, which is more easy, according to the
difference, being the only and natural way indeed that the Compass leads
in.

The 1 Example.
Being in the Latitude and longitude, as aforesaid, 15 degrees of a great
Circle from thence, according to the demonstrature of N. west and by north,
crosses the 18 degrees. 30 minutes, or meridian in longitude westward from the
first, and the parallel of north latitude 62 degrees 50 minutes.

The 2 Example.
Other 15 degrees which makes 30 degrees. from the first according to the
demonstrature of northwest and by north, touches the meridian of 50 degr. in
longitude westward from the first, and the parallel of north latitude 69 degrees 28
min.

The 3 Example.
Other 15 degrees which makes 45 degr. from the first according to the
demonstrature, of Northwest and by north, touches the Meridian of 92 degrees. 50
minutes in longitude westward from the first, and the parallel of North
latitude 66 degrees, 45 minutes.

The 4 Example.
Other 15 degrees which makes 60 degrees from the first, according to the
demonstrature of Northwest and by north, touches the Meridian of 118 degrees
in Longitude westward from the first, and the parallel of north latitude 57
degrees,

The 5 Example.
Other 15 degrees which makes 75 degrees from the first, according to the
demonstrature of N. west and by north, touches the Meridian of 130 degrees. 32
min. in longitude westward from the first, and the parallel of north latitude
44 degrees 35 minutes.

The 6 Example.
The other or last 15 degrees, which makes 90 degrees from the first, and is
the Horizon thereof according to the demonstrature of the northwest and by
north, touches the Meridian of 139 degrees, 15 minutes in longitude westward
from the first, and the parallel of north latitude 31 degrees 10 minutes.

And as for the second course or way of the Compass upon the difference which
we will rely upon, I have delivered sufficiently thereof, as a foresaid, and
for that which is also needful besides concerning this way upon the difference
to be delivered, hereafter in good sort and order follows

There is to be respected by a Master of a Ship, or the man that takes charge
in navigation, the goodness of the Compass which he sayleth by, with the
nutation thereof in any place if it be needful, otherwise it will cause the
way of a Ship to be in an Azimuth contrary to his expectation, which will cause
an error.

And for the understanding of this nutation what it is, in any place may be
delivered by a man of good conceit, as follows, having a Topographicall
instrument or otherwise called a Theodolite of brass, perfectly made, and the
Needle good, being well touched with an excellent Stone, and handled for the
purpose, delivers the nutation very well: but if the sea-gate be so great
that this Instrument cannot deliver it certain, then will no Instrument (set
forth for this purpose) deliver it neither, then must you work thus, the
height of the Sun in the Meridian at Noone observed by the Compass, the
Compass it self, then delivers the nutation from Noone, but rather thus:
the latitude at Noone known, then upon any observation of the Sun by the
Compass on any elevation about 3. a clock in the afternoon, the declination
respected, the Compass delivers the nutation more truer, my reason is this:
because the descention of the Sun in his diurnall Arch at this time in the
afternoon is more swifter toward the Horizon, then it is, the Sun being
near the Meridian.

Also that the said Master have with him of the best running Glasses that can
be made, as aforesaid, to deliver the time unto him, as certain as may be,
which must be regarded as a principal thing, the coarting of the Meridians
respected, for the delivery of the Longitude in any place, by which way the
longitude is delivered after the best manner, the latitude being known,
otherwise, the time not respected or regarded, the longitude will be delivered
with the more error.

Likewise the Azimuth of the way must be delivered or set down according to
the difference, and not otherwise, and not above 20 leagues the Sagment: for
the snorter the Segments be the truer the reckoning, which Azimuths of way upon
the differance, delivers the longitude also in reasonable sort the latitude
being known, yet in this way is more absurdity, then in the former way for
the delivery of the longitude.

Moreover there is to be respected by him that has the charge in navigation,
the violence of winds, Sea-gates, Tide-gates, surrents, Edies or whatsoever
else, that may either be helping of the ship in her way, or a hinderance of her
way, which causes an Azimuth of way, contrary to expectation, which not
regarded, brings also an error.

And for the observing of Latitudes at the Seas, it had need to be very
precisely done, having a large Quadrant of brass with a mooveable
perpendiculer accordingly, delivers it in the best sort: for in observing
with Cross, staves there is error, my reason is this, the staff not lawfully
projected to the great circle, delivers error: my further reason also is this
in observing with the staff, the eye is feign to behold and note two things at
once, which is the center of the Sun, and the Horizon, which is not possible
to be done truly.

And in a Sea-gate it can neither be precisely delivered by an Astrolabe,
therefore the Quadrant best for this purpose: for in observing therewith, there
is but only the center of the Sun, to be respected. Also there must be great
care had by him that has the charge in navigation, unto the Steeridge of the
ship that it be greatly respected of him, and of these principal men which
goes in the ship with him. which he does appoint for this purpose, because the
man at the Steridge may be negligent, and by some men that may be at the
Steridge, as I have seen my self er^ now, a 3 or 4 points of either side of
the course, commanded to be kept, breaks no square with him, which had or
contrary Steridge to expectation, not counted of or noted, causes a foul
error.

And whereas there are infinite sorts of shipping, for bigness, length, and
draft, so they are as different in qualities, wherefore I will deliver as many
qualities concerning all sorts of Shipping, as at this present I can remember,
leaving the consideration of the rest, (not now remembered of me, unto him that
has the charge for the present) with those nominated according as he shall
find the Ships quality to be which he goes in, the qualities as follows.

Of Shipping there are diverse sorts which have diverse qualities the reason is
this, because they are different in bigness and mould, and may be mistrived.
To proceed, some of them are long, and some short, some of them flottie, and
other some of great charge, or draft, some have a desire or cast to Portward,
and some other to starbord, some of them good to sail (try) weather about
without sails or hull, and other some qualited to the contrary, some are
desirous to have there stays and shrowds slacked, and some to have them set
tought, some Ships desire to be trimmed a head, some a stern, and some others
of an even keele, some steereth hard every way, and other some easy of
steeridge any way: some Ships being in a sea-gate will stay, or wend to
windward, and other some cannot, but must wend before the wind, which is a great
loss of way, long and short shipping being flotty, are laborsome in a seagate,
but long or short being deep Shipping, is easy at Sea, some are fast Ships
upon a wind, and some others are leeward, some are good Ships of asayle quarter
winds, and some not so good: some are good a fore the wind, and some others to
the contrary, some Ships are stiff sided which is a principal quality, and
some other are tender sided, which is a bad quality, some Ships are of
advantage most ways, and other some are to the contrary.

Therefore the quality of a Ship is greatly to be regarded of him that has the
charge, for a Ship of advantage or disadvantage, causes an Azimuth of way
contrary to expectation, which not being respected causes an error.

Now for your diurnall by some called a Travers book, or book wherein you
keep reckoning of the Ships way at the Seas, in my conceit and as I do use,
is in manner as follows.

In the head or beginning of which Book, set down the Title thereof, with the
Month, day, and date of our Lord, at the time of your beginning to enter into
your navigation: after which being set down, devide the leaf and so the rest
of the leaves up and down into 10 spaces or columes, and set down in every
colume as follows.

IN the first colume of which Book, set down the Months and Days, according
to the sequel of them as the time spends.

In the second colume, set down the Hours of time spent in sailing upon the
Azimuths used.

In the third colume, set down the Azimuth of the wind, or that wind for the
time it was in.

In the 4 colume, set down the Course which you have kept, that is the course
on the true Azimuth, according to the difference.

In the 5 colume, set down the quantity of Leagues run upon the Azimuth as
aforesaid.

In the 6 colume, set down the degrees of the Pole elevated.

In the 7 col. also the min. if there be any, of the Pole elevated.

In the 8 colume, set down the degrees of Longitude delivered by the time and
Latitude as aforesaid.

In the 9 colume, also the minutes (if there be any) of the Longitude so
delivered.

In the 10 colume, set down your Discourse of things, according as you find
occasion.

And to Conclude.
Every of which inconveniences, or rather good knowledge and understanding as
aforesaid, being thus noted, known and regarded by him that has the charge,
he shall deliver in his Navigations the Ships way he goes in with all
advantages, who is worthy to be trusted with any charge, and to receive great
commendations.

But to the contrary, he that has the charge, not respecting these things, as
aforesaid, he delivers the Ships way with all nvsurdities and error, and to
speak the truth, he is not worthy to take charge at all, but to have an
inferior place, which he is more fitter for: and thus will I leave delating of
the way of Shipping at Sea.

FINIS.
AN APPENDIX, OR A necessary Discourse (concerning the Helisphericall line that
a Ship describes upon the Superficies of the Sea, being directed by the
Magneticall Needle or Compass.) Between Mr. Geograph, and Mr. Nautae
Enterloquitors.
Nautae. WEll met, Mr. Geograph?


Geograph. Mr. Nautae and so are you also well met, I have much desired a long
while to have some discourse with you.


Nau. With me Sir, about what I pray you?


Geo. About that which I suppose you are well seen in, I mean the way of a
Ship upon the Superficies of the Sea, being guided by the Magneticall Needle or
Compass?


Nautae. Sir, I am very willing to entertain your motion, and at this present
to discourse with you, there are diversities of opinions, concerning the way,
motion or mooving of a Ship upon the Superficies of the Sea, which way, motion,
or mooving of a Ship is twofold, principally in Sailing. That is first
spirall, alias Helisphericall, or else secondly if is under a great Circle, the
spirall or Helisphericall way is produced by the Ships continual keeping of
one course, the four Cardinal points excepted.

But in the way of sailing under a great Circle, the course is always
alterable.

And whereas the most part of Seamen will thinks that the demonstration which
is delivered by the common plain Sea-chart (because it is eastest done) is of
all other the most exquisite for the truth thereof; Yet is the same indeed, ^ld
with many gross errors, so that such men must and are often times of
necessity greatly deceived of their expectation.

Therefore for the better understanding of those that are Practitioners in the
Art of Navigation, we will in this discourse make relation both of the spirall
way of a Ship, in keeping always one course, with the Solution of such doubts,
and answering such allegations and objections as may arise thorough want of
judgment therein; as also of sailing under a great Circle with the various and
changeable position thereof; let me therefore hear your opinion concerning the
Rudiments and grounds thereof.


Geograph. First, it is necessary for all Practitioners of Navigation to know,
that the Earth and Water together do make a round or Sphericall body being
enclosed with one converity or superficies, and that the earth and the waters
are not plain or flat formed, but like unto a round Sphere or Globe, it may
thereby easily be understood, that the courses extended from place to place,
cannot be truly described with right lines, especially in a sarre distance,
because they are Segments of great Circles and are circularly extended, from
one place to another.

Hence it follows, that the superficies of the Sea being Sphericall not plain
or flat formed, that a Ship departing from any assigned place between the
Equator and either of the Poles, by any one Rhombe or point of the Mariner and
Compass, the Meridian only excepted, I say that in keeping one and the same
course she makes her way neither in straight lyns, great Circle or lesser
Circle, but in a spirall line composed of Segments of great Circles, and
returning by the opposite of that Rhombe or point toward the place of her
departure, she shall make her way in another spirall line, by reason whereof
she cannot according to that course fall with the place of her departure.


Nautae. That the course or way of a Ship is Spirall yet concentrick to the
center of the Earth, and therefore in Segments of great Circles, when it is
continued by any one Rhombe or point of the Compass (the East and West, North
and South, only excepted, and that when the Compass has no variation) is
undoubtedly true.

But whereas you say, that in returning to the place of her departure by the
opposite point or Rhombe she sailed out, she shall not fall with the place of
her departure, (no current nor any such thing to hinder her) you err very
much, yet I would willingly hear by what reason you can prove your opinion.


Geograph. If you will grant that a Ship makes her way in Segments of great
Circles, then know hereby that all great circles do in every several
Latitude make several Angles with the Meridian, also those circles that do in
several Latitudes make like Angles with the Meridian, have their several
declinations or greatest distance from the Equator.

And by reason of these varieties both in Angles and declinations, or greatest
distances from the Equinoctial, there must also be a variety in the courses
made by opposite Angles, and yet both spirall.

For being under the Equinoctial, an Azimuth of Northeast touches the Hortzon
in Latitude 45 degrees. 0 min. North Latitude, 90 degrees. distant from the place of
being under the Eqinoctiall; Then coming to the second place in Latitude 45
degrees. 0 min. North Latitude, and intending to return to the first place under
the Equinoctial by the opposite point of Northeast, which is Southwest 45 degrees.
0 min. from the Meridian, that great circle or Azimuth intersecteth or cutteth
the Equator at near 54 degrees. 45 min, which distance is less (to return to the
Equator by the opposite point) by 35 degrees. 15 min. and is short of the place of
departure; also being under the Equinoctial the Northeast, Southeast, and
Southwest Azimuths do require 1 degrees. 24 min. 51 seconds 24 thirds to raise one
degree of Latitude.

But being in a parallel 60 degrees. 0 min. North, the Northeast and Northwest
require 1 degrees. 26 min. 13 seconds 3 thirds of distance to raise one degree of
Latitude.

And in the same parallel of 60 degrees. 0 min. the Southeast and Southwest,
require no more but 1 degrees. 23 min. 32 seconds 53 thirds, for one degree of the
Poles depression. Hereby it appears that the Segments of Northeast and
Northwest, are greater to raise one degree, then the Segments of Southeast and
Southwest to depresse one degree, by 0 degrees. 2 min. 35 second 10 thirds.

Moreover the greater Segments which do raise the Pole one degree in that
Latitude, exceed these under the Equinoctial by 0 degrees. 1 min. 21 seconds 39
thirds, and the lesser Segments which depresse the Pole, are less then those
of the Equinoctial by 0 degrees. 1 min, 13 seconds 3 thirds, which might serve for
sufficient satisfaction that the way outward and homeward are not alike, again
for your better understanding, you may note, that being at the Equinoctial, a
Segment of a great circle of 20 leagues, which makes with the Meridian an
Angle of 45 degrees. 0 min. does raise the Pole and differ the Longitude near 0
degrees. 42 min. 25 seconds 3 thirds.

And in parallel 60 degrees. 0 min. North Latitude, a Segment of 20 leagues
Southeast or Southwest depresseth the Pole 0 degrees. 42 min. 58 seconds 8 thirds,
and differs the Longitude near 1 degrees. 23 min. 4 seconds 6 thirds, and in the
same parallel of 60 degrees. 0 min. the like segment of 20 leagues distance
Northeast or Northwest elevateth the Pole 0 degrees. 41 min. 57 seconds 40 thirds,
whereby it plainly appeare^, that if the way of a Ship be composed of Segments
of great Circles, the way outward and homeward being made by opposite Angles
are not alike, yet both Spirall.

Therefore a Ship making her way by any one Rhombe or point the Meridian only
excepted, and returning by the opposite point thereof, cannot by course fall
with the place of her departure.

And further it must be considered that the greater Latitude is, and the
greater the Angle of the course is in respect of the Meridian, the greater is
the variety, and the East and West are most variable, moreover in North
Latitude, if the course be between the South and the East or West, then the
way homeward returning by the opposite to the Meridian of the place of
departure shall be shorter then the way outward, and falls into a lesser
Latitude according to the course, distance, and declination from the
Equinoctial, but if the course be between the North and the East, and the
North and the West, then in returning by the opposite, to the Meridian of the
place departure, the way homewards shall be longer then the way outward,
falling likewise into a lesser Latitude, according to the course, distance, and
the declination from the Equinoctial.


Nautae. If the Spirall or Helisphericall way of a Ship upon the Superficies of
the Sea, being composed of Segments of great Circles, had also those Segments
limited or honded to contain 20 or 30 leagues a piece, then should all your
former allegations be true, but those Segments in regard of their smalnesse
cannot be sensibly distinguished, neither can it be certainly said, that a Ship
in keeping always one course, continues under one great circle 1 league or 1
mile; for when the course is always continued according to any one point of
the Compass, it makes an oblique Angle with the Meridian, and then so often
as the Ship changes her Zenith, so often she changes likewise the great
Circle she makes her way in, that is to say, so many Zeniths as she passes
under, so many great Circles she makes her way in, and each of those Circles
make several Angles with the Equinoctial, and the greater the Latitudes are
the greater are the Angles, for in the Latitude of 59 degrees. 30 min. the
vertical circle of Southwest and Northeast makes an Angle of 68 degrees. 58 min.
with the Equator, and in Latitude 60 degrees 0 min. the Azimuth of Southwest and
Northeast makes an Angle of 69 degrees. 18 min. with the Equinoctial. Also in
parallel 60 degrees. 30 min. the Southwest and Northeast Azimuthes make an Angle of
69 degrees. 37 min. with the Equator, and in the Latitude of 68 degrees. 58 min. it
makes an Angle of 69 degrees. 18 min. and in the Latitude of 69 degrees 37 min. the
foresaid great circles make right Angles with the Meridian, and are circles of
West and East, yet notwithstanding the variable Angles that these great circles
make with the Equinoctial, and the contrary Angles, that every great circle
makes with every new Meridian. I say that in regard those Segments that a Ship
makes her way in are so small and insensible, she shall in keeping one course
outward, produce a spirall or Helisphericall line, and returning by the
opposite point thereof thee shall again pass under all those Zenithes, that
she did in her may outward and in like Segments, and shall by the same line of
inclination, fall again with the place of her departure.

But when a Ship makes an East or West way the line of her Caping makes
always right Angles with the Meridian, then shall those great Circles of whose
Segments the Ships way is composed make like Angles with the Equator, that is
to say equal to the Latitude, and the Ship shall according to that course
run a parallel to the Equinoctial.


Geograph. Me thinks that is strange that you will allow the East and West
way of a Ship being made in Segments of great Circles to entersect the Equator
at East and West, by reason whereof they are Touch-lines to the parallel of
Latitude, and yet you will not allow or grant the East and West to make a
spirall way as well as the rest.

For how is it possible that the line of Inclination or way of a Ship being
composed of Segments of great Circles, and those Touch-lines to the parallel of
Latitude, so that the Ships Caping is quite contrary to the parallel, and
makes oblique Angles therewith, and that especially in great Latitudes, how
then is it possible that the East and West should lead in a parallel or produce
a lesser Circle or any part thereof.


Nautae. Take a small Compass slye, and fasten it to a thread that may pass
through the North and South points thereof, and make a noose in the end of the
thread and put it upon the Axis of the Globe at the Pole, then carrying the fly
with the thread about the body of the Globe, and you shall see the center of
the fly describes a parallel to the Equinoctial, and yet the East and West of
the fly always respects the Equinoctial at 90 degrees 0 minut. of distance.

And so would a Ship if she had a haser or some thing else fast about the Pole
to attract her thereunto.


Geograph. But by the Globe thus do fasten the quadrant of Altitude to the
Equinoctial in the brass Meridian, and bring the beginning of the degrees of
the quadrant to parallel 60 degrees. 0 min. and then from that point where the
beginning of the degrees of the quadrant do touch in parallel 60 degrees. 0 min.
along by the edge of the quadrant to the Equinoctial is the line of East and
West, now with the point of an needle or some such thing prick of by the edge
of the quadrant 1 degrees 0 min. and make a mark there, then moove ^^lobe until
the beginning of the degrees of the quadrant do fit with that mark, and then
as before prick of again 1 degrees. 0 min, by the edge of the quadrant, and so
proceed by 1 degrees. 0 min. until you have gone round about the Globe, and that
the point of the Needle fall in the first Meridian where you began, and you
shall find the line of the Inclination to be dilated from Latitude 60 degrees. 0
min. about 2 degrees. 20 min. and for further proof hereof suppose your self to
be under the Equinoctial, and the Compass to have no variation, and the Ship
to cape East or West, also the Maine-mast to stand upright in the step, the
head thereof pointing to the Zenith, and the heel to the Nadir or rather to
the center of the earth, and the mid-ship beam making right Angles with the
mast to be parallel to the Axis of the world, I say, that this Ship proceeding
East or West in this manner makes her way in a great Circle to wit in the
Equinoctial, and returning by the opposite point thereof shall again fall
with the place of her departure.

Now I say by the same reason, that if the said Ship being in any Latitude
between the Equator and either of the Poles, in Caping East or West, her
mid-ship beam shall then be a parallel to the plane of the Horizon, and also
to the Axis of that great Circle or Circles which in her proceeding line of
Inclination she makes her way in; the head of the maine-Mast pointing to the
Zenith, and the heel to the Nadir, and the line of her Caping makes contrary
Angles with every new parallel. Now if a Ship in sailing under one Circle must
have her mid-ship beam always parallel to the Axis of that great Circle she
makes her way in, then in keeping directly under one parallel, her mid-ship
beam must be always parallel to the Axis of the world, for that is the Axis
of every parallel, and so likewise the maine-must being rectified
perpendicularly in manner as aforesaid, must be also a parallel to the
Equinoctials diameter, and make an Angle with the Horizon equal to the
Latitude, the head thereof not respecting the Zenith, nor the heel the Nadir
nor the Center of the earth, but the Center of the parallel of her Latitude,
and in this manner a Ship may run in a parallel to the Equinoctial.

But now this may stand with humane reason, I leave to your further
construction.


Nautae. Here in you are notably deceived as it shall presently at large be
made plain and evident, for whereas you say that the way of a Ship, cannot
describe a parallel to the Equinoctial except her mid-ship beam be parallel
to the Axis of the world, I say that so long as the mid-ship-beame remains
due North and South, that is to say parallel to the Meridians Diameter in the
plane of the Horizon, although the head of the maine-Mast (it being
perpendicularly erected) point to the Zenith, and the heel to the Nadir, so
long I say, her way shall describe a parallel to the Equinoctial, but as I
said before you seem by all your former allegations to prove, that the way of
a Ship; being composed of Segments of great Circles should have those Segments
limited or terminated to contain 15, 20, or 30 leagues a piece, which if it
were so, then should it be altogether according to your saying.

But now far as much as there is some difficulty in the premises and few
Mariners know how to censure thereof, I will therefore briefly prove by
Arithmeticall calculation, the East and West in any Latitude to lead in a
parallel as well as the Equinoctial.

Example.

The parallel of 60 degrees. 0 min. is equal to the length of half the
Equinoctial or 180 degrees. 0 min. of a great Circle; we will therefore in the
same make our beginning, and from the first place being situate therein,
produce 18 Segments which contain 10 degrees. 0 min. a piece, which by
Arithemeticall calculation may be thus found out.

The Theorem. viz.

AS the Radius is to the sine of the Latitude 60 degrees 0 min. so is the sine of
the Complement of the distance the sine of 80 degrees. 0 min. to the sine of the
Latitude of that place where the first Segment of 10 degrees. 0 min. ends, and so
again in like manner for the second Segment.

viz. As the Radius is to the sine of the Latitude where the first Segment
ends, so is the sine of the Complement of 10 degrees. 0 min. to the sine of the
Latitude where the second Segment ends, and this is to be continued 18 times,
so shall you find the last work to bring forth the sine of 41 degrees. 06 min. but
if you work by Logarithme sines, multiply the Legarithme sine of 80 degrees. 0
min. (the Complement of 10 degrees. 0 min.) by 18, because there are 18 Segments,
and the product add to the Logarithme sine of 60 degrees. 0 min. the Latitude
given, the sum will be the Logarithme sine of 41 degrees. 06 min. the Latitude of
the 18 Segment, which dilateth from Latitude 60 degrees. 0 min. the sum of 19 degrees.
0 min. wanting but 0 degrees. 06 min.

From whence we may see, that if great Segments have such great alterations,
then lesser Segments must have their correspondent varieties proportional unto
them, but mark what follows, and I make no doubt but that anon you will be of
another opinion then formerly you have bin concerning this matter, as from the
aforesaid parallel 60 degrees. 0 min. let there be produced 36 Segments according as
was before showed, each Segment containing 5 degrees. 0 min. or 100 leagues a piece,
and you shall find the end of the last Segment to fall in Latitude 49 degrees. 41
min. which is dilated from parallel 60 degrees. 0 min. but 10 degrees. 59 min. where
note that this dilatation is less then the former by 7 degrees. 55 min.

In like manner, in the same parallel 60 degrees. 0 min. let there be produced 180
Segments of 1 degrees. 0 min. or 20 leagues apeece, and you shall find the end of
the last Segment to fall in Latitude 57 degrees. 25 min. which is dilated but 2 degrees
35 min. from parallel 60 degrees. 0 min.

Again, let 10800 Segments be produced in the same parallel of 60 degrees 0 min.
of 0 degrees. 1 min. one minute apeece due East or West and working according to
the former manner, the last Segment will end in 59 degrees. 57 min.. which dilateth
from parallel 60 degrees. 0 min. but 2. minutes, wherefore the consideration hereof
may serve for a sufficient satisfaction plainly to prove that the East and
West directed by the magneticall Needle or Compass does lead in a Magneticall
parallel, for as great Segments have their great varieties. and lesser Segments
have their lesser alterations correspondent unto them so by the same reason
insensible Segments must have insensible differences and the like reason
holds for any other point of the Compass as well as for the East or West as
I have formerly showed you, and at our next meeting I will set you down or
show you the Theorems for operating of it.

But you will say, here is in 10800 minutes a difference of 2. minutes, and
Segments of minutes in a man's judgment are so small that a Ship cannot make
her way in lesser Segments and yet these Segments are not void of a sensible
difference, I answer as before, that neither in sailing East or West, nor in
the spirall or Melisphericall way by any other course or point of the Compass,
a Ships continuance under a great Circle or Circles cannot be terminated, and
whereas 10800 minutes do in the East or West from Latitude 60 degrees. 0 min.
produce a difference of 2 minutes, I say inrespect of ^0 great a distance, the
difference is insousible.

But if you please to take so much pains for the former parallel of 60 degrees. 0
min. to make a trial from second to second, that is (...) 648000 Segments be
produced East or West each Segment to contain one second and the end of the
last Segment shall not be from the first place, so much as one second, and thus
having prooved sufficiently that the East and West being directed by the
magneticall Needle or Compass, does lead in a magneticall parallel, and also
that in keeping one course the Ships way is spirall or Helisphericall, and
returning by the opposite point thereof, the Ship shall again fall with the
place of her departure, we will finish this discourse, and speak of some
principal rules which of all seamen and Mariners ought to be known.


Geograph. What is the first and most useful Proposition in the Pariners
practice to be taken notice of.


Nau. By the course and both Latitudes to find the difference of Longitude and
the distance.


Geo. For what reason is that proposition is sailing the primary and most
useful.


Nau. Because the course is commonly given, and the Latitudes may be known by
observation, but the distance and the difference of Longitude by sailing may be
supposed but not certainly known without the help of the former, and so
likewise the distance in sailing East or West may be supposed, but not
certainly known.


Geo. I pray you Sir, let us then proceed, (...) the practice without any
further circumstance, that having both Latitudes and the course we may ^nde the
difference of Longitude and the distance


Nau. We will Sir.

Suppose a ship to be in Latitude 50 degrees. 0 min. North Latitude sails South
South-west point West, until she be in the Latitude of 47 degrees. 0 min. I demand
the difference of Longitude and the distance the Ship has run.

The Theorem.

AS a mean proportional between the fines of the Complements of both
Latitudes is to the Tangent of the course, so is the difference of Latitude to
the difference of Longitude, which by the Logarithmes is thus.

Add the Logarithme tangent of the course 28 degrees. 7 min. to (...) Logarithme
of the difference of Latitude 60 leagues, and from that sum subtract half
the sine Complement of 50 degrees. 0 min. which is half the sine of 40 degrees. 0 min.
and half the sine Complement of 47 degrees. 0 min. which is half the sine of 43
degrees. 0 min. added together, (I mean Logarithme sines) and the remainer shall
be the Logarithme of the difference of Longitude.


Geo. What is the second most useful proposition that a Mariner in his
practice is to take notice of.


Nau. By both Latitudes and the departure from the Meridian to find the
difference of Longitude the course and the distance.


Geo. Wherefore do you account this to be the second most useful proposition
in the Mariners practice.


Nau. Because all Mariners that keep their account by difference of Latitude
and difference of Longitude (which only is the true way) after that they have
ca^^ up their Traverse by difference of Latitude and departure from the
Meridian, do find their difference of Longitude as well as their course and
their distance from their first place, where they began their Traverse this way.


Geo. I pray you Sir, set me down the Theorems for the operating of this.


Nau. I will Sir, which are these following.

1 As the sum of half the Logarithme sines of the Complements of both
Latitudes is to the departure from the Meridian, so is the Radius to the
difference of Longitude.

2 As the difference of Latitude is to the departure from the Meridian, so is
the Radius to the Tangent of the course.

3 As the sine of the Complement of the course is to the Radius, so is the
difference of Latitude to the distance that the ship has run from the first
place where she began her Traverse.


Geo. What is the third, and as I remember you said the last useful
peoposition to be taken notice of in the Mariners practice.


Nau. By having given the Latitudes of two places and their difference of
Longitude to find the magneticall course or Rhomb, and the distance.


Geo. How can this be useful for a Mariner in his practice.


Nau. Because many times it chances that a Mariner is to sail from one port
whose Latitude and Longitude he has in Geographicall tables (as in Mr. Hughes
his use of the Globes or in the Tables of the Sea-mans Calendar) and is to
sail so another port, whose Latitude and Longitude he has also in the said
Tables, and by this proposition be may examine the truth of his Sea-chart he
sails by.


Geo, Set me down the Theorems for this proposition, and I will trouble you no
further at this time.


Nau. Sir, I am in some have because the time is farther spent then I supposed
since we met, but I will perform your request, and then I will take my leave
of you for this time.

First, as the difference of Latitude is to the difference of Longitude, so is
half the sines Complements of both Latitudes (I mean of the Logarithme sines)
to the Tangent of the course.

Secondly as before, as the sine Complement of the course is to Radius, so is
the difference of Latitude to the distance run.


Geo. Master Nautae, I thank you very kindly for your company, and your
conference, you have informed my judgment very much in the matter of Navigation,


Nau. Sir, I am very joyful of it, fare you well.


FINIS.

