Practical RHETORIC. OR, Certain little SENTENCES varied according to the
Rules prescribed by ERASMUS, in his most Excellent Book De Copia Verborum and
Rerum.

Wherein Children may be Exercised, when they first begin to Translate Latin,
with many Advantages, as will appear by the ensuing Epistle.

Framed first for the use of a Private School, kept in the House of Mr. Francis
Atkinson: and now commended to the use of all SCHOOLS.

By Joshua Pool, Mr. of Arts.

-- Inopem me copia fecit. London, Printed for T. Johnson, at the Golden Key in
Paul's Church yard, 1663.

Imprimatur,

Jun. 6. 1663. M. Franck. S. T. P. R. in Xo Patri Do Epo. Land. a Sac. Dom.

BENEVOLO LECTORI SALUTEM.
Candidissime Lector,
CUM praestantissimum illum, and vere aureum Erasmi, de Copia Verborum and
Rerum, libellum serio perlegeram, intentioreque animi acie considerarem, quam
multiplex ejus esset usus, and quam immensus inde fructus percipi posset, cum
ad vitandam ingratam ejusdem verbi and Sermonis iterationem, tum ad
distinguendam varietate quadam orationem; nec-non ad subit am ex tempore
dicendi scribendique facultatem; ad Authors alios enarrandos, vel ex alieno
Sermon vertendos; ad rem Poeticam, carmenque scribendum, ne plura confecter,
quae sunt pene infinita; de Sententiis quibusdam breviusculis juxta
praescriptas formas (quantum res pateretur) variandis cogitare coepi: quibus in
transferendis, cum primum Latin vertere incipiant, exerceantur pueri, unde non
solum Verborum Rerumque copiam, praestantissimam Grammaticae Rhetoricaeque
Scientiae partem, incauti imbibant; sed and ad omne genus loquendi formas,
Affirmativas, Negativas, Interrogativas, Admirativas, and quae sunt aliae
multae, stylum suum a teneris attemperare, consuescant. Neque id solum, sed and
omne genus Notis, Commate, Colo, Semicolo, Periodo, Interrogationis,
Admirationis, etc. orationem distinguere obiter doceantur, universas fere
Rhetoricae Figuras in quavis sententia varianda cum fructu percurrant; and
denique ad exercitia omnia, maxim quae Scholis usitatiora, Sensim sine sensu
feliciter praeparentur.

Privato certe usui destinatus hic erat libellus, Sed, prolixi in transcribendo
evitandi toedii, communisque puerorum studii promovendi causa, jam publici
juris factum, Scholarum omnium usui commendare non reformido, ut adprime
utilem, si non and necessarium. Et, si maturioris Judicii pueri, Sententias
aliquas, Mart proprio, ad haec aut ejusmodi exempla, lingua nunc Latina, nunc
Vernacula, variare assuefiant; non dubitanter audebo dicere, Nullum aliud vel
esse, vel esse posse, Progymnasma, in quo tenera puerorum ingenia, majore cum
facilitate, aut fructu, exerceri possunt; neque unde, brevissimo temporis
decursu, proventum uberiorem confidentius expectare liceat. Qualis-qualis hic
fit libellus, habe tibi, Lector Humanissime, and boni consulas; culpaque saltem
apud te careat, qui optime de puerorum studiis mereri tam ardenter expetit; ut
prae eorum commodo suam post-habeat bonam valetudinem: qua cum ipse jam nunc
careat, tibi tamen ex animo apprecatur, and Vale dicit.

The same in ENGLISH.
Courteous Reader,
When I had seriously read over that most excellent, and truly golden Book of
Erasmus, concerning the acquiring a Plenty of Words and Matter; and considered
deliberately with my self, of what frequent use and benefit it was, for the
avoiding of the odious repetition of the same Words and Phrases; for the
beautifying of Speech with a grateful variety of Expressions, for the more
easy translating Authors into another Language, or expounding them in their
own; for an extemporary declaring of the mind, either in Word or Writing; for
Poetry and making Verses; not to reckon any more, which are almost infinite: it
came into my mind to vary some short Sentences according to the prescribed
Forms. In translating of which, Children may be employed, as soon as they begin
to turn English into Latin; that so, ere they be aware, they may get plenty of
Words and Matter, the best part of Grammatical and Rhetorical Knowledge, and
withal, accustom their style, even from the first, to all Forms of Speaking,
Affirmative, Negative, Interrogative, Admirative, with many others. And not
only so, but also, (by the way) be taught to distinguish their Writing, with
Points, and Notes of distinction of all sorts, Comma's, Colons, Semicolons,
Periods; Notes of Interrogation, Admiration, etc. run thorough almost all the
Figures of Rhetoric, with the advantage of familiar Examples in the varying of
every Sentence; and lastly, may insensibly be well prepared for all Exercises,
especially those most usual in Schools.

This little Book was intended for a more private use; but, for the avoiding of
the tediousness in transcribing, and for the promoting of the common good of
children, being now made Public, I am bold to commend it to the use of all
Schools, (according as I intend it for young Beginners) as very profitable, if
not necessary. And, if Children of riper years be accustomed to the varying if
some short Sentences prescribed, of themselves, according to these, or the like
Examples, sometimes in their Mother Tongue, sometimes in Latin; I dare be bold
to say, that there neither is, nor can be any Exercise, in which, the tender
Wits of Children can with more Ease, or Profit, be employed; nor from whence a
greater Improvement in a very short time may with more confidence be expected.
Such as this Book is, take it, Gentle Reader, and take it in good part, and
pardon him, who is so desirous of Childrens progress; that he preferres their
Good, before his own Health, and Welfare: which though himself at this very
present wants; yet he heartily wishes it to thee, and bids thee Farewell.

J. P.

Practical RHETORIC.
Sentence I. Love overcomes all things.
Amplificatio per Synonymiam Simplicem.
ALl things are overcome by love.

Heterosis (sive Mutatio) Activorum Passivis.
Love conquereth all things: All things are conquered by love.

Love tames all things:

All things are tamed by love.

Love Subdues all things:

All things are subdued by love.

Love brings all things under:

All things are brought under by love.

Love vanquisheth all things:

All things are vanquished by love.

Love rules all things:

All things are ruled by love.

Love mastereth all things:

All things are mastered by love.

Heterosis (seu Mutatio) Numeri.
Love throws down all before it:

All things are thrown down before love.

Love conquers every thing:

Every thing is conquered by love.

CUPID overcomes every thing:

Every thing is overcome by CUPID.

Periphrasis.
VENUS Son overcomes all things:

All things are overcome by VENUS Son.

The blind God conquers every thing:

Every thing is conquered by that blind God.

CYTHEREA 's Son quells all things:

All things are quelled by CYTHEREA's Son.

The PAPHIAN Prince rules all things.

All things are ruled by the PAPHIAN Prince.

The CYPRIAN Queen's blind boy, subdues all things:

All things are subdued by the CYPRIAN Queens blind Boy.

Meiosis, Tapeinosis, seu Diminutio.
Love overcomes many things;

Love overcomes great things:

Love overcomes no few things;

Litotes.
Love overcomes no small things.

Heterosis, seu mutati^ affirmativorum negativis.
All things yield to love:

There is nothing, that does not yield to love.

There is nothing, that is not overcome by love:

There can be nothing, that love does not overcome.

Love triumphs over all things:

There is nothing, over which Love does not triumph.

Love reigns as Lord and King in all things:

There are no things, in which love does not reign as Lord and King.

Mutatu^ Verbu^ Nomine.
Love is the Conqueror of all things:

There is nothing, of which Love is not the Conqueror.

Love exercises his power in all things:

There is nothing, in which Love exercises not his power.

Love is the strongest of all things:

There neither is, nor can be any thing stronger than Love.

All things crouch to Love:

There is nothing, that does not crouch to Love.

All things feel the power of Love:

There is nothing, that does not feel the power of Love.

All things adore the Majesty of Love:

There is nothing, that does not adore the Majesty of Love.

Nothing ever overcame Love:

Nothing can overcome Love:

Nothing ever yet withstood Love.

All things obey Love:

There is nothing, that does not obey Love.

All things serve Love:

There is nothing, that does not serve Love.

All things wait on Love:

There is nothing, that does not wait on Love.

Love commands all things:

There is nothing, which Love does not command.

Love is powerful even to Victory Heterosis (seu Mutatio) Adjectivorum
Substantivis.
in all things:

Love is of great power even to Victory in all things.

What overcomes all things? Love.

Erotesis, seu Interrogatio.
What does not Love overcome?

What overcomes all things, but Love?

What overcomes all things, if not Love?

What overcomes all things more then Love?

Can any thing overcome all things, more then Love?

What? does not Love overcome all things?

Is there any thing, that Love does not overcome?

Can there be any thing, that Love does not overcome?

What can be stronger then Love?

What can overcome Love?

Can any thing overcome Love?

Has the wide world any thing, that Love does not overcome?

In what secret and unknown corner lies that thing, which Love does not
overcome?

What is that at last, which Love does not overcome?

Where shall we find those things, that Love does not overcome?

What unfound land contains those things, which Love does not overcome?

Ecphonesis seu Exciamatio.
Oh the great Majesty and Power, of Love over all things!

Oh the many and great Victories, that Love bears away from all things!

Oh the incredible strength and force of Love above all things!

Oh the innumerable Triumphs, Trophies, and Spoils of Love!

Oh the infinite number of things that are overcome by Love!

Oh the unmeasurable and vast limits of Love's Empire!

Admiratio.
Good God! how does Love overcome all things!

Good Gods! How do all things lie crouching at the feet of Love!

Immortal God! How does Love prescribe Laws to all things!

Good lack! How does Love bear the victory from all things!

Oh, what a powerful thing is Love!

Oh, what an imperious thing is Love!

Oh, How all things lie trembling under the hand of Love!

Oh, How suppliantly all things lick the dust under Love's feet!

Oh, How true is that old saying, Love overcomes all things!

Oh ye Gods above! How are all things under the power of Love!

Oh ye Immortal Gods! How is the Power of Love above all things!

Adjuratio
Oh ye Gods and Goddesses all! How does the Empire of Love extend to all, even
to you your selves also!

Ne vivam
Let me not live, If I do not think it most true, that Love overcomes all
things. Emoriar.
Let me die, If I do not think it most true, that Love overcomes all things.
Ne valeam.
Let me not enjoy my health, If I do not think it most true, that Love
overcomes all things. Dispeream male.
Let me perish miserably, If I do not think it most true, that Love overcomes
all things.


Sic me Musae ament.
So may the Muses love me, As I think it most true, that al things are overcome
by Love. Ita mihi Dii faveant.
So let the Gods favor me, As I think it most true, that al things are
overcome by Love. Sic mihi coelos propitios habeam.
So may the Heavens be propitious to me,
As I think it most true, that al things are overcome by Love.

Commiseratio.
Alas, how weak are all things, compared to Love!

Ah, in vain do men strive to resist the power of Love!

Dubitatio.
I do not know, whether there be any thing overcomes more things than Love.

I much doubt, whether there be any thing, whose power is equal to the power of
Love.

Abominatio.
Fie upon the Tyrannical and Invincible power of Love.

Out upon the Cowardice of all things, when Love appears.

O shame, how the greatest things quake for fear, if the little God CUPID do
but show his face!

Isodynamia periphrastica, ab Adjunctis, Consequentibus, Concomitantibus, etc.
The Trophies of Love are erected in every place.

Love rides every where in a Triumphant Chariot.

All things are Love's subjects.

Kings themselves are Love's Slaves and Subjects.

Distributio partium.
Kings are Kings before their subjects; but Subjects before Love.

Collatio. Antithesis. Enantiosis.
Kings are as much under Love, as above their Subjects.

CUPID's dart wounds more and deeper, than JOVE's Thunderbolt.

The very gods are subject to Love.

Climax, Incrementum.
Not only brute creatures, but men; nor they only, but likewise gods, yield to
the violence of Love.

Metonymia Subjecti.
Both Heaven and Earth know the power of Love.

Distributio partium.
The hardest Hearts are overcome by Love.

The cruellest Natures grow gentle by Love.

An Heart of Flint, does melt by Love.

Gentle Natures Love draws, and entises; froward Natures it forces, and
compels; all at length it subdues and conquers.

Love is always either an entising Siren, or ravenous Harpy; one way or other
it is always a Conqueror.

Distributio partium. Hirmos, Asyndeton, seu Dialyton.
Love overcomes Majesty, Power, Strength, Riches, Beauty, Eloquence, Learning,
Wit, Wisdom, and what not?

The Liberal Sciences are not free from Love's Empire: and the Mechanical Arts
can by no Engine elude his Power.

Grammatica.
No power of Grammar can decline the power of Love.

Rhetoric easily persuades her self Rhetorica.
to be silent; and is dumb, when Love appears in the Oratory.

Logica.
All Logick's Arguments are inartificiall, and invalid, when Love opposes.

Musica.
The most delicious streams of Music are not able to countercharm the
Enchantments of Love.

Geometria.
Geometry cannot measure the dimensions of Love's Power.

Arithmetica.
Arithmetic cannot count the Number of Love's Victories.

Astronomia.
Love's Trophies are more, than Astronomy has Stars; who, as high as she
looks, moves always, under the Sphere of Love's Jurisdiction.

Collectio. Illatio. Ratiocinatio ab Inductione. Argumentum a Majore. Hirmos.
Asyndeton. Dialy^on.
If the Liberal Sciences, every one thus yield to Love; certainly the
Mechanical and more servile Arts dare not resist.

Paroemia.
Love makes vulgar and unlearned men become Poets, Orators, Soldiers, any
thing, all things, according to the vulgar Proverb, Love teaches Music; that
is, all Learning: for the Greeks so honored Music, that they called all
Learning by that name.

The Victories of Love are more Collatio a Majori ad Minas.
then the Sands of the Sea, Hairs of the Head, Drops of Rain, Stars of the
Sky, Leaves of the Trees, Motes Hyperbolica Auxesis:
in the Sun, Pellets of Hail, Drops of Dew, Hybla's Bees, the Birds of Ubi
obiter variatur Multi.
the Air, the Fishes of the Sea, Flowers of the Spring, Apples of Autumn,
Summer's Flies, Summer's Ants, Blades of Grass, Ears of Corn, Boughs of the
Forest, etc.

Asteismus.
He that can count the Stars in the Sky, or the Sands on the Lybian shore; let
him undertake to reckon the victories of Love*

Collatio ad se a pari.
Love is not more ancient, then he is powerful; yet Hesiod, that most divine
Poet, reckons him, amongst the most ancient gods.

Collatio ad minus. Epanorthosis.
To conquer Love is a greater work, than all Hercules twelve Labors: nay, not
to be conquered by it.

Epanorthosis.
Love overcomes many things, very many: very many did I say? nay, all things.

Periphrasis Collatio a pari.
Necessity, that hard and inevitable Weapon, does not conquer more than Love.

Metaphorica Collatio ad minus.
Love is another Achilles, another Hercules: but much more strong than either.

Collatio ad simile a pari.
All things in the hand of Love, are as Pygmies in the hand of Hercules.

Love is like Coeneus, is invulnerable and invincible.

Allegorica Paroemia.
All things go out of the Field, when Love displaies his Banner.

All things throw away their Arms, when Love sounds his Al-arm.

If Love sound a March, all things else sound a Retreat.

All things lift up finger and hands (that is, yield) when Love lifts up his
Arm.

Nothing dares so much as Lat. hiscere.
mutter, when Love appears in the front.

All things Lat. fasces submittere.
veyl Bonnet, and strike Sail, to Love: that is, yield, submit.

Allegoria.
Love has iron-Hands, and an Heart of Adamant.

No fortress can hold out against Love.

It is not safe to contemn, what Love commands.

Nothing is impregnable to Love.

No Enemy is invincible to Love.

Love exercises his strength in vain against nothing.

Love shoots with unresistable Arrows. Allegoria.


Metaleptica Enantiosis. Anthypophora, Prolepsis, Subjectio.
Love's Arrows never miss.

Love's Arrows always wound.

Though Love be blind; yet have his Arrows eyes.

Does Love overcome many things? Yea all.

Subjectio.
Does he overcome the weak, mean, and contemptible? Yea, the strongest,
greatest, and most glorious.

Allegoria.
Love disputes with unanswerable Arguments.

Paroemia.
Amplificatio and Confirmatio per Hyperbolicam praefationem, formamque
generalem.
Love in all things will find out the way; as we say commonly.

They must be very strange things, that are not overcome by Love.

I know not any thing, that is not overcome by Love.

Who can express No words can express
the power of Love.

Auxesis.
Who can count No Tongue can count
the victories of Love.

Sermon consequi, verbis eloqui nequeam.
I am not able to express in words, No Eloquence is able to express, Dici ron
potest.
It is not to tell,
how many things Love overcomes.

Mirum dictu.
It is wonderful to tell, Vix credi potest.
It is not to be believed, Fide majus est.
It is beyond belief, It transcends a strong belief to credit, Judica^i non
potest.
You can scarce believe, It is not to think, No man can in mind conceive,
How many things Love overcomes.

In Proverbium cessit.
Even to a Proverb Love overcomes all things.

It has the place of a Proverb, It is instead of a Proverb, It is used as a
Proverb, It is become a Proverb, It has obtained the force of a Proverb, It
has crept into the number of Proverbs,
Love overcomes all things.

Judicio diffidendum.
I will never again trust, neither mine own, nor the judgment of all the
Ancient; if there be any thing, that Love does not conquer.

If Love overcomes not all things; I know not what does.

Cave, credas.
Never believe, there is any thing, that Love does not overcome.

Confutatio:
Nothing is more frequent in Poets, Orators, Historians; than, None is so
ignorant, but knows; None, but the most impudent man in the World, can deny;
Let him affirm with that doting Philosopher, that Snow is black, who denies; It
were better to deny all things, than this one; He should be cudgelled into
belief, and confuted with club-Arguments, who denies; One Democritus will not
suffice, to laugh at his Folly, who denies; An acre of Hellebore will not cure
him, who denies; Give him some Hellebore to purge his Brain, who will not
confess; He understands little, who does not know; He does not speak, but bray
like an Ass, who denies; No man's Nose is so stopped but he easily smells out
this; Rubb over your Forehead, and dare to deny; Send him to Anticyrae
Bedlam, as a man, who has a Lat. Vertiginosi cerebelli.
Vertigo in his Brain, who denies;
That Love overcoms all things.

Confirmatio per Interrogationem.
Who is so blind, as not to see; Who is so impudent, that he dares deny; What
impudence is it, not to confess; Who does not understand; Who, but a Madman,
would deny; Who lives in such Cymmerian darkness, that he does not both see,
and confess; Who, except he have his Lat. in calcaneis.
Brains in his Heels, but perceives plainly;
That Love's Power and Empire is above all?

Can Impudence so put off all shame, as to deny; that Love's Power and Empire
is above all?

Asseveratio.
It is a Truth approved by the consent of all men; It is a Truth, manifest even
to blind men; It is a thing so plain, as nothing can be plainer; So certain, as
nothing can be more certain;
That All things yield to Love.

It is a Truth so apparent, and evident, that it seems writ not with Ink, but
with the Beams of the Sun; It is a matter out of question, and needs no
dispute; It is a Truth approved of, by the Testimony and Judgment of the whole
World; It is as true, as either Jove's, or Apollo's Oracle; It is as true, as
the Dodonean, Ammonian, or Delphick Oracle; It is a Truth, that requires not
many words, or a long Oration to confirm; That, Every thing submits to Love. It
appears more clearly then the mid-day-Sun; That, Every thing submits to Love.
The Sun needs no other light, that it may be seen; nor a Trumpeter to proclaim
the brightness of his Beams; so is it in this evident Truth: That, Every thing
submits to Love. He Lat. S^l^ lucernam accendere.
lights a Candle in the Sunshine, who goes about to explain this Truth; That,
Every thing submits to Love. It is a Truth, than which what can be more
certain? That, Every thing submits to Love.
That Every thing submits to Love.

Asteismus.
It is a Truth so out of all Controversy, that Love overcomes all things; that
he, who would prove it, may go tell men, The Sun-shines, when he triumphs in
his meridian Glory.

He must be of very great boldness, or very little wit, who denies; that, All
things are under the command of Love.

He, who seriously considers it, is blind, if he do not see; obstinate, if
seeing he do not confess; that, All things are under the command of Love.

They are but as Sibyll's leaves, whatsoever are objected against this Truth;
Confutatio.
The Arguments against this Truth are lighter than the leaves of the Sibylls;
Collatio.
They are but Ropes of sand, Towers of Lamia (that is, Castles in the Air),
Old-wive's Tales, vain Dreams, Metaphora.
that men prattle against this Truth; Pectines Solis.
There is neither crumb, nor drop, of sense, or reason, in those things, that
are spoken against this Truth; As one said of the Nightingal, that Vox and
praeterea nihil.
she was but a Voice, and nothing else; so they are words, and wind, and no
more, that are objected against this Truth;
That Love triumphs over all things.

Paradiastole.
It comes not from Apollo's Tripos, but the Old-Wive's Trivet, whatsoever is
objected against this Truth; Epitrope.
Let him be rich, let him be noble, let him be great, let him be what you will;
fool he must needs be, and foolhardy too, who dares to mutter against this
Truth: I could wish my self turned into a Squinancy to stop his saucy chaps,
who dare Metaphora.
bark against this Truth:
That All things obey Love.

Confirmatio.
If he be not blind enough, make him blinder, who does not see, and acknowledge
this palpable Truth: He must either shut his eyes, or put them out, to whom the
light of this Truth does not clearly shine: He is hardened against all Truth,
who denies this manifest Truth: Asteismus.
Let him go deny Principles, who will not confess this Maxim: He must have a
Forehead of Brass, a Mouth of Iron, and a Brain of Lead; who dares oppose so
confessed a Truth:
That All things are ruled by Love.

The Lacedaemonians, sacrificing Confirmatio ab Exemplo.
to Love, before they joined Battle with the Enemy; show, That they
acknowledged the power of Love in overcoming.

The Grecians, in their Wars sacrificing to Love by the fairest Boys in their
Army, declare their Opinion of the force of Love in all things.

Confirmatio a ^estimonio.
Love can be cured by no Herbs; nor can any Medicines prevail against Love; as
no less wittily, than truly said Ovid, the best of the Latin Poets.

Aetiologia.
for Love does not yield to Metalep sis.
Nobility cannot profit against Love, ancient Images; as excellently Propertius
writes.

There is no hope to fly from Love, though you had the Wings of Pegasus,
Perseus, and Mercury; though you fly as far as the River Tanais; as the same
Propertius most elegantly declares.

Ironia.
Love is weak, for sooth! and every thing overcomes it; yes, indeed.

Epizeuxis.
Love, Love is it, that all things overcomes.

Anadipl^sis
What is it, that all things overcomes, but Love? Love, that imperious passion
of the mind.
Anaphora.
Love conquers all, Love makes the proudest yield: Love ever Triumphs, ever
wins the Field.
Epistrophe.
All things submit unto the power of Love; Even Kings are Subjects to the power
of Love.
Symploce.
What is it that conquers all, but Lov's imperious hand? What conquers great and
small, but Love's imperious hand?
Epanalepsis.
Love conquers all: of all things King is Love.

Epanados.
Love conquers all things, Love makes all to yield:

Polypt^ton.
Yielding they fly, and conquered leave the Field.

Ec^honesis.
Oh the divine power of Love! which while I express, my Tongue falters, as
unable to express it.

Epiphonema.
Love conquers all things. So great and unspeakable is the power of Love.

Love made Jove -- but we must Aposiopesis.
speak nothing rashly of the gods.

Apostrophe.
O Love, thou little, but puissant, and imperious, god; what do not thou
overcome?

Pros^popoeia.
Me thinks, I hear Love speaking, and thus vaunting himself of his strength,
and power.

Cum amplicatione per Exem pla ex distributione partium. Ferocita^. Robur.
The Tigers are fierce even to a Proverb; yet how often has my force made them
tame?

Hercules was strong even to a Miracle; yet so did I effeminate him; that in
Woman's apparel he spun in the company Lat Sequioris s^xus
of the other Sex.

Majestas.
What is greater than Jupiter? yet him have I transformed into Gold, a Swan, a
Bull.

Epanorthosis
Sapien^ia.
Apollo was wise; nay, the god of Wisdom: yet did I make him, as an Heards-man,
feed Admetus his Herds.

Eloquentia
Mercury was a nimble god, the Deity of Eloquence: yet did I force him to take
upon him the shape of a stinking Goat.

Opulen i^.
Neptune is a wealthy god, lord of all the Riches which the Seas and the vast
Ocean contain: yet did I force him to deform himself with the shape of an Horse?

Fo^ma.
Venus was fair, the Queen of Beauty: yet did I force her to be inflamed with
the love of Mortals, and to take upon her the shape of an earth-born Woman.

Fortitudo. Ira.
Courageous, Angry, and Ch^rlish god: yet have I entangled him in the
embracements of Venus so often, and so long; that Vulcan has entangled them Lat.
Vtrum^ue nudum: Syllepsis Implicita
both naked in his nets, and he and Sol exposed them to the Lat. risus, and
visui; oculis, and j^culis: Pa^onomasia.
Mars is an Heroic, Valiant, view and laughter of all the gods.

R^capitutatio. Polysynde^on. Illatio ab Inductione.
And now, since Cruelty, and Strength, and Majesty, and Wisdom, and Eloquence,
and Beauty, and Wealth, and Courage, both Beasts and Men, and Gods and
Goddesses, yield to me; who dare deny my strength, or resist my power?

Anacoenosis Communicati^.
Tell me, O Hercules, what made thee so obsequious a servant to Omphale? was it
not Love? I ask of you, O ye Gods and Goddesses, what made you so often to
visit, Earth, and put on humane shapes; nay, some of you the forms of Beasts,
and those ( filthy Beasts? was it not Love?

Paraleipsis.
Love conquers both Men and Gods: not to say any thing, of his dominion over
brute Creatures.

Pleonasmus.
I have heard with these very Ears, many declaiming of the force of Love: some
not without sorrow confessing, others with great joy acknowledging, that Love
at last overcomes all things.

Parenthesis.
I believe, (nor is my belief vain) that the power of Love is above all things.

I hold, and judge, (and why may I not confess it?) that all things obey the
command of Love.

Anti-Metabole.
Kings are Lords to their Subjects: but Subjects to this Lord.

Synoeceiosis.
Strong things, and things that are not strong, are alike in the hands of Love.

Oxymoron.
Who can express the great littleness, and little Greatness; the childish
Manliness, and manly Childishness of that blind God?

Aporia.
What shall I say? shall I tell you, Love overcomes many things? that is much.

Shall I tell you, he overcomes the Climax.
greatest things? that is more; but that is not all.

What then at last shall I tell you, that Love overcomes all things? that is
the greatest, and that is enough; all that I can speak, or Love do.

Inversio.
Love does not overcome all things, may some man say; because the most things
yield to it of their own accord: Nay, therefore does Love overcome all things,
because the most yield of their own accord.

For that does not take away the victory, though it argue the easiness, and
declare both the known power of Love, and that most things despair of doing any
good by resisting.

Amplificatio per Impossible: ubi obiter variantur Impossible and Nunquam.
It is Impossible, It is not possible, It cannot be, It can by no means be, All
things may sooner be, than
that there should be any thing, which Love does not overcome.

Lat. Abire non potest.
It is not to be avoided; Lat Non est recusandum.
It is not to be refused;
but Love will overcome all things.

It must needs be, It cannot but be, that Love should overcome all things. It
cannot otherwise be; How should it otherwise be;
but that Love should overcome all things.

Paroemia.
The Wolf shall marry the Sheep, A Locust shall bring forth an Elephant, The Sea
shall bring forth Vines, The Snayl shall outrun the Hare, and the Tortoyse the
Eagle, Brambles shall bring forth Violets, and Thorns Roses, The Rivers shall
be carried toward their Fountains, The Fountains themselves shall thirst, The
Earth shall fly, The Beetle shall make honey, and the Gnat milk,
before any thing be found which Love does not overcome.

The Crabs shall go strait forward, The Nightingale shall cease to Sing, The
Owl shall sing like the Nightingale, The Heaven shall fall, The Earth shall
ascend above the Sky, Mountains shall be transplaced, The Mule shall bring
forth, Water and Fire shall agree together, The Fire shall be kindled with
Snow, A Tempest shall be calmed with a song, The Earth shall be bored thorough,
before any thing be found which Love does not overcome.

The Sun shall change his course, The Loadstone shall turn from the North,
Groves shall grow on the Waves, Sea-weeds shall be found on the Mountains,
when any thing surpasses the power of Love.

The Stars shall fall, The motion of each starr shall be irregular, Day shall
be turned to night, The waters of the Sea shall leave their saltness, The Sea
shall be plowed, A Crop shall be reaped from the Sand, Past moments shall be
recalled, The Meadows shall never more have flowers, The Heavens shall want
Stars, Day shall want Light, No sweetness shall be in Roses, The Fish shall
burn in the Ocean, No Joy shall be in Heaven, nor Pain in Hell, The Flames
shall descend, The Mountains forgetting their weights shall fly like Atoms
through the sky,
when any thing surpasses the power of Love.

The Heavens shall rest, The Sun and Stars shall shine together, when ^ any
thing surpasses the power of Love. The Pibbles shall mount up to the Stars,
The Earth shall be adorned with Stars, The Flocks shall invite the Lions to
their folds, The Skies shall endure the heavy plough, The Water shall give
flames, and Fire waters, The Sun shall rise in the West, The Ants shall leave
their industry, The Bees shall forget to make Honey, Maenalian Hounds shall fly
from the Hare, Nature shall become preposterous, No Element shall keep his
proper seat, Fire shall be cold, and Water give heat, Summer shall give Snow,
if ever any thing overcome Love.

Does shall fright Lions, The Crows shall fly thorough the Air whiter then
Snow, Swans shall be as black as pitch, Oxen shall cut the Air with their
wings, Marbles shall be softer then Wax, The Chickens shall prey upon the Kite,
if ever any thing overcome Love.

Confirmatio a perpetuitate veritatis, ubi obiter variantur, Perpetuo and
Semper.
Whilst Sun and Stars shall run their course, While Stars shall embellish
Heaven, and Flowers the Earth, Whilst Neptune's arms, shall embrace the earth,
Whilst Cynthia shall renew her Horns, Whilst Lucifer foretells the approaching
Morn, Whilst Arctos shuns the Sea, Whilst Mountains give their shades, Whilst
Streams their tribute to the Ocean pay,
ever will Love overcome All things.

Whilst Day has Light, and Night succeeds the Day, Whilst Summer follows the
Spring, and Autumn succeeds Summer; Whilst the Sun casts light, or Earth
shadows, Whilst the Land bounds the Sea, and Air the Land, Whilst the River
carries Waters, or those waters Fishes, Whilst the Earth has Trees, Whilst the
Bore loves the tops of Mountains, Note that all those Proverbial phrases, that
we made to signify Never will also signify Ever, by prefixing only Till or
Until, as will appear by one or two Examples.
Whilst Bees love thy me, and Bears honey,
Ever will Love overcome All things.

Till time and memory shall be no more, Till time shall have no plumes, Till
time shall be as bald before, as he is behind, Till time shall be swallowed by
Eternity, Till Lachesis have no more thread to draw,
will all things ever submit to Love.

Till the Woolfe shall marry the Sheep, Till the Sun shall change his course,
Till the Sun shall rise in the West, To the last Syllable of recorded time.
Till time that gives all things, shall have his end,
will all things ever submit to Love.

Conclusio:
But the end of time, puts me in mind, that it is time to make an end; lest my
discourse be as endless, as is the power of Love.

To make at last an end, There is no end of Love's majesty and power.

To come at last to an end, It is to no end, either to resist the strength of
Love, or discourse further of his power.

The end of the first Sentence, varied.
Sentence. II. Self-love is blind,
SElf-love is without eyes.

Self-love is without sight.

Self-love is deprived of sight.

Self-love wants eyes and sight.

Self-love is destitute of sight.

Self-love enjoyes neither sight nor light.

Self-love has no use of eyes.

No use of eyes is there to Self-love.

^^pro habeo.
Self-love see's nothing.

Heterosis seu M^tatio Activorum passivis. Affirmativorum neg^tivis.
Nothing is seen by self-love.

Self-love see's not at all

Nothing is blind, if not self-love.

Nothing is blinder than self-love.

Nothing is more blind then self-love.

There is nothing but is less blind than self-love.

Nothing can be blinder than self-love.

Mutatio numeri. Heterosis (seu Mutatio) Adjectivorum Substantivis.
Never did self-love see the light of the Sun.

All things are unseen to self-love,

Every thing is unseen to self-love.

Self-love is blind even to wonder above all things.

Great is the blindness of self-love even to wonder, above all things.

Great blindness is in self-love.

Self-love is a thing of great blindness.

Erotesis, seu Interrogatio.
What is blind? Self-love?

What is blind, but self-love?

What is blind, if not self-love?

What? is not self-love blind?

What is blinder than self-love?

What is more blind than self-love?

What can be more blind than self-love?

Can any thing be blinder than self-love?

How should any thing be blinder than self-love?

Is there any thing so blind as self-love?

Has the wide World any thing so blind as self-love?

In what dark and blind corner lies that thing, that is so blind as self-love?

What from East to West, is so blind as self-love?

In what secret and unknown region lies that thing, that is so blind as
self-love?

What Region in the Earth has not heard of the blindness of self-love?

What is that at last, which is so blind as self-love?

Where shall we find those things that are blinder than self-love?

What unfound Land does contain those things, that are blinder than self-love?

What new America not yet discovered has any thing blinder than self-love?

What unknown Land amongst the Antipodes breeds any thing so blind as self-love?

Ecphonesis Exclamatio.
O blind self-love!

O the intolerable O the great O the strange O the wonderful O the incredible O
the unspeakable O the unexpressible O the unconceivable
blindness of self-love.

O the innumerable O the infinite
errors which the blindness of self-love occasioneth!

Admiratio.
Good God! how blind is self-love!

Good gods! what blindness is in the eyes of self-love!

Immortal God! what thick darkness does possess the eyes of self-love!

Immortal Gods! what a thick mist covers the eyes of self-love!

Good lack! how little does self-love see!

O what a darkness does beset the eyes of self-love!

O what a darkness dwells in the eyes of self-love!

O how true is that old saying, self-love is blind!

O ye Gods above! how blind is self-love here below!

Oh ye Gods and Goddesses! how is self-love bewiddowed of his eyes!

Let me not live, Let me die, Let me not enjoy my health, Let me perish
miserably,
If I do not think it most Adjuratio.
true, that self-love is blind.

So let the Muses love me, So may the Gods favor me, So may the Heavens be
propitious to me, So may I ever be master of my desire
As I think it most true, that self-love is blind.

Alas, self-love is very blind,

Ah, in vain does self-love hope to be freed from her blindness.

Woe is me, it irketh me to see the blindness of self-love.

Dubitatio.
I do much doubt, whether there be any thing blinder than self-love.

I much doubt whether there is any thing, whose blindness is equal to the
blindness of self-love.

I am not certain whether self-love be not the blindest thing in the World
without exception.

Abominatio.
Fie upon the intolerable blindness of self-love.

Out upon the gross errors that proceed, from self-love's blindness.

O shame! how plain, open and palpable is self-love's blindness.

Oxymoron.
O burning shame, how shameful yet shameless is self-love's blindness!

Isodynamia periphrastica.
How blind must he needs be, that sees not, and confesses the blindness of
self-love!

Hyperbole Auxesis.
There is no blindness to the blindness of self-love.

Give me any blindness, but the blindness of self-love.

None are so blind as they that love themselves.

Self-love is as blind as a Beetle. Collatio ad simile Paroemia. Collatio ad
minus.


Self-love is blinder than Tyresias.

Self love is blinder than Hypsaea that old hagg.

Self-love is blinder than a Mole.

Self-love is like Polyphemus, a Monster without eyes.

Self-love is blinder than blindness it self.

Hyperbolica Epanorthosis.
Self-love is blind, nay rather blindness it self.

Let none complain of Fortune's blindness, that consider the blindness of
self-love.

Collatio.
Fortune is blind I confess, but she seems to see clearly compared to
self-love.

Collatio a Genere.
All love is dimm-sighted, but self-love is is stark-blind.

Collatio per contrarium Enantiosis.
The Eagle which does not wink at the brightest beams of the Sun, is not more
quick-sighted, than selflove is blind.

Lito^es. Charientismus Confi^matio and Demonstratio. Collatio ad Sim.
The Sea is not more deaf, than self-love is blind.

No spectacles or prospective can profit self-love.

So blind is self-love; that it perceives not its own blindness.

Self-love is like that old-woman in Seneca, that complained of the darkness of
her house, when she her self was blind.

Self-love is so blind, that it commends its own vices, and calumniates others
virtues.

Self-love is so blind; that it counts his foulest things fair.

Pa^oemia, Allegorica Ironia.
So blind is self-love; that he thinks all his Geese Swans.

So blind and foolish is self-love; that it makes men think they fart
frankincense, and their worst things best.

So blind is self-love; that it sees no faults of its own, and yet thinks it
see^ plainly the faults of others.

Metaphora.
Self-love is a mere Suffoenus.

Self-love is blind beyond all belief.

H^perb^le Auxesis.
Self-love is blind beyond the help of art or nature.

Distributio partium.
The liberal Sciences cannot free self-love from her blindness; and the
Mechanical arts can by no Engine cure it.

Grammatica.
No Case in Grammar can amend the condition of self-love: nor are all the Parts
of Speech enough to express the greatness of his Blindness.

Rhetorica.
Rhetoric had rather be eternally dumb, then speak a word to prove that
self-love has eyes.

Logica.
All Logick's arguments are inartificial, invalid, and absurd, when she goes
about to defend, that self-love is not blind.

Musica.
The delicious strains of Music, may please and tickle the ears: but never
open the blind eyes of selflove.

Arithmetica.
No Arithmetic is able to count the errors that proceed from self-love's
blindness.

Geometria.
No Geometry can measure the thickness of that pitchy darkness which does dwell
in the eyes of self-love.

Astronomia.
Self-love has as many errors as Astronomy has Stars: and had she for every
starr a Sun; yet could they not give light to the blind eyes of self-love.

Argum. a Majore.
If the Liberal Sciences each of Collectio. Illatio. Inductio.
them thus confess their weakness; the Mechanical and more servile arts
certainly dare not undertake the work.

Hirmos.
Self-love makes men fools, rash, heady, inconsiderate, of great prejudice,
Asyndeton, Dialyton.
of little judgment, blind dotards, any thing, all things.

Asteismus.
He that can count the Stars of the Sky, or the Sands of the Lybian shore; let
him go count the errors of self-love.

Obiter variatur Multi.
The errors arising from self-love's Collatio ad minus. Hyperbolica auxesis.
blindness are more then the Sands of the Sea, Stars of the Sky, Hairs of the
Head, Drops of Rain, Pellets of Hail, Pearls of Dew, Leaves of Trees, Boughs of
the Forest, Blades of Grass, Ears of Corn, Birds of the Air, Fishes of the
Sea, Flowers of the Spring, Summer's Flies, Summer's Ants, Motes in the Sun,
Bees of Hybla, Billows of the Carpathian Sea, etc.

Collatio ad minus.
To cure the blindness of self-love, is a greater work then all Hercules twelve
Labors.

Confirmatio and Ampl^ficatio per Hyperbolicam praefationem (...) formam
Generalem. Auxesis.
They must be very strange things, that are seen by self-love.

I know not any thing, that is seen by self-love.

Who can express What tongue can express No words can express
the blindness of self-love.

Who can count No Tongue can count No Arithmetic can number
the errors of self-love.

I am not able to express in words, No Eloquence is able to express, It is not
to tell, It is wonderful to tell, It is not to be believed, It is beyond
belief, It transcends a strong belief to credit, It is not to think, No man can
conceive, You can scarce believe,
how blind self-love is.

Even to a Proverb, It has the place of a Proverb, It is instead of a Proverb,
It is used as a Proverb, It is become a Proverb, It has obtained the force of
a Proverb, It has crept into the number of Proverbs, It is an Adage of a
received authority; It Is a saying as true, as old
Self-love is blind

I will never again believe mine own, nor the judgment of the Ancient; if there
be any thing, blinder than self-love.

If self-love be not blind; I know not what is.

Cave credas.
Never believe, there is any thing more blind then self-love.

Confirmatio and Confutatio
Nothing is more frequent in Poets, Orators, Historians; than, None is so
ignorant, but knows; None, but the most impudent man in the World, can deny;
Let him affirm with that doting Philosopher, that Snow is black, who denies; It
were better to deny all things, than this one; He should be cudgelled into
belief, and confuted with club-Arguments, who denies; One Democritus will not
suffice, to laugh at his Folly, who denies;
That self-love is blind.

An acre of Hellebore will not cure him, that denies; Give him some Hellebore
to purge his Brain, that will not confess; He understands little, that does not
know; He does not speak, but bray like an Ass, that denies; No man's Nose is so
stopped but he easily smells out this; Send him to Bedlam, as a man, that has a
Vertigo in his Brain, that denies; Rubb over your Forehead, and dare to deny;
That self-love sees nothing.

Confirmatio per Interrogationem.
Who is so blind, as not to se^? Who is so impudent, that he dares deny? What
impudence is it, not to confess? Who does not understand? Who, but a Madman,
would deny?
That self-love has no use of eyes.

Who lives in such Cymmerian darkness, that he does not see, and confess; Who,
except he have his Brains in his Heels, will deny? Nisi animam pro sale habeat.
To keep his body from stinking.
Who except he have his soul only instead of salt will deny? Can Impudence her
self so put off all shame, as to deny?
That self-love has no use of eyes.

Confirmatio per Asseverationem.
It is a Truth approved by the consent of all men, It is a Truth, manifest even
to blind men, It is a thing so plain, as nothing can be plainer; so certain, as
nothing can be more certain; Paradiastole.
It is a Truth so apparent, and evident, that it seems writ not with Ink, but
with the Beams of the Sun; It is a matter out of question, and needs no dispute;
That nothing is blinder then self-love.

It is a Truth approved of, by the Testimony and Judgment of the whole World,
It is as true, as either Jove's, or Apollo's Oracle, It is as true, as the
Dodonean, Ammonian, or Delphick Oracle, It is a Truth, that requires not many
words, or a long Oration to confirm it, It appears more clearly then the mid
day-Sun, The Sun needs no other light, that it may be seen; nor a Trumpet to
proclaim the brightness of his Beams; so is it in this evident Truth, He lights
a Candle in the Sunshine, that goes a bout to explain this Truth; It is a
Truth, than which what can be more certain?
that all things are unseen to self-love.

Asteismus.
It is a Truth so out of all Controversy, that he that would prove it, may go
tell men, The Sunshines, when he triumphs in his meridian-Glory. Enantiosis.
He must be of very great boldness, or very little wit, that denies, Hypothesis
Suppositio.
He that seriously considers it, is blind, if he do not see; obstinate, if
seeing he do not confess;
that all things are unseen to self-love.

Confirmatio per Confutationem.
They are but as Sibyll's leaves, whatsoever are objected against this Truth,
Collatio.
The Arguments against this Truth are lighter and vainer than the leaves of the
Sibylls, Metaphora.
They are but Ropes of sand, Towers of Lamia, Old-wive's Tales, vain Dreams,
that men prattle against this Truth; Metaphora.
There is neither crumb, nor drop of sense, or reason, in those things, that
are spoken against this Truth,
that self-love has neither sight nor light.

As one said of the Nightingal, she was a Voice, and nothing else; so they are
words, and wind, and no more, that are objected against this Truth,
Paradiastole.
It comes not from Apollo's Tripos, but the Old-Wive's Trivet, whatsoever is
objected against this Truth, Epitrope.
Let him be rich, let him be noble, let him be great, let him be what you will;
fool he must needs be, and foolhardy too, who dares to mutter against this
Truth,
that Self-love has neither sight nor light.

I could wish my self a Squinancy to stop his saucy chaps, which dare Metaphora.
bark against this Truth, Hypothesis Ironica.
If he be not blind enough, make him blinder, that does not see, and
acknowledge this palpable Truth, He must either shut his eyes, or put them out,
to whom the light of this Truth does not clearly shine,
that self-love is deprived of sight.

He is hardened against all Truth, that denies this manifest Truth, Aste ismus.
Let him go deny Principles, that will not confess this Maxim, He must have a
Forehead of Brass, a Brain of Lead; and a tongue of Iron, that dares oppose so
confessed a Truth,
that self-love is deprived of sight.

Confirmatio ab Exemplo.
Narcissus through self-love was so blind; that to enjoy himself, he drowned
himself: to find himself, he lost himself.

Oxymoron.
Narcissus through self-love was so blind, that he doted on his own Image,
which he beholds in the fountain; and while he embraces himself, he is buried
in his own embraces.

Paroemia.
Because self-love is blind, hence Confirmatio a ^estimonio.
Socrates that Oracle of human wisdom, said very well, as indeed he did
always, that, The Midwife judges better of the Infant, then the Mother. Hence
they say, Nothing which a man loves, but seems beautiful; and, Every King
pleases his Queen. And hence, the filthy Polypus ab Exemplo.
on Agna's nose in Horace, pleased her lover Balbinus.

ab exemplo fabuloso.
And so self-love in the Fable, made the Ape bring her ugly ridiculous young
ones to Jupiter, as the fairest of all living creatures.

a Testimonio.
Self-love is so blind; that she sees not what reason says, what truth
advises, but assents to what her self judges: as Stobaeus gathers
excellently, out of most grave Authors.

Self-love attributes more to her self than truth permits, and more then she
attributes to truth it self; as the same Stoboeus testifies; so great is her
blindness.

Ironia.
Self-love sees all things, is very quick-sighted I assure you, believe me that
will.

Tapeinosis and Meiosis Litotes.
Self-love sees not many things.

Self-love sees no great things.

Few are the things self-love sees.

They must be strange things which self-love sees.

Climax. Incrementum.
Self-love is not only, not clear-sighted, not only dimm-sighted, not only
purblind, but down right-blind.

Self-love, self-love, alas! can nothing Epizeuxis.
see.

Anadiplosis
Oh what can be more blind than is self-love? Self-love, that doting folly of
the soul.


Anaphora.
Self-love is blind, self-love can nothing see: Self-love from errors then can
not be free.


Epistrophe.
All things have eyes compared to self-love: Stones seem to see, compared with
self-love.


Symploce.
We through self-love the maze of errors tread: We through self-love are to
all errors lead.


Epanalepsis.
Self-love is blind, a Beetle is self-love.

Epanodos.
Self-love is blind, what then can self-love see? Naught sees self love, for
blind self-love's eyes be.


Epiphonema.
The most palpable things are unseen to self-love, so great; ^o incredible is
his blindness.

The most palpable, did I say? Epanorthosis.
indeed, all things without exception, are unseen to Self-love.

Aposiopesis.
So blind is self-love; that -- but shame forbids me to utter it.

Apostrophe
Oh Self-love! how great is thy blindness!

Synoeceiosis.
Plain things and things that are not plain are alike to self-love.

Oxymoron.
The greatest light is darkness to self-love. To self-love the clearest day is
night. The clearest things to self-love are obscure.


Anacoenosis Communicati^.
Tell me, Narcissus! what was it that wrought in thee such an obstinate
contempt of so many young men and maids that desired to enjoy thy company? What
was it that made thee so disdainfully to fly from them, till, wandering
solitarily by thy self, thou becamest foolishly the unhappy author of thine
own untimely death? Is it not all to be ascribed to the blindness of self-love?

Paralipsis.
Self-love is blind, not to say any thing of his dotage, folly, and rashness.

Pleonasmus.
I have heard with these Ears, and seen with these Eyes, many men and women
confessing too late, not without much sorrow, the blindness of self-love.

Parenthesis.
I believe, (nor is my belief vain) that self-love is the blindest thing in the
world.

I hold, and judge, (and why may I not confess it?) that nothing is blinder
then self-love.

Aporia Addubitatio.
Where shall I first begin? or what shall I first complain of, in the blindness
of self-love? Shall I tell you it is so blind; that it always errs judging all
things amiss? shall I tell you, it is so blind, that it cannot distinguish
foul from fair, good from bad, honest from dishonest? shall I ascend something
higher, and tell you plainly, it is so blind, that nothing either is, was, will
be, or can be, ever blinder than it? This is much, and yet not more then truth.

Anti-Metabole.
Self-love in its own conceit sees amongst the blind, but I am sure in the
judgment of all it is blind amongst them that see.

Me thinks I hear Narcissus pitifully Prosopopoeia.
lamenting, and thus with much grief and despair breathing out his last and
most sad complaints against self-love.

Anaphora.
O Accursed self-love, how great cause have I, to exclaim against thee and thy
folly, thee and thy madness, thee and thy detestable blindness!

Alas! it was thy blindness that brought me to such an height of pride and
disdain.

Thy blindness lead me, or rather seduced me into the Labyrinth of inextricable
errors.

Thy blindness threw me headlong into that deep gulf of doting folly, and
miserable despair.

But for thee; I had never contemned so many young men and maids that were
enamoured on me.

But for thee; I had never so neglected Echo a Nymph, so taken with my beauty,
that she pined away with grief through my disdain, into a mere voice.

But for thee; I had never killed with pride and contempt, so many Nymphs of
the woods and fountains.

But for thee; I had never come to that dotage and madness at last, to burn and
consume with the love of my self, to desire, what I already enjoyed, to seek
what I already possessed, to pine away for love of mine own Image, to burn in
the flames which I my self kindle, and for love of my self to destroy my self.

Inversio.
Self-love is not blind, may some man say; for it has eyes, as well as those
that see: Nay, therefore is self-love blind, because it has eyes, and yet has
no use of them; for if self-love never had eyes, and so were incapable of
sight, it could not properly be said to be blind.

Amplificatio per Impossible: ubi obiter variantur Impossible and Nunquam.
It is Impossible, It is not possible, How is it possible? It cannot be Can it
be? How can it be? It can by no means be,
but that self-love should be blind.

All things may sooner be, than that self-love should not be blind.

It is not to be avoided, It is not to be refused, How can it be avoided? How
can it be refused? Can it be avoided? refused?
but self-love will be blind.

It must needs be, It cannot but be, It cannot otherwise be; How should it
otherwise be? but
that self-love should be blind.

Paroemia:
The Wolf shall marry the Sheep, A Locust shall bring forth an Elephant, The
Sea shall bring forth Vines, The Snayl shall outrun the Hare, and the Tortoyse
the Eagle, Brambles shall bring forth Violets, and Thorns Roses, The Rivers
shall be carried toward their Fountains,
before any thing be found blinder then self-love.

The Fountains themselves shall thirst, The Earth shall fly, The Beetle shall
make honey, and the Gnat milk, The Crabs shall go forward, The Nightingale
shall cease to Sing, The Owl shall sing like the Nightingale, The Heaven shall
fall, The Earth shall ascend above the Sky, Mountains shall be transplaced, The
Mule shall bring forth, Water and Fire shall agree together, The Fire shall be
kindled with Snow, A Tempest shall be calmed with a song, The Earth shall be
bored thorough, The Sun shall change his course, The Loadstone shall turn from
the North,
when any thing is so blind as self-love.

Groves shall grow on the Waves, Sea-weeds shall be found on the Mountains, The
Stars shall fall, The motion of each starr shall be irregular, Day shall be
turned to night, The waters of the Sea shall leave their saltness, The Sea
shall be plowed, A Crop shall be reaped from the Sand, Past moments shall be
recalled, The Meadows shall never more have flowers, The Heavens shall want
Stars, Day shall want Light, No sweetness shall be in Roses, The Fish shall
burn in the Ocean, No Joy shall be in Heaven, nor Pain in Hell, The Flames
shall descend,
when self-love receives sight.

The Mountains forgetting their weights shall fly like Atoms through the sky,
The Heavens shall rest, The Sun and Stars shall shine together, The Pibbles
shall mount up to the Stars, The Earth shall be adorned with Stars, The Flocks
shall invite the Lions to their folds, The Skies shall endure the heavy plough,
The Water shall give flames, and Fire waters, The Sun shall rise in the West,
The Ants shall leave their industry, The Bees shall forget to make Honey,
Maenalian Hounds shall fly from the Hare, Nature shall become preposterous, No
Element shall keep his proper seat, Fire shall be cold, and Water give heat,
Summer shall give Snow, Does shall fright Lions, Crows shall fly through the
Air whiter then Snow, Swans shall be as black as pitch, Oxen shall cut the Air
with their wings, Marbles shall be softer then Wax, The Chickens shall prey
upon the Kite, and Geese upon the Fox.
if ever self-love see, or judge aright.

Confirmatio a perpetuitate veritatis, ubi obiter variantur, Perpetuo and
Semper.
Whilst Sun and Stars shall run their course, While Stars shall embellish
Heaven, and Flowers the Earth, Whilst Neptune's arms, shall embrace the earth,
Whilst Cynthia shall renew her Horns, Whilst Lucifer foretells the approaching
Morn, Whilst Arctos shuns the Sea, Whilst Mountains give their shades, Whilst
Streams their tribute to the Ocean pay,
ever will self-love be blind.

Whilst Day has Light, and Night succeeds the Day, Whilst Summer follows the
Spring, and Autumn succeeds Summer; Whilst the Sun casts light, or the Earth
shadows, Whilst the Land bounds the Sea, and Air the Land, Whilst the Rivers
carry Waters, or those waters Fishes, Whilst the Earth has Trees, Whilst the
Bore loves the tops of Mountains, Whilst Bees love thyme, and Bears honey,
ever will self-love be blind.

Till time and memory shall be no more, Till time shall have no plumes, Till
time shall be as bald before, as he is behind, Till time shall be swallowed up
by Eternity, Till Lachesis have no more thread to draw,
will self-love be void of sight.

Till Time, that gives all things their end, shall also have his own End; To
the last Syllable of recorded Time; Note that all those Proverbial phrases,
which signify Never will also signify Ever, by prefixing Till or Until.
Till the Woolfe shall marry the Sheep, Till the Sun shall change his Course,
Till the Sun shall rise in the West,
self-love will want his eyes.

Conclusio. Peroratio:
Had Self-love all Argus his Eyes; yet could they not restore his Sight; and
had I as many Tongues; yet could not I fully describe his Blindness.

Lest therefore I speak so long of the Blindness of Self-love, that I seem so
blind my self, as not to see time to make an End; I will here conclude with my
first Opinion, Self-love is blind.

Sentence. III. Honor nourishes Arts.
Amplificatio per Synonymiam simplicem. Heterosis (sive Mutatio) Activorum
Passivis.
ARts are nourished by honor.

Honor nurseth Arts:

Arts are nursed by honor.

Honor feeds the Arts:

Arts are fed by honor.

Honor fostereth Arts:

Arts are fostered by honor.

Honor cherishes Arts:

Arts are cherished by honor.

Honor maintains Arts:

Arts are maintained by honor.

Honor encourages Arts:

Arts are encouraged by honor.

Honor advances the Arts:

The Arts are advanced by honor.

Honor promoteth Arts:

Arts are promoted by Honor.

Honor exalts the Arts:

The Arts are exalted by honor.

Honor excites Arts:

Arts are excited by Honor.

Heterosis seu Mutatio numeri.
Honors nourish art:

Art is nourished by honors.

Fame cherishes Art:

Art is cherished by Fame.

Glory animates sciences:

Sciences are animated by glory.

Metaphora.
Existimation whets on Sciences:

Sciences are whetted on by Existimation.

Glory spurs on Sciences:

Sciences are spurred on by glory.

Glory suckles the Arts:

Heterosis (seu Mutatio Nominis cum Verbo, Metaphora a Relatis.
Arts are suckled by glory.

Honor is the patron of Arts:

Arts are the clients of honor.

Honor is the nurse of Art:

Art is the nursling of honor.

Honor is the tutour of Arts:

Arts are the pupils of Honor.

Honor is the foster-father of art:

Art is the foster-child of honor.

Honor is the spur of Arts.

Heterosis seu mutatio Affirmativorum negativis. Erotesis, seu Interrogatio.
There are no arts which are not nourished by Honor:

There is not any art which is not cherished by honor.

What nourishes Arts? Honor.

What nourishes Arts but honor?

What nourishes Arts, if not honor?

What? does not honor nourish Arts?

What more nourishes Arts than honor?

What can more nourish Arts, than honor?

Can any thing nourish Arts more than honor?

How should any thing nourish Arts more then honor?

Is there any thing that so nourishes Arts as honor does?

Has the wide World any thing that nourishes Arts more then honor?

In what dark and blind corner lies that Art, that is not nourished by-honour?

What from East to West, so nourishes Arts as Honor?

In what secret and unknown region lies that Art which honor does not nourish?

What is that at last, which so nourishes Arts as Honor?

Where shall we find that thing, that nourishes Arts, as honor is wont?

What unfound Land does contain that Art, which honor does not cherish?

What new America not yet discovered has any thing that more nourishes Arts
then honor?

What unknown Land amongst the Antipodes contains any thing, which so
nourishes the Arts, as Honor?

Ecphonesis seu Exclamatio.
O the great O the strange O the wonderful O the incredible O the unspeakable O
the unexpressible O the inconceivable O the singular O the innumerable O the
infinite
benefits bestowed by honor upon the Arts!

Admiratio. cum Isodynamia periphrastica.
Good God! how does honor nourish Arts!

Good gods! how are the Arts nourished by honor!

Immortal God! how indulgent is honor to Arts!

Immortal gods! how does honor favor Arts!

Good lack! how dear are the Arts to honor!

Metaphora.
O how honor, carries the Arts in her bosom!

O how true is that old saying, Honor nourishes Arts!

O ye Gods above! what a singular friend is honor to the Arts!

Oh ye Gods and Goddesses all! how much are the Arts beholden to honor!

Adjuratio.
Let me not live, Let me die, Let me not enjoy my health, Let me perish
miserably,
If I do not think it most true, that Honor nourishes Arts.

So let the Muses love me, So may the Gods favor me, So may the Heavens be
propitious to me, So may I ever be master of my desire
As I think it most true, that Honor nourishes Arts.

Commiseratio.
Alas! how little can the Arts do without the help of honor!

Ah, the Arts pine away and die, if honor do not cherish them.

Woe is me, it irketh me to think how the Arts would hang their heads if honor
did not raise them up.

I do much doubt, whether there be Dubitatio.
any thing, which nourishes the Arts more than honor.

I do much doubt whether there is any thing, whose care of the Arts is equal
to that of Honor.

I am not certain whether there be any thing in the whole World that nourishes
Arts, so much as Honor.

Abominatio.
Fie upon his intolerable blindness that does not see, that honor nourishes
Arts.

Allegoria.
Out upon the gross ignorance of him that does not know, that by Honor's dew
the Arts grow.

O shame! can any man be ignorant of this? that Honor adds wings and spirits
to the Arts.

Collatio ad minus.
The Indulgent mother does not so embrace and cherish her Infant, as Honor
does the Arts.

What careful Nurse can with more love and diligence suckle and bring up her
nursling, than Honor the Arts?

The dew does not so fecundate the grass, nor Favonius so favor the flowers;
as Honor the Arts.

The breath of honor is the Zephyrus, Metaphord
the Favonius of the Arts.

Allegoria.
The Arts grow under the drippings of Honor's tree.

The fountains and the springs do not so irrigate, and moysten the earth, that
it may be fruitful, as honor the Arts.

The rain does not so with timely showers ripen the Corn, as Honor the Arts.

The Sun by his cherishing-heat does not so enliven, and amplify all things, as
honor by her fructifying beams does increase and augment the Arts.

Distributio partium.
The liberal Sciences ascribe all they have to honor: and the Mechanical arts
are not so rustic, and without art, as not to acknowledge the same.

Grammatica.
Grammar complains of the want of words to express how much she is obliged to
honor.

Rhetorica.
Rhetoric confesses that she received her tongue from Honor, and could not
speak a word till Glory gave her Language.

Logica.
Logic and all Philosophy confess that their followers are all Creatures of
Glory, and as much desirous of Glory as Wisdom, for all their talking, (i. e.
whatsoever they talk.)

Musica.
Music confesses that she could never have reached, neither so sweet, nor so
high strains, if honor had not scrued up (i. e. extended) her strings.

Honor is the rozen of Musick's-fidlestick, and it is honor that gives breath
to all her Wind-Instruments.

A^ithmetica.
Arithmetic is counting that infinite number of thanks, she owes to Honor:
but is not yet come, nor will ever come, at the total sum.

Geometria.
Geometry feels the weight of those Obligatons, wherein she stands bound to
honor, and is scarce able to stand under the burden.

Astronomia.
Astronomy never thinks of honor, but she looks upon her Stars: and every one
represents some benefit received from her.

Collectio. Illatio. Inductione. Argum. a Majore.
And if the Liberal Arts acknowledge with such gratitude the courtesy of
honor; certainly the Mechanical cannot be so ungrateful, as not to Imitate.
second (follow) them.

Hirmos Asyndeton, Dialyton.
Honor makes the Arts active, courageous, industrious, quick, nimble, lively,
sedulous, diligent, indefatigable, sagacious, and what not.

Asteismus.
He that can count the Stars of the Sky, or the Sands on the Lybian shore; let
him go count the thanks which the Arts owe to Honor.

Obiter variatur Multi.
The courtesies of Honor toward Collatio ad minus.
the Arts, are more then the Sands of the Sea, Stars of the Sky, Auxesis
Hyperbolica.
Hairs of the Head, Drops of Rain, Pellets of Hail, Flakes of Snow, Drops of
Dew, Leaves of Trees, Boughs of Forest, Blades of Grass, Ears of Corn, Birds
of the Air, Fishes of the Sea, Flowers of the Spring, Apples of Autumn,
Summer's Flies, Summer's Ants, Motes in the Sun, Bees of Hybla, Billows of the
Carpathian Sea, etc.

Hyperbole.
Honor nourishes the Arts, with a juice far sweeter then Nectar, and much
more pleasant then the Ambrosia of the gods.

They must be very strange Arts which honor does not nourish.

I do not know that Art, which honor does not nourish.

Confirmatio and Amplificatio per Hyperbolicam praefationem and formas
generales.
Who can express What tongue can express No words can express Who can count No
Tongue can count Auxesis.
No Arithmetic can number
the benefits of Honor toward the Arts.

I am not able to express, No Eloquence is able to express, It is not to tell,
It is wonderful to tell, It is not to be believed, It is beyond belief, It
transcends a strong belief to credit, It is not to think, No man can in mind
conceive, You can scarce believe,
how much Honor does nourish Arts.

Even to a Proverb, It has the place of a Proverb, It is instead of a Proverb,
It is become a Proverb, It has obtained the force of a Proverb, It has crept
into the number of Proverbs, It is an Adage of a received authority; It is a
saying as true, as old
Honor nourishes Arts.

I will never again believe mine own, nor the judgment of all the Ancient; if
honor do not nourish Arts.

If honor does not nourish Arts; I know not what does.

Cave credas.
Never believe, there is any thing nourishes Arts, more then honor.

Confirmati^o and Confutatio.
Nothing is more frequent in Orators, Poets, Historians; than, None is so
ignorant, but knows;
Honor nourishes Arts.

None, but the most impudent man in the World, can deny; (...)
Let him affirm with that doting Philosopher, that Snow is black, who denies;
It were better to deny all things, than this one; He should be cudgelled into
belief, and confuted with club-Arguments, who denies; One Democritus will not
suffice, to laugh at his Folly, who denies;
that honor nourishes Arts.

An acre of Hellebore will not cure him, that denies; Give him some Hellebore
to purge his Brain, that will not confess; He understands little, that does not
know; Paradiastole.
He does not speak, but bray like an Ass, that denies; No man's Nose is so
stopped but he easily smells out this; Send him to Bedlam, as a man, that has a
Vertigo in his Brain, that denies; Rubb over your Forehead, and dare to deny;
that the Arts are stirred up by honor.

Confirmatio per Interr^gationem.
Who is so blind, as not to see? Who is so impudent, that he dares deny? What
impudence is it, not to confess? Who does not understand? Who, but a Madman,
would deny? Who lives in such Cymmerian darkness, that he does not see, and
confess; Paroemia.
his Cerebr^m in calcaneis.
Who, except he have Brains in his Heels, will deny?
that honor is the nurse of Arts.

Paroemia.
his soul only as To keep his body from stinking.
Who, except he have salt will deny? Can Impudence so put off all shame, as to
deny?
that honor is the patron of Arts.

Confirmatio per Asseverationem.
It is a Truth approved by the consent of all men, It is a Truth, manifest even
to blind men, It is a thing so plain, as nothing can be plainer; so certain, as
nothing can be more certain; Paradiastole Metaphora.
It is a Truth so apparent, and evident, that it seems writ not with Ink, but
with the Beams of the Sun; It is a matter out of question, and needs no
dispute; It is a Truth approved of, by the Testimony and Judgment of the whole
World,
that honor is the whetstone of the Arts.

It is as true, as either Jove's, or Apollo's Oracle, It is as true, as the
Ammonian, Dodonean, or Delphi^k Oracle, It is a Truth, that requires not many
words, or a long Oration to confirm it, It appears more clearly then the
mid-day-Sun,
that honor is the whetstone of the Arts.

The Sun needs no other light, that it may be seen; nor a Trumpet to proclaim
the brightness of his Beams; so is it in this evident Truth, He lights a Candle
in the Sunshine, that goes a bout to explain this Truth; It is a Truth, than
which what can be more certain? what more plain? Asteismus.
It is a Truth so out of all Controversy, that he that would prove it, may go
tell men, The Sun shines, when he triumphs in his meridian-Glory. He must be
either of Enantiosis.
very great boldness, or very little wit, that denies, Hypothesis Suppositio.
He that seriously considers it, is blind, if he do not see; obstinate, if
seeing he do not confess; Confirmatio per Confutationem,
They are but as Sibyll's leaves, whatsoever are objected against this Truth,
Collati^*
The Arguments against this Truth are lighter and vainer than the leaves of the
Sibylls,
that the Arts are Honor's darlings.

Metaphora.
They are but Ropes of sand, Towers of Lamia, Old-wive's Tales, vain Dreams,
that men prattle against this Truth; Metaphora.
There is neither crumb, nor drop of sense, or reason, in those things, that
are spoken against this Truth, Collatio a simili.
As one said of the Nightingal, she was a Voice, and nothing else; so they are
words, and wind, and no more, that are objected against this Truth,
Paradiastole.
It comes not from Apollo's Tripos, but the Old-Wive's Trivet, whatsoever is
babbled against this Truth, Epitrope.
Let him be rich, let him be noble, let him be great, let him be what you will;
fool he must needs be, and foolhardy too, who dares to open his mouth against
this Truth, Metaphora.
I could wish my self a Squinancy to stop his saucy chaps, which dare bark
against this Truth,
that the Arts are Honor's favorites.

Hypothesis Ironica.
If he be not blind enough, make him blinder, that does not see, and
acknowledge this palpable Truth, He must either shut his eyes, or put them out,
to whom the light of this Truth does not clearly shine,
that Arts are perfected by Honor.

He is hardened against all Truth, that denies this manifest Truth, Asteismus.
Let him go deny Principles, that will not confess this Maxim, He must have a
Forehead of Brass, a Brain of Lead; and a Tongue of Iron, that dares contradict
so confessed a Truth,
that Arts are perfected by Honor.

Confirmatio ab Exemplo.
There were no good Physicians at Athens, because there were no rewards nor
Honors for Physicians.

At the same Athens, Honor and the applause of the Citizens, nourished the Art
of Eloquence in Demosthenes to the highest perfection: So in Cicero, at Rome.
The same may be said of Aristotle, Archimedes, and diverse other famous
Philosophers.

Confirmatio a Testimonio.
Where there is no rewards, there is no Art; says Aristophanes, that Prince of
Comic Poets, amongst the Grecians.

T^st.
Every thing that is honored is increased, and that which is contemned is
diminished, says Jamblicus a most ancient Author.

Test.
to Flaccus, says, O Flaccus let there be but Favorers of Arts.
Mecoenas's, there will not want Learned Poets.
Martia^, that witty Poet, writing Maro's, and your own grounds will give you a
Virgil.

Well therefore did the Ancient feign Honor, r^nown.
Euphemia the mother of the Arts.

Apodosis.
and, as it were, blowing upon the Arts, makes them, which otherwise would be
Paronomasia.
Even as a prosperous Wind, filling Confirmatio per Similitudinem Protasis.
the Sayls of the Ship, makes it pass through the Waves with a triumphant
speed, which otherwise is carried with a slow languid and uncertain motion; so
Honor animating, resty and rusty, to move with an happy and cheerful Progress,
till by degrees they arrive at the Haven of perfection.

Ironia.
It is not honor that nourishes the Arts, no by no means; the Arts are not at
all beholden to honor, nor depend upon her vain and uncertain breath! very
true forsooth.

Honor does not disregard the Arts. Tapinosis Meiosis Litotes.


Honor is no enemy to the Arts.

Honor wishes not ill to the Arts.

Climax. Incrementum. Subjectio seu Anthypophora.
Does honor love the Arts? Yea she feeds them, cherishes them embraces
them, kisheth them, bears them in her bosom, brings them up with much care and
indulgence to their full ripeness and perfection.

Epizeuxis.
It honor, honor is, that whets the Arts.

Anadiplosis
Honor alone encourages the Arts: Arts, those ingenions Nymphs of knowing
Souls.


Anaphora.
Honor does feed, Honor does cherish Arts: Honor puts courage in their
drooping hearts.


Epistrophe.
What Arts can live, if Honor lends not breath? Arts needs must die, if Honor
lends not breath.


Symploce.
Honor alone does breed, and nourish Arts: Honor alone does feed and cherish
Arts.


Art's honor's client. Fames delight Epanalepsis.
is Art.

Epanodes.
Art's honor's child, Honor's Art's tender mother: The mother's good, the
child can be no other.


Epiphonema.
Nothing does Honor hold too dear, whereby she may promote and advantage the
Arts: so great, so singular is her courtesy to them.

Epanorthosis.
Honor nourishes Arts: what did I say, nourishes? yea gives them life and
liveli-hood, being and well-being.

Aposiopesis.
So much do the Arts depend upon the beams of Honor's favor; that -- but I
will not put the Arts to a blush.

Ap^strophe.
O Honor with what courtesy do thou embrace the Arts! with what indulgence
do thou further their increase and perfection?

Synoecei^sis.
Arts are not arts, which Honor does not nourish.

Oxymoron.
Arts would be art-less, if Honor did not cherish them.

Tell me, O Diomedes, Aldus, Anacoenosis Communicati^.
Phocas, Priscian, Linacre, Despauterius, and all you other Captains of
Grammar's Army, What made you to write such great Volumes, and to set out the
Art which you did profess, so fully and plainly? Was it not, that Honor that
should survive your ashes?

What, Cicero, made thee take such unwearied pains in Reading, Translating, and
Imitating the Greek Orators? Was it not the glory of the Roman Forum, and the
unanimous applause of all the Senate?

Anathora.
Let me beg leave to ask thee, O Demosthenes; What was it that induced thee so
soon to leave thy bed, to contend with the Mechanics, who should first be up
in a morning? to cut the hair on one side of thy head, that being a shamed to
comeforth, thou mighst be more intent to thy studies? Was it not Honor? was it
not the applause of the Athenian theater, was it not a desire to bear away the
victory from all other Orators; especially thine envious and emulous adversary
Aeschines?

Paralipsis.
Honor does nourish the Arts; to pass in silence, that she gives them their
portion and patrimony, and in them their chiefest nerves, strength, and vigor.

Pleonasmus.
I have heard with these Ears, and seen with these Eyes many professors of
Arts, who have protested, that they would not spend one hour more in the Study
of their Arts; if the hope of Honor and Reward did not intise them.

Parenthesis.
I believe, (nor is my belief vain) that nothing nourishes the Arts more then
Honor.

I hold and judge (and why may I not openly profess it?) that the Arts would
perish, if it were not for Honor.

Aporia Addubitatio.
What shall I do? what shall I at last resolve on? I know neither well how to
begin, nor beginning how to end, if I should undertake to relate, how much the
Arts are obliged to Honor.

P^os^po^^eia.
Me thinks I see and hear all the Arts squealing like so many hungry Infants,
and Honor standing by them like a tender Mother, with her breasts laid forth
and bare, and thus speaking to them. Come, my children, dearer to me then life
it self; draw out from these nipples that nectareous juice, which alone can
preserve your life. Every milk will not fit your stomach, nor will any
n^urishment add strength and vigor to your bodies. No, no, they are these
milk-bottles that contain your genuine nutriment; draw them dry then, and spare
not, that when they are empty, I may replenish them with that liquor, which
abounding to you, you grow apace: and which failing, you decay as fast. Which
said, the Arts with a wonderful greediness, each one in their order, even
wearied her with lugging her breasts.

Inv^^si^.
But methinks, I hear some man say, Honor does not always increase and
nourish the Arts, for many times Arts as they are invented out of poverty and
want, so are they increased by the hope of wealth and plenty: To which I
answer, that therefore does Honor nourish the Arts, because they are increased
out of hope of wealth and plenty: for wealth and plenty is a kind of Honor,
and they that live in wealth and plenty, live in much Honor and Esteem above
the poor and needy. So that, this argument notwithstanding, this Truth remains
firm and certain, that, Honor nourishes the Arts.

Amplificatio per Impossible: ubi obiter variantur Impossible and Nunquam.
It is Impossible, It is not possible, How is it possible? It cannot be Can it
be? How can it be? It can by no means be,
but that the Arts are nourished by Honor.

All things may sooner be, than that Honor should not nourish the Arts. It is
not to be avoided, It is not to be refused, How can it be avoided? How can it
be refused? Can it be avoided? refused?
but that the Arts must owe their nourishment to Honor.

It must needs be, It cannot but be, It cannot otherwise be, but How should it
otherwise be? but
that Honor feeds the Arts.

Paroemia:
The Wolf shall marry the Sheep, A Locust shall bring forth an Elephant, The
Sea shall bring forth Vines, The Snayl shall outrun the Hare, and the Tortoyse
the Eagle, Brambles shall bring forth Violets, and Thorns Roses, The Rivers
shall be carried toward their Fountains, The Fountains themselves shall
thirst, The Earth shall fly, The Beetle shall make honey, and the Gnat milk,
The Crabs shall go forward,
before any thing be found that more nourishes the Arts then Honor.

The Nightingale shall cease to Sing. The Owl shall sing like the Nightingale,
The Heaven shall fall, The Earth shall ascend above the Sky, Mountains shall be
transplaced, The Mule shall bring forth, Water and Fire shall agree together,
The Fire shall be kindled with Snow, A Tempest shall be calmed with a song, The
Earth shall be bored thorough, The Sun shall change his course, The Loadstone
shall turn from the North, Groves shall grow on the Waves, Sea-weeds shall be
found on the Mountains, The Stars shall fall,
when Arts live and flourish not nourished by Honor.

The motion of each starr shall be irregular, Day shall be turned to night, The
waters of the Sea shall leave their saltness. The Sea shall be plowed, A Crop
shall be reaped from the Sand, Past moments shall be recalled, The Meadows
shall never more have flowers, The Heavens shall want Stars, Day shall want
Light, No sweetness shall be in Roses, The Fish shall burn in the Ocean, No Joy
shall be in Heaven, nor Pain in Hell, The Flames shall descend, The Mountains
forgetting their weights shall fly like Atoms through the sky,
when the arts shall not be beholden to Honor.

The Heavens shall rest, The Sun and Stars shall shine together, The Pibbles
shall mount up to the Stars, The Earth shall be adorned with Stars, The Flocks
shall invite the Lions to their folds, The Skies shall endure the heavy plough,
The Water shall give flames, and Fire waters, The Sun shall rise in the West,
The Ants shall leave their industry, The Bees shall forget to make Honey,
Maenalian Hounds shall fly from the Hare, Nature shall become preposterous, No
Element shall keep his proper seat, Fire shall be cold, and Water shall give
heat, Summer shall give Snow, Does shall fright Lions,
if Arts die not when Honor refuses to nourish them.

Crows shall fly through the Air whiter then Snow, Swans shall be as black as
pitch, Oxen shall cut the Air with their wings, Marbles shall be softer then
Wax, The Chickens shall prey upon the Kite, and Geese upon the Fox. Confirmatio
a perpetuitate veritatis, ubi obiter variantur, Perpetuo and Semper.
The Hare shall chase the Hound, and the Dove the Hawks,
if Arts die not when Honor refuses to nourish them.

Whilst Sun and Stars shall run their course, While Stars shall embellish
Heaven, and Flowers the Earth, Whilst Neptune's arms, shall embrace the earth,
Whilst Cynthia shall renew her Horns, Whilst Lucifer foretells the approaching
Morn, Whilst Arctos shuns the Sea, Whilst Mountains give their shades, Whilst
Streams their tribute to the Ocean pay,
ever will the arts depend upon Honor.

Whilst Day has Light, and Night succeeds the Day, Whilst Summer follows the
Spring, and Autumn succeeds Summer; Whilst the Sun casts light, or the Earth
shadows, Whilst the Land bounds the Sea, and Air the Land, Whilst the Rivers
carry Waters, or those waters Fishes, Whilst the Earth has Trees, Whilst the
Bore loves the tops of Mountains, Whilst Bees love thyme, and Bears honey,
ever will the arts depend upon Honor.

Till time and memory shall be no more, Till time shall have no plumes, Till
time shall be as bald before, as he is behind, Till time shall be swallowed up
by Eternity, Till Lachesis have no more thread to draw,
ever will the arts bemuch obliged to Honor.

Note that all those Proverbial phrases, which stand for Never, may by
prefixing Till or Until stand for Ever, as appears by these Examples.
Till the Woolfe shall marry the Sheep, Till the Sun shall change his Course,
Till the Sun shall rise in the West, Till Time, that gives all things their
end, shall have it self an End; To the last Syllable of recorded Time;
ever will the Arts be much obliged to Honor.

Conclusio Epilogus Peroratio:
But since I have made mention of the End of Time, it puts me in mind, that it
is time to make an End of my Discourse, lest by my prolixity, I draw into
suspicion this evident truth; Honor nourishes the Arts.

Sentence. IV. Fortune is Unconstant.
Synonymia simplex per Heterosin contra^ii Substantivi and Adjectivi.
Fortune is not constant.

Fortune is a thing of great inconstancy.

Fortune is a thing of the least constancy.

Fortune is a thing of no constancy.

Fortune is uncertain.

Fortune is not certain.

Fortune is a thing of great uncertainty.

Fortune is a thing of the least certainty.

Fortune is a thing of no certainty.

Fortune is mutable.

Fortune is not immutable.

Fortune is a thing of incredible mutability.

Fortune is a thing of the least immutability.

Fortune is a thing of no immutability.

Fortune is unstedfast.

Fortune is not steadfast.

Fortune is a thing of unspeakable unstedfastness.

Fortune is a thing of the least steadfastness.

Fortune is a thing of no stedfastness.

Fortune is leight.

Fortune is not grave.

Fortune is a thing of wonderful levity.

Fortune is a thing of no gravity.

Fortune is a thing of the least gravity.

Fortune is changeable.

Fortune is not unchangeable.

Fortune is a thing of notable changeableness.

Fortune is a thing of the least unchangeableness.

Fortune is a thing of no unchangeableness.

Fortune is various.

Fortune is a thing of much variety.

Fortune is voluble.

Fortune is a thing of an uncertain volubility.

Fortune is slippery.

Fortune is a thing of a dangerous slipperiness.

Fortune is instable.

Fortune is not stable.

Fortune is a thing of unexpressible instability.

Fortune is a thing of the least stability.

Fortune is a thing of no stability.

Fortune is perfidious.

Fortune is not faithful.

Fortune is a thing of odious perfidiousness.

Fortune is a thing of the least faithfulness.

Fortune is a thing of no faithfulness.

Fortune is deceitful.

Fortune is fallacious.

Fortune is not true.

Fortune is a thing of great deceitfulness.

Fortune is a thing of subtle fallaciousness.

Fortune is a thing of the least truth.

Fortune is a thing of no truth.

Fortune is vain.

Fortune is a thing of manifold vanity.

Fortune is desultorious.

Fortune is transitory.

Fortune has no constancy.

Fortune wants certainty.

Fortune is without steadfastness.

Fortune is destitute of stability.

There is no faith or fidelity in Fortune.

Fortune is deprived of all gravity.

Fortune abounds in inconstancy.

Fortune wants not uncertainty.

Fortune is not without unstedfastness.

Fortune is not destitute of instability,

Fortune is well furnished with perfidiousness.

There is deceit and fallaciousness enough in Fortune.

Fortune is frail.

Fortune is a thing of miserable frailty.

Hyperbole.
Fortune is unconstant even to wonder above all things.

Great is the inconstancy of Fortune, even to wonder above all things.

Fortune is a thing in all the world least of all constant.

Fortune stands not long in a place.

Fortune reteyns not always the same mind.

Heterosis Affirmativorum negativis.
Not^ing is inconstant, if not Fortune.

Nothing is more inconstant then Fortune.

Nothing in the World can be more inconstant then Fortune.

There is nothing but is more constant then Fortune.

Nothing can be more unconstant then Fortune.

There is not any thing can be less constant then Fortune.

There is nothing, but is less inconstant then Fortune.

Nothing is constant, if Fortune be not unconstant.

There is nothing so unconstant as Fortune.

Heterosis Act^vi Passivo.
Nothing surpasses Forune in inconstancy.

Fortune is surpassed by nothing in inconstancy.

Nothing overcomes Fortune in uncertainty.

Fortune is overcome by nothing in uncertainty.

Nothing is so easily changed as Fortune.

Nothing is more easily changed then Fortune.

Nothing is with more ease changed then Fortune.

Nothing is changed oftener then Fortune.

What is unconstant? Fortune. Erot^sis, seu Interrogatio.


What is inconstant but Fortune?

What is inconstant if not Fortune?

What? Is not Fortune inconstant?

What is more inconstant then Fortune?

What can be more inconstant then Fortune?

Can any thing be more inconstant then Fortune?

How should any thing be more inconstant then Fortune?

Is there any thing so unconstant as Fortune?

Has the wide World any thing so unconstant as Fortune?

In what dark and blind corner lies that thing, that is so inconstant as
Fortune?

What from East to West, is so inconstant as Fortune?

In what secret and unknown region lies that thing, that is so inconstant as
Fortune?

What region in the earth has not heard of the inconstancy of Fortune?

What is that at last, which is so inconstant as Fortune?

Where shall we find those things that are more inconstant then Fortune?

What unfound Land does contain those things, that are more inconstant then
Fortune?

What new America not yet discovered has any thing, more inconstant then
Fortune?

What unknown Land amongst the Antipodes has any thing less. constant then
Fortune?

Heterosis Activorum passivis.
What does not Fortune surpass in inconstancy?

By what is not Fortune surpassed in inconstancy?

Ecphonesis Exclamatio.
O inconstant Fortune!

O the intolerable O the great O the strange O the wonderful O the admirable O
the incredible O the singular O the unspeakable O the inexpressible O the
inconceivable
inconstancy of Fortune!

O the innumerable O the infinite O the very many
changes and varieties of inconstant Fortune!

Admiratio. Isodynamia periphrastica and Metaleptica.
Good God! how great is Fortune's inconstancy!

Good gods! what inconstancy is in Fortune!

Immortal God! how Fortune gives at once with the right hand, and takes away
with the left!

Immortal gods! what a Punick faith is the faith of Fortune!

Good lack! how seldom does Fortune make good her word!

O! to how many changes is inconstant fortune obnoxious!

O! to how many vicissitudes is uncertain Fortune liable!

O how true is that old saying, Fortune is inconstant!

O ye All-seeing Gods above! how inconstant is this blind Goddess Fortune
below!

Oh ye Gods and Goddesses all! how little faith is to be had to inconstant
Fortune.

Adjuratio:
Let me not live, Let me die, Let me not enjoy my health, Let me perish
miserably,
If I do not think it most true, that Fortune is inconstant.

So let the Muses love me, So may the Gods favor me, So may the Heavens be
propitious to me, So may I ever be master of my desire
As I think it most true, that Fortune is inconstant.

Commiseratio.
Alas! Fortune is very inconstant.

Ah, in vain does any man endeavor to bring Fortune to a constant station and
temper.

Woe is me, it pitieth my heart to think how many, and how great calamities men
have suffered through the inconstancy of Fortune.

Oh grief! how is Fortune the example, idea, and pattern of inconstancy!

Dubitatio.
I do much doubt whether there be any thing, more inconstant then Fortune.

It is a very great question, whether there be any rhing, whose inconstancy is
equal to the inconstancy of Fortune.

I am not certain whether Fortune be not the most inconstant thing in the World
without exception.

I know not well what I should say, whether that Fortune is inconstant; or
inconstancy it self.

It is a thing to me not free from all controversy, Whether Fortune be not
unconstant above all things.

Abominatio.
Fie upon the intolerable inconstancy of Fortune!

Out upon that blind and inconstant Goddess, whose inconstancy is the occasion
of infinite misfortunes by Sea and Land.

Isodynamia Periphrastica, Hyperbolic^.
O shame! that Fortune whom we (forsooth) call a Goddess, place in Heaven,
erect Altars to offer Sacrifice, should be destitute of all providence, and
continue obstinately in a blind inconstancy.

There is no inconstancy to the inconstancy of Fortune.

Give me any inconstancy but the inconstancy of Fortune.

Parenthesis
Let none complain of the inconstancy Collatio.
of the Moon, Women, or Children (every one whereof is very great) that
considers the inconstancy of Fortune.

Collatio per contrarium Enantiosis.
The Earth is not more constant then Fortune is inconstant.

Confirmatio and Demonstratio. Aetiologia.
So inconstant is Fortune; that it forsakes constancy, reason, and it self too.

Needs must she be inconstant, that never leaves any place warm with her stay.

Collatio ad minus.
Fortune is more inconstant then Inconstancy it self.

Hyperbolica and paroemialis: Hypotypica and Periphrastica.
Fortune is more inconstant, then Mercury that many-shaped god, that is here
and there and every where almost in a moment.

Hypotyposis periphrasis.
Fortune is more inconstant then Vertumnus, the god of change, that has his
name from turning and varying his shape.

Fortune is more inconstant then Proteus that turns himself into all miracles
of things.

Fortune is more incorstant then Empusa, the Devil in Aristophanes always
appearing on the Stage in a several shape.

Fortune is more inconstant then Morpheus that is wont to put on, what shapes
and looks he will.

More inconstant is Fortune then the Moon, which is sometimes full, sometimes
half-full, sometimes waxing, sometimes wayning, sometimes pale, sometimes ruddy.

Collatio ad par and aequale.
Fortune is as inconstant as the Spring or Autumn-aire; sometimes clear,
sometimes cloudy; sometimes calm, sometimes stormy.

Fortune is as inconstant as the sea, every day ebbing and flowing.

Fortune is as inconstant as Euripus ebbing and flowing seven times a day.

As inconstant is Fortune, as the Polypus or Chamelion, which ever and anon
change their colors.

Fortune is as inconstant as Quicksilver, which none can take ho^d of.

Collatio ad minus.
Inconstant is a reed moved with every blast, yet far less inconstant then
Fortune.

Great is the inconstancy of dry leaves, and chafe driven by the wind, greater
the inconstancy of Fortune.

What greater inconstancy then of a wheel, whilst it is in motion; yet does the
wheel seem to stand compared to the inconstancy of Fortune.

A Weathercock turning with every wind is inconstant enough; yet less
inconstant then Fortune.

The Bark which the water carries whithersoever it pleases, is inconstant;
yet by many degrees less inconstant then Fortune.

Water, Air, Wind, are things all remarkably inconstant; yet far more constant
then Fortune.

So inconstant is Fortune; as nothing is to be compared to it.

Such is the inconstancy of Fortune; that nothing is to be equalled with it.

Collatio ad simile.
Fortune is like the Countryman in the Fable, who (to the wonder of the
Satyr) out of the same mouth blew both cold and hot.

Fortune seems sometimes a mother, sometimes a stepmother.

Fortune with the same countenance weeps and laughs.

Fortune sits on two stools, as Cicero speaks.

Fortune, like a Stage Player, puts on the Person, sometimes of a
Shipwrackt-man, a Physician, a banished man, a glorious man, a base man.

Fortune is inconstant, beyond the help of Art or nature.

The Liberal Sciences cannot cure her inconstancy, and the Mechanical cannot
invent an Engine to compel her.

Distributio partium. Grammatica.
All Grammar's Cases and Variations are not comparable to the chances and
varieties of Fortune.

Rhetorica.
All the Eloquence of Rhetoric cannot stay her flying wing,

Logica.
Logicks more solid Arguments she eludes with her fallacies.

Musica.
Musick's sweet notes cannot allure her stay, and she accounts her self the
better Siren.

Arithmetica.
Arithmetic is counting up all the changes of Fortune to her shame: but she so
redoubles and varies, that she confounds her reckoning.

Geometria.
Geometry is gone to seek some Archimedes, to make an engine to enclose this
wandering and gadding Goddess: but when the workman is found, Fortune will be
to seek.

Astronomia.
Astronomy is scouring all her Stars, that when Fortune next passes by, their
beauty may invite her stay, but Fortune is blind, and so is not taken with
external splendour.

Collectio. Illatio. Inductione. a Majore.
Now since the Liberal Sciences each one with much modesty acknowledge their
inability for this work; I hope the Mechanical for shame will not dare to put
the least finger to it.

Asteismus.
He that can count the Stars of the Sky, or the Sands on the Lybian shore; let
him go count the changes and vicissitudes of inconstant Fortune.

Auxesis Hyperbolica.
The changes and turnings of Fotune Collatio ad minus.
are more then the Sands of the Sea, Stars of the Sky, Hairs of the Head,
Drops of Rain, Pellets of Hail, Flakes of Snow, Drops of Dew, Leaves of Trees,
Boughs of Forests, Blades of Grass, Ears of Corn, Birds of the Air, Fishes of
the Sea, Flowers of the Spring, Apples of Autumn, Summer's Flies, Summer's
Ants, Motes in the Sun, Bees of Hybla, Billows of the Carpathian Sea, etc.

Collatio ad minus.
To cure the inconstancy of Fortune would be a work of greater miracle, then
all Hercules twelve labors.

Admiratio.
O what a strange sight would it be, to see Fortune remain constant in any
thing, even for an hour!

Confirmatio and Amplificatio per Auxesin Hyperbolicam, Praefationem, and
formas generales.
Who can express What tongue can express No words can express
the inconstancy of Fortune.

Who can count No Tongue can count No Arithmetic can number
the changes of Fortune.

I am not able to express, No Eloquence is able to express, It is not to tell,
how unconstant Fortune is.

It is wonderful to tell, It is not to be believed, It is beyond belief, It
transcends a strong belief, It is not to think, No man can in mind conceive,
You can scarce believe,
how unconstant Fortune is.

Even to a Proverb, It has the place of a Proverb, It is instead of a Proverb,
It is become a Proverb, It has obtained the force of a Proverb, It has crept
into the number of Proverbs, It is an Adage of a received authority;
Fortune is unconstant.

I will never again believe mine own, nor the judgment of all the Ancient; if
there be any thing more unconstant then Fortune.

If Fortune be not unconstant; I know not what is.

Cave credas.
Never believe, there is any thing more unconstant then Fortune.

Confirmati^o and Confutatio.
Nothing is more frequent in Orators, Poets, Historians; than, None is so
ignorant, but knows; None, but the most impudent man in the World, can deny;
Asteismus.
Let him affirm with that doting Philosopher, that Snow is black, who denies;
It were better to deny all things, than this one; He should be cudgelled into
belief, and confuted with club-Arguments, who denies; One Democritus will not
suffice, to laugh at his Folly, who denies; An acre of Hellebore will not cure
him, that denies; Give him some Hellebore to purge his Brain, that will not
confess; He understands little, that does not know; He does not speak, but bray
like an Ass, that denies; No man's Nose is so stopped but he easily smells out
this; Send him to Bedlam, as a man, that has a Vertigo in his Brain, who
denies;
that Fortune is inconstant.

Collatio
They are but as Sibyll's leaves, whatsoever are objected against this Truth,
The Arguments against this Truth are lighter and vainer than the leaves of the
Sibylls, Metaphora.
They are but Ropes of sand, Towers of Lamia, Old-wive's Tales, vain Dreams,
that men prattle against this Truth;
that nothing is more inconstant then Fortune.

Metaphora.
There is neither crumb, nor drop of sense, or reason, in those things, that
are spoken against this Truth, Similitudo Protasis. Apodosis.
As one said of the Nightingal, she was a Voice, and nothing else; so they are
words, and wind, and no more, that are objected against this Truth,
Paradiastole.
It comes not from Apollo's Tripos, but the Old-Wive's Trivet, what is muttered
against this Truth, Epitrope.
Let him be rich, let him be noble, let him be great, let him be what you will;
fool he must needs be, and foolhardy too, that dares mutter against this
Truth, Metaphora.
I could wish my self a Squinancy to stop his saucy chaps, which dare bark
against this Truth, Hypothesis Ironica and Sarcastic^*
If he be not blind enough, make him blinder, that does not see, and
acknowledge this palpable Truth, He must either shut his eyes, or put them out,
to whom the light of this Truth does not clearly shine, He is hardened against
all Truth, that denies this manifest Truth, Asteismus.
Let him go deny Principles, that will not confess this Maxim,
that there is no inconstancy to be compared to the inconstancy of Fortune

Confirmatio per Interrogationem.
Who is so blind, as not to see? Who is so impudent, that he dares deny? What
impudence is it, not to confess? Who does not understand? Who, but a Madman,
would deny? Who lives in such Cymmerian darkness, that does not see, and
confess? Who, except he have his * Brains in his Heels, will deny?
that fortunes inconstancy has no equal.

Who, except he have his soul only instead of salt, will deny? Can Impudence
her self so put off all shame, so as to deny? that fortunes inconstancy has no
equal. Confirmatio per Asseverationem.
It is a Truth approved by the consent of all men, It is a Truth, manifest even
to blind men, It is a thing so plain, as nothing can be plainer; so certain, as
nothing can be more certain; Paradiastole.
It is a Truth so apparent, and evident, that it seems writ not with Ink, but
with the Beams of the Sun; It is a matter out of question, and needs no
dispute; It is a Truth approved of, by the Testimony and Judgment of the whole
World, It is as true, as either Jove's, or Apollo's Oracle, It is as true, as
the Dodonean, Ammonian, or Delphick Oracle, It is a Truth, that requires not
many words, or a long Oration to confirm it, It appears more clearly then the
mid-day-Sun, The Sun needs no other light, that it may be seen; nor a Trumpet
to proclaim the brightness of his Beams; so is it in this evident Truth,
Metal^p^ica Paroemia.
He lights a Candle in the Sunshine, that goes a bout to explain this Truth;
It is a Truth, than which what can be more certain? Asteismus.
It is a Truth so out of all Controversy, that he that would prove it, may go
tell men, The Sun shines, when he triumphs in his meridian-Glory.
that nothing is or can be so inconstant as Fortune

Enantiosis.
It is a truth so evident and known, that he must be either of great boldness,
or very little wit, that does deny, Hypothesis.
He that seriously considers it, is blind, if he do not see; obstinate, if
seeing he do not confess;
that nothing is or can be so inconstant as Fortune.

Parenthesis.
Examples of Fortune's inconstancy C^nfirmatio ab Exemplo.
are but too many; take this for one. Dionysius was King of Syracuse, and
almost all Sicily; yet because his Father left him his Kingdom and Power (as
he himself answered one demanding the reason of his after-calamity) but left
him not his Fortune; he was expelled his Kingdom, and forced to teach Children
their first rudiments at Corinth.

Exemp.
So Bajazet, that great Emperor of the Turks, was carried about by Tamberlane
the Scythian, in an Iron grate, and made his Footstool, when he got on
Horseback.

Exemp.
Croesus once thought himself the Richest, and happiest man in all the World;
yet being taken by the Enemy and adjudged to death, acknowledged himself the
most miserable, and the most beggarly of all men living.

To these Examples, to which might Confirmatio a Testimonio.
be added many more, agree the judgments and sentences of the best and most
ancient Authors.

Apelles an ancient and witty Painter, being asked Why, he painted Fortune
sitting, answered, Because she could not stand.

And Quintus Curtius an Historian of great note, tells us, that Fortune has
hands to give and take, and wings to fly, but no feet to stand: you may shake
her by the hands, for she is deceitfully flattering; but she will not let you
take hold of her wings, because she will not be stayed by any in her flight.

Synoecei^sis
What Fortune makes thine, is not thine, was the witty speech of an ancient
Poet.

Voluble Fortune wanders with ambiguous paces, and remains certain and constant
in no place; but sometimes remains merry, sometimes takes sour looks, and is
only constant in her inconstancy, as writes Ovid prince of the Latin Poets, who
felt the scourge of her inconstancy.

Excellent is that dialogue of Cebes the Theban, in his tablet; where Fortune
was painted; What woeman is that? which, as if she were blind or mad, seems to
stand upon a round stone? Fortune it is, and she is not only blind, but mad and
deaf. And what is her office? She walks up and down all Nations; from some she
takes their wealth, to others she gives it, and from those again she takes what
she had given, and rashly bestows them upon others.

So inconstant is Fortune, that the very judgments of the Ancients have been
inconstant too in feigning her position whilst some feign her sailing amidst
the waves of the Sea; others set her on the top of an high Rock or Mountain,
exposed to every wind; others feign her sitting on a Cylinder; others standing
on a wheel or globe; others standing on a winged-globe in the middle of the
Sea, and sailing with her eyes muffled.

Metaphora.
Fortune is the gods Hocus-pocus Amplificatio a tropis and figu^is sive
dictionis, sive Sententiae.
casting mists before men's eyes, and showing them, how small the wisdom and
providence of mortals is, which is so easily imposed upon, and so often
mistaken.

Fortune! for shame leave wronging Ironia.
her, by taxing her of inconstancy: Why she, (if you dare believe Parenthesis
Ironica.
me) is the most constant Goddess in the World, ever performs her promise,
never takes what she once gives, never throws down whom she once sets up, and
what would you more?

Litetes. Tapinosis Meiosis Auxesis.
Fortune is not always constant.

Fortune often is inconstant.

Fortune is more inconstant then any thing that is or can be inconstant.

Epizeuxis Hypotyposis personae periphrasis. Anti-Metabole.
Oh Fortune, fortune! thou uncertain and deceitful goddess, that sit on thy
winged-globe, and with muffled eyes saylest on the fleeting waves! how blind
art thou in thy inconstancy, how inconstant in thy blindness!

Anadiplosis
Fortune's a Diety, inconstant, blind:

Epanodos.
Blind as the Mole; inconstant as the Wind.

Anaphora. Anti-Metabole Polypt^ton.
If Fortune will; thou shall be made of a Rhetorician a Consul:

If Fortune will; thou shall be made of a consul a Rhetorician.

Anaphora.
Blind fortune is inconstant eke, nor does blind fortune see: Blind fortune
without reason is, so all that trust her be.


Epistrophe, Metaleptica Paroemia:
He trusts the Wind, that trusts inconstant Fortune: He writes on Sand, that
trusts inconstant Fortune.


Symploce.
Good cause have mortals all, to blame blind Fortune's force: Good cause have
great and small, to curse blind Fortune's force.


Epanodos.
Inconstant Fortune! constantly-inconstant! How do thou triumph over the
pride of men!


Synoeceiosis.
As well great things, as things that be not great, are the laughing stock of
Fortune, and the objects, on which she may exercise, her merciless inconstancy.

Oxymoron.
Fortune is constantly inconstant and certainly-uncertain.

Aetiol gia.
Fortune must needs be inconstant, as she, that is to day a mother, to morrow a
stepmother; now flattering and fawning, presently cruel and storming.

Let Fortune be a Goddess, let her be powerful, let her have Riches, Honors,
Pleasures at her command; yet she is inconstant, uncertain, blind, and Mad.

Climax. Incrementum.
Fortune is not only wavering, slippery, deceitful, but absolutely perfidious,
and beyond belief, inconstant.

Epanorthosis Hyperbole Metaphorica.
Wise men are afraid even of Fortune's favors, especially if they flow unto
them many together. So great, so cruel, so certain is Fortune's inconstancy.

Fortune is inconstant, inconstant did I say? yea the very prime copy, Quod
imitentur.
for all other that are inconstant to write after.

Aposiopesis.
Fortune's inconstancy is -- but I will beware; lest I provoke her cruelty
against me.

Belisarius was a valiant and fortunate Captain, under Justinian the Emperor;
he overthrew the Persians, vanquished the Vandals, subdued the Goths: After
all which greatness and glory, came matter of fear and envy. The Emperor to
prevent all dangers put out his eyes, and he was forced in the Highways to beg
alms of the passengers that passed by, and to cry (miserable to tell!) Give
Apostrophe.
an halfpenny to Belizarius. O Fortune, how can thy inconstancy throw the
greatest, from the highest top of Honor and Glory, to the lowest step of
calamity and misery.

Enantiosis.
Examples are so many, and so fit Aporia.
of Fortune's inconstancy, that I know not what to do, or which way to turn me.
Shall I mention them all? I fear tediousness. Shall I omit some? they will cry
out of me, of injury. What should I tell you of Ventidius Bassus, called from
rubbing of Mules to the highest Honor in the Commonwealth? Of Fabius, called
from the Plow to undertake the weighty office of Consul? Of Varro taken from
the Shambles, to the Consulship? Or of Marius the seventh of the Tyrants? who
one day was made Emperor, the next seemed to Rule, and the third, was slain by
a Soldier; who being ready to strike him, said, This is the sword, Sarcasinus.
that thou thy self made, because he had formerly been an Iron-smith. Of
Servius Tullius who being born a slave died a King? with infinite others.

Anacoen^sis communicatio.
Tell me, o Quintus Coepio, did not thou sufficiently feel the inconstancy of
Fortune? when, after thou had been Praetor, Consul, Pontifex Maximus, called
the Patron of the Senate, and had triumphed in the City; thy body, as of a
malefactor, was mangled by the hands of the common Executioner, a public and
sad spectacle to the people of Rome. And thou, o Marius, thou most miserable
amongst the miserable, and most happy amongst the happy, did not thou taste
the cruelty of Fortune's inconstancy? who after thou had subdued Africa,
drove King Jugurth before thy Chariot, defeated the Armies of diverse Enemies
of the people of Rome, erected two trophies in the City, been seven times
Consul, wast at last proscribed and banished. And, Alcibiades, had not thou
as great cause as any to exclaim against the inconstancy of Fortune? Yes
surely: if, after Nobility, Riches, Beauty, favor of the Hirmos Asyndeton.
Citizens, greatest Command, highest Power, quickest Wit; Condemning,
Banishment, Selling of thy goods, Poverty, Hatred of thy Country, and after all
a violent Death, can give sufficient cause of complaint. But how shall I enough
commend thy prudence, Philip, in considering the inconstancy of Fortune, who,
when much and various felicity happened to thee in one day; criedst out, Oh
Fortune! strike me with some misfortune. So well did thou know her
inconstancy.

Prosopopeia
Polycrates King of the Samians if he should rise from the dead, and appear
upon the Stage, would thus declame against Fortunes inconstancy, Oh Fortune!
thou blind, inconstant and mad goddess, what a spectacle of thy inconstancy
did thou design me? how did thou flatter me, that thou might deceive me,
how did thou allure me with a seeming constancy of thy favor, I could not
wish what I did not presently obtain, all things succeeded according to my
desire. I was forced to make mine own misfortune, which I did by throwing a
Ring, dear to me, into the Sea; yet that was brought back again to my Table in
the belly of a Fish; so that I became the wonder and the envy of almost all the
World: yet at last did thou change thy countenance, sufferedst me to be taken
Prisoner by Orontes one of Darius Praefectus.
Commanders, and by him to be Cruci assigi.
Gibetted on the highest top of the Mountain Mycale, where my joints and
members rotted in the air, a joyful Spectacle to the Samians mine own
Subjects.

Occupatio Anthypophora Subjectio Prolepsis.
Fortune, may some man say, is inconstant indeed, in some things, a few, small
matters, scarce worth the looking after. Yea, she is inconstant, in many, in
all, in the highest things, and of greatest Consequence, and triumphs most, to
show her inconstancy in them.

Inversio.
Fortune is constant, say some; for she keeps a constant course in going about
the World, taking from some, giving to others, now smiling, now frowning, now
shining, now reigning now building up, now throwing down. I answer, Such a
constancy is an argument of greater inconstancy.

Polysyndeton.
High and Low, and Rich, and Poor, Kings and Peasants, Great and Small, Good
and Bad, Honest and Dishonest, are all alike subject to Fortune's inconstancy.

Paralipsis.
Fortune is inconstant, that I may let pass her other vices.

Fortune is inconstant; I do not tell Apophasis.
you that she is mad, and blind.

Pleonasmus.
Who has not heard with their Ears, and seen with their Eyes, even in a
thousand things the inconstancy of Fortune?

Parenthesis.
I believ (nor is my belief vain) that Fortune is the most inconstant thing in
the World.

Parenthesis.
I hold and judge (and why may not I profess it) that nothing is more
inconstant then Fortune.

Amplificatio per Impossible: ubi obiter variantur Impossible and Nunquam.
It is Impossible, It is not possible, How is it possible? It cannot be Can it
be? How can it be? It can by no means be,
but that Fortune be inconstant.

All things may sooner be, then What cannot sooner be, then
that Fortune should be constant.

It is not to be avoided, It is not to be refused, Can it be avoided? refused?
but that Fortune will remain inconstant.

It must needs be, It cannot but be, How should it otherwise be? but
that Fortune should be uncertain.

Paroemia.
A Wolf shall marry the Sheep, A Locust shall bring forth an Elephant, The Sea
shall bring forth Vines, The Snayl shall outrun the Hare, and the Tortoyse the
Eagle, Brambles shall bring forth Violets, and Thorns Roses, The Rivers shall
be carried toward their Fountains, The Fountains themselves shall thirst, The
Earth shall fly, The Beetle shall make honey, and the Guat milk, The Crabs
shall go forward, The Nightingale shall cease to Sing,
before Fortune leave her inconstancy.

The Owl shall sing like the Nightingale, The Heaven shall fall, The Earth
shall ascend above the Sky, Mountains shall be transplaced, The Mule shall
bring forth, Water and Fire shall agree together, The Fire shall be kindled
with Snow, A Tempest shall be calmed with a song, The Earth shall be bored
thorough, The Sun shall change his course, The Loadstone shall turn from the
North, Groves shall grow on the Waves, Sea-weeds shall be found on the
Mountains, The Stars shall fall, The motion of each starr shall be irregular,
The Day shall be turned to night, The waters of the Sea shall leave their
saltness, The Sea shall be plowed, A Crop shall be reaped from the Sand,
when Fortune bids adieu to her inconstancy.

Past moments shall be recalled, The Meddows shall never more have flowers, The
Heavens shall want their Stars, Day shall want Light, No sweetness shall be in
Roses, The Fish shall burn in the Ocean, No Joy shall be in Heaven, nor Pain in
Hell, The Flames shall descend, The Mountains forgetting their weight shall fly
as Atoms through the sky,
If ever Fortune embrace constancy.

The Heavens shall rest, The Sun and Stars shall shine together, The Pibbles
shall mount up to the Stars, The Earth shall be adorned with Stars, The Flocks
shall invite the Lions to their folds, The Skies shall endure the heavy plough,
The Water shall give flames, and Fire waters, The Sun shall rise in the West,
The Ants shall leave their industry, The Bees shall forget to make Honey,
Maenalian Hounds shall fly from the Hare, Nature shall become preposterous, No
Element shall keep his proper seat, Fire shall be cold, and Water shall give
heat,
sooner then Fortune shall become constant

Summer shall give Snow, Does shall fright Lions, The Crows shall fly through
the Air whiter then Snow, Swans shall be as black as pitch, Oxen shall cut the
Air with their wings, Marbles shall be softer then Wax, The Chickens shall
prey upon the Kite, and Geese upon the Fox. The Hare shall chase the Hound, and
the Dove the Hawk,
sooner then Fortune shall become constant

Confirmatio a perpetuitate veritatis, ubi obiter variantur, Perpetuo and
Semper.
Whilst Sun and Stars shall run their course, While Stars shall embellish
Heaven, and Flowers the Earth, Whilst Neptune's arms, shall embrace the earth,
Whilst Cynthia shall renew her Horns, Whilst Lucifer foretells the approaching
Morn, Whilst Arctos shuns the Sea, Whilst Mountains give their shades, Whilst
Streams their tribute to the Ocean pay, Whilst Day has Light, and Night
succeeds the Day, Whilst the Summer follows the Spring, and Autumn succeeds the
Summer, Whilst the Sun casts light, or the Earth shadows, Whilst the Land
bounds the Sea, and Air the Land, Whilst the Rivers carry Waters, or those
waters Fishes, Whilst the Earth has Trees, Whilst the Bore loves the tops of
Mountains, Whilst Bees love thy me, and Bears honey,
ever will Fortune be inconstant

Till time and memory shall be no more, Till time shall have no plumes, Till
time shall be as bald before, as he is behind, Till time shall be swallowed up
by Eternity, Till Lachesis have no more thread to draw, Those Proverbi^l
speeches which stand for Never, may by prefixing Till or Until stand for Ever,
as appear by these Examples.
Till the Woolfe shall marry the Sheep, Till the Sun shall change his Course,
Till the Sun shall rise in the West, Till day shall want his light, Till Time,
that gives all things their end, shall have it self an End; To the last
Syllable of recorded Time;
Never will Fortune be inconstant

I will not trouble you nor my self, any longer with so sad and so unwelcome a
Subject; and therefore though Fortune can never rest, yet I here will.

Sentence. V. Labor brings forth Glory.
Synonymia simplex Heterosis Activi Passivo.
GLory is brought forth by Labor.

Labor breeds Glory:

Glory is bred by Labor.

Labor begets Glory:

Glory is begot by Labor.

Labor engenders Glory:

Glory is engendered by Labor.

Labor brings Glory:

Glory is brought by Labor.

Labor sends Glory into the World:

Glory is sent into the World by Labor.

Industry brings forth Glory:

Glory is brought forth by Industry.

Study begets Fame:

Fame is begot by study.

Painfulness breeds honor:

Honor is bred by painfulness.

Vigilance brings esteem:

Esteem is brought by vigilance.

Care engenders reputation:

Reputation is engendered by Care.

Diligence brings praise:

Amplificatio Metaphorica, ex relatis: Heterosis Verbi cum Nomine. Heterosis
seu Mutatio Affirm. Negat.
Praise is brought by diligence.

Labor is parent to glory:

Glory is the child to labor.

Labor is the father to H^nour:

Honor is the son to Labor.

Industry is the mother to Glory:

Glory is the daughter to Industry.

There is nothing brings forth Glory more then Labor:

There is not any thing that brings forth Glory more then Labor.

Erot^sis, seu Interrogatio.
Nothing brings forth Glory, but Labor.

What brings forth Glory? Labor.

What brings forth Glory, but Labor?

What brings forth Glory, if not Labor?

What? does not Labor bring forth Glory?

What more brings forth Glory then Labor?

What can more bring forth Glory, then Labor?

Can any thing bring forth Glory more then Labor?

How should any thing bring forth Glory more then Labor?

Is there any thing so brings forth Glory as Labor?

Has the wide World any thing that brings forth Glory more then Labor?

In what dark and blind corner lies that thing, that brings forth Glory more
then Labor?

What from East to West so brings forth Glory as Labor?

In what secret and unknown region lies that thing, that bringth forth Glory,
more then Labor?

What is that at last, which brings forth Glory like Labor?

Where shall we find that thing, that brings forth Glory, more then Labor?

What new found Land does contain that thing, which brings forth Glory, as
Labor is wont?

What new America not yet discovered has any thing, that brings forth Glory
more then Labor?

What unknown Land amongst the Antipodes contains a thing that brings forth
Glory more then Labor?

Ecphonesis seu
O the great O the strange Exclamatio.
O the wonderful O the incredible O the unspeakable O the inexpressible O the
inconceivable O the singular
Glory that labor brings forth.

O the innumerable O the infinite
Honors that come from Labors.

Admiratio. cum Isodynamia periphrastica.
Good God! how Labor brings forth Glory!

Good gods! how Labor makes a way to Glory!

Immortal God! how Labor prepares a way to Glory!

Immortal gods! how Labor paves a way to Glory!

Good lack! how is Labor the high way to Glory!

O! how does Labor lay the foundation to Glory!

O! how true is that old saying, Labor is the Foundation of Glory!

O ye Gods above! how does Labor digg the foundation of Glory.

Oh ye Gods and Goddesses! how does Labor cast the foundation of Glory.

Adjuratio:
Let me not live, Let me die, Let me not enjoy my health, Let me perish
miserably,
If I do not believ it most true, that without Labor there is no Glory.

So let the Muses love me, So may the Gods favor me, So may the Heavens be
propitious to me, So may I ever be master of my desire
As I think it most true, that Labor is the fountain and spring of Glory.

Commiseratio.
Alas! what Glory could there be, if Labor did not produce it?

Ah! what folly is it to expect Glory without Labor, since Glory owes her
original to Labor.

Woe is me, how it irketh me to see their ignorance that do not know, that
Labor is the Author of Glory.

Addubitatio.
I do much doubt, whether there be any thing that more procures Glory, then
Labor.

I am not certain, whether there be any thing in the World that advances
Glory, as Labor does.

It is a thing to me not free from all controversy, whether Glory come from any
thing but Labor.

I know not well by what we attain Glory more then by Labor.

It is a very great question to me, whether there be any thing, that more
excites Glory then Labor.

Abominatio.
Fie upon his intolerable blindness, that does not see, that Labor lays the
first stone in the edifice of Glory.

Out upon his gross ignorance that does not know, that Labor is the cause of
Glory.

O shame! can any be ignorant of this? that Glory naturally flows from Labor?

Collatio ad simile.
As the many-colour'd flowers spring from the ground; so does Glory from Labor.

As you see the light beaning out from the Sun; so does Glory issue forth from
Labor.

Have you not seen a stream deriving it self from the Fountain? even so does
Glory proceed from Labor.

Like as the Rivers flow from the Sea, so does Glory arise from Labor.

As I have seen the industrious Bees bring forth Honey, so Labor brings forth
Glory.

As the fragrant Smell comes from the Flowers, so Glory comes from Labor.

As the Tree brings forth fruit, so does Labor bring forth Glory.

As the flame ascends from the Fire, so does Glory shine forth out of Labor.

Collatio ad contrarium
As Idleness brings forth infamy and contempt; so Labor brings forth
Honor and Glory.

Metaphora. Allegoria.
Glory is a Stream from Labor's Fountain.

Glory is a Flower out of Labor's Garden.

Glory is a River of Labor's Ocean.

Glory is a blossom of Labor's Tree.

Glory is a flame from Labor's Fire.

Distributio partium.
The Liberal Sciences, by their Study and Watching, profess that all their
Glory proceeds from Labor: and the Mechanical, by their public and continual
toyling, seem openly to proclaim, that they expect little Glory without Labor.

Grammatica.
Grammar has called all her Jury of Parts of Speech under Examination, and
they all with one consent, give in this Verdict, that, They that decline Labor
can in no wise attain to Glory.

Rhetorica.
Rhetoric presently cites her Demosthenes for an Example, who though at first
he could not pronounce the first letter of her Name, yet afterward by his
Labor came to a wonderful height of Glory.

Logica.
Logic tells us, No man will deny it, but he that is so absurd to deny
conclusions.

Musica.
Music harps upon no other string but the truth of this Sentence.

Arithmetica.
Arithmetic esteems it as true as her Golden-Rule.

Geometry holds it as true as any Geometria.
of Euclides propositions, and is ready to Demonstrate it by a Diagramme.

Astronomia.
Astronomy is so convinced of the evidence of this truth, that she complains,
the brightness of it out-shines her Stars.

Collectio, Illatio sive a Majore.
Now since this is the speech of the Liberal Sciences, certainly the Mechanical
were if they were permitted to speak would not contradict them!

Asteismus.
He that can count the Stars of the Sky, or the Sands on the Lybian shore; let
him go count the Honors and Glory which Labor does bring forth.

Obiter variatur Multi.
The Honors that proceed from Collatio ad minus.
Labor are more then the Sands of the Sea, Stars of the Sky, Hairs Auxesis
Hyperbolica.
of the Head, Drops of Rain, Pellets of Hail, Flakes of Snow, Drops of Dew,
Leaves of Trees, Boughs of Forests, Blades of Grass, Ears of Corn, Birds of
the Air, Fishes of the Sea, Flowers of the Spring, Apples of Autumn, Summer's
Flies, Summer's Ants, Motes in the Sun, Bees in Hybla, Billows of the
Carpathian Sea, etc.

Collatio ad minus.
To bring forth Glory and not by Labor would be a greater work, then the
twelve Labors of Hercules.

Admiratio.
O what a strange sight would it be to see Glory, and not brought forth by
Labor!

Confirmatio and Amplificatio per praefationem, Hyperbolicam, and formas
generales.
Who can express What tongue can express No words can express Who can count No
Tongue can count No Arithmetic can number
the infinite Honors that come from Labor.

Auxesis.
I am not able to express, No Eloquence is able to express, It is not to tell,
It is wonderful to tell, It is not to be believed, It is beyond belief, It
transcends a strong belief,
how much Labor gives occasion for Glory.

It is not to think, No man can in mind conceive, You can scarce believe,
how much, Labor gives occasion for Glory.

Even to a Proverb, It has the place of a Proverb, It is instead of a Proverb,
It is become a Proverb, It has obtained the force of a Proverb, It has crept
into the number of Proverbs, It is an Adage of a received authority, It is a
saying as true, as old
Labor brings forth Glory.

Amplificatio and Confirmatio per Asserverationem.
I will never again believe mine own, nor the judgment of all the Ancient; if
Glory can be obtained but by Labor.

If Glory does not arise from Labor I know not from whence it does.

Cave credas.
Never believe, but that Glory is the companion of Labor.

It is a Truth approved by the consent of all men, It is a Truth, manifest even
to blind men, It is a thing so plain, as nothing can be plainer; so certain, as
nothing can be more certain; Paradiastole. Metaphora.
It is a Truth so apparent, and evident, that it seems writ not with Ink, but
with the Beams of the Sun; It is a matter out of question, and needs no
dispute; It is a Truth approved of, by the Judgment and Testimony of the whole
World, It is as true, as either Jove's, or Apollo's Oracle, It is as true, as
the Ammonian, Dodonean, or Delphick Oracle, Apollo never answered truer from
his tripos, than
that where Labor goes before, Glory is not far behind.

It is a Truth, that requires not many words, or a long Oration to confirm it,
It appears more clearly then the midday-Sun, The Sun needs no other light, that
it may be seen; nor a Trumpet to proclaim the brightness of his Beams; so is it
in this evident Truth, He lights a Candle in the Sunshine, that goes about to
explain this Truth; It is a Truth, than which what can be more certain? what
more plain? Asteismus.
It is a Truth so out of all Controversy, that he that would prove it, may go
tell men, The Sun shines, when he triumphs in his meridian-Glory. Enantiosis.
He must be either of great boldness, or very little wit, that denies,
Hypothesis.
He that seriously considers it, is blind, if he do not see; obstinate, if
seeing he do not confess;
that Glory accompanies Labor.

Amplificatio per Confutationem and primo per Interrogationem,
Who is so blind, as not to see? Who is so impudent, that he dares deny? What
impudence is it, not to confess? Who does not understand? Who, but a Madman,
would deny? Who lives in such Cymmerian darkness, that he does not see, and
confess? Who, except he have his Brains in his Heels, will deny? Who, except he
have his soul instead of salt, will deny? Can Impudence her self so put off all
shame, as to deny?
that Labor promotes Glory.

Nothing is more frequent in Orators, Poets, Historians; than, None, but the
most impudent man in the World, can deny;
that Glory follows Labor.

Asteismus.
Let him affirm with that doting Philosopher, that Snow is black, who denies;
It were better to deny all things, than this one; Allegoria.
He should be cudgelled into belief, and confuted with club-Arguments, who
denies; One Democritus will not suffice, to laugh at his Folly, who denies;
Hyperbole.
An acre of Hellebore will not cure him, that denies; Give him some Hellebore
to purge his Brain, that will not confess; He understands little, that does not
know; Paradiastole.
He does not speak, but bray like an Ass, that denies; No man's Nose is so
stopped but he easily smells out this;
that Glory is the shadow to Labors body.

Send him to Bedlam, as a man, that has a Vertigo in his Brain, who denies;
Collatio
They are but as Sibyll's leaves, whatsoever are objected against this Truth,
The Arguments against this Truth are lighter and vainer than the leaves of the
Sibylls, Metaphora.
They are but Ropes of sand, Towers of Lamia, Old-wive's Tales, vain Dreams,
that men prattle against this Truth; Metaphora.
There is neither crumb, nor drop of sense, or reason, in those things, that
are spoken against this Truth, Similitudo
As one said of the Nightingal, she was a Voice, Protasis.
and nothing else; so they Apodosis.
are words, and wind, and no more, that are objected against this Truth,
that there can scarce be Labor without Glory, or Glory without Labor.

Paradiastole.
It comes not from Apollo's Tripos, but the Old-Wive's Trivet, whatsoever is
muttered against this Truth, Epitrope.
Let him be rich, let him be noble, let him be great, let him be what you will;
fool he must needs be, and foolhardy too, that dares mutter against this
Truth, Metaphora.
I could wish my self a Squinancy to stop his saucy chaps, which dare bark
against this Truth, Hypothesis Ironica and Sarcastica.
If he be not blind enough, make him blinder, that does not see, and
acknowledge this palpable Truth, He must either shut his eyes, or put them out,
to whom the light of this Truth does not clearly shine, He is hardened against
all Truth, that denies this manifest Truth, Asteismus.
Let him go deny Principles, that will not confess this Maxim,
that Labo^r ends in Glory.

He must have a Forehead of Brass, a Brain of Lead; and a Tongue of Iron, that
dares contradict so confessed a Truth, Metonymia Adjuncti.
Rubb over your Forehead, Impudence, and dare to deny;
that Labor ends in Glory.

Confirmatio ab Exemplo Poetico.
Do you desire that this may yet be made more plain by an Example?

Hercules.
Consider Hercules, who by his many and infinite Labors which he with much
patience undertook, got not only great Fame and Glory amongst men while he
lived, but immortal glory amongst the gods, when he died being received into
their number and Society.

Ab Exemplo Historico. Cleanthes.
Or if you desire a more familiar Example look upon Cleanthes, who when he had
not where withal to pay his Teachers, he drew water in the night, and so
earned money to give to those that taught him Philosophy on the day. By which
his Labor and Pains he became a most Excellent and Famous Philosopher, and his
very Name carries in it, The Flower of Glory.

For the Testimonies and judgments Confirmatio a ^estimonio.
of ancient writers in this point, I could be more then infinite.

Hesiod.
The gods have set Sweat before Virtue, says Hesiod that ancient, yet true
Poet.

Euripides.
Labor is the Father of a good report says Euripides, the grave Tragedian.

Epicharmus.
He that refuses Labor condemns himself, as unworthy of all good things;
for whatsoever is at all good, is got by Labor, as Epicharmus an ancient
Author writes.

Socrates.
Neither a woman without a man, nor good hope without Labor can bring forth
any profitable thing, says Socrates, judged by Apollo's oracle the wisest of
men.

Amplificatio a tropis and figuris sive dictionis, sive Sententiae.
And if you look upon the contrary a Contrario
on Idleness; what shall you find? Plato that grave Philosopher will tell Plato.
you Idleness is a living death; and that a man, while he sleeps, is no more
worth then if he were dead.

Labor breeds no contempt.

Labor brings fo^th no infamy.

Labor does not end in ignominy.

Shame and contempt do not use Litotes. Meiosis Tapinosis. Ironia.
to follow Labor and industry.

O take heed of Labor, you shall get nothing by that, but loss of time and
infamy: Yes indeed I am in earnest, am I not, think you?

Allegoria.
Glorie's harvest comes from Labors tillage.

Metaphora.
Labor is the Gentleman Usher of Glory.

Epizeuxis
Labor, labor it is, that Glory brings: And adds more Pearls unto the Crowns
of Kings.


Anadiplosis
By Labor's ladder glory does ascend: Ascend, till heaven does her Aspiring
end.


Anaphora.
Labor breeds Glory: Labor raises Fame: Labor gives Honors, Labor gives
Good-name.


Epistrophe.
As corn grows none, without Labor and pain: So Glorie's gone, without Labor
and pain.


Symploce.
What Glorye's that? does not from Labor grow: What Honors that? does not
from Labor flow.


Epanalepsis.
Glory comes after: Labor's shade is Glory.

Epanodos.
Labor breeds Fame: and Fame, by Labor bred, Advances Labor: Labor crowns
Fame's head.


Pragmat ographia periphrasis.
Labor is the best fruit and provision Hypotyposis Descriptio.
of Old age, the Ornament of the Green-head, the Crown of the Hoary-haire; the
most bitter meat in the first taste, the sweetest in the last relish; the
Wisdom of Young men, the Praise of Old; and the gods money for which they
sell all good things to Mortals.

Parodiastole.
Labor does not only prevent shame and infamy, but brings Glory and Honor.

Enantiosis.
Labor commends Glory by its difficulty, and Glory honors Labor by its
dignity.

Synoeceiosis.
Glory is not glory which is not sweetened with the pleasure of the bypast
Labor.

Inglorious is that glory that has Oxymoron.
not a taste of sweetness even from the asperity of that Labor by which it was
procured

Aetiologia.
Labor must needs bring forth Glory, because Glory is fastened to the heels of
Labor.

Epitrope.
Let Labor be troublesome, I confess it: let it be loath some, I do not deny
it: let it be unwelcome to humane nature, I grant it: yet it brings forth Fame
and Glory, and Immortality.

Climax incrementum.
Labor has raised from the earth, magnified amongst men, advanced to the
Stars, placed amongst the gods.

Erotesis.
What words? What tongue? What eloquence can sufficiently express the celebrity
of that Glory which comes from Labor?

Ecphonesis.
O the incredible fruit and benefit of Labor which always ends in Glory and
Honor!

Epiphonema.
Labor is even able to make men gods: such and so great is the force of Labor.

Epanorthosis.
Labor never brings forth any infamy, infamy did I say? nay, it always
brings great Honor and Glory.

Labor brings forth Glory, as appears Aposiopesis.
from -- but I will not trouble you with such known Examples.

Hirmos Asyndeton Dialyton.
Glory, Fame, Honor, Dignity, good Name, Reputation, Esteem, proceed from
Labor.

Hirmos Polysyndeton.
So infamy and shame and ignominy and reproach, contempt and obloquie, poverty
and calamity proceed from Idleness.

Apophasis.
Labor brings forth Glory, I do not tell you withal, that it brings forth
Wealth, Knowledge, etc.

Paralipsis.
Labor brings forth Glory, to let pass her other Fruits, and Benefits.

Pleonasmus.
Who have not heard with their Ears of thousands, and who have not seen with
their Eyes infinite numbers? which by Labor have ascended to the highest top
of Glory.

Parenthesis.
Labor (but who knows not that) brings forth Glory.

Many of mean Births and no Fortune's, men in the Eyes of the World, of no
hopes or reckoning, have by Labor attained to such an height of Glory, Wealth,
Wisdom, Learning, and Knowledge, that they have become the principal men in
the Commonwealth, O Labor, how Apostrophe.
bitter is thy beginning! How sweet and fruitful is thy end! O Idleness! how
pleasant and delightful art thou in the beginning, how shameful and ignominious
in the end!

Aporia
What shall I do? which way shall I turn me? how shall I order the course of my
Oration? Into what harvest shall I thrust my sicle? Shall I go to the Poets?
There I meet with Homer, Hesiod, Virgil, Ovid, Horace. Shall I betake my self
to the Orators? there I meet with Demosthenes, Aeschines, Cicero, Hortensius,
Caesar, Crassus, Brutus. If I take a journey to the Historians, there meet me
Herodotus, Thucydides, Plutarch, Livie, Tacitus, Salust. If I come to the
Philosophers, there compass me about, Socrates, plato, Aristotle, with
innumerable swarms of diverse Sects. Dare I go into the Army amongst Soldiers,
there meet me legions, Alexander, Epaminondas, Themistocles, Caesar, Pompey,
Cato, Scipio, Hannibal. And all these by Labor have purchased to themselves an
immortal Name and Glory.

Tell me, o Hercules, By what Anacoenosis Communicatio.
steps did thou ascend into Heaven? how, I pray thee, did thou become so
famous and glorious? though thou thy self hold thy peace, yet thy example at
this day tells us loud enough, that thou by thy truly Herculean labor,
becam'st so renowned. I could call thee to witness, O Plato, thee O Aristotle,
thee O Socrates, thee O Cleanthes; but I forbear.

Prosopopoeia.
For methinks I hear Hercules himself speaking, and you if you hearken
attentively, may enjoy the Benefit of his Speech. O virtue, when I stood in the
Bivium, and thou propoundedst one way to me, Pleasure another; how happy was my
choice! how happy was thy eloquence, which persuaded me to go this way, though
troublesome, full of labor and encombrances; since in the end I found nothing
but ease and pleasure, glory and delight; and now am I a God, whereas if I had
gone the way of pleasure, I had bin a stinking carcass.

Inversio.
But may some men say, Does not Riches, Wealth, Learning, Wisdom, procure
glory? how then does labor only bring it forth? because Riches, Wealth,
Learning, and Wisdom are Labor's daughters, and Glory is the portion he gives
them.

Anthypophora Subjectio Prolepsis.
Labor, may some say, may be some occasion of Glory, in some things at some
times, in some men; Nay, Labor and Industry can never miss of Glory.

Amplificatio per Impossible: ubi obiter variantur Impossible and Nunquam.
It is Impossible, It is not possible, How is it possible? Can it be p^ssible?
It cannot be How can it be? Can it be? It can by no means be,
but that Labor should bring forth Glory.

All things may sooner be, than What cannot sooner be, than that Glory should
not come from Labor. It is not to be avoided, It is not to be refused, Can it
be avoided? refused?
but that Labor will end in Glory.

It must needs be, It cannot but be, How should it otherwise be? but
that Honor does arise from Labor.

Paraemia.
A Wolf shall marry the Sheep, A Locust shall bring forth an Elephant, The Sea
shall bring forth Vines, The Snayl shall outrun the Hare, and the Tortoyse the
Eagle, Brambles shall bring forth Violets, and Thorns Roses, The Rivers shall
be carried toward their Fountains; The Fountains themselves shall thirst, The
Earth shall fly, The Beetle shall make honey, and the Gnat milk, The Crabs
shall go forward, The Nightingale shall cease to Sing,
when Labor is not the forerunner of Glory.

The Owl shall sing like the Nightingale, The Heavens shall fall, The Earth
shall ascend above the Sky, Mountains shall be transplaced, The Mule shall
bring forth, Water and Fire shall agree together, The Fire shall be kindled
with Snow, A Tempest shall be calmed with a song, The Earth shall be bored
thorough, The Sun shall change his course, The Loadstone shall turn from the
North, Groves shall grow on the Waves, Sea-weeds shall be found on the
Mountains, The Stars shall fall, The motion of each starr shall be irregular,
when Labor misseth of Glory.

The Day shall be turned to night, The waters of the Sea shall leave their
saltness. The Sea shall be plowed, A Crop shall be reaped from the Sand, Past
moments shall be recalled, The Meadows shall never more have flowers, The
Heavens shall want their Stars, Day shall want Light, No sweetness shall be in
Roses, The Fish shall burn in the Ocean, No Joy shall be in Heaven, nor Pain in
Hell, The Flames shall descend, The Mountains forgetting their weight shall fly
as Atoms through the sky,
when Glory does not tread on the heels of Labor.

The Heavens shall rest, The Sun and Stars shall shine together, The Pibbles
shall mount up to the Stars, The Earth shall be adorned with Stars, The Flocks
shall invite the Lions to their folds, The Skies shall endure the heavy plough,
The Water shall give flames, and Fire waters, The Sun shall rise in the West,
The Ants shall leave their industry, The Bees shall forget to make Honey,
Maenalian Hounds shall fly from the Hare, Nature shall become preposterous, No
Element shall keep his proper seat, Fire shall be cold, and Water shall give
heat, Summer shall give Snow, Does shall fright Lions, The Crows shall fly
through the Air whiter then Snow, Swans shall be as black as pitch, Oxen shall
cut the Air with their wings, Marbles shall be softer then Wax, The Chickens
shall prey upon the Kite, and Geese upon the Fox. The Hare shall chase the
Hound, and the Dove the Hawk,
when Labor does not conclude in Glory.

Amplificatio perpetuitatem veritatis, ubi obiter variantur, Perpetuo and
Semper.
Whilst Sun and Stars shall run their course, While Stars shall embellish
Heaven, and Flowers the Earth, Whilst Neptune's arms, shall embrace the earth,
Whilst Cynthia shall renew her Horns, Whilst Lucifer foretells the approaching
Morn,
will Glory be the companion of Labor.

Whilst Arctos shuns the Sea, Whilst Mountains give their shades, Whilst
Streams their tribute to the Ocean pay, Whilst Day has Light, and Night
succeeds the Day, Whilst the Summer follows the Spring, and Autumn succeeds the
Summer, Whilst the Sun casts light, or the Earth shadows, Whilst the Land
bounds the Sea, and Air the Land, Whilst the Rivers carry Waters, or those
waters Fishes, Whilst the Earth has Trees, Whilst the Bore loves the tops of
Mountains, Whilst Bees love thyme, and Bears honey,
ever will Glory follow Labor.

Till time and memory shall be no more, Till time shall have no plumes, Till
time shall be as bald before, as he is behind, Till Time shall be swallowed up
by Eternity, Till Lachesis have no more thread to draw, Those Proverbial
speeches which stand for Never, may by prefixing Till or Until stand for Ever,
as appear^ by these Examples.
Till the Woolfe shall marry the Sheep, Till the Sun shall change his Course,
Till the Sun shall rise in the West, Till day shall want his light, To the last
Syllable of recorded Time; Till Time, that gives all things theirs, shall have
its own End;
will Glory follow Labor.

Conclusio. Epilogus. Peroratio.
Much more might be said in this point, but I have labored sufficienly: I will
now sit down, and expect what Glory will follow.

The sixth and last Sentence.
Synonymia simplex.
THe loss of Time is most miserable.

The loss of Time is most lamentable.

The loss of Time is most sad.

The loss of Time is most heavy.

The loss of Time is most mournful.

The loss of Time is most calamitous.

The loss of Time is to be bewailed.

The loss of Time is deplorable.

Heterosis partium orationis. Isodynamia periphrastica.
To lose Time is to be come most miserable.

He that loses Time, cannot but be miserable.

The loss of Time brings with it great misery.

The way to the greatest misery, is the loss of Time.

There cannot be the loss of Time, without the greatest misery.

The heaviest misery waits upon the loss of Time.

Give me any loss but the loss of Time.

There is not any loss deserves the name of loss, in comparison of the loss
of Time.

There are very few that have not felt what a misery it is to lose Time.

Loss of Time is the forerunner of the greatest misery.

The loss of Time ends in the greatest misery.

Greatest misery follows the loss of Time.

If loss of Time go before, extreme misery is not far behind.

The greatest misery is in the loss of Time.

The loss of Time is the cause of the greatest misery.

The loss of Time gives occasion to unspeakable misery.

The loss of Time breeds incredible calamity.

Mutatio Affirmat. Negativis.
No misery to the misery from the loss of Time.

None can sufficiently bewail the loss of Time.

No loss can bring more misery, then the loss of Time.

Nothing can be more miserable then the loss of Time.

Nothing is miserable, if not the loss of Time.

There is not any thing can be more miserable then the loss of Time.

There is nothing but is less miserable, then the loss of Time.

Nothing is miserable, if the loss of Time be not.

There is nothing so miserable as the loss of Time.

Heterosis Activi Passivo.
Nothing surpasses the loss of Time for misery.

The loss of Time is surpassed by nothing for misery.

Erotesis sive Interrogatio.
What is miserable, if not the loss of Time?

What is miserable, but the loss of Time?

What is miserable? The loss of Time.

What? is not the loss of Time miserable?

What is more miserable then the loss of Time?

What can be more miserable then the loss of Time?

Can any thing be more miserable then the loss of Time?

How should any thing be more miserable then the loss of Time?

Is there any thing so miserable as the loss of Time?

Has the wide World any thing more miserable then the loss of Time?

In what dark and blind corner lies that thing, which is so miserable as the
loss of Time?

What from East to West is so miserable as to lose Time?

In what secret and unknown region lies that thing, whose loss is equal to
the loss of Time?

What region in the earth has not known the misery from the loss of Time?

What is that at last, which is so miserable as the loss of Time?

Where shall we find that thing, that is more miserable then the loss of Time?

What un-found Land contains those things, from whose loss comes more misery,
then from the loss of Time?

What new America not yet discovered, has any thing so miserable as the loss
of Time?

Ecphonesis Exclamatio.
What unknown Land among the Antipodes, has any thing so miserable as the loss
of Time?

O the miserable loss of Time!

O the intolerable O the great O the strange O the wonderful O the incredible O
the singular O the unspeakable O the unexpressible O the inconceivable O the
innumerable O the infinite O the very many
miseries that proceed from the loss of Time!

Amiratio.
Good God! how miserable is the loss of Time!

Good gods! what loss can be compared to the loss of Time!

Immortal God! how many thousands of calamities follow the loss of Time!

Immortal gods! what loss to be bemoaned with more tears, then the loss of
Time!

Good lack! what an incredible misery the loss of Time carries with it!

Oh! how is the misery from the loss of Time, able to break an heart of steel!

Oh! how true is that old saying, The loss of Time is above all loss!

O ye Gods above! how is the misery in the loss of Time known only to you
alone!

Adjuratio: sive Imprecatio.
Oh all ye Gods and Goddesses! that rule the motions of swift flying Time! how
well do you know, what it is to lose his precious moments!

Let me not live, Let me die, Let me not enjoy my health, Let me perish
miserably, Let me be cast to the Crows, Let fortune frown upon me, Let me never
see a a good day Let an ill Genius wait upon me, Let nothing prosper with me,
If I think any thing more miserable then the loss of Time.

So let the Muses favor me, So let the Gods love me, So may the Heavens be
propitious to me, So may I ever be master of my desire So may all things that I
undertake, have their wished success. So may fortune ever smile upon me, So
may good Angels guard me,
As I think no misery equal to that in the loss of Time.

Commiseratio.
Alas! the loss of Time is very miserable!

Ah! how sad is the misery of the loss of Time!

Woe is me, what great calamities tread on the heels of the loss of Time!

O Grief! how are all miseries surpassed in the misery from the loss of Time!

Dubitatio.
I do much doubt, whether there be any thing more miserable then the loss of
Time!

It is a very great question to me, whether any misery be equal to that from
the loss of Time.

I am not certain, whether there be any thing, from whose loss greater misery
can proceed, then from the loss of Time.

I do not know what I should say, whether that the loss of Time is miserable,
or misery it self.

It is a thing to me not free from all controversy, whether the misery in the
loss of Time, does not lighten all other misery.

Abominatio.
Fie upon that intolerable misery that follows the loss of Time?

Out upon all those unlucky things that occasion the loss of Time!

O shame! that men should be so careless in the use of Time.

When such extreme misery follows the loss of it.

Confirmatio and Amplificatio per praefationem Hyperbolicam, and formas
generales.
Who can express What tongue can express No words can express Who can count No
Tongue can count No Arithmetic can number
The misery that comes from the loss of Time.

I am not able to express, No Eloquence is able to express, It is not to tell,
It is wonderful to tell, It is not to be believed, It is beyond belief, It
transcends a strong belief to credit, It is not to think, No man can in mind
conceive, You can scarce believe,
How miserable the loss of Time is

Even to a Proverb, It has the place of a Proverb, It Is instead of a Proverb,
It is become a Proverb, It has obtained the force of a Proverb, It has crept
into the number of Proverbs, It is an Adage of a received authority, It is a
saying as true, as old
Nothing is more miserable then the loss of Time.

I will never believe mine own, Amplificatio per Asseverationem.
nor the Judgment of all the Ancients, if there be any thing more miserable,
then the loss of Time.

^f the loss of Time be not most miserable, I know not what is,

Cave credas.
Never believe, but that the loss of Time is most miserable.

It is a Truth approved by the consent of all men, It is a Truth, manifest even
to blind men, Paradiastole.
It is a thing so plain, as nothing can be plainer; so certain, as nothing can
be more certain; It is a Truth so apparent, and evident, that it seems writ not
with Ink, but with the Beams of the Sun; It is a matter out of question, and
needs no dispute; It is a Truth approved of, by the Judgment and Testimony of
the whole World,
that nothing is more miserable then the loss of Time.

It is as true, as either Jove's, or Apollo's Oracle, It is as true, as the
Ammonian, Dodonean, or Delphick Oracle, Apollo never answered any thing truer
from his tripos, than It is a Truth, that requires not many words, nor a long
Oration to confirm it, It appears more clearly then the midday-Sun, The Sun
needs no other light, that it may be seen; nor a Trumpet to proclaim the
brightness of his Beams; so is it in this evident Truth, He lights a Candle in
the Sunshine, that goes a bout to explain this Truth; It is a Truth, than
which what can be more certain? what more plain?
That the misery from the loss of Time is the extremest of misery.

Asteismus.
It is a Truth so out of all Controversy, that he that would prove it, may go
tell men, The Sun shines, when he triumphs in his meridian-Glory. Enanti^sis.
He must either be of very great boldn^s^, or very little wit, that denies,
Hypothesis.
He that seriously considers it, is blind, if he do not see; ob^linate, if
seeing he do not confess; Amplificatio per Confutationem and primo per
Interrogationem.
Who is so blind, as not to see? Who is so impudent, that he dares deny? What
impudence is it, not to confess? Who does not understand? Who, but a Madman,
would deny? Who lives in such Cymmerian darkness, that he does not see, and
confess? Who, except he have his Brains in his Heels, will deny? Who, except he
have his soul instead of salt, will deny? Can Impudence her self so put off all
shame, as to deny?
That no misery is comparable to the misery from the loss Time.

Nothing is more frequent in Orators, Poets, Historians; than, None, but the
most impudent man in the World, c^n deny; Asteisinus.
Let him affirm which that doting Philosopher, that Snow is bla^k, whodenies; It
were better to deny all things, than this one; Metaphora.
He should be cudgelled into belief, and confuted with club-Arguments, who
denies; One Democritus will not suffice, to laugh at his Folly, who denies;
Ironia.
Give him some Hellebore to purge his Brain, that will not confess; Hyperbole
An acre of Hellbore will not cure him, that denies; He understands little,
that does not know; Par^diastole.
He does no^ speak, but bray like an Ass, that denies;
that thous^nd miseries follow the loss of Time.

Allego^ia.
No man's N^se is so stopped but he easily smells out this; Send him to Bedlam, as
a man, that has a Vertigo in his Brain, who denies; Collat^o
They are but as Sibyll's leaves, whatsoever are objected against this Truth,
The Arguments against this Truth are lighter and vainer than the leaves of the
Sibylls, Metaphora.
They are but Ropes of sand, Towers of Lamia, Old-wive's Tales, vain Dreams,
that men prattle against this Truth; Metaphora.
There is neither crumb, nor drop of sens^, or reason, in those things, that
are spoken against this Truth, Similitudo
As one said of the Nightingal, she was a Voice, and nothing else; so they
Protasis.
are words, and wind, and no more, that are objected Apodosis.
against this Truth, Paradiastole.

that no misery is equal to that from the loss of Time.

It comes not from Apollo's Tripos, but the Old-Wive's Trivet, whatsoever is
muttered against this Truth, Epitrope.
Let him be rich, let him be noble, let him be great, let him be what you will;
fool he must needs be, and foolhardy too, that dares mutter against this
Truth, Metaphora.
I could wish my self a Squinancy to stop his saucy chaps, which dare bark
against this Truth, If he be not blind enough, make him blinder, that does not
see, and acknowledge this palpable Truth, He must either shut his eyes, or put
them out, to whom the light of this Truth does not clearly shine, He is
hardened against all Truth, that denies this manifest Truth, Asteismus.
Let him go deny Principles, that will not confess this Maxim,
that the loss of Time is the cause of the greatest misery.

He must have a Forehead of Brass, a Brain of Lead; and a Tongue of Iron, that
dares contradict so confessed a Truth, Metonymia Adjuncti.
Rubb over your Forehead, Impudence, and dare to deny;
that the loss of Time is the cause of ^he greatest misery.

Amplificatio per Impossible ubi obiter variantur, Impossible and Nunquam.
It is Impossible, It is not possible, How is it possible? Can it be p^ssible?
It cannot be How can it be? Can it be? It can by no means be,
That any loss should be so calamitous as the loss of Time.

All things may sooner be, What cannot sooner be,
then a loss, like loss of Time.

It is not to be avoided, It is not to be refused, Can it be avoided? refused?
but that the loss of Time will be the most miserable.

It must needs be, It cannot but be, How should it otherwise be? but
that the loss of Time is most lamentable.

Paroemia.
A Wolf shall marry the Sheep, A Lo^ust shall bring forth an Elephant, The Sea
shall bring forth Vines, The Snayl shall outrun the Hare, and the Tortoyse the
Eagle, Brambles shall bring forth Violets, and Thorns Roses, The Rivers shall
be carried toward their Fountains, The Fountains themselves shall thirst, The
Earth shall fly, The Beetle shall make honey, and the Gnat milk, The Crabs
shall go forward, The Nightingale shall cease to Sing,
when he that loses Time is most miserable.

The Owl shall sing like the Nightingale, The Heavens shall fall, The Earth
shall ascend above the S^ie, Mountains shall be transplaced, The Mule shall
bring forth, Water and Fire shall agree together, The Fire shall be kindled
with Snow, A Tempest shall be calmed with a song, The Earth shall be bored
thorough, The Sun shall change his course, The Loadstone shall turn from the
North, Groves shall grow on the Waves, Sea-weeds shall be found on the
Mountains, The Stars shall fall, The motion of each starr shall be irregular,
when the heaviest misery attends not the loss of Time.

The Day shall be turned to night, The waters of the Sea shall leave their
sa^tness The Sea shall be plowed, A Crop shall be re^ped from the Sand, Past
moments shall be recalled, The Meadows shall never more have flowers, The
Heavens shall want their Stars, Day shall want Light, No sweetness shall be in
Roses, The Fish shall burn in the Ocean, No Joy shall be in Heaven, nor Pain in
Hell, The Flames shall des^^^d, The Mountains forgetting their weight shall fly
as Atoms through the sky,
when the l^sse of Time does not go before the greatest misery.

The Heavens shall rest, The Sun and Stars shall shine together, The Pibbles
shall mount up to the Stars, The Earth shall be adorned with Stars, The Fl^cks
shall invi^e the Lions to their folds, The Skies shall endure the heavy plo^gh,
The Water shall give flames, and Fire waters, The Sun shall rise in the West,
The A^ts shall leave their industry, The Bees shall forget to make Honey,
Maenalian Hounds shall fly from the Hare, Nature shall become preposterous, No
Element shall keep his proper seat, Fire shall be cold, and Water shall give
heat,
when the loss of Time can be without the greatest misery.

Summer shall give Snow, Does shall fright Lions, The Crows shall fly through
the Air whiter then Snow, Swans shall be as black as pitch, Oxen shall cut the
Air with their wings, Marbles shall be softer then Wax, The Chickens shall
prey upon the Kite, and Geese upon the Fox. The Hare shall chase the Hound, and
the Dove the Hawk,
when the loss of Time can be without the greatest misery.

Amplificatio perpetuitatem veritatis, ubi obiter variantur, Perpetuo and
Semper.
Whilst Sun and Stars shall run their course, While Stars shall embellish
Heaven, and Flowers the Earth, Whilst Neptune's arms, shall embrace the earth,
Whilst Cynthia shall renew her Horns, Whilst Lucifer foretells the approaching
Morn,
will the loss of Time be most miserable.

Whilst Arctos shuns the Sea, Whilst Mountains give their shades, Whilst
Streams their tribute to the Ocean pay, Whilst Day has Light, and Night
succeeds the Day, Whilst the Summer follows the Spring, and Autumn succeeds the
Summer, Whilst the Sun casts light, or the Earth shadows, Whilst the Land
bounds the Sea, and Air the Land, Whilst the Rivers carry Waters, or those
waters Fishes, Whilst the Earth has Trees, Whilst the Bore loves the tops of
Mountains, Whilst Bees love thyme, and Bears honey,
will the loss of Time be most miserable.

Till time and memory shall be no more, Till time shall have no plumes, Till
time shall be as bald before, as he is behind, Till Time shall be swallowed up
by Eternity, Till Lachesis have no more thread to draw, Those Proverbial
speeches which stand for Never, may by prefixing Till or Until stand for Ever,
as appear by these Examples.
Till the Woolfe shall marry the Sheep, Till the Sun shall change his Course,
Till the Sun shall rise in the West, Till day shall want his light, To the last
Syllable of recorded Time; Till Time, that gives all things theirs, shall have
his End;
will nothing equal the misery in the loss of Time.

Distribvtio partium.
The liberal Scienees acknowledge the misery in the loss of Time, and the
Mechanical arts are not ignorant of it.

Grammar accounts the loss of G^ammatica.
all her Tenses, not comparable to the loss of one moment of Time.

Rhetorica.
Rhetoric desires to express the misery of the loss of Time to the full, but
finds it loss of Time to undertake it.

Logica.
Logic, from every Commonplace proffers a solid argument to prove, that the
misery of the loss of Time, has no compeer.

Musica.
Music knows what a misery it is to lose Time, by her keeping Time.

Arithmetica.
Arithmetic went to count the miseries that do proceed from the loss of Time,
but found them infinite.

Geometria.
Geometry imployes her self in finding the proportion, that the loss of Time
bears to all other losses; and the loss of Time in one Scale, out-weighs all
losses in the other.

Astronomia.
Astronomy confesses that every moment is worth a Star, and that the loss of
all the Stars is not to be compared to the loss of Time.

If the Liberal Sciences thus Illatio a maj^i.
freely confess the misery in the loss of Time, I hope the Mechonicall will
not contradict them.

Asteismus.
He th^^ can count the Stars of the S^^, or the sand of the Ly^ian (...); let
him go count the (...) that come from the loss o^ Time.

Obiter variatur Mul^i.
The miseries that proceed from Collatio ad minus.
the loss of Time, are more then the S^^ds of the S^a, Stars of the Sky, Hairs
of the Head, Drops of Rain, Pelle^s of H^^^, Flakes of Snow, Au^esis Hyperbo^^
Drops of (...), Leaves of the Trees, Bough^ of the Forests, Blades of (...)
of ^orn, Birds of the A^^, Fishes of the Sea, Apples of Autu^n, Flowers of the
Spring, Summer's Flies, Summer's Ants, Motes in the Sun, Bees in Hybla,
Billows of the Sea.

Collatio ad minus.
To find a thing from whose loss greater misery can proceed, then from the
loss of Time, would be a Work greater then all Hercule^'s 12. labors.

Admiratio.
O what a strange sight would it be to see any thing, whose loss is greater
then the loss of Time.

Amplificatio a ^^^pis and figu is sive ^ictionis, ^ive Sententiae. Lito^es.
Mei^sis ^apinosis.
The loss of Time is no small loss.

The loss of Time is not to be neglected.

The loss of Time brings no small calamity with it.

The loss of Time is no contemptible loss.

Ironia.
What great loss can there be in Time? Time is but a little flying minute, and
can there be so great loss (forsooth) in so small a thing?

Metaphora.
Time is the World's universal Recorder.

Epixeuxis.
Time, Time's that precious moment, which being lost; Cannot be bought again by
prayer, or cost.


Anadipl^sis
Swift-cou^sing Time's feathered with flying hours, Hours, whose constant
course all things devours.


Epistrophe.
Who would count ought a loss, that knows the loss of Time? He sorrows knows
enough, that knows the l^ss of Time.


Anaphora.
What measures motion? Time. Time nothing can recall. So precious is Time,
Time's loss exceeds all.


Symploce.
What greater loss can be? than is from the loss of Time. What greater cross
can be? than the loss of Time.


Epanalepsis.
Time all things tries; truth's aged Father's Time.

Epanodos.
Time is most precious: great then is his loss, Greater the loss, the more
Time's precious.


Paranomasia. Jactura fractura.
Time's loss. A sad cross.


Hypotuposis perip.
Time is the most ancient Artist, the greatest Physician of all diseases, the
eternal Clock, the Universal Justice that tries all things, the unentangler of
all knots, the most precious moment, Father of truth; and how should not the
loss of this be most miserable!

Paradiastole.
The misery from the los: of Time, is not only sad and heavi^, but carries with
it the height of m^sery.

Enantiosis.
Other losses may be born with, the loss of Time is intolerable.

Synoeceiosis.
Loss is not loss, compared to the loss of Time.

Oxymoron.
Losses are loss-less, if you look at the loss of Time.

Aetiologia.
The loss of Time must needs be most miserable, because Time is most precious,
and the loss irrecoverable.

Epitrope.
Let other losses be great, let them be sad; let them be heavy; they can never
be so miserable, as is the loss of Time.

Climax.
The loss of Time brings not only care, trouble, vexation, distraction, but
even extreme misery.

Erotesis:
What Tongue? what Words? what Eloquence? what Rhetoric? what Cicero? what
Demosthenes? can set out the misery from the loss of Time.

Ecphonesis.
O the ineffable, the inconceivable misery in the loss of Time!

Ecphon^ma.
Other l^sses leave some hope, all hope flies away with Time, so great is the
misery in the loss of it!

Ep^north^sis.
The loss of Time is miserable, what did I say? miserable? yea beyond all
expression, thought, or belief, miserable.

Ap^siopesis.
The misery in the loss of Time is so great, that --: but I leave it to your
conceits, as unable to express it.

Hirmos A^yndeton ^taly^on.
Poverty, Ignorance, Shame, Ignominy, Reproach, Calamity, Misery, follow the
loss of Time.

Hirm^s Polysyndeton.
But Riches, and Knowledge Wisdom end Honor, Dignity and Fame, Felicity and
Happiness, wait on the good use of Time.

Apophasis.
The loss of Time is most miserable, that I do not tell you what other evils
accompany it.

Paralipsis.
Great is the misery in the loss of Time, to let pass all the profits that are
lost with it.

Parenthesis.
The loss of Time, (alas it is too true) drowns all other ^^^s^s.

Pl^onasmus.
Who dare mutter with his mouth against this truth? that the loss of Time is
most miserable.

Ap^st^oph^
As there is nothing more precious, nor more profitable, then the right use of
Time; so can there be nothing more miserable then the loss of i^. O ^^le
idleness! how odious art thou to all wise souls, that do occasion this loss
and misery!

Ap^ria.
Where shall I begin? or beginning, where, or when shall I make an end? that I
may sufficiently set for^h unto you the misery in the losss of Time? shall I
begin with the Antiquity of Time? with the Dignity? with the Use? with the
Worth? All these would afford me matter: but I leave it to a wiser Artist.

Anacoenosis Communicatio.
Tell me, O Thales, Bias, Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, Cic^ro, Demosthenes,
Philosophers, Historians, Orators, Poets; All learned men, Ancient, Modern,
Have not you felt the misery in the loss of Time your selves, and heard
infinite others deploring with many tears the same calamities?

Prosopop^i^
But prick up your ears, and give your strictest attention, and you shall hear
wise Socrates himself gravely disputing the matter. O the madness and folly of
the world! there is nothing more precious than the right Use of Time, there is
nothing more neglected. In other things which we count precious, we set Keepers
to look to them; what madness is it then, not only not to keep, but to consume
so precious a thing as Time? Jewels, and Riches, though lost, may be recovered
again, nothing can recover Time; which since it is so precious, that so much
Knowledge, Experience, Wealth, Wisdom, Honor, man be attained by it, and the
loss of it irrecoverable, Who can deny, but that loss of Time is most
miserable.

Subjectio. Prole^sis. Anthypophora
The loss of Time may bring some Sadness, Grief, and heaviness of mind, may
some man say; but to talk of the highest misery, is something too much. Alas,
alas, thou neither know what, nor of what thou speak, whosoever thou art;
for if thou did truly understand what the loss of Time is, and the fo^lowing
misery; thy Speech would be far otherwise.

Inversio.
Time is but a flying moment, and what so great misery can be in the loss of
that? Yes: therefore is the misery greater, because it is a flying moment; for
there is less hope to take hold of it, and recall it. Besides, it is the more
precious, because it is but a moment, and yet in so short a space contains such
worth. Lastly, it is a moment, on which depends Eternity; which adds to the
Dignity of the Moment, and the Misery of the L^ss^.

Collatio.
Compare the loss of Health, and Wealth, Goods, and Good. Name, Honor and
Friends, whatsoever can be dear and near unto a man, to the loss of Time; and
it will outweigh no^ only any one of them, but all put together.

Confirmatio ab Exemplo Catonis Minor. Catonis Major. Socratis. Apellis.
Will you have this truth fruther appear by an Example? Cato-Junior was so
fearful of the loss of Time, and the following misery, that he would not
abstain from reading Greek Books in the Senate. This made Cato-Major learn
Greek; and Socrates Music, in their old age. This made Apelles to cry out, We
have lost a day, if he had spent any day, without doing something in his Art.

Do you desire a further Testimony? A Testimonio.
let that of Theophrastus be instead of all, who had always this in his mouth.
Time is a precious cost, yet there is nothing which the Vulgar less regard.

Epilogus Per oration. Conclusio.
But lest I should l^^se more Time in speaking of the loss of Time to no end;
I will here, as it is high Time, make an End.

Books lately printed, and sold by Thomas Johnson at the Golden-Key in Saint
Paul's Churchyard.
LExicon Anglo-Latino-Graecum Novi Test^menti, or a complete Alphabetical
Concordance of all the words of the New Testament, with their several
significations, Etymons, and Derivations, by A. Symson, in Folio.

Elise, or Innocence guilty, A new Romance translated into English, by Jo^
Jenning, in Fol.

The L^siad of P^rtugal an Heroic Poem, by Sir Richard Fanshaw. Knight, in Fol.

Trigonometry, or the Doctrine of Triangles, by the famous Mathematician Mr.
Will. Oughtred, in 4o.

Hi^^oria Quinque -- Articularis, or a Declaration of the Judgment of the
Western Churches, and more particularly, of the Church of England, in the five
controverted Points reproached in these last times by the name of Arminianism,
by Dr. Peter Heylin, in Quarto.

Mr. Richard B^xter's Apology, in Q^arto.

The Beauty of Magistracy, or an Exposition of the 8^. Psalm, by Mr. Thomas
Hall, B. D. Pastor of the Church at Kings N^rton, in Quarto.

The Open Door for man's approach to God, or, a Vindication of the Record of God
concerning the extent of the Death of Christ in it is Object, by John Horn,
Minister of the Word at Lin-Regis, in Quarto.

A Collection of several Sermons preached upon solemn occasions, by the late
Learned, and Reverend Dr. Holdsworth, in Quarto.

The English Parnassus, or a help to English Poesy, containing a short
Institution of that Art, a Collection of all Rhyming Monosyllables, the
choicest Epithetes and Phrases, with some general Forms upon all Occasions,
Subjects, and Theams, alphabetically digested, by Joshuah Pool, Master of Arts,
of Clare-Hall, Cambridge, in Octavo.

The History of the French Academy, erected at Paris, by the late famous
Cardinal Richelieu, and consisting of the most refined wits of that Nation,
written in French by Mr. Paul Pe^^son, Counselor, and Secretary to the King
of France.

The Birth of a day, or a Treatise of the (...) of all sublunary things, by
John Robinson, Master of Arts, etc.

The Triumph and Unity of Truth, in two Treatises, intended as a Preservative
against the many Errors and Divisions of these times, in point of Religion, by
the same Author.

A View of the Jewish Religion, setting forth the Rites, Manners, and Customs
of the Jewish Nation: written in Latin by the learned Buxtorfius, and made
English by A, R.

A Treatise of Self-Denial, by Mr. Theophilus Pole-wheel, Minister of the Word
at Tiverton, in Devon.

Mount-Ebal levelled, or Redemption from the Curse by Jesus Christ, etc. by
Elkanah Wale, Minister of Pudsey in Yorkshire.

A discourse of the Object and Office of Faith, as justifying, distinct from
other Objects, Acts, and Offices of the same Faith, as Sanctifying, by Jo.
Warner, Master of Arts, etc. in Octavo.

A Vindication of the Lords Prayer, as a Formal Prayer, and by Christ's
Institution, to be used by Christians, as a Prayer, by Meric Casaubon, D. D.

A Treatise of the Covenant of Grace. by R. Bidwell; B. D.

A Treatise of Spiritual Infatuation, being the present visible disease of the
English Nation, delivered in several Sermons at the H^gue, by W. Stamp, D. D.
sometimes Minister of the Word at Stepney, near L^ndon.

Christ, a Christians only Gain, in several Sermons, by Mr. Rich. Vines.

The Mystery of Faith opened: in several Sermons, by Mr. Andrew Gray, late
Minister of Glascow, in Scotland.

The Fear of God and the King, in a Sermon preached at Mercers Chapel, 25.
March, 1660. by M. Griffith, D. D. To which is added a brief account of the
cause, and beginning of our late Wars.

Lux Mercatoria, Arithmetic, Natural and Decimal, by Mr. Noah Bridges of
Putney.

The Art of Short-writing, in the most exact, plain, easy, and swift Method,
by Tho. Rad^liff, of Plymmouth.

The Cabbinet Council, or Maxims of State, collected by Sir Walter Raleigh.

Aristippus, A discourse concerning the Court, by Monsieur de Balsac.

FINIS.

