THE QUEENS Cabinet Newly Opened: And the Art of Physic discovered; Wherein
you shall find diverse Rare Receipts; both of Physic and of Chyrurgery: Very
good and very profitable for all sorts of Men, Women, and Children. Together
with several Medicines, for to prevent, and for to cure the most Pestilent
Diseases that Raineth in any Cattle, and that with small Cost and Charges.

By Mr. John Ponteus.

London, Printed for Richard Burton, at the Horse shoe in Smith-field, 1662.

THE Queens CABINET newly opened.
The first Remedy is against the rising of the Mother.
TAke a quart of the strongest and the stalest bear you can get, and nine tops
of Rosemary, and as much large Mace as will weigh down nine pence, and a hand
full of inward bark of night-shad, boil all these together in a Copper skellet
till it comes to a pint, then strain it, and drink three spoonfuls one after
another, just as the fit begins to come upon you, and you shall find present
remedy.

For a burning, or scalding, or any green wound.
Take Mutten suet, and sheeps dung, and the inward bark of Elder: boil them
together, and then strain it, and then anoint the place grieved therewith, and
it shall heal it without any scar.

For any soar new or old.
Take the inward bark of an Ash-tree, and then boil it well in a quart of
spring water; then bath any sore with it, three or four times every morning
and evening, and then anoint it with fresh butter and flower of Brimstone, well
mixed together, and you shall see a speedy cure.

For all aches and lame members.
Take Rye, and Rosemary, two handfuls, put them into sallet oil and malmsie,
of each one quart, let them boil half an hour together, then let the place
greived, be anointed therewith against the fire: being first chaffed with a
cloth very well, and after nointing, wrap it up in a Lambs skin, the woolle
side inward, do this to bed-ward, for the space of three weeks together, this
cured a man that could neither stand nor go, probatum.

For the Falling Sickness.
Take the skull of a man or woman, wash it purely clean, then dry it in the
Oven, after your bread be drawn, beat it to fine powder, then boil it in
posset drink, then let the party drink thereof Morning and Evening, or as often
as need requires, it is an approved remedy.

For a Tetter or Ring-worm,
Take half an ounce of white Copperis, desolved in a pint of spring water, then
wash the Tetter therewith, and it will kill all Tetters and Ring-worms.

For the Rickets.
Take a handful of the inward bark of Tammaras, and lay it in steep in a pint
of Whitewine two or three days, and let the diseased Child drink now and then
two spoonfuls of it at a time, and it will speedily cure it.

For the Pain of the Back.
Take Sage, Rosemary, Cammomil of each of them a handful; then stamp them
together, and fry them with the Oil of Swallows, and then anoint your back
therewith warm.

For sore eyes.
Take Eyebright-water, and wash your eyes therewith morning and evening; it
will both heal the eyes and strengthen the sight.

For the Cramp.
Take your forefinger and rub it between your toes when you go to bed, then
smell to your finger, it will take away the Cramp, and cure the Palsy.

For the Rhume in the Eyes.
Take Marigold-water and wash your eyes therewith morning and evening; it
cures the diseases in the eyes, and it will take away the pain of the head.

For a Quincy or swelling in the Throat.
Take a needleful of white silk, and dip it in the blood of a Mouse, and let
the party swallow it down, and it will speedily cure it.

For the pain or noise in your Ears.
First wash your ears with White Wind, then take a good handful of
Earthworms, and fry them with. Goose-greace, then strain it, and drop two
dropes into each ear when it is hot; and it will take away the pain and noise
thereof.

For the Itch.
Take four ounces of unsalted Butter: take Brimstone, Cloves, Pepper, and
Ginger, of each of them a pennyworth, then mix them together, and beat them to
fine powder, and then anoint your joints against the fire, and in three times
doing so it will cure you.

For to remove a Disease from the stomach.
Take a quarter of a pint of sack, and a pennyworth of fine Treacle, then mix
them together, and drink it blood warm going to bed, and in twice taking of it
will cure you.

For a burning Fever.
Take two handfuls of Redmints, boil them in a quart of spring water, till it
comes to a pint; and then strain it; and put thereto four or five spoonfuls of
white wine Vinegar, and as much Honey, boil it till it comes to a syrrup, take
of Endive, suckary, of each two handfuls, boil it in a quart of spring water,
till half be consumed, take two spoonfulls of this, and more of the sirrup, in
the morning fasting, and at any other time when you please, and the Fever
shall leave you, and you will recover; probat.

For an Ague.
Take all the Urine the party makes at one time, and put some flower into it,
and knead it: and make thereof a Cake and bake it; and when it is baked, give
it to the dog of the house, just as the fit begins to come upon you, do so two
or three times, and the party will be well, and the dog sick.

For the Gout.
Take a handful of Mugwort stamped, and boiled in a pint of the best sallet
Oil, till the juice be consumed, then strain it, and it will make an Ointment
that shall give speedy ease to the Gout, probat.

For a sore or any green wound.
Take the coals of a Burtch tree beaten to fine powder, and put it into an
wound or sore, heales it not only perfectly, but speedily.

For the spleen.
Take the Rine of an Ash Tree, boiled in a quart of White Wine, then drink it
six or seven mornings fasting together, will cure you.

For a Stich.
Take oil of Dil, oil of Capers, oil of Swallows, of each one ounce; then
mix them together, and then anoint your side against the fire when the pain is
upon you; and it will take away the pain thereof.

For the Yellow Jaundies.
Take a handful of the inward bark of a Barbary tree and Goose dung that
feeds on grass, and wash the white of it, and put thereto a little Saffron;
steep them in Ale, and let the Patient drink it in the morning fasting; and it
is a present remedy.

For the Scurvey.
Chop small the knotted place of a Pine tree, and boil it well in a quart of
Ale or Beer, that the steem may come out; and drink of it as often as you
please: and it will cure the Scurvey.

For the Black Jaundies.
Take of Herb Ambrose, Bettony, Mugworth, of each a handful; three or four
Dock roots, clean picked, washed and scraped, stamp all these in a Mortar till
they be indifferent small: Then take Spicknard, Turmarick, and gallingall, of
each a handful; Stamp them in a Mortar likewise; then mix them together and
put them into a clean cloth by themselves, and tie them fast with strings, and
then hang them in two gallands of good Ale newly ready to be tunned up, and
after three or four days, drink a good draught thereof every morning next
your heart, and fast after it three hours, and do so the like when you go to
bed; and you shall find present remedy, probat.

For a Consumption.
Take three Sheeps hearts, slit them and take out the strings and blood, and
lay them in water to soak a night and a day, then wash them clean and put them
into a Pipkin, lay in the bottom of the Pipkin stalks of Rosemary in the
manner of a Gridiron, then lay the hearts on them, every heart being stuck with
three Cloves, and half a quarter of Sugar being put into every heart; then stop
up the pipkin very close with paste, and put it into an oven with
houshold-bread; and when you think it is sufficiently stewed take out the
pipkin again; then every morning and evening take a spoonful of this Syrrup,
and it will cure you.

A most excellent Water for a Consumption.
Take Rosewater, and Muscadine, of each three pints, of new Milk a pottle, of
gross Pepper one ounce, of Cinnamon one ounce, of sliced bread a penny-loaf,
the yolks of three new laid Eggs, of Sugar one pound; distill all these as long
as any water will come; take of this water with a little beaten Pepper a
draught fasting, and you shall find it do you very much good. Probat.

For the Cough of the Lungs.
Take Coltsfoot, Bettony, Burnet and red Rose leaves, of each a handful; of
Comfrey roots, scraped and sliced two handfuls; boil all these in a gallon of
spring water, till it comes to a pottle; then strain it, and set it over the
fire again; then take a pound of double resined Sugar, and put into it, and let
it boil over a soft fire about a quarter of an hour; then take it off, and put
it into some glass, and stop it up close, and then drink six spoonfuls morning
and evening, and at four in the afternoon; it is an approved Remedy.

For to take away the redness of the face.
Take the roots of white Lillies, and boil them in a quart of Spring Water,
and wash your face in the said water, and it will take away the redness
thereof.

For Hearing.
Take four drops of the juice of Bettony, and warm it in a sausar, then drop it
into each ear when you go to bed, then stop them up with black wool, and it
will recover your hearing.

For to take away a Wen.
Take unslacked Lime beaten to fine powder, then mixed with black Soap, then
anoint the Wen therewith, and it will take it away.

For the pain at the Heart or Stomach.
Take four grains of Mastick at evening going to bed, and it will take away
the pain thereof.

For a Sinew strained.
Take Nerve oil, Pompillion, and Oil of Exeter, of each two penniworth, then
mix them together, and warm it in a saucer, then anoint the joint therewith,
and bind it up close, and it cures.

For the taking away Warts.
Take Figtree-leaves and rub your Warts therewith, and bury the said leaves in
the ground, and the Warts will consume away as the leaves do rot.

For Convulsion fits.
Take black Cherry-water, and the Syrrup of Violets, of each two penny worth,
then mix them together; and take three or four spoonfuls of it at a time, just
as the fit begins to come upon you, and you shall find present remedy,
probatum.

For the Cough or stopping of the breath.
Take the syrrup of Hysop, the syrrup of Lickarish, the syrrup of maiden hair,
of each an ounce, and take thereof every morning a spoonful or two.

For the Headache.
Take a handful of Speremint, and shred it small, then grate some Nut-mege into
it, with some Rose Water, and bind it close to your forehead, and it will
take away the pain thereof.

For the Worms in Children
Take two ounces of Purslain-seed, and boil it in a pint of white Wine; then
give it the Child fasting three mornings together, and it will kill the Worms.

For a sore Throat.
Take Collumbine and Cinquefoil, then stamp and boil them together, and strain
them into Milk, and drink it very warm.

For the pain in the Head.
Take Aloes boiled well with the juice of Coleworts, and made into pills, a
scruple being taken at a time at night going to bed, does most gallantly ease
the head, and take away the pain thereof.

For the Toothache.
Take two handfuls of Wood bettony, and then boil it in a pint of white Wine
till half be consumed, then take a spoonful of it, and keep it in your mouth,
do so two or three times together, and if there be any worms in them they die,
and it shall keep the Teeth from all pain.

For to draw a Thorn out of the Flesh.
Take a handful of Bettony, bruise it in a Mortar, then mixed it with Black
soap, and it will draw out any thing that is gotten deep into the flesh.

For a Plurifie.
Take two ounces of Dialthea, and anoint the grieved place therewith; then
take Cummin-seed beaten to fine powder, and strew it upon the anointed place,
then heat a Colewort leaf very hot upon coals; and bind it to the place very
fast, and you shall find a present cure.

For to cure a Dropsy.
Take the roots of Elder, and boil them in a gallon of spring water till it
comes to a pottle, and drink it as common drink, and it will speedily cure you.

For a Canker in the Mouth.
Take the juice of Plantain leaves, Vinegar and water of Roses, and wash your
mouth therewith.

For spitting of Blood.
Take Smallage and Mints, Rue and Betony, and boil them in good milk, and sup
it warm.

For a Pin and Web in the eye.
Take the fine powder of Licorice blown through a quill into the eyes; it will
take out the Pin or Web thereof.

For a scald Head.
Take two handfuls of Harrife and stamp it a little; then let it soak in a
quart of spring water twenty four hours; then wash your head therewith, or any
scabby place with it, and it will quickly heal it.

For the Worms in Children.
Take the Gall of an Ox, as much flower of Lupines as will thicken it, and
make a plaster thereof, and lay it to the navel of the belly; it will kill the
Worms.

For to stop a Looseness.
Make Pap of Bean-flower, and put thereto powder of Cinnamon,

For to stay the bloody Flux.
Take Pigeons dung stamped with white Wine Vinegar, and applied plaister-wise
to the navel of the belly stops all Fluxes.

Medicines for Cattle.
For the Plague in the guts in Horses.
TAke of Cullenbine roots and leaves, in all a good handful, as much Wormwood,
and as much Rue; wash them well, and then bruise them in a mortar, and then
boil them in a quart of Ale well; and then strain them, and add to the liquor
half a pound of sweet butter; then, being but lukewarm, give it the Horse to
drink; or Diapenthe in a pint of Muscadine.

For the sleeping Evil.
First keep him much waking, and twice in one week give him as much Soap in the
nature of a pill as a Ducks egg, and then after give him a little new milk and
honey, which is a present cure.

For the Scratches.
Take a pint of Train oil, and white bread beaten to powder, then mix them
together, and anoint the Horses legs there with, and chafe it in well, it will
bring their legs to be small, and dry up the humors.

For to make a Horse staile or piss.
Give him some Castle-soap sliced thin in a pint of white Wine, and he will
presently piss.

For the Glaunders.
Take of Auris figmentum two drachms, of Tussilaginis made into powder as much,
then mix them together with Turpentine till they be like paste; make thereof
little cakes; and dry them before the fire, then take a chafing dish of coals,
and laying one or two of the cakes thereon, over them with a tunnel, and then
the smoke rising, put the tunnel in the Horses nostrils, and let the smoke go
up into his head, which done, ride the Horse till he sweat; do thus every
morning before he be watered, till the running of his nostrils cease, and the
kernels under his chaps wear away.

For the foundring of his body.
First give him wholesome strong meat, (...) bread of clean beans, and warm
drink; and for two or three mornings together give him a quart of Ale brewed
with Pepper and Cinnamon, and one ounce of London Treacle, and it will cure him.

For Bots and Worms of all sorts.
Take Savory leaves chopped, and mix them with Honey and butter, and make two or
three balls thereof, and make the Horse swallow them down, and it will cure him.

Of the pain of the Kidneys or the Stone.
Take a handful of Ma^denhair, and ste^p it all night in a quart of strong Ale,
and give it the Horse to drink every morning till he be well, this will break
any stone whatsoever in a Horse.

For the gravelling of a horse in the foot.
Cut the hoof till you can find the sore, then take one ounce of Virgins wax,
one quarter of an ounce of Rozen, as much Dear Suet, half an ounce of Bores
Grease, one head of Semgreen, bruise all these in a Mortar, and set it over the
fire till it be melted, then apply it to the horse foot, spare not to travail
him, for it shall heal him.

For the Farcy or by some called the Farcion in a horse.
The farcy comes of the great abundance of blood, therefore you must let him
blood on both sides of the Neck, a hand breadth from the head, then take a
gallon of fair water, and put thereto a handful of salt, three handfuls of
Mallows, two handfuls of Rue, one pound of hempseed, bruise all in a mortar,
then sees them till the husk be wafted, and give it him to drink, then to the
outward sore apply one once of the oil of Terpentine, one ounce of the oil of
Petre chafe it well in, and it cures.

For a Canker in the Mouth.
Take the inward Bark of an Elder Tree, Sage and Woodbine leaves, chop them
small, and boil them in White wine vinegar, and put therein a good quantity of
Alum and Honey, then take a linen Cloth and tie it upon a stick, and wash
his Mouth, Tongue, and Root, with the water, twice or thrice a day, and it will
be whole speedily.

For wind-galls.
The cure is to prick them, and to let out the Gelly, and then dry up the sore
with a plaster of pitch.

To draw out a Stub or a Thorn.
Take a handful of Bettony, bruise it in a mortar with black soape, and lay it
to the sore, and it will draw out the Splint, Iron, Thorn or Stub.

For the Murrain in Cows, Oxen, or such Cattle.
Those that are infected, first cut off the tip of the Ear, then take the
leaves of Bares-foot dried and beaten to powder, as much as will lie on a
shilling, and a quart of milk, brew it together, and so drench therewith
blood-warm.

To prevent the Murrain.
Run a Bodkin through the double skin that hangs at the breast of the beast,
put therein a root of bares-foot, and let it abide.

Take of old ^ine a quart, and mix it with a handful of Hens-dung ^issolved
therein, and let your beast drink it.

For Pissing of Blood.
Take two handfuls of Shephards purse, and boil it in a quart of Redwine, and
then strain it, and put into it a little Cinnamon, and so give it the beast to
drink lukewarm, and it will speedily cure it.

For to cure any swelling in a Beast whatsoever.
If your beast have any outward swelling bath it with salle^ oil and vinegar
exceeding hot, and it will assuage it, but if the swelling be inward, then
boil round Aristolochia in his water:

These Receipts have been perused and approved of by diverse people in the City
of London, and are Printed for the good and benefit of the Kingdom.

FINIS.

