royal blazon or coat of arms C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT The Poll-Bill, As to be given in
Charge.
THe first Meeting of the Commissioners is to be on or before the Fourteenth
day of February next; There they agree to divide themselves into the several
Divisions of the County. And at the same first Meeting they are to send out
their Warrants into all the parts of the County, summoning Inhabitants,
High-Constables, etc. as they think fit, to appear before the said
Commissioners in their several Divisions, at such time and place as by their
Warrant they shall appoint, within eight days after their first Meeting.

At their second Meeting they are to give in Charge the Act; which, for the
better dispatch, is in brief here set down.

WHereas by an Act of this present Parliament, entitled, An Act for raising
Money by a Poll, and otherwise, toward the Maintenance of the present War; It
is provided, That all and every person and persons (Excepting only such as
receive alms from the Parish, and the children of any person remaining in his
or her family, who by reason of their poverty does not contribute to the Rates
for Church and Poor, and who are under the age of sixteen years) shall pay unto
His Majesty the sum of Twelve pence; And that over and above the said sum of
Twelve pence, all persons and Bodies Politic and Corporate, having personal
Estate in Debts or ready Moneys, which he or they do not account desperate,
over and besides such Debts as they shall bona fide owe, shall pay for every
Hundred pounds thereof, the sum of Twenty shillings; Except Moneys lent, or to
be lent to His Majesty upon Security of any Act passed, or to be passed by this
present Parliament. And that all persons having any Office or public
Employment, who are taxed to the Monthly Assessment in respect thereof, their
Deputies, Clerks and Substitutes, shall pay unto His Majesty the sum of Twelve
pence for every Twenty shillings, which shall be rated and paid in the place
where the Office is executed: And for such Offices and Employments as are not
so taxed to the Monthly Assessment, the sum of Three shillings for every
Twenty shillings accruing to them by such Office in one year, allowing one
third part of the profits thereof toward the charge of executing such Office.
And that all persons having any yearly Pension or Stipend from His Majesty,
under his Great or Privy Seal, shall pay unto His Majesty for every Twenty
shillings thereof received in one year, the sum of Three shillings. And that
all Sergeants at Law, Counselors, Attorneys, Sollicitors, and Scriveners, and
all Advocates, Proctors, and public Notaries, and all persons practicing
Physic, shall pay unto his Majesty for every Twenty shillings which they
receive by their practice in one Year, the sum of Two shillings, allowing one
third part thereof toward their Charge. And that every Servant receiving
yearly Wages, shall pay out of every Twenty shillings thereof, the sum of Twelve
pence (except for Board-wages.) All Aliens to pay double.

And that every person of the degree of a Duke of England, Scotland or Ireland,
residing within this Kingdom, shall pay to his Majesty the sum of Fifty pounds:
Of the degree of a Marquess of either of the said Kingdoms, Forty pounds: Of
the degree of an Earl of either of the said Kingdoms, Thirty pounds: Of the
degree of a Viscount of either of the said Kingdoms, Twenty five pounds: Of the
degree of a Baron of either of the said Kingdoms, Twenty pounds. Every eldest
Son of a Duke of England, Scotland, or Ireland, residing within this Kingdom,
and being of the age of one and twenty years, Thirty pounds: Every eldest Son
of a Marquess of any of the said three Kingdoms, Twenty five pounds: Of an
Earl, Twenty pounds: Of a Viscount, Seventeen pounds Ten shillings: Of a Baron,
Fifreen pounds: And every person of the degree of a Baronet of any of the said
three Kingdoms, and residing within this Kingdom, the sum of Fifteen pounds: Of
the degree of a Knight of the Order of the Bath, Fifteen pounds: Of a Knight
Bachelor, Ten pounds: Of a Sergeant at Law, Ten pounds: Of an Esquire, Five
pounds: Of the degree of a Gentleman, having an Estate of the value of Three
hundred pounds or more, Twenty shillings, though a Minor. And every Widow
respectively to pay one third part rated by this Act upon her Husbands degree,
except the Widows of Ecclesiastical persons. And that every person of the
degree of a Dean, shall pay the sum of Ten pounds: Of the degree of an
Archdeacon, Forty shillings: Of the degree of a Canon or Prebend, his Prebend
being not rated in the Exchequer at above Thirty pounds, the sum of Fifty
shillings: And every person of the degree of a Doctor in Divinity (having a
Benefice) and Doctor of Law or Physic, the sum of Five pounds.

These are therefore to require and command You, on or before the First day of
March next, to make and return unto Us in Writing, one perfect Certificate of
the Names and Sirnames, Qualities, Dignities and Titles of all and every the
Persons dwelling or residing within your respective Parishes; taking care that
no person chargeable as aforesaid be omitted; and that every person be assessed
for his Poll, Personal Estate in Debts or ready money, Office, Employments,
Wages, Pension from the King, and Title; or as many of these as every single
person is subject unto; And to assess every of them accordingly, The Estimate
what might be raised by this Bill, in the House of Commons, was 500000 li.
which is to be applied unto the War.
without Concealment, Love, Favor, Dread, or Malice, upon pain of forfeiture
of Five pounds for every default: Together with the Names of two or more
sufficient persons within your respective Parishes or Places, to be Collectors
of the Money so assessed by virtue of the said Act; for whom the Parish is to
be answerable. In the Execution whereof you are to be careful. And hereof fail
not, at your peril.

Upon the Return of the Certificate and Assessments, then the Commissioners are
to issue out their Warrants unto the Collectors to levy all the moneys charged
on every person so assessed; and to require them to make Demand of the Parties
themselves at the places of their last abode, within six days after the
receipt of the Estreat; and to levy and pay the same unto the High-Collector,
on or before the Eighth day of April 1667. And if the Commissioners, or any
three or more of them see cause, they shall and may examine the Presenters
thereof, and alter the Assessment, taking care that every person be assest for
his best Title only, and for as many other Capacities as he is chargeable
withal. The said Commissioners are empowered to authorize the High-Collector to
distrain the Sub-Collector in case of failure on his part; And to require the
High-Collector to pay in the full Sum to be by him paid unto the
Receiver-general, before the Fifteenth Day of April next. And the
Receiver-general to pay his whole Collection before the Thirtieth day of April
next. And the Commissioners are further required, That a Duplicate of the whole
Sum charged within every Hundred, Parish, or Place assessed, without naming the
persons, shall be returned into the Exchequer before the Twentieth day of April
next; All Appeals being first determined, wherein the Party by Oath may
discharge himself: And a like Duplicate unto the Receiver-general and
Head-Collectors, according unto their respective Collections; That all the
money may be paid into the Exchequer by the time aforesaid. But for such
persons as shall prove Defaulters, they are personally to be returned into the
Exchequer; there to be proceeded with, etc.

In the SAVOY, Printed by the Assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker, His
Majesty's Printers. 1666.


