The English PARNASSUS: OR, A HELP TO English Poesy.

Containing A COLLECTION Of all Rhyming Monosyllables, The choicest Epithets,
and Phrases: With some General Forms upon all Occasions, Subjects, and Theams,
Alphabetically digested

By JOSUA POOLE. M. A. Clare Hall Camb.

Together with A short Institution to English Poesy, by way of PREFACE.

London, Printed for Tho. Johnson, at the golden Key in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1657.

TO My Worthily, Honored FRIEND, Mr. FRANCIS ATKINSON.
I Shall not need to derive any confidence from the long acquaintance and
friendship has passed between us, to press you to the Patronage of this work,
when there are so many other Considerations that in a manner force it on you,
as having a certain right in it; it is the account of many a years Stewardship,
the product of many a midnight thought, during my relation to you and those
young Gentlemen committed by you to my charge and oversight, in a word, it had
the first and last hand put to it, that is, ows both its original and
perfection to your house at HADLEY. There are indeed abroad in the world many
books conducing to the improvement of youth in good Letters, whereof it may be
said of some, they are superfluous, of others they are burdensome, and by
multiplicity of instruction distract the Learner. And this proceeds partly from
an itch of reputation, which even those of that laborious, (nay, by many
slighted) profession are not free from, partly from the difficulties that
attend the education of youth, and partly from that general humor, in most
men of discovering their invention in furnishing the world with something that
is new, or their wit in reforming and advancing what had been done by others.
But for this of mine, you are not ignorant of the difficulty of the attempt,
what a strange multitude of Authors I have been forced, as it were to
anatomise, and that I may say, without any great loss of Modesty, that there
never came yet abroad so methodicall an Institution of ENGLISH POESY. For you,
who look on education through other prospective glasses than those of necessity
or advantage, know, that it requires a person of generous inclinations, that as
an exrprest Architect, lays the solid foundations of humane life, and
undertakes a business that has the greatest influence on Policy, Morality,
and Religion.

This once granted, no pains, no care, no vigilance can be too great that is
spent upon the cultivation of these noble plants, were there only this
inducement that we should transmit them such to posterity as that they may in
them perceive our care and tenderness. Upon these grounds did I enter into the
present relation to you, which being, as I said, a stewardship, it is but just
I should bring something to testify my faithfulness. You know how beneficial
this work has been where it was brought forth, and exercised, and I leave it
to you, either to communicate it, or conceal it. If ever it come abroad into
the world, I desire it may be under the conduct of your name, that, for your
particular, it may be satisfied how much you have contributed to the the
Commonwealth of Learning, and, for mine be convinced, how conscientious I have
been in the discharge of my duty, what great respects I have for you, and how
passionately desirous I am to express my self,

Sir, Your most affectionate Friend, and faithful Servant, Josua Poole.

To the hopeful young Gentlemen, his Scholars in that private School, at
Hadley, Kept in the house of Mr. Francis Atkinson.
SWeet impes of early hopes whose smiling brow
Beckens the cincture of the laureate bough,
Whose lips seem made, to taste no other spring,
Than that by which the The spian virgins sing.
Whose sprightly face, and active eyes descry
The Muses in a rising majesty:
You that without th'edition of a book,
Can make men read a Poet in your look;
Whose downy plumes with happy augurie,
Presage betimes, what the fledge soul will be.
For you (Ingenious spirits) thus I try
To find a milkie way to Poesy,
That babes, as they the coral nipples lugge,
May find an Hippocrene within the dugge,
And the first milk that they shall feed upon,
May be the sacred dew of Helicon,
And when at first their steps the earth shall greet,
At once may find their own and verses feet,
After as they grow up, Pegasus may
Be the first hobbyhorse with which they play,
And when to higher sports they come, may put
An Homers Iliads in their game some nut,
And whilst they take their pastime in the sun,
Together make their tops and verses run,
Nay to that height they shall their phancies raise,
That whilst they run at, they shall win the Baies,
In all their sports they shall the Poets play,
And make the Birch, prevented by the Bay;
For they shall need no Masters to rehearse
Long tedious precepts of the laws of verse,
In them so printed shall those laws be seen,
As if they had the laws of Nature been.
The only task their Masters shall impose
On them, will be, to learn to speak in prose;
In which, they shall have, if they chance to offend,
As boys scan, verses at their fingers ends,
Pleading like Ovid for to save their breech,
As if Prosodia went before In speech,
Or that they had into the world been brought,
As Lucan died, with verses in their throat,
Their cradles of the verdant laurel been,
Or of those learned trees which once were seen
After the Thracian Harper dance along,
Wedding their motions to his well-tim'd song,
And all that shall their sudden raptures hear,
That Poets are not made, but born will swear.
The early blossoms which I see in you,
Makes me believe these my presages true;
For, if you can so much already do;
What will they that may sooner come unto
Parnassus mount? If you so much can see
On plainer ground, what will they that shall be
Advantaged by that hill, whose tops do rise
In stately height, to parley with the skies?
On then (sweet souls) that sacred verse may be
No longer called the threadbare mystery;
Let the world see, what yet it scarce before
Has known, there are good Poets, yet not poor,
Whose inspirations, and rich phancies be
More than a Taverns frothy tympany,
That conjure not up wit with spirit of wine,
Nor make the bay, supported by the vine;
Like those whose thirsty fancies ebb and flow,
lust as their cups, greater or lesser grow,
Phoebus and Bacchus that together link,
And never write, but in or after drink:
As when great showers of rain fall from the skies,
In standing waters bubbles will arise.
And for my self (though I did never bestride
The winged horse, and through the welkin glide,
Unto the forked hill; nor saw the spring,
Where those sweet maids of Memory do sing:
Whilst their harmonious aires give easy birth
Unto the flowers, and help the teeming earth:
Whilst shaggy Satyrs yield their senses thrall
To the sweet cadence of their madrigals,
And all the leavy standards of the wood,
Quitting the place where they before had stood,
Came listening on, and every gladsome tree,
Linked with his neighbor to an unity,
Whisper their mutual joys, till they had made
By their embrace, an unexpected shade,
And all the winged musicians of the air,
Hid in their branches make a close repair,
That by their tunes, they might learn how to sing,
And give a better welcome to the spring;
Whilst savage beasts, that thither too were come
Offered themselves a thankful Hecatombe:
Though I dare not make title to that tree
That grows upon the banks of Castalie,
Nor on Parnassus top had ever Theme
Presented by the Muses in a dream,
Or with my teeth unbarkt the laurel graffe,
Yet) can I lend the weaker brains a staff
For their supportment, till their riper wit,
Shall laugh to see, they ever needed it,
Staffes cannot go, and yet enable him
That wants assistance to his feeble limb;
He that is lame, and cannot move, yet may
Lie still, and point to others out the way.
Many are dumb, and know not how to break
Their mind in words, yet by mute signs can speak,
And talk so with their fingers, that another
May give that language which their dumbness smothers.
Though whetstones cannot cut at all, they may
Do service, and make knives as sharp as they
Themselves are blunt, and they who cannot ring
By jangling may toll better ringers in,
Candles see naught themselves, yet lend a light,
Which in the dark gives others use of sight.
The height of my ambition and intent,
Is but to be a luckie instrument
For others good, and instruments we know,
Are useful, though themselves can nothing do;
Accept and use then this my book, aspire
Unto the Mountains top, blow up that fire
Which yet is but a spark Prometheus stole
From Phoebus wheels what burns within your soul,
Then give it vent, let it advance a flame,
Which may secure your and the Poets name,
From all the malice of invading time,
And conquer death with your victorious rhyme.
And though you may perchance meet some of those
That in a Satyr of their dough-bak'd Prose,
Not able to reach further, lash the horse,
They cannot sit, and whilst they rudely force
Their waspish language to disgrace the fount,
The horse-hoof-made, scorning the sacred Mount,
Too high for them to climb, turn horse themselves,
And kick in vain, as waves against the shelves.
Crushing their froth, as dogs disturb the night
With fruitless howling at fair Cynthia's light,
Whilst she untroubled still along does glide,
More by their barking envy glorified,
In that bright Carre, their snarls cannot impeach,
As much above their malice as their reach:
Or like that fox, who long with greedy eyes,
Did on the grapy clusters tantalise,
And last contents himself to call them sower,
Which he perceives placed above his power,
And these may tell you that the Poets be,
But the fomenters of of obscenitie,
Of lust and lewdness, verse the Devils bait,
To draw youth on to what they else would hate.
Be not discouraged, Muses none despise,
That ever gave the Graces Sacrifice;
Such Majesty is couched in numerous lays,
They never understood, which can dispraise.
It Is true, some spend their ill-disposed hour,
Only the Virgin Muses to deflowr,
And in loose language make the Graces be
Naked beyond the bounds of Modesty,
Who whilst with shameless ribaldry they sing,
Make Helicon a puddle for a spring,
Enough to make their reader, one would think,
With blushing change the color of their ink:
But must we, cause some children idly play,
And cut their fingers, throw our knives away?
Or cause when once their bellies full, they eat
No more, but toy, must we forgo our meat?
What if some looser dames to painting fall;
Shall chaster Matrons have no face at all?
If some for lust their gaudie garments wear,
Shall modest Virgins all their clothes forswear?
If some by faggots ruin do conspire,
Must our cold chimney therefore want a fire?
And shall Lycurgus cut down every vine,
Because some Thraoians did exceed in wine?
Shall we all modest pictures quite decline,
For the lascivious draughts of Aretine?
If that abuse could take away the right,
And lawful use, we scarce should use our sight.
Scripture may be abused, and best things may,
By the same argument, be cast away.
Though Caesar banished Ovid far from Rome,
He kept Parthenious Virgil still at home.
All Poets are not vicious some there be,
Like Cato, verse it, yet with modesty,
And won to goodness, by their verse can show,
More souls than many prose-Divines can do;
Crowned with religious bays: for often those
Are chained by numbers that contemn loose prose,
And those whose souls are come so near the gall,
Of bitterness, as to think stoicall
What speaks Religion, yet will dare to try
The Poets popular Divinity,
And with a yielding fancy lend an ear
To all that by the Poet preached they hear.
Many have been, which Pulpits did eschew,
Converted from the Poets reading pew,
And those that seldom do salute the porch
Of Solomon, will come to Herberts Church;
For as that English Lyrick sweetly sings,
Whilst angels danced upon his trembling strings,
A verse may find him who a Sermon flies,
And turn delight into a sacrifice.
Then let the Poet use his lawful bait,
To make men swallow what they else would hate,
Like wise Physicians that their pills infold
In sugar, paper, or the leaves of gold,
And by a virtuous fraud and honest stealth,
Cozen unwilling Patients into health;
Like winter fires, that with disdainful heat,
The opposition of the cold defeat,
And in an angry Spleen do burn more fair,
The more encountered by the frosty air;
Let your Phebean fires its flame advance,
Blown by the cold breath of chill ignorance,
And like Amphion build a lofty rhyme,
That shall outlast the insolence of time,
For there is hidden in a Poets name.
A spell that can command the wings of fame,
And maugre all oblivions hated birth,
Begin your immortality on earth,
"And when more spreading titles are forgot,
"And spite of all their lead and searcloth rot,
"You wrapped and shrin'd in your own sheets shall lie
"As relics famed for all posterity.
No envious time or age shall ever pierce,
The better marble of eternal verse,
Nine Muses can cammand the fatal three,
And make their baies outlive the Cypress tree,
And though they part with breath they cannot die
Whose name's embalmed in sacred Poesy,
For such are the proud miracles of verse,
They make men rise up from their drowsy hearse,
And cause the grave deaths utmost spite but be
A larger womb to immortality.
The Deities above, and those below,
To the learned nine auspcious homage ow,
And they whose heads the laurel chaplets bear
Can charm the gods in either Hemisphere.
What is it the Muses javelin cannot pierce?
When heaven and hell are mastered by a verse,
The Laurel staff swayed by a learned hand
Carries more magic than that silver wand,
Heavens verger waves, then that Medea shook,
When Aeson from the scalding bath she took,
Hot as the youth she gave him, or the ram,
Which from the Caldron leap't a frisking lamb,
Such boundless power does on numbers wait
Without a blasphemy they can create,
Nor have they fame and strength alone, but can
Surfeit the unconfined desires of man,
With soul-transporting pleasure and content,
Not to be thought on without ravishment:
For when the ranging fancy has in vain
Pursued delight through all things, yet remains
Still empty, these with satisfaction fill;
Deucalions ship rests on Parnassus hill.
For as he sung, that was the blithest swain,
That ever fingered pipe on flowery plain,
You may in these as often as you shall choose,
"Hug sweet content with your retired Muse,
"And in those studies find as much to please,
"As others in the greatest Palaces,
"Instead of hounds, that make the wooded hills
"Talk in an hundred voices to the rills,
"Hear you the pleasing cadence of a line;
"Struck by the consort of the sacred nine.
"In lieu of hawks, the raptures of your soul,
"Transcend their pitch, and baser earths control;
"For running horses, let your fancies fly
"Like arrows that outrun the hunting eye;
"For courtly dancing, you may take more pleasure.
"To hear your verse keep time and equal measure,
"All this without expense, when others often,
"With their undoings have their pleasures bought,
Such are the Poets joys, as be no less
Than the image of eternal happiness,
L^ke heavens; none these, save the enjoyers know,
And they themselves better conceive than show,
Revenged on their ignorance are those,
Which tread the mortar of untempred prose,
Whose grovelling fanc^es, and too low pitched eye
Cannot reach up unto the Poets sky,
And yet like those that to shoot up are bold,
At what their dazzled sense cannot behold,
Against the poet saucily dare vent
Their barrn fancies, frothy excrement,
Pitiing their ignorance, wish you no worse,
Than what was once the noble Sydneys curse,
May Cupid wound them, and they lie forlorn,
As pitied objects of their mistress scorn,
Wanting that fire which warms the poets brain
To thaw the ice of her deserved disdain,
Till dead with grief, they make the Muses laugh
To see their names denied an Epitaph,
And all their fame inearthed with their hearse,
Rotting for want of an embalming verse.
Contemn their scorns and with a brave disdain,
Slight all those toys, that others entertain,
Which only study how to wear their clothes,
And fill up their imperfect speech with oaths,
Scruing their body into every shape,
And are content to be the common ape
Of every Nation, so they may but be
In fashion with their flanting braverie;
Whose best discourse can no more skill impart,
Than tales of hawks and hounds in terms of art,
Who, if they have a tatling spur and bear,
Heads light as the gay feathers which they wear,
Whistle in silks, and sometimes can invent
Occasion for a threadbare complement,
And make a gaudie hilted rapier ride,
H^d in as fine a scabbard, on their side,
As more for show than use; talk of a wench
With more disease than language of the French,
In whom inventious tailours forming art,
And the spruce harbor claims a greater part,
Than nature or their education can,
Think themselves are the only Gentile man,
And complete, gallant for this outward dress,
And gilded trim, when they are nothing less;
But shapes of men, and speaking butterflies,
Attracting only fools, and childrens eyes.
Let these enjoy their humors, whose descent,
And blood's the best and only argument
That they can use to prove them Gentlemen;
Whilst by the raptures of your learned pen,
Your sweet paced numbers and harmonious lays,
You get the solid, and enduring praise,
And show your worth and birth by a divine,
And better far than your forefathers line.
Pay then the Muses Tithes, and let those powers
Of sacred verse, share in your idle hours,
Those ravell'd thrums of time on fruitless play,
And emptiness should not be thrown away.
Those threads of patcht up vacant hours may
Make cloths will serve you for a working day;
The product rising from such vacant hours
Makes this to be what I my self am --
Yours Josua Pool.

THE PREFACE, Being a short Institution OF ENGLISH POESY.
IT is the ordinary misfortune of posthumous works, like Orphans, to be exposed
to the mercy of others; insomuch, that when they come to appear in the world,
they have not those accommodations, which such as are advanced by their own
parents and friends, commonly have. Were the learned Author of this laborious
work alive to see this production of his abilities, and extraordinary industry
come abroad, there needed not any to give account of it but himself. For who
could have said more for the advantage and ornament of Poesy, than a person who
had so fortunately spent both his time and endeavors to cultivate it in the
highest manner that could be? But since he is not, the Reader must accordingly
abate of his expectation, and, instead of large Institution of Poesy, such as
might well attend the present Work into the world, accept of such as slight
account thereof, as may be proportionable to their capacities, for whose
improvement, instruction, and convenience, these endeavors of his were
intended. They indeed were calculated for their meridian who stood subject to
the ferula; which yet hinders not, but they may indifferently contribute to the
assistance of all those, who find in themselves any natural inclination or
happiness of thought more than ordinary, to express themselves in verse.

We are then to note, that as the world became more and more civilized,
Harmony, I mean that of speech and mutual expression one to another, grew more
and more into reputation. Hence is it that those languages are considered as
the most refined that are most susceptible of Harmony, and those most favoring
of incivility and barbarism, wherein a man cannot express himself without
harshnesse and discord. This harmony, in prose, consists in an exact placing of
the accent, and an accurate disposition of the words; such as delighting the
ear, does in a manner captivate the passions and the understanding. Of this,
strange instances might be made in the ancient Orators, who may be said to lead
the people whither they pleased. In Poesy, it consists besides the aforesaid
conditions of Prose in measure, proportion and Rhyme. All we have to say
relates only to the latter, and in that, confining our selves particularly to
English Poesy.

There are some, who in point of Poetry attribute so much to Nature that they
think all rules and directions absolutely unnecessary, and consequently that it
is not reducible to any Art; and this they categorically affirm of some
Nations, allowing to others greater advantages and inclinations to perfection
and excellency therein, as particularly to the Greeks and Latins. But those
certainly consider not that we are equally the children of Nature; that wit,
and happiness of conceit are an universal patrimony, and that there are in
every language certain heights proportionable to their Idiome, as may very much
advance Poetry. Besides the injustice they do the modern Languages, often
comparing their Poetry to that of the Greek and Latins, and finding it
somewhat disconsonant they presently condemn it as savage and barbarous, when
happily, considered with relation to the Languages, it is much the more
excellent. To which may be added the advantages, in point of Poetry, accrewing
by Rhyme, and consequently that the Languages that are enriched by it, are the
most suscep^ible of Poesy. But for these and the like controversies arising
concerning Poetry, we refer those that are desirous of further satisfaction to
the defense of Poesy, wri^ten by Sir Philip Sidney, printed at the end of the
Arcadia; Mr. Sa. Daniel's Apology for Rhyme, written in answer to a Pamphlet
in his time, entitled Observations in the Art of English Poesy; and a certain
Treatise entitled, The Art of English Poesy, divided into three Books, the
first of Poets and Poesy; the second of Proportion, and the third of Ornament,
printed in the year 1589. treating of Poesy in general, and exemplifying in
the English.

As to English Poesy, we shall lay it down as granted, that it may be
fortunate in any kind, and upon any subject, if it meet with a true son of
Parnassus, and a genius that knows how to manage it. And yet we find by
experience that the most considerable, and for ought can be found, the most
fortunate therein were a sort of Chimists, men of much leisure, and sedentary
lives, who writ altogether in Stanza's. In so much that for some centuries of
years, the greatest part of English Poetry, was spent on those barren and
indeed abstruse subjects of Chemistry, and the Philosophers stone, as I have it
from a Gentleman's observation, who is excellently well versed in Treatises of
that nature, and has a strange, and almost incredible collection thereof. But
the English Language ariving daily to greater perfection and purity, Poesy
must needs accordingly extend to all subjects and occasions, incident to humane
life; and since it admits of the same division into species, as the Greek and
Latin, we must, being obliged to them for their Terms, submit to their Method.

The chiefest of all the species of Poesy, is the Heroic, or Epick, as being
a representation of Heroes, or great and fortunate men, and accordingly
requiring a certain state and Majesty suitable to the persons it represents.
Some, in Mr. Johnson's time, vainly attempted to write a Heroic poem, in
imitation of the Greeks and Latins, by the measures of Spondey and Dactyl,
without any regard to rhyme. Of that number was he, who sent him a copy of
verses beginning thus,

Be^nja^mi^n i^mmo^rtal Jo^hnso^n mo^st hi^ghli^e re^no^wne^d. In this kind
were written by the Ancients, all kind of Historical Poesy, performed by most
of the Europian Languages, till of late, by way of Stanza's.

A second species of Posie is the Lyrick, which is of such extent, that it may
be made use of on any occasion. To this head are referred Madrigals, Sonnets,
Hymns, Ballets, Odes, whereof some are amorous, some rural, some military,
some jovial, made for drollery and drinking; in a word, what suits best with
the Poets humor. To these may be added, Epithalamiums, written upon occasion
of Nuptials, Epinicions, of Victories, Genethliacks of Nativities,
Congratulatories, etc. The most eminent of all writers of this kind, were among
the Latins Horace and Catullus.

A third species is that of Elegies, Threnodies, and such like long-breathed
Poems on luctiferous subjects. To this is reducible, what ever may be said on
sad and doleful occasions. Of this Ovid in his book de Tristibus, is, as it
were, the Grand Exemplar.

A fourth kind is that which is called Dramatick Poesy, divisible into diverse
species, and comprehending, Tragedies, Comedies, Interludes, Masks,
Entertainments, Dialogues, Satyrs, Frolicks, Georgicks, Pastoralls,
Piscatories, Nauticals (which three last, pass commonly under the name of
Eclogues) Memoralls and the like. In these the Poet is not strictly obliged to
rhyme, but only to measure, being such as are principally intended for the
stage, the main grace hereof consists in representation and action. Of all
these, the most ancient is the Satyr, a kind of writing, reproving common and
popular abuses, so called, for the bitterness and invectives thereof, which
was such that to regul^te and reform their licentiousresse and exorbitance
Tragedies and Comedies were introduced.

A fifth is the Epigram, a facetious kind of writing, full of spirit, humor,
and fancy. It is of a vast extent, as comprehending Epitaphs, Characters,
Emblems, Devices, Motto's, Hieroglyphics, Definitions, Aphorisms,
Distributions, Paradoxes, Rebus's, Problems, It is full of mirth and salt,
sententious, directive, as to Morality, proverbiall, Mythologicall,
Enigmaticall, in a word has all humane actions and accidents to work upon,
closing up all with a certain smartnesse of conceit. The numerous brood of it,
are, ingenious fallacies in, and extra dictionem, Encomiasticks,
Vituperatories, Scoffs, Sarcasms, Jeers, Jests, Quibbles, Clinches, Quippes,
Bulls, Anagrams, Chronograms, Acrosticks, Criticismes, in a word whatever is of
Succinct and concise Poetry, on what subject soever, handsomely couched, and
worded.

To these may lastly be added certain Poetical Treatises concerning Learning,
Science, or some particular sect of Philosophy, such as that of Lucretius,
Epistolary writings, such as those of Ovid, wherein he has been imitated by
Mr. Drayton, and Historical as Lucan, imitated by the same Drayton and Daniel,
and translated and supplied by Mr. Thomas May, both in Latin and English.

Having thus made a hasty dissection of Poesy into its several species, it is
now time we descend to some few particular instructions, which duly observed,
may contribute something to the ornament and embellishment thereof. There is,
as we hinted before, a certain harmony in Prose, much more necessary is it in
Verse, whereof the grace and advantage consists altogether in the Symphony and
cadence.

The first Observation then, shall be to endeavor such a disposition of the
words, as that, without much labor to the tongue, they make a cerrain melody
in the ear, which no sooner hears it, but she judges whether the words be
placed so, as to be pronounced without violence by the accent; whence this
verse; though it has the just number of feet, runs harshly to the ear, by
reason of the misplacing of the accent.

None think reward rendered worthy his worth.

The case is the same when by an inconsiderable alteration, as happily that of
one word, makes what was before harsh become smooth and pleasant.

For instance this,

Though death does consume, yet verue preserves, with a little transposition
will run well enough thus,

Though death does ruin, virtue yet preserves.

This discovers of what consequence the exact observation of the accent is,
which, like right time in Music, produces harmony, the want of it harshnesse,
and discord. In like manner Rhyme depends altogether on the accent; whence it
comes that many words terminating alike, yet never rhyme well, such as
weakness and confess, nature and endure, fortune and importune, etc. This is
soon discovered by the ear.

The second, to avoid as much as may be long Parentheses, which are a certain
torture to the Reader, forcing him to alter his tone till he come to the close
of the Parenthesis, and causing in the hearer a distraction and suspense till
the sense be united. Examples of this are so frequent, we need not quote any.
Some late writers have endeavored to avoid them even in Prose, and the attempt
ought to be cherished and seconded, nor indeed is it very difficult.

To this head may be added a certain licentiousness, which some English Poets
have in imitation of the Greek and Latin, presumed on to dismember, and
disjoyn things that should naturally march together; placing some words at such
a distance one from another, as will not stand with the English Idiome. Nay
sometimes they fall down into flat prose; a kind of Licentia poetica by no
means allowable in English, such is that of these verses.

But now that she is wearied with the toil
Of balling, and that all her spirits boil
With scortching flames of the blind Archers fire,
Which kindles no less vehement desire,
In her inamorato's, hence she goes,
Having farewel'd the company, at whose
Earnest entreaty she was pleased to come
Into afair and well adjusted room, etc.
A third caution i^, to avoid, as much as may be, frequent Apostrophe's,
because of harshnesse and disturbance consequent thereto, such we have in this
verse.

The husband is the head, as soon's h' unlocks Where the words as and he, are
apostrophated, which cannot be well admitted. It is ordinary with the same
Author to apostrophate us, his, by, to, be, very, etc. very harshly, and not
without violence to the ear.

A fourth is to avoid feminine rimes, such as charity and parity, double and
trouble, Dunstable, and Constable, etc. which in a verse of ten syllables or
Heroic, speaks a certain flatnesse derogatory from the Majesty thereof, and if
any where they may be allowed, it is in Ditties and Sonnets, and there hardly,
Poesy being now arrived to such purity and perfection.

With this we forbid the use of polysyllables, such as are proper to prose, and
come not into verse without a certain violence, such as representation,
skilfulness, remediles, reciprocally, convertible, sprightfully; as also the
frequent use of words, that have the accent on the fourth syllable from the
termination; as territory, disputable, protonotary, and the like.

A fifth, may be an exact observation of the rhyme, as that wherein all the
symphony and music of a verse consists. In this Sir Thomas Urquhart, a man of
an extraordinary fancy, may be said to be negligent, or indeed it is the fault
of his Country, which being obliged to France for many things, derive thence a
liberty not admittable in English Poesy. Such is that of terminating with the
same letters, as conceive, and receive, sun, and son, resent and consent, etc.
frequent in French Poetry, or such as not allowed, Poesy, would be lost among
them.

As also that of making two words that have but any affinity in sound, to serve
for rhyme, as effects, and takes, expression and copulation, lean and den, late
and set; frequent in Scotch Poets, as it were in imitation of the French, among
whom it is tolerable.

Lastly, for the Epithets, which well placed and significant, are no small
ornament in a Poem. These we would have to add something to the signification
of the Substantive, that it may not be thought they only fill up the line.
Thus to say, briny sea, is no more than to say, the sea, the woody grove is no
more than a grove, nor were it amiss to avoid a sort of harsh compound words,
much affected by some, such as Thunder-thumping Jove, tempest-raising winds,
which reading and experience will soon discover to be the issues of hollow
brains, filled with naught but wind.

Thus having run through this short Anatomy of Poesy, all now remains to do
is, in few words, to give some little account of the Author, and the design and
scope of the present work, for the Author he had sometime the charge and
management of a private School at Hadley near Barnet in the County of
Middlesex, kept in the house of a worthy Gentleman, one Mr. Francis Atkinson,
who out of a design truly generous, and public, endeavoring to prevent the
inconveniences of irregulated youth, set up a School or Academy, for the
education of a select number of Gentlemen's sons of good quality. There, it
seems, as he confesses in his Epistle to the said Mr. Atkinson, he writ this
elaborate piece. But this is not his first appearance in the world; for in the
year 1655. came forth a book of his called the ENGLISH ACCIDENCE, very useful
for such as it was intended for, as teaching a way to make him that can but
indifferently read English, to turn any sentence into pure and elegant Latin,
Printed for R. Lownds at the white Lion in Paul's Churchyard.

For the Work, he has divided it into three parts. The first treats of all
rhimes imaginable in English (as the base and foundation of Poesy) according
to their several terminations. The second furnishes the diligent Lover of the
Muses, with excellent choice and variety of apposite Epithets, somewhat in
imitation of Textors in the Latin. The third is an ample treasury of phrases,
and elegant expressions, gathered out of the best esteemed English Authors that
have writ in the several kinds of Poesy, not unlike that of Thesaurus
Poeticus, in Latin. And all this is performed by such an excellent method, and
a certain alphabetical disposition, for the greater ease and convenience of
those that shall be desirous to advance themselves thereby, that it may be
confidently said, the design is absolutely new, there having not any thing of
this kind appeared upon the English stage before.

So that there seems nothing requisite to complete the great structure of this
ENGLISH PARNASSUS, or Poetical Institution, but a Rhetorical Treatise, such
as may acquaint and furnish the industrious student with these advantages and
imbellishments, that advance as well Prose, as Poetry to the highest pitch. And
such a Treatise there is already in the Printers hands, to be suddenly put into
the Press, entitled, ENGLISH RHETORICH, and that drawn by the same hand, and
polished by the same indefatigable industry, as this PARNASSUS, And of that
RHETORICH, there is the like presumption, that proceeding from the same Author,
th^^ is, being such as pruned off whatever is burd^^ ^ome, and unnecessary, and
comprehending all that is beneficial and conducing to the improvement o^ such
as shall desire it, it will meet with a reward suitable to an undertaking of
such concernment to all learning, a general encouragement acceptance, and
applause.

I. D.

The ALPHABET OF MONOSYLABLES.
AB.
BAbe Blabbe Crabbe Drabbe Mab Scabbe Slabbe Stabbe.
ACE or AIES.
Base, Bays. Bl^ze Brace Case Chase Face Days Fraies Glaze Gaze Graze Grace
Jayes Keys Lace Maze Place Plays Race Rays Prays Praise R^ze Raise Says
Slaies Spraies Stays Space Straies Swayes Trayes Trace Mace Ways
ACK.
Back Black Brack Clack Crack Hack Jack Knack Lack Pack Quack Rack Sack Slack
Stack Tack Track Whack Wrack ACT. ut ACK.
AD.
Add Badde Bad Clad Dad Drad Gadde Gad Glad Had Lad Mad Padde Sad Swadde
ADE or AID.
Aid Blade B^ayde Cade Fade Fraid Jade Laid Made Maid Naigh'd Played P^ay'd
Ra^ed Said Shade Spade Splaid Staid Straid Swaid Trade Wade Weighed
AFE. and AFF.
Baffe Cal^e Chafe C^affe D^fle D^affe Half Laugh Q^^ffe R^ffe Ralph Safe
Staff Ep^-^aph.
AF^.
Baff^ Chaf'^ Craft D^fft Graft Haft Laughed Quafft Sh^ft Taught Waft.
AG. AGS.
Bag Brag Cag Clag Crag Dag D^ag Fag Flag Gag Hag Lag Nag Quag P^ague Rag Shag
Swag Stag A Wag To Wag.
AGE. ADGE.
Paren-tage Badge Cage Fadge Gage Madge Pilgri-mage Pupil-lage Page Rage Sage
S^age Sw^ge Wage.
AIE. AY.
Aye Bay Bray De-cay Clay Day Flay F^ay Gay Gray Hay Jay Lay D^-lay May Dis-may
Nay Pay Play P^ay Ray Ar-ray Say Slay Splay Spray Stay Stray Sway Tray Be-^ray
Way Be-wray
ACHE.
Ache Bake Brake Cake D^ake Flake Jakes Lake Make Quake Rake Sake Shake Slake
Sp^ke Stake Mis-take Be-take Under-take Over-take Wake.
ALE. AILE.
Ale Ayle Bale Dale Fail Flaile Frail G^le Goal En-g^aile Ha^le Ex-hale Male
Nail P^le Paile Quail Rail Sale S^yle S^ale Shale Sn^yle Stale En-tayle
Re-tale Traile Vale A^vayle Pre-vaile Veil Wail Be-waile.
ALL. AULE.
All Awle Ball Bawl Braul Call Caul Craule Fall Gaul Hall Maule Paul Pall
Appal Shall Small Spawle Sprawl Stall Tall Thrall Wall Whalle Yawle.
ALD.
Bald Brawld Called Crawld Gald Mauld Appalld Scauld Spawld Sprawld Stalld
Enthralld Walld Yawld.
ALDE. AILD.
Bayld Faild En-Grayld Haled Ex-hal'd Haild Naild Em-pail'd Raild Sailed Scaled
En-taild Re-tayld Trayld Vaild Pre-veyld Be-wail'd
ALFE
Calfe Half Ralphe
ALK.
Balke Chalk Stalk Talk Walk.
ALM.
Alms Balm Calm Helm Palm Psalm Qualm Shalm.
ALS.
Alice Else Ails Balls Bayles Calls B^awles Crawles Falls False Mawles
Ap-palls Spawles Sprawles Stalls. En-thralls
ALT.
Fault Ex-alt Halt Malt Salt Shall.
ALV.
Calves Halve Salve
AM.
Am Came Cham Clam Cram Dam Dram Flam Ham Lamb Mam Ram Slam
AME. AIM.
Aim Blame Came Claim Dame Fame Flame Frame Game Lame Mayme Name Same Shame
Tame
AN. ANNE
Anne Ban Bran Can Can Dan Fan to Fan Began Man Nan Pan Ran Scan Span Swan
Tan Than Vanne Wanne
ANCE.
Radiance Daliance Chance Dance France Glance Lance Prance Igno-rance
Delive-rance In trance. En-hance Countenance Maintenance
AND.
And B^nd Brand Fan'd Grand Hand Land Sand Scand Spand Withstand Understand
Stand Strand Tan'd Wand
ANE. AINE.
Bane Blaine B^ain Cane Crane Dis-dain Dane Drain Pro-fane A-gain Fane Grain
Grane Jane Lane Maine. Pain Counter-Pane Com-plain Rain Reign Slain Spain
Sprain Stain Constrain Disstrain Swain Eente^-tain Abs-tain Con-tain Re-tain
De-tain Ob-tain Sus-tain Main-tain Train Restrain Vane Wane Waine.
AMP.
Camp Champ Cramp Damp Lamp Ramp S^amp Vamp.
ANCH.
Blanch Branch H^nch Lanch Stanch
ANG.
Bang Fang Gang Hang Pang Range Sang Sprang Stang Tang Twang
ANGE.
Ex-change Grange Mange Range E^strange.
ANK.
Mounte-bank Blank Crank Dank Drank Flank Frank Hank Lank Prank Rank Sank Shank
Shrank Slank Stank Thank
ANT.
An^ Aunt R^-cant ^^-^hant Daunt Flaunt Gaunt Grant Haunt Pant Scant Taunt
Vaunt Want.
AINT
Faint Paint Com-plaint Ac-qu^i^t Saint
AP.
Cap Chap Thunderclap ^lap Gap Perhap Lap Map Nap Pap Rap Sap Slap Snap Scrap
S^rap Swap Tap In-trap Wrap.
APE.
Ape Gape Grape Jape Nape Rape E^scape Scrape Shape Tape.
APS. v. AP.
Caps Chaps Claps Re-lap^e
APT.
Apt Chapt C^apt Flapt Gapt Lapt Rapt Escaped Scrap't Shaped Slapt Snapt Swapt
In-trapt Wrapped.
AR.
Are Bar Car Far Jar Mar Scar Spar Star Tar War.
ARE. AIR.
Are Bare Care Cha^r Clare Dare Fair Glare Hair Hare Mare Pair I^-pare
R^-pare Prayer Rare Share E^-^nare Square Stare Swear Tare Ta^ir Ware.
ARB.
Barb Garb Herb Orb.
ARCE. v. ARS. ARCH.
Arche March Parch Se^rch Search Torch.
ARD
Bard Card D^^'d Guard Hard Fa^'d Heard Ja^^'d Lard M^^d N^^d Pa^'d Scared
Sh^^'d E^-n^^'d Spard D^-spaird Squard Star'd Starrd R^ward Ward Yard.
ARF.
Dwarf Scarf Warf Wharf.
ARGE
Barge Ch^rge Large Serge Targe Verge.
ARK.
Ark B^^k Cark Cleark D^rk Hea^k J^^k L^rk Mark Park Queck S^rk Shark Spark
Stark Ya^k
ARLE
Carle Charle Marle Parle S^^^le Wharl
ARM.
Arm Barm Charm Farm Harm A-larm Sperme Swarm Term Warm
ARN.
Barn Fern Learn Stern Warn Yarne
ARP.
Carp Chirp Harp Querp Sharp Warpe
ARS. v. AR. ARE.
Arse Bars Carrs Dares Fares Scarce Mars
ARSH.
Harsh Marsh
ART.
Art Cart Clart Dart Fart Heart Heart Mart Part Quart Smart Start Tart Thwart
Wart
ARTH.
Dearth Earth Girth Hearth Swarth
ARV. v. ERVE. AS.
Ass Brass Basse Class Glass Grass Less Mass Pass Was.
ASE. v. ACE. ASH.
Ash Brash Cash Clash Crash Dash Flash Gash Mash P^sh Plash Quash Rash Slash
Swash Thrash Trash Wash.
ASK.
Ask Baske Caske Flaske Laske Mask Pasch Task.
ASP.
Aspe Claspe Gasp Graspe Haspe Raspe Waspe.
AST.
Bast Blast Cast Chaste Fast A-gast Have Last Mast Past Taste Wast
AT.
At Batt Bratt Cat Chat Fat Flat Hat Mat Pat Rat Squat That What
ATE.
Bate Deli-cates Date Fate Gate Grate Hate Kate Re-late Mate Pate Plate Prate
Consec-Rate Sat Slate State Strait Wait Yate.
ATCH.
Batch Catch Cratch Hatch L^tch Match Dis-patch Patch Scratch Smatch Snatch
Swatch Thatch Watch.
ATH.
Bath Faith Has Lath Path Rathe Swathe Says Wrath.
ATS. v. AT. AVE.
Brave Cave Drove Gave Grave Have Knave Nave Rave Save Shave Slave Stave Wave
Thrave.
AW.
Aw Claw Daw Draw Flaw Haw Jaw Gnaw M^w Paw Raw Saw Spaw S^raw Thaw
AWD.
Bawd Clawd F^aud Laud Applaud Thawd.
AWN.
Brawn Dawn Drawn Fawn Gnawn Lawn Pawn Prawn Sawn Spawn Thawn Yawn.
AX v. ACK.
Ax Flax Lax Pax Tax Wax.
AY. v. AIE. EA.
Flea Key Lea Plea Sea Y^a
EACE EASE.
De-cease Fleas En-crease De-crease Grease Lease Peace Pease Pleas Prease Seas
Se^ze Tease These.
EACH.
Beach B^each Breach Leach Preach
EACH.
Im-peach Reach Teach.
EAD.
Bead Bread Dead Dread Flead Glead Head Kne^d Lead Mead Plead R^ad Shead Shread
Spread Stead Tread.
EAF.
Deaf Leaf Sheaf
EAK.
Beak Bleak Break Creak Freak Leak Peak Speak Sneak Squeak Streak Weak Wreak.
EAL.
Deal Heal Con-geal Meal Peal S^ale Squeal Steal Sweal Teal Re-veal Weal Wheal
Zeal.
EAM.
Beam Bream Cleam Cream Dream Fle^m Gleam Ream S^am Scream S^eam S^ream Team
Theme Extreme.
EAN.
Bean Clean Glean Lean. Mean Queen Rain Skean Spleen Wean Y^ane.
EAP.
Cheap Heap Leap Reap.
EAR. ERE.
Bear Blear Cheer Clear Fear Flear Hear Jear Lear Mear Near Ap-pear Peer Pheer
Rear Sheer Be-smear Spear S^eer Stear Swear Tear There Wear Were Where Year.
EAS. v. EACE. EAST.
Beast Breast De-ceast Feast Least.
EAT. ETE.
Beat Bleat De-ceit Cheat Feat Great Heat Jeat Meat Neat Pleat Seat Sweat Teat
Threat In-treat Wheat Repeat
EATH.
Breath Death Heath Sheath Wreath.
EAVE.
Cleave De-ceive Heave Leave Be-reave Sleave Weave
EB.
Gleb Neb Web.
ECK.
Beck Check Deck Neck Peck Speck.
ECT.
Checked Re-flect Neg-lect Cor-rect E-rect Di-rect Peckt Circum-spect Re-spect
Dect Pro-tect De-tect. Recol-lect Re-ject De-ject In-fect Dia-lect Archi-tect
ED.
Bed Bled Bred Bread Dead Dread Fed Fled Head Led Ned Red Read Shed Sped Spread
Stead Shred Thread Tread Wed.
EDGE.
Edge Hedge Al-ledge Pledge Sedge Wedge
EE.
Be De-cree D^^^ Fee Glee A-gree De-gree He Knee Lee Me Pee Ree See She Thee
Three T^ee We Ye.
EECE. EESE.
Cheese De-crees Fees Geese Freeze Greece Fleece Knees Lees Piece Sees Sne^ze
Squeeze Trees Wheeze,
EECH.
Beech Creech Leech B^-seech Speech
EED.
Bleed Breed De-creed Deed Feed Freed A-greed Heed Meed Need R^ed Seed Speed
S^eed Weed.
EEF.
B^ef Brief Chief Grief Be-lief.
EEK.
Cheek Creek Gleek Greek Leeke Meek Reeke Seek Shreek Sleek Squeak Week,
EEL.
Deal Eele Feel Heel Keele Kneel Peele Reele Siele,
EEM.
Re Deem Be Seem Es-Teeme.
EVEN.
Seen Green Keen Queen Seen Screen Skene Spleen Ween.
EEP.
Creep Deep Keep Peep Sheep Sleep Steep Sweep Weep
EERE. v. EAR. EES. v. EACE. EET.
Be It Feet Fleet Greet Leet Meet Sheet Street Sweet.
EETH.
Sees Teeth
EEVE.
Beeves At-chieve Cleave Grieve Re-lieve Be-lieve Re-prieve Shrieve.
EEZE. v. Eece EF^.
Cleft Deft Left Be-reft.
EG.
Beg Dreg Leg Meg Peg Steg.
EK. v. ECK. EKE. v. EAK. EL.
Bell Cell Dwell Ell Fell Hell Kell Knell Mell Nell Ex-pel Com-pel Re-pel Quell
Sell Shell Smell Spell Swell Tell Well Yell
ELD.
Dwel'd Felld Field Geld Held Queld Reeld Seld Sield Smeld S^eld Sweld Wield
Yield
ELE. v. EALE. ELCH.
Belch Welsh.
ELF.
Delf Pelf Self Shelf.
ELM.
Elm^ F^lm Helm Realm Over-whelm.
ELSE. ELSE. v. EL. ELT.
Belt Dealt Dwelt Felt Gelt Melt Pelt Smelt Sp^lt Swelt Welt.
ELTH.
Health Stealth Tilth Wealth.
ELV.
Delve Selves Shelves.
EM.
Con-demn Gemme Hemme Kemb Stem.
EME. v. EAM. EN.
Ben Den Fen Hen Ken Men Pen Skenne Ten Then When Wren.
ENCE, ENS, ENSE.
In-cense Inno-cence Frankin cence Consci-ence Of-fence De-fence. Influ-ence
Dili-gence Exi-gence Negli-gence Indi-gence Hence Excel-lence Com-mence
Im-mense Ex-pence Recom-pense Elo-quence Circum-infer-ence Confer-ence
Quintis-sence Tense Pre-tense Thence Whence.
ENCH. v. EN.
Bench Drench French Quench S^ench Tench Trench Wench Wrench
END.
Bend Blend Tran-^s-cend Con-de-scend De-fend Of-fend B^-friend Appre-hend
Compre-hend Repre-hend. Lend Com-mend De-ex-pend Rend Send Spend At-tend
In-tend Ex-tend Con-tend Wend.
ENGTH.
Length Strength.
ENE. v. EAN. ENS. v. ENCE. ENT.
Bent Inno-ascent Inno-decent In-dent Negli-gent Indi-gent Dili-gent Kent Lent
Commande-ment Argu-ment Re-pent Meant Elo-quent Shent Spent Sprent Con-straint
Re-straint Sent Represent As-sent Con-sent Dis-sent Re-sent Tent In-tent
Con-tent Ex-tent At-tent Trent Vent E-vent In-vent Circum-vent Under-went.
EP. v. EAP.
Crep Hep Skep Step.
EPE. v. EAP. EPT.
Cept Kept Leapt Ceapt Slept Stepped Swept.
ER. v. EAR.
Her De-ferre Re-ferre Pre-ferre In-terre De-terre.
ERB.
Herb Verb.
ERCE. ERSE.
Fierce me-herse Hearse A-merce Pierce Serce Terse Theirs Con-Verse Re-verse
Un-verse
ERCH.
Birch Perch Search
ERD.
Beard B^rd Cheard En-deard Feared Fleerd Herd Heard Jeerd Ap-peard Sheard
Steard Be-Stird.
ERGE. v. ARGE.
Verge Dirge.
ERK. v. ARK.
Cleark Ferk J^rk Hea^k Rick Perke Querke Smerke Yerke.
ERL. v. ARL.
Earl Girl Pearl Whirle Twirle.
ERM. v. ARM.
Sperme Firm Term
ERN.
Dis-cerne Con-cerne Derne Learn Fern Spurn Yearne Earne Chirne
ERP.
Chirpe Quirpe
ERS. v. ERCE.
Bears Chears In-dears Fears Fleers Jeeres Hers Lears Peers Pears Sears Shears
Be-smears Spears Stirs Stears Stears Swears Tears Re-verse Con-verse Wears
Years Erres Pre-ferres Re-ferres De-ferres.
ERT. v. ART.
Heart Male-pert Sh^rt Ski^t Squirt Con-vert Di-vert In-vert Per-vert De-sert
In-sert.
EARTH.
Birth Dearth Gi^th Mirth Earth Perth.
ERV. ARV.
Carve De-serve Pre-serve Re-serve Con-serve Serve Nerve.
ESS.
Besse Bless Ex-cesse Chesse Address Re-dresse Guess Jesse Less Mess
Op-presse R^-presse Ex-presse De-presse Sup press Yes Di-stresse Re-gresse
Di-gresse In-gresse Pro-fesse Con-fesse
ESE. v. EAS. ESH.
Flesh Fresh.
EST.
B^st Blessed Breast In-cest Ch^st Crest Ad-drest Re-drest Pro-fest Con-fest Hest
Jest Guest Lest Nest Ex-prest Op-prest R^-prest De-prest Sup-prest R^st
Int^-rest Quest Di-strest Test Pro-test D^-test Con test In-vest De-vest W^st
Wrest.
ET. v. EAT.
Bet Debt Counte^-fet Fret Get Jet Let Pet Set Wet Whet Yet.
ETCH. v. EACH.
Fetch Stretch Retch Wretch
ETH. v. EATH. EVE. v. EAVE. EW.
Blew Chew Crew Dew Flew Hew Jew Knew Few Sew Show Shrew View. Yew.
EX. v. ECK.
Rex Sex Vex.
EY.
Key Weigh Whey.
I. Y. IE.
Eye I By Buy Cry Die Dry Fie Fly Fry Guy H^e High Lie Ly My N^gh Pie Com-ply
Re-ply Im-ply Pry Rye Sigh Shie Sky Sly Spy Stie Tie Th^gh Thy Try Vie Why
Wry
IB.
Bib Crib Gib Glib Lib Rib Snib Squib Tib.
IBE.
Br^be Gibe K^be Scribe Tribe In-scribe De-scribe Circum-scribe Sub-scribe
Pre-scribe Tran-scribe
ICE. ISE.
Circum-cise Pre-cise Cries Dice Para-dise Sacri-fice Suf-fice Eyes Flies F^ies
Frize D^s-guise Grice Hies Lic^ Tyran-nize M^^e Nice Pies Preci-pice Plies
Price Com-p^ize Rice R^se Size Sice Des-cries Skies Slice Spice Sties In-tice
Thrice Trice Twice Vice. Ad-vise De-vise Wise.
ICH. v. ITCH.
R^ch Which.
ICK.
Brick Chick Dick Flick Kick Lick Nick Pick Prick Quick Sick Stick Tick Thick
Trick.
ID.
Bid Ch^d Did Hid Kid Lid Mid Rid Strid.
I WOULD.
A-b^de B^ide Chide Cried Dyed Dried Cruci-fied Fried Glide Hide Be-lied
De-nyed Ap-plyed R^-plyed Com-plyd Im-plyed Pride P^yed Ride Side De-scried
Slide Spied S^ride Tide Tryde Vied weighd Wide.
IDGE
A-bridge D^idge Flidge Ridge
IFE.
Fife Knife Life Rife Strife Wife.
IF.
Cliffe Qu^ffe Sriffe Whiffe
IFT.
Drift Fifth Gift Lift Quift ^ift Shift Rift Swift Thrift Whift.
IG.
Big D^g Fig Gig Jig Lig Pig Trig Twige Whig.
IGH. v. IE. IGHT. v. ITE. IKE.
Duke H^ke Pike Sp^ke S^rike.
I WILL.
Bile R^con-^ile Croca-dile De-file I Will Be-guile Mile Nile Com-pile Sile Smile
Style Tile Vile Wile While
ILL.
Bill Chill Dill Drill Fill G^ll Hill Kill Mill Nill Pill Qill Rill Shrill
Skill Spill Squill Still Swill Till Thrill T^ill Will
ILD. ILL. EILD
Build Filld Gild Killd Milld Pilld Skilld Spilld Stilld Swilld Tilld Trilld
Willd.
ILDE
Recon-cil'd Child De-fil'd B^-guild Com-pi^'d Smi^'d Styled Ti^'d Wild.
ILK.
M^lke Silk.
ILM. v. EIM. ILT.
Built Guilt Gilt Milt Quilt Spilt Tilt Wilt.
ILTH. v. ELTH.
Filth. Tilth.
IM.
Brim D^m Gim Him Limb Prim R^m Skim Swim Trim.
I AM
Chime Crime Grime Lime Prime Slime R^me Time.
IMP.
Gimp Limp Pimp Shrimp
IN.
Bin B^in Chin Din Fin Inn In Gin Be-gin Grin Kin Lin Min Pin S^n Shin Skin
Spin Thin Tin Twin Win.
INE.
Concu-bine Colum-bine B^ine In-cline De-cline Chine Dine Fine Kine Line Mine
Nine Pine D^-signe R^-signe Shine Shrine Swine valen-tine Thine T^ine Twine
Di-vine Wine Whine Whrine
INCE. INS. v. IN.
Prince Mince Quince Rinse Since Convince Wince.
INCH. v. ENCH.
Finch Inch Pinch Stench Winch.
IND
Friend Grind Lind Pined Sind Skind Spind.
INDE
Bind Blind In-clin'd De-clin'd Dined Find Grind Be-hinde Lined Kind Mind
Pined R^nde D^-sign'd Re-sign'd Shined En-shrin'd Twined Wind Whin'd Whrin'd
ING.
Bring Clinge D^nge Fling Hinge King Ling Ri^g S^ng Sling Sp^ing Sting String
Swing Thing Wing.
INGE
Cringe Fringe Hinge Singe Swinge Re-venge.
INK.
Brink Blink Cinque Chink Drink Link Pinke Sink Shrink Slink Stink Be-think
Twink Wink.
INS. v. INCE. INT.
Dint Flint Hint Lint Mint Splint Squint Stint Im-print
IP.
Chip Clip Dip Hip Lip Nip Pip Quip Rip Sip Ship Skip Slip S^ip Strip Tip Trip
Whip.
IPE.
Gripe Pipe Ripe Snipe Stripe Type Tripe Wipe.
IPS. v. IP. IPT.
Chipt Clipped Dipped Hipt Quipt Ripped S^pt Shipped Skipt Slipped Snipt Stripped Tript
Whipped
IR. v. ER.
F^re Mi^he Sir Be-stirre.
IRE.
Buyer Brier Crier Dire Drier Fire F^ier Friar Ire H^gher Hire Liar Ad-mire
Lyre Ni^her Quire De-sire Shire Ex-spire Con-spire E-squire R^-^ire A^-^ire
Tryer Were.
IRK. v. ERK. IRL. v. ERL. IRN. v. ERN. IRP. v. ERP. IRS. v. ERCE. IRT. v. ERT.
Dirt Girt Shirt Skirt Squirt
IS:
Is. Bliss Cis Dis Hiss Kiss Miss Piss Swisse T^is Wis.
ISE. v. ICE. ISH.
D^sh Fish P^sh Rush Wish.
ISK.
Brisk Frisk Whisk.
ISP.
Crisp Lisp Whisp
IS IT.
Fist Exor-cist Grist Kissed L^st Mist Wist In-fist Con-^ist D^-^ist Pe^-^ist
R^-^ist
IT.
Bit Chit Fit Flit Hit Kit Knit Nit Pit Ac-quit Sit Shit Slit Spit Split Tit
Twit Wit Writ. Com-mit Ad-mit Sub-mit Re-mit.
ITE. IGHT.
Bite Bright D^ght Fight Height Kite Knight De-Light Might M^te B^-Night Pight
Plight Re-quite Up-right Oversight Requ^-site Oppo-site Shite Smite Spite
Spr^te Wight White Write Ex-cite In-cite Re-cite.
ITCH.
Bitch B^eech D^tch Fitch Flitch Pitch Rich Sti^ch Swich Twitch Witch Which.
ITH.
Blithe Lith Since Tyth Wirh Writhe
IVE.
Dive Drive Five Give Gyve Hive Live A-live Con-nive De-prive Re-prive Rive
Shive Shrive Slive Strive Thrive Wive.
IX. v. ICK. IZE. v. ICE. O. v. OW,
Doe-dough Foe Fro Go Lo More Noe Po Roe So Shoe Sloe Throe To Toe Though Woe
Woo Who
OB. Obe.
Globe Job Robe.
OACH.
Bloach Broach Coach En-croach Loach Poach Ap-proach Re-proach. Roach.
OAD. ODE.
A Bode A-boad A-broad Goad Load Road Rode Toade Trod Yode.
OAK. OAK.
Oak Broake Choke Cloak Croak Poak Soke Smoke Spoke Stroke In-voke Pro-voke
Re-voke A-woke Yoke.
OALE. OLE.
Bole Coal Dole Foale Goal Hole Mole Pole Soale Sole Shoale S^ole Whole
OAM. OME.
Foam Home Comb Roam Tome Womb
OAN. ONE.
One Bone Cone Drone Flown Gone Groan Hone Joan Loan A-lone Moan None Roan
Shone Stone Tone Throne. v. Own.
OAP. v. OPEN.
Open Cope Coap Grope Hope Pope Rope Soap Scope Sloap Trope
OAR. ORE.
Oar Ore Boar Bore Core Door Floor A-dore Be-fore Goare Glore Hoare Lore
More Moors D^-plore Im-plore Poor Pore Roar Soar Sore Score Shore S^ore
Re-store Swore Tore Wore Yore
OARCE. ORCE.
O^res Boares Course Doors A-dores Force Floores Goares Moors Poores
De-plores Im-plores Roar Hoarse Source Scores Shores Snores Stores Whores
Re-morce
OARD.
Board Bo^'d Ac-cord Re-cord Af-ford Ab-hord Goard Gored Hoard Im-plor'd
De-plor'd Por'd Roard
ORD.
Sno^'d Sword Whor'd Word Lord.
OB.
Bob Cob Fob Rob S^b Throb.
OCHT. v. OTCHT. OCK. OX.
Block Brock Cock Clock Dock Flock Frock Knock Lock Mock Pock Rock Sock Shock
Smock Stock
OCKT.
Blockt Cockt Flockt Knocked Locked Mocked Rockt Stockt.
OD.
Cod Clod God Nod Plod Rod Sod Tod Trod.
ODGE.
D^dge Lodge
OFF.
Cough Doffe Goffe Scoff Trough
OFTEN.
Cought Croft Dofft Often Soft Scoft
OG.
Bog Cog Clog Dog Fog Frog Gog Hog Jog Log Pog
OAK. v. OAK. OLE. v. OAL. OLL.
Coll Doll Goll Loll Moll Poll Roll Scroll Con-troll Toll.
OLD.
Old Bold Cold Hold Mold Rolled Sold Scold Ex-told Told Controlled
OLK.
Folk Yolk.
OLT.
Bolt Colt Dolt Golt Polt Re-volt.
OLVE.
In-volve Re-volve Wolves
OM.
Comb Come Comm From Gom Some Plumb Tom Wom^b Whom
OMP. v. OAM.
Pomp Rompe.
ON. v. OAN.
Up-on Conne Done Gone John None Won
ONE. v. OAN. ONCE. v. OAN
Once Sconce
AND.
Bond Conn'd Donn'd Pond S^rond En-thron'd Bemoaned Groand.
ONG.
Long A-mong Song Strong Thong Throng Wrong Young
ONS. v. ONCE. ONT. v. OUNT.
Front Wont.
OP.
Crop Chop Drop Fop Hop Knop. Lop Sop Prop. Shop Slop Stop Top.
OPEN. v. OAP. OPT.
Chopped Cropped Hopt Lopt Propt Stopped Topt.
OR. Or
Dor Fore Nor
ORE. v. OAR. ORCE. v. OARCE.
Dis-course Re-course Force Horse Hoarse Remors Nource Source.
ORCH.
Porch Scorch Torch.
ORD. v. OARD. ^RGE.
Forge Dis-gorge G^o^ge Scourge.
ORK.
Cork Fork Pork Stork Work York,
ORLD. v. URLD.
World Hurled Curled.
ORM.
Dorm Form Storm Worm.
ORN.
Born Corn Horn For-lorn Morn Mourn Scorn Shorn Sworn Torn Thorn Worn A-dorn
ORN'D.
A-dorn'd Horned Scorned Mourned.
ORS. v. ORCE. ORT.
Court Dort Ex-hort De-hort A*mort Re-port Trans-port Sort Short Sport Re-tort
Ex-tort Wort.
ORTH.
Forth Worth.
OS.
Im-boss Cross Dross Goss Gloss In-gross Loss Moss Soss Toss.
OSE. v. OZE.
Chose ^-close Ens-close Di Dose Gl^ze Hose Lose Nose Pose Com-pose Ex-pose
Re-pose De-pose Im-pose Trans-pose Sup-pose Rose Those Whose
OAST. OST:
Boast Im-bost Cost Crossed Frost In-grost Host Lost Most Im-post Tossed.
OT.
Blot Clot Got Grot Hot Jot Knot Lot Not Pot Plot Rot Sot Scot Shot Snot Spot
Trot Wot.
OTE.
Boat Bloat Coat Dote Float Goat Groat Moat Note Oate Quote Rote Shote Smot
Throat Vote Wrote
OTCH. v. OCH.
Botch Notch Scotch.
OATH.
Oath Both Broth Cloth Does Froth Loath Moth Quoth Sloth Troth Wroth
OW.
Bow Bough Blow Brow Cow Crow Dow Flow Glow Grow Know How Low Mow Now Plow Prow
Row Sow Show Shrow Slow Snow Bestow Strew Tow Thou Throw Trow Vow You.
OWN.
Own Blown Brown Clown Crown Down Drown Flown Frown Gown Known Grown Mown
R^-nown Shown Town Thrown
OX. OCK.
Ox Box Fox Pox
OY
Boy Coy Cloy In-joy An-noy De-s^toy Toy Em-ploy
OYD.
Cloyed En-joy'd An-noy'd D^-stroy'd Voy'd
OIL.
Oil Boil Broile R^-coile Foil Moile Quoile Soil Spoil Toil.
OYLD. v. OIL. OILS. v. OIL. OYNE.
Foyn Groin Join Pur-^oin. Coin.
OYNT.
Ap-point Dis-appoint Un-joynt An-^oynt*
OYS. v. OY.
Choice Hoise Re-joyce Poize Voice.
OIST
Foist Rejoyc't Voic't
OOD.
B^ood Food Mood With-stood Wood Woed.
OOF.
Hoof A-loof Re-proof Roof Scroof Woof.
OOK.
Book Brook Cook Hook Look Rook Shook Mis-took.
OOL.
Cool Fool Pool School Stool Tool
OOM.
Bloom Broom Coom Doom Groom Loom Rome Room Tomb Womb.
OON.
Boon Moon Noon Spoon
OOP.
D^oop Hoop Loop Poop Stoop Troop Whoop
OOS.
Boughs Loose Nooze Goose.
OOT.
Boot Foot Root Soot Shoot.
OOTH.
Sooth Tooth Youth
OUCH.
Couch Pouch Crouch Slouch Touch Dis-a-vouch
OUD.
Bowd Cloud Crowd Flowed Glowd Loud Mowed Proud Shroud Vowed
OULE.
Owl Bowl Cowle Foul Howl Joule Poule Roll Soul Seroul Toule Con-troule
OLD. v. OLD.
Could Should Con-troll'd Would.
OULT. v. OLT. OUND.
A-bound Re-bound Crowned Drowned Found Fround Hound Pound Round Sound Stound
Wound.
OUNCE.
Bounce Plounce Re-nounce Pounce Trounc^.
OUNT. v. OWN
Ac-count Re-count Fount Mount.
OUR.
Our Bower Four Flower Hour Lowre Power Pa-ra-mour Con-que-rour Pour Sour
Shower Tower Toure D^-vour Your.
OUS. v. OW.
Blouse House Louse Mouse Rouse Souse
OUT. OUGHT.
A-bout with-Out-through Oought Bought A*bout Brought Clout Doubt Drought
Fought Flout Gout Lout Naught Pout Rout Sought Spout Sprout S^out Taught
Thought Trout De-vout Wrought.
OUTH.
Grouth Mouth South Youth.
OVE.
A-bove Clove Dove Drove Glove Grove Love Move Ap-prove Re-prove Rove S^ove
Shrove Stove Strove.
VB.
Cub Chub Club Dub Grub Rub S^rub Shrub Snub Tub.
VCE. USE.
A-buse Ac-cuse Ex-cuse Choose Re-cluse Cruse Dues Re-fuse Con-fuse Dif-fuse
Trans fuse Juice Jews. Luce Muse News Scrues Sluice Spruce S^ues T^uce Use.
VCH. v. VTCH. VCK.
Buck Chuck Duck Luck Muck Pluck Suck Stuck.
VD.
Bud Blood Cud Flood Good Hood Mud Sud Spud Under-stood Wood.
VDE.
B^ewd Im-Breud Es-Chewd Con-clude Ex-clude In-clude C^ude Feude Glewd Lewd
Mued Re-new'd Rude Scr^'d Shrewd Spu'd S^u'd S^rewd In-trude Vi^wd.
VDGE.
Budge Drudge Grudge Ad Judge Snudge Trudge.
VF.
Buffe Cuffe Chuff Huffe Muffe Puff Ruff S^uffe Tough Through
VFT. v. VF. VE.
Blue Brue Cue Clue Ac-crue Due Drew F^w Flew Glue Hiew Hugh Jew Knew Liew Mue
Re-New Pue Rue Scrue Show En Sue Slew S^ew Spue Stue S^tew Threw True View You.
VG.
Bug Dug Drug Hug Jug Lug Rug Shrug Tug Trug.
VL.
Bull Cull Dull Full Gull Hull Lull Mull Disa-null Pull Trull Wool
VLE.
Mule Pule Rule Thule.
VLD.
Bulld Culld Dulld Gulld Lulld Mulld Disa-nulld Pulld.
VLF.
En Gulf Wolf.
VLK.
Bulk Hulk Sculk.
VLS. v. VLLS.
Pulse Repulse.
VM.
B^m Come Crum Dumb Drum Gum Hum Mum Numb Plum Some Scum Sum Swum Thumb Thrum
Womb Whom
VMP.
Bump Crump Dump Frump Lump Pump Ru^p Stump Thump Trump.
VME.
Fume Plume Rheum As-sume Pre-sume
UN.
Dun Done Gun Nun Run Sun Son Shun Spun Tun Won.
VNE.
Prune Tune.
OUNCE. UN.
Dunce Once Nonc^
OUNCE.
Bunch Clunch Munch Punch.
VND.
S^nd Shund Tund.
VNG.
Bung Clung Dung Flung Hung Lung Rung Sprung S^ung Strung Swung Tongue Young.
VNGE.
Plunge Sponge.
VNK.
Drunk Monk Punk S^nk Shrunk Sl^nk Stunk Trunk
VNS. v. UN. VNT.
Blunt B^unt Fount Hunt Runt Wont
UP.
Up Cup Tup Sup.
VR.
Bur B^ur Cur Furre D^-mu^re Slur Spur S^ir^e.
URE.
In-ure Cure En-dure A^-lure De-mure Im-mure Pure As-sure Ob scure Skuer
VRB.
Cu^be D^-stu^be
VRCE. VRS.
D^s-burse Curse Purse Wo^s^. v. VR.
VRCH.
Birch Church Lurch.
VRD.
Bird Blu^d Fur'd Surd Curd Slurd Spurd Sword Turd Word.
VR'D. v. URE. VRF.
Scu^fe Tu^fe
URGE.
Forge Purge Surge Scourge Dis-gorge.
VRK.
Lurk Turk Work:
VRLE.
Curle Churl Hurl Purle.
VRLD.
Curled Hurld Purld World
VRN.
Burn Churne Mourn Spurn Turn Vrne.
VRS. v. VR. VRT.
Blurt Curt Dirt Hurt Spurt Wort
US.
Busse Trusse Us Thus.
USE. v. VCE. VSH.
Bush Blush Brush Crush Flush Hush Gush Push Plush Rush Tush Thrush.
VSK.
Busk Husk Musk Tusk.
VST.
Bust Crust Dust Gust Just Lust Must Rust Thrust Trust
UT.
But Cut Gut Glut Nut Put Rut Scut Slut Stut Strut.
VTE.
Crute Flute L^te Mute S^te D^s-pute Re-pute Im-pute De-pute Com-pute.
VTCH.
Clutch Crutch D^tch Grutch Much Such Smuch Touch.
VTH.
Ruth Truth Youth.
VX. v. VCK. VRST.
Dis-burst Cursed Durst First Nourst Worst.
TO THE READER.
READER,
THou have here, what some would count big enough to deserve the name of Book,
and give thee arguments from the industry in the compiling, and benefit in the
use, to work thee to a liking, and extort thy approbation. For my own part, if
thou will be pleased to pardon the aspiring loftiness of the title, and to
consider for whom it was intended; Nec Suffaenus sum, nec inscribo Praxitelem.
If thou find any thing here either for thy pleasure or profit, thank not me,
but the greatness of the volume: for could it have been easily transcribed, or
any other way made generally useful to all them for whose sakes I have
principally taken this pains; it had neither troubled thee, nor the Press: nor
had I added one more to the numberless multitude of scriblers. Condemn it as
unworthy the light in what words thou please, and I shall owe thee thanks for
giving my thoughts expression by thy langnage. If thou disapprovest it and art
a wise man; I shall be too proud to know an understanding man of my judgment:
if thou be a fool, I shall not be very sorry to see some hopes of an
improvement in thy judgment, by beginning in this to know what justly to
condemn. If thou commendes^ any thing, whether thou heest wise or otherwise, ^
shall be so far from giving thee thanks, that I sha^ be half angry with thee,
for so much crossing m^ expectation. Vale.

Qui gravis es nimium potes hic jam Lector abire Quo libet -- Mart.

The Books principally made use of in the compiling of this Work.
DUbart as works. Ben. Johnson. Brownes Pastorals. Randolphs Poems. Drayton.
May's Lucan. Quarles divine Poems. Quarles divine fancies. Sandys Ovid's Metam.
Sandys Paraphrase on the Canticles. Herberts Poems. Totthams Poems. Withers
Poems. Orlando Furioso. Heywoods Dialogues and Dramms. Chapmans Homer.
Overburies Characters. Balzacks Epistles. Cowleys Blossoms. Horace translated.
Ovids works translated. Johnsonus Virbius. Spencers fairy Queen. Comedies and
Tragedies, many. Quarles Solomon's Recantation. Gomersals Levites revenge Sr.
Philip Sidneys Arcadia Shakespeare Heywood of Angels. Carewes Poems. Danyel.
Mayes Edward 3. Quarles Emblems. Quarles Argalus and Parthenia. Sandys of
Christ's passion. Habbingtons Castara. Sr. John Beamounts Poem. The valiant
Bruce. Burtons Melancholy. Chapmans Hero and Leand. Blunts Characters.
Massingers Secretary. Lovelace's Pastorals. Virgil translated. Cowpers Hill.
Elegies on Mr. King. Chaucer. Aviso. Holydaies Persius Quarles Eclogues. Howels
Instructions for foraine Travel. Howels vocal Forest, and Englands Tears.
Fullers Holy State. Dunns Poems. Malvezzi. Davenants Poems. Wallers Poems.
Miltons Poems. Sandy's Paraphrase on Job. Sandy's Paraphrase on Psalms,
Ecclesiastes, etc.
The ENGLISH PARNASSUS.
Aaron. SAcred, mitred, holy, blessed, grave, priestly, pious.

Abbey. Rich, wealthy, cloysterd, monkish, religious, old, ancient.

Abbot. Old, ancient, religious, cloysterd, recluse, mitred, reverend, regular,
grave, humble, devotious, retired, zealous, abstemious, monkish.

Abraham. Obedient, aged, old, prudent, faithful, blessed, wise, devout,
pious, godly, religious, reverend, sage, grave, holy.

Absence. Envious, long, prolonged, tedious, unwelcome, constrained,
forgetful, oblivious.

Abstinence. Sober, thrifty, honest, frugall, cleanly, chaste, lent-like,
sparing, cheerful, healthy, wholesome, temperate.

Absurdity. Foolish, dotish, clownish, sortish, repugnant, contradictious,
gross, great, improper, ridiculous, incredible, simple, ignorant.

Abuse. False, deceitful, ignorant, vain, malicious, gross, injurious.

Abyss. Gaping, yawning, dreadful, profound, devouring, dark, insatiate,
covetous, deep, vast, dangerous, affrighting, low, dark, unfathomed, hideous,
obscure, hellish, dismal, wide, open.

Accents. Sweet, harsh, harmonious, well-tuned, wounding, killing, stabbing,
dying, short winded, long winded, pleasing, delightful, sad, joyful,
mournful, sh^ill, flat.

Accident. Sudden, unexpected, unthought of, surprising, casual, fatal,
doubtful, unhoped, unfores^e^, usual, common, various.

Accomplishment. Perfect, entire, wished, final, happy, successful, joyful,
for tunate, blessed, desired, dispatched, absolute, total, full.

Accord. Peaceable, amiable, mutual, amorous, composed, unjarring, happy,
uniting, sweet, gentle, friendly, agreeing, calm.

Acheron. Deep, profound, infernal, hellish, shady, sad, black, deadly,
dismal, cu^sed, unhappy, greedy, devouring, flow, tormenting, flaming, burning,
scalding, scorching, boiling, broyl^ng, gloomie, pitchi^, joylesse.

Achilles. Valourous, courageous, swift, warlike, stout, valiant, subtle,
cruel, untamed, angry, hardy, fierce, doughty, inexorable, strong, great,
brave, generous, wilful, furious, stormy, proud, undaunted, implacable,
violent, passionate, seaborn, stubborn, sturdy, unmooved, bloody, fearlesse.

Acquaintance. Familiar, private, sociable, friendly, sweet, long, short.

Acres. Rich, well tilld, fruitful, fat, wealthy, flowery, hearby.

Accuser. Odious, quarelous, envious, contentious, malicious, angry hurtful,
hated, hateful, shameless, litigious, importunate, unjust, calumnious,
loathed, black mouthd.

Adam. Old, ancient, first born, dust formed.

Adamant. Hard, unrelenting, iron-drawing, subtle, lasting, enduring, uxorious,
loving, wooing, courting, alluring, obdurate, unconquered, solid, eternal.

Adder, v. Snake, Serpent. Writhed, hissing, cold, poisonous, invenoming, long,
glistering, swelling, biting, stinking, creeping, crawling, lurking, deadly,
dreadful, mischievous, crested, malicious, scaly, speckled, sl^ppery, lybian,
loathsome, folded, cruel, bowed, knotted.

Adieu. Last, tedious, sad, grieved, sighed, loathed, lingering.

Adonis. Brave, fair, beautiful, maiden, smooth-chind, neat, spruce, young,
amorus, venereous, lovely, sweet, fresh, trim, tender, soft, pitied,
unhappy, deplored.

Admonition. Wise, fatherly, christian, useful, wholesome, healthy, cordial,
sage, grave, timely, provident, careful, prudent.

Adventure. Hardy, bold, daring, improvident, doubtful, casual, rash, sudden,
brave, strange, happy, courageous, stout.

Adversity, v. Affliction. Unfortunate, pitied, calamitous, unhappy, deplored,
hated loathed, ruining, crushing, gauling, wringing, pressing, sad black,
useful, tutoring.

Adultery, Adulterer. Unchaste, vicious, infamous, lascivious, odious,
loathsome, secret, cautelous, wary, watchful, nightly, base, lewd, lustful,
bestial, brutish, lawless, licentious, rammish, rampant, rank, baudy,
obscene, savage, injurious, neat, spruce.

Advocate v. Lawyer. Mindful, cautelous, wary, subtle, clamorous, eloquent,
fair, spoken, knowing, skillfull, ready, consulting, dissembling, colloguinge,
silver-griping, see, some, ingenious, witty, nimble, attentive, long tayld.

Egypt. Memphian, fruitful, hea^bie, fertile, cornie, reedy, superstitious,
ingenious, witty, swarthy, fat, mysterious.

Aeneas. Pious, godly, religious, devout, doughty, hardy, stout, courageous,
valiant, valorous, wandering, Trojan, perjured, fore-sworne.

Aeolus, v. Wind. Tempestuous, windy, bul-he^kt, stormy, imperious.

Aetna. Smokie, sulphurous, burning, fl^ming, fiery, S^icilian, dreadful,
vaulty, high, lofty, Trinacrian, vaporeous, unquenched, noysefull, belching.

Aeacus. Just, grimme, severe, grave, inexorable, unbribed, rigorous,
uncorrupted, unfeed, impartial.

Affairs. Important, urgent, importunate, pressing, weighty, great.

Affection. v. Love. Vehement, passionate, hot, flaming, hearty, ardent,
burnin^ unfathomd, unmeasurd, immense, great, adventurous, uncontrold,
courageous, transporting, intrancing, willing, impatient, amorous, disordered,
inordinate, doting, blind, fon^ officious, strong, obsequious, melting,
zealous, tyrant, imperious, wanton, untamed, thoughtfull, careful, soft.

Affliction. Grievous, bitter, pressing, galling, grating, wringing, painful,
dolorous, cruel, hard, sad, rough, sharp, sour, insuppo^table, deadly,
vexing, cursed, unhappy, unwelcome, unwish^ laborious, wearying, hated,
fretting.

Africa. Affrican. Scorcht, sandy, thirsty, monstrous, monster bearing, ho^
scalding, sweltering, spacious, large, wide, salvage, soultry broyled, swarthy,
tawnie, perfidious, light clothed, crue^ fierce, rebellious, unfaithful.

Age. Gliding, slipperie, stealing, creeping, flying, swift, fleet
irrevocable, hating, envious, journeying, glib, feathered, winged, rolling,
wheeling, riding, succeeding, encroaching, intruding, assaulting, invading,
devouring, growing, running, galloping, light-foot, passing, hasty, nimble,
swimming, speedy, leaping soft-foot, posting, spurring, swift-wingd,
light-heeld, ambling, greedy, succeeding.

Oldage, v. Old. Agate. Indian, precious, spotted, sovereign, bright,
Sicylian, shining, veinie, cheerful, painted, streaked, checkerd,
scorpion-hating, interlaced, motley, many colored, chamfered.

Agave. Theban, furious, mad, outrageous, fierce, cruel, bloody, raging,
savage.

Ajax. Unconquered, untamed, fierce, undaunted, courageous, valiant, rash,
headie, stout, furious, mad, warlick, stern, hardy, cruel, valorous, strong,
great, fearlesse, sturdy, fullen, grimme.

Air. Fleeting, gilded, pliant, spicie, glowing, sult^y, scattered,
boundless, diffused, dilated, un-inclosed, free, singing, whispering,
yiedling, passive, mooving, whirling, crystal, casing, intrenchant, unwounded,
dewie, pressed, sounding, empty, winding, swift, fleet, dispersed, nimble,
breathing, shrugging, shapelesse, formelesse, soft, wandering, liquid,
enlightened, ambient, transparent, stirring, buxome, subtle, lightsome, clear,
thin, moist, circumfused, light, rolling, open, beamie, slippery.

Aires. Soft, sweet, good, pleasing, enchanting, intrancing, soul moving,
pious, gentle, harmonious, melodious, well-tuned, charming, sprightly,
delicious, soul-raping, sence-bereaving, warbling, ^ulling, syrenian, well
composed.

Alabaster. White, polisht, compact, clear, bright, shining.

Alacrity. Ready, joyful, cheerful, swift, deliberate, speedy, active, nimble,
lusty, industrious, youthful, pliant, flexible, brisk, lively, stirring,
active, sprightly.

Alarm. Dreadful, sudden, frighting, hot, martial, noyseful, clamorous,
furious, astonishing, warlick, moving, tumultuous, unexpected, assaulting,
turbulent, loud.

Alcides. Vali^nt, furious, fierce, great, grimme, stern, strong, wandering,
unconquered, warlike, bloody, v. Hercules, brawny, sullen, sturdy, sinewie.

Alchymist. Alchymie. Juggling, deceitful, cozening, cheating, subtle,
industrious, potent.

Alder. Tall, sea-loving, shadie, lofty, thirsty, sucking, pithy.

Alderman. Dew-lapt, slow-paced, great ruft, grave, venerable, gowned,
corpulent, Lord-Maior-would-be, magisterious, supercilious, tun-bellyd,
deliberate, gouty.

Ale. Spicy, nappie, nut brown.

Alecto. Furious, pitiless, black, mischievous, sad, stern, grim, sullen,
sturdy, impatient, balefull, poisonous.

Alexander. Ambitious, victorious, insatiate, unconquered, undaunted,
courageous, successful, puissant, hardy, renowned, bold, warlick, great,
mighty.

Allurements. False, cheating, cozening, wary, sweet, flattering, soothing
lovely, deceitful honyed, winning, wooing, traitorous, enticing taking,
catching, attractive, drawing, mortal, deadly, licorish pleasing, luring,
inveagling, syrenian, treacherous.

Aloes. Odorous, Indian, black, bitter, strong, Arabian, fragrant.

Altar. Burning, flaming, bleeding, smoking, fat, vaporous, sacred, pious,
religious, odorous, solemn, chaste, holy, greasy, green, glittering, crowned,
adored, marble, garnisht, impaled, priestly, perfumed.

Alps. Cloudy, frozen, windy, cold, high, lofty, hilly, horned, stony,
rockie, oakie, northern, proud, icie, snowie, open, naked, spacious, shadie,
desert, steep, snow-crownd, towering, craggie, rough, woody, leavie, cavie.

Alum. White, icie, stony, crystal, mineral, rockie, clear, salt, sour,
sharp, tart.

Amazement. Dull, dead, wild, deep, strange, stupid, stounding, sad, frighful,
fearful, pale, astonishing.

Amazon. Scythian, warlike, hardy, stout, cavaleering, cruel, fierce,
audacious, manly, masculine, bold, strong, Thracian, braving, one-papt,
renowned, courageous, valiant, valourous, rash, heady, furious, raging,
half-moon-shielded, ancient, axe-bearing.

Amber. Gummie, perfumed, sweet, fragrant, odorous, fat, greasy, liquid, gray,
clear, yellow, shining, white, bright, hard, congealed, thin, subtle,
transparent, unctious, aromarick.

Ambrosia. Celestial, heavenly, divine, delicious, sugared, lovely, licorish,
healthy, sweet, immortal, honey'd, sovereign, savory, death-ex-pelling.

Ambush. Close, lurking, seceret, private. hidden, traitorous, deceitful,
surprising, concealed.

Ambition. v. Pride. Big, steep, blind, vain, jealous, hasty, wild, hot,
fearish, fiery, restless, unsatisfied, unlimited, lofty, unconfined, haughty,
proud, unhappy, unfortunate, tall, burning, careful, thoughtful, plotting,
pale, impatient, highrooft, bold, audacious, daring, damned, envious, greedy,
curious, high, swollen, curious, towering, cankerd. v. Pride.

Amethist. Witty, purple, bright, violet, shining, beaming, blazing sparkling.

Anarchie. Seditious, factious, disordered, unruly, distempered, confuted,
injurious, impetuous, enormous, unbiassed.

Ancestors. Honored, sage, experienced, wise, reverend, preceding, grave,
knowing.

Anchor. Crooked, unweildie, fangie, toothed, hookie, sharp, sharptooth'd,
biting, firm, sure, bowed, curbing, tenacious, writhed, fastening, locking,
shackling.

Anchorite. v. Hermit. Sullen, zealous, pious, devout, retired, devotious,
religious, recluse, abstemious, lonely, melancholy, bookish, studious, sad,
pensive, withered, aged, sequestered.

Angels. Watchful, winged, glorious, blessed, perfect, celestial, heavenly,
divine beauteous, smoothfac'd, heaven-bred, bright-harnest.

Anger. v. Rage Boiling, swelling, frantic, furious, raging, flaming, burning,
enchested, passionate, waspish, impatient, red-lookt, inflaming, incensed,
stormy, scarlet, moody, choleric, wrathful, revengeful, chasing, foaming,
hot, heating, sparkling, rash, blind, heady, disordered, sterne-visaged, giddy,
flame-eyed, dizzy-eyed, ghostly, distempered, transporting, tempestuous,
blustering, fierce, cr^el, violent, impetuous, threatening, menacing, unbridled,
untamed, mistaking, overseeing, frothy, implacable, pettish, bitter, rough
wild, stubborn, unruly, litigious, austere, dreadful.

Angler. v. Fisher. Patient, cunning, ensnaring, treacherous, expecting,
preying impati^nt.

Anguish. Pinching, griping, hard* sad, painful, grievous, killing, pressing,
wringing, extreme, dolorous, doleful, gauling, heartbreaking, pensive, deep,
mortal, pitied, bitter, impatient, gnawing fretting, stabbing, smarting,
torturing, tormenting, martyring racking, disquiet, heart-rending.

Annals. Memorable, ancient, long, immortal, historious, recording, ^ternal,
long-breathed.

Ants. Busy, painful, industrious, active, nimble, stirring, laborious,
swarming, numerous, frugal, thrifty, storming, laden, toyling, trooping,
crawling, tugging, corne-biting, grain-bearing, theeving, creeping, slender,
grain-supporting.

Anthems. Religious, pious, melodious, harmonious, entrancing, soulrapping,
ravishing, celestial.

Antiquity. Unpartial, sage, grave, wise, rusty, musty, moldie, dusty, gra^
hoary, aged, experienced, prudent, noble, reverend, venerable faithful,
honored, annal'd, silver-haired.

Ape. Toyful, toyish, sportive, gamesome, nimble, active, fantastical,
sprightly, counterfeiting, mimick, dissembling, crafty wise, imitating, moving,
mumping.

Apennine. High, cold, naked, old, hoary, lofty, oakie, snowie, vast, stony,
rockie, icie, hilly, craggie.

Apostle. Holy, blessed, divine, faithful, glorious, many-tongued.

Apollo. Beauteous, unshorne, fair-haired, yellow-haired, Amber-trest,
pleasant, blithe, neat, buxome, rosy, divine, laureat, quivered, beaming,
glorious, radiant, smooth chin'd.

Apostasy, Apostate. Damned, cursed, hellish, false, faithless, perjured,
revolting, unruly, irregular, infamous, vicious, rebellious, voluptuous,
mutinous, debaucht, dissolute, wretched.

Apothecary. Druggie, hearbie, expert, simpling, industrious, hopeful, artful,
drug-tongued.

Apparel. Sumptuous, magnificent, costly, pompous, gorgeous, neat, trim,
spruce, handsome, delicate, rich, gay, gaudie, fashionable.

Apples. Dangling, blushing, vermilion, sweet, delicious, yellow, golden,
hanging, juycie, roseate, fragrant, odorous, round, wild, swelling, pendent,
ripe, tast-pleasing.

Appetite. Ranging, insatiare, delicious, unsatisfied, hungry, greedy,
gluttonous, desirous, unbridled, untamed, baring, devouring, ardent, unruly,
disordered, covetous, insatiable, voluptuous, judicious, gurmandizing, wolvish,
sensual, craving, lingering.

Apprentice. Sour, young, novice, unexpert, untaught, tutored, unexperienc't,
simple, rude, ignorant, learning, saucie, unruly.

Apricot. Velvet, dangling, delicious, tast-pleasing, hanging, lurking soft,
hairie, yellow, golden, woolly.

April. Flowrie, grassie, verdant, sunnie, cheerful, gladsome, amorous,
springing, pleasant, delightful, vernal, lively, lovely, smiling, youthful,
teeming, wealthy, rich, fruitful, lusty, fragrant, blooming, budding, blithe,
quickening, jocund, buxome, gleesome, merry, pregnant, bridal.

Arabia, Arabian. Hot, perfumed, theevish, unchaste, happy fruitful, spicie,
wild salvage, odorous, aromatical, fertile, palm-bearing, rich, wealthy, hot,
sweltering, soultry, painted, mitred, remote, unshorne.

Archer. Quiver-bearing, aiming, warlick, sinewie, strong, ready, arrowing,
quick-sighted, pricking.

Arbor. Flowrie, tusted, leavie, shadie, cooling, covert, thick, branchy,
spreading, cool, silent, screening, refreshing, grassie, green, thick-set.

Argonautes. Famous, val^ent, proud, adventurous, stout, hardy, Jasonian,
conquering, Aenionian, courageous, Pelasgian, Grecian, bold, audacious.

Argument. Subtle, strong, undoubted, confirming, sure, true, false, glor^ing,
inferring, concluding, conclusive, succinct, ergoing, grave enforcing, sl^ght,
rational, authentic, persuading, rational, prov^ng, probable, satisfying,
discoursing, disputing, wrangling, litigious, contending, undenied,
faith-begetting, knotty, easy, hard opposing, unanswered.

Arms of the body. Encircling, twining, clasping, embracing, winding, ivory,
grasping, enc^osing, yoaking, twisting, twining, sinewie, strong, snowie
brawni^, hugging, fleshie, puissant, valiant, rigorous, veinie, nervous,
laborious, toyling, wielding, victorious, extended, industrious, active,
working.

Arms. Armor. Clashing, clattering, rattling, sounding, angry, warlick, bloody
murdering killing, invasive, offensive, defensive, manly, flaming sparkling,
victorious, conquering, glistering, shining, revengeful noble, hreatning,
menacing, dreadful, destroying, warlick, martial, unhappy, hurtful, noyseful,
tumultuous, jarring, furious, sa^ powerful, raging, injurious, devouring,
odious, abhorred, deteste^ hated, trembling, bright, violent, impetuous,
mortal, hostile deadly, cruel, rebellious, fatal, rigid, blood-thirsty.

Army. Numerous, great, puissant, powerful, martial, dreadful, furiou^
hostile, revengeful, strong, embattelled, conquering, victorious resolved,
couragiou^, adventurous, bold, thundering.

Aristotle. Learned, knowing, industrious, subtle, knotty, famous, wis^ grave,
divine, eloquent, piercing, judicious.

Art. Artizan. Artist. Careful, elaborate, laborious, industrious, studious,
curiou^ running, learned, knowing, expert, experienced, profitable, conducing,
witty, ingenious, judicious, piercing, quick-sighted, ready active, nimble,
subtle, noble, famous, honored, esteemed, i^structed, commendable, praiseful,
deviceful, quick, inventive, ^^gilant, early, working, sweating.

Arrogance. Frothie, skie-towring, proud, presumptuous, overweening,
self-concei^ed, aspiring, audacious, bold, adven^urous, rash shameless,
unblushing, stubborn, vaunting, bragg^ng, threatening, attemptive. v. Pride.

Arrow. Ba^b'd, bearded, deadly, mortal, poisoned, winged, fatal, piercing,
singing, deathful, whistling, whirling, thrilling, sha^p pointed, poynant,
wounding, killing, trembling, flying, flutt^ring, shivering, quivering,
digging, sharpened, darted, wingie, Cretian, light-wing'd, swift, swift-pac'd,
light-foot, norched, forked, light, Thessalian, Scythi^n, Thracian, gal-dipped,
Parthian, Sidonian, cruel, revengeful, speedy, showring, towering, Armenian,
sudden, slender, martial, warlick, harmful, b^andisht, blood-thirsty, bloody,
impetuous.

Asia. Fertile, fruitful, rich, vast, wealthy, spacious.

Ass. Tardie, lasie, sleepie, drowzie, sluggish, loytering, slow-pac't, dull,
heavy, long eard, cold, chilly, suffering, loadned, patient, pack-bearing,
braying, cold-fearing, shivering, quivering, trembling, sottish, lumpish,
broadnosed, stiffe-haired, sluttish.

Ash. Thick-leaved, tall, shady, snake-hated, rugged, barren, aged, solid,
leavie, trembling, quivering.

Ashes. Rude, smothering, pale, peaceful, quiet, sad, mournful, repentant,
warm, light, hot, hollow, black, trembling, thin.

Aspe. Deadly, poisonous, dangerous, fatal, dull, frighted, dreadful, inflamed,
venomous, Egyptian, drowsy, swelling, sleep-causing.

Aspect. Tragical, mild, benign, favorable, smiling, sad, lowering, frowning,
malign, unhappy, unluckie, envious, stern, grimme, malicious, gracious,
happy, prosperons, successeful, f^iendly, unfri^nly.

Astonishment. v. Amazement. Achievements. Brave, glorious, great, famous,
happy, adventurous, bold, prosperous, slour, valiant, valourous, courageous,
generous, virtuous.

Atheists. Dull, desperate, dissolute, faithless, audacious, heady, daring,
rash, presumptuous, adventurous, godless, damned, cursed, reprobate, wicked,
impious, vicious, voluptuous, merciless, cruel, bloody, wretched.

Athens. Learned, ingenious, wel-lettered, studious, industrious, famous,
Palladian, fertile, fruitful, towrie, lofty, ancient, eloquent.

Athos. Vast, Aemonian, craggie, ragged, icie,

Atlas. Heaven-bearing, skie-propping, cold, rough, icie, old, aged, craggie,
pine-bearing, Lybian, cloudie, cloud-kissing, heaven-knocking, heaven-brushing,
star-sweeping, hideous.

Atoms. Small, flying, un-divided, un-numbred, wandering, little, dwarfish.

Attention. Soft, still, silent, quick, obedient, patient, humble, pliant,
willing, yiedling, silent, reverent, submisse, officious, obsequious, thirsty.

Attempt. Bold, rash, vain, presumptuous, proud, arrogant, daring, brave,
glorious, base, valiant, courageous.

Avarice. Orsurious, pernicious, cruel, blind, cursed, wretched, detested,
abhorted, odious, hateful, ravenous, devouring, impious, vile, base, filthy,
loathsome, dishonest, servile, slavish, presumptuous, hoarding, sparing,
pinching, griping, raping, greedy, damned, thirsty, gouty, insatiate,
stanchlesse, eating, heart-enthralling, muck-worme, mudling, toylesome,
laborious, careful, nasty, sluttish, scraping, penurious, needy.

Augur. Augurie. Learned, knowing, foretelling, sooth-saying, auspicious,
luckie, unluckie, happy, divine, lying, presaging, foreseeing, foreknowing,
fatal, juggling, cunning.

Auster. v. Wind. Moist, cold, clowdie, raging, furious, uncertain, deceitful,
impetuous, swift, speedy, dull, strong, rainie, showrie, watrie, sweltring,
soultry, remorselesse, black boisterous, cruel, noxious, grim, tempestuous,
blasting.

Autumn. Wine-pressing, grapie, morst, teeming, aguish, wealthy, luxuriant,
unhealthy, diseaseful, feavourish, bare, naked, durty, tree-stripping, maturer,
sober, yellow, abundant, fruitful, gray, ripe, sunburned, mellow, hoary.

Aw. Obsequious, humble, ob^dient, respectful, respective, st^rn, reverential,
princely, grim, majestic, grave, fearful, cow^ng, reverent, restraining,
bridling, servile, sl^vish.

Awle. Long, pointed, sharp, industrious, searching, handled, working.

Axe. Sharp, heavy, bloody, blood-^hirsty, edged, sacrificing, heaved,
wounding, rigid, dreadful, avenging

Aid. Succouring, propitious, helpful, friendly, comforting, successful,
timely, charitable, auspicious, supplying.

B.
Babe. SUcking, smiling, whining, harmless, simple, soft, toyish, gamesome,
pettish, sportive, puling, unpractised, touchie, silly, blooming, crying,
tender, easy, credulous, foolish, young, angry, waspish, plump, fleshie, weak,
nesh, fumbling, prating, stammering, swathed, cradled, go-by-ground,
soon-pleased, soon-perswaded, puppit-dandling, imitating, apish, twatling.

Babylon. Ancient, proud, wealthy, spacious, rich, populous, Egyptian.

Bacchus. Frolic, thrice-bearing, Theban, martial, thigh-borne, refresh^ng,
cheering, drunken, merry, esteminate, warlick, winepressing, Jonian, horned,
vine-dressing, ox-eyed, furious, raving, raging, ivie-crowned, Hymenean,
care-killing, revengeful, dissolute, childish, plump, blyth, buxome, gamesome,
sportive, toyish, babbling, apish, sottish, silenian, Semelean, youthful,
Indian, free, valiant, grape-crowned, chu^-cheekt, twiceborne, adventurous,
wanton, sacred, generous, goatish, Maeonian, Thyonean, Bassardian, shameless,
immod^st, fair-hair'd, bright-hair'd, faire-c^est, fire borne, feastful,
roseat^, beardlesse, smooth chind, frothie, lightsome, delicious, brisk,
stammering, reeling, spungie, twatling.

Baies. Fresh, immortal, triumphant, victorious, glorious, Phaebean,
P^rnassian, crackling, sacred, chaste, virgineous, maiden, broad-leav'd,
green-leav'd, peaceful, crowning, shadie, leavie, soft, moist, verdant,
prophesying, learned, tufted, storm-contemning,

Bait. Calling, luring, provoking, training, treacherous, syrenian,
inveagling, pleasing, wooing, courting, licorish, deadly, mortal, drawing,
attractive, pasted, taking, enticing, traytorous, alluring, honeyed, deceitful,
lovely, soothing, flatering, inviting, sweet, wary, cheating, false wanton,
soft, cozening.

Baldness. Smooth, thin-haired, slick, aged, naked.

Ball. Round, light, sportive, gamesome, bandied,

Balm. E^sterne, odourous, sweating, ambrosial, delicious, muskie, roseate,
astringent, precious, genial, fragrant, breathing, aromatic, spicie.

Banishment. Sad, cold, detested, abhorred, loathed, uncomfortable, hard,
woeful, wretched, bitter, wandr^ng, unhappy, ignominious.

Banks. Flowrie, shadie, lilly-paved, sedgie, hollow, winding, spongie,
reed-crowned, traytorous, pregnant, frothy, foaming, sandy, shelving, thirsty,
sucking, verdant, herbie, craggie, grassie, hemming, mossie, fringing,
river-edging.

Banner. v. Ensigns. Waving, royal, streaming, martial, threatening, flowing,
rufling, whistling.

Banquet. Feastful, costly, delicious, ambrosian, gladsome, sumtuous, mirthful,
buxome, frolic, joyous, luxurious, sweet, pleasant, genial, voluptuous, fat,
full-rabled, high-feeding, nectarean, merry, royal, superfluous.

Barbary. Superstitious, savage, cruel, brutish, inhumane, bloody.

Bark. Rugged, wrapping, embracing, knottie, porous, casing, clothing,
tender, withered, wrinkled, hollow, pimpled, rifty, stiff, ^ray, aged,
weather-beaten.

Bark. v. Ship. Barking. Shrill, frothie, foaming, balling, railing, dreadful,
hideous, grinning, yawling, howling, hoarse, yelling, frantic, furious.

Bat. Ambiguous, neutral, melancholy, night-flying, whistling, lowflying,
twilight, limber-winged, milkie.

Bath. Hot, cherishing, wholesome, cleansing, sweating, refreshing, healthy.

Battle. Furious, bloody, blood-thirstie, cruel, warlick, slaughtering,
dreadful, murdering, thundering, deadly, dangerous, adventurous, impetuous,
outrageous, doubtful, unhappy, fierce, hot, angry, rugged, dreary, surly,
strifeful, smoakie, tumultuous, blood-sucking, stormy, devouring, rustling,
distresseful, sullen, gloomie, rageful, pernicious, blood-flowing, feral,
mournful, sad, disquiet.

Bawd. Immodest, impudent, shameless, enticing, alluring, training,
youth-corrupting, old, drunken, infamous, bibbing, loathsome, painted, lustful,
gratish, rampant, brutish, beastly, itchie, rammish, pockie, lascivious,
obscene, leprous, strumpetting, brocheld, withered, writheld, treacherous,
odious, twatling, lying, sly, cunning.

Beagle. Yelping, quick-nosed, ranging, well-sented, hungry, greedy, swift,
speedy, pursuing, chasing, eager.

Beak. Crooked, hookie, wounding, piercing, filching, pilfering, chattering,
sharp, hornie, pointed, pecking.

Beams. Glowing, disheveled, majestic, bristling, scattered, garish, gaudie,
d^zeling, flaring, radiant, piercing, cheerful, golden, life-infusing, bright,
beauteous, transpiercing, sparkling, conquering, victorious, thirsty,
parching, scorching, burning, flamie, supping, licking, exalted, instructive,
thawing, melting, dissolving, uncertain, enlightened, waving, glistering, clear,
painted, shining, glirtering, subtle, limber, wandering, gilded, deying,
tavelled, jagged, dispersed, chearing, blushing, streaming.

Bean. Hard, windy, flatuous, black-pated, codded, husked, hulled, pale,
spotted.

Beard. Bushie, bristly, needle-pointed, dagger, spade, trim, spruce, nea^,
grave, twirled, forked, growing, hoarie, twisted.

Bear. Pannonian, pawing, ruthless, salvage, rugged, Russian, rave, nous,
devouring, shaggie, nasty, hoarse, Lybian Caledonian, hai^ie, cruel, bloody,
deformed, ugly, Numidian, fierce. Eremanthian, dim-sighted, hungry, rough,
drowsy, sleepy, lazy, thievish, preying, Arabian, gluttonous, misshapen,
ranging, fierce, grim.

Bear North-star. Cold, icie, bright, shining, sparkling, Northern, Parrhasian,
free-Erymanthian, Menalian, chill, rugged, frosty, bleak, stormy.

Bear, drink. Strong, muddy, headie, frothy, windy, flatuous, tippling, small,
thin, weak, stinging.

Beast. Surly, savage, cruel, ranging, wood-haunting, bloody, fierce; grimme,
nasty, rough-haird, shaggie, ravenous, devouring, greedy, wandering.

Beatitude. Coveted, desired, wished, sublime, glorious, perfect, fresh,
accomplished, lovely, divine, triumphant, celestial, downy, holy, lofty, high,
angelical, supreme, immense, soft, unfathomed, unmeasured, flowery, verdant,
joyful, enamouring, endless, entrancing, ravishing, heavenly.

Beauty. Smiling, Enamouring, persuasive, wooing, courting, taintless,
untainted, spotless, unspotted, unsullied, clear, bright, shining, glittering,
lascivious, wanton, delicious, intermingled, radiant, beamie, sparkling,
inflaming, attractive, entrancing, enchanting, charming, garish, gloring,
fresh, chaste, dazzling, flaring, brittle, murdering, assayling, imperious,
commanding, alluring, enticing, assayling, imperious, alluring, enticing,
killing, unexampled, unpatternd, unpararelld, blazing, winning, soul-invading,
heart-wounding, prompting, unexpressive, bewitching, captivating, roseate,
piercing, glorious, divine, exquisite, celestial, transparent, decent, neat,
spruce, trim, comely, pleasing, magnetic, eye-delighting.

Bed. Easefull, peaceful, snorting, downy, refreshing, drowsy, sleepie, soft,
lazy, idle; wanton, lascivious, sportive, gamesome, Geniall, ve^^reous,
dallying, swelling, yielding, reposefull, quiet, silent, dark^^me, shrowding,
burying, encurtain'd, garnish't, quilted, sociable, ^^iendly, amorous, secret,
fruitful.

Be. Tugging, industrious, laborious, slowre-sucking, swift, honey-bea^ing,
yellow, humming, burring, busy, thriving, ^hriftie, suck^^g, active, painful,
early, laden, flowre-robbing, profitable, hired, ^^aw-housed, hie, blean,
wanton, quick, nimble, tawnie, slender, ^^refull, robbing, stealing, theeving,
theevish, ingenious, witty, gilded, working, waxie, cleanly, spotted, powdered,
pinked, greedy, sucking, stinging, preying, sedulous, Gecropian, Athenian,
chaste, ^anging, forraging, despoyling, sprightfull, fellonious, filching,
pilfering, chymick.

Beech. Goodly, spreading, branched, shadie, open, leavie, lofty, towering,
aspiring, mast-bearing, tufted, thick growing.

Beef. Salt, fresh, powdered, fat, lean, well-fed, lusty, fatning,
strengthening.

Beesom. Sweeping, cleansing, cleanly, twiggie, spriggie, bushie homely.

Beetle. Blind, dull, sharded, black, buzzing.

Beggar. Straggling, needy, starved, poor, cold, neglected, contemned, nastie,
naked, lousy, ragged, tattered, unclothed, penurious, craving, vile,
un-regarded, dis-respected, scorned, flouted, jeered, whining, poor, caitiffe,
wretched, lank-bellied, thin-gutted, ill ^ccoutred, slovenly, uncleanly,
sordid, patched, clouted, botched, knavish, sturdie, lubberly, impudent,
shameless, mangie, scabbie, itchie, scald-headed, scraping, scrap-gathering,
bawling, torn, roguish, budger-bearing, weeping, wailing, complaining,
unbuttoned, unbraced, untrussed, gluttonous, hungry, greedy, devouring,
^heevish, filching, pilfering.

Belides. Cruel, savage, bloody, butchering, murdering, inhuman^ wicked,
cursed, damned, unhappy.

Bell. Sounding, tolling, rolling, ringing, warning, calling, ass^^bling,
noyseful, speaking, tatling, twatling, talking, tinkling, waking.

Belly. Idle, lazy, craving, hungry, unthankful, hollow, soft, rou^ barking,
plumpe, childbearing, smooth, insatiate, rampant, ^^veting, greedy,
gluttonous, windy, flatuous, fleshie, loose, ^^vouring, hanging, desiring,
sensual, gourmandising, moist, cap^^cious.

Bellows. Breathful, puffing, whistling, panting, kindling, smoakie, fla^
engendring, hollow, windy, pursie, hoarse. swelling, whizzing.

Bellowing. Loud, noyseful, rebounding, complaining, plaintful, mour^ful,
threatening, affrighting, bemoaning, ruful, lofty, sad, sumi^^ smoakie,
dreadful, redoubled, hoarse, resounding, ^cchoed.

Bellona. Bloody, cruel, implacable, furious, warlick, angry, savage, shre^
fierce, remorselesse, murtherous, dreadful, martial, casked, cres^^e rough. v.
Mars. v. War.

Benefit. Rich, liberal, free, large, ample, useful, fruitful, deserving,
bliging, engaging, binding, enslaving, welcome, courteous, frie^ly, timely,
officious.

Benevolence. Mutual, loving, free, friendly, ready, gracious, cordial, hear^
courteous, liberal, affable, gentle patient.

Berrie. Juycie, purple, bloody, swelling, plump, smiling, blushing.

Bill. v. Beak. Bile. Swelling, inflamed, angry, smarting, painful, rotten,
stinki^^king.

Billow. v. Wave. Flitting, bustling, stormy, brinie, surgie, waving, slimie,
foa^ trembling, churlish, dancing, tripping, panting, chiding, ang^ disquiet,
wrathful, restless, crowding, thronging, posting, ha^^ rising, suily,
swelling, roaring, tumbling, rolling. v. Plura, W^^

Birch. White-rinde, tall, aspiring, lofty, strait, awing, dreadful, swinging,
mastering.

Bird. Industrious, active, nimble, warm clad, nested, pearching, chattering,
chirping, warbling, melodious, swift, downie, featherd, tatling, prattling,
wandering, straggling, winged, painted, sprightful, pecking, swimming, fearful,
shril, recording, towering,

Birdlime. Catching, shackling, entangling, ensnaring, clammie, sticking,
^olding, cleaving, embracing, amorous, clasping, clinging, gluing, glutonous.

Bishop. Sacred, venerable, aged, reverend, grave, sober, pious, learned, sage,
prudent, discreet, holy, mitred, religious.

Bit. Foamie, hated, curbing, restraing, ruling, stubborn, chasing, champed,
taming, conquering, staying, bridling, pliant, slaverd, gingling.

Bladder. Flatuous, puffed, windy, stinking, moist.

Blade. Slicing, slashing, cutting, wounding, butchering, murdering, stabbing,
piercing, sharp, bloodie-pointed, keen, warlick, dreadful, victorious,
thirsty, slaughtering, revengeful, reeking, goary, devouring, shining,
glittering, biting, quartering. v. Sword.

Blindness. Dark, dull, stumbling, fumbling, gross, mistie, foggie, duskie,
obscure, ignorant, erroneous.

Blasphemy. Hellish, cursed, impious, ungodly, execrable, detested,
outrageous, injurious, sacrilegious, horrible.

Blessedness. v. Beatitude. Blood. Lusty, reeking, crimson, wanton, dancing,
sparkling, streaming, spinning, high, wrought, active, gushing, fluent, ruby,
scarlet, purple, flushing, sporting, goary, sprightly, rising, damask,
frothie, hot, scalding, slowing, bubling, boiling, lavaltoing, capering,
rolling.

Bloome. Blossom. Bud. Virgin, maiden, verdant, vernal, springing, tender,
infant, flowery, early, sprouting, shooting, swelling, gaudie, painted,
checkerd, tufted, pregnant, spicie, fragrant, enameled, perfumed, smiling,
hopeful, silver, fresh, lively, diapred, short-lived, growing, spreadin^ soft,
velvet, wind-kissed, pride-streaked.

Blot. Sullying, infamous, disgracing, fowling, slovenly, nasty, disfig^ring,
deforming, speckling, freckling, durtie, filthy, spotting, sta^^ing,
besmearing, defiling, soyling.

Blue. Joyful, lightsome, glittering, sh^ning delightful.

Blush. Rosy, maiden, chaste, virgin, shamefac't, modest, bashful, betraying,
guilty, flushing, conscious, ruddy, purple, scarlet, carnatio^ vermillion,
stammel, soft, fearful, sanguine.

Board. Greasy, feastfull, crowd^d, groaning, dish-bearing, oppressed, free,
liberal, mirthfull frollick, furnished, voluptuous, delicious, sumptuous,
costly, wealthy, hospitable, geniall, dainty, lickorish joyous, crowching,
marshald, delicious, temperate, untemperate devouring, glutonous, exalted,
advanced.

Boar. Chafed, foaming, tusked, bristled, sylvan, stiffe-haird, salvage,
incensed, yellow, sturdy, angry, sullen, furious, mast-loving, bloody,
gnashing, impetuous, rooting, furrowing, nasty, filthy, threatening, fierce,
cruel, rough, wounding.

Boat. Crooked, swimming, passing, wave-cutting, hollow, open, hurrying,
flying, swift-pac't, trackless.

Body. Frail, weak, imprisoning, diseasefull, fleshie, voluptuous, sensual,
earthly, sinewy, solid, feeble, soul-burying, soul-entombing, rotten.

Boldness. Audacious, shameless, immodest, fearless, undaunted, unadventurous,
courageous, proud, impetuous, disdainful, daring, brave, hardy, presumptuous,
presuming, impudent, unblushing, blind, dangerous, pernicious, endangering,
endamaging, impudent, insolent, heady, rash, unadvised, unwise, unhappy,
peremptory, saucy.

Bondage. Galling, groaning, pressing, oppressing, enslaving, restraining,
heavy, crushing, bruising, wretched, constrained, odious, slavish, servile,
rigorous, infamous, laborious, toylsome, hard, shameful, burdenous, vile,
miserable, detested, hated, abhorred, ignominious.

Bone. Hard, ivory, solid, marrowie, hollow, pithie, firm, sharp, knotty,
enclosed, flesh-cloathed, flesh-coated, hoary, white.

Bone-fire. Joyful, mirthfull, feastfull, frolic, applausive, flaming,
night-enlightning, sparkling, sputtering, crackling. v. Fire.

Book. S^udious, industrious, learned, instructive, tutoring, silent tutors,
elaborate, mute-schoolmaster, treasuries of Knowledge, dumb-scholars,
ingenious, witty, communicative, imparting, voluminous.

Boreas, v. Wind. Gray-beard, icie, bleak, chill, cold, stormy, pinching,
blustering, cold-mouth, ruffian, Ice bearded, Thracian, Northern, freezing,
cloud-scattering, cloud-shattering, rough Scythian, gloomie, rigid, Samaritan,
snowie, piercing, raging, impetuous, loud, tempestuous cruel, insulting,
boisterous, sweeping, air-clearing, air-brushing, earth-shaving.

Bosom. Hollow, boiling, soft, pregnant, warm, amorous, tender, delicicious,
open, enchearing, cherishing, ambrosian, snowy, roseat, mus^ly, ivory,
enchesting, secret, flowery, swelling, maiden, virgin, enticing, alluring,
inveagling, delightful, enamouring.

Bosphorus. v Wave. Tempest. Groaning, bellowing, Thracian, stormy.

Bounty. v. Benefit. Benevolence. Bough. Pregnant, hanging, laden, shadie,
rattling, leavie, dangling, loaded, combrous, blooming, arched, tufted,
intwining, twisted, spreading, verdant, extended, winding, sprouting, branched,
knotted, waving, trembling, luxuriant fruitful, writhed, straggling, crooked,
spacious, budding, handing, bending, leaning, stooping, declining, prickly,
displayed, inter-woven, fragrant, teeming.

Bow. Arched, twanging, writhed, crooked, Turkish, Lycian, Parthian, Scythian,
bended, horned, stiff, warlick, martial, stringed, m^thering, killing, ivory,
vaultie, threatening, iturean.

Bowl. Cup. Frolic, feastful, chearing, flowing, swelling, crowned, chirpi^

Bowl. Gamesome, round, luckie, turning, running, mooving, s^^ rolling,
smooth, sliding.

Bowels. v. Entrails. Knotted, twisted, secret, winding, seeking, gloomie,
smoaki^^ trembling, fat, rumbling, hot, warm, breathing, soft, inwraped,
enclosed, enchested.

Bowers. Delightful, pleasant, flowrie, shadie, leavie, fresh, tufted, se^
silent, sun-resisting.

Boy. Gamesome, sportive, stirring, active, childish, foolish, silly, s^ple,
easy, toyish, credulous, soon-pleased, prating, saucie, apish.

Braggar. Vaunting, lying, vainglorious, glorying, boasting, gallant, ^poring,
coining, bravadoing.

Bramble. Scratching, sharp-hookt, fruitless, idle, combrous, entangli^^
prickly, briery, bushie, bristlie, biting, catching, holding, ro^^ twisted,
twining, tearing, rending.

Brain. Pregnant, shallow, spungie, working, frothie, yestie, feeli^^ active,
inventive, contriving, plotting, plodding, pliant, minti^^ coining, discursive,
nimble, roving, forging, active, teemi^^ wandering, shaping.

Branch. v. Bough. Brass. Ringing, solid, resounding, clear, shining,
glittering, gli^ring, yellow, noyseful, resplendan^, gingling, hard, sparkl^^
straw-coloured, corinthian, tinkling, Cyprian, flaming, lastin^

Brawling. Unquiet, noyseful, hot, surly, sullen, tumultuous.

Bravery. Flaunting, gallant, gaudie, painted, pompous, portly, comp^^mental,
fantastic, affected, gorgeous, courtly, glittering, glo^ous, golden, sunnie,
smiling, swelling, flashing, stately.

Bread. Strengthening, nourishing, savorie, chipped, fatning, cr^^^^e, crustie,
life-susteyning.

Breasts. Snowie, v^ry, soft, alabaster, uberous, fluent, sagging, tender,
^ressed, swelling, milkie, hanging, flagging, lolling, dimpled, ^^inie,
streaked, spicie, delicious, flowing, luxuriant, warm, ^oursing, azare,
streaked.

Breath. Ambrosian, muskie, ^osied, perfumed, aire-perfuming, spic^e, ^inking,
strong, poisonous, blasting, foggie.

Bribe. Underhanding, close-fist*d, corrupting, law-perverting, ore^waying,
blinding, coveteous, injurious, unlawfu^, guilty.

Brick. Babylonian, Egyptian, well-b^k'^, hard-burnt, lasting, blushing.

Bride. Bridegroom. Blushing, mincing, spruce, trim, neat, lovely, smiling,
modest, stately, gau^ie, gay, spritly, bashful, maiden, expecting, b^autious,
comely, eyes-attracting.

Bridle. Waving, curbing, restraining, taming, frothie, foamie, sawing,
staying, rul^ng, conquering, slavered, champed, gingling.

Brier. v. Bramble. Bridge. A^ched, bridl^ng, damming, wave-rebounding,
water^ossing.

Brightness. S^ining, radiant, beaming, flaming, sunny, fiery, trembling,
twinkling, glittering, glistering, illustrious, enlightened, l^gh^some,
aire-guilding, resplendent, piercing, cheerful, dazeling, ^ye-conquering,
glorious.

Brimstone. Sulphurous, fat, oily, blue-flam'd, scalding, catching, stinking,
smell-offending, choking.

Britains. Warlick, valiant, cold, northern, world-divided.

Brook. Murmuring, silver, snakie, sedgie, sable, bubling, rumbling, running,
gurgling, whispering, sliding, gliding, rushie, silver-breasted, gushing,
bank-dividing, crystal, glassie, swelling, purling, winding, flowing,
rumbling, rolling, rustling, grass^-fringed, moss^-fringed, grass^-margend,
mosse-margend, trickling skipping, wanton, amorous, uxorious, bank-kissing,
bank-licking straggling, wandering, pearly, weeping, wrigling, chiding, curle^
fleeting, floating, dancing, posting, sullen, silent, muttering smooth-sliding.

Broom. v. ^eesome. Brow. Smooth, sleeke, majestic, ivory, bashful, white,
arched, stately beauteous, comely, sparkling, vaulted, spacious, exalted,
snowie, threatening, alabaster, furrowed, crumpled, puckered, frowning, lo^ring,
scowling, plaited, unplaited, discontented, surly, sullen, clow^ stormy,
tempestuous, smiling, supercilious, clear, joyful, polish^

Bubble. Glassie, foamie, frothie, rising, swelling, shining, crystal,
bre^king, gurgling, purling, silver, boiling, impostumed.

Bucket. Thirsty, hollow, diving, drinking, swallowing

Buckler. v. Shield. Bud. v. Bloome. Building. v. Tower. Bull Lusty, moody,
raving, fallacious, lecherous, fuming, furiou^ sturdie, sullen, slow-pac'^,
dewlapt, scowling, rough-browd, belowing, brasse-hoov'd, bigge-bon'd, foaming,
enraged, raving.

Bullet. Way-enforcing, aire-rend^ng, murdering, thundering sudden,
unexpected, varesisted, dead-striking, transpie^cing, inevitable, unresisted,
pernicious, killing, enflamed, fie^^ irrevocable, unrecalled, impetuous.

Bulrush. Muddie, straight, slender, picked, limber, smooth, unkno^^ soft,
mo^st, round, fruitless, pithie, barren, thirsty, sucking, drinking,
sharpe-pointed, drooping, sullen, lowering, fennie, mari^^ spungie.

Pulwark. Defensive, resisting, guarding, strong, advanced, raised, shi^^ding.

Burden. Heavy, pressing, weighty, loading, massy, groaning, unwield^

Bush. Entangling, shrubbie, humble, shadie, prickly, thornie, brier^ dark,
branched, scactered, grovie.

Business. Active, stirring, industrious, laborious, disturbing, disquieting,
distracting, careful, tedious, working, urgent, pressing, weighty, pelting,

Butcher. Greasy, bloody, slaughtering, merciless, pitiless, cruel, rude,
grim, harsh, stern, sturdy, surly, burly, sl^cing, slashing, lenthating.

Butterie. Jolly, frolic, carousing, quaffing, bibbing, tippling, drunken,
swimming, frothie.

Butter. Soft, melting, yellow, cleaving, bread-kissing, bread-thatching.

Butterfly. Gaudie, painted, mealy, gilded, courtly, swift, trembling,
checkered, diaperd, silly, simple.

Buttock. R^u^d, plump, fl^sh^e, soft, quaking, trembling.

C.
Cabbidge. TUfred, coated, leavie, squeezed, crispie, curled, tender, limber,
folding, pleated, swellnig.

Cable. Writhed, twisted, binding, puchie.

Cake. Turned, savoury, delicious, sugared, spicie, honeyed.

Calamity. v. Misery. Calfe. Fat, tender, sportive, frisking, wanton, leaping,
silly, suckling.

Calm Peaceful, quiet, smooth, slumbering, sleeping, Halcyon, smoothfac't,
smooth-cheekt, smiling, sleeke, sweet, pleasant, soft, reposed; appeased,
happy, sober, stayed, wavelesse, undisturbed.

Calumny. Biting, envious, black-mouthed, malicious, wounding, false,
detracting, defaming, injurious, subtle, crafty, wily, sly, base cunning,
deceitful, forging, faining, coining, devising, inventing, tale-telling,
cogging, glozing, colloguing, jealous, suspicious, reproachful, unhallowed

Camamel. Yellow, sweet smelling, odotous, sun-loving, pain-easing.

Camelion. Aire-fed, abstemious, temperate, changing, juggling.

Camel. Bunchie, towre-backt, bunch-backt, rough, ugly, deformed, supple-kneed,
kneeling, crowching.

Camp. Armed, warlick, martial, noiseful, dreadful, clamorous, pike-bristled,
thundering, military, swarming.

Canker. Creeping, infecting, loathsome, eating, fretting, consuming, uncured,
contagious.

Candle. Shining, burning, enlightening, selfe-consuming, melting, white-coated,
flaming, sl^nder, watchful, studious.

Cannon. Thundering, thunder-mocking, fire-breathing, clamorous, noiseful,
dreadful, stounding, sulphury, pernicious, murdering, flame-belching,
wid^-mouth'd, loud-voic't, merciless, resistlesse.

Capon. Brawnie.

Capricorn. Tropic, moist, cold, watery, fierce, showry, rough.

Captain. Wa^lick, valorous, courageous, valinant, well-^kill'd, experienced,
prudent, politic, engineering, martial, wise, discreeter, deliberate,
commanding, impetious, armed, honored.

Captivity. v. Bondage. Sad, sorrowful, slavish, dolorous, insupportable,
barbarous, tyrannous.

Carbuncle. Flaming, sparkling, fiery, shining, gliste^ing, pearly, beamie,
^adiant, burning, blazing.

Cardinal. Scarlet, purple, red-hatted, long-bearded, grave, pompous, generous,
honored, wealthy.

Care. Blood-drinking, blood-consuming, biting, swarming, thoughtful,
perplexing, studious, buzzing, boiling, jealous, waking, watchful, anxious,
sollicitous, fretting, gauling, pressing, g^inding, cumbering, busy, weary,
unquiet, disturbing, sullen, thorny, stormy, flinging, obsequious, muddie,
combrous, hoary-h^aded, griping, consuming, soul-killing, macerating, doub^ful,
gnawing, painful, droyling, murdering, cutting, heart-wounding, pricking,
wan^ish, pale-fac't, wrinkled.

Carcass. Soul-lesse, stinking, loathsome, offensive, infectious, contagious,
putrid, dull, dead, unmoving, rotten, noisome, fulsome, n^sty.

Carthage. Ancient, rich, proud, wealthy, populous, well peopled, D^d^nian,
famous, powerful, warlick, Libian, aemulous, Rome-envying, Sidonian, perfidious.

Cassia. Flowery, ruddy, yellow, sp^c^e, flaming.

Castle v. Tower. Towred, fensive, lofty, stately, exalted, mosse-grown, walled.

Cat. Melancholy, solitary, mouse-chasing, hunting, theeving, spotted, brinded,
furred.

Cates. N^ct^rean, ambrosial, delicious, eie-glutting, feastful, cost^y,
delightful, sumpru^us, luxurious, superfluous, pleasant, tast-waving, tast^ul,
tast-contenting, desired, palat-pleasing.

Caucasus. Craggy, rockie, ragged, inhospitable, rough, cold, frosty, fre^zing,
high-browd, vaultie, barren, unfrequented, burly, cl^ffie, lo^^y, to ring,
cloud-k^ssing, ic^e, Scythian.

Cave. Shady, pitchi^, ^ollow, v^ult^e, rockie, dark some, gloomy, fo^saken,
so^i^ary, mel^ncholy, uncouth, mossi, black, sad, unknown, silent,
unfr^quented, dark, desert, obscure, qu^et, recluse, musty, nasty, filthy,
dreadful, dennie, deep, noisome, doleful, crooked, loathsome, lonely, sullen,
dankish, smoakie, ragged, blind, savage, yawning, ecchoing, theevish, fustie.

Cauldron. B^y^i^g, seething, flaming, smoakie, burning, hollow, capacious,
greasi.

Cedar. Odorous, lofty, sappie, aged, tall, stately, strait, wind-laring,
smooth, sl^ck, ^mmortal, lasting, un-knotty.

Cell. Darksome, melancholy, cloudy-lowly, silent, private.

Censure. Judging, carping, rigorous, bi^ing, severe, sharp, harsh,
supercilious, hard, peevish, pettish, grumbling, muttering, haughty, snarling,
lashing, invective.

Centaurie. Two-shap't, furious, proud, cruel, shaggie, hairy, cloud-born.

Cerberus. Barking, stigian, devouring, dreadful, howling, yelling, gaping,
snakie, viperous, watchful, foaming, surly, snarling.

Ceremony. Religious, devour, laudable, ancient, solemn, received, pompous.

Ceres. Law-giving, golder-haired, wealthy, golden-^ared, ingenious, dusty,
torch-bearing, sheafie, yellow.

Caesar. Victorious, courageous, undaunted, unconqered, warlick, ambitious,
triumphant, dreadful, proud, attemptive, daring.

Chafe. Light, scattered, wind-driven, dispersed, useless, empty, fruitless.

Chain. Binding, shakling, knottie, linkie, twisted, adamantine, rattling,
dangling.

Chaos. Disordered, dark, formeless, dull, ugly, empty, hideous, rude,
desolate, blind, sh^peless, undigested, confused, aged, black, old, Cimerian,
obscure, gulphie, blended.

Chaps. v. Jaws. Chaplet. v. Garland. Verdant, enamelled, diapred, flowrie,
checkerd, enterlac^d, le^vie, fragrant, roseat, triumphant.

Chariot. Rosy, lofty, gorgeous, rattling, hurrying, wheeling, swift, speedy,
triumphant, painted, pompous.

Charms. v. Magic. Powerful, enchanting, magic, Thessalian, mystic,
muttered, mumbled, perplexing, hellish, imperious, commanding, learned,
superstitious, exercising, potent, binding, forcing, ceremoneous, mysterious.

Charity. Pious, melting, pitying, compassionate, refreshing, hearty, cordial,
Christian, holy, sacred, devout, reli^ving, heaven-^ng^ging.

Charon. Stygian, inexorable, grim, sull^n, surly, sad, coveteous, unrelenting,
frowning, lowering, scowling, old, pale.

Chastity. Spotles, cold, fruitless, unstained, lilly, snowie, untainted,
unsullied, maiden, virgin, blameless, fi^me, uncorrupted, unrepr^ved, unmooved,
constant, white, pale, strict, st^ait-lac'd, vestal, fresh, holy, pious,
untouched, impregnable.

Cheer. v. Cates. Cheater. Cogging, cunning, crafty, wily, subtle, sly, bold,
deceitful, fawning, flattering, fraudulent, shameless, abusive, injurious,
sl^pstring.

Cheek. Rosy, silken, bashful, roseate, smiling, lovely, deliciou^, tempting,
blushing, soft, smooth, plump, gentle-swelling, purple, beauteous, ambrosian.

Cheese. Digestive, concocting, feast-closing, milkie, fresh, fat, old, mold^e,
hard.

Cherrie. Blushing, plump, soft, tender, coral, vermillion, delicious,
pleasant, lushious.

Cherubin. Smooth fac'^, smooth-^heekt, rosie-lipt, beauteous, winged,
glorious, celestial, joy-ravish; silver-winged, golden-plumd, helmed.

Chevalrie. Active, courageous, adventurous, warlick, renowned, glorious,
a^chieving.

Child. Officious, obedient, gamesome, sportive, tender, pliant, wanton,
soon-perswaded, c^edulou, apish, ^oyish.

Childhood. v. Infancy. Chimney. Smoakie, sooty, grimie, tall, strait, black.

Chinke. Gaping, yawning, cranied, hollow, divided, parted, cleaving.

Chinne. Dimpled, wagging, naked, well-thacht, hairie, slaver'd, hanging,
stubble, bushie, bonie.

Choler. v. Anger. Chafing, foaming, haughty, testie, touchie, waspish,
disdainful, revengeful, boiling, devou^ing, inflamed, incensed, yellow,
passionate, flaming, sudden, pale, angry, unsociable, unfriendly.

Chronicles. Ancient, memorable, old, aged, faithful, recording, historious,
studious, long-breathed, long-lived, immortal, lasting, neverending, eternal.

Crystal. Shining, transparent, clear, bright, glassie, smooth, sleeke, icie,
sl^pperie, cold, azure, polisht, glistering, snowie.

Chrysolite. Wise, sparkling, radiant, golden, beaming.

Chymick. Industrious, ingenious, sweating, laborious, active, inventive,
contriving, smoakie, subtle, na^ure-devesting.

Cicero. Famous, eloquent, ambitious, wel-tongued, fine-spoken, persuasive,
sweet-ongued, smooth, quaint, witty.

Cindars* Black, ashie, dead, cold, scattered, warm, smutchie, sootie, dying,
sparkling.

Circe. Charm^ng, tempting, enchanting, decitful, transfo^ming.

City. Noble, wealthy, rich, throng, populous, full, courtly, near,
complemental, many-peopled.

Clay. Moist, laborious, fat, clammie, compacted, glutinous, pliant, pliable,
st^cking, daubing, yiedling, crumbling, moldering, weak.

Claw. Hookie, crooked, griping, swooping, scratching* theevish, torturing,
seizing, pouncing, tending, rearing, sharp, gre^dy, catching, st^ffe, wounding.

Client. Thredbare, humble, subm^ssive, crowching, suppliant.

Cliffe. v. Rock. Ragged, solid, vaulty, yawning, craggie, uncouth,
unfrequented, horned, beetling, hanging.

Cloud. Winged, floating, mourning, wandering, hovering, pitchi^, hang^^g,
spongy, weeping, threatening, gloomy, dusky, foggy, yellow, ^uffling, ^ambling,
envious, drooping, full, dull, thick, stooping, ^wring, mounting, aspiring,
clusterd, frowning, lowering, swarthish, ^athering, drowsy, scattered, dropsy,
waving, sweltring, moving, ^under-crashing, flitting, goutie, sweating, moist,
wate^y, ayery, ^andering, melting, drunken, slumbering, sleepy, crisped,
curled, ^bscuring, darkning, contagious, smothering, strangling, vapoury,
^moaky, sullen, lofty, black, swarthy, Negro, rolling, dark, jea^ous,
thicke-swollen, swelling, bigge-bellied, mistie, stormy, ^e^ty, stifling,
chaced, justling, Eclipsing, assembling, smouldring, ^regnant, sailing, hollow.

Clown. Swarthy, rude, sweaty, toyling, sallow, hide-bound, lowtish, bar^arous,
game-some, gleesome, sportive, laborious, industrious, ^ome-bred, unfashioned,
russet, unconceiving, uncurious, uncomb'd, greazy, saucy, slovenly, frolic,
whistling, mirthfull, piping, ^ullen, blithe, lusty, robustious, brutish,
rough, untuto'rd, rustic, ru^all, wild, unlearned, simple, unletrerd,
unletterd, filly, uncivil.

Club. Murdering, cruel, knotty, knocking-striking, heavy, breaking, bruising.

Clusters. Gallant, thronged, crowding, sprouting, swelling, full, budding,
piled, grainy, juicie, purple, delicious, plump, blushing, hanging, compacted,
heapy, dewie.

Coach. v. Chariot. Coal. Glowing, sputtering, burning, flaming, crackling,
sparkling, ^moakie.

Cock. Early, crested, bristling, watchful, solacious, lecherous, spurred,
^^med, jealous, day-presaging, day-proclaiming, watchful, bloody, shrill,
war-lick, gaming, generous.

Cockle. Kissing, curled, crispy, creeping, close, embracing.

Cocytus. v. Acheron. Black, Stygian, dull, dark, shady, groaning, devouring,
faint, gloomy, duskie, fulsome.

Coffin. Stinking, fulsome, loathsome, rotten, interred, black, mourning,
vaulty, musty, fusty, moldy.

Cold. Rough, sharp, biting, piercing, duskie, gloomie, icie, chatteri^
freezing, dull, lazy, sleepie, drowsy, whisking, lashing, je^king, sl^gish,
snottie, barren, earth-locking, con-tracting, congealing, ang^stormy, raw,
cruel, stiffning, unactive, incroaching, astringent, b^numming, nipping,
pinching, chilling, bleak, blasting, Irksom, hi^ous, rugged, sap-consuming.

Colic. Wringing, pinching, vexing, nipping, painful, tormenting, w^die,
flatuous, cutting, dolorous, twitching, girding, griping.

Comb. Toothed, ivorie, biting, neat, adorning, dressing, hai^-plaini^^

Combat. v. Battle. Furious, martial, bickering, brabling, courageous,
bloody, dou^^full, dangerous, generous, debating, strife-full, contentious,
^friendly, blood-thirstie.

Comet. Hairie, stern, dreadful, vagrant, curled, grimme, curld-head, c^^py,
state-changing, ruine-portending, sad, threatening, slami^ streaming,
portentuous, bright-haird, presaging, shag'd, disast^o^ prodigious, bearded,
waving, gazing, fierc, ruddy, fatal, blood^ bristled, ominous, ill-boding,
unluckie.

Comfort. Cordial, growing, pleasing, soft, welcome, chearing, friendly,
ge^tious, propitious.

Compassion. Melting, relenting, soft, calm, tender, feeling, piteous, tend^^
hearted.

Complaint. Puling, soft, whining, just, piteous, sighing, s^d, womanish,
am^rous, passionate, mournful, bitter, groaning, deep, male-conte^^ querulous,
bawling, wayling, weeping, hoarse, powting.

Complement. Unappertaining, unconcerning, needless, vain, fruitless,
ceremonious, apish, curious, courtly.

Concord. v. Accord. Concupiscence. Sensual, voluptuous, egging, prompting,
spurring, tempting.

Conduit. Flowing, conveying; gushing; gurgling.

Confidence. Bold; courageous; audacious; advedturous; during; presumi^^
presumptuous, settled, persuaded, aspiring, easy.

Confusion. ^ild, vast, shapeless, hideous, deformed, ugly, rude.

Conqueror. ^aliant, valorous, courageous, hardy, martial, generous,
no^enowned, famous, imperious, commanding, victorious, crown-^aureld,
insulting, glorious, triumphant, laureat.

Conquest. ^lorious, brave, famous, bright, triumphant, victorious, wealthy,
^^eat, crowned, white-silver, winged.

Conscience. Strict, impartial, unbribed, arresting, tormenting, guilty,
know^^, secret, silent, accusing, torturing.

Constancy. Unremoved, resolved, steadfast, persistive, unshrinking, unshaken,
^^red, persevering, stayed, settled.

Contagion. Spreading, infectious, deadly, catching, poisonous.

Content Rich, sweet, perfect, happy, blessed, pleasan^, heavenly, wished,
^ired, complete.

Contention. Jarring, wrangling, harsh, snakie, bloody, strifefull, jangling.

Coral. Blushing, vermillion, stammel, scarlet, red-brancht, streaked,
^anched, tuddey, leaf-less.

Cork. Light, swimming, spungie, porous, floating, hollow.

Corn. Bearded, bladed, yellow, nourishing, fruitful, full-ered, tender, ^^nke.

Corrosive. Biting, smarting, eating, burning, fretting.

Cottage. Lowly, private, humble, silent, patcht, ragged, turfie, cold,
shatered, contry, naked.

Cough. Slavery, spitting, spawling, cold, d^y, harsh, belching.

Countenance. Handsome, graceful, lovely, modest, disdainful, settled, shaped,
hanging, joyful, beauteous, smiling, pleasing, winning, wooing, ^arkling,
attractive, grimme, stern, grave, severe, frowning, lowering, sad, mournful,
cheerful, ligh some, threatfull, supercili^^ blushing, careful, sour,
dissembling, murdering, killing, stabb^^ powting, affected, disguised.

Country Clownish, flowery, grassie, fruitful, merry, spacious, open, wo^^
downright, plain-dealing, honest, free-hearted.

Courage. v. Valor. Daring, valiant, valorous, adventurou^, presumptuous,
att^^tive, audacious, undaunted, untamed, unquelled, stour, mascul^^ constant,
unmov^d, unshaken, bold, proud, noble, free, active, M^jestick, undejected,
manly, haughty, heroic.

Course. Speedy, hasty, winged, unbridled, careering, impetuous, post^^ sweaty,
breathless, sweeping, industrious, laborious.

Courser. v. Horse. Curvetting, prancing, nimble, stirring, panting,
high-boundi^^ spur-obeying, stamping, foamy, trapped, speedy.

Court. Complementall, glittering, pompous, costly, expensive, lasc^ous,
wanton, sportive, envious, smooth, royal, proud, glorio^^ gaudy.

Courtier. Avaritious, soft, smooth, oily, sleek, near, polisht, spruce,
comp^^mentall, well-tongued, fair-spoken, silkworm, affected, fantastic^
rustling, stalking, sprightly, dapper, flaunting, glittering, nimb^^ starcht,
accomplished, fine-sattin, gay, gaudy, painted, wealthy, ^^ceitfull, perjured,
stickling, indebted, d^pper, brisk, pert, silk^^ smooth-faced.

Cow. Lowing, milkie, fruitful, useful, straggeling, straying, wa^dering,
uberous.

Coward. Pale, fearful, dull, un-active, un-manly, crest-fallen, heart-les^
white-livered, cold, base, ignominious, yielding, crouching, leaden hearted,
winking, cruel, desperate, vaunting, sneaking, flinching.

Coyness. Dissembling, squeamish, pettish, pievish, froward, slighting
scorning, contemptuous, sour, bitter, easy, churlish, uncivil, proud,
disdainful, angry, tempting, persuading, wooeing, waywar^, untoward.

Crab-star. Hot, flaming, crooked, burning, scorching, scalding, broyling^
showry.

Crab-fish. Slow-pac't, dull, lazy, lither, pawing, lumpish, sleepy, wadling,
^ayward, crawling, sprawling.

Cradle. Rocking, sleepy, peaceful, tottering, shaking, moving, drowsy, ^lie,
warm.

Craft. Cunning, fly, cheating, deceitful, beguiling, wily, wary, juggling,
^gging, subtle, injurious, witty, ingenious, artificial, secret, under^orking,
undermining, politic, devicefull, silent, double-tongues, ^inding, doubling,
plotting, inveagling, circumventing.

Cramp. Pulling, painful, torturing, wringing, pinching, nipping, vexing,
^ormenting, girding, twitching.

Crane. S^rimonian, Thracian, soaring, mounting, towering, high-flying,
^hattering, warlike, watchful, ravenous, long-neckt.

Credulity. Easy, silly, Simple, unwise, foolish, soft, indiscreet, weak,
fond, ignorant.

Crest. Plumed, lofty, glittering, nodding, waving, advanced, gaudie, proud,
braving, radiant, flancing, glistering, jagged, brestly, staring, dreadful:

Crime. Blushless, black, heinous, odious, detested, guilty, infamous,
capital, suspicious, pale, conscience-tearing, light-fearing, mischievous,
unhappy, unexcusable, audacious, enormous.

Critic. Snarling, supercilious, biting, lashing, captious, censorious,
carping, exceptious, invective, wise, capricious, curious, exact, accurate,
judging, rigorous, sharp, sharp toothed, severe, pettish, pievish,
sponge-using, flouting, gibing, quipping, jeering, girding, rigid, snappish,
grinning.

Cry. Confused, yelling, noisefull, hideous, amazing, bustling, clamerous,
aire-rending, tumultuous, rumbling, yawling, re-sounding, re-bounding,
re-ecchoing, redoubled, howling.

Crocodile. devouring, wily, banefull, deceitful, noisome, weeping, Egyptian,
deadly.

Crop. Wealthy, rich, hopeful, hope-answering, thankful, fruitful, ^^ful,
gainful.

Cross. Hard, painful, cruel, unhappy, afflicting, oppressing, bitter, ^cred,
victorious.

Crow. Predictious, presaging, jetty, sable, hoarse, hungry, devourin^ prating,
twatling, carrion, jangling, chattering, unluck^, lo^^*liv'd, shower-divining,
thirsty, barking.

Crown. Imperial, Pearl-enchased, dazzling, triumphant, victorio^ flowery,
enameled, enterlaced, noble, gilded, royal, Princely, pe^ly, honored,
adored, commanding, radiant, beamy, glittering, ^^ning, majestic, awful.

Cruelty. Barbarous, brutish, Scythian, marble-hearted, slintie, fli^*hearted,
savage, wolvish, inhumane, odious, abhorred, detested, ^^thed, remorseless,
raging, dogged, enraged, incensed, bloody, pro^^ blood-thirsty, grimme, stern,
haughty, murdering, fleshie, dre^full, devouring, awful, frowning, rigid.

Cuckold. Horned, cornuted, scorned, jealous, loving, simple, patient, ^^ting,
conniving, contented.

Cuckoo, Plain-song, gray, scabbie, harsh, unpleasant, stammering, ^^^tering.

Cupid v. Love. Idalion, Paphian, wanton, lascivious, winged, feathered,
slippe^^ envious, jealous, swift, joyous, gamesome, sportive, Citherean,
i^constant, deceitful, false, lying, imperious, blind, ambitious, pi^^less,
bold, audacious, venerous, killing, wandering, ticklish, ^morous.

Cur. v. Dog. Snarling, barking, bawling, ravenous, angry, pievish, ch^lish,
sullen.

Curiosity. Nice, studious, affected, woman^sh, careful, vain, silly, f^uitle
idle, dainty, neat, quaint.

Curle. v. Hair. Neat, crispy, shining, twisted, pleated, knotty, snak^e,
braic^e dangling, sleavy, silken, scatterd, flowing, ruffled, art-less, fl^ri^
uncomposed, graceful, waving, beauteous, frizled.

Curse. Hellish, dire, banefull, imp^ous, blasphemous, execrable, hateful,
heavy, damned, revengefull, mischievous, vilanous, miscreant, winged.

Custom. Received, aged, imperious, commanding, tyrannous, observed,
^laudable, commendable, ancient, long, honored, reverent, frequent, common.

Cyclops. Sooty, grimy, sweaty, smoaky, one-eyed, hideous, strong, robustious,
massy, dreadful, proud, fierce, laboring, industrious, rude, clownish,
uncivil, lowtish, stern, grimme, old, bloody.

Cymbals. Tinkling, rattling, noysefull, Berecynthian, Cybelian, joyful, loud,
mirthfull, sacred, hollow, brazen, sounding, hoarse, shining.

Cynnamon. Odorous, fragrant, spicy, verdant, Pangnan, Indian, spriggie.

Cynick. Snarling, currish, snapping, captious, biting, grinning, barking,
brawling, bawling, carping, sharp, fanged, sharp-tooth'd, tonguelashing,
quipping, girding, jeering, flouting, rigid, tart, sharp, smart, jerking,
churlish, sullen, snappish.

Cypress. Tall, strait-growing, fatal dismal, mournful, sable, sad, verdant,
lasting, weeping, smooth, lofty, towering, mounting, aspiring, odorous,
funereous, pensive.

D.
Daffadill. TAwny, guilt-bowly, purple, gaping, open, smiling, vernall.

Dagger. Short, stabbing, murdering, desperate, sharp-pointed, bloody, secret,
poynant, silent, stealing.

Daisie. Tufted, studded, golden, vernall, smiling, sunny.

Dale. Flowery, humble, lowly, delightful, fruitful, pleasant, sweet-cloaths,
motly, gaudy, smiling, tufted, enameld, checkered, gree^-plusht, spo^tive,
painted, grassie, shadie, ecchoing, resounding, rebounding, fragrant.

Dance. Graceful, courtly, skillful, enamouring, wanton, sportive, a^tractive,
active, flowing, swimming, nimble, tripping, measur'^ well-ordered, moving,
lascivious, modest, well-timed, amorous pleasing, winning.

Danger. Sad, dreadful, unavoyded, certain, doubtful, unhappy, bitte^,
pensive, pressing.

Darkness. v. Night. Rusty, gloomy, sullen, sooty, sad, pensive, jetty, pitchy,
neg^^, cloudie, duskie, Egyptian, Cymerian, sable, Ebon, dull, sil^n, blind,
collied, swarthy, grimme, smoaky, ugly, sh^peless, deformed, stumbling, shady,
obscuring, sleepy, drowsy, peaceful, confused deceitful, dull, lither, l^zy,
hideous, still, quiet, unactive.

Darnell. Black, barren, hurtful, choking, over-topping, unlucky,
domineering, sleepy, drowsy, injurious, harmfull, bitter, eye-offending

Dart. v. Arrow. Thrilling, pointed, poynant, singing, trembling, flying,
fluttering, quivering, whirling, wounding, poisoned, killing, winged.

Daw. Prattling, twatling, noysefull, winter-presageing, thievish, prating,
stealing.

Dawn. v. Morn. Early, blushing, purple, spicy, rosy, dewie, rosie-fingerd,
weeping, pearly, gray-cheekt.

Day. Winged, busy, active, lightsome, gladsome, cheerful, labor^ous,
industrious, ^r^ght, clear, careful, shining, beamy, enlightened, s^^ding,
joyful, posting, succeeding, sunny, rosy, purple, ambrosiaa, peering,
increasing.

Death. v. Destiny. Pale, wan, sable, impartial, imperious, all-commanding,
chiling, cold, tyrann zing, domineering, overruling, all-controulling,
uncontrouled, inexorable, exacting, invading, encroaching, restfull, quiet,
silent, peaceful, unresisted, unrelenting, remorseless, hideous, yawning,
engrossing, grasping, lean, dustie, meager, bareribd, flint-hearted, cruel,
grimme, stern awful, frowning, devouring, ravenous, rigorous, rigid, nasty,
fulsome, unwelcome, unexpected, covetous, insatiate, abhorred, detested,
loathed, loathesome, noisome, blood-thirsty, hasty, trembling, ugly, deformed,
groaning, timely, untimely, surprising, arresting, envious, unbribed,
implacable, unperswaded, disdainful, uncivil, proud, scornful, disrespective,
regardlesse, careless, audacious, fearlesse, adventurous, saucie, unmannerly,
presumptuous, ambitious, gluttonous, deaf, stifling, smothering, choking,
injurious, dreadful, bitter, felonious, importunate, glorious, disgraceful,
ignominious, shameful, ruthlesse, resistlesse, victorious, triumphant.

Deathbed. Cold, pale, quivering, bleake, lean, meager, trembling, groaning,
gasping, yawning, sad, pensive

Deceit. v. Craft, December. v. Cold. F^ostie, cold, icie, snowie, lither,
lazy, drowsy, dull, lumpish, sad, fr^l^ck, jolly, mirthful, feastful,
drunken, hoary, nipping, pinching, gamesome, joyous.

Deep. v. Sea. Vasty, devouring, unfathomed, unsounded, boiling, swelling,
working, floating, angry, aged, wealthy, shelfie, tumbling, stormy, ruffl^d,
fretting, rugged, insatiate, gulphy, swallowing, curled, surgie, remorseless.

Delay. Lingering, tedious, comfortless, dull, weary, sad, pensive, slow,
snail-pac't, tardy, laz^e, cold, freezing, dronish, needless, fruitless, vain.

Delicates. v. Cates. Delight. Free, soft, dear, melting, sportive, wanton,
effeminate, sensual, voluptuous, fleshly, carnal, enamou^ing, dallying,
dandling, extasyde, joyous, intrancing, lavish, raping, loose, fresh, choice,
tempting, pleasant, gay, chearing, luxurious, riotous, superfluous, royal,
desired, tickling, gaudy, courtly, princely.

Den. v. Cave. Gloomie, vaultie, crooked, loathsome, nasty, noisome, fulsome,
musty, fusty, dusty, moldy, rockie, doleful, melancholy, hollow, darksome,
mossie, uncouth, sullen, pensive, lonely, theevish,

Dear. Browsing, feeding, goodly, fearful, tripping, light-foot.

Desert, Devious, wild, wide, vast, savage, uncouth, melancholy, sad, silent,
unfrequented, sandy, dreaful, sullen, shadowie, gloomie, rockie, ho^ry, rough,
pathlesse, shrubbie, bushie, unpeopled, unfruitful, b^^ren, inhospitable,
scorched, dangerous.

Desire. Uns^ti^fied, uncontroled, uncurb'd, disordinate, irregular,
invincible, wi^ged, untamed, covetous, insatiate, ardent, passionate,
ambitious, flaming, hot, sottish, sollicitous, unfathomed, deep, unmeasured,
unlimited, unconfined, burning, blind, careful, amorous, unspeakable,
unexpressible, longing.

Despair. Sad, pensive, sorrowful, heavy, dull, cold, pale, comfortless,
l^zie, hellish, damned, faithless, hopeless, snakie, dark, grim, stern,
lean, meage^, sullen, enginous, plotting, sighing, groaning, weeping, mournful,
chill, low.

Destiny. Changelesse, ruthlesse, remorselesse, unrelenting, unbribed,
inexorabl^, imperious, commanding, unchanged, unaltered, resistlesse
victorious, triumphing, adamantine, unconquered, compelling, fixe^ eternal,
everlasting, enforcing, fatal, uncontrolled, impartil, ^yrannizing,
domineering, overruling, all-controlling, exactin^ unresisted, unprevented,
surprising, arresting, importuning, almig^ty, inevitable, unavoyded, blind,
secret, silent, unmooved, seve^^ inclining, deaf, inflexible.

Detraction. Envious, foul-mouthed, calumnious, biting, crafty, black-mouth'^
malicious, injurious, subtle, sly, base, vile, forging, glozing, co^ging,
j^alous, envious, babbling, twatling.

Device. Queint, choice, fabulous, pleasant, painted.

Devil. Subtle, tempestuous, pernicious, hideous, unclean, lying, decei^ful,
mischievous, tempting, vigilant, industrious, crafty, malitio^^ d^ceiving,
vilainous, enchanting, devouring, infernal, seduci^^ fraudulent, calumnia^ing,
cursed, damned, tormented, hurryin^ malignant, reb^llious, wily, snakie.

Devotion, Holy, sacred, religious, quick, fervent, pious, affectionate,
suppl^ant, humble, solemn, profound, reverent, gracious.

Dew. Trickling, pearly, honey-dropping, crystal, rosy, ambrosial,
^^freshing, vegetating, early, balmie, melting, cool, morning, nig^ly,
dropping, showrie, glassie, fruitful, enlivening, flower-courtin^ kissing,
vanishing, short-lived, weeping, fresh, ambrosial, nectareous, sprinkling,
sca^tered.

Diamond. Shining, sparkling, Indian, bright, lasting, pointed, glasse-cutting,
obduring, hard, solid, unconquered, eternal.

Diadem. v. Crown. Dice. Cheating, cogging, gamesome, deceitful, uncertain.

Dido. Unhappy, bloody, pensive, despairing, weeping, Carthaginian, Sidonian,
Tyrian-Qu^er, sad, fair, beauteous, sorrowful.

Dirt. Miry, slimy, muddy, filthy, nasty, loathsome, fulsome, putrid, rotten,
sordid, stinking, dagling.

Discord. Hell-nourish't, stern, j^rring, harsh, snakie, unsociable,
unfriendly, hateful, seditious, quarrelsome, ^uinous, pernicious, mortal,
tumultuous, furious, li^igious, inhumane, pittylesse, merciless, bloody,
angry, grumbling, war-breeding, dissentious, blood-thirsty.

Disdain. v. Scorn. Proud, contemptuous, malevolous, arrogant, sober,
scorneful, unkind, chaste, coy, high, wry-mouthed, insolent, sowre-eyed,
pettish, peevish, brave, churlish, haughty, swelling, portly, surly, burly,
squinteyed, currish.

Discretion. Wise, sage, prudent, mature, advised, reposed, grave, modest,
tempered, sound, staid, sober.

Disease. v. Malidy. Dull, contagious, infectious, languishing, stern, pi^i^g,
pale grievous, torturing, vexing, incurable, pettish, peevish, angry, ^f^al,
painful, fretting, griping, twitching, girding, sad, pinching, ^^ipping,
pulling, cutting, pressing, wringing, gauling, doleful, ^itter, gnawing,
racking, smarting, lingering, noisome, loathsome, filthy, fulsome, nasty, cruel,
impatient, trembling, raging, plaintful, querulous, whining, puling, wasting,
eating, drying, ^ucking, tedious.

Dissobedience. Rebellious, mutinous, unruly, proud, tumultuous, seditious,
sau^y, impudent, shameless, daring, bold, audacious, graceless, unseem^y,
unfitting, uncomely, unbecoming.

Disorder. Confused, tumultuous, irregular,

Doctor. Knowing, learned, skilful, grave, experienced, pi^us, reverend,
h^noured, famous, ancient, aged, studious, industrious, painful, in g^nious,
witty, prudent, discreet.

Do. Swift, light-foot, fearful, tender, flying, savage, tripping, browsing,
weak, frightful.

Dog. Ravenous, bawling, hungry, greedy, faithful, headstrong, theevish,
fierce, furious, watchful, flat-nosed, muzzeled, gluttonons, swi^^ fleet,
speedy, eager, chasing, fallow, pursuing, wel-trust, nimble, biting, snarling,
grinning, yelping, yawling, ranging, deep-mouth'^ ful-mouth'd, well-sented,
quick-nosed, spotted, speckled, surly, su^len, stubborn, sturdy, shaggie,
careful, grim, stern, grumblin^ guarding, breinded, flea-bitten, lousy,
colla^'d.

Dogge-starre. Hot, enraged, enflamed, scorching, unhealthy, diseaseful,
unwho^some, smarting, itching, netling, sparkling, broyling, dry, burnin^
fiery, flaming, pernicious, thirsty, mad, raging, raving.

Dormouse. Sleepie, drowsy, idle, lazy, lither, fat, plumpe.

Doubt, Distractful, vexing, torturing, tormenting, anxious, netling, ca^^ful,
sollicitous, perplexing, quaking, jealous, ambiguous, fear^^^ suspicious,
giddie, faint, cold, heartlesse, lazy, amazing, mazie, ^^sing, jarring,
struggling, quandaring, hovering, sagging, mudd^ wavering, wavie.

Dolphin. Crooked, armed, green, amorous, venereous, wanton, loving, ^zure,
flattering, scaly, speedy, wandering, ranging, straying, M^sick-enamoured,
bowed.

Dove. Simple, trembling, sprightly, panting, timorous, fearful, ai^ piercing,
silly, melancholy, harmless, billing, amorous, venereo^ mourning, cliping,
gentle, courteous, wanton, lascivious, b^ swift, fleet-winged, paphian, tender,
Idalian, crooing, feeled, wh^ling, weak, tender, grave, whispering, gal-less.

Downs. Motly, enamelled, flowery, tufted, dasied, painted, gaudie, s^ling,
verdant, enflowred, fragrant, hearbie, grassie, embroyder^ sportive,
faire-cloathed, green-plush'^, fruitful, checkerd, wide-s^ted, spaticu^,
pleasant, op^n, goodly, delightful.

Dragon. Quick-eyed, quick-sighted, watchful, waking, yawning, devouring,
venomous, poisonous, scaly, crested, writhed, voluminon, curled. winged, wary,
azure, hissing, swelling, cruel, fell, greedy, the guardian of the golden
fleece, speckled, freckled, s^otted.

Dream. Ominous, pleasing, wandering, black, auspicious, bewi^ching, empty,
vain, slippery, fl^shie, fallacious, deceitful, de^uding, flattering,
fantastic, pale, busy, senceless, lying, flying, careful, dreadful,
distracting, disastrous.

Dreggs. Muddy, courser, rejected, despised, fruitless, useless.

Drone. Lazy, lither, idle, buzzing, humming, yawning, barren, fruitless,
stingless, injurious.

Drop. Liquid, pearly, amber, roping, hanging, distilling, trickling ^rilling,
frothie, spotting, staining, flowing, falling, swelling.

Dropsy. Self-indulgent, swelling, puffing, thirsty, insatiate, spungie.

Dross. Rejected, dreggie, base, muddy, abject, fruitless, barren, useless.

Drugges. Virtuous, aromatic, spicie, outlandish, precious, healthful,
sovereign, oriental, eastern, sophistick, medicinal, Indian.

Drum. Bellowing, thundering, clamorous, rattling, noyseful, stirring, tatling,
spirit-st^rring, warlick, martial, affrightning, frightful, threa^ning, hollow,
light, re-ecchoing, courage-working.

Drunkenness. Swelled, nasty, loathsome, filthy, noisome, fulsome, spongie,
brutish, beastly, swinish, wallowing, vomiting, spueing, ap^sh, b^lching,
babbling, teltale, fo^ming, frothie, spawling, sottish, raving, flammering,
reeling, lisping, faultering, surferting, diseaseful, fiery, rich-nosed,
pot-tossing, infamous, volup^uous, shame less, saucy, uncivil, staggering,
indenturing, besotting, intoxicating.

Duck. Diving, plunged, muddy, fearful, plain-foot, watery, fearful, soft,
tender.

Duel. v. Combat. Dugge. Sagging, milkie, noursing, soft, flowing, fluent,
tender, pressed, hanging, flagging, lolling, veinie, streaked, azure-streaked,
spicie, delicious, luxuriant.

Dung. v. Dirt. Dungeon. Dark, darkesome, nastie, loathsome, filthy, hollow,
v^ult'e, glo^mie, obscure, doleful, dankish, fustie, mustie, fulsome, airelesse.

Dust. Scattered, dispersed, dry, small, filthy, thirsty, uncleanly, soyling,
summer, country, nasty.

Dwarf. Low, deformed, short, diminutive, little, Pygmie,
three-horse-loaves-high, short-statured.

E.
Eagle. Towering, so^ring, generous, imperious, chacing, ravenous, raping,
audacious, hardy, cruel, lofty, clear-seeing, quick-^ye^, cou^agious,
yellow-plumed, trussing, stately, princely, royal, majestic, full-winged,
undazled, mou^nting, sun-confronting, flame-bearing, preying, quick-sighted.

Ear. Charged, listening, yiedling, at^entive, observing, glowing, whispering,
tender, winding, drinking, hollow, curious, secret, easy, open, gristlie,
hanging, g^ping, cranied, insatiate, judicious, judging, flagging, inquiring.

Ears of Corn. Bearded, weighty, dangling, full, fruitful, tender, yellow,
fat, hoary, gilded, sl^nder, grained, flaxen, waving, joyful, smiling, crested,
bristled.

Earth. Shaggy, sullen, pregnant, teeming, many-peopled, flowry-mantled, dull,
wealthy, sad, weighty, drossie, thirsty, sluttish, wide-skited, spacious,
m^ssie, motly, yawning, cranied, porous, melanch^ly, verdant, fl^wre-enamelled,
tufted, fruitful, checkerd, fostering, embroidered, grassie, clayie, mirie,
solid, globous, meta^-bearing, wealthy, painted, gaudy, sandy, hanging, cold,
fat, uncleanly, diapred, open, vast, extended, turfie, cloddy, gravelly, dusty,
foodful.

Earthquake. Impetuous, amazing, tumultuous, portentuous, aguish, dreadful,
affeightful.

Ease. Peaceful, quiet, silent, silken, restful, calm, barren, soft, smo^th,
reposed, happy, pleasant, volup^uous, desired, faint, sleepie, drowsy, lazy,
secured, warm, fruitless.

East. Ruddie, glowing, balmie, early flowery, pregnant, blushing, gorgeous,
gray-cheekt, radiant, pearly, purple, wealthy, flaming, aromatic, spicie,
dawnie, gilded.

Echo. Prattling, twatling, babbling, tearing, loud, tesounding, shall, vocal,
cavy, talking, solitary, wood-hunting, wandering, roving, piercing.

Eclypse. Dark, shady, obscuring, gloomy, sullen, swarthy, predict^ous,
portentuous, presagious, threatening, menacing, dreadful, prodigious, disastrous,

Eele. Slippery, glib, snaky, winding, writhing, tu^ning, fold^ng, gl^stering,
glittering, clammy, viscous, glutinou^, sl^my, muddy, fat, soft, moist,
wrigling.

Eye. Flaming, burning, sparkling, piercing, radiant, spungy, enquiring,
lively, lovely, wheeling, wounded, wounding, melting, inveigling, persuasive,
rolling, longing, inflaming, pleading, hungry, greedy, expecting, Starty,
glistering, betraying, discoursive, speaking, beamy, enamouring, gliding,
singering, rransparent, instructed, Crystal, soul-wounding, observing,
gazefull, judgeing, luring, floating, swimming, assayling, bashful, roving,
intentive, tempting, invi^ing, courting, wooing, conquering, victorious,
triumphing, attractive, love-a^med, wandering, inflaming, commanding, busy,
whispering, sea^ching, smiling, beauteou^, murdering, bewitching, ch^rming,
delicious, traiterous, wanton, spearly, conducting, ^winkling, passionate,
weeping, lascivious, subtle, dazzling, lavish.

Egg. Fruitful, marrowy, lustful, breeding, hatching.

Eglantine. Sweet Smelling, twining, pricklie, twisting.

Egypt. v. Egypt. Fat, fruitful, mysterious, superstitious, swarthy.

Elegy. Mournful, wailing, lamenting, whining, whimpering, puling, sad,
weeping, complaining, complaintful, flattering, soothing, amorous, baudy,
wanton.

Ambassador. Sage, wise, prudent, reverend, learned, honored, grave,
eloquent, stately, authorized.

Embers. v. Cinders. H^ssing, glowing, warm, dying, sparkling, dead, ashy,
black, sooty, grimie.

Embraces. Warm, hot, strict, glueing, close, soft, clasping, hugging,
encircling, twining, grasping, twisting, yoaking, loving, amorous, venereous,
greedy, mutual, fruitful, dear, sweet, pleasant, delicious, knotty, knitting,
wanton, joyful, glutinous.

Emrald. Flamie, beamie, radiant, cheerful, green, bright, eye-refreshing,
Erythraean, Scythian, sight-chearing, shining.

Elephant. Castle-bearing, rough-skinned, stiffe-kneed, fleshie, Indian,
massy, robustious, dreadful, warlick, Getulian, savage, docile, fierce, cruel,
untamed, white-tusked, ivory-toothed.

Elm. Strait-limbed, spreading, lofty, towering, mounting, aspiring,
skie-threatning, cloud-kissing, shady, branching, vine-hugging, levy,
spacious, tall, bough-extending.

Eloquence. Winning, gaining, encroaching, persuasive, wooing, enamouring,
nectareous, intrancing, enchanting, encharming, delicious, ravishing,
soul-raping, smooth, oily, courtly, soft, rich, quaint, painted, glozing,
soothing, infinuating, victorious, triumphing, sweet-tongu'd, grave,
C^ceronian, well-polisht, deceitful, inveagling, circumv^n^ing, attractive,
happy, overcoming, successeful, fancytickling, tempting, soul-invading,
conquering, bewitching, transporting, n^ctar-droping, captivating.

Elysium. S^f^, flowery, flower-enamelled, quiet, peaceful, blisseful, joyful,
soul-ravishing, smiling, blessed.

Enemy. Bloody, blood-thirsty, hateful, spiteful, fierce, cruel, malicious,
odious, opposing, traiterous, undermining, deceitful, impetuous, assaulting,
assayling, furious, invadng, insulting, murdering, ambitious, hurtful,
pernicious, crafty, despitefull, unjust, injurious, perfidious, dreadful,
proud, daring, cursed.

English. Stout, courageous, valiant, true-hearted, hardy, bold, audacious,
adventurous, warlick, apish, imitating.

Ensigns. v. Banners. Warlick, triumph^^t, victorious, martial, painted,
displayed, threatening, advanced, waving.

Enterprise. Bold, avdacious, adventurous, doubtful, uncertain, uneasy,
dangerous, perilous, brave, glorious, famous.

Entertainment. Gracious, welcome, courteous, loving, fair, kind, friendly,
willing, ready, rich, liberal, pompous, hearty, glorious, costly, sumptuous,
magnificent.

Entrails. v. Bowels. Secret, winding, reeking, gloomy, smoking, trembling,
auspicious, predictious, prophetic, sooth-saying, consulted, enchested,
enclosed, hidden, abstruse.

Envy. Pale, lean, swelling, snarling, blue-eyed, squint-eyed, restless,
killing, stabbing, cutting, wounding, sullen, snaky, viperous, poysonou^,
blear-eyed, self-eating, self-consuming, self-torturing, self-mar^yring,
black-mouthed, muttering, whispering, lean-fac't, carping, censorious,
repining, underminining, snake-haird, burning, flaming, boiling, revengefull,
malicious, spightfull, cancred, subtle, sly, crafty, heart-gnawing, deadly,
mortal, jealous, cruel, calumnious, detracting, pernicious, out-rageous,
proud, disdainful, haughty, crooked, bi^ing, currish.

Epicure. Godless, voluptuous, sensual, brutish, bestiall, beastly,
irreligious, ungodly, loose, dissolute, intemperate, vicious, wallowing,
swinish, insatiate, gluttonous, gurmandizing, self-pampering, selfpleasing.

Epigram. Short, witty, loose, wanton, merry, pleasant, railing, nipping,
biting, snarling, soothing, flattering, smooth, neat, facetious.

Epitaph. Mournful, sad, pensive, weeping, moanfull, immortal, lasting,
^numentall, re-cording, name-preserving, life-continuing.

Equity. v. Justice. Reasonable, rational, just, sacred, sober; severe,
orate, unbridled, ^corrupted, unfed, inexorable, constant, Rhadamanthian,
equal, i^partiall, unsiding, holy, unmoved, unchanged, indifferent,
unprej^dic't, uninclining, strict, riged, even-handed, just-dealing, upright.

Erebus. Misty, foggy, black, dark, darksome, vast, dismal, ugly, hideous,
^^ping, yawning, ghastly.

Erinnys, Sad, fatal, ferall, snak-hairy, grimme, cruel, ghastly.

Ermin. Spotless, unspotted, speckled, painted, cleanly, checkered.

Error. Rash, fond, straying, straggling, doubtful, seducing, fantastic,
fa^tick, obstinate, blind, ambitious, crooked, wandering, credulous, p^nicious,
gloomy, misty, muddy, doltish, audacious, bold, gross, d^cloudy, foppish,
sottish, dark, mole-eyed, beetle-braind, thick, st^^ bling, furious,
mis-guiding, black-mouthed.

Eternity Immense, unfathomed, unmeasured, unmoved, uninterrupted, l^ing,
lofty, incorrupt, divine, during, supreme, unexpressible, per^^nent,
incomprehensible, inconceivable, soft, downy, flowery, bright, gl^rious,
unlimited, unconfined.

Ethiopian. v. Moore. Sunburned, swarthy, sooty, soultry, scalded, broyled,
schorched, ^^led, tanned, black, barbarous, bak'c, wild, brutish, moorish,
roasted, fri^^ naked, collied, bloody, flat-nosed, tawny, misbelieving, Negro,
thi^^lipt, wainscot-faced.

Evening. Cur-fue, aged, gray, silent, calm, gloomy, dappled, dewie, blushin^
torchy, rheumy, cool, late, black, duskie, smoaky, cloudy, shady, slo^pac'^,
drwosie, lazy, idle, starry.

Eunuch. Smooth-fac't, smooth-chinn'd, weak, delicate, soft, weak, unman^y
womanish, effeminate.

Euphrates. v. River, Deep, fertile, fruitful, winding, swift-pac't, wary.

Ewe. Wanton, supportive, teeming, fleecy, warm-clothed, uberous, g^^zing.

Europ. Rich, wealthy, fruitful, healthful, temperate, populous.

Evidence. Convincing, unanswerable, undoubted, strong, firm, confirming,
^doubted, certain, authentic, conclusive, persuasive, faith-beger^ng,
satisfying.

Exaction. Rigorous, unjust, cruel, pinching, oppressing, tyrannous,
tyrani^^ll, lawless, imposed, griping, pilling.

Example. Leading, teaching, guiding, encouraging, plain, evident, memorable,
famous, glorious, sage, wise, prudent.

Excess. Dissolute, wanton, loose, vicious, intemperate, unrestrained,
out^^gious, superfluous, needless:

Exchequer. Rich, wealthy, swallowing, moneyed, royal.

Excrement. Ejected, disrespected, neglected, odious, loathsome, nasty,
sluttish, ^ovenly, superfluous, unnecessary, fulsome, noisome.

Excuse. Shifting, lying, cogging, coined, forged, painted, dissembling,
pro^able, studied, fair, subtle, alleged, just.

Exercise. Laborious, industrious, active, stirring, studious, wholesome,
useful, beneficial, advantageous, strength-confirming, health-confirming.

Exhalation. Fat, oily, aspiring, sinoaky, cloudy, vaporous, earth-engendered,
^able, gloomy, dusky, foggy, misty, malignant, smothering, rising, mounting,
towering, infectious, unhealthy, breathing.

Exile. v. Banishment Exorcisme. Exorcist. Charming, enchanting, magic,
hellish, powerful, commanding, imperious, conjuring, dark, black.

Expectation. Longing, long-looking, desirous, waiting, tedious.

Experience. Certain, prudent, discreet, sage, wise, approved, infallible,
sure, assured, grounded, clear-eyed, aged, old, tutord, long-taught,
dearbought, grave, learned, gray-silver-hoary-haird, sober, school^ng.

Ecstasy. Ravished, soul-raping, unconcerving, death-like, astounding, ad^ring,
amazed.

Extortioner. Rigorous, oppressing, injurious, lawless, cruel, unjust,
tyranno^^ tyrannical, heavy.

F.
Fable. VAin, lying, old, facetious, witty, devised, feined, fictious, ^gar,
frivolous, idle, ingenious, incredible, popular, do^i^^ truthless, monstrous,
mysterious, instructive.

Face. v. Countenance. Beauteous, roseate, enchanting, bewitching, enamouring,
smili^^ wanton, downy, joyful, pensive, lowering, wooing, unfullied, del^^ous,
entrancing, attractive, heart-wounding, captivating, unp^^tern'd, unexampled.

Faction. Jarring, disagreeing, contentious, strifefull, seditious, furious,
^^multuous, litigious, siding, dissentious, blood-thirsty, wa^^ breeding.

Faggot. Flaming, bundled, sputtering, crackling, consuming, self-eati^^
heating, pitchy.

Fairie. Dancing, night-walking, nimble, active, stirring, tripping,
sprigh^full, cleanly, nipping, pinching, sporting, night-tripping, light,
silen^ soft-foot, dairy-hunting, green-cloth'd, yellow-skirted.

Faith. Sence-conquering, quick-seeing, almighty, servent, powerful^
wonder-working, miraculous, zealous, assured, firm, adhering, inviolable,
constant, steadfast, unmoved, indissoluble, untainted, immortal.

Fame. Wide, flitting, lasting, immortal, eternal, enduring, swift, l^vish,
winged, embalming, immortalizing, eternizing, surviving death-less, swelling,
blabing, babbling, long-tongued, wide-mouth^^ prattling, twatling, gossipping,
graceful, swift-winged, flying, ^ather-footed, nimble-winged, Eagle-winged,
unextinguished, ^nowning, sleek-tongued, glib-tongued, spreading, smiling,
bright, ^ry, glorious, lying, tale-telling, light-heeld, spurring, posting,
busy, ^anting.

Famine. Lean, pale, thin, lean-chapt, pinching, impetuous, cruel, mea^er,
ravening, devouring, sharp-fang'd, clinging, lanck, lawless, ^ecessitating,
constraining, panting, sharp, gaping, yawning, ra^ing, greedy, gluttonous,
barking, tedious, consuming, anxious, ^ard, torturing, torm enting, vexing,
meager-fac't.

Fancy. Nimble, contriving, active, stirring, roving, vagrant, roaming,
^anging, forging, working, quick, pregnant, teeming, busy, mint^ng, coining,
spinning, enritched, wealthy, foreign, shaping, in^ustrious, traveling,
inventive, plotting, studious, plodding, wandering, projecting.

Fantasmes. v. Phantasmes, Farewell. Tedious, sad, grieved, loathed, last,
sighed, lingering, pensive.

Fast. Abstemious, lean, temperate, chaste, frugall, cleanly, moderate,
healthy, wholesome, faint, meager, mortyfiing, flesh-subduing, religious,
virtuous, sober, penetentiall.

Fate. v. Destiny. Driery, resistless. unpittying, flint-hearted, remorseless,
unrelenting, rugged, cruel, unchanged, unmoved.

Father. Loving, careful, tender, sollicitous, grave; pious, reverend,
honored, indulgent, tenderhearted.

Fauchion. v. Blade. Keen, bright, slicing, slashing, cutting, slaughtering,
murdering, quartering.

Faulcon. Towering, Princely, stooping, swift, thundering, courageous, freckled,
wheeling, lured, high-pitched.

Fault. Secret, grievous, heinous, shameful, petty, sinful, vicious,
dishonest.

Fawns. v. Satyr. Hairy, shaggy, tripping, rude, horned, nimble, swift-footed,
wan^^ frisking, wood-haunting, lustful, salacious, lecherous.

Fear. Jealous, sallow, chilly, reverentiall, pale, shallow, trembling, lo^
presaging, chilling, lumpish, faint, prophetic, superstitious, omino^ wanny,
heartless, guilty, cold, sullen, hovering, anxious, suspision bloodless,
pressing, ignominious, unresolved, doubtful, distracted, i^perious, degenerous,
restraining, pulling, distempered, impulsive, ^vering, boggy, winged, ghastly,
suggesting, projecting, contriving, i^ clowdy, muddy, shuddering, shallow,
restless, pale-hearted, cream-fa^^ startling, wary, modest, blushing,
impetuous, assaulting, palsied, pa^^lytick, heart-amazing.

Feast. Ambrosial, gladsome, mirthful, sumptuous, costly, delicious,
delig^^ful, luxurious, joyous, buxome, frolic, pleasant, genial, ful-tabled,
^^ble-pressing, voluptuous, royal, Nectarean, tast-contenting, pala^^ pleasing,
lavish, love-preserving.

Feather. Hovering, waving, tufted, soft, downy, plumy, lightsome, flauntin^
gay, gallant, pompous, gaudy, fantastic, trembling, hangi^^ smooth, velvet,
flying, painted, wanton, stiff, limber, freckled.

Fever. Hateful, hot, burning, panting, malignant, intermitting conta^ous,
spotted, infectious, pulse-spurring, furious, trembling, pale, vi^lent, cruel,
grievous, pettish, pievish, angry, consuming, drying, te^^ous, lingering,
inconstant, d^y, thirsty, secret, eating, scorching, bloc^^ boiling.

Fee. Bribing, corrupting, unlawful, injurious, secret, eating, schorching,
blood-boyling.

Feet. v. Foot. Field. Dusty, warlick, martial, bloody, dreadful, dismal,
murdering, tented, blood-flowing.

Fields. Spiced, unambitious, gaudy, painted, flowery, tufted, checked, grassie,
naked, open, wild, flowre-enamell'd, motly, dasied, smiling, verdant, herby.
fragrant, diaperd, enflowred, fruitful, pregnant, teeming, embroydered,
sportive, spacious, wide-skirted, fair-clothed, green-plush't, pleasant,
delightful.

Fenne. Moorish, drowsy, slimy, slothful, foggy, vaporous, unhealthy, pudly,
^^king, filthy, durty, muddy, black-turf'd, aguish.

Fetters. Shackling, binding, locking, close, strait.

Fictions. Lying, devised, fabulous, deluding, deceiving, coined, minted,
in^^nted.

Fig. Milky, delicious, fat, two-leaved, pleasant, sweet, lushious,
broad^aved, autumnal, sugared.

Fight. v. Battle. Dusty, furious, cruel, bloody, hot, dreadful.

Filberd. Clustered, shady, grovy, bushy, rank, shady, branching, twining,
^^mber.

File. Biting, toothed, smoothing, polishing, plaining, laborious, indu^^rious,
gnawing, nibling, eating, fretting, wearing, correcting.

Fingers. Soft, sleek, delicate, active, nimble, plianr, industrious, curious,
^ainty, slender, round, unequal, Ivory, bending, wanton, alabaster, ^rembling,
quavering, filching, pilfering.

Fire. Sprightly, active, ravenous, greedy, catching, hungry, wandering,
^evouring, crackling, flashing, lieentious, searching, all-consuming,
^^lf-eating, glowing, whirling, quick, embracing, clasping, climb^ng, wastful,
subtle, purging, amorous, furious, unsparing, rage^ull, sparkling, flaming,
furious, schorching, broyling, roast^ng, melting, glittering, smoakie,
covetous, avaritious, flamebelching.

Firmament. Azure, wide-skirted, unmeasured, unfathomed, starrie,
star-enchased, star-powdered, glittering, gilded, star-studded, rolling,
wheeling, whirling, spangled, arched, silver-paved, silver-bosom'd,
all-clasping, bright, vaultie, glorious, Crystal, lofty, open, wide, extended,
beamy, radious, cloudy, flaming, turning, painted, all viewing, all-embracing.

Fur. Tall, lofty, towering, heaven-kissing, skie-threatning, aspiring,
unknotty, fragrant, shady, crispy, curled, strait, useful, flaming, oily, fat,
^igh-topt, rozen-weeping.

Fishes. Glittering, gliding, dancing, silver, silver-breasted, crooked, s^^
nibling, nimble, inveagled, credulous, shining, watery, slippery, sli^^ hungry,
clammy, floating, greedy, silent, dumb, speechless, leapi^^ skipping, wrigling,
azure, glassie, viscuous, glutinous, wandering, str^^ling, phlegmatic, finny,
silver-scal'd.

Fisher. Inveagling, deluding, tempting, deceiving, baiting, ho^ing, patient,
impatient, juggling, insnaring, treacherous, expecti^^ hoping, cunning, skillful.

Flag. Spreading, waving, swelling, hanging, pregnant, winged, wa^^ stuffed,
floating, ruffling, rustling, trembling, dancing, furled, curled.

Flame. Insultive, wilder, hungry, catching, devouring, purging, clean^^
sucking, licentious, scattered, wasting, active, sprightly, waving, curs^
crisped, whirling, aspiring, mounting, towering, ragefull, venge^^ clasping,
fretting, eating, sputtering, sparkling, lurking, embrac^^ subtle, amorous,
courting, nimble, greedy, licking, ttembling, ^^nous, searching, hungry,
crackling, glowing, ruddy, blushing, furio^ scorching, piercing, imbosom'd,
darting, singing, choking, gli^ing, combustious, climbing, clambering,
impetuous, violent, un^am^^ oily, belched, bright, busy, self-consuming,
straggling, cheerful, lig^^ some, proud, ambitious, quick, pursuing,
carbonadoing.

Flash. v. Flame. Flattery. Flatterer. Base, servile, slavish, soft,
file-tongu'd, smooth, oily, courtly, smoo^^ tongued, lisping, obsequious,
gilt-tongu'd, windy, dissembling, soo^ing, melting, officious, pick-thank,
cogging, pliant, sugered, fleari^^ fawning, traitorous, treacherous, cheating,
overreaching, jugl^^ circumventing, cunning, deluding, crafty, wily, sly,
deceitful, ^^ spoken, smooth-worded, raking, winning, dawbing, candid,
glass-fa^^ pyde, knee-crooking, clawing, tempting, tickling, colloguing,
honeyed, crouching, glozing, insinuating.

Phlegm. Cold, moist, watery, unactive, dull, flow, noisome, unwholeso^
diseasefull, distilling, rheumatick.

Flea. Biting, nipping, skipping, twitching, sucking, sable, pestering, sle^
disturbing, peevish, blood-thirsty.

Fleece. Rich, wealthy, woolly, snowy, curled, crisped, soft, hary, wa^^
thirsty, drinking.

Fly. Buzzing, pestering, sportive, wanton, tickling nimble, skipping,
^ubborn, froward, sucking, blood-thirstie, importuning, provo^ing, saucie,
lickorous, stinging, sun-delighting, m^got-blowing.

Flight. Dustie, speedy, hasty, confused, disordered, guilty, trembling,
^oasting, breathless, panting, fearful, ignominious, shameful, ha^ened,
accelerated.

Flint. Obdurate, hard, unrelenting, fiery, sparkling, fire-engende^ing.

Flocks. v. Sheep. Numerous, thronging, bleating, wealthy, curled, grazing,
jolly, ^el-fleec'd, gamesome, sportive, wanton, goodly, wandering, ^ragling,
shaggie, trooping, swarming, thriving, increasing, ^ibling.

Flood. Rolling, rising, swelling, silver; aged, raging, incensed, gliding,
preading, glancing, hurrying, high-wrought, shower-enhanced, ^oaming,
wind-incensed, tumbling, impetuous, enchased, vaulting, ^eaping, dancing,
cleansing, horned, ambitious, sea-ingulphed, ^oaring, snakie, gulphie,
careering, azure, smooth-sliding, silver-^rested, invading, sweeping,
intruding, amorous, chiding, crystal, ^icentious, curled, enraged, wavie,
glassie, whirling, rustling, rush^ng, pearly, wandering, straggling, angry,
boiling, stormy, swallow^ng, chafing, incroaching, ruffled, wrinkled, posting,
surly, sullen, ^ustling, murmuring, muttering, surgie, tossing, proud, bubling,
^umbling, wrigling, frothy, sandy, muddy, swift-pacing, wheeling, mounting,
bank-courting, uxorious.

Flora. Merry, mirthful, joyous, pleasant, delightful, painted, gay, gaudy,
pompous, enamelled, pearly, amorous, wanton, lascivious, per^umed.

Flower. Pregnant, spicie, fragrant, enamelled, gaudie, pyde, perfumed,
^heckered, smiling, vernal, verdant, tufted, taintless, unspotted,
^ummer-swelling, odorous, amorous, vermilion, purple, silver, dia^ered,
painted, freckled, blushing, vernal, glittering, delicious, mus^ie, fading,
short-lived.

Foame. Boiling, hissing, curled, froathie, angry, belched, snowie, hoary,
^oating, waving, chafing, ayrie,

Foe. v. Enemy. Fogge. Unhealthy, unwholesome, diseaseful, gloomy, vaporous,
choking, misty, drowsy, dull, spongie, duskie, mufling, drooping, swarthy,
dropsy, sullen, gouty, sleepy, stifling, stinking, ascending, smell-offending,
contagious, infectious, fen-suckt.

Fool. Soft, dul-eyed, lean-witted, motley, knotty-pated, gross,
^unconceiving, silly, shallow, admiring, stupid, sottish, doltish, dul-wi^ed,
beetle-brained.

Foot. Swift-pac't, hollow, flying, tripping, vaulting, wanton, nimble,
active, dusty, ivory, delicate, tender, soft, silent, beauteous, ambrosial,
snowie, silver, stalking, trampling.

Force. Male, masculine, mastering, manly, domineering, imperious, compulsive,
commanding, tyrannizing, courageous, sinewie, rob^stious, untamed, impetuous.

Forehead. v. Brow. Stately, smooth, sleeke, beauteous, comely, delicious,
maj^stick.

Forest. Hoary, leavie, shady, salvage, verdant, fragrant, shaggie, gloo^y,
m^ssie, grassie, rockie, rough, wild, desert, wide-skirted, devio^^, vast,
unco^th, melancholy, unfrequented, sullen, pathless, unpeopled, beast-haunted,
silent, bushie, shrubbie, ecchoing, tufted, br^^ly, spacious, mast-bearing,
dreadful.

Forester. v. Swain. Forgetfulness. Dark, shady, obscure, rusty, rude, musty,
moldy, unkind, d^^courteous, cruel.

Furnace. Flaming, burning, scorch^ng, scalding, flame-belching, sput^ring,
sparkling, hollow, smoakie, devouring, sulphurous, ^^pouring.

Fortitude. Daring, valiant, valourous, adventurous, prudent, attempti^^
undertaking, undaunted, unquelled, unconquered, noble, und^jected, majestic,
manly, courageous.

Fortune. Wheeling, uncertain, unconstant, giglet, lying, delud^^^ imperious,
commanding, domineering, tyrannizing, treacherous, injurious, envious, cruel,
^^epdame, dreadful, pernicious, peevish, froward, wanton malicious, mocking,
flattering, audacious, almighty, disasterous, turning, slippery, perfidious,
proud, stubborn, malignant, fullen, surly, insolenr, licentio^s, lawless,
fickle, hoodwinkt.

Fountain. Crystal, gushing, rustling, silver, gliding, purling, pearly,
weeping, bubling, gugling, chiding, clear, grasse-fringed, mosse-fringed,
sacred, grasse-margend, mosse-margend, trickling, soft, delicious straggling,
dancing, vaulting, murmuring, muttering, wispering, prattling, twatling,
sweet-rolling, swelling, rising, sparkling, flowing, frothy.

Fowler. Subtle, crafty, wily, skilful, cunning, treacherous, ensnaring,
tempting, deceiving, inveagling, alluring, expecting, hoping, wary.

Fox. Wily, sly, subtle, theevish, ravenous, greedy, stinking, strong-breath'd,
bush-taild, inearthing, snarling, cunning, crafty, devouring, pullet-eating.

France. French. Fruitful, healthful, rich, wealthy, learned, warlick, courtly,
generous, ingenious, deviseful, active. industrious, lascivious, wanton,
stately, courteous, cavoleering, courageous, complementive.

Friend. Friendship. Faithful, constant, cordial, hearty, familiar, ayding,
helpful, advantageous, affectionate, sacred, loyal, trusty, sociable, certain,
pleasing, favoring, courteous, dear, loving, happy, firm, equal, agreeing,
uniting, cementing, unchanged, inviolated, assured, peaceful, sincere,
unloosed, united, conjoined, chained, pliant, stable, glued, rive^ed, unanimous.

Frenzy. Raving, chafing, doting, witless, dreaming, hot, choleric, furious,
untamed.

Frog. Sprawling, croaking, loathsome, fulsome, querulous, complaintful,
noiseful, yellow, hoarse, fen-haunting, shrill, babbling, gugling,
spring-forespeaking.

Frost. v. Cold. Sharp, keen, grave, nipping, hoary, silver, chilling, icie,
gray-haired, pinching, rough, biting, piercing, chattering, astringent,
benumming, bleak, sap-consuming, stinging, gray-bearded.

Froth. v. Foame. Frown. Surly, sullen, haughty, disdainful, proud, angry,
churlish, currish, lumpish, rough, stormy, discontented, brow-pursing, cloudy,
tempestuous, supercilious, imperious, domineering, awful, tvrannizing,
brow-knitting, brow-puckering, lowering, scowling, ruffled.

Fruit. Dangling, delicious, timely, tast-pleasing, palar-wooing, savoury,
pleasant, sweet smelling, leave-enwrapped, hanging, painted, delightful,
autumnal, exp^cted, desired, ambrosial.

Funeral. v. Obsequies. Fury. v. Anger. Blind, disordered, distempered,
frantic, burning, giddie, sternvisaged, headstrong, unruly, untamed, flaming,
wrathful, snakehaired, revengeful, sparkling, flame-eyed, lean-chapt, waspish,
cruel, d^zzy-eyed, flamie, grim, ghastly, enraged, barbarous, seditious,
dreadful, pernicious, boiling, tempestuous, stormy, frothie, fant^stick,
impatient, unbrideled, transporting, impetuous, tumultuous incensing,
distracted.

Furies. Snake-haired, dismal, haggish, hellish, malicious, envious, grim,
sullen, ghastly, dreadful, swelling, snarling, blue-eyed, torch-bearing,
snake-crowned, squint-eyed, black-mouthed, torturing, tormenting,
heart-gnawing, spightful, blood-thirsty, strifeful, contentious, debateful,
revengful, Stygian, inexorable, deformed, missh^pen, ugly, hideous,
mischievous, night-bo^ne, flame-eyed,

Furre. Soft, warm, shaggie, cold defending, lining.

Furrow. Long, sliced, ridged, seed-noursing, crooked, dividing,

Furze. Bushie, shrubbie, combrous, prickly, rank:

G.
Gain. WElcome, wealthy, fruitful, expected, desired, pleasing, sweet,
recompencing, satisfying, contenting, large, ample, thrifty, sweet smelling,
dear-bought,

Gale. Gentle, fanning, refreshing, breathing, rusling, whistling, whisking,
cooling, whispering, flitting, soft, pleasant, flowing, warm, wanton,
wholesome, floating, fruitful, puffing, courteous.

Gall. Bitter, biting, swelling, black, glassie.

Gallows. Shameful, ignominious, infamous, unlucky, detested, painful,
dreadful.

Game. Sportive, joyous, mirthful, pleasing, care-killing, time-stealing,
refreshing, enchanting, bewitching, facetious, frequented, solemn, unthrifty,
wanton, idle, careless.

Ganges. Silver, rich, wealthy, azure, deep, wavie, sandy, Indian, gilded,
spacious, east-flowing.

Ganymed. Phrygian, Trojan, Idean, beauteous, wanton, lascivious, princely,
Jove-beloved, Jove-enamouring, Joves Catamite, fair, young, Eagle-hurryed,

Garden. Flowery, gaudy, painted, enameled, checkered, enflowred, fruitful,
wel-drest, fragrant, verdant, pleasant, hearby, smiling, delitious, bordered,
knotted, squared, enclosed, levelled, diapered, weeded, neat, handsome,
embroidered.

Guardian. Careful, faithful, watchful, regardful, jealous, observing,
attentive, unbribed, officious, diligent.

Garland. v. Crowns. Leavie, triumphant, victorious, fragrant, roseal, flowery,
enam^i'd, checkered, swathing, hooping.

Garments. v. Apparel. Garner. Thrif^y, wealthy, swelling, wel-lin'd, storing.

Gate, Brasse-rib'd, leavie, folded, plankie, studded, creaking.

Geese. v. Goose. Gemmes. v. Jewels. Shining, reflecting, sparkling, radiant,
beaming, oriental, Eastern, pendant, dangling, enchacing, bright, blazing,
pearly, cost^y, rich, sumptuous, glittering, orient, Indian, star^y, flaming,
ai^egilding, aire-enlightning, unvalued.

Gentleman. Noble, watlick, valiant, generous, free-hearted, honored, brave,
illustrious, famous, ingenious, pompous, courtly, gaudy, gallant,
haughty-spirited.

Gentles. Superstitious, paganish, misbelieving, incredulous, obstinate.

Germans. Fierce, warlick, audacious, daring, adventurous, valiant, ingenious,
industrious, rebellious, thirsty, drunken.

Gesture. Flowing, speaking, graceful, comely, winning, becoming, seemly,
affected, unaff^cted, free, composed, handsome, gracious, pleasing, haughty,
ingratiating, courteous, stately, portly, humble.

Ghosts. Fleeting, thin, affrightful, pale, grizly, ghastly, dreadful, lean,
meager, light, deceased, bodiless, airy, wandering, unfathomed, ungrasped,
unsubstantial, hollow, gliding, marowless, cold, glaring, unreal, heartless,
doleful, deformed, sullen, vanishing, empry, fantastic, bloodless, unbodied.

Giant. Massy, robustious, big-limbed, great-rib'd, large-joynted, vast,
audacious, stalking, stern, grim, dreadful, earth-bread, greatbon'd, lubberly,
impetuous, proud, disdainful, haughty.

Gift. Rich, free, precious liberal, wealthy, large, ample, honorable
bounteous, princely, royal, obliging, engaging, binding, sacred, costly,
sumptuous, magnificent, gracious.

Ginger. Biting, corroding, knotty, rugged, rough-coated, fragrant, odorous,
sharp, Arabian.

Girdle. Embroidered, silken, swathing, gilded, painted, hooping, clasping,
buckled, embossed.

Glance, Lascivious, subtle, wanton, amorous, quaint, silent, obsequious,
smiling, imperious.

Glass. Smooth, slick, icie, crystal, reflecting, resembling, representing,
flaring, brittle, melting, clear, transparent.

Looking-glass. v. Mirror.

Glead. v. Kite. Hungry, ravenous, devouring, theevish, swift, greedy, preying,
raping, gouty, crow-hating, fox-hating.

Gleaner. Needy, poor, stooping, searching, waiting, gathering, picking,
attending, following, industrious.

Glue. Viscous, clammie, uniting, fastening, tenacious, cementing, compacting.

Globe. Round, turning, wheeling, rolling, solid, spacious.

Glory. Pompous, painted, costly, envious, glittering, shining, radiant,
beaming, ambitious, eternal, enduring, lasting, triumphan^, victorious,
fleeting, empty, fading, insolent, everlasting, desired, vaunting, flaunting,
immortal, windy, flatuous, inflaming, encouraging, provoking, egging,
spurring, incensing, prompting, swelling, beauteous, dazzling.

Glove. Perfumed, fringed, embroidered, furred, fragrant, hand-sheathing,
muskie, spruce, neat, handsome, gentile, fashionable.

Gluttony. Glutton. v. Luxury. Witty, judicious, high-feeding, gurmandizing,
brutish, voluptuous, sensual, bestial, beastly, intemperate, loose, dissolute,
swinish, insatiate, selfe-pleasing, self, pampering, devouring, ingulphing,
l^zie, big-bellyed, swelling, epicurean, lickorous, greedy, ravenous, costly,
lasciviou^, slow-bellied, full-gorging.

Gnat. Busy, pestering, biting, pinching, pulling, nipping, sucking, stinging,
twitching, disturbing.

Goad. Pointed, sharp, poynant, piercing, pricking, biting, inciting,
prompting, quickening, spurring, bloody, tu^oring, teaching, incensing, egging.

Goat. Lustful, stinking, climbing, clambering, browsing, nibling, lescivious,
bush-haunting, rampant, fearful, rough, hai^y, shaggie, flat-nosed, savage,
wanton, luxurious, vine-browsing, jumping, braying, cliffe-bred, mountain,
bearded, salacious, leacherous.

Gods. Deathless, almighty, powerful, uncreated, just, immortal, inthroned,
sacred, revengeful, adored, propitious, unpassive, uneyed, invisible,
al-seeing, invoked, al-knowing, omnipotent, omniscient, infallible, unerring,
unchanged, unresisted, resistless, supreme, soverain, al-ruling, awful,
dreadful, reverenced, eternal, thundering, unconfined, incorporeal, unseen,
immaterial, unrestrained, undeceived.

Cold. Massy, burnisht, envied, shining, glistering, beamie, glittering,
bewitching, ench^nting, charming, dazzling, gaudy, corrupting, victorious,
al-conquering, triumphant, almighty, saint-seducing, eye-beguiling, tempting,
provoking, wealthy, high-esteemed, yellow, imperious, commanding,
way-enforcing, pernicious, way-making, care-curing, beamy, audacious,
ambitious, desired, fatal, royal, solid, care-remooving, pain*easing, refined,
heart-corrupting. eye-delighting, eye-rejoycing.

Goose. Cackling, gagling, wadling, plain-foot, silly, fenne-laving, devouring,
feathered, watchful, flickering, mudling.

Gore. Clotted, foamie, froathie, congealing, smoakie, gellied, re^in^
flushing, flowing, spinning.

Gossip. Prattling, twatling, tatling, babbling, un-thrifty, talking.

Gourd. Round, bellied, drunken, seedy, pilgrim, hollow.

Gout. Knotty, rich, wealthy, painful, slow, tardy, impatient, tedious
hereditary, twitching.

Gown. Learned, honored, studious, reverenced, long, low-reaching,
feet-hiding, peaceful, grave.

Grace. Assisting, preventing, helping, ayding, free, comely, pleasing,
smiling, attractive.

Graces. Wanton, loose, naked, uncloathed, decent, beauteous, pleasing,
smiling, virgin, maiden, youthful, shining, merry, joyous, mirthful, cheerful.

Grain. Fruitful, sprouting, increasing, propagating, vigorous, seedy, ^egnant,
teeming.

Grape. Gemmous, purple, blushing, swelling, clustered, viny, youthful, ^anton,
chearing, bleeding, lusty, jucie, generous, delicious, dang^ng, pleasant,
nectareous, soft, plump.

Grass. Rich, proud, soft, springing, matted, flowery, verdant, tufted,
slug^ish, tender, pliant, dewie, herby, moist, pleasant, green-plusht,
^owre-enameled, fading, growing, checkered, crisped, snakie, pain^ed, withered.

Grasse-hopper. Stubble, loving, streaming, tatling, hoarse, shrill, querulous,
noiseful, flender, summer, dew-fed, dull-eyed.

Grave. Quiet, silent, undisturbed, gapeng, yawning, greedy, devouring,
^avenous, hated. loathed, detested, tyrannous, exacting, insatiate, ^ark, pale,
blind, swallowing, corrupting, infectious, sluttish, nasty, ^oathsome, fulsome,
moldie, sullen, forsaken, forgotten, peaceful, ^aseful, rotten, mossie, sad,
cold, pensive, moist, obscure, shadie, du^ty, fusty, dankish, dreadful,
gasping, j^wstretcht, wide-mouthed, ^ollow, gloomy, musty.

Gravity. Awful, aw-infusing, reverend, sober, settled, affected, unaffected,
severe, mature, timely, sad, untimely, ripe, unripe, proud, haughty,
disdainful, supercilious, frowning, aged, stately, censorious, judicious,
prudent, sage, beseeming.

Greece. Ancient, deviseful, inventive, artful, famous, learned, art-inventing,
lying, proud, vaunting, ingenious, subtle.

Greek. Curled, shag-haired, long-hai^ed, faire-haired, learned, subtle,
ingenious, witty, lying, fabulous.

Green. Flow y, sportive, checkered, enflowred, wanton, smiling, embroidered,
tufted, enameled, plushie, soft, velvet, painted, fragrant, verdant gaudie,
speckled, hearby, fair-clothed, diapered, joyful, mirthful, delightful,
cheerful, youthful.

Grief Heart-rending, tearing, contracting, killing, im-bosomed, complaining,
whining, pulling, dumpish, lumpish, sullen, gloo^ wrinlding, warping,
whimpering, en^aging, careful, chumpish, ^contented, macerating, eating,
pensive, melting, pitied, fro^^ peevish, pettish, swarthy, pinching, wringing,
oppressing, fre^^ smarting, torturing, gnawing, impatient, gawling,
heart-breaki^^ disquiet, tear-wringing, eye-wringing, eye-squeesing, unbounded,
dious, stormy, rugged, heart-afflicting, drooping, melancholy, ^^ wounding,
heart-confounding.

Griffon. Greedy, ravenous, hook-clawed, flame-eyed, winged, ^^pant,
white-winged, courageous, gold-guarding, Indian, (...) hurting.

Gristle. Bending, flexible, limber, pliant.

Groan. v. Sigh. Thrilling, killing, tearing, heart-rending.

Groin. Lustful, bawdy, obsene, hairy, swelling, sweaty.

Groom. Base, servile, slavish, serviceable, officious, industrious, obsequi^^
laborious, obedient, careful,

Grove. Silent, shady, leavy, close, solitary, melancholy, lovely,
unfreq^^ted, arched, woody, forsaken, sullen, bushy, shrubby, dark, unkno^^
gloomy, mossie, shaggy, ecchoing, high, waving, thorny, tufted, pl^sant,
delightful, secret, bird-hanted, uncouth, quiet, darksome, ^scure, dusky,
cloudy.

Guide. Conducting, leading, convoying, teaching, foregoing, lai^^^ sure,
assured, directing, prudent, sage, knowing, skillful.

Guile. v. Craft. Guilt. Conscious, fearful, timorous, trembling, blushing,
self-disclos^ suspicious.

Gulf. Devouring, swallowing, ingurgitating, frothy, spacious, deep,
p^nitious, dreadful, boiling, whirling, yawning, gaping, gasping,
wi^^*mouthed, wide-jawed, jaw-stretcht, unfarhomed, insatiate, varitious.

Gum. Weeping, sweating, distilling, dropping, spicy, fragrant, medicin^
aromatic, virtuous, viscous, clammy, glewy, odorous, shining, gli^^ing, rich,
wealthy, precious.

Guns. v. Canons. ^esistless, thunder-mocking, murdering.

Gut. Winding, turning, wrigling, writhing, windy, knotty, interwoven,
^rementall, flatuous.

Gypsy. ^ragling, wandering, cheating, juggling, cogging, subtle, babbling,
^cing, careless, nimble, theevish, swarthy, fulsome, black, nasty, ^y.

H.
Hagge. MUmbling, withered, unhallowed, hellish, ugly, nasty, fulsome, hideous,
furious, malicious, misshapen, cruel, mischievous, ill-^king, grumbling,
muttering, spightfull, dreadful, revengefull frightfull, shameless,
five-turning, image-pricking, bloody.

Haggard. v. Hawke. Hail. Skipping, icy, pebble, pelting, congealed,
scattered, shattered, ^^pestuous, crackling, rattling, impetuous, Crystal,
Thundering, ^ne-spoyling.

Hair. Braided, dangling, sleavy, silken, scattered, shining, pleated, curled,
^otty, ruffled, fluent, artless, snarled, flaring, uncomposed, shaggy,
^mbrosian, graceful, fragrant, waving, beauteous, amber-orient, angled,
crisped, frizled, roseate, bushy, disheveld, disparkled, shady, ^iting,
wrigling, gilded, snaky, spreading, wiry.

Hammer. Massy, conquering, victorious, subduing, cruel, tyrannizing,
en^^cing, beating, knocking, working, laborious, industrious, rude,
^ystererous, robustious.

Hand. Officious, snowy, lilly, marble, Ivory, Alabaster, smooth, soft, fleek,
^^tin, velvet, thrifty, frugall, tender, trembling, active, stirring, labo^ous,
industrious, revengefull, veiny, ayding, sinewy, nervous, delicate, ^mbrosiall,
well-proportioned, beauteous.

Hangings. Sumptuous, costly, gaudy, painted, embroydered, pendant, state^^,
curious, courtly.

Hanniball. Valiant, courageous, cruel, grimme, stern, fierce, undaun^^
furious, Lybian, unconquered, Carthaginian, politic, wise, w^^lick, Martial,
thundering, prudent, adventurous, renowned, sto^^ subtle.

Happiness. v. Beatitude. Coveted, desired, unfathomed, flowery, enamouring,
endless, ^^trancing, ravishing, soul-raping, soft, un-disturbed, un-in^^rupred.

Harbenger. Preparing, fore-running, winged, pourveying, providing.

Hardness. Stiff, stiffening, rigid, unrelenting, unmoved, unyeelding, sulle^
surly, resisting.

Hare. Purblind, fearful, timorous, trembling, turning, doubling, ^^ing,
fur-footed, short-lived, lecherous, fruitful, bushy, brown^^ brindled,
squeaking, speedy.

Harlot. Unchaste, uncivil, lascivious, wanton, lustful, rampant, sal^ous,
dissolute, immodest, rotten, alluring, enticing, tempt^^ perjured, mercenary,
abscene, filthy, persidious, shameless, impud^^ dissembling, infamous,
dallying, noto^ious, bawdy flearing, gadd^^ musty, nasty, infectious, pocky,
loathsome, painted, cancred, train^^ i^chy, goatish, rammish, unblushing.

Harmony. According, sweet, numerous, agreeing, melodious, pleasant, j^^full,
gladsome, measured, diaposon'd, soul-invading, soul-raping, ^^trancing,
Seraphick, delicious, enchanting, encharming, ^^vishing.

Harp. Melodious, harmoneous, stringed, resounding, Thracian, Aoni^^ crooked,
Ivory, gilded, Lesbian, pleasant, warbling, quavering, ^^morous, merry, wanton,
sweet-sounding, B^stonian, A^^dian.

Harpie. Ravenous, devouring, gurmandizing, gluttonous, greedy, theevi^^
insatiate, saucy, lickerous, glutting, winged, deformed, nasty, ug^^ loathsome,
raping, Stimphalian.

Harrow. Toothed, bruising, raking, clod-breaking.

Heart. Long-lived, fearful, timorous, light-foot, fleet, chased, panting,
^andering, weeping, braying, long-aged, trembling.

Harvest. Joyful, fruitful, wealthy, copious, thankful, rich, hopeful,
^ope-answearing, sickce-hlunting, sunburned, thirsty, laborious, toyle^me,
weaty, gain-full, teeming, reaping.

Hasell. Bushy, branched, moist, shady, leavy, rank.

Have. Impatient, desperate, Eagle-winged, swift-foot, sweaty, panting,
^eathless, flying, ^rembling, undiscovered, undiscerned, unper^ived, rash,
hudling, expeditious, speedy, important, unheady, busy, ^weeping, toyling,
ungoverned, regardless, careless, poasting, auspi^ovus, unhappy, laboring,
willing, poasting, auspicious, unhappy, ^borious, dispatchfull, quick,
preposterous, blustering, inconsi^erate.

Hate. Hatered. v. Envy. Heart-gnawing, fretting, sullen, full-rooted,
mortal, inveterate, evengefull, murderous, deadly, cancred, blear-eyed,
Vatinian, ferall, ^nreconciled.

Haven. Sure, safe, desired, long-expected, joyful, weedy, wished, anchor^ng,
peaceful, open, spacious.

Hawke. Towering, eager, sharp-set, gryping, preying, theeving, killing,
^^aring, long-wing'd, fleet-wing'd, high-pitchd.

Hay. Witherd, foddering, loose, botle, botteld, sunburned, stiff, dry, ^^nn'd.

Hazard. Adventurous, dangerous, doubtful, uncertain, fatal.

Head. Towering, stately lofty, sence-lodging, understanding,

Health. Active, desired-wished, perfect, joyous, sweet.

Heap. Crowded, clustered, thronging, massy, unfarhomed, unmeasured, ^ounting,
stored, wealthy, eopious.

Herb. Powerful, virtuous, soft, sloory, green-clothed, sprouting, fragrant,
^leasant. odorous, sweet smelling, wholesome, serviceable, useful, ^ruitfull,
medicinal.

Heard. Horned, bellowing, grazing, sttagling, wandering, forrest-h^ing,
trouping, numerous, swarming, thronging, wealthy.

Heart, Melting, marble, rocky, infractuous, winding, treasurous, tho^ full,
passionate, wounded, bleeding, tender, obdurate, relenting, relenting.

Hearth. Flaming, cheerful, smoaky.

Heat. Sweltering, schorching parching, quickening, active, boiling, ^^ling,
seething, scalding, roasting, soultry, stewing, baking, bu^^^ glowing, singing,
smoking, smothering, dry, flaming, drying, vent, ardent, sweating, stifling,
consuming, devouring, faint, spar^^ swarthy, dusky, s^utchy.

Heathen. Misbelieving, obstinate, barbarous, superstitious.

Heaven. Spangled, azure, arched, silver-paved, rolling, whirling, all-cla^^
bright, vaulty, starry, star enchased, star-enameld, wheeling, s^^ bosomed,
crystal, lofty, turning, moving, glittering, unfatho^^ unmeasured, star
powdered, all-viewing, all-embracing, ^^*skirted.

Hedge. Thorny, bushy, thick-set, shrubby, woven, leavy.

Hedgehog. Bristly, thorny, prickly, thorn-backt, armed.

Height. Towering, stately, ambitious, aspiring, slippery, stupendous.

Hell. Insatiate, devouring, dismal, vasty, gaping, yawning, wide-mou^^ed,
jewstretcht, dreadful, pale, dark, stinking, woeful, painful, ^^menting.

Hellebore. Brain-purging.

Helmet. Crested, plumy, dreadful, massy, pointed, weighty, feather^^ bright,
glittering, glistering, shining, gilded, bristled, threatn^^ battered, burnisht.

Help. v. Aid. Hemlock. Cold, poisonous, green, fatal, deadly.

Hen. Clocking, brooding, hatching, loving, young, protecting*

Hercules. Brawny, massy, un-conquered, un-wearied, stern, laborious,
heaven^^ring, victorious, fearless, sullen, sturdy, sinewy, fierce, grimme,
^ndering.

Heresy. Obstinate, wilful, damned, cursed, dissentious, contradictious,
^ind, Church-rending, pernicious, seditious, proud, overweening, ^ntastick,
self-opinioned, factious, war-kindling, unlucky.

Hermaphrodite. Ambiguous, promiscuous, mixed, sex-confused, mongrell, neuter,
^eminate.

Hermit. v. Hermitage. Humble, cold; sad, melancholy, pensive, sedentary,
pious, devout, ^igious, sullen, zealous, retired, recluse, abstemious, lovely,
studious, ^okish, thoughtfull, meditating, withered, sequestered, aged,
^oystered.

Hearse. Sable, mournful, pensive, black, balefull, sullen, dismal, pitied,
^moaned, bewailed.

Hill. v. Mountain. Stately, moss-thrumb'd, hearby, climbing, lofty, steepy,
proud, aspi^ng, towering, mounting, sky-kissing, sky-threatning,
cloud-in-wrap^^d, high-browed, shaggy, supercilious, aire-invading,
st^r-brushing, ^elling, rising, woody, bushy, ascending, rocky, craggy,
insolent, ^^oud-headed.

Hind. Nimble, tripping, light-foot, skipping, speedy, swift-pac't, lightcold,
timorous, fearful, trembling, shie, skittish, wanton, ^isking.

Hinges. Grinding, tatling, turning, twatling, creaking, speaking, blabbing,
^^le-telling.

Hippocrene. Wit-infusing, Crystal, purling, Poet-prompting, Enthusiastic,
^^spiring, intrancing.

Hog. Wallowing, tumbling, rolling, miry, nasty, sluggish, grunting, ^ristled,
greedy, hungry, devouring, gluttonous, filthy, fatted, full^orged, drowsy.

Holiness. Pious, devout, precise, strict, religious, conscientious, grave,
rig^^obedient, legal, upright.

Honesty. Strict, rigid, just, equal, legal, even-hand, uncorrupted,
^^tainted, upright, unmoved, plain-dealing, simple.

Honey. Fragrant, Bee-wrought, delicious, lushious, nectareous, yello^ gilded,
clammy, viscous, frothy, fulsome-

Honey comb, Spongy, delicious, nectareous, porows, parched, sqeezed,
Bewrought.

Honor. Clear, fair, bright, flatuous, windy, blazing, pompous, gaudy,
pa^^ted, envied, glittering, radiant, beaming, eternal, enduring, lasti^^
triumphant, inflaming, encouraging, provoking, egging, sp^ring, incensing,
prompting, swelling, fading, vaunting, flaunti^^ glorious, tympanizing,
shining, popular, prodigious, unfathom'^ frothy, waxen-winged.

Hoof. Horned, hollow, arched, crooked, solid, printing, impressive.

Hook. Crooked, bowed, catching, intangling, inveagling.

Hope. Early, blooming, promising, flattering, fawning, pleasing, heart-^^
holding, encouraging, soothing, towering, mounting, ambitious, ^^dacious, low,
dejected, lofty, expecting, becalming, quieting, aspiting enlarging, feeding,
comfortable, deceitful, traiterous, bewitchi^^ uncertain, enchanting,
charming, spurring, covetous, tedious, insole^^ inveagling, credulous,
courageous, thirsty, quickening, persw^sive.

Horn. Writheld, sprouting, bending, sounding, crooked, pointed, fork^^
offensive, branches, rigid, stiff, moony, hoarse, knaggy, kno^^ ragged.

Horne^. Waspish, stinging, buzzing, hors-bread, pievish, angry, pettish.

Horror. Cold, pale, wan, ghastly, black, dreadful, trembling, affrighting
amazing.

Horse. foaming, chafed, barbed, warlike, fierce, prancing, horn-^o^^,
courageous, panting, trapped, insulting, careering, impetuous, inlustrious,
generous, curvetting, nimble, stirring, laborious, swea^ing, swift-paced, high
bounding, stamping, bit-champing, spur^beying, speedy, hasty, posting, winged.

Host. v. Army. Numerous, puissant, powerful, victorious, courageous.

Hound. Ranging, yelping, yelling, fulmouth'd, cheared, deep-mouthed,
wel-sented, quick-sented, hungry, greedy, devouting, fawning, pusuing, eager,
chasing, swift, speedy, quick-nosed.

Hour. Fleet, light, cr^eping, sliding, gliding, riding, light-foot,
lightheeld, nimble, running, pacing, posting galloping, passing, flying,
winged, hasty, speedy, swimming, tripping, stealing, leaping, ambling,
trotting, spurring, feathered, soft-foote, slippery, swift-winged, swift-paced,
headstrong, unrestrained, uncurbed, smooth-sliding, equal, unrecalled,
succeeding, nere-returning, changing, yielding, careering rolling, wheeling.

Humility. Low, pliant, submissive, obedient* obsequious, pleasing, graceful,
winning, taking, resigned, meek, mild, crouching.

Humor. Distilling, cold, salt, rheumatick, unhealthy, diseaseful, flowing,
corrupting, fretting, viscous, clammy, flowing, glewie, vaporous, ^oping.

Hunger. Griping, chearless, meager, starved, lean, pale, thin-chapt,
sharp-fang'd, clinging, lanke, panting, sharp, gnawing, fretting, barking,
torturing, tormenting, thin-gutted.

Hunter. Gleesome, jolly, gamesome, eager, wood-ranging, chasing, pursuing,
patient, speedy, wandering, roaming, toyling, busy, searching.

Husband. Loving, careful, loyal, disloyal, jealous, suspicious, embracing,
hugging, chearing.

Husk. v. Chafe. Fruitless, empty, swelling, useless.

Hyacinth. Soft, purple, blushing, beauteous, wanton, tender, wayling.

Hyades. Showry, stormy, tempestuous, cloudy, weeping.

Hybla. Honey-breeding, fruitful, wealthy, Sicilian, flowery, fragr^^ rich,
lofty, Trinacrian

Hydra. Lernean, snakie, losse-gaining, fruitful, fierce, pernicious, poysenous.

Hymen. Joyous, mirthful, frolic, smiling, genial, chaste, torchie, crowned,
soft, pleasant, feastful, flowery.

Hypocrite. Saint-seeming, sniveling, dissembling, juggling, painted, cheating,
gulling, glosing, masked, visarded, secret, lurking, hollow, hearted, lip-holy,
temporizing, time-serving, disguised, form^l, double-hearted.

Hyssop. Phlegm, purging, cleansing, bitter.

I.
Jaile. Jailer. Loathsome, nasty, noisome, fulsome, dark, darkesome, fil^hy,
tedious, loathed, hollow, dusty, tattered, doleful, musty, (...) dankish,
aire-lesse, vaultie, ugly, grim, stern, austere, frowning, lowering, careful,
watchful, jealous, dogging, eying.

Jakes. Stinking, filthy, loathsome, nasty, fulsome, dirty, dungie, cornered,
dark, darksome, obscure.

Jambicks. Swift, free, fierce, swift-pac't, wanton, cruel, biting, chafing,
^^ging, lashing, jerking, satirical, railing, stinging.

Janus. Two-fac'd, key-bearing, key-carrying, peaceful, old, ag^^ ancient.

January. v. Cold. Snowie, icie, cold, drowfie, sluggish, snow-bearded, barren,
^^fruitful, stern, grim.

Jason. Noble, famous, perjured, perfidious, disloyal, deceitful, adventu^ous,
bold, courageous, wandering, proud, insolent, undaunted, thee^ish, audacious.

Jasper. Green, azure, purple, glittering, shining, beamie, transparent,
^leeke, smooth, yellow, dicoloured, many-coloured, streaked, checkerd.

Javelin. Trembling, thrilling, darted, pointed, mortal, wounding, whir^ed,
quivering, singing, killing, bloody, swift-pac'd, sharpe-pointed, ^mpetuous,
death-bringing, waving,

Jaw. Gaping, yawning, devouring, wide-stretcht, bloody, blood-thir^ty, vasty,
foamy, carching, grinding, lightning, gasping, threatening, ^readful,
affrightful, ravenous, sharpe-fang'd, snatching, greedy, ^hamping*

Jay. Prating, painted, gaudy, speckled, checkerd, pyde, tatling, twating,
prattling.

Ice. Slippery, crystal, glassie, transparent, shining, crusted, congeaed,
thick-ribd, chilling, stiffned, benumming, united, glistering, ^igid, hanging,

Idea. Shady, Tojan, leavie, sacred, branching, steepie, pine-bearing, ^atry,
pleasant.

Idleness, Lazy, lustful, lethargick, stupid, sottish, sluggish, dronish,
drow^ie, easy, cold, unactive, yawning, freezing, soft, lither, restive, dull,
^olling, shady, shapeless, truant, resty, careless, neglective, vicious,
^ernicious, vice-noursing, wanton, mischievous, un-employed, faint, ^dious,
loathsome, detested, nuzling, barren, fruitless.

Idolatry. Detestable, Egyptian, superstitious, do^ing, gaudy, cursed, lying,
^^toneous, erring, mad, sinful, bateful, blind, fabulous, profane; ^moakie,
damnable, obstinate, ignorant, toyish, paganish, heathenish, ^ond, nuzling,
garish, zealous, ceremonious.

Jealousy. Cold, hellish, trembling, fretting, enraged, self-^orturing,
soul^artyring, wakeful, pale, groundless, raging, burning, wary, fear^ul,
timorous, furious, cautelous, peevish, hateful, malicious, reveng^^l, chumpish,
lumpish, brutish, self-harming, green-eyed, overcurious, sottish,
quick-sighted, quick-eyed, yellow, grim, obser^^ eye-rolling, ghastly,
frowning, prying, outrageous, raving, susp^^ous, suggesting, disquiet, careful,
rival, waking, searching, dist^^ful, hair-braind, envious, impatient, unhappy,
blind, boiling, ^^menting, racking, burning, flame-eyed, frantic, distempered,
g^dy, sterne-visaged, lean-chapt, sparkling, dizzy-eyed, wrathful, ^^gry,
transporting, surm^zing.

Jest. Wanton, sportive, harmeless, sharp-witted, seurrilous, ridicul^^
pleasant, mirthful, free, loose, dissolute, neat, handsome, bit^^ cutting,
innocent.

Jet. Attractive, Negro, sable, straw-wooing, drawing, straw-cour^^^
straw-embracing, amorous.

Jew. Incredulous, unbelieving, usurious, avaritious, griping, cr^^ bloody,
flint-hearted, oppressing, marble-hearted, wandering ^^cumcised, superstitious,
wealthy, obstinate, ceremonious, serv^^ scraping, wary, thrifty, tributary,
slavish, hoarding, odious, detest^^ hateful.

Jewel. v. Gemmes. Pendant, hanging, spangling, glittering, costly, pretio^^
courtly, dangling, sparkling, radiant, flaming, aire-gilding, aire-^^lightning,
unvalued.

Ignorance, Foggie, misty, cloudy, gloomy, uncertain, doubtful, waver^^
staggering, stumbling, erroneous, muddy, blind, audacious, bo^^ raw, rude,
unconcieving, dull, gross, admiring, affected, silly, sh^^low, simple, erring,
thick, groping, Cimerian, dark, black, dus^^ foppish, dull-eyed, barbarous,
doltish, barren, unfruitful, lead^^ lead-pated, fat-headed, stupid, blear-eyed,
scaly, drowsy, mol^*eyed, sottish, fond, beetle-braind, pernicious, credulous,
soon ov^^*reached, grinning, presumptuous.

Image. Pourtrayed, resembling, mocking, imitating, mimick, thoug^ reflecting,
shape-representing, decei^ful, adorned, adored, gilded.

Immortality. Soft, flowery, endless, everlasting, never-ending, unfathome^
unconfined, bright, glorious, unconceived, uninterrupted, unco^prehended.

Impatience. v. Anger. Testy, angry, pettish, choleric, distempered, frantic,
ragi^^ furious, chafing, swelling, maleconrent, stern.

Impiety. Tyrannous atheistical, godless, cruel, sacrilegious, furious,
d^m^ed, cursed, execrable, detestable, base, irreligious, diabolical, divelish.

Employment. Busy, active, stirring, instant, pressing, urgent, weighty,
grave, ^mportunate, great, forcing.

Importunity. Uncomely, unhandsome, unmannerly, forcing, urging, odious,
^mpatient, unruly, ungoverned, unanswered, unsatisfied combrous, ^olesting.

Imposture. Lying, juggling, calumnious, injurious cheating, fraudulnet,
flearing, ^oothing, shameless, bold, impudent, fallacious, sly, cunning,
sub^le, cogging.

Imprisonment. Sad, cold, pensive, hard, grievous, painful, ignominious,
woeful, wretched, bitter.

Impudence. Steeled, flinty, scared, audacious, bold, unblushing, shameless,
immodest, shallow, brazen, headstrong, shame-confounding, undaunted, odious,
saucie, fearlesse, unawed, proud, arrogant, insolent, vice-noursing,
bold-fac'd, brasse-browd.

Incense. Persumed, fragrant, smoky, flaming, gummy, sweet, religious,
ascending, aspiring, heaven-pleasing, priestly, sacred, vaporous, odorous,
superstitious.

Enchantment. v. Magic. Magic, strong, charming, victorious, imperious,
hellish, learned, mystic, powerful, binding, forcing, undissolved.

Inconstancy. Light, vain, wavie, wavering, reeling, changing, mooving,
floating, wheeling, turning.

Increase. Fruitful, gainful, joyful, ample, welcome, rich, happy, large
flowing, doubled, blessed.

India. Indian. Tawny, swarthy, sallow, wealthy, spicy, fruitful, black,
barbarous, spacious, pearly, drug-bearing, aromatic, diving, brown,
long-lived, lean, scorched, sunburned.

Industry. Eager, active, stirring, working, quick, sharp, fierce, untir'd,
painful, sweating, subtle, careful, watchful, in genious, adventurous,
undiscourag'd, courageous.

Infamy. Blasting, black-mouthed, shameful, dishonest, divulged, ignominious,
scandalous, loathsome, spotted, notorious, leprous*

Infancy. Infant. v. Babe. Soft, sucking, simple, harmless, toyish, gamesome,
sportive, smiling, puling, unpractised, testie, lisping, peevish, froward,
pe^^ish, angry, waspish, whimpering, silly, blooming, nonaged, didling,
dandled, wadling, sprawling.

Infection. Spreading, contagious, stinking, putrid, corrupt, filthy, nasty,
noisome, loathsome, pernicious, deadly.

Influence. Virtuous, vigorous, masculine, powerful, thriving, working,
efficacious, unresisted, luckie, happy, smiling, frowning, favorable,
malignant, unhappy, disastrous, heavenly, celestial.

Ingratitude. Foul, base, odious, shameless, detestable, vicious, impious,
abhorred, unacknowledging, proud, insolent, arrogant, saucy, oblivious.

Iniquity. v. Impiety. Injury. Boisterous, wrongful, abusive, outrageous,
intolerable, unsupported, defaming, conturnelious, grievous, displeasing,
enormou^ ignominious, unlawful, unruly, disordered, lawless, unpardone^
bold-fac'd, insulting.

Ink. Mourning, sable, gummie, blotting, spotting, flowing, usefu^^ the sable
wave.

Innocence. Spotless, taintless, untainted, harmeless, unstained, unsullied,
white, snowie, simple, unaffected, lillyed, pure, clear, bright, chis^ calm,
ensoyled, meek, blameless, faultless, religious, pious, sacred, unwary,
conscientious, dove-like, peaceful, quiet, soft, silent, smiling, unappeached,
infant, babish, guiltless.

Insolence. v. Pride. Proud, haughty, disdainful, arrogant, swelling, stately,
triumphing gay, fantastic, insulting, imperious, lofty, mounting, towering,
sullen, surly, supercilious, hateful, headie, portly, burly, bold,
respectlesse, disrespective, presumptuous, rash, audacious, rufling, rustling
bustling, scorneful, overweening, ambitious, strutting, imperuous,
tympanizing, tyran^zing, flaming, bubling, currish, churlish, brow-beating,
puffed, pursie, soaring.

Instrument. Melodious, harmonious, well-tuned, according, consorting,
resounding, useful, laborious, industrious, toylsome, needful.

Intemperance. Loose, dissolute, careless, riotous, luxurious, disorderly,
irregular, unmeasured, voluptuous, brutish, bestiall, beastly, pernicious,
life, shortning, short-lived, wanton, lustful, lascivious, sluggish, drowsy,
impoverishing, prodigal, unthrifty.

Invention. Quick, sharp, acute, witty, ingenious, subtle, ready, speedy,
quickey'd, musing, thoughtfull.

Joy. v. Pleasure. Cheerful, lightsome, beart-chearing, active, nuptial,
diffusive, enlarging, melting, leaping, feeling, intrancing, coveted, smiling,
bursting, ravishing, soul-raping, heart-tickling, luxurious, delicious,
pleasing, transitory, fleeting, trembling, dancing, frisking, attractive,
fresh, soft, enchanting, imparadising, decitfull, deluding, balmy, transporting.

Joint. Nimble, supple, pliant, active, proportioned, well-shap't, beauteous,
graceful,

Iron. Rusty, solid, sparkling, hissing, burning, stiff, unrelenting.

Isickles. Pendant, dangling, eves-dropping, hanging, crystal, crusty,
congealed, dull, roping, hoary.

Italy. Italian. Fruitful, healthy, pleasant, populous, warlike, well-peopled,
spruce, near, amorous, proud courtly, complementall, ceremonious, jealous,
suspicious, proud, insolent.

Itch. Spreading, infectious, contagious, smarting, twitching, burning,
scalding, mangy, inflaming, botchy, loathsome, nasty, fulsome, noisome.

Judge. Angry, stern, grave, grimme, frowning, brow-beating, awful, learned,
severe, impartial, austere, unbribed, uncorrupted, reverend, short-shorn,
upright, equitable, even-handed, rigorous, unsiding, sacred, dreadful,
law-making, law-expounding, sterne-visag'd, decreeing.

Judgment. Quick, quick-eyd, quick-sighted, clear-eyed, clear-sighted,
conceaving, sage, ripe, mature, exact, grave, accurate, purged, finebolted,
sifted, pure, clear, refined, settled, staid, profound, deep, diving, just,
rigorous, censorious, solid, firm, stable, light, unconstant, steady,
unsteady, haire-braind, shallow, silly, floating, well-kneaded, supercilious,
dough baked, concocted, deliberate, rash, inconsiderate, chaste, sober,
wel-weighed.

Jugler. Nimble, cheating, overreaching, circumventing, cogging, crafty, wily,
misty, subtle, active, slight-handed, cozening, abusing, winding.

Juniper. Sandy, mountain, hard, knotty, twisted, branched, interwoven.

June. Imperious, jealous, commanding, controling, royal, almighty, revengeful,
swelling, chasing, angry, bitter, cruel, genial.

Jupiter. Almighty, thundering, thunder-darting, Olympic, Pano^phean, just,
revengeful, heaven-ruling, al-commanding, eternal, tempest-guiding, al-seeing,
al-knowing, cloud-bestriding.

Justice. Impartial, strict, upright, equitable, grim, unbribed, uncorrupted,
sacred, untainted, unappeached, rigid, rigorous, even-handed, inviolate,
powerful, wholesome, blameless, golden, severe, awful, dreadful, stern,
unfeed, unexorable, unmoved, unchanged, unprejudiced, indifferent, unsiding,
equal, un-inclining, plaindealing.

Ivy. Clasping, wanton, youthful, twisting, clinging, twining, embracing,
flattering, fawning, uxorious, amorous, climing, clambering, mounting,
amb^tious, writhing, wrigling, winding, snakie, creeping, crawling, twirling,
hugging, wandering, pale, spreading, leavy, victo^ious, lascivious, lustful,
wanton, pliant, creeping, ^e^cious, trembling, encroaching.

Ivory. Spotless, Indian, polishr, burnisht, costly, unstained, Numidian,
Assyrian, shining, speckled, smooth, fleek, unwrinkled, snowy.

K.
Calendar. NUmbering, time-directing, annall'd, recording, day-ranking,
immortalizing, historious.

Kennell, S^inking, pudly, nasty, sulsome, loathsome, noisome, flowing, ^uddy,
filthy, dirty.

Kernel. Fleshy, substantial, enclosed, boxed, soft, pleasant, delightful,
^elicious, lurking, sculking, imprisoned.

Key. Treasurous, turning, safe-keeping, winding, admitting.

Kidde. Frisking, climing, browsing, wanton, sportive, tender, wander^ng,
sucking, straggling, spotted, speckled, gamesome, frigging, gad^ing, busy
nimble, tumbling, gambolling.

King. Scepter-bearing, crowned, scepter-swaying, awful, dreadful,
commanding, princely, Majestic, sacred, glorious, imperious, con^rolling,
adored, powerful, puissant, magnificent, pompous, stately, portly, glittering,
victorious, God-like, renowned.

Kiss. Balmy, spicy, delicious, uniting, impressive, zealous, Soul-transfusing,
soul-raping, enchanting, charming, heart-stealing, lovedarting, melting,
sugared, Nectard, moystening, lingering, tedious, ceremonious, fond, wanton,
amorous, baudy, leacherous, Printing, dinting, sealing, wounding,
love-dropping, smacking, entrancing, untoward, froward, forced, wrested, warm,
musky, yiedling, welcome, joyful, chearing, sweet, billing, ambrosian,
voluptuous, joyous, delightful, lascivious, repeated, dewie, soft, ravishing,
bashful, modest, Virgin, maiden, chaste, fawning, courting, arresting, smiling,
tempting, wooing, struggling, coy, breathing, panting, fragrant, roseate,
treacherous.

Kite. Flagging swooping, gliding, swimming, ravenous, devouri^^ greedy, swift,
theevish, preying, raping, goury, crow-hating, fox-^^ting, soaring.

Kitchen. Smoaky, greasy, flamy, roasting, frying, boiling, broyling, steamy*
black, hot, stifling fulsome.

Knave. v. Rascal Base, rude, raskally, saucy, paltry, surly, stubborn,
lecherous, mischievous, crafty, wily, sly, cunning, cheating, cozening,
juggling, ove^reaching, circumventing, impudent, shameless, unblushing, thee^^^^
filching, pilfering, malapert, unruly, boisterous, burly, lubberly, ^^governed,
abusive.

Knee. Supple, bending, crouching, cringing, adoring, humble, obsequ^ous,
obedient, bowing, supplyant, crooking, sinewy, willing, honoring, ceremonious,
complementall.

Knight. Valiant, noble, famous, warlike, Martial, crested, courageous,
a^venturous, undaunted, renowned, armed.

Knowledge. Sacred, learned, venerable, ingenious, lettered, studious, artfull,
i^dustrious, active, useful, grave, experienced, skillful, quick, ready.

L.
Labor. INdustrious, painful, toylsome, active, stirring, assiduous,
chearf^^^ careful, hard, vigilant, deserving, watchful, fruitful, gainful,
a^vantogeous, patient, sedulous, officious, diligent, obsequious, incessant,
weary, unwearied, sweaty, continued, Herculean, S^yphian.

Labyrinth. Winding, turning, amazing, twining, mazy, intricate, doubling,
blind, darksome, crooked, snaky, pathless, subtle, ingenious, devisefull,
vaulty, intangling, confounding, curious.

Lace. Gaudy, gay, trimming, pompous, fantastic, over-laying, the ou^ward
lining of the clothes.

Lachesis. v. Destiny. Life-twisting, fate-spinning, impartial, unchanging.

Ladder. ^caling, climing, ascending, mounting.

Lady. Soft, feeble, weak, silken, glittering, stately, portly, courtly,
paint^d, pompous, beauteous, graceful, neat, spruce, complementall, ver^uous,
courteous, flanting, rustling, gaudy, amorous, wanton, ^angled.

Lays. Harmonious, melodious, well-tuned, well-timed, pleasant, glad^ome,
gleesome, joyous, mirthfull, sprightly, stately, charming, ^ntrancing,
enchanting, delicious, soul-raping, lulling, sence-bereave^ng, warbling,
Syrenian, ear-enamouring.

Lake. Unfathomed, soundless, winding, silver, fishy, miry muddy, sluggish,
^rowsie, slow, still, weedy, clear, azure, swelling, crisped, wavy, gulphy.

Lamb. Frisking, frigging, gamboling, tumbling, wanton, gamesome, sportive,
tender, gadding straggling, following, wadling, cheerful, ^eate-lugging, metry,
skipping, fearful, frizled, bleating, silly,

Lamp. Blazing, flamy, watchful, waking, thirsty, laborious, industrious,
oyle-drinking, oyle-supping, sucking, attractive, oily, sputtering, studious,
shining, trembling.

Lamprey. Azure, slippery, glewy, clammy, speckled, viscous, lickerous, muddy.

Lance. Warlick, murdering, brandisht, revengefull, threatening, pointed,
shaking, trembling, dreadful, thrilling, whirling, knotty, knaggy, victorious,
conquering, singing.

Landscape. Various painted, pourtraid, resembling, pleasant, described,
descypherd, pensill'd, curious, artfull.

Language v Eloquence, Flowing, sluent, smooth-pac't, flowery, strewed with
flowers, well cought, winning, taking, stately, persuasive, delicious,
nectarean, intrancing, enchanting, charming, overcoming, smooth, oily,
insinu^ting.

Lantern. Shining, leading, guiding, way-showing, way-clearing, artificial-sun.

Lapwing. Long-shankt, crested, nimble, worm-devouring, shell-bearing, hasty,
speedy, puling, coasting.

Lark. Gamesome, early, early-rising, mounting, soaring, harmonious, amorous,
crested, jolly, merry, chirping, skipping, gentle, watchful, morning, timely,
wanton, sportive, summer, presaging, Lyrick.

Laughter. Loud, loose, shrill, shallow, saucy, wanton, fawning, disorderd,
unruly, fleering, sneering, unseasonable, unseasoned, filly, ignoran^,
disturbing, noisefull, side-holding.

Law. Stern, strict, just, wholesome, rigid, unpartiall, powerful, craggy,
knotty, winding, turning, controlling, constraining, enforcing, binding,
obstreperous, litigious, wrangling, brawling, coercive, compelling, directing,
revenging, severe, imperious, equal, rigorous, dreadful, awful, cowing,
awing, scourging, thorny, intangling strife-full, contentious.

Lawyer. Quilletting, querking, brawling, wrangling, litigious, contend ous,
arguing, purse-milking, clamorous, eloquent, moting, moving, silver-griping,
feesome, obstreperous, nimble-chapt, learned, grave, knowing, skillful,
greasie-fisted, petti-fogging.

Lawn. Snowy, thin, limber, transparent, fine-spun, cob-web.

Lawnes. Motly, enameld, flowery, tufted, dasied, painted, gaudy, smiling,
verdant, enflowred, embroydered, checkered, delightful, pleasan^, sportive,
wide-skirted, fair-clothed, spacious, green-plusht, fragran^, fruitful, herby,
grassie, russet.

Laurel. Victorious, triumphant, crackling, virgin, fresh, immortal,
peaceful, crowning, green-leav'd, learned, tufted, prophesying, verdant

Lead. Massy, dull, heavy, melancholy, melting, solid, pliant, yielding.

League. Friendly, peaceful, according, agreeing, confederate, sociable,
conjured, conspiring, combining.

Leanness. Meager, starved, thin-chapt, misshapen, deformed, hideous, ugly,
unhandsome, dwindling, lank, writheld, pale, hollow-cheekt, scraggybond,
ghastly, greezly.

Leaper Leaprosie. Loathsome, hoary, eating, fre^ting, nasty, fulsome, scurfie,
spotted, speckled freckled, measeld, hoarse, whizzing, wheazing, despised,
loathed, contagious, infectious.

Learning. Sacred, honored, venerable, wealthy, ingenious, laborious,
industrious, painful, subtle, pleasant, fruitful, useful, graceful,
commendable.

Lecher. Baudy, salacious, filthy, lustful, ramping, liver-scalded, itching,
burning, goatish, beastly, licentious, rammish, rambling.

Lees. Dreggy, muddy, squeezed, fruitless, course.

Legate. v. Ambassador. Legend. Licentious, lying, fabulous, idle, stuffed,
abusing, guilty.

Lent. Abstemious, fishy, cleanly, sober, temperate, austere, sparing, thrifty

Leopard. Cruel, swift, Lybian, azure, wary, spotted, monky-hating,
thick-skind.

Lethargy. Drowsy, fluggish, lither, unactive, dull, doting, forgetful,
dreaming, sleepy, cold, moist, so^tish, lumpish, heavy, benumming.

Lettice. Tender, crispy, curled, cold, milky, loosening, nourishing, folded,
sober.

Libbard. v. Leopard. Libell. v. Pamphlet. Scandalous, seditious, railing,
calumnious, reviling, abusive, inju^ious, licentious, lawless, loose,
dissolute, regardless, saucy, audacious.

Liberty. Idle, easy, desired, ill-disposed, loose, unrestrayned, unrayned,
unruly, disordered, licentious, lawless, uncurbed, free, unconsined, unbridled,
sweet, joyful, pleasing, delightful.

Library. Studious, industrious, laborious, well-stor'd, furnished, famo^^,
wealthy, copious, stately.

Lice. Creeping, crawling, nasty, eating, twitching, filthy, loathsome,
beggarly, infamous, many-footed.

Licentiousness. v. Liberty. Lie. Liar. Deceitful, deluding, detested,
prodigious, shameless, infamous, ignominious, fearful, cowardly, loud,
invented, devised, crafty, politic, cheating, juggling, brass-browd.

Life. v. Age. Contented, discontented, quiet, disquiet, careful, active,
unactive, swift-pac't, uncertain, decaying, flowing, frail, laborious, weary,
tedious, sober, austere, happy, unhappy, laborious, easy, solitary, retired,
lovely, melancholy, merry, jolly, mirthfull, delightful, joyous, delicious,
voluptuous, idle.

Light. Beaming, radiant, sacred, scattered, naked, disrobed, dismantled,
unmufiled, sputtering, blazing, flaring, gladsome, all-quickning, joysome,
gleesome, cheerful, all-chea^ing, diffusive, garish, aire-gilding, silver,
laborious, industrious, active, shining, glittering, trembling, quavering,
piercing, purple, beauteous, graceful, azure, ga^dy, life-infusing,
night-exiling, victorious, glorious, triumphant, Starre-chasing, waving,
blushing, clear, sparkling, transparent.

Lightning. Three-forkt, pale, glowing, nimble, blasting, winged, threewinged,
flashing, sulphury, whizzing, swift-pac't, resistless, transpiercing, sudden,
flashing, flaming, streaming, silver, waving, quick, sparkling, fiery,
trembling, darted, flame-feathered, flame-winged, flame-plumed, schorching.

Lilly. Unsullied, unspotted, untainted, taintless, bright, silver, palefac't,
milk-sprung, open, smiling, painted, fruitful, tall, royal, maiden.

Limbeck. Distilling, dropping, Chymick, eztracting, glowing.

Limbs. Snowy, shapefull, handsome, beauteous, graceful, well-shape,
well-proportioned, harmonious, comely, ivory.

Lips. Ruby, scarlet, vermillion, carnation, stammell, blushing, rosy,
^morous, balmy, tempting, melting, delicious, roseall, coral, cherry,
^harming, enchanting, intrancing, soft, warm, purple, gently-^welling,
trembling, honey-flowing, love-dropping, juycy, nectare^us, smiling, wanton,
Sister, life-breathing, life-infusing.

Listening. Attentive, secret, silent, greedy, eves-dropping.

Liver. Spongy, bloody, blood-making, purple, hot, desiring, blood-mint^ng,
veiny, amorous, scalding, trembling, panting, digestive.

Loadstone. Attractive, drawing, tenacious, embracing, wanton, uxorious, ^able.

Lobster. Scarlet, crawling, lusty.

Load. v. Burden. Locks. v. Hair. Wiry, sleeky, shaggy, watled, spreading,
snary, dangling, curled, frizled, braided, scattered, pleating, floating,
flaring, amber, dishevelled, discomposed, disparkled, bushy, rufling, fluent,
artless.

Logic. Strict, arguing, wrangling, contentious, disputing

Longing. Unsatisfied, desirous, covetous, greedy, insatiate, passiona^^,
ar^ent, burning, amorous.

Look. v. Countenance. Speaking, whispering, discoursive, smiling, modest,
disdainful, ^ournfull, cheerful, supercilious, attractive, winning, wooing,
supercilious, stern.

Lord. Imperious, controlling, honored, dreadful, awful, command^ng,
wealthy, powerful, noble, stately, portly, pompous.

Lot. Ambiguous, unconstant, uncertain, various, blind, deceitful, de^uding,
happy, unhappy, chance-full, changing, prosperous, successful.

Love. Officious, doting, obsequious, inflam^ng, uniting, resolved, power^ull,
commanding, imperious, uncontrolled, adventurous, melting, ^urning, zealous,
affectionate, sportive, marrow-boyling, tyran^ous, blind, cruel, remorseless,
victorious, venereous, fond, idolatrous, superstitious, jealous-winged,
captivating, conqueri^^ deceitful, heart-stealing, thievish, enchanting,
bewitching, care^^^ thoughtfull, fearful, sollicitous, fawning, flattering,
untam^^ honeyed, fugred, wanton, lascivious, slippery, envious, joy^^ gamesome,
ambitious, audacious, ticklish, secret, un-fathom'^ unmeasured, unexpressed,
silent, courageous, transporting, impatie^^ tedious, passionate.

Lover. Fantastic, stirring, active, luxurious, perfumed, gorgeous, g^^tle,
neat, spruce, pert, nimble, obsequious, dancing, flatteri^^ trim, brisk,
jet^ing, joyous, languishing, frizled, crisped, maide^^ fooling, toying,
sportive, dapper, impatient, inconstant, submiss^^ kembed, sleek-hair'd, fresh,
watchful, melancholy, glancing, gle^ing, captivated, pale, jealous,
youthful, heartless, gainsome, boasti^^ blind, mute, flazing, uxorious,
wanton, bashful, modest, pens^^^ pleasant, whispering, gay, gaudy, neat,
jolly, frolic, sad, courteo^^ complementall, careful, thougtfull, intranced,
grieved, secret, p^^fainting, eye-ravisht.

Lowse. v. Lice. Lowinge Loud, noysefull, rebounding, plaintfull, complaining,
mournf^^ lofty, sad, rufull, bemoaning, smoakie, foamie, fuming, resou^^ing,
eccohoing.

Lucifer. Watchful, ushering, blushing, radiant, beaming, b^ight, ^^rora's
harbinger.

Luck. Successful, prosperous, desired, favorable, smiling, propitio^^
advantageous.

Lullabie. Sad, pensive, drowsy, careful. charming, sleepie.

Lunges. Spungie, lifting, wasting, fanning, breathing, panting, flappi^^
flatuous, cooling, windy, heart-wrapping, involving, swelli^^ pursie.

Lure. Training, calling, inviting, wooing, pleasing, baiting, treach^rous,
inciting, soothing, false, c^zening, cheating, delusive, ^^ceiving, deceitful.

Lust. Itchie, flaming, brutish, pampered, untamed, wild, sco^^inging,
intemperate, goatish, stallion, lewd, disordered, gree^^ rampant, unrain'd,
hot, uncurbed, unbrideled, rammish, unruly, nameful, burning, beastly,
lawless, licentious, unrestrained, las^^vious, whorish, baudy, insatiate,
brotheld, liver-scalding, carbo^ading, corne^-haunting, raging, exuberous,
tempring, luxurious, ^otous, ruffian, stanchlesse, rank, impetuous,
voluptuous, sensual, ^eastial, filthy, odious, damned, cursed, outrageous,
furious, por^entuous, infamous, stinging, provoking, obscene, inconsiderate,
^eady, dark, impure, secret.

Luster. Dazzling, radiant, beamy, darting, resplendent, bright, reflecting,
^hining, glorious, beauteous, graceful, flaming, fiery, trembling, ^winkling,
starry, sunny, glittering, cheareful, eye-conquering, aire^ilding, enviou^,
victorious, triumphar, pompous, varnisht.

Lute. Melodious, harmonious, warbling, quavering, trembling, care-^h^rming,
delicious, ivory, golden, melancholy, amorous, sweet-^ounding, many-stringed,
Lesbian.

Luxury. v. Gluttony. Prodigality. Infamous, dissolute, disordered,
intemperate, pompous, revelling, ^ascivious, prodigal, spendthrift, expensiue,
exuberous, overflowing, ^uperfluous, voluptuous, costly, sumptuous, harmeful,
pernicious, ^ishonest, unch^st, brutish, unmeasured, wanton, delicious, damned,
cursed, detested, goatish, cramming, profuse, unthrifty, wastful, sybaritick,
venereous, idle, slow-bellied, ful-gorged, excessive.

Lybia. Lybian. Scorched, broyled, savage, portentuous, monster-breeding, dry,
sandy, barren, sunburned, parched, soultry, swarthy, thirsty, scalding,
sweltring, light-clothed, cruel fierce, rebellious, perfidious, hot, tawny.

Lion. Generous, cruel, furious, devouring, impetuous, Thracian, savage,
mountain, yellow, engorging, audacious, Massylian, fierce, eager, greedy,
hungry, hunger-starved, courageous roaring, undaunted, angry, proud, rough,
dreadful, Lybian, frizled, shaggy, Getulian, robustious, untamed, grim,
swift-pac't, cock-fearing, watchful, pursie, panting, fire-searing, chafed,
stordy, awlesse, fearlesse, lusty, Numidian, Arcadian, hot, Idumaean.

M.
Madness. DIstempered, wild, savage, pitied, disordered, frantic, giddy,
sternvisaged, headstrong, unruly, untamed, flame-eyed, lean-chapt, grim,
ghastly, entaged, tempestuous, boiling, stormy, frothy, inpatient, impetuous,
transporting, hair-braind, distracted.

Magazin. Wealthy, wel-stored, thronging, crowded, wel-furnish, large, copious,
spacious, vaulty.

Magistrate. Honored, venerable, grave, reverend, public, just, grim, ste^^,
stern-visaged, stately, purpled, awful, dreadful, brow-beating, angry,
frowning, severe, impartial, sowre-lookt, austre, rigorous, la^-executing,
law-entrusted, upright, unsiding, even-handed, unb^^bed, uncorrupted, crabbed.

Magic. Secret, hidden, black, portentuous, wonder-causing, cursed, helli^^,
execrable, mumbling, charming, enchanting, muttering, ceremo^ious,
superstitious, powerful, commanding, deceitful, juggling, co^juring, presaging,
mysterious, mystic, imperious, perplexing, ^^forcing, efficacious, exorcising,
victorious.

Maid. Blushing, bashful, trembling, fearful, beauteous, ingenious, (...),
froward, disdainful, smiling, modest, shamefac't, amorous, untai^ted wanton,
spruce, neat, trim, pranking, mincing, quaint.

Majesty. Awful, controlling, imperial, adored, rising, fear-infusing,
soverain, grave, wel-tempered, stern, stout, princely, kingly, royal,
commanding, attractive, clear, proud, sacred, brow-beating, brigh^,
supercilious, beamy, cheerful, graceful, high, rich, portly, stately, pompous,
powerful, glorious, gracious, beauteous, swelling, ^^mooved, undaunted, lofty,
flowery, smiling, winning, blazing.

Main. v. Ocean. Sea. Impetuous, wavie, swelling, curled, frothy, floating,
chafing, ^^gorging, pathless, boundless, unconfined, boiling, raging, roari^^,
greedy, flowing, engulphing, working, licentious, gulphy, toyling unfathomed.

Malady. Infectious, diseaseful, disquiet, heart-fretting, oppressing,
co^tagious, dull, pining, pale, grievous, torturing, painful, vexi^^ incurable,
hopeless, pettish, peevish, feral, griping, twitching, gir^ing, sad, pinching,
nipping, pulling, wringing, cutting, gaulin^ doleful, bitter, gnawing, racking,
smarting, lingering, noisome, ^^dious, loathsome, impatient, wasting, sucking,
eating, whining, ^^ling, pl^intful, soaking, ghastly, wan, bleak, discolored,
sallo^ consuming, decaying, withering, sowre-lookt, crabbed, powting,
diseaseful, appalling, bedridden, wayward, froward, pitied, grumbling,
complaining, groaning, grunting, unhealthful, crasie, pensive, pining,
wearying, weary. decrepid.

Malice. Revengeful, spightful, active, cancred, sly, craf^y, secret, subtle
crooked, stirring, fork-tongued, pale, black-mouthed, poisonous, sullen
envious, rancorous, swelling, blew-eyed, squint-eyed, restless, killing,
stabbing, cutting, wounding, snakie, viperous, bleareyed, self-eating,
self-consuming, self-torturing, self-martyring, whispering, lean-chapt,
carping, censorious, boiling, undermining, ^nake-haird, burning, flaming,
deadly, heart-gnawing, heart-fret^ing, biting, currish, unappeased, implacable,
cruel, bloody, calumnious, hard-hearted, marble-hearted, flint-hearted,
inhumane, remorseless, unrelenting, devouring, resolved, enraged, incensed,
inexorable.

Mallows. Bearded, hairy, loosening, light, soft, wholesome.

Mandrake. Squealing, ill-boding, lustful, venereous.

Mane. Shaggy, yellow, flaxen, furled, frizled, pleated, braided, rough,
dangling, hanging, snarled, flaring, graceful, waving, floating, spreading.

Manna. Delicious, honyed, tast-pleasing, ambrosial, ^oseate, heaven-sent,
^ained, showry, savory, falling, nourishing.

Marble. Lasting, obdurate, enduring, curled, Pari^n, sleeke, smooth, rocky,
leprous, freckled, spotted, speckled, polisht, Numidian, solid, shining,
glittering, colored, weeping, Phrygian, azure, plain, remorseless, senseless,
unrelenting, painted, hard, cold, stiff, rigid, breathless, well-laboured,
during, Corinthian, chill.

Marigold. Flaming, blazing, gilded, time-observing, sun-courted, opening,
shutting, yellow, shining, garden-sun, sun-enamoured, dewdrowned.

Mariner. Industrious, sea-tost, storme-beaten, adventurous, vowing, wandering,
trembling, fearful, greedy, avaritious, sea-chasing, seafaring, sea-surrowing,
sea-cutting, sea-tracing, wealthy, covetous, expert, ^kil-ful, wind-observing,
star-gazing.

Market. Busy, thronging, crowded, clamorous, cozening, noiseful, promiscuous,
buying, selling uttering, open, public, weekly, wel-stored, wel-furnisht,
providing, dispensing, expensive.

Marmoset. Antic, foolish, toyish, smiling, grinning, painted.

Marriage. Uniting, peaceful, agreeing, mirthful, pleasant, glewing,
conjoyning, coupling, chaining, sementing, rivetting, shackling, kni^ting,
fettering, joyful, joyous, frolic, smiling, genial, sacred, flowery, feastful,
chaste, incestuous, happy, successeful, ill-boding, lawfu^, unlawful, stolen,
secret, amorous, loving, solemn, ceremonious, ingrafting, manacling.

Marrow. Melting, bone-lining, pithie, bone-boxed, enchested, secret, so^^,
inward, close, enclosed, flowing, fat, oily, unctious, boiling, frying

Mars. Bloody, blood-thirsty, blood-quaffing, swarthy, sweaty, crue^^ dreadful,
raging, raving, warlick, fatal, lascivious, venereous, inpetuous, unconquered,
angry, furious, flame-eyed, unappeased, ^^sparing, stern-visaged, grim, ghastly,
crested, casked, plumed, rough savage, fierce, remorselesse, implacable,
courageous, undaunt^^, murtherous, thundering, inexorable.

Marsh. Marish. Slimy, muddy, fenny, environed, herby, grassie, rushy, sedg^e,
moist, plashie, watrish, dank, dirty, willow-bearing.

Martyr. VVilling, patient, faithful, flame-embracing, burning, sta^^-kissing,
pious religions, conscientious, valiant, courageous, undauted, fearlesse,
joyful, constant, pitied, unmoved, glorious, honored tortured, tormented.

Martyrdom. Heavy, grievous, tyrannous, painful, joyful, cruel, bloody,
honored, glorious, pious, tormenting.

Massacre. Bloody, ru^hlesse, cruel, murtherous, impious, hellish, butch^ring.

Mast. Lofty, towering, aspiring, winged, sail-bearing, splitting, trembling,
quavering.

Mastiffe. Eager, fierce, snarling, courageous, grinning, watchful, noysef^^
barking, devouring, bristling, house guarding, bawling, hungry, furious,
greedy, yawling, surly, grimme, sullen, grumbling, muzz^ld, colla^'d.

Matron. Sober, grave, modest, portly, stately, aged, chaste, honored,
respective, well-carriaged.

May. Delightsome, gladsome, gleesome, mirthful, jolly, joyful, cheerful,
frolic, glooming, budding, springing, flowery, fruitful, teeming, enameld,
cheery, youthful, checkerd, lovely, beauteous, we^^^hy, sportful, gamesome,
smiling, blossomed, embroyderd, painted, M^tley, guidie.

Maze. Perplexing, ambiguous, winding, uncertain, turning-blind, darksome,
crooked, subtle, snakie, distractful, giddy, dizzy.

Mead. Meadow. v. Plains. Motly, smiling, verdant, en-flowed, fragrant, herby,
grassie-paved, embroyderd, diaperd, enameld, tufted, dazied, leveld, fertle,
fruitful, sportive, gamesome, green-plusht, checkerd, gaudy, painted,
fair-cloathd, wide-skirted, flowre-enambled, flowry-mantled, green-mantled,
soft-coatep, pleasant, spacious, flowre-spangled, green-brested,
stream-embroiderd.

Mean. Golden, virtuous vice-interceeding, impartial, commendable, praise-ful,
vice-dividing, equal, well-tempered.

Measure. Confined, unconfined, bounded, unbounded, boundless, proportioned,
equal, unequal, unfathomed, uncertain, squared, presribed, limited, limitless.

Medea. Unchaste, cruel, charming, subtle, bloody, furious.

Medicine, Cordial, powerful, healthful, confirming, helpful, comforting,
health-giving, restorative, health-restoring.

Meditation. Deep pious, secret, thoughtful, pensive, silent, sad, dumb,
melancholy, solitary, retired.

Megoera. Hideous, ugly, ghastly, cruel, snake-haird, furious, snakie, haggish,
swelling, snarling, dreadful, hellish, dismal, flame-eyed, spightful.

Melancholy. v. Grief. Froward, sad, pensive, solitary, lovely, black, sable,
lumpish, dumpish, chumpish, sullen, sowere, swarthy, fearful, reposed, dull,
earthy, recluse, retired, drooping, discontented, gloomy, dusky,
heart-contracting, dejected, discouraged, drooping, whining, puling, powting,
pitied, heartbreaking, sequestered, barren, rugged, slow, saturnine,
unsociable.

Melody. v. Harmony. Harmonious, according, sweet, pleasant, gladsome,
soul-invading, soul-raping, intrancing, Seraphick, delicious, enchanting,
charming, ravishing.

Memory. Faithful, firm, bounteous, treasurous, recording, lasting, re^entive,
tenacious, waxy, impressive, imprinted, thankful, happy, sacred, fruitful,
teeming, pregnant, eternal, locking, enchested.

Merchant. Careful, laborious, industrious, avaritions, greedy, sea-scourged,
usurious, trafficking, early, busy, stirring, bargain-driving, tru^^ing,
adventurous, sea-tost, seafaring, sea-scouring, sea-cutting, seacutting,
sea-furrowing, sea-tracing, wealthy, storm-beaten.

Mercury. Swift, nimble-footed, winged, sage, rod-bearing, subtle, theevish,
eloquent, sweet-tongued, cunning, crafty, wary, glozing, colloguing,
ear-tickling, persuasive, quaint, soothing.

Mercy. Embracing, pitying, gracious, melting, relenting, soft, welcome,
yielding.

Mermaids. Enticing, alluring, encharming, enchanting, delicious, training,
floating, green haired, crafty, subtle.

Meteors. v. Comets. Portentuous, gazing, blazing, revengeful, bearded,
flaming, burning, prodigious, frightful, exhaled, curled, bright-haired,
presaging, ruddy, streaming, bristled, glozing;

Metephor. Quaint, strained, forced, fa^-fetched, translated, painted, flowery.

Metals. Rich, wealthy, solid, lurking, hidden, buried, veiny, massy,
refined, glittering, ine^rthed, interred, searched.

Milk. Trembling, waving, smoking, noursing, feeding, nourishing, curded,
creamy, plenteous, uberous.

Mill. Turning, winged, grinding, squeezing, whirling, twirling, trilling,
news-min^ing, common, laborious.

Mind. Discoursive, thoughtful, active, roving, nimble, winged, wandering,
flitting, posting, inventive, subtle, deviseful, contriving, ro^ming, ranging,
floating, forging, working, quick, busy, minting, coining, pregnant, teeming,
wealthy, industrious, studious.

Mine. Rich, wealthy. searched, obscure, secret.

Mineral. Rich, wealthy, fat, sulphury, unctious, hidden, secret, lurking,
concealed, inearthed, interred, buried, veiny, creeping.

Minos. v. Judge. Grim, stern, rigorous, impartial, uncorrupted, unbribed,
grimvisaged, grave, law-giving, inexorable.

Minotaure. Two-shapt, bloody, cruel, devouring, deformed, ugly, hideous,
monstrous, Cretian.

Mint. Industrious, laborious, coining, industrious, stamping, wealthy, golden.

Minute. Swift-winged, swift-flying, nimble, light-foot, pygmy, speedy, hasty,
hastening, changing, succeeding, brief, short-lived, stealing, theevish,
posting, fleet, light, creeping, sliding, gliding, running, light-heeld,
pacing, running, galloping, swimming, feathered, softfooted, ambling, slippery,
rolling, wheeling, smooth-sliding.

Miracle. Stupendous, admired, prodigious, subtle, divine, sacred,
unaccustomed, strange, unheard, unbeleeved, powerful, amazing.

Mirror. Ch^ystal, shining, shape-reflecting, representing, smooth, sleeke,
silver, gl^ttering, resembling, mocking, mimick, impartial, faithful,
imitating, unflattering, pourtreying.

Mirth. v. Joy. Frolic, jolly, joyous, joyful, pleasant, tickling, gamesome,
sportive, toyish, graceful, frantic, gigling, lavish, sprightful, active,
youthful, gleesome, gladsome, cheerful, lightsome, heart-chearing, diffusive,
heart-enlarging melting, fri^king, soft, enchanting, loose, free, delightful,
sprightly, heart-easing, giddy.

Misery. Oppressing, distressed, perplexed, galling, wringing, crushing,
bruising, grinding, heartbreaking, killing, heart-rending-tearing-contracting,
puling, warping, enraging, pensive, dejecting, suppressing, pinching,
heart-fretting, gnawing, impatient, pitied, hollow-^y^*

Mist. Foggy, rusty, gloomy, dussty, drowsy, groping, dark, thick, st^fling
choking, smoaky, vaporous, unhealthy, unwholesome, diseaseful, du^^ spongy,
mufling, drooping, swarthy, dropsy, swelling, sullen, fensu^^^ sleepy,
contagious, infectious, black, obscuring, shadowing, floatin^ empty, dampish.

Miter. P^arled, enameld, crowning, sacred, glittering, gilded, honoure^
adored, venerable, glorious, two-topr, head-impaling.

Modesty. Maiden, Virgin sober, pure, chaste, grave, vestal, silen^, blushing
b^shful, respective, fearful, sweet, cold, graceful, winning, shamefac'^,
well-tempered, strait-lac't, pious, trembling, coral.

Moisture. Dank, watery, dampish, cold, fluid, flowing, clammy, liquid.

Mole. Mining, digging, lifting, working, undermining, blind, pernicious,
earthing, quick-hehring, listening.

Moment. v. Minutes. Monarch. Sovereign, powerful, puissant, imperious, portly,
Scepter-beari^^, crowned, sceptered, renowned, valiant, royal, warlike,
tyrannizing, ^yrannous, scepter swaying, awful, dreadful, commanding,
majestic, ^^cred, glorious, pompous, stately, magnificent, victorious,
glittering, controlling.

Money. C^veted, desired, life-sustaining, almighty, useful, corrupting,
ruleing, commanding, scraped, heaped.

Monk. Shaven, cloysterd, shaved-crown, recluse, sullen, zealous, pious,
^eligious, conscientious, abstemious, lovely, melancholy, retired, sedentary,
solitary, bookish, studious, contemplating, devotious.

Monkey. Toysul, toyish, sportive, gamesome, nimble, active, fantastic,
sprightly, mimick, imitating, wily, counterfeiting, meddling.

Monster. Prodigious, stupendous, portentuous, ugly, ghastly, hideous,
deformed, ill-shapen, horrid, dreadful, affrightful, cruel, feral.

Monument. Lasting, stately, proud, ambitious, time-worn, memorable, immortal,
speaking, enduring, live-long.

Moon. Silver, pale-fac't, horned, pale-eyed, humerous, inconstant, change^^g,
rosy, wandering, beamy, radiant, silent, bright, blushing, ruddy, ^listering,
aged, newborn, growing, increasing, decreasing, waxing, ^aining, dewy,
double-horned, giddy.

Moore. v. Fenne. Swarthy, tawny, sooty, Negro, mis-believing, soultry,
sun^urnt, sallow, scalded, eurled, tan'd, barbarous, roasted, baked, broyled,
ried, collied, flat-nosed, thick-lipt, oxe-eyed, furious, cruel, duskie,
^peedy, swift-foot, nimble-footed, wainscot-faced.

Morpheus. Drowsy, sleepy, lither, sluggish, heavy-eyed, leaden, dreaming.
fan^astick, counterfeiting, black, busy, shape-representing, lead-heeld,
^ethargick, shape-feining.

Moses. Patient, meek, pious, law-giving, courageous, faithful, abstemious,
conducting, obedient, humble, sacred, prophetic, predictious, stammering,
radiate, beamy.

Moss. Crisped, curled, spongy, downy, frizled, hoary, ragged, idle, furd,
ravell'd, thrumb'd, tufted, tasselled, fringy, shaggy. The mountains frizled
coat.

Moth. Eating, consumings useless, dull, silent, gnawing, devouring.

Mother. Loving, embracing, indulgent, careful, tender, solicitous, fruitful,
kind, pampering, fond, tender hearted.

Motion. Quick, nimble, active, stirring, swift-pac't, light.

Mountain. Moss-thrumd, rocky, shady, cloud-headed, insolent, steep, ambitious,
towering, aspiring, mossie, hoary, aged, steepy, surly, burly, lofty, ^all,
craggy, barren, stately, climbing, sky-kissing, sky-threatning,
cloud-inwrapped, high-browed, shaggy, supercilious, air-invading, hanging,
brambly, desert, uncourh, solitary, heaven, shouldering, leavy, resounding,
rebounding, ecchoing, thorny, inhospitable, shady, cold, freezing, unfruitful,
lovely, crump-shouldered, ragged, unfrequented, forsaken, melancholy,
clambering, sky-braving, pathless, lovely, cloud-touching, star-brushing,
bushie, ascending.

Mountebank. Juggling, cheating, prating, quacking, bragging, bold, boasting,
saucy, impudent, unblushing, shameless, deluding, cozening, stronglin'd,
great-worded.

Morning. v. Morpheus. Mourning. Sad, sable, sullen, pensive, grievous,
blear-eyed.

Morning. Morn. Aurora. Rosy, dapple, infant, dawning, dew-cheekt, blushing,
wakef^^ dew-haird, purple, gray, rosie-fingerd, lovely, beauteous, dew-^^abled,
wished, cheerful, silver-throned, chaste, modest, lilly-hand^ shining,
opall-coloured, roseate, sugared, ambtosiall, dew-spangl^ early, balmy, spicy,
weeping, gray-eyed, youthful, gray-chee^ early, gladsome, lightsome, beamy,
sparkling, vermillion, rud^^ safron-coloured, yellow, gilded, painted, checkerd.

Mouse. Little, short, greedy, hungry, saucy, lickerous, gnawing, thie^^ brown,
dun, nimble, hurtful.

Mouth. Yawning, grinning, devouring, gasping, wide, stretched, open, h^ing,
blabbing, prattling, tatling, twatling, roseate, clamorous, ^^brosiall, smiling,
learned, grave, eloquent, persuasive, honey-fi^^ing, comely.

Mudde. Durty, black, soft, clayie, clammy, putrid, tenacious, fen^^ thirsty.

Mulbery. Shady, cold, fearing, slow, loytering, lingering, wary, wise, p^dent,
mountain-loving, bloody, purple, loosening, aged, silk-wo^^ breeding, tardy.

Mule. Mongrill, stubborn, b^rren, bit-champing, strong, heady, gid^^
self-willed, wilful, obstinate, moody, humorous, sullen, franti^^ sturdy,
pack-bearing, ambling.

Multitude. Brainless, hair-braind, heady, headstrong, moody, humero^^
self-willed, giddy, easy, frantic, rash, shallow-headed, unlearn^^
promiscuous, inconstant, tumultuous, unsettled. weak-brain^^ thronging,
crowding, thick-shouldered, cluttering, clusterd, co^^^less, lawless,
seditious, factious, rebellious, raskally, flocking, ^^numbred, swarming,
wild, credulous, soon-perswaded, soo^^ overreached, populous, preasing,
way-ward, froward, un-ruely, u^rained, unbridled, giddy-headed, unwary, silly,
deluded, unski^full, malignant, furious, outrageous, untamed, astonished, amaz^^
admiring, novelty-affecting, innovating, prattling, clownish, clam^rous,
ignorant, barking, biting, braying, bustling, trooping, unconceiving,
unletterd, misjudging.

Murmr. Soft, buzzing, confused, whizzing, wheazing, hoarse, trembling,
^umbled, shrill, broken, threatening, clamorous, factious, sediti^^s, muttered,
whistling, whispering, still, silent, noysefull, grin^ng, qnerulous,
complaining, contradictious, repining, grum^ng.

Murren. Contagious, infectious, catching, spreading, pernicious, fatal, ^hy,
nasty, noisome, fullsome loathsome.

Murder. Murderer. Pale, gilty, bloody, bloodthirsty, butcherly, inhumane,
cruel, ^rbarous, cursed, direful, damned, furious, outrageous, mischievous,
^rrid, execrable, pittiless, remorseless, mercyless, unrelenting, in^orable,
dreadful, ghastly, brutish, fearful, pale-fac't.

Mushrom. Unsavory, tasteless, watrish, cold, moist, soon-sprung, poisonous,
^ngy, thunder-engendred.

Music. Musician. Crot-cheting, heart-ravishing, soul-invading, raping,
intrancing, ^elodious, harmonious, well-tuned, sweet, pleasant, well-timed,
^^ll-measured, heavenly, celestial, Seraphick, delightful, cheerful,
^ul-chearing, delicious, according, agreeing, numerous, warbling, ^arering,
consorting, diapasond, enchanting, encharming, sence^reaving, fancy-tickling,
wanton, well-proportioned, descanting.

Muses. Castalian, Pegasean, Aonian, Thespian, sacred, chaste, Virgin, ^aiden,
Pierian, Heliconian, sister, sweet-singing, sweet-tongu'd, spiring, propitious,
assisting, ingenious, industrious, laborious, ^^shfull, Sicilian, buskind,
fancy-prompting, fancy-propping, flu^t, genial, fount-sprung, laureate,
Maionian.

Musk. Odorous, fragrant, subtle, sweet, comforting, amorous, voluptu^^s,
luxurious, chearing, perfuming, Indian, spicy, delicious, wanton, ^^feminate.

Musket. v. Canon. Mustard. Biting, sharp, strong, stinging, poynant, weeping,
tear-wring^^g.

Mutiny. Factious, seditious, rebellious, tumulruous, repining, contradicti^us,
murmuring, importuning, querulous, noyseful, grumbling, odi^^s, angry, froward,
wayward, unruly, audacious, spleenful.

Myrrh. Fragrant, odorous, gummie, dropping, weeping, fat, un^^ distilling,
bitter, Indian, Arabian, Egyptian, Sabaean, aro^^ prickly, bristly, yellow.

Myrtle. Tender, Paphian, shore-loving, sable, cold-fearing, fleepy, dro^^
fading, short-lived, fragrant, odorous, frost-fearing, quivering, ^bling,
norrow-leaved.

Mystery. Concealed, hidden, secret, ceremonious, solemn, sacred, (...) deep,
profound, unknown, unvulgar, undivulged, unexpressed conceived, uncomprehended,
high, admired, amazing, strupen^ adored, reverend.

N.
Nag. v. Horse. Nails. TEnder, clawing, sharp, scraping, scratching, pearly,
ch^^horny, pilfering.

Name. Lasting, immortal, eternal, enduring, glorious, renowned, balmed,
eternized, surviving, deathless, unextinguist, spreading.

Narcissus. Proud, coy, froward, scornful, disdainful, pievish, wanton, (...)
spruce, trim, brisk.

Nature. Powerful, vigorous, liberal, rich, wealthy, pregnant, teem^ fruitful,
provident, kind, fore-casting, careful, sollicitous, pru^^ courteous, prodigal,
industrious, officious, imperious, command^ uncontrolled, unchanged, constan^,
skillful.

Navell. Round, knotty, tying, nursing, meat-conveying.

Navy. Numerous, puissant, well-armed, well-furnisht, well-provi^^ great,
strong, sail-bearing, winged-sailing, floating, sail-win^^ brass-beakt.

Necessity. Imperious, pressing, urgent, strict, rude, grimme, rough, violent,
^^petuous, forcing, invincible, dire, hard, fierce, cruel, lawless, ty^nnous,
rigid, uncontrolled, severe, rigorous, stern, insupportable, ^^all, ingenious,
witty, shifting.

Neck. Ivory, alabaster, snowy, yielding, pliant, writhing, fleshie, roseall,
^mbrosiall, brawny, stiff, silver, smooth, soft, fleeke, milkie, slen^er,
graceful, beauteous, chain-bearing, Pearly, bending, ^owing.

Nectar. Vermillion, sprightly, ambrosian, delicious, sparkling,
taste-ravish^ng, eternal, immortal, celestial, heavenly, death-expelling,
sweet^owing, fragrant, spicie, odorous, perfumed.

Need. Urging, pressing, pinching, forcing, ingenious, witty, shifting,
pe^urious, perplexing.

Needle. Pointed, sharp, working, slender, drawing, pricking, wounding,
stabbing, industrious, laborious, piercing, unseaming, maiden, thrifty,
thread-ushering, frugall, embroydering.

Negligence. Loose, supine, careless, slubbering, sleepy, dull, idle, lither,
loytering, lethargick, drowsy, dreaming, disrespective, homely, rustic,
easy, clownish, lazy, unactive, yawning, pernicious, odious, gaping,
regardless, unadvised, inconsiderate.

Negro. Schorced, quick, wealthy, swift-pac't, swarthy, tawny, sooty, collied,
soultry, misbelieving, sallow, curled, barbarous, roasted, Sunne-bak'c, broyled,
fried, duskie, thick-lipt, oxe-eyed, flat-nosed, swift-foot, nimble-footed,
diving, pearly, pearl-searching.

Neptune. Surgy, tempestuous, impetuous, wave-bestriding, trident-bearing,
azure, gray, aged, frothy, furious, earth-shaking.

Nereides. Green-haird, wanton, ehanting, gaudy, gay-painted.

Nereus. Aged, frothy, blew, flormy, wandering, tempestuous, impetuous, furious.

Nest. Warm, chearing, chirping, woven, hollow, hanging, industrious, leavie,
plumie, downie, featherd, airie, lofty.

Nector. Old, aged, sage, grave, prudent, eloquen^, decrepit, vali^^ wise,
sweet-tong'd.

Net. Insnaring, intangling, catching, treacherous, windowy, corded, i^folding,
imprisoning, enraging, hampering, subtle, fly, unexpect^^ surprising, griping,
tenacious, taking, fast-holding, deceitf^^ trameld.

Nettle. Biting, stinging, smarting, angry, peevish, touchy, sharp, usele^^
barren, pricking, pettish.

Neuter. Ambiguous, uncertain, doubtfu^l, impartial, un-siding, un-^^ged,
un-interested, un-active, un-medling, indifferent.

News. Desired, certain, uncertain, expected, hoped, unexpected, report^^
related, welcome, ucwelcome, joyful, public, secret, heavy, happ^ unhappy.

Niggard. Covetous, thrify, frugal, sparing, scraping, sordid, tenacious,
^^ritious, gathering, wretched, hated, contemned, odious, hoardi^^ heaping,
pinching, griping, nasty, toylseme, laborious, moneyd, we^thy, rich, fat, full
chested, usurious.

Night. Still, silent, freezing, drowsy, dusky, dreary, swarthy, Neg^^ gloomy,
shady, Ethiopian, sullen, black-eyed, tardy, black-brow^dampish, tedious,
pitchy, sable, moist, sacred, foggy, peaceful, grie^ly, grimme, sooty,
Ambrosian, sullied, collied, dewy, hideous. Ebo^ jetty, ghastly, restful,
dreaming, palefac't, solitary, melancholy, gra^ haird, aged, civil, sober,
grave, humorous, vaporous, blind, bla^^ darksome, fleepy, faint, secret,
thievish, wanton, lascivious, rosy, sta^ painted, star-enameld,
star-enflowred, star-embroydered, brow^ star-crowned, star-empearled,
reposeful, dumb, hushed, speechless amorous, misty, forgetful, vayled, close,
stumbling, dreadful, masking grovelling, groping.

Nitingale. Sweet-voyc't, melodious, harmonious, warbling, quavering, ch^^ting,
ravishing, amorous, pleasant, prattling, wanton, jolly, me^^ delicious.

Nile. Wealthy, seven-channelled, paper-bearing, swelling, monster^ breeding,
ore-flowing, seven-horned, rich, fruitful, wanderin^ winding, turning,
straggling, fat, muddy, thick, running, impetuous, ^ven-headed.

Niobe. Sad, cold, pensive, stiff, proud, unhappy, mournful.

Nobility. Clear, bright, stately, honored, high, haughty, ancient, famous,
^ch, wealthy, powerful, dreadful, pompous, stout, courageous, gay, ^udy.

Nonage. v. Infancy. Gamesome, sportive, tender, soft, pliant, improvident,
waxy, ^elding, unadvised, inconsiderate, unwary, childish, boyish, wanton,
^loomy.

Noone, Manly, radiant, full-aged, lusty, beamy, bright-shining.

North: Cold, freezing, congealed, icy, boisterous, blustering, angry, fro^y,
rainie, violent, impetuous, sharp, dreadful, cloudy, tempestuous, ^histling,
chill, snowy, noyseful, bleak, cold-mouthed, gloomy, ^iercing, surly, sullen,
chattering, churlish.

Nose. Dropping, toting, sniveling, snuffing, gristly, scoffing, jeering,
^cornful, flat, crooked, smelling, quick, sagacious.

Nose-trills. Open, gaping, breathing, panting, flaming, hairy, hollow,
sluttish, ^queezed.

Notes. v. Aires. Soft, sweet, pleasing, enchanting, intrancing, harmonious,
melodi^ous, well-tuned, charming, soul-mooving, ravishing, sprightly, de^icious.

Noveltie, Strange, portentuous, pernicious, un-expected, unwonted,
un^ccustomed, un-couth, monstrous, wonder-breeding, admired, amazing.

Novice. Unpractised, un-experienc'c, un-skilful, ignorant, learning, simple,
silly, untutord, untaught, fumbling, bungling.

Noise. Confused, bustling, rumbling, tumultuous, clamorous, obstreperous,
tatling, hoasre, shrill, deafning, drumming, dreadful, murmuring, muttering,
resounding, blelowing, Ecchoing, barking, roaring, thundering, loud, piercing,
air-rending, tearing, startling, amazing, astounding, litigious, jangling,
jarring.

Number. Countless, swarming, trooping, thronging, crowding, preasin^ flocking,
cluttering, clusterd, unrold, unm^asured.

Numbers. Free, flowing, fluent, eternal, lofty, stately, gentle, easy,
sugared, ^^chanting, intrancing, unstraind, even-pac't, smooth-pac't,
harmo^^ous, melodious, well-tuned well-trim'd, lulling, sence-bereavin^
ear-enamouring, soul-raping, delicious, sprightly, lively, gleeso^^ pleasant,
pleasing.

Nun. Holy, pious, religious, vowing, praying, recluse, devout, solita^^
cold, chaste, cloysterd, devotious, adoring, sacred, consecrated, pe^sive,
retired, zealous, abstemious, sedentarie, meditating, conte^plating.

Nuptials. v. Marriage. Amorous, solemn, wanton, gladsome, gleesome, frolic,
jolly, merry, mirth-ful, pompous, feastful, cheerful, sacred, celebrated,
happi^ unhappy, joyous, joyful, successful, ill-boding, ceremonious, hono^red.

Nurse. Careful, sollicitous, sedulous, fearful, loving, indulgent, lulling
dandling, feeding, hugging, embracing, tender.

Nut. Brown, gamesowe, sportive, hollow.

Nymph. Sleek-haird, painted, gaudy, nimble-footed, tripping, sportive,
gamesome, wanton, fair, beauteous, bright, spring-haunting, dancing gleesome,
frolic, merry, flowrie, neat-drest, amo^orous, skipping shining, spangled.

O.
Oak. KNottie, Caggie, leavie, spreading, aged, solid, branchie, sturdie,
brawnie, long-lived, three-aged, b^oad, stately, ^ude, rough hewn,
strong-grown, gnarled, broad-spred, thick-leav'd, well-limb'd, strong-rib'd,
lofty-fronted, shady, mast-bearing, hollow, stooping, decrepit, jagged, tufted,
savage, sacred, proud.

Oar. Indust^ious, laborious, servile, slavish, painful, hanging, ^oi^^ng,
tugging, brushing, nimble, fluttering, slicing, cutting, ^ave-dividing,
broad-palm'd, flashie, plashie, dashing, spat^ng, tossing, flitting.

Oats. Slender, barren, shrill, unluckie, piping, horse-cramming.

Oath. Binding, obliging, strict, enforcing, awful, religious, so^^mne,
ceremonious, duteous, truth-confirming, sacred, invio^able, faithful.

Obedience. Officious, obsequious, submisse, tender, punctual, meek, ^umble,
yiedling, pliant, waxie, resigned, willing, active, rea^ie, cheerful, reve^end,
awful, filial.

Objection. Thornie, knottie, knaggie, puzling, craggie, sharp, litigious,
^ontentious, jarring, jangling.

Oblation. Pious, sacred, flaming, thankful, cheerful, costly, religious,
devout, zealous, solemn, rich, free, fat.

Obligement. Obligation. Strong, great, deep, binding, tying, forcing, slavish.

Oblivion. Dark, duskie, dustie, moldie, gloomie, rustie, mustie, rude,
thanklesse, shadie, discou^teous, unkind, lazy, dull.

Obscurity. v. Darkness. Dark, dull, duskie, gloomie, rude, blind, mustie,
black, mistie, foggie, sullen, sootie, silent.

Obsequies. Pompous, sad, pious, ceremonious, pensive, weeping, solemn,
religious, zealous, honored, latest, mournful, teer^bedabled:

Obsequiousness. Pliant, nimble, active, willing, servile, slavish, humble,
crouching, yiedling, officious, obedient, waxie, ready, fawning, soothing,
clawing, soft, smooth, oilie, melting, winning, daubing, sly, politic.

Observation. Serious, strict, careful, regard^ul, eying, intent, mindful,
prying.

Occasion. Busy, fair, urgent, weighty, pressing, fleeting, sudden,
seasonable.

Ocean. v. Sea. Pathlesse, tide-^^ised, hungry, boundless, wild, unconfined,
greedy, ^^g^ng, roaring, flowing, earth-incircling, earth-girding, engorgi^g
boiling, impetuous, wavie, swelling, curled, frothie, floating, ch^fing,
foaming, working, toiling, swallowing, unfathomed, azure, angry, hirstie,
ireful, stormy, glassie, tumbling, ploughed, dropsied, unbottomed, gray,
brackish, licentious, wrathful, rufled, fretting, wind-hew'd, fishie, belching,
tossing, wealthy, troubled, insatiate, ho^^ie, vaulting, tossing.

Ode. Lyrick, wanton, amorous, pleasing charming.

Odor. Spicie, aromatic, delightful, luxurious, voluptuous, subtle,
precious, rich, balmie, persumed, aire-perfuming, ambrosian, genial, delicious,
pleasant, wanton, Assyrian, chafed, muskie, Arabian, grateful, Indian, Sabean,
Panchaian, ungrateful, noisome, loathsome, fulsome, fuming, sence-offending,
infectious, overcoming, contagious, filthy, stinking, sulphurous.

Old age. Bed-ridden, decrepid, withered, crazie, cold, heatlesse, crooke^,
feeble, discolored, trembling, sober, experienced, mature, mellow, testie,
touchie, angry, peevish, pettish, waspish, saplesse, abhorred, crabbed,
wrinkled, shrieveled, pensive, sad, melancholy, hoarie, silver-h^ired, tedious,
querulous, complaintful, slow, dull, tardie, slow pac't, otten, diseaseful,
sickly, doting, nastie, fulsome, weak, helpless, venerable, sour, grave,
severe, supercilious, odious, wary, provident, frugal, covetous, thriftie,
sparing, avaritious, co^sorious, rigid, ^^thonian, Nestorean, honored,
sleepie, drowsy, laz^^ lither, wear^e.

Olive. Pale, peaceful, tardie, slow-grow^ng, fat, hoarie, gray, pliant,
s^^ple, harmless, shadie, verdant, triumphant, victorious, goat-fearing
long-lived, lasting, sacred, fruitful, fl shie, fertile, plump, juicie.

Omen. Happy, unhappie, luckie, unluckie, successeful, prosperous, dis^st^ous,
propherick, presaging, portending, black, pred^ctious, secr^^ mistick,
misterious, oncealed, dismal, dreadful, encouraging, de^^ring, aff^^ghtful.

Onion. Coated, angry, biting, weeping, windy, flatuous, hoarie.

Onix. Serio^s, slipperie, bright, shining Indian, Arabian.

Onset. Assault. Furious, dreadful, impetuous, bloody, tumultuous, cruel,
warlic^ importunate* dangerous, perilous, sharp, smart, proud, doubtful,
troublesome, toilesome, adventurous, bold, daring, audacious.

Opinion. v. Doubt. Error. Vain, doubtful, floating, giddie, waving, reeling,
ottering, staggering, jarring, received, common, false, suspicious, vulgar,
proud, haughty, erroneous, jealous, faint, heartlesse, hovering, sagging.

Opportunity. Fair, smiling, wooing, co^^ting, ripe, mature, seasonable,
commodious, fit, pleasing, favorable, desired, w^shed, sudden, unexpected,
welproportioned, well-suiting, well-occasioned, convenient, p^oper.

Opposition. Litigious, contentious, strong, weak hot, cold, sharp, smart,
threatening, jarting, jangling, brawling, furiou, impetuous, violent,
tumultuous, raging, angry, fuming.

Oppression. Oppressor. Violent, tyrannous, cruel, hard, pitilesse, grinding,
heavy, vexing, unmercifull, bloody, sqeezing, greedy, grievous, rigorous,
rough, harsh, flinty, griping, pinching, gauling, tortur^ng, wringing,
crushing, savage, bruising, stern, ^igid.

Oracle. Doubtful, ambiguous, consulted, enquired, resolving, commanding
imperious, presagious, predictious, prophetic, deluding, u^erring, undeceived,
fatal, anxious, mysterious, unquestioned, perplexing, pazling, dark, obscure,
authentic, undoubted.

Orange. Yellow, golden, gilded, delightful, delicious, odorous, savourie,
tast-quickening, thirst slaking, thirst-allaying, j^ycie, sque^zed.

Otator. v. Eloquence. Sweet-tongu'd, learned, insinuating, applausive,
persuasive, subtle, Sweet-lipt, honey-flowing, smooth, oily, courtly,
well-p^li^ht, captivating, grave.

Orchard. Fruitful, fruit-enamell'd, pleasant, well-drest, smiling, leavie,
delightful, spacious, verdant.

Order. Ranged, well-rank't, sacred, disposed, harmonious, graceful, beauteous,
decent, comely.

Orgies. Sacred, mistick, misterious, ceremonious, mad, drunken, raging,
raving, furious, solemn, honored, wanton, ^ffeminate, Theban.

Ori^n. Showrie, stooping, pale, black, rainie, clowdie, glitte^ing, fie^ce
cruel, chasing, moist, tempestuous stormy.

Orison. v. Prayer. Devotious, pious, zealous, fervent, religious, numbered,
flowing, passionate, measured, fervent.

Ornament. Graceful, gorgeous, glorious, beauteous, pompous, painted, costly,
envious, glittering, shining, ambitious, dazzling, sumptuous, curious,
embellisht.

Orphan. Poor, wretched, helpless, succourless, distressed, oppressed,
ragged, scorned, dejected, pitied, naked, houseless, disregarded, afflicted,
lean, starved.

Orpheus. Thracian, sweet-tongu'd, melodious, harmonious, sweet-singing, aged,
sacred.

Ostentation. Proud, empty, vaunting, flanting, fantastic, vain, pompous,
arrogant.

Ostridge. Srrong-stomacht, digestive, iron-digesting, Ethiopian, speedy,
quick-pac't, winged.

Oven. Smokie, burning, flaming, flalme-belching, spurtering, sparkling,
hollow, devouring, baking.

Oversight. Careless, neglectful, erroneous, pernicious, dammaging, imprudent,
improvident, regardlesse.

Overthrow. Dreadful, dismal, disastrous, unhappie, bloody, pernicious,
wretched, pitied, lamented.

Ousill. Box-bill'd, warbling, melodious.

Outrage. Violent, quarrelsome, injurious, dissolute, loose, headie, luxurious,
riotous.

Owl. Screeching, ill-boding, dull, clamorous, funeral, melancholy, whooping,
buzzing, staring, prodigious, disastrous, fatal, Tragic, presaging, whooting,
hoarse, feral, barking.

Ox. Sinewie, laborious, laboring, weary, toiling, tugging, grim,
(...)*foot, slow, ^ardy, slow-pac't, bonie, strong, brawnie, sturdie, burly,
massy, brass-footed, lowing, bellowing, headstrong, broad-brow'd, painful.

Oil. Ointments. Odorous, dissolving, suppling, glittering, shining balmie,
fat, unctious, costly, fragrant, aromatic.

P.
Pace. Winged, speedy, Eagles, Eagle-winged, breathless, hasty, quick,
nimble, slow-footed, tardie, stealing, silent, gliding, creeping, grave,
measured, theevish, soft-footed, assured.

Pagan. Unbelieving, mis-believing, barbarous, idolatrous, superstitious,
ceremonious, incredulous, obstinate, cruel, hard-hearted, unchristian
unchristned, unbaptized.

Page. Officious, obsequious, brisk, nimble, attending, waiting, duteous,
observant, serviceable, ready, careful, quick, diligent, speedy.

Pageant. Painted, pompous, gay, gaudie, gorgeous, motly, gilded, triumphant,
joyful, glittering glorious, streaming, waving, varnisht, costly, sump^tious,
slanting.

Pain. Dolorous, heart-fretting-wringing-eating, pinching, nipping,
soul-oppressing, griping, hard, sad, grievous, killing, doleful, gauling,
heartbreaking, pitied, bitter, impatient, gnawing, stabbing, smarting
torturing, tormenting, martyring, racking, disquiet, heart-rending-tearing,
grating, cruel, sharp, wearying, unsupported, tedious, unwelcome.

Palace. Gorgeous, stately, aspiring, lofty, magnificent, exalted,
cloud-kissing cloud-cleaving, aire-braving, mosse-growne, royal, ambitious,
envied, proud-towred, gilded, glitering.

Palate. Nice, cu^ious, judicious, thirsty, witty, luxurious, hungry,
greedy, tasting, delicious, gluttonous, insatiated.

Palenesse. Bleak, cold, chill, trembling, fearful, wanne, sallow, discolored,
duskie, sad, grieved, deformed, fainting, affrighting, meager, muddie, ghastly,
disfigured, wannish.

Pallas. Wise, warlick, prudent, chaste, courageous, ingenious, industrious,
unmarried, gray-ey'd.

Palm. Generous, triumphant, lofty, victorious, leavie, verdant, glorious,
shadie, rugged, trembling.

Palmer. Devout, devotiou^, pious, religious, humble, wandering, melanch^*ly
pensive, unknown, gray-frockt, lonelie, withered, weather-beaten, sad,
meditating, abstemious, weary.

Palsy. Trembling, shaking, quavering, quivering, unjointed, unsteadie,
fainting, numme.

Pamphlet. Loose, wanton, seditious, libellous, saucie, scurrilous, sandalous,
calumnious, railing, reviling, abusiv^, licentious, lawless, audacious,
injurious.

Pander, v. Bawd. Odious, covetous, impure, wary, crafty, sly, importunare,
perfidious, cunning, soothing, cheating, fawning, lascivious, tempting,
dr^^ken, deceitful, guileful, cozening, vilanous, youth-corrupting, coging,
immodest, impudent, brazen-fac't, shameless, enticing, alluring, training
beastly, brutish, obsceane.

Pang. v. Anguish. Pain. Panther. Savage, wild dreadful, untamed, cruel,
spotted, devouring, grimlook't, painted, stubborn, incensed.

Panting. Faint, breathless, warm, weak, weary.

Papist. Superstitious, image-adoring, Idolatrous, ceremonious, deluded,
merit-pleading bloody.

Pap. v. Dug. S^gging, milkie, nursing, soft, ^ender, spicie, delicious,
azure-streaked, veinie.

Parable. Obscure, dark, concealed, misterious, grave, wise, sage, ingenious,
witty, discoursive, deep, profound.

Paradise. Happy, Celestial, immortal, deathlesse, glorious, beauteous,
delicious, eternal, triumphant, flowrie, joyful, enamouring, entrancing,
soul-raping, ravishing, soul-invading, transporting.

Paradox. Incredible, unbelieved, improbable, stoical, un-vulgar, fals-seeming.

Parasite. Fawning, soothing, flearing, dissembling, officious, obsequious,
pick-thank, pliant, sugared, traitorous, treacherous, candid, glass^-fac'^,
cheating, juggling, overreaching, circumv^nting, pide, knee-crooking, cunning,
deluding, crafty, wily, sly, clawing, tempting, dawbing, deceitful,
fair-spoken, smooth-worded, ear-tickling, crouching, gl^z^ng, insinuating,
cogging, flattering, servile, slavish, smooth, faire-mouthed, lying,
smel-feast, greedy, vaunting, colloguing, cozening, idle, babbling, prattling,
file-tongu'd, oily, courtly, smooth-tongu'd, lispping, gilt-tongu'd, windy,
smoothing.

Pardon. Favorable, gracious, remissive, free, indulgen^, smiling gentle,
courteous, willing.

Parent. Beloved, dear, aged, careful, indulgent, affectionate, nursing,
loving, tender, solicitous, grave, pious, indulgent, honored, reverend,
tenderhearted.

Park v. Meadow. Pleasant, flowrie, delightful, fruitful, herbie, grassie,
enclosed, impaled, verdant, green-plusht, spacious.

Parliament. Grave, honored, honorable, stately, severe, wise, judicious,
justice-executing, consulting, authentic.

Parnassus. v. Mountain. Sacred, rugged, two-topt, two-forkt, lofty, learned,
divine, Muse-haunted.

Parret. Green, painted, prattling, talking, babbling, speaking, tatling, gaudie,
faire-plum'd, tw^tling, chattering.

Parthian. Light, swift-foot, warlick, couragi^us, fierce, cruel, darting
furious, backward, fighting, flying, perfidious, seditious, lascivious,
qu^ver-bearing, martial,

Partridge. Chattering, painted, speckled, salacious, hot, devouring,
lascivious, ruffled, fearful, spotted, plump,

Passage. Easy, ready, open, fr^quented, difficult, uneasy, broken.

Passion. v. Anger Fury. Rage. Disordered, wild, distempered, hot, unrulie,
headstrong, frantic, uncollected, ireful, tyrannous, stormy, wilful,
blundering, bitter, pernicious, disquiet, roving, affectionate, turbulent,
vehement, surpr^^ing, importuning, violent, impetuous, unconstant, blind,
impatient, unbridled, furious, transporting, usurping, unadvised, light-wingd.

Pastime. Sportful, toyish, joyful, delightful, refreshing, honest, pleasant,
swee^, wanton, dallying, jesting.

Pastoral. Low-stiled, humble-stiled, rustic, plain, pleasant, jolly,
youthful, country.

Pasture. v. Lawnes. Flowery, motly, enameled, tufted, green-plusht, painted,
gaudie, fruitful, fat, smiling, verdant, enflowred, embroidered, herbie,
gra^sie, checkerd, delightful, dewie, pleasant, shrubbie, sportive, fragran^,
mossie.

Path. Frequented, trodden, directing, leading, grassie.

Patience. Strong, resolved, willing, sottish, soft, cold, dull, pack-bearing,
yiedling, burdned, phlegmatic, unfeeling, unmooved, tame, cool, constant,
virtuous, slow harmless, suffering, enduring, holy.

Patron. Liberal, protecting, favoring, careful, willing, affectionate,
bene^ficial, bountiful, propitious, defending, securing.

Pavement. Low humble, dejected, foot-bearing, spurned, trodden, rugged, cold,
hard, dusty, du^tie, pressed, beaten,

Pavilion. Soft, gilded-stately, warlick, vaultie, tented.

Paunch. Great-bellied, swelling, sull-gorged, tun-bellied, gurmandizing,
hollow, deep, spacious, cavie, voluptuous, luxurious, insatiate, gluttonous,
swallowing, engulphing, hungry, greedy, devouring, lazy.

Paw. Russet, griping, dreadful, raping, fawning, crooked, hairie shaggie,
rough, scratching, clawing, ravenous, wanton.

Pawn. Engaging, obliging, binding, faith-binding, assured.

Peace. Soft, H^lcyonian, calm, happy, feastful, mild, smiling, flowery,
silken, fruitful, safe, harmonious, snudging, sleepie, unactive, disarmed,
easy, friendly, silver-wing'd, white-wing'd, virgin, maiden, civil,
effeminate, smooth-faced, turtle-footed, unbloodie, untroubled, undistur^d,
lovely blessed, lazy, joyful, desired, quiet, divine, war-chasing, sa^ed,
victorious, firm, golden, agreeing, heavenly, composed, harme^s, gowned,
genial, auspicious, triumphant, meek-eyed.

Peach. Velvet, woolie, dangling, trembling, soft-skin'd.

Peacock. Gay-plum'd, gaudie, pompous, glorious, glittering, starrie, proud,
^ested, envious, painted, stately, haughty, wheele-tail'd, moon-tail'd.

Pear. Soft, sour, delicious, dangling, mellow, savoury, sharp, brisk,
tast-^easing, hanging, yellow, juycie.

Pearl. Indian, precious, rich, shining, beauteous, oriental, eastern, bright
^ear, deliceous, curious, sparkling, reflecting, radiant, beaming, dang^ing,
enchacing, blazing, flaming, aire-gilding, aire-enlightning, orient.

Pebble. Humble, purling, little, murmuring, hissing, whistling, gushing,
rolling.

Pedant. v. Schoolmaster. Knowing, tutoring, teaching, angry, peevish,
choleric, imperious, severe, grave, learned, lashing, scourging, sour, cruel,
tyrannous, tyrannising.

Pedigree. Ancient, long-breathed, well-descended, famous, noble.

Pedlar. Trucking, shop-brearing, wandering, straggling, trifling, trudging.

Pegasus. v. Horse. Winged, swift-flying, Medusaean, Gorgonean, fleet,
horn-footed.

Pelican. Indulgent, Aegiptian, solitary, lonelie, melancholy, sharp-beakt,
groaning, mourning, young, loving, brest-piercing, officious.

Penance. Hard, sad, dolorous, painful, rigorous, severe, enjoined, imposed,
exacted.

Pen. Learned, skilful, nimble, quick-pac't, clarkly, artful, industrious,
laborious, painful, studious.

Pencil. Skilful, artful, nimble, active, cunning, drawing, industrious,
labo^ious, painful, pourtraying.

Penury. Griping, pinching, wringing, dejecting, oppressing, uneasy,
so^^*squeezing, gauling, servile, craving, down-looking, ragged, ^corn^^
despised, freezing, disrespected, unregarded, tattered, thread-b^^ crushing,
soul-bruising, grinding, suppressing, starving, needy.

Pepper. Rugged, wrinckled, rough-coated, biting, black, sharp, hot, bruise^

Perfection. Complete, accomplished, absolute, rare, divine, admired, exa^^
beauteous, desired, singular, unpatterned, unparagon'd, unparalell'^ unmatched,
unpeer'd, unequalled, unexampled.

Perfume. Fragrant, spicie, sweet, smell-ravishing, sacred, choice, rich,
odoro^^ Ambrosian.

Peril. v. Danger. Period. Perfect, accomplished, desired, consummated.

Perjury. Hollow, black, hellish, impious, damned, cursed.

Periwigge. Hair. Hairie, false, counterfeited, curled, frizled.

Persecution. Cruel, bloody, murderous, tyrannous, outrageous, furious,
unc^^stian, barbarous.

Perseverance. Stiff, stout, courageous, undaunted, firm, constant, patient,
resolv^^ unmoved, steadfast, unshrinking, settled, unshaken.

Persian. Perfidous, unfaithful, luxurious, voluptuous, drunken, bablin^
anointed, surfeting, strong-breath'd.

Persuasion. Soft, insinuating, sly, moving, wooing, courting, encouragin^
winning, victorious.

Pestilence. v. Plague. Infectious, contagious, mortal, deadly, spotted,
tokened, ca^^^ing, raging, burning, dismal, killing, devouring.

Petition. Humble, suppliant, begging, crouching, wooing, earnest i^portunate.

Phaeton. Rash, proud, ambitious, audacious, y. bold, presumptuous,
adve^turous, world-fireing, world-inflaming, unhappy.

Phantasmes. Vain, vanishing, empty, uncertain, flying, shady, imaginary,
aerie, ^^dfull, aff^ighting, pale, grisly, fleeting, unsubstantiall, unreall.

Philomel. Sad, pensive, complaintfull, wailing, sweet-voic'd, warbling,
melo^us, harmonious.

Philpsopher. Philosophy. Grave, sage, wise, learned, deep, profound, sober,
severe, abstemi^s, temperate, austere, artfull, knowing, mysterious, subtle,
knottie, ^^ne, bearded, contemplative, industrious, obscure, studious,
^oughtfull, musing, ingenious, venerable.

Phoebus. v. Apollo. Fair-haired, learned, all-seeing, predictious, bright,
prophetic, ^urel-crown'd, bright-hair'd,

Phoenix. Gay-plum'd, painted, immortal, gold-neck'd, maiden, gold-^ested,
immortal, reviving, spicie, lovelie, chaste, unmated, long-^v'd, aged,
eternal, self-begotten, Assyrian, eastern, solitary, ^irgin.

Phlegethon. Burning, flaming, scorching, smoakie, duskie, gloomie, raging,
fie^ie, devouring, gaping, yawning, spacious, vastie, capacious, flame-^elching.

Phlegm. v. Phlegm. Phrase. Fluent, well-drest, clear, polished, neat, filed,
forced, sugared, win^ing, ear-captivating,

Physic. v. Medicine. Physician. Expert, learned skillful, knowing, artfull,
faithful, careful, diligent, prudent, wary, studious, helpful, curing.

Pickerell. Greedy, gluttonons, devouring, preying, swallowing.

Picture. Speaking, livelie, dumb, fair, beauteous, rich, artificial,
colored, varnished, dead, resembling, imi^ating, counterfeiting, skillfull,
artfull, deceiving, eye-deluding.

Pigeon. v. Dove. Wanton, trembling, quaking, ash-colored, jealous, loyal,
chaste, rough-footed, crooing, crested, speckled, amorous, gallesse.

Pike. v. Lance, Pilgrim. v. Palmer. Pillar. Stately, Dorick, Corinthian,
strong, firm, upholding, sustein'^ steadie, ^^able, unshrinking, solid,
marble, gilded, lasting, lofty, ^^vanced, massy, ivory, smooth, even-wrought,
polisht.

Pilot. Gain-spurr'd, tugging, skilful, wandering, expert, guiding, dire^ing,
star-gazing, industrious, sea-tost, storm-beaten, adventur^^ trembling,
fearful, North-observing, commanding, prudent.

Pine. Tufted, bristled, heaven-scaling, star-kissing, lofty, skie-invad^^
oilie, sprouting, proud, sacred, torchie, kernel-bearing, Pan-belo^ exalted,
strait, stately, strait-bodied, branchie, supercilious, hairie, ^^unctious,
Cybelean, Berecinthian, odorous, hoarie, dagger-leaved, ^^cutting.

Pinion. v. Wing. Shadie, feathered flagging, spreading, floating, plumie,
glidi^^ fluttering, active, mooving, waving, industrious.

Pinnace. v. Ship. Winged, fleet, saile-winged, sea-torne, adventurous,
thin-rib'd.

Pipe. Mirthful, merry, jollie, sweet-sounding, melodious, rustic,
har^^nious, bored, solacing, chanting, shrill, tuneful, frolic, ch^^full.

Pirate. Sly, adventurous, bold, audacious, barbarous, preying, sea-robbi^^
theeving, cruel, crafty, spoiling, merciless, unpitying, roving.

Pismire. v. Ants. Thriving, industrious, frugal, thriftie, grain-bearing,
crawling, ^ctive, prudent, corne-gathering, careful, laborious, ingenious,
subtil^ politic, painful.

Pitch. Clammie, Illi^ian, catching, melting, tenacious, viscous, glutin^^
Negro, sootie, ebon, ship-lining.

Pith. Marrowie, enclosed, inward, soft, tender, fat.

Pity. Melting, relenting, soft, calm, tender, feeling, charitable,
comp^^sionate, weeping, affectionate, yiedling, bleeding, tender-h^^ted.

Pit. Blind, darksome, deep, unfathomed, unsounded, gloomie, duskie, ^en,
obscure, sootie, durtie, fulsome, loathsome, nasty, dreadful, dan^ous, steepie.

Plague. Mortal, contagious, infectious, diseaseful, catching, raging,
sulphu^us, burning, dismal, uncomfortable, violent, spotted, surprising, ^sive,
dreadful, threatening, sudden, unexpected, detested, murther^s, accursed,
impartial, raging, pernicious, cruel, unsparing, unpity^g, merciless, deadly,
inexorable, fiery, devouring, consuming, ^thsome, nastie.

Plains. v. Meadows. ^patious, wide-skirted, flowrie, tufted, enameled, open,
dasied, mot^^, delightful, lowly, humbe, smiling, verdant, fragrant, hearbie,
gras^^, embroidered, levelled, fruitful, diapred, green-plusht, sportive,
fair^athed, flower-enameled, flowre-mantled, flower-spangled, soft^ated,
fertle, pleasant, green-brested, stream-embroidered, frolic.

Plane. Shadie, heavie-headed, barren, genial, feastful, tall, stately, lofty,
reading, leavie, nodding, branched, dangling.

Planet. Blazing, bright, shining, beaming, rolling, flaming, sparkling,
floa^ng, swimming.

Plant. Vegetative, young, fruitful, tender, sappie, juycie, growing,
increa^ng, thriving.

Play. Sportful, joyous, mirthful, care-killing, wanton, idle, careless,
be^itching, facetious, time-stealing, enchanting, unthriftie, careless,
^armelesse, soft, pleasant, frolic, vain, empty, delightful, delicious,
^oluptuous, sensual, familiar, sportive, free, loose, dissolute, lascivious,
^me-beguiling.

Pleasure. Melting, wanton, lulling, itching, lavish, soft, desired, easy,
idle, sil^n, golden, tickling, intrancing, choice, delicious, delightful,
fresh, ^portive, attractive, magnetic, imparadising, balmie, b^ckning,
in^^anting, bewitching, Syrenian, flashie, ravishing, soul-invading,
^me-beguiling, sugared, raping, temp^ing, captivating, transporting, Nectareous,
Ambrosian, spicie, sprightly, active, cheerful, lightsome, ^eart-chearing,
smiling, heart-enl^rging, luxurious, voluptuous, fle^^ing, transitory, empty,
enamouring, charming, fancie-tickling, glo^ing, pernicious, alluring, enticing,
inveagling, hooking, luring, treacherous, intemperate, gliding, care-killing,
disordered, revelling, ^^ney-flowing, unbridled, lascivious, effeminate,
depraved, unmeas^^^^ blind, toyish, soul-moving, entrancing, fulsome, rambl^^^
unctious.

Pledge. Assured, confirming, obliging, engaging, binding, faith-b^^^^

Pleiades. Dropping, weeping, showrie, sad, moist, rainy,

Plenty. Luxurious, swelling, flowing, copious, fertile, fruitful, joy^^^^
gladsome, rich, pregnat, teeming, ample, large, full, superfl^^^^ abounding,
excessive, wanton, lavish, smiling.

Plover. v. Lapwing. Coasting.

Plough. Peaceful, crooked, furrowing, industrious, laborious, (...) wounding,
slicing, furrow-making, thriftie, rustic, sordid, pain^^^ toilsome.

Plough-man. v. Clown. Rustic, sordid, laborious, industrious, tugging,
patient, (...) swarthy, toilsome, hoping, sunburned, tawnie, brawnie, surly,
(...) clownish, sturdie, rude, sweating, sallow, hide-bound, hobnail'd, ^^^ish,
homebred, unfashion'd, slovenly, frolic, blithe, lusty, robust^^^ boarish,
rural, rough-hewn, unlearned, unlettered, simple, (...) whistling, gleesome,
merry.

Plume. Hovering, waving, tufted, soft, painted, downie, aerie, lightso^^
flanting, gay, gaudie, gallant, pompous, trembling, hanging, sm^^^ velvet,
flying, wanton, limber, freckled, pide, motlie, spotted, speck^^^ air-dividing-

Plumme. Dangling, hanging, delicious, juicie, tast-pleasing, nectar^^^^
pleasant.

Plummet. Sounding, sinking, diving, poising, guiding, mossie, heavy.

Plush. Soft, smooth, rich, costly, sumptuous, courtly, shining, shagg^^^^
tufted.

Pluto. Black, hellish, dreadful, unpitying, merciless, unrelenting, gree^^^^
gloomie, shadie, gastlie, grisly, implacable, inexorable, rigorous, ^^gian,
Sulphurie, grim, frowning, lowering, scuoling, stern-visaged, ^varitious,
raping, remorselesse, sullen.

Pome. Poesy. Poetry. Poet. Whining, sacred, immortal, eternal, deathlesse,
embalming, in^^cing, nimble, fluent, sweet-flowing, sinewie, learned, numerous,
^asant, sweet, brisk, amourous, wanton, lascivious, lofty, stately, di^e,
tickling, loose, sugared, delicious, nectareous, Ambrosian, laure^^, facetious,
fabulous, ingenious, witty, lying, well-drest, captiva^g, soul-invading,
soul-raping, imparadising, immortalizing, grave, ^asured, well-tuned, winding,
audacious, artfull, knowing, clear^ded, honored, biting, lashing, lavish,
prophetic, melodious, ^monios, Muse-inspired, praise-prompted, insinuating,
heaven-bred, ^husiastick, flattering, smoothing, glozing, smooth-swelling,
well^ck'd, well-composed, well-couch'd, wel-laboured, powerful, almigh^
everlasting, ear, enamouring, s^nse-bereaving, sprightly, livelie, ^esome,
jollie, frolic.

Policy. Working, winding, plotting, contriving, scruing, diving, crafty, ^e,
subtle, cunning, secret, under-mining, under-working, ingenious, ^der-handing,
devicefull, prudent, wary, circumventing, fore-cast^g, projecting, snakie,
winding, wriggling.

Pomander. Persum'd, sweet, delicious, well-sented, smell-pleasing, odo^iferous
^grant.

Pomegranate. Delicious, vermilion, blushing, juicie, many kernel^'d.

Pomp. Gorgeous, glittering, glorious, gay, gaudie, golden, Sunny, swel^ng,
painted, stately, costly, sumptuous, magnificent, braving, luxu^ous,
superfluous, smiling, varnished, courtly, shining, fl^nting, gal^nt, portlie,
fantastic, flashing, blazing, profuse, lavish, unthriftie, ^zling, envied,
eie-conquering, triumphant, solemn, proud, royal, ^mbitious, excessive,
expensive, needless, vain, unnecessarie, wast^ll, ceremonious.

Poniard. Stabbing, killing, murdering, desperate, sharp-pointed, secret,
^lent, stealing.

Pool. Sleepie, drowsy, slimie, fishie, calm, quiet, dull, lazy, sluggish,
slow^oving, waving, weedie, muddie, crisped.

Pope. Mitred, adored, canonized, insulting, imperious, proud haughty,
in^olent, stately, tyrannizing, magnificent, Lording, domineering.

Popingay. Gay-plum'd, gaudie, feathered, painted, mounted, soaring,
high-fly^ng, towering.

Popler. Tall, lofty, soft, weeping, leavie, amber, gummie, woollie, many
colored, river-loving, barren.

Poppie. Drowsy, sleepie, cold, benumming, yellow, Lethean, oblivio^^
chilling, refreshing, cooling, stupfying.

Porcupine. Bristlie, pricklie, thornie, fretful, armed, sharp-quill'd,
quill-sh^^ting, angry, revengeful.

Post. Speedy, hasty, nimble, spurring, swift-pac't, winged, swift-fo^^
fleet, light-foor, light-heel'd, panting, breathless, sweating, indu^^^ous,
quick, dispatchful.

Posture. Sprightly, graceful, becoming, handsome, comely, delightful, a^cted,
unaffected, careless, slowing, seemly, composed, winning, pl^^sing,
insinuating, ingratiating, stately portly.

Poverty. Penurious, needy, sleepie, vile, unregarded, cold, whining, pi^i^^
crushing, thin, meager, starving, honest, uneasy, soul-squeezing, oppressed,
scorned, pitied, dejected, down-looking, ragged, despise^ freezing, gauling,
pressing, wringing, pinching, sad, servile, cravi^^ simple, disrespected,
wronged, tattered, houselesse, threadbare, so^^ bruising, grinding, dejecting,
suppressing, griping, urging, sordi^ neglected, contemned, nasty, lank-belly'd,
thin-gutted, ill-accout^e^ naked, fulsome, taunted, flouted, jeered, painful,
laborious, indust^^ous, tugging, toylesome, necessitating, importuning,
suffering, desp^ring, enforcing, bankerupt.

Power. Attractiue, magnetic, vigorous, controlling, imperious, comm^ding,
active, enforcing, compulsive.

Pox. Pitting, digging, delving, beautie-marring, face-plowing, face-f^^rowing,
disfiguring, ditching, marking, imprinting, ingravin^ scratching.

Poison. Deceitful, pale, cold, baneful, raging, foamie, tainting, deadl^
deathful, destroying, spreading, swelling, black, consuming, eatin^ cruel,
benumming, stupefying, creeping, viperous, inflaming, b^^ing, frothie, secret,
lurking, treacherous, slic-working, Theffili^^ snakie, drowsy, sleepie.

Praise. Just, deserved, admired, windy, soothing, gilt-tongued, lavish, so^id,
swelling, big-bellied, spurring, alluring, attractive, Magnetic, encouraging,
living, lasting, immortal, enduring, never-dying, deathlesse, unfathomed,
unmeasured, unsounded, tympanizing, bla^ing, pompous, glozing, triumphant,
inflaming, incensing.

Prayer. Wishing, longing, zealous, ardent, fervent, devout, pious, religious,
earnest, winning, conquering, persuasive, mooving, passio^ate, humble, weeping,
mournful, holy, pensive, importuning, af^ectionate, urgent hearty, instant,
obtaining, solicitous, imploting.

Precepts. Strict, rigid, severe, rigorou, awful, restraining, just, coercive,
^oul-binding.

Preface. Preambling, ushering, way-making, ceremonious, tedious, com^lemental,
unnecessary.

Prejudice. Disadvantageous, indammaging, corrupting, partial, blinding,
^urtful, harmeful, injurious.

Prelate. Sacred, learned, grave wise, pious, religious, devout, zealous,
^nowing, reverend, venerable, aged, gray-haired, magisterious, mi^^ed.

Presumption. Daring, adventurous, bold, rash, audacious, saucy, proud,
inso^nt, swelling, puffed, unmannerly, arrrogant.

Pretense. False, lying, colorable, likely, glozing, juggling, cogging.

Pride. Ruffling, boundless, swelling, stately, triumphant, gay, envied,
^anton, luxurious, phatastick, insulting, imperious, lofty, hateful, ^dious,
detested, purple, heady ambitious, sullen, portly, surly, bur^^, hot, mounting,
towering, aspiring, respectlesse, haughty, presum^^ous, insolent, audacious,
squint-^yed, stern, disdainful, scornful, ^ver-weening inventive, fl^ring,
gaudy, strutting, impetuous, tim^anous, rebelliovs, Lucif^rial, glittering,
fl^ming, bubling, swolln, ^ow-beating, bustling, currish, churlish, frantic,
supercilious, puffed, ^^rsie, tyrannizing, soaring, boasting, frothy,
skie-^owring, self^onceited, adventurous, bragging, attemptive, vaunting,
flanting, ^^amelesse, unblushing, big, burning, high-swoln, dating, unconfi^ed,
unbrideled, contemptuous, high-^ooft.

Priest. Sacred, aged, chaste, long-gouned, holy, learned, devout, zealous,
shriving, confessing, absolving, attoning, pious, sacrificing, reverend,
venerable, religious, studious, contemplating, musing, retired, meditating.

Prince. Generous, illustrious, magnificent, wise, virtuous, puissant,
magnanimous, undaunted, warlick, valiant, couragiou^, courteous, just,
renowned, redoubted, valorous, ambitious, noble.

Prior. v. Abbot. Prison. Loathsome, nasty, noisome, fulsome, dark, darksome,
filthy' tedious, loathed, hollow, vaulty, dusty, lousy, doleful, musty, fu^ty,
dankish, unwholesome, unhealthy, airelesse, penning, stinking, obscure, ugly,
careful, anxious, graty, sad, pensive, melancholy.

Prisoner. Suppliant, crowching, fearful, trembling, nasty, needy, straved,
hungry, comfortless, sad, cold, pensive, melancholy, anxious, sighing,
careful, lousy, tatterd, fulsome, chained, swallow, discolored, pale,
slavish, fettered, desolate, afflicted, hoping, despairing, weary, swarthy,
lean, oppressed.

Privy. Stinking, filthy, nasty, loathsome, fulsome, durty, dungie, cornered,
dark, obscure, choking, darksome, secret.

Prodigal. Prodigality. Profuse, lavish, expensive, costly, excessive,
sumptuous, unthrifty, luxurious, pompous, soft, voluptuous, spendthrift,
wastful, regardlesse, melting, consuming, profusive, wealth-eating, unbridled,
swallowing, fearlesse, devouring, dissolute, disordered, intemperate,
revelling, superfluous, needless, unnecessary, squandering, gadding wandering,
street-wearing, pavement-beating, pot-hunting, wen^ing, whoring.

Profit. Gainful, advantageous, alluring, enticing, commodious, large-abundant,
increasing, growing, welcome, wealthy, fruitful, expected, desired, large,
ample* contenting, satisfying, pleasing, hear^-enchanting.

Prophecy. Prophet. Predictious, foretelling, fore-knowing, deep, austere,
profoun^ h^aven-prompted, holy, inspired, ancient, Enthusiastic, sacred,
mysterious, spirit-prompted.

Proportion. Beauteous, graceful, equal, just, comely, handsome, measured,
squared

Prose. Untrust, loose, creeping, undrest, homely, unkneaded, dough-bakt,
free-footed, unshackled, ragged, grovling, low, humble.

Proserpine. Infernal, imperious, chaste, cruel, Sicilian, ravished, inexorable,
impartial, duskie, dreadful, unpitying, remorselesse, unrelenting, grim,
ghastly, stern-visaged, rigorous, frowning, lowering, scouling, sad pou^ing,
sullen.

Prosperity. Happy, joyful, flowery, peaceful, perfect, wished, coveted,
desired, smiling, cheerful, gleesome, gladsome, fat,

Prostitute. Flinty, brazen, shameless, unblushing, unchaste, uncivil,
lescivious, wanton, lustful, rampant, salacious, dissolute, immodest, rotten,
alluring, enticing, tempting, perjured, mercenary, obscene, filthy, perfidious,
impudent, dissembling, infamous, dallying, notorious, baudy, flearing, gadding,
infectious, pockie, loa^hsome, painted, cancred, training, itchie, goatish,
rammish.

Proteus. Changing, turning, varying, shape-changing, predictious,
foretelling, azure, juggling, blue, ambiguous.

Proverb. Sententious, ancient, grave, succinct, old, noted, common, known,
famous, received, usual, vulgar, facetious, witty memorable.

Gods Providence. Observing, overshadowing, al-commanding, eternal, undeceived,
unchanged, al-working, al-contriving, al-disposing, al-ruling, al-pricing.

Providence. Prudence. Sagacious, sage, wise, grave, mature, deliberate,
discreeter, foreseeing, fore-casting, projecting wary, cautious, cautelous,
consulting, careful, advised, watchful, vigilant, circumspect, experienced,
quickeyed, clear-sighted, eagle-eyed, contriving, plotting, studious,
industrious, active.

Prowess. Hardy, attemptive, martial, warlick, valiant, valorous, exploitful,
atchieving, courageous, victorious, conquering, triumphant, undaunted,
virtuous, stout, redoubted glorious, renowned, daring, adventurous, masculine
constant, unmooved, unshaken, active, majestic, undejected, manly, haughty.

Publican. Greedy, griping, avaritious, exacting, odious, detested, hateful,
oppressing, extorring, injurious, tyranniz^ng, crafty, subtle' promoting,
evesdropping, pick-thank, cruel, unpittying, grim, stern, surly, collecting,
uvercharging, affl^cting, crushing, rigorous.

Pulse. Sprightful, activ^, nimble, panting, drumming, trembling, leaping,
dancing, subtle, industrious, beating.

Pumice. Hollow, dry, smoothing, pouncing, porous, rough, mossie.

Punishment. Just, deserved, severe, cruel, sad, heavy, revengeful, avenging,
bitter, rigorous.

Punk. v. Prostitute. Puppet. Toyish sportive, gamesome, nimble, gay, gallant,
dapper, jolly, wanton, frigging, frisking, fond, silly, spruce, quaint,
tricksie.

Purchase. Rich, wealthy, gainful, advantageous, commodious.

Pargatory. Flaming, cleansing, expiating, purse-milking, painful.

Purple. Blushing, shining, pompous, glittering, royal, princely, ruddy,
bloody, vermillion, Tyrian, Persian, costly, rich, sumtuous, mignificent.

Purse. Well-cram'd, swelling, strouting, ful-stuft, well-monied, speaking,
lanke, hollow, empty, dumb.

Pursevant. Officious, attaching, sword-bearing, subtle, crafty, rigorous,
suit-loving, severe, grim, odious, sterne-visaged, unwelcome, unpitying,
inquiring, dogging.

Pygmie. Dwarfish, low, little, short-statured, Crane-opposing,
Crane-contesting.

Pyramid. Aspiring, tall, star-pointing, proud, skie-braving, skie-threatning,
heaven-piercing, heaven-boring, exalted, lofty, mounting, soating, towering,
prodigious, cloud-bearing, cloud-cleaving, lasting, monumental.

Q.
Quail. LOw-flying, wheat-loving, hot, cold-fearing.

Qualm. Sudden, unexpected, surprising, overcoming, oppressing.

Quarrel. Litigious, tumultuous, bloody, jingling, jarring, contentious,
froward, peevish, pettish, inveterate, mortal, infamous, brawling, angry,
hell-nourisht, snakie, unfriendly, seditious, factious, dissentious,
blood-thirsty, grumbling, war-breeding, scoulding, uncharitable, wrangling,
brabling, harsh.

Queen. Stately, portly, majestic, awful, scepter-bearing, scepter-swaying,
sacred, glorious, imperious, commanding, glittering, virtuous,

Question, Thorny, doubtful, puzling, perplexing, anxious, debated, obscure,
contentious, discoursive, disputed, controverted, jangling, wrangling,
brawling, diffentious, argued discussed.

Quicksilver. Active, nimble, stirring, skipping, coy, squeamish.

Quiet. Peaceful, restful, silken, calm, smooth-fac't, still, silent, flowery,
smiling, friendly soft, mild, harmonious, silver-winged, pleasing, lulling,
sleepy, drowsy, sacred, untroubled, undisturbed, harmless, sleek, pleasant,
smooth-cheekt, reposed, retired, lonely, melancholy, downy, solitary,
sedentary, slumbering

Quill. Slender, limber, pliant, moving, waving, feathered, plumie, learned,
industrious, studious.

Quince. Downy, woolly, soft-skin'd, bea^ded, yellow, strong-sented.

Quintessence. Subtle, extracted, sublimated, drained, purged, diviner,
refined.

Quire. Quirister. Learned, artful, skilful, wel-tuned, harmonious, melodious,
fulvoic't, shrill, chanting, cheerful, sweet-voic't, sweet-singing, Seraphick,
soul-mooving, soul-raping, sence-bereaving, ravishing.

Quiver. Clashing, clattering, rattling, painted, sounding, hanging, dingling,
arrow-bearing, gilded.

R.
Rabbat. FEarful, sucking, timorous, tender, frigging, frisking, tender.

Rabbie. Rabbin, Learned, lettered, knowing, honored, majestic, imperious,
lying, calculating, obscure, mysterious, studious.

Race. Speedy, panting, puffing, blowing, breathless, sweating, contentious,
posting, industrious, laborious, nimble, active, short-winded.

Radish. Watery, biring, seeded, rooted, lurking, salt.

Rage. Stormy, furious, impetuous, tumultuous, heated, angry, chasing,
offensive, transporting, high-wrought, swelling, burning, boiling, tempestuous,
disordered, unadvised, ungoverned, unruly, unbridled, untamed, inconsiderate,
staring, tyger-footed, rash, unscan'd, flame-eyed, moody, distempered, hot,
headstrong, frantic, trembling, hot-mouth'd, surly, sullen, lawless, lavish,
misguided, uncollected, ireful, tyrannizing, wilful, self-wild, blundering,
pernicious, disquiet, surprising, impatient, blind, judgment-perverting,
giddie, stern-visaged, grim, revengeful, ghastly, dizzy-eyed, barbarous,
passionate, frothy, distracted, incensed, foaming, blustering, presumptuous,
sparkling, witless.

Ragge. Tattered, patched, lousy beggarly, nasty, filthy, loathsome, fulsome,
rejected, despised, scorned, contemned, flouted.

Raie. Sparkling, thirsty, parching, bu^ning, exalted, refulgent, instructive,
thawing, melting, dissolving, uncertain, scattered, dispersed, disheveld,
transpiercing, victorious, supping, licking, aire-gilding, glowing, majestic,
glorious, golden, gilded, garish, flaring, gaudy, d^zl^ng, cheerful,
life-enfusing, bright, shining, glittering, glist^ring, resplendent, flamie,
scorching, enlightened, waving, streaming, painted, checkered, embroidered,
enameled, subtle, limber, wandering, ravelled, ragged, blushing, conquering,
jagged.

Rain. Falling, showry, descending, soaking, river-swelling, refreshing,
fatning, fruitful, gentle, sweeping, quickening, drizling, weep^ng,
well-seasoned, timely, stormy, wealthy, growing, balmy, temp^stuous, impetuous,
soucing, scouring, washing, cleansing, cold, gushing, dropping, plentious,
dispersed, scattered, watery, bedewing, grass^-^mpearling, bleak, dabling.

Rainbow. Arched, painted, various, checkered, embroidered, purple,
many-coloured, moist, presaging prophetic, gaudy, crooked, sun-confronting,
sun-opposing, show^y, cloudy, eye-pleasing, streaked.

Rake. Sharp-fang'd, long-tooth'd, scraping, gathering, crooked. hooking,
tenacious.

Ram. Fleecy, ramping, salacious, butting, recoyling, shaggie, warlick,
warring, fighting, wanton, lascivious, jurring, joulting, push^ng, scuffling,
browsing, horned, back-forc't, ba^tering, impetuous, assaulting, eager, violent.

Rampire. Defensive, thick-rib'd, strong, assaulted, battered, resisting,
shielding, guarding, warding, skreening.

Rancour. v. Malice. Spightful, malicious, deadly, cankered, revengeful,
secret, subtle, sullen, fork-tongued, poisonous, viperous, black-mouthed,
envious, swelling, blew-eyed, squint-eyed, snakie, censorious, boiling,
heart-gnawing, heart-fretting, biting, unappeased, calumnious, flint-hearted,
inexorable.

Kape. Enforcing impetuous, violent, secret, nightly, sad, unwelcome,
unwilling, resistlesse, deflowring.

Rapier. Courtly, dangling, fantastic, gilded, thrusting, stabbing, gaudy,
fatal generous.

Rapine. Greedy, griping, injurious, avaritious, impetuous, despoiling,
infamous, theevish, adventurous, audacious, wrongful, impious, unjust,
tyrannous, devouring, cruel, pitiless, violent, remorselesse.

Raptures. Enthusiastic, flaming, resining, lofty, intrancing, enchanting,
encharming, soul-moving, melting, pleasing, glorious, transporting, inspired,
Poetic, raving, high-bred.

Raskal. Vilainous. mischievous, unblushing, impudent, brazen faced, rope-ripe,
desperate, audacious, daring, cheating, cozening, deluding, overreaching,
circumventing, sly, crafty, subtle, knavish, saucy, paltry, surly, juggling,
pilfering, malapert, impious, inju^ious, abusive, ungoverned, unruly, lawless,
crack-rope, lubberly, boisterous, branded, infamous, notorious.

Rashness. Heady, headstrong, unruly, ungoverned, unadvised, indeliberate,
wilful, selfwild, hasty, impetuous, improvident, unwary, adventurous,
audacious, blind, furious, foolish, idiscreet, inconsiderate, bold, saucy,
fearlesse, presumptuous, il-advised, peremptory, preposterous, blustering.

Rat. Nimble, subtle, sly, crafty, harmful, gnawing, odious, loathsome,
nasty, mischievous.

Rattle. Noysesul, crackling, stilling, toyish, sportive, pleasing,

Raven. Black, sable, croaking, greedy, cramming, ravenous, gluttonous,
ill-boding, presaging, predictious, ominous, unluckie* hoarse, crack-voic'^,
long-lived, old, prating, twatling, aged, coaly, fatal.

Readiness. Willing, cheerful, nimble, active, officious, serviceable,
obsequious, attentive, quick, respective, industrious, obedient, speedy,
lively, sprightly.

Reaper Sweaty, scorched, sunburned, sun-bakt, broyled, laborious, industrious,
toylesom, thirsty, weary, stooping, crooked, panting.

Reason. Imperious, controlling, commanding, guiding, moving, enforcing,
directing, consulting, wise, sage, understanding, urgent, prudent, wary,
cautious, conclusive, excusing, teaching, tutoring, schooling.

Rebel. Rebellion. Insolen^, lawless, unruly, ungoverned, untamed, fearlesse,
awlesse, bold, saucy, audacious, adventurous, unblushing, confronting,
opposing, unquelled, disloyal, undaunted, malepart, impudent, mutinous,
furious, seditious, disturbing, state troubling, tumultuous, impetuous,
stat^-changing, factious, discontented.

Rebuke. Just, unjust, deserved, undeserved, sharp, smart, angry.

Recompense. Joyful, expected, desired, wished, contenting, large, ample,
fruitful, grateful, thankful, satisfying, hop^d, deserved, earn^d, equitable,
proportioned.

Records. Antic, ancient, sage, registring, eternal, lasting, memorable,
immortal, deathlesse, historious, truth-preserving, truth-treasuring,
truth-storing, annal^zing, immortalizing, time-worme.

Recreation. v. Play. Gamesome, sportive, toyish, time-stealing, mirthful,
harmless, lavish, unthrifty, fruitless, solacing, heart-chearing.

Redemption. Gracious, merciful, powerful, victorious.

Reed. Shivering, plash-loving, quivering, pliant, bristling, whis^ering,
foggy, fenny, wavering, waving, bending, shaking, limber, ^rembling, whistling,
rattling, marish-loving, tender, slender, incon^ant, moist, dancing, vocal.

Refreshment. v. Play. Refuge. Assured, propitious, defensive, protecting,
comforting, happy, successful.

Register. Recording, treasuring, historious, eternal, eternizing, immortal,
^mmortalizing, truth-preserving, lasting, truth-storing.

Reins. v. Kidneyes. Secret, hidden, concealed, hot, chafed, lustful,
liver-draining, gravelly.

Reins of a Bridle. Curbing, ruling, guiding, turning, waving, loosned, foamy,
stubborn, staying, slavered, gingling.

Relief. Charitable, merciful, courteous, kind, pious, gracious, pitying,
tender.

Relics. Sacred, pious, ancient, antic, religious, adored, superstitious,
venerable, worshipped, honored, choice, precious, dear, gilded, dusty, musty,
worm-eaten, holy, devotious, moldy, maggot-eaten, time-worn, solemn.

Religion. Sacred, holy, pure, sincere, zealous, fervent, solemn, faithful,
Catholic, Apostolic, conscientious, ceremonious.

Remedy. Preserving, preventing, sovereign, present, powerful, approved,
health-giving, wholesome, virtuous, applied, healthful, joyous, joyful,
singular, pain easing, strong, useful, commodious, cordial, comforting,
efficacious.

Remembrance. Sad, glad, heavy, pensive, busy, joyful, mindful.

Remorse. Checking, curbing, awing, conscientious, sharp, sad, shaming,
pricking, penitential, secret, pale, scrupulous.

Renegado. Apostate, damned, cursed, hellish, impious, perfidious, false,
faithless, perjured, revolting, unruly, irregular, infamous, branded,
rebellious, wretched.

Renown. v. Fame. Winged, deathless, immortalized, famous, glorious, spreading,
^^sting, incredible, unexprest.

Repentance. Sad, pensive, ashie, mournful, weeping, late, slow, tardy, hea^^
sour, sharp, sober.

Repining. Querulous, seditious, factious, grumbling, sour, frowning, gri^
stern, threatful, impious, secret.

Reply. Sharp, short, smart, acute, rational, arguing.

Report. v. Fame Rumor Swift-wing'd* fleet-wing'd, spreading, tatling,
twatling, babli^^ flitting, lavish, swelling, long-tongued, tell-tale,
gossipping, gaddi^^ winged, light-heeld, glib-tongu'd, wide-mouthed,
sleek-wing'd, Eagle-wing'd, posting, spurring.

Repose. v. Quiet. Secure, soft, calm, quiet, peaceful, easy, retired, silken,
happy, desire^ lazy, warm.

Reproach. Taunting, flouting, oprobrious, injurious, harsh, contumelious,
^^just, shameful, biting, girding, stinging, twitching, infamous, noto^ous,
saucy, bold.

Reproof. Just, unjust, deserved, undeserved, merited, unmerited, sh^^^ smart,
harsh, bold, courageous, angery, stern, sour, grimme, choleric.

Repulse. Sharp, sour, stern, valiant, courageous, stout, manly, obstina^^
impetuous, strong, angry, choleric, churlish, sullen, surly, sturdy, brave,
glorious, victorious.

Request. Humble, suppliant, earnest, solicitous, importunate, bold, ea^^^
crowching, fawning, inconstant, urgent, pressing, reasonable, fair, honest,
pertinent, impertinent, seasonable, unseasonable.

Resistance. v. Repulse. Rest. v. Quiet. Peaceful, foft, quiet, silent, lazy,
lither, downy, untroubled, ^^disturbed.

Resurrection. Joyful, joyous, cheerful, wished, blessed, glorious, reuniting,
fin^^ happy, reviving, quickening.

Restorative. Virtuous, rigorous, sovereign, efficacious, cordial, healthful,
^^ngthning, comforting, reviving.

Revenge. Black, dismal, furious, rageing, chafing, boiling, bloody, insatiate,
appeased, implacable, sad, flame-eyed, snake-haired, desperate, cru^^, stern,
grimme, frowning, rageful, wrathful, threathing, mena^^^g, hellish, stinging,
just, rash, barbarous, thirsty, fiery, hot, flaming, ^^petuous, stormy,
swelling, burning, hot-mouthed, sullen, bluster^^g, self-willed, impatient,
passionate, sparkling, foaming, fro^^^.

Reverence. Obsequious, auspicious, submissive, solemn, holy, pious,
ceremo^^^us, aweful, fearful, dreadful, silent, crouching, adoring,
prostrating, ^^ee-crooking.

Reward. v. Recompense. Rhadamanthus. v. Judge. Grimme, stern-visaged,
inexorable, impartial, severe, austere, ^^el, unsparing, unpittying, just,
grave, wise, even-handed, brow-^^^ting, frowning.

Rhetoric. v. Eloquence. Heart-stealing, soul-moving, soul-raping, persuasive,
smooth, ^ly, courtly, varnisht, quaint, painted, glozing, insinuating,
victo^^ous, overcoming, delicious, sweet-lipt, soul-invading, bewitching,
^^chanting, encharming, Nectareous, ambrosian, ear-captivating, ^cy-tickling.

Riddle. Dark, knotty, perplexing, puzling, posing, subtle, hard, profound,
ob^^^re, doubtful, ambiguous, secret, grave, scrupulous, mysterious, con^^^led.

Rigor. Cruel, hard-hearted, flint-hearted, marble-hearted, strict,
re^orseless, unrelenting, unpitying, merciless, tyrannous, angry, bit^^^,
odious, obstinate, obdurate, bloody, blood-thirsty, stern, savage, ^^^ious,
impetuous.

Rimes. Laurel-worthy, wel-trickt, wel-drest, smooth, flowing, Nectar^^opping,
melodious, harmonious, wel-tun'd, delicious, smooth-pac't, ^igh^ly, gleesome,
joyful, ear-enamouring, soul-raping, soul-mo^^^g, soul-invading, joyous,
mirthful, numerous, pleasant, measured, ^ll-proportioned.

Rind. Rugged, coating, clothing, tender, sleek, smooth, sh^ly, writheld,
^^mpled, frumpled, wrapping, embracing, knotty, porous, wrinckled, ^low,
weather-beaten, casing, pimpled, mossie.

Ring. Burnisht, gilded, enamelld, hining, impearled, nuptial, g^^ generous,
finger-hooping, graceful, costly, pompous, pearly.

Riot. Headie, luxurious, lascivious, loose, dissolute, unruly, vngov^^
disordered, distempered, lawless, wanton, licentious, tumultu^^

Rites. Mysterious, solemn, ceremonious, sacred, pious, holy, relig^^
devotious, venerable, ancienr, received.

Rival. Jealous, suspicious, fearful, ambitious, careful, industrious, env^^
malicious, spightful, revengeful, calumnious, heart-wounded, ^^ing, eying,
wary, cautious, circumspect, amorous.

Rivar. River. v. Flood. Winding, whispering, gulphy, uxorious, bank-kissing,
bank-^^ing, Crystal, amorous, swelling, silver, silver-breasted, rustling,
^bling, dancing, gliding, purling, snaky, rolling, hurrying, shower, censed,
vaulting, leaping, glassie, whirling, wandering, strag^^ wheeling,
smooth-sliding, wrigling, floating, swan-imbroided, (...)

Road. Common, beaten, frequented, hoof-beaten, stamped, foot-ram^ travaild.

Robber. Highway, treacherous, insidious, impetuous, assalted, inj^^^ subtle,
vigilant, crafty, sly, secret, ambusht, murdering, cruel, blo^ surprising,
pitiless, watchful, greedy, preying, expecting, way-la^^ pestering,
purse-taking.

Robe. Rich, wealthy, pompous, stately, gallant, magn^ficent, g^^ costly,
sumptuous, decent, grave, comely, graceful, becoming, (...) spruce, handsome,
attiring, adorning, fashionable.

Rock. Craggie, justling, solid, crushing, rooted, ragged, hanging, l^vaulty,
rattling, aged, hollow-vaulted, high-browd, sea-survey^ froth-girt,
sea-outfacing, knaggie, sea-confronting, sea-orehang^ sea-outlooking,
sea-daring, ship-threatning, wave-breaking, repell^ churlish, solitary,
towering, aspiring, obdurate, ruthlesse, steep, (...) cliffie, barren, burly,
froathy, foamy, massy, guttered, unfreque^^ melancholy, impregnable, dull,
horned, beaten, dashing, splitt^^ sea-girt, supercilious, skie-braving,
skie-towring, skie-inva^^ skie-threatning, desert, uncouth, forsaken,
inhospitable, crump-^^dered, shrubbie, mosse-thrumd, deaf, unfruitful, proud,
ambi^^^ dreadful, exalted, bushie, wave-spurning, crannied, slippery.

Rod. ^wful, dreadful, scourging, lashing, awing, schooling, tutoring, ^aining,
curbing, ruling, jerking, smarting,

Roe. ^kipping, leaping, dancing, vaulting, tripping, wanton, frisking, ^ging,
gamesome, sportive, light-foot, nimble, timorous, fearful, ^bling.

Rogue. v. Rascal. ^otorious, crack-rope, rope-ripe, vilanous, bold,
mischievous, ^^dent, shameless, unblushing, saucy, malapert, cheating, coze^g,
juggling, brazen-fac't.

Roof. Losty, stately, hanging, vaulty, arched, airy.

Root. ^ervie, sinewie, fibrous, bearded, spreading, m^ssie, sinking, ^ing,
moist, watery, thirsty, earth-bound, sappy, jucie, the plants ^^r, attractive,
tender, branched, dispersing, scattered, wrigling, ^^y, stringed, knaggy,
knotty vigorous, enterlaced, creeping, craw^^, grovelling.

Rope. Corded, twisted, dangling, knotty, twined, binding, hanging, ^hed.

Rose. ^lushing, stamme^, fragrant, dew-dropping, odorous, vermilli^^
carnation, perfumed, smiling, maiden, virgin, blowing, fading, ^t-lived,
withering, muskie, velvet, purple-plusht, budding, amo^s, bearded, thorny,
prickly, dew-empearled, painted, delicious, ^ly, sweet-lipt.

Rosemary Flowery, odorous, fragrant, genial, nuptial, branching, shooting,
^ggie, tufted, posied.

Ruby. Glittering, blushing, orient, wealthy, precious, beaming, flaming,
^iant, Indian, inestimable.

Rue. ^itter, wild, mountainous, sharp-sented, cold-fearing, wet-fea^g,
dung-hating:

Russian. Whoring, wenching, roaring, swearing, cursing, swaggering, ga^^g,
quarrelling, debaucht, dissolute, unruly, ungoverned, bicke^g, brabling,
rapier-wearing*

Ruin. Pitied, dusty, dismal, dreadful, undoing, sudden, tempestuous, mented,
bewailed, woeful, bemoaned, deplored, sad, miserable, unh^^^ black, mourned,
fatal, reproachful, shameful, ignominious, hide^^^ ghastly, affrightful.

Ruler Directive, instructing, guiding, teaching, tutoring, authen^^^ squaring.

Ruler. Imperious, commanding, controlling, awful, dreadful.

Rumor. v. Fame. Report. Busy, meddling, saucy, licentious, lawless, winged,
light-heeld, l^^^*tongued, swifi-winged, glib-tongue.

Rush. Pithie, knotless, bearded, piked, tufted, waving, smooth-s^^^ sleek,
quivering, wavering, trembling, limber, slender, muddy, ^^^^loving,
plash-loving, thirsty, sharp-pointed, spungy, pithy, ^^^rooted.

Russian. Cold, freezing, frost-bit, frost-nipt, bleak, chill, furred, quivering

Rusticitie. Rude, saucy, clownish, lubberly, nasty, loathsome, noisome, odi^^^
fulsome, slovenly, sluttish, rough, harsh, absurd, boisterous, blustr^^^
blundering, simple, plain, untaught, barbarous, ignorant.

S.
Sabaean. SPicie, soft, effeminate, delicate, rich, wealthy, plump, pre^ctious,
remote.

Sabbath. Sacred, ceremonious, religious, honored, solemn, restie.

Sabines. Ancient, severe, rigid, strictliv'd, chaste, temperate, sober,
in^^strious.

Sacrament. Mysterious, ceremonious, solemn, reverend, venerable,
gr^^^conferring, grace-conveying, devout, uncomprehended.

Sacrifice. Plous, religious, devotious, solemn, humble, appeasing, bloody,
^oaking, censed, burning.

Sacrilege. Accursed, impious, audacious, execrable, odious, detested,
ab^rred, godless.

Saffran. Yellow, gilded, flowery, trampled, golden, ruddy, blushing,
sweet-^eathing, fragrant.

Sails. Flagging, unfulled, winged, wind-stuft, ful-spead, whistling,
^welling, hollow, unfoulded, great-bellied, ambitious, ruffling, trem^ling,
spreading, buffing, hoysted, pregnant, limber, portly, rufled, ^oa^ing waving,
gathered, speedy, hanging, stooping, paunched, gor^ellied, strouting,
weather-beaten, rustling, rattling.

Sailer. v. Mariner. Fearful, timorous, trembling, watchful, storm-beaten,
Sea-scour^ed, tempest-driven, industrious, adventurous, Sea-fairing,
Sea-^utting, Sea-tracing, wind-observing, star-gazing.

Saint. Honored, adored, enshrined, triumphant, blessed, canonized, glo^ified,
exalted, immortal.

Salamander. Unburnt, cold, unschorcht, spotted, speckled, fire-quenching,
star^ed, star-powdered, venomous, poisonous, icie.

Sallow. Limber, verdant, branching, spreading, sprouting, bank-loving, pliant,
plash-loving, moist, shadie, tender, bitter, short-lived, twiggy, ^ruitless.

Salt. Savoury, quickening, sharpening, stomack-whetting, frothy, corroding,
preserving, clotting, melting, relish-giving.

Salve. Curing, healing, powerful, efficacious, health-restoring, pain^easing,
applied, plaistered, pain-allaying, unctious.

Sanctuary. Sacred, holy, reverend, venerable, frequented, honored,
reve^encing, protecting, sequestered, unprophaned.

Sand. Flitting, barren, yielding, golden, beachy, yellow, thirsty, sucking,
^purling, silver, straw-colourd, dusty, wavy, gravelly, loose, moving,
^flood-driven, hurried, cold, dry, unfruitful, rolling, wandering, pearly,
^queachy, shifting, sliding, numerous, unnumbred, flowing, muddy, ^glittering,
floating.

Saphyr, Devout, pious, azure, purple, speckled, shining, glittering, h^^^
uncarved.

Sarmatian. Swift-foot, cruel, wandering, straggling, sallow, unshorne,
lo^^-haired, stout, valiant, cold, freezing, shaggie, blood-qu^ffing, flitti^^

Satin. Sleeke, smooth, glittering, shining, pompous, rich, wealthy, sp^^^
brisk, rustling, whistling.

Saturn. Cold, dull, heavy, lumpish, doltish, leaden, melancholy, sull^^
sallow, aged, long-bearded, mowing, sickle-bearing, deposed, s^^^ old, pensive.

Satyrs. Shaggy, rough-hewn, sportiue, lusty, wanton, salacious, lasci^^ous,
salvage, frolic, light-foot, wild, unruly, lust-spurd, amoro^^, clamorous,
jolly, tripping, nimble, horned, goat-footed, shouting, noyseful, blundering,
harsh, impetuous, boisterous, blustering, ^^civil, wood-haunting, frisking,
swift-footed, churlish, sullen, surly, burly, tumultuous, gamesome, gleesome,
unfashioned, rural, rob^stious, naked, listening, prick-ear'd, leaping,
skipping, vaulting, d^^cing, saucie, flouting, jeering, venerous.

Satyr. Girding, biting, snarling, scourging, jerking, lashing, smarting,
sharp, tart, rough, invective, censorious, currish, snappish, captio^^,
barking, brawling, carping, fanged, sharp-tooth'd, quipping, jeering, flouting,
sullen, rigid, impartial, whipping, thorny, pricking, stinging, sharp-fanged,
injurious, reproachful, libellous, harsh, rough-hewne, odious, opprobrious,
contumelious, defaming, calumnious.

Sauce. Poynant, stomach-whetting, p^ovoking, relish-giving, sl^pping,
superfluous, luxurious, costly, sumptuous, expensive, excessive, unthrifty,
sharp, sour, tart, lickerous, piercing, stinging, seasoning, savoury.

Saw. Toothed, grating, reciprocated, cutting, cleaving, dividing, shrill,
noyseful.

Scab. Loathsome, nasty, fulsome, odious, infectious, contagious, diseaseful,
unwholesome, spreading, scaly, scurfie, shelly, putrid, noisome,

Scabbard. Peaceful, drowsy, rusty, gilded, shielding, coating, hollow, resty.

Scaffold. Spacious, capacious, frequented, exalted, advanced, lofty, thron^d,
crowded, swarming.

Scales. Weighing, poising, equal, just, hanging, dangling, even-dealing,
^ea^ing, juggling, turning.

Scandal. Injurious, harmeful, pernicious, dangerous, infamous, defaming,
^pprobrious, offensive, calumnious, vile, black-mouthed, envious, ^alitious,
squint-eyed, long-tongued.

Scarecrow. Affrighting, dreadful, bugbear, ugly, hideous, ghastly, awing,
^owing, awful, empty, silly, simple.

Scarlet. Blushing, flaming, deep-hiewd, rich, wealthy, pompous, magni^cent,
stately, worshipful, honored, aw-infusing.

Scavenger. Filthy, nasty, fulsome, noisome, loathsome, durty, base, poor,
tat^er'd, stinking, dung-farming, gold-fining.

Scepter. Pearly, awsul, proud, desired, ambitious, courted, enamelled,
stud^ed, royal, regal, princely, stately, portly, majestic, honored, swey^ng,
ruling, shining, commanding, imperious, controlling, quelling, ^hreatning,
envied, glittering, graceful, aw-infusing, dreadful, ivo^y, golden, glorious,
grave, victorious, massy, weighty, venerable, ^ompous.

Shisme. Shismatick. Seditious, renting, peace-disturbing, tumultuous,
war-engende^ing, libellous, factious, siding, malecontented, state-troubling,
turbulent, fiery, bloody, furious, haire-braind, giddy-headed, brainsick,
^ruth-perverting, Scripture-wresting, unlettered, misguided, seduced,
^rroneous, fantastic, audacious, pernicious, state-molesting, Church-^ounding,
self-conceited, self-opinioned, obstinate, self-willed, wilful.

Scholar. Painful, careful studious, submissive, obedient, pliant, attentive,
^ssiduous, industrious, vigilant, laborious, meager, bookish, pregnant,
ingenious, sharp-witted, blockish, dull, careless, dull-witted.

Shoole. Learned, lettered, industrious, educating, instructive, feared, ha^ed,
painful, laborious, toylesome, nurturing.

Schooleman. Subtle, knotty, quick-conceited, plodding, wit^y, discoursive,
arguing, industrious, studious, knowing, sifting, bandying, disputing, thorny,
acute, sharp-witted, discussing.

Schoolmaster. Pedant. Pedantick, severe, grim harsh, stern-visag'd, austere,
angry, su^len, hasty choleric, waspish, impatient, lashing, jerking, scourgin^
furious, tyrannous, tyrannizing, tutoring, instructing, painful, laborious,
careful industrious, inculeating, sour, peevish, pettish, lea^ned, skilful,
knowing, cruel, grave, imperious, majestic, domineerin^

Science. Sacred, industrious, gainful, useful, graceful, subtle, famous,
^^ble, ingenious, studious divine.

Scoff. Geering flanting, wry-mou^h'd, taunting, gibing* girding, wipi^^
disdainful, flouting, deriding, contemptuous, abusive, secret, wry-nos'd.

Scorn. Disdainful, proud, insolent, squint-eyed, sullen, wry-mouth'^
deriding, contemptuous, arrogant, sowre-eyed, peevish, haugh^^ swelling, surly,
currish, churlish, spightful, angry, despising, undevaluing, disesteeming,
unbecoming.

Scorpion. Writhed, stinging, knotty, curled, folded, poisonous, venemo^^,
dreadful, crooked, bowed, cruel, deadly, mortal, fatal, burning:

Scourge. Lashing, je^king, smarting, painful, revengeful, sharp, knot^^,
twisted, awing, dreadful, feared, hated, loathed, curbing, restraining,
tutoring, cruel, bloody, schooling, fleaing, severe, rigoro^^, rattling,
threatening.

Screen. Fencing, warding, shielding, sheltering, defending, hiding,
co^cealing, protecting.

Scribe. Scrivener. Painful, industrious, laborious, inkie, pen-wearing,
paper-bl^ring, intentive, assiduous, ready, nimble, quick-fingred, dispatch^^
skilful, artful, hand-commanding, posting, hand-running.

Scum. Frothy, foamy, superficial, floating, sweaty, swelling, bublin^ boiling,
hoary, swimming.

Scot. Hardy, valiant, ficrce, forward, adventurous, warlick, active, ^^ry,
waspish, peevish, angry, choleric, hasty.

Scruple. P^icking, anxious, vexing, perplexing, conscientious, curio^^
doubtful, grubby, molesting, jealous, fearful, suspicious.

Scythian. Barbarous, warlick, bloody, rude, cruel, savage, untamed, freeing,
wandering,

Sea. Working, boiling, floating, wavie, angry, raging, swelling, diffu^ed,
licentious, curled, insulting, swallowing, awful, dreadful, gul^hy, toyling,
pathlesse, drenching, thirsty, ever-drinking, floody, a^ure, ireful, stormy,
surgy, ebbing, flowing, glassie, tumbling, pine^loughed, dropsy, unbottomed,
unpath'd, unsounded, breaking, un^easured, unfathomed, vasty, impetuous,
resulting, giddy, wrathful, ^rinish, blew-wav'd, wrackful, tumultuous,
resounding, brackish, ^ray, yielding, aged, hoary, rugged, rufled, wind-hew'd,
vaulting, ^retting, bigh-wav'd, fishy, troubled, foamy, belching, untamed,
^ocky, billowie, tossing, frothy, soundlesse, green-fac'd, swelling, ^^ncing,
roaring, bellowing, infatiate, wealthy, shelfie, tide-raised, ^^ngry,
boundless, devouring, ravenous, gluttonous, unconfined, ^ngorging,
earth-incircling, earth-girdling, engulphing, pearly, im^atient, furious,
inexorable, hollow, winding, grumbling, sail-bea^ing, greedy, a varitious,
capacious, unfrozen, water-crashing, earth^urrounding, hydropick.

Seaman. Wandering, fearful, weather-beaten, storm-fearing, trembling,
ad^enturous, vowing, greedy, avaritious, wind-observing, star-gazing,
wave-cutting, wave-tost.

Search. Industrious, careful, diligent, curious, laborious, piercing,
assiduous, ^ttentive, watchful, active, hunting, painful, prosperous,
successeful, ^ishing.

Secret. Concealed, hidden, sequestered, undivulged, mysterious, private,
^nclosed, enchested, reserved, covered, murmured, deep, profound, ^lent,
lurking, pensive, treasured.

Sectary. v. Schismatic. Siding, partial, prejudicial, sequestring, obstinate,
self-willed, self^onceited, self-opinioned, seditious, tumultuous,
peace-disturbing, Church-renting, factious, giddy, hair-braind, brainsick,
male-con^ented, insolent, jangling, wrangling disagreeing, jarring, unfriendly.

Security. Easy, sluggish, sleepy, drowsy, audacious, quiet, soft, insolent,
prejudi^ial, indammaging, careless, fearlesse, bold, blind, incautelous,
credu^^us, dreaming, supine, regardlesse, negligent, yawning loose, pernici^us

Sedge. Intangling, muddy, weedy, plashy, marish, loving.

Sedition. Tumultuous, turbulent, siding, partial, unfriendly, factious,
brainsick, rebellious, mutinous, pernicious, novel, brawling, barking
wrangling, jangling, jarring, impious, wicked, unpeaceable, confe-confederate,
conspired, combind, lawless.

Seed, Fruitful, growing, increasing, propagated, sprouting, pregna^^,
masculine, powerful, vigorous, rooting, springing, scatterd, ingendring,
procreative, genial.

Seminary. Fruitful, pregnant, teeming, happy, successful.

Semiramis. Babylonian, masculine, manly, courageous, valiant, famous, w^^ton,
Iascivious, luxurious, unchaste, profuse.

Senate. Purple, grave, reverend, aged, honored, prudent, authentic, sage,
wise, deliberate, consulting, advising, decreeing, law-making, assenbled,
judicious.

Sense. Voluptuous, seducing, erroneous, active, nimble, industrious, spo^tive,
gamesome, wanton.

Sensuality. v. Lust, Luxury. Barbarous, brutish, beastly, bestial,
luxurious, ungoverned, volup^^ous, swinish, wallowing, unramed, unbridled.

Sentence. Learned, wise, grave, judicious, pithy, useful, obscure, profound,
^^morable, ingenious, facetious, witty, golden, divine, subtle.

Sentinel. Watchful, careful, waking, industrious, attentive, vigilant,
wa^c^ing, wary, cautious, circumspect.

Sepulcher. Forsaken, oblivious, forgotten, mournful, pompous, honored,
glorious, sable, marble, sumptuous, cold, magnificent, shady, darksome obscure,
proud, silent, dumb, black, fatal, hollow, vaultie, yawning, quiet, peaceful,
devouring, time-worn, loathsome, corrupting, nasta* fulsome, dustie, musty,
fusty, jaw-stretcht, gaping, wide-mouthed, da^kish, unfrequented, comely,
decent, graceful.

Sepulture. Honest, decent, comely, befitting, solemn, ceremonious, obsequio^^
mournful, pensive, lamenting, graceful.

Seraphin. Smooth-fac't, beauteous, sweet-voic't, swift-wing'd, silver-wing'^
golden-feather'd, smooth-cheet, rose-lipt, glorious, blessed, holy, h^ppy,
celestial, joy-ravisht, sworded.

Sergeant. Officious, law-executing, crafty, fly, subtle, willing, ready,
employed, busy, sword-bearing, odious, detested, hateful, suit-loving,
merciless, pitiless, unpittying, remorseless, unrelenting, grim, harsh,
austere, cruel, feared, dreadful, bugbear, hated, stern-visaged, sullen,
sour, haling, frowning, brow-kn^tting, supercilious, imperiou^, ^o^ghdealing,
dogging.

Serpent. Slimy, speckled, folded, winding, crawling, killing, stinging,
wreathing, writhing, wrigling, twining, knotty-nowed, subtle, crafty,
grovelling, doubling, creeping, lurking, crouching, damaskt, wily, scaly,
checkerd, venomous, poisonous, baneful, forked, fork-tongued, deceitful, sly,
spotted, freckled, basking, hissing, enameld, swelling, biting, deadly,
dreadful, glittering, glistering, crested, azure, blew-skind, quick-sighted,
slipperie, noxious, gluttinous, gliding, assaulting, vaulting.

Servant. Industrious, quick, stirring, active, nimble, willing, ready,
officious, obsequious, obedient, pliant, diligent, laborious, toyling, tugging,
moyling, careful, painful, watchful, assiduous, faithful, honest, idle, lazy,
lither, dronish, sleepie, drowsy, rebellious, murmuring, grumbling, repining,
saucy, uncivil, sordid, regardless, careless, deceitful, thievish, unfaithful,
dishonest, disobedient, proud, insolent, negligent, s^ow, freezing.

Service. Hard, cruel, rigorous, laborious, toylsome, drudging, easy,
honorable, happy.

Servitude. Rigorous, cruel, oppressing, slavish, gauling, groaning,
restaining, heavy, crushing, bruising, wretched, constrained, odious, infamous,
laborious, tugging, toylesome, tyrannous, shameful, ignominious, intolerable,
unsupported, detested, abhorred, hated, burdenous, loading soul-dejecting,
tormenting, vexing, drudging, loathed, grating.

Sessions. Dreadful, grim, sad, severe, austere, awful.

Severitie. Grim, sad, austere, cruel, awful, hateful, odious, rigorous,
bloody, rigid, imperious, frowning, supercilious, tyrannous.

Shacles. B^nding, fettering, pressing, gauling, wringing, slavish,
restraining, servile, infamous.

Shade. Shadow. Fleeting, Sylvane, spreading-gloomy, darksome, delightsome,
faint, foggy, cooling, refreshing, sullen, scowling, whispering, leavie,
obscuring, kind, courteous, friendly, befriending, cool, chil, sad, dark,
doleful, empty, dank, griesly, covert, ghastly, unfrequented, silent, Ebon,
deformed, glimpsing, dreadful, flitting, unsubstantial, dusky, brow^, pale,
learing, feeble, hungry, dogging, faint, thin, sable, meager, hollow,
unfathomed, ungrasped, lean, glaring, gliding, wandering fantastic, bloodless,
drowsy, trembling, sliding, glancing, flying, ^wi^ming, deceitful, genial,
hospitable, verdant, melancholy, bloodess.

Shaft. Darted, wingy, whirling, whistling, singing, Cretian, light-winged,
forked, thrilling, trembling flying, pointed, fluttering, quiveri^^, wounding,
killing, bearded, fatal, poisoned, piercing, deathful, digging, swift-paced,
light-foot, Thessalian, Scythian, Thracian, P^^thian, Sidonian, cruel,
revengeful, Armenian, impetuous, bloody, blood-thirsty.

Shambles. Fleshy, bloody, greasy, swearing, cheating, fat, murdering,
killin^, but cherly, bleeding, nasty, sluttish, fulsome.

Shame. Blushing bashful, disgraceful, infamous, dishonest, ugly, lasting,
burning, opprobrious, fearful, modest, trembling, reproachful, ingen^ous,
concealing, pale, ignominious, betraying, towardly.

Sheafe. Ripened, weighty, pregnant, bundled, bristled, fruitful, joyful.

Sheep. Harmless, fleecy, silly, wealthy, wandering, straying, rambling,
straggling, nibling, browsing, flocking, curled, bleating, grazing, gamesome,
sportive, woolly, fruitful, gainful, fleece-bearing, fearful, weakheaded,
seduced, rambling, broad-taild.

Sheet. Nuptial, genial, enfolding, wanton, conscious, nightly, silent, secret,
venereous, lecherous.

Shell. Hollow, pearly, Crystal, casing, housing, sounding, crispy, curled,
radiant, shining, glittering, bright, crooked, arched, vaulty, painted,
enameld, writhed, scaly, streaked, frothy, foamie, wrinkled, knaggie.

Shelter. Defensive, protecting, securing, safe, warm, happy, joyful, shady,
screening, covering, hiding, fencing, concealing, shielding.

Shepherd. v. Swain. Silly, lusty, jolly, gamesome, sportive, gleesome, piping,
mirthful, gladsome, merry jovial, un-envied, honest, blithe, buxome, jocund,
rude, rural, rustic, clowuish, boorish, robustious, active, careful,
labo^ious, industrious, ill-favored, unfashioned, whistling, sallow, sunburnt,
swarthy.

Shield. Plated, batterd, clattering, clashing, fencing, warding, guarding,
repulsing, belabored, securing, protecting, defending, saving, screening,
trusty, glittering, gilded, flashed, wounded, gashed, bloody, hollow, brazen,
shining, desensive, massy, dazzling.

Shine. Scattered, glaring, trembling, dazzling, glimsing, dispersed, spreading,
radiant, beaming, glorious, gaudy, gorgeous, graceful, beauteous, darted,
reflected, flaming* starry. glittering, eye-conquering, pompous, resplendent,
victorious, enlightened, gilded.

Ship. Winged, bras-beakt, sayl-winged, stately, portly, laboring, hollow,
many-joynted, thin-ribd, well-rigg'd, adventurous, swift-pac't, sea-plowing,
crooked, vaulty, floating, posting, flying, corded, pitched, sea-tracing,
sea-cuting, storm-beaten, reeling.

Shipwreck. Dreadful, fearful, miserable, splitting, lamented, sad, unhappy,
comfortless, tempestuous, stormy, black, dismal.

Shop. Busy, trafficking, merchandising, thronged, well-stored, well-sorted,
wealthy; open, cozening, cheating, bartering, bargaining, exchanging, storing.

Shore. Wavy, solid, winding, beachy, ratled, sandy, foamy, frothy, g^oaning,
rugged, calm, rocky, craggy, broken, flowing, sucking, wished, long-desired,
mossie, grassie, weedy, bounding, shelly, sh^l-strewed, pearly, pibly fl^my,
naked, unpeopled, confining, bounding, crooked, desert, forsaken, unfrequented,
barren, prattling, murmuring, hoarle, recoyling, repulsing, wave-spurning,
enameld, wave-courted, scarterd jagged, hollow, shrubby, resounding, drumming,
bellowing, flushing, wave-dashing, coy, squeamish angry, chu^lish, froward,
beachy.

Shoulder. Strong, massy, able, robustious, supporting, bearing, pack-bearing,
upholding, sustaining, propping, loadned.

Shout. Noyseful, cheerful, clamorous, joyful, applausive, voice-uniting,
confused, tumultuous, deafning, pierceing, Air-rending, Skie-tea^ing, amazing,
astounding.

Shower. Drizling, weeping, balmy, refreshing, corn-lodging, impetuous,
falling, soucing, soaking, dropping, plenteous, tempestuous, gushi^^ fruitful,
stormy, pearly, silver, threatining, river-swelling, fatnin^, sweeping,
quickening, washing, drenching rensing, wel-seasond, balmy, scouring, cleansing,
scattered, grass-impearling, frothy, windy, r^^ling, dabling, honeyed.

Shrew. Cursed, froward, pievish, scolding, angry, frowning, brow-pursing,
brow-knitting, sullen, furious, brawling, way-ward, soul-lookt.

Shrine. Sacred, honored, adored, gilded, superstitious, worshipped, devotious,
religious, garnisht.

Shrub. Humble, bushie, prickly, thorny, bristly, idle, barren, unfruitful,
mossie, grovie.

Shuttle. Gliding, speedy, quicke-returning, weaving, swift-pac't,
reciprocated, bandied.

Sibyl. Aged, prophetic, sacred, Virgin, chaste, long-lived, predictious,
presaging, foretelling, inspired, enthusiastic.

Sicambrian. Fierce, yellow, bloody, untamed, stormy, cruel, warlick, grim,
stern, crisp-haird.

Sicilia. Sicilian. Trinacrian, fruitful, fabulous, ingenious, subtle, crasty,
sly, dissembling, politic.

Sickle. Crooked, keen-edg'd, sharp-tooth'd, biting, cutting, reaping, bending,
wheeling, sweeping, moving, rusty.

Sickness. v. Malady. Wasting, consuming, decaying, infectious, diseaseful,
disquiet, pievish, pettish, waspish, angry, fretting, eating, oppressing,
painful, dull, pining, whining, plaintful, querulous, complaining, pale,
grievous, torturing, vexing, wearing, griping, twitching, girding, sad,
pinching, nipping, pulling, wringing, cutting, gauling, doleful, bitter,
gnawing, racking, smarting, lingering, noisome, tedious, loathsome, weary,
impatient, wasting, blood-sucking, puling, soaking, bleak, wan, duskie,
discolou^'d, sallow, crabbed, sour-lookt, powting, appalling, bedridden, wayward,
froward, grumbling, groaning, grunting, pensive, unhealthful, tormenting,
crasie, decrepit, dolorous.

Sigh. Blood-drinking, thirsty, blood-consuming, blood-sucking, Airy,
heart-rending, scalding, burning, smotherd, rising, blasting, fiery, deep
fetched, melting, broken, fervent, stormy, winged, restless, hearty, pity^g,
compassionate, affectionate, easy, groaning, careful, anxious, ^erplexed,
heart-fretting, mournful, sad, pensive, melancholy, pene^ntial, repentant,
lamenting, bewayling, pious, remorseful, conscienous, weeping, repeated,
heartbreaking, languishing, fainting, in^errupted, sweet-breathing, enclosed,
dissembled, concealed, secret, ^hispering, amorous, pious, religious, zealous.

Sign. Betraying, directing, instruct^ve, apparent, evident, presaging,
predictious, foretelling, representing, resembling, speaking.

Silence. Hollow, dull, concealing, dumb, peaceful, reposed, slumbering,
patient, shady, still, calm, appeased, listening, attentive, secret,
Pythagorick, forced, willing, yielding, faithful, trusty, timorous, fearful,
Monasticke, Reverend, aweful, squeamish, blind, self-devouring.

Silenus. Aged, old, Asse-bestriding, drunken, reeling, foamy, spuing,
bleching, slaggering.

Silk. Rustling, whistling, shining, glistering, wealthy, pompous.

Silkworm. Industrious, laborious, cunning, nimble, active, working.

Silver. Shining, glittering, glancing, massy, solid, burnish^, refined,
wealthy, desired, coveted, inchested, hoarded.

Simonie. Sacrilegious, impious, god-selling, unlawful, odious, infamous,
secret, accursed, damned.

Simplicity. Credulous, incautelous, indiscreet, unwise, naked, open,
rusticke, clownish, pure, devour, religious, honest, harmless, innocent,
downright, homely, rude, raw, plain, undisguized.

Sincerity. Hearty, cordial, downright, simple, honest, true, pious; devout,
zealous, religious.

Sink. Filthy, noisome, nastie, fulsome, loathsome, puddle, mddie, dirtie.

Sinew. Binding, supple, knitting, knotty, able, strong, lusty, fibrous,
nervous, swelling, trembling.

Sin. Leprous, charming, enchanting, alluring, enticing, ugly, filt^^
spotted, odious, crying, pernicious, displeasing, soul-tainting, soukilling,
mortal, venial, damning, accursed, prevaricating, soul-woun^ing, soul-stabbing,
impious, vengeance-provoking, infamous, defa^ing, scandalous, wilful,
obstinate, presumptuous, enormous, execrable loathed, detested, malicious,
hard-hearted, dissolute, riotous, exorb^tant, incorrigible, depraving,
rebellious, prodigious, heinous.

Siring. Squirting, injecting.

Sirrup. Delicious, sl^pping, taste-pleasing, delightful, lickerous,
swee^-tasting.

Sisyphus. Tugging, toyling, sweating, stone-rolling, subtle, crafty, unhappy,
weary.

Since. Keenedged, sharp-edged, sweeping, mowing, cutting, reaping, crooked.

Sive. Hole-checkerd, unretaining, scattering, windowy, Magic,

Skeleton. Bony, scraggy, meager, lean, starved, fleshless.

Sky. v. Air, Firmament. Azure, lofty, brazen, flitting, glorious, crystal,
glystering, enameld, aeched, vaulty, vastie, wide-skirted, starry,
star-powdered, star-^^-broidered, transparent, marble, dusky, empty, lofty,
beamy, spangled, sweltring.

Skill. Artful, learned, knowing, active, painful, industrious, laborious,
charming, admired, cunning, experienced, subtle, ingenious, witty, powerful,
judicious, piercing, quick-sighted, famous, honored, po^tentuous, amazing,
prodigious, praiseful, deviceful, contriving, curirious, inventive.

Skin. Ivory, alabaster, sheathing, smooth, sleek, delicious.

Skirmish. Bickering, hot, bloody, conflicting, furious, dreadful, cruel,
murdering, dangerous, impetuous, doubtful, fierc, angry, rugged, tumultuous,
unhappy.

Slander. Rank-mouth'd, injurious, squint-eyed, calumnious, black-mouthed,
defaming, detracting, scandalous, biting, malicious, wounding, forge^ng,
devising, false, fame-stabbing, reproachful, envious.

Slave. Branded, servile, infamous, earboared, oppressed, groaning, tugging;
^oyling, weary, wronged, abused, scourged, dejected, burdned, ignomi^ious,
scourged, dejected, burdned, ignominious, scorned, drudging.

Slavery. v. Servitude. Rigorous, cruel, oppressing, gauling, groaning,
bruising, crushing, ^eart-killing, detested, tormenting, laborious, toylsome,
tugging, ig^omioious, drudging.

Slaughter. Bloody, murderous, eruel, furious, massacring, fierce, impetuous,
ghastly, hideous, dreadful.

Sleep. Dark, urgent, leaden, soft-fingered, healthful, peaceful, reposed,
^uiet silent, arresting, downy, gentle, calm, forgetful, silken, golden,
drowsy, yawning, surprising, delicious, refreshing, all-subduing,
death-counterfeiting, death-imitating, senseless, benimming, sying, deceitful,
nuzling, curtaind, balmie, soft, care-charming, heavy, pale.

Slime. Foamy, frothy, muddy, viscous, glutinous, flat, clammy.

Sling. Impetuous, violent, bullet-melting, warlick.

Sloth. v. Idleness. Drowsy, lazy, yawning, gaping, nasty, bedded, resty,
lethergick, dronish, unactive, careless, vice-nursing.

Sloven. Nasty, noisome, fulsome, loathsome, careless, uncurious, neglectfull,
regardless, sordid.

Slut. Nasty, loathsome, fulsome, noisome, sordid, filthy, dowdy, ugly,
deformed.

Smell. v. Odor. Wholesome, unwholesome, sweet, breathing, delicious, pleasant,
head-aff^cting, spicy, aromatic, delightful, balmy, Aire-perfuming, ambrosian,
genial, musky, noisome, loathsome, fulsome, infectious, contagious, stinking,
sence-overcoming.

Smile. Sweet, pleasing, peaceful, easy, cheerful, wanton, fl^eting,
courteous, bewitching, cordial, dimpled, simpering, pliant, boxome, gladsome,
deceitful, traitorous, attract^ve, becoming, graceful.

Smith. Swarthy, sooty, grimie. industrious, laborious, hammering, knocking,
broyled, sweating, dusty, coaly, smudged, sallow.

Smock: Baudie, wanton, lecherous, venereous, body-sheathing, embraci^^

Smoke. Curled, infestive, pestering, stifling, smothering, choking, mi^^
foggy, cloudy empty, gliding, vaporous, eye-pricking, wavie, aspiri^^
tear-wringing, floating.

Snail. Slow-pac't tardie, dull, sleepy, drowsy, sluggish, lazy, slow,
un^^ous, cloistered, soft-pac'd, creeping, house-bearing, cockeld, ^^mie,
wrigling, foamy, frothy slavering, nasty, sluttish, trace-leari^^ folded.

Snake. Folded, speckled, slimie, winding, crawling, subtle, groveli^^,
doubling, crafty, creeping, stinging, writhing, wreathing, wrigl^^^ twining,
twisted, lurking, scaly, damaskt, checkered, venomous, poy^^nous, baneful,
forked, fore-tongu'd, deceitful, wily, sly, spotted, b^^ing, freckled,
hissing, enameld, swelling, crested, glittering, clam^^ rolling, glutinous,
gliding, slippery.

Snare. Intangling, subtle, deceitful, treacherous, fly, surprising, catchi^^
intrapping, imprisoning, hampering, unexpected, griping, detaining captivating,
inthralling, sence-beguiling.

Snivel. Snot. Filthy, nastie, noisome, loathsome, dropping, cold.

Snow. Untroden, soft, driven, falling, winter, downy flecie, flakie, wooll^
curled, bleached, ragged, shivering, drizling, scattered, mounta^^ watrie,
melting, thawing icie, freezing, hoary, plumy, feathered, d^^ling, Alpine,
Scythian, Thracian, Sarmatian.

Sobriety. Wise, temperate, discreet, sparing abstemious, modest, healthful,
thriftie, frugal.

Sodomie. Beastly, bestial, brutish, barbarous, base, nasty, infamous, ugly,
odious, execrable, abominable, detested, hateful, loathsome, unmanly.

Solace. Comfortable, refreshing, sweet, life-giving, chearing,
life-preserving, appeasing, allaying, encouraging.

Solemnity. Ceremonious, busy, thronged, sacred, exact, famous,
superstitious, religious, venerable.

Song. Wel-tuned, intrancing, lulling, enchanting, delicious, harmonious,
^nce-bearing, melodious, warbling, soul-raping, pleasant, rural, glad^^me,
gleesome, sprightful, ear-enamouring, sweet-flowing, sweet-^^aind.

Son. Obedient, loving, affectionate, dutious, obsequious.

Sorcerer. Black, dark, working, guilty, hellish, enchanting, accursed,
execra^le, detested, ghastly, wonder-causing, portentuous, prodigious,
charm^^g, mumbling, ceremonious, mysterious, mystic, exercising, hell-^toured.

Sore. Smarting, painful, dolourous,, angry, swelling, putrid, putrifiing,
^ipening, nastie, filthy, noisome, loathsome, running, gathering, ^estering.

Sorrow. v. Grief. Wrinkling, drooping, griping, lumpish, brinish,
eye-wringing, heart-rending, heart-tearing, killing, contracting, wounding.
crushing, bruising, whining, puling, sullen, dumpish, sable, mournful,
chumpish, discontented, pensive, melting, swarthy, pinching, oppressing,
fretting, gnawing, eating, impatient, gauling, disquiet, grating.

Sot. Simple, dull, ignorant, unconceiving, doltish, blockish, fat-headed,
shallow, beetle-braind.

Soldier. Bloody, painful, daring, valiant, courageous, wastful, rough-hewed,
uncivll, adventurous, valorous, insolent, lousie, pillaging, impetuous,
murdering, slaughtering, dusty, mercenary, injurious, ravenous, undaunted,
furious, greedy, hungry, preying, tumultuous, thievish, devouring, rummaging.

Soul. Immortal, deathless, diviner, untouched, subtle, active, lively, moving,
un-eyed, undiscerned, celestial, ready, nimble, winged, eternal, unbodied,
uncaged, dislodged, clearer, drained, apprehensive, understanding, unfathomed,
sprightly, sparkling.

Soil. Fruitful, fertle, barren, unfruitful, fat, rich, wealthy, mellow,
thirsty, sandy, native, foraign.

Spangle. Shining, glittering, starry, radiant, beamy.

Spaniard. Haughty, statele, portly, slow-paced, proud, arrogant, sober,
wealthy, abstemious, warlick, tawny, lofty.

Spaniel. Loving, shaggy, fawning, ranging, questing.

Spark. Lurking, fiery, flying, catching, kindling, ruddy, glittering,
ski^ping, wanton, frisking, twinkling.

Sparrow. Russet, hot, fallacious, wanton, venereous, leacherous, chirpin^
shrill, short-lived, frisking.

Spawn. Fruitful, ingendering, procreative, increasing.

Spear. Warlick, martial, fatal, bloody, wovnding, trembling, thrillin^
brandisht, tall, threatening, pointed, victorious, iron-headed, piercin^
glittering.

Spectator. Courteous, gracious, pleased, smiling, frowning, attentive,
patien^, impatient, weary, applauding, hissing, amazed, admiring, gazing,
benevolous, carping, censorious.

Speech. Learned, rational, witty, well-coucht, taking, winning, popula^,
pleasing, applausive, fawning, facetious, sharp, tart, ear-enamouring,
heart-captivating, tedious, cart-rope, ingenious.

Speed. Hasty, posting, timely, convenient, laborious, winged, undiscerned,
industrious, auspicious, successful, impatient, nimble, active, willing,
Eagle-wing'd, swit-footed, undiscovered, expeditious, dispatchful.

Spell. Magic, Thessalian, charming, enchanting, bewitching, mysterious,
ceremonious, mumbled, muttered, powerful, exercising, perplexing imperious,
commanding, myst^ck-

Spheres. Harmonious, glorious, beauteous, raped, spangled, whirling,
wheeling, azure, tuneful, chiming, crystal, loofty, moving, turning, rolling,
star-embroiderd, enameld.

Spice. Aromatic, Indian, Arabian, rich, wealthy, delicious, taste-pleasing,
costly, E^stern, balmie, ambrosial.

Spider. Ingenious, spinning, subtle, working, industrious, lahorious, active,
artful, cunning, hanging, bellied, thrifty, poisonous, stirring, nimble,
odious, loathsome, baneful, busy, bottled, lofty, high-minded, pain^l,
poison, sucking, toyling.

Spy. Watchful, wary, cautious, attentive, observing, circumspect, indurious,
careful, prying, subtle, crafty, secret, treacherous, ambusht, dis^uised,
silent.

Spite. Malicious, sullen, revengeful, rancorous, envious, cancred, accured,
deadly, secret, fork-tong'd poisonous, vipereous, blew-eyed, quint-tyed, snaky,
venomous, flint-hearted, inexorable, boiling, swel^ing, heart-gnawing.

Spindle. Twirling, rolling, turning, nimble, industrious, pregnant, whirled.

Spire. Mounting, towering, shar-pointed, lofty, ambitious, cloud-kissing,
Sky-braving, Air-invading, Sky-threatning.

Spirit. Active, free, unbodied, noble, generous, discoursive, nimble, winged,
^oving, subtle, blessed, damned, bodiless, unfathomed, courageous, fantastic,
revengeful, malicious, envious.

Spittle. Nasty, loathsome, noisome, foamie, frothy, contemned, sluttish,
moistning.

Spleen. Enraged, hasty, despightful, malicious, angry, wrathful, distemperd,
chasing, itching, revengeful, envious, boiling, incensed, tempestuous, stormy.

Splendour. Shining, radiant, beamie, glittering, glistering, flaming, sunny,
fiery, twinkling, dazzling, Air, gilding, enlightening, eye-conquering,
glorious, victorious, triumphant, beauteous, graceful, reflecting, enenvied,
admired, amazing, pompous, varnisht.

Spoils. Rich, glorious, w^althy, dear-bought, victorious, triumphant, lading,
purchased, bloody, ample, warlike.

Sponge. Porous, drunken, thirsty, receiving, dry, muddy, slimy, soft, light,
flaggy, yielding, wiping, cleansing, squeezed.

Sport. Choicest, wanton, delightful, toyish, pleasant, gamesome, time
beguiling, active, joyous, mirthfull.

Spot. Sullying, defacing, infamous, disgraceing, defiling, fouling, flovenly,
sluttish, nasty, ugly, deforming, speckling, freckling, blotting, d^figuring,
soyling, staining, besmearing.

Spouse. Modest, beauteous, graceful, bashful, nuptial, bridal, lovely,
smiling, stately, sprightly, comely, blushing, eye-attracting, handsome,
amorous.

Springtime. Flowrie, smiling, youthful, teeming, wealthy, fragrant,
pregnant, enflowred, fruitful, verdant, blooming, budding, quickening, jocund,
lively, blithe, buxome, gleesome, merry, joyous, joyful, mirthful, wanton,
enamouring, bridal, dawning, infant, beaureous, lovely, painted, lusty,
gladsome, dancing, leavie, gaudie, amorous, refreshing, reviving, Pearly,
embroidered, enamelled, showrie, genial, jovial, earth-awakening.

Springs. Silver, Crystal, purling, fruitful, living, bubling, murmuring,
m^tering, skipping, dancing, sac^ed, grass-fring'd, grass-margen'd,
mosse-fring'd, moss-margen'd, trickling, running, rustling, gushing, so^^,
delicious, gliding, Pearly, weeping, gurgling, chiding, whispering, swelling,
flowing, rolling, rising, sparkling, tatling, prattling.

Spur. Teaching, tatling, twatling, gingling, betraying, bloody, babbling,
talking, commanding, piercing, instigating, inciting, exhorting, ^^toring,
quickening, prompting, incensing, egging, poynant, sharppointed, pricking,
horse-awaking, biting, goading, boring.

Squinzie. Choking, breath-stopping, strangling.

Squirrel. Nimble, light-foot, active, stirring, vaulting, leaping, skipping,
bush-taild.

Stable. Nastie, filthy, dungie, fulsome, litterd, sluttish.

Staff. Supporting, upholding, sustaining, ayding, helpful, knottie, knaggie.

Stage. Thronged, frequented, mirthful, facetious, ample, populous, sp^tious,
joyous, wel-peopled, applausive, hollow, vaultie, clamoro^^ noyseful, lofty,
public.

Stag. Stately, gallant, rich-attired, long-lived, swift-foot, weeping,
fe^^ful, timorous, flying, aged, branch-hornd, basking, braying, sunning.

Stair. Winding, ascending, mounting, turning, aspiring.

Stallion. Lustful, ramping, covering, breeding, ingendering.

Standard. Advanced, warlick, victorious, triumphant, martial, painted,
di^played, threatening, waving, streaming.

Star. Sparkling, lofty, heaven-embroydering, enamelling, spangling,
glittering, radiant, beamy, gliding, burning, silver-tressed, rolling, shining
flaming, twinkling, wandering, blaz^ng, bris^led, flame-hait'd bright,
glorious, happy, unhappy, successeful, ill-boding, auspicious, lucky, unlucky,
inauspicious, malignant, smiling, frowning, golden, waving, floating, swimming,

Statesman. Politic, plodding, thoughtful, contriving, musing, projecting,
casting, pondering.

Statute. Dumb, senseless, spe^chlesse, silent, breathless, painted,
life-counterfeiting, artful, g^lded.

Statutes. Strict, rigorous, coercive, restraining, paenal, austere, severe,
binding, compelling, imperious, commanding, directing, just, wholesome,
controlling.

Stealth. Cunning, crafty, sly, subrile, theevish, pilfering.

Steed. v. Horse. Foaming, barbed, warlick, cap^ri^on'd, prancing, trapped,
cu^veting, careering, high bounding, spur-obeying; bit-champing, sw^ft-pac'd,
metled, courageous.

Steel; Solid, piercing, transpiercing, shining, bu^nisht, biting, quartering,
wounding, warlick, fl^shing, murdering, cutting, s^icing, revengeful,
dreadful, glistering, bloody, blood-thirsty, but h^^^ing, slaughtering,
killing, martial.

Stern. Guiding, ship-directing, sh^p*b^idl^ng.

Steward. Dispensing, disbursing, receiving, just, faithful, careful,
providing, provident, wise.

Stews. Bawdy, wanton, lustful, goatish, rami^^, ^echerous, loose, filthy,
obscene, brutish, dallying.

Stie. Filthy, nasty, noisome, durty, loathsome, fulsome, wallowing, miry*

Style. Elegant, eloquent, curious, delicate, well-coucht, biting, stately
lofty, humble, grovelling, low, learned, grave.

Still. Dropping, Chymick, extracting, quintessential, glowing.

Stinge. Smarting, piercing, wounding, goading, poisonous, invenomed,
sharp-pointed, bitter, cruel, boring, pricking, poinant.

Stink. Nasty, noisome, loathsome, filthy, fulsome, offensive, infectious*
unwolesome.

Stirrup. Mounting, resting, supporting, hanging, vaulting, dangling, gilded,
pendant.

Stitch. Pulling, wringing, twitching, stinging, painful, dolorous, pinc^ing,
nipping, diseaseful, griping.

Stock. Dumb, dead, senseless, speechless, dull, breathless, unmoving.

Stoic. Dull, flinty, obdurate, unmoved, unrelenting, rigid, marble-hearted,
flint-brested, sad, sage, sour, strict, stern, severe, austere, grave, grim.

Stomach. v. Appetite. Barking, empty, concocting, digestive, boiling, hungry,
hollow, devouring, engorging, ingulphing, queazie, nauseating, greedy, c^^ving,
sharp-set, loathing.

Stone. Hard, senseless, unfeeling, unrelenting, obdurate, massy, dumb,
deaf, callous, rocky, grinding, dashing, bruising, rigid, mossie.

Store. Copious, wealthy, plenteous, abounding, swelling, flowing, fruitful,
smiling, joyful, lavish, profusive, excessive, ample, numerous, oreflowing.

Story. Sad, mirthful, witty, amorous, pleasant, delightful, mournful,
facetious, un-appettaining, tedious.

Storke. Pious, loving, affectionate, grateful, chattering, loving, indulgent,
slender-footed, serpent-killing.

Storm. Hideous, angry, growing, gathering, tempestuous, dreadful, impetuous,
roaring, rising, pelting, foggie, clowdy, showry, threatening, rough-browed,
black, sable, boisterous, fulmouthed, chasing, bawling, loud-voic't, sullen,
thundering, rattling, rufling, rustling, bustling, blustering, dark, pitchy,
howling, hurrying, swelling, surly, resistlesse, wreakful, justling.

Strains. Harmonious, melodious, charming, warbling, tuneful, delicious,
enchanting, intrancing, soul-raping, ravishing, soul-invading, sence-bereaving,
ear-enamouring, lofty, stately, rural, homely, rustic, high-tun'd, high-bred,
inspired, sprightly,

Stranger. Unfriended, wandering, houselesse, unacquainted, unknown,
travailing, disregarded, journeying, pilgrim, wary, observing,

Strappado. Torturing, wringing, writhing, unjoynting, tormenting, painful,
dolorous, pitied, killing.

Stratagem. Cunning, politic, contrived, devised, subtle, artful, warlick,
martial.

Straw. Loose, scattered, shattered, rejected, withered, trampled, light,
barren, fruitless, useless, littering, parched.

Strawbery. Blushing, creeping, spreading, crawling, mountanous, cooling,
creamy, soft.

Streake. Near, curious, delightful, graceful, comely, beauteous, embroidering,
checkering, diapering, painted, straggling, wrigling, adorning, becoming,
eye-pleasing.

Stream. Winding, curled, purling, foaming, silver, crystal, writhing,
wrigling, snaky, sweeping, hurrying, silent, chiding, impetuous, resistlesse,
enraged, flowing, fruitful, fishie, gurgling, running, gliding, slippery, soft,
whispering, wandering, roaring, straggling, gushing, cleansing, drenching,
whirling, rushing, glassie, pearly, silver-brested, rolling, swelling,
wheeling, spreading, gently-sliding, glancing, raging, tumbling, incensed,
shower-enhanced, dancing, vaulting, horned, careering, azure, wavie, rustling,
amorous, angry, boiling, bustling, surgie, murmuring, muttering, rumbling,
frothy, bank-courting, uxorious, sliding, hasty, swift-pac't, swan-embroydered.

Street. Peopled, thronged, swarming, frequented, populous.

Stength. Sinewie, resistlesse, impetuous, robustious, assaulting, victorious,
brawny, unconquered, Herculean.

Strife. v. Discord. J^^ring, jangling, wrangling, litigious, disagreeing,
unfriendly, seditious, tumultuous, blood-thirsty, angry, harsh, hell-nourisht,
dissentious.

String. Quavering, twanging, st^ffe, trembling, high-tun'd, twisted, corded,
melodious, harmonious, resounding.

Stripe. Smarting, painful, dolorous, aching, blew, tormenting, soul-cutt^ng,
lashing.

Strumpet. Baudy, unblushing, shameless, impudent, notorious, lascivious,
o^scene, uncivil, wanton, lustful, ^ampant, salacious, dissolute, immode^^,
rammish, goatish, rotten, alluring, enticing, insnaring, entangling,
captivating, in^hralling, pe^ju^'d, mercenary, perfidious, dissembling,
infamous, dallying* flearing, gadding, night-walking, infectious, pockie,
loathsome, painted, cancred, itchy.

Stubble. Flaming, bristled, withered, parched, crackling, light, barren,
flame-feeding.

Student. Study. P^le, weary, industrious, laborious, watchful, poring, waking,
painful, lamp-smelling, book-turning, plodding, solitary, sedentary,
sequestered, retired, silent, melancholy, musing, meagre, thoughtful,
meditaring, contemplative, bookish, ingenious, assiduous, constant, intentive,
brain-tasking, brain-beating.

Styx. Old, aged, hoary, conjuring, attested, sulphurous, dreadful, awfu^^,
s^^dy, obscure, dark, darksome, pale, thirsty, infernal, dusky, gloomy, vasty.

Subject. Obedient, loyal, loving, affectionate, submissive, obsequious,
observant, efficious.

Subsidy. Needful, ayding, supplying, willing, ample, seasonable.

Substance. Real, wealthy, solid, massy, gross, pure, diviner, refined.

Subtilty. Crafty, wily, nice, deceitful, winding, fetching, double-dealing,
^^sembling, overreaching sly, circumventing, cunning, snaky, under^ining,
secret, under-handing, under-working, juggling, disguised.

Success. Happy, prosperous, luckie, auspicious, advantageous, desired,
cro^ning, wish^, blessed, coveted, propitious.

Succor. Helpful, ayding, timely, needful, propitious, auspitious, friendly,
chearing, comforting, supplying.

Sugar. Delitious, ambrosian, tast-pleasing, Indian, reedy, congealed, gummy.

Sulphur. Quick, hot, flaming, unctious, liquid, melting, burning, stinking.

Summer. Scalding, soultry, tanning, rosting, sweltering, broyling, parching,
scorching, naked, flowery, swarthy, green-plusht, flower-enamel'd,
flower-embroidered, dusty, fiery, piercing, leavie, pleasant, joyful, ^le^some
sluggish, lither, idle, thirsty, yawning, chapping, infectious, diseas^ful,
pestilential, smothering, beamy, sweaty, panting.

Sun. Broyling, scorching, tanning, parching, rosting, testing, cheerful,
dazzling, glorious, lofty-going, quickening, reviving, impartial, all-di^cerning,
all-seeing, chearing, garish, gladsome, beamy, radiant, laborious, restless,
^olling, unwearied, scalding, baking, burning, glowin^, sparkling, speedy,
posting, galloping, careering, wheeling, golden, glittering, flamy, fiery,
mi^red, gold-haired, fair-trest, flame-haired, jou^neying, piercing,
enlightening, life-infusing, horned, thirsty, drying, sucking,
vapour-attract^ng, heaven-surrounding, far-beaming, golden-tressed-

Superfluity. Excessive, profusive, unth^rsty, luxurious, unnecessary,
needless, voluptuous, useless, copious, abundant, costly, p^mpous,
overflowing, delicious, sumptuous, unconfined, boundless, limitless, wastful,
money-squandering.

Superstition. Fond, toyish, garish, gaudy, doting, brainsick, zealous, blind,
scrupulous, ceremonious, self-pleasing, nuzling, gulling, gay, pompous,
e^toneous, ignorant, obstinate, fearful, nice, conscientious.

Supplication. v. Prayer. Humble, earnest, requesting, beseeching, weeping,
pious, kneeling, bending, zealous, complaining, devout, religious.

Surey. Obliged, engaged, securing, promising, faith-plighting.

Surfeit. Pompous, luxurious, engorging, cramming, drunken, gluttonous,
exc^ssive, intemperate, riotous baneful, unmeasured, wanton, dangerous,
diseaseful, wastful, health-destroying, health-eating, b^so^^ing, swelled,
spungie, noisome, loathsome, d^stemperered, hot-mouth'^, fi^ry.

Suspicion. Jealous, groundless, probable, prying, squint-eyed, wakeful,
vigilant, causeless, secret, lurking, goggle-eyed, pale, fearful, trembling,
wary, cautelous, frantic, dark.

Swaggerer. D^unken, reeling, riotous, oath-rapping, wenching, lascivious,
gaming, unthrifty, profusive, intemperate, godless, impious, dissolute,
audacious, uncivil, luxurious, bawling, wrangling, quarrelsome, rapierd,
gallant, rustling, bustling, blustering, blundering, money-squandering,
wastful, wealth-consuming, obscene, oath-belching, oath-mouthing, pot-tossing.

Swain. Merry, lusty, boorish, youthful, mirthful, blythe, jocund, gleesome,
rough, wild, rude, rural, rustic, active, gamesome, sportive, industrious,
laborious, tugging, toyling, homebred, unconceiving, unfashioned, uncurious,
uncombed, greasy, slovenly, saucy, frolic, whistling, clownish, rugged,
sullen, sturdy, lubberly, lolling, robustious, rough-hewn, swarthy, sallow,
sunburned, hide-bound, lowtish, ignorant, silly, untaught, unlearned,
unlettered, untutored, simple, piping.

Swallow. Winding, swift-winged, tender, gentle, spring-presaging, wandering,
lascivious, hot-dunged, shrill, chattering.

Swan. Silver, snowie, chanting, silver-coated, silver-plumed,
silver-feathered, prophetic, death divining, jealous, death-presaging, downy,
soft, gliding, bustling, stately, portly, shrill-voic't, sweet singing,
long-neckt. greedy, stream-loving, stream-fed.

Swarm. C^owdy, thronging, crowding, clustered, cluttering, preasing, populous,
numerous, unnumbered, flocking, numberless, trooping.

Swearer. Oath-rapping, oath-mouthing, oath-belching, swaggering, impious,
godless, damned, execrable, odious, detested.

Sweat. Laborious, industrious, toylesome, scalding, melting, clammy, weary,
faint, cold, tedious, uncleanly, sluttish, nasty, flowing, officious, painful,
dewie.

Swine. Beastly, nasty, fulsome, noisome, loathsome, miry, dirty, uncleanly,
sordid, wallowing, greedy, hungry, grunting, dull, bristled, wastful, rooting,
tumbling, rolling, sluggish, lither, drowsy, gluttonous.

Sword. Keen-edged, bloody, goary, blood-thirsty, flesht, raging, flaming,
brandisht, revengeful, smoking, thirsty, reeking, wounding, shining,
glittering, glistering, murdering, slaughtering, slicing, but chering,
flashing, clashing, warlick, victorious, quartering, barbarous, cruel,
merciless, impious, unrelenting, unpitying, dreadful, dazzling, glancing,
waved, naked, unsheathed, sharp-pointed, devouring, killing.

Sycophant. v. Parasite. Fawning, slanderous, calumnious, detracting, defaming,
cogging, glozing, colloguing, pick-thank, cozening, cheating, juggling,
injurious, smooth-tongued, makebate.

Sylvans. v. Satyrs. Symmetry. Graceful, comely, beauteous, handsome,
attractive, harmonious, eye-pleasing, becoming, proportioned, equal, measured,
exact, accurate, complete, perfect, accomplished, praiseful, laudable,
commendable.

Sympathy. Agreeing, loving, natural, inbred, innate, friendly, mutual,
amiable, unjarring, according, amorous, admired, secret, silent, affectionate,
uniting.

Symptoms. Apparent, evident, discrying, betraying, manifest, certain,
convincing, conclusive.

Synod. Learned, grave, sacred, assembled, convened, honored, reverend;
venerable.

Sirens. Subtle, crafty, floating, swimming, chanting, charming, bewitching,
pernicious, lulling, enticing, alluring, singing, sleepcausing, delicious,
green-haired, warbling.

Syrian. Luxurious, voluptuous, inconstant, anointed, feastful, flouting,
superstitious, garden-doting.

T.
Tobacco. Tobacconist. FUming, smoaky, spawling, spitting, cavaleering,
swaggering, generous, puffing, whiffing.

Tabernacle. Mooving, tented, sacred, flitting.

Table. Luxurious, mirthful, feastful, ambrosian, nectarious, delicious,
greasy, crowded, groaning, thronged, free, liberal, dish-bearing, oppressed,
frolic, well-furnisht, voluptuous, sumptuous, luxurious, hospirable, costly,
genial, dainty, temperate, intemperate, sobe^, d^unken, gluttonous, frugal,
thrifty, unthrifty, profusive, ^xpensive, marshaled.

Tables. Gaming, swearing, wrangling, brawling, bawling, cozening, cheating,
cogging, rattling.

Tablet. Shining, hanging, dangl^ng, p^inted, pictured, varnisht, delightful,
sacred, superstitiou^, oyled, Apellean, artful, artificial.

Tabour. Tabret. Sounding, drumming, dreadful, martial, hoarse, piping, hollow,
light, murmuring.

Taciturnity. Silent, peaceful, quiet, concealing, listening, still, modest,
coy, squeamish, calm, attentive, fearful,

Tackling. Corded, ^wisted, knotty, entangled, hampered.

Taffety. Thin, limber, pliant, smooth, shining, glittering, tufted, pompous,
rich, gallant, strouting, puffing, swelling.

Tagus. Golden, wealthy, rich-sanded, gold-paved, glittering, bright,
gold-rolling, swift-streamed, gaudy.

Tail. Hinging, dangling, pendant, wanton, frisking, frigging, whisking,
tufted, wagging, forked, sawning, clawing, clapping, flapping, lickerous,
scorned, venereous.

Tailour. Devising, contriving, fashioning, spruce, nimble, tricking,
long-bill'd, costly, expensive, shaping.

Tale. Fabulous, merry, delightful, facetious, trifling, sad, amorous, doleful,
pleasant, mournful, tedious, moldy, fict^ous, devised, facetious, appertaining,
unconcerning, frivolous idle, time-beguiling, time-shortning.

Talent. Massy, wealthy, hoarded, heaped, rich, yellow, golden, enabling,
pow^rful.

Tallies. Counting, numbering, compared, agreeing, reckoning.

Tallow. Melting, greasy, flaming, flame-feeding, unctious, congealed,
rumbling.

Talons. Griping, catching, clawing, oppressing, defending, armed, sharp,
^ough-handling, hooking, crooked, scratching, sweeping, raping, rave^ous,
thievish, preying, seizing, pouncing, rending, tearing, greedy, wounding.

Tamarisk. Humble, low slender, small-^prigged, tender, fruitless, barren.

Tankard. Weeping, drunken, thirsty, slavering, flapping, frothy, bellied,
capacious, swelling, engorged.

Tansie. Green sweet, delicious, tastfull, tast-pleasing, sugared.

Tantalus. Blabbing, tell-tale, unhappy, catching, greedy, hungry, thirsty,
deceived, nose-wiped, Phrygian-bloody, son-killing distrustful, overcurious.

Taper. Flaming, wasting, spending, slender, burning, consuming, decaying,
shining, melting, watchful, waxen, sacred, holy, religious, devotious,
wind-bl^zing, winking,

Tapestry. Industrious, hanging, gaudy, costly, sumptuous, magnificent,
pompous, stately, courtly, curious, wealthy.

Tappe. Dropping, distilling, weeping, emptying, disgorging, pissing, spuing,
gushing, noise-full.

Tapster. Officious, nimble, quick-footed, jogging, jug-bearing, drunken,
scraping, knee-crooking, saucy.

Tares. Choking, stifling, weedy, barren, unwelcome.

Target. Plated, battered, clattering, clashing, fencing, warding, shielding,
repulsing, belabored, securing, protecting, defending, saving, screening,
trusty, glittering, gilded, sl^shed, wounded, gashed, bloody, hollow, brazen,
shining, defensive, massy.

Tar. P^tchy, clammy, viscous, tenacious, healing, marking, liquid,
glutinous, roping, sticking, cleaving.

Tartar. Sallow, swarthy, tawny, bloody, cruel, furious, valiant.

Task. Laborious, industrious, hard, toylesome, studious, tedious, weary,
burdenous, heavy, oppressing.

Tassell. Tufted, pendant, hanging, dangling, jagged, silk-thrum'd.

Taste. Judicious, delicious, exquisite, accurate, quick, pleasing, hars^,
offensive, nice, curious, unpleasant, savoury, unsavory, insipid.

Tatters. Ragged, lowsy, hanging, patched, clowted, scorned, poor, beggarly,
contemned, nasty, loathsome, filthy, dropping, loose-hung, dancing, waving.

Tatling. Noyseful, clamorous, ted^ous, prating, needless, unappertaining,
unconcerning, combrous.

Tavern. Haunted, frequented, drunken, w^nie, luxurious, intemperate,
distempering, riotus, intoxicating, quarrelsome, swearing, swaggering, spawling.

Taunt. Bitter, reproachful, injurious, scoffing, biting, opprobrious,
contumelious, flanting, gibing, girding, wrimouth'd, flouting, contemptuous,
scornful, disdainful, deriding, jeering, wry-nos'd.

Tax. Oppressing, heavy, burdening, loading, tyrannous, disabling,
impoverishing, racking, imposed.

Teacher. Instructive, painful, assiduous, diligent, careful, learned,
lessoning, tutoring, guiding, schooling, famous, artful, honored, grave,
reverend, venerable, expert, experienced, knowing, blameless, skilful, able.

Tear. Pearly, crystal, transparent, melting, trickling, numerous, flowing,
warm, moving, falling, descending, persuasive, victorious, overcoming, wooing,
bursting, instructed, forced, pleading, springing, brinish, gushing, repentant,
sad, pensive, penitential, dewie, scalding, passionate, drowning, soft, salt,
tributary, obsequious, fluent, tender, troubled, careful, mournful, sable,
complaining, silver-shedding, relenting, solemn, swelling, commanding* fluxive,
obtaining, weeping, rolling, seigned, dissembling, pitied, annumbred,
thronging, crowding seeking wayling, dumb.

Teate. Coral, cherry, vermillion, nippl'd, milky, gushing, tugged,
milk-^onveying, nursing, milk-springing:

Teeth. Ivorie, pearly, impaling, grining, grinding, foaming, evenly-ranged,
^nowie, greedy, ravenous, devouring, frothy, wounding, mear-min^ing,
tongue-hedging, smooth, tongue-guarding, tongue-inclosing, gnawing, burnisht,
envious, sharp-set, gnashing, poisonous, cancred, ^labaster, yellow, scurfie,
shaking, chattering, marble.

Tempest. Howling, stormy, pitchy, singing, cruel, angry, chafing,
ful-mouth'd, ^oud-voic'^, giddy, black, cloudy, threatening, gathering, growing,
^ideous, struggling, thundering, furious, brawling, rattling, impetuous, roaring,
rising, yelling, bellowing, pelting, foggy, showrie, boisterous, ^esistless,
ruffling, sullen, rustling, bustling, blustering, hurrying, surly, wreakeful,
raging, devouring, unbridled, whirling, whizzing, swelling, barking, dreadful,
surprising, unexpected.

Temper. Quiet, peaceful, pleasing, ingratiating, mild, winning, loving,
sullen, surly, angry, chasing, stormy, sweet.

Temperance. Frugal, thrifty, sparing, abstenious, cleanly, healthful,
quick-witted, sober, soon-contented, chaste, abstaining, forbearing, chaste,
modest, grave, wise.

Temple. Sacred, holy, reverend, dreadful, venerable, inviolate, unprofaned,
consecrated, sequestered, divine, lofty, stately, magnificent, sumptuous,
thronged, costly, garnisht, religious, pious, devotious, spacious, honored,
solemn, ceremonious, hallowed.

Temporizer. Lip-holy, hypocritical, hollow-hearted, dissembling, cunning,
crafty, masked, concealed, vizarded, gulling, glozing, cheating, juggling,
painted.

Temptation. Secret, soliciting, spurring, inciting, egging, enticing, luring,
baited, gilded, smiling, courting, wooing, treacherous, juggling, cozening,
seducing, sinful, pernicious, baneful, gaudy, gay, gallant, fallacious,
cunning, crafty, wily, sly, subtle, urging,

Tenant. Officious, obsequious, fearful, willing, humble, oppressed, groaning.

Tennis. Gamesome, sportive, banding, time-stealing, rackering.

Tent. Soft, stately, gilded, warlike, vaulty, martial, pitched, moving
flitting.

Tenter. Racking, stretching, extending, widening.

Term. Busy, thronging, wrangling, jangling, bawling, brawling, costly
expensive, see-some, pleading, mooting.

Terror. Cold, pale, dreadful, affrighting, sad, sudden, ghastly, grisly,
amazing, stounding, grim, stern.

Testament. Dying, ordering, disposing, inviolable, solemn, settled, confirmed,
witnessed, sealed, holy, sacred, venerable.

Testimony. Large, ample, evident, apparent, assured, certain, confirming,
unanswerable, plain, undeniable, convincing, deposing.

Tetter. Eating, fre^ting, spreading, infectious canckering.

Text. Large, copious, narrow, open, plain, convincing, well-chosen,
well-handled, discussed.

Thanks Thankfulness. Duteous, officious, obesquious, hearty, lasting,
obliged, engaged, immortal returned, humble, obedient, serviceable, bounden,
unnumbred, unmeasured.

Thatch. Loose, humble, country, homely, wi^hered, parched.

Theme. Large, copious, amorous, mournful, sad, joyful, discoursive, bandied,
discussed, disputed, tedious.

Theater. Public, spacious, thronged, crowded, open, populous, peopled,
crammed, well-fill'd, mirthfull, joyous, noisefull, clamarous, applausive,
pompous, gorgeous.

Thebes. Ancient, famous Beotian, palm-bearing.

Thief, Theft. Stealing, picking, pilfering, filching, private, secret,
creeping, surprising, crafty, she, subtle, cunning, silent, raping, miching,
fearful, wary, prying, preying, conveying, nimming, purlo^ning, slight handed,
cornered, felonious, nightly.

Theology, Sacred, divine mysterious, profound, knotty, obscure.

Theseus. Valiant, magnanimous, courageous, cruel, victorious, undaunted,
valorous, attemprive, perjured, perfideous, disloyal faith-breaking,
faithless, unfaithful, ungrateful.

Thetis. Sea-thrond, silver-footed, beauteous, azure, floating.

Thicket. Bushy, shrubby, leavy, intangling, thronging, cumbrous, thorny,
p^ickly, sh^dy, gloomy, darksome, branched, brierie, grovie.

Thigh. Fleshie, musclie, solid, plump, fat, stradling, sinewie, smooth, ivory,
ala-baster, marble, stalking, stately, portly, majestic, supporting,
rebounding, moving, shaking, fatned, delicate, graceful, well-proportioned,
twinne-born.

Thimble. Maiden, virgin, sencing, sempstering, finger-arming, defensive,
finger-casing, silver, gilded, posied.

Thirst, Burning, spongie, raging, swelting, parched, scorching, greedy,
ins^tiate, unstanched, fiery, dry, inflaming, panting, dropsied, unquenched,
Tantalean, molesting, torturing, tormenting, intolerable, unmeasured
unsupported.

Thisbe. Unhappy, constant, loving, faithful, Babylonian.

Thistle. Downy, prickly, dull, barren, fruitless, brifly, touchy, pointed
pricking, wild, savage, many-headed, biting, angry.

Th^rn. Crooked, sharp-hookt, brisly, prickly, brierie, bushie, scratching,
catching, holding, detaining, rough, tearing, rending, barren, fruitless,
bloody, wounding, piercing, tufted, knotted, entangled, biting.

Thought Discoursive, swift-winged, nimble, fl^tting, silent, roving, winged,
wandering, ranging, running, scartered, confused, tumbling, rolling, contriving,
devising, musing, studious, contemplating, roaming, working, teeming, plodding,
casting.

Thracian. Untamed, warlick, martial, oblivious, drunken, cold, fierce,
undaunted.

Thraldom. Sad, slavish, tyrannous, oppressing, captive, cruel, gauling,
rigor^^ groaning, restraining, heavy, crushing, bruising, toylsome, laborio^^
odious, detested, abhorred, hated, dejecting, vexing, loathed, grati^^
wretched, miserable, unsupportable, intolerable.

Threats. Menacing, braving, awful, insulting, stormy, angry, insolent,
swe^ling, rigid, cruel, boisterous, proud, affrighting, terrifying, dread^^
arrogant, supercilious, frowning, brow-beating, despiteful, reveng^ful,
malicious, injurious, outrageous, choleric, enraged, chasing, i^perious,
lordly, domineering, presumptuous, overweening, braggi^^ boasting, vaunting,
gnashing, grining, audacious.

Thread. Slender, feeble, small, weak, dangling, twined, twisted, hempe^^ silken.

Treshold. Entering, creaking, sputned, frequented, dusty, humble, lowly,
foot-worn.

Thrift. Frugal, parcimonious, sparing, scraping, careful, anxious.

Throat. Devouring, swallowing, gluttenous, greedy, meat-conveying gulping,
ingorging, ingulphing, gurmandizing, luxurious, volup^^ous, hollow.

Throne. Awful, dreadful, majestic, stately, glorious, pompous, gorgeous,
inperial, lofty, glittering, princely, royal, regal, exalted, venerable,
fear-infusing, honored, bright.

Throng. Crowding, preasing, numerous, unnumbred, thrusting, swarming,
trooping, clusterd, cluttering, innumerable.

Thrum. Shaggie, tufted, tassel'd, ravel'd.

Thrush. Dappled, speckled, greedy, hungry, fat, deaf.

Thumb. Pliant, active, nimble, industrious-useful, grasping.

Thunder. Flame-winged, rattling, dreadful, noiseful, drumming, cracking,
resistless, affrighting, amazing, imperuous, sulphurie, roaring, flashing,
loud-voic't, bawling, loud, loud-mouted, skie-rending, bellowing, cloud-riving,
sudden, tempestuous, swift-wing'd, barking, resounding, re-ecchoing,
cloud-crushing, squashing, squeezing, flame-belching, ^zzing, harmful, howling,
yawling, rumbling.

Thyme. Flowery, fragrant, loadning, honey-making, Bee-haunted, Hyblean,
^weet-smelling, odorous.

Tide. v. Stream. Lavish, swelling, working, waxing, rolling* justling, hasty,
vaulting, ^ancing, rising, luxurious, high-wrought, pregnant, impetuous,
incon^ant, wavie, billowie, streaming, flowing, high-swolln, roaring,
resist^esse, stormy, hushing, foamy, frothy, speedy, careering, swift-pac't,
^umming.

Tiffany. Limber, thin, pliant, fine-spun, transparent.

Tiger. Fierce, cruel, savage, furious, impetuous, bloody, ruthlesse,
merciless, ^npitying, grim, grinning, Lybian, Hircanian, Midian, sported,
rave^ous, speedy, swift-footed, hungry, tusked, foaming, enraged, ireful,
^ffrican, Indian, speckled, poudred, Armenian, streaked.

Tile-tree. Supple, limber, pliant, soft, tender, odorous.

Timbrel. Hollow, shrill, sounding, hoarse, tinkling, brazen.

Time. Aged, fleeting, unstaying, unrescued, unregained, light-foot,
unre^alled, irrecoverable, gray headed, aged, crazie, growing, speedy,
slut^ish, wastful, restless, slippery, old, gliding, stealing, creeping,
flying, ^ating, envious, journeying, feathered, winged, rolling, wheeling,
post^ng, succeeding, encroaching, assaulting, invading, running, galloping,
^evouring, swift-footed, swimming, light-heeld, swift-wing'd, mowing
^^^h-bearing, convenient, seasonable, commodious, all-gnawing, succes^ive,
ensuing, injurious, tyrannizing, domineering, waving, rusty, dusty, moldie,
consuming, unreturning, all-ripening.

Tinder. Catching, taking, fiery, spark-embracing, spark-nursing, watchful,
stu^eous, burning.

Tinker. Knocking, hammering, sooty, grimy, trugging, straggling, patching,
^udget-bearing.

Tin. White, English, sounding, limber, pliant, bending.

Titan. v. Sun. Radiant, beam-crown'd, bright-hair'd, fair-crest, roseate,
flaming, ^parkling, glowing, posting, golden, cheerful, dazzling, glorious,
scorch^ng, parching, reviving, quickening, unwearied, restless, rolling,
all-^eeing, all-viewing, all-discerning, light-infusing.

Tithonus. Old-aged, crazie, decrepit, gray headed, wea^y, Mygdonian, Phygian.

Titles. Swelling, ambitious, honored, honorable, proud, ancient, va^^ empty,
famous, pompous, puffing, magnificent, stately, bubling, win^y fluttering,
spreading.

Toad. Croaking, crawling, spotted, speckled, freckled, ugly, nasty, noisome,
loathsome, fullsome, sprawling, swelling, venomous, poysono^^ heavy-paced,
slow, slow-footed, broad-bellied, wadling, toothless^ muddy, slimy, foaming,
frothy, shvering, driveling, fenny, sharp-lip^, sharp-gumm'd.

Toad stool. Spongy, swelling, porous, soft, hollow, unsavory, cold, moist,
(...), lumpish, poisonous, soon sprung, thunder-engendred, insipid, tastle^^^,

Teast. Swimmed, drunken, drowned, thirsty, souced, spungie, swelling sucking,
dry, parched, crackl^ng, sailing.

Tomb. Forgotten, forsaken, rotten, solitary, mustie, moldering, dustie, age^,
mossie, sable, fatal, mournful, quiet, silent, peaceful, vaultie, st^tely,
pompous, gaudie, garnisht, sumptuous, costly, magnificent, inscribed, speaking,
glorious, marble, shadie, darksome, mounfull, nastie, fullsome, time-worn,
unfrequented.

Tone. Puling, whining, stately, graceful, joyful, sniveling, pleasant,
ear-enamouring.

Tongs. Pliant, ruddy, fiery, pinching, crooked, hooking, tenacious useful,
nimble.

Tongue. Melodious, sweet-voic'd, harmoneous, nectareous, heavenly, angelical,
Seraphick, enamouring, victorious persuasive, conquering, captivating,
enticing, insnaring, alluting, bewitching, enchanting, charming, delicious,
malicious, calumnious, detracting, reproachful, bibbling, wagging, twatling,
tat^ling, prating, noisefull, foul-mouthed, fluen^, pleasant, stammering,
spongie, judicious, tastfull, liquotous, wanto^, delicate, lavish, flattering,
smooth, soothing, froward, clamo^ous, envious, unbrideled, treacherous, lying,
deceitful, glozing, coll^ging, filed, gilded, venomous, harmfull, poisonous,
invenommed, bitter, invective, lashing, scourging, Satyricall, rolling.

Tool. Busy, useful, industrious, pliant, sweaty, laborious, nimble, active,
well-handled-

Tooth. v. Teeth. Delicate, sweet, wanton, lickerous, invenomed, poisonous.

Top. Gamesome, whirling, scourged, sleeping.

Torch. Burning, blazing, sparkling, dropping, fl^ming, smoakie, fiery,
shi^ing, pitchy, melting.

Torment. Sharp, bitter, bloody, aflicting, vexing, grievous, unsupported,
in^upportable, intolerable, painful, dolorous, groaning, cruel, miserable,
violent, sad, dreadful, rigorous, ^eart-fretring, wringing, gnawing ^ating
pinching, griping, unexpressed, unpattern'd, un^xampled, n^p^ing, killing,
soul-wounding, soul-opressing, gauling, doleful, pitied, ^eart-breaking,
impatient, insuffera^le, stabbing, smarting, racking, ^artyring, disquiet,
heart-rending, heart-tearing, gra^ing, tedious, un-welcome, uneasy, bruising,
crushing.

Torrent. v. Flood. Swelling, boiling, furious, impetuous, dreadful, noiseful,
unruly, ^rothy, foaming, speedy, whirling, murmuring, silver, rumbling,
gliding, gushing, rolling, rustling, winding, weeping, wrigling, strag^ing,
floating, muttering, dancing, careering, posting.

Tortoise. Shell-housed, slow-paced, tardy, crooked, vaulty, hollow,
big-bellied.

Torture. v. Torment. Touch. Easy, gentle, yiedling, rough, smooth, harmless.

Tow. Flaming, burning, loose, scattered, light, ruffled.

Tower. Lofty, exalted, sensive, mounting, aspiring ambitious, stately,
cloud-^kissing, skie-braving, cloud-cleaving, mosse-grown, proud, gorge^us,
skie-kissing, skie-threatning, cloud-inwrapped, skie-invading, ^tar-brushing,
insolent, high-topt, impregnable, defensive, climbing, ^ostly, sumptuous,
magnificent.

Toy. Gaudy, boyish, childish, garish, wanton, lascicious, fan^astick, gilden,
fine, superfluous, pompous, girlish, worthless, trining, useless, unmanly,
empty, barren, painted, varnisht.

Toil. Tedious, laborious, industrious, weary, oppressing, sweating, bruising,
crushing, painful, careful, watchful, busy, incessant, officious, obseq^ous
assiduous.

Trade. G^inful, thriving, successeful, prosperous, luckie, commodious,
u^thriving, barren, busy, industrious, laborious, tedious, weary, toylesome,
painful.

Tradesman. Industrious, laborious, swearing, toyling, painful, careful,
nipping* cheating, cunning, crafty, cozening, glozing, deceiving, venting,
s^^full, unlearned, unlettered, unconceiving, frugal, thrifty, wealthy.

Traffic. Industrious, laborious, busy, gainful, wealthy, merchandising,
c^^ning, exchanging, contracting.

Tragedy. D^eary, sad, bloody, gloomy, sullen, black, woeful, ruthful, dole^^l,
pensive, sable mournful, buskind, swelling, high-stil'd, great-worded, grave,
lofty, stately, weeping, sententious, thundering, severe, elaborate* heroic,
pitied.

Traitor. Black, ugly, subtle, viperous, poisonous, tainted, guilty, lurking,
secret, rugged, bloody, disloyal, conspiring, toad-spotted, unfaithful,
perfidious, revolting, rebellious, wary, cautious, fearful, undermining,
under-working, under-handing, insidious, fawning, glozing, odious.

Transgression. v. Sin. Bold, foul, guilty, heinous, lawless, leprous,
filthy, ugly, spotted, odious, crying, exorbitant, enormous, wilful.

Trappe. Surprising, catching, unexpected, insnaring, secret, lurking, subtle,
deceitful, treacherous, inthralling.

Trappings. Gaudie, gay, gallant, gorgeous, rich, painted; gilded, barded,
shining, glittering, costly, garish, sumptuous.

Trash. Empty, rejected, refuse, base, dis*regarded, dis-respected, cashie^ed,
fruitless, useless, barren.

Travel. Laborious, painful, careful, hard, thorny, combrous, weary, tedious,
continual, watchful, assiduous, willing, toylesome, mercenary, incessant,
officious, obsequious, improving, enaging.

Traveller. Weary, sweat^ing, painful, flitting, houselesse, sad, unfriended,
wary, observant, laborious, industrious, assiduous, diligent, wakeful,
unacquainted, discoursive, trudging.

Treachery. Subtle, lurking, secret, ambuscadoed, assaulting, surprising,
insna^ing, intrapping, inveagling, alluring, enticing, training, luring,
fairspeaking, smooth, glozing, soothing, gilded, smooth tongued, smooth-worded,
dissembling, concealed.

Treason. v. Traitor. Treachery. Treasure. v. Gold. Rich, wealthy, unpriz^d,
inestimable, unmeasured, unconfined, unfathomed, numerous, precious, unsounded,
abounding, flowing, secret, concealed, massy, moneyed, ambitious, proud,
gorgeous, gaudy, desited, coveted, powerful, hidden, enchested, dark,
inearthed, glittering, inter^ed, buried, true, solid, substantial,
friend-betraying.

Treaty. Friendly, peaceful, parlying, discussing, disputing, reconciling.

Tree. Tufted, leavie, spreading, branching, budding, pregnant, teeming,
loadned, burdened, fruitful, shady, verdant, crooked, shrubby, skie-kissing,
high-topt, high-waving, knotty, stately, lofty, vegetative, deeprooted, sappy,
shaggy, curled, gloomy, bushie, wel-grown, rattling, blooming, arched, twisted,
stooping, bending, fragrant, ambitious.

Trembling. Fearful, amazed, affrighted, feavourish, cold, pale, dreadful,
sudden, palsied, disquiet, paralytick.

Trench. VVarlick, dreadful, hollow, winding, snaky, turning, fensive,
ditched, encompast, besieging.

Tresses. v. Hair. VVaving, floating, crisped, curled, frizled, ruffled,
braided, dangling, twisted, wanton, shining, amber, radiant.

Tribunal. Dreadful, awful, sad, feared stern, severe.

Trident. Forked, three-graind, awful, dreadful, sea-commanding,
storm-quelling, storm-raising, crooked, controlling, imperious, majestic,
tempestuous.

Trifle. Vain, empty, fruitless, useless, light, gaudy, windy, toyish,
unserviceable,

Trinity. Holy, sacred, immortal, glorious, undivided, adored, uncomprehended,
knotty, unconceived, misterious.

Triton. Blue, resounding, piping, scaly, enameled, shrill, swift, moist, ^oc^*
loving.

Triumph. Solemn, pompous, gallant, gaudy, gorgeous, magnificent, joyful^
joyous, gladsome, mir^hful, jovial, feastful, glorious, victorious, sacre^,
honored, peaceful, proud, swelling, crowned, noble, laureate, stately
maj^stick.

Troop. Flocking, swarming, numerous, numberless, unnumbered, inn^merable,
preasing, crowding, thronging, clustered, marching, furious, warlick, valiant,
clashing, rattling, besieging.

Trophy. Boasting, stately, proud, triumphant, victorious, insulting, lasting,
memorable, never-dying, immortal, deathlesse, glorious, famous, pompous,
joyful, gorgeous, warlick, lofty, honored.

Trouble. v. Affliction. Anxious, perplexing, tumultuous, vexing, puzling,
molesting, e^combering, combrous, pestering, turmoyling,

Troy. Ancient, ruined, pitied, perjured, stately, magnificent, spacious,
god-built.

Truant. Gamesome, wanton, idle, lazy, loytering, dronish, guilty, fearful.

Truce. Peaceful, friendly, according, releasing, refreshing.

Trumpet. Martial, warlick, loud-voic't, shrill, hoarse, stern, dreadful,
threa^ning, singing, roaring, braying, high-talking, writhed, bloody, crooke^
windy, barking, b^nding, stounding, noyseful, loud-sounding, che^k-puffing.

Trust. R^posed, relying, assured, faithful, sacred, inviolate.

Truth. Naked, unclothed, simple, undisguized, unmasked, light-loving
corner-hating, unplaited, unpainted, certain, undoubted, unquestioned, evident,
apparent, confessed, granted, undenyed.

Tumult. Confused, noyseful, impetuous, seditious, mutinous, tempest^ous,
dreadful, disordered, distempered, unruly, rebellious, furious, angry, enraged.

Tune. Intrancing, enchanting, delicious, ear-ravishing, warbling, harmonious,
melodious, enamouring, pleasant, soul-raping, lightsome, merry, gieesome, sad,
mournful, pensive, sprightly, melancholy, heavy.

Turbot. Large, flat, delicious, tastful, crafty, subtle.

Turk. Unbelieving, misbelieving, thrifty, abstemious, cruel, unpitying,
merciless, unrelenting, inexorable, warlick, circumcized, superstit^ous,
bloody, wine-forbearing, turban'd, covetous, avaritious, erring.

Turkey. Jealous, painted, gaudy, coral-chained, Indian,

Turney. Turnament. Winding, wheeling, rolling, spacious, justing, dusty,
delightful, pleasant, sportive.

Turpentine. Syrian, liquid, odorous, sweating, dropping, subtle, drawing.

Turret. v. Tower. Turtle. v. Dove. Ch^st, wanton, pensive, mourning,
murmuring, whispering, sw^ftwing'd, faithful, loving, constant, meek, gentle,
plaintive, coplaining, querulous, sullen, billing, grizle, courteous, hoarse,
amorous, venereous, salacious, fleet-wing'd, crooing.

Tuske. Piercing, wounding, rending, tearing, crooked, bloody, goary, gnashing
foamy, frothy.

Tutour. Careful, painful, faithful, observing, eying, guarding, instructing,
diligent, assiduous, watchful, attentive, jealous, strict, severe,
sterne-vi^aged, austere.

Twig. Leavy tender, bloomy, verdant, springing, budding, sprouting, d^ngling,
green-coated, hoary-headed, waving, bending, writhing, twining inter-woven,
pliant, straggling.

Twilight. G^oomy, doubtful, ambiguous, neutral, mongrel, late, darksome,
dewy, dusky, grizzle, dappled, gray.

Twins. Resembling, coaeval, contemporary, equal-aged.

Tiber. ^. Flood. Yellow, old, aged, sandy, Ausonian, horned, Tuscan, swelling,
enraged, speedy, reed crowned.

Tympany. Swelling, puffing, bigg-bellied, gor-bellied, strouting, windy,
watery, stretching, skin-tentering, ambitious.

Type. Resembling, representing, prefiguring, predictious, declaring,
exemplifying.

Tyrant. Tyranny. Impetuous, insulting, supercilious, insolent, sullen,
ambitious, imperious, grim, stern-visag'd, waspish, angry, brow-beating,
lawless, passionate, incroaching, oppressing, fearlesse, awlesse, bruising,
crushing, currish, churlish, surly, murtherous, usurping, high-looking, proud,
stormy, self-willed, self-law'd, savage, moody, odious, haughty, hated,
detested, remorselesse, cruel, unrelenting, pompous, inexorable, inhumane,
bloody, blood-thirsty, rigorous, voluptuous, marble hearted, eye-sparkling,
wrathful, flint-hear^ed.

V.
Vagaboud. Wandering, straggling, houselesse, restless, friendlesse.

Veil. Masking, hanging, dangling, shadowie, virgin, maiden, spreading,
cloudy, hiding, concealing, saintly.

Vale. Valley. v. Meadows. Plains. Dusky, gloomy, narrow, humble, sportive,
grovelling, crowching, delightsome, fruitful, green-plusht, low-coucht,
dejected, solitary, underlying, shaded, over-looked, bushy, flower-enamell'd,
motley, smiling, fragrant, hearby, grassie, flower-embroidered, tufred, dazied,
level^'d, gamesome, green-cloath'd, green-mantled, soft-coated,
flower-spangled, resounding, ecchoing hollow, stooping, crooked, darksome,
melancholy, winding, green-breasted, stream-embroydered.

Valor. Un-affrighted, undaunted, courageous, unshrinking, stout, unsh^k^n
daring, adventurous, undertaking, attemptive, audacious, untamed, unquelled,
masculine, unmooved, presumptuous, free, active, majestic, undejected, manly,
haughty, puissant, generous, warlick, triumphant, victorious, all-subduing,
heroic.

Vanity. Melting, empty, fleshing flaring, smoaky, frothy, pompous, ridiculous,
superfluous, lying, fruitless, speckled, swelling.

Vapor. Exhaled, smoaky, moist, cloudy, frothy, smothering, rainy, dusky
sable, gloomy, foggy, misty, malignant, fat, oily, aspiring, earth-ingendered,
rising, mounting, tow^ing, infectious, unhealthy, ascending.

Variance. Jarring. disagreeing, dissentious, wrangling, brabling, jangling,
unfriendly, seditious, tumultuous, angry, harsh, hell-nourisht, blood-thirsty.

Variety. Novel, changing, different, plenteous, copious, prodigious,
incredible.

Varnish. Painted, shining, glittering, pompous, gaudy.

Vassal. v. Slave. Groaning, tugging, toyling, weary, wronged, abused,
drudging, ignominious, laborious, burdened.

Vault. Solitary, moldy, hollow, dankish, rocky, gloomy, darksome, forsaken
unfrequented, musty, uncouth, sullen, arched, dark, obscure, mossie, hanging,
blind, nasty, denny, doleful, lonely, concealed, secret.

Vdder. Sagging, milky, nursing, soft, flowing, tender, fluent, hanging
flaging, lolling, veiny, strouting, luxurious.

Vein. Fluent, azure, violet, purple, swelling, flowing, warm, winding,
branched, bloody, dancing, enterlacing, trembling, boiling, seething, meandring.

Velvet. Glittering, pompous, rich, shaggy, smooth.

Vengeance, Sharp, hot, swift-wing'd, flaming, wreakful, black, fiery, secret,
deserred, gnawing, pursuing, furious, raging, chafing, boiling, bloody,
insatiate, unappeased, sad, flame-eyed, snake-haired, cruel, stern-visaged,
grim, frowning, rageful. wrathful, threatening, hellish, stinging, ^ash
impetuous, stormy, hot-mouth'd, sullen, blustering, impatient, passion^te,
sparkling, foaming, frothy, hideous, slow-pac't.

Venison. Delicious, tastful, tast-pleasing, well-seasoned, well-relish^,
larded, costly.

Venom. Baneful, raging, subtle, working, piercing, spreading, swelling,
eating, benumming, creeping, burning, drowsy, sleepy, stupefying.

Venus. Froth-born, smiling, faire-hair'd, lovely, frolic, weeping,
incestuous, wanton, lustful, burning, raging, youthful, lascivious, unchaste,
joyous, joyful, proud, toyish, sportive, gamesome, deceitful, fruitful,
teeming, attractive, beauteous, enamouring, bewitching, enchanting, enticing,
voluptuous, delicious, black-brow'd, luxurious, adulterous, ingenious,
perfumed, pleasant, pernicious, harmeful, bashful, blushing subtle, crafty,
curious, quaint, Idalian, Cytherean, Paphian, sea-born, salacious, powerful,
commanding, controlling, imperious, golden-haird, smooth.

Verdict. Just, unjust, malicious, injurious, honest, dishonest, severe, grim.

Verdure. Flowery, smiling, youthful, gay, pleasant, gaudy, joyful, joyous,
fresh springing, blooming, leavy.

Varjuyce. Sharp, tart, poynant, stomach quickening, sour.

Vermin. Nasty, filthy, loathsome, noisome, harmful, gnawing, misch^evous,
creeping, crawling.

Verse. Smooth-swelling, tributary, exalted, lofty, harmonious, immortal,
deathlesse, powerful, everlasting, well-laboured, well-trickt, wel-drest
well-composed, eternal, embalming, numerous, fluent, sweet-flowing, sinewie,
learned, pleasant, amorous, wanton, delicious, nectareous, facetious,
immortalizing, prophetic, muse-inspired, ear-enamouring, fancy-tickling,
sprightly, sacred, measured, sententious, buskined, charming, enchanting,
intrancing nectar-dropping.

Virtue, Active, sacred, maiden, chaste, white, cold, fair, bright, untainted,
un-appeached, taintlesse, clear, thredbare, unregarded, disrespected,
conspicuous, spotless, precious, diviner, heroic, generous, glorious,
deathlesse, immortal.

Vesture. v. Garments. Sumptuous, magnificent, costly, pompous, gorgeous, neat,
trim, spruce, handsome, delicate, rich, gay, gaudy, fashionable, becoming.

Vexation. Anxious, pressing, wringing, pinching, dolorous, painful, combrous,
pestering.

Ugliness. Loathsome, deformed, foul, nasty, prodigious.

Viands. Delicate, delicious, delightful, tastful, tast-pleasing, nectarean,
ambrosial, eye-glutting, feast-ful, costly, expensive, palat-pleasing, desired

Vice. Infamous, execrable, light-flying, enormous, unruly, odious, deformed,
ugly, detested, leprous, filthy, spotted, pernicious, soul-tainting,
soul-killing, impious, soul-stabbing, soul-wounding, defaming, loathing,
^nsidious, rebellious, incorrigible, depraving, slipperie, alluring.

Victor. Victory. Laureate, crowned, white, silver-winged, triumphant,
delightful, valiant, courageous, martial, warlick, renowned, famous,
imperious, insulting, glorious, bright, subduing, conquering, happy, immortal,
puisant, insulting.

Vigor. Manly, powerful, nervous, sinewie, cheerful, active, lively,
sprightly.

Villain. Michievous, rude, roguish, fordid, erath-born, notorious, crackrope,
rope-ripe, shameless, unblushing, saucy, bold, impudent, brazen faced.

Vine. Spreading, winding, clasping, amorous, clustered, limber, sprightly,
life-chearing, grape-charged, bleeding, humble, generous, lusty, swelling,
uxorious, fruitful, youthful, wanton, embracing, clinging, twining,
increasing, creeping, wrigling, writhing, knotty, brisled, leavy, ramping,
bending, spriggie, branching, shadie, underpropped, enterlacing, tender,
gadding, full-clustered.

Vinegar. Sharp, tart, sour, cold, vigorous, subtle, piercing, cooling,
refrigerating, poynant.

Vintage. Fruitful, teeming, wealthy, plenteous, prosperous,

Violence. Harsh, rugged, rigid, enforcing, surious, raging, untamed,
unresisted, impetuous, cruel, tumultuous, tempestuous, angry, disdainful,
proud, dreadful, insolent, hurrying, oppressing, unpitying, unrelenting,
audacious, imperious, disordered, tyrannous, swelling, transporting,
headstrong, frantic, wild, savage, ungoverned, impatient, passionate,
blustering, heady, surly, sullen.

Violet. Nodding pale, purple, pale, azure, creeping, soft, st^eaked,
beauteous, sweet smelling, glowing.

Viper. Poisonous, venomous, drunken, wine-loving, abortive, pernicious,
birth-forcing.

Virago. Stout, hardy, courageous, manly, masculine, heroic, valiant,
valorous, bold, audacious, adventurous, fearlesse, undaunted.

Virgin. Chaste, modest, blushing, bashful, sober, untainted, pure, unspotted*

Virginity. Cold, barren, fruitless, chaste, pure, taintlesse, modest, sober,
bashf^^ spotless, straight-lac'd, untoucht, maiden, white, pale.

Visage. Deformed, beauteous, smiling, mild, joyful, sweet, pleasing, ang^^
frowning, furious, rageful, stormy, imperious, graceful, lovely, disdai^ful,
moded, settled, stern, grim, mournful, cheerful, affected, murtherous,
supercilious, haughty.

Vision. Prophetic, sacred, enthusiastic, inspired, heaven-sent.

Vizard. Masking, disguising, concealing, dissembling, deceiving, veiling.

Ulcer. Putrid, diseaseful, nasty, loathsome, infectious, swelling, inflamed,
uncured, corrupting, sordid, noisome, corroding, fretting, spreading, painful,
putrefying.

Ulysses. Prudent, famous, subtle, crafty, wary, perju^'d, wandering,
treacherous, warlick, lingering.

Vnadvisednesse, Rash, peremptory, inconsiderate, heedlesse, blustering.

Uncleanness. Nasty, foul, loathsome, fulsome, sordid, sluttish.

Inconstancy. v. Inconstancy. Underling. Oppressed, groaning, inferior,
obedient, humble, dejected, yiedling, slavish, servile.

Understanding. Clear, quick, sharp, ingenious, apprehensive, deviseful,
artful, inventive, ready, subtle, active, nimble, ranging, roving, pregnant,
teeming, busy, rich, wealthy, enriched, contriving.

Ungratefulness. v. Ingratitude. Foul, base, odious, shameless, detestable
impious, proud, insolent, arrogant.

Vnhandsomenesse. Deformed, ugly, loathsome, nasty.

Unhappiness. Disastrous, pitied, killing, perplexed, impatient.

Unicorn. Long-horn'd, warlick, virgin-loving, lyon-hating, Indian, savage,
furious, precious, rich-horned, yelling.

Uniformity. Graceful, proportioned, agreeing, becoming, decent, beeauteous,
equal, even-squared, pleasant, handsome.

Unity, Union. Friendly, peaceful, loving, amorous, embracing, conjoyning,
sociable, according, agreeing, calm, mutual, unjarring.

Vuniverse. Large, wide, wide-skirted, dispersed, extended, populous.

University. Lettered, learned, studious, famous, populous, bookish,
instructive, honored, peopled, thronged.

Voice. Sweet, harmonious, delicious, confused, suppliant, interrupted,
intrancing, enchanting, well tuned, ear-ravishing, ear-enamouring, soul-raping,
sprightly, mournful, piteous, complaining, joyful, mirthfull, puling, whining.

Volume. I earned, studious, subtle, sacred, grave, industrious, instructive,
elaborate.

Vow. Religious, chaste, binding, fervent, pious, solemn, rash, inconsidetate,
unadvised, devotious, obliging, irrevocable.

Votray, v. Hermit. Voyage. Dangerous, adventurous, successful,
successelesse, disasterous, happy, unhappy, tedious, prosperous,

Uproar. Tumultuous, confused, seditious, mutinous, rebellious, lawless,
unruly, disordered, noyfull, furious, distempered.

Vrn. Quiet, forgetful, sacred, peaceful, forsaken, fatal, mournful,
sable-vaulty, shady, darksome, cold, silent, shrowding, Ashy.

Use. Frequent, commodious, profitable, gainful.

Usury Usurer. Oppressing, griping, exacting, avaritious, greedy, covetous,
scraping, odious, hateful, cruel, crushing, squeezing, hoarding, pinching,
stanchlesse, insatiate, heart enthralling, monied, pale, careful, fearful,
rigorous, unpitying inexorable-

Vulcan. Laborious, smudgy,, black, industrious, deformed, smoakie, coali^,
grimie, polt-foot, fiery, dustie, slow-footed, tardie-pac'd, lame, halting,
rusty, musty, horned, cornuted.

Vulgar. v. Multitude. Low, bas^, misjudging, misdeeming, rude, illiterate,
unconceiving, unlearned, sottish, giddy-headed, brainlesse, hair-brained,
moodie, humorous, frantic, shallow-headed, tumultuous, inconstant, seditious.

Vulture. Greedy, ravenous, presaging, devouring, slow-wing'd, gluttonous,
ill-boding, predictious, ominous, raping, carkasse-haunting.

W.
Wagon. Wain. CReaking, groaning, shreeking, burdened, wheeling, turning.

Wall. Assaulted, scaled, enclosing, immuring, imprisoning, incircling, proud,
lofty, mounting, towering, aspiring, ambitious, spacious, entow^ed, silent,
mosse-thrun^'d, aged, crazie, defensive, stubborn, stone compacted.

Want. Griping, pinching, oppressing, penurious, needy, crushing, bruising,
meager, soul-squeezing, gauling, freezing, heart-dejecting, enforcing,
importuning, necessirating, tugging, laborious, industrious, toiling,
down-looking, grinding, urging, lank-bellied, thin-gutted.

Wanton. Wantonness. Lascivious, obscene, dallying, toyish, sportive, lewd,
rude, ungoverned, unruly, unreined, uncurbed, jolly, frolic, frantic,
hair-brained unbrideled, tempting, luxurious, heady, disordered, intemperate,
regardlesse, revelling, saucy, full-fed, insatiate, fearlesse.

Wardrobe. Rich, wealthy, pompous, go geous, gaudy, tumbled, ruffled, rifled
ransacked.

Wariness. Cautious, cautelous, timorous, fearful, perplexed, doubtful,
advised, considerate, deliberate, pondering, tardy, slow-paced.

War. Rugged, blood-thirsty, rude, remorslesse. angry, hungry, stein, surly,
sullen, bloody, dreary, gloomy, strifefull, litigious, stormy, ^empestuous,
blustering, rustling, impetuous, wastfull, terrour-breathing, active,
tumultuous, smoaky, all-abhorred, cormorant, distressefull, devouring,
blood-sucking, all-consuming, confused, murdering, furious, sacrilegious,
impartial, inexorable, outrageous, dreadful, inhumane, savage, ruinating,
brutish, feral, enraged, mischievous, cruel, mortal, adventurous, attemptive,
courageous, victorious, doubtful, uncertain, insolent, disastrous,
successful, blood-streaming, pitilesse, merciless, hell-nou^isht.

Warrior v. Soldier. VVasp. Angry, peevish, pettish, testy, touchy, stinging,
injurious, humming, harmfull, pestering, noysefull, thievish, fellonious,
pilfering, robbing, preying, raping, purloyni^g filching.

VVast. Lavish, profusive, expensive, unthrifty, luxurious, prodigal,
improvident, fruitless, causeless, riotous, excessive, wealth-eating,
devouring, wealthy, consuming, needless, superfluous, unnecessary, swallowing,
dissolute.

Wast. v. Wilderness. VVatch. Observant, careful, svigilant, attentive,
listening, night-walking, strict.

Water. v. Springs VVave. Pliant, crisped, flowing, cleansing, plashie,
streaming, clear, bright, Crystal, glassie, running, deep, shallow, fishie,
boiling, bubling, gushing, muttering, unruly, rolling, muddie, healthful,
floating, gliding, scattered, foaming, froathy.

Wave. Angry, enraged, boiling, swelling, rolling, foaming, crisped, curled,
purled, stormy, azure, writhing, wrigling, winding, fl^tting, floating,
wilder, dancing, tumbling, straggling, fretting, sparkling, troubled,
shattered, swallowing, engulphing, ingorging, chasing, impetuous, tempestuous,
wandering, encroaching, invading, assailing, roaring, noysefull, drumming,
rocking, rising, giddie, frothy, foamy, yielding, justling, stooping, yawning,
sweeping, silver, Crystal, trembling, brackish, surly, sullen, sliding,
mounting, breaking, ruffled, wrinckled, churlish, brisied, imperious,
tumultuous, vaulting, leaping, furious, careering, arched, gliding, posting,
bustling, tossing, murmuring, muttering, self-drowning, proud, big-bell^ed,
climbing, yesty, contentious, wreakfull weltring.

Wavering. Unconstant, uncertain, doubtful, unsettled, unsteady, windy,
instable, perplexed, anxious, dist^acted, ambiguous, giddy, faint, cold,
heartlesse, fearful jealous, suspicious, careful.

Wax. Soft, pliant, relenting, yielding, melting, limber, supple, obedient,
clammie.

Wealth. v. Gold. Envied, desired, unmeasured, unconfined, unfathomed,
abounding, unprised, inestimable, proud, gorgeous, gaudy, commanding,
imperious, glittering, pompous, unexhausted, sullen, treasured.

Weapons. Offensive, defensive, clashing, sharp-edged, fatal, mortal, bloody,
thirsty, gory, keen-edged, flaming, revengefull, reeking, wounding murdering,
barbarous, victorious, glancing, brandished, sharppointed.

Weariness. Fainting, tedious, vexing, tired, toilsome, jaded, irksome.

Weathor. Fair, foul, delicate, dull, healthful, unhealthfull, diseasefull,
tempestuous, sad, heavy, cheerful, seasonable, unseasonable, cloudy, showry,
hot, cold, nipping, freezing, soultry, sweltring, freezing, sharp, mild,
pleasant, drowsy.

Weathercock. Turning, windy, wind-turn'd, unconstant, lofty, moving.

Wedding. v. Marriage. Mirthfull, feastfull, joyful, joyous, ceremonious,
stolen, amorous, peaceful, geniall.

Weeds. Choking, fruitless, cumbrous, encumbering, unwelcome, barren,
marish, rank, presumptuous, usel^sse, plashie, shallow-rooted, pernicious,
harmfull, noisome.

VVeesell. Slender, fearful, lurking, egge-sucking, lank-bellied.

VVelcome. Gracious, cheatfull, loving, smiling, chearing, kind, bounteous,
jolly, loving, courteous.

Welkin. v. Firmament. VVelshman. Valiant, furious, generous, genealogicall.

West. Sober, red-cheek'd, blushing, Sun-inning, gloomy.

Whale. Storm-boding, massy, prodigious, storm-presaging, sea-oppressing,
sea-tyrannising.

Wheat. Yellow, bearded, golden-eared.

Wheel. Turning, rolling, creaking, swift-pac'd, speedy, crooked, rushing.

Whip. Lashing, scourging, smarting, painful, correcting, revengefull, sharp,
knotty, twisted, awing, dreadful, fearing, hated, loathed, curbing,
restraining, tutoring, cruel, blooody, schooling, severe, rigorous,
threatening, torturing.

Whirlpool. v. Gulf. Devouring, swallowing, frothy, deep, yawning,
wide-mouthed, jawstretch'd.

Whirlwind. v. Wind. Dusty, impetuous, flaming, sweeping, sudden, resistlesse,
tempestuous, cloudy, boisterous.

Whisper. Soft, warm, glowing, guilty, secret, close, hollow, silent,
fearful, pleasing, magic, drowsy.

Whore. v. Harlot Lascivious, wanton, lustful, obscene, leprous, infamous,
rammish, strumpeting, dallying, rampant, callet, baudy, brothel'd, uncivil,
rotten, salacious, dissolute, immodest, mercenary, shameless, impudent,
notorious, filthy, painted, canckered, itchie, goatish, unblushing, loathsome,
musty, nasty, pocky.

VVidow. Comfortless, desolate, sad, pensive, melancholy, l^nely, jolly,
lusty, frolic, bounsing, distressed, mournful, woeful, afflicted, oppressed.

Wife. Loving, careful, sollicitous, embracing, indulgent, chearing, loyal,
disloyal, brawling, contentious, litigious, unquiet, scolding, happy, unhappy,
delicious.

Wilderness. Unpeopled, uncou^h, shaggy, desert, solitary, lonely, devious,
savage, melancholy, silent, unfrequented, sandy, dreadful, sullen, gloomie,
rockie, hoary, pathlesse, shrubby bushy, unfruitful, barren, inhospitable,
wastful.

VVile Crafty, cunning, treacherous, insidious, cheating, deceitful, beguiling,
subtle, juggling, ingenious, artificial, secret, sly* working, circumventing.

Will. Unforced, free-working, uncontrolled, active.

Willow. Pliant, limber, branching, spreading, sprouting, bank-loving,
plash-loving, shadie, tender.

Wind. Howling, bellowing, drumming, incaved, sweeping, ruffling, prattling,
tatling, twatling, talking, saucy, uncivil, tyrannising, loud voiced,
churlish, hollow, barking, wandering, amorous, courting, whizzing, whirling,
mutinous, whistling, whisking, active, singing, dancing, flitting, unruly,
rustling, inconstant, swinging, curled, chiding, posting, busling, whiffing,
whispering, fanning, murmuring, impetuous-creeping, bleak, hurrying,
licentious, insulting, swelling, straggling, scattering, shattering, rocking,
chafing, incensed, struggling, flying, justling, rapefull, rising, jangling,
jarring, ranging, blustering, surly, careering, rattling, sturdy, puffing,
stern, stormy, high-rais'd, sporting, dallying, gamesome, chattering,
audacious, muttering, sullen, tanning, angry, nimble, quarrelling, fantastic,
resistlesse, wrestling, laboring, loudly-storming.

Windings. Slipperie, snakie, spacious, crooked, doubled, intricate.

Window. Lofty, hollow, Crystal, trall^'st, stately.

Wine. Costly, brisk, rich, generous, spruce, neat, choice, odorous,
spirit-prompting, care-drowning, sparkling, heating, delicious, massick,
Caerubian, Chian, Lesbian, Candian, joyous, smiling, nectareous, fuming,
forgetful, raging, wit-expelling, rebellious, reason-deposing, sprightly, lusty.

Wing. Supporting, roosting, fluttering, swooping, gliding, sweeping, brushing,
towering, scaling, nimble, active, industrious, soaring, mounting, moving,
wandering, plumie, well-feathered, fanning, panting, beating, brooding, downy,
ruffled, trembling, waving, swimming floating, flagging, slicing, hatcihng,
hovering, subtle, ready, easy, soft, restless, busy, swift, balanced tosed,
airie, air-cutting,

Winter. Bleak, blasting, irksome, pinching, barren, stormy, shivering,
trembling, frosty, fruitless, foggy, rugged, leavelesse, chil, frost-starved,
drizling, dull, hoary, old, gray, hideous, blustering, nipping, sap-consuming,
rude, sluggish, drowsy, sullen, icie, keen; sharp, deformed, decrepit, rainie,
windy, showrie, dirty, mirie, fierce, snowie, cruel, injurious, devouring,
angry, churlish, crabbed, tempestuous, melancholy, grim, sterne-visaged,
discolored.

Wire. Pliant, slender, limber, twisted, twining.

Wish. Hungry, covetous, desirous, longing, greedy, cherisht, avaritious,
ardent, ambitious, passionate, hearty, sollicitous, insatiate.

Wit. Active, pregnant, piercing, quick, sagacious, plotting, contriving,
inventing, mature, nimble, stirring, happy, enriched, penetrating.

Witch. Thessalian, blew-eyed, freckled, mumbling, withered, unhallowed,
hellish, ugly, nasty, fulsome, hideous, furious, malicious, misshapen, cruel,
mischeevous, il-looking, g^umbling, charming, muttering, hateful, spightful,
dreadful, revengeful, affrightful, siveturning, image-pricking, bloody.

Woe. v. Grief. Doleful, mournful, plaintful, pensive, sad, cruel,
unexpressed,
heart-rending-tearing-contracting-killing-pinching-wringing-fretting-oppressing-gnawing-gauling-grating-breaking-squeezing, discontented, impatient, intolerable, unsupported, pitied, disquiet.

Wolf. Rapeful, ravening, cursed, Thracian, hungry, greedy, devouring, raping,
howling, Appulian, mountain, insatiate, bloody, preying, foaming, grinning,
night-stragling, gluttonous, furious, salvage.

Women. Beauteous, soft, wanton, crafty, deceitful, inconstant, weak, frail,
pityful, tender, compassionate, prattling, passionate, delicate, melting,
jealous, impatient, weeping, puling, whining, war-detesting, revengeful,
smooth-faced, rash, inconsiderate.

Womb. Pregnant, teeming, fruitful, barren, painful, swelling.

Wonder. Attractive, unwonted, stupendous, prodigious, silent, unbeleeved,
fai^h-surpassing, unaccustomed, amazing, intrancing.

Wood. Silent, shaggy, pathlesse, leavy, shady, lofty, bushy, ecchoing,
h^ghwaving, arched, stately, sullen, wel-grown, unfrequented, solitary, mossy,
cu^led, shrubby, desert, gloomy, devious, darksome, verdant, beast-haunted,
unpeopled,

Wool. Curled, thirsty, fleecy, twined, rough, drinking, frizled, furled,
ravelled,

Word. Winged, flying, irrevocable, unrecalled, gilded, oily, sententious,
sugared, forced, strained.

Work. Laborious, tedious, toylesome, stirring, active, busy painful,
industrious, unimitable, unpatterned, unexampled.

Worm. Crawling, wrigling, gnawing, impartial, devouring, saucy.

Wormwood. Bit^er, distastful, gray, hoary, medicinal.

Wound. Gaping, reeking, gushing, ghastly, gasping, yawning, smarting, lanched,
sharp, rankling, bleeding, festered, painful, cruel, gashing, hollow,
trembling, killing, murdering, fatal, bloody, griezly.

Wrack. Doleful, woeful, pitied, sad, unhappy, disastrous.

Wrath. v. Anger. Fury. Burning, baneful, hot, inflaming, wal-eyed, brutish,
blustering, fierce, fiery, bloody, revengeful, impetuous, tempestuous, furious.

Wrinkle. Aged. hanging, deformed, curled, folded, frowning, gathered,

Wrist. Sinewie, snowie, ivory, veiny, azure-streaked.

Wreath. Pleited, braided, knotty, curled, leavy, laurel, flowery, triumphant,
victorious, brow-incircling, joyful.

X.
Xanthus. v. River. Speedy, crooked, yellow, golden-streamed, Phrygian.

Xenophon. Learned, studious, industrious.

Xerxes. Haughty, Persian, ambitious, voluptuous, proud, sea-scourging,
luxurious.

Y
Year. TArdy, sliding, turning, increasing, fleeting, lingering, tedious,
swift, wheeling, flying, unrecalled, wasting, declining, passant, rolling,
succeeding, gliding, snakie, creeping, running, posting, winged, reviving,
surviving, hasty, speedy, swift-paced, un-returning.

Yeast. Frothy, foamy, swelling, rising.

Yew. Warlick, dismal, fatal, mortal, ven^mous, unhappy, verdant, deadly,
dreadful,

Yoke. Galling, pressing curbing, wringing, restraining, heavy, crushing,
bruising, uneasy, hateful, slavish, servile, detested, crooked, odious,
painful, displeasing, tyrannous.

Youth. Unbrideled, wild, hot, fresh, loose, manly, blooming, vigorous,
ungoverned, unruly, amotous, giddy, immoderate, flowing, waxie, pliant,
budding, green, rude, raw, unexperienced, untutored, active, stirring,
unreined, lustful, smiling, downy, wanton, vernant, burning, coltish, able,
intemperate, dissolute, untamed, proud, ambitious, voluptuous, luxurious,
unwary, rash, haire-braind, inconsiderate, flowery, lascivious, soft, tender,
free*boyling, impatient, furious, hardy, unwise, lively, quick-headed,
impetuous, audacious, daring, courageous, sprightful, active, generous,
cheerful, merry, ingenious, witty, brisk, neat, inconstant, sportive,
gamesome, frolic, jovial, choleric, uncontrolled, unmellow, unripe unfledge,
sleeke, smooth, unsifted, unreclaimed, indiscreet, riotous.

Z.
Zeal. COouragious, industrious, religious, affectionate, passionate, virtuous,
fervent, hot, burning, ardent, officious, pious, sacred, inflaming, flamy,
devoted, superstitious, ravished, intemperate, wel-tempered, careful, cordial,
hearty, hot-mouthed, frantic.

Zephirus Balmy, spicy, flowery, cooling, life-breathing, life-infusing,
courteous, mild, kind, odorous, winged, warm, swift-winged, wanton, enamoured.

Zodiak. Crooked, painted, starry, heaven-girdling, sparkling, star-enameld,
star-embossed.

Zoylus. Envious, calumniating, backbiting, babbling, biting, injurious,
detracting, convitious, barking, carping, reproachful, snarling, supercilious,
disdainful, lashing, captious, censorious, exceptious, currish, capricious,
invective, sharp-toothed, tongue-wounding, quipping, girding, jeering,
snapping, condemning, reviling, unknowing, ignorant, fantastic, grinning.

Who with condemning eyes does on me look,
Is that which gives a period to my book.
FINIS.
The ENGLISH PARNASSUS.
A.
Abel.
DEaths first fruits, Deaths handsel,
who first did lead
That way which all succeeding men must tread,
Envies first object,
who first did feel the hand of fate
In a short life, and cursed brothers hate.
The first of martyrs, The worlds proto-marryr.
Murders first essay, who first bedewed the ground
With drops of blood, show^'d from his gushing wound,
whose blood does cry,
And with revengeful language pierce the sky.
Abortive. v. Embrion.
whom untimely birth
Excused from all the sorrows of the earth.
Imperfect Embrion, Half-made man.
that from the womb
Took but his rise, to leap into the tomb,
Finding a night before they see a morn.
The womb
Is both his crable and his tomb
Abraham.
That miracle of faith, abstract of obedience
Great soul of faith who with unpalsied hands
Can sacrifice his son, when God commands;
Whose countless issue did in number use
With all those lights that twinkle in the sky;
whose pious prayer
Hid saved five Cities if ten had been there.
As righteous as he -- Isaacs old fire, Sarah's loyal mate, Great Terah's
faithful son.

Absalom.
David's rebellious son; That piece of ill placed beauty,
Whose chiefest ornament be^^^e
The instrument of death and shame;
That double Rebel who at once did do
What were too much of crime, though shared to two.
Whom neither civil nor domestic law,
Neither a father nor a king can aw
And keep from, treasonable acts --
Who in incestious pleasures bathing lay,
And made the blushing sun close up the day
Amazed to see such acts as those were done
At once both by a subject and a son,
Envying his father should enjoy alone
By him unrivaled, either bed or throne.
Abstemious. v. Temperate.
One that in wine tastes water, in water wine, As if he had drunk of the
Clytorian fount, which who so tastes nere after relish wine.

One that can slake
His thirst with waters of the running lake,
Whose drink's of natures brewing,
Who if his drink but a cold moisture have
No other qualities does in it crave,
And with a rich contentment can resign
To others all the pleasures of the vine.
Absurd things indecently joined.
So have I seen the pride of Natures store,
The orient pearl chaind to the sooty Moore,
So has the diamonds bright ray been set
In night, and wedded to the Nigro jet,
Like Delphins ranging in the wood,
Whilst boars are swimming on the flood,
Heaven and hell together lie
With reconciled antipathie.
Acheron.
The joyless lake, the flaming torrent, gloomy water dismal wave.

Where never fish were seen to play,
Nor water Nymphs to keep their holy day.
The sad infernal stream, the moate of hell, Where the sad Furies bath their
ugly limbs.

Achilles.
Fair Thetis godlike son. Chirons stour pupil.
The Trojans fear and hate.
Unvanquisht mortal that from Thetis sprang,
He whom the silver footed goddess bore,
That brave attemprive spirit that could feel
Deaths wounding stroke at no place but his heel;
Swift as the dart he cast, as arrows fleet,
Who though he best could, laest did use his feet.
He for whose arms such stern debate did rise
That Ajax would not live without the prize.
Actaeon.
Unhappy hunter, who became
To his own dogs th'unlucky game,
By whom was naked in the fountain seen
The beauty of the quiver-bearing Queen.
whom his own dogs did tear
Transformed into the figure of a dear,
who as he flies
Wonders at the new swiftness of his thighs.
Adam.
The highest pitch of perfect nature,
The lively image of the great Creator,
In whom comprised was, what ever can
Belong to the perfection of a man.
Reasons eldest master. Gods eldest son.
That Universal father* The general kinsman.
That spring of men. Manhood without foregoing infancy.
Adamant.
The unrelenting stone,
Which naught can break but the warm blood of Goats.
Which fire cannot warm, nor hammer bruise.
Poison hating stone, cut with nothing but it self.
Admire. v. Wonder.
Admiration strikes mine eyes,
And all my apprehensive faculties.
To view with wondering amazed, admiring eyes.
With adoration to admire. I Am ravished with just wonder.
To scatter the spirits in admiration. Intranc'r with wonder.
Struck with admiring wonderment.
All eyes that saw their lids with wonder raised.
Admirable. v. Incredible.
Transcending the power of a strong belief.
The greaeest miracle that ever challenged wonder.
Each thing we see did yeeld-subject for admiration.
Where art and miracle draw equal breath.
The amazed beholders wondering eyes
Were taken captive with the sight,
So much of miracle it has.
Adonis.
Venus fair minion.
He whom his sister bore, his grandsires son.
Fair but unhappy hunter -- in whom the foamie boar
Sheathed his sharp tushes, wounded late before.
Adorn.
To grace, embellish, enamel, beautify, fringe, lace edge, embroyder, embosse,
enchase inlay, spangle, sleeke, smooth, file, enrich, varnish.

Adultery. Adulterer.
The beast with two backs. Adulterate mixture.
Stolen pleasures of the lustful bed.
Loves felony. Venus theft. That unrepaired injury.
Hymen's high treason, disloyal traitor to the marriage bed
Stolen meetings in unlawful sheets,
Whose longing eyes wait for the twilight.
Adversity. v. Miserable.
The spite of srowning fortune. Fortunes storm.
Fortunes clowdy brow. The melice of the angry fates.
Heavens sour and most malignant influence.
The school of patience. Unst^ppy opportunity to try a friend.
The souls night clothes.
Aeacus.
Grim Judge of trembling ghosts. In^zorable shade.
Hells stern trium^^^. Witty inventor of sad punishment.
Aeneas
Anchyses pious son. Cytherean Hero. Venus loved darling.
That truest Trojan. The Trojans glory, and their hope.
More valor mix^ with greater piety
Then was in him the world could nere discrie.
Who on his shoulders with triumphant joy
Bore his old father from the flames of Troy.
Dido's unhappy and unthankful guest.
Loves pious brother. The pious root of Roman families.
The beauteous fugitive of Troy
That did the Carthage Queen enjoy.
Aeolus. v. Wind.
That struggling winds, in rockie cavernes keeps,
And at his pleasure calmes the raging deepes,
Great guardian of the hollow winds.
Storm fettering God. The bubcheekt steward of the winds.
The windy Monarchies imperious King.
who can appease
The angry waves, and swell them when he please.
Blustering Hippotades. The storm commanding tyrant of the air.
Aetna.
The vast Sicilian hill, whose jaws exspire
Thick clouds of dust, and vomits flakes of fire v. Sandys Metam. lib. 5. p 191.

The hill that burns with embowelled flames
Vomiting stones, and darkening showers of dust
The mount which smokes in curied darkness rolls,
Whence a black cloud sometimes is belched out,
Whose pitchy fume, and fiery sparks about,
Vent flakes of flame, which seem the stars to lick,
Vomiting up unbowelled, mount-mold thick.
Working up rocks to heaven, and heaps of stones,
Venting from his vast paunch his fiery groans,
Encelad's lightning half-burnt, corpse it is said
Under this mighty pressing grave-stones laid,
Who through those chimney breaches breaths out fire
And when that weight his weary limbs does tire
Sicilia shakes with rumbling noise and cries,
And pitchie fogges muffle the frighted skies,
the urging flames come from
Sicilian Aetna's over-burthened womb,
As great Typhaeus throws his stones abroad
Pressed with Inarim^'s eternal load.
The Cyclops forge.
Affection. v. Love. Africa.
The torrid clime more hot,
Then which for men the Gods created not.
The scorched fields,
Where neither river, nor the fountain yields
Water enough, where Titans heat abounds,
And killing serpents smear the parched grounds,
where the sun does bro^le
Upon the hot sands of the Lybian soil,
Where the Sun. v. Hot Summer.
With neighboring rays bakes the divided earth,
And drinks the rivers up. That fourth part of the world,
Graspt in the clutches of the salding crab.
Ajax.
The master of the sevenfold shield, Whom ambitious charms,
Conjured to madness for Achilles arms, Whom ambitious strife
Deprived first of sense, and then of life.
He who alone, Jove, Hector, sword and fire
So often sustained, yields to one stroke of ire
The unconquered sorrow conquers;
Whose blood engendered on the ground
The flower, first made by Hyacinthus wound.
Air.
The host of Mists, the bounding tennis Ball
That stormy tempests toss and play withal,
Of winged Clouds, the wide unconstant house
The unsettled Kingdom of great Aeolus;
The warehouse, shop, mint, treasure-house of winds,
The throne of night and day, the wardrobe of the rain,
The birds Sea, the Airy main, whose traffic gives
Motion of life to every thing that lives
Unmeasur'd-Welkin, the dish we feed on every minute.
Alchymist. v. Chemist. Alecto. v. Fury. Alexander.
The Macedonian Philippis mad-braind son,
The prosperous thief. He that the world subdued
That all the Sky encompast Globe did gain.
Thine was both night and day, the stars would shine,
And Planets wander over no lands but thine
That little world to whom the greater seemd but little
Ambitious Monarch, whose unconfined desire
Found not, a limit with the world. The fiery youth of Macedon.
The Macedonian youth who knew
No work so full of ease as to subdue,
Who scarce believed his conquests worthy fame,
Since others thought his fortune overcame.
Ambitious. Ambition.
^ke Phaeton, or that ambitious crew,
those towering thoughts, no less than heaven pursue
that with disdain look at their narrow fate; Who have ambitious aim,
^o build tall Pyramids in the Court of fame
those boundless hopes earth cannot satisfy,
that with Caligula court the Moon.
and with Eudoxus, do aspire, to kiss the Sun
High-rooft, exalted-aspring unconfined thoughts,
^patious minds, desires that know no limits but the poles
^owring hopes, honor thirsting minds,
Thinking no face so beautiful as that
Which looks under a crown of a large-striding mind;
A mind having no limits of hope, and not knowing why
To fear. A brain beating for honor, Whose towering thoughts presume so high
Swelled with a vain ambitious, tympany,
Ambition like the circle on the stream
Which never cease to enlarge it self
Till by broad spreading it disperse to naught
The soldiers virtue. Virtues disease
Bred like surfets from an undigested fullness.
Whose avaritious thoughts would teach them run,
As long continued journeyes as the Sun,
And make the Title of their strength, not right
As known and universal as his light;
Whose desires know no Horizon Who had thoughts so hie
They humble seemed, when the aymd at victory.
Amazed.
I more amazed than Circe's, prisoners, when
They felt themselves turn beasts --
Amazed they stand, as when Joves tresses shake
And make the earth and stars though fixed, quake,
Mankind and all the worlds affrighted frame
Astonished shook. So amazed stood
Deucalion, when he saw the swallowing flood,
Or when he heard the ambiguous oracle. So amazed were
The sad Heliades, when they behold
The creeping Bark their tender limbs infold.
Amazement seized him. As if his soul did in his body sleep.
So in the seas stood the Phaenician ship
That brought Ulysses home.
As if he had looked on the Go^gans face,
Struck with a deep amazement
Like a man gone a far journey from himself.
transformed with wonder
Senceless he stood, as one struck down by thunder.
More amazed, than had I seen the vaulty top of heaven,
Figured all over with meteors. Stands like a breathing stone
Recovered from amazement.
Time and reason had reduced
His flying senses to some certain stand,
Recollected from his ecstasy.
Amorous. v. Love Anchorite.
That entertains, the rising day
With Prayer and holy M^ditation,
That is as well
Contented with his homely cell
As they that glitter in the courts of Kings;
One that has bid the world good night
Before his time to go to bed,
Whose sleep wants only length to prove him dead.
Sitting like patience on a monument,
Smiling at grief, uninterested in the worlds affairs*
That only lives, to learn well how to die.
That in religious melancholy,
Sits and smiles at all the folly,
All the pleasures, all the toys
That the worldlings style their joys,
And does make the silent air
Chariot up his pious prayer.
Anchyses.
That welcome burden to his pious son.
With whom the queen of love in sportive play
Upon the leavy tops of Ida lay
Aeneas aged Sire.
Anger. v. Rage. Fury.
That burning fever of the soul, enraged blood,
The tempest of the troubled thoughts, souls combustion,
Valors whetstone. That shorter madness.
The souls torrid zone.
That heat which chaps the soul, and lets the devil creep in at the ^ranies,

Angry.
Having all his thoughts bound up in choler
The icie current of his frozen blood
^s k^ndled up in agonies as hot
As flames of burning Sulphur
The ashy paleness of his cheeks.
^s scarlated in ruddy flakes of wrath,
And like a bearded Meteor does suck up
With swiftest terror all the dusky mists
That over-cloud compassion in the breast,
^mpatience lowreth in his face, a February face,
All full of frosts, and storms and cloudiness,
And were his eye balls into bullets turned
He would in rage have shot them at his face.
Their eyes sparkling like the beaten flint
Like Ajax Telamonius,
When he on sheep and oxen spent his fury,
Nor can he buckle his distemperd passion
Within the belt of reason*
Like a tyled house on fire, no coming near to quench it.
Had Narcissus looked so when he was angry, and seen his own face, he could
never have been in love with himself.

Fierce anger makes* the blood grow hot,
Even as a firebrand does the seething pot;
And then thy flaming eyes sparkling forth fire,
Thou say and do so in thy furious ire,
That mad Orestes dares swear such a fact
None but a man stark mad ere durst to act.
All his phlegm is turned into choler. If God should have then armed him with
thunder in 24. hours, there had neither been tent nor pavillion.

As if all his humors had turned choler,
His heart too great too great for his strait bosom grew
Transported with his rage.
Like to the chafed bore, whom eager hounds
Have at a bay and terrify with sounds.
With eyes confessing rage, and eyebrows knit
Her face as much as rage would suffer, fair.
She stops, and shaking her dishevelld hair,
So boiled Progne when she knew,
Her sisters rape. His eyes blaze blood and fire,
He frowns with eyes that sparkle fire,
In whose red eyes two darted flames appeard,
The curses lighten from his lip,
So looked great Agamemnon, when he heard
Calchas unwelcome prophecy.
Within his eyes a burning furnace glowes,
Death and destruction muster in his face,
Fretting like a piece of gumm'd velvet.
Who like the roaring of the furious wind,
Vents out the wild distempers of his mind. v. Frown.

Angels
The glorious Hosts of Heaven. Nimble posts
Immortal beings, glorious essences, winged wartiours,
Heavens harbengers, and swiftest pursivants,
The sacred Tutors, Guardians of the Saints,
Heavens-nobles, courtiers, Ambassadors, flaming powers
Lofty, exalted, unspotted spirits, glittering ranks.
The heavenly warders, silver winged Legions,
That soar above heavens bright star, spangled regions,
Winged intelligences, winged heralds, watchmen, legates,
Celestial hierarchies, Diviner Mercuries,
Heavens winged choristers, carollers that warble out
A silver ditty; That spread their golden pinions,
Quick Posts, that with a speedy expedition,
Fly to accomplish their divine Commission,
Twixt heaven and earth the true Interpreters
Winged messengers of heaven, radiant sons of light
That can bestride the lazy puffing wind,
And sail upon the bosom of the Air, fiery essences.
Answer. v. to speak.
He did divide
The portalls of his lips, and thus replide;
To shape an answer.
Answerable.
Correspondent, suting with, ecchoing to, holding proportion with, v. Sandys.
Ovid. Metam. lib. 7. page 262.
Keeping pace with.

Ants.
Industrious grain supporting crew,
which by troops haste from their hollow cells
To get in harvest, graving where they gone
Their diligence, even in a path of stone
The lustiest swarms for their provision range
The sick and old, wait at their thrifty grange
^'unload the burdens, and lay up the store
(...) their great garner, biting yet before
^f every grain, lest kept so warm below
^mid the world, it after sprout and grow.
The little pattern of great pain,
Lugs in her mouth her load of grain;
the thrifty Ant
In plenty hoards for time of want.
Antiquary.
That finds all the ruins of wit in the rubbish of old Authors. ^ man
strangely thrifty of time past, and has an unnatural disease ^o be enamoured
of old age and wrinckles, and loves all things as ^utchmen do cheese for being
moldie, a broken Statue would almost make him an idolater. His estate consists
most in shekles, and Roman coins: printed books he contemns as a novelty of
this ^at^er age, bur dotes on a manuscript, and would give all his wealth for a
Book of the old Roman binding, or six lines of Tully in his own hand. His
chamber is commonly hung with strange beasts skins, and is a kind of
charnell-house of bones extraordinary. Rescuing the prey from the teeth of
time, making an Hue and Cry, for Cities that are run away; and by certain marks
and tokens, pursuing to find them. If he meet with an old manuscript which has
the mark worn out of its mouth, and has lost the date, yet he can tell the age
thereof either by the Phrase or Character.

Apollo. v. Phoebus.
Latona's bright-haird son. The laureat God.
Unshorn deity. The Delian God. The Lycian, Delphian,
Clarian, Leucadian, deity. The master of the Delphian oracle.
Sacred Soract^'s God. The Roseate God.
President of verse;
By whose instructive rays are seen
What is, what shall be, or has ever been
Immortal verse from his invention springs,
And how to strike the well concording strings,
With all the use of herbs.
The Patron of that Spring,
Where in calm peace the sacred Virgins sing.
April. v. Spring.
When first the Spring dissolves the mountain snow.
And Western winds upon the waters blow,
When with his golden horn bright Taurus opes
The cheerful year. Venus blithe month.
when temperate breath
Gives to the glad field fruitful birth,
When proud pide April dressed in all his trim,
Has put a spirit of youth in every thing,
That heavy Saturn laughs and leaps with him.
The summers front;
When Nightingales do hush the silent night,
And a wild music burdens every bough.
Arabia.
Natures great shop of spices
Where sweet Panach^an gums, and choice perfumes
Of unctious nard, which with their spicie smoke
Perfume the neighbor air, till it does choke. v. Sweet smelling.

The greedy sense.
Where the Sabean vapors as they fly, v. Phoenix.

Perfume with sweets the mornings majesty.
The glowing East,
Where the rare Phaenix builds her spicy nest,
And burns her self, making one narrow room
Her urne, her nest, her cradle and her tomb.
Arbor. v. Shade.
Shady screene, leavie shade, leavy coverture,
A place to shun
The scorching fury of the sun,
Leavy bulwark, from the suns invasion. Leavy veil.
The shelter from the suns offensive rage.
Shady rampire. Where shadows seem to woo
The lovesick passenger to come and sit
And view the beauties Nature stroes on it.
Arachne.
To whom Minerva gave a fatal doom
For her contending at the skilful loome.
The Nymphs of Tmolus often their vines forsook
The fleek Pactolian Nymphs their streams to look
On her rare works, nor more delight in viewing v. Sandys transl. Ovid Metam.
l. 6.

The done (done with such grace) then when a doing,
The bold Maeonian maid that durst compare
With Pallas at the weaving trade.
Argonautes.
Those daring Heroes that brought back to Greece
The wealthy purchase of the golden fleece,
Whose glittering Argo sails amongst the stars.
Jasons bold mates.
Argus.
Ios jealous guard
Whose hundred eyes his heads large circuit star'd
Whereof at once by turns two only slept,
The others watched and still their stations kept.
Ariadne.
By whose directing clue
Theseus the Cretan monster slew,
Unhappy bride of perjured Theseus,
Whom Bacchus graced with the Cnossian crown,
Minos fair daughter.
Aristorle. v. Learned.
Atlas of learning. Magazin of arts.
That walking library. Great Alexanders Tutors
The learned Stagyrite. Monarch of sciences.
That ruled as he thought fit.
The whole monopoly of wit. Soul of philosophy.
Natures great torch. Plate's great scholar.
Great Register of Natures secrets.
Arms.
Delicious arms,
In whose white circle love writ all his charms,
Fair Cynthia wished his arms might be her sphere,
Grief makes her pale because she moves not there,
Sweet fleshy prison.
Whose sweet embraces might quicken death.
Whiter than Juno's were sufiduing charms.
The ivory prison of her arms.
Loves swathing bands. Happy bondage.
Cupids sh^kles.
Arms. Armor.
Harness, habilaments, greaves, guyses, van-brasse, pouldron, co^selet,
gantlet, curasse, shield, helmet, sallet, target, burgane^* ^u^rions, tates.

Enclosed about
With glittering walls of steel.
Housed in steel, cased, box'd in arms, coated in mayle.
Arrow. v. Swift.
The feathered wood outruns the hunting eye,
And cuts a passage through the yielding sky,
Whose sharpened point cleaves the divided air,
The bows swift messenger with an angry errand:
Artificial.
That net of brass which Vulcan did bestow
About the guilty bed, could never show
Such art. -- Natures ape
Here went beyond her copy in the shape;
Where art and miracle draw equal breath,
Others men wonder at, but this adore.
Where art it self might go to school,
And all her skill taught hence, to this refer.
Ass.
That slow dull creature, which does learn far more
By punishments than precepts.
That beast which old Silenus does bestride
When he amongst his Nimphs and Satyrs rides.
Assent.
With glad alowance gave his counsel ear,
To give a yielding obedient ear.
Astonished. v. Amazed.
Whose soul is gone upon some serious etrand,
And left the corpse in pawn till it come back,
Amated, stupefied. To stand like stags at gaze.
Stand as with ghosts affrighted,
The understandings ecstasy. Intranced soul.
Astraea.
Which, when the other goddesses were gone,
Remained in the hated earth alone,
The glittering Virgin of the Zodiac.
Just Virgin goddess. That bears the equal sword.
Astronomer.
Register of heaven, privy counselor to the planets.
A breathing almanac. The heavens notary.
Star-cleark. Star-divine.
That walks along the lofty stars.
And backs the clouds sitting on Atlas crown.
That stars prophtick language understand.
That know aright
The Gods and all the orbs, to whom for fight
Of planets and the motions of each star.
Not great Egyptian Memphis might compare,
That wisely studious are
To trace the motions of each star,
How swift they travel, and how far.
That with their Jacobs staff can walk to heaven.
Whose eyes dismount the highest sphere,
That bores
And threads the spears with his quick piercing mind,
He views their stations, walks from door to door.
Surveyes as if he had designed
To make a purchase there, he sees their dances,
Their full-eyed aspects and their secret glances.
That search the courses of the rolling spheres.
That audit of the stars have made,
Have measured heaven, conceived how earths thick shade
Eclypst the silver brows of Cynthia bright,
And her brown shadow quenched her brothers light,
The true Endymions that embrace above,
Upon mount Latmos their imperial love,
Great Queen of heaven, about whose bed for guard
Millions of archers with gold shields do ward,
True Atlasses, the pillars of the poles
Empyreal palace -- that send
Their spies to see what is done in every sphere.
Keeping their state intelligences there.
The hungry star-fed tribe, well skilled in heavens Physiognomy.
Talmud, Albumazer, and Erra Pater
That know the heavens as if they had been there,
And helped each Angel turn about his sphere
The earthly Godfathers of heavenly lights,
And give a name to every fixed star.
That to the heavens direct their curious eyes,
And send their minds to walk the sparious skies,
That walk by Cynthia 's light and lift their eyes
To view the ordered armies of the skies;
The heavens they measure with imagined lines,
And when the Northern Hemispheare declines
New constellations in the south they find.
Assuage.
To calm, still, quiet, sing asleep, to lullaby,
slake, cool, compose, to give allay, pacify.
Atheist. v. Wicked.
That knows no God more mighty than his mischiefs;
Whose wickedness is grown to such an height,
As makes the earth groan to support its weight;
That pursue
Deeds after which no mischief can be new,
To whom murders are but resolute acts, and treasons matters of greater
consequence,
Doing such things as might the Devil shame,
Which if in hell no other pains there were,
Makes men fear hell, because they must be there*
Replenisht villain. Abstract of all vice.
Stigian quintessence, for whose sinful sake
Schoolmen new tenements in hell must make;
Whom neither law
Of God or man can keep in aw.
Fearing that God he flouts at, and dreading that deity which he denies.
Athens.
The city named by Pallas. Minerva's sacred city.
The learned, noursery of Greece.
Mopsopian, Gecropian University.
Erecthaean towers. Pallas beloved city.
Atlas.
Whose brawny shoulders boulster up the stars.
Where Titans panting steeds his chariot steep,
And bathe their fiery fe^locks in the deep,
Knocking his brows against heavens brazen door,
Whose lofty pillars tack
Heaven to the earth. Which shrouds
His airy head in hanging clouds.
He that the noble burden bears,
And on his back supports the spears.
Attend. Attentive.
To hear with such attention
As if they heard the inquired oracle
Pronouncing of their fare.
As if the words they hear
Were not received, but grafted in the ear,
And with a greedy ear,
Devoured up his discourse. To hear with sucking ears.
Ear was al their sense. To drink with thirsty ears.
The soul climbes up into the ear.
With double ravishment
She hung upon his melting lips attent.
With greedy ear she hung
Upon his words dropped from his melting tongue,
With due attention lent a chained ear.
The soul dwelt in the ears. A melting ear,
Prepared for soft attention
To tie, chain, link, lock the ears unto the tongue.
Still silence did enlarge the ear
For quick attention.
The soul is planted in the ear.
Every sense made have to be all ear.
The greedy ear clings to the speakers lips.
Avarice. v. Covetousness. Augurs.
That lightnings motions understand,
Birds flight, and entrals op't.
Who divine by sight
Of slain beasts entrals, and the various flight
Of birds.
Aurora. v. Morning.
The blushing goddess which does sway
The dewie confines of the night and day,
Who from the glowing East displaies
Her purple doors, and odoriferous bed
With plenty of dew-dropping roses spread,
Which as she in her lightsome chariot rides,
Scatters the light from off her saff on wheels
Aged Tithonus beaureous wife
Memnons fair mother. The Muse patroness.
Autumn.
Pomona loads her lap with delicates,
Winter begins to chide away the flowers.
Smeard with crushed Lyaeus blood.
The sober mean twixt youth and age, more staid
And temperate, in summers wain, repaires
His reverent temples sprinkled with gray hairs;
The evening of the year -- when the thresht shea^e
Loses its grain, and every tree its leaf;
When birds do cease their notes
And stately forests ^'on their yellow coats
When Ceres golden locks are nearly shorn,
And mellow fruit from burdned trees are torn;
When little lads sit on a bank to shale
Their ripned nuts plucked in the woody vale.
That pales the red blush of the summers face,
Tearing the leaves the summers covering,
Three months in weaving by the curious spring
The laden boughs
With swelling pride crown Autumnes smiling brows,
The year in childbed.
The teeming year big with her rich increase,
Bearing the wanton burden of the prime,
Like widowed wombes after their Lords decease.
When yellow leaves, or none, or few do hang
Upon those boughs that shake against the cold,
The twilight of the year.
Vertumnus sits and courts his loved Pomona,
The cold Autumnal dewes are seen
To cobweb every green,
The saplesse branches do'ffe their summer suits,
And wean their winter fruits,
When stormy blasts enforce the quaking trees
To wrap their trembling limbs in mossie freeze,
Fair summers pride begins to fade away,
And night ^'encroach upon the hours of day,
The time of declination and decay.
The flailes upon the floor begins to groan
Autumn uprears his aged head
With timely apples chaind.
The Lions flaming main
Ripens the fruit, and the full year susteins
Her burdened powers.
The Autumn with fair Ceres crowned,
Now paid the sweaty plowmans greediest prayer,
And by the fall disrobed the gaudy ground
Of all her summer ornaments and fair attire.
When droope the sweetest flowers,
And rivers swollen with pride oreflow their banks,
Poor grows the day of summers golden hours
And void of sap stand Ida's Cedar ranks.
The pleasant meadows sadly lay
In chill and cooling sweats,
By rising fountains, or as they
Feared winters wastful threats.
The clustered grapes swell till their skin
Can scarce contein the wine barrelled within,
The year is in her pride,
And the grape full with wine purples her side,
When the clear air keeps a divided seat
Affording sometimes cold, and sometimes hear,
When an unseen decay,
And slow consumption steals the leaves away
When every wind in fury beats his stroke,
Against the ribs of the broad spreading oak.
Awake.
With silken wings soft sleep flew from his eyes,
Light does divorce the low and upper lids,
The eyes resume their charge.
The wakened senses had unlockt the eyes.
VViping the drowsy slumbers from his eyes.
B.
^abe. v. Infant. Bacchus.
THe juycie God. The God of grapes. Nysaeus, Bacchus,
Lyaeus, Bromius, Even, great Jacchus. Vide Sands Ovids Met. lib. 3. page 107.

The twice born God.
Father Eloleus. Thyon never shorn.
Lenaeus planter of life-chearing vines.
Nyctelius. The God that holds in aw
The spotted lynxes which his chariot draw.
The leavy God of Naxus. The dimpled son
Of Semele, that crowned upon his tun
Sits with his grapie chaplets,
Whose chariot is by savage Tyge^s drawn.
The genial planter of the vine. The fire-born God.
Bacchanals. v. Orgies. Bald.
That bears a bowling alley on his head.
Bald as a gourd, not an hair betwixt him and heaven.
Whose head does want its native ornament.
Unshadowed heads, an unthatcht head. v. Hair.

Whose head is bare,
Wearing or none, or else some borrowed hair.
Bald as old time behind.
In the winter of his age when his leaves fall.
Banks.
The rivers hem, lips, ledges, shelves, brewards.
The margents of the rolling brook.
The winding borders. The mossie fringes of the flood.
The rivers grassie fringed skir^s. Shelving borders.
The Crystal currents flowery brinks.
The embroydered margins of the flood.
The painted margins of the silver brook,
Where thousand yellow flowers at fishes look,
That Flora used to sit upon
Curling her fair locks in the liquid glass,
When she her gems and rich attire put on.
Whose trees fringe round the waters brink,
And with their thirsty roots her moisture d^ink.
Banners.
Streamers, ancients, ensigns, flags, pennons.
The curled flags dance in the waving (...),
And with their crispy streamings hea^^en on
To the approaching fight.
Banquet. v. Feast. Baptism.
The sacred fount. The holy ^a^er. Soul-purging water.
The healthful stream. Heavenly dew.
Base, v. Voluptuous. Wicked.
One of strange and ill contrived desires.
One of a narrow yet intemperate mind.
A son of earth, enthralled to the sense.
Lethargick, Slumbering souls.
Lanke souls, that in no other thing delight,
But what may please the sensual appetite,
Who all things in the earth amends
By being worse tha^ (...)
Bastard.
The wretched pledges of the wanton bed.
The lucklesse issue of dishonest wo^bes
The upbraiding burden of a shameless crime,
Where lust
Impostumes for a birth of bastardie.
He^vens Image coined with a forbidden stamp
That comes saucily into the world, before he is sent for.
The lusty stealth of nature.
The common issue of the earth by channel.
Accursed issue of unlawful sheets,
Though unable to speak, yet at his birth,
Tells a plain story to his mothers shame.
Bat. v. Evening.
The mungril bird. The winged neuter,
The leather-winged mouse that never flies
Till the re^e evening curtain up the Ski^s.
Bath.
Like to a Lilly, sunk into a glass,
Like soft loose Venus, as they paint the lass
Born in the Seas;
Or like an Ivory image of a grace
Neatly enclosed in a thin Crystal case;
The water bea^ by her hands, made lines in his face, and seemed to smile at
such beating, and with twenty bubbles not to be content to have the picture of
her face in large upon him; but he would in each of these bubbles set forth her
miniature.

Battle. v. War. Beard.
A well-thatcht-face, that hairy argument of age
Na^ures manly bounty. Uneffeminated chinne
Man's prerogative.
Beasts.
The stubborn droves
That haunt the deserts and the shady groves
The wild Burgesses of the Forests;
Forest Citizens.
Fierce walkers of the Wilderness,
Wild Forresters.
Beau^ie.
The eyes Idol, a damask skin, Loves common stratagem,
Natures Epistle. Natures best Orthography
Natures silent Rherorick, dumb commendation,
Natures Italian hand, Loves dumb Orator,
Loves lure, call, day-net, bait, Loves artillery,
Better colored dirt, The eyes Music, Natures Idea,
The light
Which ages cloud (...) soon benight
The Fort, which cannot long hold out
The battery of time. The lodestone of desire,
Chief object of delighted sense. Pseasing tyranny.
May Game of time and sickness. Youths proud livery.
Freedoms golden-hook. The Rose mixed Lilly.
Loves Engineer, Factour. Captivating look.
The bait of bestial delight. The work of pleased nature.
Sweet silent Rhetoric of persuading eyes,
Dumb Eloquence of the face. Attractive lodestone,
Still harmony, whose diapason lies
Within a face; The privilege of Nature
Dumb comment.
Beautiful.
Fairer than the morn. Natures proud Masterpiece,
Whom all grow rivals for
A thousand Cupids, shoots she from her eyes,
Fair, as the dawning morn;
The Mine, the Magizin, the Commonwealth of Beanty,
The first and best original
Of all fair copies. Whose radiant look striks every gazing eye.
Stark blind, and keeps the amazed beholder under
The stupid tyranny of love and wonder.
Whose eyes let out more light, than they take in
Whose rich beauty lent
Mintage to other beauties, for they went
But for so much as they were like to her
Elixar of all Beauty,
Zeuxes, his labor might have saved,
And made her stand for all that he did view,
When Venus beauteous pourtraiture he drew
Beauty and Virtue have no other sphere,
Whose rare composure does abstract the Story
Of true perfection, modellizing forth
The height of beauty -- in whose face,
Nature, and curious Art had done their best
To sum that rare perfection, which transcends
The power of strong belief.
Narcissus change, sure Ovid quite mistook,
He died not, looking in a Crystal brook;
But, as those which with emulation gaze,
He pined to death by looking on this face,
When he stood fishing by some ^ivers brim,
The fish would leap, more for a sight of him
Than for the fly -- The Eagle, highest bred,
Was taking him once up for Ganymed.
Nature by some device
Had to her face transplanted Paradise,
A beauty that might free
A ravisher, and make adultery
No crime at all. Nature did wondering stand
At ^er own work. Eclipsing all other objects.
The wealth she wore about her seemd to hide,
Not to adorn her native beauties pride;
Though there bright Pearls from Erythrean shores.
From all the Assyrian lakes, the wealthy store
Of silver Ganges, and Hydapses shore,
And cheerful Emralds gathered from the green
Arabian rocks were in full splendor seen,
Pale Onyx; Jaspers of a various die,
And Diamonds darkened by her brighter eye,
The Saphy^es blew, by her more azure veins
Hung not to boast, but to confess their stains.
The blushing Rubies, seemd to loose their dye,
When her more Ruby lips were moving by,
It seemed, so well became her all she wore,
She had not robbed at all the creatures store,
But had been natures self, there to have showed
What she on creatures could or had bestowed;
And Jupiter would revel in her bower,
Were he to spend another golden shower:
Whose eyes dart glowing rays,
Would thaw the frozen Russian to lust,
And parch the Negro's hotter blood to dust.
So the loose Queen of love did dress her eyes
In the most taking flame, to win the prize
At Ida. The Cynosure of neighboring eyes,
Whose bright eyes rain influence.
Often have we viewd
In one heaven many stars, but never yet
In one star many heavens till now were met;
A breathing Star,
His orient cheeks and lips exceeding his,
That leapt into the water for a kiss
Of his own shadow, and despising many
Did, ere he could enjoy the love of any.
Had wild Hyppolity this beauty seen
Pierced with his darts he had enamourd been,
Nature wept when she saw her, as undone,
And robbed of all her treasure
Aurora took him for her Cephalus
Phoebe mistook him for Endymion
Venus, for her Adonis,
Each wandering eye inflamed that looked upon her;
A beauty, in whose radiant eye
Love sat enthroned, and full of Majesty
Sent forth such glorious eye-surprizing rays
That she was thought the wonder of her days,
Repress those flames that furnace from thine eye
They ravish with too bright a ^yranny
The Diapason of all symmetry.
Incarnate Angel. Mortal Venus
Nature sealed her the Charter at her birth
Mirror of heaven, the wonder of the earth,
Beauty has no Exchequer now but him,
And proud of many lives upon his gains,
And him she stores, to show what wealth she had
In days long since:
Fairest piece of well formd earth.
As if she swaid an Empire in her face,
Nature her self, did her own self admire,
As often as she were pleased to attire
Her in her native luster, and confess
Her dressing, was her chiefest comeliness,
Where every limb takes like a face,
One accent from whose lips the blood more warms,
Than all Medea's Exorcismes, and charms;
He that since nature her great works began,
She made to be the mirror of a man;
That when she meant to form some matchless limb,
Still for a pattern took some part from him;
And jealous of her cunning, brake the mold
In his proportion done the best she could.
If he discourse, his lips such accents break;
As love turned air, breaths from him, as he speaks.
Makes Jove invent a new disguise,
In spite of Juno's jealousies;
Whose every part does re-invite
^he cold decayed appetite;
which shall be nurse, as Juno swears,
^o the next Cupid that she bear.
The only scope
^f men's affections, and their envied hope.
If ever jewels had cause to be proud, it was with
^e wearing of them.
^hey took the veil of which her face had hid,
^t which the very air seemd to grow proud,
^s when the Sun new breaks out of a Cloud
To shine with greater fulgence:
Such the censorious Cynink might affect,
Though he had promised abstinence,
That bea^s the light about her, and strikes dead
With flashes of her eye,
Beauty, which might an Angels envy move
Enough for all the ^exe;
And make them proud to know it is part of hers,
Whose fee^ print the farewell of all beauty;
Beauty to teach beholders chastity.
On others, Painters in their pictures bestow beauty;
Her beauty bestowed skill on the Painter,
The fair Ambassador of a fairer mind.
^. All that beheld her (and all that could, did behold her) made their eyes
quick messengers to their minds, to let them know they had seen the uttermost
that could be seen, and despair of ever meeting a fairer object.

All eyes degenerate from their creation
That do not honor and adore her beauty,
She apparrel'd her apparel.
Model of Heaven, triumph of Nature, life of Beauty.
^f there be any beauty left in others, it is in their
Eyes, to whom her presence has imparted it:
Sometimes mine eyes would lay themselves open
To receive all the darts she could throw;
Sometimes close up with admiration,
As if with a contrary fancy, they would preserve
The riches of that sight they had gotten;
Or cast my lids, as curtains over that image of beauty,
Her presence ^ad printed in them.
Beauty in which by all right, all hearts and eyes
should be inherited,
Which in a definite compass, sets forth infinite beauty. Dead beauties heir,
Each night she impoverisheth her clothes,
To enrich her bed, which might well scorn the shrine
Of Venus, whose clothes proud to be worn by her
Eclypse a sun of beauty.
Beauty too much for patient ^ight
Whose face carried such a lightning,
As none could look on, nor would look off.
Diana apparelld in the garments of Venus,
Making each beholding eye
A blinded mole, or else a burning fly.
Beauty which pictured the curious eye, would repeat
An imaginary rapture of some transported
Conceit, aiming at in impossibility;
Dumb eloquence commanding without authority,
And persuading without speaking,
Working unwitting effects of wonder.
The red and white rose quarterd in her face.
A face that bears a wanton modesty, and enticing Soberness.
Beauty, not to be matched, but by the fairness Of her mind.
Where Nature does with infinite agree
The miracle of flesh and blood,
Able to make Hercules to turn the spit, and
Cleave his club to make the fire;
The withered Hermit, fourscore winters worn,
Might shake off fifty looking in her eye.
Such beauty in her face,
As once the daughter of Agenor had,
That made great Jove humble him to her hand,
When on ^is knees he kissed the Cretan strand
Framed in the prodigality of nature,
Where every God did seem to set his seal,
To give the full assurance of a beauty
Beggering all description,
Takes prisoner the wild motions of the eye
A body so harmoniously composed
And so divine a creature
As nature seemd to have disclosed
All her skill in her feature;
Whose form might call
The world to wars, and make it hazard all
^is valor for her beauty.
The worlds ambition, no man de^iring further Happiness.
Beauty might from him copies take.
Which might kindle youthful flames,
In men of fourscore, and give fire
Again, to their decayed desire
Envy bursts, if she espies her,
Venus his perfection finds,
And no more Adonis minds;
Jupiter would court her did he know.
To find a shape might tempt such chastity.
A look to move
The heart of cold Diogenes to love
Her eye was such, whose every glance did show,
To kindle flames upon the hills of snow,
And by her powerful piercings could imprint
Or sparkle fire into an heart of flint.
Quintessence of beauty -- whose beauty might
Attract all eyes, and center humane sight,
Pandora without fiction, causing transcendent hea^,
And working such insinuaring fire;
As stole into each reverend Si^e
When beauteous Hellen, showed her cheeks
Unto the Army of the Greeks.
Beauty too rich to use,
Whose outside had enough to satisfy
The expectation of a curious eye.
Self-lov'd Narcissus, in the mirror
Of her fair eyes does see his error,
The Heliotrope which did pursue,
The adored Sun converts to you
Their tops, the Paphian myrtles move
Saluting you the queen of love;
The Phaenix from the glowing East,
With sweets, here builds her tomb and nest:
Another Phaenix seen she dies,
Burnt into ashes by your eyes,
She comes in rich array,
Richer in beauty, so they use to say,
The stately Naides and Dryads so
In Sylvan shades -- So
The naked Cupids lively painted show;
But least their habits some distinction make
A quiver give, or his from Cupid take
The ambient aire's proud to embrace her lims,
She might have Necter filled in Hebes stead,
And he supli'de the Idaean Ganymed
His visage decked
With rofie rays of youth and sweet aspect,
So looked Aeneas, from the breaking cloud
decked by his mother, in that dusky shroud;
So Helen looked, when on the Scaean towers,
She did inflame the aged Councillors;
Whilst Paris, and her Menelaus fight,
And weary fetch new courage from her ^ight
Whose beauty feasts the amorous eye.
So beautified for form exact,
That nature to a miracle was rackt
In her perfection blazed with'th' eyes of men
That made of all the countries heart a chain
And drew them suitors to her,
All the beauties of the Spring,
Are but her ^oyles,
Whose eyes wound there where Cupids shafts do miss
So fair, and so divine a feature.
That envies self could not but dote upon her,
Heaven could not choose but be enamourd on her
When she was born, nature in sport began
To learn the cunning of an Artizan.
And did Vermillion with a white compose
To mock her self, and paint a damask rose;
But scorning Nature unto Art should seek,
She spilt her colors on this maidens cheeks;
Whose lilly white, inshaded with the rose
Had that man seen that sung the Aeneidos
Dido, had in oblivion, slept and she
Given his Muse her best eternity,
Had brave Atrides who did erst employ
His force to mix his dead with those of Troy,
Been proferd for a truce, her feigned peace
Helen had staid, and that had gone to Greece.
Sweetness truth and every grace
Which time and use are wont to teach,
The eye may in a moment reach,
And read distinctly in her face.
whose cheerful ray,
Can turn the saddest night to day.
More fair than she that filled the cup
To the great thunderer, wounding with her eyes
More hearts than all the troops of deities.
As fair and lovely as a goddess, she
If such, as hers a goddess beauty be,
Had Venus past that way and seen him ly,
She would have sworn, had she not seen him dead,
It her Adonis were, or if there was
The transmigration of Pythagoras,
Of souls; for then certain her lost loves spirit,
A fai^er body never could inherit.
Fair^r far
Than he whose chastity made him a star,
Hypolitus,
To whom the Queen of love
Served for a foil, and Cupid could no other
Than fly to her mistaken for his mother,
Whose body all the graces has ingrost.
Nature made
And gave the damask rose its pleasant grace,
That men might liken somewhat to her face,
love therefore blinded Cupid, lest that he
Should see her, and so love mortality;
The fairest creature ever eye
Beh^ld, or yet put on mortality
The maiden lillies at her lovely sight
Wax^pale with envy, and from thence grew white,
Aurora blushed at such a sight unknown,
To see those cheeks were redder than her own. Videat plura cui libet Brownes
Pastorals. 1 lib.. 4. 2 lib.. 1.

Not the bright shield of Thetis son,
For which such stern debate did rise,
That the great Ajax Telamon
Refused to live without the prize.
Those Achive powers did more engage,
Than she the gallants of our age.
Some other Nimphs with colors faint
And pencil slow may Cupid paint,
She has a stamp and paints the boy;
Can with a single look inslame
The coldest breast, the rudest tame. v. Face Eyes. etc.

Bees.
Honey merchants, rraffickers for honey.
Harmeless thieves. Honey flies* Hyblean Citizens.
The courtiers of the waxen palace.
The winged commonwealth. Buzzing Armies.
Sweeping their honey from perfumed flowers
Which in the prime of May,
By sunshine through the slowry meadows stray,
When they produce their young, or store their hive
With liquid honey, or their cabins stive
With pleasant Nectar, when they take the loads
Which others bring, or chase from their aboads
The lazy drone. The busy buzzing swarms.
Hot grows the waxie work, and sweet their smells
From their mell^fluous, odoriferous cells.
Honey people. The busy buzzers with the Cypress wings.
That fly ore painted fields with nimble wing,
Deflowring the fresh virgins of the spring,
That on mount Hybla ply their husbandry.
The murmuring ^^oopes within their waxen homes,
Some with laden thighs
Take charge to bear their waxi^ butthens home
Others receive the welcome load, and some
Dispose the wax, others the plot contrive,
Some build the curious comb, some guard the hive
Like armed sen^inels, others distre^n
The puret honey from the wax, some train,
And discipline the young, whilst others drive
The sluggish drones from their deserved hive.
Thus in the commonwealth untaught by art,
Each winged burger acts his busy part.
The thrifty people that exact and earn
Their sweet provision, and with laden thighs
Bear home their weary burdens.
Who th'Aristaean busy swarms have seen
On Hybla's top, whether with lancelets keen,
Charging the drones which over near their home,
Come humming out to rob their fragrant comb,
Whether collecting their delicious dew,
From various thyme and other flowers not few
Whether extending in rare symmetry
With wondrous art their waxen canopy,
And arching even, so many thousand cells,
Whether conducting their too full supplies,
Elsewhere to plant their goodly colonies.
Creatures that by a rule in nature teach
The act of order to a peopled kingdom
Where some like Magistrates correct at home,
Other like merchants venture trade abroad,
Others like soldiers armed in their stings
Make booty on the summers velvet buds,
Which pillage they with merry march bring home
To the tent royal of their Emperor,
Who bu^ied in his majesty's surveyes.
The singing masons building roofes of gold.
The civil citizens kneading up the honey.
The poor mechanic porters crowding in
Their heavy burdens at the narrow ga^e.
The sad-eyed justice with his surly humme,
Delivering ore to executioners.
The lazy yawning drone.
So painful bees with forward gladness strive
To join themselves in throngs before the hive.
And with obedience till that hour attend,
When their commander shall his watchword send,
Then to the winds their tender sails they yield,
Distress the flowers, depopulate the fields.
Bed.
Loves Altar. The voluntary grave.
The dear repose for lims with travel tired.
Pallet, couch. Warmer grave.
Beggar,
Whose hourly wants implo^e
Each meals relief, trudging from door.
That struggle with their strong necssities.
And with afflicted language pity crave,
That hear no dialect from churlish lips,
But news of beadles and their torturing whips.
That wage against th'emnities of the air.
Clad in windowed rags, pelting against the storm. v. Poor.


Beginning.
Blooming, dawning, infant, morning, portal, threshold, cradle, infancy, bud,
bloome, blade, Gam-ut, Alphabet, Elements, youth, nonage, pupillage, minority,
childhood, porch, front, entry, commencement.

Belides.
The cursed daughters of fierce Danaus.
Belus damned neeces,
whose kinsmens blood accuse
Who ever draw the water, which they loose
Those youthful sisters who in vain
Still water pour into the fatal tun,
Yet that as empty, as when they begun.
Belerophon.
He that the flame-breathing Chymera slew.
He that the Muses winged horse bestrid.
He that first bridled horse,
And taught th'untamed beast an ordered course.
The bearer of the fatal letters.
Bellona. v. Pallas.
To whom no sacrifice does stand for good,
Not mingled with the sacrificers blood.
Mars grim-lookt sister.
Jov^'s blew-eyed daughter. Wars triumphant maid.
Eelly.
Natures kitchen. Natures cook-shop.
Insatia^e beggar. Importuning craver.
Birds.
The aires nimble winged guests.
Natures choristers, minstrels, minstrelsie.
The summers waits. VVinged minstrels. Musicians.
Sweet heralds of the spring. The winged conforts.
The forest Quire. The airy quire. Artless songsters.
The free inhabitants of the pliant air.
The chirping choristers. The aires feathered parishioners.
The quiris^^rs of May. The denizons of air.
The slitting pinionists of air.
The Sylvan quite.
The feathered people of the sky.
The feathered quiristers which on their spraies
Chant to the merry spring, and woo the flood,
Or with their music court the sullen wood.
Feathered Musicians of the spring. The airy people
That with wild music burden every bough,
And in the evening hush asleep the day.
The aires Musicians sing
And carol to the flowery spring.
VVild inhabitants of the air.
The winged travelers that trace the sky.
That with their chirping lullaby the day.
That in their leavie cages sing
A welcome to the approaching spring.
The winged Musicians that awake the morn
That with their horny haut boys music make.
The warbling chanters of the wood.
VVinged crew, train, troop, chattering flocks.
The airy passengers. The woods wild burgesses.
The living ships with feathered sails.
Sylvanus winged songsters. The chirping consorts of the air.
The citizens of path-lesse woods.
Bitter.
As the gray wormwood. Hemlock, Gall, Hell^bore.
As coloquintida, or aspicks tongues.
Black.
Sable, ebon, jet^y, gloomy, dusky, pitchy, sooty, (...).
Black as the sooty mcore or negro jet,
As nights black mantle, as a starless night.
Black as the sullen night,
Or consciences where guilt and horror dwell
As Acheron, and the dark streams of hell.
Black as Illytian pitch. Covered with a veil of jet:
Blew.
Blew as the freezing sky,
Or the bright color in Bellona's eye. Azure.
Blind.
Rational moles, to whom even day is night,
VVanting the common benefit of light;
Whose eyes a^e muffled in eternal night.
Beauties unfitting judge. To whom colors are useless.
That sees but by his ear.
Casting up his blind eye. to the sun, as if he would hunt for light.
Blind as the beetle. Like Polypheme,
That makes no difference twixt the Sun and Stars,
But by the heat. Midday groper.
Blood.
Crimson, flood, purple, deluge, blushing, ruby, nymph,
Purple, crimson-sweat, streams, brooks, dew,
With dama^k eyes, the ruby blood does peep
And ran in branches through het a zure veins,
The ruby nymph within the crimson brooks
Dissolved rubies, liquid coral. Vermillion spring,
The red sea of the lesser world, active torrent.
Blush.
The Virgin-die, the rosie-blush; ensign of modesty;
And in her blushes
Lies modesty, as in a bed of Coral;
So blushed Calisto, and the Virgin crew,
When in the fount Joves rape on her they knew.
So blushed Diana, when Actaeon saw
Her naked in the fount, to die the cheeks in blushes.
Such is the color which the Clouds adorn,
Shot by the Sunbeams, or the rosie-morn;
Venus so blushed when she was found
By all the gods in bed with Mars, and bound
In Vulcans net.
So apples show upon the sunny side,
So Ivory with rich Vermillion did,
So pure a red, the silver-moon does stain,
Then when the beaten brass do sound in vain
Even so the purple morning paints the skies,
Her face fl^sht with imbosomed flames.
The rosy dye that decks the morns uprise
Flusht in her face. Her virtuous blood.
Struck with respective shame. So looks the Rose,
When she her taintless beauty does disclose,
She looked out
And all the Air, she purpled round about.
Clad all in Crimson, shame sits in her cheeks,
Her cheeks struck with a rosy red,
As setting Suns do give unto the west
When morning tempests are pre^igured,
Vermillion, signal in a guilty che^k
Warm blood upon the guilty cheek,
Her cheeks a deaper scarlet were
Than the chaste mornings blush,
Life's blood, which from the heart is sent
In beauteous field, pitcheth hie crimsome Tent
In lovely sanguine suits, the Lilly cheek,
Whilst it but for a resting place does seek
And changing oftentimes with sweet delight,
Converts the white to red, the red to white,
The lovely blush, the paleness does distain;
The paleness makes the bush more fair again.
Have ye beheld when fresh Aurora's eye
Sends forth her early b^^ms, and by and by
Withdrawes the glory of her face, and shrowds
Her cheeks behind a ruddy mask of clouds,
Such were her looks.
Have you beheld when Titans lustful head
Has newly dived into his seagreen bed
With Thetis, how the bashful Horizon
Enforced to see, what should be seen by none,
Looks red for shame, and blusheth to discover,
The incestuous pleasures of the heaven-born lover,
A sweet Vermillion tincture staind
The brides fair cheeks, the more that she restraind
Her blush, the more her disobedient blood,
Did overflow, as if a second flood
Had meant to rise, and for a little space,
To drown that world of beauty, in her face;
The ruby flames do flush
Into their faces, with a modest blush,
Cheeks with kindly clarret spread
Aurora like, new out of bed.
O^ like the fresh Queen-apples side,
Bl^shing at sight of Phoebus pride,
Her cheeks in red letters writ more,
Then her tongue could speak.
The modest evidence of inward virtue,
A blush, modest as morning, when she coldly eyes,
The youthful Phoebus.
A scarlet blush, her guilty cheeks arraid,
Such as a Rose mixed with a Lilly breeds
Or when the Moon travels with charmed steeds,
Or such wherewith, lest years should turn the die,
Arachne stains, Assyrian Ivo^y.
Body.
The lay part of the man, cloud, shroud, robe of flesh, ^obe of clay, walls of
better clay, fleshie cloud, flesh^e shroud, fair prison of the soul, house of
mooving clay.

The fair shrine of a fairer saint.
The fleshy veil, case. The souls sheath.
The fleshie lantern of a light divine.
The souls clothes, garments, apparel.
The souls moving inn, house, closet, cloister, chamber, study.
Living charnel house.
Sack of bones, gown of clay.
The souls casket temple, shrine, box, case, palace, shell, chest, cosfin,
dark-lant^orne.
The living tomb. The souls dark prison.
A province packt up in two yards of skin,
Frail mansion of distempered clay.
Box of flesh, clay. Frail mansion of mortal^ty.
The clayie tenement. The souls ivory case.
Stirring earth. The clay lodging of the soul.
The souls husk. The souls uneasy clothing.
The clothes of flesh and blood. Better compacted dust.
The fleshie tabernacle. The narrow mansion of the soul.
Walls, whose laths are plaistered ore with flesh and blood.
Better mo^tar. Natures first robe of home spun cloth.
Bold. v. Impudent.
Bold as that earth-born race,
That bid Jove battle, and besieged the gods.
Such boldness as those Giants once poss^st.
When with the thunderer they did contest,
As Phaeton th'audacious charioter.
A brow where never came
The least impresse of modesty or shame.
Undaunted minds that know not how to fear.
Books.
Impartial tutors, dumb scholars, silent school masters, mute instructers,
treasurers of knowledge.

A part of man's prerogative,
In formal ink they thoughts and voices hold,
That we to them our solitude may give,
And make time present travel, that of old,
Our life ^ame pieceth larger at the end,
And books it farther backward does extend.
Boreas. v. Wind.
^rithia's love, Orithya's ^lustering husband.
^ongealing snow, beating the earth with hail,
^e thundering skies with his encounters rock,
which through the crannies of the earth does fl^e,
and makes the ghosts there tremble.
Whose airy motion strikes
^he earth with blasts, and makes the Ocean roar:
^rayling his dusky mantle on the floor,
^he earths besome, the earths windy barber.
Born.
^y life I owe to -- man, earth, etc.
When his paind mother freed his root of man,
^oon as the womb entrusts him on the earth;
When the womb unlades her shipping,
The womb delivered of her freight,
Where I first breathed Air, and saw the light
Where first I did salute the wo^ld.
To Bow.
To congie, cringe, curtsie.
Bracelets.
C^pids swa^hing-bands which seen,
^enus then scornd her Cestos, and did swear
This best became the Queen of Love to wear;
The superstitious Saint, would court her shrine
With prayers devouter, and far more divine,
And would embolden them to challenge bliss,
Were but her numbering beads once strung on this,
Which by a private charm does tie
As well the heart, as strike the wondering eye.
Braggadochio. v. Coward.
Of war, that nere knew more
Than the fine scabbard, and scarf he wore;
He talks of counter-scarfs, and ^asomates,
Of parapets, courtneyes, and pallisadoes
Of flanks, of ravelings, Gabions he pratks,
And of false baits, of sallies and scaladoes;
One that can take towns at table, and make foreign designs between his bed
curtains, whose tongue is his best weapon.

That talks of nothing but stoccadoes, and circumvallations, and studies hard
words in other countries, to fright poor folks with them at home;

That has got a dozen of dangerous words,
How he might hurt his enemy if he durst;
That brag to Stars,
And tell to bushes, what they do in wars.
Brain.
The source of sense and motion, the sinews seed-plot,
The seminary of the nerves, the souls register,
The souls day-book, bedchamber, closet
The Well of sense, from whence
Those sinewy strings, that do our bodies tie,
Are ravel^'d ou^, and fast there by one end,
Fountain of nerves, reasons cool seat
The privy council to the heart,
The understandings rhrone.
Breasts.
Those swelling mounts of softer Ivory,
The I Will of Cyprus, twixt two snowy hills;
The snowy mountains,
Which when loves warm sun does thaw,
Does resolve in Nectar fountain,
Twixt which mountains, lies a valley,
Like Joves heavenly milking alley;
Loves tents, pavillion. Paphos,
Two little spears
Wherein such azure lines in view appear,
Which were they obvious unto every eye,
All liberal Arts would turn Astronomy,
That solid snow, warmer Alps, Cupids nest, cradle,
The valleys of desire, two milky ^ountains,
That spring beneath two snowy mountains
The liquid Ivory balls, two equal swelling sisters,
Loves, Elysium. Tempe. Transplanted Paradise,
Hillocks, between which thousand Cupids lie,
Where Cytherea's doves, might billing sit
While men and gods with envy look on i^,
Breasts softer far than tu^ts of unwrought silk;
Soft breasts, where grow,
Warm violets upon a bank of snow
Twins of miracle, snowy breasts
Whiter than new fallen flakes, the spicy nests
And pillows from loves drowsy temples rest
Loves delicious paradise. The Phaenix nest
The snowy Hybla's, the ivory hills,
^oves Hespe^ides, soft ivory, warm, snow.
^ottels of melted Manna. Venus Alps,
^he box where sweets compacted lie,
^he hives of sweetness, yielding marble,
^he curious apples of her snowy breasts,
^herein a Paradise of pleasure rests
Whire silken pillowes, where
love sits in soft delights
that fleshy Acidalia, Cyprus, Paphos
^he chest of softer Ivory,
^here Violet veins in curious branches flow
^here Venus swans and milky doves are set
upon the swelling mounts of driven snow,
^here love whilst he to sport himself does get
^ath lost his course, nor finds which way to go,
^nclosed in a Labyrinth
Where sweet delicious love
^ayes down the quiver, that he once did bear
^ince he that blessed Paradise did prove,
He leaves his mothers lap to sport him there
White Satin cabinets of love.
Where Venus swans have built their nest
The panting balls of snnw, Venus, springs, Venus Albion
The happy valley, vale of Lillies, bower of bliss,
There where the beauteous region does divide
unto two milky ways; Loves swelling Apennine
The spicy grove of Eglantine,
Those sweetly rising hills, those mountains
Hil^'d with snow, where milky fountains
Sugard sweets as syrrup berries,
Must one day run, through pipes of cherries.
Those downy mounts of never melting snow,
The Li^ly mountains where dwells eternal spring
Breasts more white
Then their own milk. Eryx and Cytheron
Loves promontories. Loves delicious bower,
That pretty double hill
Not the fairest Larda's swan,
Nor the sleek est Ma^ble, can
Be so smooth, or white in show,
As those Lillies, and that snow
Delicious apples. The lively clusters of her breasts.
Of Venus babe the wanton nest.
Like pommels round of marble clear,
Where azure veins well mixed appear
With dearest tops of Porphytie,
Betwixt which two a way does lie;
A way more worthy beauties fame,
Than that which bears the milkie name,
That leads into the joyous field,
Which does unspotted Lillies yield;
But Lillies such, whose native smell
All Indian odours does excel.
The Ivory paved way,
Between two Ida's to the Elysian plain.
Breath sweet. v. Sweet smelling.
Comes stealingly out, as if it seemd loath to come forth from so delicious a
mansion, but that it hoped to be drawn in again to that well closed Paradise.

Which seemed to purge the Air of pestilence;
The Air respires the pure Elisian sweets,
In which she breaths. Airie amber
Making even Sryx breath balm, and Phlegethon,
Exhale perfumes of Musk and Cynamon;
And could she love the damned, might expel,
The stench of Tartar, and make heaven in hell.
Breath-stinking. v. Stinking.
But for her breath, (Spectators come not ^igh)
It lays about. God bless ^he company,
The man in the Beares-skin, baited to death,
Would choose the dogs much rather than her breath
One kiss, and eighteen words of her alone,
Puts down the Spanish Inquisition;
Thrice blessed we (quoth ^) when I think on
The former days of Persecution;
For were it free to kill this griesly elf,
Would Martyrs make, in compass of her self,
And were she not prevented by our prayer,
By this time, she corrupted had the Air;
Would she use a medicine for her teeth,
She were the better to speak to in the morning.
Bright. v. Shining.
Brighter than the Moon,
Then when she spreads her Beams, and fills her Orb;
^s when the Sun darts through his golden hair
^is gaudy beams, into the lightsome Air,
More fair
Phoebus nere Chariots through the gilded Air,
And though the Sun did hold his light away,
You might behold this gem by its own day,
Bright as the deathless gods.
Bright as the Sun does rise, after the night
He calls ^' account, the Moon for all the light
She ever borrowed, and has all repaid,
As Sol obscured in shrouds
Of exhalations breaks through vanquished clouds,
As when the Sun subduing by his rays
The muffling clouds, his golden brow displayes,
So shone Aeneas golden tree,
As makes a day^ of night. Bright as that star that last forsakes the skies
That bears a light able to check the dark
More bright
Than is the starry senate of the night
Brighter than the day
Or new raisd Phoebus in his morning-ray
The Sun holds down his head for shame,
Dead with Eclipses, this when we but name,
Shining as fair
As Cynthia burnisht in her brothers hair,
As may challenge the brightest day, the clearest Diamond.
Brook. v. Spring. River. Brow. v. Forehead.
A brow where love may banquet royally,
Where beauty rides in triumph
Smoother than polisht marble,
A front like Jove, that bank, that mount of Ivory,
That Ivory plain, that comely field of snow.
Building. v. ^astle. v. High.

An Aedifice to outwrastle time,
Those sports for ruin, and times bartery.
The structure in brave beauty strove
With what the height of fancy could express, v. Ovid. 2^ Metam. v. Lucan. lib.
10.

Or any pens most graceful happiness
Describe aright. Like the Palace of the Sun,
Like that wherein
Her Caesar Cleopatra entertaind,
When from Pharsalia, he in Egypt gained
A second victory,
All showd the builders, cravd the seer's care
The Amazed beholders wondering eyes,
Were taken captive at the sight.
The Camfred pillars, plinths, and antic bosses,
Medals, ascents, statues, and strange Colosses
Which buss the clouds, kiss their own feet at last
Buried in their own dust.
And nod their drowsy heads unto the ground,
Those lasting monuments,
Where Mars with Venus dwells,
Beutie with strength.
Burden.
Typhon bears not a greater load
Who under all Trinacria's weight does groan, Ovid. 5. Metam.

Nor Hercules, when he did Atlas ease.
A lighter burden makes old Atlas shrink
His pressed shoulders
That makes the earth groan to support its weight
A load Liburnian porters could not bear,
Such once Typhaeus bore when as he lay
Under the weight of all Trinacria
His burly legs set in the massy stocks,
Of the great high-browd Lilybaean rocks.
To bury.
Whose bones
Are raked up in a cold heap of stone.
To tomb a corse with solemn obsequies,
To lay them where they must
Measure their cold proportion in the dust
To make them lie
In the hard loding of mortality,
To bring them to their latest home,
To lay them in their silent monument,
That quiet closet of content
Raked up in deaths cold embers;
To lay
The liveless body in a bed of clay,
Laid in his sable chest.
To burn. v. Fire.
To wrap in flames
The flames rear up their curled grymids
To make to sink in flames,
Spit forth their flame, like the Sicilian hill.
Busy.
By pressing actions called away,
In debt to business.
As busy as the industrious Be
Pressed with occasions importunity.
O.
Gacus.
THe fear and shame of the Aventine wood
Mulcibers thievish son, who stole away
The beasts, which with their lowing him betray,
The fire-breathing thief, that with the Air
B^lcht from his mouth, burnt up the fruitful fields,
Whose filthy face was in so black a plight,
Sols radiance could never give it light;
Fresh murders still lay reeking on his floor,
And heads of murtherd men besmeard in goare v. Virgil Aeneiad. 8.

Vulcans great son, whom stout Alcides hands
Slew, and squetzd out his fiery eyes.
Cain. v. Cruel. Abel.
The first that did embrue
His hands in blood, and with one murder slew
The fourth part of the world. He that gave
Death his first handsel.
He that the the first Martyr made.
Calm.
When not a wrinckle seen on Thetis face,
And so much breath as with a gentle gaile,
May cause an easy swelling of the sail
Joves eg-born issue smile upon the flood;
And with their milder aspect do appear,
To be a warrant from all future fear
Smooth as a Ladies glass, or what shines there,
The Sea was now.
As when the Alcyon harcheth on the sand
Neptune his trident lays aside,
And Triton his loud sound^ng shell inspires,
Giving the waves a signal to retire,
The smoother waves glide slowly.
Calmer far
Than in their sleeps forgiven hermits are.
The Halcion sits upon her floating nest
Seven winter days with peaceful calm possessed,
Then safely sail, then Aeolus incaves
The justling winds, and smoothes the stooping waves.
The drowsy winds do sleep.
All the sea prostrate in soft slumbers slept,
A calm so gentle that no air
Breaths strong enough to stir a virgins hair.
The courteous sea
Did smooth his wrinkled brow, the winds did sleep,
And only whispered music to the deep.
When seas and winds are silenced by a calm
The seas flat face now all becalmed lies,
Like standing pooles, no waves or billows rise.
The bridled sea stands, and observrs no more
Her ancient course, she had forgot to roar,
No tides flow to and fro, nor seems the sun
To dance upon the waters motion,
No winds then wrastled.
Her waves the tired main,
By the winds leave composed and smoothed again.
The heavens and seas put on their robes
Of settled motions.
When Triton drives his blew steedes ^re the seas.
Calm winds have smoothed the seas rough brow.
The waves were all at peace.
The flagging mainsail flapt against her yard,
The useless compass and the idle card
Were both neglected upon every side,
The gamesome Porpoyse tumbled on the tide,
Grim Neptune wiped his foamy mouth,
Held his tridented M^ce upon the south.
The whispering winds do tell their tale
In such a breath as may but fill a sail.
No winds but such as rock the waves asleep.
The smooth ^ac'd Keptune with his gladder smiles
Visits the banks of his beloved Is^^s,
The winds retire and sink into their sea^,
And seagreen Triton sounds a shrill retreat.
When the ships glide upon the sleeping wave,
The smiling Nymphs dance upon the rising wave,
The wind courts the sails. The sea
Wears brows as smooth as virgins be,
Tempting the Merchant to invade his face.
The winds were like a servant waiting on them,
So just that they might fill the sails as they listed.
Old Nere^es on his Dolphin rides,
Presenting bridles to direct the tides.
No wind rebels.
The air was calm, and on the level brine,
Slick Panope with all her sisters played,
As still as midnight were the sullen waves,
And Neptunes silver-ever-shaking breast,
As smooth as when the Halcion builds her nest,
None other wrinkles on his face were seen
Than on a fertile mead or sportive green,
Where never plow share ripped his mothers womb,
To give an aged seed a living tomb.
The winds with wonder whist
Sweetly the waters kissed,
Whispering new joys to the mild Ocean,
Who now has quite forgot to rave,
Whilst birds of calm sit brooding on the charmed wave.
Nor blinded Mole the batning earth ere stird,
Nor boys made pitfals for the hungry bird.
The whistling reeds upon the waters side
Shot up their sharp heads in a stately p^ide,
And not a binding Osier bowd his head,
But on his root him bravely carried,
No dandling leaf played with the subtle air,
So smooth the Sea was, and the sky so fair.
Cameleon.
Those foodlesse creatures fed by air alone,
Which every color that they touch put on.
Cancer.
The spreading cancer scorning helpless art,
Creeps from the infected to the sounder part^.
Candles.
On gilded yards light-bearing cressets hung,
Which sullen night subdue with flaring beams,
Domestic stars. Tallow stars.
In golden lamps the lights are placed round,
And make a forced day the night confound.
The house stars. The candle sleepy grew and winkt.
Care. Careful.
Swarms of perplexing care buzze in his brain.
A studious care boyld in his zealous mind.
The thief of youth and beauty, tempest of the soul.
Perplexing and enaging cares
That without years can snow down silver hairs.
The Chaos of the mind, the noise, the tumult of the thoughts,
Tempest of the troubled mind. Unquiet thoughts.
The journey of the head. Millions of cares
Beats on the anvile of my poor weak head.
My heart's an anvile hammerd by my thoughts.
My head's a crazie hive for swarms of thoughts
Which have more sting than honey.
Care seeks out wrinkled brows and hollow eyes,
And builds himself caves to abide in them,
Swarms of buzzing cares hive in his head.
Carrier.
A man unlearned and yet a man of letters.
His own hackney man, letting himself out to travel as well as his
horses. The ordinary Ambassador betwixt friend and friend.
A great affl^cter of high ways.
To Carry away violently.
To traile, hale, drag, hurry.
To hurry with them like the spreading flood.
R^pt as a ship upon the high wrought flood.
By savage tempests chac't, which in despair
The Pilot leaves to the Gods and prayer,
As when by Ganges flood,
A Tiger draggs a fawn through silent woods.
Castle. v. Building.
Safe for defense,
And sweetly wanton with magnificence.
With all the cost and cunning beautifide
That adds to state, where nothing wants but pride,
Castor and Pollux.
Joves egge-borne is^ue.
Leda's twin sons. Tyndarian brothers.
The Amyclaean youths. The glistering brothers.
Helens fair brothers, whom mariners invoke,
When the victorious waves their ships have broke,
The famous Argonautes.
Caucasus.
The S^ythians snowie mountains on whose top
Prometheus growing liver feeds the Crop
Of Joves great bird. Inhospitable rock
Whose craggie sides have often endured the shock
Of the fierce north.
Which with less distance looks at heaven by far,
And with more large proportion shows the stars.
Cave.
Under the hollow hanging of this hill
There was a cave cut out by natures skill,
Or else it seemd the mount did open his breast,
That all might see what thoughts he there possessed,
Whose gloomy entrance was environd round
With thick set trees, etc. In which no chearing light
At all ere peeped but sad and driery night,
A squallid filth and moldinesse had made,
From whence exhaled stenches did invade
The upper air, -- There Is bred by dreary night.
Pale moldy filth, and darkness sad, no light.
But light by Magic made ere shined there
A deep black cave low in the earth is found,
Whose duskic entrance like pase Morpheus cell,
With strange Meanders windeth under ground,
Where sooty darkness evermore does dwell.
With torches now attempting the sad cave,
Which at their entrance seems in a fright
At the reflection, that the brightness gave,
As till that time it never saw the light.
Centaures.
Wretched Ixions shaggie-footed race.
The cloud born issue. Which first bestrid the horse.
Cerberus.
That scoulding cur who barking shakes
About his tripple brows Medusa's snakes.
The dreadful dog of hell.
The viper curled dog. The tripple headed cut that shakes
His dreadful main curled with hissing snakes.
His d^reful head
With hundred snakes encomp^ssed.
And noisome breath, whilst bloody drops
Flow from his tripple tongued chaps.
Grim porter of the Stygian hall.
Ceres.
The yellow goddess.
The gold haird mother of life-strengthening seed.
The fair browd Queen that shakes her golden hairs.
And makes the fields to wave their golden ears.
The grain-rich goddess. The sheavie Queen,
Who first instructed duller mortals how
To make earths surface wear a furrowed brow,
As if she frownd on them, and stormed to feel
Her bowels gashed by the ripping steel.
Who causes Aetna from her jaws expire
Thick vapors lined with dust and wrapped in fire*
Sad mother of fair P^oserpine.
The El^usinian Queen, that clothes the fields with grain,
Whose yearly feast
Grave matrons in long linen stoles invest
With sacred undivulged rites do, keep,
Offering garlands of their first ripe corn
Forbidden Venus for nine nights forborne.
And touch of man.
Certain.
Grown to a certainty, unto assurance grown
Certain as the unchanged edicts of fate,
As certain as the stroke of death, v. Destiny.

Or the last judgment day.
Changeable.
Begot by Proteus on a Cameleon.
B^got in the change of the moon.
Engendered by the wind and weathercock.
A Prot^us that can take
What shape he please and in an instant make
H^ms^lf to any thing, be that or this,
By voluntary Metomorphosis. As Vertumnus.
Waxing and waining an hundred times in a minute,
As the mother of Talegonus.
Such Metra daughter to the hungry king,
More unconstant than the giddy wave,
As pliant wax still new impressions takes,
Whose resolutions air,
So loose and easy that a ruffling wind
Can blow away. More than Proteus or the subtle race
Of Polypus, who roving, to rob more
Transform them hourly to the wavie shore;
whose minds
In various change strive to outvie the winds,
That tread on globes and circles,
The apes of fortune that desire to be
Resolved on as ^ickle wheels as she.
The planets at their birth which rulers were,
Were all irregular,
Whose mids change oftener than the Greek could dream.
That made the Me^empsychos'd soul his theme
The tide of minds.
I wonder his soul finds not some way to kill his body, to which it
has been so long united.
Begot when the moon was in conjuction, and all the other p^anets drunk at a
morris dance.
A skitt^sh mind, as if their souls were made of changeable taffaty.
Their mind is always like the moon in her last quarter, ever upon the change.
That may contend for varying shapes
With the blew Proteus, or the horned flood.
Chaos. v. Confused.
That undigested lump, and barren load,
Where jarring seeds of things ill-joyn'd abode. v. Ovid. 1. Me^am.

The confused, jumble, medley. The worlds Emb^yon.
The creatures noursery. The mingled lump of things.
Natures gallimauphrey. Enough for to confound
Unnumbe^ed wo^lds.
Heaven was with earth confused,
And stars with rocks together crushed and bruised.
Charms. v. Ovid. 7. Metam. Medea. Ovid. Epist. Hipsipile to Jason.

In words dark and perplexed nine times thrice,
Enchantments mutters with her magic voice.
Circe waves her magic wand,
Thrice turns she to the east, twice to the west,
Thrice touch^ him with her wand, three charms expressed,
From Erebus and Chaos conjures night,
With all her gods and Hecate intreates. Homer Odyss. 10. Virgil. Aen. 4. Dido.
Lucan lib. 6.

With tedious mumblings,
The moon perplex't with tedious charms below
Till she on under herbs her^j^lly throws.
Charon.
Hells grim botes-swain, hells scowling ferryman.
The burning streams old ferriman
That wafts pale ghosts over the stygian lake.
Hells ugly untrim'd waterman. The stygian sculler.
That plies the passage ore the filthy flood,
With crabbed countenance, hoare hairs which stood
Ruggedly overgrown ore all his chin,
His gogling^ eyes star'd as they flames had bin; Virg. Aen. 6.

In ragged robes and tattered old attire,
With a strong pole thrust in the pudly mire,
He drives his boat, assisted with one sail,
And ore the black streams meager ghosts he hales.
Char^bdis.
Whi^ling Charibd is with her sucking waves,
Suppes up the seas and gives the ships their graves.
With yawning swallow
Sups up huge waves which broken in do follow,
And thrice again disgorgeth them on high,
Dashing its wavie vomit to the sky.
Chaste.
As the sweet dew that loads the heads.
Of drooping flowers. All her k^sses do speak her virgin.
The blushes of her cheeks speak innocence.
Warmed with a bashful hea^.
Call snow unchaste, and say the ice is wanton, if she be so.
Chaste as the maiden blossoms of a rose.
Sweet as the spring it buds in.
The Phoenix self although but one may sooner be no virgin.
Chaste as the Nuns first vow, as the cold hermits cell.
Chaste as the bashful morn.
Chaste as the vows of Nuns or Anchorites prayer.
Whose beauty is the shrine of chastity.
Immu^'d in snow, whose greatest hea^ is like to that faint light.
The glow-worme shoores at the cold breast of night.
Cloystered in ice. That in her lilly bosom wears
The spotless flower of while chastity,
Whose cool thoughts feel no hot desires,
That serve not Venus flames but Vesta's fires.
As chaste as ice such as were never seen
In wanton dalliance, such as until death
Never smelt any but their husbands breath.
^ucrece, Diana, Penelope, Vestals, Sabine women.
^ato, Hippolitus, Curious.
J^piter would court her did he know
A shape whereby to tempt such chastity.
Her lips in pure and vestal modesty
Still blush as thinking their own kisses sin.
You may sooner tempt
A votary, or move a S^ythian rock,
Than shoot a fire into her chaster breast.
A Camphire constitution.
Fit for the golden age and Saturnes reign.
Almost afraid to ly with her self.
Chaste as the hardened rock.
Whose kisses were so chaste, that love seemed to play there without darts.
Chaste as the eyes of turtles. Diana apparelled in the g^rments of Venus, such a
wanton modesty she had, and in^icing soberness.

A breast as cold as hemlock.
One whose blood is snow-broth, who never feels
The wanton stinges and motions of the sense.
Chaste as the unblowne bud.
Whose lips blush at their own sweet kisses.
Chaste as a picture cut in Alabaster. As Ysickles
That curdled by the frost from purest snow,
And hang in Diana 's Temple.
She was always hidden either under a veil, or in her chamber, and all the
world might suspect he^ to be fair, but there was scarce any knew it, bu^ her
mother.

In Crystal chains
All love is bound within her icie veins,
Like tapers on the altar shine her eyes,
Her breath as the perfume of sacrifice.
Chaste as the air, Holy Nuns breath in prayer.
Cheeks.
Two banks of fairest flowers
Enricht with sweetness from the twilight showre^
VVhereon those jars which were so often bred,
Composed are betw^xt the white and red.
Those plots where half-ros'd lillies lie,
Not one by art but natures industry.
Each Indie in each cheek -- where met
Vermillion with a silver tincture set,
Cheeks lightly staind with red,
Like spotted marble newly polished, which enclose
The smiling ^ulip, and carnation rose
Beauty, times stern rage to shun,
In her cheeks lillies hid her fom the sun,
When she meant to triumph in her May,
Made that her E^st, and there she broke her day,
Cheeks in which two pits do lie,
To bury those slain by her eye.
Cheeks with kindly clarret spread
Aurora like new out of bed.
Either cheek discloses,
Mingled bathes of milk and ^oses.
Or like the fresh Queen apples side,
Blushing at sight of Phoebus pride,
Blushing lillies, where scarlet were a blot,
Aurora blushed at such a sight unknown
Seeing those cheeks were redder than her own.
Transplanted Paradise. Beauties tempe. Elysium.

Have you seen carnation grow
Fresh blushing through new flakes of snow,
Have you seen with more delight
A red rose growing through a white,
Have you seen the pretty gleam
That the strawberry leaves in cream,
Such was the tincture of her cheeks.
Child. v. Infant.
A man in a small letter. Natures short hand. Stenography.
The best copy of Adam before he tasted Eve or the apple.
Natures best picture newly drawn, which time and much handling dims and
defaces.
Whose souls white paper is yet unscribled with observations of the world,
wherewith at length it becomes a blurd note-book. Who yet knows no evil, nor
has made means by sin to be acquainted With misery.

All the language he speaks is tears, and they serve well to express his
necessity.

His hardest labor is his tongue, as if he were loath to use so de^eitful, an
organ, and he is best company with it, when he can but ^rattle.

His fathers little S^ory, wherein he reads those days of his life, ^he cannot
remember, and sighs to se^ what innocence he has ^out-liv'd.

In his purity, and simplicity, he is the Christians example, and the old man's
relapse.

Could he put off his body with his little coat, he had got eternity without a
burden, and exchanged one heaven for another. Like his first father, he is
worse in his breeches. He wears his dagger m^zzled, lest it should bite his
master.

With Child.
The pregnant womb grows heavy, and requires
Lucina's aid. A team of harnest Peacocks fiercely draw
Her siery Chariot from the flitting sky,
Wherein there sat the glorious Majesty
Of great Saturnia, on whose train attended
An Host of Goddesses; Juno descended
From out the flaming Chariot and blessed
The painful womb. The plenteous womb,
Expresses her full tilth and husbandry,
The ripe burden stretched the heavy womb.
When nature quickens in the pregnant womb
Her wishes past, and now her hope, to come.
Children.
The unprized treasure,
Of the chaste womb, the pledges of the loving bed,
Those little models of our selves,
The lesser volumes, Epitomies of their parents
Strong knots of love.
Natures common, but rarest blessing,
Traduction of our selves.
Chiron.
Achilles two-shapt Tu^our,
He that taught stout Peleus son the way,
How with delight upon the Harp to play,
He that great Aesculapius Physic taught,
And learnt Alcides his Astrology,
The glittering Archer in the Zodiac.
Christs-Cross.
Dry leaveless trunk on Golgotha.
Choleric. v. Angry.
A man made out of fire. A wasp,
Whose every humor is turned into choler;
Choler lies in him like lees in wine,
The least motion of the vessel makes them rise up,
Like a thatcht house, quickly on fire,
Like gumm'd velvet quickly fretted,
Cha^ing, as if they were rubbed with soap.
Chymick. Alchymist.
The subrle Chymick does d^evest,
And strip the creature naked, till he find
The sallow principles within their nest
Admitted to Natures bed-chumber;
The Alchymists that choke
Themselves with fumes, and waste their time in smoke,
That teach dull nature what her own forces are;
The sooty tribe, whose ingenious itch
Makes them grow poor, by studying to be rich.
Close. v. Embrace.
Close as the griping fist, or cherry lips
Of happy lovers in their melting sips,
Close as two Oisters, Cockles.
Cloud.
The waves, the surges, billows of the Air^,
The suns dusky robes. The dropping wings,
The watery curtains of the Heavens. The mistie cloak,
Heavens mufler, maskie, vail, scarf, wa^ry, tiffany,
Heavens mourning clothes, Heavens silk Cypress,
Those rolling waves, floods, billows of the skies;
Such clouds Jove made when he
Wrested from Jo, her virginity.
The duskie mufled sky,
The pitchy shroud, heavens gloomy mask,
Those waves of thickened Air.
The frowns of discontented Heaven,
The thickened Air that steals away the sky
Thick Air does chok the jarring heavens
The gloomy bosom of the cloud,
Whose gloomy darkness shroud
Heavens lamps -- the wave-embatteld shrouds
Brought from the sea on Eurus wings,
Blew curtains, mixed of Air and Water;
The hoorders up of Rain,
That in their melting bosoms hug the sun,
And smother up the struggling light.
The treasure-house of showers,
The magizines of Snow and Rain.
Cock.
The watchful-bird, crest-people, featherd King,
The peasants trusty clock, Aurora's trumpetter,
The mornings watch. The feathered Bellman of the night
The feathered Prophet of approaching light.
The Bell-man of the morn
Summoning, light up with his bugle horn,
The native Bell-man of the night,
Startles the Moon, and wakes the drowsy morn.
The bird that warned Peter of his fall.
The trumpet of the day,
That with his lofty, and shrill-sounding throat
Awakes the day, and makes the erring ghosts
Have to their confines,
The husband Cock looks out, and strait is sped
Meeting his wife, which brings her feather-bed,
That wakes the morn,
With bird of flesh, and mouth of horn.
Cock fight.
The Cocks do fight
B^istling their plumes, and red with fury smite
With spurs, and beak-bounding at every blow,
With fresh assaul^s, freshing their fury so,
That desperate in their unyielding wrath
Nothing can end their deadly fewd, but death.
The Lords about, that on both sides do bet,
Look partially, when one the field shall get,
And trampling on his gaudy plumed pride,
His prostrate ^o, with bloody spurs bestride,
With clanging trumpets, and with clapping wing,
Triumphantly his victory to sing:
Cold.
Frosty, frost-bit, chill, frozen, congealed, Northern, bleak,
Where men's breath does instantly congeal,
And atom'd mists turn instantly to hail
Colder than Salamanders. As cold as Alpin snow
Cold as Lycaeus that P^ne-bearing mount,
As snowy Haemus, or cold Rhodope.
As mountain ice, which the North-winds,
Congeal to purest Crystal;
Cold as the frozen zone,
Whose hair with isickles are hung,
And chattering teeth confound the useless tongue,
Cold as the breath of winter; as Apennine
Where the hills active coldness does go near
To freez the frosty sun within his spear,
Cold as the top of snowy Algidus;
Cold as the feet of rocks.
Cold as the Got, or rough Sarmatian,
As Pindus frozen tops,
Cold as the frozen Muscovite.
Colored.
Streaked, stained, smeared, speckled, f^eckled, tinctured, varnishe,
pyde, which nature did,
In more eye-pleasing hewes, and richer grain,
Then Iris bow attending Aprils rain
Nor can the Peacock in his spo^ted train,
So many pleasing colors show again,
As in the Rain-bowes many-colured hiew
Here we see watchet deepned with a blew,
There a dark tawny with a pu^ple mixed,
Yellow, and flame, with streaks of green betwixt
A bloody stream into a blushing run,
And ends still with the color, which begun,
Drawing the deeper to a lighter stain
Bringing the lightest, to the deep'st again,
With such rare Art each mingleth with his fellow,
The blew with watchet green, and red with yellow;
Like to the changes which we daily see
About the Doves neck with variety,
Where none can say, although it strickt he tends
Here one begins, and there the other ends.
Combat. v. War.
Redoubled-blowes
Fall like amazing thunder on his cask
Like Perseus on his Pegasus.
To Come.
To arrive a^. When scarce her feet had touched the beachy shore
By free force of her palfrey wan
Access to the ^own: Till they with pacing won
The steepness of the hill, when their travel had attaind
With weary steps they conquer all the way.
Comet.
It flew,
And after it long blazing tresses drew
The curled star that from his head throws out
A thousand sparks, fatal torch, hairy lamps.
On whose pale flame an angry spirit flies
The shooting stars that glide,
With bloody-beams. The bristled stars,
^n flaming letters writ sad destiny.
The dismal star
That threats the world with famine, plague, or wa^:
The Star that wears a beard of flame,
The Autumnal ruddy streaming S^ar
Presageing famine, pestilence and war;
^mporting change of Times and S^ates;
Brandish their C^rystal tresses in the sky,
Heavens dreadful heralds, whose shag'd portent
Foretells the coming of some dire event.
Torch-bearers to a royal funeral, Il-boding lights:
Those blazing stars that show
A Princes death, or fatal overthrow
Of prosperous States,
The fa^al ushers of calamity,
The flaming Heralds, Harbenger of vengeance.
To Compass.
Impale, ingirt, environ, encircle, girdle, surround, swathe, swaddle,
^all about, hemme in, inlinke, sphere, hoop garter.
A Compass.
Circumference, circle, incirelet, surrounding, verge, boundry,
^phear, orb, round model, cope, circuit, enclosure.
Confused.
As the first Choas, ere division wrought
An harmony, and to proportion brought
The seeds of discord, undistinguisht
Conquer. v. Victory. Triumph.
Who wears the Laurel planted on his brow,
Who with his conquests cloyed the jaws of death,
Sing Pances, and thy brows with Laurel bind,
A full and perfect conquest was obtaind,
That for the sword no further work remaind,
On the glittering ^rest I see
The glorious garland of the conquest born,
While feather-^ooted fame before us flies
Upon the golden wings of honor born,
Whom victory convoyes.
Crowned with the Garland of her golden hair
On whose glittering crest
The glorius garland of the conquest rests
Bright conquest shines upon his sword.
Conscience.
The souls pulse, eternal larum, ever-barking-dog
The black-book, the hateful register.
The terror of the astonished soul.
The tempest of the mind,
That well-kept Register, wherein is writ
All ill, men do, all goodness they omit
His pallid fears, his sorrows, his affrightings,
His late wished had I wists, remorseful, bitings
The witness executioner and Judge.
Justice bedchamber.
The King of Heavens Attorney General.
Consider.
To look on a thing with a serious eye
With instructed, judging eyes to view
To take a narrow view.
Constant.
Whom neither fear nor favor can
Wrest from his thoughts, and make him less a man,
Whom neither force nor fawning can
Unpin, or wrench, from giving all their due
Whose honesty is not
So loose or easy, that a ruffling wind
Can blow away, or glittering look it blind,
Who rides his sure and even trot
While the world now rides by, now lags behind,
Whom nothing can procure,
When the wide world runs bias, from his will
To writh his limbs and shake,
A man of firm resolves, firm as the center,
Unmoved, as the poles;
Bold hands as some might hope to force
The rolling light of Heavens, as change her course.
Consume.
Languish, waste, melt, thaw, decay,
That with a slow infection melts away
Like ice, before the Suns uncertain ray.
Corn.
Ceres goldy lo^ks, treasure. The pride of Ceres plain.
The Plowmans hope and long expected gain.
Covetous.
A mole. A son of earth that digs his mothers entrals
To turn up treasure, A rich beggar troubled with Midas itch
A sucking sponge, one that sits brooding ore his bags
Thief to himself. A dung-hil wretch, muck-worm
Grown poor by getting riches, his own torture
A rust unto himself, as to his gold,
That spider-like does spin a web of gold,
Out of his own bowels-only knows the care
And another the use of gold, scraping dust-worm,
That starves at feasts, and in the Rivers thirsts,
Whose wretched mind bends to no point but this,
That who have most of wealth, have most of bliss
Volopone's. Armed with hooking tentors, and clad in bird^ime
That scrape like dung-hil Cocks in dirt and mire
To find the gemme, they know not how to use
Golds dropsied Er^sycthous. Like Dypsa's thirst,
Is never satisfied, unless it burst.
Ever hungry, till he surfets
Wealths horse-leaches that ever crave
So much the more, the more they have,
Whose droyling hands thinks nothing can supply
The greedy wants of his insatiat eye.
Naught can fill
The unfathomed gulf of his insatiate will.
The picture of miserable happiness, and rich beggary;
Such an one, as an enemy could not wish him worse, than to be himself; doing
any thing to get that which he is determined, when it is gotten never to use.

Rich fools, whose base and filthy heart
Lies hatching still the goods wherein they flow,
And damning their own selves to Tantals smart,
Wealth breeding want, more wretched grow,
A chiverel conscience, that will stretch to hold more,
Base stooping souls, that grovel on the earth,
That think heaven for gold an easy morgage:

One that could love God well, if there were an L. more in h^^ name. One that
has coffi^'d up his soul in his chest before his body, whom upon any payments
wrested from him, the charges of ^ rope, merely keeps from hanging himself.

Like a dog in a wheel, toils to roast meat for others eating, freezing before
the fire, whilst he fears to be burnt, if he come nearer it.

That could be content to have both his eyes pluck^ out, so he might have gold
put in the holes.

Court.
The place of glorious troubles, empty fallacies,
Falls delights, the shine of kings, envies hatching place,
Where rules of State, and Ceremonies are
Observed so seriously, that I must dance,
And act ore all the complements of France,
And Spain, and Italy, before I can
Be taken for a well-bred Englishman.
Vpstart Courtier. v. Fantastic.
The silken youths of Court, great Atlas of the State,
That an high sail of honor bear
Using the fine Rhetoric of clothes,
To win esteem, serious glorious fools,
Court ear-wigs, wrigling to the ear of greatness
Gaudy nothings. That can speak a tedious piece of nothing,
Vary his face, as Seamen do their Compass;
Made of nothing but antic clothes and cringes,
Signs of men, court bubbles,
Gaudy glowworms, carrying seeming fire,
Fine clothes, with a bad lining. Barrels of others wit,
His word like a fantastical banquet, just so many
Strange dishes. A child of fancy, Pedlars of wit,
That speak taffatie ph^ases. Mushrom gentlemen,
That shoot up in a night to place and worship
The glittering Cou^tier that in tissue stalks,
That wear a Pedlars shop about them
Like the Cynnamon-tree-bark more worth than the body.
Like the Bird of Paradise feathers, more wor^h than the flesh.
Living under the tyranny of Ceremonies.
Perfumed silkworms. Inferior orbs directed by the motion of higher spears.

Living by the refl^ction of higher substances,
Can better exchange a piece of gold than of reason.
Such a man as his tailor pleases to shape him,
Putting much of his judgment away about the situation of his clothes. There is
a confederacy between him and his clothes, betwixt them to make up a puppy.

Proud of the rattling of his silks, (clothes being the remembrances of lost
innocence) like a mad man that laughs at the rattling of his ^etters.

Coward v. Br^gadochio.
A son of fear, whose blood is whey.
A full bubble, a valiant vanity.
That in high terms can swear down fortresses,
And spoil the enemy before he sees him.
Whose spiri^'s only active in his he^l.
One that has indented with the grave to bring all his limbs thither.
A C^rpet knight.
That date do naught but fear. Possessed with an ignomin^ous fear.
That manhood only by their beard bewray.
Alivel^sse damp beleaguers every joint, as often he swounds
As ere he views his sword or thinks on wounds.
That swings his sword about his head and cuts
The empty air, which h^sseth him in scorn.
Ready to run away from himself, like the Satyr that ran away a^^ the noise of
the noise of the horn which he himself blew.

Looks as if his eyes would run into his soul, and his soul out of his body
upon the least sent of danger.

Cast^ng such unlikely dangers, as all the planets together could ^^arce
conspire. Clinias. Damaetas. ^hersites.

A valiant voice, that is resolved to have his sword never cursed by any widow.

H^s blcod not daring to be in so dangerous a place went out of his face, and
hid it self more inwardly, and his very words as if afraid of blows came
slowly from him.

Afraid of his own sword he wears, and affrighted wi^h the clashing, of his
own armor.

Whose feet is his best defense, and his tongue his best weapon.
A dish of skimm'd milk. Tossed and butter.
That fear the report of a cal^ver.
Worse than a st^uck fool, or hurt wild-duck.
The fanning of his enemies plume would nod him in^o despair.
Cream-fac'd fellow, lilly-liverd, whey-face, linn^n che^kes, pigeonliverd.
That wears all his daggers in his mouth,

And will see his sister sooner naked than a sword.

His blood runs thick, as if it would blot a sword.

Prometheus was a sleep while his heart was making, and forgot to put fire in
it.

If once his eye be struck with terror, all the costick physic in the world
cannot stay him.

Wonderful, exceptious and choleric, where he sees men are lo^^ to give him an
occasion, and you cannot pacify him better than by quarrelling with him.

Whom when he is most hot, you may easily threaten into a very honest quiet man.

The sight of a sword wounds him more sensible than the stroke, every man is
his master that dare beat him, and every man dares that knows him.

He is a Christian merely for fear of hell fire, and if any religion could
fright him more, he would be of that.

Such as would conquer victory it self, if it stood in their way as they fly.

Loving to show a nature steeped in the gall of passion, display the ignoble
tyranny of prevailing discords, being valiant against no resistance, and making
no resistance when they meet true valor.

That would sooner creep into a scabbard, than draw a sword, and endure a
bullet than shoot of a musket.

Coy.
A piece of pettish, froward, wanton anger.
Such as possessed Narcissus.
P^ssest with savage chastity.
Coy as the plant Pud^setan,
That shrinks at the approach of man.
Rustic chastity. Discourteous modesty.
That as long as they are chaste, think they may be discourteous,
And lawfully scratch men, if they do not kiss them.
Consume their own Idolater.
Of such a goddess no time gives record,
That burns the temple where she is adored.
Crafty.
The subtle fox.
Hyoena, Crocodile, and all beasts of craft,
Have been distilled to make one nature up.
Volpone.
Cranes.
That watchful fowl, the Pygmies enemy.
Direct their flight on high,
And cut their way they in a trigon ^ly,
Which pointed figure may with ease divide,
Opposing blasts through which they swiftly glide,
Which with loud clangors fill the ^kie
When they from cold and stormy winter fly
Toth' Ocean and that aires more temperate breath,
Inflicting on the Pygmies wounds and death.
The Thracian foul, which with their loud alarme^
Make little Pigmies soldiers run to arms.
Strimon^an birds in Pygmies death rejoice,
And tear the air before them with their voice.
Which while they sleep make one keep sen^inel.
P^lamedes ^utors. Which by their flying taught
Him letters, and his warlick discipline.
Credulous.
A man of easy confidence, of rash belief,
That has the only disadvantage of an honest heart.
To Cry out, v. Noise.
To rive, ^ear the air with cries,
To fill the bosom of the shricking air,
With loud complaints.
Crime. v. Wicked.
Guilty of a blacker crime,
Than ere in the large volume writ by time,
The sad historian reads, acting black mischief,
A fault
Not to be purged with brimstone, fire and salt.
A sin no prayers or tears
Can ere wash off.
That blurs the grace and blush of modesty.
Critic.
That beholds nothing but with a mind of mislike,
Writing with oil and fire.
The least child their pen is delivered of, comes into the world with all its
teeth.
The Muses Cerberus. Archilochus himself was not more bitter.
Churlish reteiner to the Muses.
One that has spelled over a great many of books, and all his observation is
the Orthography.
The surgean of old authou^s, healing the wounds of dust and ignorance.

He is a troublesome vexer of the dead, which after so long sparing, must rise
up to the judgment of his castigation.

He is one that makes all books sell dearer, whilst he swells them into folios
by his comments.

Crocodile.
Niles fell rover. Niles poisony Pi^ate. Niles greedy beast.
That kills the man, then bath^s him in his tears.
That beast, which opposite to natures law
In other creatures, mooves the upper jaw.
Crown.
Cornet, chaplet, garland, diadem, incirclet, wreath, fillet, circlet, ringe,
^inglet, cincture, anadem, impalement.

Cruel.
Like Ounces, Tigers. or the Panthers whelps,
Whose healths are morning draughts in blood.
As Lycaon when he changed his shape
VV^^h Selmus turned into an Adaman^.
The swallowing Syrts, Charybdis chaft with w^nd,
Or some fell Tiger of the Armenian kind
Did him beget -- his cruel breast,
Rough flint, hard steel, or adamant invest,
As if he had drunk of the Ciconian stream,
That fre^zeth all the entrails into stone.
He on the cruel Caucasus hard mounts
Was bred, or sucked from Tigers milky ^ounts.
Of some Tigers b^ood,
Bred in the wast of fr^st-bit Calydon.
An heart hewn from a Parian stone.
Mortar made of blood and clay.
By rocks engendered, ^ib'd with steel.
Like Tigers fel^,
VVh^m their fierce dams with slaughterd cattels blood,
Were wont to nourish in the Hircanian wood.
Most delighted when
They bath and paddle in the blood of men.
To whose heart, nature has set a lock, to shut out pity.
Cataline. Marius. Ner^. M^zentius.
Q^^affers of humane blood. Savage rigor.
More cruel than a Turk or Troglodite. Than the Laestrigon.
The savages to S^ythian rocks confind,
Who know no God nor virtue of the mind,
But only sense pursue, who hunger tame
With slaughtered lives they and their food the same,
Are not so cruel. As Phalaris or famed Gemonides.
Hircanian Tygar. Numidian Getulian Lion.
Anthropophagi. The horse-blood-swell'd Sarmatian,
In whose heart a vein of matble grow.
Enough to make men waver in the faith,
And hold opinion with P^thago^as,
That souls of animals infuse themselves
Into the trunks of men -- whose cu^rish spirit
Governd a wolf, who hanged for humant slaughter
Even from the gallows did his fell soul fleet,
And whilst he laid in his unhallowed den,
Infused it self into him. His heart is iron, and his heart strings wire,
The taitnesse of his face sowers ripe grapes.
He was not bo^n at --
But on some rock within the Pontick la^d,
Or Scythian mountain that so wildly stand,
And v^ins of flint are every where dispersed
In sl^nder br^nches through his iron breast.
An heart as as hard as brass,
And more obdurate than M^dusa's was.
Mercy shall as soon be found at the hands of prevailing cowards.
Cuckold
The only horned beast that has teeth above.
That ha^gs his bugle in an invisible baldrick.
Struck by the forked plague.
So ungrateful, he nere thanks him tha^ made him.
An he moon. Civil monster. R^tional beast.
Cupid.
The P^phian archer. The Paphian Prince.
Cytherea's son. The ^loth aff^ct^ng boy.
Psych^'s soft husband. Venus sweetest son.
The peevish shooting hoodwinkt else. Little great King.
The quiver'd god. The mirthful god of amorous daliance.
The blinking boy that winks and hits the ma^k.
The winged god that wounds hearts.
Great little Emperor of hearts.
The Cyp^ian Queens blind boy.
The Giant dwarse. Venus wanton son.
The god whose nights out shine his days.
Who though ^e's blind, shoo^s arrowe^ that have sight.
Sees not to shoot, yer se^s to hit the while.
Little tyrant lordly Love That does aw the gods above
As they creatures here below, With his scepter called a bow,
And does all their forces bear, In the quiver that he wears,
Whence no sooner he does draw Forth a shaft but it is law.
Custom.
That second nature. Imperious tyrant.
Vice-nature. That Apoplexy of bedrid nature.
That takes from us the privilege
To be our selves, rends that great charter too
Of nature, and likewise cancels man,
And so inchains our judgments and discourse,
To present usances. That great giant that is so prevalent that oftentimes we
shape the discourse of reason, and course of nature to the inb^ed notions, and
preconceptions she has printed in our minds.

Cybele.
Wood-^^unting mother by yok't Lions drawn.
The fruitful mother of the Gods.
The turban'd Goddess. The Berecinthian Queen.
Saturnes great wife. Dindymens, Ops, Rhea, Vest^.
Cyclops.
Joves tinkers. The thunder-smiths. The sweating throng
Of hamme^ing blacksmiths at the lofty hill,
The forgers of Joves fierce Artillery. v Aetna. v. Thunder.

Which in vast caves their anviles beat
Steropes, Brontes, nakt Pyracmon sweats v Hesiod. Theogonia. v. 139

In forging thunder, part now finished, Jove
This on affrigh^ed earth hurles from above
On the imperfect part, three clattering showers
Of winter hail, and spring-tide-rain he pours,
To which are added straight three fl^shes swift v. Virgil. Aen. 8.

Of summer flames, three puffes of Autumne's drift.
Cynthia. v. Moon. Diana.

D.
Dale. v. Valley. Dance.
HE made his natural motion far more sweet,
And shook a most divine dance from his feet,
To move in nimble measures. Moving measures.
The Spheres could not in comlier order meet,
Nor move more graceful, whether they advance
Their measures forward, or retire their dance.
To meet
The sprightly Music with their numerous feet.
Dancing is the descant upon the plain song of walking,
And with even motions beat the happy ground.
Have you beheld the Graces dance
Or seen the upper spheres to moove,
So she did tu^n^, return, advance
In her gestures, as she paces,
Are united all the Graces.
Dandle.
Ballancing his weight in dancing him.
So Hector dandled his Astyanax
Then when the nodding plume upon his crest
Frighted the child.
Dangerous
As to ore-walk a current roaring loud.
On the unstedfast footing of a spear
Though hell it self should gape.
Ruin with her saile-strecht wing,
Ready to sink us down and cover us.
Dark.
Gloomy, duskie, pitchy. As the first Chaos ere the light adornes
The world, or Phebe filled her wained horns.
Dark as the sullen night. Where Phoebus never shows
His cheerful light. Dark as the Negro's face.
Stars shroud their heads in clouds, night lost her eyes.
Dark as the drowsy mansion house of sleep.
Not seen by Phoebus when he mounts the skies
At height, nor stooping. Darker than Ach^ron.
Enough to make a night ^f day.
No glimmering spark gave out his feeble rays,
Where yet the gladsome day has not been seen,
Nor Phoebus piercing beams have ever been.
Like the Cimmerian clime,
Where sun, nor moon meet out the length of time,
Wherein the eye of day
A stranger was, and Phaebe's horned light,
In vain contended with the shades of night.
Where is not so much as that fainter light.
The glowworm shoots at the cold breast of night.
Darkness lights elder brother there did reign.
Dark as the Egyptian night.
The heavens did not peep through the blanket of the n^ght.
Darkness as thick as ill me^ clouds can make.
D^^k as the blind and quiet age of night.
So dark as if the funeral of light
Were celebrated there.
The moon into her darkened orbe^e^ires
Nor scaled up stars extend their golden fires.
Day.
The suns bright daughter, issue, heir,
The lesser children of the year.
The verses of the book of time.
The rags of time. The h^i^es of times old head.
Happy Day.
A day marked white in Clothe's hook.
Old men were glad their fates till now did last,
And infants that the hours had made such have
In bringing them to see this day.
I now first breath and live. Worthy to be the prime
And first account of months, of years, of time.
The Calends of all lucky days,
The rubric, ^pact, epoche, dominical of all happy days.
The golden number in a day,
Was never bliss more full and clear than this.
The smiling month of May Nere looked so fresh as does this day.
Sign this day with a purer stone. Power wine unto thy Genius.
With whiter wool beclad the day,
Children unborn as in the womb they lay,
Sighed for the loss of seeing such a day.
Space of days of nights.
Thrice had bright Phoebus daily chariot run
Past the proud pillars of Al^mena'^ son.
Twice had the night shed poppy on the heads
Of wearied mortals.
Thrice Phoebus had unyoak^ his panting steeds
Drencht in Iberian seas, whilst night succeeds.
S^udded with stars.
Ten times had Luc^fer the stars suppressed,
Twelve times the day star now had crowned the east.
Now had the Sun in golden Chariot hurld
Twice bid good morrow to the nether world,
And Cynthia in her orb and perfect round
Twice viewed the shadows of the upper ground,
Thrice had the day star usherd forth the light,
And thrice the Evening-star p^oclaimd the night;
Now fifteen courses had the bright steeds run,
Thrice had the Golden-sun his hot steeds washed.
In the West main, and thrice them sharply lasht,
Out of the balmy East. Hyperion from his glittering thron^
Seven times his quickening rays had bravely shown,
The dewy-cheet Aurora's purple die,
Thrice dappled had the ruddy morning sky,
And thrice had spread the curtains of the morn
To let in Titan when the day was born,
Phoebus was thrice eoucht in his watery bed
The dewy cheekr Aurora did display
Her golden locks, and summon up the day,
Twice twenty times, and rests her drowsy head,
Twice twenty times within old Tithons bed,
Five times had Hesper Titan warnd away,
Five times again, did Lucifer appear,
Waving the standard of the glorious day;
Thrice had the bright surveyor of the heaven,
Divided out of the day and night by even,
And equal hours.
Five morns had cleard the Air with Phoebus light,
And from the pole removed the damps of night,
Ere twice the horses of the sun shall bring
Their fiery torcher his Diurnal ring,
Ere twice in murk and occidental damp,
Moist Hesperus has quenched his sleepy lamp,
Or four and twenty times the Pilots glass
Has told the thievish minutes how they pass;
Now fifteen times had Phoebus gone to rest,
Inning his Chariot in the gloomy West.
David.
Kingly Prophet, Isreal's sweet singer,
Jesses stout son, Holy song-man,
The holy Father of wise Solomon,
The father of rebellious Absal^m,
That with his sling the mighty champion s^^w,
The pious O pheus of the Jew^.
Deaf.
A culvering discharged at his ear, would scarcely bore it,
Deprived of the hearing sense,
To whom the greatest talkers, are as dumb,
One that enjoyes that benefit, that he never hears himself ill
spoken of, Deaf as remorseless seas
Natures drum lies in his ears unbraiz'd,
Deaf as the Icarian rocks.
Death.
Natures bold Pursivant. The forgetful lake,
The Eclipse of life. The graves purveyour
Sleeps, younger brother. The Stygian bay,
Eternal sleep within a bed of dust,
The two-long-joyned lovers sad divorce,
The dark and common period,
Tyrant ore tyrants, thou which only do
Clip the lascivious beauty without lust,
The pale-fac't sergeant, that lays us in our ^able chest
Natures rude sergeant, the moth of natures Art,
The common extinguisher of natures candles,
The first Alchy^nist to calci^e into dust
The living bodies, -- Life's Epilogue
The unsparing Pursivant with Eagles wings,
That knocks at poor men's doors, as well as Kings,
The sad stipend of the first transgression,
The child of sin. Great pale-fac't tyrant,
Sad message of the ^ullen b^ll
Death attends,
Natures pale-fac't bayl^ffe,
The parting stirrup at the journeyes end,
That night,
Which from the living takes the last of light.
Hate and terror to prosperity,
^e put my eye-bals in thy vaulty brows
And ringe these fingers with thy hous-hold worms,
And stop this gap of breath with fulsome dust
Come grin on me, and I will think thou smilest
And kiss thee. Miseries love and wish
That only can
Measure the true dimensions of a man
Which is at best,
An unexpected and unwelcome guest,
Grimme executioner to destiny, Birthday to Eternity,
Unchanged law of Nature. The best and last Physician.
Untimely Death.
To Whom the Fates owe years,
Abortive darkness, veils the setting light,
The crime and sad mistake of destiny
The untimely seizure of the greedy grave,
The extortion of the rigorous fares. Exacting fate,
Deaths supererogation to the ^ates.
Deathbed. v. approaching death.
When the latest sand
Of the spent hower-glass is now at hand,
And as she spoke that word, her voice did alter
Her breath grew cold, her speech began to faulter,
Fain would she utter more, but her faint tongue,
Not able to go forward faild, and c^^nge
To her dry roof -- when the drum of death,
Beats a cold march.
When deaths pale-slags advanced in his cheeks,
His eyes turning round in the dance of death.
Lips trembling, as though they kissed their neighbor death
Ready to take his oaths to be deaths true liege-man,
Death swims and baths her self within his eyes,
He gasps for breath, as the grave gasps for him.
That has ^id the last stage of life,
Lises candle twinckles within the socket,
When he has bid the world and life adieve,
And set one foot within grimme Charons boa^,
Expecting every minute deaths sad summons
Life's ^wilight. When his last testament and grave,
Is made an icy stifness, benums by blood.
Deformed.
Her eyes do sink into their holes,
As if they were afraid to see the light
Her breath infects the Air, and sowes a pestilence:
It Is known that she has eyes by the holes only
Which have crept further in, than her nose out.
Her quarrelling teeth
Of such a color are that they themselves
Scare one another, and do stand at distance.
Nature made her, when she was disposed to just,
And length of time, has made her more ridiculous,
Ca^idia new, come from the jaws of hell
Natures Errata, faul^^ escaped natures Print,
Which who so has to wife,
Shall nere be cuckolded, unless for spite,
By some that durst not do it but in the night.
For fear of loathing her.
Never sin was at so high a rate,
But one nights hell with her might expiate
A shape, the Poets were afraid to fain,
For fear the shadow might infect their brain
With hollow yellow teeth, or none perhaps,
With stinking breath, swart teeth, and hanging chaps,
With wrinckled neck, and stooping as she goes,
With driveling mouch, and with a s^iveling nose,
Whose face gives a prospect, which might well
Give, a surphet to a weak stomach.
Her nose seemed to threaten her chin,
Her tears like rain upon dirty furrows
Disgracing weeping with her countenance,
Her hands those golden golls
Tears in her eyes did seem there to bewail
Their own disgrace.
Like Chaos, or an unlickt Bears whelp,
That carries no impression like the dam,
The very dogs bark at him as he goes
Crusty batch of Nature.
A face not worth the scorning,
Notclean enough to spit on
Made by one of Natures unskilful and idle prentises.
A nose at enmity with all others, and against which no possible defense, but a
pair of Spanish gloves.

That blunders all the rivers he passes through, and avoids the sight of
Painters and glasses, lest they should show him the pattern of his visage:

Goggle-eyed, sparrow-mouthed, gubber-toorhed, canker-eatengummes, hook-nosed,
rotten-teeth, Morphew-fact, beetle-browed, her nose and chinne half meet to
make the teeth friends that are fallen out. A breath stinking up and down the
room, a nose dropping Winter, and S^mmer; A Bavarian poke under her chinne,
lav^-^ard, dugges, like two double juggs, bloody-fallen-singers,
scabbed-wrists, Cow-wasted, tand-skinne, splay-footed, gouty legs,
stinking-feer.

Dowdy, Gorgon, Blouze, Gobrian, Mother, Fulsome;
Cavida, Mopsa, Niso, Fustilugs,
That needs no other proof besides her face,
To proclaim her witch. So far from being fair,
None could be foul, that did with her compare,
Natures trespass. Made up of natures worst deformities.
She spied her filthyness, and fain she would
Have blushed, if through so much dirt she could.
Natures Heteroclite, with some member defective,
Or redundant. Natures solocisme.
A natural vizard, like a winters Apple, shrunk up together, and half rotten.
The Chaos of a man. Aesop, Thersites, Demagoras.
The Sun does almost fear to lend his shine,
Least the reflection of his purest rays
From such a dunghill, as she bears about.
Might chance to infect the universal Air
So, that a general plague should give the world
A second deluge, and make Air prevent
The Doomesday of her sister Element.
Nature was idle, and weary of her work,
When she shaped her. The fingers crooked are
As Nature made them for no other use,
But for to scratch her ugly face;
There Is Art lies coucht even in mishapness,
And he that draws the foulest monster worse
Does in it pencill out the best of skill;
'Twas Natures pride to show that skill in her,
Or else she made her for her common foyl,
To set of all her slips in woman kind,
And is not she the Queen of Drabs, v (...) Pastor. Lib. 2. Song ^.

Whose head is pe^iwigd with scabs?
Whose hair hangs down in curious flakes,
All curld and crispt like crawling snakes;
The breath of whose perfumed locks,
Might choke the devil with a pox,
Whose dainty twinings did entice
The whole monopoly of lice
Her forehead next is to be found
Resembling much the new plowed ground,
F^trowed like stairs, whose windings led
Unto the chimney of her head,
The next thing that my Muse descries,
Is the two mil-pits of her eyes,
Mill-pits, whose depth no plumme can sound,
For there the God of love was drowned
On either side there hangs a souse,
An ear I mean keeps open house.
An ear which always there did dwell,
And so the head kept sentinel,
Which there were placed to descry
If any danger there were nigh,
But surely danger there was bred,
Which made them so keep off the head,
Something for certain caused their fears,
Which made them so to hang their ears.
But hang her ears, Thalia seeks
To suck the bottle, of her cheeks,
Her cheeks, whose pride did make them ^ise,
Contending to outface her eyes.
Upon her cheeks I Would longer stay,
But that her nose calls me away,
Her nose on which all beauty sat,
Her Indian, Ruby nose, that's flat;
Help Muses now, I have begun
That as her nose, my verse may run;
Help furies, you that cannot flatter,
I know her nose affords matter,
For on her nose there hangs I wot
A curious Pearl of Chryst^ll snot.
As purely white, as whitest rose,
A dainty gemme for such a nose;
But now methinks Thalia skips
Intending to salute her lips:
Although she fears her lips are such,
It Is almost pain of death to ^ouch,
I Would wish the divill so much bliss
Those daily to be damm'd to kiss;
But where shall I find words uncouth
To rake the kennel of her mouth?
Whose wryness with a certain grace
Sets out the beauty of her face,
Whose dreary gapings might affright
The lustful Incubus of night,
And Succubus might be afraid
Hereafter to come near a maid,
Whereout in curious posture hunge.
The spungy flie-flap of her-tongue,
As if that nature did contrive
To hang her whilst she was alive.
Her teeth were fixed like Eagles claws
Upon the ruins of her jaws,
Which there were placed like pikemen tall,
Something inclining to their fall,
Whose ripened age did yield them mellow,
The curious gold was no^ so yellow,
I think she had them by descent
From her first father Adam lent
Her chin a little lower stands,
Much like the cape of bon 'sperance,
Which kindly nature stretched so,
To point her way, as she does go.
Come Muses at Apollo's beck,
And wreath an halter for her neck,
Her neck was next, which might have bin
A fi^ supporter for her chin
But nature to supply her lack,
Had d^awn her neck up to her back.
V. Sir Philip Sidney's description of Mopsa.
Arc. 1. lib.
Degenerate.
To hold a wing
Quite from the flight of all his ancestors,
Unmindful of his fathers glorious name,
He makes his fathers honor be his shame,
That bastard well-begot.
By Degrees.
And as a lovely maiden pure and chaste,
With naked ivory neck and gown unla^'d
Within her chamber, when the day is fled
Makes poor her garments, to enrich her bed
First puts she off her Lilly silken gown,
That shrikes for sorrow, as she lays it down,
And with her arms graceth a wastecoat fine,
Embracing her, as it would nere untwine.
Her flaxen hair, insnaring al beholders,
She next permits to weav about her shoulders:
And though she cast it back, the silken slips,
S^ill forward steal and hang upon her lips
Whereat she sweetly angry with her laces,
Binds up the wanton locks in curious traces,
Whilst twisting with her joints, each hair long linger^
As loath to be inchaind, but with her fingers;
Then on her head a dressing like a crown,
Her breasts all bare, her kirtle hanging down,
And all things off, which rightly ever be
Called the foul fair marks of our misery,
Except her last, which enviously does feize her,
Lest any eye partake with it in pleasure,
Prepares for sweetest rest, till Sylvans greet her
And longingly the down bed swells to meet her,
So by degrees, etc.
Delay.
That spediest lamely comes to great desires,
The stone that waiting suitors grinds
By whom at Court the poor man's cause is signed,
Who to dispatch a suit, will not defer
To take death for a joint Commissioner,
Delay the woers bane, revenges hate,
The plague to Creditours decayed estate
The test of patience, of our hopes the rack
That draws them forth so long, until they crack
Virtues best benefactour in our times
One that is set to punish great men's crimes.
Delight.
To view with ravished eyes
How lay I all dissolved in delight
To surfeit with delight,
Delight too strong for staid conceit
Deluge.
When as the ancient world did all imbark, v. Dubertas end of the second day:
v. Sands Ovid. Metamorph. 1. lib. p. 7.

Within the compass of good Noah's ark
Seven persons only, were relieved from death,
The solid Globe was but a sop,
When Proteus drove his finny flock
To feed on cliffes of steepy rocks,
And to the Elms top fishes clave
Where Turtles used their seats to have,
And Does by nature fearful ^ride,
To pass the Oceans stormy tide.
Despair. v. Miserable.
When every woe could by despair be brought.
P^^sents it self unto the troubled thought.
Hopeless misery.
Destinies. v. Fates.
The fatal Ladies. Daughters of night and secrecy.
That draw the chain of destiny.
Upon whose threads both lives and times depend,
And all the periods of mortality.
The impartial maids. Inexorable three.
The impartial tray that spin the fatal twine.
The Adamantine sisters. Stern nymphs.
The great pair royal of unchanged maids.
Destroyed.
The very ruins now ly ruined.
With scarce such relics as may prove a being.
In former times. Bur^ed in its own dust.
Devil. v. Pluto.
Nights black Monarch, sly parent of revolts and l^e^.
The grand accuser of the brethren.
The Stygian prince. Man's restless enemy.
The general adversary of humane nature.
Hells envious tyrant. Master of the damned crew.
The old malicious serpent. The roaring Lion every hour.
Seeking his prey, and ranging to devour.
That grand professor of destructive arts.
The prince of hell,
Who whilome from heavens glory fell,
Like an infectious exhalation
Shot through the spears. That all shapes
Does counterfeit to perpetrate his rapes.
Man's inveterate foe. The soul of envy.
Dew.
The mornings tears. Aurora's liquid pearl.
Gemmes which adorn
The beauteous tresses of the weeping morn.
The tears that swell the roses blushing checks,
As if the earth to welcome in the morn,
Would hang a jewel on each ear of corn.
That in a gentle shower
Drops pearls into the bosom of a flower.
The pearly drops which youthful May,
Scatters before the rising day.
Diana's silver sweat. The pearly purled showers
Hangs on the rose bud tops, and knowing it
Must be anon exhaled, for sorrow shrinkes
It self into a tear. That from Aurora's eyes
In Crystal tears is wept, when she must leave
The bed whereon her loved Tithonus lies,
The air close mourner for the setting sun,
Bedewes her cheeks with tears when he is gone
To the other world. The cold sweat of the morn.
Diana. v. Phaebe.
The chast-born arrow-loving Queen.
The chast-born seed of Jove. The beamy Queen.
The virgin huntresse. The maiden archer.
The grovy Queen. Bow-bearing goddess.
The goddess of Gargaphia, Titania, Cynthia, Trivia.
The three shaped goddess. Phoebus bright sister.
Latona's shining daughter.
Dido.
Unhappy Carthaginian Queen. Unfortunate Eliza.
Phaenician, Phrygian, Tyrian, Sidonian Queen.
Aeneas lucklesse hostess. Good Sichaeus widow.
To Die. v. Death. Souls departed.
To cast off the robe of clay.
To drop into the grave.
To pass the fatal ferry.
Death unjoynts the soul and body.
Whose latest breath
Has freely paid their full arrears to death.
Become a tenant to the grave.
Matriculated among the dead. Enrolled in the Register of death.
To quit scores with nature. Raked up in deaths cold embers.
The stiffening cold benums her senceless limbs.
The winter of cold death
Congeales her path of life, and stops her breath.
To make
A swift descent into the Stygian lake.
H^s eyes do swim in night,
To pay their debt to the exacting fates.
To go on natures embasse.
Like poor farmers pay.
Quit-rent to nature on the very day.
When we bequeath
Our bodies as a Legacy to death.
When death shall lulle us in eternal rest.
The meeting eyelids conclude a lasting league.
To house with darkness and with death.
When we must
Resolve into neglected dust. When we must
Resolve to our originary dust. When we must
Commit an incest with our mothers dust.
Their rolling eyes together set in debt.
Together they expire their parting breath.
Their heavy eyes with dying motion ^urning.
They close and sigh out death
To dislodge the soul. To pass the flamy pile.
To accomplish their fate.
To pay his period to fate.
Sm^ke to the house of death.
Whose soul has fled the abodes of men.
To pay tribute to the fates.
To Pluto's mansion dive.
To hide his wretched head
In Ploto's house, and live amongst the dead.
To kiss the cup of death.
To nature he obedience gave,
And kneeld to do her homage in the grave.
His eyes possess eternal night.
The Parcae with impartial knife,
Have left his body tenantless of life.
^ossest with lasting sleep.
The pale ghost fleets into air.
^reading the paths that lead
^o the dark region of the dead.
^olded up in death.
To force
Between two long-joyn'd lovers sad divorce.
When life does ebb away.
^ost in cold night of death.
To fall
To a loathed nothing, in the ^unera^.
To become
A Potentate within the starry court
Free from the Eclypse of earth.
Fee from the darksome prison of their clay.
To break the prison of our clay.
To sail ore the vast main of death.
To shift our flesh, to cross the S^igian lake.
That have performed the task of life.
Put out the tapour of our days.
A soul uncas'd, unorgand by the hand of death.
To sleep in peaceful ashes.
Death unclasps the fleshy cage.
To have his exit from the common scene.
Death breaks the shell of sin.
And there is hatched a Cherubin.
The Gordian knotted band
Of life's untied. To pay the shot at natures table.
To return to their mothers dusty lap.
The body is confined to dust.
Take a poor lodging in a bed of dust.
VVrapt in the cold embraces of the grave.
To pay to nature her last duties.
To walk the way of nature. To submit to the law of nature
^n the falling eyelids death appears,
When we that precipice shall tread,
Vhence none return that leads unto the dead.
The tomb
Yawns to devour him.
Darkness veiles the setting light,
We to the graves infernal prison must
Descend, and rot in silent shrouds of dust.
Death's all-curing hand does close the eyes.
Lost in the ashes of their funeral.
Dying Beauty,
Fair eyes en^ombed in their sweet circles.
Death dallying seeks
To entertain it self in loves sweet place.
Decayed roses of discolored cheeks
Do yet retain fair notes of former grace,
And ugly death sits fair within her face.
Sweet remnants ^esting of vermilion red,
That death it self doubts whether she be dead.
So looked once poisoned Rosamund,
The l^llies and the roses that while ere,
Strove in her cheeks till they compounded were.
^ave broke their truce and fiercely fallen to blows,
And now the lilly has overcome the rose.
Different.
Twixt whom is so great od^,
Almost as twixt the furies and the Gods,
Who these would make to meet, he may as well
A reconcilement work twixt heaven and hell,
Most inconsistent beings.
Difficult.
Which may employ the strength of all their car.
And task their best endeavors.
Uneasy task, enough to rack the brain
To bring about, and make all study vain.
All Hercules twelve labors put in one,
Would not hold weight, with this alone.
Discourse.
Discourse thus entertaind the day.
And in discourse consumed the shortened night.
With such discourse they entertaind the feast,
That taken away dispose themselves for rest.
They rise with day.
Disease.
That tedious guest. H^rbenger of death. Blood-sucker.
Deaths arrows. Deaths pale unwelcome m^ssenger.
Virtues shop. Virtues sharp schoolmaster.
Unwelcome guest. Sad companion. Unwelcome visitor.
The A^mighties rod.
The bodies j^rring and untuned Music.
That consumes the reins,
And drinks the blood out of the swelled veins.
Doubt. Doubtful.
Even as a ship upon the raging sea
Be ween two winds cross tossed every way.
Uncertain, knows not in what course to set her:
O my divided soul! how do I tremble.
Like to the doubtful needle twixt two loadstones.
One thought another does control,
So great a discord wracks the wavering soul.
Such thoughts had Biblis when she wooed her brother.
Such Meleagers mother when she held
The fa^al brand. With a battle in the fighting thoughts.
As when a mighty Oak now almost felled, his fall
On each side th^eatens and waves to and ^ro^
The ague, palsy of the soul.
The tumult of distracted minds.
Plunged in doubtful passions:
The tempest of the thoughts.
A strange confusion in the troubled soul,
Whose flying though^s are at no certain ^^and.
The jarring passion of the struggling soul.
Quandaring passion. The souls Labyrinth.
T^de of the mind, Earthquake of the breast.
The megrim of the soul. Euripus of the mind.
Tossed like a ship twixt two encountering tides.
Dove.
The feathered steeds that Venus chariot draw.
The harmless nuntios of peace, which have all
Like other creatures, only want the gall.
The birds that bear a rainbow in their neck.
The feathered emblems of chaste love.
The feathered coursers of the Queen of love.
Dreams.
The creatures of the drowsy brain. Sleeps airy shapes.
Her senses keep a festival. The fancies revels.
The fantasies of night. The slattering visions.
The sweet oftence of erring fancy. The fancies Chao^.
The fancies poetry. Delighted fancies play.
Shape feigning Morph^us in the dead of night,
Sent from the King of rest with speedy flight,
Presents, etc.
As ominous as was Calphurnia's dream
The night before her Caesar dyed. Prophetic fancy.
Fair sanguine dreams, that see^ to cheer the night
With beauteous shipes and rosy wings.
Such Caesar had before the day
He conquered Pompey in Pha^salia.
With strange ^ormes, and shadows ominous.
Did my last sleep my greedy soul entertain.
The smoaky clouds of sleep.
Sleeps shadowie operations.
The images presenting day desires. Rest-disturbing fancie^
The sleepy brood hatched by the wings of night.
Confused shows thrown from sleeps horny wand.
A ghastly dream that did last night surprise.
The frighted fancy. The mocking of unquiet ^lumbers.
Black illusions of the night. Crystal visions.
The maygame of the shaping fancy.
The fancies wardrobe rifled, thrown on heaps.
Drink. Drunkard.
With generous wines they cheer
Their heightened spirits.
Empty the bowls of wine and brains of wit.
One that will be a man to morrow morning:
One heel trips up the other.
Makes indentures as he goes.
A blind man with eyes, and a cripple with legs on.
A speaking tossed. A living sponge. Soused in liquor.
Drunkenness, Audacious thief that often before ones face.
Steals man away, and leaves a beast in place.
One outlawd by himself, all kind of ill
Did with his liquor s^ide into his veins.
That ^orfeits man, and does d^vest
All worldly right, save what he has by beast.
The soul eclypst. The raving fancy.
Puffing his cheeks, blearing his curious eye.
Studding his nose with vicious heraldry,
While pearls and rubies does his wine disclose,
He makes his purse poor to enrich his nose.
So far drowned in d^ink, he needs the Crowner to sit on him.
That hates nothing more, than an unfill'd can.
Twenty of the dogs days rain in his nose.
All about him are under the line.
His nose in the cup in winter saves the labor of a tossed,
And is enough to give his drink a second brewing.
With bowls so full,
At once they fill their bladders and their skull.
That to no seat confine
Their wounding feet.
Drought. v. Famine. Thirst.
A fiery thirst
Sups up the vital humor and does dry
Their beauties up into Anatomy,
Leaving not so much moisture that they may
Use their throats for complaint.
Each bears an Aerna in his thirsty breast.
They all complain, yet rests not any where.
So much of moisture as to make a tear.
They drink
The stale of horses, and the gilded puddle,
That beasts would cough at:
To Drown. Drowned.
So headlong Ino with the load she bears,
Fell, and the sparkling waves did fall in tears
Struck down by Neptunes trident.
To make themselves a shipwreck.
Dying in water, to revive in fire.
Whom Tnetis in her silver bosom took,
That fi^d their tomb and watery grave,
Within the silver bosom of a wave.
To whom rude tempests ^ave
Made an unhappy and inglorious grave,
The waves that were above when as she fell,
For fear flew back again into their well,
Doubting ensuing times would on them frown
That they so rare a beauty helped to drown,
Her fall in grief did make the stream so roar,
That sullen murmurings filled all the shore.
A jewel never sent
To be possessed by one sole element,
Let Us drown him once again within our tears.
Entombed within the watery main.
The saphyre-visag'd God grew proud,
Imagining that Ganymed displeased
Had left the heavens, therefore he on him seas'd.
Whom swelling waters do embalme,
Neptune for ever do bewail his death,
And all the Nimphs tear off their seagreen hair.
Drum.
The tongue of war, mocking the loud-mouthed thunder.
The clamorous harbenger of blood and death.
Whose doubtful music does delight
The willing ear, and the unwilling fright.
A sound whose concord makes a jarre,
'T^s noise in peace, though harmony in war.
Dust.
The battered center flew.
In clouds of dust, raised from the horses hoofes,
That beat a thunder from the groaning earth.
Clouds of dust did fly
As great as Thracian whirle-winds blow about
Ore the skies face, and put days bright eye out,
The mounted dust, like smoke obscured the skies,
The swartish clouds of dust, did suit their arms in gray,
As if the emulous earth meant to have Clouds, as well as the air. The naked
wind appareld her self in dust,

The Air is choakt with dust.
Dwarf.
Natures Epitomy, manual, Compendium, Enchyridion
Natures lesser volumes, shorthand, Decimo sexto,
Man in the Print of Amsterdam.
A walking thumb,
Whose voice more than his stature can
Tells us, that he is a man. Jack of the clock-house,
A thrum of man, Dandiprat, Hop-on my thumb,
Who when he stands on tiptoes seems to sit. Pigmie.
E.
Eagle.
THe Bird that bears,
Joves awful lightning in her golden fears
Joves foul, that in her talons bears
Impetuous thunder.
Joves winged Armor-bearer. Joves feathered squire,
The imperial Airie peoples King.
That cleaves the Clouds, and bravely bold does think,
With firmer eyes, to make the suns eye wink,
That dares the brightest Radiance of the sun,
The bi^d that fixtly can oppose her eyes
Against the proudest light in all the Skies,
The princely bird that through the azure Skies
At Joves command with fiery lightning flies.
Of all the winged crew ordaind the head
For faithful service in his Ganymed,
The birds that change their aged plume
And a new age, with newer wings resume.
Ear.
The fleshie laborinth. The mazie holes.
The bodies scouts. The Echoes winding mazes.
The watchful sentinels. Hearing Portals.
The crooked narrow allies. The winding entries.
The port^ls that let in the sounds, Insatiate concave.
In whose incirclets if you gaze,
Your eyes may tread a lovers maze.
The tippe no jewel needs to wear
The tippe is Natures-Jewel there;
The winding rounds
That give an enter^ainment to the sounds,
The hearing Organes, that drum unto the soul.
To give ear. v. Attend.
To lend a listening ear, a yielding ear, obedient ear,
With glad allowance gave his counsel ear.
To grace with glad attention.
To lend soft audience.
To give no ear.
He hears me so, as rocks the roaring waves
That beat their brows,
As the tempestuous seas, the hopeless Mariner.
Earth.
The worlds great pedestial. Our globy Grandame.
The Sky encompast Globe. The ^olid center,
The center of the vast circumference
The flowery mantled stage. The lower Globe,
The fruitful surface of the pregnant soil
Enricht by the labourious plow-mans toil,
The solid Globe ballanc't in weightless Air^.
Earthquake.
The ague of the earth. Earths. grumbling fit^
The center pants with sudden throwe^,
The trembling earth, a sad distemper shows
The feavourous earth did shake
The aguish earth trembles in every vein,
The great worlds ague, the ^eeming earth
Is with a kind of Cholick pin^ht and vexed
By the imprisoning of unruly winds
Within her womb, which for enlargement strives,
Shakes the old beldame earth, and tumbles down
Steeples and mosse-grown towers,
Earth imprisoned Air, with sudden birth,
Scartles the world, and shakes the shivering earth.
East.
The honored cradle of the Rosy morning,
Aurora's sweet Vermillion lap,
The gate hung all with golden tissues,
Whence Hyperions Chariot issues.
The light-disclosing portals of the Sun;
The Chambers of the springing light;
The ascend^ng Sun, Rising Sun, Suns ascent
Where, into the Ocean
Nysus, Hydaspes, and swift Ganges fall.
The gray cheeks of the East,
The neighbors to the Suns uprise
Great Alexanders Altars,
Pearly Aurora's saffron colored bed
The Nations that first see
Sols early rising from Aurora's knee,
Whence early day does spring
Where silver Ganges runs
From whence the mornings beams ascend.
Eat.
To pay the debt due to the stomach
To stop the mouth of hunger,
To satisfy the exacting appetite,
To give alms to our craving stomach.
Echo.
Daughter of air and tongue,
Which the last of dying speech retorts,
Whilst she with others language sports.
The babbling guest of rocks and hills,
That blab that will not, cannot hold her tongue
Who never asks, but ever answers all.
Who lets not any her in vain to call
The babbling gossip of the air,
The vocal goddess of the woods,
Slides through the vale, and danceth ore the floods.
Loud Eccho's tear woods.
The Ape of Speech,
The image of a voice;
The gentle neigh-bourhood of Grove and Spring,
Unbosome all their Echoes.
Eclipse.
The Suns or Moons mourning clothes, robes,
The Suns tempest, storm;
The Moon into her darkened Orb retires.
Sun, Moon's, swound, ecstasy, trance, enchantment,
Fair Phebe in Diameter;
Earth interposed betwixt the Sun and her
Suffers Eclypse, and is disrobed quite
During the time of all her borrowed light,
The Moon paused in h^^ paler sphere,
Whilst her grim dragons drew her through the ai^e,
Sole pale sister, in her wandering race
With interposed wheels obscures his face,
Thessalian witches, conjure down the Moon,
The Moon deprived of her brothers sight
Earth interposing his celestial light
The earths thick shade
Eclyp'st the silver brows of Cynthia bright,
And her brown shadows quenched her brothers light:
Egypt.
Upon whose fertile b^east a thousand ways
In wandering tracks the wanton Nilus plays,
And with his amorous folding arms does seem
T'imbrace small Islands, whilst his silver stream
From several channels of it self does meet,
And often it self with wan^ on kisses greet
Where Philips son
That all the rifled Ocean won,
Built his proud Ci^ie.
The Pha^ian land.
That soil where sad heaven never rains
The fertile plain, where swelling Nilus serves in stead of rain,
Where Nile discolours the blew Ocean.
Egyptian.
Those that shine in linen stoles, where Nilus flows,
Renowned Nation,
Fed with fair Nilus fruitful inundation,
Which near confine
The sweltering Coasts of swarthie Abyssine.
That with timbrel'd Anthems dark,
Bear Osyris wo^shipt Ark.
Eyes.
Those lovely Lamps, those fleshie stars,
The souls windows. Starry twins. Cupids quiver,
Sparks excelling in their shine
Fairest beams of Erycin^. Cupids piercing shafts
The wombs of Stars, from whence
At every glance a constellation flies
Sparkling Chrysolites. Natures looking glasses,
The bodies lattices, watchmen, scouts, sentinels,
Cupids burning glass^s. Loves silent Orators,
Loves train band. Loves select band. Loves artillery,
The starrie Jewels. Loves Legates, Ambassadors,
Looks the Embassy of Love. Loves Magizin of Archerie.
Bright was the Sun, but brighter were her eyes;
Such are the Lamps, that guide the Deities,
Nay, such the fire is, whence the Pythian Knight,
Borrows his beams, and lends his sister light.
Eyes whose life infusing beams,
Have power to melt the Northern icie streams,
And so inflame the Gods of those bound seas,
They should inchain their Virgin passages,
Under whose lids do move,
In nimble measures, beauty, wit, and love.
Eyes whose rays,
Might thaw the frozen Russian into lust,
And parch the negroes, hotter blood to dust.
The Crystal Cisterns that send out hot streams,
Of liquid pearl, An eye might captive love.
Beauty sometime in all her glory crowned.
Passing by that clear fountain of her eye,
Her sunshine face there chancing to epsy,
Forgot her self, deeming she had been drowned;
And thus whilst Beauty at her beauty gazed
She with her own perfections was amazed,
'Twixt joy and grief, she wi^h a smiling frowning
Cast in her self, to save her self from drowning
The Well of Nector, paved with Pearl and Gold;
Where she remains for all eyes to behold,
An eye where Loves dance galliards,
On whose eyelids sit
A thousand Nymph-like, and enamoured graces,
Bright Citherea's Arks of love;
Loves dumb music, silent Oratory Rhetoric,
The souls casemen^s. Natures Paradise,
Beauties Crystal quivers. The busy wanderers
Cupids nest. Magic circles. Harbingers of Love,
Cupids chariot, fowlers arrows, torches, touch-box, matches,
Secret Orators, thoughts ^mbassadours, Pandars of the soul,
Nuntio's of the mind; Letting more light out then they take in,
Eyes, which so far all other lights control
They warm our mortal parts, but these our soul.
The rolling eyes
Cast flames, like lightning darted from the skies
Gilding the object, whereupon they gaze
The windows through, which the heavens delight to peep,
Which when the heavens do spy,
They think themselves braved by a lower sky.
Where en trencht Cupid lies,
And from these turrets all the world desies
The salvages, that worship the Suns rise
Would hate their God, if they beheld these eyes,
All heavenly beauties join themselves in one
To show their glory in her eye alone;
Which when it turns its celestial ball
A thousand sweet stars rise, a thousand fall,
Eyes sending forth such pointed darts
As pierce the hardest Adamantine heart
Whose motions wheel the restless fate of every lover.
Those suns display,
Their lids, and thence let out imprisoned day,
The tempting books
On which even crabbed old men look,
Whence every beam creats a day
Cupids throne befet with beams,
An eye.
Quick, round, and full, raid round with majesty;
The Eagles do produce their b^ood
To try their young ones there.
Two sprightful jetty eyes,
Where subtle Cupid in close ambush lies
Two of the fairest stars in all the heavens,
Having some business, do entreat her eyes
To twinkle in their spears, till they return,
Whose eyes in heaven
^ould through the airy region stream so bright
that birds would sing, and think it were not night,
Eyes that seem a temple, where love and beauty are mar^ed,
those every looks a triumph;
Which nothing like themselves can fee;
Eyes, which when so ere they rove
All the Spheres of beauty move,
Which while they make love conquer, conqver love
The school where Venus has learnt chasti^y,
Eyes which marry state with pleasure
And keep the keys of Natures chiefest treasure,
Whose shining eyes
Are the two greater lights of ^^pids skies
To cure his blindness love does make repair
Unto her eyes, able to steal the lookers on, and leave
Them quite unfurnisht.
Cupid did espy
The greatness of his God-he^d in her eye,
The Deities
Of love light torches at her flaming eyes.
Love was dandled in her eye,
Yet curbd with a beseeming gravitie
Eyes might with a beck command a Monarchi^;
Eyes which hit when Cupids shafts do miss.
That shut their coward gates on atomies
Wounding eyes
At every glance an arrow flies,
Whose lasting eyes,
Out-lookt the starry Jewe^s of the Skies.
Elaborate.
Things that were born, when none but the still night,
And his dumb candle saw his pinching throes,
That cost the buffeting of many a de^k,
And bitten nails with rubbing of the brow,
Which cost the dear expense of oil,
Sucked by the watchful Lamp,
That cost the tapers thirsty wast
That smells of Lamps and night cap,
Labored work, the child of a bed-ridden wit.
Elegies. v. Lamentable.
My blubbering pen her sable tears let fall
In Characters right Hieroglyphicall,
And mixing with my tears are ready turning
My late white-paper to a weed of mourning,
Or ink and paper, strive how to impart
My words, the weeds, my thoughts were in my heart;
Or else the blots, unwilling are my ^imes,
And their sad cause, should live till after times.
Fearing if men, their subject should descrie,
They forthwith would dissolve to tears, and die.
Invailed in a sable weed, she sat, v. Browns Pastor. 1. Book. Song 5. upon
Prince Henry.

Singing a Song, which stones dissolved at;
How shall we find a fitting monument
For brass and marble were they placed here
Would fret, and melt in tears to lie so near
Repeating ore
The Story of his virtues, until I
Not write, but am my self his Elegy,
Without disturbing the harmonious spears,
We Will bath below thy memory in tears
Such grief, as who can utter it.
Does not vent forth his sorrow, but h^s wit,
I envy death, the treasure of his sleep
The illiterate vulgar in a well-tuned breath
Lament his loss, and learnedly chide death.
It were a shame for all, thou being gone,
Not to have power to die with grief alone.
But, 'twere proud piety if we
Should think by prayers to alter Heavens Decree,
His death, the crime of destiny
Children untaught, by instinct for thee weep
My distracted fears
Have no commerse with reasonable tears,
Whose death commands
A subsidy from every private eye,
Fetch all the Spices that Arabia yields;
Distill the choysest flowers of the fields:
And when in one their best perfections meet,
Embalm her corpse, that she may make them sweet.
Infectious grief striking all hearers.
Tears the best
Expressours of true sorrow, speak the rest,
Every tear speaks a dumb Elegy,
The wine of lif^'s drawn out, and from this time
Mere lees is left this vault.
Let him whose lines a private loss deplore,
Call them to weep, that never wept before.
Call not the winds, nor bid the rivers stay,
For though the sighs, and tears they could repay,
Which injured lovers mourners for the dead,
Captives and Saints have breathed away and shed;
Yet we should want to make our sorrow fit
For such a cause as now does silence it.
So ^weell instructed are my tears
To^y fall in ordered characters.
My grief is more audacious, give me one,
Who every day has heard a dying groan!
The subject of my verses may suffice
To draw new tears from dry and weary eyes.
To shrine his name within an Elegi^,
I may forget to drink, to eat to sleep,
Remembering thee, but when I do to weep,
In well weighed lines, that men shall at thy hearse
Envy the sorrow that brought forth my verse,
May my dull understanding, etc.
All joys have now one common funeral.
Our grief we cannot call
A^ passion, since the ground is ra^ional,
Our tears and sighs may be excused, though those
To deluges, and these to tempests rose.
No pen can plead excuse
For Elegies, howl all who cannot sing,
For tombs bring turfe who cannot marble bring,
I often have verse on meaner subjects made,
Should I give presents, and leave debts unpaid?
Want of invention, here is no excuse,
The matter I shall find and not produce,
And as it fares in crowds, I nothing doubt,
So much would pass, that nothing can get out,
And in the work which now my thoughts intend,
I shall find nothing hard, but how to end.
Had this been for some meaner persons hearse,
I might have then observed the laws of verse,
But here they fail, nor can I hope to express
In numbers, what the world counts numberless,
I dare not (learned shade) bedew thy hearse
With tears, unless that impudence in verse
Would cease to be a sin; and what were crime
In prose, would be no injury in rhyme.
Upon
Whose death the Ocean might turn Helicon.
O who will give me tears? Come all ye spring^
Dwell in my head and eyes; come clouds and rain,
My grief has need of all the warry things
That Nature has produced. Let every vein
Suck up a river to supply mine eyes,
My weary weeping eyes too dry for me,
Unless they get new conduits, new supplies
To bear them out, and with my state agree.
What are two shallow foords, two little spouts
Of a less world? The greater is but small,
A narrow cupboard for my griefs and doubts,
Which want provision in the midst of all;
Verses, ye are too fine a thing, too wise
For my rough sorrows; cease, be dumb and mute,
Give up your feet and running to mine eyes,
And keep your measures for some lovers lute,
Whose grief allows him music and a rhyme
For mine excludes both measure, tune, and time.
Now unto sorrow must I tune my song,
And set my harp to notes of saddest woe.
Befriend me night best patroness of grief,
Over the pole thy thickest mantle throw,
And work my flattered fancy to belief,
That heaven and earth are colou^'d with my woe,
My sorrows are too dark for day to know;
The leaves should all be black whereon I write,
and letters where my tears have washed, a wannish white.
v. Elegies on Dr. Done, annexed to his Poems.
Quarles Emblems joynd with his divine Poems.
Habbingtons Castara, the third part.
Sr. John ^eamounts Poems.
Johnsonus Virbius upon Ben. Johnson.
Upon Mr. Edw. King fellow of Chr. Coll. in Cambridge.
Elements.
The primitive ingredients of all bodies.
The mess of simple bodies.
Natures first mournival.
The jarring inmates of all bodies.
Whose discord makes the worlds harmony.
The Diatessaron of natures harmony.
Natures great Tetrarchs.
Elephant.
The stiffe-kneed carry-castle. Natures great M^ster-piece.
The only harmless great thing. Giant of beasts.
The towre-backt beast. Vast Lybian beast.
The ivory-toothed beast.
That scorns whole armies, and yet fears a mouse.
Eloquence, Eloquent.
A speaking pomander. A^ exchequer of good language.
Whose tongues men's ears in chains could tie,
With due attention drawing every ear,
Such smooth, soft language that each line
Might stroke an angry God, or stay
Joves thunder, -- make the hearers pine
With envy -- whose words in order meet,
And softly stealing in with equal feet,
Slide into even-pa^'t numbers, with such grace
As each word had been molded for its place.
Had the sun,
When he pursued the swiftly flying maid;
Courted her in such language, she had staid.
Persuasive magic of the charming tongue,
The B^e within his sacred mouth seeks room
To arch the chambers of her honey comb.
Mercury could not have wooed Venus with more magificent eloquence. When he
speaks,
Mute admiration lurketst in men's ears,
To steal his sweet and honeyed s^ntences.
Such charming eloquence
As in the ear does lock up every sense
Of the rapt hearer. Able to reconcile antipathies.
Language melting in the ear.
Whose words leave in all such impression, as is wont to be the first
elementing and foundation of love.
If Eloquence her self would speak, she could not make use of more winning
terms than those he uses.
Suad^ sits throned upon his tongue. Revived Tully.
N^stor returned to see
Another age, to add unto his three.
The fear, lest he should make an end,
Lessens the pleasure that his speech does lend
To the admiring eat. His tongue the ear with music feeds
When he did speak, th'allot^ed hour would stay
His hasty minutes, and beguile the day,
And yet the greedy hearers chid the have
Of the false hour, that ran away so fast.
Elysium. v. Pleasant place.
The blessed fields where gentle lovers walk.
In endless joys. The blessed groves.
The happy mansions of the dead.
The blessed abodes. Those pleasant places.
Those pleasant fields, and groves of all the graces.
The joyful bliss of ghosts repurified.
Where every object charms the wandering eye,
And bids the soul gaze there eternally.
Where all those objects are that lend delight.
To the admiring fancy. Where grows the golden tree.
At the same season nature there does bring
The autumnes wealth with pleasures of the spring.
Where in green meadows sits eternal May,
Purfling the margents, whilst perpetual day
So double guilds the air, as that no night
Can ever rust th'enamel of the light.
Elysian lay,
Where every season is ^he month of May.
Where restored forms nere fade,
Where growth can need no seed, nor light a shade,
The joys which in our flesh through frail expense
Of strength, through age were lost to our injured senc,
We there do meet again, and those we taste
A new, though we devour, do ever last.
Embrace.
Swathe, swadle, environ, wrap, grasp,
clip, girt, girdle, hug, clasp,
Sweet endearments.
Closer than cockles, and in lustful twines
Ou^bid the ^vi^, or the winding vines,
So near, and folded in so close a knot,
As if they could concorporate and grow one.
So clasping ivy round the oak does grow.
So Salmacis embraced th'Hermaphrodite
As in the fount he bathed.
The Polipus does so deteine his foe,
With strict embracements glu'd.
T^'d fast in Natures chains.
Her yiedling neck with loving twines embrac'^,
With amorous twine,
About the husband oak, the vine
Thus wreathes to kiss his leavie face,
Their streams thus rivers join,
And loose themselves in their embrace.
T^us turtles bill, and groan,
Their loves into each others ear,
Two flames thus burn in one,
When their curld heads to heaven they rear,
The flattering and uxorious ivy so
Enclasps her aged husband.
Embracing with as much delight
As Salmacis her dear Hermaphrodite.
So the uxorious vine
Does with the straight and well limbed elm entwine.
And in such embraces twine,
As if we read unto the vine,
The ivy and the columbine,
VVeaving into more subtle twines
Than woodbine, ivy, or the vines.
His arms infold her in more subtle knots
Than amorous ivy when it hugs the oak.
We Will cling together like two wanton vines,
Circling our souls and loves in one another,
With such embr^cements, as it seemed their souls
Desit'd to mere, and their hearts to kiss.
The female ivy so
Emings the barkie fingers of the elm,
And locks her so in his embraces,
As if he meant to pin her to his heart,
Hangs on him
As if increase of appetite did grow
From what it grew on.
Cleaving l^ke burres. Like streams which flow,
Encurl'd together, and no difference show,
Whilst in their liquid silver on they ^un,
And twine themselves like wool together sp^n.
Embrion. v. Abortive.
Unfashioned lump.
The Chaos of the lesser world.
Rude, and yet shapelesse burden of the womb.
Natures first draught.
Endymion.
The moons pale favorite.
Mount La^mus sleepy shepherd.
England.
Neptunes park. The British ^^e. Albion.
That Isle which Neptune did divide,
And set apart from all the world beside,
Purgatory of servants, Hell of horses, Paradise of women.
The ringing Island. Stored with mountains, bridges, wool,
With Churches, rivers, women beautiful.
Little world, so self-sufficient, that she seems to thrust away from her all
the world besides, as being a substanrive that can stand by it self.

Europes epi^ome. Europes microcosme. Queen of Isles.
Neptunes minion. The Churches first daughter.
That had the first Christian King, and out of whose bowels sprung the first'
Christian Emperor.

To Envy. Envious.
Bearing devouring Ae^na in his breast.
His own torment. Fu^y E^ynnis.
Like to Aglaucos turned to speckled stone.
B^rning like Aetna with embowelled fire.
Like Basilisks that dart an eye.
Impoyson'd with the dreggs of cruel hate.
That draw an envious breath.
What more could poison if it had a tongue to express.
Whose tongue's a sponge of venom.
That feels a busy swarming nest
Of never dying dragons in their breast.
The viper of the venomous soul.
To look with narrow eyes. Malice lies lieger in his breast.
Whose eyes cannot look right on any happy man, nor ears bear the burden of
his praise, contrary to other plagues, he is plagued with another well being,
making happiness the ground of his unhappiness, and good news the argument
of his sorrow, whose favor none can win, but at the dear race of being
miserable.

Such an one, as his enemy needs wish him no worse, than to wish his own
happiness seen by him.

That when he sees another happiness,
And views himself, wishes the organs of his ^ight were cracked,
And that the engines of his grief would cast
His eye balls like two g^obes of wild fire forth,
To melt the unproportioned frame of nature.
That could eat his entrals,
And sink his soul unto the earth with sorrow.
Of a l^an body and visage, as if his eager soul biting for anger at the ^ogge
of his body, desired to fret a p^ss^ge through it.

Envy.
The barking S^ylla. Envy tears
The snakie fleece which on her head she wears.
That black inhabitant of hell,
Self eating el^e,
Through others leanness fatting up her self,
Swol^'n like a ^oad, betwixt her bleeding jaws,
He^ hissing serpents wrigling tails she chawes.
Sicilian tyrants yet could never find
A greater torment. The fury lapping vipers blood,
And feeding on their flesh, her poisonous food,
Her body more than meager, pale her hew,
Her ^eeth all rusty, eyes that look askew,
Her breast wi^st gall, her tongue with poison swelled,
She only laughed when she sad sigh^s beheld,
He^ ever waking cares exile soft sleep,
She cannot look on good success but weep,
Repining pines, and wounding others bleeds,
She on her self revengeth her misdeeds.
That da^k shadow ever waiting on shining virtue.
That banquets in another miseries.
Epicure. v. Glutton. Voluptuous.
That ^ect which acknowledge no greater evil than pain, nor h^gher bl^sse than
pleasure.

An easy soul made tender with delight,
Which thinks that he has forfeited that hour,
That adds not to his pleasure, or his power.
Epitaph.
In deathlesse verse
Bestowing same on noble sepulchers.
The lying postscript of a perjured stone.
The sad elogium of a speaking stone.
Epithalaminm.
The Nuptial song. Hymenaean verse.
Thou that dwell'st on Helicon,
That to men do virgins hale,
With sweet flowred Margerum;
With a smiling look appear.
Let this day with pleasure spring,
Nimbly dance the flaming pine,
With good auguries come wed,
Like a my^tle ever green,
Where the Nymphs their sports pursue;
Come O with a willing mind,
Sunk in Thespian rocks where chill,
To the Bridegroom call the Bride,
As when closely creeping vines,
Chastest virgins, you who may
Make the air with Hymen ring,
Fairest souls that shine more bright
Than your nuptial tapers light,
And with deeper piercing dart,
Beams af love into the heart,
Modest Hymen dare not here
At your sacred rites appear,
Blushing that his paler light
Is by you eclipsed to night,
And your power, far above
All that presidents of love.
He his saffron robes neglects,
And his garlands disaffects.
All his tapers, all his flowers,
All his fillets, all his powers,
All the pleasures, all the sweets
That attend the geni^l sheets,
All his chains and loving bands
He resignes into your hands,
May soft joys now you are wed,
Be the curtains for your bed;
May fair honor and delight
C^own your day, and bless your night;
May your often repeated kisses
Bring with them as many blisses,
And the warm embrace of love
Be soft as Down, on Venus Dove,
May the pleasures of your bed,
Pass the hairs upon your head,
And your joies outvie the sand.
O thou fai^ Uranias son,
Hymen, O thy brows impale
Take thy Safferon vail and come,
Yellow stocks of woollen wear,
Shrill Epithalamiums sing
Shake in that fair hand of thine
Those two to an happy bed,
On the shore of Cyprus seen,
Fostering it with Rosy dew,
Leave the Aonion Caves behind
Aganippe's waters drill,
In Affections fetters tide,
Claspes, the Oak in amorous twines;
Taste the like another day,
Hymen, Hymenaeus sing.
What Is that we see from far? the spring of day
Bloomd from the East? or fair enameld May,
Blown out of April? or some new
Star filled with glory to our view;
Reaching at heaven
To add a nobler Planet to the seven?
Say, or do we not descrie,
Some Goddess in a Cloud of Tiffany,
To move, or rather the
Emerging Venus from the sea.
It Is she, it is she, or else some more divine
Enlightened substance, see how from the shrine,
Of holy Saints she paceth on
Throwing about Vermillion,
And Amber spice --
^ing the chaste Air with fumes of Paradise,
Then come on, come on and yield
A savor like unto the field,
When the bedabled morn,
Washes the ears of corn.
Lead on fair pair of Nymphs, the whilst her eyes
Guilty of somewhat, guild the straw-berries
And cherries in her che^ks: there is cream
Already spilt, her rays must g^eam
Gently thereon,
And so create lust and temptation,
To surphet and hunger
Help on her pace, and though she lag, yet stir
Her homeward, well she knows,
There is her heart, where ere she goes.
See where she coms and smells, how all the street,
Breaths V^neyards and Pomgranates, oh how sweet
As a fired Altar is each one
Breathing pounded Cynnamon,
The Phoenix nest.
Built up of odours burns in her breast.
Who would not there consume
His soul to cyndars, in that rich perfume,
The while
He burns to embers in the pile.
Hymen, O Hymen, tread the sacred ground,
Show thy white feet, and head with marioram crown^
Mount up thy flames, and let thy torch
Display the Bridegroom in the porch.
In his desires
Towering more, more disparkli^g than the fires
Show her, how his eyes do burn,
And roll about, and in their motion turn
Their balls to ash heaps: have
Or else to nothing he will wast.
Glide through the banks of virgins then, and pass
The showers of Roses, luckie four-leav'd grass
The whiles the clouds of younglings sing
And drown you with a flowery spring
Whilst some repeat
Your praise, and bless you, covering you with wheat,
Whilst others do divine,
Blessed be the Bride, on which the Sun does shine;
And thousands gladly wish
You multiply as does a fish.
Why the^, on forward fair aspitious Bride,
And come upon the B^idegroom like a tide,
Bearing down time before you, hie
Swell more, and loose your selves, imply
Like streams which flow
Encurld together, and no difference show
In their most silver, ^un
Into your selves, like wool together spun,
Or blend so, as the sight
Of two, makes one Hermophradite,
Welcome at last unto the threshold. Time
Throned in a saff^on evening seems to chime
All in: kiss, and so enter, if
A prayer must be said, be brief,
The easy gods,
^or such contempts, have only myrtle ^ods
To stroke, not strike: fear you
No more wild Nymphs, than they would have you do
But dread, you more offend
In that you do begin, than end;
And now you are enterd, see the codled cook,
Runs from his tor^id zone, to p^y and look,
And bless his dainty mistress, see
Now the aged whisper, this is she,
Who now must sway
Us, peace shield her, she is pretty, yea and nay,
And the smi^k, butler thinks it
Sin in his wappery not to express his wit.
Each striving to devise
Some ginne to take her eyes
Now if we must, for Ceremony sake
Bless a sack posset, luck go with it, take
The night charm quickly, you have spells
And Magic for to end, and hells
To pass, but such
And with such torture, as no God would grut^h
To live there, and for ever fry,
Yea, and consume, and grow again to die,
And live, and in that case
Love the damnation of the place.
To bed, to bed sweet Turtles now, and write
This the long day, and that the shortest night;
And yet though short, for you, for me,
I count this night as long as three
Lying alone,
Estrige.
That drops her eggs upon the naked land,
And wraps them in a bed of hatching sand,
Exposed to the wandering traveller,
And feet of beasts, which those wild deserts tear.
Eternity.
The soft down of Eternity,
Unfathomed circle, Endless duration,
The boundless Ocean of conceit,
That great uncenterd vast circumference,
That knows no limits, unconfined by time.
From all Eternity.
Ere by the spears times motions were created,
Ere the astonished spring
Heard in the Air the feathered people sing,
Ere time had motion, or the Sun obtaind
His Province ore the day,
Ere the worlds great Creator did,
From the dark formless Chaos light divide,
S^ablish eternal laws, to which he tide
His creatures and himself, and did divide
The worlds set ages by unchanged fate,
When fea and earth, and heaven was yet unfram'd,
Ere nature had that face, they chaos named,
Ere Titan did the world with light adorn,
Or waxing Phoebe filld her wained horn,
Ere the self-poysed earth in the Air was pla^'d,
Or Amphytrite the vast shore embraced.
To all Eternity. v. Ever. Ethiopian.
Upon whose brow
And curled locks the scorching sun does show
His lasting tyranny. A wainscot face,
Which in the clearest light
Bears in his face still a continued night,
Whose face wears natures mask, natures vizard
That dive the b^iny seas,
For those gay things which so much fancy please
Gods image cut in Ebony or Jet.
Eve.
Nosooner woman, than a wife,
The general universal Grandame,
The bride
Taken from out her sleeping husbands side.
Satan's first factour. Temptations handsel,
On whom the Devil first did make essay
To ^y his cunning in the tempting way.
Evening.
Phoebus bright chariot, now had run
Past the proud pillars of Ascmena's son,
The sun does gallop down the western hill
The eb of day, the winter of the day
The Autumn of the light. When doubtful light
Draws on the dewie chariot of the night
To Thetis watery bowers, the sun does hie
Bidding farewell, unto the gloomy sky,
The labor of the day, now near at an end,
From steep Olympus Phoebus steeds descend,
When the eye of heaven
Is quite closed up, and has with earth made even,
The drooping light
Begins to treble the increasing shades.
Now hasty Titan to the Hesperian seas.
Descends. Phoebus now enters the Tartessian main,
The old age of the day. When day does end,
And Phoebus panting steeds to seas descend,
The day declines his light,
And earth-born shades, had clothed the world with night.
The day grown old and weak.
The evening now descended, and did steep
The eyes of all men with desire of sleep,
The day grows old,
And gins to shut in with the Marigold,
The neat-heards kine do bellow in the yard,
And dairie maids for the milk p^epar'd.
Now great Hyperion leaves his golden throne,
That on the dancing waves in glory shone,
For whose declining on the western shore
The oriental hills, black mantles wore,
When the gentle Air
Breaths to the sullen night a soft repair.
Now the setting Sun
To drown as much of his bright orb begun,
As the Moon wants, when after full she wain^
Or grows near full, when days last light
Gives place to the approach of duskie night.
Night in her black shade
Shuts up the day. The setting sun does hiss,
Drencht in the sea. The declining of the parting day.
Now Titans orb, half drowned in the seas,
Gave part to us, part to th'Antipodes.
When the declining lamp
Trebles the shadows, and the evening damp,
Begins to moysten, and refresh the earth.
When day yields up his right
To the succeeding Emperess of night.
The envious west,
Too greedy to enjoy so fair a guest,
Calls Soll to bed, where ravished from our sight,
He leaves us to the solemn frowns of night.
The drooping light. Expiting of the day.
Day in her deathbed. Day undressing.
What time the bright sun^ fiery teame
Toward the western brim begins to draw.
Arrival of the night.
The sullen night now her black curtains spread,
Lowering the sun had tarried up so long,
Whose fair eyes closing, sof^ly stole to bed,
When all the heavens with dusky clouds were hung,
When birds wild music burden every bough,
And with their chi^pings lullaby the day,
Hushing the silent night. Sleepy light,
When as the sun hales toward the western shade,
And the trees shadows three times greater made.
Phoebus ray sunk in the seas,
Sols steeds retire,
To quench their burning fetlocks and to steep^,
Their flaming nostrils in the western deep.
The suns half buried in a cloud,
Whose rays the vapors of approaching night
Have rendered weak and faint.
The declining sun
Had hurried his diurnal load
To th'borders of the western road,
By this time had the heavens surrounding steeds
Quelled their proud courage, turned their fainting heads
Into the lower hemisphear to cool
Their slaming nostril^ in the western poole,
Night had laid the sun to sleep
Now night begins to muffle up the day.
The wether rings his bell.
The toyling ploughman drives his thirsty teames,
To taste the slippery streams.
The droyling swineheard knocks away, and feasts
His hungry guests
The Box-bill, Ousil, and the dapled Thrush
As rivals meet at their beloved bush.
The morning of the Antipodes.
The day grows old, the low pitched lamp has made
No less than treble shade,
And the descending damp does now prepare
T'uncurle bright Titans hair,
Whose western wardrobe now begins ^'infold
Her purples, f^ing'd with gold,
To cloth his evening glory, when th'alarmes
Of rest, shall call to ly in Thetis arms.
Time has lodged the sun.
The weather rings his evening bell.
The curle-pate waggoner of heaven
Had finished his diurnal course and driven,
His panting steeds down to the western hill,
When silver Cynthia rising to fulfill
Her nightly course lets fall an evening tear
To see her brother leave the Hemisphear
The golden-headed chariote^ of heaven
With hasty speed his prouder rains does bend
His panting horses to their journeys end.
He blushes, and with unrestrained careere,
He hurries to the lower hemispheare,
And in a moment shoots his golden head
Upon the pillow of fair Thetis bed.
When the candles begin to inherit the Suns office,
When lights make an artificial day,
When the Sun like a noble heart shows his greatest
Countenance in his l^west estate. deceased day.
The Sun makes speed to leave our west, to do his
office in the other hemisphear, as if he meant to
carry news what stars he left behind.
Nights black contagious breath
Already smoaks about the burning crest
Of the old feeble and day wearied Sun.
The waining of the Sun. The bat does fly
Her cloistered flight to sullen Hecats summon^
The shade born Beetle with his drowsi^ humme
Has rung nights yawning peal,
Seeling night,
Skarfs up the tender eye of beauteous day.
When like Elinar wi^h his evening beamss
The Sun has turned to gold the silver streams,
The treble shades begin to damp
The moistened earth, and the declining lamp invites to silence:
Light thickens
And the Crow makes wing unto the woods,
Good things of day begin to droop and drowse,
Whilst nights black agents to their preys do rows^
The west but glimmers with some streaks of day.
Now spurs the lated traveller apace
Unto the timely Inn,
When as the Nightimgale chanteth her Vesper,
And the wild forresters couch on the ground,
The long shades of the hills appear,
The Sun is fled to Thetis bed,
When night entombs the dying light,
What times the gray fly winds her soultry horn
The Even-star bright
Toward heavens descent had slopt his burnisht wheel.
Phoebus goes to rest
Inning his Chariot in the glooming West
The Sun in golden Cstariot burld
Now bid good morrow to the nether world.
The evening damp
Begins to fall, and heavens declining lamp,
Bespeaks the doubtful twilight, day grows old,
Invites the fowls to roost, the sheep to folds
When day does give her room
Unto the shady gloome.
When rising stars shall spread
Their golden flames
Evening star
The star that ushers in the Even,
And gives a beauty to the sober West.
The sea bathed star that brings
Night on, and first displaies her sable wings.
That Titan warnes to bed.
The glistering herald that proclaims the night.
That bright star that last forsakes the skies.
Ever. v. Never.
Till dissolution date times, nights and days,
While radiant stars shall run their usual race,
Whilst Neptunes arms the fruitful earth embrace,
Whilst Cynthia shall her horns together close,
While Lucifer the rosy morn fore-showes
While lofty Arctos shuns the salt profound.
While shades the mountains cast, streams to the main
Their tribute pay, or skies the stars sustein.
While spangling stars shall give the sky their light.
Till time and memory shall be no more.
Whilst land the sea, and air the land shall bound,
Whilst laboring Titan runs his glorious round.
Whilst there is a summer to succeed the spring,
Or Autumn winter. Whilst upon his wing
Time has a feather.
Till Lachesis have no more thread to spin.
To the last syllable of recorded time.
Whilst the sun light, or earth does shadows cast.
Till time, that gives all, have an end.
Whilst the celestial orbs in order roll,
And turn their flames about the steadfast pole.
Experience.
That looks with eyes of all the world beside,
An with all ages holds intellig^nce.
In credit by the trust of years.
Wisdoms great looking-glass.
Mistress of fools. That dear bought learning.
Ecstasy.
The soul eclipst. Th'intranced soul.
The short divorcement of the soul.
That shorter death.
F.
Face.
WHose face is beauties chair of state,
Where in triumphant majesty she sat.
Nature made
And gave the dam^k rose its pleasant grace,
That men might liken somewhat to her face.
Envy would burst had she no other task,
Than to behold this face without a mask,
Making the eyes glad prisoners to her face,
Unpattern'd beauty summoned all her grace
To the composure of so sweet a face.
A face wherein
The linked Deities their graces fix,
Where roses with unsullied lillies mix.
A face worthy a Goddess.
Immortal frame of a matchless beauty.
A face wherein does swim
A flood of beauty.
R^ch beams of beauty shine within her face.
Beauties Elisium. Tempe, Elixir, Magazin,
Quintessence, Exchequer.
Transcript of perfection.
That box where sweets compacted lie.
Beauty takes up her place,
And dates her letters from that face,
When she does w^ite. Hive of sweetness.
Rich magazin of sacred treasure.
Whence graces spring in unconfined measure.
The lilly and the rose
So much contending lately for the place,
Till both compounded in her beauteous face.
Perfections magazin, where beauty does command desire:
That court of beauty, where the Queen
O^ Love does keep eternal residence.
Where beauty spreads
Her glittering wings, where majesty
Crowned with sweet smiles, shoots from her eye
Diffusive joy.
The dining room,
When love and beauty will on feasting come.
The silver horned moon is feign
Still by night to mount her wai^e,
Fearing to sustein disgrace
If by day she meet this face.
That precious book of love. Unbound volume of beauty
That paper perfect white
Where love has writ the story of delight
With beauties reddest ink by nature stirred.
If that Geometry had lost proportion,
Sheneed look no where else to find it.
A face, to which all that look upon it yield obedience;
So that the only means to be rebellious is to be blind.
Invites delight, and courts the longing eye.
A face
Which neither rhetoric, no^ glass can flatter.
Beauties tower, a face in which is seen
Natures best picture of the Cyprian Queen.
A face which Gods might move,
And like Tydides wound the Queen of love.
That face, which nature looks on, when she draws
Within a look the pandects of all laws
Concerning symmetry, which Jove does view,
When he would give his silver flakes their true
And proper tincture, which the lillies make
Their sampler, when their native white they take.
A face, that owes the wealth of nature.
Fair. v. Beautiful. Bright.
Fair as the Eastern morn.
When with her summer robes she decks the plains,
And hangs on every bush a liquid pearl
In May's triumphant month. As the replenisht moon.
Fair
As Phoebus rays gilding the glittering air.
More fair
Phoebus nere chariots through the gilded air.
Holding resemblance with those spotless skies,
Where slowing N^lus want of rain supplies;
That Crystal heaven, where never Phoebus shro^d^
His golden beams, nor wrapped his face in in clods
Fair as unshaded light or as the day
In its fairest bi^th, when all the year was May.
Fair Weather. V. Calm.
The pleased heavens their fairest livery wear.
The face of heaven is masked with ^o clouds
Nor wrinckled into frowns.
Fairies.
The airy troop which nimbly play,
And by the springs dance out their summers day,
Teaching the little birds to build their nest,
And in their singing how to keep their rest.
Which whilst they measures tread
Within the meadows make such circles green,
As if with garlands it had crowned been.
Those elves
That pinch those maids that have not swept their shelves.
And if by chance, by maidens oversight,
Within door water were not brought at night,
Or if they spread no table, set no bread,
These nip them from the toe unto the head;
But for the maid that has performed each thing,
They in the water pale do leave a ring.
Which lend their weaker glow-worme fir^
To conquer the nights chillness, with their Quee^
In harmless revels tread the happy green.
That by moonshine ringlets make,
Where the ewe no meat will take.
That in cowsl^p bells do lie
When they hear the owlets cry,
On the bats back which do fiy.
The moonshine revellers and shades of night.
The Orphan heirs of fixed destiny.
The glowworms are their torch-bearers, lanthornes.
The elves for fear
Creep into acorn cups, and hide them there.
D^ncing their ringlets to the whistling wind.
Cl^d in the snakes enameled skin:
Killing the cankers in the muske-rose buds.
Warring with reare-mice for their leather wings,
To make the small elves coats.
The yellow-skirted Fayes,
That tread the moon-lov'd maze.
The honey bags steal from the humble bees,
And for night tapers steal their waxen thighs,
And light them at the fiery glowworms eyes.
And pluck the wings from painted butter-flies
To san the moon-beams from their sleepy eyes.
That dance by drowsy fires glimmering light.
In a field of yellow broom,
Or in checkerd meadows where
Mints perfume the gentle air,
And where Flora spends her treasure,
There they dance their circled measure.
There is Mab the mistress Fairy
That does nightly rob the dairy,
And can hurt, or help the churning,
As she please without discerning,
She that pincheth country wenches
If they rub not clean their benches,
And with sharper nails remembers
When they rake not up their embers,
But if so they chance to feast her,
In their shoe she drops a tester,
This is she that empties cradles,
Takes out children, puts in ladles,
T^ains forth midwives in their slumber
With a five, the holes to number,
And then leads them from their boroughs,
Thorough ponds, and water furrows.
The Fairy Queen.
Come follow, follow me You fairy elves that be,
Which c^^cle in the green, Come follow me your Queen,
Hand in hand le^s dance a round,
For this place is fairy ground.
When mortals are at rest. And snorting in their nest,
Unheard and unespied Through key holes we do glide,
Over tables stools and shelves
We trip it with our fairy elves,
And if ^he house be foul, Or platter dish or bowl,
Upstaires we nimbly creep And sind the sluts a sleep.
There we pinch their arms and thighs,
None escapes, nor none espies,
But if the house be swept, And from uncleanesse ke^
We praise the household maid, And surely she is paid,
For we do use before we go
To drop a tester in her shoe.
Upon a mushroms head Our table we do spread,
A corn of rye or wheat, Is manchet which we ear,
Pearly drops of dew we drink
In acorn cups filled to the brink,
The brains of nightingales. The unctious dew of ^nails
Between two nutshels stewed, Is meat that is easily chewed, the beards of mice

Does make a feast of wondrous price.
On tops of dewie graffe, So nimbly we do pass,
The young and tender stalk Nere bends when we do walk
Yet in the morning may be seen
Where we the night before have been.
The grasshopper and fl^e, Serve for our minstrelsie.
Grace said, we dance a while, And so the time beguile,
And when the moon does ^ide her head,
The glow-worme lights us home to bed.
Oberons Clothing.
When the monthly horned Queen
Grew jealous that the stars had seen
Her rising from Endymions arms;
In rage she threw her misty charms
Into the bosom of the night
To dim their curious prying light,
Then did the dwa^fish fairy elves,
(Having first attired themselves)
Prepare to dress their Oberon king
In light robe^ for revelling.
In a cobweb shirt more thin
Than ever spider since could spin,
Bleacht by the whiteness of the snow,
As the ^tormy winds did blow
It through the vast and freezing air,
No shirt half so white, so fair.
A rich wastcoat they did bring
Of the trout-flies gilded wing;
At this his elveship began to fret,
Swearing it would make him sweat
Even with its weight; and needs would wear
His wastcoat wove of downy hair
New shaven from an Eunuchs chin,
That pleased him well, 'twas wondrous thin;
The out side of his doublet was
Of the four-leav'd true love grass,
On which was set a comely gloss
By the oil of crispy moss,
That through a mist by starry light,
It made a rainbow in the night,
On each seam there was a lace
Drawn by the unctious snailes slow trace,
To which the purest silver thread
Compared, did look like slubberd lead,
Each button was a sparkling eye
T^ne from the speckled addars fry,
Which in a gloomy night and dark
Twinkled like a fiery spark,
And for coolness next his skin,
'Twas with white poppy lined within.
His breeches of that fleece were wrought
Which from Colchos Jason brought;
Spun into so fine a yearne,
Mortals might it, not discern,
Wove by Arachne on her loome,
Just before she had her doom,
Did crimson with a maidens blush,
And lined with sost Dandalion plush.
A rich mantle he did wear,
Made of the tinsel Gossamere,
Bestrowed over with a few
Diamond dropps of morning dew.
His cap was all of ladies love,
So passing light, that it could move;
If any humming gnat or fly
But puff't the air in passing by;
About it was a wreath of pearl,
Dropped from the eyes of some poor girl,
Was pincht, because she had forgot
To leave clean water in the pot,
And for feather he did wear
Old Nisus fatal purple hair,
A pair of buskins they did bring
Of the cowladies coral wing,
Inlaid with inkie spots of jet,
And lined with purple violet.
His belt was made of yellow leaves
Pleated in small curious threaves.
Beset with amber cowslip studs,
And fringed about with daisie buds,
In which his bugle horn was hung,
Made of the babbling Ecchoe's tongue,
Which set unto his moon-burnt lips
He winds, and then his fairies skips,
And whilst the lazy drone does sound,
Each one does trip a fairy round.
Oberons Diet.
A little mushrome table spread
After a dance, they set on bread,
A yellow corn of Parkey whea^,
With some small sandy gritts to eat,
His choice bits with, and in a trice,
They make a feast, less great than nice.
But all the while his eye was served,
We cannot think his ear was starved;
But that there was in place to stir
His ears, the pittering grasshopper.
The merry cricker; puling fly,
The piping gnats shrill minstrelsie,
The humming dor, the dying swan,
And each a chief Musician.
But now we must imagine first,
The elves present to quench his thirst,
A crystal pearl of infant dew,
Brought, and besweerned in a blew
And pregnant violet, which done,
His kitling eyes began to run
Quite through the table, where he spies
The horns of papry butter-flies,
Of which he eats, but with a little
Neat cool allay of Cuckoe spittle.
A little fuz-ball pudding stands,
And yet not blessed with his hands.
That seemed too course, but he not spares
To feed upon the candied hairs
Of a dried canker and the lag,
And well bestrutted bees sweet bag.
S^roking his palate with some store
Of emmets eggs, what will he more,
But beards of mice, and gnats stewed thighs,
A pickled maggo^, and a dry
Heppe, with a red-cap worm that's shut
Within the concave of a nut.
B^own as his tooth is, with the fat
Well rooted eye-ball of a bat,
A bloted earewigge, and the pith
Of s^gred rush, he glads him with.
But most of all the glowworms fire,
As much betickling his desire
To burn his Queen, mixed with the far
Fe^cht binding jelly of a star,
With withered cherries, mandrakes ears,
Moles eyes, to these the slain stags tears,
The unctious dewlaps of a snaile,
The broke heart of a nightingale,
Or^come with music; with a wine
Nere ravished from the clustered vine,
But gently strained from the side
Of a most sweet and dainty bride,
Bought in a daizie chalice which
He fully quaffes up, to bewitch
His blood to height. This done commends
Grace to his priest, and the feast ends.
Drawn by a team of little Atomies;
The wagon spokes made of a spinners legs,
The cover of the wings of grasshoppers,
He^ traces of the smallest spiders web,
Her collers of the moon-shines watery beams,
Her whip is made of little cricket bones,
Her waggoner a small gray-coated gnat,
Her chariot is an empty hasel nut
Made by a squirrel.
Oberon, the Emperor. Mab the Empress.
Periwiggin, Periwinckle, Puck,
Hobgoblin Tomalin, Tom Thum, Courtiers.
Hop, Mop, Drop, Pip, Trip, Skip, Fib, Tib, Tick,
Pinke, Pin, Quick, Gill, Jin, Tit, Wap, Win, Nit:
The maids of honor. Nimphidia, Mother of the maid^.
Fame. v. Report.
That fluttering ill
That thrives by flight, and as it goes grows still,
The tatling snow-bal. Old times recorder.
Sorrows hasty barbinger.
The drunken bastard of the multitude.
The long tongued gossip. Times treasurer.
True honors eagle-winged herald.
That sounds the silver trumpet.
Clad in a robe of gold,
Whose train old time obsequiously does bear,
Wherein in rich embroydery is enrolled
The acts of all the worthies ever were.
On her fair breast she two broad tablets wears
Of Crystal the one, the other ebony,
Where are engraven all the names of yore,
In the large tomb of lasting memory.
Or the black book of end^esse obloquie.
Her palace placed betwixt earth and skies,
The windows all composed are of eyes.
The walls are strongly edified of ears,
And underfoot floord all about with drums;
The rafters trumpets admirable cheer.
The cranies tongues.
The doors unlock with every little breath
That on the sun beams gloriously to ride.
The registers, the worlds eternal hours.
The light-foot, feather-tongued dame.
She that enquireth into all the world,
And has about her vaulted palace hurld
All rumors and reports or true or vain,
What utmost lands, or deepest seas contein.
Her house is full of Echo made,
Where never dies the sound,
And as her brows the clouds invade,
Her feet do touch the ground.
Famous.
Who bears.
The rarest fame that ere enriched air,
Or found the way fair to aeternity.
Whose name
Still breathes perfume from their embalming fame,
Beyond whose worth shall never sound a name,
Nor honor in her everlasting story,
More deep engrave for all ensuing glory.
A fame which shall
Out live the sun, and close the worlds great eye.
A blast
From fames loud trumpet which so long shall last,
Till the last trumpet drown it.
Fame adds perfume unto his dust,
Which your name shall save
From the black edicts of a tyrant grave,
Nor shall your day ere set till the sun shall
From the blind heavens like a dull cynder fall.
And all the elements imb^nd their strife,
To ruin what they made, then your fames life,
When desperate time lies gasping shall expire,
Attended by the world in general fire.
Which from times injury,
Fame still will vindicate. His name is fames best music.
Famous beyond the utmost date of time.
Spreading fame
Fore-runs the welcome of his honored name
To last for times eternal process.
Whose highly honored name for ever bears
A welcome accent to all honest ears;
No ^irrh, nor Cassia, nor no choice perfumes
Of unctious Nard, or aromatic fumes
Of hot Arabia, do enrich the air
With more delicious sweets, than do the fair
Reports that crown the merits of his name
With heavenly laurels of eternal fame.
Fames
Immortal books record no nobler names.
Whose louder name
Has blast enough, to split the trump of fame.
Whose name is writ in fames immortal annals.
Worthy to be filed on fames eternal bead-rol.
Whose name even fills report.
Sainted in fames best Kallender. Canonized by fame.
Enrolled in the register of fame.
Who^e fame has won
A strong advantage on the sith of time.
Nor time nor malice can wrong out the right,
In the inheritance of fame he must possess.
That fills the wide and open mouth of fame.
The farthest shore
Washed by the Ocean shall him adore,
And all those northern Isles, whom days bright flame
Scarce warmes, shall bear the thunder of his name,
Which shall survive the funeral of time,
And be the subject of a learned rhyme.
Beheld by many with the eyes of fame,
That nere had happiness to see his face.
Dear son of memory, great heir of fame
Enrolled by the hand of sat, in fames steel tables,
Whose name -- Is impt upon the wings of fame.
Hurld
Hot from fames trumpet, round about the world
Eternal same, trumpets forth his deserts
Whose fame extended is so wide
As that on it a man to heaven might clime
Whose rich report. Fame was oppressed with as a talk too
great VVinged fame
Grows great with honor of -- name.
Whom all, that dare believe report, admire.
The Poets theme and patron.
Fame shall resound them on oblivions he^se,
T^ll graves gasp with her blasts, and dead men rise.
Whose praise is sung of in unsilenc't story.
Whose praise
In spite of envy and her restless pains,
Is unconfined as blessed eternity.
The vales shall ring
Thine honored name, and every song shall be
A Pyramid built for thy memory.
Whose fame runs the suns course.
Whose fame can be
Confined by nothing but eternity.
Only the period of all days
Shall seal his fame, and never ending praise.
Whose fame in never dying rimes
Shall be delivered to succeeding times.
Whose fame shall last
Till to be truly virtuous, truly chaste
Be held a sin. Sooner shall etc. -- then thy fame
Shall be forgot, or honor fail thy name.
Whose high renown shall only bounded be
By the worlds bounds, and vast Eternity,
Whose fame times file shall never fret away:
Whose fame shall credit win,
Till Lachesis have no more thread to spin,
Nor time a feather on his crazy wing,
His glories crescent to a circle grew.
Mounted to an height that envy cannot reach.
Whom fame is so desirous to honor, that she borrows all men's mouths to join
with her trumpet.
No Prince could pretend height, nor beggar lowness, to bar him from the sound
of his praises.
Whose name
Is nursed by the fullest breasts of fame.
Long needy fame
Does even grow rich by sounding -- name.
Whose fame is writ with characters of brass,
A sorted residence against the teeth of time,
And Razour of oblivion.
Whose honor baits the edge of times keen since,
And makes him heir of all Eternity,
Surviving fame with daring flight,
Does give his name eternal right,
Whose name does strike the stars,
And rings about the concave.
A fame may dare times proudest injury.
His garland with time edged about,
Lest any age should ever ravell't out,
Writ in fames eternal legend,
Whose fame shall never die,
Till time lies buries in Eternity. V. Ever. Never.

Shall live beyond the Calendar of time.
Famine v Drought.
Like beasts some suck
Beasts dugges, and when milk fails with greedy j^w
Meeere blood from their exhausted udders draw.
Herbs and green leaves they wring, bedewed twiggs
They lick, and juice of bleeding vines, small sprigs
Of trees, they for their tender sap do squeeze,
The ground no pasture for their horses yields:
Nor yellow Seres clothes the fallow fields;
The men eat grass, and when the fields grow bare,
The grass from off their camps dry turfs they tear;
With tears, or nothing must they quench their thirst.
Impetuous famine, sister to the sword, The pinching Fury.
Left hand of death, child of the infernal Lord,
That pleasure takes in the tedious breath
Of pining Mortals, and their lingering death,
The people tear their trembling flesh for food,
And from their ragged wounds they suck forth blood
The father dies, and leaves his pined corse
TO enrich his heir with meat, the hungry nurse
Broyls her starved suckling on the hasty coals, V. Browns Pastoralls. 2 l.
Song 1. Description the cave of famine.

Devours one half, and leaves the rest in holes.
The Tyrant that compells the mother
To kill one hungry child to save another.
Famine in their dry entralls takes her seat,
What nature most abhorres enforced to eat.
The infant trembles at his fathers knife,
The babe reenters her who gave it life.
The lively form of death
Still yawning wide, with loathsome stinking breath,
With hollow eyes, with meager cheeks and chin,
With sharp lean bones piercing the sable skin.
Some mince their papers will in parchment writ. V. Dubarta's Furies

And so devour their bitthright at a bit.
Fancy.
The roving, pregnant, busy, teeming sense,
The souls mint. The forge of shapes and dreams,
Commanding Empress of the brain, ubiquitary, faculty.
The immateriall Coyner. That makes a bodilesse Creation.
Bounld^sse, restless faculty, free from all engagements, digg^ without spade,
sails without Ships, Flies without wings, builds without charges, fights
without bloodshed, in a moment striding from the Center to the circumference of
the world, by a kind of omnipotency creating and annihilating things in a
moment, and marryng things divorced in nature.

Fantastic Gallant.
Something more than the shape of a man*
The chief burden of his brain is the carriage of his body, an^ the setting of
his face in good frame, which he perfo^ms the better, because he is not
disjointed with other Meditations.

He has staid in the world to fill a number, and when he is gone there wants
one, and there is an end

In the speculation of his good parts, his eyes like a drunkard ^es all all
double, and his fancy like an old man's spectacles makes great Letter in a small
print.

He conceives men's thoughts very idle, that is only busy about ^im. Both his
Inprimis and his Item are his clothes. A pretty ^iece of finicall ignorance, or
a fool without his motley coat.

Such a man as his Tailour pleases to make him.

That puts away most of his jugement about the situation of his ^loaths. His
cloachs are sacrified-

Going with such a noise, as if his body were the wheel-barrow (...) carry his
rumbling judgment.

His whole body goes all upon skrews, and his face is the vice that moves them.

His glittering clothes show like the sunshine in a puddle.
Who now and then breaks a d^ie biscuit j^st,
Which that it may more easily be chewed
He steeps in his own laughter.
With a brain lighter than his feather.
Like an empty bottle, and his head the cork to stop it.
His skin is tanned in sivet,
Walking, as if he had a suit of wainscot.
All his behaviors are printed,
A marmoset made all of clothes and face.
One that weighs
His breath between his teeth, and dares not smile
Beyond a point, for fear ^' unstarch h^s look.
A fellow so utterly nothing, that he knows not what he would be.

That would rather have the whole Commonwealth troubled, than an hair out of
order about him.

Ever in the slavery of Ceremony and Complements.

A man consisting of a pickedevant, and two mustachoes, and utterly to defeat
him there needs but three clippes of a pair of c^zzars.

A barren brain in fertle hair.

A speaking Butterfly. Sober drunkards. Fastidious, Brisk, wise only by
inheritance.

who while he proudly wears
A silver hilted rapier by his side,
Endures the lies and knocks about the ears,
Whilst in his sheath; the sleeping sword does bide
Wears gaudy clothes,
And fills up his imperfect speech with oaths,
That has a Bedsam fancy, all whose conceits are anticks.
The cares of men having little else of them but speech and laughter, using the
preface of a mile to bring in a furlong of matter,

That speaks his mind in fustian eloquence,
Forced affected phrase, and strained discourse,
Whose language is astonishing bumbast, till men understand him they are scard
with it.

Wits in jest, fools in earnest,
There is a confederacy between him and his clothes to make a puppet: A man

In whom the Tailours forming art,
And nimble barber claim more part
Than nature her self can.
Fat.
A whale with a tun of oil in his belly.
A mountain of Mummy. That wears Shrove Tuesday in his che^ks.
If he lives till doomsday he'^ burn a we^k longer than the whole
world. A face like a Sarazens.
Mountain of flesh. Walking barrel.
That cannot see his own knee. Voluminous body,
Cloak bag of guts, a load of guts. Luxury swells in his eyes.
And his fat belly loads his yielding thighs.
Fate.
Those lasting leaves.
Whose smallest character is never altered.
The doom
Spun on the fatal sisters sable loom.
Clotho's book. The Canons of eternal date.
The Consistory of the stars.
Entered the book of unavoided fate.
Enrolled in heavens brass leaves.
The privy Council of the heavens and planets.
The Adamantine book. The Commissary of God.
That has marked out a path and period
For every thing. Knot of all causes whose changelesse brow
Never smiles not frowns. The brazen Laws.
The ancient sisters, adamantine doom.
Decrees that needs must pass,
Writ in huge folds of solid steel and brass,
With Adamantine pens, Heavens consistoriall Decree.
A more unchanged law
Than any Mede, or Persian ever saw.
Et^rnal, unresisted orders of the Gods.
Fates. v. Destinies. Favorite.
A^omes that dance within the gilded rays
That kings shoot out.
Aspiring souls who grow but in the spring,
Porc'r by the warmth of some indulgent king.
Their fair leaves spread
But as the marigold to the suns eye,
And in themselves their pride lies buried,
For at a frown they in their glory die.
Fear. Fearful.
As if all his blood turned whey. Crest-fal^'n.
Blood-shaken. Bach'd in a c^ld quick silver sweat.
So feared young Proserpine rapt in the coach
Of the infernal king.
A chill fear
Shook all his powers. So old Aegeus shak'c
When he the po^soned cup to Theseus gave.
Presaging fears her quite did confound.
A chill cold sweat
Bathed all my limbs. Drowned in fear.
With such a fear flies the aire-piercing dove.
A chilling fear surprizeth all his joints.
Fe^r the underminer of all determinations
Making abortive answers.
Then cold amazements stiffened up his hair.
Congealed blood usurpt their trembling hearts,
and left a faintness in their feeble parts.
Who trembling out distractful language speak.
Fear, the ague, palsy of the soul, tempest of the mind*
A chilling ice shivers through every limb.
My blood shrinks back into my veins,
And my affrighted hairs are turned to bristles.
My eyes creep back into their cells,
As if they seemed to wish for thicker darkness
Than either night or death to cover them.
His soul melts within him.
A chilling sweat ore-^uns my trembling joints.
My seated heart knocks at my ribs, against the use of nature.
Distilled almost to jelly.
Ha^rowes the soul, and makes the eyes start from their spears.
The hair stands on end
Like quills upon the fretful Porcupine,
The bedded, hair like life in excrements
Start up, and stand an end. A freezing sweat
Flows through at all my pores.
The knees are mutual anviles.
A breathless man pricked on by winged fear,
With staring eyes, distracted hear and there,
L^ke kindled exhalations in the air,
At midnight glowing, his stiff bolting hair,
Not much unlike the pens of porcupines,
Parboild in sweat, and making fearful signs.
With a look so pitious in pourport,
As if he had been loosed out of hell
To speak of horrors. The bolting hair
Staring upright on their affrighted heads
Heave up their hats.
Horror and heart-amazing, fear possessed
The fainting powers of my troubled breast.
Fear is the carefullest, and greatest housewife of our passions, keeping all
the rest in Sentinel.
Fear the Jaylour of the soul.
A flesh quake does possess their powers.
My knees each other st^uck, the frighted blood,
Fled to my heart, my ears like bristles stood.
Feast.
The table groans, as though this feast,
Would as the flood destroy all foul and beast,
The boards are princely served, and Bacchus flows
In burnisht gold. With feasts they crown this day,
And wanted naught to crown the appetite
With rich content.
Where all the guests impaild with dishes sit.
Studied dishes. Where lusty diet and the frolic cup
Does rouse, and raise the quickened spirits up,
And brave triumphing Bacchus does display
His conquering colors in their cheeks.
The wanton cook prepares his poynant meat,
To teach the satiate palate how to eat,
Where every dish invites the likorish sight.
A table whose spread sides admit
A large access of friends to fill the seats
of this capacious circle, filled with meats
Of choicest relish, till his oaken back
Under the load of pil'd up dishes crack,
Giving the eyes a pleasant taste before
They come unto the mouth.
When with choice viands they delight,
And satisfy the wanton a petite.
Fever.
The pulses spur.
Within the deserts of Arabia, nor in the entrails of the sea, was there ever
so furious a monster found, and if Tyrants, whose memory is hateful to us, had
been stored with such instruments for effecting their cruelties, surely the
martyrs had endured a fever for religion, and not that outward fire, nor
bitings of wild beasts. At every sting it ca^ries a poor sick person to the
borders of the other world, and causes him sensibly to touch the extremities
of life. To support it long, a greater remedy than pa^ience is no less than
requilite, and other forces than those of man. Enough to make a man pity him
four hundred leagues off, yet he is so valiant, he would not fly though pursued
by an army, and so stately, he would not rise from his bed to salute a King. If
God had conferred a kingdom upon him, with condition never to sleep more than
he does, he would prove the most vigilant prince living, not would need either
guards or sentinels about his person.

Feet.
The pedestals. Bases of the frame of man.
Like Thetis. The tramplers.
Feet that print the farewell of all beauty.
Cupids pursuivants. That set an heaven on earth.
The precious roots of understanding trees.
With whose pace does move
A band of beauties.
Fierce. v. Cruel. Violent.
Fierce as the Midian tiger.
Fiddler.
A man and a fiddle out of case.
That rubs a living out of two sticks.
So many strings above a beggar.
His life is so many fits of mirth,
A country wedding and a whitson^^le are the ^wo main places he domineers in,
where he goes for a musician, and overlooks the bag-pipes.

Fight, v. War. Sea Fight.
Ships against ships, beaks meeting beaks resound,
And run a stern, the air is darkened round
Wi^h flying darts, which falling the Ocean hide;
Then ^urning their fore-castle far more wide,
They make their horns engirt the adverse fleet,
As when strong winds with tides repugnant meet.
One way the sea, the waves another go,
The ships upon the furrowed Ocean so,
Make different tracts, and waves upon the Main,
That oars raised up, the sea beats down again.
They grapling fall into the crimson lake,
Nor-there alas their emnity forsake;
But weakly try the combat out, where he
That conquers, can no long survivor be,
At whose ingrapling natures mantle took
A purple color.
Their armed naval forces made
Blew Neptunes face, the first discolored stage
Of war, a scene of their incensed rage.
Men would have thought some forest moov'd from far
When winters rage, the pines proud tops does bar;
Or that the famed Aegean Cyclades
Torn from their roots had floated on the seas.
Blood filled the wrinkles of the sea's visage, which the water
would not wash away, that it might witness it was not always his
fault, when we condemn his cruelty.
Fingers.
Fingers might Bacchus grace.
Five nimble brethren small
Armed with pearl-shell helmets all.
Cupids shafts.
Fire.
Domestic sun. Weightlesse fire
Whose flames unto the highest arch aspire
To vomit fl^kes of fire.
Wrapped in the embracements of the unwilling fire.
So M^leager f^ied, when to the flames
His mother cast the fatal brand.
Flamy Pyramids. Sleeping in his ashie bed.
The soul of Chymick art. P^omethean theft.
The sun of night and dark days.
Darting its scat^e^ed shines in crispy spires.
The fiery tent. The fiery vault.
The hot bright flamer. The elemental flame.
Fountain of life. Source of motion.
That merciless impartial element.
The waters flaming enemy.
Firm.
Firm as those celestial poles
Twixt which the stars in all their course do move.
Firm as the center. As the golden taper of the sun,
Which hourly sails the circuit of the sky.
Firm as the northern star,
As that bright line, the measure of the years
Which makes a league betwixt the poles
And joins the Hemisphears.
Fishes.
The Oceans fry. Sea citizens. The scaly, finny crew.
Watery citizens, w^try leagions, scaly legions.
The inhabitants of the briny regions.
The natural boats. The living ships.
Neptunes busy burgers. Spawning legions, armies.
Watery burge^les. Free people of the sea.
The scaly train, The finny coursers.
The denisons of floods. N^ptunes finny subjects.
(...) that row themselves with finny oars.
The angl^ r^^nibling prey. The watery constellations.
The s^as stars, planets. The innumerable legions
Of greedy mou^hes that haunt the briny regions.
The scaly nation, armed in silver male.
That cut with golden oars the silver stream.
Proteus finny flock. Neptunes watery heard.
Proteus scaly infantry.
Fit.
As a pan-cake for shrove tuesday, a mor^is for May Day, a candle for the
candlestick, a nail for the hole, a Nuns lips for a F^^ars mouth.

M^de for no other use.
Designed by nature for no other end.
Which on good advantage stands. For -- etc.
Flattery. Flatterer.
Language stowed with flowers. Court-mothes. Erewiggs.
A shadow of a fool. Flies of estate and sunshine.
Gilt, fi^'d, soothing tongue. Born in the country of good words.
Court-erewigs, wrigling in the ears of greatness.
Only eloquence. Catching oratory. Words steeped in oil.
Charitable, liars, smooth-faced, silken, soft, velvet words.
That dress their speech in plush.
Those worst of ravens that devour
The quick, when others ^rey but on the dead.
The tame wild beast. The servile tyrant.
Glutinous bodies that can stick
Like snailes on painted walls.
That pour their oil into the ears.
Make their revennues out of legs and faces.
That spin their raiment
Out of observance. Tied to their friends by th'teeth.
The very air of him whom he observes
Blows off his cap. A soul ground into oily colors.
Stretching each thing even to divinity.
That does enforce
An empty laughter in a vain discourse.
Which put so large a distance betwixt the tongue and the heart, that they are
seldom relatives.

That ha^ the Heliotropian quality of the Tulip and Marigold, following the
motion of the sun, opening and shutting with him.

None has better command of rain and sunshine in his face, to smile and weep
at pleasure.

That wear their faces to the bent
Of others looks.
The gilding flatterer that does torment,
His active lunges t'endeavour a consent,
And echo to another speech.
The picture of a friend.
Following them, whose fortunes may tempt his pains to deceive them.

He is before hand with your thoughts, and able to suggest them unto you. He
will commend to you first what he knows you like, and ha^h always some absurd
story or other of your enemy; and then wonders how your two opinions should so
jump in one man.

His worst chiding is his most earnest commendation,
You are but too good, too honest, etc.
Most active in the worst diligences.
It is an happiness not to discover him,
For as long as you are happy, you shall not.
Flora.
The summers Queen. The Lady of the flowers.
The painted wife of spicie Zeplryrus.
Zephyritis. Chloris.
Flowers.
The golden tufts within a silver crown. Dazie.
Kind natures neatest huswifery.
The gaudy issue of the spring. The summers pride.
The fresh springs gaudy hue.
The beauteous children of the spring:
Flora's embroidery, checker work, richest stock.
The spicie infants of the spring.
The fading issue of the spring,
Earths embroidery, diapery, enamelling.
The valleys quaint enameld eyes,
That on the ground tur^e suck the honeyed showers,
And purple all the ground with vernal flowers.
The livery of the spring. The painted bravery of the spring.
The mo^ly meadows glory and delight,
The earths stars. Gilded bosses.
The flowery graces of the smiling spring:
The summers gaudy gallantry.
The checkered pavement of the greens.
The flowery tufts. Flora's bracelets beads.
The terrestial galaxie. Flora's richest tapestry.
A mine of flowers. Natures drapery.
The beauties of the spring, Which lay down their heads
At soome trees roots on mossie feather beds.
The smiling beauties of the buxome spring.
The gemmes on Flora's hair. Proclaimers of the spring.
The trimming laces of Flora's mantle.
The treasures of the wanton spring
The curious weaving of the spring.
The painted glories of the spring.
Everlasting. Muskmillions. Sweet William. Time.
Maiden-blush. Peagle. Tulip. Oxlops. Lady-smock.
Sops in wine. Start up and kiss me. Sweet B^sil. Marj^^um.
tufted Daizy, six-leav'd Primrose, True-love, L^ly,
azure Hare-bell, Rose, yellow King-c^p, tawny Columbine,
Orange-tawny, Marigold, Pansie, Cowslip, Hony-suckle, Viole^
Piony, Monks-hood, Buglosse, Pinke,
Bears-foot, Batchlours button, Burrage, Crow-foot, Crow-toes,
Daffadil, Dendelion, Priest-crown, Eglantine, Gdle-flower,
Flower-deluce, Hearts-^ase, London-button, Lady-gloves,
Liricumphancy, Rose-parsley; Wake-Robin, Rose-mary,
Prick-madam, Rocket-gallant, Capons-taile, Shepheards-pouch,
Tansie, Sow-thistles, ya^row, nose-bleed, Wood-bin^.
To Fly.
To swim, to glide, to spin, to spring,
To break the air with nimble ^wing.
With winged ascent springs through the boundless^ air.
Shoots through the air. Sweeps the air.
To cut through the u^enclosed air.
Swims through the airy main with ^eathered finnes.
Then swi^tly through the yielding air they glid^,
To strike airy rings.
His tossed feathers chafe the wandering air.
Waving his wings through airy regions glides.
Through air they ply with an industrious wing,
And spread their shady p^nions.
And with winged nerves swim through the clustering clouds,
And with a swooping flight glide through the air
With nimble wing they cleave the flitting sky.
T^rough air they spring,
Spreading the pinions of their nimble wing.
Sailing upon the bosom of the sky.
Sw^mming upon the bosom of the air.
To make wing. To keep. Hold wing.
Unto the air their feathered sails they yield,
And row with plumy oars.
To Fly away. v. Swift.
Arethu^a sled
So from the river that her rav^shed.
Such was chaste Daphne's flight,
Shunning the dalliance of the God of ligh.
Recommends the protection of his life to his ^eer.
As trembling doves the swooping eagle fl^e,
Or a young lamb, when he the wolf ^spies.
As panting doves the eager ^awke eschewes,
Or eager hawke the panting dove pursues.
Fool.
The most arrant dotish clown that ever was without the privilege
of a babble. A simple nothing.
His behavior such, it is beyond the degree of ridiculous.
Looks like an ape that had newly taken a purgation.
A subject ^it to be the stale of laughter.
A subject able to justify excessive laughter.
Over whom contempt may make a just challenge.
A motly, thick-brain. Not well furnished in his upper rooms.
Whose wit is turned the seam-side outward.
Pity nature was ere at leisure to make him.
A drum that every one may play on.
No more brains than a butter-fly.
Whose tongue is the gentleman usher to his wit, and still goes before it.
A mere stuffed suit. Looks like a musty bottle new wicker'd, his head
the co^ke for it.
A most Catholic cocks-combe.
One fit to drink good store
Of pure, unmixt, brain-purging Helebore.
A child at man's estate. One whom nature hudled up in have, and
left his best part unfinished.
The rest of him is grown to be a man, only his brains stay behind.
That has nothing to prove him a man but his shape.
Forehead. v. Brow.
Forehead fair as summers face.
Built upon two ivory arches.
The mount of bleached snow.
Beauties sphere,
A thousand several graces mooving there,
Clear promontory where sweet violets grow.
Forget;
^^e drink oblivion to forget her name.
Under oblivions rusty keys concealed.
To lock out of remembrance.
In Lethe drowned. Inhospitable memory.
Which can no longer entertainment find
Within the memory. Exiled from all the confines of
Memory. Cancelled from all the books of memory.
He need not learn that art T^emistocles so much desired.
Blotted out of the souls great registers.
D^v^sted of remembrance.
He that forgot his name, may sooner this remember.
As winter torrents tumbling from on high,
Wast with their speed, and leave their channels dry,
So run from my remembrunc^ --
Fortune.
The worlds imperious Queen. Blind inconstant Goddess.
Great arbitresse of humane things.
Constant in nothing but inconstancy.
The only rebellious handmaid against virtue.
Inconstant Queen of humane state,
Rectresse of actions, arbitresse of fate,
To whom all sway, all power, all empire bowe^.
That stands upon her golden ball,
And makes the world her toy to play withal.
That tottering stands upon her rolling wheel.
Which in triumphant pride,
In chariots drawn by blinded horses rides.
Rackets with man as with her tennis ball.
That this day raises to a crown,
Whom she the next day tumble^h down.
Fortunate. v. Happy.
Whose souls are only troubled how to bear the burden of their
bliss.
Envy put out thine eyes, least thou should see
The Oceans of delight that flow in me.
Fortunes eldest son and heir. Fortunes white boy.
The button on fortunes cap. I fear
My soul has her content so absolute,
That not another comfort like to this
Succeeds in unknown fates.
Happy enough to pity Caesar.
As if both heaven and earth should undertake
To extract the best from all mankind to make
One perfect happy man.
He takes it for an injury,
If fortune chance to come behind his wish.
Nor does wide heaven that secret blessing know
To give, that she on him does not bestow,
Blind fortune is his slave, and all her store,
The less he seeks her, follows him the more.
Born under joyful destinies, and smiling stars.
Like to the stately swan,
Rididing on streams of Bliss; more rich arrayed
With earths delight, than thoughts could put in ure,
To glut the senses of an Epicure
Tired with the surfeit of delight
More fortunate than he,
To whom both Indies tributary be.
To move as a star in the orb of happiness,
Moving in a Labyrinnth of delight
Which have
More happiness than modesty could crave.
Fortunes great pledge, to whom
Fa^e ever owed so much. Environed with delights
Commanding Fortune. The favorite of heaven.
In favor with the stars. Fortunes darling, Minion.
Swimming, bathing in felicity,
One that knows not so much as the name of misery,
To whose nativity the Fates doow
A swelling glory. For whom
A glorious thread they spin, such as their Loom
Is proud to see. An happiness worthy the envy of the gods.
Happiness courts him in her best array,
To whom all blessedness in nature is a servant.
Child of indulgent fortune.
As if Fortune had got eyes only to cherish him:
As happy as Metellus. As Polycrates.
Thy tents shall flourish in the joys of peace,
The wealth and honor of thy house increase.
Thy children and their offspring shall abound,
Like blades of grass, that cloth the pregnant ground.
Thou full of days like weighty shocks of corn,
In season reaped shall to thy grave be born.
The fight of him does strike the envious blind.
As the mounted Sun
Breaks through the clouds, and throws his golden rays
A out the world: so his increasing days
Succeed in glory.
Fountain. v. Springs. Foul. v. Deformed. Free.
Free as the air. Free as the mountain wind.
My soul enjoyes an unrestrained freedom.
With all the indulgence of fair liberty.
My thoughts disclaim all right and interest
Any can challenge in me. Unsh^ckled souls,
Unengaged thoughts.
Friends.
A pair of friends, or rather one called two.
Our but divided selves. Diapason of vows and wishes.
A mind in two divided, but not part^d.
A double body, and yet single hearted.
Pylades soul, and mad Orestes was
In these if we believe Pythagoras.
That partake of one another good and evil with so lively a reflection, that
there needs but one blow to make two wounds. O^r second selves. Our other
selves.

Achilles, Patroclus. Hercules Hylas. Jo^athan, David.
Titus, Gesippus. Theseu^, Perithous, Pilades, O^estes*
Damon, Pithias. Nisus, Eurial^s.
Wrapped and woven into all trusts and counsels.
Nor the silvet doves that fly
Yoked in Cytherea's Car,
Nor the wings that lift so high,
And convoy her sun so far,
And so lovely, sweet and fair;
Or do more innoble love,
And so choicely matched a pair
Or with more consent do move.
Frost.
Keen frosts have chained up the deep.
The streams are bound with ribs of ice.
The floods in icie fetters bound.
Crusted earth. Every honey-headed twig
Wears his snowie Periwig,
And every bough his snowy beard.
Waters have bound themselves, and cannot run.
Suffering what Xerxes fetters would have done.
The fish are froze as they swim in the wave
The wine is frozen in the cup.
The Country swain.
O'r the stiff waves does drive his loaded Wain,
The frozen wine hoth keep the vessel^ shape.
A shell of ice does glaze the Rivers o'r,
And had Leander such a shore descried,
Then in that narrow sea he had not died
The Frost does cast an icie cream
Upon the lakes and Crystal stream.
Show me those flames you brag on, you that be
Armed with those fires wine and Poetry.
You are now benumbed spite of your god and verse,
And do your Metaphors for prayers rehearse.
Whilst you that call snow fleece and fe^thers, do
Wish for true fleeces, and true feathers too.
Our rivers are one Crystal, shores are fit
Mirrours, not being now like glass, but it.
Our ships stand all as planted, we may swea^
They are not only born up, but grow there.
While waters they are pavements firm as stone.
And without faith are each day walked upon,
What parables called folly heretofore,
Was now discreet to build upon the shore:
There Is not one dines amongst us with washed hands
Water is scarce here, as in Africa sands,
And we expect it not, but from some god,
Opening a fountain by some Prophets rod,
Who needs not seek out where he should unlock
A stre^m, what ever he struck would be true rock.
When as heaven drops some smaller drops our sense
Of grief's increased, being but deluded thence;
For whilst we think those drops to entertain:
They fall down pearls, which came down half way rain.
Green Lands removal now the poor man fears,
Seeing all water frozen but his tears.
We suffer day continual and the snow
Does make a little night become noon now.
We hear of some inchrystall'd, such as have
That which procu^'d their death become their grave.
Bodies that destitute of soul yet stood,
dead, and fell not, drowned, yet without a Flood,
Nay, we who breath still, are almost as they,
And only may be called a softer clay,
We stand like Statues, as if cast and fit
For life, not having, b^t exp^cting it.
Each man's become the Stoics wise man hence,
For can you look for passion where is no sense?
Which we have nor resolved to our first stone,
Unless it be one sense to feel w' have none.
Our very Smiths now work not, ^y what is more,
Our Dutch men write but five hours, and give o'^.
We dare provoke faith now, we know what it is
To feel cold death, only by suffering this.
All fires are Vestal now, and we as they
Do in our Chimnies keep a lasting day,
Boasting within doors our domestic Sun
Adoring it with our Religion.
We laugh at Fire-briefs now, although they be
Commended to us by his Majesty,
And it is not treason, for we cannot guess,
That we should pay them for their happiness.
Each hand would be a Scevola's, let Rome
Call that a pleasure hence forth, not a doom.
A Fever is become a wish, we si^.
And think fallen angels have a benefit,
Nor can the thoughts be impious when we see
Weather that Booker durst not prophecy.
Weather may give new Epocha'^, and make
Another Since in his bold Almanac.
Weather may save his doom, and by hy his foe
Be thought enough for him to undergo.
We now think Alabaster true, and look
A sudden trump should antedate his book;
For whilst we suffer this, we ought not fear
The world cannot survive to a fourth year;
For sure we may conclude weak nature old,
And crazie now, being she is grown thus cold:
But frost's not all our grief, we that so sore
^ffer its stay, fear its departure more;
For when that leaves which so long has stood,
'Twill make us count from since the second Flood.
Frown.
The Hieroglyphick of anger and denial.
TO unsmooth the forehead with observed distaste,
Furrowing the forehead with an unseen plow,
To fold the brow in angry frowns.
The tempest of the face, the discontented brow.
To muffle up the face in frowns.
The hated strangers fee. The cloud that hangs upon the brow.
A forehead gathered into frowns.
A look dressed up in frowns.
^ Brow knit up in clouds of wrath.
^ Brow whereon dwells anger.
^corn fits in state upon his ^urly Brow.
^ vinegar verjuice face. To wear a frown upon the brow.
^uffled his brow like a new boot. Contracted brow.
To purse the brow. To furrow up the face.
The rising furrows in the brow. The sour countenance
More angry wrinckles on his brow appear,
^han hunted lions in their Fury were.
Fruit.
Summers pregnant treasures. Tribute. Autumnes burdens.
The dangling pendants of the trees. Pomona's jewels.
Fruitful.
Natures chiefest wardrobe, no other soil
Does more reward the industrious plowmans toil,
With rich increase no other pastures keep
More horned heads, more wealthy fleeced sheep,
Where the bleating flocks,
And horned herds do graze, the laboring ox
Wearied in those fat furrows, never deceives
Hopes which the greediest husbandman conceives,
Whose tender paps with plenty overflow.
Fury. v. Anger. Rage. Furies.
Daughters to old night. The Nymphs of Nemesis.
In snaky curls they twist their dreadful hair,
Whose tresses dangle down with hissing snakes,
And crawling adders with their forked tongues.
The sisters with their hissing hair,
Who on the faces of the guilty stare,
With dreadful Torches -- infernal Harpie^.
Eumenedes
With snaky curls, that on the guilty seize
Black midnight imps.
Erynnis had encompassed all
The Town, her snakie hairs and burning brand,
Shaking us when she ruled Agave's hand,
O^ the self-main^'d Lycurgus.
The sullen broods of evil spirits.
Upon her horrid brows did serpents hiss.
Her komb kemb'd poison down.
Whose scourges wound
All guilty souls,
A sulphurous vapor from her eyes possessed the fair,
And sweet complexion of the abused air
With pestilence.
The ghastly Sprites that haunt the gloomy night.
Black Pluto's messengers, Posts. Executioners.
Snake trest sisters with knotted whips of wire.
Malignant Spirits periwig'd with Snakes,
Hells hateful hags.
Murdering Ministers, that in their silent substances
Wait on natures mischief.
Unhallowed hags, fell Ministers of fate.
The di^e Tartarean monsters hating light,
Begot by dismal Erebus and night.
The Jades
That drag the tragic melancholy night, V. Virgils Alecto. Aen. 7. V. Sands
Ovids Met. l. 4. p. 141. Lucans Phemon, lib. 5.

And with their drowsy, slow, and flagging wings,
Clip dead men's bones, and from their misty jaws
Breath forth contagious darkness in the air.
Megaera. Alecto, Tisiphone
Furious. v. Angry. Mad.
Who would have seen the picture of Alecto, or with what manner of conutenance
Medea killed her own children, needed but take his face for the full
satisfaction of his knowledge in that point,

Nor Dindimenian, nor the Pythian Priest,
Are wi^h such Fury by their gods possessed,
Nor Bacchides, nor Corybantes so,
When on shrill brass, they iterate their blow.
G.
Gale. v. Wind.
Whispering Gale
A Came dallying with the leaves along the Dale.
Which whispers out its tale.
In such soft language, as but fills the sail.
The flitting Gales,
That cool the bosom of the fruitful Vales.
Natures soft fan. The airs cool whispers.
Soft spirits of the air.
The wind pants out small gusts as out of breath
Gamester.
Blacking the night with oaths and imprecations.
Spending the day
In cursing fortune, and his fruitless play,
That civil gunpowder which can in peace
Blow up whole houses and their whole increase.
That spends his time
In oaths and exclamations on his fate.
That makes his whole estate a lottery.
Bewitched with their hopes, they nere give ore,
Looking to gain their own, or to win more.
There is but a cast at dice betwixt him and a beggar*
Ganimed.
Joves beauteous Catamite.
Whom Joves majestic bird to heaven trust up
To ^i^gle nectar in his genial cup.
From Ida's shady top. Juno's fair rival.
Garden. v. flowers: Pleasant place. Garland. v. Crown.
Leavie twines, wreathes. Flowery chaplets.
Verdant incirclets. Glorious impalement of the brow.
Garments.
Vestment, habits, habiliment, array, raiment, livery, robes; mantles garb,
weeds, vestures.
The bodies sheath, scabbard. Fairest covers of the foulest shame.
Foul fair marks of our misery.
Gemmes.
The pibbles paving Neptunes court.
The riches of the unsounded deep.
That gay purchase which does make
The scorched Negro dive the briny lake.
As rich a gemme
As ere enamoured glorious diadem.
B^ight gemmes
Adding new splendor to the diadems.
The wealthy store
Of Ganges, and the Erythrean shore;
Such Cleopatra wore
When she first Caesar met.
The rich seas spoiled store. The pride of natures store.
Rich spoils of the Eastern shore. Shellfish spoils.
What the diving Moo^e*
Amongst the red weeds seeks for in th'Easterne shore.
Some ly in dead men's skulls, and in the holes
Where eyes did once inhabit, there were crept,
As 'twere in scorn of eyes. Reflecting gemmes
That woo the slimy bottom of the deep,
And mock the dead bones that ly scattered by.
Rescued from the covetous sand
To make the seas hid wealth adorn the land,
And though the Sun did hold his light away,
You might behold this gemme by its own day.
Which impart
To wondering eyes the workmans art.
That which the Sultans glistering bride does wear,
To these would but as glow-wormes eyes appear;
The Tuscan Duke's compared shows thick and dark,
These l^ving stars, and his a dying spark.
Ghosts. v. Souls departed.
Dislodged souls. Airy shapes. Fleeting shades.
Airy mockeries. Unsubstantial phantasmes.
Sightlesse substances. Cold midnight wanderers.
Glad.
This day I received my private Gospel.
Swell, swell my joys, and faint not to declare
Your selves as ample as your causes are,
I did not live till now, this my first hour
Wherein I see my thoughts reached by my power,
The earth receives me not, it is air I tread,
And each step that I take my advanced head
Knocks out a star in heaven.
More glad than is
The teeming earth to see the longed for Sun
Peep through the horns of the celestial ram,
My joys like waves each other overcome,
And gladness drowns where it begins to flow.
It is the only way to make me contradict my self when I account^
my self miserable.
I have not any discontent which is not lost in the joy I receive,
This sweetness all the bitterness of my spirit in my most sens^ble d^stasts.
Eenough to blot out all the story of my misfortune.
I surfeit with excessive joy.
Can there be a thing
Under the heavenly Iris that can bring
More joy unto my soul, or can present
My Genius with a fuller blandishment,
The raven almost famisht joys not more
When restless billows tumble to the shore
An heap of bodies shipwrackt on the sea.
I write, and having written I destroy,
Because my lines have bounds, but not my joy*
So joys the Pilot that has escaped a grave
In the swelled bosom of an angry wave,
And after all his shipwrack't hopes at last
Does in that port his joyful anchour cast,
Which has occasioned many pious aires,
And been the subject of his serious prayers.
Can fate present
What after this, I can call discontent?
More proud am I of this, than Phaeton
When Phoebus flaming chariot he did guide;
Before he knew the danger coming on,
Or else than Jason, when from Colchos he
Returned with the fleeces victory.
Then on his neck shedding a shower of joy,
That ten-years traveled Greek returned from sea
Nere joyd so much to see his Ithaca.
Pouring himself into embracements,
Loosing himself in Labyrinths of joy.
So joy'd Andromeda freed from her chains
And the grim monster.
His breast scarce holds his joys, whose fancy works
On golden wonders.
I know not whether I then was more composed of joy or joy of me,
for I seemed not merty, but mirth it self.
As glad, as was the wandering youth of Greece,
When he from Colchos brought the golden fleece.
Like seamen that descry the land at last,
For whose glad sight, they get the hatches under,
And to the Ocean tell their joys in thunder.
Shaking those barnackles into the sea,
At once that in the womb, and cradle lay.
As Nymphs and Shepherds when the timbrell rings,
Or crooked Dolphin, when the saylour sings.
Whose joy and mirth.
Transcends the united pleasures of the earth.
What angels tongue can let
The world conceive our pleasures when we met.
Who could have seen how that kind Roman dame
Overcome with joy did yield her latest breath,
Her son returning laden with such fame,
When thankful Rome had mourned for his death.
Might have beheld her personated right,
When I approached to -- sight.
Like as a man whose hourly wants implore
Each meals relief, trudging from door to door,
That hears no dialect from churlish lips,
But news of Beadles and their torruring whips,
Takes up perchance some unexpected treasure,
New-lost, departs, and joyful beyond measure,
Is so transported, that he scarce believes
So great a truth, and what his eye perceives,
Not daring trust, fearing it is some vision,
Or fl^ttering dream, deserving but derision.
I am too narrow to contain my joy.
The Merchant when he plowes the angry seas,
And sees the mounting billows fall upon him.
As if all elements, and all their anger
Were turned into one vowed destruction,
Shall not with greater joy embrace his safety.
My joy cannot show it self modest enough without the badge of
bitterness, my tears.
My plenteous joys,
Wanton in fullness, seek to hide themselves
In drops of sorrow. Imparadis'd. An ecstasy of joy.
Drunken with joy. Ready to leap out of their skin.
Glove.
Whose fine proportion showed well what a dainty guest was wont
to be lodged therein. The hands sheath.
Glutton. v. Voluptuous.
That dis-people all the elements, to please their palates.
That impoverish seas
And air dispeople, their proud taste to please.
That greedy tyrant to obey,
Who varies still his tribute with the day,
His health by surfets forfeiting.
Ve^st only in the kitchen Alchimy, Philosophy.
To tire their glutted appetite.
Chained by the teeth unto their meat and drink.
Digging his own grave with his teeth.
Witty and ambitious appetite.
Three elements at least dispeopled be
To satisfy judicious gluttony.
Nice palates, Knowing stomachs,
That never fast, but presently after dinner,
The whole world is his confectionary.
Banquet beagles. That wears his brains in his belly.
That cannot judge the controverted c^se,
Twixt meat and mouth, without the bribe of sauce.
That gull the seas,
Their witty appetite to please.
That eat
The heads of par^ets, tongues of nightingales.
The brains of peacocks, and of ostriches.
And could they get the Phoenix,
Though nature lost her kind, she were their dish.
Apicius, Geta, Galba. Vitellius. Heliogabalus,
Sybarites, Abderites, Sardanapalus.
Goats.
The bearded heard. The wanton flocks.
The bleating flocks,
Which powle the steepest mountains motly rocks.
God.
Almighty essence, arbiter of fate,
Who wisely governs what he did create.
Whose unresisted hands do tear
The clouds with dreadful thunder. The great Disposer.
The great director of the rolling stars.
Emperor of Angels. King of stars. The great Creator.
To whom nothing's so great as to resist, nothing so small as to be contemned.
The first and last of things.
Whose great arm spans the East and West,
And tacks the center to the sphere. The great Three-one.
That sees the secret chambers of the heart,
And with his knowledge can prevent our thoughts.
Goodnesse's eternal fountain. Searcher of the heart.
The spirit that all the world maintains,
And the poised earth in empty air susteins.
Great self-subsisting nature.
One accent of whose breath has power
To ruin heaven and earth, and in an hour
To build a thousond more. The worlds great Architect.
That his mansion has on high
Above the reach of mortal eye.
All living creatures that does feed,
And with full hand supply their need.
That with his miracles does make
Amazed heaven and earth to shake,
That by his all commanding might,
Did fill the new-made world with light.
Gods.
Eternal beings. Awful powers. Immortal essences.
Heav^nly dwellers. The blessed Celestials.
The deathlesse powers. Heaven imbowred Gods.
That on immortal thrones reside.
Heavens tenants, that in heavenly Halls
Haveblest abodes. Ever-being states.
The heavenly housed powers. Skie-thron'd powers.
Heaven-housed states. Deities.
Immortal Synod of the glorious sky.
That do the fates eternal courses know,
And tell of things to come.
That have the power
To trouble or compose all things below their bower.
The powers that never vary state.
Immorral guests,
Which with Ambrosia and Nectar feast.
Great Berecynthia's deathlesse pr^geny.
To Go up and down.
To keep their paths. To apply their steps.
To task their steps to. To divide their nimble paces.
To task the feet. Direct the steps.
Gold.
Precious dirt. Fairer dunghill. Mechanic trash.
Jove knew thee when he courted Danaae,
And Cupid wears thee on that arrows head
That still prevails. On Ida once the Martial maid.
Venus and Juno did to mortal eyes.
Naked for thee their sacred bodies show
The bait of avarice. The glittering oar.
India's rich bowels. Tagus. Pactolus sands.
The misers God. The general charm.
Bright son of Sol, much brighter than his father.
The golden ore
That lies on Tagus or Pactolus shore.
That pure sand
The Indians find upon Hydaspes strand.
The golden apples of the Hesperides. The golden fleece.
The Golden number. Golden rule.
Bills of this metal slackt At'lanta's pace,
And on the amorous youth bestowed the race:
Venus the Nimphs mind measuring by her own,
Whom the rich spoils of cities overthrown,
Had prostrated to Mars, could well advise
The adventurous lover how to gain the prize.
Nor less may Jupiter to gold (...)*
For when he turned himself in (...),
Who can blame Danaaeor the b^^^en tower,
That they withstood not the Almighty shower.
Never till then did Love make Jove put on
A form more bright and noble than his own.
Golden age.
The age of better metal.
Strife only reigned, for all strove to be good.
Rivers ran with streams of milk.
Honey-dropped from the trees.
The earth unto the husbandman
Gave her voluntary sees.
When no freezing cold beguile.
The eternal flowery spring.
And the heavens a constant smile,
Darted upon every thing,
When no ship had brought from far
Neither ill sought ware nor war,
Pale conscience started not at ugly sin
When good old Saturn's peacefel throne
Was unusurped by his beardlesse son.
When jealous Ops nere feared the abuse
Of her chaste bed, or breach of nuptial truce,
When just Ast aea poys'd her scales, in mortal hearts.
Saturnes reign, when as the homely cave,
A narrow dwelling to the people ga^.
A little hearth, small fire, when beasts and men
Slept in the shadow of one common den,
The herb gave wholesome seeds at first,
And the clear fountain quenched their thirst,
Beneath the shadow of the pine,
Men slept, then in the Ocean brine;
No keele was washed, no unknown guest
On any foreign coasts did rest,
No blood was shed through bitter hate,
No arms took up to pluck on fate,
For what should hostile fury do?
Or stir up mad men's spirits unto.
Saturnes reign,
When as the earth unmeted did remain,
And no long journey's known, the sea not cut
By any crooked stern, as ye^ (...)
To such new but thens, and (...) ^^dering wind
To play withal, no limber say (...) could find;
Nor did the erring mariner so (...)
Travel, or yet find out the constant star.
By which to steer, nor as they now do roame
from remote places to bring traffic home.
The servile yoke did not the bull disturb
The unbackt Jennet knew no bit or curb,
The dwelling house no door had, but stood open,
Nor was the stone prefixed, that bounds the scope
Of common fields, the bollow oak the hive
That yielded honey, neither did they drive
Their cattle home, but with their udders swel^'d,
They flockt unto the milk-paile uncompell'd,
No wrath, no war, no armies to invade,
For no smith then, knew how to cast a blade.
In the worlds young days
Nation against nation did no forces raise
T* invade each other, no man then for gain
Da^'d in a thin rib'd bark to cross the main.
No craft was known, no fraud then understood,
The udders of their cattle lent them food,
The fleece their garments, only to defend.
From wind and weather (for no other end
Was clothing made) pride was a monster then
Unheard, unthought, one fashion was to men.
Women another, for no change they knew,
One garb they kept, and studied nothing new,
None idle was, but lived by his own sweat,
^he brook their drink, the herb and root their meat,
^he industrious ox safe wanders up and down.
^ares and bright felicity do crown
And seed the land; through seas by Neptune tamed
No sailors fly, faith fears to be blamed.
No chaste house with adultery defiled,
C^stome and law had spotted sin exiled,
Each man about his own hills shut up day,
And 'bout the widow elmes does vines display,
And frolic in free earouses.
When every thought a seed did bring.
And every look a plant did bring.
And every breath a flower,
Then earth unplough'd did yield her crop,
P^e honey from the oak did drop;
The fountains did run milk,
The thistle did the lilly bear,
And every bramble roses wear,
And every worm made silk,
The very shrub did balsome sweat,
And nectar melt the rock with heat,
And earth did drink her fill,
That she no harmful weed did kow,
Nor barren fern, nor mandrake low,
Nor mineral to kill,
The male and female used to joint,
And into all delight did coin
That pure simplicity,
Then feature did to form advance,
And youth called beauty forth to dance,
And every grace was by,
It was a time of no distrust
So much of love, had naught of lust,
None feared a jealous eye.
The language melted in the ear,
Yet all without a blush might hear,
They lived with open vow.
Each touch and kiss was so well placed,
They were as sweet as they were chaste.
The goats their swelling udders home did bear
The droves did then no shaggie lions fear;
No herbs did with deceitful poison flow,
And sweet Amomum every where did grow.
Ripe grapes did dangle from the briars tops
Hard oaks sweet honey formed in dewie drops
The pine did then no use of trade retain.
Each country bred all fruit, the earth disdaind
The harrows weight, and vines the sickles stroke.
Strong ploughmen let their bulls go free from yokes,
Wool learned not to dissemble colors strange,
But rams their fleeces then in pastures changed
To pleasing purple, or to saffron die,
And lambs turn ruddie, as they feeding lie.
The golden time which uncompell'd,
And without rule in faith and truth excelled,
As then there was nor punishment, nor fear
Nor threatening laws in brass preseribed were,
Nor suppliant crouching prisoners stoopt to see
Their angry judge, but all was safe and free.
To visit other worlds no wounded pine
Did yet from hills to faithless seas decline.
Then unambitious mortals knew no more
But their own countries natur-bounded shore,
Nor swords nor arms were yet no trenches round
Beseiged towns nor strifefull trumpets sound,
The soldier of no use in firm content
And harmeless ease their happy days were spent,
The yet free earth did of her own accord,
Untorn with ploughes, all sorts of fruits afford,
Content with natures unenforced food.
They gather wildings, straw buries of the wood,
Sower cornells, what upon the bramble grows,
And Acorns which Joves spreading oak bestows.
'Twas always spring, warm Zephyr sweetly blew
On smiling flowers, which without setting grew;
Forth with the earth, corn unmanured bears,
And every tree renewes her golden ears,
With milk and nectar were the rivers fili'd,
And honey from green holly-oaks distili'd.
When froth-born Venus, and her br^t,
With all that furious brood young Jove begar.
In horrid shapes, were yet unknown
Those Haleyon days, those golden days are gone.
There was no clyent then to wait
The leisure of a long-tail'd Advocate.
The Talion law was in request,
And Chancery courts were kept in every breast;
Abused statutes had no tenters,
And men could deal secure without indenters;
There was no peeping hole, to clear
The wittols eye from his incarnate fear.
There were no lustful cinders then
To broyl, the ca^bonadoed hearts of men;
The rosy cheek did then proclaim
A shame of guilt, but not a guilt of shame.
There was no whining soul to start
At Cupids twang, or curse his flaming dart.
The boy had then but callow wings,
And fell Erynnis scorpions had no stings.
The better acted world did move
Upon the fixed poles of truth and love;
Love essenc'd in the hearts of men,
Then reason ruled, there was no passion then,
Till lust and rage began to enter,
Love the circumference was, and love the center,
Until the wanton days of Jove,
The simple world was all composed of love.
V. Britannia's Pastorals. Lib. 2. Song 3.
Boet. Matam, lib. 2. Met. 5. Juvenal. Sat. 6.
Tibullus. Lib. 1. Eclog. 3.
Goodly.
Like a ship in her full trim. Portly. Stately.
Mooving in state. Like the sailing swan.
Mooving with a portly grace.
Gorgon.
Medusa's snaky head, which who looks on
Is strait congealed to a sencelesle stone,
On whom Minerva her due vengeance takes,
In turning of her radiant hairs to snakes,
For her unlawful pleasures in her fane,
From whose hot blood, when her bold Perseus slew,
Thence Pegasus, and thence Chrysaor flew
Under the frosty Atlas cl^ffie side:
Grape.
The juicie burden of the vine.
The spicie clusters of the vine,
The juicie vines attire.
The purple pendants of the vine.
The dangling jewels of the clustered vine.
The swelling clusters great with child of Bacchus.
Giving the eyes a pleasant taste,
Before they give the mouth repast.
Grass
The mountains motley lock.
The green plush of the plains,
The enameli'd valleys flowrie fleece,
The chequered vesture of the Meads,
Dressing the valleys in their shaggie freeze.
The tufted mantle of the fields.
The earths green Summer gown.
Grave. v. Stoic
S^ldome he smiles, and smiles in such a sort,
As if he mocked himself and scorned his spirit,
That could be moved to smile at any thing,
That looks with such Majestic grace'
As if he swayed an Empire in his face.
The Grave.
Tomb, Urn, shrine, monument, shroud, vault, charnel,
Last home. The cold bed. The common Inn.
The harder Lodging of mortality, deep Goal of Death
The cha^itable honor. The everlasting bed,
Which makes no changing of the Sheets.
Earths dark bosom. Deaths cold embers.
Deaths melancholy dungeon. Caves of death.
The cabinet where is laid the pawn for the
Souls re-turn.
The bed of clay. The wormie bed.
Deaths public tiring house, where all men must,
Measure their cold proportion in the dust,
That locketh up our scattered dust,
That she must audit upon trust,
That quiet closet of content.
The child's portion, our common mother bequeaths her children.
Dusty confinement of the body. That dusty bed.
Where unfelt worms, are all the fleas are bred.
^ithin whose dusty Territories plowmen are full.
Compeers to Kings, where the spade may challenge precedence ^f the Scepter,
and where the mitre may not contest with the ^^^tock.
There where the weary from their labors rest.
Nor pisoners there enforced by torments cry,
(...) fearlesse by their old tormentors lie.
^he mean and great on equal basis stand,
No servants there obey, nor Lords command,
Where all in silence mourn,
From whose dark shores no travelers return,
A Land where death, confusion, endless night,
And horror reign, where darkness is their light.
Great.
Of the Gigantick Size.
The Folio of nature or of art.
Natures text-hand. Natures great capital letters.
Of vast proportion. Large Dimensions.
Grief. v. Melancholy
That froward Scholar in Arithmetic,
Who does Division and Substraction fly,
And only learns to add and multiply.
Beauties moth, cancker. Daughter of care and misery.
Souls-afflicting vinegar.
To Grieve. v. Mourn. Lament. Groan. v. Sigh.
The end of this gave life unto a groan,
As if her life and it had been but one.
Sad symptom of oppressing misery,
Wounding the pitying air.
Grove. v. Dark, Silent VVood.
All hushed and silent as the mid of night.
Birds that compassion from the rocks could bring,
Had only license in that place to sing.
Whose doleful notes the melancholy Cat,
Close in an hollow tree sat wondering at,
Trees nod their curled heads as they would be
The judges to approve their melody,
Where Fairies danced, and Shepherds quills,
In sweet contention past the tedious day:
Dark silent grov^, profaned by no unholy love.
Where witty melancholy never
Did carve the trees or wound the air,
Where naught except a solitary spring
Was ever heard, to which the Nymphs did sing,
Narcissus obsequies. The scattered grove
Leads winter shelters, and gives summer bowers,
As with the flood in courtesy it strove,
And by repulsing the sharp Northern showers,
Courts the proud Castle, who by turning to her,
Smiles to behold the wanton wood nymph woo her,
A bushie grove pricking the lookers eye,
Where every morn a quire of Sylvans song,
And leaves to chattering winds served as a tongue,
By which the water turns in many a ring,
As if it fain would stay to hear them sing,
And on the top a thousand young birds fly
To be instructed in their harmony
G^ilty. v. Blush.
Whose guiltiness betraying blushes speak,
That makes his fault legible in his cheeks,
His trembling lips, and his disjointed word.
Attainted breast. The conscious thoughts.
Giant.
Sighing out clouds of breath.
From his great yawning nostrils, the earths bold sons,
A moving rock, a walking, stalking tower.
Great stones he flung,
Like quarries by a warlick engine slung.
A walking Aetna, natures great Folio.
A stalking mast, Natures text-hand, Natures whole cloth.
He that saw him go
Would think some steeple reeled to and fro.
When the dreadful monster stirred
His massy limbs, beneath his feet he rea^'d
A cloud of dust, and wheresoe'r he went.
Flight, fear and death his ghastly steps attend,
That swears by great Mahoon, moving mount of flesh.
Corflambo, Garugan^u^. Colbrand, Brandamart,
Typhoeus, Antipha^es, Polyphemus, Brontes, Steropes, Pyracm^n
The serpent footed issue that durst invade,
And would on heaven their hundred hands have laid.
Tirans. Mimas, Porphyrian, Enceladius, Rhaetus
^reat sons of earth. Of large dimensions.
The great hill-lifters.
Gunnes.
Engines whose rude throats.
The immortal Joves great thunder, counterfeit.
The weighty circumstance of glorious war.
^i^ick thunder, ^pes of thunder,
Whose vast throats disgorge,
And with loud thunder belch their angry language.
Vomiting out, digested into flame,
What was but dust crammed in. Cowardly cruelty,
That date not speak, nor do, but at a distance,
H.
Hair.
THE heads native ornament. Natures shadow.
Locks like streams of liquid amber
Smoothly dangling seemed to spread,
Curtains fit for beautes chamber.
Hangings fit for beauties bed,
Of which slender golden sleave
Love his wanton nets did weave.
The strings of Cupids bow. Venus trammells.
Sleavy Amber. Cupids sleavy chains,
Insnaring nets like to the rays,
Wherewith the sun does diaper the seas.
Had fair Arachne wrought her hair,
When she for skill with Pallas did compare.
Minerva's work had never been esteeem'd.
The silken fringes of the head,
Her hair was rold in many a curious fret,
Like to a rich and artfull Coronet.
Upon whose arches twenty cupids lay,
And were, or tied. or loath to fly about.
Such hair.
As those that lay their tresses to the Sun,
View hers, and see if theirs be not agreeing
To roll them up, as scarcely worth the seeing.
Her tresses far more fair,
Would show in heaven, then Berecynthians hair,
Her plenteous hair in curled billows swims,
On her bright shoulders, and harmonious limbs.
The flaxen wealth of nauture. The dangling curls.
The bounteous treasure of her hair,
Whose dangling tresses if they had been shorn,
Yet never cut and unto Colchas born,
They had allured the venturous youth of Greece,
To hazard more than for the golden Fleece.
Bright Phebaean hair,
Where perfumed Meanders are.
That amorous cordage, glistering groves.
As if that nature for so rare a piece.
Had meant a shadow,
Whose curious tresses dangle all unbound
With unaffected order to the ground.
Her tresses falling down,
As loath to be imprisoned on her Crown.
I saw the soft air sportively to take
To diverse forms, and sundry shapes to make it.
Natures rich fan, whose wires are drawn
Softer than the threads of Lawn,
And are softer than the leaves
On which the subtle spinner weaves,
That net of beams able to captive Jove.
Vulcan need not a finer, stronger net,
For Venus and her Champion to set.
On whose radiant hair
Cupid sits fettered in a golden snare.
Her disheveled hair
Hung down behind, as if her only care
Had been to reconcile neglect and art.
His hair becomes him like the star
That ushers in the day. Locks some curled, some forgotten, with such a
careless care and art dissembling art, as she seemed she would lay them for a
pattern, whether nature simply, or nature helped by cunning were the more
excellent.

A net able to have caught Jupiter
When he was an eagle.
It was doubtful whether the hair graced the garland, or the garland the hair.
Whose odor fills the ambient air.
Which loosest fastest ri^st.
The golden sea, whose waves in curles are broken.
The wanton winds, with beauties so divine.
Ravished, staid not, till in her golden hair,
They did themselves in sweetest prison twine,
And fain the sportive winds, there would their stay
Have mad, but forced by nature still to fly.
First did the puffing kisses her locks display.
Her sunny locks
Hang on her temples like a golden fleece.
Nature there p^aid the spider, and has wove
A golden mesh^^'intrap the hearts of men.
Like a Laconian maid,
*Ties her neglected hair in curious braides*
Locks so aptly twined
That every hair a soul does bind.
Insnating all beholders.
Like to the silk the curious Seres spin.
Which from their crown
Phoebus and Bacchus wished were hanging down.
Small as the w^e^y net
Which Vulcan once for Mats and Venus set.
Hail.
The candid balls of ice. The candid pellets of the sky.
The northwest wind under the weeping kid.
Never so thick his vollies racketed.
Of bounding balls, of icie pearl. The gunshot of the skies.
Halcyon.
The azure-plumed Halcyones.
Whose birth controlls the raging seas.
Birds of calm that brood upon the charmed wave.
Hands.
Natures handmaids. The bodies victuallers.
A wealthy palm
Which holds the sweating of the Eastern balm.
Whence Jove might sip out nectar.
Fingers the darts of love,
Which with a touch might make a tiger me^k,
So soft, so feeling delicate and sleek,
As Nature wore the lillies for a glove.
As might beget life, where was never none,
And put a spirit into flinty stone.
Where whiteness does for ever sit,
Nature her self enameld'd it,
Where with a strange compact dothly,
Warm snow, moist pearl, soft ivory.
There fall those saphire-coloured brooks,
Which conduit like, with curious crooks,
Sweet Islands make in that sweet land;
As for the fingers of that hand,
The bloody shafts of Cupids war,
With Amethists they headed are,
Which without stroke subdue.
Which with their whiteness make one desire to touch them, and with their
softness rebound a desire to look on them.
In whose comparison all whites are ink,
Writing their own reproach, to whose soft seizure
The cygnets down is harsh, and spirit of sense,
Hard as the plough-mans hand.
Hanged.
Chok't with a hempen squincy.
To dangle from the cursed tree.
To go to heaven in a string
To take a turn at Tyburne
Happy V. Fortunate
I am in Elysium. I will pronounce this for my birth day.
Plact in the Apogaeum. Zenith of all happiness
Whose bliss
Meets his desires, or prevents his wish.
One that has so much happiness, as puzzles his soul to find subject for
another wish.
Envy to cry could scarce forbear,
Finding no argument could urge a tear,
I am too great for Fortune to bereave,
Though much she ravish, she much more must leave.
My blessings are above low fear,
Like N^obe before, Latona's doom.
Blessed
Beyond the treasures of the balmy East.
Every day
Rose with delight, and with it to us set.
An happiness, which Jove would be
More proud of far, than of his deiry.
Writes a non ultra to his bliss.
^n happiness which none can have but he,
^ust blush to call ought after misery.
Hard.
Hard as the ploughmans hand.
As the camels c^llows knee. As adamant,
Which naught can soften but the blood of goats.
Hard as the unrelenting tyrants heart.
As the Scythian rock. As fire-engendring flint.
As the stiff ribs of iron. As the lasting marble.
As solid brass. As the rockie stone.
Harpies.
The virgin raping fowls. Stimphalian monsters.
T^^tarian birds. Aello. Ocypete. Celaeno.
^ore horrid monsters, direr plagues than those,
Or wath of Gods, from Styx yet never rose,
Like foul with virgin faces, purging still
Their filthy paunches, armed with talons ill,
And ever pale with famine. Jupiters dogs.
Daughters of Neptune, and old Tellus. Parents of prodigies.
Phineus torm^ntours, which with hooky claws,
Snatched all his meat, to glut their filthy mawes.
Harvest. v. Autumn.
The reaper panting both for heat and pain,
With crooked rasor shaves the tufted plain,
The full ears humbling their flowery top,
Are even as ready with a grateful crap,
To think the husband for his painful toil.
The summers green is girded up in sheaves,
Borne on the bear with white and bristly beard.
Now the industrious harvester,
Scorched all day with his own scalding heat,
Shaves with keen sith, the glory and delight
Of motly meadows. When Ceres yellow locks are shorn.
Have. v. Swift.
Each step the other strives to overgoe.
With hasty feet, swallowing the tedious way,
With speed that went before the winged thought.
With speed untainted by delay. With a lovers speed.
Ste^'d in his reeking sweat. Each envious pace vies to be first.
Have looks through his eyes. With such speed,
He Is almost dead for breath, has scarcely more
Then will make up his message.
With as much have as they would fly death.
To spar, to give wings, to feather flight, to post.
Hate.
To pursue with a stepdames hate.
The tender swallow hates less the cold.
He hates me like a dog or snake,
The Gods cannot more hate the Stygian lake.
Pursues him with Vatinian hate. Bupalian hate.
God loves not goodness more than she hates thee.
Unreconciled hatred. When these agree,
Nature will reconcile antipathies.
So plants love oil. So vines the colwort love.
So sheep love wolves. Swounds at the very name.
And sinks as if he mean the Antipodes
To see, and leave this loathed hemispheare
Wherein I breath.
Haven.
Harbor, port, safe station of the tossed barge.
C^lme bosoms that embrace the sh^p.
The weary seamans wish and hope.
The long expected shore.
That has occasioned many pious aires,
And been the subject of the seamans prayer.
Hawke.
The common terror of the doves.
The airy hunter. The insulting tyrant of the air*
The airy pyrate, Rover.
Head.
Crest, sommet, globe of wonder.
That does contain
All sense, and fountain of all sense, the brain.
Health.
My pulse beats music, and my lively blood
Danceth an healthful measure.
Whose brow no wrinkle bears,
Whose cheeks no palenesse, in whose eyes no tears,
But like a child, she is pleasant, quick and plump,
She seems to fly, to skip, to dance and jump,
And life's bright brand in her white hand does shine,
The Arabians bird rare plumage plat^ed fine
Serves her for surcoate, and her seemly train,
Mirth, exercise, and temperance sustein.
Whose humors in sweet temper ly
With undisturbed harmony.
The humors calm.
Hear.
To salute the ear. To be presented to the ear.
To strike, to beat the ear.
To entertain the attentive ear.
To glad the ear. To wound, to stab the ear.
Hearken. v. Attend.
To grace with attention.
To lend a willing, yiedling ear.
To lend soft audience, Afford the speakers tongue an ear.
Heart.
The busy furnace. The spring of heat and life.
The anvile on which all the thoughts do beat.
The bodies sun. The seat of passions.
The souls throne, The minthouse of affections.
Heat. Hot.
The suns offensive rage.
Hot as the scalding ray
Which Phoebus darts, when he divides the day
Into its equal halfes, Hot as the torrid zone.
Burning with a calenture.
So hor was the Tyrinthian when he wore
The poisoned shirt washed in the Centaures gore.
So burning Phaeton, when he did drive
The flaming chariot.
My bulk to Aetna turns,
And all her flames pent in my bosom burn.
I dare that fire it self for heat provoke
That chambers in the sky.
Like flames of burning sulphur. Acheron. Phlcgethon.
Hot as a burning fever. As Perillus bull.
Seething, boiling, soultry, stewing, baking, brewing, frying, roasting,
broyling, parching, scorching, burning, flaming, chased smoking, sweating,
reeking, glowing, findging, scalding.

Hot as the flaming furnace.
Heaven.
The Olympic Hall. Joves white hall.
The starty vault. The stately palace of the Gods.
The spangled canopy. The airy battlements.
Star-spotted-spangled-powdered-checkered-embroyderered curtains, carpets,
books.

The azure circle. Upper loft. Crystal map.
The highest chamber, story, gallery.
The glistering circles of the sky. The rolling globe.
The Crystal spears, arches.
The azure tester trimmed with golden sparks.
The starry seeling. The rich pavillion of the Gods.
The Crystal rafters of the sky. The vast extensious of the sky.
The blew rafters of the spangled skies.
The spangled mansion of the stars.
Heavens gilt azure cope. Joves high turrets.
The glorious roof, the star-enamelled vault.
The starry court of Jove. The vault of stars.
The starry round. Heavens shining bauldrick.
The azure-spangled regions. The Crystal throne.
The starry round. That house of purer bodies tenanted.
The rapid orbs that bear
The changing seasons of the year,
On their swift wings.
Silver chime,
Moving with melodious time.
The silver pages of that book,
Where stars are golden letters. Glory's magazin.
Starry towers. Celestial bowers. Sapphire rafters of the skies,
The whirling poles.
That dance their daily galiard.
Majestic roof fretred with golden fire.
Harmonious orbs that roll
In restless gyres about the Artick pole.
Hector.
Andromache's stout husband. Priams tall son.
Priams valiant son. The Grecians hate and fear,
Till he that was their fear, became their scorn,
And slain, was by Ae^onian horses torn.
Hecuba,
Priams sad wife. Hectors unhappy mother.
Great Dima's daughter. Priams fruitful wife,
That gave the all illustrious Hector life.
That scratcht out Polymnestors eyes.
Buried with stones upon her flung,
Yet first revenged with curses of her tongue.
Whom raging grief converted to a bitch.
Ulysses scorned lot. Unhappy Queen,
Which after she so much of joy had seen,
Had life by fates unkindest kindness lent,
To see her daughters impious ravishment;
Her sons untimely fate, her husband die,
And rolled in blood before Joves altar lie;
Polyxena dear issue of her womb,
A sacrifice upon Achilles tomb;
And which was worse than all she saw before,
The livelesse corpse of her young Polydore.
Helen. v. Beautiful.
The beauty of whose cheeks
Brought against Troy the army of the Greeks.
Paris unhappy bride. Leda's fair daughter,
That charming beauty, free from tainting spot,
Worthy of Jove, if not by Jove begot.
The twin-brothers pride.
Hell.
Sad Averno's strand. The depths to heaven-oppos'd.
Pluto's sad monarchy. The shady coast.
Pluto's wide-door'd house. The damned dismal mansion.
The darksome plashie lake of Acheron.
The silent deeps,
And horrid shades where sorrow never sleeps.
Pluto's pale kingdom. Dungeon. Blind caves of Dis.
The gloomy dwellings of the damned spirits.
Where Demogorgon's in dull darkness pent.
Where hideous Chaos keeps. Pluto's grizly band.
A land where death, confusion, endless night,
And horror reign, where darnesse is their light.
The infern. I vault. The dolorous mansion.
Where Styx the old grandame of the Gods does lie.
That dungeon where the damned souls are shut.
The pooles of scalding oil and sulphur.
The burning wheel turned round in flames.
In burning beds of steel the damned lie.
Where S^syphus his restless torments rolls.
Roasted in sulphur.
And washed in deep vast gulphs of liquid fire.
The black empire. The ugly baleful bower.
The loathsome kingdom. P^uto's empty regiment.
T^'accurst aboades, monsions.
The gloomy empire of the infernal king.
The unamiable realm. The realms to day unknown,
The dreadful house of Austere Pluto.
Where Tantalus does ever dread
The falling stone that hangs upon his head.
There are those youthful sisters which in vain
Power water still into that fatal tun,
Which is as empty as when they begun.
There Centaures, there the hissing Hydra stands,
Scylla, Briarius with his hundred hands,
Fire-arm'd Chymera's, Harpies full of rape,
Snaky hair'd Gorgons. Gerions triple shape.
There all the furies, daughters to old night,
Implacable, and hating all delight.
Before the adamantine doors do sit,
And there with combs, their snakie curles unknit.
The dungeon of the damned this is named,
Here Tityus for attempted rape defamed,
Has his vast body on nine acres spread,
And on his heart a greedy vulture fed,
Ixion turned upon a restless wheel,
With giddy head pursues his flying heel.
v. Stix, Cocitus, Phlegethon, Acheron, Ixion, Tityus, Belides,
Tantalus, Geryon, Cerberus, Furies, Pluto, Proserpine.
Helmet.
Nodding a terror to the foe, with plumed crests.
The plumed caske. The Soldiers warlick mask.
The shining caske. The armed heads defense.
Hercules.
The bold Tyrinthian Hero.
He who bears the dreadful club.
Whom twice six labors deified.
Proud Al^mena's son. Fair Al^mena's son.
Joves great laborious son.
That wore the fatal shirt. VVhite-anckled Hebe's spouse.
Whose shoulders did sustein
The world, nor shrunk beneath so great a fraught.
To strangle serpents was his cradle sport.
Who when he saw the Thracian horses feast
With humane flesh, their mangers overthrew,
And with the steeds, their wicked master slew.
Joves cruel wife was sooner weary to impose,
Than he was to perform.
Whose garment that he wrapped his body in,
Was glorious spoils, the Nemean Lions skin:
The injured worlds revenger, and his own.
First he the grim Cleonian Lion slew;
Next Hydra did with sword and fire subdue;
The Erimanthian Bore with Javelin stroke;
The brass hoov'd stagge with golden antlers took;
The chac't Stimphalides his arrows felt,
From th'Amozonian won her precious belt;
Then cleans'd Augaeus stalls with ordure full,
And vanquished the furious Cretan bull;
S^erne Diomed his ravenous horses threw,
Three-headed Gerion in Iberia slew;
The Hesperian dragon-guarded apples won,
And scowling Cerberus showed to the sun.
Hermophradite.
Sir and Madam twisted both together.
One orb contains both sun and moon.
Within whose eyes
Both Venus and Adonis lies.
In every simple sound
A perfect dialogue is found.
Tib and Tom in a trick. Natures Philip and Mary's sixpence.
Two sexes in one Individual.
Hermit. v. Anchorite. High.
Which with less distance peeps into the stars.
Than which no place of earth does swell more high
In any place, nor nearer meets the sky.
Which by their wondrous height
Might seem to threat the skies, and once more fright
The Gods with a gigantick war.
That out-braves the sky.
Till as Atlas pillars which did tack.
Heaven to the earth.
That to an immense height draws up the eye.
A cliffe
As high as the Canarian Tenariffe,
Which lift their swelling tops above the skies.
Which shrouds
His airy bead in hanging clouds.
Whose lofty top
Nature has made contiguous to the heavens,
Whose lofty top does know
No distance from the Skies.
Singing his pate against the torrid Zone.
Makes Offa like a wart. That emulate the Sky,
As they would ease great Atlas of his load,
That rear
Their glitering tops, which fatal lightning fear,
Invade the Skies, And bid defiance to the Sky,
That lick the stars, and steal a kiss from heaven,
That muffle up their heads within the clouds.
Like Athos Mount, Or Erix steep and long,
Or like old Apeninus raised on high
Into the Air, kissing the starrie Sky.
Whose top seems to despise
The under vale -- does rise*
In stately height to parley with the Skies,
As Mountains on whose barren breast,
The laboring clouds do often rest.
Whose stately eminence.
Vassals the under vales circumference,
So high as if they meant,
To ease strong Atlas of his punishment,
Whose head like winged fame,
Might pierce the clouds, yea seem the stars to kiss,
And Mausolus great tomb might stand in this.
Tempting the Sky, so ^gh
From thence swelled mountains seem but to the eye
As atoms, losing their heads within the Sky,
Bearding the stars, thrusting acquaintance on the Sky
Proudly insulting o'r the under Sky,
Whose lofty foreheads brush the stars,
As if thee meant to put out heavens bright eyes,
As if they meant to scale the Skies,
Whose height does court the clouds,
Scaling Olympus snowie brow,
Knocking their h^ows against heavens brazen doors,
That heaven and earth atone.
That reach heavens battlements,
So high
They thr^atned to give battle to the Sky,
Which show
Against the height of heaven their pointed brow.
Skie-kissing, air-invading, High as Riphoean hills.
Hill. v. High.
Two rockie hills lift their proud tops on high.
And make a vale beneath, Their lofty brows display.
Earths dugges, wart, risings, tumors, blisters.
Athos, Atlas, Haemus, Rhodope, Ismarus, Eryx, Cithaera,
Taurns, Caucasus, Alps, Appenine, Oeta, Tmolus, Aetna.
Pa^nassus, Othrys, Cynthus, Mimas, Dyndimus, Mycale.
P^lion, Pindus, Offa, Olympus, Helicon, Ida.
History.
The rorch of truth. The treasure-house of time.
The glass of ages past. The Matron with her eyes, behind her.
Hippocrene.
The fount
Made by the horse hoof on the Muses Mount.
^ganippe's spring. The Heliconian well,
The Muses sacred rill. The Poets fount,
Where they to drench their ravished lips are wont. V. Muses-Parnassus.

Forked Parnassus spring, where those sweet maids of memory do sing
Homer.
The Grecian Merlin.
The Muses high Priest
Blind Bard of Greece.
The Muses Purveyor. Apollo's Caterer.
The Priest of Smyrna that took such delight
In knowledge, that for it he changed his sight,
Whose pen
The Scepter was, which ruled the souls of men.
Honest. v. Forms of Commending.
A man of a most confirmed honesty,
He would not flatter Neptune for his trident,
Or love for power to thunder. His heart's his mouth.
Would not betray
The Devil to his fellow, and delights
No less in truth than light.
A mind keeps correspondence to his tongue.
A mind allied unto his words.
He has all the entendmenrs of an honest man,
From whose free tongue proceeds naught
That is not correspondent to h^s thought,
Whose head and heart keep always one pace.
His conscience and his tongue keep the same tune.
Who punishment, less than the trespass fears.
Honey.
The sweets that crown the labors of the Be,
The sweet provision of the Be,
Bees flowrie task. The riches of Hyblean Cottagers
The treasures of industrious Bees.
Honor.
The waxen Palace of the Be.
The waxie Cabbins of industrious Bees.
The Bees hollow home. The Bees arched cells.
The dainty wax divided rooms.
The honey Merchants shop. The waxen Canopie.
Honor.
The inheritance of air. Prides Stirrup.
That glorious nothing. Ambitious wish and scope,
Which envy ever lackies at the heels.
That great engagement to great purposes.
Swelling Titles, gilded emptiness, virtues due guerdo.
Dreams in career. Embroydered names.
The creature of authority.
Hope.
The poor man's god. The lullabie of care.
The greatest antidote against despair.
Miseries babie, rattle, lenitive.
Engaging expectation, The parasite of thought.
The dream of mad men. Ever-changing gale,
Swelling with wanton breath, the gaudy sayls
Of glorious fools. Miseries cordial.
The only happiness of those that are deprived of all other. The hope with
expectation feed.
The dame of beggars, and the Queen of Kings.
Our joy in sorrow, and our peace in strife.
The waking dream. Brave temper of resolved spirits.
Valors incentive. Patience's pillow. Lawfullest flatterer.
The pullies to draw up dejected hearts. The firstborn of experience
Horns.
The terror of the skull. Natures offensive arms,
And her defensive too.
Horse.
High bounding Steeds, whose rich caparison
With Scarlet blush, with gold their bridles shone.
The best that ever trod
The sounding Center. Like to the breed of great Laomedon,
^r those which Jove gave Tros.
The bloody spur thrusts anger in his side,
Which perform their fiery course.
^^rinckling their foam, and snowing on the dust.
^^e Steed in stately trappings proudly stamps,
and in his mouth the foamy bridle champs,
(...) forth the ringled bit, and with his hooves
Checks the submissive ground.
He lifts his hasty hoof, as if he scorned
The earth, as if his tabering feet had found
A way to go, and yet never touch the ground.
Bounds from the earth, as if his entrails were hairs.
He is pure air and fire. Earth and water never show
themselves in him, but in his still patience to let his ^ider mount him.
There stamps a Steed that champs the frothy steel.
This strokes the ground, that scorns it with his heel.
His neck with thunder armed, his breast with force,
Who from his nostrils throws a dreadful, light
E^alts in his own courage, proudly bounds,
With trampling hoof the sounding Center wounds,
Breaks through the ordered ranks with eyes that burn,
Nor from the battel-ax nor sword will turn,
The rattling Quiver, nor the glittring Spear,
Or dazzling Shield can daunt his heart with fear,
Through rage and fierceness he devours the ground,
Nor in his fury hears the trumpet sound,
Far off the battle smells, like thunder neighs,
Loud shouts and dying groans his courage raise.
One snorts, another puffes out angry wind,
This mounts before, and that curvets behind,
That with their hoofs so swift beat out the race,
As if an engine shot them to the place,
Going as if they did disdain the ground,
And treading on it, not for necessity, but in contempt.
The battered Center flew V. Dubarta's Handicrafts description of an horse.

In clouds of dust raised from their pransing hoofs,
That beat a thunder from the groaning earth.
Hour.
Times lesser children.
The fleeting measures of the day.
The rags and bits of time.
Time labors to bring forth, 7, 8, 9, etc.
Humble.
Unambitious, spirit-groveling, low-pitcht soul.
No swelling glory courts his private thoughts.
Content with fortunes courtesy.
whose unaspiring Bark by calm shores glide,
So humble as she is able to put pride out of countenance.
Who avoids not pride by not knowing her excellency, but makes
it one of her excellencies to be void of pride.
Hungry.
A barking stomach. Lawless, famine, self-consuming hunger,
Which makes men feed, on that they cannot feed
Their weakened limbs. Hunger, the bellies flame.
The empty bellies lean inhabitant.
Like Erisicthon King of Thessalie,
He dreams of feasts extends his idle jaws,
With laboring teeth fantastically chaws,
Deludes his throat by swallowing empty fate, V. Ovids Met. l. 8. Fab.
Erisicthon. Browns Pastorals, l. 2. song 1.

And for affected food devours the air.
Hot famine raves through all his reins,
And in his guts and greedy palate raigns.
Hunt. Hunter.
None more,
The choice affected, or t'entoil the bore,
The tops of Mountains scale,
And trace the leavie woods,
Follows the cry of hounds,
And drives the hair along the fallow grounds,
Wakening the prattling echo -- sounds,
And shrill Alarums of the foul mouthed hounds,
Whilst hounds do make the woody hills,
Talk in an hundred voices to the rills.
The savage and the bloody sport
Of chaste Diana -- that loves to set
The toils, and chase the Deer into the net,
Whose choicest music is the cry of hounds.
Quick-sihred Beagles in a view,
O'r hill and dale, the fleeing chase pursue
The sented trace. The babbling echo mocks the hounds
Takes pleasure in his pale enclosed grounds,
And lets the Rhetoric of his deep mout'd hounds
Persuade his headstrong sorrows so to fly
Before his herd, as they before the cry.
^e quick-nos'd army with their full mouthed sounds
^^sue the timorous hare,
^e mournful Echo left off to bemoan
^^r Loud Narcissus, and with them made one.
Busy in pursuit of savage spoils,
^e drove the Deer into his corded toils,
^ith purple blood, slain Deer the hills imbrue Ovid. Met. l. 3. Fab. Actaeon.

^^y tread the mazes of the pathlesse wood.
Hyades.
^e watery Deities. The showry Constellation.
The seven glistering stars
^^ the Bulls front.
^^mpestuous Constellations.
^eeces to Tethys and Oceanus.
^aughters of Atlas and Aetheria.
^^brosia, Eudoxa, Pasithea, Coronis, Plexautis.
^ytho, Tyche.
Hydra.
Lernean serpent with her store
Of srightfull heads which by their loss encreast,
that having less she still had more,
^ill by the fire and sword at last suppressed.
^ercules second Labor.
Hymen. v. Epithalamium.
The God of union, he that ties
Hearts in a knot, and links in sacred chains,
The mutual souls of lovers,
Great president of love the God that sings
His holy numbers over marriage beds,
By whose sacred Rites
The Bride is led to nuptial delights,
The god that wears the Saffron robes,
Whose sacred lights, V. Marriage.

Give luster to the marriage nights.
Hypocrisy. -- Hypocrites.
How foul soever the back-doore or postern be, the gate opening
to the street is swept and garnished.
Religious Alchimy, maskt impiety.
Double iniquity. The filed tongue with defiled heart.
False fire. Religions Meteors.
Rather than lose a drop of praise, lick it up with their own
^ongues.
Like Saul going to the Devil in a disguise.
Religious glowworms. The Churches rotten wood.
Sodoms apples. The Devil in a Monks habit.
The Devil like an angel of light. Whited sepulchers.
Wolves in sheeps clothing. Gouty legs in silk stockins.
Abomination in the Holy Place.
Hanging an Angel for the sign in their face, when the Devi^
lodges in their heart.
High hung mills make most noise, and grind least.
Shallow streams that make the higher noise for their low water.
The archer and the mark in all actions, shooting at his own praise and profit.
Fasting is meat and drink to him whilst others behold it.
Gilt cups glister more than those of massy gold, which are seldom burnished.
Brave it in the shop, that have nothing in the warehouse.
He has a gaudy facing, hut cares not for the lining.
Hide.
To mask, shroud, cloak, couch muffle, periwig, coat, curtain, carpet, target,
pave, matt.
To canopie, to candie o'r, sheath, mantle, house, shell, cloister, scarf,
skreen, wrap, immure, envelope, involve, enshrine, enchest, liverit,
vail, envail, to roof, to tester, to pavilion.
I.
January.
When with winter snow,
The Pleiades does Oemu^ top bestrow,
When the times new-naming day draws near,
Old Janus feast beginner of the year,
That from old Janus takes his name,
The leader of the months,
The foreman in the Jury of the months,
When the Sun has run his full career,
Through the twelve Stages of the turning year.
The King of light, father of aged time,
Has brought about that day which is the prime.
To the slow gliding mon^hs, when every eye
^eirs symptoms of a sober jollity,
^d every hand is ready to present
^e service in a real complement,
^st some in golden letters write their love,
^e speak affection by a ^ing or glove,
^r planes and poin^s (for even the peasant may;
^er his ruder fashion be as gay
^s the brisk Courtly Sir) and thinks that he
Cannot without a gross absurdity,
^e this day frugall, and not spare his friend,
^ome gift to show his love finds not an end.
^ith the decased year.
^^, Cold, Frost, Hall, Snow, Winter.
Janus.
Key-hearing god. The two faced god Pat^^cius.
^^ lausius, That shuts and opes the year,
Who only of the gods can see his back.
Old Vesta's husband.
Whose temple shut to Romans did declare,
A settled peace, but open, open war.
Jason.
He that from Colchos brought to Greece
The wealthy Trophies of the golden Fleece^
The great Commander of the Argonautes.
Aesons victorious heir.
The Aemon^an conqueror.
Ice. v. Frost.
Water Chrystalized, ctusted snow, Crystal chains
Compacted water. Curded streams.
Idle.
Lethargick soul, slumbe^ing soul, with yawning lips
Whose arms infolded kni^.
A drowsy knot upon his careless breast,
That lies in hungry wishes pined.
That feed on sloth.
As beetles in the dung they breed in,
Not ca^ing how the metal of their mind
Is eaten with the rust of idleness.
A reasonable dormouse. His soul lies fallows
Ida.
The mount enchas'd with silver springs.
The famous mount of Troy,
Where Paris judge'd the naked goddesses,
Whose wealthy top,
Is always crowned with a plenteous crop.
The stately hill of Troy,
Whence Jove's great eagle snatched the beauteous boy
Idolater.
That to the wo^d and stone devotion do,
More senseless than the stones they bow unto.
Jealous. Jealousy.
Burning like Aetna with an imbowell'd fire.
Self-torturing Martyr. Hollow-ey'd, Snake-hair'd monster.
That watches himself a mischief, and keeps a lear eye still, for fear
he should escape him.
Hundred eyed Argos, ever waking spy.
Pale hag, infernal Fury, pleasures smart,
Envious observer viewing every part.
Pined
With seeking that he would be loath to find.
The frenzy of of the wise. Unkind carefullnesse.
Self-punishment for others fault. Cousin of envy.
Daughter of love and mother of hate.
Self-misery for others happiness.
Beauties watchful guard.
Diligent in hope to lose his labor.
That fruitful mischief, ferall malady.
Con^inuall Fever. The furious b^tter passion.
Self-harming passion. Virtue drowning flood,
That hellish fire not quenched but with blood,
One that dates scarce trust his mother in bed with
his wife. An head fly-blown with suspicion.
Argos was not so jealous of his Cow,
Nor the watchful dragon of the golden fleece.
An ill Jailour that makes many break prison. It
opens more ways to wickedness than it stops, and
where it finds one, makes ten dishonest.
Ignorant.
Things like men, which seem far off a man.
Of scarce so much understanding as will deliver him from being
a fool.
Only his lineaments belly a man,
A son of earth. A narrow flat soul.
A man of a lank shallow brain.
Dull unconceiving brains. Idiot, D^zzard.
Speaking beast. A greater babie.
Cumine ass. Old children.
A piece of earth that Prometheus put not half th^s
p^oportion of fire into. A soul drowned in flesh.
Ignorant rich man.
A glorious fool, a golden ass.
Sh^ep with a golden fleece, a crowned ass.
Dull as a thick-skul'd Justice, drunk with sloth,
Or Alderman far gone in capon-broth.
Island.
Ground hugged in Neptun^s arms.
Clasped in the embraces of the sea.
Hoopt with a watery girdle. Hedged in with water.
Neptunes enclosures.
Immortal. v. Eternal
That may challenge time and out wear it.
What neither age, winter nor death can know.
Above times battery, which ages cloud can n^'r benight.
That neither stoop to age nor death:
Imperfect.
Embryon'd, unpolisht, unfill'd, not th^oughly anvill'd.
Impossible. v. Never, Incredible.
Not within the sphere of omnipotency.
Not within the capacity of being an object to an al^ighty power.
Mere contradictions. Chymera', of a restless brain.
We may hope as soon to calm a tempest with a song.
Should all the world their da^ing wits confer,
They should not make this less impossible.
You may as soon go kindle fire with snow,
As easily may thou th^ow
A drop of water in the breaking gulf,
And take it thence again unmi^gled,
Without addition or diminishing.
As soon*
The whole earth may be bored, and the Moon
May through the Center creep and so (...)
Her brothers noon-ride with the Antipodes.
Imprison.
Its easier far,
The torn and injured panther to restrain,
In's hot pursuit, or stroke him cool again,
To tell the cause why winds do disagree,
Divide them when in storms they mingled be,
Strait fix them single, where they breathed before,
Or fan them with a plume from sea to shore:
Than -- men shall sooner see
The enticed needle disobey, the tempting Adamant.
Imprison.
Confine, enjayle, enclose, fetter shackle,
gyre, manacle, chain, enthral, enslave.
Impudent.
Of a ^ear'd impudence,
Who have confirmed their faces like to flint,
Against all die of modesty.
Who nere had so much grace
As is portended by the blushing face.
Ash^m'd of nothing but of modesty.
One that has dispensed with all shame.
A reprobate in virtue.
Without restraint of shame, or modesty.
An headstrong impudence, that mocks reproof.
Which with small change might be turned into flint.
Inconstant. v. Changeable. Incredible. v. Admirable.
I add no more least truth it self should blush,
Fearing to loose its credit.
Were not avouched by antiquity
Who durst believe it? Behold,
What hope transcends, nor can with faith be told,
It Is past my creed. Beyond the credit of the credulous.
Above all history, stands not within the prospect of belief. Which to believe,
Is a faith which reason without miracle
Can never plant in understanding judgments.
Not believed without some difficulty.
Without all appearance of reason.
There Is nothing is incredible after this.
Which none would speak, but he that thought
He had a privilege without control,
To speak things unlikely.
Posterity will scarce the same believe.
Which no wise man can lend a thought to.
I sooner will believe Medusa's head
With snaky hairs was round encompassed;
Or Scylla, or Chymaera's monstrous frame,
Lion and serpent parted with a flame,
Or that the Minotaure has ever been,
Or Cerberus with triple dog-face seen,
Or Sphynx, or Harpyes, Giants that had feet
Like serpents, Gyges, or the Centaures fleet.
I will believe all these can sooner be,
Than that, etc.
v. Never Impossible. Indian.
That sucks sweet liquor from his sugar cane,
That dives for pearls within the wealthy maine.
That within
The streams of Ganges bathe their swarthy skin.
Infamous.
Whose name is in black letters registered
In the eternal book of infamy.
From out the book of honor razed quite.
Infant.
Nonage, pupillage, mino ity, dawne of life.
The new-spun thread of life.
That has but yet an inch of life.
Bonelesse gums. Unbreathed suckling.
Whose lips hang on the mothers breast.
Whose cries
A estill'd with rattles, and fond lullabies.
A thrumbe of man, Natures epitome.
The handful of a man. Not much in debt to time.
The mothers late delivered load.
Whose young breath scarce knows the way.
Whose pretty smiles could never yet descry
The deep affect on of a mothers eye.
Whose imperfect pace,
Can hardly lead his feet from place to place.
Inocent.
A man as free from wronging others, as himself.
Whose hands are free,
And yet unstaind with any injury.
From all aspersions clear.
Whose souls unsullied yet with ^oul offense
Enthroned sit in spotless innocence.
Pure as the stream of aged Symois, untainted with offense.
White as the unsullied lilly was her soul.
His looks does raise from blemish clear.
Entice.
To train, toll, ensna^e, becken, woo, court, allure, bai^.
Job.
That spectacle of patient misery,
All the ulcers that had been
In Egypt cured were broke out again
In his distempered flesh. The patient Edomite.
He that tr^'d both estates,
Acquainted with the smiles and frowns of fate
Pa^^ent unto a P^ove^^,
Whom neither riches could make insolent,
Nor naked p^verty impatient.
John the Baptist
The son of Zachay.
Late issue of the barr^n womb.
Christ's former trumpet, The head of Prophets,
Forerunner to the King of heaven,
The morning star of the etern^l son,
Whose head was price unto the D^msels feet.
Joyful. v. Glad. J^y Public. v. Shout. Noise.
The Palace with the peop^e^ praises rings,
And sacred joy in every bosom sp^ings.
The people that in shoals do swim,
Walls window^, ooft, ^owers, steeples, all were set
With several eyes that in this object met.
Children incapable to all men's thinking,
Were d^unk with joy, as others were with drinking,
And st^ik^s the heavens with sound of trembling bells.
The Vocal G^ddesse leaving d^sart woods,
Sl^des down the Dales, and dancing on the floods
Observes our woods, and wi^h repeating noise
Contends to double our abundant joys.
Mirth digs her pits in every che^k.
To bury grief and sorrow, Casheer all care, and cheer the foolish, soul
To join.
To mar^y glue, paste, wed, wedge, ^ive^, yoke, manacle, fetter, shackcle,
sodder, cement, knit, tie.
Iris v. Rainbow.
Heavens Embassadresse, the thousand colored dame,
She that paints the clouds,
Golden winged Thaumantia.
The goddess with the painted bow.
The painted mother of the showers. Juno 's embassad resse.
Judas.
The damned Iscariot,
He that betrayed his master with a kiss,
And missed of heaven even at the gates of bliss.
Judge.
Grim pronouncers of the Law. Living Law.
S^rict conservers of the Laws.
Grave Stewards and dispensors of the Laws,
That sit on bright Astraea's sacred Throne,
That speaks nothing but chains and shackles.
Whose stubble beard does grate poor prisoners eyes.
Whose stern faces look
Worse than the Prisoner that is denied his book.
Or Pilate painted like a scalded Cook.
Day of Judgment.
The worlds combustion. The general Bonefire.
The grand Sessions. Natures Funeral.
The worlds sad hour. Doomsday.
When souls shall wear their new array.
When the words mass shall shrink in purging flame*
The last days summons, when earths T^ophies lie,
Ascattered heap, and time it self shall die,
When the Sun shall
From the blind heavens like a dead cinder fall,
And all the elements intend their strife
To ruin what they framed,
When desperate time lies gasping,
When thunder summons from eternal sleep
The imprisoned ghosts, and spreads ^'th frighted deep
A veil of darkness.
When the knot of nature is dissolved,
And the worlds ages in one hour involved
In their old Ch^os, seas with skies shall join,
And stars with stars confounded lose their shine.
The ^arth no longer shall extend her shore.
To keep the Ocean ou^, the Moon no more
Follow the sun, but scorning her old way,
Cross him, and claim the guiding of the day.
The falling worlds now jarring frame, no peac^,
No league shall hold, great things themselves oppress,
When earth and seas to fl^mes are turned,
And all the world with one sad fire is burned.
The utmost date of time,
When rocks and all things shall disband.
The great and universal doom,
When Christ shall in a throne of clouds descend
To judge the earth.
With rusty mask the heavens shall hide their face.
The aged world dissolved by the last,
And fatal hour, shall to old Chaos have;
Stars justling stars shall in the deep confound
Their radiant fires, the land shall give no bound
To swallowing seas, the moon shall cross the sun
With scorn that her swift wheels obliquely run,
Days throne aspiring, discord then shall ^end
The worlds cracked flame, and natures concord end.
The frame
Of nature then shall feed the greedy flame,
Men, cities, floods and seas by ravenous lust
Of fire devoured, all shall resolve to dust.
When the dancing poles
Shall cease their whirling galliard.
When Lachesis has no more thread to spin,
Nor time a feather on his crazy wing,
When this vast o^be of earth shall blazing burn,
And all the world in funeral flames shall mourn;
When heaven and hell amaz^ng must appear
In two extremes, joy, and excessive fear.
The hindge of things
Is broke, all ends run back into their springs.
The second Chaos.
When earth and sea in fiery flames shall fry,
And time lies buried in eternity.
When as to those enchaind in sleep,
The wakeful trump of doom shall thunder through the deep
With such an horrid clang
As on mount Sinai rang.
While the red fire, and smouldring clouds out brake,
The aged earth aghast
With terror of that blast,
Shall from the surface to the center shake,
When at the worlds last session,
The dreadful Judge in middle air shall spread his throne.
July.
That month whose fame
Grows greater by the man that gave it name,
When many well pil'd cocks of short sweet hay,
stands in the field.
What time soft night had silently begun
To steal by minutes on the long-lived day.
The furious dog pursuing of the sun
Whose noisome breath ads fervor to his ray.
v. Summer. Zodiac. Leo.
June.
Sol leaving Gemini, and drawing near
Unto his height in Cancer, when shortest night
Urged the Thessalian archer.
v. Summer. Zodiack-Cancer.
Juno.
Saturnia. Great Queen of Gods.
Great matron of the Thunderer.
That chariots through the skies
By peacocks drawn stuck full of Argus eyes.
Heavens Queen. The Empress of the sky.
Silver-arm'd goddess. White-arm'd deity.
Saturnia that makes the white embrace.
The ivory fingerd Queen.
Drawn with a team of harnest peacocks,
With silken bridles in a coach of gold,
Lined with Estrich plumes. She
That shares with Joves imperial sovereignty,
Joves sister, and his wife. That kindles Hymen's fires,
The Queen of marriage, and of chaste desires.
Heavens great dame
That has the charge to rule the nuptial flame.
In nuptial bands
That ties the hearts, and then the willing hands.
Jupiter.
Saturnius. The Almighty Thunderer.
To give the soul a goal delivery.
To deal their martial alms.
To suffer shipwreck of the soul.
And with his blood embrued
The blushing earth. Making a fatal rest to lul^
Him in the sleep of death, which closed his sight,
Shutting his eyes up in eternal night.
Taught him the way to his grave.
Driving the soul out at the yawning wound.
Uncase, dislodge, untenant, uncage a soul.
As when a spring conducting pipe does break,
The waters at a little breach burst ou^,
And hissing through the airy regions smoke,
So ^lusht the blood.
To Kill ones self.
To leave the warfare of this life
Without a pass from the great general.
He gives himself a period to the race
Of his loathed life.
To abridge their own lives pilgrimage.
To be a traitor to ones self.
To let out life, and so unhouse the soul.
To break the prison,
As if'^were sweet to dye, when forced to live.
Accessory to their own death. Self murderer.
Kings.
Gods enshrined in earthly frames.
Fine^ but more britle ware. Sifted from common bran.
Inferior Gods. Earthly Deities. Mortal God.
Whose awful eye
Bears signs of an imperious majesty.
That swaies the awful scepter in his hand.
The supreme moderators of the law.
Ast^^a's princely stewards. Men in Text letters.
Whose roval temples are impaled
With the enameled crown and diadem.
Who on th'^mperial throne
Does always sit, and always sits alone.
Whose lives are gaudy troubles, whose crowns are
Not more beset with pearls than stuffed with care.
He that bears
Heavens Scepter, and the clouds with thunder tears.
The King of Gods.
That power from whom, what ere has being springs:
The goat-nurst God, who three-forkt lightning flings.
Whose nod the worlds foundation shakes.
Father of men and Gods.
Great Berecynthia's son.
Great founder both of Gods and men.
Grim Sa^urnes son. The great Olympic Jove.
The spirit that all the world maintains,
And the poised earth in empty air sustain^.
That with his dreadful thunder rends the skies.
Who day with light inspires,
Dividing duskie clouds with glittering fires,
Who the dull earth, and tempest-tossed seas,
C^ties and hells sad kingdom does appease,
And with the equal power of a just law,
Does Gods above, inferior mortals awe.
Great Panomphaeus.
v. Gods. Thunder. Justice.
Whose looks are ^ixt and sad, her left hand holds
A pair of equal balances, her right
A two edged sword, her eyes are quick and bright,
Not apt to sqint, but nimble to discern,
Her visage lovely is, yet bold and stern,
Unpartial maid. Unb^ibed virgin.
Beauteous Astraea.
K.
To Kill. v. To Wound.
WIth thousand wounds divor^'^ the trembling soul.
The pavements blush with blood.
Th^s hand thy breath has crushed to air.
Made him a morsel for the jaws of death,
And with his sword he signed his fatal pass.
Ly bathing in their blood.
Death with his purple finger shuts their eyes.
That command the crowching knee,
And the officious feet.
Walking upon the battlements of Sovereignty.
Kiss, v. Lips.
The seals of love set on the red-wax lips.
Inspiring souls, and whispering ta^es of love.
Dumb wooing. Harmless adultery.
The melting sip. Loves alarm. Loves sweet indearments.
The close conjunction of the happy lips.
When zealous love print stories on their lips.
On lips to print the volumes of their love.
Loves silent, but persuasive Rhetoric.
Loves silent O^ato^y, language.
The soft and warm impression of the lips.
The lips dissolved. Hymen's less delights.
The lovers oath, when lips are made the book.
To coin young Cupids. Loves mintage. Loves indentures.
Their lips do meet so near
That cockles might be tutored there.
Whose kisses rais^ betwixt them such a fire,
That should the Phoenix see, he to expire
Would shun the spicy mountains, and so take
Himself between their lips a grave to make.
Loves tribute. To seal loves contract.
Honest adultery. As if he plucked up kisses by the roots,
That grew upon her lips. The blind Gods darts.
The abstract of true love. Loves print.
Knee.
Where the thighs
Knit with the ham-strings in the knotty joint.
The parts sacred to mercy. The supple bender.
L.
Laborious.
HIs sauce was labor, exercise his fire.
Industrio^s Bees so in the prime of May,
By sunshine through the flowery meadows stray.
In every joint about him moves
An Intellectus Agens.
Labor needless. To power
^^o the sea an useless shower.
To guild refined gold. To paint the lilly.
To throw perfume upon the violet. Send owls to Athens.
To smooth the ice, or add another hiew
^^o the rainbow, or with taper light,
To seek the beauteous eye of heaven to garnish.
To add stars to the enameled firmament.
To give drops to the swelling Ocean,
And add more beams to the Garish sun.
To give more trees unto the thronged wood.
^ore leaves unto those trees.
Labor in vain. v. Impossible.
To number sands and drink the Ocean d^y.
To wash the brick, or the scorcht Aethiop.
To sow their seed upon the plashie shore.
To roll the restless stone of Sisyphus,
And cast in water to th'unbottom'd tub.
To teach the crab go forward.
To make a bucket of a five.
Make thorns bear figs, and make the thistles stoop,
Pressed with her grapie clusters.
Make fire and water meet without contention,
And seek to reconcile antipathies.
Go tutour stocks, preach to the sencel^sse stones.
Go and sheare wool from the dull affes back.
From the smooth bladders go and pull the hairs.
Go boil a stone, and plough the barren shore,
Or throw thy seed upon the mooving wave.
W^ite on the water, go and cut the fire.
Build on the sand, and teach the stones to swim.
Go hunt the winds, seek to revive the dead,
Sing to the deaf, or the ^egardlesse shores.
Teach eagles how to fly, Dolphins to swim,
Dig through the Isthmus, prattle to the stones.
Go glue the b^oken shell, spin spiders webs.
F^ght with the Gods, teach asses for the race.
Go tie a knot on Dolphins slippery tails,
And think to bake thy loaves in a cold oven.
Go feed a whetstone till thou makst it fat.
K^^k against pricks, and strive against the stream.
That since she clean forgot her former note.
His fear the stout asp could not then dissemble.
Which since that time is ever seen to tremble,
The stars for pity drop down from their spears,
And Cynthia in gloomy vale of night
Inshrowds the pale beams of her borrowed light.
Then envy slept, and waking wept,
And cruelty it self sat almost crying.
There Is not in all
The stock of sorrow any charm can call
Death sooner up. For misick in the breath
Of thunder, and a sweetness even in death
It brings with it, if you with this compare
All the loud noises that torment the air.
Able to move,
And justify compassion in the breast
Of unrelenting Stoics. Fit object for the weeping ey^.
If time will not allow
His death-prevented eyes to weep enough,
Then let his dying language recommend
What Is left to his posterity to end.
Let such as shall rehearse
This story, howl like Irish at an hearse.
Which who so hears,
It makes the eyes pay ransom for the ears.
Lark.
The wakeful herald of the morn. Days mounting herald.
The bird that learns observance to the sun.
Quavering her clear notes in the quiet air.
The ploughmans clock.
The bird that to the morning sings.
The Lyrick trumpeter of day.
To laugh.
Mood by the itching spleen.
Smiling his face into more lines, than are in the new maps with
the Augmentation of the Indies.
The cirles of the eyes, flow with distilled laughter.
Mirth digs her dimpling pits within the cheek.
Steeping their hard dry biscuit jests
In their own laughter.
The eyes invested with the loveliest smiles.
^raw dry the sea, or set it all on fire.
Gorob the naked man of all his clothes.
from the child's elbow go and pluck a beard.
Labaerinth. v. Minotaure.
Art therein would needs be deligh^ful, counterfeiting its enemy
^^rour, and making order in confusion.
Meanders, winding, intricate mazes, Which so beguiled
The troubled sense, that he which made the same
Could scarce retire. The maz^e house of Daedalus.
The winding prison of the Minotaure.
To Lament. v. to Mourn.
To tear the air with cries.
So wept the Fawnes that in the forr^st keep,
So all the Nymphs, and shagg^e Satyrs weep,
Lamenting their loved Marsyas.
They with remorselesse hands their bosoms tear,
And wailing call on him that cannot hear,
And with torn garments they present their woe.
v. Elegy. Tears. Weep.
Lamentable. Sorrowful.
Which who so reads,
His eyes may spare to weep and learn to bleed
Carnation tears. Like Niobe let every one
That cannot melt at this, turn to a stone.
To hear of this,
Each heart was turned a wardrobe of true passion,
Where griefs were clothed in a several fashion;
Grief went her progress through all hearts, and none
Could own a thought, whose best advice could borrow
The smallest respite from th'extreams of sorrow.
The direst Tragedy that ever chaleng'd wonder.
The rosy die that decks the blushing morn
Grew pale, and clouds immurd the muffled skies.
These woes made every one with woe in love.
That heart is flint that does not grieve to hear it.
The high topt firrs that on the mountains keep,
Have ever since that time been seen to weep.
The owl till then, it is thought full well could sing,
And tune her voice to every bubling spring,
But when she heard these plaints, then forth she yode
Out of the covert of an ivy tod,
And hollowing for aid, so strained her throat,
to show
The lavish wrinckles of a laughing brow.
Laughing as lechery were w^thin their lungs.
Smiles the cheek in rest.
Lawyer
That travailes in the knotty ^aw.
Who purchase land, build houses by their tongue.
And study right that they may practice wrong.
That studies brawling laws,
And setts his voice to sale in every cause.
His pen is the plough, and the parchment, the soil,
from whence he reapes both coin and curses.
Long gown'd warriors.
Who play in Westminister unarmed at barriers.
Purse milking nation, gowned vultures.
Brawling Harpies.
Whose tongues will live, when they are dead.
Lean.
Living Anatomy. Breathing skeleton.
Living charnel house. A sack of bones.
His skin hangs about him like an old ladies loose gown.
A dwindle.
One whose ribs like rugged laths rub out his doublet.
The parched corpse do show
In the loose skin, as if some spirit it were
Kept in a bag by some great conjurer.
Lean as a whetstone. Lean as a rake appears,
That looked, as pinch with famine, Aegypts years,
Worn out, and wasted to the pithlesse bone.
As one that had a long consumption.
His rusty teeth forsaken of his lips,
As they had served with want two prentiships,
Did through his pallid cheeks, and lankest skin,
Bewray what number were enrank't within,
How many bones made up this sta^ved wight,
Was soon perceived, a man of dimmest sight
Apparently might see them knit and tell
How all his vei^s, and every sin^w fell;
His belly inward drawn, his belly pressed,
His unfill'd skin hung dangling on his breast,
His feeble knees with pain enough upho^d
That pin^d carcass, cast, as in a mold,
C^t out by deaths grim form. If small legs wan;
Ever the title of a Gentleman;
His did acquit it, in his flesh pulled down,
As he had lived in a beleaguerd town.
A wretch so empty, that if ere there be
In nature found the least vacuity,
'Twill be in him.
As if his hollow cheek,
Had been at buffets with an emberweeke.
That wears good friday in his face.
Whose hollow cheeks
Are faithful Almanacks of ember weaks.
The pining body to a shadow wears.
V. Browns Past. lib. 2. song 1.
Learned. v. Eloquent.
The Muses minion. A branch of Minerva's Olive.
A knowing soul. Lights of nature. Gulf of learning.
Giant of wit. Monarch of wit. Quintessence of wit.
Walking, breathing library. Atlas of letters.
Dictatour of learning. Zenodotus heart. Crates liver.
Minerva's tower. Rich mine of wit.
Magazin of learning. Architect of wit.
Monarch of Sciences. Learnings triumphant Victor.
That ruled as he thought fit,
The whole monopoly of wit, Englands third University
Whom all the Muses court. Walking Vatican.
In the firmament of learning, he will shine to all poste^ity, a star of the
first magnitude.
A soul so learned, truth feared that she
Might stand too nakt near his philosophy.
Many languag^s, that departed from Babel in a confusion, met in his mouth in a
method.
The only wise,
And when he dies, the fame of wisdom dies.
Phoebus to him his oracles resigned.
Wisdom is only to his breast confi^'d. v. Aristotle.
Leaves.
Trees shadie locks. The dangling tresses of the wood.
The wanton gugawes of the gamesome wind.
The trees green perewigge.
The trembling pendants of the boughs.
The shady covert of the fruit.
Leda.
Helens fair mother.
Whom Jove deceived like a silver swan.
And made her lay two eggs, from whence there came
The stoutest brothers, and the fairest dame.
That ever chaleng'd wonder.
Legs.
Cupids columns.
The bodies sister pillars.
Legs streighter than the thighs of Jove.
Letters.
The absent voice and tongue. The dumb discourse.
The talk at distance. Thoughts in black and white.
The silent language. The hand talks with the paper.
Discourse by signs betwixt them whom distance have
made dumb. Friendly communion of the thoughts,
When distance must deny that privilege
Unto the tongue, by dumb interpreters.
Letters of sad contents.
Putting her fingers to unrip, the seal
Cleaving to keep those sorrows from her eyes,
As it were loath the tidings to reveal,
Whence grief should spring in such variety,
But strongly urged, both to her will appeal,
When the soft w^x unto her touch implies,
Sticking unto her fingers bloody red,
To show the bad news quickly followed,
And for a fescue, she does use her tears,
That when some line she loosely overpast,
The drops do tell her where she left the last,
Her trembling hand as in a fever shakes,
Wherewith the the paper does a little stir,
Which she imagins at her sorrow shakes,
And pities it, which she thinks pities her,
Made the short letter long, by reading it often over.
I burst open the letter, but not till after the third pluck, as if the^ dumb
wax, pitying my too nigh approaching unhappiness, seeme^ to be an unwilling
messenger of my misery.

Letters of glad contents
How often did I kiss the seal, your letters waxen lock! ^ow often did I put
it to my lips, that by that dumb show, it might un^^derstand its welcome.

How often did I read, and read again the superscription! How did I smile at
every word, every letter promising as many joys, I never loved my name till I
saw it writ with your hand on the backside of your letter.

Many times did I put my hand to the seal to break it open, and a^ many times
withdrew it, fearing to su^fet with excessive joy.

Leviathan.
That swarthy tyrant of the Ocean.
Shielded in his proud scales, so close that air
Cannot pierce through, etc. v. Job. chap. 41
^. Qu^rles Job militant. p. 260
Light,
Gods eldest daughter. The firstborn creature.
Times firstborn issue. Beau^eous daughter of the sun.
Lightning. v. Thunder.
The flesh of heavens ^antastick flame.
Hot flaming issue from the clouds cold womb,
That like a viper eats the straitning room
For fre^'r passage.
The curled clouds do break into a radiant fl^me.
As ligh^ning by the wind fo^c'd from a cloud,
Breaks through the wounded air with thunder loud
Distu^bs the day. Crushing the justling cloud.
R^rified air
In flashing^st eams does open the darkened heavens,
Joves forked shaft. The whizzing exhaltations,
The cleaving, tearing, riving of the skies.
Heavens soultry flash
Riding upon a pair of burning wings.
The cross blew lightning seemed to open
The breast of heaven, and let down ^he sheets of fire.
Like.
As Daucius sons, Timber and Larides,
Such perfect copies were they of each other,
Their parents knew not Timber from his brother.
Like Spencers Amias and Placidas.
Natures disguise. Humane paralels.
An apple ^left in two i^ not more twin
Than these two creatures. These hands are not more like.
One sand resembles not another more.
Water and water are not more alik^.
Nor have two eggs a lesser difference. Like Vibius and Pomp^y.
Two bees are not more like, or figs, or ants.
Like as Eamelus mares, Neighboring upon Identity.
Narcissus to the thing for which he pined,
Was not more like.
Lilly.
The spotless flower
Which Juno's milk did spring.
That had their color from the milk
Of Juno, when she sleeping nursed the great
And stout Alcides. v. White.
Lips.
Ruby cherrilets. The sister corals that each other kiss.
The sister rubies. The mooving leaves of coral.
Soft warmer coral. Those leaves of damask roses.
The folding coral valve's of the mo^th.
The melting rubie corals. Loves assured tests.
The melting rubies on her cherry lip
Are of such power to hold, as on one day,
Cupid flew thirsty by, and stoopt to sip,
And fastened there could never get away.
Banks of blisses,
Where love plants and gathers kisses.
Soft coral gates. Lips fit to be th'utterers when
The heavens would parley with the chief of men.
That breath gums and spice
Unto the east, and sweets to paradise.
Lips where mines of rubies grow.
Those speaking pomanders. The coral berries.
Rosy twins. Warm porphyrie.
Lips which like threads of scarlet show,
Whence graceful accents sweetly flow.
Taste her lips, and then confess
If Arabia does possess,
Or that honey Hybla hill
Tastes like those that thence distill.
Which s^ich the blushing from the orient.
That with delight and pleasure,
Through a sweet smile unlock their pearly treasure.
Congealed N^ctar. Transplanted paradise.
The ruby po^^als of our words.
The two leaved ruby gate,
To which a pearl-portcullis make a gra^e.
Two swelling wel^s of coral round behem
With smiling shows two rows of orient gems,
As sweet and red as early cherries.
Two twin-cherries died in blushes
Which those fair suns above, with their bright beams
Reflect upon and ^^pen.
^ashful pearls adding more redness to their native hew,
By blushing at their own sweet beauty.
Which never part, but that they show.
Of precious pearl a double row.
Dian^'s lip
Is not more smooth and rubeous. Melts in the touch.
A lip
Would tempt to an eternity of kissing.
Those sister kissing cherries,
Which sweetly blush for this,
That they one another kiss.
The wax whereon love prints a kiss.
Loves rubie alcars. That sweet divided union.
Little. v. Dwarf.
Dwarfish, -- Nature made thee
To show her cunning in Epitomie.
Small printed things. Diminitives.
Live.
To see the sun adorn the darkesome earth.
To enj^y the pr^vi^edge of breath.
To ^eed on air.
The fates still draw my lengthened thread.
Mine eyes enjoy the benefit of life.
S^ll nature gives
L^fe to my veins.
Whilst brea^h gives motion to my ^oyled limbs.
While memory holds a seat
In this distracted globe.
Life.
Thin smoke and empty shadow, which the wise,
As the fools Idol, soberly despise.
The fading rose, the running sand, the spurring post.
The shadow of a dream. Light and inconstant air.
Fortunes babble. That waving brat, tossed on the sea of fate.
The pilgrimage of man's laborious days.
The even-spun twine.
A span of f^ailty, plunged and orb'd about
With floods of bi^ternesse.
That knot of soul and body, which nothing can unti^
but the eye of heaven.
In which each gasp of breath
Are minutes posting to the hour of death.
Short life, v. Untimely death.
Like that armed crew
Grown from the dragons teeth.
That to fate,
Are tenanrs, to a shorter date.
Like the beasts of Hippanis,
Whose life in one day's spun, drawn out and cut:
Long life.
To count many years.
Whose life does swell the number of his years.
To reach T^^honus years, or aged Nestors,
Or the wrinkled Sybil. Courteous fate
Draws out his thread with an unweary hand
To fill the number of his days.
To groan under the burden of his years.
Whose long days even rust the ^ithe of time.
Private life
That peace of passions noble banishment.
That close happiness, without either pomp or envy.
Whose ambition goes no farther than the border of his village.
That prefers the liberty of the country, before the pleasures of the court,
whom chains cannot tempt, though never so well made, and gilded over.

That life without pomp or rumult, but with more solid joy and satisfaction.

Whose armor is an honest thought,
And simple truth his highest skill;
Whose state can neither flatterers fear,
Nor r^ine make accusers great.
Lives of himself though not of lands,
And h^v^ng nothing yet has all.
That th^nks glory a lie, and state, grave sport,
And coun^^y sickness above health at court.
That seeks no higher prize
Than in unenvied shades to ^it
And sing his Mrs. eyes
That ^ast in hours, secure from courtly strife,
The soft oblivion of a quiet life.
No war disturbs his rest with fierce alarmes.
Nor angry ^eas offend,
He shuns the law, and those ambitious charms
Which great men's doors attend.
Lives to himself, and glitte^ing titles shuns.
He lives unenvied, honor crowns his ends.
Which gentle peace
Enjoy pure innocence, the rich increase,
Of various gifts, what pleasure the broad fields,
Caves, living waters, and cool Tempe yields,
Lowing of beasts, sweet sleeps by shades obscured
Woods, savage chase, the hardy youth, inured
To live with little, whom no labor tries.
Justice here left her last impression when
She fled from the defiled abodes of men.
V. Sandys Ovids Metam. lib 8. page 295.
Fab. Philemon. Baucis. lib. 11. page 397.
Fab. Aesacus. Horace Epod. 2.
Liver.
The bodies sponge, the bloody conduit.
The bu^^e furnace. The concrete blood.
The shop, the mint, the fountain of the blood:
The bodies almoner. Dispenser of the blood.
To look.
To chain their eyes to. To feast the ey^s upon.
To surfeit the ey^s upon. To read ore a thing.
To traffic with the eyes. To run ore with eyes.
To fix his gazes on. To river his eyes on a thing.
So Clytie looked upon the sun,
Till she turned Heliotrope. Mine eyes
Have been attentive on this exercise.
To peruse with eyes. To lend an eye.
On him she claspt her eyes.
To talk, to discourse with eyes.
To address the ^ight. Survay with curious eyes.
Close prisoner to the object.
To own no other object. To shoot the eyes.
To throw our eyes on. To tie the eyes.
To weigh with Crystal skales.
To view with captivated eyes.
To oppress with his eyes. To nail the eyes upon.
To drink with eyes the nectar of her sight.
Center the scattered radiant of the eye
Upon one object. To entertain the eyes, etc.
Upon his face all threw their covetous eyes.
To feed, to feast the greedy eyes.
To crack the eye-strings with a fixed view.
To cast lots.
Their votes to the dispose of lots they strait refer,
Electing chance for their blind arbiter.
Loud. v. Noise.
One that may be heard to th'Antipodes.
That talks as if he spoke to the Antipodes.
The mot^on sounded like to Nilus fall,
That the vast air was deafned there withal.
As loud
As thunder shot from the divided cloud.
Love.
The pleasing tyrant. Sweet captivity,
The heavy lightness, serious vanity.
The amorous fire. The merry sadness.
Sighing-singing, freezing-frying,
Laughing-weeping, living-dying.
The marrow-melting flame.
The cherisht fire,
Which blindly creeps through every vein and d^ies
The fluent blood, whence grosser vapors rise,
Sadding the soul with fearful fantasies.
The guilty flame betraying signs reveal.
The sweet poison. Imbosomed flame.
The enamouring fi^e. The golden shaft.
The knife that cuts the throat of joy.
The Siren that does sh^pwrack youth.
A pleasing but disquiet guest,
That is the ha^benger of all unrest.
The warm f^ost. The freezing fi^e.
The warring passion. The pleasing flame.
Loves ^d^lian fire,
The glow^ng flame, that does it self reveal.
The wanton conquering flame.
The first borne of the Gods. Refiner of inventions.
^^d fancy, scum the dregs of scattered thoughts.
^^-chosen snare. Cradle of causeless fear,
^^itcher of the wit, rebel to reason.
^^ayer of resolution, defiler of the thoughts.
^^derminer of magnanimity. Flatterer of vice.
(...) to weakness. Infection of youth.
^^dnesse of age. Curse of life. Reproach of death.
^^ctionate Idolatry.
(...) passion more easily reprehended than refrained.
^^domes golden hook. Child of likeness.
^^ntrolled passion. Plato's great Devil.
^^res golden chain. Mastering Passion.
Makes imagination the glass of lust, and a man's self the tray^^ to his own
destruction.
Such insinuating fire,
^^ stole into each reverend fire,
^^en beauteous Hellen her fair cheeks,
^^w'd to the army of the Greeks.
V. Sandys Ovid. Metam. Lib. 2. P. 78,
Fab. Europa. To love or be in love.
(...) old man does not love his heaps of gold,
^^th a more doting superstition.
Gla^^ing himself within his Mistress eyes,
^ollowing her with a doting observance,
^grossing opportunities to meet her,
Thrusting himself into such a yoke
^^ will make him sigh away Sundays.
Melting away before a female flame,
^ike waxen statues, which the witches ^^ame,
^ll his words are overlaid with passion.
^oves Chaplain. That soaks his Mistress name,
and makes her name the toast to warm his drink,
That to Volonus sends his frequent prayers,
That god of Lovers. Volonus votarie.
Cupid with his youthful dart
Transfixed the Center of her feeble heart:
Close prisoner to his Mistress eyes,
^^ owns no other object.
The treasure of his heart must lie
^^ the fair Casket of his Mistress eye.
He became
A slavish prisoner to the conquering flame.
Attach't by Portamour, Bayliffe to Cupid.
Dissolved into affection.
That combats with his Mistress eyes.
Burnt by loves insultive flame.
Proud of his triumphant chain.
Courting his beauteous ^etters.
Loving his sweet affliction.
That know no heaven but in their Mistress eyes.
One of Cupids hospital that lie
Impatient patient to a smiling eye.
Pyrausta of his Mistress eyes.
That wastes his idle days,
In loose delights, and sports about the blaz^
Of Cupids candle, he that daily spies
Twin-bab^es in his Mistress Geminie^.
As stubble burns,
And hedges into sudden blazes turn,
So springs he into flames, a fire does move
Through all his veins.
A bullet by Balarian ^lingers flung,
Increases so in fervor as it flies,
And finds the fire it had not in the skies.
That bears an Aetna in his breast.
Like to the sulphurous match
Which instantly the approached flame does catch.
Whose melting eyes
Have but one object. His thoughts ingrost by one,
Who rivets on his love his eyes.
As when we fire an heap of hoary reeds,
Or catching flame to sun-dried stubble thrust,
So inbred lust enraged his blood
To fry in secret fires.
His eyes
Extract a fire wherein his bosom fries,
Burning like Aetna with imbowell'd fire.
Clasping his eyes upon his Mistress face,
Bearing a fuel, which her sun-like eyes
Inflamed, and made his heart the sacrifice.
That in his Mistress eyes
Contracts the wonders of the skies.
^ fry with inward flames,
^ views a face with an obsequious glance.
^k by loves arrow with the golden head,
That in a curious strain
Does praise his fairest fair,
^d with queint metaphors her curled hair
Curls o'r again.
Protestations of love
^e me in coldest champions where
^o summer warmth the trees does cheer,
^ me in that dull climate rest,
^h clouds and sullen Jove infest,
Yea place me under^eath the Carre
^ ^oo near Phoebus seated far
from dwellings -- I Will love
^ose smiles, whose words so sweetly move:
^hy^aera breathing flames of fire,
^or hundred handed Gyas ire
^ll separate my soul from thine.
^rer to me than all those ruddy drops
That visit this sad heart,
D^ubt that the stars are fire,
Doubt that the Sun does move,
Doubt that truth is a liar,
^ never doubt I love.
Apollo Lyde never loved so well,
No^ did Phileta's love so much excel.
To his dear Battis. If I am any thing, '^is thine,
The Poles shall move to teach me ere I start,
And when I change my love, I Will change my heart,
Nay if I wax but cold in my desire,
Think heaven has motion left, and heat the fire,
^h more I could, but many words have made
That often suspected which men would persuade:
Take therefore all in this, I love so true
As I will never love none else but you.
Two Lovers.
Who so unite.
That two distinct make one Hermaphrodite,
Whose loves within one Center meeting have.
Pythagoras his Letter which does love commend,
Making of two at first one in the end.
Fair course of passion where two Lovers start,
And run together, heart still yoked in heart,
Two souls that join in one desire.
Iron and Loadstone, Hedrargyre and gold.
Amber and straw, pearl-fish and sharpling,
Sargons and goats. Sparage and rush.
Elm and vine. Ivy and oak. Myrtle and olive,
That with a smiling grace
Twine wreaths of eye-beams from each others face,
So gra^efull a receipt of mutual affection, that if she desir^ above all
things to have him he feared nothing, but to miss he^ If he took her by the
hand, and softly strained it, she think^ that knots of friendship ought to be
mutual, would with a swe^ fastness show she was loath to part with it.

Looking of babies in each others eye^.
The perfect abstract of all sympathy.
V. Friend. Lovers Tears.
Fresh tears stood on her Cheek,
As does the honey and nectareous dew
Upon a gathered Lilly almost withered.
The Dodonean Spring,
That lights, the torches that are put therein,
L^ke dew upon the damask rose. Loves dew.
Making his tears the instruments to woo her
The sea wherein this love should swim unto her,
And could there flow from his two headed fount.
As great a flood, as made the Hellespont,
Within that deep he would as willing wander
To meet his Hero, as did ere Leander,
A stream of tears upon her fair Cheeks flows,
As morning dew upon the Damask Rose,
Waters which whisper love,
Blessed with such a face,
As tears became, and grief it self did grace,
A beauteous and becoming woe.
Golden storms. Fell from her eyes, as when the Sun appears.
And yet it tains, so showed her eyes in tears,
Her tears were black, mourning to be her tears,
Which as she spoke
^^th from those shining Crystal Cysterns brake,
^stream of liquid pearl, which down her face,
^de milk white paths, whereon the gods might trac^*
^o Jove's high Court. Love's Elixir,
^stilling from the Limbecks of her eyes
The Deluge drowning beauties wo^ld.
^^ wept the Heliades their liquid amber.
^ock as the dew upon the Damask Rose,
^ho through that liquid pearl his blushing shows,
^d when the soft air breaths upon his top,
^om the sweet leaves falls easily drop by drop,
^s by her Cheeks, distilling from her eyes,
^e tear for joy another room supplies.
^^ if so many stars from thence had shot,
^^ if the eyes had meant to wash themselves,
^e they looked on such Beauty.
^^urning pleasure, delightful sorrow,
^ea^s themselves did seem to smile
Seas of melting pearls
That rain from beauties sky.
Lucifer.
The star that wakes.
The dewie morn, and last the heavens forsakes
The sea-bath'd Hesperus, who brings
^ight on, and first displayes his golden wings,
Radiant Lucifer, who day
^^lts, and chaseth night away.
Heavens brightest star that first does call
The early morning out.
Days harbenger, the hench boy of the Sun,
The father of the mornings purple-light,
The usher of the day,
The silver-wing'd post-boy of the Sun.
The ancient-bearer of the day,
That waves the standard of the glorius day,
Who leads the stars,
And days illustrious path prepares.
The star that ushers in the day.
The herald of the day, Aurora's Harbenger.
The rosy watchman of the morn.
^enus sacred messenger. That bright star that last forsakes the skies.
Lucina.
The gentle goddess that makes swift repair.
At the first hearing of child bearing prayer.
The midwife goddess. The President of birth.
That goddess courteous to the swelling womb.
Lucretia.
Clear light of Roman chastity.
The Roman dame,
Whom force might ravish, not the fact defame.
Chaste wife of Collatine,
Mirror of chastity,
Natures mistake when she did place.
The heart of man joined to a woman's face.
That Roman Matron, which did choose no life
Rather to have, than live a ravished wife.
Lust.
Wilder flames. Have above the rage of dog-dayes.
Young desires. Tinder for the sparks of hell.
The itchy warmth of the stewed blood.
The savage heat, loose affection. Flame,
The unruly faction in the blood.
The unreclaimed savagenesse of blood.
Bestiall dalliance. The heyday in the blood,
Unruly heat called love which truly is but appetite.
Lustful.
That speaks not but from Aretine.
Con'd all his Prints.
Knows all the quirks within Loves labyrinth.
A professed critic in lechery.
Like Hercules whose lustful sprite,
Kept heat for fifty maids one night.
Salamanders living in the fire of lust.
That will make her grave a brothell,
And tempt the worms to adulterate her carcass.
A common tinder box, a goat, a floating goatish eye*
Incubus, Succubns, Stallion.
I do not think, but were the pox a woman,
He would not stick to court it.
As if he h^d washed in Salmasis.
Whose blood like kids upon a plain,
Does skip and dance Levalto'^ in each vein.
Whose breasts are swollen with the Venerian game,
^d warm themselves at lusts alluring flame,
^o da^e to ask as much as men can think,
^d wallowing lie within a sensual sink,
^ read no books, but obscene Aretine,
^o the loose laws of their wild blood obey,
^enst with savage heat.
^e to lxions shaggie footed race,
^hen as the gaudy Nymphs pursue the chase,
He
That makes a flying vow to every she.
^full as Tarquin or base Messaline.
^s the debosht Catamite. A goat is cooler.
^cking damnation from a strumpets lips.
That ^at nothing but Potato's, Eringo's and Cantharides,
^earying the night with wanton dalliance,
^ore prime than goats or Monkies in their pride,
Whose eye
^rries with^^'^ piercing adultery.
There is not chastity in any language
without offense for to express his lust.
His soul is the Bawd to his body.
He is more violence to a modest ear than to her ^e deflowred. Keeping a S^ew
in his heart.
Nothing is harder to his persuasion than a chaste man, and ^e makes a scoffing
miracle of a maid.
The Pox only converts them, and that only when it kills them.
With Fancy unconfin^d,
And lawless as the Sea or wind.
Lusty.
Lusty as the early day. As the youthful Morn,
As the flower of youth.
Lute. v. Music.
Musicks full interpreter.
Wabling harmony, unfeathered Nightingale.
Lybia. v. Africa, Lycaon.
Savage, Arcadian, tyrant,
Whose house when Jove had overtun'd,
With vengefull flames which round about him burned.
He frighted to the silent woods did fly,
Their howls and speech with lost endeavor tries,
His self like jaws still grin, more than for food,
He flaughters beasts and still delights in blood,
His arms to thighs, his cloths to brisles changed
A wolf not much from his first form estranged,
So hoary hai^'d, his looks so full of rape,
So fiery eyed so terrible his shape.
Lion.
The King, the Emperor of beasts. The Forest King
Whom rage nor courage suffers for to fl^e.
To lie.
His heart disguising with his tongue,
His heart does give his tongue the ly,
The heart and tongue at ja^^ing enmity.
M.
Mad.
FIt to drink good store.
Of pure unmixed, brain-purging Hellebore.
Frantic like those,
Which in the Orgies tread the frantic round,
Such was Agave, when in pieces she
Tore her son Pentheus:
So Athamas and Ino when the Snakes
Crawled in their bosoms.
Scarce Master, Mistress, of his, her wit,
Like a bull,
By hornets stung, whom scratching brambles pulll
The soul eclipsed,
Like mad Grestes of his wits bereft,
Or Dido when Aeneas had her left,
Such fury as possessed
Phemonoe at Appius request,
Like those whom Bacchus has inspired,
And touching with the vinie staff has fired
Their bosoms -- heaved from off the hinge
Of his right reason, un^un'd and jarring senses,
The Furies and distempered fantasy.
Like one of Bacchus frantic, ^aging Nuns,
Or like a Tartar, when in strange disguise
Prepared unto a dismal sacrifice.
From reasons center straid.
Passion did invade
Reasons cool seas, and there prevailing made
A strange distraction.
Many degrees beyond the power of Hellebore.
Magic. v. Charms. Witch. Man.
The worlds Epitome. The mortal Angel.
That worm of five foot long.
The food of worms and times devouring rust.
That heap of Atoms which with blood
Nature has kneaded into solid flesh.
That little world of living clay. Spark of heaven.
Inch of living earth. Natures Epitome. Manual.
Quintessence, model of nature.
Walking tree with the roots upward.
Moving, walking, compacted dust,
The worlds abridg^ment. The manual of Gods glory.
The worlds contracted sum. The little All.
The joint patentee,
With smooth-fac't Cherubins.
Whose first estate,
Heaven copied from himself.
In whose frame the great Three-one advised,
And with a studied hand epitomized
The large, volumnious and perfect story
Of all his works. In whose soul the all eternal drew
The image of himself for earth to view,
With fear and wonder, in whose sovereign eye,
He breathed the flames of dreadful majesty.
Manifest.
Whose clearness excludes it from all controversy.
Unquestioned verity. That needs no dispute.
Writ by the sun beams in the open light.
Which he that runs may read.
Which even the blind may see.
Which all must see that do not shut their eyes.
Many.
Like casting bees in swarms.
Like dancing atoms on a ^^ramers d^y.
As candid pellets in congeaIed rain.
Than Autumnes ears far more,
Or leaves of trees, or sands on Neptunes shore,
Unnumbered motes that in the sun do, play,
When at some cranny with his peircing eye,
He peepeth in some darker place to spy,
Are not so many. More.
Than there are sands upon the Lybian shore.
More than the welkin poures
Of candid drops upon the ears of corn,
Before that Ceres yellow locks are shorn.
Numbers that the stars outrun,
And all the Atoms of the sun.
Able to pose Arithmatick.
As wandering Atoms in the empty sky,
He that can number in November, all
The withered leaves that in the forest fall,
He that can number all the drops in showers
Which Hyads, Pleiads, moist Oryon powers,
May count, etc.
Past stars in number, or those sands that spread
The vast seas bottom.
Almost arriving to an infin^ty, bordering upon infinity*
So multiply,
That they mock the envying sky.
Too large for all Arithmatick.
Mount Gargarus has not so many stems,
You may first count Cenyphia's ears of corn,
Or how much sweet Thyme Hybla does adorn,
How many birds cut the air with their wings,
How many fishes through the seas do swim,
Before you number, etc.
The flowers in spring time thou may sooner tell,
Or Autumnes apples, or the snow that fell,
Than, etc. More ears of ripe corn grow not in the fields,
Nor half so many boughs the forest yields,
So many green leaves grow not in the wood,
Nor swim so many fishes in the flood,
So many stars in heaven you cannot see.
As, etc. -- Like trooping ants,
In pl^nty hoarding for the time of want,
More leaves the forest yields not from the trees,
More beasts the Alps breed not, nor Hybla bees.
Nor are those billows more,
That proudly justle the Carpathian shore.
Like cloudy threaves
Of busy flies, when summers golden vailes
Enrich the fields and milk bedewes the pales,
As many they employ
As Agamemnon once brought ships to Troy,
Not Hybla's mountains in the jocund prime,
Upon her many bushes of sweet thime,
Shows greater number of industrious bees. Th^n, etc.
The p^ety little king,
Of honey people in a sunshine day,
Leads not to field in o^derly array,
More busy buzzers. Swarm, tide of people.
Which surmount
The language of Arithmaticks account.
Abound
Like blades of grass, the cloth the pregnant ground.
Nor a^e in numbe^ more,
The sands whereon the rolling billows roar.
March. v. Spring.
The month that bears the warriors name.
When first the sun
Peeps through the horns of the celestial Ram.
That from his golden saddle Hell threw,
And drowned her in the sea, that bears her name.
Making the days and nights of equal length.
Mark. v. to Look.
To view with an observing eye.
As jealous of the object.
Marriage. To Marry.
The nup^ials. The nup^ial solemnity.
The Genial sheet. The tedious Ceremony.
Love and Hymen urge the nuptial bed,
The sacred fires with rich perfumes are fed,
The house hung round with garlands every where,
Melodious harps and songs salute the ear,
When with nuptial kiss they smother
Growing flames in one another.
The unslipping kno^. The nuptial twine,
The g^rlands on the marriage door were worn,
The linen fillets did the posts adorn,
The b^idal tapers shone, the bed on high,
With ivory steps, and gold imbroidery,
The matron in a towred crown that led
The bride, forbid her on the threshold tread,
The yellow veil covered her face to hide
The fearful blushes of the modest bride.
Coupling Hymen, with his nuptial bands,
And golden fette^s, had conjoined their hands,
The garland made, the bridal chamber dressed,
And jolly welcome had to every guest,
Exposed the bounty of the marriage feast,
Wedlock had coupled their espoused hands.
The Muses have consulted with the G^aces,
To crown the day, and honor their embraces;
Hymen begins to grumble at delay,
And Bacchus laughs to think upon the day,
The Virgin tapers, and what other rites
Do appertain to nuptial delights,
Are all prepa^'d -- Hymen attends
The noble pair, and is prepared to yoke
T^eir promised hands, the sacred altars smoke
With my^^h and frankincense, the ways are strow'd,
With Flora's p^ide, and the expecting crowd.
Hymon spend all thy torches on this night.
The God that sings
His holy numbers over marriage beds,
H^th knit their h^arts and hands.
Marriage is l^ke rose water in a Crystal glass.
More st^ings to make better music.
Bondage knit in love knots. The Antidote for lust.
Marriage, which two does so unite,
That they are both but one Hermaphrodite.
Modest Hymen shakes his torch.
And chaste Lucina smiles.
The sacred Gordian knot.
When maids must change their virgin state and name.
The kno^ tied with the ^ongue, and not to be unloosed
with the teeth.
The bridal captives.
Two mutual souls to link in sacred chains.
And with our tongues we will tie a Gordian knot.
To put a free neck to the yoke of love.
Chaining with holy charms their willing hands,
Whose hearts are linkt in loves eternal bands,
The morning night dismaskes with welcome flame,
When Jun^, Venus, and free Hymen came
To grace the marriage.
The palace rung with our confused joys.
They Hymen sing, the alters fume with flames.
^^e maid now marriageable, honored
With her nuptial bed.
To make a nuptial pair.
The nuptial torch does light him to the bed of etc.
Hymen puts on his saffron weeds.
To bind his soul in Hymen's knot.
The reverend man by magic of his prayer,
Has used such cha^mes that now they are
Contracted into one, the holy lights,
Smile with a cheerful lust^e on their rites.
Hymen wears
His brightest robes, where some famed Persian shall
Work with the wonder of her needle all.
Toe nuptial ^oyes.
v. Epithalamium. Martyr.
^^e joyful martyr springs into the flame,
As fearful to escape that death.
Confi^ms his faith, sealing it with his blood.
With a triumph^nt patience he bears
His welcome death, Courring the flame,
Me^ting the fire with a kind embrace.
M^unted to heaven up in a coach of fire.
Whose head in heaven shall wear eternal crowns.
T^u^hs bone-fires.
Mars. v. War.
The furious God. Wars vermillion God.
H^ that rules in deeds of arms.
That supples earth with blood.
Arms potent patron. The president of war.
^^ther of great Romulus.
^^ves warlick son. Bellona's raging brother:
Whose music is the drum,
The trumpet, guns, and shrieks of dying men.
That with unpartial sith,
Mowes down whole fields of men.
The Cuckold making God. Venus bold champion.
He whom unto the Gods, the sun betrayed
As in the nets with Venus caught he laid.
Mask.
The silken cloud.
Beauties artificial clouds.
The cloud, that under it an heaven of beauty shroud,
The veil that hinders the quick, busy the eye
From reading ore the face.
Beauties defense, veil of deformity.
May, v. Spring, Flowers.
When the E^sterne morn,
Does with her summer robes the plains adorn,
And hangs on every bush a liquid pearl.
Triumphant month. The gaudy Queen.
Whose early breaking day
Calls Ladies from their easy beds to view,
Sweet M^ia'^ pride, and the discolored hiew
Of dewie brested Flora.
Who from her green lap throws
The y^llow cowsl^p, and the pale primrose.
The month that does inspire,
Mir^h and youth, and wa^me desire,
Woods and groves are of her dressing,
Hill and dale do boast her blessing.
Medea.
That great enchantresse which once took such pains
To force young blood in Aesons withered veins,
And from groves, mountains, h^lls and moorish fenns,
Used all the hea^bs o^dain'd for the use of men,
And in the powerful potion, that she makes,
Puts blood of men, of birds, of beasts, of snakes.
The Colchion Queen. Jasons deserted wife.
She that the ^aste to stay
Of her p^rsuing father, in the way
Strow'd her torn brothers limbs.
Helped by whose charms, Jason brought once to Greece,
The we^lthy purchase of the golden fleece,
v. Ovids Metam. lib. 7.
Medusa.
The snake-hair'd mother of the winged steed.
The stern eyed Gorgon which could turn to stone
All that her viewed.
Whose ho^rid shape Perseus did safely eye
In his bright Targets clear refulgencie,
Her ghastly head he from her shoulders took
Ere heavy sleep, her and her snakes forsook,
And thence Chrysaor and his winged brother,
Sprung from the blood of their new slaughtered mother.
Whose passing beauty was the only scope
Of men's affections, and their only hope;
Yet was not any part of her more rare
(So say they that have seen her) than her hair,
Whom Neptune in Minerva's fane comprest,
Joves daughter, with the Aegis on her breast,
Hid her chaste blushes, and due vengeance takes,
By turning of the Gorgons hairs to snakes.
Melancholy.
Whose arms enfolding tie
A drowsy knot upon his careless breast.
Whom inward melancholy has made weary
Of the worlds ey^s.
So retired and solitary, as if his only comfort were the
want of a comforter.
Hands indented one with another.
Only rich in unfortunate remembrances, to whose
heart even trifling n^i, fortunes come.
To make up the roll of a grieved memory.
Speaking by piecemeales, as if the tempest of passion unorderly
blew out his words.
As melancholy as a gyb'd cat, as a lodge in a warren, as a snaile,
as an hoblouse, or a lug'd bear.
G^ven ^v^r to silence and sadn^sse.
Sorrow is made by custom so habitual,
It Is now part of his nature.
Melancholy, the worst natural parasite, whosoever feeds him, shall never be
rid of him.

With his hat like a penthouse ore the shop of his eyes, and his arms a cross
his thin bellied doublet, like a rabit on a spit, sitting like patience on a
monument, smiling at grief.

That surly spirit,
That bakes the blood; and makes it gross and thick.
Dropping his tears upon one place,
As if he meant to fret himself a grave.
Drooping like over-ripened corn,
Hanging the head at Ceres plenteous load,
Fixing his eyes upon the sullen earth.
That looks on all things as the history of Japan, or the affairs of another
world.
All whose pleasure is dependant
Upon exterior divertisements.
One fallen cut with the world, and therefore resolves to be revenged of
himself.
Fortune has denied him in som^thing, and he takes pet, and will be miserable
in spite.
An arch enemy to an hatband. He is much displeased to see men merry, and
wonders what they can find to laugh at.

He never draws his lips above a smile, and frowns wrinke him before forty.
Loathed melancholy of Cerberus and blackest midnight borne.

Melt.
The pliant wax melts not before the fire,
With such submission, nor the grassie spire,
Crusted with ice, before the thawing ray
Which Phoebus darts, when he divides the day
Into its equal halfes.
Like wax before the scorching flame.
Or snow before the sun.
Like waxen statues which the witches frame,
When they are roasted by the charmed flame,
Like melting bullets by the slinger cast.
Melts away
Like ice before the suns dissolving ray,
As floods which frosts in ^cie fetters bind
Thaw with the approaching sun, or southern wind.
So the Hyme^^^an wax
Relents with heat, which cha^ing thumbes reduce
To pl^ant forms.
Memory.
The eyes true register. The peasants book.
Times wealthy treasurer. Warder of the brain.
The souls stomach. Treasure house of the mind. Mother of the Muses, Mother of
experience. The souls exchequer.
Merhhants.
Sons of Avarice who but to share
^^certain treasure with a certain care,
^^mpt death in the horrid Ocean.
That proudly plough the troubled Maine.
That climb steep mountains for the sparkling stone.
^^rcing the center for the shining oar,
And the Oceans bosom to rake pearly sands.
Cr^ssing the torrid and the frozen zone.
^idst rocks, and swallowing gulfes for gainful trade.
The embarked traders on the floods.
Who by trading claspe the ^sland to the continent, and
^^^k one country to another.
Those excellent Cardiners, making their own country
^^ing forth all things.
Deceitful merchants take a man's purse, and never bid him stand.
Mercury.
Joves son of fulgent Pleias bred.
Joves winged pursui^ant. Atlantiades.
The God that bears the drowsy rod.
Cyllenius, The winged legate of the Gods.
Joves winged Herald, Ambassador.
Ma^a's cra^ty son. He that swaies the Caduceus.
Pleion^'s N^phew. Heavens verger.
The faithful messenger to Joves designs.
Heavens considerate spy. The Argus-killing God.
The crafty God that bears the rod of gold.
The quaint tongued issue of great Atlas race.
Heavens pursurvant whose brawny arms extend
The winged Caduc^us. Great Atlas daughters son.
The interpreter of the Gods.
He that some ghosts do call from hell,
And others drives unto that darksome cell.
With winged feet that traceth through the air.
Merry. v. Glad. Joy,
I do not feel the weight of clay about me:
I am all air, or of some quicker element.
I have purged out all that was earth about me,
And walk as free a soul as in the separation,
O^e whose heart stands on the wind side of care.
Never sad, but when she sleeps, and that is often, too, broke
with laughing.
Meteors. Comets.
That play their fiery friscolls in the air.
The glozing meteors in a starry night,
Prankt with the bristles of another light.
Milk.
The infants wine. The whiter blood.
Te nectar of the dugge.
Milkey way.
By which the Gods resort
Unto The Almighty Thunderers high Court,
With ever open doors on either hand,
Of nobler dei^ies the houses stand,
The vulgar dwell dispersed; the chief and great
In front of all their shining mansions sheate.
The star-enam^l'd Galaxie. Heavens Watling street.
Hevens regent walks Framed of many namelesse stars.
The milk which gusht from Juno's Whiter breast,
In heaven that splendent pa^h, and circle drew,
From whence the name, as erst the color grew,
And troops of unseen stars there join their light,
And with united splendor shine more bright,
And souls of Heroes from their bodies freed,
Exchanging earth for heaven, their virtues meed,
Shine in that orb, their proper place of rest,
And live Aehereal lives, of heaven possessed.
Minerva. v. Pallas. Bellon^.
Wars angry Goddess. Joves fierce girl appears
With a fair hand, but weilding of a spear.
Joves daughter, wi^h the Ae^is on her breast.
That turned the Gorgons hair to snakes,
And then to make her enemies afraid,
Bore in her shield the serpents which she made.
Tritonian maid. Inventresse of the olive, and a verse^
B^stonian Virago.
Minotaure.
The Cretan monster.
That uncouth prodigy, half man, half beast.
The mothers foul adultery discry'd.
M^nos resolves his marriage shame to hide
In multitudes of rooms perplexed and blind,
The work ^'^xcelling Daedalus assigned.
Which sense distracts, and error leads a maze
Through subtle ambages of sundry ways,
^s Ph^ygian Meander sports about,
The flowery vales now winding in now out,
^self incounters, sees what follows guids,
His streams into his Springs, and doubling slides
To long mock'd-Seas. Pasiph^'s beastly Love.
^age devouror of the Athenian youth,
Whose death was the Seas glory.
Minutes.
Times youngest children which divide the day,
And with their number measure out the year.
In various seasons. A^omes of time.
Toose bits of time. Thrumbs, shreds, rags of time.
Miracle. v. Admirable. Miserable. v. Lamentable
That tread
The mazes of perplexed misery. A living Corse.
Levelled with low disgraced calamity.
A multitude of walking grio^s, too sad a weight
For reason to endure.
There is not in the compass of the light
A more unhappy creature.
Affliction is enamored on her parts,
And she is wedded to Calamity.
The May Game of the fates.
As if thought by fortune fit only to be made the Spectacle of misery.
Whose heart is nothing but a stage of Tragedies.
Time seemed to forget her, bestowing no one hour of comfort upon her.
Without any comfort or easement, but when the stars breathed for a greater
misery.
Ripe misery had her harvest in him.
The triumph of the hateful destinies.
Miserable below the reach of pity.
In a state s^nk beneath the fear of a greater misery,
The fittest object for that poor comfort of calamity, pity.
Never could any misery more justify a vehement compassion.
Enough to have taught sorrow to the gladdest thoughts, and have en^^ved it in
the minds of hardest metals.
Misery enough to justify excessive sorrow.
One whom the Fates have marked to be
A feeler of the extremes of misery,
A soul bruised with adversity.
Groaning under the sad load of woes,
Where life has no more interest but to breath.
Such misery
As might have sprinkled even the gods with tears,
And make the Stoic leave his Principles.
Such misery as one would make a conscience to punish patri^^cides with, Who
cannot look

Beyond the prospect of consuming grief.
Shipwrackt on the sea of his own tears, by the wind of his own sighs*
There is nothing can sooner make a worker of miracles, see that there is
something impossible for him to do than my ill fortune,

Whose torments should men see,
He had no mercy, that could wish for me
A days breath more,
All the happiness he has, is the security his bad fortune has wrought him,
which lightly cannot be made worse.

He need not fear that any bad success,
Can bring him to more pitied distress,
Whose thread is spun
Of black and dismal wool,
Even beasts had they but reason for to see,
And know her grief would mourn her misery,
Than whom there is nothing can inferior be,
As if high heaven had laid some strict command
Upon each star, some plague on her to pour,
whole heaven against us have conspired,
Or in our troubles they had else been tired,
The powers have made a vow,
Up to that height my sorrows to advance,
That before mine all miseries shall bow,
That all the sorrows mortals can surmise,
Shall fall far short of my least miseries,
Earth, which griefs only animate.
Misery is witty in our plagues,
whose misery is grown to such an height,
As make the earth groan to support its weight.
Clothed in misery. The abstract of all misery.
Whose storms of woe so mainly have beset her,
She has no place for worse, nor hope for better.
That tread
^ Labyrinth of woe without a thread,
Whose grief like to Medusa's head makes all,
That hear it to a flinty substance fall,
^^d work* such patience as none repine
^^ any grief, except as great as thine.
Whose misery none can make known
^^ in the depth of his must lose his own,
Whose comfort is, (if for him any be;)
That none can show more cause of grief than he,
Most wretched creature ev^r eye
Beheld, or yet put on mortality.
Clouded with woes fortunes football, tennis ball,
A pitied subject even to enemies,
Malice could not wish greater misery.
A Text fittest for grief to comment on.
Modest.
Whose Cheeks blush,
As if modesty it self lay there within a bed of coral,
Bright beams of beauty streamed from her eye,
And in her cheek sat maiden modesty.
A far finer man than he thinks on, that confutes his commenders, giving
reasons to think they are mistaken, and is angry if they do not believe him, a
bawdy jest shall more shame him than a bastard another, and if you take him by
his look, he is guilty.

Modesty, that cumbersome familiar of womankind.
Her motion blushed at it self.
When dishonesty comes near her ear, wonder stops it out, and saves virtue the
labor.

Monk. v. Anchorite. Moon.
Nights horned Queen. The silver-fronted star.
The Suns pale sister. The cold crescent.
Nights gloomy patroness. The Mistress of the Skies.
Cynthia darts her borrowed rays. Phoebus dark sister.
The cold Queen of night. Regent of humors.
The mother of the months. The lowest Planet.
Bright Cynth^a's Carre, Throne.
The pale faced Emperesse of the night.
That common Calendar. Universal Almanac.
The Queen of stars, Titans bright daughter.
That sits upon the silver Throne;
And holds the reins of darkness gloomy Coach,
Nights gloomy Charioter. The Sovereign b^^uty of the night.
Faint light through duskie clouds sad ^ynthia gave,
Night wandering and pale wat^y star,
Whom yawning Dragons draw in thirling Carres,
From Latmus Mount up to the gloomie sky,
Where crowned with blazing light and Majesty,
She proudly sits. Nights forked Queen.
Endymions fair mistress. The monthly horned Queen.
The unconstant Lady of the night,
Which from the wave embatteled shrowds,
Opening the West comes streaming through the clouds.
With shining Troops of silver tressed stars
Attending on her as her torch bearers,
And all the lesser lights about her Throne,
With admiration stand as lookers on,
Whilst she alone in height of all her pride,
The Queen of light along her sphere does glide,
The pale faced Lady of the black-ey'd Night,
That tips her sharpened horns with borrowed light.
The fair directresse of the night, the silver Planet.
The curious train of spangled Nymphs attire,
Her next nights glory with increasing fire,
Each Evening adds more glory and adorns
The growing beauty of her grasping horn,
She sucks and draws her b^others golden store,
Until her glutted orb can suck no more.
Nights bashful Empress, which does often wain,
Yet often repents her darkness, primes again,
And with her circling horns does re-embrace,
Her brothers wealth, and orbs her silver face,
The still Commandresse of the silent night,
Phoebus pale sister, which strikes her silver horns quite
Through the clouds. The lowest of Celestial bodies,
And darts a beam upon nights swarthy face.
Great Queen of shadows, governesse of floods.
Cynthia seated in her silver chair.
The Moon at full thought no scorn to be torch-bearer to a greatter beauty,
guiding her steps whose motions bare a mind that bore in it self more stirting
motions.

that with long beams the shamefaced night arrayes.
Full Moon.
The moon does join
^er growing horns, and with replenished shine
^e views the earth,
^hen in a silvver orb her horns unite.
Space of Months.
^o times her roundles Phoebe had complete,
Seven times had Phoebe from her wain
^ith Phoebus fire filled her horn again
^ith joined horns 2, 3, 4 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Moons their
orbs had filled.
^, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Crescents now had made their orbs complete,
Their growing horns unite,
and had as often withdrawn their ^eeble light.
^, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Aged Moons grew young.
^, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Crescents had full displaid
^eir joining horns repleat with borrowed flame,
^e twice the Moon her shining Crescents fill,
Thrice had the Queen of night
Shifted her robes, and changed her horny light,
^re Phoebe thrice twelve times have filled her horns.
Thrice has the pale faced Empress of the night,
^ent in her chaste increase, her borrowed light,
To guide the vowing mariner.
Seven times had Cynthia filled her wained light,
The tenth month was in her bright Chariot throned
Before the moons sharp horns were twice grown round,
Unti^ll seven Months had gained and lost their fire,
When as the fair directresse of the night,
Had thrice three times repaired her waining light.
The horned Moon three courses did expire,
T^^ice three times had the Sovereign of the night,
Repaired her empty horns with borrowed light.
Bright Cynthia's head had three times thrice
^epair'd the empty horns and filled the eyes
Of gazing mortals with the Globe of light.
Twice six months have run
Their tediou^ courses.
Thrice had the Moon renewed her wained pride.
Moore. v. Ethiopian. Morning.
^y in its cradle, day in its swathing clouts,
Infant day, day new hatched from the shell.
The day in dressing. The Infancy of day.
The bloom, the bud of day.
The blooming light buds from the blushing East.
Day new apparrelled.
Thy Morn with pearls of dew bedecks the plains.
The prime of springing day. Nonage of the day.
The Maidenhead of day. Pupillage of day.
The eldest daughter of the light.
Aurora rides
And throws the light from off her Saffron wh^els,
The wakefull morning from the East displayes
Her purple doors, and odoriferous bed,
With plenty of dew-dropping Roses spread.
Clear Lucifer the flying stars does chase,
And after all the rest resigns his place.
Early Sunshine.
Now the bright morning star, days harbenger
Comes dancing from the East.
When Titan saw the dawning ruddy grew,
And how the Moon her silver horns withdrew,
He bad the light-foot hours without delay,
To join his steeds. The Goddesses obey.
Who from their lofty mangers forthwith led
His fiery horses with Ambrosia fed.
The humid night
Beyond the Hesperian vale has taken her flight:
Aurora's splendour re-enthrones the day,
Aurora does her dapple cheeks display,
And from the East does usher in the day,
When aged night Aurora's blushes fled,
When from the approaching morn the stars withdrew
And that the Sun had drunk the scorched dew,
Lucifer displayes
Aurora's blush, and she Apollo's rays,
The dewie confines of the night and day.
When gray Aurora now had vanqu^sht night,
When Sol had raised his beams above the flood,
Now Lucifer exalts the day, to hell
Old night descended.
Day sprung, and mountains shone with early beams
The morning night dismasks with welcome flame.
Now Lucifer awakes
The dewit morn.
The time, when light the gloomy nigh^ invades.
B^ight Lucifer his taper shows,
The harbenger of day;
T^^'enlightned world resignes to Phoebus sway.
That time the light
Begins his triumph ore the vanquished night.
Aurora now begins to creep
Out of her eastern cradle.
Already in the ruddy east
B^ight E^ycina with the beaming crest,
Calls up Aurora.
The day the suns bright son,
Now awake does first discover
Mountain t^p^ new g^lded over
With his ruddy rays thereon;
Then Aurora richly dight, In an azure mantle fair,
Fringed about with silver bright, Pearl dews droping through the air.
Hung the gate with golden tissues. Where Hyperio^'s chariot issu^s
About the hour when the heavenly teame
Begins her golden progress from the east.
The dawne scarce drew the curtains of the east.
The dawne usur pes upon the night.
What time the sun
first gilds th'Horizon with his radiance.
Blushing Aurora sweetly peeping out,
Chides in the stars. The sun begins to suck
His early balm, and Island spices.
The glory of the next days light,
Had chac't the shadows of the tedious night.
The darkness flies, and light is hurld
Round about the silent world.
When the shrill cock proclaims the infant day*
The day begins to disclose his comfortable beauties.
The rosy morning draws away
The sable curtain, and lets in the day.
Like Venus rising from a sea of jet.
When as the sh^dy gloome
Does give the day her room.
The rising sun
Does show the victory that he has won
Of cloudy night. The hour when we might
Not speak a falsehood, if we called it night,
The morning having dispossessed the night,
Makes the sky wear her livery of light.
The pale-fac't empress of the night
Has resurrender'd up her borrowed light.
And early Hesper shoots his golden head,
To usher Titan from his purple bed.
When dewie cheek't Aurora's purple die,
Dapples the beauty of the morning sky.
Aurorora does display
Her golden locks, anu summons up the day.
Titan heaves up his head,
From off the pillow of his saffron bed.
Titan now ready for his journal race,
Has roused his dewie locks and rosy face,
Enricht with morning beauty.
Phoebus has now upheav'd his golden head,
From the soft pillow of his seagreen bed,
And with his rising glory has possessed
The spacious borders of the enlightened east.
Gray lines do fret the clouds, the messengers of day.
The winking Mary buds open their golden eyes.
The rising, breaking light.
The stars are vanquished by the mornings flame.
The morning sun erects his beams,
And rarifies the earth with peircing gleames,
Lady of light, the rosy fingred morn.
Sol with his face new washed in cleansing waves,
Enchac't the skies. The new fired sun
Strikes the broad fields.
The cheerful Lady of the light,
Clad in her saffron robe,
Dispersed her beams through every part
Of the enflowred globe.
The mornings beauty now had glazed the sky.
The rosy morn holds out her silver light,
Now drew the suns bright steeds light from the hills.
When Phoebus fiery carre
Threw darkness of its wheels,
When now the thirsty sun drank up the stars.
When light does show
Her silver forehead,
Aurora rose from her loved Tithons bed.
Fair Nymph, whose chaste and fragrant beauties run
A course that honors and prevents the sun;
It Is thou that breaking through the enlightened ^ire,
Come first abroad, and shakst day from thy hair.
Aurora rose,
And from her orient tresses threw the light,
The morning sitting in a throne of gold,
Surva^d the earth.
The early riser with the rosy hands.
Soon as the white and red mixed fingred dame
Had gilt the mountains with her saffron flame.
Now the next mornings light sprang from the east;
And Sols bright rays the dewie shades dec^east.
Sols puffing steeds begin to breath out day
From their inflamed nostrils.
The modest morn on earths vast zone,
The gladsome day does re^enthrone.
The spring of day
Bloomed from the east.
The dawning gray,
The ensign of a glorious day.
The morn does look out of her eastern gates, portalls*
Casements, chiding the stars to bed.
When the next day had with his morning light
Redeemed the East from the dark shades of night,
And with his golden rays had over spread,
And all the neighbor hills embroydered.
When the next morning had renewed the day,
And the early twilight now had chac't away
The pride of night, and made her lay aside
Her spangled robes. The lily-handed morn
Saw Phoebus stealing dew from Ceres corn.
The mounting lark, days herald got on wing,
Bidding each bird choose out their bough to sing.
By this had Chantecleere the village clock,
Bidden the goodwife for her maids to knock,
And the swart plowman for his breakfast staid,
That he might till the lands which fallow laid,
The hills and valleys here and there resound
With the re-ecchoes of the deep-mouthed hound;
Each shepherds daughter with her cleanly paile
Was come a field, to mi^ke the mornings meal,
The bees were not got out, nor scaly fry,
Beg^n to leap, and ca^ch the drowned fly.
Aurora
Kisseth the perfumed cheeks of dainty Flora,
The sun our Hemispheare has repossest,
The early rising lark sings up the ploughman.
The Muses friend Gray eyed Aurora ye^
Held all the meadows in a cooling sweat,
The milk-white Gossamores not upward snow'd,
Nor was the sharp and useful steering goad,
Laid on the strong-neck'd ox, no gentle bud,
The sun had dryde, the cattle chewed the cud,
Low levelled on the grass, no flies quick sting
Info^c'^ the stone horse in a furious ring,
To tear the passive earth, nor lash his tail
About his buttocks, yet the s^^my snaile
Might on the wainsco^, by his many mazes,
Winding Meanders, and self-knitting traces
Be followed, where he stuck his glittering slime
Not yet w^pt off, it was so early time,
The careful smith had in his sooty forge
K^ndled no coal, nor did his hammer urge
His neighbors patience, owls abroad did fly,
And day as then might plead its infancy.
The morn came out with sandals gray.
Eous and his fellows in the teame,
(Who since their watring in the western stream,
Had run a furious journey to appease
The night-sick eyes of our Antipodes.)
Now sweating were in our horizon seen
To drink the cold dew from each flowery green.
The morning now in colors richly dight,
Stepped ore the eastern thresholds.
The day, drew from the earth her pitchie veil away
And all the flowery vales with carrols rung,
That by the mounting la^ke were shrilly sung,
The duskie mists rise from the ch^ystal floods,
And da^knesse no where reigned, but in the woods,
The chaste morn all her beauty now discloses,
Ou^-bl^shing all the emulating roses,
When the cock with lively d^n
S^atters the rear of darkness^ thin,
Of lis^ining how the hounds and horn,
^learly rouse the slumbering morn.
The ruddy horses of the rosy morn
O^^ of the eastern gates had newly borne,
Their blushing Mistress in her golden chair,
Sp^eading new light throughout o^^ Hemispheare.
The Lyrick larkes practice their sweetest strain,
A^ror^'s early blush to entertain.
The day star late sunk in the Ocean bed,
Does now again repai^e his drooping head,
And tricks his bea^s, which with new spangled ore,
Flame in the for^head of the morning sky.
The day out of the Ocean main
Began to peep above this earthly mass
With pea^ly dew sprinkling the mountain grass.
The shining morn bewrays unto the gloomy world her face
Before the lamp of light. Above the earth upreard his flaming head.
When the ra^he morning newly now awake,
S^arce with fresh beauty furnished her brow,
Her self beholding in the general lake,
To which she paies her never ceasing vows.
Scarce h^d the sun dried up the dewie morn,
And scarce the heard gone to the hedge for shade.
The early lark mounts from the sullen earth,
And sings her hymns to welcome in the light,
The prime of day breaks through the pregnant east.
The sun does rise,
And shu^s the lids of all heavens lesser eyes.
With quivers Nymphs ado^ne
Their active sides, and wake the morn
With the sh^ill music of their horn.
When everystar fled from the approaching sun bu^ Lucifer.
Bright day dissolves the d^mps of nigh^.
The P^e^ades grow dim, each nearer star,
Loses his light, Boots lazy car.
T^rnes to the plain complexion of the skies,
And Lucifer the great star darkened flies
From the hot day.
A^rora now from Tithons purple bed
Arose, and the eastern sky discolored,
Gave cheerful notice of the approaching sun.
The ^osie fingred morn
Kisseth each flower that by her dew is borne.
Envious light, chides away the silent night.
By this Apollo's golden harp began
To sound forth music to the Ocean,
Which watchful Hesperus no sooner heard,
But he the days bright-bearing carre prepa^'d,
And ran before, as harbenger of light,
And with his flaring beams mock^ ugly night,
Till she overcome with anguish, care, and rage
Threw down to hell her loathsome carriage.
The nigh^'^ dislodged, and now
The morn is trimming of her virgin brow
To court the sun, when from the western deep,
And Te^hys lap his glimmering beams do peep,
To ascend his glorious carre.
Days porter has unhinged the painted door.
When the sun scat^ers by his light
All the Rebellions of the night.
When Chanticleere the bellman of the morn,
S^mmons up twilight with his bugle horn.
The nights swift course with silence is outworn^,
And gives a kind farewell unto the day;
The winged musicians which awake the morn,
With hollow throats and horned bills do play.
The illustrious officer of day,
First worshipped in the east, gins to display
The glory of his beams, then buds unfold
Their chary leafes, each dew-drown'd marigold
Insensibly does st^r it self, and spread,
Each violet lifts up his pensive head.
The evening of the Antipodes.
The early dawn enamelling the air^.
Heaven p^ays the good huswife, and puts her candles out
When first the morning has her mantle spread.
The sable night's disl^dg'd, and now began
Aurora's usher with his w^ndy f^n,
Gently ^o shake the woods on every side;
While his fair mistress like a stately bride,
With flowers and gem^s and Indian gold does spangle
Her lovely locks her lovers looks to tangle,
When gliding through the air in mantle blew,
With silver fringe, she drops the silver dew.
Aurora now her treasures forth had brought
Edging the silver clouds with fringe of gold,
And hangs the skies with arras rarely wrought,
^ouder'd with pearl and precious stones untold,
Yet weeps she, for she thinks it all too small
To welcome great Apollo to her hall.
The glorious sun does gild the day.
^ights chear^ul dame in saf^ron robes did shine,
Whose silver beams through every part dispe^st
Of the terrestrial globe did now refine
The thickened air, and leavie for^ests peir^'t.
Now sparkling Titan burnisht Neptunes waves,
And spread his beams on earths enamel^'d breast.
The bashful morn does long in vain
Court the amorous Marigold,
With sighing blasts and weeping rain,
Yet she refuses to unfold.
But when the planet of the day
Approaches with his powerful ray,
Then she spreads, then she receives
His wa^mer beams into her virgin leaves.
The blushes of the morn appear,
And now she hangs her pearly store,
Fi^hed from the eastern shore,
(...) cowslips bell, and roses leaves.
The rapid motion of the spheers,
Old night from our Hor^zon bears:
And now declining shades give way
To the re^urne of cheerful day.
The morn does now display
The purple ensign of ensuing day.
The sun ready to ride.
Nights duskie shadows fly,
And morning flecks the rose-enamell'd sky.
Phoebus now prunes himself.
His way is strow'd with roses.
The beauteous Harbenger of day
^^^sht from the Eastern pillow, where she lay
Claspt in her Tythons arms, red with those kisses,
Which being enjoyed by night, by day she misses.
As soon as Titan gilds the eastern hills,
And chirping birds, the Saints-bell of the day
Ring in our ears a warning to devotion.
Light now repa^^es the wrongs of night.
When Sol with morning glory fills the eyes
Of gazing mortals, whose victorious ray,
Chacing the night rethrones deposed day.
The illustrious prince of light,
Rises in glory from his Crocean bed,
And tramples down the horrid shapes of night,
The early bugle horn
Of Chantecleer had summoned up the morn.
The eastern lamps begin
To fail, and draw their nightly glory in.
Ere the first cock his ma^^ens rings.
By this the b^oad sa^'^ Quirister of night
Surceas'd her screeching note, and took her flight
To the next neighboring ivy. Birds and beasts
Forsake the warm p^otection of their nests.
And nightly dens, whilst darkness does display
Her sable curtains to let in the day.
Phaebe now to the lower world r^tires,
Attended with her train of lesser fires.
The gray-ey'd ^anitor does now begin
To open his eastern portals and let in
The newborn day, which having lately hurld
The shades of night into the lower world;
The dewie cheek'^ Aurora does unfold
Her purple curtains, all besring'd with gold;
And from the pillow of his Crocian bed,
Don Phoebus raises his refulgent head,
That with his all discerning eyes survaies,
And gilds the mountains with his morning rays.
In the flowery east
Fair Erycina with her beamy crest
Raises Aurora; and she starts with blushing,
From aged Tithons cold arms quickly rushing,
Opens the wide ga^^s of the welcome day,
And with a beck summons the sun away;
Who quickly mounting on his glistering chair
Courseth his nimble horse, through the air,
With swi^ter pace, than when he did pursue,
The laurel changed Nymph that from him flew.
The morn in russet mantle clad,
Walks ore the dew on yond high eastern hill.
The glow worms uneffectual fire, begins to pale
Aurora rising from her blushing wars,
Does with her rosy hand put back the stars,
Now ore the sea from her old love comes she,
That draws the day from heavens cold axletree.
When light
^^^ps through the glimmering eyelids of the morn.
Flame-snorting Phlegon's ruddy breath began,
^educing day, to gild the Indian.
Aurora's saffron ray,
On the Horizon does renew the day.
Au^o^a weary of her cold embrace
With her old spouse, began in Inde apace
To paint her portal of an opal hue.
Before the worshipped sun
Pears through the golden windows of the east.
The all chearing sun,
In the remotest east begins to draw
The shady curtains of Aurora's bed.
The gray eyed morn smiles on the frowning night,
Checkering the eastern clouds with streaks of light,
And freckel'd darnesse like a drunkard reeles
From sorth days path, and Titans burning wheels,
When silver streaks do lace the blushing clouds.
Nights candles are burnt out, and jocund day,
Stands tiptoe on the misty mountains top.
The rising sun peeps ore the hills, and with a hearty draught
Of morning dew, salutes the welcome day.
Aurora now puts on her crimson blush.
And with resplendent rays gilds ore the tops
Of the aspiring hills, the pearly dew
Hings on the rose bud tops, and knowing it,
^ust be anon, exhaled, for sorrow shrinks,
And melts into a tear. The lark begins his flight,
And singing startles the dull night
From his watch tower in the skies,
Till the dapled morn does rise.
The early la^k, With other winged choristers of the morn,
Chant forth their anthems in harmonious aires.
The morning strows roses and violets
Upon the silver pavements of the heaven
Against the coming of the approaching sun.
The morning had given the stars leave to take their rest.
By that the next morning begins to make
A gilded show of a good meaning.
Ere that the morning shall new christen day.
The morning draws dew from the fairest greenes
Against the approach of her burning lover, to wash her face withal.
The morning winning the field of darkness.
The night grown old, his black head waxen gray.
The morning steals upon the night,
Melting the darkness.
The wolves have preyed, and the gentle day,
Before the whe^les of Phoebus round about,
Dapples the drowsy east with spots of gray.
Ghosts wandering here and there,
Troop home to Churchyards damned spirits all,
Unto their wormy beds repair.
The eastern gates all fiery red,
Opening on Neptune their dispersed beams,
Turn into yellow gold, his salt-green streams.
Sol fires the proud tops of the eastern pines.
And darts his lightning through each guilty hole,
Out from the fiery portal of the east.
When ruddy Phoebus had with morning light
Subdued the east and put the stars to fl^ght,
When Phoebus harbenger had chased the night
And tedious Phosphar brought the breaking light.
When the plowman near at hand,
Whistles ore the surrow'd land,
And the milk maid sings blithe,
And the mower whets his sith,
And every shepherd tells his tale
Under the hawthorne in the dale.
Morpheus. v. Sleep.
His dreaming pace was so,
That none could say he moov'd, he moov'd so slow.
His folded arms athwart his breast did knit
A ^luggards knot, his nodding chin did hit
Against his panting bosom.
He wore a Crown of poppy on his head,
And in his hand he bore a Mace of Lead.
He yawned, etc. The drowsy god. Lethargick Deity.
Shape-feigning god, who of those brother sprites,
With the most subtle art and cunning can,
^^urp the gesture, visage, voice of man
His habit, and known phrase, and only takes
An humane form, Another shows a Snakes,
A birds, a beasts, this Icelos they call,
Whom heaven embowr, though Phobetor, by all
Of mortal birth he is named. But Phan^^sies
Of different faculty indues a tree,
Earth, water, stone, the several shape of things
That life enjoy not. The Lead-Mace-bearing Sergeant.
Mountain. v. Hills. High.
The rockie ribs of earth. Earths war^s. Blisters.
Mountebank.
W^xing rich at others cost and smart.
Grow famous Doctors purchasing promotions,
Whilst the Churchyard swells with their hurtful potions,
Who, hang men like, fearlesse and shameless too,
Are prayed and paid for murders that they do.
Play booty with a sickness,
Turn A Consumption to men's purses, and purge them worse th^n their bodies.
Setting up an Apothecaries shop in private chambers.

Living by revenues of close stools and urinalls.
Defe^^ing sick men's health from day to day.
As if they went to law with their disease.
A fool to fill a close stool.
The best cure he has done is upon his own purse,
His learning consists in reckoning names of diseases, in which he is only
languag'd, and speaks Greek of^entimes when he knows it no^

If you send your water to him you must resolve to be sick, for he will never
leave examining your water till he has shak'd it into a disease, then follows
a writ to his Drugger in a strange tongue which he understands though he cannot
constru^,

He tronslates his Apothecaries shop into your chamber, and the ^e^y windows
and benches must ^ake Physic.

One that dares not come to a dead patient lest his carcass should bleed. A
sucking Consumption.

Impostors that do give
To sick men potions that themselves may live.
Skillful to spur on nature to her end,
That have an art to cure poverty.
Quacking Leeches, Empyricks,
Who by corosive plasters often make more,
And deeper wounds than were received before,
And by their Chancery cures make men worse,
To heal the gashes of their crazie purse,
Yo mourn v. Lament
To shead from drowned eyes vain offerings to the dead,
Who with remorselesse hands their bosom tear,
And wailing call on him who cannot hear,
She rudely tears the adornment of her hair,
And with redoubled blows her breast invades
Her face as much, as grief would suffer fair,
She sighs and shaking her disheveled hair,
And with torn garments did present their woe,
Her ruffled hair, As at a woeful Funeral she tare.
Wringing her upheav'd hands. He dust upon his clouded forehea^ throws.

So Seres mourned her daughters ravishment,
So Philomel mourned her Virginity.
The father and sad sisters did not more,
Mourn him that slew the C^lydonian bore,
Her garments from her bruised breasts she tare,
So mourned Venus drawn by silver Swans,
Her loved Adonis. To cloud the face with grief.
Trees shed their leaves, streams with their tears increase,
The Naiades and Dryades invest
Themselves in sullen sable and display
Their scattered hair in uncomposed curls.
Feeding on tears. Hugging grief with strict embrace.
Venting the sad tautologies of lavish passion.
Loading the bosom of the fleeting air
With sad complaints. Raise clouds of dust that f^ll upon their hair,
Springs that ^long time before had held no drop,
Now welled forth and overwent the top.
B^rds left to pay the Springs their wonted vows,
And all forlo^n sa^ drooping on the boughs,
The Springs and birds, trees with unwonted groans,
Bewail her chance, and force it from the stones. v. Weep.
Multitude. v. Many. Murmr. v. Noise.
The people such a murmuring make.
^^ when far off the roaring surges rake
^^e ratled shore or when loud Eurus breaks
Though tufted Pines.
Muses.
^oddesses of verse. The sacred nine.
^amassian girls, Aonian Maids, Apollo'^ quire.
^he presidents of verse and sacred numbers.
^he learned maid^ which by the mossie banks
^f drizling Helicon in airy ranks,
^read roundelayes upon the silver sand,
^hilst shaggie Satyrs tripping o'r the strand,
^and still at gaze, and yield their senses thrall
To the sweet cadence of their Madrigalls.
^he learned ^isters of the sacred well,
Those virgins imps of Mneme which do bring
D^ws of invention from their sacred Spring.
The virgin Choristers of Castalia.
^^eet Maids of memory. Fair Thespian Ladies,
That on the two topt mountains dwell
And daily drink of the Castalian well,
The heavenly sisters by whose sacred skill,
Sweet sounds are rai^'d upon the forked hill
Of high Parnassus, they whose tuned strings,
Can cause the birds to stay their nimble wings.
And silently admire, before whose feet,
The lambs as fearlesse with the lions meet,
Which did the harp of O^pheus so inspire,
He from the Stygian Lake could safe retire,
And did Amphions heart with virtue fill,
That even the stones were pliant to his will.
The sweet infusers of diviner strains.
That sitting sing upon the flowery banks
Of sacred Helicon in spangled ranks,
Pierian Quire. Calliope, Clio, Erato, Tnalia, Melpomene,
^erpsicore, Evterpe, Polyhimnia, Urania.
Music. v. Sweet sounding.
Break in sweet sounds the willing air.
Well digested sounds. Speechless song, universal language.
That innocent pleasure which the spears
Vouchsafe to make and gods do deign to hear.
Melodious harps and songs salute the ^ar.
The wanton airs in twenty sweet forms dance
After her fingers. The air and fingers meet.
In sweet contention, raping the ears into attention.
true concord of well tuned sounds.
By unions married, each string husband to the other.
Marrying his voice unto the strings.
Making the Lute in his language show how glad he was to b^
graced with the touch of her fingers.
With the choice Music of her hand and voice,
Stills the loud wind, and makes the wild
Incensed Bore and Panther mild. Harmonious airs:
Break in sweet sound the willing air.
Music.
Like an hostess that has no Arithmatick, but her brain to se^ down her
reckoning.

N.
Naiades.
THe fountain Deities. The fountain Queens.
The watery Deities of the winding brooks,
With fedgie Crowns, and ever harmless looks.
Dance in the crispi^ channels.
Hyale, Niphe, Rhanis, Psecas, Phiale, Crocale, Phaethusa, Lampetie
Neaera, Arethusa, Doris.
Naked.
Disrobed, vnarraied, dismantled, unclothed, unmasked, unvailed
Name
To christen, to confer, impose a name.
Narcissus.
The self enamour,d boy.
That leapt into the water for a kiss,
Of his own shadow, and despising many,
Died ere he could enjoy the love of any.
Once a C^pid, add but wings.
Who too much trusted to deceitful springs.
A flower, now to the floods inclines that so.
He might by that which was his ru^ne grow.
V. Ovid. Metam. Lib. 3.
Nature
Gods lieutenant, Gods* vice gerent.
^he mother of all things.
^^at nere can stray so far, not to return.
^^changed inclination.
Near
As near
(...) clamor might inform an ear
Their eyes their masters object were.
Necessity
Victorious rebel against strongest laws,
That lawless tyrant.
^olding in brazen hands as pledge of woes.
^ormenting beams, and wracks and more to daunt.
^^pe hooks and molten lead do never want.
that just excuse, unanswerable argument,
Neck.
(...) neck that polisht ivory wears
^ilver pillar whiter far,
^h^n towers of polisht ivory are.
Negro. V. Ethiopian Nemesis
^^st goddess of revenge, stern Rhamnusia.
^other of fate and change.
(...) bearer of eternal providence,
Daughter of frowning justice.
which from black closed Eternity,
from thy dark cloudy hidden seat.
^he worlds disorders do descry,
Which when they swell so proudly great.
Reversing the order nature set;
Thou give thy all confounding doom.
Which none does know before it come.
Neptune
The aged father of the floods. The wavie Monarch.
The great sea Admiral. The trident armed God,
Whose state
Is next to Jove's. Great ruler of the floods.
The king of surges. The Saphyr God of seas.
The Monarch of the sacred floods.
The father of the swelling Maine. Cerulean God.
The God whose trident calmes the Ocean.
The god that earth does bind
In brackish chains,
He that girds earth in cincture of the sea,
Whose vast embrace ensphears whole earth,
He that all lands
Girds in his ambient circle and in air,
Shakes the curled tresses of his Saphyr hair.
The watery King that holds the three toothed scepte^,
The god that rides
In his blue chariot o'r the surging tides,
That makes the roaring waves shrink when they feel
The heavy burden of his pressing wheel,
Whose threeforkt scepter rules the sea.
The Saphyr visag'd God. Great master of the floods,
The unresisted power of the deeps, King of waves,
He that unlocks
The gaping quicksands, undermines the rocks
Saturns warry son. Joves watery brother.
Sea Deity. Tattarean god. The universal Admiral.
Nereides.
That on the Dolphines back ride o'r the seas,
Their finning coursers. Thet is virgin train.
The Watery powers, goddesses, Deities.
The Nymphs that float upon the watery seas.
The wanton Nymphs within the watery bowers,
That o'r the sand with printlesse foot
Chase ebbing Neptune,
That on their heads wear caps of pearly shells,
Green goddesses of Seas, gray Doris daughters,
That in low coral woods
String pearls upon their Sea green hair,
Psamathe, Thetis, Do^o, Galenae, Clotho, Gala^aea.
Eucrato, Glauce, Leucothoe, Proto, Doris Spio,
Cymodorea, Idya, Endore, Sao, Eunica, Dynamene.
Th^iaa, Pasithee, Eulimen^, Cymathoe, M^lite,
Pherusa, Phao, Agave, Poris, Nesaea, Erato, Panopa.
Protomedea, Hyppothoe, Actaea, L^ssia^issa, Pronaea.
Euagore, Pantoporea, Autonone, Neso, Eione, Be^oe. V. Hesiods Theogonia v.
230. 346

Glauconome, Alimeda. Hipponeo, Laomedia, Liagore.
Cymo, Eupompe, Themiste, Euarne, Menippe, Pet^aea.
Nemertea, Ocyr^oe, Cydippe, Tyche, Acaste.
Cly^ie, Ianthe, Lycoris, Plexaure.
Nestor.
That miracle of aged eloquence,
He that three ages saw. Eloquent gravity.
The Pylian sage. That lived to see a treble age.
Net.
Corded toils, corded snares. Corded mashes
Windowie toils. Masht in the net.
Never.
The sun shall change his course and find new paths
To drive his chariot in. The loadstone leave
His faith unto the North. The vine withdraw
Those strict embraces that infold the elm,
In her kind arms, ere, etc.
First shady groves shall on the b^llowes grow,
And sea weeds on the tops of mountains show
Their flimy chires.
Heavens fi^es shall first fall darkened from their sphere,
Grave night, the light weed of the day shall wear.
Fresh streams shall chase the sea, tough plowes shall tear
Their fishie bottom, etc. Before.
Sooner fleet minutes shall back rescued be.
Soonner expect the harvest from the sand.
Sooner every star
May in his motion grow irregular,
The sun forget to give his welcome flame
Unto the teeming earth.
December sooner shall see primrose grow;
And swift-pac't rivers in soft murmures flow,
No more shall mead be decked with flowers,
Nor sweetness dwell in rosy bowers,
Nor early buds on branches spring,
Nor warbling birds delight to sing.
Nor April violets paint the grove.
The fish shall in the Ocean burn,
And fountains sweet, shall bitter tu^ne.
The humble oak no flood shall know.
Black Lethe shall oblivion leave.
Love shall his bow and shaft lay by,
And Venus doves want wings to fly,
The sun refuse to show his light,
And day shall then be turned to night,
And in that night no star appear.
No joy above in heaven shall dwell,
Nor pain torment poor souls in hell,
Can earth forget her burden and ascend?
O^ can aspiring flames be taught to tend
To earth? Then etc.
Can hills forget their ponderous bulks and fly
Like wandering Aromes in the empty sky?
Or can the heavens, grown idle, not fulfill
Their certain revolutions but stand still,
And leave their constant motion to the wind
T'inherit? Then etc.
Sooner the sun and stars shall shine together.
Sooner the wolf make peace with tender lambs.
Sooner shall rigid Boreas first take wing
At Nilus head, and boisterous Auster spring
From the icie floods of Izland -- Then etc.
You may sooner part the billows of the sea,
And put a bar between their fellowship.
Sooner shut
Old time into a den, and stay his motion,
Wash off the swift hours from his downy wing,
Or steal eternity to stop his glass.
Sooner the pibbles, on the hungry beach,
Shall ^illop stars, and the mutinous winds,
Throw the proud Cedars up against the sun.
When Poe shall wash the topps of Matine hill,
Or the sea swallow lofty Apennine,
And strange eff^cts of love, new monsters join,
That Tigers may from hindes seek lusts delight,
And the meek dove is trodden by the kite,
When flocks the Lions friendship entertain,
And wanton goats affect the brackish main. Then etc.
Sooner the mountains shall want shady trees,
Sooner the ships shall not ^aile on the seas,
And rivers make recourse unto their springs,
The rivers shall recoile unto their springs,
The sun shall from the west his course begin,
The earth shall first with shining stars be filled,
The skies unto the furrowing plough shall yield,
The water shall send forth a smoking flame,
The fi^r shall yield water back again,
First shall the birds that welcome in the spring,
All mute and dumb; for ever cease to sing,
The summer Ants leave their industrious pain,
And from their full mouths cast their loading grain.
The swift Maenalian hounds that chasing are,
Shall frighted run back from the trembling ^^are.
First nature shall become preposterous.
No element shall hold his constant seat,
Heaven shall be earth, and earth Joves star^y house,
Fire shall be cold, and water shall give hea,
Summer shall give a snowie livery
Unto the ground, and does shalllyons fright,
Through air the crows whiter than snow shall fly,
And the days brightness turn into the night,
The fish shall not inhabit in the flood,
And silver swans shall take a jetty die,
The cha^ing boar shall not then haunt the wood,
With wings then oxen shall divide the sky,
Marble shall then the wax in softness pass,
The chicken then shall prey upon the kite,
In the vast welkin shall the staggs se^ke grass,
The dog forget Arcadian wolves to bite,
Stars shall enamel earth; and from the tree
No leaves shall dangle, eagles court the dove,
The highest moun^ains then shall levelled be,
And the fierce griffons shall the horses lov^.
V. Famous. Ever Incredible, Impossible.
New years day,
The birth and infant of the year.
That day which is the prime
To the slow-gliding months, when every eye
Wea^s Symptoms of a sober jolity,
And every hand is ready to present
Affection in a real complement.
When even the peasant thinks that he
Cannot without a gross absurdity,
Be that day frugal, and not spare his friend
Some gift to show his love finds not an end
With the deceased year.
When every street
Sounds with the trampling of presenters feet.
When as the lowest fortune will not fear
To give a welcome to the new come year
With some proportioned gift.
The day old time does turn his annual glass.
New.
Infant, blooming, budding. That counts not many years.
Scarce yet has seen the public light.
News.
Whose itching ears even smart to know the news.
Fames plumed birth.
Sad News. v. Harsh sounding.
Sounds like a mandrake torn out of the earth.
That living mortals hearing it run mad.
K^lling, stabbing, wounding accents.
Good News. v. Sweet sounding.
The sweetest tidings, and the greatest wonder
As ever broke in sunder, the lips of panting fame.
Which to hear,
There Is none but would wish all his body ear.
The happiest news that ever begged an ear.
Night.
The nights black wings mask up the light,
The obscure mantle of the night. The shady gloome.
Whose sable wing
In gloomy darkness husheth every thing.
Under her sable pinions folds the world,
When Cynthia darts her borrowed rays,
The lights black curtain, cypress.
The gloomy night
With sable curtains had beclouded all.
Days elder sister. Best patroness of grief.
Heavens surrounding steeds
Quell their proud courage, turn their fainting heads
Into the lower hemispheare to cool
Their flaming nostrills in the western poole.
When Morpheus with his leaden keys
Locks up the senses.
Night sheds her poppy on the weary world,
When leaden sleep has sealed up all men's eyes.
The time when mortals take their soft repose.
The friend to secrets.
The face of heaven studded with stars.
The nurse of cares her curtains draws.
Nights heavy charms
^^ad closed all eyes. When sleep bestows
On men and on their cares a sweet repose.
Night spangs the sky with stars.
Light
^ies in the shady coverture of night.
That obscure mantle that invelopes ^ight,
When silent darkness does invite
Our eyes to slumber.
When night has spread her dusky dampe.
The sober suited matron. Days sable hearse.
The ebon box wherein heaven puts her light.
^haebe's black coachman.
Deceased lights black coffin.
The black browd lady. Black eyed empress.
That Ethiopian Queen. Negro Queen.
S^art night her brows exalts with stars impaled.
The gloomy night on light extends her shades.
The winter of the day.
The earth borne shades had closed the world with night.
The nights dew dropping shadows hide
The face of earth: The mask of day.
Night lays her sable mace on earth.
Sols glorious light
Dives to the sea, and brings up drowsy night.
The peaceful night treads busy day under her sable feet.
The p^ndant spangles
Beam from the sky, and drowsy sleep entangles
The eyes of mortals.
Nights moist shades the earth does hide,
And Cy^^hi^ in her golden ch^^iot rides,
Dark night rusht down, and hid the face of earth
With her spread sable pinions --
Heavens eye does gild the seas
In his days journey to the Antipodes.
When heaven that was a Cyclops late before,
Becomes an Argus.
Over the pole, night her thick mantle throws.
The time the jetty charioter
Hu^les her black mantle ore our Hemispheare.
Mother of sleeps and fears.
That with her sable mantle friendly covers
The sweet stolen sports of joyful meeting lovers.
The day is sunk in hideous night,
The black-ey'd night her ^able mantlehurld,
And in thick vapors muffled up the world.
Which in dull darkness canopies the light.
When nights black muffler hoodeth up the skies.
The sun does leave us to our rest,
And Cynthia has her brothers place possessed.
Now had the glorious sun taken up his Inn,
And all the lamps of heaven englightned been.
Virgins, now day is fled,
Make poo^e their garments to enrich their bed.
Which in a carre of Jet,
By steeds of iron gray, which mainly sweat,
Moist drops on all the world, drawn through the sky.
When we may
The bright Cel^stial sphere sorvey,
So rich in j^wels hung, that night appears
Like to an Ae^hiope bride.
Now in the sea bright sol had hid his head,
And stars appeared, the moon her shadows spread,
Nights silent reign had ^ob'd the world of light,
To lend in lieu a greater benefit.
Repose and sleep; when every mortal breast,
Whom care, or grief permitted took their rest,
Now nights black mantle had the earth orespread,
And all the ^^st of stars in P^aebus stead,
Though with less light ado^n'd the spangled sky.
The night did ^rowning rise
Into her throne, and from her humerous breasts,
Visions and dreams lay sucking, all men's rests
Fell like the mists of death upon their eyes.
Loves Mart of k^sses. Venus day. Soft rest of cares.
Night lays her velvet hand upon days face.
The air with sparks of living fire is spangled,
And night deep drencht in misty Acheron,
Heaved up her head, and half the world upon,
B^eath'd darkness forth.
The sky appeared in sable mourning dress,
The ebon night brought in a coach of jet,
Drawn by her sable feathered steeds, ravens.
When Morpheus ^e^geant of the night
Had laid his mace upon the dying light.
And with his listlesse limbs had closely spread,
The sable curtains of his drowsy bed.
Darkness had stained,
The Crystal brow of day, and gloomy night
Had spoiled and rifled heaven of all his light.
Grim night looked forth with grizly countenance,
Her smoakie breath in duskie clouds does fly
from her pale lips, and darkened heavens bright glance,
^^evailing ore the earth and azure sky.
When as the un^versal shade,
Of the unspangled heaven and earth had made
An utter darkness.
When as the heavens by the suns teame untrod,
Has took no print of the approaching light,
And all the spangled host keep watch in squadrons bright.
Her body is confined
Within a coleblack mantle thorough lined
With sable surres, her tresses were of hiew,
Like Ebony, on which a pearly dew
Hung like a spiders web, her face did shroud
Aswarth complexion, underneath a cloud
Of black curld cypress, on her head she wore
A crown of burnisht gold, b^shaded ore
Wi^h fogs and ro^y mists, her hand did bear
A scepter, and a sable Hemispheare.
Death resembling shades of night
Had drawn their misty curtains twixt the light,
And every darkened eye.
Sols horses now eat their Ambrosia
Within the western meads, deposed day
Surrenders up her throne, and yields her right
Unto her Negro sister. -- In the raging sea,
The sun is drowned, and with him falls the day,
When Cynthia whips her drowsy teame.
When the wings of night fans sleep on mortals.
Now was ou^ heavenly vault deprived of the light
With suns depart, and now the darkness of the night
Did light those beamy stars, which greater light did d^rk,
Now each thing that enjoyed that fiery quickening spark,
Which life is called, were moved their spirits to repose,
And wanting use of eyes* their eyes began to close.
A silence sweet each place with one consent embra^'^
A music sweet to one in careful musing placed,
And mother earth now clad in mourning weeds did breath
A dull desire to kiss the image of our death.
Earth thing with her black mantle night does sconce,
Saving the glow-worme, which would courteous be
Of that small light: of watching shepherds see.
The welkin had full niggardly enclosed
In coff^r of dim clouds his silver groates.
When Phaebe does behold
Her silver visage in the watery glass,
Decking with liquid pearl the bladed grass.
Night that from eyes their busy function takes
The ear more quick of apprehension makes,
Wherein it does impair the seeing sense
But paies the hearing double recompense.
Borne by swift dragons in an Ebon coach.
The creeping murmr, and the poring dark,
Fills the wide vessel of the universe.
The Churchyards yawne, and hell it self breaths out
Contagion to this world,
When the Diurnal Charirioter had set
His fiery brasse-hoo^'d coursers to their meat,
And o'r his golden glistering locks had spread
The jetty hangings of his sable bed.
Lights sable Coffin buries up the day,
The night close mou^ner for the dying light,
Bedews her cheeks with tears,
When the wearied Sun is gone to rest,
And darkness made the worlds unwelcome guest,
The sable mantle of the silent night,
Shut from the world the ever joysome light.
Care fl^d away, and softest slumbers please
To leave the Court for lowly Cottages:
Now when the night her sable wings had spread,
And sleep his dew on pensive mortals shed,
When visions in their a^rie shapes appear.
Wild boars fo^sake their dens^on woody hills,
And sleightfull otters left the purling rills;
Rooks to their nests in high woods now were flung,
And with their spread wings shield their naked young,
When thieves from thickets to the cross way stir,
And terror frights the lonely passenger.
^en naught was heard, but now and then the howl
^f some v^le Curre, or whooping of the owl.
^w the hungry lion roars,
^d the wolf beholds the Moon,
^hilst the heavy Plowman snores,
^ with weary task foredon,
^ the wasted brands do glow.
^ile the scre^ch owl screeching loud,
^s the wretch that lies in woe,
^ remembrance of a shroud.
V. Moon. Stars. Sleep, Midnight.
^ow it is the time of night,
^t the graves all gaping wide,
^y one lets forth hi^ spright,
^n the Church yard paths to glide,
^ow o'^ one half of the world,
^chie darkness round is hurled.
^a^ures seem dead, and wicked dreams abuse
^he curtain'd sleep, now witchcraft celebrates
^ale Heca^'s offerings,
^he owl is abroad, the Bat and the Toad,
^ And so is the Cat a Mountain,
^he Ant and the Mole ^it both in an hole,
And the frog peeps out of the fountain,
^imes dead low water, when all minds divest
To morrows business. The noon of night.
When stars begin to stoop.
The stars had reached their middle height,
When Titans ray
G^ves the Antipodes their noon of day,
When morrals have
Their Bu^ial in their voluntary grave. Bed.
^y this the feathered Bellman of the night,
^nt ^orth his midnight summons to invite
^ll eyes to slumber.
When far spent night persuades each mortal eye,
To whom nor art nor nature gran^eth light,
To lay his then mark wanting shafts of sight.
Closed with their quivers in sleeps armour^e.
The noontide of the Antipodes.
The deep of night is crept upon our talk.
The dead wast of the night.
The aged night is now grown gray.
The midnight bell
Does with his iron tongue, and braz^n mouth
Sound on unto the drowsy race of death.
The gaudy day
Is crept into the bosom of the sea;
And now loud houling wolves aro^se the Jades
That drag the Tragic melancholy night
Who with their drowsy, slow, and flagging wings
Clip dead means bones, and from their misty jaws
Breath foul contagious darkness in the air.
The deepest silence of the night,
And Luna in her crescent shined bright.
Now 'twas still night, and weary limbs at ease,
Slept sweetly, woods were hushed and calm the seas.
When the still night did gently kiss the trees,
And they did make no noise.
The moone-light sweetly sleeps upon the banks.
Nightingale.
Making a thorn her prick-song book.
Woods musicks king. The forest harmless Siren.
Enchanting Sirens of the air. Warbling Philomel.
The forest Lutinist. The yearly Augut of the spring.
Nilus.
Whose streams a thousand ways,
In winding tracks, and wanton turnings plays
On Aegypts fertile breast.
Which with his amorous folding arms does seem
To Embrace small ^slands, whilst his silver stream
From several channels of it self does meet,
And often it self with wanton kisses greet.
The seven horned river, paper-bearing stream,
Whose fruitful inundation,
Aegipt with plenty crowns.
The streams of Nile
Augmented by the weeping Crocodile.
Nimble. v. Swift.
So free from dregs of earth, that you would think
H^s body were assumed and did disguise
Some one of the celestial Hierarchies.
Their very first matter was quicksands.
Nimble as fiery elves.
^ if their veins ran with quicksilver,
^pricious spirits, a vein of Mercury in his feet,
^ike subtle snakes, can almost skip out of his skin,
That can rise,
and stoop almost together like an arrow,
^oot through the air as nimbly as a star.
(...) short as does a swallow and be here,
and there, and here, and yonder, all at once,
Born
Like Iphichus upon the tops of corn,
Nimble as winged hours,
^o dance and caper o'r the ^ops of flowers,
And ride the sunbeams.
Niobe.
Whom all might call,
The happiest mother that yet ever brought
Life unto light, had not he^ self so thought,
Of late env^'d by those
That were her friends, now pitied by her foes.
The weeping marble. Never fate
P^oduc'd a greater Monument
Of slipperie heights and prides descent.
A sep^lchre without a body.
A body without a sepulcher,
^ Body and sepulcher unto her self.
She that was made to know
The utmost heavenly smiles or frowns could do.
Noah's Ark.
Holy Janus sovereign boa^,
Where Churches and all Monarchies did float,
That swimming College, and free hospital
Of all Mankind that cage and vivarie
Of fowls and beasts, in whose womb destiny
^s and our latest nephews did install.
The floating park, That did all kinds and shapes imbark.
The sacred A^go.
Noon.
What time the Sun does dine,
The highest tide and flow of light.
The summer of the day, The headstrong day,
The parted day in equal balance held.
And now the Sun, the shortest shadows made,
Now East and West the equal sun partakes,
Now Phoebus with inflaming eye does view
The crannied earth.
Now Titan bore his equal distant sight,
Betwixt foregoing and ensuing ligh^.
When Phoebus from the height of all the sky
Beholds the East and West with equal eye.
When as the high pitched Sun invades
The Earth with hottest beams and shortest shades,
Now he that guides the Chariot of the sun,
On his Ecliptic circle had so run,
That his brasse-hoof'd fire-breathing horses wan
The stately height of the Meridian,
By this bright Phoebus with redoubled glory,
Had half way mounted to the highest story
Of his Olympic Palace.
Now laboring men seeing the Sun decline,
Take out their bags and sit them down to dine,
The Sun was in the middle way,
And had o'rcome the one half of the day.
When as the Sun up to the South aspires,
And seats himself upon days glorious T^rone,
Ascending through heavens brightest azure vault,
The Sun is now upon the highest hill
Of his days journey,
Now the Mid day had made the shadows short,
The Evening and the Morn of equal port.
The Rosy Morn resigns her light,
And milder glory to the Noon.
North.
The frozen pole, where winter which no spring can ^ase,
With blasting cold does glaze the S^ythian seas.
The frozen wain. The farthest shore,
Washed by the Northern Ocean,
Those whom days bright flame,
S^arce warms -- Their Northe^n Pole,
Where a perpetual winter binds the ground,
And glazeth up the floods,
Where Phoebus fire scarce thaws the Isickles.
Cold Champions where
No summer warmth the tree does cheer
(...) Climates which a sullen air infest,
(...) where Galistho drives her froz^n team.
^^here raigns the greater and the lesser Bear,
^^hich from their Poles view all things which they please,
(...) never set beneath the western seas,
(...) the Pole of the Parrhasian Maid,
(...) region under the Erimanthian Bear.
V. Cold. Boreas. Frost. Nose.
The double doored port.
^^here Zephyrus delights to sport.
(...) Arbitrator betwixt the eyes lest they should
(...) together by the ears.
Stands in bucklers place,
To take the blows for all the face.
Noise.
^^lted voices through the Palace rung,
Confused noise did smite the gilded sta^s,
^^ppl^usive murmures with a flood of air,
(...) justling waves against the rocks.
(...) noise made Mars wounded by Diomede,
Throwing about their rude confused sounds.
Clamor flew so high,
^^er wings struck heaven and drowned all voice.
^^ith tumult broke the air. Such a shout
Made Polyphemus when his eyes went out.
Driving affrighted Echoes through the air,
^ike the loud rattle of the drumming wind.
Like Canons when they disgorge
Their fiery vomits.
So Aetna roars when etc. v. Ae^na.
Their shout not that can pass,
Which the loud blasts of ^hracian Boreas,
On Pini^ Offa makes and bows amain
The rattling wood,
A noise horrid and as loud,
As thunder makes before it breaks the cloud,
Their noise not that of Thracian Boreas,
Amongst the Pines of O^^a can surpass,
Nor that which Nilus falling water makes,
Precipitated from the Cataracts.
A noise that did the wounded air with terror fill.
Such noise does make,
Enceladus, when he his tomb does shake,
Enough to make an Earthquake.
Like ^he roar of a whole herd of lions.
As loud a noise as make, the Hurrican,
The River trembled underneath his banks
To hear the replication of his sounds.
No longer hold
Their bursting joies, but through the air was ^oll'd,
A lengthened shout, as when the Artillery,
Of heavens discharged along the cleaving Sky,
With such a foul great noise, that you would say,
Surely some great Arcadian ass did bray,
Whose noise appalls
Worse than ten Irish Funerals,
As when confused cries,
In dead of night rend the amazed Skies,
That may be heard to the Antipodes.
V. Murmr. Shout. Nuptials. v Marriage. Nymphs.
The wanton rangers of the wood.
That in the Coral woods string pearls upon their hair.
The beauteous Sylvan Deities.
That trip upon the Mountains,
Or delight in groves and fountains,
That dally on the flowery hill or vallie.
The buskined Deities. Nereides, Nayades, Dryades.
H^madryades. Oreades.
O.
Oak.
Where stately Oaks are in no less account.
For height or spreading than the proudest be,
That from high Oeta look on Theassaly,
So fairly dressed
With spreading arms and curled top that Jove,
Never braver saw in's Dodonean grove.
^^^es that to fate are Tenants of a longer date,
^^^nce dangle Acorns, cradled in their husks.
^^es sacred Tree. Chaonian tree.
Obscure.
^^ling, posing, perplexing, puzling, abst^use
Enigmaticall, requi^ing a resolution from the Delian Oracle,
^^rdian language. Knot^y speeches.
^here all is ve^l'd, that he that reads divine,
^uching the sense at two removes.
Language that fits the ear,
^^d mouth of Oedipus to speak and hear,
Language that walks in mists and shrouds.
^s meining in the bosom of a cloud,
Darker than Plato's numbers. Carcinus Poems.
Archimedes Problems. Mysterious language.
^^lian verses.
Observe. v. Mark.
^^ Argos Io. To behold with an intentive observing eye.
To look with eyes that own no other object.
To behold with gazefull jealous eyes. Look.
Old.
In the downfall of his mellow years.
Nature has brought him to the door of death.
Nature in him stands on the very verge
Of deaths confines. Descended into the vale of years.
Struck with the rod of time.
A face impressed with aged Characters.
Her teeth dance in her head like Vitginall Jacks.
Autumnall face. Whose face does show
Like stately Abbeys ruined long ago.
When a man is daily betwixt the affliction of diseases, and the
apprehension of death.
That has nothing but ice in his veins, and earth in his visage
One of four score, three night-caps and two hairs.
A chilly frost surpriseth every member,
And in the midst of June he feels December.
There is nothing, wherein we may see more lamen table marks of the inconstancy
of humane things, than in the spoils, and ruins of her face.

Trembling limbs, shaking voice.
A bald-head, and childish dropping nose.
U^^armed gums. Loose cheeks and wrincles mad^,
As large as those, which in the woody shade
Of spacious Tabraca, the mother ape,
Deep furrowed in her aged cheeks does scrape,
When age by times imperious law,
With envious prints the forehead dimmes,
When drought and leanness, suck and draw
The moisture from the withered limbs.
Old croan that has outlived her teeth.
That has three hairs, four teeth a breast,
Like grasshoppers, an emmets crest.
A skin more ^ugged than her coat,
And dugges like spiders webbes,
His Temples like the swans soft feathers are,
A charnell house of bones, which yet quick,
Have quite outlived their own Arithmetic.
Her teeth are fallen out, but her nose and chin,
Intend very shortly to be friends and meet about it,
When deeper years
Has interwoven snow amongst our hairs,
When we are bruised on the shelf
Of time, and read
Eternal daylight on our head,
When with the rheum,
The cough and P^i^ick we consume
Into an heap of cynders. One foot in the grave, Charons boat.
Daily expected by their winding shee^,
Whose head is covered with an hoary fleece,
On whom age snows white hairs,
Whose every wrinckle tells him, where the plow
Of time has furrowed, to whom ice does flow
In every vein, whose aged head wears snow.
The living snow. The live sepulcher.
The head which age has clothed in white,
Old as the withered ram Medaea ^lew,
Whose age she in the caldron did renew.
Ready to stoop into the yawning grave.
The tomb
Yawns to devour him.
Whose chill blood and dull declining years, etc.
A man whom hoary hairs call old,
Upon whose front time many years had told.
Arrested by crooked age.
Pressed with a burden of so many years
As make him stoop under his load,
A man whom palsy shakes,
And spectacles befriend. When
We are become, but statues now of men,
And our own monuments expecting every day,
When courteous death shall take their life away,
Age does power upon his head a silver shower.
Grizly hairs
^^gins to cast the account of many cares.
Upon his head. Decrepit days,
When creeping age shall quench thy sprightly fires,
And breath cold winter on thy chill desires,
When ebbing bloods neap-tides shall strike thy limbs
With trembling palsies, when dry age bedims
The Optic sunshine of thy bed rid days
Whose bones and veins may be
An argument against Philosophy,
To prove an emptiness.
A man declined to his Preterperfect tense,
In the autumn of his mellow age,
The glass accuses to the face,
Their want of beauty,
Whom rotten teeth and wrinckled face,
And head of snowie hairs disgrace,
Cold age has frosted his fair hairs,
Whose hairs do wear the sober hue of gray,
Envious time
^^th delv'd her paralels within her brow,
^orty winters have besieged the brow,
And dig'd deep trenches up in beauties field,
When ^able curls are silvered o'r with white,
Time has spilt snow upon your hair,
Whose hairs contend with snow,
That wears snow on his shaking head.
^^e in his hear. All whose revolting teeth are fled,
Now careful age has pitched her painful plow
Upon the surrow'd brow,
And snowie blasts of discontented care
Has blanched the falling hair,
That bears in his look the Chronicle of many years ago.
A memento more, One whom death has forgot.
How many crows has she outhv'd?
She Nestor. Of a mellow age. Rotten ripe.
That talks behind a beard,
As his beard him, not he his beard did bear.
Having satisfied the tyranny of time
With the course of many years.
Like a weather beaten Co^duit of many Kings raigns,
A breathing Chronicle. Hands prisoners to the palsy,
Winter faces whose skins slack,
L^nk as an unthrifts purse, but a souls sack,
Whose eyes seek light within, for all here is shade,
Whose mo^ths are holes, rather worn out than made,
Whose every tooth to a several place is gone
To vex their souls at Resurrection.
Living deaths head, more antic than ancient.
Old age.
Crooked age. Deaths twilight. Deaths slumber.
The bloodlesse age, when times dull plow
Does print her fu^^ows in the aged brow,
When Ladies in their glass
Look for their own, and find another face.
The gray sum of years. The winter of our life,
When golden haits do turn to silver wire.
Nature has crossed her fornoon book, and clea^'d that score
But scarce gives further trust for any more.
VV^th silver hairs speaking experience.
Gray hairs the Pursivants of death, bedridden days.
F^osty hairs. Chair days. Decrepit days,
VVithering the face, hollowing the ^heumie eyes,
And makes a man, even a man's self despise,
When death displayes his coldness in the cheek,
Times colder hand leads us near home.
Deaths Calends.
When as the Castles two leaved gates be bar^'d,
When as ^he millstones language is not heard,
When horn-mouth'd Bellmans shall affright ^hy slambers,
Thy untuned ears shall loath harmonious numbers,
Each obvious molehill shall augment thy fears,
And careful snow shall blanch thy falling hairs,
When as thy sinews silver cord is loosed,
Thy brain^ go^d bowl is broke, the undispos'd,
And idle livers ebbing fountain dr^'d,
The bloods Meandring cisterns unsuppli'd,
When black-mouthed time
Of sullen age approached the day,
When dying pleasures find a full decay,
When as the Sun and Moon, and stars appe^r,
Dark in thy mircrocosmall hemispear,
When as the clouds of sorrows multiply,
And hide the ch^ystall of the gloomy Sky,
When as the keepers of the crazie tower,
Bepalsie stricken, and the men of power,
Sink as they march, and grinders cease to grind,
Dist^stfull bread, and windows are grown blind.
Old things.
As if they had been made
Long time before the first Olympiade,
Old as Evanders mo^her. Fit for an Antiquaries Library.
A good old man. v. Earls. Chracters set out by Ed. Blount. Chap. 29. Omens.
Such as were seen
Before the Romans on the Amathian plain,
With their own Countries blood their swords distain,
Sad presages, irregularities of natures,
As ominous as was that voyage when
When Caesar did ^ail from Greece to Italy
In the small Bark.
The ominous ^aven with a dismal cheer,
Through his horse beak of following horror tells,
Bege^ting strange imaginary fear,
With heavy echoes like to passing bel^s,
The howling dog a doleful part does b^ar,
As though they chim'd his latest bu^ying knell,
Under the Eves the buzzing screech owl sings,
Beating his windows with her fatal wings,
And still affrigh^ed with his fearful dreams,
VV^th raging fiends and goblins that he meets,
Of falling down from steep rocks into streams,
Of tombs, of buri^lls, and of winding sheets,
The melting stars their sulphu^^^s su f^t shed,
The Center pants with sudden throes,
And trembling earth a sad distemper shows
The sun a^^righted hides his golden he^d
From hence by an unknown E^lyptick fl^d,
Irregular heavens, abortive shades display,
And night usurps the empty throne of day,
The Meteors fright the fixed stars of heaven,
The palefac'd Moon looks bloody on the earth,
And lean-look'd Prophets whisper fearful change,
As does the raven o'r the infectious house,
The Skies hung with prodigious signs,
As if the Scorpion would drop down
Out of the Zodiac, or the fiercer Lion.
The croaking ravens
F^ag up and down beating the air
With their obstreperous beaks,
The yawning graves have yielded up their dead,
Fie^ce, fiery warriors fight upon the clouds,
In ranks and squadrons, and right form of war,
Which drizzle blood upon the Temples top.
The noise of battle hurtled in the air,
Horses do neigh and dying men do groan,
And Ghosts do shrick and squeal about the streets,
Lamen^ings heard ^'ch air,
Strange skreams of death and prophesying,
With accents terrible of dire combustion,
And confused accents hatched to woeful time,
The obscure bird clamoured the long lived night,
Some say the earth was feaverous and did shake.
Heart thrilling groan^ first heard, he round his bower,
And then the screech owl with her utmost power,
L^bou^'d her loathed note, the forests bending
with winds, as Hecate had been ascending,
As if some divelish hag were come abroad
With some kind mothers late delivered load,
A ^uthlesse, bloody sacrifice to make
To those infernal powers that by the Lake
O^ m^ghte S^yx, and black Cocytus dwell:
Swords in the spangled heavens did then by night,
In the East and West extend their blazing light,
Ash^s in showers upon the earth did fall,
L^stre deserts the Sun in height of all,
His towering pitch. The Moon did then look red,
And ^e^rs of blood from her dark Chariot shed,
Hand ^ocks did groan. Ar^'d troops of foot and horse
Encounter in the air with horrid force.
Prod^gious events. Presaging signs.
Portents of dire calamity and woe,
Affrighting voices in the air were heard,
The Sun himself in threatening forms appeared,
Sometimes as if he wept, his glorious head,
With a blue Rainbow round environed,
S^metimes quite dimmed, as if he fled the sight
Of men, and meant to make eternal night.
The windy spirits through earths torn caverns break,
^o^ds change their courses, beasts against nature speak,
The air that night was filled with dismal groans,
And people often awaked with the howls,
Of wolves and fatal dogs, ill boding owls,
Night ja^s and ravens, with wide sttetched throats,
From yews and hollies send their balefull notes,
The shrieches, wailings, and all cries were heard
Of every fatal and affrighting bird.
Oracle.
Where the cleft ground inspires, Oraculous truth.
The gaping earth exhales Prophetic winds,
Tripodes keepers of fate. A voice so shrill,
As all the caves capacious throat might fill,
The laurel falls from ^^thia's frighted hair,
The god possessed
With a full spirit her inspired breast,
Her hair upright throws down,
The sacred ornaments, and Phoebus crown,
Her neck turns wildly round, and down she throws
All Tripodes she meets with as she goes,
And with an inward fire she burns
To crave the Oracles advise,
To the undoubted Oracle resort.
The Delphian Phoebus did possess
In killing rage his wretched Prophetess,
Making sad death the punishment and hire.
Of the poor soul his fury did inspire.
An hideous voice,
Runs through the arched roof in words deceiving,
A nightly trance or breathed spel,
Inspires his pale ^y'd Priest from the Prophetic cell.
V. Mays Contiuation of Lucan Lib. Orator. v. Eloquent. Orgies.
Treading a frantic round. Bacchus mad Trieterick,
The time in wild disguise,
Scythonian matrons use to solemnize.
Lyaeus three years feast.
The Bacchides their leavie javelins wave,
Women with men the base and nobler sort,
Together to those unknown ^ites resort,
On high Cy^haerons sacred top which rings
With frant^ck songs, and shrill voic'd Bacchaualls,
In Libers c^lebrated F^stivalls,
Now on Edonian Pangaeus they tread,
Now on the Thracian P^ndus lofty head,
Their ^oins a sacred P^nthers skin ^evests,
With r^ffled hair the ma^^ons hide their breasts,
And brandish leavie javelins lightly born.
The Priest proclaims a solemn feast,
The Dames and Maids from usual labor rest,
Wrapped in skins, their hair-laces unbound,
And dangling tresses with wild lvy crowned,
They leavie spears assume,
High Rhodope with Timbrels rings,
Vines shade their brows, the rough hide of a Dear,
Shog at their sides, their shoulders bear a spear.
Orpheus.
The Thracian ha^per.
The Thracian singer that once with his Lyre,
Taught the deaf stones to hear him and admire,
When Thracian Orpheus to^k
His Lyre, and gen^lly on it st^ook,
The learned stones came dancing all along,
And kept time to his charming song,
With artificial pace the warl^ck Pine,
The Elm and his wife, the lvy Twine
With all the better trees, which erst had stood
Unmoved, forsook their native wood,
The L^wrell to the Poets hands did bow,
Craving the honor of his brow,
And every loving arm embraced and made
With their officious leaves a shade.
The beasts too strove his auditors to be,
Forgetting their old tyranny.
The fearful Heart next to the Lion came,
And Wolf was shepherd to the Lamb,
Nightingales harmless Sirens of the air,
And Muses of the place were there,
Who when their little w^nd-pipes they had found,
Unnequal to so strange a sound,
O'rcome by grief and art they did expire,
And fell upon the conquering Lyre,
The gods interpreter who sung so well,
As by his songs to bring his wife from hell;
For while he sung and struck the quavering strings,
The bloodlesse shadows wept, nor flattering springs
Tempt Tantalus, Ixions wheel stood still,
Their Urn the Belides no longer fill,
The vultures feed no^, Tityus left to groan,
And S^syphus sat l^stning on his stone,
The Furies vanquished by his verse were seen
To weep, that never wept before, hells Queen.
And King of darkness, yield to his powerful plea,
V. Ovids Metam. Lib. 10. Ovid.
The Roman O^pheus. H^mer.
That smoothed old Poets with his fluent vein,
And taught the new a far more numerous strain,
It Is doubtful whether he whom Sulmo b^re,
The world commanding Tyber honored more,
Than his ^oul exile th^e defamed O Rome.
The pa^te^s Poer.
From times first birth that chants the change of things,
The flames of love in Elegiack sings.
With c^rses doubtful Ib^s he insnares,
Epistles dictares, fraught with lovers cares,
In swanlike tunes deplores his sad exile,
His verse the Roman festivals compile,
Of fishes sings unknown to La^ine ^^rs,
Computes the stars that glide in heavenly spears,
His paper fills with Epigrammick times,
The tragic Stage in high co^hurnals climbs,
Whips Poetasters that abuse the times,
Loves Antomedon. Master of the art of love.
Pelignian glory. Sulmo's great renown,
Whose picture in the days of old
The Roman Ladies wore in rings of gold.
Owl.
Minerva's sacred bird.
Nictymene which masks her shame in night,
About her all the winged troops prepare,
And with invectives chase her through the air,
Nights fatal bird laboring a loathed note,
The Shrieking Harbenger of death,
That roosts all day within an Ivy tod,
Or in the Sea-^liffes or the dampie caves,
In Charnel-houses or amongst the graves,
The broad faced Qui^ister of night.
The bird of night and shame.
The fatal Bell-man that gives the stern goodnight.
The sad companion of the night.
Night wandering bird. Palla's howling bird.
P.
To paint the Face.
To counterseit the seal of nature.
That prank old wrinckles up in new at^ire,
To alter natures course, prove time a liar,
Abusing fate, and heavens just doom reverse,
On beauties grave to set a crimson hearse,
With a deceitful foil to lay a ground,
To make a glass to seem a Diamond,
That paint their perboil'd faces,
And seek by greater shames.
To cover their d^sgraces.
A varnished countenance. That wear a fairer mask.
A horse might mire upon their face.
A face as full of lies,
As Gypsies, or the running Lotteries,
She reads over her face every morning, and sometimes blots out
white, and writes red. The face Phy^itians
Which desire
To scorch their lovers hearts with painted fire.
^ygmalions statues in true flesh and blood,
And with the sign of beauty feed the fire.
Pale.
^s if all his blood turned whey,
From her clear face the sprightly vigor fled,
Her affrighted blood
Forsakes her cheeks.
Pale fear repells the blood,
And the uncu^led hair like bristles stood.
So Piramus grew pale
When he mist This be, saw the bloody veil.
^oxe was not paler than her changed look,
And like the lightly breathed on sea she shook.
So pale was Thisbe, when she softly rears
Her Pyramus, and fills his wounds with tears.
A chill cold checks her blood.
Death looks less pale. An inward cold
Shot through her bones, her changing face appear^
As pale as box bedewed with her tears.
Blood from her visage fled, usurpt by palenesse,
As he that bare-foote treads a way
All paved with serpents. Ashie pale,
As evening mist sent from a watery vale,
More bloodlesse than a walking ghost.
Fear steals the color from her cheeks.
The natural ruby of the cheek is gone,
Blancht all with fear.
Pale as the color which in leaves in seen,
When they by Autumne's frost have nipped been.
That pale and meager look
Like those that wander by the sable brook
Of Lethe, or those ghosts from graves escape.
Pallas. v. Minerva.
She that rules in deeds of arms.
Wars triumphant maid.
Jove's blew-^yd daughter. Man's Fauteresse.
Unconquered Queen of arms.
She that supples earth with blood.
The maiden Queen that has the azure eyes.
Heavens martial maid,
That wears Joves shield fringed with his nurses hair.
Divine Athenia. Arms potent Patroness.
Tritonian maid. Joves brain born issue.
To whom Joves pregnant brain was mother.
By Vulcan cleav'd in twain.
The fire-eyed maid of smoakie war.
Palsy.
Unjoynted nerves. The joints in gimmers.
Continual ague.
Pan.
The God whom pines do crown.
The King of sylvan, rural Deities.
The God of si^ly sheep.
The father of the flocks.
The mountain goat-foo^e God.
He that first taught to join the pipes with wax.
Arcadia's half goat God.
Paradise. v. Pleasant place.
Epitome of pleasures. Enclosure of delight.
The garden conscious to the first man's sin.
Parnassus.
The Muses forked hill.
With two tops reaching to the sky,
Twixt east and west equally distant lies.
To Bacchus and Apollo's Deities
Sacred, to whom in mixed sacrifice,
The T^eban wives at Delphos solemnize
Their trietericks, this one hill alone
Appeard when all the world was overflowne,
And stood as middle twixt the earth and sky.
Young Phoebus there with shafts unused slew
The speckled serpent, that in wait long lay
His banish'^ mother, great with child to sl^y.
Where all the Muses sit in soangled ranks,
Tuning their ditties on the flowery banks.
There springs the Poets fount,
Where they to drench their ravished lips are wont.
Passion. v. Fury, Anger.
The souls fever. Tyrant of the mind.
The Judgments tempest. Herricano of the soul.
When passion has the fairer judgment collied.
The civil war in reasons commonwealth.
The earthquake of the lesser world.
The shipwreck of the soul. Strangler of reason.
The violent perturbations of the soul.
Dry drunkenness. Whirlewind of the soul.
As if the breast inclo^'d the eastern wind.
Patient.
Well poys'd humors, in whose composition nature
^en'd most Geometry.
Nature forgot to g^ve him gall.
As if he meant to do fortune a spite, by taking from her
^he pleasure she sought to take in his misery.
S^out only in the asses fortitude.
Making misery it self amiable by a pious and patient deportm^nt.
Patroclus.
Achilles faithful friend. Actors brave Nephew:
^enae^uis stout son,
Whom Hector slew, clad in Achilles arms.
The occasion of Achilles just revenge,
And H^ctors cruel death.
Peace.
The drowsy sword lies snorting in the sheath.
Now ^anus gate is shu^.
Concord that all ti^ngs does infold
In her white arms and the worlds safety holds.
The cold sheathed swords their thirst of war
Have coo^'d. Calm days when rest
Has rockt asleep sluggish security.
The busy spider weaves her ta^ke
Within the belly of the plumed cask.
Fair peace descends, and with her silver wings
Cuts through the yiedling air.
Old Janus now has locked his temples gate.
Justice and faith do kindly kiss each other,
And Mars appeased, sits down by Cupids mother.
No war or battles sound
Was heard the world around.
The idle spear and shield were high up hung,
The ^ooked chariot stood
^staind with hostile blood.
The trumpet spoke not to the armed throng.
Glorious peace
Triumphs in change of pleasures.
Dear nourse of arts, plenty, and joyful births.
When the very name of king, is a general fortification
over all his kingdom.
The silver drops from peace's dewie wings,
Suppressed dissention's flame,
Auspicious peace
Claps her triumphant wings.
Peacock.
The star-embellisht foul which Juno l^ves,
Jun^'s star^'d coursers.
The bird that in her train bears Argus eyes,
Which with her wheeling tail, does brave the skies,
And slights the stars, viewing her Argus eyes.
Pegasus.
Gorgonean horse. Medu^aean horse.
The winged courser of Bellerephon,
Spangled with fifteen stars.
From whose hoof did spring
The crystal waters of the muses well.
Which with his brother,
Sprang from the blood of their new slaugh^ered mother.
The horse on which Bellerephon did ride,
When by his hand the fierce Chymaera dyed.
Aurora's winged courser.
That God begotten steed, the horse of fame,
Whose bounding hoof, plowed that Bo^tian spring,
Where those sweet maids of memory do sing.
Penelope.
U^ysses constant wife.
The chaste Icarian wife,
That lived a widow though she was a wife,
As chaste unto her mate,
As all her wooers were importunate.
By honest craft her wooers to deceive,
What all the day she works, by night unweaves.
The Queen of Ithaca, whose precious name
For chaste desires, is dear to us and fame.
Perillus.
Unhappy maker of the brazen bull.
That had the first experiment
Of that sad torment which he did invent.
And in that bull rece^v'd a burning grave,
Which he to the Sicilian Tyrant gave.
Phaeton.
^^bus unhappy son.
^^t great incendiary which set all on fire,
^^ruling ill, what he did ill desire.
Whose sisters mourn,
(...) tragedy till they to poplars turn.
v. Ovids Metam. 2. lib. Phaenix.
Which makes one narrow room,
^er u^ne, her nest, her cradle and her tomb.
The beauties of the first return
from spicie ashes of the sacred urne,
^er own selfs heir, nurse, nurseling, dame and ^ire.
Which when she rests
Her aged carcass in her spicie nest.
The quick devouring fire of heaven consume^,
The willing sacrifice in sweet perfumes;
from whose sad cyndars balm'd in funeral spices,
A second Phaenix like the first arises.
The bird which in the glowing ^ast
With sweets does make her tomb and nest.
Who the wane
Of age repaires, and sowes her self again.
Nor feeds on grains or herbs, but on the gum
Of frankincense and jucie Amomum.
Now when her life five ages has fullfill'd,
A nest her horned beak and talons bu^ld.
Upon the crownet of a trembling palm,
Bestrew'd with Casia, spikenard, precious balm,
B^u^^'d Cynnamon and My^rhe, whereon she bends
Her body, and her age in odours ends;
This breeding corpse a little Phoenix bears,
Which is it self to live as many years,
Grown strong, that load now able to tran^fer
Her cradle, and her parents sepulcher.
Devoutly carries to Hyperions town,
And on his flamy altar lays it down.
So ^a^e,
That nature never yet could give a pair,
One finds a cradle in the others urne,
She dies to live, as the sun sets to rise.
The Arabian wonder that in spicie fume
Renews her self in that she does consume,
O happy! thine own h^ir: what ruins all
Adds strength to thee; restored by Funeral,
Age, thou not dying, dies. The ages gone
Were seen by thee, the revolution
Of time thou know; then when the tumid main
Swallowed the Mountains in his l^quid Plain,
When Phaetons error set the world on fire,
None touched thy safety, nor did thou expire,
With stifled earth. The destinies nor draw,
Nor cut thy thread, nor subject to their law.
The Bird of silver Ganges.
Philomel. v. Nightingale.
C^cropian bird. Pandionian bird.
Prognes unhappy sister. v. Ovids Met. Lib. c.
Philosophers. v Learned Aristotle.
Who through the mists
Low nature casts does upper knowledge spy,
That unfold
All natures close^. These plodders in the Mine^
Of nature. Whose more purged ear,
Is washed as 'twere with truths sharp vinegar.
Natures great Secretaries,
Physician.
Gallens adoptive sons. The bodies botchers, cob^ers,
That flay a man before they kill him.
Podalirius, Machaon, Chyron, Aesculapius. v. Mountebank
Phoebus v. Apollo.
The god of Patara and Delos stood,
Who with pure waters of Gastalian flood,
Bedews dishevelled, hair walks Lyrian groves,
And through the woods that bred him, gently roves,
Phoebus with radiant bow divine,
Gracious among the Muses nine,
Who does with heaven inspi^ed art
To crazie bodies health impart,
Who in his chariot bright,
Does call forth day and shuts up night,
And other and the same does come.
The Delian Deity. God of archerie.
The god that bears the silver bow,
And throws the light from off his radiant brow.
The God that bears
^e silver bow, and strikes the quavering strings,
^ God of light. The Delphian archer.
^ days eternal king. Joves bright son.
^ king of a^chers. Muses sacred king,
^ose praise in Delos Isle does ever ring.
^s first founder, whose arts excellence
^racted natures chiefest Quintessence.
^na's quiver'd darling. The radiant God.
^ Pythian Knight,
^ from his beams does lend his sister light:
Picture.
^be poesy. The fancies eldest daughter.
^ birth and creature of the pen.
Pity.
^ melting pity creeps into his heart.
^at poor comfort of calamity.
Place Pleasant.
^ture her self did there in triumph ride,
^d made that place the ground of all her pride,
those various flowers, deceived the rasher eye,
^ taking them for curious tapestry.
^ silver spring forth from a rock did fall,
^at in a d^ought did serve to water all.
^on the edges of a grassie bank,
(...) of trees grew circling in a rank,
^ fair, so fresh, so sweet, so green a ground,
^e piercing eye of heaven, yet never found.
Places
which hold the worlds delight in their embraces.
^here trees do groan under their fruitful burden,
^ the same season nature there does bring
^hes of Autumn, pleasures of the spring.
Where the early spring,
^ wealthy stock of nature brings.
^nsplanted paradise. Transplanted Tempe.
(...) Elysium.
^ such luxurious plenty of all pleasure,
^ seemed a second paradise to be,
^o lavishly enricht with natures treasure,
that if the lasting souls which do possess
^^' Elisian fields, and live in happy bless.
Should happen this with living eyes to see;
They soon would leave their lesser happiness.
And wish to live, returned again.
Where eyes may surfeit with delight.
Where every tree a fruitful issue bears
Of mellow apples, ripened plums and pears,
And all the shrubs with sparkling spangles show,
Like morning sunshine tinselling the dew,
Here in green meadows sits eternal May,
Purfling the margents, whilst perpetual day.
So double gilds the day, as that no night
Can ever rust the enamel of the light,
Where Flora lays forth all her pride.
There was no stint, no measure
To the old man's profit, or the young man's pleasure,
The only place worthy our wish.
Furnished with all fair objects, that may deliver
Delight to the admiring fancy.
Which richly paid the pleased beholder thanks
In its sweet situation.
A valley graced with natures art and care.
As fertle as the soil of Arabia.
As pleasant, as Thessalia Tempe fair,
On which from heaven no blustering tempests fly,
Nor Zephry blows but sweet and wholesome air.
A long whose side the mossie mountains rise,
And lift their swelling tops above the skies.
Down through the mist of this fair valley glides
The Crystal flood with glancing silver hue.
Whose roaring streams on golden channels slide
With murmr sweet in Thetis bosom blew,
Of brooks supplied with liberal store besides,
Which tops of towering mountains still ren^w.
In midst of this fair valley does arise
A mighty mounting rock of wondrous height.
On whose ambitious back, as in the skies,
A City stands impregnable to sight.
A castle on his lofty crest espies
The valleys round about the mountains height,
Below the rock the glancing river glides,
In whose cold streams, he cooles his hoary side.
When T^tan does ascend unto the south.
Ascending through heavens vault of brightest azure.
Those lofty turre^s seem to have desire
To view their beauties pride, while they h^ve leisure,
Then set they all the rolling flood on fire,
Whose trembling billows show their golden treasure,
The smiling sun illustrates them with beams,
While as their beauty, beautifies their streams.
A place for pleasan^nesse, not unfit to flatter solitar^^^sle, for it being
s^t upon an insensible rising of the ground, as you are come to a pretty
h^i^h^, before almost you perceive that you ascend, it gives the eye lordship
over a large ci^cuit.

It seems a pleasant picture of nature, with lovely lightsomenesse and
artificial shadows.

With such a rise as does at once invite
A pleasure, and a reve^ence from the sight.
They who abstract paradise from the earthly globe, make
^ that part of heaven, which is this places Canopie.
As if nature there had meant to make a place where
the beholders are beholde^, and sufficiently paid in their
grateful prospect for the pains of their view.
Where lands untilled are yearly fruitful seen,
And the unpruned vine perpetual green,
S^ll olives by the fertle branch are borne,
And mellow figgs their native trees adorn,
Honey from elmes distill, the gentle fountains.
Descend with purling noise from lofty mountains:
There milkey goats come freely to the pa^le,
Nor do glad flocks with dugs distended fail,
The mighty bore, ^oares not about the fields,
Not hollow earth does poisonous vipers yield.
Add to this happiness the humid east
Does with no frequent showers the field infest,
Nor the fat seeds are parcht in barren land,
The heavenly powers both ^empering with command,
No bark comes hither with Argoan ore,
Nor landed wanton Colchis on this shore.
Cadmus with swelling ^ailes turned not this way,
Nor painful troop that with Ulysses stray,
Here amongst cattle no contagi^^ are.
Nor seele flocks drowthy power of any star.
When bra^^e did on the golden age int^ude,
Jove for the pious did this place seclude.
Where every object charms the wandering eye,
And bids the soul gaze there eternally.
The smoke by which the loaded spits do turn,
For incense might on sacred altars burn.
The n^ked rocks are not unf^u^tful there,
But at some certain seasons every year,
Their barren topps with lushious food abound,
And with the eggs of various ^ouls are crowned,
Ripe fruits and blos^oms on the same trees live,
At once they promise, what at once they give.
So sweet the air, so moderate the clime,
None sickly lives or dies before his time,
Heaven sure, has kept this spot of earth uncurst,
To show how all things were created first.
V. Hom. Odys. Calipso's v^ile. Dubartas Eden.
V. Brownes Pastor. lib. 2. song 3.
Sad, Melancholy place.
The thick grown briar,
And prickled haw-thorne, woven all entire,
Together clunge, and barred the gladsome light
From any entrance, ^itting only night.
All overgrowne with moss, as nature sat
To entertain grief with a cloth of state.
Before the door to hinder Phoebus view,
A shady box-tree grasped with a yeugh,
As in the place behalf they menaced war
Against the radiance of each sparkling star.
A place as woeful as my verse,
A stage made for some woeful Tragedy.
Where none do tread,
Except the ghosts of the disturbed dead.
Where the trees answer to the sighing air.
A charnel house
All covered ore with dead men's rattling bones:
With reekie shanks, and yellow chaplesse sculls.
A gloomy vale
Wrapped with unpleasant shades of yeugh,
And cypress sprung from Lovers grave,
On which the croaking raven with other birds
Of night do sit, and hollow their sad accents.
Such as may fitly sympathize with mourning.
A murmu^ing brook of wronged virgins tears.
A bed of moss
^^hered from vaults, and charnel houses, where
^^e dead inhabit. An uncouth cell,
^^ere brooding darkness spreads his jealous wings,
^^d the night raven sings.
Detested veil,
^^ trees though summer, yet forlo^ne and lean,
^^^come with moss, and balefull missiltoe:
^^e never shines the sun, here nothing breeds,
^^lesse the nightly ow^e, or f^^al raven.
^^ thousand feinds, a thousand hissing snakes,
(...) thousand swelling toads, as many urchins,
^^ich make make such fearful and confused cries;
^^ any mortal body hearing it,
^ould strait fall (...), or else dye presently.
^^, Grove, Cave. Dark. Silent,
Plague.
(...) grows the time, nor with her wonted cheer,
Or usual dressing ^o^h the spring appear.
^o cleansing gale of Zephyr mooves the air,
^hile rising foggs obscure the welkin fair.
without his showers contagio^s Auster blows,
^^d painted summer no kind fruit bestows.
^or does the sun as yet inflamed with ire,
^^nd down that wholesome and prolifick fire,
^e used to do, but beams of mortal heat,
and from the bosom of; the twins as great
Combustion kindles here, as if he then
^^on the Nemean Lions back had been,
^ithin the farthest eastern lands from whence
^hy breaks, breaks forth the f^^al pestilence,
^s if with rising Titan it begun,
and followed thence the mo^ion of the sun,
^o Europe then does hot contagin fly,
^^ing through every part of Italy.
Death apace,
^^ his pale chariot sides through all the land;
^o age nor sex escape^ his vengefull hand,
^oung men in prime of all their strength are st^^ck,
and yield, the sucking in ^ant wh^t he took
^^om nature, soon^s summoned to rep^^
^^om those soft limbs untimely ^lee^s away.
The new-come soul, before it can be grown
Acquainted with the tender mansion.
The aged man, not because aged goes,
But only cause he had a life to loose,
The mourning grave becomes a marriage bed,
To brauteous maids preposterously dead.
One father wailes his son, another all
His household carries in one funeral.
And for so many debts one mourning serves,
If one be left to mourn, no care preserves,
Nor antidote can save from this disease,
Their greatest hope is but to die in peace.
For often the fiety sickness did invade
Reasons cool seat, and there prevailing made
A strange distraction, worse than loss of breath,
For which their friends wished as a cure, their death,
The face often burned, no moisture had the eye,
Nor could by tears express their misery,
Some while their dearest friends they do intombe,
Before that pious office done become
Themselves a funeral, death makes him to be,
An hearse, that came a mourning obsequie,
Nor does this venomous contagion,
Work the destruction of mankind alone,
The sheep and ca^tel perish, as if grown
On earth quite useless, since the men are gone,
Wastly the lawnes, the fields of tillage now
A^e desola^e, while the forsaken plow,
Nor men, nor cattle scarce can exercise,
The ox in midst of all his labor dies,
And leaves behind his mourning fellow now
Dismissed from toil, and service of the plow,
Who takes no comfort now in shady woods,
In flowery meadows, or clear Crystal floods,
That destiny allots for him, remains
Although at rest, the warlick horse disdaines
The pleasant streams, and sick forgets quite
His food, and the honor of a race or fight,
Even roads and vipers die. acquainted grown
With venom far more mortal than their own.
Dogs, oxen, sheep, and savage beasts first die,
No birds can from the swift infection ^lie.
^d swains amazed see their oxen shrink
^^ath the yoke and in the furtowes sink,
^^e fleecie flock with anguish faintly beat,
^^t fall their wool and pine away with heat,
^^ generous horse that from the race of late,
^^n'd with honor, now degenerates
^indfull of the glory of his prize,
^^nes at his manger and there deedlesse dies,
^e bore forgets his rage, swift feet now fail
^he Heart, no bears the horned heard assail,
^l languish, woods, fields, paths no longer bare,
^^ fil^'d with carcasses, that stench the air,
^^h neither dogs, nor greedy foul (how much
^be admired) nor hoary wolves would touch,
^^ raves the plague amongst our country swains,
^^w in our large and populous city reigns,
^^ first their bowels broyle with fervor stretched
^^ symptoms, redness, hot wind hardly fe^cht.
Their furred tongues swel, their dry jaws gasp for breath,
^^d with the air inhale a swifter death,
^ane could endure or coverture, or bed,
^^ on the stones their panting bodies spread.
^old stones could no waye^ mitig^te that hear,
^^ they beneath those burning burdens sweat,
^one cure attempt; the stern disease invades
The heartlesse Leech, nor Art her author aides
The near allied, whose care the sick attends,
^^ themselves, and dye before their friends.
^f remedy, they see no hope at all
^^ only in approaching funeral.
Th^ee sisters speedy hands cannot suffice
^or breaking threads has ty^'d the destinies.
^ly ^^tians skill himself does still engage.
Unto the hallowed ground,
The ^owling widow h^ugh she loved him dear,
^^ dar^^ not follow, her dead husbands biear.
V. May's Edward 3. lib 4.
V. Seneca's Tragedies Oedipus, Act. 1.
Planets v. Stars.
The swimming Islands of the heavens.
The wandering lamps. The rolling seven.
(...), Jupiter, Mars, Sol, Venus, Mercury, Luna.
The wandering spangles of the sky.
The floating stars.
Please.
Nothing can strike the roving fancy more.
Nothing presents delight
In suller measure. Satisfy a curious desire.
Correspondent to the wish Tickling the wanton fancy.
Such joy it gives, as when soft pleasure warmes
Joves mel^i^g bosom swathed in Venus arms.
Pleiades.
The seven Atlantic Nymphs.
Sterope's bright heard. Atlas bright daughters
Whose rising bring
The wealthy pleasures of the painted spring.
Pleione's issue. The watery powers,
Whose rising melts the clouds to dropping showers.
Plow.
To rend the gleabe with crooked plough
To cheveron the ground in ridged hills.
The plowshare rip^ his mothers womb
To give the aged seed a living tomb.
To lance earths bunchy back.
Earth furrows up her brow and storms to fe^le
The cutting gashes of the wounding steel.
Ploughman V. Swains
Whose hands have made a vow.
And sworn allegiance to the peaceful plow.
That with his plow
Does give the earth a new, but forrow'd brow,
That as he tuggs along,
Sweetens his labor with some tural song,
That to his merry teame,
VVhistles his passions.
Pluto. v. Hell.
The king of shades. The infernal King.
Who rules the tripple worlds inferior part.
The nights sad king. Black prince of Acheron.
Who Geryon, and T^tyus bound
With sable river, does surround,
A stream on which each man must sail
From royal scepter to the flaile.
Hells black monarch. Proserpines sad mate.
C^^^ grim son in law. King of Erebu^.
Infernal Jupiter. Adamantine king.
S^^^es black son. That rules the grizly land,
That keeps the wide door'd house.
Poesy.
The language of the spears and angels.
Speaking picture.
Poets.
Great Genius of brave verse. Orpheus learned race.
Great sons o^ Phoebus, whose lips are wont
To drench their coral in the font
Of forkt Parnassus; you that be
The sons of Phoebus, and can flee
On wings of fancy to display
The flaggs of high invention. The inspired train.
That search for purling springs,
Which from the ribs of old Parnassus flow,
On whom M^lpomene with mild aspect,
Does all her favor at his birth refl^ct,
Soft quires. Princes of numbers,
That commit at once incest with nine sisters.
The darling of the Delian Deity. Sacred Bards.
The Muses fairest ligh^s. The lea^ned shades.
Great souls of numbers. Wits general tribe;
Heirs to Apollo's ever verdant tree. Dear sons of memory
Whose vocal notes tuned to Apollo's lyre,
The Sirens and the Muses did admire.
The Nymphs to him their gems and coral sent,
And did with swans and nightingales present.
Whilst la^rel sprigs another head shall crown,
Thou the whole grove may challenge as thy own.
Cities for Homer strove, Muses for thee.
Whose victorious rhyme
Revenge their masters death, and conquer time.
Could Virgil hear his lofty strain,
He would condemn his works to fire again.
Whose learned pen is d^pt in Castalie.
The willowes and the hasel copses green,
Were often seen
Fanning their joyous leaves to his soft lays,
On whom from their high tower,
The Gods celestial divine raptures power.
The Muses priests, writ in the Muses rolls.
The threadbare tribe. Apo^lo's brood.
The learned Chorus, The laure^te crew,
That on the horses spring do use to bowse,
And sleep upon Parnassus forked brows,
Whose images the clasping twine
Of ivy girdles. Great herald of the Muses.
That in accents b^ing.
The Gods breasts down, and breath them as thy sing.
That taste the d^wes of Hippocrene. Great hei^^ of fam^.
Filled with Ph^bean fire,
Worthy to be crowned with a wreath of stars.
Delphick Quire. R^ch pregnant fancies.
Parnassus brood. Those that hear Phoebus sing,
Bathing their naked limbs in Tu^spian springs.
The graduates in the threadbare mystery.
The virtue of the twiforkt hill
Inspires the ^avisht fancy, and does fill
The veins with Pegasean fire.
The learned authors of immortal strains.
Whom mighty numbers do inspire.
That sit in shadow of Apollo's tree.
At every close their language meet,
In sentences of sub^^le feet.
Poetaster.
Betattered rimers. Ivy poets. Fustian poets.
Frippery poets. Reteiners to the Muses.
Whose works are but a greater blot.
A widemouth'd poet, that speaks nothing but bladders
and bumbast. Half-codled poets. The Muses haberdashers.
The common scriblers of the times. The Muses pedla^s.
The paper blurrers of the times,
Whose high^st praise it is to trot in rhyme.
The needy poetasters of the age.
The sneaking t^ibe tha^ w^ite and drink by fit,
As they can steal or borro^^ coin or wit.
Their brain^^ly all in notes. Lord how they would look!
If they should chance to loose their table book.
Their baies like Iv^e cannot mount at all,
But by some neighboring tree, or joining wall,
Who po^ing on, their spungie brain still squeeze,
Neglect the cream, and only save the lees.
^pping their flying quill, they clip fames wing,
(...) Hes^con a puddle not a spring,
^^t ^^are and sour their faces, nay to ven^
^ir b^ains, they eat their fingers excrement,
^d scratch their heads as if they were about,
^it wit so hidebound is, to scratch it out,
That for every jest they bring,
^danger must their buttons or bandstring.
^t takes such pains to make a verse,
^t at the birth of each he twists his face,
^^ if he drew a tooth, he blots and writes,
^en looks as pale, as some that go to fight,
^^ ^^nts sometimes an hour one rhyme to get,
^^h the whole kennel of the Alphabet.
^^ius, Maevius, paltry poets,
those wit is but a tavern timpany,
(...) shavings and the chips of poetry,
Unbak'd poetry,
^^ch as the dablers of the time contrive,
those invention comes like bird-lime from freez,
^^ll brains and all out.
^^per pedlars. Jaded wits. Murderers of paper.
^he d^^gs of wit. His verse runs like the tap, and
(...) invention as the barrel ebs and flows at the merry of the spiggot.
^he press is his mint, which stamps him now and
^en a six pence.
^is ^^rses like his clothes, miserable cento's and
^^ches. Earls Char. 45.
Pope.
^reat Admiral of the Roman sea.
^omes Arch-flamin. That wears the triple crown.
^omes speaking Scripture.
^^ers proud successor.
Poor. v. Beggar.
^^tunes dwarf, pressed with the yoke of wringing poverty,
^^ man of narrow fate. Shallow, lank fortune.
^^n under unthrifty Planets. Crushed fortunes,
Of having no store of any thing but want, lean revenues.
^^age in a plain frame,
One whose fortune is out at heels, out at elbows,
^^ke on the wheel of fortune.
^ortunes shoe-soal, next to beast. Gods

Whose presented ^akednesse outfaceth,
The winds and all the persecution of the Sky,
That ea^s the coated onion and the salt,
Poorer than Irus.
Earls Char. 67. Porcupine.
That carries on his back an host of P^kes,
Brisled with bodkins, armed with awls and darts.
Like the Stymphalides.
On whose fide does grow
Both string and shafts, the quiver and the bow,
We armed see
With nothing but her own Artilerie,
Who seeks no foreign aid with her all go,
She to her self is quiver, dart, and bow.
Pox.
Unwomanly disease, Which plows up flesh and blood,
And leaves such prints of beauty if he come,
As clouted shoon do upon floors of loome.
That honey-combs of smoothest faces makes,
And of two breast, two colanders,
Love shot those darts
And made those pits as graves to bury hearts.
Poison.
The surfeit of Echidna. Cerberus foam,
Heca^'^ banefull seeds; banefull weeds,
Such as grim Cerberus when dragged from bell,
By the Tyrinthian Hero vomited,
For Theseus such Medea did prepare.
Echidna's gore. Such washed the fatal robe,
Which Deinira sent to Hercules.
The fiery venom deep
into his marrow and scorched entrals creeps,
Which quite drunk up all moisture that should flow
Into his vital parts, his palate now
And tongue is scortcht and dry, no sweat could go
From his tired joint, from eyes no tears could flow.
Though he in midst of Tanais did lie,
Padus or Rhodonus he would be dry.
Worse than any comes
From the fell aspects, foul infectious gummes,
Which does breath,
^^aths secret errand.
What an hot summer's ^n my bosom,
That all my bowels crumble up to dust,
Bid winter come,
^d thrust his icie finger in my maw,
Or let all rive^s take their course.
Though my burnt veins, entreat the North,
To make his bleak w^nds kiss my parched lip,
^^d breath me some cold comfort. v. Hot.
Prayer.
^^ous airs, pious orgies, pious orisons,
^^ch was Deucailon, such was Pyrrha's prayer,
To Themis drowned in water and despair.
To ^ear the trembling hands,
Then to the stars his hands advancing cries,
To throw the eyes to heaven,
He vows to heaven addressed,
With eyes and hands to heaven advanced he prays,
In accents clothed with reverence.
With such a fervent grace, as if Devotion had borrowed her
body to make of it self a most beautiful representation, with her
eyes so lifted to the Skies, as if they had begun to fly thitherward,
(...) take their place amongst their fellow stars.
To pay our pious debts to heaven.
T^ pour out the eyes in a petition,
The Churches banquet, angels,
God^ breath in man returning to his birth,
The soul in paraphrase, heart in pilgrimage.
The Christian plummet sounding heaven and earth,
Engine against the Almighty, sinners tower,
^^versed thunder. Christ's side-piercing spear,
G^^dnesse of the best,
Heaven in ordinary, man well dressed,
The milkie way, the bird of paradise.
Church bells beyond the stars heard, the souls blood.
The land of spices, something understood,
To invade gods ear with welcome importunity.
Praise.
^welling encomiums, elogiums.
To strew praises in their way.
^o exalt unto the stars.
Prejudice.
The Jaundies in the eyes of the soul.
V. Forms of commending. Presently:
Before the air had cooled his hasty breath,
Ere the quick motion of the eye,
Sooner than thought could change its present object.
Pride.
The Magistrate of sins.
That solemn vice of greatness. That rude vice
Of ignorance and pitied greatness.
Primrose.
The first born issue of the ^eeming spring.
The eldest children of the spring.
The springs maidenhead.
The firstlings of the winter year,
The first appearing beauties of the Spring.
The springs first Infants.
Prison. Prisoner.
The grave of the living, the worms that gnaw them, their ow^ thoughts, house
of meager looks, and ill smells, where to be out a^ elboows is in fashion, and
a great indeco^um not to be thread bare*

Where a doublet with buttons is more out of fashion than trun l^ breeches,
wearing out their life like an old suit, the faster the better, it teaches
much wisdom too late, and a man had better b^ a fool than come thither to
learn it.

So cursed a piece of land that the son is ashamed to be his fathers heir in
it. Banished at home.

The dunghill of the Law, upon which are thrown the ruins of the Gent^y, and
the nasty heaps of decayed bankrupts.

The University of poor Scholars, wherein three arts are chiefly studied to
pray, to curse, and to write Letters. A place where all the inhabitants are
close fellows, and fast friends, sure men, and such as you may know where to
have them. A ^enement which none will take over their heads. Old men and young
men there are much alike, for neither go far.

Prodigies. v. Omens. Profound. v. Obscure
Craving a mind, from earth and ignorance refined.
Promercheus.
That fet^ht from heaven the living fire.
That on the Scythian mountains snowie top
Does The Eagle with his growing liver feed.
J^pe^us bold son that brought from heaven,
The spark of life from Phoebus chariot wheel,
For which on C^ucasus he chained lies,
And with his heart the eagle satisfies.
Shaper of man.
Prophecy. Prophet.
His breast
Was by a prophesying rage possessed.
And the included God inflamed his mind.
To have an entheated breast. Enthusiastic.
Gods interpreter. Touched with adiviner fire,
Sees long before, what others will admire
Many years hence. Whose words are oracles.
Whose soul receives a clear and holy light,
Conveyed by the still visions of the night.
Heavens familiars. Entrusted with heavens secrets.
Gods sacred heralds. Inspired Souls. Sacred Bards.
Proserpina.
Bright Empress of th'Elysian s^^des.
Ceres fair daughter. Queen of Erebus.
The Lady of the infernal ghosts. Persephone.
The Stygian goddess. Queen of Phlegethon.
Pluto's sad wi^e. The sad faced Goddess. Hecate.
By Dis stolen from the plains of S^cily.
V. Ovid. Met am. lib. 5.
Prosperity.
That lolle on beds of roses. Flowing in a golden swim.
^ladulgent fortune smiles on him.
Finding no want of any thing but want.
Living in fortunes sunshine.
A prosperous gale
^anns courteous wind upon the swelling sail.
V. Happy. Fortunate. Protesilaus.
By instinct of fate
The first that fell in Greece and T^oy's debate.
That boldly leapt on the Sygaeum shore.
Deceived by sly Ulysses, who before,
Appeared to have trod upon the fatal strand,
But lighted on his shield first thrown to land.
Pro^eus.
Gray prophet of the sea. T^^ juggling sea-god,
Blew scaly god that in the sea does range,
Who now a man, a lion now appears,
Now a fell boar, a serpents shape now bea^s.
A bull with threatening horns now seems to ^,
Now like a stone, now like a spreading tree,
And sometime like a gentle river flows.
Sometimes like fire, averse to water shows.
Proud. v. Ambitious.
Disdain and scorn ride sparkling in his eyes,
Misprising what they look on,
Which as he goes
Kic^s at the earth with a disdainful scorn,
Whose brow is clothed with proud disdain,
Upon whose surly brow state sits in scorn,
As if he meant to tear from heaven their stars,
If it be true the giants ere made war against heaven, he
had been a fit ensign-bearer of that company, whose
thoughts fly a pitch beyond ambition.
Looking at himself through a multiplying glass, and
the bigger end of the prospective,
He that rides on a winged horse to tell him of his
good parts shall come too late, to bring him stale news of
what he knew too well before.
One of tolerable parts, but intolerable p^ide.
P^re. v. Bright
Pure as the brightest beams sho^ from the sun
At his full heigh^.
Pirates.
That play the parts of tempests in the sea,
That with the sea contend to try,
Whether can show a greater cruelty,
Sea-vermin, Seas water rats.
That act the part of ^empests in the seas.
Pyth^go^as.
The first that called himself Philosopher.
^^mian wiseman. That held the transmigration of the soul,
^ first his Funies five years silence taught.
V. Ovid. Met. Lib. 5.

Q.
Quake. v. Tremble.
^s does the trembling earth
^ Beat by the sea Gods ^rident,
^ sudden fear unnerves his quaking thighs
^ Phaeton, when from the arched Sky,
^ earth at such a distance he did eye,
^ Europ^ quake, when on the back,
^ the loved bull she rode.
A death resembling cold
^g'd her heart and vital heat controlled,
^yblis quaked when her repulse she heard,
^^ees unknitting, one another struck,
^yrtha entered to her fathers bed,
^joynts pale horror shook.
sudden fear his bloudlesse veins did fill,
^in a shivering exta^ie I stood,
^ knees are mutual anvils,
^ as the guilty prisoner fearful stand^,
^ding his fatal Theta in the brows
^ him who both his life and death commands,
^ from his mouth he the sad sentence knows.
^iking through her limbs she finds,
^e leaves saluted by the winds.
Queen.
^ partner of the throne.
^ Princely consort of the royal bed,
^ She from whose blessed wombs increase,
^es present joy, and future ages peace.
Quiver.
^arrows ivory garden. Clattering hinges.
^ painted prison of the darts.
^ archers Magazine. The Nymphs bright armoury.
R.
Rage. v. Anger. Fury.
HIgh wrought blood.
Her face decked anger, anger decked her face.
So ran distracted Hecuba along
the streets of Troy.
Rain.
The muffled heavens dissolve themselves in tears.
Sad issue of the weeping air.
The watery issue of the falling cloud,
Big bellied clouds delivered of their load,
Empty their watery womb water stilled in heavens great Limbec^
The liquid silver from the welkin gush^ing.
The straining of the squeezed clo^ds, spungie cloud.
The falling rain.
That gives green Liveries to the Plains,
The spungie clouds grown big with water,
Throw their conception on the worlds Theater,
Down from the hills the rained waters roar,
Whilst every leaf drops to augment their store.
The moist conception of big-bellied clouds;
The hand of heaven the spungie cloud does strain,
And throws into earths lap a shower of rain,
When the assembling clouds do meet and pour
Their long provided sury in one shower,
Congealed vapors melt again
Extenuated into drops of rain.
Now Cynthia her full horns
Does spend in showers. The South winds tear
The showring clouds. Jove unlocks the clouds.
The issue of the melting cloud.
That which the clouds congealed bowels keep.
The wat^y burden of the groaning clouds,
Jove opes the showry floodgates of the Skies,
Jove opes the Cataracts of heaven.
The heavens set open their sluices.
Disgorging of the drunken cloud.
The justling winds shatter the brittle sides
Of spungie clouds and make them weep.
That in a gentle shower,
Drop tears into the bosom of the flowers.
The lost clouds power
^^^o the sea, their useless shower.
Drenching showers,
Which thickened air from her black bosom poures.
^ad clouds with frequent tears th^mselves impair.
Rainebow. v. Iris.
So wa^^y clouds gilt by Apollo show
The vast sky painted with the arched bow.
The many-colour'd messenger that here
^oth disobey the wi^e of Jupiter,
Who with her sa^^ron wings upon the flowers
^^^^useth honey drops, refreshing showers,
And with each end of her blew bow does crown
The buskie acres, and the unshrub'd down.
The painted cloud which forms Thau^^antias bow.
The painted bow, which so ado^^es the skies,
And in one arch does boast so many dies.
Thaumantes painted daughter.
Heavens ename^'d Arras.
That sacrament which does the earth assure
A second deluge it shall nere endure.
In whose many colou^'d hue,
Here we see w^tchet deepned with a blew,
There a dark tawny with a purple mixed,
^ealow and flame, with streaks of green betwixt,
A bloody stream into a blushing run,
And ends still with the color which begun;
Drawing the deeper to a lighter stain,
^^inging the lightest to the dee^'st again,
With such rare art ^ach mingles with his fellow,
The blew with watchet, green and red with yellow;
^ike to the changes which we daily see
about the doves neck with v^rie^y;
Where none can say (though he it strict attends)
Here one begins and there another ends.
Ram.
Which whilst they butting stand;
^aise from their feet, a cloud of nume^ous san^,
The captain of the ^leecie train;
Which back retire,
To come again with her more impetuous ire.
Rash.
A man too quick for himself. Whose actions put a leg
still before his judgment, and out run it.
Every hot fancy or passion is the signal that sets him forward, and his reason
comes still in the rear.

One that has brain enough, but not patience to digest
a business, and stay the leisure of a second thought.
All deliberation is to him a kind of sloth, and freezing
of action.
He does not enter, but throws himself upon althings.
A man whom fortune must go against much to make
him happy, for if he suffered his own way he is undone.
Raven.
Which seldom boading good,
Croake their black augu^ies from some dark wood:
Read.
To travel over with the eyes.
Her eyes these lines acquainted with her mind.
Had scarcely made.
Reap.
The sweatfull harvester with bubling brow,
Does reap the interest of his painful plow.
The reaper panting both with heat and pain,
With crooked raisor shaves the tufted plain.
The indust^ious harvester.
Sco^ched all day with his own scalding hear,
Shaves with keen sith the glory and delight
Of motly meadows.
Reason.
Queen Regent of the senses. The souls eye.
The Queen that rules the commonalty of passion^.
Rebellion.
Atheism against Gods on earth. Open treason.
None his ensigns bore,
But who the badge of some known mischief wore.
Recreation.
A second creation, when weariness has almost annihilated our spirits.

The souls breathing, almost st^fled with continual business.
Labors sauce: Labors allay.
Delightful physic. Waking sleep.
Pleasing cordial.
Red.
Purple, crimson, scarlet, damask, blushing,
Stammel, vermillion, coral, cherry, ruby,
Red as the blushing rose.
Reed.
Dancing unto the music of the wind.
The winds gugaw, babble. D^ngl^ng fringes of the banks.
Report. v, Fame.
When same the wide-mouthed daughter of the earth:
Newly disburdned of her plumed birth.
From all her turrets did her wings display,
And pearched in the ears of etc.
Earths black babbling daughter, she that hears,
And vents alike both truth and forgeries.
^^^ering often che^per than she buys.
She spread the pinions of her nimble wi^gs,
Advanced her trumpet, and away she springs.
And fills the whispering air, which soon p^ss^st
The spacious borders of the enquiring east.
Fame sounds with brazen breath. Fame fills
With his report, one of her listening quis^s.
The lavish breath of fame
Gives language to her trumpet, and proclaims.
That lying gossip. Blatant beast.
That Mushrom growing without root.
Creeps through a village, goes through a town, runs
through a city, flies through a country, the farther the
^^ster. Increasing snowball.
Resurrection.
When the loud trumpe
^all wake the sleeping ashes from the dumpe
Of their sad urne, that blessed day wherein
The glorified metamorp^ of'd skin
Shall circumplexe and terminate that fresh
And new refined substance of the flesh;
And the transparent flesh discharged from groans,
And pains, shall hang upon new polish^ bones,
When as the body shall reentertain,
The cleansed soul, and never part again.
When as the soul shall by a new indenture,
Possess her new built house, come down and enter,
When as the body and the soul shall plight
Inviolable faith, a^^ ^ever fight.
When death shall be exiled, and damned to dwell
W^^hin her proper and true center, hell.
Revenge.
Now had Rhamnusian Nemesis poss^st
In all her blackest forms the vengefull breast
Of fierce etc. Burnt with revengefull fury.
Then fury rounded in his ear revenge,
Pleasing revenge tickle the enraged blood.
Thasty revenge for satisfaction pants.
Rhetoric. v. Eloquence. Rich.
Fortunes greedy minion. Fortunes giant,
Whose store meets his desires, and outgoes his wish.
Finding no want of any thing but want.
Both the Indies spread their laps to him,
Into whose chest the yellow Tagus flows,
Whilst his plate-fleet in bright P^ctolus rows.
The Hesp^rian Orchard's his. All Peru in a chest,
As if both Indies did supply his store.
As if he did in bright Pactolus swim,
Or Tagus yellow waves did water him.
As if he had God Fortunatus purs^,
Or Amalthea's horn. That bears
The wealth of worlds, the bowels of the East,
And all the richest treasures of the West,
The sands of T^gus, all P^ctolus ore,
With both the Indies. Spices snarcht from the Canary Isl^s
The gumms of Egypt, or the Tyrian fleece,
Di^d in his native purple, with what Greece.
Colchos, Arabia or proud China yields,
With all the metalls in Guiana's fields,
The wealth of Babylon and Lydia.
Wears speaking pockets. That command
The storehouse of earths hid minerals.
C^ffers gilded with Ducates.
Rich as Ch^oesus, Crassus, Midas, Licinius, Achaemenes.
That in his graner stores
What has been swept from fruitful Lybian flores.
Wealthy as Attalus. Richer by far
Than the Arabs untoucht mines or Indies are.
That swim in golden lard up that their chin.
Is borne up by the^fatnesse of the flood.
A man of myriads. Wallowing in wealth.
Whose spring tides of gold, many degrees transend his wish.
Ride. v. Horse.
He beats the ring, and cheeks the foamy j^wes,

As if, Centaure like, he had been one piece with his hors^, was ^o more moved
than one is with going on his own leg, and so commanded in effect his horse,
as his own limbs, though he had both spurs and wand, they seemed rather marks
of sovera^gnty than instruments of punishment.

His hand and leg commanding without threatening, and rather remembering, than
chastising, at least if sometimes he did, it was so ^^ollen, as neither our
eyes could d^scerne it, nor the horse with any d^ing did complain on it, he
ever going so just with his horse, either ^otthright, or turning, as if he
borrowed the horses body, and ^nt him his mind.

Kidiculous. v. Fool.
Able to justify exc^ssive laughter.
The fixed figure for the time of sco^ne,
To point his slow and mooving finger at,
Enough to make a stoic forfeit his gravity.
Enough to make Heraclitus burst into laughter.
When the storck might honestly enough have broke the
laws of his philosophy, and lost his gravity without
lightness.
At which the Stoic might
Ch^ce a loud laughter, and yet not be light.
A subject fit to be the stool of laughter.
River.
Whose gurgling stream frizadoed on the gravel.
In wose soft streams, sw^ns wash their silver wings,
Fanning the bosom of the enamoured Nymph.
Which both held the eyes open with her ^zure streams,
And yet sought to close them with the purling noise,
It made upon the pibles it ran over,
Making sweet music with the enameled stones,
And gives agentle kiss to every sedge,
He overtaketh in his pilgrimage,
And so by many winding nookes he straies
With willing sport to the wild Ocean,
To whose gentle falls
Melodious birds sing solemn madrigalls,
Whose streams on purling p^bbles murmr keep,
Which may invite and summon gentle sleep;
Where waves call waves, and glide along in ranks,
And prat^le to the water-edging banks,
Her sad kings fishers tell their grieved tales,
And fish enrich the brook with silver scales.
The Nim^h came from the veins
Of our first mother having taken pains,
In scouting of her channel all the way,
From where she first began to leave the sea.
Which writ^hes in knots, and gives a gown of green
Unto the meadows, and to play is seen,
And drive the rushie mills that in his way
The shepherds make. That come
From the swelling Thetis womb.
The wanton river which the meadow dresses,
With silver collar of her turning Esses, SS.
Upon whose b^est, which trembled as it ran,
Rode the fair downie silver-coated swan,
And on the banks each cypress bowed his head
To hear the swan sing her own Epicede.
The Oceans sons,
That to their old ^^es strict embraces run,
Hasting to pay their tribute to the sea,
Like mortal life to meet e^ernity.
The silver tide,
That wantons up and down, and gently slide^
In soft Meanders, through the fluid veins
Of the green-breasted, stream-embroider'd plains.
A Crystal river on her bosom slid,
And passing seemed, in sullen muttering chid.
The aged flood came bravely from his cell,
Down from his head hung dangling silver tresses,
From every hair, a Crystal stream does fall,
And when he sweats, a roaring stream there passes.
His wrinkled brow a pearly dew distilleth.
His seagreen eyes with endless tears still fills,
The Nymphs with dancing round about him tript,
Against the sun their a zure mantle shone
From wave to wave the wanton fairies skip,
The sheals of fish here swim, there leap anon.
^^rke how she court^ the banks, whilst they,
As amorously their arms display,
Pembrace and clip her silver waves,
See how she strokes their sides, and craves
An entrance there, which they deny,
Whereat she frowns, threatening to fly
Home to her stream, and gins to swim
Backwards, but from the channells brim,
Smiling returns into the creek,
With thousand dimples in her cheek.
Chiding the stones that stop his speedy course.
With unusual pride,
And dimpled cheeks rolls sleeping to the tide,
Rides in his cha^iot. A thousand ways
In wand^ing tr^cks the wanton river plays,
And with his amorous folding arms does seem
Pembrace small ^^ands, whirst his silver stream,
From several channels of it self does meet,
And often it self with wanton kisses greet.
Whose silver streams do dally
With the smooth bosom of the wanton sands,
Whose winding current parts the neighboring lands.
And often washes the beloved sides
Of her delightful banks with loving tides.
All along the flower-enamell'd vales,
The silver stream on pearly sands does glide,
And to the meadows telling wanton tales,
Her ch^ystal limbs lasciviou^ly in pride,
As ravished with the enamoured gales,
With often turnings casts from side to side,
As loath she were the sweet soil to forsake.
It ^an upon so fine and delicate ground, as one could nor easily judge whether
the river did more wash the gravel, or the gravel ^urifie the river, running
not forth right, but continually winding, as if the lowest streams could
return to their spring, or the river had a delight to play with it self. The
banks on either side s^eming arms of the loving earth, that feign would
embrace it, and the river a wanton Nymph, which still would slip from it,
either side of the bank being fringed, with most beautiful trees, which
resisted the suns darts from over much piercing the natural col^nesse of the
river; amongst the rest, a goodly cypress, who bowing the fair head over the
water, it seemed she looked into it, an^ dressed her green locks by that running
river.

Lacing the fuitfull valley.
Dirce, Amymone, Pyrene, Tanais, Caicus, Ismenus,
Peneus, Erymanthus, Lycormas, Xanthus, Meander,
Melas, Eurotas, Euphrates, Orontes, Phasis, Ister,
Thermodon, Ganges, Alpheus, Sperchius, Tagus,
Pactolus, Danubius, Cayster, Hebrus, Strymon, Rhene,
Seine, Rhodanus, Po, Tyber, Thames, T^ent, Humber, Avon*
Twede.
Rock.
The rock repelled the Oceans pride,
By his own poysure firmly fortified.
Against whose naked breast,
The surges tilt a rock.
Whose chalkie sides the beating waves do mock,
An huge aspiring rock neighboring the skies,
Whose surly brow imperiously commands
The sea his bounds that at his proud feet lie;
And spurns the waves that in rebellious bands
Assault his empire and against him rise.
Under whose craggie government, etc.
Whose hanging head ore-looks th'unfathom'd deep.
The Oceans surly neighbor.
The waters with an amorous noise
Leap up and down, and in an amorous dance,
Kiss his dull cheeks that scorns their fond embraces,
And darts them back, till they with terror scattered,
Drop down again in tear^.
That beetles ore his brow into the sea.
Whose high and bending head
Looks fearfully on the confined deep.
On which the sea often throws his angry waves,
And foames to see the stones neglect his braves.
The vaulty rock
Breaks the proud billows which her large sides knock.
So have I seen a sea confronting clisse,
Whose surly sides have felt the angry whiffe
Of the cold North, and with disdainful pride,
^y his own poisure firmly fortified,
^^stle the saucy winds and spurn away
^he crowching waves that underneath him lay,
Till the revengefull sea now discontent,
And weary of his craggy government,
^^gins to undermine him, and does ride,
Sometimes at tilt against his chalkie side,
Spitting her frothy venom which does flaw
^^is tagged limbs and like a cancker gnaw
His vaultie ribs until she work away.
The rubbish that on his foundation lay,
At last when angry fates his ruin call,
And the rejoicing waves expect his fall,
Clapping their envious hands, he storms to see
Their malice feasted in his misery,
He bows himself and with a stately frown,
And a noise worthy of his bulk falls down,
And with a dying valor shatters all
H^s jeeting foes, that laughed to see him fall.
Rose.
The summers breath their masked buds discloseth.
On whose soft cheek a deep Vermillion dwells,
With such a purple light it shone,
As if it had been made of fire,
And spreading would have flamed anon,
Which in their early pride,
But half reveal, and half their beauties hide,
Which opes her ruby bosom to the sun,
And drops away, when he is from her gone.
Venus sacred flower, whose beauty is as short as sweet,
The sading flower, which with the suns uprise
Her bud unfolds, and in the evening dies.
Run v. Have. Swift.
Short breath from panting bosoms scorching flew,
To throw the feet, With hasty steps they run.
More swift than Mir^h or Daphne in her chase,
The f^et ^carce touch the ground.
S.
To sacrifice.
HOnoring the Deities with the large expense
Of blood, free gifts and heaps of Frankincense.
The blood
Gush from the oxen in a purple flood,
And on the altar spout their streams of gore,
Who praying new born flames with incense fed,
And bowls of wine on marble altars shed,
They holy fumes present to all the gods,
The entrals laid
On burning altars, to the gods conveyed
An acceptable smell,
The sacred flames S^bean gums devour,
And blaze on altars cround about with flowers,
Scaling the Welkin with their sacred fumes,
The crooked horned rams now at the shrine,
With their perfumes do cloud the sun,
With thankful incense all the altars smoke,
The altars do with joyful incense flame,
To feast the altars with blood and odours,
With prayer to mix perfumes,
And sacred fires, with incense feeding pray.
Congested incense burns,
And cheerfully with horns gilt offerings pay
Religious vows. On the altars pour the wine. Girt with tapers hol^ shine.
With fire he feeds the altars, richly feasts
The gods with gifts, whole Hecatombs of beasts,
Their horns with ribbonds wreathed imbrew the ground,
The ax does beat the ox, his curled crown,
With Wine being poured betwixt his horns falls down
An hund^ed bulls with garlands crowned
Are p^id to Jove,
The sacrificed beasts the ground shall beat,
And bright Religious fires the welkin hea^,
Send grateful incense up in pious smoke
We will choke
The fires with weighty lumps ^f richer gums,
^d send perfumed clouds to the heavenly seats
^a continued thankfulness,
^^h smoakie Hecatombs, and mealy showers,
They pay their rites unto the sa^red powers.
Sad.
A sadness dwells upon the cheek,
^^sting the tender Roses growing there,
^a confused conflict of the mind,
^ars drowning sighs, and sighs drying up tears,
^olumes of sad despair writ in his looks
^^e legible. Sorrow looks ou^ at his eyes,
Those eyes look through their tears. v. Sorrowful.
Sappho.
^he Lesbian Lyrick. The Lyrick maid.
The Lesbian tenth Muse add^d to the nine.
The Lesbian Poetesse. That doted on the Lesbian boy.
Satyrs.
The troop that frolic on the lawns,
That load their shaggie sides with bells,
Which as they shall strike a time,
^^ their dance do make a chime,
^rions shaggie footed race,
The goat-hair'd gods, that love the grassie mountains.
The wanton gods, the lecherous deities,
Rural D^ities. Country gods.
Satyricall. v. Critic.
^^ttering snaks in every line.
That shoot malicious noise and vomit gall,
Full of gall, hurl^ink and wit
As mad men stones, not caring who they hit.
Lycambean style.
To sail.
North winds invite to seas, and prosperous gales
^^ng in their shrouds, they have to trim their sails,
And fell with Sicilie on the sixth day,
To breast the surge, to slice the swelling sea,
They hoise their sails,
And plow the foaming brine with prosperous gales,
Neptunes moist wilderness they plow,
To ride upon the broak back of the sea.
To beat the ^oamie ocean with their oars,
Riding in triumph on the brisled wave,
They sat and plied
Their polisht oars, and did in curls divide
Their white head waters.
The foamie seas beneath their labor shook.
Ransack the seas,
The gently fanning blasts made dandling play
Upon our sails. -- Our oars we ply.
Slice up the foam, sweep the blew waves on high,
And with our nimble oars,
We brush the flood, and glide off from the shores.
The waves do shreek to feel
Their slicing Oars, and at each cut they roar,
Belching their angry foam upon the shore,
Slicing their wavie way. To ^urrow up the briny sea,
The keel begins to obey
Her gentlerudder, leaves her quiet key
Divides the streams, and without wind or oar,
She easily glides along the moving shore,
Her swelling canvas gives her nimbler motion,
O^tstrips the tide, and hies her to the Ocean,
Forth to the deep she lancheth and outbraves
The prouder billows, rides upon the waves,
She plies that course, her compass has enjoined her,
And soon has left the lessened land behind her,
That guide their winged wains
On the azure forehead of the liquid plains,
Which when the proud bark feels,
Scorns the salt waves should kiss her ^urrowing keel
And trickt in all her flag, her self she braves,
Capring for joy upon the silver waves,
The frolic wind plays with the pregnant sail,
And courts her linen sides. To sweep
Neptunes smooth face, and cleaves the yielding deep
The Sails conceive and grow big bellied with the wanton winds,
To plow the bosom of the floods. Full Sails.
Wing his successful course.
The crooked vessel chases the drenching seas.
He bids them lanch the ship witho^t delay,
And fit her tacklings.
The Seamen call aboard in double ranks,
Reduce their oars uprising from the banks.
^h equal strokes. -- from shore,
^he Vessel drives, and thence her object bore,
^er following eyes the flying ship pursue.
Sails.
^anvas wings, flags, pennons, banners, streamers, linne^
^gs, linen sides, swelling canvas.
Sailour.
A pitched piece of reason, calkt and tackled, and only studied to
^pute with tempests.
^ wisdom is the coldest part about him, still pointing toward
^ North, in a storm it is disputable, whether the noise be more
^ or the elements, and whether first will leave of scolding.
^ coach-men, Sea-waggoners, that drive their winged wains
O^ the azure forehead of the liquid plains.
Scholar. v. Learned. Student. Scylla.
Cha^ybdis ^urly opposite, which in her covered caves,
With sharp fang'd mouth, sucks the ships from the waves.
^ward a man, downward a comely maid,
Whose lower parts like an huge Whale are made,
All of wolves wombs, and Dolphins tails are said
To be engenderd.
Sea.
The wavie angry, curled deep. The curled Main.
The bubling ball. The swelling Main-Brine. Deep.
The boiling gulf, The floating globe, Mass,
The boundless moat, The rivers Rendesvous.
The brinie ball, Neptunes Royal seat, mo^st Sky.
Thetis large cells. Thetis large wa^^y bowers.
The h^nging thin, sad ^lippery water-ball.
Neptunes watery front, the watery camp, plain.
The silver brine. The brinie regions. Lower heavens.
The glassie deep, watery wilderness.
The place where salt and fresh waves meet.
Nereus wavie round. The insulting Main.
The r^ging, aged, deep, toyling Main.
Neptunes soft skies. Fishie skies, fishie world.
The huge whalt-bearing lake. Fishie Monarchy.
Nepe^nes confluence. The worlds vast moat.
Neptunes liquid soil. The watery floor.
Neptunes vast, watery Regiment.
Mother of Rivers.
That bound which to the worlds extremest ends,
Endless her self, her liquid arms extends.
The stable of horse-fishes, the stall of kine-fishes, the stie of ho^ fishes,
the kennell of dog-fishes, the Ape of the land.
The watery desert, solitude. Inconstant deep.
Which with spread arms stands ready for the tender
Of daily tribute, which the swollen floods render
Into her Chequer, whence as worthy kings,
She helps the wants of thousand lesser springs.
The briny lake. Tempestuous desert,
The rugged element,
That spacious cistern whence does flow
Refreshing streams, rivers and springs
That fill earths dugs the hills, Thetis glassie bower.
Where in Coral groves.
The wanton mermaids sporting with their loves.
Blue Thetis boundless arms.
Neptunes liquid belt, Thetis wet Empire.
The floating kingdoms. The weltring waves, oozy channel
The kingdom of the watery Jupiter,
Where thousand dangers sleep
In the smooth bosom of the deep,
Paved with native Jewels,
The watery kingdom whose ambitious head
Spits in the face of heaven,
The beachie girdle of the Ocean.
Secret. v. Silent.
Uncrannied, free from the bold intrusion of an eye,
Unwitness'd imbosom'd, cloystered, enchested, boxed,
wound up in mind, sequestered, lurking,
Free from all men's superintendency.
Sectary.
Meteor of flame and zeal.
Ignis fatuus of Religion.
Religious Alchymist.
Diseased Apocrypha, corrupting the T^x^,
A piece of ill directed zeal.
Affecting singularity, beyond the Churches unity.
Senses.
The cinque ports of the soul.
The understandings portalls.
Temptations in Cinque port, shops of vanity.
^^e subtle Organs of delight.
September.
The time wherein just Libra weighs
^he hours and makes the nights equal with days,
When the year resigns.
^he glorious sun up to the watery signs,
Which through the clouds looks on the earth in scorn,
The little birds, yet to salute the morn,
^^on the naked branches set their foot,
The leaves now lying on the mossie root,
^^d there a seely chirping do they keep,
^^ though they fain would sing, yet fain would weep,
^raising fair summer that too soon is gone,
Or sad for winters too fast coming on.
Sepulcher. v. Grave. Tomb. Serpent. v. Snake.
A glittering comb, his sl^ppery head invests,
^^stead of eyes two sparkling rubies swell.
^^ps up the air, and sinks into himself,
He hurls
His wanton body into numerous curls,
Yreath'd into scaliy folds, bound up in s^imie toists,
Hiffing within their knotty curls,
Gathered in folds shoots out his forked tongue.
Swindging the scaly horror of his folded tail.
Serving man.
Cast behind his Master, as his sword or cloak.
For his head he has little use of it, but to keep it bare.
He has wit enough if he can comprehend common sense and a
^^encher.
One that keeeps the best company, and is none of it,
For he knows all the Gentlemen his master knows.
Sexton.
The last of tailours, that never takes measure, whilst there is
hope of a new suit.
That gives deceased bones their quiet mansion.
Deaths bed maker. Conversing with the graves.
And Charnel house.
Shade.
The native Screen. The leavie coverture,
A place to shun
The scorching fury of the sun.
An awful shade,
The meeting boughs exiling Phoebus made,
Natures green network. Leavie Canopie,
Which fortifies the visage from the sun,
The bushie tops do bid the sun forbear,
And checks, the proud beams that would enter there,
Whose leaves still muttering, as the air does breath
With the sweet bubling of the Spring beneath,
Does rock the senses whilst the small birds sing,
Lulled asleep with gentle murmuring,
Where lightfoot Fairies sport at prison baies.
The pleasing lining of the trees.
Where the trees so lovingly enterlaced one another, that th^^
could resist the strongest violence of eyesight.
Where beauty might beguile the sun from looking on her.
A rampire against the sunns rage,
Where the shadows seem to woe
The lovesick passenger to come and sit,
And view the beauties nature strows on it
Where every tree
Embraced his neighbor to an unity.
Nature in leavie Ne^work arbours made,
Sconce from the suns distempers.
A bulwark from the suns invasion,
The shelter from the suns off^nsive rage,
The leavie vales which Phoebus beams keep out.
Shadows.
The fleeting shades which run
In full extent unto the setting sun.
Those coy brown nymphs which fly if you pursue,
Which if you fly make have to follow you.
Shame. v. Blush.
His fair cheeks covered with pale sheets of shame.
Sheep.
That gentle beast
Whose udders swell with Nectar and invest
Exposed man with their soft wool and are
Alive than dead more profitable far.
The curled bleating flocks, Whose fleecy loins bear thriving burdens.
The shepherds fleecy train, bleating charge.
The pre^y lambs with bleating oratory
Crave the dams comfort. Fleecy numbers.
^eecie troops. The shepherds skipping train.
Shepherd. v. Swain.
In secure silence wears away his time.
And better is acquainted with himself,
Than others, who so great a stranger is
^o city ^ollies, that he knows them not.
^e sits all day upon some mossie hill,
His rural throne, armed with his hook; his scepter,
A flowery garland is his country crown:
The gentle lambs and sheep his loyal subjects.
Which every year pay him their fleecy tribute.
Thus in an humble statelin^ss^ and majesty,
^e tunes his pipes, the woods best melody.
^en that want but little, because they desire not much.
Wi^h whose face the sun has had too much familiarity.
That on his scrannel oaten pipe does sing
His rural ditties.
Amorous Shepherds and gamesome.
Dorilus. Phili^ides. Celandine.
Col^ clout. Doridon. Thenot.
Pie^s. N^lkin. Duddy. Hobbin.
Alexis, Sylvan. Teddy. Rowly.
Perigot. Willy. Philocel. Cleon.
The^^ylis. Strephon. Claius. Roger.
Rocket, Rollo. Remond. Dover.
^^ptol. Thomalin. Jockin.
Philos. Cladon. Palinode. Wernock.
Shepheardesses.
Kala. Phillis. Amarillis. Chloe.
Phloe. Marina. Marinda. F^da.
Rosaline. Walla. Pastorella.
Sylvia. Dorinda. Melina. Lycoris.
Galataea. Laurinda. Lalage. Neaera.
Shining. v. Bright.
Be^ming, sparkling, glittering, spangling, radian^.
Brighter than the vestal fire.
^ike T^gus, or Pactolus golden sand.
Throwing, darting a piercing beam.
Whose luster far excells
All that is found in mines, or fishes shells.
Ship.
Hulke, pinnace, gally, carrack, bark, fregate.
Floating bowers, castles. Wooden horses.
S^a-coaches, sea-wagons. Floating houses.
Linen winged sea foul. VVater-treaders.
The winged pine. Bridging the Ocean.
The birds with woven wings. Skarfed bark.
Sea horse. The billows tennis ball.
The waves shuttlecocks. Thin-rib'd bark. Reeling vessel.
Crooked vessel. VVinged castles of the sea.
Bottom. Skiffe. Cray. Scallop. Flying towers
Bring home to us, and make both Indies ours.
Shipwreck. v. Tempest.
The ship as it were tearing out her own bowels, to feed the sea greediness,
leaving nothing within it, but despair of safety, an^ expectation of a
loathsome end.

Some sat upon the poupe, weeping and wailing till the sea swallowed them,
some more able to abide death, than fear of death, c^^ their own throats, to
prevent drowning, some prayed, and there wanted not them which cursed, as if
the heavens could not be more angry, than they were.

A monstrous cry begotten of many voices was able to affect with a fear, a mind
that had not prevented it by reason.

The precious wares give more,
And makes addition unto Neptunes store,
Spice all the waters, and enrobe
The roaring billows with the rustling silk.
The Tyrian goods
Enrich the wealth-devouring floods. v. Sea fight.
Shoot.
To send an arrow from the ^wanging bow.
To dischar^ge the bow. A winged flight,
The archer drew, which flew as swift as sight.
He took the arrow by the nock, and to his bended breast,
The oxie sinew close he drew, even till the pile did rest
Upon the bosom of the bow, his strength an orb did make.
To make a^re sigh with darts.
The nock stands to the string, so strong she drew,
That both the horn ends meet.
The feathered wood they from their bows let fly.
To set on wing a dart. And in his side he lodged the dart.
The arrow takes a sad rest in his heart.
The barbed head shot through his breast.
Shoulder.
Where neck and breast their native closure take.
Shout. v. Noise. Loud.
To tear the air.
A voice that purchased every ear.
Loud exclamat^ons cleave the yiedling air.
Sibyll.
Aged Prophetess. Cumaean ma^d. Euboan virgin.
Amphrisian Prophetess.
Persian, Libyan, Delphian, Cumaean, Erythraean,
Samian, Hell espontan, Tyburtine, Albunean, Cuman.
That on loose leaves left writ their prophesies.
The frantic prophetess.
Who in her deep steep rock does prophecy,
And all her notes and names in leaves she writes,
And what in leaves she written leaves, indites
^^ meeter modules, and locks in her cave,
And there untoucht they lie in order brave,
But if the door being open the wind displace them,
And out of door the whilking puffs do chase them.
She never cares to catch them in again.
Sickness. v. Fever.
The moth of nature. The fighting humors.
The harmony of nature out of rune.
The bodies tempest, earthquake.
The dissolution of the bodies league.
That wholly puts a man into the hands of the physician.
That makes all the chaires and stools in his chamber
^^ke physic. Deaths harbenger.
Sighs. To Sigh.
The legates, interpreters, issue, daughters, off spring,
^mbassadours, etc. of imbosom'd griefs.
That sad warm air.
Sobs every accent part,
And sighs ascend from her astonished heart.
His burning sighs inflame the air.
Sad sounds, aires, breath. Those killing accents.
A deep-fetcht breath, which seemed of power to ki^
The breast that held it. T^ers and sighs,
The storms and showers of nature.
From the hearts center haled.
That gently whispering wind.
My thoughts imprisoned in my secret woes,
Wi^h flamy breaths does issue often in sound.
As if the heart wedged with a sigh,
Would rend in twain. The burning breath.
Those sad disturbers of the quiet air.
Du^^be language of the soul oppressed.
Teaching the angry wind to sigh. Grinding a groan.
Cloying the bosom of the idle air.
Her sighs in storms arise,
And ill aboding tears burst from her eyes.
Sign.
B^dge, token, livery, cognisence, argument, witness,
Testimony, symptom, symbol, crisis, signal, remonstrance,
Probate, hierogliphick, emblem, character.
Silent. Silence.
The grave of thoughts.
As silent as the house of sleep.
No crested fowls shrill crowing here awake
The cheerful morn, no barking sentinel
Here guards, nor geese, who wakefull dogs excel,
Beasts tame or savage, no wind-shaken boughs,
Nor strife of jarring tongues with noises rouse
Secured ease No door here on their creeking hinges jard
As still as midnight.
Clamor grew dumb, unheard was shepherds tongue,
And silence girt the woods, no warbling tongue
Talked to the Echo. Sa^yres broke their dance,
And all the upper world lay in a trance. Silent as death.
As the shade, where chaos lay before the winds were made
Only the curled streams soft chidings kept,
And little gales that from the green leaf swept,
D^y summers dust in fearful whispering stird,
As loath to waken any singing bird.
To be Silent.
Silence ties up her tongue.
Now silence locked the organs of her voice.
To lock his thoughts within his silent breast.
The secrets of nature.
Have not a greater gift of silence.
Give it an understanding but no tongue.
My tongue shall never take knowledge of a word
Delivered to me in nature of your trust.
I am Harpocrates.
When you discover secrets to him you hide them.
Concealed in eternal night.
My tongue shall be close prisoner to my heart.
To silence she her lips confined.
To seal the lips.
Silk-wormes.
Those little weavers that their t^ske so ply,
And work so fast on leaves of mulbery,
The Persian worms, whose weary summer toils
So long has been the rusling Courtiers spoils.
Sing. Song. v. Sweet sounding.
Sweetly break the ye^lding air.
With her voice embalmes the air.
Sonnets, lays, roundelaies, carrolls, canzons, warbles,
Descants, stanzos, well-divided breath. Harmonious air.
Skin.
The bodies alabaster sheath. The native shi^t.
The bodies oldest clothes.
Silenus.
The foster father to the God of wine.
Who when he reele^ from his dull ass, the cries
Of Satyrs echo, rise up Father rise.
Who weakly hangs upon his tardy ass.
That ^ald big bellied Satyr.
That with a reed holds up his ^e^ling limbs.
Sisyphus.
That rolls in vain
The stone which rolled up, falls down again.
Sleep.
The peace of minds from whose abodes.
Care ever flies, restoring the decay
Of toyle-tyr'd limbs to labor burthening day.
The s^iken fumes that do the senses bind,
The rescue from all cares,
In soft slumbers binding every sense.
Pains ^asiest salve, which does fulfill,
A^l offices of death except to kill.
The drowsy publican
Robbing a man of half that little span,
Nature has lent his life. Sergeant of the night.
Whose charge it is, those breaches to repair,
Which nature takes from sorrow, toil and care,
Rest to the limbs, and quiet she confers.
To troubled minds.
She which of fumes, and humid vapors made,
Ascending does the seat of sense invade.
That steeps
The weary temples in the dew of sleep.
Thou charm to all our cares, that art
Of humane life the better part.
Winged issue of a peaceful mother,
Of rigid death the elder brother,
Father of dreams, of life the port.
Days sweet repose, and nights consort.
To kings and vaslals equal free,
The labor tired refresht by thee.
Who man, whom death does terrify,
Inu^'st continually to die.
Astraeas drowsy son.
Deaths leiger-embassadour, drowsy brother,
The sleepy counterfeit of death. That shorter death.
The king of rest. Arrester of the sense,
Morpheus bayliffe; The ape of death.
Drowsy image of cold death. Natures opium.
Care charmer sleep, son of the sable night.
Brother to death in silent darkness born^.
Whom night breeds in her gloomy womb,
Now borne, with ease and silence feeds.
That strikes all with her horny wand.
Glad in cotton, shod in wool.
Rubbing his eyes with poppy, and does press.
The yellow night shade and blew gladiols juice,
Wherewith his sleep-swo^l'n heavy eyes he glewes.
Drawn by dull bears within a noyselesse coach.
The sweet refresher of the wearied sense.
As quiet as the dead of night.
The respit of the vital spirits,
The certain knot of peace,
The baiting place of wit, the balm of wo^.
The poor man's wealth, the prisoners release.
Th'^ndifferent judge between the high and low.
Soft nu^se of nature.
Dull God that on the high and giddy mast
Seals up the the ship-boyes eyes, and rocks his brain.
In cradle of the rude imperious surge.
He that knits up the ravell'd sleave of ^are.
The death of each days life. Sore labors bath.
Balm of hurt minds. Great natures second course.
Chief nourisher in life's feast. Peaceful sleep,
All care and anguish does in Lethe steep.
When sleep his poppy on the temples sh^ds.
The humble God that dwells
In cottages and smoaky cells,
Hates gilded roofes and beds of down,
And though he fears no princes frown.
Flies from the circle of a crown.
The powerful God,
That his leaden charming rod,
Dipped in the Lethean lake
Over wakefull temples shakes.
Great son of night within an ebon cell,
Where softest slumbers do delight to dwell,
Binding the scattered sense with silver wand.
Amid whose ebon cave a downy bed
High mounted stands, with sable coverings spread,
Where lies the lazy God dissolved in rest,
Fantastic dreams which various forms expressed,
About him lay. v. Sand. Ovid Met. lib. 11. p. 382.
To sleep.
Now Morpheus le^den key locked up the sense.
Morpheus the drowsy sergeant of the night
Laid on his eyes his sable mace.
Sleep bathes himself within her eyes.
More proud than Phoebus of his throne of gold,
Is the soft God, those softer limbs to hold,
Nor would exchange with Jove to hide the sky
In darkening clouds, the power to close her eye.
The God of sleep
Whiskes a wet branch of soporiferous dew,
Whose stigi^n strength he ore his eye brows threw,
Which soon his rolling eyes with sleep ore-laid,
The leaden God sits on his eyes.
Sweet sleep did then the weary limbs compose.
Then heavy sleep the eyelids did surprise,
And drew those fringed curtains of the eyes.
Struck by sleeps horny wand new dipped in Leth^,
In drowsy flight,
Morpheus with lazy wings does on them light.
Sleep,
Their drowsy lids does in his Lethe steep,
To pay their drowsy vows at Mo^pheus shrine.
As if he had drunk Lethe, and made even, with heaven.
The dew of sleep descends
And locks up her fair lights in pleasing slumbers.
To recommend themselves to deaths elder brother.
Swallowing sleep with open mouth, making such a noise
with all, as none could lay the stealing of a nap to her charge.
Making their pillowes weak props of overladen hea^^*
Sleep begins with heavy wings
To hatch upon the eyes.
As fastly locked up in sleep, as guil^lesse labor,
when it lies starkly in the travelers bones.
On their eyes daeth-counterfeiting sleep,
With leaden legs and bat^y wings does creep,
Sleep gives a soft attachment to the senses.
Sleep draws the fringed curtains of her eyes.
Sleep pays her nightly tribu^e to her eyes.
Whose eyes are stroakt with Hermes drowsy rod.
Sleep oppressed his heavy eyes.
The eyes veil to the God of sleep.
Sleep enchains the senses. Nigh^s heavy charms
Had ^l^^'d his eyes. Sleep with brooding wings,
S^ft slumbers on his heavy eyelids flings.
Night shed her poppy on her eyes.
The night had clo^'d her fieled ^yelids.
Sleep creeps upon her yiedling senses.
They give the rest of night to soft repose.
Charmed, lulled with so^t sl^epe.
They drown the night in sle^pe.
Death does embrace him in his leaden arme^*
The meeting eyelids conclude a peaceful league.
In sleeps wherein the last trumpe scarce could wake
The guiltless, dead, clay.
Soft sleep does close
His guarded eyes, with undisturbed repose.
Sleep through his power diffused.
^is golden humor.
^orpheus had waved his Mace o'^ both his eyes.
Soft-finger'd sleep,
(...) silken co^dage binds the weary sense,
Sleep surfets on their weary eyelids.
Till sleep
The juncture of their joints and nerves did sleep
^^ his dissolving humor,
And all that all his labor could comprise,
Quickly concluded in his closed eyes
With drowsy charms,
^ind sleep bewitcheth thee into his arms,
^^mbring in a melting rest.
Slow.
As the slow pac'd-Snail. The Tardy ass.
A To^toise speed, a Spaniards stride,
^^ke the musing Alderman. The plotting Statesman,
Slow as the river T^ras. Moves with such speed,
As prisoners to a Psalm, that cannot read.
Smooth.
As the polisht marble. As sleekest Parian stone.
S^oother than Crystal ice. As smooth as oil.
As Monumental alabaster.
Smooth as the stream, where none can say,
He does this drop to that prefer.
Smooth as the Eunuchs cheek, chin,
Such looks Jove wore, when in the shape of bull
He did Europa court.
Smooth as the face of waters first appeared,
^^tides began to strive, or winds were heard.
Smooth as the brow of love.
Snake. v. Serpent.
Two gliding snakes extending,
Their speckled breasts, and flamie main all bending
Above the main their ugly odious ^ail,
And backs with fearful folds do wrigling trail,
Their gogling eyes flashing forth blood and fire,
Their hissing mouths, sharp tongues do stench expire.
The scaly monster roling on the sand
Inspatious windings.
The several snakes that out of Lyb^a's flime
Are bred, might all have been combined in him,
Nor could Medusa's head had all the blood,
In one place fallen produce a greater brood,
Whose speckled belly with more spots is decked,
Than various Theban Marble takes. Ennamell'd skin,
Which hissing from his den appears
Amazing both at once, the eyes, and ears.
Fire from his threatening eyes, like lightning sho^,
And Stygian blasts exhaled from his dire throat.
Snow.
In silver flakes an heavenly wool does fall.
The feathered rain. The hoarie heaps.
The silver gray which shivering winter bea^s,
The falling showers congealed by freezing winds*
Cold down, that makes the fields look old,
The drift wind shakes
Black clouds in p^eces, pulling plumie fl^kes
From their soft bosom, Jove in a silver shower.
The watery fleece. Snow periwigs the hills. v. Winter.
Socrates.
He whom Apollo wises^ thought of men.
Sophroniscus prudent son. The grave Philo^opher.
Whom the cold draught of hemlock forced to die.
Plato's great master. The Masons learned son.
Xenocrates great master. Instructor of the learned Xenophon,
The patient husband of the scolding wife.
Xantippes patient husband,
Whose Copper image Athens did adore,
Admiring dead, whom they contemned before,
Who with convicting reasons did strike dumb
(Instructed by his great Daemonium)
All his opponents. The Pagan Martyr.
Soft.
As the childhood of the Morn. As the lust full bed,
Soft as young down,
Trimmed up and made for Queen Semiramis,
To whose soft seizure
The cygnets down is ha^sh, and spirit of sense,
Hard as the plowmans hand.
Soft as the down of S^vans.
Have you felt the wool of Beaver,
Or the nap of velvet ever,
Or the down of thistles?
These it does excel as much
(...) the softness of the touch,
As they do urchins bristles.
^^ft as the airie plumes of thistly down,
^oft as Euganean wool. Soft as the Ladies hand,
^oft as the velvet hand of sleep,
^s bathed in the soft streams of Salmacis,
Of a yielding pliancy. Soft as the pliant wax.
^ofter far than tufts of unwrought silk.
^ofter than Beavers skins,
Which when the hands do touch, they find from thence,
^^ch pleasure they contract, and lose all since.
Soft as the balmie dew. Soft as the hand of love.
Soft as the godded swan, or Venus dove,
Soft as the down of Phoenix.
As cotton from the Indian tree,
Or pretty silkworms huswifer^.
Sorrowful. v. Sad. Melancholy.
Setting forth in a darkened countenance, a doleful copy of his
^^oughts, and that he was going to speak,
Carrying in his countenance the evident marks of a sorrowful
^eak mind supported by a weak body.
An heart full of unquiet motions.
^^king a piteous war with her fai^ hair,
With such vehemence of passion, as if his heart would climb up
^^to his mouth to take his tongues office,
As if he were but the coffin to carry himself to his sepulcher*
S^asoning his words with sighs.
A face wherein there lies
Clusters of clouds, which no calm ever clears,
Whose every gesture accused her of sorrow,
In^ecting each thing she looks upon so with her griefs, that all
things about her seemed to mourn to see her.
In whose eyes sad coffeehouse sits.
Bearing a plurisie of griefs about her.
A living coffin to her cares. In silent sorrow drowned.
Excess of sorrow scarce gives way
To the relief of words.
Anchored down with cares in seas of woe.
A living coarse.
Suffering sorrow to dress her self in her beauty.
Shunning all comfort, she seemed to have no delight, but in ^^
king her self the picture of misery.
Bearing sorrows triumph in her heart.
His senses carried to his mind no delight from any of the
objects.
In the book of beauty nothing to be read but sorrow.
Sitting in such a g^v^n over manner, one would have though^ lence,
solitariness, and melancholy were come under the ens^ of mishap to conquer
delight, and drive him from his natural ^^ of beauty.

Giving grief a free dominion.
A face whose skin's in sorrow died.
With a countenance witnessing she had before hand passed thro^^
so many sorrows, that she had no new to look for.
Sorrow melts down his lead into my boiling breast.
An heart as full of sorrow as the sea of sand,
Sits her down on the bare earth,
As her grief and sorrow were so great,
That no supporter but the huge firm earth
Could hold it up.
Grieving no less than did that Theban wife
To see brave Hectors body robbed of life.
Drawn by Theflali^n ho^ses,
Whose phrase of sorrow
Conjures the wandering stars and makes them stand.
As wonder wounded hearers,
So Priam grieved, when ^e too late did find
The Grecian horse with armed men was lined.
Sad Agamemnon had such eyes,
When he beheld his daughters sacrifice.
Distilling even the Elixar, and the spirit of tears,
And moved without a soul,
So swift Achilles looked, then when he sent
His loved Briseis to Alcides tent.
Deep sorrow sat upon his eyes, drowned in discontent,
Whose heavy heart the height of sorrow crowned,
Tears were but barren shadows to express
The substance of his grief. Veiled with sorrows wing.
A heart as high in sorrow as ere creature wore,
And with a voice that floods from rocks might borrow,
That feels a tempest in his soul, the soul eclipsed*
With a face as sad,
grief could paint, wanting no art to borrow,
^^edlesse help to counterfeit a sorrow.
^^ing beneath the tyranny of grief.
^^ds still, some pitying God
(...) him to marble.
^^aetontiades, Niobe. Orpheus for Euridice, Andromache
Hector and Astianax. Egeus for Theseus supposed dead,
(...) for her sons. Daedalus for Icarus, Progne.
^^gone leading her blind father Oedipus. Autonoe for Actaeon,
^^ compared with this sorrow, deserve not the names of grief.
V. Miserable. Tears. Sighs. Weep. Soldier. v. Valiant.
That lays his head,
^^aps on some rude turf, and sadly feels
^^ nights cold damps wrapped in a sheet of steel,
Whose ears
^^cted in the language of the drum,
^^ chase brave employments with their naked sword,
^^ march all day in massy steel, the armed throng,
^^ glory vying child of fame,
^^ from deep wounds sucks forth an honored name,
^^ thinks no purchase worth the style of good,
^^ what is sold for sweat, and sealed with blood,
^^ for a point, a blast of empty breath,
^^aunted gazeth in the face of death.
(...) perfume their heads with dust and sweat,
Though his sword went faster than eye sight could follow it, yet ^own
judgment went still before it. Wars dustie honors that (...).

^^ by the genius of the camp.
^^ husbandman of valor, his sword the plough,
^^ming with more prints in his body, than pence in his pocket.
^^t walks in clouds of powder and blue mists,
^^ead of wealthy bracelets on their wrists,
^ear chain shot -- That in the field,
^^ at a breach has taken on his shield,
^^ darts than Roman Sceva, that has spent
any a cold December in no tent,
^^ such as earth and heaven make, that has been,
^^cept in iron plates, not long time seen,
^^n whose body may be plainly told
More wounds than his lank purse does alms deeds hold,
The twigs of the rod of war, wherewith God scourges a want
nation into repen^nce.
When the sword is once drawn, he wishes all scabbards cut in pie^^
Soul.
The heavenly spark, the better part of man.
Of a fair lodging, brigh^er guest. The bodies inmate.
The rational and nobler part. The bodies Tenant,
The best first part, the Monarch of the breast.
The bodies best perfume.
Souls departed.
Spirits which have thrown away
All their envious weights of clay,
And by their glorious troops supply
The glorious winged Hierarchy,
Whom their great Creators sight,
Inebriateth with delight.
Spirits imparadised. Freed souls. Uncaged spirits,
Flidge souls, that leave their shells.
Uncased, unorganed, unsheathed souls.
Ghosts repurified, unhoused, uncloathed souls,
That have put on the glistering Pall
Of immortality. That clothed be
In garments wove of immortality.
Divorced, infranchised, refined souls,
That have put off their gowns of clay.
Harsh sound.
The bells in pestilence never made like sound,
The croaking raven, or the engendring toad.
The mandrakes shriek not half so harsh. Killing accents.
No harsher news did ever strike the ear.
Heart-wounding news. Sinking the soul with the report.
Where truth is worse than any forgeri^,
Where we may curse the mouth that does not lie,
Where fame goes off with a most sad report,
Oh wound us not with sad a tale, for bear
To press our grief too much, we cannot hear,
This all at once, such heavy news as these
Must gently sink into us by degrees,
Let us digest
This first, then try our patience with the rest,
Practice us first in lighter griefs that we
(...) grow at last strong for this Tragedy,
(...) it in whispers and uncertainty,
^ some new unauthoriz'd b^zze without
^^ason or warrant to confirm our doubt.
South.
Where Auster vailes,
^^d heavens with clouds, and earth with showers assails.
Sew.
The cunningest painter might have learned of her needle, which ^^h so pretty a
manner made his careere to and from through the ^^h, as if the needle would
have been loath to have gone from such ^^istresse, but that it hoped to return
thitherward very quickly a^in, the cloth looking with many eyes upon her, and
lovingly em^^acing the wounds she gave it, the shears were also at hand to
be^^d the silk that was grown too short. And if at any time she (...) it to her
mouth to bite it off, it seemed that where she had been ^^g making roses with
her hands, she would in an instant make ^^ses with her lips, the lillies seemed
rather to have whiteness of ^e hand that made them, than the matter they were
made of, and (...) they grew there by the suns of her eyes, refreshed by that
air which an unawares sigh might bestow upon them.

Like artificial Gods creating flowers.

Spark.
^s fire his strength being wasted, hides his head
^n the white ashes sleeping, though not dead.
Who ever saw a dying spark of fire,
^^ke in warm embers, till some breath inspire
^^orc't revival, how obscure it lies,
And being blown, glimmers awhile and dies.
^^eping in his ashy bed.
Speak.
To break the yiedling air.
His tongue begun his task.
His lip^ he thus unlocks, unseal^.
^o present the air with.
To salu^e the ears.
To cloth the thoughts in airy garments.
To form a speech, to shape a voice.
And wings gave to this speech.
To digest his thoughts in words.
As if a God did break
The air amongst us, and vou^hsafe to speak.
He straight divides
The portals of his lips, and thus repl^'d,
His lips such accents break.
To unseal the red virgin wax.
To break the bars of silence.
Open once more those rosy twins.
Op^ning the cherrie of her lips.
The conceptions of the mind discharge their birth.
Spider.
Industrious Spinster. That weaves the waving tiffany,
That on high rafters lays her thin spun net
To catch the buzzing fly,
That weaves her own Lawn hanging canopie,
Ingenious spinner, twining with her feet
What from her bowels comes.
Spinne.
To twine the carded wool,
The carded wool,
With following twine their busy fingers pull,
And with soft murmures draw the teased wool,
From their small spindles twerl the twining thread.
A Spring or Fountain.
Crystal riverlings purl on the pebbles,
The lesser daughters of the sea. Edged with poplar trees,
Where Crystal springs do woo the meeker ground,
And makes the pebbles dance unto their sound,
The Crystal spring
Got newly from the earths imprisoning.
The Crystal current of the plains,
The water turns in many a ring,
As if it staid to hear the wood quire sing,
The water so transparent, pure, and clear,
That had the self enamored boy gazed here,
So fatally deceived he had not been,
While he the bottom, not his face had seen.
A Crystal rill,
Gently di^burd'ned from a swelling hill,
Which from the green side of a flowery bank,
Eat down a channel, where the wood nymphs drank.
That smileth as she floats,
And in her face so many dimples show,
And often skips, as it did dancing go,
Whose fretful waves beating against the hill
(...) all the bottom with soft mutterings fill.
The murmuring brook
That wantons through the meadows.
Sweet springs in which a thousand nymphs did play.
^oft rumbling brooks that gentle slumber drew.
By whose falls,
^elodious birds sing madrigalls.
^ babbling spring that trips upon the stones,
and with soft murmr rocks the sense asleep.
The Crystal Nymph. The flowing deity.
^ bubling spring with streams as clear as glass*
^n chiding by, enclosed with matted grass.
A Crystal spring,
Presenting the impartial shapes of things.
The spring.
^regnant with flowers, now the spring
Like a new bride appears,
those feathered music only bring
Caresses, and no requiem sing.
On the departed year,
The earth like some rich wanton heir,
Whose parents conffind lie,
^orgets it once looked pale and bare,
And does for vanities prepare,
As if spring nere would die.
^hen temperate breath,
^^es to the glad fields truitful birth.
^h' enamored spring soft blush^s blows.
Upon the roses cheeks. The south inspires,
Life in the spring, and gathers into quires
The sca^ter'd nightingales. Now the astonished spring,
^ears in the air the feathered people sing.
The easy spring
^^icht with odours, wantons on the wing
^f the Eastern wind.
^^ir Mistress of the earth with garlands crowned,
(...) out her flowery wealth.
The trees put on their leavy hats,
Then glad earth gives new liveries to the trees,
When sturdy Aries ushers in the spring.
Now each creature joys the other
Passing happy days and hours,
One bird reports unto another,
In the fall of silver showers,
Whilst the earth our common mother,
Has her bosom decked with flowers,
Whilst the greatest tofch of heaven,
With bright rays warmes Flora's lap,
Making nights and days both even,
Chearing plants with fresher sap.
When proud pyde April dressed in all his trim,
H^th put a spirit of youth in every thing,
That heavy Saturn laughed and leapt with him.
The summers front. The foyzen of the year,
When nightingales do hush the silent night,
When nightingales do sing the sun asleep.
And a wild music burdens every bough.
The winter-starved earth,
By nature teeming labors toward her birth,
Still as the day upon the dark world creepes,
One blossom forth after another peepes,
Till the small flower, whose root is now unbound,
Gets from the frosty prison of the ground,
Spreading the leaves unto the powerful noone.
When gardens prankt with rosy buds do spring,
Whilst Flora dallies in her flowery bed,
Whom Zephyr courts, and sweetly to her sings,
W^ping away the tears Aurora shed.
When vernal blasts and gentle windsappear,
Such as blow flowers, and through the glad boughs sing
Many soft welcomes to the lusty spring.
In verdant weeds fresh earth the spring arraies
Flora with tapestry checkers the fields.
The trees and earths embroyderer,
Phoebus in his yearly race,
Pranketh in perfumed robes,
All these goodly nether globes.
Paving the ground with flowers.
The morning of the year.
From the awakened roots the buds do grow,
The fragrant spring with flowery chaplets crowned
^he year in its sucking infancy bloome*
^hen flowers paint the gaudy fields.
When balmy showers
^^ck the soft b^est of fragrant meads with flowers.
The quickening spring,
^hen birds are tutoring their young to sing.
The jocund spring,
^herein the leaves, to birds sweet caroling,
^^nce with the wind. When May
^^cks up the fi^lds in holidayes array,
^hen well*appareled April on the heel
Of limping Winter t^eads.
^he ram that bore fair Hellen once away,
(...) made the dark night equal to the day.
^^ir colored flowers in the meadows spring,
and now the birds their untaught notes do sing.
The seed which long time in the earth has laid*
^s now shot forth into a tender blade.
The birds salute the growing spring.
The jolly tide,
^hen the earth in all her pride,
And the lady of the May
^^imm'd up in her best array,
^ath invited all the swains,
With the lasses of the plains.
The warm sun does thaw the earth,
And gives the fleet-wing'^ swallow birth*
^aking within the hollow tree,
The cuckoe and the humble be.
The flowery prime,
^hen lavish nature in her best attire
Clothes the gay spring, the season of desire.
The time that the Lady Flora uses to cloth our gran^^me earth with a new
livery, diapred with va^ious flow^^s, and checkered with all delightful
objects.

A season no less proper, than propitious to lovers.
Now winters gone* the earth has lost
^er snow white robes, and now no more the f^ost,
Candies the grass, or casts an ice cream
Upon the silver lake, and crystal stream.
But the warm sun thawes the benumbed earth
And makes it tender* gives a sacred birth
To the dead swallow, wakes in hollow trees,
The drowsy cuckoe, and the humble Be.
Now do a quire of chirping minstrels bring
In t^iumph to the world the youthful spring,
The valleys, hills, and woods in rich array,
Welcome the coming of the longed for May.
The smiling spring
Danceth on Zephyres rosy wing;
And with a pregnant flowery birth
Does retresh the teeming earth.
The g^ound does smile at the springs flowery birch,
The spring crowned with the glories of the earth,
Rides on the heavenly ram.
When Zephy^'s muskie kisses breath,
Fresh honor on the smiling trees.
When the earth begins to put on her new apparel against the approach of her
lover, and the sun running an even course, became an equal arbiter betwixt
night and day.

When every thing does make a gleesome boast.
The birds chant melody on every bush.
The snake lies ^olled in the cheerful sun,
The green leaves quiver with the fanning wind.
And make a checkerd shadow on the ground.
Now snowes are quite dissolved, fiesh grass we see,
To cloth the fields and leaves on every tree,
Earth ^^angeth hiew, the swelling waters sink,
And with soft current slide within their brinke.
Aglai^ naked dares upon the ground,
With Nymphs, and her bright ^isters dance a round.
South winds the spring attending still,
B^^alme the seas, and sails do fill.
Now ^rost makes not the meadows hoare,
Not winters snow swollen rivers ror^.
The lucklesse bird her nest does frame,
B^ wayling ^^ys and the shame, of Cecrops house.
The shepherds of rich flocks rehearse,
And to their pipes chant rural verse,
Seeking his godhead to appease,
Whom flocks and hills Arcadian please.
The longed for sun,
Peepes through the horns of the celestial ram.
The winter to the spring be queaths
The rule of time, and mild Favonius breaths,
A quire of swans to that sweet music sing,
The air resounds the motion of their wing.
When over plains they fly in ordered ranks,
To sport themselves upon Caysters banks.
Whilst every bushie veil,
and grove, and hill, sounds of the nightingale,
The sun breaks up earths rugged chains,
^herein rude winter bound her veins,
The naked trees get crisped heads,
And colored coats the roughest meads,
And they with growing glory rise,
That lately fettered were with ice.
Stagge. v. Swift.
Upon the b^ink
Of some smooth stream about to drink,
With shame remembers that he fled
(Surveying th^re his armed head.)
The scorned dogs, resolves to try
The combat next, but if their cry
^^^ades again his trembling ear,
^e strait resumes his wonted fear,
Leaves the untasted spring behind,
and winged with fear, out flies the wind.
Whom fences long with held
from meadows where the spring in glory reigns.
^ow having level^'d those unpleasing chains,
and treading p^oudly ore the vanquished flowers,
^^ in his hopes a thousand joys devoures.
The long-lived beasts. That bears the branched horns.
Whose life four times exceeds the c^owes.
The knaggy-horned beast.
Stars.
^eav^ns sparkling fires. Heavens fiery sparks.
^angles of heavens canopies. The burnisht lamps.
Those freckles in the beau^eous face of heaven.
The burning tapers of the sky. Heavens bright torches.
The bright eyes of the firmament.
^eavens twinkling pride. Heavens golden studds.
(...) twinkling spangles of the firmament.
The gilt nails in the wheel of heaven.
The heavens bright crescents.
The powdered embroidery of heaven.
^eavens golden bosses, ingots, beads.
Immortal synod of the glorious sky.
The twinkling eyes
That with disordered order gild the skies.
The gilt studs of the firmament.
The wandering armies of the skies,
Which march above in blew gold tinsell'd lawne,
Tilting at ours their many-pointed eyes,
The common people of the skies.
Heavens clear fires,
Which with the moon succeed when day retires.
The spangling light,
That sparkle on the brow of shady night.
The glorious wonders of the skies.
The Almighty's mystic characters.
The powdering of heavens azure tapestry,
The flaming letters of the book of heaven.
The sparkling beauties of the night.
Heavens shining pendants. Nights giudy jewels*
The sparkling diamonds of the sky.
The skies bright sentinels. The starry senate of the night.
The parliam^nt of stars. The pretty wonders of the sky.
Nights rich exp^nsion. The golden issue of the sky.
The skies enamelling. Ann^aling of the skies.
Well ordered Armies of the skies. Nights spangled host.
The mo^^s silver-^r^ss^d torch bearers.
The servants to the humerous night.
The gli^tering sparks. B^ight squadrors of the skies.
Whose light undarkes
The gloomy sh^dowes of the night.
And in a silent story,
D^clare the greatn^sse of their makers glory.
By ordered courses driven
In golden coaches through the lists of heaven.
Hesperus beauteous herd.
The numerous train of spangled Nymphs.
The silver spangles of the glorious sky.
That hang upon the dusky cheeks of night
As a rich jewel in an Aethiops ear,
Those lamps of living fire to fixed motion bound.
The welkins silver-groats. Diana's starry nymphs.
Those fiery Oes that do engild the night.
The floor of heaven
Is thick in laid with pattens of rich gold.
The blessed candles of the night.
Heavens unnumbered sparks.
The starry jewels of the skies.
The night-borne creatures of the sky.
Mysterious letters in heavens silver page.
The meaner beauties of the night,
Which poorly satisfy our eyes,
More by the number, than the light,
Like common people of the skies.
The starry chains whose blazes play
In knots of light along the milky way,
That through their crystal casements peep.
The little drops of light, that in their orbs do glow.
Which travel in their motion so,
That we their names and courses know,
And he that on their changes looks,
Would think them governed by our books.
Rich spang^es that adorn the skies.
Which though they shine for ever fixed there
With light and influence relieve us here.
A falling Star.
As when a falling star falls from the sky,
Or seems to fall to the deceived eye.
A streaming star from heaven did nimbly glide,
The melting stars, their sulphurous surfeit shed.
Flaming jelly.
Blazing star. v. Comet. Stink.
Like old saturns socks.
Such breathing Cadmus dragon threw
In the infected air.
More loathed than Lerna, or the Stygian lake,
Whose consuming sent,
Would poison thoughts, although it had no vent
To b^ing it forth. As Cerberean Avernus.
As the ^oame of Cerberus.
Stoic.
Whose visages do cream,
And mantle like a standing pond.
That do a wilful stillnesse entertain,
Only to be dressed in an opinion
Of wisdom, gravity, profound conceit*
That cruel sect which seek to bereave us of one half of our selves in
seeking to free us from all our passions, and affections; and instead of making
a wise man have raised a statue.

Delighting in long breathed accents, which he prolates with such pauses that
before he be at the period of a sentence, a man may reach a second thought.

Vinegar aspect. Who all easy passion flies:
The dry brained portick, whose A^henian breast,
Transcendinng passion, never was oppressed
With grief. Marble brains.
Flint brested stoics, they whose marble eyes,
Contemn a wrinckle, and whose souls despise,
To follow natures too affected fashion,
Or travel in the regent walk of passion,
Whose riged hearts disdain to shrink at fears,
Or play at fast and loose with smiles and tears.
Stomach.
The bodies kitchen. Natures cook.
Digestive fire. That greedy tyrant. Exacting Publican.
That varies still his tribute with the day.
v. Glutton.
To Stone.
To give at once both death and grave.
To c^ush with an hard shower.
Strange.
A thing more strange, than on Niles slime the sun
Ere bred, or all which into Noa^s arc came,
A thing which would have posed Adam to name.
Stranger than seven Antiquaries studies.
Than Africks monsters, Guinas rarities.
Stranger than strangers.
To Study.
Spends many a gray goose quill unto the handle,
Buries within their sockets many a candle,
Blots paper by the quire, and dries up ink,
As Xerxes army did whole tivers drink.
Sets his brain on the Strappado,
^l^ing the brain into invention,
With more discoursing in his head,
^an Jove when Pallas issued from his brain,
^o call a Council of his wits.
^entering the squeezed brain. Rub the brain.
^o ^ask the brain, to beat the brain.
^he brain in labor, travail.
^he working soul projecteth thousand ways.
Student.
^he that has sworn allegiance to his book,
^watcheth Moons and grows more pale than they,
^aborious as Cleanthes, whose breath as well,
^s writings of the oil and candle smell.
Styx.
Which through obscure abodes
^preads his dull streams, the terrors of the gods.
The sacred streams by which the gods do swear,
Which oath who break are for an hundred years,
^xiled heaven, and not invited come
^o Joves high table, nor of nectar drink.
Whose waters are of so cold a temperature,
That no hing but a mules hoof can endure.
Summer.
Sol leaving now the gentle twins
With Cancer and thirst panting Leo Innes
What time the groves are clad in green,
The field dressed all in flowers,
And that the sleck hai^'d nymphs are seen
To seek them summer bowers,
The verdant Meads do dress themselves in green.
Sols Palfries having past the twins,
Are posting hotly toward Cancers innes.
Wheat ears the brows of naked summer crown,
When fields in flowery mantles are arrayed.
Days burning eye,
^lakes Cancers crooked claws in servour s^ie.
The lusty youth of year. The noontie of the year,
When all things vigorous appear.
The Summers day.
Perfects the Embryon blossoms on each spray,
The dogstar rains his maladies.
And robs the high and air-invading alps
Of all their winter suits and snowie s^alps,
When cherry trees enticing burdens bear,
Green plush the meadows wears,
^lora at her own beauty wondering stands,
When Flora lays forth all her pride,
When the sun gallops in his full career
On the back of the scalding Crab.
Now bright Andromeda's refulgent Sire
Shows to the world under his hidden fire,
Now Procyon, and the raging Lion swayes,
And Phoebus brings forth dry and parched days.
The shepherd tired with his faint flock does hie,
To find cool shades, or troubled current nigh
And rough Sylvanus thickets, while the shore
Becalmed stands from seas tumultuous roar,
The furious dog stars heat
Upon the parched corn long since has beat
With its fierce scalding influence, and made
The beasts to seek the spreading elms cool shade,
Now Cepheus plainly shows his hidden fires.
The dog star now his furious heat displayes
The lion spreads his raging ire,
The sun brings parched days.
The shepherd now his sickly flocks restores,
With shades and ^ivers, and the thickets finds
Of rough Sylvanus silent shores,
Are free from playing winds,
When Cancers star increases light,
And leng^hens ou^ the days.
Summer now of the dog star boasts,
Of angry constellations honored most,
From whose strong heat Egyptians still begun
To mark the turning circle of the sun,
When as the sun mou^ts on the lions back,
When Syrius does first appear,
The time which with a full hand to us brings,
All that was promised by the hopeful spring,
The laboring sun has wrought his track
Up to the top of lofty Cancers back.
The Icie Ocean cracks, the frozen pole,
Thaws with the heat of the cele^tial coal.
Sun.
Phoebus, Sol, Hyperion. The Father of the light.
The days illustrious eye. The lights bright chariot.
The worlds great lamp. Taper. The days great eye,
The burning stone of Anaxagoras. Days bright flame.
Sols blazing throne. Heavens Christmas candle.
The never dying lamp, taper, torch, candle.
Titans golden ring. Great Titans carre.
The good old Planet. The worlds surveyor General,
That Prince of light that takes his morning crown,
And in the Evening lays his glory dow^.
Phoebus burning throne. The days bright champion
Sols orient shrine. Greatest torch of heaven,
The bright surveyor of the heavens,
That each day goes his golden pilgrimage,
Whose flaming hair
Does every day gild either Hemisphere.
Days glo^ious Prince, the father of the year.
Fountain of light, heavens richest gem.
Heavens golden headed Charioter.
Lord of heat viceroy of nature, King of lights,
By whose male force is all we have begor.
The curled pa^e waggoner of heaven.
^mperor of light, King of Planets, Sovereign of the stars,
Monarch of days and years. The Persian Deity.
Father of winged time. The worlds surveying lamp,
Which with his hot steeds guides the winged day.
He who alone can tame
Those Steeds which from their nostrils vomit flame.
The tardie year I measu^e, I am he,
Who see all objects, and by whom all see,
D^yes lofty going flame. The King of flames,
Monarch of light, great Hyperions golden throne*
That opes the pleasant sweets of May.
That runs the glo^ious round. Unwea^ied traveller,
The Sovereign of heavens golden fires,
That h^th his forehead circled in
With many clear beams, and sh^rp pointed ray,
And drives the pu^ple chariot of the day.
Who in his flam^ng chariot rides,
And with perpetual motion time divides,
Great King of day, from whose far darting eye,
Night wandering stars with fainting splendor fl^^.
The worlds bright eye,
Careering daily once about the sky.
The lights bright chariot. Heavens burning Axle-tree.
The prince of planets with his locks of amber.
The glorious governor of day.
The bold fac'^ lamp. Phaebe's bright brother.
The illustrious sovereign of the day.
That has the guidance of the day.
Instated all alone,
Amidst the planets in his burning throne,
Distributeth abroad with large extent,
Light both unto the stars and firmament.
Whose heat and light,
Makes creatures warm and bright.
Great glory of the sky,
That gilds the streams with heavenly Alchimy.
That all the world does lighten with his ray.
Phe Pythian knight. Illustrious officer of day.
That strips the mountains of their snowie shirts,
The Ocean of light. The Persians shining God.
Phoebus bright chariot by Vulcan wrought,
The beam, and axle tree of massy gold,
On silver spokes, the golden fellies rolled,
Rich gems, and chrysolites the harness decked,
Which Phoebus beams with equal light reflect.
That eye of day,
That in twelve measured hours does survey
The moity of earth. Natures lusty Paramour.
Who by the clear extension of his light,
Chaseth from earth the impious sons of night,
Whose beams the various forms of things display,
Like multitude of figures wrought in clay.
Sun Rising. v. Morning. Sun Set. v. Evening. Surgeon.
That has some business about the building of the little house of man, whereof
nature is as it were the tiler, and he the plaisterer.

His gains are very ill got, for he lives by the hurts of the common wealth.

He differs from a physician, as a sore does from a disease.

He is a reasonable cleanly man, considering the scabs he has to deal with.

Swains. v. Shepherds.
That barb the fields and to their merry teams
Thistle their passions.
^^^ched all day with his own scalding heat,
^^ved with keen since the glory and delight.
^^motley meadows,
^^ich with their whistling hearten on their team,
All whose theme
^ of their oxen, and their team.
^^e piping lads that sound their sprightly strains,
^hilst they their fleecy troops drive o'r the plains.
Swannes.
Which claps her silver wings,
^^d in the sedges of Meander sings,
Which many a day.
^n the streams swelling breast has had its play.
^^d on the panting billows bravely rides,
^hilst Country lasses walking on the sides,
^^mire her beauty, and with clapping hands,
should force her leave the streams and tread the sands,
that add harmonious pleasures to the streams,
^^ffling their plumes, come gliding on the Lake.
The air resounds the motions of their wings,
^hen over plains they fly in ordered ranks
^o sport themselves upon Caysters banks.
^^at on Caysters bank when death does come,
^^^h sweetly sing an Epicedium,
That sadly sings
(...) mournful dirge to the silver springs,
^^hich careless of his song glide sleeping by,
^^ithout one murmr of kind Elegi^.
Swear.
(...) if they meant to unstar the spears with oaths,
^^at often names God in oaths, and only then.
Whose best of Rhetoric is a full mouthed oath with a grace^e grace.
V. Forms of protesting. Sweat.
^ds of sweat stand moist upon thy brow,
^ke bubbles in a late disturbed stream,
^^e watery bubbles of the painful* brow,
^face froth'd o'r with sweat,
^^ir bosoms bathed and steeped in frothy sweat*
Drowned in the native deluge of his sweat,
The sweat came gushing out from every pore,
And on his head a standing mist he wore,
Springs of sweat, did in his forehead rise.
Sweat embalms
His varnisht forehead.
Sweet smelling.
Zephyrus breaths not with a sweetergale,
Through groves of Sycamore.
A breath composed of odours. Sweet as Panchaian fumes,
As the sweet sweat of tosesin a Still,
Or that which from chased Musk cats pores does tril.
As the Almighty balm, of the early east.
Like the Sabaean airs, which as they fly,
Perfume with sweets the morning Majesty.
Like to the Phoenix nest, when she her wain
Of age repairs, and sows her self again*
Or when that balmy load she does transfer
Her cradle, and her parents sepulcher,
To Heliopolis, Apollo's Town,
And on his flamy Altar lays it down.
A place that breathed perfumes,
Her words embalmed in so sweet a breath,
That made them triumph both on time and death.
Whose fragrant sweets. Since the Cameleon knew
And tasted of, he to this humor grew,
Left other elements held this so rare,
That since he never feeds on ought but air.
Oh how the flowers pressed with their treading on them,
Strove to cast up their heads to look upon them,
And jealously the buds that so had seen them
Sent out their sweetest smells to come between them,
As fearing the perfume lodged in their powers,
If known, would make men quite neglect the flowers,
The nard breaths never so, nor so the rose,
when the namour'd spring by kissing blows
Soft blushes on her cheeks, nor the early east
Vying with Paradise ^'th Phoenix nest
As it, the nard expires.
Perfuming Phoenix like his funeral fi^es.
The winds of Paradise send such a gale,
More precious breath than which moves
The whispering leaves in the Panchaian groves.
Arabian wind, whose breathing gently blows
^^le to the violet, blushes to the rose,
^^ever yield an odor rich as this,
^hen the Phoenix from the flowery east
^^s the sweet treasure of her perfumed nest,
^^et as the proudest treasures of the east.
^^et as the Indian Cane. As flaming gums,
^^agrant as the morning rose,
^^t as Panchaian gums or Frankincense,
^myrrhe, nor Cassia, nor the choice perfumes
^untouch'd nard, or Aromatic fumes
^ hot Arabia does enrich the air
(...) more delicious sweetness,
(...) ever smelt the breath of morinng flowers,
(...) sweetened with the dew of twilight showers.
^ pounded amber, or the flowring thyme
^ purple violets in their proudest prime
^welling clusters from the cypress tree.
^sweet etc. As drops of balm.
^^st of odours, spice and gums.
^^fumes, that all the Arabian gums excells,
(...) spices that do build the Phoenix pyre,
^^en she renews her youth in funeral fires,
Whose sweetness does as far exceed
^bian sents, as they the fowlest weeds,
^^et as the Altars smoke, or as the new
^^lded bud swelled by the early dew.
Whose native smell
^ Indian odours does excel,
^ll the pleasures were distilled,
(...) every flower in every field.
(...) all that Hybla's hives do yield,
^^re into one broad mazer filled,
^^ereto added all the gums,
(...) spice that from Panchaia comes,
(...) odours that Hydaspes lends,
(...) Phoenix proves before she ends,
^ all the air that flora drew,
^ spirit that Zephyrus ever blew,
^ere put therein, and all the dew,
^^t ever rosy morning knew,
(...) all diffused could not compare,
With etc. As gums distilled from weeping trees,
Whose spicie smoke,
Perfumes the neighbor air, till it does choke
The greedy sense, sweet as the drops of balm,
As when soft west winds struck the garden rose,
A shower of sweeter air salutes the nose,
When with a sparing kiss and gentle power,
He unlocks the virgin bosom of the flower.
Whose odor fills the ambient air,
Like spice of smokes raised from sweet gums
With aromatic powders fraught,
By merchants from Sabea* brought,
That yield
A savor like unto the field,
When the bedabbled Morn
Washes the ears of corn,
Fetch all the spices that Arabia yields,
Distill the choicest flowers of the fields,
And when in one their best perfections meet,
Bring them to this, that so they may seem sweet.
Sweet sounding
The soft spring
Chides not the pebbles that disturb her course
With sweeter murmr, harmonious chime
She forced, when she touched her lyre.
The waves to leap above their cliffes, dull earth,
Dance round about the center, and creates new birth
In every element, and outcharms the fears,
Oh I could turn Cameleon, and live on this sweet air.
A tongue made up of harmony,
The hearers soul out at his ears enticing,
Charming the soul even to an ecstasy,
Striking a wonder in their ears,
It wrought an envy in the spears, Unexpressive notes*
Whilst every strain
Calls the soul into the ears* Taking all ears captive*
Which with a greedy listening fain
Would turn into the sound it hears,
Contending nightingales struck mute,
Drop down and die upon the lute,
Such time and measures Mercury did keep,
Then when he plya'd all Argus eyes asleep.
The ravished air such pleasure loath to loose,
With thousand echoes still prolongs each heavenly close.
Such breaths the dying swans give, as they ride
Upon Cayster, or Pergusa's glide.
Such music Orpheus made in hell,
When he wooed Pluto for Euridice,
And S^syphus sa^e listening on his stone.
Harmonious as the breath
Of dying swans, prophetic in their death,
Should but swans hear this well divided breath,
They listen would, and sweetly welcome death,
The ravished nightingales striving too high
To reach it would in emulation die.
Whilst the amazed ear,
^ands ravished such harmonious breath to hear.
So sung the Thracian poe^, when his songs
^asts, trees and stones attracts in following throngs,
Her voice the woods and rocks to passion moves,
Tames salvage beasts, the troubled rivers smoothes,
Detains their hasty course, and when she sings,
The birds neglect the labors of their wings.
Even so the dying swan with low raised breath,
Sings her own exequie before her death.
So Canens did bewail
Her late enchanted Picus.
The dying swan adorned with silver wings,
So in the sedges of Meander sings.
So sung the Sirens, when Ulisses fast
^as bound with kno^ty halters to the mast.
Gave accents in the sweetest strain,
That ever opened an enamoured vein,
Whose sadder tones enforc'^ the rocks to weep,
Enricht all neighbor ears.
Wooing the rivers from the springs to hear him.
Such Musi^k as it is said,
Before was never made,
But when of old the sons of morning sung,
While the Creator great,
His Constellations set.
And the well balanc'^ world on hinges hung,
And cast the dark foundations de^pe,
And bid the weltring waves their oozy channel keep.
Able to make the rocks to dance,
And surly beasts that through the deserts prance,
H^gh from their gloomy dens.
A song whose cadence does enthral.
All sense it reaches. In strains so rare,
That all the ^litting pinionists of the air,
A^tentive sat, and in their kinds did long
To hear some notes from his well timed song*
Had wise Ul^sses who regardlesse flung
Along, the Ocean when the Sirens sung,
B^t heard her song, he would to her fair eyes,
Offered his vessel as a sacrifice.
Or had the Sirens on the neighbor shore,
Heard in what raping notes she did deplore
Her buried glory, they had left their shelves,
And to come near her, would have drowned themselves.
And none that heard him wished his song an ending.
Such music did Arion make,
When as he rid upon the Dolphins back.
The prating Eccho's long
For repetition of so sweet a song,
All listening stood,
At those sweet aires which did entrance the flood.
And had the Thracian played but half so well,
His wife had ne^e returned back to hell,
Sounds, which by their delicious melody
Might ^ull, not Argus, but even Mercury,
Cho^cest accents be
Harsh echoes of that heavenly harmony.
Should such an holy song
Enwrap our fancy long;
Time would run back, and fetch the age of gold.
Nature that heard such sound,
Beneath the hollow round
Of Cynthia's ^eat, the airy region thrilling,
Now was all most won,
To think her part was done.
And that her reign had here its last fulfilling;
She knew such harmony alone,
Could hold all heaven and earth in happier union.
T^' attentive rock,
The rigor does of its creation mock,
And gently melts away; Argu^ to hear
The music, turns each eye into an ear.
Sounds which the P^nther a^,
And sets the wildness of his nature law:
A voice able to entrance the Panther, and command
Incensed winds.
Like sounds that breath upon a bank of violets.
The shades admiring stand,
And sacred silence to themselves command,
Whilst the heaped multirude with greedy ^are,
Throng. As if music from the spears
Did with their golden raptures swell our ears.
Can charm the spears, and rocks the heavens asle^pe*
Every sense makes have to be all ears,
And give attention to those pleasing aires,
To which the Gods may listen as to prayers
Of p^ous votaries, the which to hear,
^^mults would be attentive and would swear,
To make no noise.
^ willingly would bear deaths harshest doom,
To have her sing an anthem on my ^ombe.
A song,
Which can inspire the dull, and cheer the sad,
And to the dead can lively motion add,
Charming the crystal floods.
Had echo with so sweet a grace,
Narcissus loud complaints r^^urn'd,
Not for reflection of his face,
But of his voice, the boy had mourned.
A music so divine did pierce his ear,
As never yet the ravished sense did hear.
Like the sea nymphs in veigling harmony,
May sing a lullaby unto the spears.
Me thinks my ravished ear,
^^pt with the secret music that I hear,
A^^ends the warbles of an angels tongue,
^^sounding forth a sense-bereaving song.
Where the ear bathes in pleasing harmony.
With such excess,
Of grace and music to the ear,
As what it sung, it planted there, stroking the air,
Which stills the winds and makes the wild
Incensed bore and Panther mild.
Which floods have stopped their course to hear,
To which the spotted Lynx have lent an ear*
As st^ikes a wonder in all ears,
And works an envy in the spears,
Making the soul climb up into the ear.
Whose melody have made the spears to lay
Their heavenly lutes aside only to listen
To their more charming notes.
See how to hear thy sweet harmonious sounds
About thy craddle here are thronging round,
Woods, but with ears, floods, but their fury stopping;
Tigers, but tame, mountains, but always hopping.
Sph^ar-borne, harmonious sisters voice and verse,
Wed their divine sounds, and mixed power employ,
Dead things with imbreath'd sense able to pierce,
Such harmony make the seraphick quires,
With their immor^al harps of golden wi^es.
The melting voice through mazes running,
Untwisteth all the chains that tie
The hidden soul of harmony,
That Orpheus soul my heave his head,
From golden slumber on a bed
Of heapt Elysian flowers, and hear
Such strains, as would have won the ear
Of Pluto to have quite set free,
His half regaind Euridice.
See how the heavens rapt with so sweet a tongue,
To list to thine, leave their own dance and song.
To hear her warble,
Would move the rocks, and ravish marble.
Like softest music to attending ears,
Whose least breath brings from the spears their music,
charging each ear with insensiblenesse that did not lend
^t self unto them.
Making the soul plant it self in the eat.
Magic sound,
Which destroys without a wound.
If Orph^us voice had force to breath such musicks love
Through pores of senseless trees, as it could make them move
If stones good m^asu^e danced, the Theban walls to build,
To cadence of the tunes, which Amphions lyre did yield*
More cause for a like effect, at least wise b^ingeth,
O stones, O trees, learn hearing Stella sings.
Soul invading voice,
The very essence of their tunes when angels do rejoice,
Sweet as those dulcid sounds in break of day,
That creep into the dreaming bridegroomes ears,
And summon him to marriage.
Sweet in taste.
The purest honey sweet
That the Muses birds do bring.
To mount Hybla every spring,
No thing near so pleasant is.
As sweet and good
As the most costly and delicious food,
Which if but tasted does at once impart,
Both life and gladness to the cheared heart.
Like the sweet gummes that from electar trees
Distill, or honey of the laboring bees,
Like morning dew, that in a pleasant shower,
Drop pearls into the bosom of a flower.
To which compared honey is as gall,
Sweet as the Indian cane, as Hybla's trees,
Or roses b^lmy breath, which often delight.
The palates of the active bees.
Some star fled from the sphere, is melted there.
That mock
Madera's sugar, and the Apricock.
Passing in pleasant taste the drink,
That now in Candia deck Cerinthus brink.
Nepenthe. Ambrosia. Nectar. D^ops of balm.
Mummy. Elixir.
Swift.
As swiftly whitling as the whisking wind.
As swift as shafts fly from a parthian bow.
Swift as the sweeping stream, the winged arrow.
Swift as the winged thought.
W^^h nimble speed, scorning to touch the ground.
Swi^ter than an Hungarian ague, or english sweat.
The swifter courser did out swim the wind,
As lightning which one scarce dare say he saw:
With as much speed as Daphne fled, or Phoebus did pursue,
Swifter than forced ai^e. As the drumming pulse.
Swift as the breathed stagge.
So swift that in mine eye,
Lightning seemed flow, and might be taught to fly.
So Pluto d^ove when in his gloomy coach
He hurried Proserpine.
So fly the arrows from the twanging strings,
With no less speed, than if supplied by wings.
He vanished from our eyes,
As swiftly as a well driven javel in flies,
Or as a singing pellet from the sling.
As haw^a the fea^ful dove, or huntor swift,
Pursues the hare through Aemons snowie drift.
Swift as the rolling fire.
As the quick mo^ion of dislodged souls.
Swift as an arrow from a Cretan string.
As swift as Scythian shaf^s.
Both from the barriers start,
Whose nimble steps scarce touch earths upper part.
Their feet unwet the sea might well have borne,
Or unsuppressed stalks of standing corn.
Hippomanes and Atalanta ran with such a quickness,
His noiselesse wings by night, fly Morp^eus strains,
And with the swif^nesse of a thought attains, etc.
Fear wing's her feet, and love enfor^'^ his pace.
Swift as the cha^ed cloud, or flying wind.
As swift as grayhounds laid in with the hare.
With pace as speedy as the wind.
Their pace was flee^,
And thick they gathered up their nimble feet.
Their sails so wrought,
They cut a feather, and command a thought.
Swift as Camilla, who with nimble feet,
The tops of the unpressed corn could greet;
And on the swelling waves so go that they
Sunk no^, when she on them her weight did lay.
Quick as the eastern wind,
Sweeps through a meadow, or the nimble hind,
Or Satyr on the lawnes, or skipping roe,
Or well winged shaft sent from a Parthian bow,
Like gallant*stags, that as they scorned the ground,
Run from the sh^ill cries of the full-mouthed hound,
Nor swifter comes the messenger of heaven,
Nor winged vessel with a full sail driven,
Nor Myr^ha's course, nor Daphne's speedy flight,
Shunning the dalliance of the God of light, etc.
Swift as the foales conceived by the winds.
Swift as the fleeting air,
Fleet as the swift-wing'd moments, hours, minutes.
As if she had leapt into the chariot of the wind.
Swift as the flight of lightning through the air.
Swifter than whelpe-rob'd tigers, or the flight
Of lightning ore Apulia, where the fi^ld,
Unplough'd, no corn, but sl^ggish grass does yield,
Swifter than lightning, or the southern wind
Through Lybia's yiedling ai^e.
Swift as the Autolole's whose winged speed,
In running far outst^ips the swiftest steed;
Equal the winds themselves, and as they pass,
Scarce bend the standing corn, or sl^nder grass.
Outstrip the wind,
And leave the breathed heart behind.
More swift than motions self.
To this compared, slow
Fly stones from slings, and not so swift as she,
From Parthian bows, the winged arrows flee.
Swifter than winds, whose tardy plumes,
Are reeking waters, and dull earthly f^mes.
As Biscan darts, or shafts from Russian bow,
Swallowing the way. As the arrow from the Tartars bow.
Like arrows that outrun the hunting eye.
That on a winged whirle wind ride.
As the swift son of Euriale,
Who in his course was said to be so fleet,
To run ore rivers, and nere drench his feet.
Or on the land through well grown meadows pass,
Yet with his weight not once to bend the grass.
Swim.
Pace with the native stream the fish do keep.
To move the bodies oars.
Himself the oars, The pilot, and the boat.
To b^est the surge, and row himself
With his own arms. Himself the ship and wares.
B^ff^t the stream with lusty sinews.
Swine.
Tusked swine,
That foe unto the corn and vine.
The bristle-bearing beast.
The beast that first taught mortals how
To rip the earth with shared plough,
That with such pleasure can desire
To wallow in the dirt and mire.
The nasty cattle which the Jew
With so much hatred did pursue,
The beast which lovely Venus hates,
Remembering her Adonis fate,
And Bacchus from them does decline,
As the destroyers of his vine.
Sword.
A Millain hilt. Damasco blade. Toledo.
As good a sword, as ever rid on Gentleman's thigh.
Imprisoned weapon. Morglay. Excalibur. Durindana:
Swound.
Then grief contracts the soul, a sudden night
Invades the sense, and reaves the eyes of light,
The nerve forsaken joints all fail, cold ice
Freezeth the heart, with hope of death she lies
Deceived. Souls eclypse. Ecstasy. Counterfeit of death.
Sirens.
Those impes that with their charms,
Wooed wise Ulysses to his harms.
The rude sea grows civil at their song,
And ravished stars shoot madly from their spears
To hear their music. Great The^is train,
That on the shores do plain,
And trammell up their seagreen hair.
Acheloides. Those deathlesse powers,
Were with the Goddess when she gathered flowers,
Whom when through all the earth they sought in vai^
They wish for wings to fly upon the main.
That pathlesse seas might testify their care,
The easy Gods consented to their prayer.
Strait golden feathers on their backs appear,
But least that music framed to ^nchant the ear,
And so great gifts of speech, should be prophand,
Their virgin looks, and humane voice remaind.
Never man in sable bark sailed by,
That gave not ear to their sweet melody,
^ut the sly Greek,
They to the Temple went among the rest,
There where Aenarian waves that Isle invest,
Their faces with an oilie fucus spread,
Their lips so rosy, not with their own red,
Their necks and breasts shone with adulterate white,
^^re to the wast, the better to invite,
With painted eyes and tresses of false hair,
Which jointly bear off lust, the badge and snare,
Whom when Minerva from her shrine had spied,
She hid her eyes, and turned her head aside,
If I a goddess, nor in virtue fail,
^^ight of force or modesty prevail,
They shall not said she herein glory long,
^ly grief shall arm me to revenge this wrong,
New scarce departed from her T^mple door,
When scarce their feet had pressed the beachy shore.
Their legs united in a scaly hide,
And bones in finnes thrust out on either side:
Nor yet their former mind unchanged keep,
But hold themselves for monsters of the deep,
Who now upon the dancing billows move,
^ shes below the wast, and maids above.
Harmonious daughters of Calliope
Parthenope, Ligea, Leucasia,
T.
Talkative.
TY^ng his ear to no tongue but his own,
An ocean of words. That lions tail, tongue ever in motion.
That tyrant in discourse. Drum of the company.
That spend thrift of his tongue. Unthrifty babbler.
A pattentee of speech. Ingrosser of discourse.
Two grains of wheat in two bushels of chafe,
Such are his words.
Thinking silence commendable in nothing but a dead neats tongue, whose tongue
has a good turn when he sleeps. Too m^ of the mother in him.

Long winded monster, Crispinus, Hydra discourse.
Land remora, wordie prodigal. Speaking frying pan.
One that has got a patent for prating, and it were no less t^^^ to take his
purse, to speak a word in his company. A flood, a (...) Vollies, hail shot of
words, His tongue goes continually his erra^^ but never speeds, enough to make
a man's memory ache, with c^^^ing such dirty stuff into it. Able to speak far
more with ease, t^^^ any man can endure with patience.

One that drops out at his mouth whatsoever is poured in at ears.

That sows his words by sacks, whilst others do it by handfulls* rolling tongue.

They which converse with him run the same fortune which they which live by the
fall of Nile, there is no overflowing like that his words, a man cannot safely
give him audience, an head ach three days after is the least hurt he can take,
that but hears him ^^ter dinner.

Upon any occasion he will find a mouth, find a speech w^^^ will.

His talk at table like Beniamins mess, five times to his part.
Tantalus.
Hungry, whilst ripened fruit hangs by his lip,
Thirsty whilst water by his chin does slip.
Pelops great father. Allowed to feast with gods.
Admitted to the secrets of the gods.
Unhappy father of proud Niobe.
That made a bloody feast
Of his own son, and called the gods his guests,
From whom the long desired waters sl^p,
And caught at fruit, steals from his touched lips,
He that does daily dread,
The hanging stone, that hovers o'r his head.
Thrown headlong into hell.
Cause he the secrets of the gods did tell.
Tantalise.
As when beyond our greedy reach we see,
Inviting fruit on too sublime a tree,
As when the greedy dog sees that repast,
Which awed by the whip, he dares not taste.
A Tavern.
^ degree, or a pair of stairs above an alehouse,
There men are drunk with more credit and apology.
A broacher of more news, than hogsheds, sucked up here by some ^^gie brain, and
then sque^zed into a Comedy. The common ^^sumption of after noons, and the
murderer or maker away of a ^^nie day. The busy man's recreation, and the idle
man's bu^^nesse.

Teach.
^esson, Tutor, inform, instruct.
Tears.
The best expressours of true sorrows, the urine of the eyes,
^ad daughters of the eyes. The pearly floods,
The pearl, and crystal showers, the wine of love.
The balmy sweat of the eyes. The watery language of the ^^tys. Dumb Eelegy, the
numerous issue of the eyes,
The liquid amber. The lovers pleading eyes.
The watery orators, dumb persuasion, Rhetoric, eloquence
^^ll tide of sorrow.
The sadder straining of the melting eyes.
Wet badge of weak mortality.
The Plaintive floods, fruits of the funeral,
The brinie showers, sad tribute of the eyes.
Sorrows liverie, the dumb Ambassadors of grief.
Streams of liquid pearl. Soft dew distilled.
^ from the two crystal limbecks of her eyes.
Those moving agents.
Due tribute of the dead, watering those plants are sown in corruption.
The innundation, deluge of the eyes.
The issue of the pregnant teeming eyes,
The flood of pearly moisture.
The tributary drops of woe.
The pearly treasure of the eyes.
The eye-offending brine, sorrowful water,
The fruitful river in the eye.
The watery trappings, and the suits of woe.
The flushing of the galled eyes.
The p^ous beads.
False tears.
Such Tereus shed, when he Pandion sues
In Progne's name for Philomel.
So weeps the monster of the seven mouthed Nile.
Instructed tears.
Lovers Tears. v. Love. Tedious.
So many minutes as in hours there be,
So many hours each minute seemed to me.
Teeth.
Those ivory pales, which enclose a tongue made up of* harmon
Those ranks of orient pearls.
The pearlie pales, That hedge of ivory.
The ivory bounders of the tongue. The pearly row.
The ivory Precincts. The double pearly guard of speech.
The pearl-pott cullis, that adorns
The two leaved ruby gate.
The second sweetly fenced ward.
An heavenly dewed tongue to guard
Natures shedding knives.
Temperate. v. Abstemious
Content with natures courtesy.
His feast but hungers banishment,
That never refused.
The diet Curii and Camillus used,
Whose unbought cates please their unlearned throats,
That lives at natures cheap expense.
That feeds at natures charge.
Tempest.
The furious winds with one another scold.
Lightning is all our light, and it rained more,
Than if the sun had drunk the sea before,
Darkness lights elder brother, his birthright.
Chained o'r this world, and to heaven chased this light*
The seas are ruffled into billows. Eurus stiffely blew,
And high wrought seas with chafing foamie grew,
The tossing seas appear to touch the sky,
And wrap their curls in clouds.
Ambitious seas to gloomie heaven ascend.
Sails suck the falling rain.
Showrs join with floods.
The assailing waves the vessel rock,
On every rising wave,
Death sits in triumph and presents a grave*
The giddy seas do whirl, and pitchie clouds.
Obscure the sky, The wild Ocean knows no shore.
^e roaring surges rake the ratled shore.
^s thrust their waves upon the groaning shore
^^stle their backs and spit their angry foam.
The tempest raves.
^oops from the clouds, and cuffes the purple waves,
^e destinies sat dancing on the waves,
^^see the wrestling winds with mutual braves,
^^sume each other. The waves do knit their brow,
^he ruffled waves of the enraged sea,
Then every puff of wind blows up a grave,
^^thin the bosom of the angry wave,
Neptune then gathered clouds up from the Land,
^ighted the seas up, snatched ino his hand
Is massy trident, and aloft did toss
Of all the winds all storms he could ingrosse,
^ll earth took into sea with clouds, grim night,
^ell tumbling headlong from the cope of light,
The East and south wind justled in the air,
^oll'd waves before them.
With clouds did Jove heavens heightened fore head bind.
Then tyrannized the wrath of all the winds,
The floating ship was cuff'd from wave to wave.
Made the winds tennis ball,
^uch was the tempest when Ulysses lost
All his companions.
The waves and winds in mutiny.
O stempered waters, Jove drives his flock of clouds,
The stormy tyranny of winds,
The Ship is made the scorn of sea and winds.
Winds quick, winds up the waves, the billows rise.
Dark clouds ^oll up, and take day from our eyes.
With our laborious oa^s we ply,
Slice up the foam, and sweep blew waves on high,
The bow backed waves toss us up to the sky.
A storm whose blackness frights the sea,
Horror in triumph rides upon the waves,
And all the furies from their gloomy caves,
Hovered upon our ship,
Where howling trenches of self-drowning waves,
And stormy gusts throw up untimely graves,
Where billows with white foam show angry minds,
For not outroaring all the high raised winds,
The Dolphins that presage a coming storm,
Swiming on the waves, to teach us, none should dare,
Excepting fishes then to venture there.
When the distracted Ocean
Swells to sedition, and obeyes no law.
The storms speak loud,
And the astonished day does turn to night.
The seas are raised so high,
That waves do hang like tears in the suns eye,
That we, as in vast cataracts they fall,
Think that he weeps at natures funeral.
Such was the tempest in which Caeser sailed,
In a small bark from Greece to Italy.
Proud billows rise, and war against the skies.
The waves in crooked furrows flow,
As if that Aeolus and Neptune strove
For the seas empery.
The threatening Ocean spends his swelling spite,
The tenth wave rears the ship.
The Porpoise dance upon the swelling wave,
Whilst every billow is her sisters grave,
The angry tumults of the sea and skies.
Aeolus lets loose his uncontrolled breath,
Whose language threatens nothing under death*
The rudder fails, the ships at random driven,
The eye no object ownes, but sea and heaven.
The heavens begin to roar,
As they would split the massy globe in sunder,
From those that live above, to those live under.
The winds above, the water underneath,
Join in rebellion, and conspire death;
Each one becomes an Orator for life.
Their hands are busy, while their hearts despair.
The waves
With unresisted tyranny outbraves,
And threats to grapple with the darkened skies,
Whilst like to mooving mountains they arise,
From their distempered Ocean and assail
Heavens batlements. High tides do flow,
Whose brackish waves do lash the broken shore*
Seas smooth back rolled before with gentle breath,
In brissels set, now spits her foamy wrath.
A pitchy storm, wrapped up in swelling clouds,
^^ster, clad in a cloak of clouds, and lined,
^^^h thunder mufiled up the heavens.
^able air so muffles up the sky,
^^at the sad sailers can no light descry,
(...) if some beam break through their pitchy night,
^s but dread flashing of the lightning's light,
^^d with their top-saile tilt up at the stars.
The sea does rage and rore,
^^menacing to swallow up the shore.
The troubled waves in mighty mountains rise,
Threatening to spit their brine drops in their eyes,
The sea her billows musters proudly up,
and shoots them at the sun,
^^ if all elements, and all their power,
Were turned into one vowed destruction.
The ship with main mast bores the moon,
The troubled billows chasing with the shores.
The scolding winds
^ive up the knotty oaks.
The Ambitious Ocean swells, rages and foams
To be exalted with the threatening clouds.
The chiding billow seems to pelt the clouds.
The wind shakt surge, with high and monstrous main,
Seems to cast water on the burning bear,
And quench the guard of th'ever fixed pole.
^^ never did like molestation view
On the incensed flood.
Winds blow, as if they meant to waken death.
The laboring bark climbes up vast hills of se as
Olympus high, and ducks again as low,
As hell's from heaven.
A water combat on the sea, betweeen
Two toaring, angry, boiling billows, how
They march and meet, and dash their curled brows,
Swelling like graves, as if they did intend
Tentombe each other, ere the quarrel end.
Ulysses ships found not the seas more rough,
Nor the unhappy navy that from Troy,
Once with Aeneas sailed.
The sea is not more troubled than their breast.
All the tempestuous stars
Their Constellations join and on them pour
Their most malignant influence.
Sterope, Artophylax, The kids, Hyades, Orion.
Africus, Notus, Euroclydon. Tempestuous winds.
V. Dunnes storm. Sands Ovid. Metam. Lib. 11. p. 379. Virgil. 1. book a^nexed.
p. 535.
The frighted sea-calves sculk away and hide
Their quivering heads within the swelling tide.
The crooked Dolphins bristle up their backs,
Amazed to hear such loud voic'd thunder cracks,
And all those massy whales that brush the seas,
Dive down for fear to find the Antipodes,
The juggling sea god trusting to no shape,
Nor any transformation for escape,
Saddles his finny courser and does fly,
Followed by all his scaly infantry.
Doris and her gray daughters shreeking tear
From often their heads their seagreen locks for fear,
And Mellicertus speedier does fly,
Then when he fled his fathers cruelty,
(His snorting sea horse Triton does bestride,
Thrusting his shell-spurs in his brawny side, etc.
Temporizers
That shake hands with the unworthy times.
Running with the current of the S^ate.
A participle of the Present tense.
That danceth to the tune of fortune, and studieth
For nothing more than to keep time.
Terror. v. Fear.
Such terror, as when Jove his tresses shake,
And makes the earth and fixed stars though fixed shakes.
Such terror, as when Jove did drown the world,
Or Phaethon it burn.
Making every one to stand upon his guard,
And have a continual larum bell in his ear.
Thanks. v. Forms of Thanking. To Thaw. v. Melt.
To unknit, unfetter, unlock the ice.
The Pythian Knight
Does strip the mountains of their snowie lawns,
The crusted snow dissolves, and all those veins
Which frost had fettered up in Crystal chains,
Are now dissolved.
Theseus.
Aegeus glorious seed.
Great Narathon resounds his praise
For slaughter of the Cretan bull.
Vulcans seed
By him glad Epidaure beheld to bleed. Periphetes,
Savage Procrustes death Cephisia viewed,
Elusis Cercyons. Scinis ill endued,
With strength so much abused, who beeches bent,
And tortured bodies twixt their branches rent,
He slew. If we his years should number with his acts,
His years would prove a cipher to his facts.
Ariadne's faithless spouse.
That slew the monster of the Labyrinth,
And the Arthenians from their tribute freed.
Helens first ravisher.
Thieves.
Who daily mark
Those houses, which they plunder in the dark.
Thetis. v. Sea. Waves.
Doris fair daughter. Nereus fair issue.
The Queen of seas. The Goddess with the silver feet.
Fair Queen of waves. Achilles beauteous mother.
The fair Queen of the liquid plains.
The powerful Lady of the sea. Queen regent of the waves.
Out of whose spacious cisterne daily flow
Refreshing streams, which as they run do fill,
Earths duggs, the hillocks, so preserving still.
The infant grass. Fair pearl and glory of the sea.
Thighs.
The alabaster rocks. Supporters of the beauteous frame.
Soft ivory pillars. Well proportioned columns.
The sister pillars of soft ivory.
Thin.
Thin as burnt air. Thin as the starved chaps.
Thin as the unsubstantial ghosts.
Stretched to an airy thinness.
Thirst. v. Draught.
My tongue wants moisture, and my jaws are dry.
Scarce is there way for speech.
Water to me were Nectar.
Such was Latona's when the Lycian clownes
Denied her water.
No greater is the thirst of Tantalus.
Thought.
The still borne issue of the mind.
Silent discourse, the quiet creatures of the soul.
Tenants of the heart. Free inhabitants of the breast.
That know no prison. Free borne issue of the mind.
That are not subject to an human law,
Nor but of God, and conscience stand in aw.
The souls still language. The minds parliament.
Thunder v. Lightning.
Joves hitting shafts. Inevitable flame. Joves trident.
Cyclopian darts, shafts. The vengefull flame.
He thunders, and with hands that cannot err,
Hurles lightning. The three forkt shaft.
The breaking cloud rackt by the winds,
Hot from the cyclops anvile. Aerial tumults.
The throws and shrieking of the childbed cloud.
Whilst her hot issue from her cloven womb.
Tears out a forced passage. Loud Artilery of heaven.
Loud noises that torment the air. The voice
Of angry heaven, intrancing with its noise,
That rend the amazed firmament, and makes
The Affrighted rafters of the sky to shake.
The balling issue of the sulphury cloud,
That tears in pieces the wide cheeks of air.
Joves fire-breathing horse.
Wherewith dull earth, and wandering rivers quake,
Yea Stygian fens, and horrid dwellings shake,
Of horrid Taenarus, and Atlas bounds.
Heavens choleric, angry, chiding language.
Heavens arrows shot from the divided cloud.
The coughing, hoarse barking of the skies.
Heavens chin-cough.
Clouds roaring conflicts from their breaches throw
Darts of inevitable flames.
To Tie.
To knot, manacle, fetter, gyve, chain, infetter, lock.
Time.
The eternal clock. Swift old dotard,
Which glides away with undiscovered have,
And mocks our hopes. The nimble aged sire.
Swift speedy time feathered with flying hours,
Whose constant course does every thing devour.
That does unglosse the flourish set on youth,
And delves the paralels in beauties brow.
Whose slippery wheel does play
In humane causes with inconstant sway,
Motions swiftest measure.
The motion of the ever whirling wheel.
Devouring cormorant. That common arbitratour.
The general invader. That ever flying minute,
The moth of nature, and of a^t.
Natures book*worme. The shop and mint of change.
The universal Justice, that tries all things.
Untangler of all knots.
Who greedy to devour,
His own and all that he brings forth.
Is eating every piece of hour,
Some object of the rarest worth.
Truths aged father.
The most abhorred Stratagems of night,
Lurking in cavernes from the glorious light,
By him perforce are from their dungeons hurld,
And showed as monsters to the wondering world*
Whose absence all the treasury of earth
Cannot buy out. I^revocable time.
Not all
The wealth or treasures of the earth recall
One of his swift-wing'd minutes back.
The bald unbribed witness.
Timanthes.
The famous painter that allowed no place
For private sorrow in a princes face,
Yet that his piece might not exceed belief,
He cast a veil upon supposed grief.
Tomb. v. Grave.
The solitary vault. The marble monument.
The gilded marble, or the brazen leaves.
A stone to bear
Witness, that once we were.
The blind dark vault. The chest
Which harbors the pale ashes, sad dust,
The vault were the sad ashes lie.
The cool vault. The dark silent room.
The monumental vault.
The melancholy chamber of the earth.
The marble where we are.
Slaves to the tyrant worms.
Cold burden of our ashes. The gloomy cave.
That glorious trouble ore the grave.
The gorgeous palace of the dead.
Sad entertainment of the grave.
The dead's embroydered clothes.
The sacred vault where ashes proudly dwell,
And dead, as living do their pomp express,
In sumptuous tombs, like gorgeous palaces,
That sever the good fellowship of dust,
And spoil their meeting.
Unenvied mansions of the dead.
The gloomy house of death. Deaths silent mansion.
That often perjured stone bearing a lying postscript.
Where none can bribe impartial worms to spare,
Princes corrupt in marble.
Tongue.
The hearts Herald. The thoughts Ambassador.
The minds interpreter. The legate of the soul.
The best, worst dish* Great little member.
That shapes the air to words. Mother of speech.
Top.
Summit, crownet.
Torch.
Flaming pines, sputtering flames, oily pines,
Pitchy tapers.
Torment.
Strapado, rack, martyr, excruciate, grate, eat.
Torn.
Mangled, minced* scattered, shattered, shivered, anatomized
Tower.
Turret, arcenal, citadel.
Tragedian.
Whose angry muse does in her buskins rage,
And her long tragic robe does brush the stage,
Whose numbers thunder, and whose quills
Fresh drops of death at every word distill.
The (...) of Melpomene.
Traveller.
The curious exile.
Expert in all but home Cosmography.
That has seen much, but can discourse of more,
And with a pretty bold authority
Challenge belief, even when he tells a lie
Trees. v. Shade*
The shady screens: The leavy covertures.
The birds leavy cage,
With bushy crowns, and leavy hats.
Whose curled tops deny the heavens great eye
To see the stock they were maintained by.
The standarts of the woods. Muff'd with hoary moss.
Under whose shade the Nightingale would bring
Her chirping young, and teach them how to sing;
The woods most sad musicians thither hie,
As if it had been the Muses Castalie,
And warbled forth such elegiack strains
As struck the winds dumb.
That stretched their branching arms.
That give a welcome shelter to the beasts,
When scorching summer them with heat infests.
Tremble. v. Quake. Fear.
She trembles like a lamb snatched from the fangs
Of some fell wolf, that dreads her former pangs,
Or as a dove, who on her feathers bears
Her bloods fresh streams, and late felt talons fears.
So trembled Philomele in Tereus arms,
When she perceived her now approaching harms,
Like shaking corn, which waveth with the wind.
And like a misshap'd letter I do stand,
Which has been written with a trembling hand,
As the sea trembles, when light winds do blow,
O^ waving aspes.
Triton.
Whose shrill shell-trumpet seas and shores do hear,
His snorting seahorse does bestride,
Thrusting his shell spurs in his brawny side.
The scaly herald of the sea.
Whose shells loud blast
Blew floods affright, his figure to his wast
Presents a man, the rest a fish, before
His monstrous breast, the foaming furges roar.
Neptunes blew brother.
Triumph.
The laurel crowns their brows, they Io sing,
And to the captiol their trophies bring.
In ivory chariot rides
The glorious wardrobe of the victors show.
High palaces are now with garlands dight,
And smoking incense, turns the day to night,
Now the white victimes by the axe are slain,
And with their purple blood the pavements stain;
The captive kings more to increase the show,
Before the plumed horse do chained go.
The subjects by loud shouts their love do show,
Whilst all the way with sweetest flowers they strew,
The V^ctors Temple crowned with verdant baies,
The soldiers singing Io to his praise,
While in his ivory chariot drawn he goes
Into the temple.
v. May's continuation of Lucan. lib. 5.
Troy.
P^iams unhappy town. The ancient city of Laomedon.
Ten years assaulted by the angry Greeks.
Laomedons rich city. The God-built city.
Whose walls were built by the sweet harmony
Of Phoebus harp. Hectors native town.
Unhappy Pergamus. Distressed Ilium.
True.
Unquestioned as an oracle. Undoubted verity.
True as the voice of Jove.
The Pythia from the tripos never gave
A truer answer.
When this is false, then truth it self may ly.
Trumpet.
The martial trumpet gives the bloody sound.
That gived the cruel noise. The tragical Alarm.
A trumpetter is a man whose profession is not so worthy,
as to occasion insolence, and yet no man so puffed up.
His face is as brazen as his tumpet.
He is somewhat in the nature of a hogshead, shrillest
when he is empty.
No man proves life more to be a blast, or himself a bubble, and he is like a
counterfeit bankrupt, thrives best
when he is blown up.
Truth.
Times eldest daughter. Times wonted offspring.
Upon her head she wears a crown of stars,
Through which her orient hair waves to her wast,
By which believing mortals hold her fast.
And in those golden cords are carried even,
Till with her breath she blows them up to heaven.
She wears a robe enchast with eagles eyes,
To signify her sight in mysteries.
Upon each shoulder sits a milk white dove,
And at her feet do witty serpents move.
Her spacious arms do reach from east to west,
And you may see her heart shine through her breast.
Her right hand holds a sun with burning rays,
Her left a curious bunch of golden keys.
With which heavens gates she opens and displaies.
A crystal mirror hangs at her breast,
By which men's consciences are searched and dressed.
In her coach wheel Hypocrisy lies rackt,
And squinteyed slander with vain glory backed,
Her bright eyes burn to dust, in which shines fate,
An Angel Ushers her triumphant gate.
Whilst with her fingers, fans of stars she twists,
And with them beats back error clad in mists.
Eternal unity behind her shines,
That fire, and water, earth and air combines,
Her voice is like a trumpet, loud and shrill,
Which bids all sounds in heaven and earth be still.
Turnings.
Me^nders, writhings, wheelings, windings, esses, ma^es, whir^ings, whiskings.
Twilight. v. Evening.
Now to the day succeeds that doubtful light,
Which neither can be called day, nor night.
The wavering light. The doubtful close of day.
Nor had night spread
Her sable mantle, yet, though day was fl^d,
That part of day in which we might
Not speak a falsehood, though we called it night.
Tyrant,
Whose law is will,
By which they govern, spoil and kill.
That knows no bounds, but makes his powers his shores
Themselves esteem,
Made for themselves, and all the world for them.
Whilst heavens great law, given for their guide appears
Just and unjust, but as it waits on theirs.
Scruing up the pins of power too high.
Not cutting but ravelling out men's lives.
He seldom sleeps soundly, having blood for his bolster.
His fancy presents him with strange masks,
Wherein only feinds and furies are actors.
The fright awakes him, and he is no sooner glad that it
was a dream, but fears it is prophetical.
Having lived in other men's blood, he commonly dies in
his own.
As if he had a quarrel at all mankind, killing all he
comes near.
Who what they cannot gain
By fairer language Tarquin like constrain.
That can what soere he wills, wills what he can,
To whom it is enough to be guilty, to have power to be
guilty. Wanton cruelty, knowing no Horizon.
Punishing not so much for hate, or anger, as because he
felt not the smart of punishment.
Pleasing themselves in making others wrack, the effect
of their power. Whose liking was his justice.
Sporting themselves in pains, and making others prayers
the argument of their victories.
Disdaining to obey any thing but his passion, which he calls his mind.
Observing no formality but what passion suggests.

To whom the eloquence of hatred, has given revenge
the face of delight.
Able to teach Tiberius craft, and Nero cruelty.
His will is his God, and power his law.
A man that can be as ill as he lists,
And loves to be as ill as he can, and as much as any advancement can be got by
it.

The red eyes of strained authority.
That with their humor only can comply.
He keeps a constant kennell of blood hounds,
To accuse whom he pleases, which will depose more than men an suppose.
He leaves nothing to his poor subjects they can call their own but their
miseries.
Dancing pleasantly at the doleful Dirty of dying groans
Like Devils in flesh, antidate hell in inventing torments.
Epicurising on poor men's pains* Killing men for their wealth
^s the west indians kine for their tallow.
V. cruel.

V.
Vale. Valley.
WHere the mild whispers use.
Of shades and wanton winds, and gushing brooks,
On whole fresh looks the swart star sparely looks.
Embroidered o'r with quaint ennamell'd eyes,
That on the green turf suck the honied showers,
And purple all the ground with vernall flowers.
^ac'd with silver rills,
Encompassed round with gently rising hills.
V. Pleasant Place. Valiant. Valor.
Puissance, p^owesse, fortitude, chivalty.
The soldiers virtue, the soul of war.
A man made all of fire. Attemptive spirits.
^ndaunted, high, erected spirits,
The dead quake in their grave to think of them.
One that dare prop the sun if it should fall,
Dares grasp the bolt from thunder,
And through a Canon leap into a town.
One that dare die next his heart in cold blood,
That leads the fight, and lets no danger pass
Without improvement.
The fl^nts he treads upon.
Sparkle with luster from his arms,
As if in love with danger,
That life can sobetly despise.
Undaunted spirits that encounter those,
Sad dangers, we to fancy scarce propose,
That deride
Pale death, and meet with triumph in a tomb,
Who to pale fear,
Whispering danger never lent an ear.
That sells his life dear to his foes,
Whom dangers do encourage and invite
A spirit scorning justest fears. As if incapable of fears,
Who, when a foot, is mounted upon an high spirit,
Flying nothing more than the mention of flying,
The sweetness of life cannot so flatter the palate of the soul, as
make him swallow the bitterness of an eternal disgrace.
As the Indian for his gem does sound the stood,
He dives for honor in a sea of blood,
Glazing his valor in a crimson flood,
A spirit that has outgrown his years,
Trampling depressing fears,
Under his valiant feet, sets bravely on
The Front of danger,
'Twixt whom an fear there is an antipathy.
A spirit that durst war against the fates.
That dare set his naked breast
Against the thunder. Giving a Majesty to adversity.
Making time have it self to be witness of their honors* and o^
place witness to another of the truth of their doings.
Men of such prowess, as not to know fear in themselves, a^ yet to teach it
others that had to deal with them.
A courage apt to climb over any danger.
Observing few complements in matters of arms, but such as pro^ anger did
indite to him.
Giving as many wounds as blows, as many deaths as wound
That can face the murdering Canon,
When it blows ranks into the air like chafe,
A courage that knows not how to fear.
As full of spirit as the Month of May.
A spirit of greater confidence,
Than can admittance give to thoughts of fear.
Will fight until his thighs with dares
Be almost like a sharp quill'd porcupine,
Every gash he receives is a grave for him that made it,
That being angry does forget
He ever heard the nime of death.
An unaffrighted mind.
Didaining fortune with his brandisht steell,
Which smoakt with bloody execution,
Like Valors minion carved out his passage.
Bellona's Bridegroom, ushrinking spirit,
So daring that he would
Go on upon the gods, kiss lightning, wrest
The engine from the Cyclops and give fire
At face of a full cloud.
Looks like Apollo, raised to the worlds view,
The minute after he the Python slew.
An heart that scorneth danger, With a brain
Beating for honor* Like Eagles, his undazzeled eyes
Affront the beams, that from the steel arise.
That looks on his enemies with a kind of noble heaviness, no insultation.
A spirit that to sullen fear,
Whispering death never lent a gentle ear,
Like to the Roman Scevola dothstand,
Bathing in flames his Salamander hand,
And with a sober scorn does laugh to see
The worst incensed fates can do.
Amazing death, to see with dying pride,
In her pale chariot him in triumph ride,
That wear their lives at their swotds point,
Whose courage out-brave all fear,
If he do not live to enjoy the honor he purchases with his blood he leaves
the world his Executor, and to it bequeaths the rich inheritance of his memory.

Ready to disburse his life upon a good occasion.
Adventuring upon such designs, as have no more probability,
Than is enough to keep them from being impossible.
That never saw fear, but in the face of the enemy,
Hands of steel, and hearts of diamond.
His valor like the Fairy Arthurs shield,
Which but disclosed awaked the weaker eyes
Of proudest foes, and won the doubtful field,
A God-like courage, which no soft delight
Can weaken, nor the face of death affright.
A courage used to victory as an inheritance,
Having the Thracian God tied to their swords,
More than his body was to Vulcans chain.
A wise well tempered valor.
Those giants, death and danger,
Are but his ministers, and serve a master,
More to be feared than they, and the blind Goddess
Is led amongst the captives in his triumphs.
Veins.
Twining M^anders of the blood. The bloods meandting ^^sterne^
The purple channels of the blood.
The pipes of blood. The laces of the skin.
The purple conduit pipes. The crimson brooks.
Fair rivulets which for the food
Of living bodies bear the crimson flood
To every part, within the liver meet,
And there with kisses numberless do greet
Themselves, and as they through each other glide,
Make many knots, as if they took a pride
In their strange foldings, and themselves did please,
In their admired Apostomoses. The airy paths
Where ruby fairies dance their liquid rounds.
The crystal cases of the blood.
The azure chains. Purple Labyrinth.
Those saphyr colored brooks,
Which conduit like with curious crooks,
Sweet Islands make in that fair land.
The natural gates, and allies of the body.
The bodies purple lanes. A zure rivulets.
Venus.
The queen of beauty. Cyprian Queen.
Paphian Goddess. Loves fair Empress.
The power that rules in love* The Cyprian Deity.
The Queen of all that is fair.
She that governs chamber sport.
Mother of love. Loves golden arbitresse.
Cupids beauteous mother. Vulcans lovely wife.
Mars gamesome mistress. The sea born Queen.
The fair wife of the sooty blacksmith God.
Loves sportive mother. Loves lascivious dame.
The rosy Queen of love. Fair Erycina.
Great Queen of Paphos, and Cythaera's shrine.
The blushing Queen of love's
Drawn in a chariot by a team of doves,
^ut whips her doves, and smiling rides away.
^e froth-borne goddess. Laughter loving dame.
Tho C^idos, and bright Cyclads holds.
Tho Paphos with paired swans does view.
That from the Ocean draws her pedigree.
Neptunes Niece,
^ormed out of Ambergreece.
Who in her snowie arms
The God of rage confines,
Her whispers are the charms,
Which only can divert his fierce designs.
The pleasant Queen to Paphos thence retires,
Where stood her temple; there an hundred fires,
Whose fragrant flame Sabaean gums devoures,
Bl^ze on as many altars crowned with flowers.
Aged Anchysa's sprightly wife. Adonis goddess.
Aeneas beauteous mother. Idalian Queen.
Samian goddess. Acidalian mother. Bright Cyth^rea.
Verse. v. Poetry.
Weighty numbers. Victorious rhyme.
Revenge their masters death, and conquer time.
Soul-raping numbers. Soul entrancing lays.
Harmonious language.
Victory. v. Valiant. Triumph.
Victory does play upon their dancing banners.
Upon their swords
S^ts laurell'd victory, and smooth success
Is strewn before their feet.
Returns laden with spoils and honor.
Bright conquest does her silver wings display,
Perch't on their standards. Victory their inheritance.
Doubtful victory.
The wars success in doutful balance hunge.
Slow v^ctory in choice yet what to do.
With doubtful wings 'twixt either army flew.
Conquest with doubtful (...),
Hovered upon their lances.
The balances of fate did equal stand
For either Army. They fight on equal terms,
Fortune deliberates,
As not resolved yet what she should do,
On equal hopes they both engaged were,
And fury joined with fury equal held,
The balance straight, whilst doubting victory
Seemed not a while resolved whose to be,
Like to the mornings fight,
When dying clouds contend with growing light.
Vine.
The limber tree that yields the sprightly drink.
Bacchus uxorious tree. Grape charged tree.
That bears the juicie clusters. Life chearing tree.
-- Which cut, abounds
With budding gems, and prospers in her wounds.
Violent.
Like lightning crushing through the justled clouds,
As when a tempest raves,
Stoops from the clouds and cuffs the swelling waves,
Then like a Lybian lion round beset,
Armed with an high despair, and rage as great,
Careless of wounds and weapons, forth he goes,
And sells a loathed life, dear to his foes.
As heavens sulphurous flash
Against proud mountains, surly brows does dash,
As hasty powder fired
Does hurry from the fatal Canons womb.
Like that fierce bird, which from the yielding skies,
At Joves command with fiery lightning flies,
Of all the winged crew ordained the head,
For faithful service in his Ganimede,
Whom youth had native vigor forth have drawn,
Labors to try, which were before unknown,
And those soft winds that fan the lively spring,
Have taught with fear his new flights managing,
When he raised with a generous courage flies
Into the field, his strength to exercise.
Or like fell dragons, that like force do vie,
Is trained by hope of food, or victory.
Or like a lion new weaned from the teat
O^'s yellow damme, who goats intent to meat,
Spying in verdant fields resolves straight,
O^^ him his youthful jaws to sa^iate,
^^e them etc.
^ when south-winds on surly billows ride,
^hilst showry Pleiades the clouds divide,
^^as two shaped Ausidus amain,
^^s bellowing forth along the Apulian plain,
^hen he with rage and swelling floods abounds.
^^eatning a Deluge to the t^lled grounds.
V. Lightning. Thunder. Wind. Tempest. Violet. v. Primrose.
The violets which first appear,
By their fine purple mantles known,
^^d as the virgins of the year,
Thinking the Spring to be their own.
The purple offsprinsi^ of the prime.
The resolved fair Virgin.
Which contracted to her own bright eyes,
^eeds her lights flame with self substantial fuel,
^aking a famine where abundance lies,
Whose uneard womb
^^dains the tillage of good husbandry.
^nthrifty lovelynesse. Beauteous niggardnesse.
Profitlesse usurer, that trafficks with her self alone.
The seal that stamps no print,
Natures Apostate. June in her eyes, in her heart January,
The cruel fair one. Venus Anchorite.
That will leave the world no copy of her graces.
Fair cruelty clasped in her own embraces,
Who dead,
The worms must rifle for her maidenhead,
Like Daphne she as lovely and as coy.
Ulysses.
The Grecian wanderer. Old Laertes son,
He that so many men and Cities saw.
Wise Laertides. Penelopes grave husband.
^jax coorrivall for Ulysses arms. The politician of the Greeks.
That wisely stopped his ear,
And would not the enchanting Sirens hear,
Whose mates by Magic wine,
Circe transformed to the shapes of swine.
The well-tongued Lord of Ithaca.
Unchangeable. v. Firm.
Inviolable as the stygian lake,
Eternal as the book of fate,
That never knows change or date,
Like the unremoved rock.
Like to the Laws of Medes and Persians.
That knew no alteration. Beyond the reach of change.
Unhappy.
In whom
All stars conspire to make affliction perfect,
Far more than is
The common heap of humane miseries
His mother bore him to. Fortunes utmost spite
Pursues our actions. The blind goddess her tennis-ball.
Born under unpropitious stars, malignant influence.
Unthrifty planets ruled at his birth,
A sullen star was at his lucklesse birth,
The Lord Ascendant of the house.
Libra in his full aspect,
And cursed Scorpius with beams direct,
And Capricorn that rules the gloomy west,
His Horoscope with cruel rage infest,
Whose thread of life is spun
Of black and dismal wool. v. Miserable.
Unlearned. v. Ignorant. Fool. Unlucky v. Ominous.
Dismal, fatal, inauspicious,
Like to the omen of ill boding owls,
This nor Juno blessed,
Nor Hymen, nor the graces graced that feast,
The snake-hair'd furies held the sputting light,
From funerals snatched, and made the bed that night,
The ill-boding owl upon the roof was set.
Tereus and Progne with such Omens wed,
But neither Hymeneus usual words,
Nor cheerful looks, nor happy signs affords,
The torch his hand sustained still sputtering raised
A sullen smoke, nor yet though shaken blazed.
The event worse than the Omen,
Such Omens wa^ted on.
Orpheus his marriage with Euridice.
The funeral owl thrice rent.
The air with ominous screeches,
Such Omens waited on
Lascivious Myrrha to her fathers bed.
Unspeakable.
Though Phoebus should an hundred tongues bestow,
A wit that should with full invention flow,
All Helicon infused into my breast,
Yet could not this, for all this be expressed.
Had I as many tongues as Argus eyes,
As Xe^xes arrows that did cloud the skies.
As many mouths as Sybills had of years,
Or fruitful Gargarus has ripened ears, etc.
We may as well,
Descibe the joys of heaven, and pains of hell.
So vast,
That all the act, and power of speech is wast.
Voluptuous. v. Glutton.
Master of unexampled luxury.
Sardanapalus drowned in soft excess.
That follow passion and voluptuous sense*
That revel out their lavish days.
Like one of wise Ulysses foolish mates,
Sons of earth, enthralled to sense.
Dark, narrow souls which drowned in foggy flesh,
Do never dream of higher happiness.
Plunged in soft delights. Stues his heart in mirth,
Crushing the child of sorrow in the birth.
Whose flat delights on earth do creep and grow.
A soul lost in the flesh. Lethargick slumbering souls.
Lanke souls that in no other thing delight,
But what may please the Brutish appetite.
Melting away in pleasures wanton lap.
Licentious Libertines,
That practice in the present those delights,
Hereafter promised by the Alcoran.
Hard hearted evil men,
Who virtue think a school name, and no God
But abject pleasure.
Oyling the wings of time with unctious pleasures.
Melting down their youth
In different beds of lust, and never learn
The icie precepts of respect, but follow
The sugared game before them.
That treads the primrose path of dalliance.
Their bathes the juice of July-flowers.
Spirit of roses and of violets.
The milk of Unicorne, and Panthers breath
Gathered in bags, and mixed with Cretan wines,
Their drink prepared gold and amber.
Wedded to sports they were,
The Kallender for to divide his year,
Making with time, his gamesome pastimes try
Whether could show gretter variety.
That revel out the nights
In dalliance, and the day in loose delights.
Usurer v. Covetous.
That undoes those he has most interest in.
You are least beholding to him, when you are most obliged, and he is less
your friend, for the multitude of his courtesies.

Sits brooding ore his bags,
And measures time, by counting of his gold.
Vulcan.
The famous fiery Artisan. The president of fire.
The crook*leg'd God. Venus lame husband.
The cripple God. The sooty blacksmith God.
Lemnian God that in his fiery shop,
Hammers out thunderbolts on Aetna's top.
The God whose face is smudg'd with smoke and fire.
The God with collied cheeks and sooty beard.
The poultfoot God. Aetna's limping smith.
The white armed Goddess, sooty son. Slow pac't God.
Vulgar.
The many headed beast. The unconceiving crew.
The shallow headed, weak brained, multitude.
Lay-understandings. Lowest dreggs of men.
Uncertain tide of people. Unlearned throng.
Illiterate crowd. The giddy headed swarm.
Humorous tumults. Frantic company.
Which like so many empty pitchers may
By the lugg'd ears be carried any way.
W.
Wander.
Rove, roame, range, random, vagary, gadde, flitt.
which run a planetary motion.
By wandering stars and not by compass sail.
Ulysses did not wander more from ^thaca.
That have no certain station.
War.
The sulphurous breath of war.
All destroying fury.
Where drums and trumpets and loud canons talk,
In an affrighting language.
Neglected plowes want laboring hands,
Janus gate stands open. Death ha^h his plenteous harvest.
The soldiers thronged could scarcely wield at all
Their killing hands, the slain could hardly fall.
Supported so, the number did oppress
The dying people, and dead carcasses
Encreast the slaughter falling heavily.
On living bodies. Where stand the groves of spears.
Three sisters spedy hands cannot suffice,
For breaking threads, has tired the destmies.
When now the horse came prancing nigh,
The ground did shake, and clouds of dust did fly,
As great as Thracian whirlewin is blow about,
Ore the skies covered face, and darkness wrought.
Shrill cornets then began the air to wound,
The alarums beat, and all the trumpets sound,
The noise and shout of souldlers pierce the sl^^e.
Poor soldiers stand with fear of death dead struck.
All hands are bathed in blood.
And with a purple stream the thirsty soil
Oreflow'd, where all besmeared in blood there lies,
A throng of carcasses, wose livelesse eyes
Are closed with dust, and death.
In a well ordered body stood
Erected pikes, like a young leavelesse wood.
Where drums and trumpets give such fearful sounds,
As they would shake the clouds unto the ground.
Each body seemed but as a sheath
For his next neighbors sword.
Where an ounce of honor, costs a pound of blood.
Where dead and wounded, pave the bloody field,
Strewn with the slaughtered carcasses.
Where brandisht ensigns seem to brave the day.
Where in one shrick another shriek is drowned,
And blood for blood incessantly does call,
From the wide mouth of many a gaping wound,
Where drums and trumpets do awake the day,
Muffled in mists. Where the blunted sword,
Does rather break than wound,
Cloying the greedy jaws of death.
The conquered field sown round with carcasses.
There they fell,
And made their clashing armor ring their knell.
The crimson paths of war paved all with corpse,
The bloody harvest where whole threaves of men,
The reaping sword sythes down.
Where men are drowned in showers of darts
Shafty, armed clouds.
Steele-glistering spears the very fields affright,
And all the camp seems fired with armor bright.
Where towers,
Prostrate themselves before the iron showers.
Where is spent
Many a cold December, with no tent,
But such as earth and heaven makes.
The rugged paths which those men tread,
Which with a barbarous pride reckon the dead,
And thence their glories number.
Where runs the scarlet flood,
Dogged war bristles his angry crest,
And snarleth in the gentle eyes of peace,
Thousands like sacrifices in their trim,
Unto the fire-eyed maid of smoaky war,
All hot and bleeding do they offer up.
And mailed Mars does on his altar sit,
Up to the ears in blood.
The naked infants spitted on the pikes.
The wounded steeds
Fret fetlock deep in gore, and with wild rage,
Yerk out their armed heels at their dead masters,
Killing them twice, and tread a quagmire made
Of mangled brains.
No blow is dealt, that leaves not death behind it:
Where friends depart, and never bid farewell.
Where dying mouths do gasp forth purple breath.
Blades imbrued
In rivers sprung from hearts.
Now horse to horse, and man is joined to man,
So strictly, that the soldiers scarcely can
Their adversaries from their fellows know.
The grassie pavements stood,
All moated over with a crimson flood:
War that blood sucking cormorant,
From battered caskes with every envious blow,
The scattered plumes fly loosely here and there,
Which in the air does seem as drifts of snow,
Which every light breath on his wings does bear.
The child of malice, and revengeful hate,
That impious good, and good impiety.
Warm their cold swords in blood of enemies.
So thick their blows,
No wound one sword unto the other owes.
War, whose angry feet shake towns and towers asunder.
An iron cloud, heavens angry face does hide.
There stood
A mount of bodies in a moat of blood.
The dikes ore filled with slaughter, while the blood
Of men and horses make one purple flood,
As if in nature they had been the same,
And from the wounds of slaughtered Centaures came.
Each one plies deaths fatal task, the swords sad work.
Pikes, bills and darts, seemed as they stirred or stood.
A mooving forest, or a standing wood.
Drowning their swords in blood.
Striking so thick, as if that every blow would fain have been foremost.
Making the earth to groan under their furious burdens*
The horses angry in their masters anger, with love and obedience, brought
forth the effects of hate and resistance and with winds of servitude, did, as
if they affected glor,

The earth wont to bury the dead, is now it self buried with deabodies.

In one place lay disinherited heads, dispossessed of their natural seigniories,
there lay arms, whose fingers yet moved, as if they would feel for him that
made them feel, and legs, which contrary to common reason, were made heavier
by being discharged of their burdens.

Many first overthrown had the comfort to see their murderers over run them to
Charons ferry.

Where terror was dect so bravely, that the eye,

With delight had scarce leisure to be afraid.

Where each sword makes spacious room before it,

Like a wanton rich man, that throws down his neighbors house, to make
himself the better prospect.

The horses with open nostrills breath war, ere they can see an enemy, and now
up with one leg, then with another, seeming to complain of nature that she
had made them any thing earthy.

Their swords like cannons, battering down the walls of their armor, making
breaches almost in every place, for troops of wounds to enter.

The bloody armor seemed to blush, it had defended its master no better.

Making many windows in their armor for death to come in at. Bleeding in such
measure, as if they meant to lend Charon a flood, to ferry ore their departing
souls.

The cannons spit their iron salutation*
With bullets wrapped in fire,
They make a shaking feavour in the walls.
The sleeping stones
By the compulsion of the ordinance
Are raised from their fixed beds of lime.
Now death lines his dead chaps with steel,
The swords of souldiets are his fangs.
The summer dust is laid with showers of blood.
Tearing the clowdy cheeks of heaven,
With roaring bellows from the iron mouth
Of loud voic't cannons.
V. Dubartas The vocation.
Ovid Mat. lib. 12, Centaures Lapithae.
Virgil. 4. last books Aeneids.
Lucan by May translated.
Civil war.
To distain
In their own bowels their victorious swords,
Where kindred hosts encounter.
Known ensigns, ensigns do defy,
Piles against piles, eagles against eagles fly,
Like those on the Aemathian plains.
Like the Serpentine brood by Cadmus sprung.
Like ensigns all, against like ensigns band,
Bows against bows, the crown against the crown,
Whilst all pretending right, all right throw down.
Convulsions of the state. Untuned drums.
That viperous worm,
That gnawes the bowels of the common wealth.
The trumpet gives uncertain sounds,
Where both most loose, though but one party win*
Wast of the body.
A wast as strait and clean
As Cupids shaft, and Hermes rod,
And powerful too, as either God.
Strait as Circe's wand.
Water.
The crystal regions. Issue of the springs.
The liquid crystal. Flowing deity.
Crystal Nymph, liquid glass, melting crystal.
Shaking crystal, impartial mirror, undeceiving glass.
Watch Wake. v. Sleep.
As the keen dogs keep sheep in coats,
O^ folds of hurdles bound,
And grin at every breath of air,
Envious of every sound.
Sleep wants weight, to close a wink.
Light does divorce
The low and upper lids. His eyes resume their charge.
On leaden wings sleep from him flew.
My weakened s^nces had unlockt mine eyes.
Wave.
Billows, surges, flows, the rolling hills.
Frothy mounts. Liquid mountains.
The foamy wrinkles of the main.
W^try heaps. Neptunes watery brissells.
Rolling trenches, moving mou^tains.
The swelling clusters of enraged seas.
Thetis glassie mountains.
Those sparkling furrows of the swelling tide.
Weave.
Arachne's fatal, yet deserved doom,
Nere gave such glory to Minerva's loome,
As did her weaving this, that did but show
Her art was great, this showed her Goddess too.
Such as Arachne on her loome,
Wove before she had her doom.
Weep. v. Tears.
I will weep a flood*
Deep as Deucalions, and again the Chaos
Shall muffle up the lamentable world,
In sable cloaks of grief and black confusion.
Then with the pressure of her eyes she freed
One tear from prison.
The trickling tears ore flow the blubberd cheek.
The flowing eyes send out their numerous tears.
To pour out the soul at the eyes.
So wept Deucalion, when he saw the state,
And face of nature deadly desolate.
With tears which might have made another flood,
Bathing her cheeks in tears.
To shead
From drowned eyes vain offerings to the dead.
So wept the Heliades,
When they bewailed their brother, so their trees,
Yet amber weep.
Such was Ocyrrohoe's tears, and such her care,
When she perceived her self become a mare.
So wept old Inachus, then, when he found,
His unfound Io.
So wept the skilful Centaure, when the fair
Ocyrrhoe his daughter turned a mare.
Warm tears did from her charged eye-springs drain.
So wept Andromeda, as to the rock
She chained lay.
So Cyane when thawed into a lake,
She mourned the ravishment of Proserpine.
The drops of rears at every accent fall.
Grief dissolved eyes. Eyes drowned in tears.
Sorrow impatient to be slowly uttered,
^^ her often stopping speeches, poured it self in tears,
Eyes big with tears.
Like a proud river peering o'r his bounds,
^o water the plants, the roses and lilies in the cheeks.
My cheeks are guttered with my fretting tears.
^o launder cheeks and handkerchiefs in tears.
So wept Pandyon when to Tereus he
Gave Philomel. Scarce could he bid farewell,
^obs so engage his troubled speech.
Such tears wept myrrha now become a treee,
Abortive tears flow from their spring.
So wept old Hecuba, then when she washed
The wounds of her beloved Polyxena,
And saw dead Polydore float on the Main,
To mellt his grief in tears,
Washing her eyes, with their own native tears,
Fresh streams of loves salt flood,
^illowed on her soft cheeks.
To drown the eyes in tears. Steep the eyes in tears,
Make Limbecks of the eyes. The melting thawing eye.
The deluge of her melting tears disgrace,
And drowned the world of beauty in her face,
Hard was it to descry
Whether the drops were clearer or her eye.
Tears fearing conquest to the eyes might fall,
An innundation brought, and drowned all,
There remained a feature
Made sorrow sweet placed in so sweet a creature,
Showring eyes.
Run floods of sorrows. Distill the soul in tears.
Channel their cheeks with tears.
To drop the brain in tears.
His eyes look through his tears,
A flowing tide of tears gush from his eyes,
Tears wrapped in sighs.
With eyes that threatened they would drown his face.
Eyes great in labor with their tears.
With rainy eyes.
Write sorrow on the bosom of the earth,
And with the southern clouds contend in tears.
Lik one was born in April.
The falling tears fret channels in her cheeks,
The eyes
Drop faster tears than the Arabian trees.
Their medicinal gum.
Down from his eyes a shower of tears did flow,
Like water running from the melted snow.
So Ariadne left by Theseus wept,
Whom she seeks,
Whilst showers of tears made furrows in her cheeks.
Mine eyes do flow
Like Nilus when it scorns the opposed shore.
Tears the best
Expressors of true sorrow speak the rest.
D^opping his tears upon one place,
As if he meant to fret himself a grave.
To spend the pearly treasures of the eyes,
His eyes out flow the ocean.
To weep for joy. v. Lovers Tears.
Have you beheld an April shower
Send down her hasty bubbles, and then stops
Then storms afresh? through whose transparent drops,
The unobscured lamp of heaven conveys,
The brighter glory of his sparkling rays,
Even so upon her blushing cheeks resided
A mixed aspect 'twixt smiles and tears divided.
Welcome. v. Glad*
More welcome than was light,
To the disordered chaos.
Welcome as are the ends unto my wishes.
Nay far more welcome than the happy soil,
To sea scourged Merchants after all their toil.
Kings meet Queens.
So Cleopatra met Mark Antony.
So soft streams meet, so springs with gladder smiles
Meet after long divorcement made by Isles,
When love the child of likeness urges on
Their crystal waters to an union.
Welcome as quiet rest
To one by pain and want of sleep oppressed.
Health to the sick, drink to the thirsty soul.
Is not more welcome. As is the journies end
To weary travelers.
Ulysses after all his toil at sea,
^as not more welcome to Penelope.
The scorned beggar could not entertain
With greater joy, should he a Kingdom gain,
His unexpected fortunes.
West.
Proud pillars of Alcmena's son,
The Hesperian Vale. Sols wavie bowers.
^^ low Hesperian vales those pastures are,
Where Phoebus horses on Ambrosia fare,
Here Titans panting steeds his chariot steep,
And bath their fiery fetlocks in the deep.
Tartesian main. Sols descent.
Hercules pillars, Great Alcides spires,
Where Joves great son his pillars rear.
^ols watery bed. The western streams,
Where weary Phoebus drops his fading beams
Gades. Titans western valley. Iberian deep.
Tartesian shore.
Where furthest Ganges girdles India.
Whale.
Those moving rocks. The floating mountains of the sea.
The living Islands of the sea. Swimming Delos.
The swarthy tyrant of the Ocean,
Such was that Monster Perseus once did slay,
Rescuing from him the fair Andromeda.
Such was the monster angry Neptune sent
To Troy, as a revengefull punishment,
Which great Alcides slew,
That swim in a sea of waters, and have a sea of oil swimming in them.
As a gallie with forefixed p^ow,
Rowed by the sweat of slaves the sea does plow,
Even so the monster furroweth with his breast
The foaming flood.
Whisper.
The language melted in the ear.
White.
As Venus Doves, as mountain snow,
White as the driven and untroden snow,
Before the moist and thawing Auster blows,
White as the Bull in which
Jove did Europa court. As drifts of winter snow.
As spotless ivory. As Albanian snow,
Or milk white swans that breast the streams of Poe,
Not Pelops shoulder whiter.
Flora ravished with the sight,
In emulation made all lilies white,
All other whites but shadowings to this.
VVhiter than morning milk.
White as the flower,
That Juno's milk did spring the silver lily,
Whiter than Laeda's swan, or bleached snow,
Whiter than was the fair swans downy feather,
When Jove and Laeda lay in bed together,
Like new fallen snow upon untroden mountain,
As white as is the nectar*stained way
The restless sun by traveling does wear,
Passing his course to finish up the year.
VVhiter far,
Than Towers of polished ivory are.
So white it is.
Snow is an Ae^hiope, if compared to this,
Not the fairest Laeda's swan,
Nor the sleekest marble can,
Be so smooth and white for show,
As her lilies, as her snow,
More white than snow
Which on cold winters face does grow.
More white than Neptunes foamie face,
When struggling rocks he would embrace,
There Laeda's swans her feathers mews,
White as the spotless Ermine. As unsum'd snow,
As that congealed snow.
The cast wind hangs on Taurus brow,
White as the Aethiops tooth, as the fanned snow*
That Is bolted by the Northern winds twice o'r,
In whose comparison all whites are ink,
To write their own reproach.
As new fallen snow.
Or silver swans that trace the banks of Poe,
VVhiter than Scythian snow,
Which Jove does as his pattern view,
When he would give his silver flakes their true
And proper tincture, which the lilies make
Their sampler, when their native white they take.
Whore.
A parcel of the damned family.
^n Advowson that has many incumbents.
Give her thine, and she has a maiden head,
Whose eyes speak charms
Embracing makes loose circles with her arms,
Whose looser glowing rays,
Would thaw the frozen Russian to lust,
And parch the Negro's hotter blood to dust.
^oyson'd Marmalad box. Burning temptation.
^tock vermin. Tear sheets.
No way good, but that openly bad,
The quiver open for every shaft.
^ustina, Thais, Helena, Lais, Clytemnestra, Tullia.
^ppia, Catulla, Iberina, Messaline, Inachia.
^lesina, Lydia, Chloe, Lesbia, Naeera, Phryne.
^hrysis, Glycerium, Pasibula, Pamphila, Bacchis.
^ilotis, Philenium, Sylenum, Gymnasium, Delphium.
^lematium, Erotium, Philocomasium, Acrotelleutium.
^asicompsa, Phenicium, Adelphasium, Anterastilis. Phro^esium.
Her self is both Merchant and Merchandise, selling her self for
^ofit, and has pleasure into the bargain.
Her love is a blank wherein she writes the next man that tendereth is
affection.
Like the common road, ready for the next Passenger.
Her eyes like burning glasses inflame their objects.
She writes chracters of wantonness with her feet as she walks.
VVanton temptations ly in the language of her gesture and be^aviour.
She ties her self in marriage to one, that she may more freely stray ^t to
many.
She uses her husband as an hood, casts him off in the summer
^^ prosperity, and puts him on for a cover in adversity.
^ost shameless, when her deeds are most shameful.
Wicked. v. Forms of dispraising.
^^at has practiced villainy from his Cradle.
And from the dugge sucked mischief more than milk.
The gallows was all the inheritance he was born to. The ba^ scum and spawn of
fiends, doing such things as might the De^ shame.
Which if in hell no other pains there were,
Makes me fear hell, because he must be there,
Who with sins of all kinds as familiar be
As Confessors, and for whose sinful sake,
School new Tenements in hell must make,
Going beyond all examples of others, as if they scorned to be holden to them
for their damnation.

Monopoly of vice, Hieroglyphick of all ill.
That have contracted in a soul the body of all mischief, one tha^ has in him
all the ingredients of wickedness., Such an one, as h^ enemy need not to wish
him worse than to be himself.

Such another would sink all mankind.
Replenisht villain, Who is no less
Than the perfection of all wickedness.
Wilderness.
Deserts where none make stay,
But savage beasts, or men as wild as they.
winds v. Aeolus.
Gusts, blasts, puffes, Aeolian scouts, Aeolian slaves.
Heaven-fanning exhalation. Heavens fan.
The whisking brooms of air.
The thundering Skies with their incounters rock,
Which with their dusky mantle sweep the air.
And earth and seas, The brushing beesomes of the air,
Which loose submit to no command,
Perplex the clouds, with stern encounters roar,
And strike forth ^lames,
That whirl about in their uncertain sphere,
And ride their unknown circuit every where.
The Astraean sons in swift incursions join,
Tossing the troubled air and Neptunes brine,
That rake the breaking clouds.
The hollow flood of air, in Zephyrs cheeks,
The tatling bellows. Tatling gossips of the air.
Loud noises that torment the air.
Chill breaths
Fly from their rockie den and blow,
As if they meant to crack their swelling cheeks.
Whose tardie plumes
^ereeking waters, and dull earthy fumes,
^^at from the troubled womb of earth,
^here they receive their undiscovered breath,
^eak out in wild disorders, till they make
Has beneath his shaking load to quake,
^^e quarrelling winds that deafen unto death,
^e living and the dead, vvaken to breath.
Wine.
Which will disengage
^^ humane thoughts.
^^e juice of the bewitching grape,
^^e lusty blood drawn from the youthful vine,
^^e sprightly liquour of the spreading vine,
Those floods of light,
Which with their sparkling streams,
Darting diviner graces
Casts glory round our faces,
And dulls the tapers with Majestic beams
^p^eez'd from the lustful cluster of the vine,
Delicious grapes, surprising juice. Frolic cups.
Whose dancing sprightly bubbles,
Defy degenerous fears and the dull troubles
Of poor afflicted hearts. The inflaming blood
Of generous grapes.
Wings.
Feathered sails, plumed oars, feathered oars.
VVinter.
When Isicles hang by the wall,
And Dick the shepherd blows his nails,
And Tom bears logs unto the hall,
And milk comes frozen home in pales,
Then blood is nipp'd and ways be foul.
And nightly sings the staring owl,
When all aloud the winds do blow,
And coughing drowns the Parsons saw,
and birds sit brooding in the snow,
And Marians nose looks red and raw.
When roasted crabs hiffe in the bowl,
And nightly sings the whoopping owl,
When we can see nothing but a pale Sun, and a thread bare ^^ath.
When roping Isicles hang on the ears,
When Capricorns cold Tropic lengthens night
And old men tell their tales, as by the fire
They tossed themselves.
The Sun to us a niggard of his rays,
Revelleth it with our Antipodes.
The years cold and decrepid time,
When Flora's self does a freez jerkin wear,
The springs by frost
Having taken cold, And their sweet murmures lost.
The Evening of the year. Old age of the year.
Winter storms do crisp the hills,
The abstract of the iron age.
Boreas congeals the snow, and bears the earth with hail,
When in the air winds meet with such a shock,
That thundering Skies with their incounters rock,
Then comes old winter void of all delight,
With trembling steps, his head or bald, or white,
The leavie branches, then put off their green.
The snowie dotage of the year,
When downie snow did make the fields look old.
Jove his cold Javelin throws
Upon the earth, and whites it all with snows,
When floods embrace the snows fair tender flakes,
As their own brood. When hardly feed the flocks,
And Isickles hang dangling on the rocks,
When Hiems binds the floods in silver chains,
And hoary frost has candied all the plains,
When every barn rings with the threshing flails,
And shepherds boys for cold do blow their nails,
Which with many a storm.
Beat the proud Pines that Ida's tops adorn,
And makes the sap leave succourlesse the shoot,
Shrinking to comfort the decaying root,
Divorced leaves then carpet all the ground,
Winter does the earth array
In suits of silver gray, when night and day
Are in dissension, night locks up the ground,
Which by the help of day is often unbound,
The winter comes and makes each flower
Shrink from the pillow where it grows.
And the intruding cold has power
To scorn the perfumes of the rose,
When seas are fettered in cold chains of ice.
Wrincles the beauty of the fields,
When we have pigmie days,
Hiems locks up the rivers with her icy key,
Phoebus lamp to our horizon low
The shortest days, and coldest does bestow,
From Capricorn cold winter glazed the floods,
And pur^'d with frosts the fields and naked woods,
Every thing has now
His courser nature on winters rough brow,
And Boreas blast with envious have, rends every tree,
D^sle^ves each twigge and bough,
When trees put off their leavie hats
In reverence to old Winters silver hair,
When every hoary headed twigge
Wears his snowie periwigge,
When every bough
Wears on his head a cap of snow.
When watery Pisces cools fair Phoebus side,
The frost
Candies the grass, and casts an icie cream
Upon the silver lake and Crystal stream,
Heavens archer arrows every where bestows,
Headed with ice, feathered with sleet and snow,
Winter has scaled the crannies up with frost,
And crusted all the grounds.
V. Cold, Frost, Ice, Snow.
Wise. v. Learned.
Crowned with wisdoms rays. A mind
From earth and foggie ignorance refined,
A knowing soul.
Who high in knowledge sir,
From earth and foggie ignorance refined,
Wisdom is centered in his breast from whence
She draws the lines of her circumference.
Witch.
Sycorax, Canidia, Circe, Medea, Perimede S^mmetha,
Meroe, Dypsas, Sagana, Vei^,, Folia, Maegae^a,
Which cursed dew from the unwholesome fenne,
Brush off with ravens feathers. Pythonissa, Erict^^.
Company for toads, Beetles and Bats.
That can control the moon, cause flows and ebbs,
Whose exercise
Is secret murder, sullen tragedies;
Her drink the blood of babes, her dainty feast,
Men's marrow, brains, guts, livers late deceast.
The mumbling Beldame muttering her charms.
On the corner of the moon,
Hangs a vaporous drop profound,
I Will catch it ere it come to ground,
Which distilled by Magic slights,
Shall raise artificial sprights*
Thrice the brinded cat has mewed,
Twice and once the hedge pigge whin'd,
Harpier cries, it is time, it is time.
Round about the cauldron go,
In the poisoned intralls throw.
Toad that under the cold stone,
Days and nights have thirty one.
Sweltered venom sleeping got,
Boil thou first in the charmed pot.
Fillet of a fenny snake,
In the cauldron boil and bake.
Eye of neutes, and toe of frogs,
Wool of bats, and tongue of dogs.
Adders forke, and blind worms sting.
Lizards leg, and howlets wing,
For a charm of powerful trouble,
Like a hell broth boil and bubble.
Scale of dragon, tooth of wolf,
Witches mummy, maw, and gulf.
Of the ravin'd salt sea sharke,
Root of hemlock dug in the dark,
Liver of blaspheming Jew.
Gall of goats, and slips of yeugh,
Sliver'd in the moons eclypse,
Nose of Turk, and Tartars lips.
Finger of birth-strangled babe,
Ditch-deliver'd by a drab,
Make this gruel thick and slab.
Add therein a Tigers chauldron,
For the ing^^dients of our cauldron.
Cool it with a baboones blood,
Then our charm is firm, and good.
By whom large streams back to their fountains flow.
The stars drop blood,
While the still moon with sanguine visage stood.
By moone-light herbs with brazen sickle crops,
And poisonous weeds that bleed in sable drops.
Whose unkembed head,
Are with short vipers filleted,
Commands from graves wild sigtrees torn,
And Cypress, which does beers adorn.
Eggs steeped in blood of toads, to bring,
With feathers of the Scritch owls wing.
Herbs of Iolcos baneful field,
And poisons Thessaly does yield.
Bones snatched from jaws of hungry bitch,
To burn with flames of stinking pitch.
On which the witch does water fling,
Fetched from Avernus loathsome spring.
Ingredients of witchcraft.
Pieces of dead carkases snatched from ravenous beasts.
Wolves hair. Mad dogs foame. Adders care.
Serpents slough. Spurging of a dead man's eyes.
Mandrake root* Flesh, bones, and sculls from charnel
houses. Ropes, chains, rags, bones, hair, sinews,
Marrow of men-gibetted, blood and fat of slain infants.
Eggs and black feathers of a screech owl.
blood and back bone of a frogge.
Aconite, hemlock, henbane, adders tongue, nigh^-shade, Moon-wort, libbards
bane, poppy, cypress, w^ld figtrees growing on tombs, juice of the la^ch
tree, or Agaricum. Basiliskes blood, vipers skin, the toad-eyes of the owl,
bats wings, young colts forehead.

Harpier, Padock, Martin, familiar spirits.

Pluto, Hecate, Proserpina, Chaos, Diana, Eumenides, and all the infernal
powers, the deiri^s invocated by witches.

V. Dubartas. Trophies, Witch of Endor.
Ovids Metam. lib. 7. Amorum 1. Eleg. 5.
Horace. Epod. 5, Virgil Eclog* 8.
Theocritus Pharmaceutria.
Skakespears Macheth.
Ben. Johnsons mask out of the house of Fame.
Lucan. Lib. 6*
Witty.
Whom the fates thought fit
To make the master of a mine of wit,
That rules the Monarchy of wit.
His brain's a quiver of jests,
Women.
The frail tribe, softer sex. Fair afflictions.
Beauteous troubles. Frail Corporation.
Weaker vessels. Oversight of nature.
Mistake of nature. Disgrace of reasonableness.
Obstinate cowards, slave born tyrants.
Shops of vanity, gilded weathercocks.
In whom conscience is but peevishness, chastity,
Way wardnesse.
A bad wife is
The Hectic fever, not to be be cured, but by death,
Like Falcons stooping to a gaudy lute.
VVenders of nature when they wrong her not.
The best of goods, or else the worst of evils.
Glorious angels, or else cursed devils.
None more desire honor, or worse keep it.
That most desire what you most deny,
And most contemn, what comes most easily.
That carry a pedlars shop about them.
Names of beauteous women.
Cynthia, Caelia, Phebe, Phyllis, Amarillis, Lesbia,
Chloris, Phloe, Sirena, Co^ynna, Clarinda, Castora,
Amoret, Florimel, Claribel, Arabella, Lucida,
Belphebe, Paeana, Aemylia, Serena, Blandina,
Gloriana, Delia, Rosalinda, Laura, Lucinda, Rosaline,
Portia, Cornelia, Angelica, Angelina, Stella, Mira,
Miranda, Lucerta, Olivia, Violetta, Lycoris, Julia,
Cytheris, Clarinda, Calista, Irene, Leucippe,
Chariclea, Panthea, Saccharissa, Philumene.
Valiant women.
Laurina, Tulla, Tarpeia, Camilla, Hippolyta, Acca,
Penthesilea, B^^^omart, Tomyris, Artemysia,
Hipsicratea, Candace, Voadicea, Zenotia, Amalasunta,
Valasca.
Unchaste women. v. Whores.
Faustina, Thais, Lais, Helena, Clytemnestra,
Tullia, Hippia, Catulla, Messaline, Iberina.
Women of all sorts, Heywoods book of Women. Wolf.
Which infest the night
With their wild howling at fair Cynthia's light,
The Mountain dogs, that out at midnight stalks,
And round the quiet sheepfolds closely walk.
The bitter foe of bleating flock.
Womb.
The winding chambers of the womb,
Our Mansion where kind nature shows her cunning,
The secret Mansions where we are,
Whilst nature does our limbs prepare,
Natures secret cabinet.
Man's first grave and tomb.
Wonderful. v. Admirable. Wood. v. Arbor. Shade.
A wood untoucht of old was growing there
Of thick-set trees, whose boughs spreading and fair,
Meeting obscured the enclosed air,
And made dark shades exiling Phoebus rays,
Where no rude fawn, nor wanton Sylvan plays,
No nymph disports but cruel deities.
No bird dares light upon those hallowed boughs,
No beasts made there their dens, no wind there blows,
Where Dryades often meet
The Naiade^, and with their nimble feet
Soft dances lead, although their aierie shape,
All but a quick poetic sight escape.
There Faunus and Sylvanus keep their court,
And thither all the horrid hosts resort.
A wilderness of trees.
Wool,
The curled burden of the ram.
The fleecy burden of the sheep.
Thriving burdens.
World.
The universe. The glorious ball.
The twin globe.
The universal bower.
The all-circumference. Vast volume.
The vast amphitheater Mighty orb.
The vast rondure. A ball of wind. A glorious nothing.
The biggest bubble. A ball of ice. A slippery bowl.
The common hall of troubled natures factious court.
All the World over.
Where ever Nereus walks his wavy round.
From where the morning rises, and the sun,
To where the even, and night their courses run.
As far as ere heaven-propping Atlas high,
Bears on his back the beauteous starry sky.
As far as Phoebus dart*s his golden ray.
Wheresoere the sun does cast his flaming eye.
From Alexanders to Alcides bounds.
From Indian shores unto the setting sun,
And from the farthest Hyperborean coasts,
To those whose climes continual summer roasts.
Where ere the invading sea assaults the land.
As far,
As is the Artick from th'antartick star.
From silver Ganges to Sols watery bed.
In all the world where Phoebus ever shows
His glorious face, when he his circuit goes.
From East to West, until in dusky night,
Unto the lower world he lends his light,
Within the compass of the general frame,
In all the countries, which from Gades extend
To Ganges, where the morning beams ascend.
Worms.
The crawling vermin. Dead corpse bed-fellowes.
The wrigling tenants of the grave.
Crawling Canniballs. Wrigling insects.
That feast upon the dead.
The unfelt fleas within the winding sheet.
Wound. v. Kill.
The biting steel's pursued by streams of blood,
That b^th'd her pure white in a crimson flood.
To warm the reeking steel in blood.
To sheath the weapon in the flesh.
To plow the flesh. To sluice the blood.
As from a crack in a strait pipe of lead,
Conveying water from some fountains head,
Hissing in the air the captive stream does spin
In Crystal threads her silver humor thin.
Unseam the skin. The gash lies gaping for revenge.
Wrong.
No patience can bear, no charity pardon.
An injury beyond all satisfaction.
Height of injustice. Break the laws of justice.
W.
Xanthus.
Troy's ancient river, which such streams did hold,
As made the sheep that drunk of them wear gold.
Divine Scamanders flood.
The stream,
Which men Scamander, Gods did Xanthus call.
The streams wherein young brides did wash their bright,
And beauteous limbs before the marriage night.
Xerxes.
Darius wealthy son,
That brought the numerous army into Greece.
1700000. or as others, 1000000
That with his armies, drank whole rivers dry.
That with his ships bridg'd ore the Hellespont.
That whipped the seas, and lasht the winds cause they
His threatening commands durst disobey.
Whose soldiers through the mountains cut their way.
Persia's luxurious prince.
Year.
The year,
Whose winged car by months, days, hours is drawn.
The circle of the months.
The chapters of the book of Time.
The serpent rolling in, into her self.
Space of Years.
Thrice seven summers I had seen,
Decked in Flora's rich array,
And as many winters keen,
Wrapped in suites of silver gray.
Thrice through the Zodiac had Hyperion pranc't,
And the fourth time his burning team advanced.
When Sol again had brought his team about,
The sun has three times parched crab and goat,
Twelve times the sun
Through his twelve signs had run.
Now he to fifeteen added had a year.
When summers five he thrice had multiplied.
By this the sun,
Conducting time had through, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, etc.
Autumnes run
Now through twelve signs, the sun had brought his light.
Now Titan thrice had finished his years.
In watery Pisces.
While slowly shding months make up the date
Of thirty years.
Now thrice four heavens have rolled about
The circle of the year.
Until Sol thrice the globe has circled round.
The quickening sun
Had twice six times about the Zodiac run*
Twice had the glorious sun run through the signs,
And with his kindly heat improved the mines.
Thrice had Phoebus been,
In horned Aries, taking up his Inn.
Now when the year had turned his course about,
And fully worn his weary hours out;
And left his circling travel to his heir,
That now sets onset to the ensuing year.
Now seventimes Phoebus, had his welked wain,
Upon the top of all the Tropic set,
As many times descending down again,
His fiery wheels had with the fishes wet.
Three winters cold,
Have from the forests shook the summers pride:
Three beauteous springs to yellow Autumn turned,
Three April perfumes in three hot Junes burned.
Three summers now have past,
Thrice has the painted pride of flora graced.
Earths joyful bosom, thrice has winters rain,
Bereaved her of that verdant dress again:
The posting sun
Five times, through his celestial Innes must run:
Cold Capricorn had paved earths surface, twice,
With brittle places of crystal crusted ice.
Twice glazed rivers, and the sappy blood,
Of trees has twice re-periwig'd the woods.
^aturnes flow team has trotted twice the round,
The sun has gone his yearly progress twice.
Full thirty times has Phoebus Car gone round
Neptunes salt wash, and Tellus orbed ground;
And thirty dozen moons with borrowed shine,
About the world have twelve times thirty been,
The rising Pleiades have four Autumnes seen.
Twice has the golden sun,
Through the cold p^sces his round journey run.
^re Phoebus thrice twelve times shall fill her horns*
When years first styled me twenty.
V. Spring. Summer. Autumn. Winter.
Young man.
To whom nature did late begin,
To uneffeminate his smoother chinne*
Now in his looks both boy and man appear:
An old boy, an infant man.
The doubtful down now budding on his chin.
His chin began to bud with down of gold.
His blooming youth twice told eight birth days crown,
And cloth his cheek with scarce appearing down.
So young,
Scarce any down darkning their cheeks was sprung.
The blossom of his youth so fully blown,
That strength of nature now thought good to seek,
Her entertainment in his downy cheek.
And with her manly beauty did begin,
To uneffeminate his sleeker chin,
Whose Phaenix down began but to appear,
Like unshorne velvet.
Whose bare outbrav'd the web it seemed to bear.
Fresh beauty triumphs on the brow.
His height made him more than a boy,
His look would not allow him man.
The mossie down still growing on his chin.
Whose face as yet did not bewray his sex,
With so much as a show of hair.
His face now beginning to have some tokens of a beard,
was composed to a kind of manly beauty.
Not old enough for a man, not young enough for a boy,
a squash before it is a pescod.
A stripling, not much in debt to years,
Upon whose chin, are not so many hairs,
But a tapsters arithmatick may soon bring his particulars therein to a total.
The swift post of time has now begun
His second stage.
Reason now draws her curtains, her closed eyes
Begins to open, and she calls to rise.
Youths now disclosing bud peeps out, and shows
Her April head,
And from her grass green bed,
Her virgin primrose early blows,
Whilst waking Philomel begins to sing
Her warbling sonnets to the wanton spring.
His stage is pleasant, and the way seems short,
All strewn with flowers,
The days appear but hours,
Being spent in time-beguiling sport,
Her griefs do neither press, nor doubts perplex,
Here Is neither fear to curb, nor care to vex.
His downy cheek grows proud, and now disdains
The tutours hand,
He glories to command
The proud neckt steed with prouder reins.
The strong breathed horn must now salute his ear
With the glad downfall of the falling dear.
His quick-nos'd army with their deep-mouthed sounds
Must now prepare
To chase the timorous hare,
About his yet unmorgag'd grounds,
The evil he hates is counsel and delay,
And fears no mischief but a rainy day.
The thought he takes, is how to take no thought,
For bale nor bliss;
And late repentance is,
The last dear penniworth that he bought,
He is a dainty morning, and he may,
If lust ore-cast him not, b'as fair a day.
He is now out of natures protection though not yet able to guide himself.
Just of age to be miserable, when in his own conceit he begins to be happy. His
reason serves not to curb, but to understand his appetite, and prosecute the
motions of it with a more eager earnestness. Himself is his own temptation.
He leaves repentance for gray hairs, and performs it in being covetous. He
conceives his youth as the season of his lust, and the hour wherein he ought
to be bad, and because he would not loose his time, he spends it. He distasteth
religion as a sad thing, and is six ears elder for a thought of heaven. He
scorns, and fears, and yet hopes for old age, but dares not imagine it with
wrinkles. He does seldom any thing, which he wishes not to do again, and is
only wise after misfortunes. He suffers much for his folly, and a great deal of
knowledge makes him a wise man. Every action is his danger, and every man his
ambush. He is a ship without pilot, or trackling, and only good fortune can
steer him.

Youth.
Blooming years. April of our years.
The morning of our days.
The time for heat and lust.
Satan's best opportunity. The flowery prime of age.
Youthful.
Youthful as the early day.
Youthful as snakes that their fresh skins resume,
Or eagles having mewed their aged plumes.
Like to Medea's ram,
Which from the cauldron rise a frisking lamb,
Youthful as Aeson from the cauldron leapt.
When rigor trains
The sparkling blood through thy meandring veins.
When as thy flaming marrow shall foment
Thy lustful fires.
Z.
Zephirus.
The father of the painted flowers,
And in their bosoms drops his balmy showers.
The gentle wind whose mild
And fruitful breath, gets the young spring with child.
The hatching breath. Gentle Favonius.
The thawing wind.
Zealous.
So inflamed with zeal, he turns all objects into fuel to feed it.
Zodiac.
Heavens painted girdle, scarf.
The heavens bright shining baudrick.
That way the restless sun does wear,
Passing his course to finish up the year,
The shining belt, about the breast of heaven.
On the right shoulder like a flaming jewel.
His shell with nine rich topazes, adorned.
Lord of the Tropic, sits the scalding crab;
Who when the sun gallops in full careere,
His anual race, his ghastly claws uprears,
Frights at the confines of the torrid zone.
The fiery teame, and proudly stops his course,
Making a solstice, till the fierce steeds learn
His backward paces, and so retrograde,
Post downward to the opposed Capticorne.
Heavens bright Bandaleere.
The oblique scarf that knits the year.
Sols twelve Innes.
Aries.
First stands the ram that Hell bore away,
And makes the nights equal to the day.
Which Phrixus carried safe, but Hell threw,
Into that sea, which from her drowning drew
The name of Hellespont.
The ram that bore the golden fleece,
Which Jason once in triumph brought to Greece.
Taurus.
Whether a cow or bull we cannot know,
The parts above appeared, but not below.
Europa's bull that wore the golden horns,
On whose soft back she ore the seas was borne.
Which lowing walked upon the tender grass,
Amongst the herd, yet did in form surpass.
His color whiter than untroden snow,
Before the moist and thawing Auster blow.
The flesh in swelling rolls about his neck,
His broad spread breast, long dangling dewlaps deck,
His horns though small, yet such as art invite,
To imitate, than shining gems more bright,
His eyes no wrath, his brows no terror threat,
His whole aspect with smiling peace repleat.
Gemini.
The swan-got brothers. The brother stars.
Hellens bright brothers. Castor and Pollux.
The egge-borne twins. Tindarian stars.
The twins begot on Leda by a swan.
Cancer.
The parching crab that burns up all the grass.
The thirsty star, The summers rainy star.
The scalding star. Whose crooked claws with fervor fry.
The crawling crab which great Alcides slew.
The Crab sent in by Juno's angry spite,
To vex Alcides in his busy fight
With the Lernaean Hydra.
Leo.
The raging Lion. Hercules first labor.
That keeps his station next the crab.
Nemaean monster, whose unpierced skin,
The great Alcides wrapped his body in.
Molorchaean star. The shaggy constellation.
July's scorching star.
Virgo.
The maiden star. The chaste star of Erigone.
The virgin constellation. Icarius sad daughter.
Who when she saw, she could not give relief
Unto her father, hanged her self for grief.
The maid by whom is borne
In her fair hands, the ripened ears of corn.
Libra.
The hanging balance, that does weigh the light,
Giving an equal share to day and night.
Astraea's shining balance.
Sorpius.
That bears the deadly poison in his tail.
That boldly stretches out his ugly claws.
The dreadful beast that Pale Orion slew.
The star that rises at Orions fail.
Which Tellus did on purpose breed,
To let Orion see,
Though he did in power exceed,
There stronger was than he.
Sagitarius.
Achilles Tutor. Dreadful archer.
The armed Centaure. Thessalian archer.
The double shaped star. Phillyrian fire.
Whom at the Muses prayer, Jove made a star.
Capricorn.
The winter Tropic. Showry Solstice.
The half fish goat.
Pan turned himself into that shape,
When he did from Typhaeus fly.
And in that form did safe escape.
Which made Jove place it in the sky.
Aquarius.
Heavens showry skinker.
He that full pitchers powers
On earth in drizling showers.
The pitcher-bearing boy.
Joves eagle up from Ida snatchr.
Fair neighbor to the Capricorn.
Pisces.
Last constellation of the twelve.
The suns last Inn. The scaly star.
That ends the circuit of the year.
The watery star. That periods the year.
Zoilus. v. Cririck.
That like the dog run, and snarle at the stone.
Condemning that, which is too hard a bone
For their thin chaps to deal with.
Condemning most, what they least understand.
Malignant spirits that with envious look,
Read others, as they mean to read this book;
And blaming many things, they cannot mend;
Tell you they are glad there is at last an End.
FINIS.
Forms of Commending.
IT will be
Dispraise enough, for him that censures thee.
The Poets theme and Patron.
Time shall a Poet raise,
Borne under better stars to sing his praise.
If we thy years should number by thy acts,
Thy years would be a Cipher to thy facts.
Praise her who list, he still shall be her debtor,
For art nere feigned, nor nature framed a better.
He that will write of him, must still write more,
Nay men would think their states for ever raised,
To look on him that is so highly praised.
Whilst we
Admire all virtue in admiring thee.
So brave a person to describe to men,
Requires a curious pencill, not a pen.
Should any power into my brain infuse,
Thy worth, or all the Poets had before;
I could not praise, till thou deserve no more.
But I employ,
My pen in vain to overtake his fame,
All praisefull tongues do wait upon that name.
Whose worth so far transcends all praise,
Who writes him well, may well deserve the baies.
But striving her to grace, I injure her,
For ever where true worth for praise does call,
He rightly nothing gives, that gives not all.
Oh what virtues be
Inherent, even to the least thought of thee!
To live blessed, is to trace his ways.
Epitome of all that books,
Or ere tradition taught. I aspire
Enough to worth, whilst I his worth admire.
A name most dear to virtue.
Perfections great exchequer. Learnings exchequer*
Nature at her own work does wondering stand.
I speak not this in hope to incroach on fame,
Or add a greater luster to his name,
Bright in it self enough.
Servant to justice and strict honesty.
Whose powerful name,
Merits above the donatives of fame. A name,
That he who without reverence speaks the same,
Commits a sin that all his tears and prayers,
Can never expiate. Circumference,
And fixed center of all excellence.
All others virtues is his paraphrase.
He is -- but time denies to tell thee what,
Sum all perfections up, and he is that.
For whom nature did her self engage,
To do more than in man could scarce be done.
I should commend
Particulars, but then how should I end,
Without a volume? So noble all,
That envy grows weary of her gall.
Whose acts and name
Become the wonder and discourse of fame.
Each verdant laurel, every myrtle bough,
Are stripped for wreaths to adorn and load his brow,
Triumphant wreaths, which cause they never fade,
Wise elder times for kings and Poets made.
A sun, the beams of whose meridian glory,
Fills eyes with wonder, and all tongues with story.
He had all the graceful parts that might attract love,
Or conduce to the accomplishment of a perfect soul.
Had Plutarch lived till now, to blazon forth
His life (as sure he would) what prince of worth,
Or Greek, or Roman, had his single story,
Selected out to parallel his glory.
The Hemispheare of whose praise knows no Horizon.
Had the blind Greek, one of the Muses first Priests, been conof so subto
Apollo
temporary to this Hero, how proud would he have been lime a subject to
heighten his fancy; a subject adequate himself, and his whole quire of
daughters.

Your self being extant, well may show
How far a modern quill does come too short,
Speaking of worth.
Fame that has undertook your name to blaze,
Plays but the envious huswife of your praise.
Alone in him was nature prodigal.
Of so divine, and rich a temper wrought,
As heaven for him perfections depth had sought.
The best whilst thou art here,
Compared with thee, like men scarce made appear*
That curious form made of an earth refined,
At whose blessed birth the gentle planets shined
With fair aspects, and sent a glorious flame,
To animate so beautiful a frame.
The darling of the Gods and men.
All that dare believe report, admire.
Bright honors great example.
Seems not a man but virtues name.
Though all might boldly, none could justly blame him.
In whom consists all that
The heavens have raised to a perfection.
Parts beyond the degree of admiration.
One that whosoever will praise well,
Must first set down with himself, what it is to be excellent, for so she is.
All that beheld him (and all that might behold him, did behold him) made their
eyes quick messengers to their minds, to tell them they had seen, the uttermost
could be seen.

Of whom all expected as much as human nature could bring forth, and his virtue
will not let their expectation be deceived.

The senate house of the planets were never so set to decree perfection in man.

Of whose high praise, and praiseful bliss,
Goodness the pen, heaven the paper is,
The ink immortal fame does lend.
If ever virtue took a body to show its else unconceiveable beauty it was in
-- N. M.
Where truth it self must speak like flattery.
It is a praise, to praise, when thou art praisd,
Not thou by praise, but praise by thee is raised.
Where nature does with infinite agree.
Only in you the flatterer never ^^eth,
Whose desert outstrip all praise, and make it halt behind it.
When tongues speak sweetly, then they speak her name.
No title good enough to keep his name company.
A mind, envy cannot but call fair.
Whose name's the theme of honors tongue.
All report of him, that is not fair, gives it self the lie, and pulls
rebuke from every ear that hears it.
Mortal Angel,
Wants nothing of an Angel but eternity.
That paragons description and wild fame,
Who in the authority of merit, puts on the vouch of malice it self.
Of whom to speak as he deserves I am unable, and in what I can,
I am unworthy.
All other perfections are so far from matching his, they deserve not to be
mentioned, the great distance makes them appear like a little point, scarce to
be seen, and less to be respected.
So virtuous and spotless, that malice is angry, she can find no cause to be
angry with him.
His life was a letter, written full of religion and learning, whereof his
death was the seal.
Her virtues stifle my pen, they crowd in so fast upon it.
His praises are as painful for himself to hear, as pleasant for others to
relate.
His virtues are too great to be spoken, and yet too great to be concealed.
Fames fingers are too foul to touch his virtues.
His virtues raise
A work to trouble fame, astonish praise.
The element so mixed in him,
That nature might stand up and tell the world,
There was a man, whose fame is like the air.
Invulnerable, and all calumny against him but malicious mockery.
Where every God did seem to set their seal,
To give the world assurance of a man.
Sing, speak, and write the praise of other men,
At him kneel down and wonder.
A virtue that can give envy bounds.
On whose every part,
Truth might spend all her voice, same all her art,
Whose graces do as far out*strip all fame,
As fame does silence.
Old men were glad their fates till now did last,
And infants, that the fates had made such have,
In such a welcome time to bring them forth,
That they might be a witness to such worth.
What others call virtue is the natural habitude of this princess.
An angel dressed in flesh and blood.
Such, as if a man were to choose out of all men, he could not pick another.
Incarnate Cherubim.
To be dislikt by him, i^ enough to be miserable,
All whose inclinations do aim at goodness,
And virtue to him is so natural, as I verily believe, he would be much
troubled to do ill.
It were hard to find a man for whom he could be changed without loss.
In a place at Athens, when one named Plutarch, the echo answered Philosophy,
the same would have been done with his name and virtue.
Whose virtue is a transcendent, far above the abilities and carriage of our
age, a match for antiquity, in its greatest purity and severity.
In which name I call
Up so much truth, as could I here pursue,
Would make the fables of good women true.
The wiser world does greater thee confess,
Than all the world, than thy self only less.
Far beyond the pen,
Or the weak knowledge of admiring men.
Oh what a tax and impost have thou laid,
Of worth upon thy followers, how much praised,
Must be that virtue, that can keep them free
From the exprobration of thy memory?
Thou have undone
So much our fancy, and invention,
It cannot gave thee ought, he that of thee
Shall write out half seems to write poetry.
It is a strong line here, to speak but true,
Hyperbole's in others are thy due. We
Admire all virtues in admiring thee.
With such goodness blessed,
As may merit praises best.
Such goodness as admits no hopes of imitation, and by that only
privileged from envy, and emulation.
As if both heaven and earth should undertake
To extract the best from all mankind to make
One perfect man.
He does excel,
In honors, courtesies, and all the parts,
Court can call hers, or man would call his arts.
He Is prudent, valiant, just, and temperate,
In him all action is beheld in state.
And he is built, like some Imperial room,
For these to dwell in, and be still at home,
His breast is a brave palace, a broad street,
Where all heroic ample thoughts do meet,
Where nature such a large surveigh has taken,
As other souls to his, dwell in a lane.
Beneath her feet pale envy bites her chain,
And snaky discord whets her sting in vain.
He that adventures of your worth to sing,
Attempts in vain to paint a boundless thing.
The highest pitch of perfect nature.
Whom none can equal, best, but imitate.
I know what ere my verses be,
They will like the most servile flattery show.
Though I write truth, and make the subject you.
Want of invention here, is no excuse,
The matter we shall find and not produce.
And as it fares in crowds I only doubt,
So much will pass, that nothing will get out;
Who undertakes this subject to commend,
Shall find nothing so hard, as how to end.
What Muse can silent be,
Or little say, that has for subject thee.
I fear to act,
A sin like their black envy, that detract,
As often, as I would character in speech,
That worth, which silent wonder scarce can reach.
Nor dare I, unless impudence in verse,
Would cease to be a sin, and what were crime
In prose, would be no injury in rhyme.
Praises on thee,
Short of thy worth, a kinder libell be.
To write is easy, but to write on thee;
Truth will be thought to forfeit modesty.
Language richest dress,
And highest sense, cannot thy worth express.
To crown thy merits I shall only be
Sumtuously poor, low in Hyperbole.
None can speak of him without praise.
Nor praise without admiration.
Whom most men's hearts adore, and all admire,
Worthy the envy of angels were they capable of passions.
Oh had I Virgils verse, or Tullies tongue,
Or raping numbers, like the Thracians song.
I have a theme, would make the rocks to dance,
And surly beasts that through the deserts prance,
Hie from their caves, and every gloomy den,
To wonder at the excellence of men.
A man of unexampled goodness.
On purpose made by fate,
That all might have one for to imitate.
Not borne, but sent from heaven.
Who writes of thee,
Must volumes make, and write an history.
Of whom men speak, when they his actions tell,
Not as of man, but some great miracle.
Should the stars come from heaven they could not thenc*
Be here received with greater reverence.
Whose name when it salutes the ear,
M^n think they then, perfections abstract hear.
V. Famous. Admirable. Unspeakable.
Forms of Dispraising.
The baseness of whose mind is such, that it sinks a thousand degrees lower
than the basest body could carry the most base fortune.

An unnecessary letter in the alphabet of creatures.
The cipher in Natures Arithmatick, and the accounts of all good men.
To make him more culpable than he is, were but to cast ink on an Aethiops
face.
Oh for a name
Were bad enough, but all exp^ession's lame.
A man of that stupendous composition,
He seems made up of the worst of all extremities.
Whose ill is grown to such a height,
It makes the earth groan to support his weight.
The quintessence and abstract of all evil,
Clothed in flesh to play the closer Devil.
Incarnate Devil. Devil in hose and doublet.
Whose shame even hoarse with age black fame shall ring.
And after times with horror shall distract,
And by recounting of so vile an act,
Mortality so much astonishing,
Make them account their wickedness, scarce sin
To that, which long before their time has been.
That know no God more mighty than their mischief.
Of the most wicked disposition, that ever infected the air
with his breath.
S^ts fires on barnes, and hay-stacks in the night,
And bids the owners quench them with their tears.
That d^g up dead men from their quiet graves,
And set them upright at their dear friends doors,
Even when their sorrows almost were forgot.
Not clean enough to spit on.
A man that is the abstract of all faults,
That all men follow. The impostume of all corruptions.
Who all things on the earth amends,
By being worse than they.
A disposition would turn charity it self into hate.
That pursue
Deeds, After which no mischief can be new.
Who is no less
Than the perfection of all wickedness.
The Stigian Quintessence. The Devils Enchiridion.
In one the monster of all wicked men.
None speak his name, but spit after it, for fear of being poisoned. The type
of baseness,
To whom vice is so proper, that it seems to grudge any
man the practice of it, but himself.
To whom murders are but resolute acts, and treasons,
matters of great consequence.
The Devils facto^r for all wickedness.
An honest man can neither see him, nor speak of him
without a blush.
v. Wicked Fool. Voluptuous. Forms of protesting.
By all the oaths sacred religion knows.
By all oaths made in reverential fear
Of heaven, and her inhabitants.
By your self, that is by all that's good.
By Styxes muddy peacelesse spring, the fear,
And only sacred oath the Gods do know.
By all the floods infernal here I swear
An oath, whose breach the very Gods forbear,
Pronounce me guilty of a blacker crime,
Than ere in the large volume writ by time,
The sad historian reads of.
By those chaste lamps that yield a silent light,
On the cold urnes of virgins. By that night,
Which guilty of no crime does only hear
The vows of recluse Nuns, and Anchorites prayer,
And by thy chaster self.
Now by my fathers ashes do I swear,
Of whom a reverend memory I bear.
By the sad ashes of my sleeping father.
By dreadful Styx, by which the Gods
Nere swear and break their vow.
By my best comforts.
By the honor of my fathers hearse.
By the black brook of hell.
As there comes lights from heaven, and words from breath.
As there is sense in truth, and truth in virtue.
By Cupids strongest bow.
By the best arrow with the golden head.
By the simplicity of Venus Doves,
By that which knitteth souls and prospers loves,
And by that fire, that burnt the Carthage Queen,
When the false Trojan under sail was seen.
By all the vows that ever men have broke,
By all the Gods that ever men invoke.
By all the virgin roses of the spring.
By maid-hood, honor, truth, and every thing.
By innocence I swear, and by my youth.
By all that's sacred, and can make an oath.
By all that's sworn by, divine, and humane.
Now by these burning tapers of the sky.
Now by the sacred radiance of the sun.
By all the operations of the heaven.
Now by yond marble heaven.
In the due reverence of a sacred vow.
I do engage my words.
So help me every spirit sanctified.
By earth and sea, and Stigian Gods I swear.
V Gods. Heaven. Sun. Moon. Stars.
Forms of Conjuring, or Beseeching.
I conjure thee by all the charms that love can teach*
By all the rites of love I thee conjure.
By those fair eyes that have enthralled mine,
And by that all-alluring face of thine.
So may thy growing fruit survive the frost,
Nor ripening by the rapefull winds be lost.
By that happy woman that bare thee, by all the joys of
thy heart, and success of thy desires.
By what more dear, a better proposer could charge you
with all.
By your fair beauty, for if Persians may
Swear by their sun, I well may swear by that.
By all that is virtuous.
By all that you hold dear.
By the sad ashes of your sleeping father.
By the loved memory of all your ancestors.
By the honor of thy fathers hearse.
I desire you by all that is sacred.
Forms of giving Thanks.
No word
Breathes through my lips, that does not thanks afford.
I could afford
To melt my self in thanks.
A benefit I have received from you, never to be forgotten, but with
ungratefulness.
Which whenever I remember, without due thanks, I shall forget all gratitude.
I must repay you, with the uncurrent coin of thanks, out of the exchequer of
the poor.
You have anticipated all that I intended to say, and have not left for me in
all rhetoric, either complements, or commendations to
return you.
This is to enforce ingratitude by excess of obligation, and to reduce me to a
necessity of being indebted to you after I am dead.
Gratefulness is the poor man's virtue, and seeing I cannot be liberal, I will
endeavor at least not to be unmindfull.
If there be a vice opposite to ungratefullnesse in the excess of gratitude,
your many favors would drive me into it.
Requital were presumption, and you may
Call me ungrateful, when I strive to pay.
All thanks are so due, that the greatest scarce can excuse from ingratitude.
Your favors, and benefits to me are so much above my merit, that they are
even above my* gratitude, if that were to be judged by words that must express
it.

The swiftest wing of recompense is slow to overtake your favors.

My life wants worth to repay your favors.

This dicourtesie alone your favors have done me, that I shall be forced to
live and die ungrateful.

You could not be unhappy, could either my wishes, prayers or power make you
fortunate.

When my pen-feather'd Muse has learned to soar,

And gotten wings as well as feet, look then
For equal thanks from my unwearied pen.
I cannot think of your courtesies, without sighing at the sense of innability
to repay, and blushing that I must needs (how thankful so^'^ I am) at least
appear ungrateful.

I should be ready upon all occasions to give you thanks, did not the
Consideration of the greatness of my Debt make me desperate.

Sir, there is nothing you possess you may use more freely than my self, so
much has your courtesit purchased me yours,

There is none has a more ample interest in my love,

Nor any have a lodging nigher to my heart.
My uttermost ambition and endeavor is to climb to those deserts may give me
the name of your thankful servant.
No creature bears life,
Which more faithfully studies to do you service.
I am so far beneath the riches of your merits, it can be no honor to your
name to rank me in the number of your servants.

The least words you speak I receive with as much reverence, as an absolute and
unresistable commandment.

You have given so great testimonies of your love to me, that i^
I should not have a due resentment of them, It were fit I lost my memory.
I cannot forget your favors without forfeiting my right to a memory.
You have so absolutely acquired me yours, as you have left me no liberty to do
what I desire, when there is any question of performing your pleasure.
There Is nothing that my sense can reach,
That does not some way me my duty teach,
Eevery object, me thinks, upbraids my ingratitude.
H^d I as many tongues, etc.
V. Many unspeakable.
My gratitude to you is as necessary as my being, and I can sooner cease to be,
than to be unthankful.

If you expect thanks worthy your favors. I beseech you afford me the terms I
may repeat after you for your satisfaction. For I confess my incapacity to
express the resentment your obligations cause in me.

V. Forms of concluding Letters. Forms of blessing or wishing well.
All the dear joys here, and above hereafter,
Crown thy fair soul.
May sick men, if they have your wish be well.
And heaven hate those you curse.
Prosperity be your page.
Success crown all your actions.
Good fortune by your lacquey, and wait upon you.
The best wishes your thoughts can forge be your servants,
and attend you.
May each day better others happiness.
May each sun shine with a new blessing on you.
Until the heavens envying earth's good hap,
Give you immortal honor,
So live on earth, that heaven may thee desire,
Yet slowly to the expecting stars aspire.
May you carve out your fortune to your wish.
Safety and honor always attend you.
May heaven empty her storehouse of blessings upon you.
V. Happy. Forms of cursing or wishing ill.
Mischief and sorrow go along with you.
Hearts discontent and sour affliction
Be playfellows to keep you company.
May poison be their drink.
Gall, worse than gall, the dainties that they taste,
Their sweetest shade a grove of Cypress trees,
Their chiefest prospects murdering Basilsks,
Their softest touch as smart as lizards stings,
Their Music frightfull as the adders ^isse,
And boding shriech owls make the consort full,
All the foul terrors in dark seated hell,
All curses madded Hecuba gave the Greeks,
And mine to boot dart on thee.
The gods send thee not death, the common plague,
but feeling after death,
May thy curse equal thy merits, and the Devils malice be glutted in thy
misery.
May heaven create a new puinshment in hell for thee alone, as conceiving all
the degrees there already heaped together, too little for thy wickedness.

The ravenous Vulture tear his breast,
The rolling stone disturb his rest,
Let him next feel
Ixions wheel,
And add one fable more
To lying Poets store.
May he be whatsoever rage and malice wish.
V. Miserable. Unhappy Forms of blessing times and days.
That blessed night, that mild aspected hour,
Shall consecrated evermore remain,
What gentle Planet in that hour remain,
It shall be happy in the birth of men,
Which was chief Lord of the Ascendent then,
With whiter wool be clad the day,
It shall be marked with the whitest stone.
The sun shall shine upon that happy day,
And ever crown it with a glorious ray.
This happy day
Shall be to after times their Epoch.
And when reckon up the sum of bliss.
They shall wish all their days to be like this.
And may there on that day for ever be,
A Rubric set to all eternity.
The golden number light upon that day
Not any moments are
More sainted in Fames happy Calendare,
Nor shall that happy day for ever lack
Its worth in fames eternal Almanac,
Which none shall read, but straight their loss deplore,
And blame the fates they were not born before
To see this day. Times last annals eternize that day.
Forms of cursing days and times.
O let that day be guilty of all sin,
That is to come, or heretofore has been,
From his unnumbred hours let time divide it,
Lest in his minutes he should hap to find it.
Or let him on his brows for ever wear it,
That when he comes all other days may fear it,
And the ill-boding Planets by consent,
That day hold ever their sad Parliament,
Be it in heavens decree enrolled thus,
Black, fatal, dismal, inauspicious.
O let that day be ever banished far,
And quite expunged from times great Calendar,
Succeeding years as they their circuit go,
Leap o'r this day, as the sad time of woe,
May the unwearied sun for ever shroud
This day his face within some dismal cloud,
And when the Morn shall bring its dawning light,
May it be strangled in eternal night,
When this day yearly comes let every one,
Throw in their urn their sad and blackest stone,
Let never bird that cuts the air with wing,
Except the owl be this day heard to sing.
Let clouds and darkness dwell upon that day,
Unblest for ever by Sols chearing ray,
Let all men curse it, let it never appear,
Amongst those days that consummate the year,
Let mirth and joy be banished from that day,
May it its course and cursed succession lack,
Nor have a name in any Almanac.
Let that day be bound
In clouds of pitch, nor walk the Aethaerean round.
Let not God write it in the roll of days,
Nor let the sun restore it with his rays,
May plagues and famine, and the worst of fate
Light on that day, may universal hate
Make it by all detested. may all unhappy stars
Conjoyn their most malignant influence,
And then extract the subtle quintessence,
And throw it on this day.
Let the eclipsed Moon her throne resign,
Instead of stars let blazing Meteors shine,
Let deaths dark shade involve, no light appear,
But dreadful lightnings, its own horror fear,
Be it the first of miseries to all,
Or last of life defamed for funeral,
O* be that dismal night for ever blind,
Lost in it self, nor to the day rejoined,
Nor numbered in the swift circumference
Of months and years, but vanish in offense,
O let it sad and solitary prove,
No sprightly music hear nor songs of love,
Let wandering Apparitions then affright
The trembling Bride, and quench the nuptial light.
Forms of breaking off.
But as in cutting up a man that is dead,
The body will not last out to have read
On every part, and therefore men direct
Their speech to parts that are of most effect,
So
But like a winters day. I must make amends for my unpleasantnesse in my
shortness, therefore etc.
Day would expire
Ever all were told, and would your patience tire,
Should I from their original,
Our sufferings tell, should you give ear to all
The annals of our toils, approaching night,
First in Olympus would enclose the light,
But should I all intend to show,
The days swift course would sink before below.
But day would end,
And Phoebus panting steeds to seas descend,
Before my scant Oration could pursue
All etc. But I must free your weary patience.
But I Am afraid my tedious discourse
Should give your ears a surfeit and enforce,
A loathing on your willing patience.
But it would be a crime beyond excuse,
If I your patience longer should abuse.
Forms of bringing Similitudes.
Have you beheld. So have I seen.
Have you not seen. So we often see.
As I have seen. So I have often observed.
So often has my observing eye descried,
Not much unlike. Holding resemblance with.
Forms of invocating Muses.
Twice sacred powers (if sacred powers there be,
Whose mild aspect engyrland poesy)
Ye happy sisters of the learned spring,
Whose heavenly notes the woods are ravishing,
Brave Thespian Ladies, at whose charming lays
Each moss thrumb'd mountain bends, each current plays
Pierian singers, O ye blessed Muses,
Who as a gemme too dear the world refuses,
Whose truest lovers never clip with age,
O be propitious in my pilgrimage,
Dwell on my lines until the last sand fall,
Run hand in hand with my weak Pastoral,
'Cause every coupling cadence flow in blisses,
And fill the world with envy of such kisses,
Make all the rarest beauties of our clime,
That daign a sweet look on my younger time,
To linger on each lines enticing graces,
As on their lovers lips, and chaste embraces.
Assist my trembling and unable quill,
Oh all ye powers that hunt Parnassus hill.
V. Muses. Apollo. Phoebus Forms of concluding Letters.
You will impose an Obligation beyond expression upon -- your etc.

If you please to make an addition to all your former favors, by the
acceptance of this testimony of my gratitude, I shall be the more deeply
obliged to be --

Time makes me put a period to my lines, but it shall, find its own ever it
force me to put one to my service, Which is as large as my desires to be --

I shall receive an honor in your acceptance from your accustomed goodness
far above the merits and expectation of --

And which I desire may supply the place of any further complement, I am --

Accept I pray this short presentment of my humble service from him that lives
to be

I shall forfeit my right to a memory, when I forget what obligements I have to
be

I desire this short Letter may give you some testimonies of my gratitude,
being the only means I have to show you in my absence how much I am

My uttermost ambition is to climb to those deserts may give me the title of

There is nothing else for the present concerns your knowledge, unless you
will be pleased to take notice that I am

I esteem not my self so unforttnate as formerly I did, since I have happened
upon so fair an occasion, to let you know that I am

You shall receive a larger testimony in this kind of my love, when I may have
a better opportuity to assure you that I am

In the mean time and ever, I shall most passionately remain

It is the height of that honor I most passionately aspire to, to be esteemed.

I shall sooner cease to be, than not to be perfectly

But I will not be further tedious, if you will please to let me tell you, that
I most passionately am

Assure your self of all those that have any share in your favors, there is
not any more proud of his good fortune, than my self, or more really than I am

Amongst all my felicities, I account not the lowest the liberty you are
pleased to grant me of stiling my self what I most truly am

My occasions for the present are so importunately urgent, that it is all I can
do to write thus much, and to tell you what you knew long since, that I am

Think not that I complement with you, or speak Court language, when I assure
you I am more than any man living

I shall not fail to attend all occasions to serve you, and by that to testify
how passionately I am

I am truly sensible of my disability to keep correspondence with your love,
and find nothing more deficient in me, than the desert of being

But I hope you will be pleased to pardon me, your goodness being as
illimitable, as is the desire I have to tell you that I am*

But the straitness of my time makes me say sooner than I intended, that I am
ever absolutely

Be pleased to let these assure you that it is impossible to be more than I am,

Let these assure you of my firm resolution, to be as long as I live,

But I have neither time nor paper left, but only to tell you that I am,

I hope you cannot refuse me, your affection, since it is a kind of deserving
it, to be so passionately as I am

But since the have of the bearer, and the straightness of the time do press my
dispatch, I will for the present content my self with telling you that I am,

I shall never esteem my self absolutely miserable, whilst I have liberty to
call my self

I should think worse of my self, if I were one jot less than I am

You shall never want my prayers for your happy return', when I may with
greater joy, and less distance tell you that I am,

But you will pardon me I hope, if I abruptly break off this discourse, out of
a passionate desire I have to tell you, that I most reallie am

I shall not fail, by my care in any concernments of you, to show you more
clearlie that I am

But I refer it to your prudence and pleasure, being ready in that and all
things else to show my self

I shall be happy in a more seasonable opportunity to do you that faithful
service, which must ever be acknowledged due from

Thus far if you please to crown my most earnest and sollicitous desires, I
shall take it for the deepest engagement ever imposed upon

Let these lines present my humble service, and demonstrate what strong desires
I have to be.

Accept I pray, this imperfect way of presenting my service, till I am able to
give you a worthier testimony, that I am

Assure your self, there is none more truly loves you, nor more passionatelie
desirous of your happiness than

Assure your self, I so much honor and respect you, that you could not want
perfect happiness, were it in the disposal of

I wish with passion I had any employment in your service, whereby I might
force you to believe that I am extremely

In this I do not implore your belief, desiring to let you see by effects
rather than words, that I am without a complement

The passion which I have to your service, is so violent, that it nourishes in
me a continual care of seeking opportunities to make it known that I am

Assure your self, that of all the servants your merits have acquired you,
there is none more than I am

I am by so many obligations yours, that my only discontent, is the want of
occasions to give you testimony that I am

I beseech you honor me with your commands, that (other means failing) my
obedience may oblige you to believe that I am

I must discharge my heart in telling you, that I honor you more than all the
rest of the world, and that I most really am

Though I have often told you, how devoted I am to your serv^ce, yet my pen
shall once again assure you of the same, expecting an occasion, when I may give
you more eminent proofs, that I am

Assure your self, you may have more powerful, and more considerable servants,
but never one more than my self

I esteem too much the honor of your remembrance not to desire the
continuation of it, and withal to beseech you for some employment, wherein I
may witness the passion I have to your service, and to be

Esteem infallibly, that I am more than all the world besides

Assure your self, I shall never be capable of other resentment, than which
shall witness the quality that I bear of

It remains in you only to allay the discontent of my mind, by giving me some
employment in your service, which may witness the passion I have to maintain
the quality of

The esteem which I make of your deserts, and the inclination which carries me
to your service, obliges me to assure you that I am

Though you should forget me even to my name, I shall never change the
resolution, which I have taken to be all my life

Assure your self, you shall hereafter accuse me rather of importunity than
neglect of writing, it is the protestation of

You may easily know without being a Prophet the dear esteem I make of you,
and may believe without any further assurance, that I am

Believe assuredly, that into what extremity of adverse fortune so ever I am
reduced, I will always conserve the passion I have to your service, as being
without fiction

Though I despair of ever making you satisfaction for your many favors, yet I
shall always have a good will and passion to your service, which I shall
heartily offer you up, being

I content my self with the expectance of an occasion wherein I may witness
with services, rather than words, that I am unfeignedly in heart and soul

These are no discourses of complement, my heart dictates to my pen, what my
pen writes to you, when I assure you that I am

Your thanks have bought my service at so dear a rate, that the satisfaction,
which I before received, is utterly now taken from me; Keep) our complements I
pray for some other, and remember to use more familiarly

Leave of I pray, that language of complements which is unknown to true
friends, whereof I am one, and which is more

You will be sooner weary in commanding, than I in executing, as being
unreservedly

I send you back your thanks, to the end you may make use of them, when you
entertain some person less indeared to your service than I, who am

Treat with me I pray with less civilitie, and more freedom, if you account me
as I am

I do not doubt of your power, and less your courtesy, which forces me to
believe, that you will comply with this occasion offered you, to oblige
extremely

I have no greater pleasure in the world, than to make my self remarqued in all
places

I wish you had every day occasion to command my service, that I might
continually have the good fortune to produce new proofs of my obedience, and
stronger assurances of my being

I should be happy in an emploiment, wherein I might witness, according to your
merit, and my affection, how unfainedly I am.

I beseech you S^^ use my endeavors, to any thing, within my power, assuring
your self, that I am without reserve

I shall avoid no occasions, which present themselves for your service, but
will comport my self with so much passion in all your concernements, that you
shall be forced to confess that I am unfeignedly

In the mean time, I hope my bare confession will be eloquence enough to
persuade you, what contentment I am deprived of, by the want of ability, to
witness unto you how much I am

The contentment I take to hear of your health and happiness, can be equalled
by nothing, but the passion which I have to your service, as being

But the good opinion which I hope you have conceived of me, will give a far
better testimony than my pen is able, which has in charge at this present,
only to put you in mind, that (...) always according to my wont

I am unable to acquit my self otherwise than by prayers of the service I owe
you, yet do not cease I beseech you to continue me in the number of

I shall be happy to be honored by your commands, since by that means my
obedience, may give me the perfect contentment, of being able to testify unto
you, how much I am

Believe it, you may be as confident as of the most assured thing in the world,
that I am in heart and soul

I shall die of impatience if I expect long, the opportunity to witness unto
you how deeply I am

I should become envious of your virtuous inclinations, but that they admit no
hopes of imitation, and therefore I reserve only admiration to contemplate them
in quality of

I most passionately desire some occasion would offer it self, whereby I might
in some part merit your favor by the realitie of my service, since I am, and
will be all my life

My disability to requite you, makes me ashamed to remember what engagements I
have to be

I conjure you to serve your self without exception, of all the advantages in
my power, if you would really have me believe, that you count me of the number
of your best friends, as I am

Give him I pray an occasion by your emploiments to show you what passion he
has to your service, who desires rather to be in effect, than appearance

Believe assuredly, that in the whole train of your servants, there shall be
very few able to imitate me in resolution which I have taken to carry to my
grave, the quality of

Grant me I beseech you the liberty to importune you at all times to honor me
with your commands, that by the readiness of my observance in your service, you
may be constrained to know, that if you be extremely generous, I am no less
sensible, nor no less

I shall sooner loose my self, than the remembrance of your favors, and my
engagements by them to be

I confess my incapacity to express the resentments which your obligations
cause in me, as well as my disabilitie sufficiently to acquit my self, as

But since generous actions carry their recompense with them, all I can do, is
to put you in mind of your nobleness, and to tell you that I am

Let this acknowledgement, I beseech you, serve for a satisfaction, till I can
better assure you that I am

Accept this testimony of his service from him that has taken oath to live
and die

I shall continue for the time to come, what hitherto I have been

It Is the counsel and friendly advice of

There is none more interested in your contentments, nor more participates in
any satisfaction of yours, than I am by inclination as well as reason

The only good fortune which I expect with impatience is an occasion to change
my words into effects, and to show you how really I am

If occasions to do you service would offer themselves as often as they do to
write to you, I should give testimony by my actions, rather than by discourse,
that I am more than in complement

I know your desert and condition have acquired you many servants, yet I can
assure you with as much reason as ostentation, that join them all together,
they are not so much as I am

Let this for the present satisfy you, till I have occasions (which with
continual impatiency I expect) to give you more effectual proofs of my being

Could my endeavors take effect, or my vows accomplishment, you should not
long account me in the number of your unprofitable servants, for I am

But whatsoever happen, I shall never be other than

If I did not apprehend, I might be importunate, I should write to you by every
opportunity that presented it self, for it is the only consolation that I
have in your absence, to put you in mind, that I will be eternally

If in any thing I be able to do you service, it stands upon nothing but your
self to give me the employment, being glad to witness to you at all times how
much I am

I shall employ my best care and industry in any of your commands, when you
desire proofs of the obedience of

Return quickly your answer, if you will free from sortow and disquiet.

The only means to occasion my return is to signify to me how I may be
useful to you when I am there being in a firm resolution to render you all
manner of service in quality of

If I could be persuaded that my absence could occasion your disquiet, or my
presence necessary to your service, you should see by my speedy return how much
I am

The news of your sickness has bred such a change in my health, that I may
justly count my self in the number of those that are not well: either leave
your bed suddenly, or you will constrain to take his

I shall acquit my self very willingly of my duty in any thing wherein I may
be useful to your service, of which I give you most faithful assurance, as
protesting to be all my life

I can assure you, it is a very great satisfaction to me to see my self honored
with the favor of your remembrance, and the delightful entertainment of your
letters, wherein I read what cause I have to be

Do not think that I complement, but believe infallibly, that my heart, mouth
and pen conspire together every time I give you assurance, as I do now, that I
am more than all the world.

You will do me a great favor to honrur me with your commands, and to believe
that I am unfeignedly, and without reservation

I shall never esteem my self happy till the day wherein you are pleased to
give me an employment for your service, it being the only thing in the world I
aspire to, with most passion to let you see that I am

Every time I think of your favors, I am touched with an extraodinary
impatience in expecting some opportunity to show my self

I cannot express my uncessant disquietnesse in seeking occasions to testify
unto you how perfectly I am

It is impossible for me to express how strictly I am yours, nor the least
part of the passion I have to your service, being both unimitably, and
unlimitably

There are not many in the world that can vaunt with reason, that they are to
that height as I am

My resolution is to profess my self all my life

I begin to grow weary of your favors, the disability in which I find my self
will not suffer me to receive any new one, for fear I should be constrained in
the end to pass for ungrateful when I am most strongly obliged to be

I would say more if I made no conscience of detaining your eyes* too long upon
this paper, I shall therefore free both them and your patience, by telling you
that I am, and shall be everlastingly

I desire nothing of you but prayers intermingled with commands, to the end
that my obedience may make me worthy the good opinion you have of

Though my misfortunes be in their flood they have not drowned the respectfull
observance I always used in your behalf, as having made a vow to coffin up
with my self the quality of Believe that if I be extremely afflicted, I am no
less

The sorrow which I endure, and the straitness of the time will scarce give me
leave to assure you that I am*

But whatsoever mutations and vi^ssitudes there are in the world, I shall never
change the resolution to be all my life

If you knew with what impatience I expect the favor of your reply, I assure
my self your charity would oblige you to set at quiet the mind of

I will lose my life, rather than my resolution to die

If I had the power to comfort you with my presence, you should soon see me
where my letter is now, however I beseech you wheresoever I am, and at what
distance soever, I most really am

If you doubt of the truth of my service make use I pray of that absolute power
which you have acquired over me to oblige my enendeavours to all manner of
proofs, that I am

I never think of your many favors, but it renews the remembrance of my
engagements to be

I shall as soon forget my name as my obligements to prefix before it the title
of

I shall be content to be accounted ungrateful when I less am

I shall suspect a great growth of vice, in me when I feel any cooling of my
desires to continue everlastingly

And certainly Sir, I shall never be so impious, as not to confess my self

But I see my letter is almost grown to a volume, that I may therefore at last
make it end like me, give me leave to tell you that I am

Or if that may come within the construction of a complement, believe that I
speak most unfeignedly, when I tell you that I am

My gratitude to you is as necessary as my being, and I can sooner leave that,
than not be most truly

I shall not fail when opportunity befriends me, to give you a more expressive
testimony that I am

Be pleased to take my bare word, till I can give you a more convincing
argument that I am

I never think of the catalogue of my friends, but it puts me in mind what
cause I have to give you this subscription

I could say more, but the times are strict, and scarce allow the pen its full
liberty, however I hope I may be bold (for it is no secret) to tell you
plainly that I am

Though the times be inquisitive, and urge secrecy, yet I shall never be
brought to conceal how much I am

Though letters have not their wonted freeness, and the superscription be not
privilege enough to keep them sealed, till they reach the hands that ow the
direction, yet I will dare to tell you, and all the world, that I most truly am

Thuogh the times be dangerous, and letters unsafe, yet as long as I dare
write, I will be bold to tell you that I am

Though I be debarred your sight, yet I hope I am not envied the happiness, to
give you notice how passionatelie I am

When the world speaks the worst of me, it is some comfort to my conscience,
that I find not my self yet so vicious, as to forget what obligements I have to
serve you, and to remain perpetually

It is no small preservative against vice, to remember your virtues, and the
many engagements I have for ever to continue

Though I am most unspeakably busy, yet my occasious shall never be so
pressing, but I will be at leisure both to be, and to tell you that I am

Assure your self I shall never forget you in my prayers, as often as in them I
remember

I hope you will be pleased to honor with your acceptance, this presentment of
that service, which shall ever be duly acknowledged and upon all occasions
expressed.

I beg your acceptance of this testimony of my gratitude, and my earnest
desires, to deserve the name of

I shall be as glad to hear of your health and happiness, as I am thankful for
the many engagements I have to write my self

I hope I need not desire you to be confident, that whatsoever is deficient in
my expression, wants not a perfect supply in the hearty affection of him that
will ever remain

I desire you to accept this paper present, which is all I now can tender, and
which will be enough, if it can obtain your belief, that it comes from one who
is

Of this I desire you to rest assured, as a thing most seriously resolved by
him who is

Assure your self you think not amiss when you think me

There is none has a more ample interest in my love, nor any have a nigher
lodging to the heart of

The least word you speak I receive for an unresistable commandment as being

You have so absolutely acquired me to your service, as you have left me no
liberty to do what I desire, when there is any question of performing your
pleasure, as being

FINIS.

