July 20. 1665.
Imprimatur,

ROBERT SAY VICECAN:

The Nullity of the Romish Faith. OR A BLOW At the Root of the Romish Church,

BEING An Examination of that Fundamental Doctrine of the CHURCH of ROME
concerning the Churches INFALLIBILITY, and of all those several Methods which
their most famous and approved Writers have used for the defense thereof;

TOGETHER WITH An APPENDIX tending to the Demonstration of the Solidity of the
PROTESTANT FAITH, wherein the Reader will find all the material Objections and
Cavils of their most considerable Writers, viz. Richworth (alias Rushworth) in
his Dialogues, White in his Treatise De fide and his Apology for Tradition,
Cressy in his Exomologesis, S. Clara in his Systema fidei, and Captain Everard
in his late account of his pretended Conversion to the Church of Rome discussed
and Answered.

By MATTHEW POOLE late Minister of the Gospel in London.

OXFORD, Printed by Hen: Hall Printer to the UNIVERSITY, for Ric: Davis, 1666.

To the Right Honorable ARTHUR Earl of DONEGAL Lord Viscount Chichester, of
Carickfergus, Baron of Belfast, one of his MAJESTY'S most Honorable Privy
Counselors for his Kingdom of Ireland.
My LORD,
HOw much it concerns every man to be rightly informed in the Controversies
between Rome and Us, is sufficiently evident from the great importance they
have in reference to our everlasting state: The Papists think the Protestant
Doctrine is dangerous to Salvation; and the Protestants know the Popish
Doctrine to be so: For although they use confidently to give it out to their
Partisans that their Religion is a safe way in the judgment of Protestants
themselves, and though in former times of ignorance God might wink at some
members of the Church of Rome that held the Foundation, although they built a
great deal of Hay and Stubble upon it: Yet since the late Edition of several
new Articles of their creed, and since the contempt of that clear and glorious
light of Gospel discoveries shining in the discourses and Writings of
Protestant Authors. I cannot (and I fear God will not) excuse them from that
heinous crime of rebelling against the light or with holding it in
unrighteousness; and as Christ said to the Jews, they have now no cloak for
their Sins.

What the portion is of the followers of Antichrist we may more safely
understand from the Testimony of God then from the conjectures of men; of them
we read that they shall be damned, 2 These. 2.12. That their names are not
written in the Book of Life, Rev. 13.8. That they shall drink of the Wine of
the wrath of God -- and shall be tormented with Fire and Brimstone -- and the
smoke of their Torment shall ascend evermore, and they shall have no rest day
nor night which worship the beast and his image, Rev. 14.9, 10, 11.

The only doubt is whether the Papists be followers of Antichrist, or (which
comes to one) whether the Pope be Antichrist, which seemed so probable to the
famous Lord Bacon that being asked by King JAMES whether he thought him so to
be, it was no less truly then wittily answered by him, That if an hue and cry
should come after Antichrist, which should describe him by those Characters by
which he is deciphered in the Bible, he should certainly apprehend the Pope for
him, and I desire all Papists, who would not venture their Eternal Salvation
upon uncertainties, to do our cause and their own Souls that justice as to
peruse the Author's of both sides viz. Whitaker and Downham on the one, and
Bellarmine and Lessius on the other, and then I doubt not but they will
conclude the notorious weakness of their cavils, or pretended Answers to our
Allegations to be at least an high presumption of the truth of our Assertion,
if not sufficient to put an end to all further doubtings.

My Lord,

It is no small evidence of a good cause and felicity of our Protestant people,
that they are permitted to see with their own Eyes, and are both allowed and
warned by their teachers, not to take matters of Salvation upon trust but to
enquire and search the Scriptures and other Authors whether those things be
true or no, whilst unhappy Papists like the Andabatae of old must wink and
fight, and are obliged with an implicit Faith to follow their guides in spite
of Christ's caution used upon the like occasion, If the blind lead the blind
both shall fall into the Ditch, Matthew. 15.14. Protestant Ministers bespeak
their hearers in St Paul's language, I speak to wise men judge ye what I say, 1
Cor. 10. 15. While Popish Priests, if they would speak out must say I speak as
to Fools, believe all that I say: A plain sign their Gold is adulterate
because they dare not suffer it to come to the Touchstone.

My Lord,

In the handling of these Controversies I thought it most prudent and ingenuous
to follow the Council which Benhadad gave to his Soldiers, to fight neither
with small nor great, but with the King of Israel, and therefore I did not mind
the branches, but have endeavored to strike at the Root: For such is the
Doctrine here discussed viz. The Doctrine of the Churches Authority and
Infallibility and so it is acknowledged by all the Romanists, and we are
advised by them (if we mean to do any good) to attaque them in this point. I
like the Counsel and therefore have resolved (...) arcem petere to attempt
their strongest hold: All the Controversies of the Church of Rome have (what
Caligula wished all the people of Rome had) one work, and that is this of the
Churches Infallible Authority: while this is safe, we do but pair their
Nails, and cut their Hair which will quickly grow again, but if this fails,
all falls, wound them here, and it goes to the heart. Whether I have done this
here or no, I shall not be so absurd or arrogant as to give judgment in my own
cause, this only I shall be bold to say, that I have faithfully represented
the strength of the Popish cause in this great point out of their most famous
and approved Authors, and such of whom it might be truly said Si moenia Romae
Defendi possent dextra hac defensa fuissent, and therefore if all the plausible
pretenses of their most considerable Writers be here removed and destroyed
(which I willingly refer to the judgment of the serious intelligent and
impartial Reader) I may without injustice conclude that their Doctrine is
indefensible and their cause desperate.

My Lord,

The reason why I devolve the patronage of this work upon your Lordship is not
only the consideration of your real worth and those honorable qualities
resplendent in you, that true generosity, sincere friendship, obliging
sweetness, impartial valuation of persons acc^rding to their merit, not their
party or opinion in little things, and other conspicuous virtues (which they
that have the happiness of your acquaintance are witnesses of) nor is it only
the known excellency and exemplary piety of your most Illustrious Lady (which
nothing but ignorance or malice can deny) nor the particular obligations which
I shall always desire to own to both of you, but the contemplation of that
great interest, which by the high capacity of your Place, and the nobleness of
your Estate, and the unexampled affability of your deportment, you have in the
Kingdom of Ireland; which how free it is from other Venoms your Lordship
knows better then I, yet sure I am it is sadly infected with the Poison of
Popish Doctrines, and therefore I thought the Antidote most needful there, and
that your Lordships Authority and Influence accompanied with your zealous
endeavors (which God expects and I promise to my self from you in so good a
cause) might induce many persons of the Romish persuasion to read and consider
this short Treatise, if God peradventure may give them Repentance to the
acknowledgment of the Truth that they may recover themselves from the snare of
the Devil.

That God would incline your heart to contribute your most effectual help to
so good a work and succeed you in it and recompense you for it, and that God
would bless Your self and worthy Lady with all the blessings you want, and
mercifully preserve and Sanctify to you all you have, and crown all with those
inexpressible felicities of another World, is now and shall by Gods assistance
be the humble and fervent prayer of,

My Lord, Your Lordships Orator at the Throne of Grace MATTHEW POOLE.
Sept. 1. 1665.
To the Reader.
BEfore I come to the work it self I know my Reader will require satisfaction
in two things which I hold my self obliged to give in the first to the
Protestant, in the latter to the Romanist. 1. It will be objected to me as the
Jewish Tradition, tells us was objected to Moses by his Antagonists, who charged
him with bringing Magical operations among them, that he brought Straw into
Egypt, a country abounding with Corn: so it will be said that I trouble the
World with needless repetitions, that I write an Iliad after Homer, and do
that work which has long since been d^n much better by our Protestant Heroes,
and that Nil dictum est quod non est dictum prius; and particularly that this
point of Infallibility has been discussed by that formidable Adversary of Rome
the most acute Mr Chillingworth, Lord Falkland, Dr Hammond, and lately by our
Learned Mr Stillingfleet: To these my Apology is, 1. That the clamorous
importunity of Popish Writers does force us to these repetitions, it being the
practice of most of their present Controvertists boldly to urge those things in
English as unanswerable which they know have been so solidly disproved in Latin
that they neither cannot have pretended to Answer. 2. I have made it my
endeavor as much as I could to avoid repetitions, which are as displeasing to
me as they can be to the Reader, which if I have in many places stumbled upon,
it has rather been the necessity of the thing or an unhappy chance then the
choice and design. 3. The Reader I hope will find (...): If I had known of any
Author, who had in so short a compass and plain Method contracted and
dissolved the strength of the Popish cause in this great point, I had willingly
superseded; nor did I intrude my self into this work, but was invited to it by
diverse worthy and learned friends, and afterward encouraged in it by the
approbation of such persons, whose judgments I think almost all the learned
part of England does reverence. 4. Here is a new plea (viz concerning the
sufficiency of the Testimony of the present Church and the Infallibility of
Oral Tradition) not at all considered by Mr. Chillingworth, nor fully discussed
by any other that I know of, (except the ingenious Lord Falkland, who handles
it quite another way, and has left room for some Gleanings after his Harvest:)
Nor is it debated by Mr. Stilling fleet, whose Adversaries led him to things of
another nature. And besides it is known to diverse, that this Treatise was
prepared for the Press before Mr. Stillingfleet's excellent Discourse came out,
though retarded by some unhappy occurrences which it is needless here to
recount.

The second particular is this: The Papists will pretend, that the Doctrines I
charge upon them, and the Testimonies which I allege against them, are only
the particular opinions of private Doctors, and not of their whole Church. My
defense is this.

1 The Authors which are here introduced, are not pedantick writers, but such
as are of prime note and highest esteem in the Church of Rome, and the most
zealous and considerable Champions of their cause, and such (for the generality
of them,) whose writings came forth with the character of their Churches
approbation upon them, concerning whom it will be very difficult to persuade
any intelligent man, either that such persons did not understand the sense of
the Church of Rome, (as well as the Objector) or that they did knowingly
contradict the doctrine of their Church, or would be permitted so to do without
any censure upon them.

2 The testimonies of those Authors are undoubtedly sufficient for that end for
which I alledg them, which is to show the falseness of those doctrines, and the
weakness of those arguments which are disbelieved and disproved by their own
learnedest and stoutest Champions, by which it may appear to all impartial
persons, that it is not the ignorance nor prejudice of Protestants, (as some of
their VVriters have the Effrontery to assert) which makes them reject the
Popish Tenets, but merely the want of Truth and evidence therein, confessed (as
you will see all along in the following Treatise) by their own Brethren, and
that it is a desperate madness in any Papist to hazard his everlasting
concernments upon such principles, as so many of their acutest Scholars do
publicly disavow: And that this is really the case of the unhappy Romanist I
refer thee to the subsequent Discourse.

POOLE's Nullity of the Romish faith.

The INDEX.
The Introduction. Page 1.
CHAP. 1.
The Popes infallible Authority is no sufficient foundation of Faith, and is a
mere nullity page 2.
CHAP. 2.
Scripture is no sufficient foundation of Faith to a Papist according to their
principles proved out of their prime Authors. Sect. 1, 2, 3, 4. The Scriptures
alleged by them for the Popes infallible authority examined in general. Sect.
5. 6. In particular Matthew. 16. 18. Thou art Peter Sect. 7. 8, 9, John 21. Feed
my sheep. Se. 10, Luke 22. I have prayed, etc.. 11. Deuteronomy. 17. 11, 12,. 12.
CHAP. 3.
Of the Infallible authority of the Fathers Asserted by the Papists. Sect. 1.
Disproved, 1. By the same arguments by which the Papists derogate from the
authority of Scripture.. 2, 3. 2. Because Infallibility is the Churches
Prerogative.. 4. 3. The Fathers disclaim it.. 5. Exc. But Fathers where they
agree are Infallible Answered.. 6. p. 46. 4 The Papists themselves disown the
Infallibility of the Fathers though consenting.. 7, 8, 9.
CHAP. 4.
Of the Authority and Infallibility of the Church and Councels Asserted by
Papists.. 1. Disproved, 1. There is no Foundation for it in Tradition.. 3, 4.
For 1. If the Fathers deliver such a Tradition they are not infallible.. 5.
Exc. Fathers consenting are Infallible: Answ. We cannot at this distance
understand their consent. ibid. 2. If the ancients did believe the
Infallibility of Councels, they might do it upon the account of Scripture not
Tradition.. 6. 3. It does not appear that the Fathers believed the
Infallibility of Councels. Proved by answering the arguments of Bellarm. and S.
Clara. Sect. 7, 8, 9, 10. Of St Austins judgment.. 10, 11. 4. It appears that
the Fathers believed the Fallibility of Councels.. 12. 2. There is no
foundation for this Infallibility in Scripture. Proved in general.. 13. In
particular by the examination of the Texts urged for it. 1 Timothy, 3. 15.. 14.
Mat. 18. 17. Hear the Church and Luke 10. 16. 15. That the Church and Ministers
are not to be heard in all things with an implicit Faith. 1. Christ denies this
to the Apostles: 2. Else people cannot sin in obeying their Pastors. 3. People
are allowed to examine their teachers Doctrines. Job. 16. 3. He shall guide you
into all truth.. 16. Acts 15. 28.. 17. Mat. 28.. 18. page 103. 3. The Papists
themselves disown the Infallibility of Councels.. 20. An examination of that
evasion and pretended agreement of Papists in this, that the Pope and Council
together are Infallible.. 21. 4. The Infallibility of their Councels destroyed
by the consideration of those things which Papists themselves require in
Infallible Councels as 1. That they be general.. 23 2. That they have the
consent and approbation of the whole Church.. 24. 3. That they be rightly
constituted and ordered and guided by honesty, piety, and love to Truth.. 25.
Exc. Pope, Councels, Fathers, Scripture conjoined make the Church Infallible.
Answered.. 26.
CHAP. 5.
Of O^all Tradition and the Testimony of the present Church. This new opinion
represented in the words of its Authors and abettors.. 1. Refuted. 1. Hereby
they both settle the Protestant foundation of Faith and overthrow their own..
2, 3 2. This makes Orall Tradition more certain then writing, against the
judgment of God and all men.. 4. page 140. 3. Errors may come in and have come
in to the Church under pretense of Tradition.. 5. 4. Traditionary proofs
disowned, 1. By the Prophets and Jews of old.. 6. Exc. The Law of Christians
is written in their hearts not Tables. Answered.. 7. 2. By Christ and his
Apostles. 8. Exc. 2 These. 2. 15. ibid. 5. Scripture proof is necessary for
confirmation of Doctrines in the judgment of the Fathers.. 9. ^. Orall
Tradition has deceived the Romanists themselves.. 10. page 158. Exc. They are
not deceived in great points de fide. Answered. ibid. ^. Though experience
sufficiently proves the deceit of this argument, yet it is particularly showed
how error might creep in this way.. 11. It might creep in by degrees.. 12. 1.
Christians might mistake the mind of their Predecessors.. 13. page 166. 1.
There was no certain way for the third age to know the Doctrines of the
second. ib. 2. Instances given of men's misunderstanding the Doctrine of the
precedant Age.. 14. 3. The words of our praedecessors may be remembered and the
sense perverted.. 15. 4. Some ages were horribly ignorant and careless
Exemplified in the tenth Age. Sect. 16, 17, 18. And few Writers.. 19. 2.
Christians might knowingly recede from the Doctrines of their Ancestors. 1.
From Gods just judgment.. 21. 2. Because they did believe their praedecessors
erred. Sect. 22. 3. Eminent persons might corrupt the Doctrine received from
their Ancestors and did so. Sect. 23. Exemplified in a forgery of the Popes.
ib. 8. This way of Tradition disproved by the practice of the Church of Rome
which introduces Doctrines, not descending by Tradition but new. Sect. 24.
Exemplified in two Doctrines The immaculate conception of the Blessed Virgin,
And the Canon of the Scripture. ibid.
CHAP. 6.
Of Miracles and the motives of credibility The o^inion represented in their
words. Sect. 1. Refuted 1. Other Churches have a juster claim to these marks
then Rome. Sect. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. 2. Diverse of them are not marks of the Church.
Sect. 8.9.10. The Character of miracles specially considered and their Argument
thence confuted. 1. Christ's Miracles prove Romes Fall^bility. Sect. 12. 2.
Miracles are not simply and universally to be believed. Proved by Arguments.
Sect. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. 3. Miracles only prove the verity of the
Doctrine not the Infallibility of the person. Sect. 19. 4. Miracles do not
always prove the verity of a Doctrine for they may be, and have been done by
Heathens and Heretics. Which is acknowledged by the learned Papists. Sect. 20.
5. Miracles are pleaded by the Romanists either impertinently or falsely. Sect.
21 6. Protestants may plead Miracles as well as Papists. Sect. 22. A brief
recapitulation of the several pretensions and resolutions of Faith among the
Romanists. Sect. 23. Another plea from Gods providence, and the supposed
necessity of a living Infallible judge. Sect. 25, 26, 27, 28.
CHAP. 7.
Of the Solidity of the Pro^^stants Foundation of Faith. The Protestants have a
solid fou^^dation of Faith in the Scri^^tures, the Papists themselves (...) ing
judges. Sect. (...) Their Learned men acknowle^ 1. That the Scripture is, (...)
may be known to be the (...) of God without the Church Testimony and by its ow^
light. Sect. (...) 2. That the Books of Scriptu^^ are not corrupted in
essentia^ and necessary points. Sect. (...) 3. That the sense of Scripture
(...) things necessary may be u^^derstood. Sect. (...) Except: Protestants
(...) upon an humane Transla^tion answered Se. 5, 6, 7, ^ Protestants freed
from the pre^^tended circle of proving Scrip^^ture by the spirit, and the
spi^rit by the Scripture. Sect. 9^ 10, 11, 12^ A consideration of that preten^
ostered at by some Romanists. That the Churches Authority (...) a sufficient
foundation for faith without infallibility. Sect. 13^
The APPENDIX.
THe occasion of it. page 1 The occasion of Everards pretended conversion to
Popery. p. 5. The Argument which perverted him, viz. that a Protestant cannot
be infallibly assured of the truth of Christian Religion: considered and
examined. page 8. to the 12. Of the Doctrine of Infallibility as stated by Mr
Cressy. p. 12. Papists and Protestants grant that such a Doctrine ought to have
the greatest evidence that such things can bear. p. 14. Whether the Doctrine
of Infallibility be evidently proved. The Negative defended. 1. Because it is
not evident to the Papists themselves. p. 15. They are divided about it
notwithstanding their pretended agreement. p. 16. Their haltings in the point,
and Mr Cressy's shufflings discovered. p. 18. 2. Because their reasons to
dedefend it are weak. Mr Cressy's arguments examined. Arg. 1. Take away
Infallibility and you destroy all authority. p. 21. 2. From the Anathema's of
Councels. p. 23. 3. From the promises of Infallibility made to the Church. page
25 to page 30. 4. No unity without Infallibility. page 30. Other considerations
against infallibility. 1. The Texts and arguments alleged, either prove
nothing or more then Mr Cressy would have. page 33. 2. If a Pope and Council
together were Infallible, yet now they have no Infallibility in the Church of
Rome. ib. A Character of the last Pope drawn by a Papist, and the Popes
confession that he never studied Divinity. p. 34. The grounds of the Faith of
Protestants stated, and the pretended differences among Protestants reconciled.
page 36. to 45. Captain Everards arguments against the judgment of reason
considered. page 45. Everards arguments against Scriptures, being a perfect
rule and judge of Controversies, examined and answered. 1 (Which is the great
argument of the Papists) because it does not answer its end nor reconcile the
dissent^rs. p. 47. 2. Some books of Scripture are lost. p. 50. 3. A rule must
be plain but Scripture is dark. p. 52. 2 Pet. 3.16. Vindicated. page 52.
Several particulars wherein the Scripture is said to be dark. considered. 1.
About the number of Sacraments. page 54. 2. About the number of Canonical
books. p. 55. 3. About the incorruption of Scripture. p. 56. 4. About the sense
of Scripture. p. 57. 5. About fundamental points. p. 59. 4. Protestants have
not the Originals but only Translations. p. 63. 5. There are contradictions in
Scripture. p. 65. 6. Scripture is liable to contrary Expositions. p. 66. 7.
Scripture was not judge in the Apostles days. p. 68. 8. This makes every man
judge. p. 69. Another argument of Cressy's, taken from hence that Scripture
were written upon particular occasions. p. 71. Rushworth's two great ap^plauded
a^guments in his Da^^alogues refuted. The first taken from the great
uncertain^y and corruption of the Texts in our Bibles. p. 75 to 82. The second
from the Methods of Laws and Lawgivers. p. 82. Mr. White's argument, viz. That
Scripture was not Written about the present Controversies, considered and
answered. p. 88. The Scriptures authority and sufficiency, argued only from
one Text. 2 Timothy 3.15, 16. Vindicated from diverse exceptions of Captain
Everard, Mr Cressy, and Mr. White. p. 92. ad finem.
A Postscript to the Reader.
The design of this Treatise being to destroy all pretensions of Infallibility
in the Church, Pope, or Councels; it were an unreasonable thing for the Reader
to expect Infallibility in the Printer or to deny his pardon to the errors of
the Press occasioned by the Authors constant absence. Such smaller errors as
do not pervert the sense, the Reader will easily discern. The grosser mistakes
which he is entreated to Correct are such as these that follow.

For work page 4. of the Epistle Dedicatory line the last but one read neck
Page 8. l n. 27. read decis^on. p. 9. l. 7. r. Gret^^^^^. p. 13. l. 31. r.
rock. p. 14. l. 21. r. least. p. 33 l. 17. r. Melchior. p. 35. l. 32. r. their.
after namely p. 39. l. 15. r. because. for best. p. ^0. l. 8. r. least. p. ^5.
l. 26. r. Grill. ^^^ acquices. p. 58. l. 25. r. acquiesces. p. 60. l. 2. r.
Gresserus. p. 65. l. 26 and 27. r. ^^d there for ^y p. 84. l. last r. of p. 87.
l. 22. r. Osius. p. 87. l. 26. r. add with p. 112 l 4.r. fricat. ^b. l. 26. r.
breaths. p. 116. l. 10. r. Celotius. p. 117 l. 32. r. scrupulosi^^ p. 120. l.
29. r. affectione. p. 125. l. 3. r. Dullardus. p. 130. l. 1. r. student. p.
137. l. 7. r. discevers. p. 137. l. 14. r. Romish. p. 137. l. 25.r.
recentieribus. p. 138. l. 31. r. niti page 155. the signatures to the cit^tions
are misplaced. p. 165. l. 29. r. answerer for thinks. p. 171. l. 20. r. things.
p. 174. l. 33. r. Apota^^ici. p. 201. l. antepenultima dele non. p. 218. l.
last. r. protervire p. 218. l. 31 and 32. dele and to fetch in miracles that
they may not want arguments p. 226. l. last. r. undeniable.

In the Appendix.
Page 40. l. 3. after iu^^ read each particular. p. 44. l. 30. r. it is. p. 61.
l. 31. r. effectuall^. p.62. l. 17. r. Stilling fleet. ib. p. 31. r.
Smiglecius. p. 76. l. 20. for perfectly r. in part.

The Nullity of the Romish Faith
The Introduction.
ALl Papists profess to resolve their Faith into, and to ground it upon the
Churches infallible T^stimonie and supreme Authority. But when they come to
explicate what they mean by the Church, and on what account they ground their
Faith upon her, then they sall into diverse opinions. By the Church some
understand the ancient Church, whose Testimony is expressed in the writings of
the Fathers, others, the present Church, whose living Testimony, and
Authority they say is sufficient without any further inquiry: and this
present Churh too, they cannot yet agree what it is: Some say the Pope, others
a general Council, and others the Pope and a Council together. Nor are they
less at variance about the grounds on which they build the Churches Authority.
This some lay in the Testimony of scripture, others in the Authority of the
Fathers, others in universal or all tradition, others in the motives of
credibility (as we shall see in the process of this discourse.) My purpose is
to discover the rottenness of these several foundations as they make use of
them and to show. That they have no solid foundation for their Faith in any of
these recited particulars: and for more orderly proceeding I shall lay down six
propositions.

I that a Papists faith has no solid foundation in the authority and
infallibility of the Pope. 2 Nor in the scriptures according to their
principles. 3 Nor in the authority of Fathers. 4 Nor in the infallibility of
the Church and Councels. 5 Nor in unwritten tradition; and the authority of the
present Church. 6 Nor in the motives of credibility. Of which in order.

CHAP. 1. Of the Popes Authority and Infallibility.
Sect. 1. Propos. 1. THe Popes infallibile authority is in it self of no
validity, and is a mere nullity further then it is established or corroborated
by the rest. This needs no great proof. For if I should ask any Papist why he
rather relies upon the decisions of the Bishop of Rome, then the Bishop of
York, the only plea is, that the Bishop of Rome is St Peter's successor, and
established by God in those royalties and jurisdictions, which St Peter is
supposed to have been invested with. But if I ask how this appears, what proofs
and evidences there are of this assertion (upon which hangs the whole Mass, and
Fabric of Popery.) There is no man so grossly absurd, to believe himself or to
affirm that I am bound to believe this barely upon the Popes assertion, that he
is Peter's successor. But for the proof of this, I am by the learned Romanist
referred unto some passages of scripture; as Thou art Peter feed my sheep, etc.
Unto Tradition and the Testimony of Fathers and acts of Counsels, that have
either devolved this power upon or acknowledged and confirmed it* in the
Bishops of Rome: from whence it undeniably follows, that the Popes (...) or
naked affirmation of his own Authority (though delivered ^x Cathedra, and with
all immaginable formalities) is of no weight in it self, and has no strength,
nor virtue in it further then it is supported and demonstrated from such
Testimonies of scripture fathers or Counsels. Which will further appear from
this consideration: That upon supposition, that the Scripture had been silent
as to Peter's supremacy, and the Fathers and Councels had said nothing
concerning the succession of the Bishops of Rome, in St Peter's chair, but had
ascribed the same privileges, which they are pretended to atribute to the
Pope, to the Bishop of Antioch. I say upon this supposition, the Popes
pretenses would have been adjudged extremely presumptuous, and wholly
ridiculous. From this then we have gained thus much. That the Popes Authority
and Infallibility being the thing in Question and but a superstruction upon
those other forementioned foundations; and not (...), or credible for it self,
that, it is not in it self a sufficient foundation for a Papists faith. And so
that must be quitted as impertinent to the present enquiry, and we must go to
the other particulars and examine whether a Papist without any reference to or
dependence upon the Popes Authority or Infallibility can find a solid
foundation for his faith either in Scriptures, Fathers, Councels, tradition or
the motives of Credibility. And if I can show, that the Papists according to
their own principles cannot have a solid and sure ground for their faith in any
of the now mentioned particulars, or if I can show that all their other
pretensions according to the principles of the most and learned Papists,
depend upon this Authority of the Pope, and without it are no solid foundation
of faith, that Scriptures, Fathers, Councels, and tradition, are not conclusive
nor obliging to me to believe, without the Popes Authority and Interpretation
(which I think will be made evident in the following discourses) then I may
truly conclude that they have no foundation for their faith. Therefore I pass
on to the second head.

CHAP. II. Of the Authority of Scripture according to Romish Principles.
Prop. 2. Sect. 1. THat the Scripture in it self, without the Interpretation,
Testimony, and Authority of the Church, is not a sufficient foundation o^
Faith for private Christians, according to the Doctrine the Romanists: This is
so plain, so often asserted b^ them, so universally owned, so vehemently urged
in a^ their Treatises, that if there were not an horrible per^versnesse and
tergiversation in that sort of men (wh^ indeed by the badnesse of their cause
are forced to sa^ and unsay, give and recall, affirm and deny the sam^ things
as occasion requires, and the strength of an Ar^gument forces them:) I might
supercede from an^ further pain or trouble therein; I shall therefore only
observe two Principles of the Popish Creed, either o^ which (and much more both
put together) do plainly and undeniably evince, that according to their
Hypotheses the Scripture in it self is no solid ground nor foundation of a
Christian Faith. 1. That a Christian cannon know, and is not bound to believe,
any, or all of the Books of Scripture to be the Word of God, without the
Churches Witness and Authority. 2. That the senc^ of Scripture is so obscure
and ambiguous in the Article of Faith, that a Christian cannot discover it
without the Churches interpretation.

. 2. For the first of these, it may suffice at present t^ mention two or three
passages out of their approved Writers. Baily the Jesuit, in his Catechism of
Controversies made by the command of the Archbishop o^ Bordeaux. puts this
Question: Doctor Jesuita. Ad quem pe^^inet de libris Canonicis Determinare?
Catholicus Papista. Ad ^ccl^siam, sine cu^us authoritate, non plus fidci
a^hiberem Ma^thaeo quam Tito Livio. par. 1 ^^. 12.
To whom does it belong to determine of Canonical Books! and Answers thus, To
the Church, without whose Authority I should no more believe St Matthew then
Titus Livius. When Brentius alleged the saying of a Papist; that if the
Scriptures were destitute of the Churches Authority, they would weigh no more
then AEsops Fables: the Cardinal Hosius replies, Po^uit illud pio sensu dici
-- Nam revera nisi nos ecclesiae doceret authoritas hanc scripturam esse
Canonicam, perexiguum apud nos pondus haberet. de Authoritate Scripturae contra
Brentium Lib. 3. Fol. 271.
That these words may be taken in a pious sense; For in truth (says he) unl
esse the Authority of the Church did teach us that this Scripture were
Canonical, it would have very little weight with us: So Charron plainly tells
us, Scriptura nullam babet authoritatem, nullum pondus, nullam vim erga nos and
nostram fidem, nisi quod ecclesia dicit and declarat Charron verse. 3.
That the Scripture has no Authority, no weight or force toward us, and our
Faith; but for the Churches assertion and declaration. Andradius in express
terms denies Neque in Scripturis quicquam inesse divinitatis, quae nos ad
credendum, quoe illis continentur, religione aliqua constring at, at Eccles^e,
quae codices illos sacros esse docet -- nemo sine gravissima impietatis nota
^ossit rep^g^are. Defens, Trident. lib 2.
That there is any thing of Divinity in the Scripture, which binds us to
believe the things therein contained, but the Church, which teaches us, that
those Boo ks are Sacred, none can resist without the high^st impiety. One may
well cry out- Heu Pietas, heu priscae fid^s! To disbelieve the Scripture, that
is no impiety, but to resist the Church, that is the Highest impiety: To make
God a liar, that is no impiety; but to make the Church a liar, that is impiety
in the highest. You see now the reason why Violations of the Churches Authority
are more severely punished at Rome, then the grossest transgressions of Gods
Lawe^ because there is more impiety in them, and so more sev^rity should be
exercised against them. And Pighi^ uses no less freedom, telling us
Scripturae, nisi ab Ecclesia accepto veritatis testimonio, nuliam, ex scripsis
aut suis authoribus, apud nos authoritatem habere, Lib. 1. Hierarchio cap. 2.
That the Scripture have no Authority with us either from themselves, or from
their Authors, but merely from the Churches Testimon^ Thus you see, that
according to the systeme of Popis^ Theology, the Scripture does not discover it
self to b^ the Word of God, nor oblige my faith, unless it brin^ along with
it the Churches Letters of credence: An^ whereas in St Paul's days, neither
Church nor Apostle was believed further then they brought credentials from
Scripture, Acts 17.11. And St Austine in his days, in hi^ Controversies with
the Donatists, batters down their Church by this Argument, that they could not
show it in, nor prove it from the Authority of Scriptures: Now on the contrary
the Scripture is not to be received, unless it be confirmed by the Churches
Authority: And as Tertullian argued of old: Net Deus ern nisi homini placuerit.
God shall not be God, without man's consent. It is here, as in dealings between
man^ and man; if I say to some unknown person recommended to me by one whom I
know and trust, I should not believe your professions of honesty (for I know
you not) were it not for the Testimony which my worthy friend gives of you: In
this case, the man's professions of honesty are not the ground of my faith or
confidence in him, but only my friends Testimony. Or as if a learner in
Philosophy should say to his Tutor, I should not believe that to be true, which
I read in my Book, that the Earth moves, were it not for the reverence I bear
to your deep judgment and great abilities: Here it is plain, the reading in
his book, is not the foundation of his faith or persuasion, but only the
reverence he bears to his teacher. And just this (say they) is the case of the
scripture, to which purpose they allege, and own those words of Austin,
(though they pervert the sense) Ego vero Evangelio non crederem, nisi me
Ecclesiae commoveret authoritas.
I should not believe the Gospel, unless the Churches Authority did move me.
Which if true in their sense, then the Churches Authority is the sole
foundation of my faith, and without it the scripture is a mere Cipher or at
least not sufficient to command, or ground my faith, which was the thing to be
demonstrated, The truth is, the Papists put the same scorn upon the scriptures,
that the prophet Elisha did upon that ungodly King Iehoram -- 2 Kings 3.14. and
bespeake it in the same language -- were it not that I regard the presence, the
testimony and the authority of the Church, I would not look toward thee, not
believe, nor reverence thee.

Sect. 3. If it be said, that although the Churches Testimony was necessary
before, yet since the Church has long ago consigned the Canon of the
scripture, my faith is now grounded not only upon the Churches testimony; but
upon the scriptures Authority.

To this I answer. 1 That now as well as formerly, the faith of a Christian
(acted by Romish principles) does not depend upon the word but barely upon the
Churches testimony, which I shall make plain by an instance. I do not believe
(supposing I were a Papist) the Popes supremacy because I read these words.
Thou art Peter, (for if I read those words in Tacitus, I should not draw an
Argument from them, unless happily I should fall into as merry a vein as
Bellarmine does when he proves Purgatory out of Bell. de Purgat. lib. 1. cap. 7.
Plato, Cicero, and Virgil) But because the books wherein I read those words,
Thou art Peter, is a book of Canonical scripture, and a part of the word of
God, there lies the whole stress of the argument. And this I cannot know, (say
our Catholic masters,) and am not bound to believe, but for the Churches
Testimony: Which testimony, as it is the only cause which makes the scripture
in general, Authentical, Quoad nos, says Stapleton, so it must be that
alone, which makes this place: Thou art Peter, Argumentative quoad nos, that
is, all the force that Argument has to persuade or convince me, is from the
Church and not from the scripture, and the scripture makes it Canonical to me,
and its being Canonical, gives the whole weight to the Argument, and quod est,
causa causae, est causa causati.

Sect. 4. 2. It is not the words, but sense of Scripture, where the strength of
the argument lies. And that sense, say they, we cannot understand, nor attain,
but by the Churches interpretation, which leads me to the second principle of
the Romanists, viz. That the sense of scripture, (which is indeed the very Soul
of scripture, and the only ground of faith, and Arguments,) is in many
matters: of faith, so obscure, and ambiguous, that there is an absolute
necessity of an Authentic, and infallible Interpreter, and Judge to acquaint
us therewith, that is the Church, or (per aequevalentiam Iesuiticam) the Pope.
And it is absurd to expect, and impossible to receive satisfaction of doubts,
and dceision, of controversies, of faith from the scripture, which is but a
dead letter, unless the Church animates it. This is so notoriously owned by
them all, that it is needless to quote Authors for it. That which I infer
from hence is this, that according to this Hypothesis, the scripture in it
self, (I say in it self, for that is all the present Proposition pretends to
prove) is no solid foundation for my faith; and indeed, that it is a mere
Cipher, which if your Church be put to it, may have some signification and
value, butelse none at all. And that it is not the letter of the Scripture in
it self, but the Churches interpretation which gives weight to this argument.
And this plainly appears from that saying, of their great Master Stapleton,
which deserves to be often men tioned, in rei memoriam, and the rather, because
Grotserus Defens. Bell. Tom. 1 page, 386.
owns it and justifies it when Stapleton had asserted in his triplication
against Whitaker, c. 17. that even the Divinity of Christ, and of God did
depend upon the Authority of the Pope. And when Pappus had charged Stapleton
with that assertion. Gretsers defense is: that Stapleton did not mean that they
depended upon the Pope: in se and ex part rei, but only quoad nos, in respect
of us, and so (says Gretser) it is very true, for that I believe that Christ
is God, and that God is one, and three, I do it, being induced by the Authority
of the Church, testifying that those books wherein such things are delivered,
are divine, and dictated by God: (a) I desire the reader to observe this as
fully opening the mystery of the Romish Cabal, and discovering the dreadful
tendency of Popish principles making the Divinity of Christ precarious, that
the Divinity of the Pope may be absolute and certain. And thus I trow the Pope
has quit scores with Christ, for as he was beholden to Christ, for his
Authority, so now Christ is beholden to his vicar, for his Divinity: and says
he, it was truly said by Tannerus (nor needed Pappus to wonder at it,) that
without the interpretation and testification Recte hoc ab illo asseritur. Addit
enim Stapletonus divinitatem Christi and Dei pendere a testimonio and
judiciariaa potestate Pontificis quoad nos, non in se, and ex port rei. Et
paulo post: Neque Praedicanti adeu mirum videri debet, quod a Tannero nostro in
Examine Relationis Hunnianoe scriptum, est, sine hae interpretatione and
testificatione Ecclesiae impossible fore credere (supernaturaliter) ex sola
Scriptura, Deum esse unum; esse cres hypostases divinas in una essentia: non
est, inquam, quod adeo miretur and irascatur insulsus Pappus, quia uihil a^
veritate alienum complectitur. Defens. Bell. Tom. 1. in Append. 1. ad lib. 1.
Card. Bell. p. 386.
of the Church it is impossible to believe out of Scripture alone, that God is
one, and that there are three persons. Who is it that dare charge these
Jesuits with Equivocation? I think they speak as plainly as their greatest
enemies can desire: Here you see the meaning of that distinction quoad se and
quoad nos, viz. They acknowledge the Scripture in it self to be true and
Canonical, and it is a Truth in it self, that Christ is God; but so far as
concerns me, I am not bound to believe either the one or other; but for the
Churches Testimony, which is the very thing I am now proving and hereby
granted, That the Scripture in it self is no foundation of my Faith. And this
is the more weighty, because you see it was not an unadvised slip of one man's
Pen, but here you have it deliberately asserted and defended by a Triumvirate
of Popish Authors, each of whose works, where that passage was, is set forth
with the approbation of several Romish Doctors of principal note.

. 5. But peradventure, Quae non prosunt singula a juncta juvant. Although,
neither the Popes Authority, nor the Scriptures Testimony alone will, yet both
together may constitute a solid and sufficient foundation of faith; and the
Popes Authority being asserted in, and demonstrated by the Scriptures, is a
sure sooting for my faith; To which, though it might suffice to object the
circle (which is here most palpable and evident) yet I shall at present
forbear that answer, and refer it to another place, and shall here consider,
whether the Scriptures assert the Popes infallible Authority, as it is
pretended. And first in general, whereas several Texts of Scripture are
pleaded by the Romanists, in favor of the Popes Supremacy and Infallibility,
as Feed my sheep -- Thou art Peter I have prayed for thee -- and the like: I
demand whether these words or Texts of Scripture, in, and for themselves,
without the interpretation and testification of the Romish Church, do bind me
to believe the Popes Supremacy, and Infallibility, or no^; If they deny the
validity of these Texts, without the Churches Testimony and Authority (as needs
they must according to their Principles) then it follows, that there is
nothing in Scripture, considered in it self, that binds me to believe the
Popes Supremacy, and consequently I do not sin, when I do not believe and own
their Arguments drawn from these Texts, and that the Scripture in it self is
no sufficient foundation for a Papists Faith: If they affirm it, then let all
the Papists in the World give me a reason why these Texts The Word was God,
Joh. 1. He thought it no robbery to be equal with God, Phil. 2. This is the
true God -- 1 John 5. Should not in themselves, and without the Churches
Authority as solidly prove the Divinity of Christ, as the other mentioned Texts
are affirmed to prove the Supremacy and Infallibility of the Pope.

. 6. If they persist still to say, that the alleged Texts are in themselves a
solid foundation for my faith, although such an aspersion is contrary to their
universal profession and overturnes the whole fabric of Popery; yet because I
know those Proteus's will turn themselves into all shapes, and endeavor to
slip all knots, and because I observe all their writings are stuffed with
several Texts of Scripture, as if they would make their deluded Proselites
believe they made them the foundation of their faith: I shall therefore make
some brief remarks upon the chief of their Scripture allegations, in
pursuance of the Proposition under consideration, and show that the faith of a
Papist has no foundation at all in the sacred Scripture, in the great and
fundamental point of the Popes Infallibility: Only that you may understand
the diffidence, which some of their own great Rabbis have in their Scripture
Arguments, I shall mind you of a remarkable saying of Eminent Doctor Pighius,
who persuading his Catholics in their Disputations, rather to argue from
Tradition then Scriptures, he breaks out into these memorable expressions:
Cujus doctrinae, si memores faissemus, haereticos non esse informandos seu
convinecendos ex Scripturis, meliore sane loco essent res nostrae, sed, dum
oftentandi ingenii and eruditionis gratia, cum Luthero in certaemen descenditur
Scripturarum, excitatum est hoc, quod, Proh dolor! videmus incendium. cap. 4.
Hierachiae
Of which Doctrine if we had been mindful, that Heretics are not to be
convinced out of Scriptures, our affairs had been in a better posture; but
whilst for ostentation of wit and learning men disputed with Luther from
Scripture this Fire, which, alas, we now see was kindled, as if he had said:
You may as soon fetch water out of a stone as prove the Romish cause from the
the Scripture: Oh the power of truth! Oh the desperateness of the Popish
cause. His Council indeed was good, but they could not follow it; for having
once been sumbling about some Scriptures, though they saw well enough how
impertinent they were to their purpose, yet having once begun, they were
obliged to proceed, and make good their attempts (for of all things in the
World, they hate retreating and recanting) left they should put an Argument
into our hands, against the infallibility of the Church from her actual
mistakes and errors in the exposition of Scriptures.

. 7. The principal places of Scripture upon which the Popes Supreme Authority
and infallibility is founded, are as follow.

The first is Matthew. 16.18. Thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I build my
Church, and the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it: Ergo, The Pope is
Supreme Head, and Infallibe: I shall forbear actum agere, and therefore shall
omit several Answers already given, and only point at some few of those many
allegations, by which the ridiculousnesse of this collection may appear, and
the desperateness of that cause that can find no better supports.

1. This promise concerns only the invisible Church of elect persons, which
appears thus, because he speaks of that Church against which the gates of Hell
do not prevail, but the gates of Hell do prevail against all reprobates) and
therefore the meanest sincere Elect Christian in the World, has a juster
claim to infallibility from this place, then many Popes of Rome had (whom
their own Authors confess to have been reprobates.)

2. This promise secures the Church as well from damnable sins as damnable
errors. I prove it; The Church is here secured against the prevalency of the
Gates of Hell: But the Gates of Hell may prevail as surely, and do prevail as
frequently by damnable sins, as by errors. Ergo, If therefore notwithstanding
this Text, Popes have fallen into damnable Sins, they may consequently fall
into damnable Heresies.

3. The Infallibility here promised, extends only to damnable Heresies, and
such as lead to, and leave a man under the gates of Hell, and therefore if it
were intended of the Pope and Church of Rome, Christ promises no more
infallibility to him, then he hereby promises, and generally gives to all
persevering Christians.

4. This promise is spoken of, and made to the whole Church, and therefore
belongs to all the parts and members of it alike: So that, if it prove the
Infallibility of the Romish Bishop and Church, it proves also the same of the
Bishops and Churches of Corinth, Ephesus, Philippi, etc. which may further
appear, thus; That if we should grant the Papists their absurd supposition,
that this work was not Peter's confession, but his person, yet since the Bishops
of Corinth, and Ephesus, and indeed all the Bishops in the World, according to
this supposition were built upon Peter's person, as well as the Bishop of Rome,
and the infallibility supposed is here promised equally to all that are built
upon the Rock, it must either prove all of them infallible, or leave the Pope
fallible.

5. Whatsoever Authority or Infallibility is here promised to Peter is in other
places promised and given to the rest of the Apostles, and therefore what is
collected from this place, for St Peter's Successors may be with equal truth
and evidence pleaded from other places, for the Successors of the rest of the
Apostles. The same Keys which are here promised to Peter are actually given to
all the Apostles, Math. 18.18. and Ioh. 20.22, 23. And if infallibility be here
promised to Peter, as much is promised to all the Apostles, John 16.13. He will
guide you into all Truth. And if St Peter be here called a Rock, so are the
other Apostles called Pillars, Gal. 2.9. and Foundations, Ephesians. 2. Apoc. 21.14.
And that 16th of Matthew speaks not one syllable more of transmitting St Peter's
Authority to his Successors, then those other places do to their Successors:
And therefore it unavoydably follows, either that all their Successors are
infallible, or that St Peter's Successor is fallible, at best for any thing that
appears from this Text (whether the Popes infallibility has other foundations
we shall examine in their order.)

8. It may be said, That although this place may not seem to be cogent to one
that considers it in it self, yet if you take it according to the exposition
of the Fathers, it proves what it is alleged for:

But 1. The Fathers generally did understand this Rock to be not Peter's Person,
but his confession, or Christ as confessed by him, and this you shall find
proved to have been the mind of St Cyrill, Hilary, Hierom, Ambrose, Basil,
Augustine, yea, and the whole Council of Chalcedon in that incomparably
learned and Irreffragable Discourse of Moulins, called The Novelty of Popery,
Lib. 2. cap. 4.

2. That the Fathers are not infallible guides of Faith and Religion I shall
prove in the next Proposition.

3. But howsoever, They that assert the infallibility of the Fathers, when they
relate the Churches Judgment, yet allow their Fallibility in expounding
Scripture: Caietan and Maldonate both acknowledge it, and practice accordingly,
that a man may in many cases prefer a new exposition, though it be repugnant
to the expositions of most of the Ancient Fathers: And Sr Kenelme Digby
speaking of the infallibility of the Fathers, expressly says, he understands
it only of the Traditions. or Doctrines, delivered by them as the Faith
received from their Ancestors, not of their Comments or Sermons upon
Scripture, which are to have no more weight then the reasons they give for
them. Letters between Lord Digby and Sr Kenelme Digby, page 10.

. But if all these, and other difficulties were cleared; yet, do two things
remain behind, in which this Text, and all others are wholly silent, and for
them they are forced to fly to Tradition, and the Authority of the Fathers, (of
which in the next place.) The first, That all this Supreme Authority and
infallibility, which they suppose to have been in Peter, was transmitted to his
Successor (and consequently Linus St Peter's Successor was Superior to the
Apostle and Evangelist St John, which he had need have no squeamish Conscience
that can digest) and yet all this amounts to nothing, unless another thing be
proved, viz: That the Bishop of Rome is St Peter's Successor; and here the
scripture fails them, and the Coronis or Apex of the Argument (without which
it is both impertinent, and impotent, as to the probation of the Sovereignty of
the Roman Bishop) is fetched solely from Tradition and the Testimony of the
Fathers: And so their Argument stands like the Angel in the Apocalypse with
one foot on the Earth, another on the Sea, one Leg of it in Scripture, the
other in History; an^ because conclusio sequitur partem deteriorem, the
conclusion cannot be de side; or rather to speak the truth: The whole
Syllogism is extra Scripturall. The prerogative of St Peter are transmitted to
St Peter's Successors; Bu^ the Bishop of Rome is S Peter's Successor; where it
appears from what has been said, that neither proposition is to be proved
from Scripture, but wholly from Tradition, and that is all at present I am
concerned to make good. And yet if all this were over, they have not done^
Behold the misery of a desperate cause: for whereas it is known, and granted by
the Papists, that St Peter had two Seas, he was Bishop of Antioch for seven
Years says Baronius, and Bishop of Rome, it must be further evin^ ced, That
the Bishop of Antioch was excluded from, and the Bishop of Rome invested with
St Peter's Prerogatives And would you know the proof of this position (which is
the very Foundation Stone of the Popes Supremacy You shall have the Argument in
Bellarmines words De Pontificiis, Lib. 4.
(...) had its rise a facto Petri from St Peter's fact. Peter leave^ Antioch and
comes to Rome, and there he dies, and so hi^ Holiness got the day. Here I
desire the Reader to observe, that all the Faith of the Romanists, concerning
the Popes Infallibility, depends upon, and is resolved into a matter of Fact,
and an uncertain Historical relation (...) Nay, to speak truly, there are
several matters of Fact, every one of which must be solidly demonstrated,
before their Faith can have a firm Foundation. 1. That Peter was at Rome. 2.
That Peter was Bishop of Rome properly so called. 3. That St Peter died at
Rome. 4. That it was Christ's, or Peter's intention, that Peter's Successor should
enjoy all his Privileges. 5. That Christ or Peter appointed his Roman not his
Antiochian Successor to be this person, to whom such privileges were to be
transmitted: If there be a flaw in any one of these, their whole cause in this
point, is lost. And all these are matters of fact. And such is the nature, and
uncertainty of matters of fact, that the Papists confess those persons whom
they suppose infallible in matters of faith, are fallible in matters of fact.
Excepitng that modern dotage of some of the Jesuits, who have lately asserted
the Popes infallibility in matters of fact: But that is such a piece of
drollery, and impudence, that their own brethren, who have not forsworn all
modesty are ashamed of it: now to assume, as some of these assertions are
apparently false, so there are none of them, but are disputable points, and
denied by diverse learned men, not without a plausible appearance of authorities
and arguments. And if the Jesuits opinion be true concerning the doctrine of
probability, that a man may satisfy his conscience, and venture his salvation
upon the opinions of two or three learned Doctors. Then a Protestant may
satisfy his conscience, and venture his salvation upon it, that all these
propositions are false, being denied by far more then that number of learned
Doctors. At least this must be granted, that it renders the forementioned
positions, dubious and uncertain. And so the Papists build their divine faith
upon a dubious historical faith: yet again: what if Peter dies there? must the
universal headship needs go to the Bishop of the place where he dies, and not
to another where he lived? Charles the fifth was King of Spain, and Emperor of
Germany; if he die in Spain, must all the Kings of Spain be therefore Emperors
of Germany? Happily they will say no, because the Empire is elective, not
hereditary; and if that were granted, which the Papists will never be able to
prove, that there was such a thing as this universal headship, and that this
was to continue, will they pawn their souls on it, (for so indeed they do)
that this universal headship was hereditary, not elective? How will they prove
it? Christ dies at Jerusalem, by this rule the Bishop of Jerusalem must be
universal head: Suppose the Pope should leave Rome, and go to Avignon, (a^
once he did) and settle, and die there, by this rule, the Bishop of Avignon
must succeed in the universal headship^ But I need say no more of so absurd a
fancy.

Sect. 10. A second place of scripture is, Ioh. 21. Pete^ feed my sheep; And
this feeding must denote ruling as wel^ as teaching, and this rule (forsooth)
must needs be the supreme power, and that power must be attended with
infallibility, and these sheep must be all the sheep in the world, nay,
shephards too, exceept the Pan, or princep^ pastorum at Rome. Tantae molis erat
Romanum conder^ papam. And this rope of sand must be called an argument, by
which one may see the intolerable confidence they have in themselves and their
shameless contempt of the Readers, whom they think obliged to receive all
their dictates without enquiry. I would have you to wit that the Church of Rome
knew what they did, when they invented the doctrine of an implicit faith and a
blind obedience to all the Churches decrees, for if men should once dare to
open their eyes and examine their assertions, all their craft would be in
danger to be set, at naught, and the Temple of Dominus Deus noster papa, (as
the Canon Law calls him) would be despised and his magnificence would be
destroyed, whom so great a part of the world worshippeth. But if indeed they
will by Transubstantiation turn this handful of straw into a pillar of their
Church, (as I cannot blame one near drowning, for catching at every twig) then
I shall offer these things to their consideration.

1 That Bellarmine (as his manner is) bestows seven arguments to prove that
which none ever denied, that those words were spoken to Peter alone, and
neglects that which he should have disproved viz. the reason thereof given by
Aug. Cyril, Ambrose, and others; and after them the Protestants which was, not
the collation of a new dignity superior to that of the other Apostles, but his
restoration to his former dignity of the Apostleship, from which by his great
transgression he might seem to have fallen as Judas really did fall by his
Transgression Act. 1.

2. If this Text afford them any support, they must have it either from the
Act, or the word Feed, or from the object or phrase, my sheep: For the first,
By what Arts can the Supremacy of the Pope he drawn from that word or precept!
This feeding (in the judgment of the Romanists themselves) implies nothing but
teaching and ruling, and both those are ascribed to all the Apostles without
any discrimination, Mat. 28.19, 20. Mat. 18. John. 20. And Bellarmine himself
confesses, that not only the power of Rule, but the supreme power was
conferred upon all the Apostles: Lib. de Pontifice Romano, lib. 1. cap. 12.. ut
autem.
Nay, they are ascribed to inferior Ministers Heb. 13. Obey them that have the
rule over you; and 1 Timothy 5.17. The elders that rule well; and to such, the
very same Precept is given, 1 Pet. 5.1, 2. The Elders -- I exhort -- Feed the
flock of God which is among you: Does Feeding in one place argue superiority,
and in another place imply subjection? or rather in both places it seems it
signifies what the Pope pleases; But you must know the Romish Doctors having
called ^he Scripture a Lesbian Rule, and a Nose of Wax, -- they were bound in
honor aut invenire aut facere, either to find it so, or to make it such; if
it be said their charge (...) limited to the Flock of God among them, whereas
Peter's extends to all the sheep; the Answer is easy, if that ^e granted, for
then the difference does not lie in the act of Feeding, but in the object of
which I now come to speak, that is the second thing; the phrase my sheep:

Granting therefore what Bellar. desires that he speaks of all the sheep, yet
herein St Peter had no prerogative above the other Apostles who are equally
commanded to teach and baptize all Nations Mat. 28.19. to preach the Gospel to
every Creature, Mar. 16.15. And Peter's Diocese surely cannot be larger, unless
happily Utopia be taken in, or that which is in the same part of the world, I
mean Purgatory: But you will say, surely they have somewhat else to plead for
themselves from this Text; Why yes These good masters of the feast have
reserved the best Wine to the last. Here comes in a rare notion not fit to be
prostituted to vulgar apprehensions, you shall hear it upon condition you will
not put them to the proof of it which they are not bound to do, for nem^
tenetur a^ impossibilia, No man is obliged to do more then is in his power;
Peter was to feed the sheep as ordinary Pastor, the rest as extraordinary
Ambassadors and with a certain subjection to Peter, Ut autem intelligeremus
banc summam potestatem collatam A^ostolis omnibus, ut legatis, non ut
pasteribus ordinariis and cum quada^ subjectione ad Petrum. Bell de Romano
Pontifice lib. 1. cap. 12.
If you ask, does this Text say so? or any other Text? or is there one syllable
from whence this may be deduced? you must remember the condition which I told
you. And what if this be granted, how comes the ordinary power to be greater
and higher then the extraordinary? In the Old Testament generally, the
extraordinary officers, the Prophets whom God raised were superior to the
Priests, And in the New Testament, the Apostles and Evangelists who were
extraordinary officers were superior to Pastors and Teachers, which are the
ordinary. How come the Tables to be turned? and the ordinary agent to be
advanced above the extraordinary Ambassadors? And what if all this be granted
it edifies nothing unless two things be superadded, of both which the
Scripture is wholly silent and their proof fails them. 1. They must prove that
this power of feeding is transmitted to Peter's Successors in a more peculiar
manner, then to the Successors of the other Apostles, and that whatever power
Peter had is deposited in their hand. 2. That the Pope. is this Successor to
whom these things are concredited. And these they do not pretend to prove from
Scripture So that still the conclusion remains entire, That the Scripture is
not to the Papists a solid and sure ground of Faith.

. 11. A third place always in their mouths is Luke 22.31. Simon, Simon; Satan
has desired to winnow you, but I have prayed that thy faith fail not. A man
would not believe if he did not see it with his own eyes that such Learned men
as diverse of the Papists are should put any confidence in such broken reeds
and shattered Arguments as this is, Truly says a learned man, Hoc non est
disputare sed somniare: This is rather a dream, then an Argument: What
thoughts the Papists have of our English Sectaries is sufficiently known; but I
must needs do them this right to profess, I do not know that Sect among us
(the Quakers excepted) so absurd and impertinent in the all gations of
Scripture for their most irrational opinions as in sundry particulars (and
this especially) the Papists are. But because they shall not complain of us
(as we do justly of them) that we rather condemn them then confute them, I
shall show the ridiculousnesse of this allegation to their purpose.

1. If this Prayer secure the Pope from unbelief and error in judgment, it
secures him also from unbelief and Apostasy in heart and life: But this Prayer
does not secure the Pope from Apostasy in heart and life. The Papists generally
confess that several of their Popes were Apostatici non Apostolici Apostates,
not Apostolic persons. All the doubt lies about the Major, which I prove thus;
If this Prayer was put up for Peter in the name and on the behalf of his
Successors as well as himself (as the Papists pretend it was though we deny
it) then the same thing for which Christ prays for Peter, Christ Prays for it
for his Successors also, and therefore if Christ prayed that Peter might be
kept from Apostasy in heart and life as well as in opinion and judgment, then
the Major is true. But Christ prayed that Peter might be so kept, which I thus
prove Christ's Prayer was the Antidote against the Devils malicious design;
Satan has desired to winnow you, but I have prayed etc. And consequently the
plaster must be as large as the sore: But the Devils design was not only to
draw Peter to error in judgment, but also, yea principally to draw him to
Apostasy in heart and life. Ergo.

2. If notwithstanding this Prayer it was possible, that Peter himself might
fall so far after Christ's Prayer, as to teach a false Doctrine; then this
Prayer does not prove the Popes infallibility. But notwithstanding this Prayer,
it was possible that Peter might fall so far as to teach a false Doctrine. The
Minor (which alone needs proof) I prove thus, He that believed a false
Doctrine, might preach a false doctrine; but Peter after this prayer did
believe a false doctrine which plainly apeares from Acts 1.6. Will thou at this
time restore the Kingdom to Israel? by which it is evident and the Popish
expositions confess it) that the Apostles (and Peter with them) still retained
the old leaven of the belief of a Temporal Monarchy of Christ upon earth, (a
Doctrine which the Papists themselves condemn in the Millenaries) Nor was
this* the only mistake of Peter or the Apostles after that Prayer. And indeed
it was not Christ's Prayer, but the gift of the Holy Ghost after his death which
did secure the Apostles from error, and us from deceit, in following their
Doctrines.

3. If Christ's Prayer for the not failing of Peter's faith render the Pope
infallible, then St Paul's Prayer for the Thessalonians, I pray God your whole
Spirit, Soul and Body be preserved blameless, unto the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ, 1 These. 5.23. and for the Philippians, That they might abound in
knowledge -- and approve things that are excellent, that they might be sincere,
and without offense, till the day of Christ, Philip. 1.9. prove the
infallibility, yea, the impeccability of the Thessalonians, and the
Philippians. The reason is this; because St Paul's Prayer being infallibly
dictated by Gods Spirit, and made according to his Word, and in Christ's name
must as surely be answered, as Christ's Prayer was, for God who cannot lie has
promised to answer such Prayers.

4. If the Prayer of Christ for the perseverance of Faith, makes him infallible
for whom Christ prays, then all elect and persevering believers are
infallible. The consequence appears thus; Because Christ did pray, and does
intercede for the perseverance of the Faith of every such person. Christ
expressly tells us, Joh. 17. I pray not for these alone, but for them also
which shall believe on me through their word. And there is not one persevering
Christian in the World, but owes his perseverance to the Prayer, care, and
intercession of Christ: Hence they are said to be preserved in Christ Jesus
Jude 1.1. And therefore either this Argument concludes, not for the Popes
infallibility, or else it gives him ten thousand partners in that privilege.
And surely, if the prayer for this mercy makes the Pope infallible, much more
does the actual donation of this mercy make believers infallible.

5. This Prayer was intended for the other Apostles, as well as Peter (though
Christ speak to Peter in the name of the rest, as his manner was as evidently
appears from hence. Christ prays for those, whom the Devil desires to winnow.
That is plain from the words, Satan has desired to winnow you, but I have
prayed -- But the Devils aim was, not only against Peter but the rest of the
Apostles, as Christ expressly tells us (...) not (...) thee but (...) you in
the plural number. And therefore it follows, that as the disease and danger
was general and common to all the Apostles, so was that relief and succor,
which Christ here afforded, and consequently all the Apostles are interested in
this promise, and therefore either it makes not the successors of Peter
infallible, or else it makes all the successors of all the Apostles
infallible, let them choose which they will.

6. And yet if all those difficulties be overcome, the Conclusion may be
granted, without any advantage to their cause. For, what if Christ prayed for
Peter alone? What if this prayer intended and procured infallibility for him?
Quid hoc ad Iphieli boves? What is this to the Pope? What Scripture, what
Father, what man (that is not wholly mancipated to the Popes ambitious humor)
will say or can prove that the Pope is interested in all the prayers of Christ
for Peter? Or why may not all the successors of the other Apostles upon as
good grounds claim an interest in that prayer of Christ for the infallibility
of all the Apostles Ioh. 17? (For sure I am those prayers of Christ that God
would keep them through his own name, v. 11. keep them from evil, v. 15.
sanctify them through his truth and keep them unto glory, v. 21, 22, 23, 24. do
as fully imply infallibility as this that Peter's faith might not fail,) Or, if
I do grant, what they cannot prove, that Peter's successors have this as their
peculiar, yet why should not this prayer preserve the chair of Antioch as well
at that of Rome from fallibility? And how can this prayer that his faith may
not fail be put up by Christ for one of them that he tells us, he does not pray
for. Ioh. 17.9. I pray not for the World, i.e. of reprobates (and such many
Popes are confessed to have been) or how can this prayer for perseverance in
the faith be offered up by Christ for such as never had any true faith (as is
acknowledged of many Popes) or how dare they say Christ prayed thus for the
faith of all succeeding Popes, when they confess the faith of several Popes
has failed? It is true they have a miserable shift they tell us a Pope may
err as a private person, though not as a Pope, he may err personally, though
not judicially, not in Cathedra, it is no doubt among us (says Costerus) Dico
nullum apud nos dubium esse, Romanum Pontificem, ut hominem privatum, errare ac
in haeresin labi posse) in Apologia cap. 2.
That the Pope as a private person, may err and fall into Heresy. If this be
granted, the Pope is not concerned in this prayer and promise of infallibility.
For if this prayer for Peter reaches to his Successors, then the same
privilege for which Christ here prays for Peter, for the same he prays for
his Successors: But the same privilege, which according to their supposition
is here prayed for on Peter's behalf, is not prayed for on the behalf of his
successors, themselves being Judges. For Christ's prayer they confess secured
Peter from falling into error, even as a private person, which you see they do
not Pretend for the Pope. But here is the benefit of the popes reserving the
key of interpretations in his own breast, for now he can order it as he
pleases, and proportion the meanings of any Text as need requires, and so this
Text (if you please to believe them) it procures. 1. That Peter cannot err,
neither personally, nor judicially. 2. That the Pope may err personally, but
not judicially. 3. That the whole Church of Rome cannot err personally: But it
is all the reason in the world that the first inventers and Authors of
Infallibility should have the disposing of it in their own hands.

. 12. A fourth place vehemently urged on the behalf of the Popes Infallibility
is, Deuteronomy. 17.11, 12. where the Iowes are commanded under pain of death to
stand to the judgment of the High Priest, and to do according to the sentence
which the Priest should show them. -- Therefore (say they) the High Priest was
infallible (else the people had been bound to rest in a false decision) and
consequently the Pope who succeeds in the Highpriests place is infallible.

To which I answer, 1. If a man should put them to prove the consequence, how
woefully would they be gravelled? If these Romanists would lay aside their
Dictatourship and condescend to the proof of their assertions, how would they
prove one of these things: 1. That the high Priest of the Jews has a visible
Successor upon earth among Christians. 2. That the Pope alone is this
Successor. 3. That this supposed successor must be invested with all the
Privileges which the High Priest had. But I shall pass by all these and the
horrible impertinency of the instance and feebleness of the consequence, and
shall assault them on the strongest side by denying the Antecedent, viz. that
any infallibility is here ascribed or promised to the High Priest, for proof
hereof I offer these Arguments.

1. No more infallibility is here ascribed to the HighPriest then to the Judge
and to the inferior Priests: But the Judge and inferior Priests were not
infallible; Ergo, This place does not prove the Highpriests Infallibility, The
Major is evident from the reading of the Words, the Judge or Civil Magistrate
is joined in the same commission with the Priest, and the people are commanded
to acquiesce indifferently in the determinations, both of the one and of the
other: and therefore either both are infallible, or neither: Again it is not
the High Priest alone, who is here meant, but others also, so the words run in
the plural number, the Priests, the Levites, v.9. And they shall show thee,
they shall inform thee.

For the Minor, it is acknowledged by the Papists Ergo.

2 If this text proves the high Priests infallibility, it proves it in the
matters here spoken of: But this place does not prove the high priests
infallibility, in the matters here spoken of: for those are matters of fact,
between blood and blood, plea and plea, stroke and stroke: questions which were
decided by Testimonies, and in such they confess the Pope may err: so then
their Argument runs thus: The high Priest was infallible, in matters of fact.
Therefore the Pope is not infallible in matters of fact, but he is infallible
in matters of Faith: but our comfort is, as it is a dangerous Argument, so
themselves furnish us with an Antidote; for they deny both propositions. 1.
they deny the consequent, from matters of fact, to matters of faith. 2 They
deny the antecedent, for they do not ascribe to the Pope, and consequently, not
to the high Priest, infallibility in matters of fact. You see what shifts they
are put to, to support their cause with such rotten posts: to argue from the
Aut hority of the priests, to end particular controversies between man and man,
between blood and blood, plea and plea, stroke and stroke, (which is all that
place speaks of,) to the infallibility of the Pope, in all the matters of God,
and deciding all the controversies of religion. I think they have sufficiently
improved the stock the high Priest left them.

3 Those words (however they may seem to a careless reader at first view) do
not assert the infallibility of the Priest or Priests, nor the obligation of
the people to an absolute submission, and blind obedience to all their dictates
and expositions, and that for two undeniable reasons.

1 Because other places of Scripture (with whom this, must be reconciled)
command both Prince, and people to keep close to the word of God, and to that
end, to read in the book of the law diligently, and to do according to all that
is written therein, Deuteronomy. 5.32, 33. You shall observe to do as the Lord has
commanded you, you shall not turn aside to the right hand, or to the left: You
shall walk in all the ways which the Lord commanded you. So Deuteronomy. 6.6. etc.
It is Gods speech to Joshua, chapter 1.8. This book of the law shall not depart
out of thy mouth, but thou shall meditate therein day and night, that thou
may observe to do according to all that is written therein. And in case of
doubt, it is the Prophets injunction to the people, to have recourse to the
law, and to the Testimony. Isa. 8, 20, Now put case an high priest should fall
into Idolatry (I may well suppose it, for it was done,) and should expound the
law so as to favor his opinion, and practice, I demand whether in this case,
the people of the Jews were bound to believe and obey him, or not, to worship
an Idol, or not? Affirm it none will, but one of a Jesuiticall h.e.a feared
conscience nor can any Christian hear such an assertion without horror, If
they deny it, their argument from this place is lost.

2 That sense of Scripture which justifies the Jews in in putting Christ to
death, is a false fence, and corrupt exposition: But the Popish sense of this
place, and their argument from it, does justify the Jews in putting Christ to
death. Ergo it is a corrupt exposition, for the Major, he that denies it,
deserves not the name of a Christian: And whatever his successors will do at a
pinch, I am sure St. Peter did not justify them, but severely condemns them,
and highly aggravates, their sin in it: Act. 2, and 3, and 4, and 5. The Minor,
(about which alone the doubt lies) I shall easily prove: which I am more
willing to do, that all Christians may observe the just Judgment of God, and
the fearful Apostasy of these men, that rather then recant their errors will,
(in effect) renounce Christianity, and justify the murderers of Christ, I
prove it thus: If the Jews, in that Act, did nothing, but what by virtue of
this place, they were obliged to do, then they did not sin. But the Jews did
nothing in the murdering of Christ, but what by virtue of this place (If the
Popish sense be true) they were obliged to do. Ergo: The Major they do, and
must grant, for it cannot be a sin to obey Gods command. The Minor I prove, if
this law did require absolute obedience to their Priests, and was in force at
that time, then the Jews did nothing, but what they were obliged to do: But
this law did require such obedience, (say the Papists) and it was in force at
that time (say I) Ergo: The consequence no man will deny, but he that does not
understand it. The Minor, I prove it in its two branches 1. This law bound the
Jews to absolute obedience to their Priests: This is known to be their
opinion. But because I have no great confidence in the ingenuity of these men,
I will prove it out of 2, or 3 of their most eminent authors. Becanus has
these words, the whole people in matters of religion were commanded to follow
that which the High Priest enjoined them. Totus populus in negotio religioais
jubebatur id sequi, quod Pontife^ judicabat sequi oportere. In manuali de
Iudice controversiarum lib. 1. cap 5. nu. 62.
What more plain? Thus Melchior Canus (one of great Authority with them) Moses
does not command that they should believe the Priests if they judged according
to law, but rather, that they should take that for law, which the Priest taught
them Non praecipit Moses ut sacerdotibus credant, si judicarent secundum legem,
sed potius, ut que sacerdotes docueriat, ea pro lege habeantur in Oper, Cani,
lib. 6. p. 510.
Bellarm disputes against the assertion of Brentius, That the people were to
stand to the Judgment of the High-Priest's only upon condition they judged
according to law, and argues that they were absolutely bound to follow it. De
verbi Dei interp. lib. 3 c. 4.
And (that you may see it is a resolved case) Gretser defends Bell in it and
tell's us plainly the people were bound to stand to the Highpriests judgment
whatsoever their sentence was Quamcumque sententiam tulerunt. Defens. Bell. lib.
3. cap. 4.1239.
I think an Adversary will not require more for the proof of the first branch
of the Minor.

The second branch of the Minor is, that this law was then in force, which I
prove thus. If Christ had not at that time destroyed or abolished this Law, it
was in force: But Christ had not at that time destroyed or abolished it: The
Ceremonial Law which was to expire yet in the judgment of all intelligent
Divines, Ancient and Modern, Popish and Protestant did not expire till the
death of Christ, and consequently while Christ lived, this Law was in force,
which being considered, quite invalidates the last and most plausible evasion
of the Papists to this instance as Becanus delivers it Synagoga fere expiravit,
The Synagogue was almost expired: He should have said the precept, Deuteronomy. 17.
was altogether expired, and instead of it here is, the Synagogue was almost
expired: And what then? it was not yet expired, nor dead. A man that is almost
dead is yet alive, and while the Law lives, it has its force over us, as the
Apostle argues Rom 7.1. Else it is a pretty device of Becanus, and will do fine
feats; for by the same Argument I will prove that the Jews were not then bound
to observe their Passover, quia Synagoga fere expiravit: And if that Law which
enjoined the observation of the passover was in full force to the Jews,
notwithstanding the nearness of its expiration, then the same must be
acknowledged of this Law, which required absolute obedience to the Highpriests
sentence, and consequently the Jews were then bound by it, and therefore
(Horresco referens) did not sin in it; And because the conclusion is divilish
and detestable to all that love the Lord Jesus in sincerity, therefore the
principles from which it flows are rotten, and that Popish cause which cannot
stand without such prodigious blasphemies ought to be abhorred by all that
pretend to Christianity. And therefore the Popish gloss upon the place is
false, and their Argument from it is wicked, and the true sense is this, they
were bound to hearken to the Priests, if they delivered sentence according to
the Law, and not if they did grossly contradict it: And the rejection of this
exposition, and the assertion of the peoples implicit faith has forced
several of them, who pass for sober men amongst our Adversaries into such
expressions as these That this action of the Priests (in condemning of Christ)
was indeed contrary to Christ, but their sentence was most true, and most
profitable, yea, that it was a Divine Oracle. So Canus Nam sacerdotum veterum
acta quidem Christo adversa fuerunt, at seatentia bominum alioqui pessimorum
non solum verissima, sed reipub. etiam utilissima fuit. Quin Divinum oraculum
fuisse Johannes testatur in operibus. lib. 5. ca. ult. page 283.
That at that time the Priests had the Holy Spirit, the Spirit of Truth: So
Petrus a Soto Non defuit tune temporis sacerdotio Levitico Spiritus
Propheticus, Spiritus Sanctus, spiritus veritatis in Evolegomenis.
That the Arts of that Council were wicked, but the sentence whereby they
condemned Christ was just and true, So Harding. Against Jewels Apology ca. 6,
divis. 3. par. 6.
Really Protestants must be tender in pressing their Arguments too far, for
the Papists, like wild Horses when they are chased will venture over hedge and
ditch. We have already made them turn Jews; I am afraid next remove we shall
dispute them into Paganism, if they be not there already.

. 13. And thus I have dispatched the Romanists pretensions from Scripture, for
the Popes Supreme and infallible Authority: If infallibility have any
foundation in Scripture, it is in these places: And how far they are from
giving any countenance or support to their opinion I leave to that reader to
judge, who has either sense or conscience, or any care of his Salvation. But I
must not do them wrong, I confess there is one Argument behind, and that is
taken from St Peter's prerogatives: And Bellarmine reckons up no less then
twenty eight Prerogatives, which all undoubtedly belong to the Pope: yes, that
I confess strikes all dead and therefore I must crave the Readers pardon, and
Bellarmines mercy, if I once do (as the Papists do ordinarily) pass over in
silence what I cannot Answer, for who can resist these Evidences? Peter's name
is changed: Ergo, the Popes nature is changed from fallible to infallible:
Peter is often mentioned in the first place, therefore ought to have the first
seat, and is the chief Bishop: Peter walks with Christ upon the Water, and
therefore the Pope must reign with him upon earth, and Divisum imperium cum
Jove Papa tenet: Peter pays Tribute, and therefore the Pope should have a
power of levying Tribute to reinburse him. Christ teaches in Peter's Ship, and
therefore to quit scores, the Pope should rule in Christ's Church: Christ bids
Peter let down his Net, therefore the Pope must catch the Fish of Supremacy:
Christ washes Peter's feet, therefore all men must kiss the Popes Toe: These
and diverse other such prerogatives. Bell has collected together, and
vehemently argues from them for the Popes Supremacy, De Pontifice, lib. 1. ca.
17. ad ca. 25.
but for these I must desire some time to give in my Answer.

I hope I have said enough to prove the second Proposition, viz. That the
Scripture in it self is not a sufficient and solid foundation for a Papists
faith (according to their Principles) and that the popes pretended
Infallibility has no solid foundation there; But when they are beaten out of
Scripture they use to fly to the Fathers, and to rest their Faith in the
Authority of the Fathers: And therefore that must be considered in the next
place.

CHAP. III. Of the Authority and Infallibility of the Fathers.
Prop. 3. Sect. 1. THe third Proposition then is this: The Faith of the Papists
has no solid foundation in the Authority of the Fathers: This the rather
deserves consideration, because they make their great boast of it, and urge it
as a principal Pillar of their Faith: It is asserted in their Cannon Law, That
the Fathers are to be owned and followed even to the least jot. And although
some of them have declared their dislike of that assertion; yet they generally
agree in this, That the Authority of the Fathers, especially where they
consent, is a solid Foundation for their faith to rest upon. Hence those
expressions of their great Doctors, Take away the Authority of Fathers, and
Councels, and all things in the Church are doubtful and uncertain, Eccius.
Tollatur Patrum and Conciliorum authoritas and omnia in Ecclesia erunt ambigua,
dubia, pendentia, incerta. In Euchiridio de Conciliis.
From the Writings of the Fathers as from an Oracle Universities have the
certainty of their assertions, and Councels have their decrees, Et Scriptis
Sanctorum Patrum velut ex oraculis Theologorum Academiae assertionum suarum
constanliam accipiunt, summique, Pontifices decreta sumirat in praefat. lib 5.
Biblioth.
Sixtus Senensis, Melilior Canus an Author of great Note among the Romanists
lays down this Conclusion, That the common sense of the Fathers in the
exposition of Scripture is a most certain Argument to confirm Theological
assertions: For (says he) the sense of all those Holy men is the sense of Gods
Spirit. And a little after, Although you may require of a Philosopher the
reason of a Philosophical Conclusion, yet in the exposition of Holy Scripture,
you are bound to believe your Ancestors, though they give you no reason for it,
and to defend whatsoever opinions you receive from them, of the Law of faith
and of Religion: And a little after, All those Holy men together cannot err in
a matter of Faith. In expositione sacrarum literarum communis omnium sanctorum
veterum intelligentia certissimum argumentum Theologo praestat ad Theologicas
assertiones corroborand as. Quippe cum sanctorum omnium sensus Spiritus Sancti
sensus ipse sit. -- Quanquam a Philosophis quidem rationem Philosophicae
conclusionis jure forsitan postularis, in Sacrarum autem literarum
intelligentia, majoribus nostris debes, nulla etiam ratione habita, credere,
and quas sententias de lege, de fide, deque religione ab illis accepisti
defendere. Loc. Theolog. lib. 7. c. 3. Conclus. 5. Sancti simul omnes in fidei
Dogmate errare non possunt. Ibid. Conc. 6.
All the Fathers together do never err, nor can they agree in one error says
Bell. Patres nunquam omnes simul errant, etiam si aliquis eorum interdum erret,
nam simul omnes in uno errore convenire non possunt. Bell. lib. 2. de Christo
cap. 2. et l. 1. de Purgat. c. 10.
The sayings and Testimonies of the Ancient Fathers are not to be examined,
when all or almost all do agree in one opinion, says Salmeron. Non sunt
probanda (examinanda) veterum Patrum dicta and testimonia quando omnes vel fere
omnes in unam sententiam convenient, lib. 1. Epis. Pauli part. 3. disp. 6. in
fine.
That which the Fathers unanimously deliver about Religion is Infallibly true,
says Gregory de Valentia; Quod Patres unanimi consensu circa religionem
tradunt, infallibiliter verum est; in Analist fidei lib. 8. c, 8.
from all which we plainly see, that according to their opinion, the judgment
of the Fathers is a sure basis and ground of Faith: That is it which I am now
to disprove, and to show, That the Writings of the Fathers, neither are, nor
can be a safe and sufficient foundation for a Papists Faith.

. 2. Only let me premise two things. 1. I would not be misunderstood as if I
did intend to derogate from the just Authority of the Fathers, or to defraud
them of that veneration which is due to persons of such Antiquity, ability, and
integrity, but only to deny that pretended infallibility which none did more
dislike then themselves as we shall see hereafter. Let them have all the honor
which is due to the most worthy men, not acted by divine inspiration, but let
them not have that Honor which belongs to God only, and his inspired ones: We
grant their Testimony is highly credible, especially where there is indeed that
which is often pretended, but seldom proved, viz. an universal consent, but
their Authority is not infallible. 2. That I do not fall into this dispute as
declining the judgment of the Fathers of the first 600 years, or suspecting
their partiality on the Popes side. I know sufficiently, and so may any man
(whom the God of this World has not blinded) that does but read what our
Learned Divines have said in this particular, or with his own eyes look into
the Fathers, that there is is not one considerable point in controversy
between us and the Romanists, but if judgment were to be given by any
impartial person from the Fathers (excepting those who are evidently
demonstrated to be spurious Authors) their mouths would presently be stopped
and their cause and confidence laid in the dust; only because that work is so
thoroughly done by others, and would swell this into a voluminous bigness; I
shall forbear that, and proceed to handle what I proposed; and P shall prove
the proposition by four Arguments.

1. All those assertions and Arguments which the Papists urge against the
Authority of sacred Scripture, for the decision of controversies do no less
overthrow all the Authority of the Writings of the Fathers. When they attempt
to disprove the Authority of the Scriptures considered in themselves; these are
then Arguments universally owned and urged: God would not have his Church
depend upon Paper-Books says Costerus. Scripture (say they) cannot decide
controversies, because it cannot summon and hear both parties, it cannot
compel trangressours to obedience, it does not particularly condemn
Heretics: It does not say Erras Jacobe Gretsere, Gretser you are in an error:
It speaks doubtfully, and men dispute about the sense of Scripture, and so
controversies will be endless. Hence I thus argue; Either those Arguments are
strong and cogent against the Scriptures Authority, or they are not: If they be
not, then the Scripture must be owned as Judge of Controversies,
notwithstanding all those Arguments: If they be valid against the Authority of
Scriptures, why are they not as strong against the Authority of the Fathers! Or
what difference is there in this particular, between the writings of the
Scripture and of the Fathers? Are the writings of St Paul deaf that they cannot
hear parties, and dumb; that they cannot deliver sentence, and can the
Writings of St Austine, hear, and speak? Does not the Scripture say Gretser
you are in an error? And do the writings of Jerome or Ambrose say, Luther you
are in an error? Cannot St Paul condemn Heretics and compel transgressors to
obedience? and can St Cyprian do it? What offense has St Paul done, that
Peter's Successors should thus degrade him, sure Manet alta mente repostum they
bare him a grudge for reproving St Peter Gal. 2. And so now they are even with
him. In short, forasmuch as the Arguments and premises are wholly the same
concerning the Scriptures and the Fathers, either the authority of both of them
must be received as Judges of Controversies, or else both must be rejected:
For, in pari causa idem jus, say the Lawyers, in the same cause, there is the
same right.

Again another of their Arguments, Why the Scripture cannot of it self be a
ground of Faith is this; because without the Church, we cannot know which books
of Scripture are genuine, and which are spurious: This is the great Argument of
Stapleton, and all other Romish Doctors. In like manner I argue the writings of
the Fathers cannot in themselves be a solid ground of my faith, because without
the Churches judgment I cannot tell which of their Writings are genuine, and
which are spurious. For that there are great multitude of spurious Writings
masked under the names of the Fathers, is acknowledged by Sixtus Senensis. Bell.
and others, and the Fathers themselves often complained of that practice in their
days. So again, Scripture is obscure and ambiguous, and full of seeming
contradictions, and there are many disputes about the true sense, and therefore
it cannot be the rule of my faith say Bellarm. Becanus, Costorus, and the rest.
The same may be more justly said against the Authority of the Fathers. Their
obscurity and ambiguity appears from the very same Arguments which they bring
to make good their charge against the Scriptures, even from the multitude of
Comments which Learned men have made upon the dark passages, of the Fathers,
in which, no less then in St Paul's Epistles are (...), things hard to be
understood, which men of corrupt minds wrest to their own destruction, and from
the great disputes which are at this day fervent in the World, concerning the
judgments of the Fathers, and their meaning in several passages' about which
there are as fierce contests as about any passages of the Scripture: it having
been truly observed by indifferent persons, that both Papists and Protestants
have fortified their several and contrariant assertions with plausible
allegations from the Fathers: Nor are there only seeming contradictions in the
Fathers (as there are in Scripture) but most real and direct ones, and if it
be not enough, that one of them contradicts another, many pregnant instances
are given of the same Father in one place, contradicting himself in another;
But for this and other things concerning the Fathers Authority, I must refer
the Reader to those Learned Authors that have exemplified this in several
Instances Whitakar, Gerhard, Daille.
. Once more, The Scripture (they say) is corrupted and falsified in several
places, and so unfit to be a rule: And have the Fathers Works seen no
corruption? Yes, we have it under the hands of Possevinus, Sixtus Senensis,
Bellarm. and others who confess their hard hap in this particular, and how
woefully they are corrupted in multitudes of places, and needs must the Fathers
fare worse then the Scriptures herein, because they were never preserved with
that care and conscience which was exercised about the Holy Scriptures;
Therefore, either they must quit their Arguments against the Scriptures
Authority, or else renounce the Authority of the Fathers which is obnoxious to
the same inconveniences.

.4. 2. That the Fathers whose writings are extant (for of them this proposition
treats) are not infallible, may be undeniably evinced from the Hypothesis of
our Adversaries, and the supposed subject of that Infallibility which is
pretended. Infallibility is the proper and peculiar privilege of the Church,
say all the Papists: The only question is, What this Church is? Some make it
the Pope, others a Council, others the whole body of the faithful, but they
generally agree that it must be some one or all of those: But the Fathers I am
here discoursing of are not one, or all of these, and therefore they cannot
pretend to the supposed infallibility; nor can the Papists by their own
principles ascribe it to them; to which may be added, That if the Pope
himself, notwithstanding his pretended gift of Infallibility, may err as a
private Doctor, either in speaking, or writing (which all the Papists grant)
how can either any, or most of them, who have no other capacity but that of a
private Doctor be exempt from a possibility of erring? And consequently the
Fathers are not infallible, nor a solid foundation for a Papists faith.

Sect. 5. Again, if they will needs obtrude upon us, this upstart Infallibility
of particular fathers, I demand whether this infallibility belongs to all the
fathers that lived in one Age, or only to the Writers of that Age, or only to
those of the Writers, whose works have had better hap then others to come to
our hand, and whether to all them together, or only to a part of them? For one
of these they must unavoydably assert: If they say the first, that this
Infallibility was in all the fathers that lived in one Age, or the Major part
of them (as in reason they must, for what Scripture or Reason had one, to
pretend Infallibility, more then another, excepting always the Bishop of Room,
of whose Infallibility, it must, be confessed, there was never any quaestion,
namely, in those days none had the impudence to assert it) if that be granted
yet those few, whose writings are extant (of whom alone our controversy is)
might all be fallible, though the Major part of the Fathers be acknowledged
infallible. If it be said, those Fathers do not only speak their own sense,
but the sense of the Church of their Age, and in that respect, they are
infallible, which is the common plea, and most plausible Argument they use in
this point: The Fathers are infallible, not in their expositions, but in their
traditions, and the Doctrines they deliver as received from their Ancestors:
Thus Sr Kenelm Digby, White, Holden, and the Papists of the new Model, This I
shall have occasion to handle more largely afterward: At present it may suffice
to answer two things. 1 That it is most certain, they are so far from
delivering the sense of the Church of that Age in the controversies between us,
and the Romanists, that they seldom touch, upon the most of them, and when they
do it, it is obiter, and by accident, not ex professo, and solemnly, they being
then taken up with other matters, as disputing against Jews, and Gentiles, and
the heretics of that Age

2 However, that being purely matter of fact to understand, and report the
History of the Churches Doctrine in their Age; if they were infallible in
matters of Faith, yet in point of fact, they were not infallible, For the Pope
himself is allowed to be fallible in such matters, and as it is confessed, the
Pope may err, through fear or hope, or humane passions (as Liberius
Marcellinus, and others did) at best, for a season: so doubtless might the
Fathers, either through weakness, misunderstand, or through favor, or
prejudice misreport the sense of others; (of which it were easy to give many
Instances.) If the second thing be asserted, that this Infallibility belongs
only to the Writers of each Age, we would desire them to set the^r inventions
on work, to devise a reason why the Writers were infallible; ^and not the
Preachers, seeing the Apostles who had, and all others that pretend to
Infallibility (as the Pope, and Council) challenge it equally in their
Sermons, and Writings, in their verbal, and written decrees, and much less can
they with any color assert that this Infallibility belongs only to those
Writers which are come to our hands, as if it were not sufficient for the rest,
that they lost their Writings, but they must also lose their Infallibility. And
yet such is the impudence of these men, and the desperateness of their cause,
that they are found to attribute this Infallibility, not only to all
conjunctly, but to the most of that small remnant of surviving Writers, as you
saw from their expressions, which because they are so monstrously bold as to
assert, I shall take the boldness to ask, by what right shall five Fathers,
vid. Dionysius, Clemens, Ignatius, Polycarpus, and Hermes, supposing that all
the works extant under their names were genuine (for these are all left us of
those great numbers of the Fathers of the first Age) I say, by what right shall
these five invest themselves with the name, or privilege of the whole
Catholic Church of that Age: (for it is to her alone the supposed promise of
Infallibility was made) in what Scripture, or Father, or Lexicon, do five
Fathers make up the whole Church? True it is, the Pope has a peculiar
privilege in this point, and is by the Jesuits invested with the name of the
Church -- The Church Virtuall. And it must be acknowledged there is since
color for the Title: for having swallowed up all the rights and privileges of
the Church, he ought to have the Name into the bargain: But setting aside that
prodigious (...); I would know, why I might not as well say, that five of the
Romish Doctors, viz. Salmeron, Canus, Costerus, Stapleton, and Bellarmine, are
the Church of Rome, or that five of our English Doctors are the Church of
England, nay, all the Protestant World, as that five of the Fathers made up the
whole Church of their Age? Yet again, forasmuch as they ascribe infallibility,
not only to all, but also to the major part of the Fathers: of these five
then, two may err by their own confession. And that all the particular Fathers
have their their errors is generally acknowledged by the Papists, and often
urged by them to defend themselves from the force of many convincing
allegations from the Fathers against their opinions. Well then, to keep to this
particular instance: It is granted that Dionysius may err, and so may
Ignatius, then the Infallibility is preserved in Clemens, and Polycarpus, and
Hermes: But they also, or any two of them may err in other things, and then
the Infallibility is preserved in Dionysius, and Ignatius, and Hermes. Thus (it
seems) Infallibility is banded between the Fathers like a Tennis-ball, from one
to another, and they have it by turns. Such monsters must be in the
Conclusion, if Infallibility be in the premises. That is enough for the second
Argument.

. 5. The third Argument is this: The Fathers profess they are not infallible:
either they say true or false; if true, then they are not infallible; if false,
then they erred in that assertion, and therefore are not Infallible. So the
Papists are gone by their own Argument, and rule too: For here we have the
consent of the Fathers; It were infinite to recount all passages to this
purpose: I shall only suggest some few which are evident and undeniable in
this particular. Clemens Alexandrinus has these words, The principle of our
Doctrine is the Lord who has taught us by the Prophets, by the Gospel, and by
the Apostles; and he adds, If any man think this Principle needs another
Principle, he does not indeed keep that Principle. But the Papists say, the
Scripture principle needs another principle to support it, viz. the Churches
Authority: Ergo, the Papists have forsaken the principle of the Scripture, and
so saved us further labor of proving their Apostasy. And he adds, that the
standard by which things are to be examined, is not the testimony of men
(therefore not the Testimony of Fathers, Councels, Popes, who I think are all
men, save only that several of the Popes are represented by their own Authors
as beasts) but the Word of the Lord. And lest you should understand it of
Tradition, he calls it just before the Scripture and word of the Lord: We do
not (says he) believe the assertions of men, they must not only say, but
prove, Lib. Stromatum 7. versus sinem. (...).
and that: too from the Scriptures. What can be more express? So Basil In
Moralium regula 72. in initio. (...).
tells us, The hearers that are instructed in the Scriptures must examine the
Doctrine of their teachers, they must receive those things which are agreeable
to Scripture, and reject those things which are contrary to it: Where we
plainly see St Basils direct contrariety to the principles and practice of the
Romish Church.

1. St Basil allows his hears to examine their teachers Doctrine; so do not
the Papists. The people are so bound to be subject to their Pastors, that if
their Pastors shoulderre, the people were bound to err with them, says
Tannerus, In Collatione Ratesbonensi.. 9.
A Christian is bound to receive the Churches Doctrine without examination,
says Bellarmine. Pastors are simply to be heard in all things, nor are we to
consider what is said, but who said it, i. e. if he were a lawful Pastor, as
Stapleton In causa fidei non est considerandum quid dicatur sed quis dicat:
Relect. con. 1. qu. 4. art. 2. p. 91. Ecclesiam audire populum fidelem Christus
jubet, Doctrinam Ecclesiae populam expendere non jubet Stapleton Tripliciat.
adversus Whitak. pro Eccles. Author page 89, cap. 9. Et alibi voci Ecclesi in
Doctrina fidei simpliciter and absolute acquiescendum est, in Robert. con. 4.
qu. 3. art. 3.
bellows it out (for it is a speech fitter for a beast then for a man,) Debet
Christanus sine examine recipere Doctrinaem ecclesiae Bellar. de verbi Dei
Interpretatione, lib. 3. c. 10.
And yet these are the men who will not depart a nails breadth from the
Fathers: This is the Church, the principal note whereof is consent with the
Fathers, of which you may judge by this, and what we shall add from others.

2. Basil makes the Scripture alone the rule by which all other things are to
be examined, not Fathers, not Councels, not Traditions: but the Papists are of
another mind. St Clara. Prodiit quidam Dialogus -- solenniter Parisiis
approbatus -- In quo express asserit Ecclesiam ideo recipere Scripturas, quia
and in quen'um sunt conformes fidei, quam ab Apostolis per traditiones accepit;
non e converso. Et bactenus sine dubio rectissime. Systemat. fidei cap. 11. in
initio.
tells us of a Popish Treatise, written by a friend of his, solemnly approved by
the Parishian Doctors of the Sorbon (so you see it is no particular fancy, but
a received opinion) where (says he) that Author expressly asserts, that the
Church therefore receives the Scriptures, because, and so far as they are
conformable to Tradition not contrarily, i.e. She does not receive Tradition,
because, and so far as it agrees with Scripture: And thus far doubtless he was
in the right, says St Clare; And consequently Basil was in the wrong.

That saying of Cyprians is never to be forgotten, Quod solus Christus debet
audiri Pater de celo testatur -- Non ergo debemus attendere quid alius ante nos
faciendum putaverit, sed quid qui aste omnes est Christus prior fecerit, neque
enim hominus consuetudinem, sequi oportet, sed Dei veritatem. Epistola. 63. ad
Ciecilium.
That Christ alone is to be heard, the Father witnesses from Heaven: We are
not therefore to regard what others before us thought, but what he that was
before all, Christ first did, for we are not to follow the custom of men but
the truth of God. If the Papists would say as much, this controversy would be
at an end. And it is observable, that Pamelius who is very brisk and free of
his Notes and animadversions wherever Cyprian casts in a word that may seem to
give countenance to their opinions, passes over this place with profound
silence, as well seeing, it was so hot, it would have burned his Fingers.

St Chrysostom 13. Homilia in 2. ex. ad Corinth. versus finem (...).
is as fully Protestant in this particular (as if he had been of Council in
our cause) in two points he is positive for us. 1. He presses the people to
examine things delivered to them (therefore he was against the Popish implicit
faith) Let us not carry about the opinion of the multitude, but let us examine
things; and not contented to deliver the assertion, he adds a reason. Is it
not absurd, that when you are to receive many, you do not trust other men, but
examine it your selves, and when you are to judge of things, then to be drawn
away by other men's opinions? And this (says he) is the worse fault in you,
because you have the Scriptures. That brings in the second Herely of
Chrysostomes: The rule by which he commands them to try all things is the
Scripture, and (the mischief too is) he calls it a perfect rule, you have
(says he) an exact standard and rule of all things: and he concludes thus, I
beseech you do not regard what this or that man thinks, but enquire all things
of the Scriptures: I know no way to avoid this evident testimony but one: if I
might advise them, the next Jesuit that Writes shall swear these words were
foisted into Chrysostomes works, by the Protestants; and that they are not to
be found in an old Manuscript Copy of Chrysostom in the Vatican.

What Protestant can deliver our Doctrine more fully then Origin: It is
necessary (says he) that we should allege the Testimony of Scriptures,
without which our expositions do not command faith Necesse est nobis Scriptur
as sanctas in testimonium vocare, sensis quippe (...) et enarrationes nostroe
sine his testibus non habent fidem. Homil. 1. re Jerem.
: Or then Cyrill, Do not believe me saying these things, unless I prove them
out of the Scriptures (...). Catechesi. 4.
Or then Ambrose, thus speaking to the Emperor Gratian, I would not you should
believe our Argument or disputation, let us ask the Scriptures, ask the
Prophets, the Apostles, Nolo Argumento nosiro credas, Sancte Imperator, aut
nostrae disputationi Scriptur as interrogemus Apostolos, interrogemus Prophet
as interrogemus Christum, lib. 1. de fide ad Gratianum.
St Austin had none of the Fathers in greater veneration, then Cyprian, and
Ambrose; yet hear how he speaks of them, of Cyprian thus: Ejus Authoritate non
teneor, ejus liter as non ut Canonicas habeo, eas ex Canonicis considero; quod
Scripturae non congruit cum pace ejus respuo. in lib. 2, contra Cressonium cap.
32.
I am not obliged by his Authority; I do not look on his Epistles as
Canonical, but I examine them by the Scriptures, and what is repugnant
thereunto, with his good leave I reject it: Would the Papists give us but this
liberty, we should desire no more: and of Ambrose he says the like.

Peradventure it will be said in this point, as it is in the general; That
although it is confessed by the Fathers, that particular Doctors are liable to
error; yet in such things wherein the Fathers do unanimously agree, they have
an infallible Authority, and are a sufficient foundation of Faith.

To this I answer: 1 If this were granted, it does not in the least, secure the
Romists concernments because there is not one of all those points controverted
between them and us, wherein such unanimous consent can be produced, but in
every one of them there are pregnant allegations, out of some of the Fathers
repugnant to their opinions and assertions. This their learned men cannot but
know, and if they have any ingenuity in them, they cannot deny.

2 I answer with Witaker against urging this very Plea: What a silly thing is
it to deny, that, that which happened to each of them cannot possibly happen to
all of them. Quam hoc ineptum est quod singulis contigit, id nogare posse in
omnes cadere Contra lib. 6. De Firmamentis patrum. page 414.
And with Gerhard, the Testimonies of the Fathers collectively taken, cannot
be of another kind and nature, then they are distributively Patrum singulorum
testimonia collective sumpta non possiunt esse alterius generis quam singula
sunt distributive. Confess. Cathol. lib. 1. par. 2. cap. 13.
Nor can any man deny the truth of the proposition, if he apprehends the
meaning of it; for how can the same persons, being only considered under a
double notion be both fallible and infallible at the same time; And if Austin,
Ambrose, Cyprian (supposing these were all the Fathers) be each of them
fallible, how can a mere collective consideration of them render them
infallible?

3. I Answer with Learned Dr Holdsworth: That the Fathers deny this
Infallibility, not only to one or two of them dispersedly, but to all the
Ancients collectively considered, Non solum de uno aut altero sparsim, sed de
omnibus veteribus gregatim in scriptis suis Patres ubique pronuntiant and little
dogmata esse ad Scripturas expendenda ut probentur, and eorum testimonia ex
Scripturis aestimanda ut ex istarum consensulaut dissensu magis minusve valiant
ad fidei controversi as dirimend as, Lect. 46.
and this I shall prove only by one Argument. They that make Infallibility the
peculiar property of the Canonical Writer, deny the Infallibility of the
Fathers, eitheir collectively, or distributively considered: But the Fathers
make Infallibility the peculiar property of the Canonical Writers, and
abjudicate it from all other Writers. St Jerome is express, Except the
Apostles, whatsoever else is afterward said, let it be cut off, for it has no
Authority Exceptis Apostolis, quodcunque ali^d postea disitur, abscindatur non
(...) postec authoritatem. in Psalm. 86. (c) Scito me aliter habere Apostolas,
aliter reliquos tractatores, illos sem^er vera dicere istos in quibusdam, ut
homines errare. Epist. 62. ad Theoph. Alex.
And again, I make a difference between the Apostles and other Writers, those
always said Truth; but these in somethings as men did err Id (...) literarum
a nobis non cum credendi necessitate sed cum judi^ andi liberate ^ gendum est.
contra. Faustum 1. 11. c. 5.


St Austin makes this difference between the Holy Scriptures and all other
Writings, That those are to be read with a necessity of believing, but these
with a liberty of judging Quod Divinarum scriptur arum perspic^a firmatur
Authoritate, sine ulla dubitat^one credendum ess: aliis veto testibus vel
testimoniis tibi credere vel non credere liceat, quantum ca momenti ad
faciendam fidem vel habere vel non habere perpenderis. Epis. 112. ad Paulineim.
What living man can express the Protestant Doctrine in more evident terms
then the same Father elsewhere does, That which is confirmed by the Authority
of the Holy Scriptures, is without doubt to be believed, but for other
witnesses and testimonies, (whether more, or fewer; agreed, or divided, all is
one to St Austin) you may receive them or reject them as you shall judge, they
have more or less weight Solis Scripturarum libris -- didici bune timorem
honoremque defer ut nullum little seribendo errasse fi^missime eredam -- Alios
autera ita lego ut quantalibet sanctitate, ductrinaque proepollcant, non ideo
verum putem quia ipsi ita senserunt, sed quia per Canonicas persuadere
potnerimt: Tom. 2. Epis. 19.
And again, when he was pressed by Ierom with the Authority of six or seven of
the Greek Fathers, he thus Answers: Quod Divinarum scriptur arum perspic^a
firmatur Authoritate, sine ulla dubitat^one credendum ess: aliis veto testibus
vel testimoniis tibi credere vel non credere liceat, quantum ca momenti ad
faciendam fidem vel habere vel non habere perpenderis. Epis. 112. ad Paulineim.
I have learned to give this honor and reverence to the Books of Scripture, to
believe there is no error in them: But as for others, how Learned or Godly
soever they be, I so read them that I do not believe any thing to be true,
because they thought so, but because they proved it so to be by the Scriptures.
To conclude, so evident is St. Austin's judgment in that point, that it forced
this ingenuous confession from a learned and acute Papist, Occam by name, who
speaking of a passage of St. Austins about this point, has these words.
Notandum quod Augustinus in authoritate illa loquens de scriptoribus aliis a
scriptoribus Bibliae, inter hos scriptores and illos non distinguit: and ideo,
sive fuerint summi Pontifices, sive alii, sive scripserint aliquid in Concilio,
sive extra, consimile de eis judicium est habendum. Part. 3. Dialog. tract. 1.
lib. 3. cap. 24.
It is to be noted, that Austin in that authority speaking of other writers
beside the penmen of the Scripture, mak^s no difference among these
Non-Canonical Writers: and therefore, whether they be Popes, or others, whether
they writ in Council, or out of Council, the same judgment is to be passed upon
them. You see St. Austin's mind is plain, and does (our Adversaries themselves
being judges) directly overturne that great fundamental point of the
Infallibility of Councels and Popes (which, if you will believe them, is not
only true, but necessary to salvation) and yet these are the men that walk in
the good old paths; These are they, that maintain no doctrine, but what has
been conveyed to them by the Fathers. I know no Salvo but that which they use
in the great article of Transubstantiation, viz. to tell us, we must not
believe our selves when we read such passages in the Fathers, and that together
with the eyes of our mind our Reasons, and Consciences, we must give up the
eyes of our body to the Pope's disposal. And this doctrine of Austins (if you
will believe the Romanists) when delivered by the Protestants is a new and
upstart doctrine, never heard of in the world till Luther's days; and by this
you may judge of the justice of that charge, when the like is said of our other
doctrines. I might fill up a Treatise with pertinent citations out of the
Fathers to this purpose, but this is enough for any but those, who are resolved
to sacrifice their consciences to the Pope's ambition, and for them it is too
much.

7. The fourth and last argument is this: The Papists themselves, whatever
sometimes they pretend, yet indeed do not make the Fathers the ground and
foundation of their Faith, but acknowledge them fallible 1. This appears from
what has already been discoursed concerning their avowed Doctrine, That
Infallibility is the proper and peculiar privilege of the Church, and
consequently belongs not to the Fathers in their single capacities. 2. It
appears from the acknowledged novelty of several Romish doctrines, which their
most learned men confess cannot be proved from the Fathers: Such are

1. The doctrine of forbidding the reading of the Scripture to Laymen (as they
are called:) We confess in their days (viz. of ^erome and Augustine) Laymen
were conversant in the reading of the Scripture, says Azorius Fatemur tune
temporis (sub aetate Hieronymi and Chrysostomi) laicos in Scripturarum lectione
versatos fuisse. Instit. Moral. lib. 8. cap. 26.
And whereas many Popish Authors expound those words Ioh. 5 39. (...)
indicatively, as if they did only acquaint us with the practice of the Jews,
and not contain a command of Christ to his hearers to read the Scriptures.
Tolet and Maldonaete in locum.
both witness, that Chrysostom, Theophylact, and Augustine, and all weighty
authors except Cyrill do understand it imperatively for a command of Christ.

2 They acknowledge the novelty of Transubstantiation. The words of Scotus are
these: Prout recitatur a Bellar. de Euchar. lib. 3. c. 23. unum addit Scotus,
quod minime probandum est; Ante Lateranense concilium non fuisse dogma fidei
Transubstantia^ionem.
Before the Lateran Council, the doctrine of Transubstantiation was no point
of faith: and the first Laeteran Council was above 1100 years after Christ's
birth. And Alphonsus de Castro delivers this memorable assertion: Many things
are known to later Authors, which the Ancient writers were wholly ignorant of,
for these seldom make any mention of Transubstantiation. Multa sunt
posterioribus nota, quae vetusti illi scriptores prorsus ignoraverunt. Nam de
Transubstantiatione -- vara esi in antiquis scriptoribus mentio. lib. 8. contra
haereses in verbo Indulgentia.


3 The doctrine of Indulgencies and Purgatory (I join them both together as
being near of kin) of which Bishop Fisher has this remarkable passage. Nemo
jam dubitat orthodoxus an Purgatorium sit, de quo tamen apud priscos nulla vel
quam rarissima fiebat mentio. -- Contemplantes igitur aliquamdiu Purgatorium
incognitum fuisse. -- Cum itaque Purgatorium tam sero cognitum ac receptum
fuerit Ecclesiae, quis jam de Indulgentiis mirari potest, gaod in principio
nullus fuerit earum usus. Roffensis in confutatione Lutheri, p. 496.
No orthodox Christian now doubts whether there be a Purgatory, though the
Ancients seldom or never mentioned it: And a little after; Considering that
Purgatory was for a good while unknown, -- and again, seeing then Purgatory was
known and received in the Church so lately, who can wonder that Indulgencies
were not used in the primitive Church? So Gabriel By el: Ante tempora Beati
Gregorii modicus vel nullus fuit usus Indulgentiarum. Nunc autem crebrescit
earum usus, quia Ecclesia sine dubio habet spiritum Christi, ideoque non errat.
in lect. 57. super canonem Missae.
Before the times of St. Gregory (and that was 600 years after Christ) there
was little or no use of Indulgencies: but now they are used frequently, because
the Church without doubt has the spirit of Christ, and therefore cannot err.
That sine dubio did his work, for I was about to dispute against his
assertion, but that phrase quite took away my courage. You see it is a courtesy
that the Papists will condescend to prove their doctrine from Scripture and
Fathers; whereas if they would stand upon their terms, they might argue thus:
The conclusion without doubt is true, that the Church cannot err; therefore a
fig for the premises. So Durandus: De Indulgentiis pauca dici possunt per
certitudine^, quod nec Scriptura express de eis loquitur. -- Sancti etiam, ut
Ambros. Hilar. Aug. Hieron. minime loquuntur de Indulgentiis. in lib. 4. de
sentent. did. 20. qu. 3. cum. 4.
Concerning Indulgencies little can be said with any certainty, because the
Scripture speaks not expressly of them; and the holy Fathers Aug: Ambrose,
Hilary, Jerome do not at all mention them. And Cajetan expressly: Nulla
Scriptura sacra, nulla priscorum Doctorum Graecorum vel Latinorum authoritas
Indulgentiarum ortum ad nostram deduxit no, titiam, Opuse, 15. cap. 1.
No sacred Scripture, no authority of ancient Fathers, either Greek or Latin,
has brought the rise of Indulgencies to our knowledge: And yet (if you please
to believe it) this and all the doctrines of the Romish Church are no other
then such as have been handed to them from the Apostles by all the ancient
Fathers in an uninterrupted succession. I believe I could instance in twenty
several Articles of the Romish Church, for which they have no color of
authority from any of the Fathers. But this may suffice for a Specimen of that
respect which the Papists have for the Fathers, when they do not comply with
their humors. The Fathers were so ignorant for a thousand years together, that
they did not understand, or so negligent that they did not instruct their
people in that great mystery of Transubstantiation, (then which none was more
necessary to be taught, because none more difficult to believe.) The Fathers
were so hard-hearted and cruel, that they would suffer souls to fry in
Purgatory for hundreds of years together, whom they might have certainly
released by the help of Indulgencies. The Fathers were so indiscreet, that they
allowed their hearers to read the Scriptures, and have them in a vulgar tongue.
But now it is not fit to be granted, says Sixtus Sinensis lib. 6. Biblioth.
annet. 152.
The Church of Rome has got a monopoly of all knowledge, fidelity,
tender-heartedness, (which you will wonder at) discretion, and all good
qualities, and Infallibility into the bargain.

This is the excellency of the Romish faith, that it is calculated for any
Meridian. Are any of their doctrines seemingly favored by the Fathers? why
then you shall have large Harangues concerning the authority of the Fathers,
and their adherence to them. Are there any of their points, wherein the Fathers
are either silent of opponent? why they are furnished with another strain: that
the Fathers were but private Doctors, and had their failings. The chief of the
Fathers had their falls, says Bellarmine. Praecipui Patrum lapsi sunt de verbo
Dei, lib. 3. cap. 10.
In the books of the Ancients, which the Church reads as authentic, sometimes
are found wicked and heretical passages, says Sixtus Sinensis. In sibris
sanctorum Doctorum, quos authentice legit Ecclesia, nonnunquam inveniuntur
quaedam prava and haeretica. Praesat. in lib. 5. Biblioth.
And so long as the Church of Rome reserves to her self always a liberty of
determining what passages are wicked and heretical, I trow she is out of
Gunshot: I do not value Origens judgment, says Pererius. In Romans 3. disp. 6.
And that you may see the Papists do insanire cum ratione, I pray you take
notice, that what they want in conscience and honest dealing, they make up in
wit, and therefore have devised several ingenuous shifts, whereby they can
elude the most pregnant testimonies of the Fathers levied against them.
Sometimes they answer, that the Fathers speak (...) in opposition to the
present Adversary they were disputing with, not (...) as laying down their own
positive opinion: thus Perron: lib, 1. de Euchar. p. 52.
and Sixtus Senensis Praefat in lib. 5. Biblioth.
Sometimes they say the Fathers speak declamatorio more, by perbolically, and
by excess: thus Sixtus Senensis answers our allegations from the Fathers for
reading the Scripture lib. 6. Bibl. annot. 52.
Thus Petavius answers a clear passage of Chrysostomes against Auricular
Confession. Animadvers. in Epiphanii haereses. 59. page 244.
At other times they tell us the Fathers did not always speak what they
thought, but what they saw necessary to confute their Adversaries: thus Perron
answers the citations from the Fathers against creature-worship. If you allege
the Epistles of the Fathers, they tell you, the Fathers did not use fully to
open their minds in those writings: So Perron answers a Testimony of Austins
against Transubstantiation. Sometimes they plead, that the Fathers speak the
opinion of others, not their own; as Bellarmine answers a place out of Hierom.
lib. de gratia primi hominis. cap. 11.
If you bring any passage out of their Poems, they say the Fathers did use
Poetical liberty, as Bellarmine answers to Prudentius De Purgatorio. lib. 2.
cap. 18.
So just was the judgment of the University of Doway upon Bertram's Book, of
the body and blood of Christ: Seeing we bear many errors in the ancient
Fathers, and extenuate and excuse them, and often times by some divised fiction
we deny and put a convenient sense upon them, when they are opposed against us
in disputations with our adversaries, we do not see why Bertram does not
deserve the same equity, and diligent recognition. Cum in veteribus aliis
plurimos feramus errores, and extenuemus, excusemus, excogitato commento
persaepe negamus, and commoduna iis sensum affingamus, dum opponuntur in
disputationibus, aut conflictionibus cum adversariis, non videmus, eur non
eandem aequitatem and diligentem recognitionem mereatur Bertramus. Vide Ind.
expurg. in tit. B.
And thus they deal with the Fathers, when they displease their humor, and
oppose their doctrines. But if the Fathers deliver any thing that seems to
countenance their conceits, then every passage of the Fathers is dogmatical,
and every word an argument: then the Fathers have done playing and quibling,
then they have opened their minds fully, and given us their most serious and
last thoughts.

8. And lest you should think it was only the opinions of several Fathers which
they despised, I shall acquaint you with their practice in case of consent of
the Fathers, or the major part of them. That the Angels were corporeal, was the
opinion of most of the Fathers says Pererius Lib. 1. in Genes. dis. 106.
For this opinion Sixtus Senensis reckons up Origin, Lactant: Athenas:
Methodius, Hilarious, Damascinus, Cassianus, and the secound Council of Nice: to
whom Maldonat adds, as (...), Clemens Alexan: Theodoret, Tertullian, Ambrose,
Augustine, etc. such a Constellation one shall seldom find in any controverted
opinion: Yet hear what Senensis says, I think the contrary opinion is the
trust. If a Protestant had said as much, what tumults and tragedies would it
have raised in the Roman Court? how would all the world have rung with it? So
again, that I may further lay open this Romish imposture, I shall represent to
the reader's consideration that controversy concerning the immaculate
conception of the Blessed Virgin: what is the common and current doctrine of
the Church of Rome at this day is sufficiently known from the decree of the
Council of Trent concerning Original sin, (in which decree they expressly tell
us, they would not have her included) Declarat sancta Synodus non esse suae
intentionis comprehendere in hoc decreto, ubi de peccato originali agitist,
beatam and immaculatam Virginem Mariam Dei genetricem. conc. Trident. in sess.
5.
, and from the severe constitutions of Sixtus the fourth, and Paul the fifth,
and Gregory the fifteenth Popes, against those that should presume to teach
this Doctrine, that the Blessed Virgin was conceived in sin, and from the
practice of diverse Popish Universities, who have not only received the doctrine
of the immaculate conception of the Virgin, but bind their members by solemn
oath to own it, and from the writings of multitudes of the most eminent Popish
writers, who positively assert it, as Delrio, Henriquez, Az^rius, Suarez,
Vasquez, Salmeron, Acosta, Abulensis, Canus, Navarrus, and a world of others.
Now let us see, whether in this point they made the consent of Fathers their
rule, or (which is equivalent) what was the judgment of the ancient Fathers
therein: which I shall give you from the mouths of the Papists themselves, then
which they cannot desire a fairer trial. Hear Canus: All the ancients that make
any mention of this matter, have with one mouth asserted, that the Blessed
Virgin was conceived in sin, as Ambrose, Aug: Chrysostom: etc. and none of them
contradicted that assertion: and then he adds his (...) and the Romish
opinion: That the argument from authority is weak, and the contrary doctrine is
probably and piously defended in the Church of Rome Sancti (antiqui) omnes, qui
in eius rei mentionem inciderunt, uno ore asseverarunt Beatam Virginem in
peccato originali conceptam, -- and nullus sancturum contravenit: Infirmum
tamen ex omnium authorilute argumentum ducitur, quin potius contraria sententia
probabiliter and (...) defenditur, loc. theol. lib. 7. c. 1.
And he confesses, he knew no other way to confute this argument of Erasmus
against the authority of the Fathers, then by saying the opinion was not de
fide, or no matter of faith. ibid. (...) 3.
A remedy as bad as the disease.

1. Because the opinion is most absurd that a Doctrine is not de fide till the
Pope or Council have determined it, from whence would follow amongst many
other gross absurdities. 1. That it was not de fide while Christ lived that
Jesus was the Messiah, no Council having determined it. 2. That most of the
Articles of the Christian Religion were not de fide before the Council of
Nice. 3. That God revealing a truth in his Holy Scriptures cannot oblige our
faith as much as a Council, revealing it in their Decrees. But I need say no
more of this, because it is rejected by diverse of their own most Learned
Authors: It is the common opinion of Doctors, that a Council does not make a
thing to be of Faith, but denies, or declares, that such a thing is, or
formerly was de fide, as the Holy Fathers abundantly confirm, says White
Communis Doctorum sentextia sert conilium non facere aliquid de fide, sed
decernere esse seu prius fuisse de fide, ut Sancti etiam Patres abunde
confirmant. De fide and Theologia. Tract. 2. Sect. 22.


2. Because this was de fide according to their own Doctrine: For the Council
of Basil had positively defined and determined it, as pious and agreeable to
Faith, reason, and Scripture, to be embraced by all Catholics; and that it
should be lawful to no man to teach the contrary. Ses. 36.
This put S Clara so hard to it, that he is forced to this horrible shift, that
they only defined it, tanquam piam and consonam fidei. Now the terms tanquam
and consonam are terms of diminution In systemate fidei cap. 35. p. 377.
But to return; Salmeron treating of this point tells us, that his Adversaries
reckon 200, others 300 Fathers against his and the Romish Doctrine of the
immaculate conception: Well, what is his Answer? Really it is so full of Heresy
that I fear they will chide me for translating it: he tells you, The Argument
from Authority is weak: I Answer (says he) from Exodus 23.2. Thou shall not
speak in a cause to incline after many to wrest judgment, as Augustine answered
the Donatists; it was a sign that a cause wanted truth, which leaned upon
Authority; That the younger Doctors see further then the ancients: that is to
say, the Romish Doctors are wiser then the Ancient Fathers. Argumentum ab
authoritate infirmum est -- Respondemus ex verbo Dei Exodus 23.1. In judicio
plurimorum non acquisces sententiae, ut a vero devies cum Augustinus respondent
Donatistis signum esse cause a veritatis nervo destitutae, quae soli multorum
Authoritati, qui errari possunt innititur Doctores quo juniores, co
perspicatiores sunt. Disp. 51. in Romans 5.
I commend these passages to the care of my Lords the Inquisitors, the next
time the purging humor takes them, they richly deserve a room in the Iudex
expurgatorius.

And yet these are the only adorers of the Ancient Fathers, that tell you We
do not receive part of the Doctrine of the Fathers, and reject part, but we
embrace it all says Duraeus Nos pat^um Doctrinam non aeliqu^ ex part
admittimus, aelia^ repudiamus, sed integram amplectimur. Contra Whitak. fol.
140.
We hold the whole Volumes says Campian Tenemus integra volumina. In december
rationibus, rat. 5.
These are they that hold the Fathers to be uncorrupted judges of
Controversies, whom God would not suffer to fall into error, and lead others
into it, says Costerus Incorrupti sunt judices controversiarum, neque enim
credibile est eos, presertim in rebus quae fidem attingunt, a Deo sic
destitutos fuisse, ut ^psi errarint, doctrinaque sua alios in errorem
induxerint. In Euchir. p. 64.
Will you see more of this mystery of iniquity? I shall only name the rest:
Diverse Popish Authors of prime note acknowledge that it was the general
opinion of the Fathers, That the Sacrament of the Lords Supper ought to be
given to Infants. So Maldonate, The Opinion of St Augustine, and Innocent the
first, (a Pope, and therefore his opinion infallibly true) flourished in the
Church for 600 years that the Eucharist was necessary to Infants Missam facio
Augustini and Innocentii. 1. sententiam qui sexcentos circiter annos viguit in
Ecclesia Eucharistiam etiam infantibus necessariam. in Joh. 6. verse. 53.
That the Lords Supper should be received by the people in both kinds. For the
Council of Constance in that very place where it takes away one kind, (the
Cup) do acknowledge that the use of both kinds by the people was instituted by
Christ, and enjoyed by the people in the ancient Church Sessione 13.
That the Saints departed, should not be admitted to the vision of God, before
the day of judgment: So much Perron confesses, and Sixtus Senensis, Lib. 6.
Bibl. Annot. 345.
That the Saints should reign with Christ a thousand years, that Pamelius
grants In notis super Cypriani hortationem ad martyrium.
In all these and several others, it is known that the Church of Rome asserts
the contrary, how truly, and justly I dispute not, nor is it material to my
purpose, which is only to show how upon all occasions, where need requires
they do as little regard the Authority of the Fathers as any, whom they most
traduce for so doing. But would you know the mystery of this? why, The Fathers
are not reckoned as Fathers when they deliver any thing which they did not
receive from the Church, says Duraeus Neque enim patres censentur, cum suum
aliquid, quod ab Ecclesia^ non acceperunt, seribunt vel docent: con. Whit. ubi
supra.
In earnest, that saying deserved a Cardinals Cap. And Baily the Jesuit
seconds him in it, where putting this question; Whether the Authority of the
Doctors (Fathers) ought to be admitted; he answers: Yes, as f^r as the Church
approves of them Debetne admitti Doctorum (Patrum) Authoritas? Debet quatenus
ab Ecclesia approbatur in Catecbis.


The Fathers have Authority with us as far as we please: I will add a third
(that you may see it is a ruled case:) and that is Gresserus. A Father (says
he) is one that feeds the Church with wholesome Doctrine: but if instead of
corn he give chaff or tares, he is not now a Father but a stepFather, not a
teacher but a seducer. Nam Ecclesiae pater ille dicitur qui Ecclesiam salutari
Doctrina alit and pascit -- Iam vero si pro salutifero Doctrinae pabulo --
offerat and adducatur lolium and zizania -- perversorum dogmatum -- eatenus non
Pater est sed vitricus, non Doctor sed seductor. In lib. 2. de jure ac more
prohibendi libras noxios cap. 10.


When the Fathers say any thing which seems to countenance their positions,
then they are Fathers, incorrupt judges, infallible interpreters, and Purgatory
is too mild a punishment for him that shall go one hairs breadth from them.
But if the Fathers will once begin to take upon them, if they will exceed those
bounds the Pope has set them, and contradict his interest or opinion, then it
is time to take them a peg lower, then they call them Fathers, but make
children of them: They had better have held their Tongues; for now all comes
out, and the Papists are the Chams (as they call the Protestants) who uncover
their Fathers nakednesses: Then Eusebius (who when he is Orthodox in the Roman
account passes for a most famous Writer, a most learned man, and a Catholic
with Lindanus, Panopl. l. cap. 17.. inprimis.
Sixtus Senensis Apud Baron. in Anal. tom. 3. an. 340.
and others) is all on a sudden transubstantiated into an Arrian Heretic with
Costerus Haereticus Arrianus, in Apologia contra Grevinchovium c. 8. n. 9.
and Baronius Loco jam citato.
Then poor Tertullian (who, when he speaks righteous things passes for a most
noble Author, the chief of all the Latin Fathers with Lindanus, Nobilis
admodum author, latinorum omnium facile princeps. Panopl. (...). cap. 23.
) is not so much as a man of the Church; nay, he is an heretical Author, an
heresiarch, a Montanist say Azorius Tom. 1. Moral. lib. 8. ca. 16.
and Bellarm Lib. 1. de Sanctis ca. 5.
Then Origin (who when he is a good boy passes for a witness beyond exception
with Duraeus Testis omni sane exceptione major. contra Whitak sol. 109.
another master of the Churches after the Apostles as Jerome calls him says
Lindanus Alterum Ecclesiarum post Apostolos Magistrum asebat Hieronymus. Panop.
lib. 3. cap. 26.
) is a mere schismatic says Canus Loc. com. lib. 7. cap. 3. number. 11.
the Father of the Arrians and Eunomians says Maldonate In Johan. 1.3.
Then Constantine himself, (that you may see the Church of Rome is not guilty
of respect of persons) is not much to be regarded he was a greater Emperor then
Doctor says Bellarm. De verbo Dei 1. 4. c. 11.
Then Lactantius is better skilled in Tully, then in the Scripture and
Victorinus was a Martyr but wanted learning says Bellarmine Lactantius magis
librorum Ciceronis quam Scripturarum Sanctarum peritus. Victorinus martyr
quidem fuit, sed ei cruditio defuit, Lib. 1. de sanctis 6.5. in fine.
Nay, I think both he and the rest of the Fathers wanted wit as well as
learning: for if they would but have blotted out all Anti-Romish passages
(which might have been done with one Blot, provided it reached from the
beginning to the end of their works) they had all passed for Orthodox and
admirable men, and we had not heard one word of their infirmities or
miscarriages.

What need I trouble my self and the Reader, with saying that which all the
World knows concerning the Papists receding from the common sense of the
Fathers in expositions of Scripture, and preferring new interpretations before
them, (not fearing their own Tridentine thunderbolt, That no man should dare to
interpret Scripture against the common consent of the Fathers, Sessione 4.
For which I shall only refer the reader to those places where he may be
more fully satisfied, that this was the opinion and practice of the Learned and
approved Romanists, as Cajetan In Prafatione in Pentateuchum.
Pererius, Lib. 3. in Genesis qu. 5. n. 45.
Maldonate la muitis locis Joh. 8.56. Mat. 16.18. and 19.
and several others Stella in Luc. 10. 21. Baronius in Annal. Tom. 1. An. 34.
Patres in interpretatione Scripturarum non semper -- Catholicam Ecclesiam
sequuntur.


. 9. In short, to strike the business dead, you shall have the positive
judgment of the principal pillars of the Romish Church: Sacred Doctrine (says
Aquinas) uses Authority of Scripture as a necessary Argument, but the
Authorities of other Doctors of the Church only as a probable Argument: for
our faith leanes upon the revelation made to the Apostles and Prophets, not to
other Doctors Sacrae Doctrina Authoritatibus Canonicae Scripturae utitur
proprie ex necessitate Argumentando, authoritatibus autem aliorum doctorum
Ecclesiae arguendo ex propriis, sed probabilitet. Innititur enim fides nostra
revelationi Apostolis and Prophetis factae -- non ^utem revelationi, si quae
fuit aliis Doctoribus factae. Part. 1. qu. 1. art. 8.
The Authorities of the Fathers without the Scripture does not oblige my faith,
says Biel Authoritates patrum sine Scripturis non obligant ad fidem. Lect. 41:
in Canon Missae.
It is the property of the Holy Scriptures, that there is no error in it which
needs correction says Baronius Divinae tantum Scripturae, nihil habere
erroris, quod corrigatur. Tom. 4. Annal. An. 369.
The Writings of the Fathers (says Bellarmine in totidem terminis) are not a
rule, and have not authority to oblige me Patrum Scripta non sunt regula, nec
habent authoritatem obligandi. de Council. lib. 2. cap. 12.. Dico secundo.
And not contented to assert, he elsewhere offers proofs of the invalidity of
the Fathers without, and their perfect subjection to the Authority of the
Church and Bishop of Rome. The Fathers execute the office of Doctors, but
Counsels and Popes execute the office of a Judge committed to them by God
Augustinus and ceteri Patres in comm^ntartis sungebantur officio doctorum, at
Concilia and Pontifices funguntur officio judicis a Deo sibi commisso lib. 3.
de verbo Dei cap. 10.
And again: The Pope has no Fathers in the Church, but all are his sons: No
wonder then that the sons are subject to the Father, not the Fathers to the
Sons Ponlifex non habet ullos in Ecclesia Patres, sed omnes filios. Quid vero
mirum est, si non pater filiis, sed filii patri suo subjiciantur. Lib. 2. de
Romano Pontifice cap. 27.
Thus Gregory de Valentia cuts the knot he cannot untie: If the consent of
Doctors cannot be made out, the Pope may use his Authority Si de Doctorum
consensu non aperte constar^t, sua tunc constat Authoritas Pentifici in Analysi
lib. 8. cap. 8. page 119.
Really these Jesuits are most ingenious fellows, they are resolved never to
be at a nonplus: when they saw the Scripture was not for their turns, they
vote that should not be judge of controversies and fled to the Fathers. When
they saw multitudes of notable passages cited out of the ^athers destructive to
their Hierarchy, then it must be consent of the Fathers: Now because they know
they cannot make out the consent of the Fathers for any one Article of their
Faith. Here is a Salvo for that, the Popes Authority is evident: It is but
saying, that is a first Principle, and all controversies are at an end. By this
time I think I may expect the Reader that has but a dram of ingenuity in him
must needs acknowledge that the Authority of the Fathers is neither ex veritate
rei (in truth) nor ex opinione Pontificiorum (in the judgment of the Papists) a
solid foundation for a Papists Faith which was the Proposition to be proved: I
shall dismiss this with two Observations.

1. How sweetly the Romish Doctors agree in that which they acknowledge to be a
principal foundation of Faith, viz. the Authority of the Fathers.

2. I shall leave this Syllogism, taken out of their own Authors, to the
consideration of the prudent Reader: If you take away the authority of Fathers
and Councels, all things in the Church are uncertain, says Eccius, as you saw
before: But B^llarmine and others, have here taken away the Authority of the
Fathers: And in the next Chapter you shall see they take away the Authority of
Councels: Ergo, There is nothing certain in the Romish Church: Thus I have
showed that the Faith of the Papists has no sure ground or foundation in the
Authority of the Pope, Scriptures, or Fathers: Now I come to the fourth
particular, the Authority and Infallibility of the Church and Councels which is
the sacra anchora the principal refuge of a languishing cause.

CHAP. IV. Of the Authority and Infallibility of the Church and Councels.
Sect. 1. LEt us therefore examine in the next place, whether the Councels will
stand them in better stead. Whether the splendid name and Authority of the
Church be a solid and sufficient foundation of Faith. In order to which I shall
lay down this proposition. That the Authority of the Church and Councels is no
sufficient foundation for a Papists faith: This I shall more fully discuss,
because here it is that very many of the Popish Doctors do build their hopes,
and lay the foundation of their faith. And here indeed they have greatest
appearance of probability. A general Council rightly congregated cannot err in
the faith, says Alphonsus de Castro Concilium generale recte congregatum non
potest errare in side. lib. 4. adversus he^ reses in verbo Concilium.
Councels represent the Catholic Church which cannot err, and therefore they
cannot err says Eccius and Tapperus Concilia repraesentant Ecclesiam Catholic
im quae errare non potest. Ergo etiam ipsa errare non possunt. Ecchias in
Enchir. c. 2. Tappor in Art. 1. Lovan. p. 5.
The decrees of general Councels have as much weight as the Holy Gospels, says
Costerus Decreta Conciliorum generalium -- idem habent pondus and momentum,
quod sancta Dei Evangelia. in Enchiridio p. 46.
Councels approved and confirmed by the Pope cannot err, say Canus Lib. 5.
loc. com. c. 4.
and Bellar* Councels, P^el. de Conciliis -- lib. 2, c, 2.
being the highest Ecclesiastical Iudicatories cannot err says ^annerus In
part 3. Anat. De^. 10, Sect. 222.
The decrees of Councels are the Oracles of the Holy Ghost, says Stapleton: In
Relest. Controv. q. 3. art. 4. p. 610.
Surely now I may cry out (...): Here is the ground and pillar of truth, and at
least -- spes altera Romae.

. 2. 1. Then I would know whence comes this Infallibility of Councels? It must
be from Gods promise (for they do not pretend it is any natural inhaerent
property of any man or men single or conjunct.) And this promise must be made
known to us by divine Revelation, i.e. either by Scripture or Tradition (for
other revelation they do not pretend to:) Thus far they and we are agreed:
Now I assume, That the Infallibility of Councels is not revealed to us, neither
in the one nor in the other.

. 3. 1. Not in the Traditions of the Fathers; for among all the Traditions
mentioned by them you shall not find this concerning the Infallibility of
Councels: Nor have our Adversaries (that I know of) alleged one considerable
ancient Father, asserting that such a Tradition was conveyed to them from the
Apostles, though there had been such a Tradition, they who were so careful to
enumerate all the Traditions of far less consequence, which pretended to an
Apostolical Original, neither should nor would have omitted to acquaint the
Church with so important a Tradition, as this is now supposed to be: And this
might suffice for Answer, till our Adversaries give us an instance of some such
Tradition.

. 4. But because Tradition and the testimony of the Fathers is their chief
Pillar of the Infallibility of Councels (the wiser sort of them being sensible
of the impertinency of their Scripture allegations:) I shall consider this a
little more largely then at first I intended, and shall endeavor to make good
four things, which if proved, will give a deadly stroke at the root of
infallibility. 1. If there were such a Tradition among the Fathers as is
pretended, it is no solid and sufficient foundation for our Faith. 2. If the
ancients did believe the infallibility of Councels, yet it does not follow they
believed it upon the account of such a Tradition. 3. It does not appear that
the Antiens did believe the Infallibility of Councels. 4. It does appear that
the Ancients did believe the fallibility of Councels.

. 5. The first proposition is this; That if some of the Fathers did tell us
they had such a Tradition among them as is pretended concerning the
Infallibility of Councels, it is no solid and sufficient foundation for our
Faith, because the Fathers were subject to errors and mistakes, as we have now
proved, and as the Papists confess, at least they might err in matters of
fact (for in such things they acknowledge the Pope himself to be fallible.)
And this was purely a question of fact, whether such a Tradition were delivered
to them. And that the fathers were ofttimes deceived in the point of
Traditions, and in matters of fact is acknowledged by several of the most
learned Papists; and Baronius gives us diverse examples of their mistakes in
sundry parts of his Annals, and that too amongst the first Fathers, who had
far greater opportunities to know the truth then their followers, and greater
integrity to deliver nothing contrary to their knowledge, and much more there
might mistakes be committed by those that came after them.

If it be said, That although some particular Fathers might mistake in the
matters of Tradition, yet the Fathers consenting therein are infallible.

This is already answered in the former Chapter, to which I shall here add;
that it is impossible for us at this distance to understand the consent of the
Fathers, e.g. of the first or second Age, there being such a small and
inconsiderable remnant left of them like two or three planks after a common
shipwreck. Gregory de Valentia confesses even of the Doctors of the age we
live in that it seldom happens that we can sufficiently understand the opinion
of all the Doctors that live in one Age Fatendum est raro accidere posse, ut
quae sit Doctorum omnium ejus tempore viventium de religione sententia, satis
cognoscatur. Lib. 8. Analys. cap. 8. page 119.
How much more hard, nay, impossible must it needs be to understand the mind
of that Age which is gone 1500 years ago? And Melchior Canus confesses, That
the Authority of most of the Holy (Fathers) if a few did contradict them, will
not afford a Divine a solid Argument Plurium Sanctorum Authoritas, reliquis
licet pancio^ibus reclamantibus, firma argumenta Theologo sufficere and
praestare non valet Loc. theol. lib. 7. cap. 3.
So that if such a tradition had been delivered by some, yea the major part of
the Fathers, if some others, though fewer had contradicted it, Faith has lost
its foundation, and this might be done (and such things in all probability were
often done) though no footsteps of it are come to the memory of Posterity. As
Austin speaks of Cyprian when he was pressed with his Authority, he answers
Happily he did recant, though we know it not: For neither were all things
done^among the Bishops at that time committed to writing, nor do we know all
things that were committed to Writing Fortasse factum sed nescimus. Neque enim
omnia^quae illo tempore inter Episcopos gesta sunt, memoriae liteuisque mandari
po^uerunt, aut omnia quae mandata sunt, novimus. Lib. 2. con. Donat. cap, 4.
And if this was considerable in Austins days, who lived within two hundred
years of those times, how much more weighty must it be to us that come twelve
hundred years after him? Now then to put a case (because this consideration
shakes the very pillars of Popery, and overthrowes almost all their pretensions
from Tradition and the Authority of the Fathers.) Suppose the Major part of the
Ancient Fathers had said in terminis, that the Bishop of Rome was supreme head
and infallible governor of the Church (though nothing was further from their
thoughts) and suppose a less number of the Fathers did in that age contradict
it, though the contradictours happily either did not commit their opinion to
Writing, or if they did, their Writings might be suppressed by the major part
(as has been the lot of most Ages) or by the injury of time are lost (which
the Papists cannot say was impossible for the Writings of the Fathers, seeing
they tell us that de facto some of the Books of Holy Scripture are lost:) The
next age comes and understands the truth of what I have now supposed: The
question is, Whether the Authority of the Major part of the Fathers of the
former age be a sufficient foundation for their Faith in the Popes Supremacy
and infallibility? Melchior Canus says No: Now then the next age or ages
having happily forgotten such contradictions (which the Age immediately next
remembered.) The question is whether that foundation which was insufficient to
the precedent Age, is now through their ignorance of such contradiction become
sufficient to the following Age? if they affirm it, it would become the
Jesuits in point of gratitude to Write a Panegyric in praise of Ignorance
which is it seems, not only the Mother of Devotion, but of assurance and
certainty of knowledge; if they deny it, they confess the weakness of their
assertion: In short, he that will lay the foundation of his Faith upon such a
quicksand, must either prove the negative that there was no such contradiction
as we have supposed (which is impossible) or confess his Faith relies upon the
Sand (which is dreadful.) And again admit they had the consent of Fathers in
this Tradition. I have given several instances, wherein they acknowledge they
have departed from the consent of Fathers, and that there were several
Doctrines which (if we believe the Papists when they tell us the Fathers owned
no Doctrine, but what they had by Tradition) the Fathers received by Tradition,
wherein they were de facto mistaken, and why might they not be mistaken in
this? We all know how general the Millenary opinion was among the Fathers of
the second and third Centuries, though it be said all came from the mistake of
Papias, an honest, but credulous Doctor. And dare these men venture their Souls
upon it, that Papias was the only credulous Author? and that this was the
only mistaken Tradition? or that it was impossible for those Fathers who were
so many of them imposed upon by one credulous person in one point to be imposed
upon by another in other points? All these and many other uncertainties must
not only be allowed but are laid in the very foundation of Infallibility.

. 6. The second particular is this: That if the Ancients did believe the
Infallibility of Councels, yet it does not follow they believed it upon the
account of such a Tradition, for they might believe it upon other grounds. It
is evident they believed many (nay, to speak the truth all) Doctrines because
they apprehended them to be contained in the Scriptures; and why might it not
be so with this? Why might not the Fathers believe this (if they did believe
it) upon the same misapprehensions and mistakes (which the Papists at this day
run into) concerning the sense of those Scriptures which are alleged for the
Infallibility of Councels? And consequently the Fathers opinions of the
Infallibility of Councels does not argue that they received such a Tradition
from the Apostles, but only that this was their opinion, wherein, no less then
in other points, they were subject to errors as I have proved.

. 7. The third Proposition is this: It does not appear that the ancient
Fathers did believe the Infallibility of Councels. For trial hereof I shall
refer my self to those Arguments and Authorities which are alleged for the
proof of the contrary position: Bell brings three Arguments, to show that the
Ancient Fathers held that general Councels could not err and not one of them
speak to the point:

His first Argument is this, They affirm that the sentence of a general
Council in the cause of Faith is the last judgment of the Church, from which
th^re lies no appeal, and which cannot be made void or retracted: Hence it
evidently follows that such Counsels cannot err, because else it were a very
unjust thing to compel Christians that they should not appeal from that
judgment which may be erroneous Affirma^t primum Concilii generalis sententiam
esse in causa fidei ultimum Eccl^sice judicium, a quo appellari non possit,
quodque nullo modo irritari vel retractari queat. Hine autem apertissime
constat ejusmodi Conc^lia non errare etc. lib. 2. de Council. auctor. c. 3.
I Answer, 1. St Austin did hold that the sentence of a general Council might
be retracted, though not by private Christians, yet by a ^ollowing general
Council, former general Councels (says he) are corrected by the later, of
which more by and by, and that is enough to show he did not believe it
infallible. 2. The Consequence is weak and denied by the Protestants, and
therefore might be denied by the Fathers: If the consequence be infirm now, it
could not be strong then; and for this we have the Testimony of a Papist S.
Clara, who tells us; that Calvin, and Robertus Baronius, and all the
Protestants, and some others who deny the Infallibility of general Councels do
nevertheless acknowledge it to be the supreme Judge of Controversies upon
Earth, and that such a Council has a det^rmining and decisive power, which
all are externally bound to obey to prevent Schism Fatetur Baronius Concilium
generale esse supremum in terris Controversiarum Iudicem -- determinativam and
decisivam fo^^statem (agnoscunt) Adversarii cui omnes exterius obiemperare
tenentur, ne schisma fiat: S. Clara. in system. fidei cap. 20. number. 14. et 15.
Nor is it unjust, but necessary for the preservation of order and prevention
of worse mischiefs, that there should be a Supreme though fallible Authority,
beyond which there might be no appeal: And as it is no injustice that there
lies no appeal beyond the Supreme Magistrate in civil affairs, though he be
confessed to be Fallible: so neither can it be any injustice that there is no
appeal beyond the Supreme Ecclesiastical Judicatory in Church matters though
it be fallible, provided it be granted (which the Protestants with the Fathers
do assert and have proved) that such Judicatories do not bind the conscience
but only regulate the outward Acts, and prevent visible Confusions.

. 8. And the same Answer will serve for Bellarmines second Argument, which is
this: The Fathers and Councels teach that they who do not acquiesse in the
sentence of general Councels are Heretics and deserve excommunications, and
therefore they thought such Councels could not err Docent Patres and Concilia
esse hereticos and excommunicandos omnes qui non acquiescunt conciliis
plenariis. Ex quo manifest sequitur ces putasse Concilia non posse errare.
Bellar, ubi supra.


Answer, 1. I deny the Consequence again for the now mentioned reason: The
civil cutting of such as resist the sentence of the Magistrate does as fully
prove the Magistrates Infallibility, as the Ecclesiastical cutting of such as
do not rest in the sentence of a Council does prove the Councels
Infallibility. 2. The Fathers did not account men Heretics merely because they
rested not in the sentence of a Council as such (for then they should have
been Heretics for rejecting the Arrian Councels) but because the Doctrine
which they opposed, and the Councels asserted was true; and so it was the
verity of the Doctrine, not the Conciliarity (if you will pardon the word) of
the sentence by which they judged of Heretics. That cannot be an Argument that
the Fathers believed the Infallibility of Councels, which is common to those
that deny their Infallibility; but the cal^ing of those Heretics who do not
acquiesse in the sentence of Councels is common to those that deny the
Infallibility of Councels; for the Protestants themselves have branded and
censured and sometimes put to death as Heretics such men as in fundamental
points of Religion have receded from their public Confessors of Faith, and the
decrees of their Synods, without ever pretending to Infallibility.

But (that I may improve the Cardinals Argument for him to the highest) Put
case the Fathers had said that men were bound to believe all the assertions of
their general Council, yet this does not evince that they thought them
Infallible, I prove it plainly thus. The Papists maintain that people are
bound to believe their Pastors, and to receive all their Doctrines without
examination or haesitation (according to that which Stapleton so largely and
frequently defends; That Pastors are simply to be heard in all things) and yet
they do not hold these Pastors to be Infallible: So they tell us by virtue of
that Text, Mat. 23. 2. The Jews were bound to believe all the Doctrines
publicly taught by the Scribes and Pharisees, and yet they do not hold that
the particular Scribes and Pharisees (of whom that Text speaks) were
infallible: And the Fathers might justly say all men were bound to believe all
the decrees of their Councels which then were past, not that they thought
Councels were Infallible, but because they judged all their decrees true and
consonant to the Scripture: otherwise how little they valued the decrees of
Councels, when they apprehended them repugnant to the holy Scripture may be
sufficiently understood by their contempt of the Arrian Councels.

3. There is in this argument the same (...) or error which was through most of
the arguments and testimonies of the Fathers pretended in this cause, viz. they
argue from the authority of Councels to their infallibility, and how invalid
the consequence is appears from this undeniable argument. Masters, Magistrates,
Parents, Bishops, and Provincial Councels have Authority, but not
Infallibility. If all that the Fathers say to that purpose were put upon the
rack, it would prove nothing but this, that they thought (what the Protestants
grant) that general Councels were the supreme judicatories of the Church, from
which was no appeal, and in which all men were obliged peaceably to acquesce;
but that does not infer Infallibility, as we have seen.

9. Bellarmine's third argument is this The Fathers teach, that the Decrees of
general Councels are Divine, and from the Spirit of God; from wh^nce follows,
that they were not subject to error Patres docent esse divina and a Spiritu
sancto edita decreta generatium Conciliorum, Ergo: ubi supra.
. And this he confirms by the testimony of Constantine (who, now he is orthodox
is grown considerable, though when he was alleged against him, he was a
greater Prince then Doctor, as we heard even now) Greg. Nazianz. Cyrill, and
Leo, who call the decrees of the Council of Nice divine, and say they were
ordered by the Spirit of God: and so say I too. And it is true of all the
decrees of all Councels, (nay of all the Sermons of Ministers) which are
collected from Scripture and conformable to it (such as the Nicene Decrees
were) that they are divine Oracles. But then their Divinity, and that, which is
the consequent of Divinity, Infallibility, arises not from the Authority
decreeing them, (which being but humane, could not make the decrees divine) but
from the matter of the decrees which was taken out of Scripture, (as Bellarmine
confesses Coacilium Nicenum cum definivit Filium Patri esse (...),
conclusionem deduxit ex Scripturis. de Conciliis lib. 2. cap. 12.
, and therefore divine. But if Bellar: thinks from this particular case to draw
a general conclusion, I must make bold to stop him in his careere, till he has
told me whither he think this argument solid. The Fathers held the decrees of
the Council of Nice to be divine, and (say it were) infallibly true: Therefore
they thought the decrees of all Councels divine and infallible, and
consequently the AntiNicene and Arrian Councels. If he can digest this, I will
say he has a stomach as good as his conscience is bad.

10. I think it is time to take my leave of the Cardinal, and come to the Friar
S. Clara (who being an ingenuous person, and coming last, has doubtless
selected the best weapons) and his great argument I find to be this: That the
Fathers did generally own the Infallibility of the Catholic Church, and
consequently the Infallibility of general Councels, which are the same with the
Church, and their definitions are the determinations of the Church: this he
largely prosecutes cap. 20, 21, 22. For Answer, let me premise what I have
proved, that if this were the opinion of the Fathers, yet seeing that they
confess themselves to be men subject to like passions and mistakes with others
according to that of Austin, Neither do you think, that because we are Bishops,
we are not liable to irregular motions, but rather let us conceive that we live
dangerously amongst the snares of temptations, because we are men Nec
arbitreris ideo nobis non posse subrepere injuslam commotionem, quia Episcopi
sumus, sed potius cogitemus inter laqueos tentationum nos periculesissime
vivere, quia homines sumus. Epistola 75.
. And seeing the Papists confess they have erred in many things, therefore
this, if it were true, will afford no solid and sufficient foundation for their
faith; but I shall forgive them that infirmity: The argument (however he
glories much in it) has nothing sound from head to foot; how can they expect
this argument should prevail with us, when it is rejected by themselves, who
deny the consequence from the Infallibility of the Church unto that of
Councels. So does Cam^racensis (as S. Clara notes) in these words: A general
Council may err in the faith, because if it should err, yet it would remain
that others without the Council did not err, and by consequence that the faith
of the Church did not fail Concilium generale potest contra fidem errare, quia
ipso sic errante adhuc staret aliquos extra Concilium non errare, and per
consequens fidem Ecclesiae non deficere. art. 3. in quaestione vesperiarum.
aslert. 8.
. The like says Panormitanus: A Council may err, as it has err^d; nor does
this hinder it, that Christ prayed for his Church that it might not err,
because, although a general Council represent the whole Church, yet in truth it
is not the whole Church: -- All the faithful do constitute that Church, whose
head and husband Christ is, and that is the Church which cannot err Concilium
non potest errare, quia Christus oravit pro Ecclesia sua is it non deficeret:
Quia dico, quod licet Concilium generale representet totam Ecclesiam
universalem, cujus caput and sponsus est ipse Christus, and ista est illa
Ecclesia quoe errare non potest. Super part. 1. Decret. sol. 142.
. The very same thing, and almost in the same words says Antonius in his summa
part. 3. tit. 22. c. 2. de Conciliis generalibus.. 6.
, where he adds an instance, That the saying of Jerome was preferred before the
decree of a Council. Thus you see the consequence is denied by three famous
Authors of their own: Nay, what say you, if S. Clara himself deny the
Consequence: I am greatly mistaken, if it does not follow from hence, that he
makes Gouncels infallible no further then they are afterward received and
owned by the Church, and allows them to be fallible where that reception does
not follow, as we shall see hereafter; and therefore the Infallibility is fixed
in the Catholic Church, not in the Council, and consequently the Church may be
infallible, and yet the Council remain fallible: as those Papists that assert
Councels to have their Infallibility from the Pope, (which Bellarmine and the
Jesuits generally do) confess Councels without the Popes confirmation, and in
themselves to be but fallible: for what the Pope's confirmation is in
Bellarmine's opinion, that the Churches reception is in the judgment of S.
Clara, and all the Authors he cites to that purpose. What say you further, if
S. Clara confess the falsehood of his own Conclusion? let the intelligent
Reader judge. His Conclusion is, Therefore Councels are infallible in the
judgment of the Fathers; and of all the Fathers he tells us S. Austin is the
greatest Assertor of the Infallibility of Councels: now I assume, St. Austin in
the judgent of S. Clara held, that Councels are fallible. This I prove from his
own words: In this sense Occham rightly delivers the mind of Austin: whether
they be Popes or others, whether they wrote any thing in Council, or out of
Council, the same judgment is to be passed* upon them, that things are not
therefore to be reputed infallibly true and certain because they wrote so, but
only because they could prove it by Scripture, or reason, or miracles, or the
approbation of the universal Church. Thus far Occham. Now follows S. Clara's
(...): Which doctrine of his I judge most safe, and that it is owned by almost
all Catholics. Denique in boc sensu been dicit Occhamus de mente Augustini,
quam ibi resert 3. Dialog. tract. 1. lib. 3. c. 24. Sive fuerint summi
Pontifices, sive alii, sive scripferint aliquid in Concilio generali, sive
extra, consimile de iis judicium est habendum, ut in his quae scientiae vel
juris sunt, non ideo aliquid putetur certitudinaliter modo praedicto (scil.
infallibili) esse verum, quia ipsi ita scripserunt, nisi id vel per Scripturam
divinam, vel rations irrefragabiles, aut operationem miraculorum, aut per
approbationem universalis Ecclesiae persuadere voluerint: Sic Occham: Quam eius
senten^iam tutissimam aestimo, and ab omnibus fere Catholicis amplexam, System.
fidei c. 26. number. 2.
The evidence of this place forced S. Clara to make this acknowledgment, that
it seems to favor the opinion of those who asserted the Fallibility of
Councels in lesser things, (though indeed this is but a figment of his own
brain, and a distinction foisted into the text, which St. Austin never dreamed
of) and he is reduced to such straits, that he has no other way to evade, but
in stead of an Answer to oppose one argument against another; viz. that it is
sufficient for him, that the Fathers call those Heretics that do not adhere to
the definitions of Councels, Ergo they thought them Infallible Ibid.
: It is Bellarmine's argument, and I have already answered it. And so this
block being removed, the Conclusion remains firm, That St. Austin thought not
Councels infallible. For farther confirmation whereof, I shall from hence
collect two Arguments, plainly proving, that St. Austin was not of the judgment
of the Romanists in this point of the Infallibility of Councels.

1. Because no more Infallibility is here granted to general Councels then to
particular Synods, nay then to private Doctors. This I prove, because St.
Austin, and the Papists themselves, and indeed all men allow each of them so
far infallible, and their assertions to be infallibly true, as they can prove
them by Scripture, or irrefragable reasons, or miracles, or the approbation of
the whole Church: and not one syllable more does Austin give to general
Councels.

2. Because the Papists will not, and cannot according to their principles
truly speak what St. Austin there speaks; and therefore St. Austin did not
think as they think (unless they will make him one of those, who seldom speak
as they think) It is the known and avowed Doctrine of the Romish Church,
(however disowned by some few of them, whom they look on as Extravagants and
Schismatics,) that we are bound to believe the Doctrine of the Pope, say some,
of the Council, say others, of the Pope and Council together, say almost all,
upon the credit of their own assertion, without any further reason. This is
evident from Stapleton Contra whitak. in variis locis.
, Gregory de Valentia lib. 8. Anal. fid.
, Tannerus In colloquio Ratisboaensi. ses. 9.
, and Bellarmine in several p^aces, one I shall instance in. It is one thing
(says he) to interpret a law as a Doctor, (that requires Learning;) another
thing to interpret it as Judge, (that requires Authority:) a Doctor propounds
not his opinion as necessary to to be followed, farther then reason induces
us; but a Judge propounds his opinion with a necessity of following it. The
Fathers ^xpound Scripture as Doctors or Lawyers, but the Pope and Councels as
Judges or Princes Aliud est interpretari legem more Doctoris, aliud more
Iudicis: ad explicationem more Doctoris requiritur eruditio, ad explication^m
more Iudicis requiritur authoritas. Doctor enim non proponit suam sententiam ut
necessarid sequendam, sed solum quatenus ratio suadet; at Iudex proponit ut
sequendam necessario. -- Augustinus, and ^aeteri Patres in commeatariis
sungebantur officio Doctorum, at Concilia and Pontifices funguntur officio
Iudicis. De verbi Dei interpretatione. lib. 3. cap. 10, versus sinem.
. And now let S. Clara himself judge, if he will deal heartily, whether St.
Austin and Bellarmine were of a mind, or (which is all one) whether St. Austin
did receive the Decrees of Councels as of Judges and Princes, barely upon the
credit of their authority or assertion, as the Papists say he did, or only as
Doctors, because they could prove what they say from Scripture or reason, as
St. Austin in terminis asserts?

11. But because it is of some concernment to understand Austin's mind in this
point, (whose authority is so venerable both to them and us, and whom both
Parties willingly admit for Umpire in this controversy, (I shall further
consider what S. Clara alleges from him for this purpose: the passage he
pleads is this; Until that which was wholsomely believed, was confirmed, and
all doubts removed by a general Council Donec plenarie totius orbis Concilio
quod saluberrime sentiebatur, etiam remotis dubitationibus firmarctur. lib. 1.
con. Donatistas. c. 7.
: Therefore, says S. Clara, it is not lawful to doubt after the definitions of
Councels Non licet igitur dubitare post definitiones Conciliares.
. Put it it into a Syllogism, and it is this. That which so confirms a truth,
as to remove all doubts, is Infallible: But a general Council so confirms a
truth, as to remove all doubts: Ergo. The Major is denied: for a private
Minister may by the evidence of Scripture or reason so confirm a truth, as to
remove all doubt from the hearers, and yet is not therefore infallible. There
are then two ways, whereby doubts may be removed. 1. By the infallibility of
the authority: Thus when God tells me that which seems improbable to reason,
this should remove all doubt. 2. By the evidence of arguments: and so their
argument proceeds a genere ad speciem affirmative, thus a general Council
removes doubts, Ergo they do it by the Infallibility of their Authority; it
follows not, for you see they may do it by the evidence of their argument.
And this Answer might very well suffice: But that I may give them full
satisfaction (if possibly the interest of these men would suffer their
consciences to open their eyes) I shall prove that it was so, and that St.
Austin speaks of this latter way of removing doubts, i.e. by their convincing
arguments, not by their infallible authority. This plainly appears by
considering the contexture of the words: Lest I should seem, says he, only to
prove it by humane arguments, because the obscurity of this question did in
former times, before the schism of Donatus, make great and worthy Bishops and
Provincial Councels differ among themselves, until by a General Council, that
which was wholsomely believed was confirmed, and all doubts removed, I shall
bring out of the Gospel infallible arguments Iam enim ne videar humanis
argumentis id agere, quoniam quoestionis bujus obscuritas prioribus Ecclesiae
temporibus ante schisma Donate -- patres Episcopos ita inter se compulit
salva^, pace disceptare ac fluctuare, ut diu Conciliorum in suis quibusque
regionibus diversa statuta nutaverint, donee plenario totius orbis Concilio,
quod saluberrime sentiebatur, etiam remotis dubitationibus firmaretur, ex
Evangelio profero certa documenta. lib. 1. con. Donatum. c. 7.
. Where you plainly see, that he calls the authority of Councels but a Humane
argument and authority, and that he acknowledges none but Scripture-arguments
to be certa, certain or infallible, as is evident from the Antithesis. 2. This
appears most undeniably from a parallel place, where St. Austin speaks thus of
Cyprian: That holy man sufficiently showed, that he would have changed his
opinion, if any had demonstrated to him that Baptism might be so given etc.
Satis ostendit se facillime correcturum fuisse sententiam suam, si quis
demonstraret baptismum Christi sic dari posse. Et paulo post.
And a little after, he would have yielded to a general Council, if the truth
of that question had in his time been evidenced, and declared, and confirmed by
a general Council Si jam illo tempore questionis hujus veritas diquata and
declarata per plenarium Conclium solidaretur: and postea;
. And he gives the reason of his yielding, Because that holy Soul would have
yielded even to one man declaring and demonstrating the truth quia profecto and
uni verum diceati et demonstranti posset facillime consentire tam sancta anima.
lib. 2, con. Don. c. 3.
, -- much more to a general Council. In all which it is plain, that it was not
any presumed Infallibility of the Council, but the clearness of the truth, and
the strength of their arguments which would have satisfied Cyprian in St.
Austin's judgment. 3. This may be irrefragably proved from hence, that St.
Austin makes this the peculiar property of the holy Scripture (by which it is
distinguished from, and advanced above all the opinions, decrees, or writings
of all Bishops in or out of Councels) that we may not doubt of any thing
contained in it. The words are express, and brought in with a Quis nesciat: Who
knows not that the holy Scripture is so preferred before all the letters of
after-Bishops, that we may not so much as doubt or debate concerning any thing
contained in them, whether it be true or no. But the letters of the Bishops may
be reproved by Councels, if they swerve from the truth: and Provincial Councels
must yield to General Councels, and former general Councels are often corrected
by the latter Quis nesciat sanctam Scripturam -- omnibus posteriorum
Episcoporum literis ita praeponi, ut de illa omnino dubitari aut disceptari non
possit, utrum verum vel certum sit, quicquid in ea scriptum esse constiterit.
Episcoporum autem literas -- per Concilia licere reprebendi, si quid in iis
sorte^ a veritate deviatum est: and Concilia -- per Provincias plenariorum
Conciliorum authoritati cedere, and ipsa plenaria saepe priora posterioribus
emendari. lib. 2. contra Donatistas c. 3.
: where there is a gradation from Bishops to Provincial, and thence to General
Councels, but all of them are in this respect postposed to the Scripture, that
we may lawfully doubt of any thing contained in their Decrees, and where they
swerve from the truth, reject it. And nothing more evinceth the strength of
this argument; then the silliness of our Adversaries evasions: He speaks of
questions of Fact and Ceremony, not of Faith, says Bellarmine and Stapleton,
whereas the question there disputed was, whether persons Baptized by Heretics
should be rebaptized, which the Fathers formerly made and the Papists now make
a question of Faith. But by emendantur (says Stapleton) he means perfectius
explicantur: If you ask in what Dictionary or Author the word emendantur is so
taken, you must understand that it follows a majori ad minus: that if our
Romish Masters may coin new Articles of Faith, which diverse Papists profess
they may, much more may they devise new significations of words. But I would
know of these Doctors, what they would think, or at least what discreet and
sober men would think of that Author that should say, Libri Mofis a Prophetis
emendantur, or Scripta Prophetarum ab Apostolis emendantur: and yet if
Stapletons Lexicon may be used, it were an harmless expression. But if these
men will give St. Austin leave to be the interpreter of his own words, he has
sufficiently opened his mind, by making emendare and reprehendere parallel
expressions, and by speaking of such an Emendation as follows after, or is
conjoined with a doubting of the truth of what was delivered by the Council.
This may serve for the third Proposition.

12. And here I might give my self a supersedeas, having showed the imbecility
of their principal Proofs from the Fathers; but ex abundantis I shall add the
fourth Proposition, which is this; That it does appear, the Ancients did
believe the fallibility of Councels. The former proposition showed, that they
could not prove their Assertion, and this I hope will disprove it. But because
what has been already said may serve for that end also, I shall be the briefer
in this, and shall only mention three arguments to prove it.

1. They who make Scripture Proof necessary to command the belief of doctrines
or matters of Religion, do not hold the Infallibility of Councels; But so did
the Fathers: Ergo. The Major is evident from hence: because one infallible
Authority is sufficient; and the addition of another, though it may tend ad
melius esse, yet it cannot be necessary ad esse, (for then the former were not
sufficient.) And the Papists who believe the Infallibility of Popes or
Councels, do profess eo nomine that Scripture Proof is not necessary, and that
the Churches authority without Scripture evidence is sufficient. When Whitaker
urged the necessity of Scripture Proof, to show the Church for proof of the
Scriptures prerogative above the Church, Stapleton roundly answers, That such
proof is not necessary to a Christian man, and a Believer Homini Christiano and
Catholico -- huiusmodi probatio necessaria non est. De Authoritate Scripturae
lib. 3. cap. 1. in fine.
. For the Minor, That the Fathers did judge Scripture proof necessary, has
been already showed, and will hereafter be made good; and to prevent tedious
repetitions I shall now forbear it.

2 They who allow the people liberty of examination of all that any men, since
the Apostles, say, do not believe the Infallibility of Councels: but so do the
Fathers. The major is evident from the confession and practice of our
Adversaries, who believing the Infallibility of the Pope or Councels, do enjoin
the reception of their Decrees and Injunctions without examination. A Christian
ought to receive the Churches doctrine without examination, says Bellarmine
Debet Christianus sine examine recipere doctrinam Ecclesiae. Bell. ubi supra.
. The Minor has been proved from the express words of the Fathers.

3. They that derogate Faith from all men without exception, beside the
Apostles, do not hold the Infallibility of Councels: But so do the Fathers,
Ergo. The Major needs no proof: for the Councels are made up of men, and such
too as are confessed to be each of them fallible. Nor do they pretend to any
Enthusiasme, or immediate revelation. The Minor also has been fully proved: to
which I shall add one out of Austin^ If it be confirmed by authority of
Scripture, we are to believe it without all doubting: but for other witnesses,
or their testimonies, a man may believe, or not believe, as he apprehends what
they say has weight or not Si Divinavum Scripturarum -- perspitua firmetur
authoritate, sine ulla dubitatione credendum est. Aliis vero testibus vel
testimoniis, quibus aliquid credendum esse suadetur, tibi credere vel non
credere liceat, quantum ea momenti ad saciendam fidem habere vel non havere
perpenderis. Epis. 112.
It is true, S. Clara says, that St. Austin does only prefer Scripture before
particular authors Dico Augustinum hic solum praeferre Scripturas
particularibus authoribus. System. sid. ubi supra.
: which, how false it is, sufficiently appears from the other testimony of
Austins, which I have even now discussed, wherein you plainly saw in Occam's
and St. Clara's own judgment, St. Austin positively took away all difference
between Councels and private Doctors in this particular, and equally denied all
(...) to both of them. Thus I hope I have sufficiently proved what I undertook
concerning the supposed Tradition and the testimony of the Fathers, in
reference to the Infallibility of Councels. This is the first Branch; The
Infallibility of Councels is not made known to us by Tradition: the next
Proposition must show, That it is not revealed in Scripture.

13. This therefore is the Second branch, That the Infallibility of Councels
has no foundation in Scripture^

1. I might justly insist upon what has been already mentioned concerning the
doctrine of the Romanists about the insignificancy and insufficiency by the
Scripture to ground my faith without the Churches authority. And surely they
that profess they are not bound to believe the Divinity of Christ, were it not
for the testimony and interpretation of the Church, i.e. the Pope, or a
Council, (which is their assertion) must needs give us the same liberty to
assert, that a Christian is not bound to believe what the Scripture says
concerning the Infallibility of the Pope or Councels, but for the testimony of
the Pope and Councels: that is, we have no reason to believe their
Infallibility, but this, that they tell us they are infallible, we have their
word for it; so it seems the Disciple is better then his Master, and the Pope's
word will go further then the word of God: for the Scriptures Testimony is not
to be credited in its own cause says Bellarmine Etiamsi Scriptura dicat libros
Prophetarum and Aposlotorum esse divinos, tamen non credam esse, nisi prius id
credidero, Scripturam euae boc dicit esse divinam. Nam in Alcorano Mahumetis
(...) legimus ipsum Alcoranum de coelo a Deomissum
, as the Churches Testimony is. When the Papists would press the Scripture to
the service of this notion, it may say to them as Iepthah did to the Elders of
Israel, Iud. 11.7. Did not je hate me, and expel me out of my fath^r's house,
and why are you come unto me now, when ye are in distress? And upon condition
they will reply with the Gileadites, Therefore we turn again to thee now that
thou may be our head. I will overlook that otherwise unpardonable fault, by
(which they have rendered the Scripture unserviceable to their purpose) and once
more they shall have a fair trial, whether the Infallibility of Councels can be
demonstrated from Scripture.

Sect. 14. The first and principal support of Infallibility is 1 Timothy 3. 15:
where the Church is called the pillar and ground of Truth. This is their Ajacis
ctypeus, which you shall find used upon all occasions, and infinitely repeated
by every impertinent scribler of the Romish party.

For Answer, to pass over that notion of our acute, Chillingworth, that it is
not the Church, but Timothy who is there called the ground and pillar of Truth,
and so there is only an Ellipsis of the word (...) which is very frequent
(...) for (...), or of the word (...) for (...), as the learned Gataker
observes, and there are diverse instances of either of them. So the sense is
that thou might behave thy self in the House of God, the Church as a Pillar
or as becomes a Pillar. And he gives this notable reason for it, because it was
heterogeneous to call that Church a pillar which in the same verse he had
called an house. And this I am sure would puzle our masters to answer: But to
wave that, I answer.

1 The Church spoken of is not the Church of Rome, but the Church in which
Timothy was placed. And whether it be spoken of the Church in general or in
particular, what is this to Rome? Here we find a notable piece of the Roman
mystery of iniquity: If there be any reproves, or censures applied to any
other Churches, there every Church must bear its own burden: But if any Church
be honored in Scripture with commendations, promises, privileges that
presently belongs to Rome, and they have a commission to seize it for their own
use: but how unjustly we shall here discover, for if you understand these words
of the Catholic Church, or of the Church in general, then the words only
prove the indefectibility of the whole Church, which may consist with the
error and Apostasy of several which then were eminent Churches whereof we have
unquestionable Instances in the glorious Churches of Asia, which
notwithstanding this promise fell away: and consequently Rome, though then her
faith was famous throughout the World, might fall with them or after them. And
if you understand the words of a particular Church they must be understood of
that Church in which Timothy was placed: And if my memory fail me not
exceedingly, that was not Rome, but Ephesus, which notwithstanding this
Caracter did fall away: And moreover it was not the Church ruling, but the
Church ruled in, and over which Timothy, was set, which is here called the
pillar and ground of truth. And so the Argument runs thus: The Church and
people of Ephesus are the pillar and ground of truth. Therefore the Pope of
Rome is infallible. The Consequence is thus proved, the Pope may interpret
Scripture as he pleases, and though he may err in the premises, as Stapleton
confesses In relectione principiorum fidei. controv. 4. qu. 2.
yet he is always infallible in the conclusion as the same Stapleton asserts:
Ergo the Popes infallibility is out of the reach of all Arguments.

2 The term of Pillar notes the solidity, but not the infallibility of the
Church, it notes the difficulty of its removal, but not the impossibility.
Every stout Champion of Gods Truth is a pillar of the truth, and such are
frequently called by that name in the fathers, but yet they are not infallible.
Athanasius was a pillar of the truth, but not infallible: The great Osires a
pillar of the truth, and Nicene faith, yet fell fowly, as appears by the story.
Musonius Bishop of Neocaesarea is by Basilius Caesariensis invested this very
title of (...). In Epis. 63.
Ergo by the Roman Logic Basil* thought him infallible, or if he did not then
Basil did not think those words employed infallibility, Gregory Nyssen tells us,
not only Peter, and James, and John are pillars, not only John Baptist is a
light, but also all that build up the Church are pillars and lights in vita
Mosis.
Therefore it seems all Ministers are infallible: Male Children are called
(...), the pillars of their families, among the Greek Poets, and Getae, a
faithful servant in Terence, is called Columen Familiae, the pillar of the
family: For ought I know, if those men would go to Rome, and upon the credit of
this word sue out a Writ of privilege, they might be as infallible as the Pope
himself.

3. This Phrase, The Church is the Pillar of Truth, may note the Churches duty,
not her practice, and what she ought to be, not what she always is. They shall
not say this is gratis dictum, I will make it good by parallel Instances,
wherein they shall see the absurdity of their argument. Rulers are not a terror
to good works, but to the evil. Romans 13.3. If this argument be good, The
Church is a Pillar, E. she cannot e^re, then this also is good, That Rulers
cannot be a terror to good works. None but one that comes from Bedlam would
assert the latter, and none but one that comes from Rome would conclude the
former. Thus our Savior says of his Ministers, Ye are the salt of the world,
ye are the light of the world, Matthew. 5. Ergo by this argument, this Salt could
not loose its savor, and no Minister can be in the dark, but every one must be
infallible. Thus Prove. 16 10. A Divine sentence is in the lips of the King, his
mouth transgresses not in judgment: Ergo Kings are infallible. If the Pope had
such a Text in the New Testament, The Pope's mouth transgresses not in
judgment, you may easily imagine what triumphs the Assertors of Infallibility
would have made, who can build a towering confidence upon such pitiful
foundations: and yet this does not inform us of the practice of Kings, but
acquaints them with their duty, as Interpreters agree.

4. This Phrase, The pillar and ground of Truth, notes the necessity of the
Churches ministry (quoad nos) but not the infallibility of her Authority: those
are two distinct things, and the one no way consequent upon the other. The
utmost which can be squeezed from that phrase is this, that the Church does
support the truth and Gospel of Christ in the world, and so does every sincere,
zealous defender of the truth, and especially the Ministers, and prime
champions of the truth, not only when met together in a general Council, but
also in their single capacities, which I think will be undeniably proved by
this argument. The Church was the pillar and ground of truth for the first
three hundred years after Christ and the Apostles, never did it more deserve
that name, nor did it ever more discharge that office; but all that time there
was no ecumenical Council (and that is the only Council to whom Infallibility
is ascribed by the Papists) therefore either that phrase does not evince
infallibility, or the several pastors of those ages were infallible.

5. The consequence of the argument is false and frivolous; The Church is the
pillar of truth, Ergo she is infallible: for the same Church may be a pillar of
truth and a seat of Error. For what is it to be a Pillar of the Truth, (if we
draw aside the curtain of the Metaphor) but to be a Defender of the Faith? And
who knows not that the same persons may defend the truth, and maintain errors
with them, unless he be one that never read the Bible, nor Ecclesiastical
History? Who knows not that the same persons, which defended the truth of
Christianity against Jews and Pagans, did also maintain the Doctrine of
Iesabel, and the Heresy of the Nicolaitans? Rev. 2. and that those very men
that owned the foundation, did build the hay and stubble of false doctrines
thereupon, 1 Cor. 3. and that diverse of the stoutest defenders of the truth of
the Gospel among the Fathers had their errors, as Bellarmine acknowledges?
Else, if they will stand to the consequence, it will follow by virtue of it,
Such a Minister preaches the truth, Ergo he is infallible, and cannot preach
false doctrine. Such a Judge is the Pillar of Justice in the land, Ergo it is
impossible he should make an unjust Decree: Proclamations are hanged upon such
a pillar, Ergo a Libell cannot be fastened there.

6. Their argument proceeds from a declaration of the Churches present state,
(for that is all that place asserts, viz. that the Church then was a Church and
Pillar of truth) to an assurance of its perpetual continuance in that state,
(which is quite another thing:) Which kind of argumentation, if it might pass
for current, it would work brave exploits; for then it would follow, The city
of Sion was an habitation of righteousness, a pillar of truth and justice,
Ergo the Prophet Isay was misinformed, when he said, The faithful City is
become a Harlot, it was full of judgment, righteousness lodged in it, but now
murderers, Isa: 1.21* Nay then the Church of England is orthodox in the Roman
sense: Probatur: It was the Pillar of truth, viz. when it was the Pope's Ass,
Ergo it is so still, and the Papists slander us, when they say, we are fallen
away. The Church was a Virgin in the Apostles days, says Egesippus, Ergo she
is not now corrupted, nor indeed can be: for I must tell you, the Pope can do
more then all the Apostles either pretended or did; for they could not even
while they lived wholly keep the Church from actual corruption, but the Pope
keeps her from all possibility of corruption. Thus the Pope is omnipotent, and
it is no marvel he is infallible.

15. The Second place of principal moment alleged for the Infallibility of the
Church and Councels is Mat. 18.17. where all are commanded to hear the Church,
and they that hear her not, are to be accounted as Heathens and Publicans, Ergo
the Church of Rome is Infallible: for this is the comfort, whatever is in the
premises, Romes infallibility is in the conclusion; and the Church of Rome,
that can dispense with Gods laws Secundum plenitudinem potestatis de jure
supra jus possumus dispensare ait Innocent. 3. in Decret. de conces. Praebend.
tit. 8. c. proposuit. and addit Glossator, Nam contra Apostolum dispensat: item
contra vetus testamentum.
may well dispense with Syllogistical rules, by which there ought not to be
more in the conclusion then in the premises, but that Law was made for
Subjects, but not for our Sovereign Lord the Pope. To this may be added another
place they vehemently urge, Luke 10.16. He that hears you, hears me, Ergo
the Church is infallible.

Ans. 1. Whatever these texts prove, what right has the Church of Rome to her
monopoly of the privileges here conveyed? Or why may not the Greek or English
Churches and their Ministers claim the benefit of them? The words have an
indifferent aspect to all of them.

2. The consequence is false, Christians must hear the Church and Ministers,
Ergo they are infallible: which I thus prove. Children must obey their Parents,
and if they do not, they must dye for it, Deuteronomy. 21. are parents therefore
infallible? Subjects must obey their Magistrates, or dye for it, Ios. 1.18.
Whosoever will not hearken unto thy words, he shall be put to death: it seems
then Magistrates are infallible. For this is the argument by which the
Romanists pretend to prove the Infallibility of the Highpriest of the Jews,
because they that would not hear him, were to be put to death, Deuteronomy. 17. Nay
this very text Luc. 10. destroys that sense which the Romanists would fasten
upon it: for seeing it is not the Apostles, but seventy disciples, and they too
not as met in a Council, but as preaching the Gospel severally, or (at most) by
pairs, whom they are under such dreadful penalties commanded to hear, if it be
conclusive for infallibility, it proves the infallibility of every Minister, or
at least of every pair of them.

3. It is agreed between them and us, that Christ speaks of the Censures of the
Church Mat. 18. and therefore surely, if it prove the Churches Infallibility,
in any thing, it must be in the matter there spoken of viz. in Church Censures:
But they grant the Church is Fallible in her censures, as depending upon
Testimony and matters of fact: And therefore it is ridiculous to infer from
thence her Infallibility in other things which are not spoken of in this place.

4. The Church and Ministers are to be heard, not simply and in all things, but
only in the Lord, and what they speak, according to his word: This is denied
by the Papists who positively assert, that they are to be heard in all things,
and without examination, as we have seen from their own words: It is therefore
necessary to say something to overthrow this lawless liberty and boundless
authority ascribed by them to the Church, for this is their (...), or one of
their radical mistakes.

1. That which Christ denies to the Apostles is not to be ascribed to the
Church: but Christ denies this absolute Authority to the Apostles Matt. 23.10.
Be ye not called masters, for one is your Master even Christ, where it is not
the name, but thing which is prohibited, even magisterium fidei, or the
usurpation of an absolute authority in teachers, and the exaction of an
universal belief and blind obedience in hearers, which was the error of the
Pharisees here condemned by our Savior, for so they said: You are to believe
all the sayings of our Rabbines in their Homilies no less then the Law of
Moses: And again, All their words are the very words of God are their
expressions in the Thalmud. It cannot be denied that Christ derogates that
authority from the Apostles, which he ascribes to himself; but if the Popish
opinion were true, the Apostles had as great authority as Christ himself, for
the height of Christ's authority is expressed in these words (nor can more be
said of God himself) him shall ye hear in all things Act. 3.22. This indeed the
Popish Doctors most blasphemously arrogate to themselves (as you have seen) but
so did not the Apostles: they had not so learned Christ; they allwaies observed
their Distance: Be followers of us as we are of Christ. I have received of the
Lord that which I delivered. St Paul denies that he had dominion over their
Faith, 2 Cor. 1.24. Not that we have dominion over your Faith. I Will warrant you
Paul denied it to himself, because it was Peter's Prerogative, for it is
certain St Peter's Successors challenge it, for Dominion and Subjection are
Relatives. And if the people owe an absolute subjection of their Faith to their
teachers, the Teachers have an absolute dominion over the Faith of the people:
In short: This sottish Doctrine of an implicit Faith must needs be Apocryphal,
so long as the Epistle to the Galatians is Canonical, and especially Gal. 1.8.
Though we or an Angel from Heaven Preach any other Gospel -- let him be
accursed: And he is not contented with a single assertion, but adds as we said
before, so say I now again -- let him be accursed: Which if the Reader compare
with that abominable passage of Bellarmines, If the Pope should err in
commanding Vices and forbidding Virtues, the Church were bound to believe vices
to be good, and virtues to be evil Si Papa erraret praecipiendo vitia and
prohibendo virtutes, teneret^r Ecclesia credere vitia esse bona and virtutes
malas. De Romano Po^tifice lib. 4. cap. 5. in fine.
: He will be able to judge whether the Faith of the present Romish Church be
the same with that of the Apostles days, or not: and whether they who are so
liberal in dispensing their Anathema's to all that differ from their
sentiments do not justly fall under the Anathema here denounced.

2. If Pastors are to be heard in all things, then people cannot sin in
obeying their Pastors, (else they should sin in doing their duty) but people
may sin in obeying their Pastors: Methinks this should need no proof, but I
find this to be the temper of our Adversaries, they who give the hardest
measure to us, expect the highest measure from us, and they of whom we may say
(as Galen did of Moses) multa dicunt, nihil probant, they say much, and prove
nothing; will yield us nothing, but what we must win by dint of Argument;

Therefore I shall prove it briefly: The Jews sinned in following Aarons
Doctrine: These be thy Gods O Israel: So the Prophet Jeremy frequently
condemns them for obeying the decrees of their Priests in his time: And our
Savior has put this out of doubt, speaking of the Jewish Teachers, Matt. 15.
If the blind lead the blind both will fall into the Ditch: And St Peter assures
us (if his Successors will please to give him credit) that the Jews were
guilty of a great sin in Christ's death, though they did it in obedience to
the decrees of their Rulers, Acts 3.14.17.

3. If people are allowed to examine the Doctrines of their Teachers by the
word ere they receive them, then they are not to be heard in all things; But
people are allowed so to examine -- All the doubt lies about the Minor; and yet
who can doubt of that, who ever read these following places. Take heed that no
man deceive you, for many shall come in my name, Math. 24.4, 5. Prove all
things, hold fast that which is good, 1 These. 5.21. Prove the Spirits, 1 John
4.1. It is true Bellarmine says, These precepts belong only to Learned men
Praedicta mandata non ad omnes, sed ad solos Doctores pertinent de verbi Dei
interpretatione, lib. 3. cap. 10.
: And Gretserus gives this reason for it, because the unlearned people are not
able to examine Cum peritia probandi omnes spiritus superat vulgi ca^tum,
praeceptum hoc ^lebeiis minime dictum est. Gretserus in Defens.
; very good: It seems then, none but the Learned can have their senses
exercised to discern between good and evil, Heb. 5.14. And it is the
privilege of shephards only which Christ made the Character of all his sheep;
That they knew his voice, and could distinguish it from the voice of Strangers,
Joh. 10.4, 5. It seems Christ spoke to the learned only, when he said, Search
the Scriptures, Ioh. 5.39. It seems the learned Thessalonians only were bound
to hold fast that which is good, for that goes with their proving, and proving
was in order to holding fast. It seems the Bereans (whom Paul commends for
examining his doctrine by the Scriptures, Act. 17.) were Masters of Arts, and
Berea was an University, and (...) implies that they had Academical education;
and the Apostle meant it only of the University, when he writ to the city of
Corinth, I speak as to wise men, judge ye what I say, 1 Cor. 10.15. Nay, the
mischief is, if this be granted, their work is not done: for if the learned may
examine, that is sufficient for our purpose for such are many Laymen, (as they
are called) and diverse of the Clergy, who have no share in the Churches
government, and therefore are as much bound to subjection as any of the people:
and consequently the Rulers are not simply to be obeyed, nor their doctrine
blindly received upon their own credit. But (says Bellarmine) Inde d doubtful
doctrines are to be examined, but the doctrine of lawful Ministers is not
doubtful, but openly good Agitur de Doctrina dubia, nam illa sola indiget
probatione: Doctrina autem legitimorum praepositorum non est dubia, sed aperte
bona. ubi supra.
I see the Cardinal intended to show his wisdom, reserving the discovery of
his honesty to another time: Bellarmine was resolved to take a post, which he
might be sure to keep, he knew the Heretics would be nibling about the
premises, and therefore he leaves the guarding of them to others, and resolves
to hold the conclusion, (which he knew was not good manners to deny.) But if
such doctrine as our teachers deliver be eo nomine evidently good and true,
then these commands of trying are both dangerous (seeing they suppose and allow
of doubts) and frustraneous, (since I may safely receive them without trial.)

16. A third place alleged for the Infallibility of the Church and Councels is
Joh. 16.13. When the Spirit of truth his come, he will guide you into all
truth. Hence Bellarmine thus argues: Christ speaks not of the Apostles only,
but of their successors, because he says, the comforter shall abide with you
for ever, chapter 14.16. i. e. with them and their successors for ever. But Christ
does not lead the Bishops severally considered into all truth, therefore he
leads them into truth when they are gathered together; and seeing there is no
greater chair in the Church, by which God teaches us, then the Pope, when a
Council is added to him: if his chair should err, how this promise is true, he
will teach you all truth, I see not Alter locus est Ioh. 16. Spiritus veritatis
docebit vos omnem vevitatem. Et ne putemus hoc dici solis Apostolis and non
etiam successoribus, Cap. 14. perse. -- Dominus testatur spiritum sanctum
mansurum cum Apostolis in (...), i.e. tum cis and cum successoribus perpetuo.
At Episcopos seorsim existentes non docet Spiritus sanctus omnem veritatem,
ergo saltem Episcopos omnes in unum congregatos docebit omnem veritatem: and
sane cum non sit in Ecclesia mayor aliqua Cathedra, per quam Deus nos doceat,
quam summi Pontificis Cathedra, adjuncto consensu generalis Coneilii, si baec
etlam Cathedra salli potest cum universam Ecclesiam docet, nescio quomod^ vera
sit illa promissio, Docebit vo; omnem veritatem, De Council, authoritate lib. 2.
c. 2.
This may be too: Bernardus non videt omnia, and why should Robertus do it?

Ans. 1. These words, if extended beyond the Apostles, do not imply any
infallibility: or if they do, a man may with as great color deduce the
infallibility nay the omnisciency of all Believers from 1 John 2.20. Ye have an
unction from the holy one, and ye know all things: and v. 27. The same
anointing teaches you all things. All truth in the text is only meant of all
truths necessary to salvation (nothing being more familiar in Scripture-use,
then for general expressions, as all men, every creature, etc. to be understood
with tacit limitations) nor are all whom God leads into truth, infallibly led
into it, unless they will make all sincere Christians infallible; for all such
are led by the Spirit into truth, but not all in the same manner and degree, as
the Apostles were. So the Popish argument proceeds a genere ad speciem
affirmative: They are led into truth, Ergo they are infallibly led.

2. There is nothing in that text Joh. 16. to show the extent of that promise
to the Apostles successors, which Bellarmine sufficiently discovers, by
deserting this place and fetching in another to his aid Joh 14. so his argument
is cunningly patched up of two places. That God would lead them into all truth
he proves from Joh. 16. That God will do this for ever he would fain prove from
Joh. 14. whereas this place does not say, that God would lead the Apostles into
all truth for ever, but only that the spirit should abide with them for ever,
and that as a comforter, which is quite another thing: if not, let me see that
Papist that will give it under his hand, that every one with whom the Spirit
abides as a comforter is infallible. And yet if I should wink at this
fraudulent dealing of Bellarmines, and admit the phrase for ever into the
principal Text, this would not infer a necessity of stretching this promise
beyond the Apostles; partly because in Scripture use that phrase does
frequently denote the term of life, as Exodus 21.6. The servant is to be with
his master for ever, and 1 Kings 12.7. -- they will be thy servants for ever;
and principally because in strictest propriety of speech the spirit of God did
and does for ever abide in the persons of the Apostles. As God betroths every
one of his people to him for ever, Hos. 2.19. and is their portion for ever,
Psalm. 73.26. and the water that Christ gives to his people (which he himself
expounds of the Spirit, Joh. 7.38, 39.) is in them for ever. Joh. 4.14.

3. If this promise of leading into all truth be understood of the Apostles and
their Successors in the same manner, that is so as to make them both
infallible, then as the Apostles severally considered were infallible, and not
only when combined in Councels, so also are their Successors each of them
Infallible. (which all Papists deny) It is a strange way of arguing which
Bellarmine uses. The Apostles severally considered were Infallible by virtue
of this promise: And their Successors are comprehended in this promise: And
their Successors are not infallible in their single Capacities, (as the
Apostles were:) Ergo, they are infallible when they are gathered together: This
is that I told you before, and here you see it exemplified, though Fallibility
be in the premises, yet you shall be sure to meet with Infallibility in the
Conclusion.

4. If this promise of the Spirit did contain Infallibility, and did extend
beyond the Apostles, yet certainly it is a most unreasonable thing, not only
to communicate but appropriate this promise of the Spirit to such as have not
the Spirit: such are all ungodly men Jude verse. 19, -- sensual, not having the
Spirit. Yea, in that very place which the Papists urge for the perpetual
residence of Gods Spirit in Popes and Bishops Ioh. 14. There is a positive
exclusion of all ungodly men from any share therein verse. 17. The Spirit of
Truth whom the World cannot receive, because it sees him not, neither knows
him. A Character ascribed by God himself to all wicked men, 1 Io. 3.6.
Whosoever sins (be he Christian, Minister, or Pope) has not seen him,
neither known him. Soin this Argument they run upon a double absurdity. 1.
That they deny the promised guidance of the Spirit unto those Elect, Holy and
humble Christians who are the only persons that in Scripture account have the
Spirit, and are led by the Spirit, and walk after the Spirit. 2. That they
challenge the Infallible guidance of the Spirit to those that have not so much
as the general conduct of the Spirit which is common to all true Christians.

5. That you may see the desperateness of the Popish cause, you may observe
that Bellarmine himself elsewhere denies the Conclusion which in this place he
strives to obtrude upon us: For here he inferres the Infallibility of Councels,
but elsewhere he lays down this position, That a general Council may err,
and is not Infallible, except the Pope confirm them; that is to say, The
Council in it self is Fallible, the Pope only is Infallible, of which more by
and by: And thus according to Bellarmines opinion, the Bishops neither
severally nor concunctly are infallible, but in truth. The Pope only is
infallible. And so Bellarmine has not only shuffled the Pope into the Text,
but indeed jusled out all others, and destroyed that infallibility of Councels
which he pretended to assert; as became the Popes faithful servant to do. And
so this is Bellarmines Argument from these words, God has promised
Infallibility to lead all the Apostles, and all their Successors into all
truth: Therefore none of the Apostles Successors are Infallible, save St Peter's
only.

. 17. A fourth place for the Infallibility of Councels is Acts 15.28. For it
seemed good unto the Holy Ghost, and to us, to lay upon you no greater burden
then these necessary things, whence they thus argue: This Council had the
Infallible direction of the Holy Ghost and consequently all other Councels have
it.

Answ. 1. If the Conclusion be universally true (which if it be not, it will do
the Church of Rome no service) then the Arrian Councels were infallible: But if
they say that only the Orthodox Councels are Infallible, that alters the
question, and the Church of Rome must first prove her Orthodoxy, and then her
Infallibility; and to speak truth, she may prove the one as soon as the other.

2. The utmost importance of this phrase is, that they made this decree by the
direction of the Holy Ghost d.d It seemed good to us by the direction of the
Holy Ghost. And for this there is no need to devise a new Phenomenon of
infallible assistance, to be afforded to all Councels (of which there is not
one syllable in the whole Chapter) seeing there are other ways, mentioned in
that place, in respect whereof they had the Holy Ghosts direction, and might
say it seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us, and by which the Holy Ghost did
give its Testimony to their decree directed against those that urged the
necessity of Circumcision upon the Gentiles. 1. It seemed good to the Holy
Ghost inasmuch as when the Gospel was preached to the Gentiles by Peter -- God
bare them witness, giving them the Holy Ghost, even as he did unto us, v.8. so
making no difference between the Circumcision and Uncircumcision. 2. It seemed
good to the Holy Ghost who in the Scripture had foretold the conversion of the
Uncircumcised Gentiles to the Faith and their reception into the Church: And
for as much as it is exceeding plain that the controversy was debated in that
Council principally if not solely by Scripture Arguments, and the conclusion
deduced from Scripture evidence, they might very well say it seemed good to the
Holy Ghost, if it was conformable to the Scripture, there being nothing more
familiar then this that what is said in Scripture is ascribed to the Holy
Ghost, as Act. 1.26. The Holy Ghost spoke by the mouth of David. Heb. 3.7.
Wherefore as the Holy Ghost says, to day if ye will here my voice.

3. If that phrase does imply Infallibility, yet the consequence does not hold
from Apostles to Bishops: I appeal to any Papist (whose candor is not gone
with his conscience) whether this follow: A Council wherein were several
persons, even in their single capacities Infallible, had infallible direction,
when they were met together; Ergo, Those Councels wherein there is not one
person, but is confessed in his single Capacity to be Fallible, are Infallible:
If any or every Apostle had singly said, It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and
to me, would this have inferred the Infallibility of every single Bishop! They
say No: Then let them show a reason why the Argument proceeds not as well from
single Apostles to single Bishops as from Apostles conjoined in Council to
Bishops conjoined.

4. There is also another inconsequence: The Apostles and Council had the
direction of the Holy Ghost in a conclusion regulated by Scripture and
collected from it: Ergo, All following Councels have the direction of the
Holy Ghost, and cannot err in all their conclusions whatsoever: Is not this a
goodly Argument? This Council did not err: Ergo, No other Council can err:
The words are only assertive of a present case, viz. of the direction of this
Council in that point, not at all promissive of any thing for the future, and
therefore can give us no security at all for the Infallibility of Councels for
the future: it would make fine work if every assertion were turned into a
promise: I might as well argue. David was guided by the Spirit of God in the
ordering of Gods house (as you read, I Chron. 28.12, 19.) Therefore all
succeeding kings of Judah were Infallible: Moses was faithful in all Gods
house. Heb 3.5. Ergo, None of Moses's Successors could be unfaithful: Nothing
can be replied, but this, That David and Moses had a special assistance not
communicated to all their Successors: And the same may as truly be said of this
Council and the Apostles here assembled; But (says Bellarmine) Infallibility
being granted to this Council as being necessary for the conservation of the
Church against Herestes, the same reason and necessity continuing the same
Infallibility must consequently be granted to following general Councels De
Conciliis lib. 2. cap. 2.
; I Answer,

1. If this Council by reason of the Apostles was Infallible, yet this
Infallibility was purely accidental (because persons endued with Infallibility
for other ends were there present) and not conferred upon them for the decision
of the present controversy: and the reason why Infallibility was bestowed upon
the Apostles was not common to all but particular to that age and season viz.
because they were to lay a solid foundation for, and to give a sure rule to all
the Churches in after ages, and therefore Infallibility was their peculiar
privilege. It is but a lame inference, Infallibility was necessary in the
first founders of Christianity for the Plantation and constitution of the
Gospel Church: Ergo, It was necessary for the constant and perpetual
government of the Church in all after ages: Upon the same warrant a man may
argue thus: Miracles were necessary in the first erecting and laying the
Foundation of the Church: Ergo, they were necessary for the edification of the
Church in all successive ages: In both cases the consequence is repugnant to
common sense and reason, and confuted by experience; For

2. That such general Councels and their Infallibility are not so necessary as
the Papists would persuade us plainly appears from hence that God (who is
never defective in necessaries) left his Church for three hundred years
together wholly without them, and yet the Church since the days of the
Apostles never had more stability in the Faith, and a greater plenitude of
every grace and good work then in those times.

5. That you may see how little reason there is that Protestants should be
convinced by this place, take notice that diverse of the Learned Papists are
unsatified with this Argument, among which are Ockam Par. 3. Dialog. trac. 1.
lib. 3. cap. 9.
, Cameracensis Quaes^de Resumpta tit. R.
, Ferus In locum.
, and Mr White in his Treatise De fide and Theologia, where he thus Answers the
Argument: Nor is it material that in that Apostolical Council they use those
words. It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us; For first, it was a Council
of Prophets in each of which Gods spirit dwelt in a special manner, at least
in the Apostles -- And he adds -- If they acted with reason, doubtless they
acted by the instinct of Gods Spirit, although not such as Divines feign to be
assistant to Counsels Neque interest quod in Concilio Apostolico institutoe
sunt eae voces Visum est Spiritui Sancto and nobis. Inprimis enim erat
Concilium Prophetarum in quorum singulis habitabat Spiritus Sanctus speciali
modo, saltem in Apostolis. Et Paulo post: si ex ratione agent indubio ex
instinctu Spiritus Sancti, etsi noa tali qualem singunt Theologi assistentem
Conciliis. Tract. 2. parag. 21:
.

A fifth place they urge is Mat. 28. verse. the last. I am with you allwaies to
the end of the World.

Answ. 1. Whatsoever this promise contains, the Papists have no part in it,
because it depends upon a condition which they have so grossly violated,
Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you, and lo
(in so doing) I am with you: Christ commanded his Disciples to search the
Scriptures: Papists teach the Contrary; Christ commanded all his Disciples that
partook of the Bread to drink also of the Cup: Papists teach otherwise, and the
like may be instanced in an hundred particulars.

2. Put this Argument into form and it is this: They whom Christ promises to
be with are Infallible, But Christ promises to be with his Church: Ergo, This
Church is Infallible: Here are three propositions, and every one of them faulty
in one kind or other. 1. For the Major, it is most falfe: For Christ has
promised to be with every single sincere believer. Ioh. 14.23. If a man love me
-- we will come to him and make our abode with him: So Ioh. 17.20, 21, 22.23.
And the Holy Ghost (by which it is that Christ is present) is given to every
such person: Ergo (it seems) they are Infallible* 2. For the Minor, it is true,
but impertinent: Christ has promised to be with his Church and with his
Ministers to the worlds end, but not in the same manner and with the same
degree of assistance as he was with the Apostles to give them Infallible
direction: If otherwise, then as every single Apostle was, so every single
Minister must be Infallible, which they themselves deny. 3. The Conclusion if
granted, reaches not to Rome: for there being several Churches pretending to
this promise, and the Text no more determining it self to one then to the
other, it may as well be claimed by the Greek or English as by the Romish
Church; Nay, which is more, Rome is excluded or rather has excluded her self
from it, as we have seen, and by her disobedience to Christ's commands, has cut
off her Title to his promise.

. 19. There is one place more they use to plead; it is Mat. 18 20. Where two or
three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them. This I
confess drives the Nail home: I see they are resolved to make sure work. For
now it matters not what becomes of the Infallibility of the Pope or general
Councels, or the Universal Church; For wherever there are but two or three
Jesuits met together, pretending Christ's name, there is Infallibility: I think
those Heretics had better have held their Tongues, for then the Church of Rome
would have been contented to assert the Infallibility of Pope or Councels, but
now they will not abate them an Ace, but will make it good in spite of
Scripture, Fathers, and Councels, and all the World, that every leash of Popish
Priests is Infallible.

But I need say nothing more in Answer to this ridiculous Argument, because the
Answers to the last Argument will serve for this also, and their own great
Doctors confess the impertinency of this allegation, and amongst them two
great names, Stapleton Con. 6. qu. 3. art. 4.
and Gregory de Valentia Tom. 3. Disp. 1. qu. 1. punct. 7.
: And these are the Scriptures upon which they ground their Monstrous conceit
of the Infallibility of Councels: what a sandy Foundation they have for it in
Tradition we showed before: And how little countenance they have from
Scripture, and how absurdly they wrest that to their own destruction has been
now discovered: And therefore I may conclude this Doctrine has no footing in
Scripture, nor Tradition, which was the first branch of the Proposition to be
proved.

. 20. And here I might set up my rest: For having pulled down the two Pillars
upon which the building of Infallibility stands, I know no remedy but it must
fall to the ground: But for the more abundant demonstration of the (...) of the
Romish Doctors, and vanity of their Religion, I shall add a second
consideration and show, that however when they discourse with Protestants, they
make a great noise about the Infallibility of councels, yet when they debate
the point among themselves, none deny it with greater seriousness, nor dispute
against it with more earnestness then diverse of themselves. I speak not now
of the private opinions of some obscure Doctors among them, but of the public
doctrines of their Church, the opinion of the Popes, Cardinals, and all the
^esuites and stoutest champions of the Romish Church, and the generality of
Italian, Spanish, and Germane Papists, and almost all (some of the French
faction excepted) do expressly deny the infallibility of Councels, and, which is
more, they dispute against it: particularly Cajetan, and Bellarmine, and
Gregory de Valentia, some of whose Arguments are these. Infallibility is not in
the headless body, therefore a council in it self is not infallible That from
which there is appeal, is not infallible, but there lies an appeal from a
council to the Pope, Ergo. The Church is committed to Peter, not to a
council, Ergo. Thus Cajetan De Authoritate Papae and Concilii tract. 1. cap.
6. and 8. and 11. et 12.
. The Pope can either approve or reject the decrees of a Council, Ergo the
Council is not infallible. The Council has its infallibility from its
conjunction with her head the Pope, Ergo. Many Councels have erred in decrees
of faith, Ergo. Thus Bellarmine De authoritate Concilii cap. 11.
. By the way remember, this is the Gentleman that even now urged Ioh. 16. to
prove, that Councels could not err, and now he proves they have erred: it were
well if the Romanists had either better consciences, or better memories. God
does nothing in vain, but the gift of infallibility would be given to Councels
in vain seeing the Pope has it, Ergo. That which is repugnant to our most
assured faith concerning the Pope's primacy is not to be admitted, But the
supreme and infallible authority of Councels is repugnant to the Pope's
primacy, Ergo: Thus Gregory de Valentia Anal fidei. lib. 8. cap. 7.
. So you see, by their own argument, either the Pope's primacy or the Councels
infallibility is lost: and as the Jesuits on the one side thus strenuously
dispute down the infallibility and supremacy of Councels, so their Adversaries
on the other side do as stoutly overthrow the supremacy and infallibility of
the Pope, wherein besides the positive testimonies of diverse of the most
learned and ancient Papists, they have the suffrage of two late famous Popish
Councels Constance and Basil, such a spirit of giddiness and division has God
put amongst these Builders of Babel: And yet this is the Jerusalem, a city
united in it self. These are the men that reproach the Protestant Churches with
their divisions in some petite controversies, whilst they themselves are so
irreconcileably divided in that, upon which the decision of all other
controversies depends, viz. in the rule and judge of controversies. I think I
need not say much more: For the more ancient Papists, he that shall look into
that excellent discourse of Robert Baronius against Turnbull, called Apologia
pro disputatione de formali objecto fidei, will find the infallibility of
Councels expressly denied by Ockam, Cameracensis, Waldensis, Panormitanus,
Antoninus, Cusanus, (all venerable names in the Romish Church) whose words are
there recited Tract. 5. Cap. 19.
. And for the modern Papists it may suffice to name three authors of principle
account, whom the rest of the Herd do follow. Melchior Canus lays down their
doctrine in two Propositions. 1. A general Council, which is not called and
confirmed by the Pope, may err in the faith. 2. Provincial Councels, which are
confirmed by the Pope, cannot err; the rest may err 1. Concilium generale,
quod non congregatum and confirmatum est autboritate Pontificis, potest in fide
errare. 2. Consilia Provincialia, quae a^ Papa consirmantur, errare non posunt,
reliqua autem possunt. loc. com lib. 5. c. 4.
And Bellarmine says the same thing almost in the same words De Conciliis.
lib. 2. c. 11.
, and when he was gravel'd with the authority of that famous Council of
Chalcedon, (a Council that Pope Gregory the great said he reverenced as one of
the four Gospels) and a Decree of theirs against the Primacy of the Bishop of
Rome, he answers roundly, that that Decree is of no force, because it was made
in the absence of the Pope's Legates, who afterward did protest against it
Decretum illud magni quidem est Concilii, sed non legitime factum, proinde
nullius est rolioris, vel authoritatis, quia, factum est absentibus legatis
Apostolicae sedis and postea reclamantibus. De Pontif. lib. 2. c. 17.. Quart.
. Where by the way we may take notice, what opinion that ecumenical Council
had of the Pope's Supremacy and Infallibility, who first passed and afterward
ratified that decree, notwithstanding all the solicitations and protestations
of the Roman Legate in the Pope's name to the contrary. In like manner says
Andradius, That Council erred, in as much as it did rashly and without cause
prefer the Church of Constantinople before that of Alexandria and Antioch
Erravit in co, quod temere and nulla ratione Constantinopolitanam Ecclesiam
Alexandrinae and Antiochenae duxerint praeferendam. In defens. fidei. lib. 1.
. And Gregory de Valentia being assaulted with a Canon of the Synodus
Trullaena, defends himself with this answer: That Synod is of no authority,
because its Canons were not confirmed by the Pope Trullana Synodus nullius est
authoritatis, quia non erant ejus Canones approbati a Pontifice Romano. In
libro de Coelibatu, p. 861.
.

21. It is true, the Papists perceiving the danger of their cause from this
difference between the Pope and Councels, have at last found out this (...)
(and by that means they pretend they are all agreed) the Pope and Council
joining together are infallible: And in this sense their doctrine is true, that
general councels are infallible, viz. if they are called and confirmed by the
Pope. For answer whereunto I commend four things to the Readers observation.

1. Observe the nonsense of this opinion. The question is, whether general
councels lawfully called have an infallible assistance and guidance of the
Spirit in the forming of their decrees? The Papists affirm, we deny: now comes
in a condition in their affirmation, which overthrowes the affirmation it self.
They are infallible (say they) if the Pope confirms them: well then, the
Council meets, considers, decrees; here is their work done, hitherto (say our
Masters) they are fallible: they send them to the Pope for confirmation, for
ubi desinit Concilium, incipit Papa: if the Pope confirms them, they are
infallible; if he disapprove them, they are fallible. And so, it seems, the
council receives infallible direction from God for their work, after their
work is done; and it cease to be, before it be infallible, in spite of the
old maxim of the Logicians, Ab est tertii a^jecti, ad est secundi adjecti
valet consecutio. Really the councels have an hard bargain of it, that cannot
get Infallibility, till they have lost their existency.

2. Observe the hypocrisy and self conviction of this opinion. The
infallibility of councels is the great (...) cast before the eyes of those who
cannot penetrate into the depth of things. Several Scriptures are pretended,
which are said evidently to prove this infallibility: now we see they
themselves deny the thing, they pretend to prove; and councels are infallible
no further then the Pope pleases. And with this key you must open all the
alleged Scriptures: you must hear the Church, i. e. unless the Pope shut up
your ears Christ is present where two or three are met together in his name,
viz if they have the Pope's approbation. The Spirit will lead you into all
rruth, viz. if you follow the instructions of his Holiness. And if a council
may say, It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and us, it signifies nothing, if it
be not added, and to our Lord the Pope. Thus Councels are mere ciphers, except
the Pope add his figure: and Councels are joined with Popes, only as Bibulus
was with Caesar, to fill up a vacancy, and make a noise in vulgar ears. Nor is
the wound of the Popish cause healed by this device, but only skinned over: for
as the assertors of the infallibility of councels deny infalliblity to the
Pope, further then he adheres to such councels; so the assertors of Papal
infallibility allow to councels no infallibility, but what they have in
dependence upon, and by influence from the Pope. So Bellarmine in terms says,
Infallibility does not come partly from the Pope, and partly from the Council,
but wholly from the Pope Tota firmitas Conciliorum legitimorum est a Pontifice,
non partim a Pontifice, partim a Concilio. De Pontif. lib. 4. c. 3.
. And Stapleton is express: The Pope receives no new power, nor authority, nor
infallibility from the addition of a Council Papa adjuncto Concilio nullam
potestatem, vel authoritatem, vel etiam certitudinem in indicando novam
acquirit: In relect. con. 6. qu. 3. art. 5.
. What need I say more, such contemptuous thoughts has Bellarmine of the
infallibility of councels, that he spends one entire chapter upon the proof of
this Proposition, That general Councels may err, if they do not follow the
Pope's instruction, if they have not the Legates consent; nay more, if it be in
a point wherein the Legates have no certain instructions from the Pope: and he
gives us amongst many instances of erring Councels this remarkable one: The
Council of Basil by common consent, and with the Legates concurrence concluded,
that a Council is above the Pope, which certainly is now judged erroneous
Concilium Basiliense una cum legato Pontificis communi consensu statuit
Concilium esse supra Papam, quod recte nunc judicatur euroneum: De Romano
Pontifice lib. 2. cap. 11.
. You see how hard it is for Councels to carry their dish eaven. By what has
been said it appears what a sorry foundation the Infallibility of Councels is,
when from their principles it unavoidably follows, That a college of Jesuits
is as infallible as a general Council: for they confess a provincial
Council (which in it self has no more Authority to oblige the whole Church
then such a College) is Infallible with the Popes concurrence, and without it
general Councels are Fallible.

3. Observe the insufficiency of this evasion: For if Infallibility were
granted to such a combination of Pope and Council, this gives them no relief,
save only during the Session of the Council, for when the Council is
dissolved, their Writings must endure the same fate with the writings of the
Apostles of being unable to Judge or decide controversies: For all the Papists
most vehemently plead for the necessity of a living Judge that can hear both
parties and determine all emergent controversies: Thus Infallibility is not so
much as res unius aetatis: Nay ofttimes it is but res unius anni, like Ionah's
gourd, it comes up in a night and withers in a night. And the Church for three
hundred years after Christ had no Infallibility, and since the Council of
Trent the Papists have not had an Infallible judge, and at this day their
Church has no Infallibility and consequently no solid Foundation for their
Faith.

4. Observe the preposterousnesse of this opinion: If Councels come to the Pope
for Confirmation, he may say to them as John the Baptist said to Christ, Mat.
3, 14. I have need to be baptized of thee and come thou to me? So may the
Pope say, I have need to be confirmed by your Authority, and without you am but
magni nominis umbra, and do you come to me? But I confess wanus manum feriat.
If the Pope have any Infallibility, he had it from Councels, for Scripture
ownes it not (as we have seen) and the particular Fathers could not give what
they never had, and now it is good manners to requite them, and so he
comunicates to them that Infallibility he receives from them.

To conclude this consideration: It is sufficient for my purpose which is
acknowledged by the greatest and most considerable part of the Romish Church at
this day, That general Councels in themselves are not Infallible, and
consequently are no solid Foundation for a Papists Faith, which is all this
Proposition pretended to make good, though you see I have given them an (...).

. 22. A third consideration is this: If the Infallibility of general Councels
rightly called constituted and ordered, were granted, yet this would give no
Advantage to the Romish cause nor security to their Faith, and that for such
reasons as diverse of the most Learned Papists themselves do stamp with their
approbation. And here I might insist upon sundry particulars, but I shall
confine my self to a few, and for the rest refer you only to one of their own
Authors; White in the often mentioned Treatise who thus breaks out his doubts
concerning this Doctrine of the Infallibility of Councels: -- If you assert an
unknown and invisible influence of Gods Spirit it is so uncertain and
doubtful, that it is fruitless to contend about it: Seeing it is matter of
strife, rather then evidence to what Councels; and when this assistance is
given: whilst some quarrel with the calling, others the absence of nations,
or Patriarchs, and others dispute about the praesidency, and others about the
method and circumstances in the handling of questions: others about the number,
weight, or degree of suffrages: others about Confirmation: and others require
the Churches consent, ere it can be known whether this Assistance belong to the
Council, or no Sed si ad ignotum and invisibilem afflatum Spiritus Sancti
religetur, evadit adeo incerta and dubia, ut sine fructu aliquo de ca certe^tur
Cum quibus Conciliis and quando haec assistentia debeatur, altercationis, non
evidentiae plenum sit. His convocationem, illis Patriarcharum, aliis nationum
absentiam calumniantibus; aliis de praesidentia disputantibus, aliis de Methodo
and circumstantiis agitandarum questionum; Aliis de suffragiorum numero,
pondere gradu; Aliis tandem de confirmatione decertantibus; Imo and consensum
feu acceptationem Ecclesiae per quietum usum and praxim efflagitantibus, ut
fieri possit, utrum hec assistentia Spiritus Sancti sit concilio debita neene.
De fide and Theologia. tract. 2. parag. 21.
. Where you may observe no less then ten several causes of doubting, and yet
all these uncertainties they will rather run upon, then acknowledge the
Authority and sufficiency of the Holy Scriptures which are called a more sure
word (2 Pet. 1.19.) then that which had another kind and far higher degree of
certainty then the decrees of Councels can ever arrive at, but I must not rest
in generals. I shall particularly acquaint you with some of the Intrigues of
the Romish Church and their own requisites to the legitimation of Councels: I
shall pick out three. 1. They confess the Council which is Infallible must be
oecumenicall. 2. And its decrees must be ratified by the consent and
approbation of the whole Church. 3. They must proceed sincerely, and
faithfully, and piously in it: Now in all these things there are notorious
defects in the Church and Councels of Rome.

. 23. 1. Most Papists grant that, that Council, to which Infallibility is
promised, must be general or oecumenicall: and they that pretend to assert the
Infallibility of Provincial Councels when confirmed by the Pope, do indeed
utterly reject the Infallibility of all Councels, and ascribe it wholly to the
Pope, and to Councels only by participation from him and in dependence upon
him: If then any Councels be Infallible, they must be general: to which
purpose they allege the saying of St Austin, That those only are Concilia
plenaria, full and general Councels which are collected out of all the
Christian World Illa sola sunt Concilia plenaria quoe fiunt ex universo orb
Christiano lib. 2. de Bapt. cap. 3.
Hence the seventh Synod disowned the Constantinopolitan Council and their
decrees against Images, because they were not a general Council and had not
all the Patriarchs there Quia sonus indictionis non exiit in omnem terram, and
etiam quia non habebat omnes Patriarchas, nec eorum Delegatos.
. And S. Clara calls it The most received Doctrine of their Church, and cites
several Authors of great note to that purpose In systemate fidei cap. 27.
receptissimam hanc Doctri^ nam number. 1.
. Now to assume: The Councels pretended by the Romanists were no general
councels. To say nothing of former Councels (which in their greatest plenitude
were only conventions of the Churches in the Roman Empire.) The later
Councels (on whom the weight of the Popish cause principally depends) were not
oecumenicall Councels. There is one acknowledged defect in them all, to wit,
the absence of the Greek Church. Cardinal Cusanus complains, At present
(Alas!) the Catholic Church, and the Parochial Church of Rome have but one
Council, seeing the whole Church is now reduced to one Patriarchate Hodie
(prob dolor!) Catholicae Ecclesiae and Parochialis Romanae sedis unum est
Concilium cum tota Ecclesia redacta sit ad illum tantum Patriarchatum; lib. de
Concordia. 2. c. 15.
. And as the Objection is really unanswerable, so that which is offered in
stead of an Answer is very considerable which S. Clara. represents out of
Cusanus and Barlaam: That it matters not that only the Roman Patriarch and
those united to him are there, and that the Schismatic Patriarcks are
absent, for general Councels are not to be collected out of Heretics and
Schismatics, but out of the Orthodox, and such as are united to the Church
Generalia enim Concilia non ex haereticis and schismaticis, sed ex Orthodoxis
and Ecclesid colligi debent: System: fidei cap. 27. page 301.
. From whence I gather two things. 1. That if the Church of Rome cannot assoile
her self from the imputation of Heresy (which by the leanenesse of their
replies to the inditements of Protestant Authors sufficiently appears they are
not able to do) their Councels are constituted ex Indebita materia, of undue
materials, and therefore cannot pretend to Infallibility, if there were any
such thing in rerum nature a. 2. That we are not to believe the Orthodoxy and
much less the Infallibility of Councels upon the credit of their naked
assertion and absolute Authority, as the Papists affirm (seeing the most
Heretical and Schismatic Councels have ever asserted themselves to be
Orthodox) but it is the right and privilege of Subjects to examine and judge
of the legitimatenesse of Councels, and consequently of the validity of their
decrees.

. 24. The second particular is this: That Councels are not infallible nor their
decrees unquestionable, unless they have the tacit consent and approbation of
the whole Church. This position is laid down by S. Clara (in the forementioned
Treatise) There is required a tacit or interpretative ratification of the whole
Church to complete the definition of a Council Ratihabitio igitur nempe tacita
vel interpretativa universalis Ecclesiae requiritur ad complendam Concilii
definitionem. In system, fidei. cap. 22.
: Nor is this his private opinion, but he there confirms it from the words of
Panormitanes, Turnball, Pope Leo, Petrus a Soto, Castillo, Mirandula, Gersonius
and others Idem in cap. 23. per totum.
: And afterward he quotes these words out of Petrus D' Aliaco, That general
Counsels may err, unless when they are accepted by the Universal Church and
then they are Infallible Probabiliter respondent aliqui, quod Concilium
generale potest errare, and tamen quando and in quantum Concilia universalia
acceptantur ab Ecclesia universali, insallibilitatem eis tribuit. Id. c. 26.
. And in another place himself expressly tells us We are not presently to
pronounce a thing de fide by reason of some expressions of Councels or their
Canons, but we must diligently inquire the constant judgment of the Church,
else we shall find many Canons of Faith which do not agree with the truth
according to the opinion of many Non statim pronuntiandum quid vis osse de fide
ex quibuslibet Canonum vel etiam Conciliorum loquendi formulis subinde
apparentibus, sed constans Ecclesiae judicium tam ibi quam alibi diligenter
expendendum est, alioquin multos fidei Canones numerabimus, qui veram doctrinam
haud sapiunt, in multorum opinionibus. Id. cap. 22.
. And Coltius has these words, As we have seen before the common d^ssent of
the Church has rendered the decrees of Popes and Councels invalid Quemadmodum
supra vidimus, publicam reclamantis Ecclesiae vocem Pontificum and Conciliorum
decretis robur detraxisse. De Hierarchia lib. 4. cap. 12.
. I mention this the more fully, because it is a pretty devise. It must be
confessed the Religion of Rome cannot easily be mistaken for a piece of Piety
but he that shall deny it to be an Art of Policy will quickly be confuted and
here is an instance will put him to silence.

There is a double discovery of the Romish subtilty in this business.

1. You see how handsomely they make a virtue of necessity: now they manage it
as a Principle taken up on choice, whereas S. Clara himself sufficiently
insinuates, that they were forced to it se def^ndendo and took it up at a
forced put: for speaking of the former rules of discerning a general Council
he confesses, That their business is very intricate and liable to many
troublesome objections against the lawfulness of their Councels, but here is a
short way to obviate those difficulties by arguing from the reception of the
Church, for if the Church receive it for a general Council, we need not
trouble our selves about little matters, since this reception is sufficient
evidence Cum negotium sio valde perplexum, multi etiam multa objectare soleant
-- quibus ea illegitima esse contendunt, in quibus non parum sacessunt nobis
molestiae: In his vero omnibus, hoc saltem modo multum diminuetur difficultas,
arguendo a posteriori scilicet ex ipsa receptione Ecclesiae utique si Ecclesia
pro universali receperit, non erit opus serulpsius indagare minutiora, adeo ut
haec receptio nobis manifestet, quodnam concilium aestimari debeat tale: ubi
supra cap. 26.
.

2. Here is an excellent Antidote against the saucy decrees of several
Councels repugnant to the Popes Supreme Authority: If the sixth Council of
Carthage be pleaded that there should be no appeals to Rome from beyond the
Seas, if that of the Council of Chalcedon be urged, wherein they give (...)
the same honors and privileges to the Bishop of Constantinople as to the
Bishop of Rome. If the later Councels of Constance and Basil be alleged
wherein the Popes subjection to Councels is positively determined: Now here is
an Answer ready to this, and to all that former Councels said and to all that
any Council shall ever say to the Worlds end viz. The Canons of these Councels
were not received by the whole Church, but opposed and rejected by the Church
and Bishop of Rome, a great and eminent part of it: Thus, I think, they have
brought off their master the Pope with honor, and as he was Infallible, so now
they have made him invulnerable. Scripture cannot hurt him, for he has the key
of Interpretation. Fathers cannot reach him, for they are his Children (says
Bellarmine.) As it is no news for the Pope to be well stored with Children:
And now Councels cannot touch him, for he will hinder their universal
reception: And if the Romish Doctors be beaten out of this conceit, it is but
studying some new device which is easily done by men that want no wit and have
no conscience: for it is resolved to hold the Conclusion, though the poor
premises may be put to hard shifts. Well then, to allow them their supposition,
and all the benefits of it they must remember the rule of the Lawyers: Qui
sentit commodum debet sentire and onus: Benefit and inconvenience must go
together. And this is the inconvenience and mischief which they are still
forced into notwithstanding all their tricks and stratagems, even to eat their
own words and to pull down with one hand that Infallibility which they build up
with another; For how can the Council or the Pope either be said to have that
infallible guidance (which is pretended) in the making of their decrees if the
Churches non-reception may prove their Fallibility? But here is the
wonder-working power of the Church of Rome: do not think strange when you read
that passage in the Council of Lateran delivered in an Oration before the Pope
and Council, That the Pope-hath a power above all power in heaven or earth In
Papa omnem esse potestatem supra omnes potestates, tam caeli, guam terrae dixit
Stephanus Archiepiscopus Patracensis in oratione in Concilio Lateran^nsi little
Leone 10.
For he can do that which the Schoolmen unanimously put out of the reach of
every power in Heaven or Earth, viz. factum infectum reddere, recall things
that are past, and by this Argument prove, that, that Council which was
Infallible while it sat, after its dissolution is become Fallible. But to
return: This is to precipitate themselves into those absurdities which they
charge upon us. This is to make the Church judge of her Judges: This is to take
away all the security of their Faith if we may believe their own famous
Council of Basil, whose words are these: Nor let any man presume to say that a
general Council may err, for if once this pernicious error were admitted,
the whole Catholic Faith would stagger, and we should have nothing certain in
the Church, for by the same reason that one may err, the rest may err also
Nec quisquam illud dicere praesumat. Quod aliquod generale Concilium legitime
congregatum invalidum sit, aut errare possit, quia si bie perniciosus error
admitteretur, tota Catholica fides vacillaret, nec aliquid certi in Ecclesia
haberemus quia, qua ratione potest errare unum, possu^nt errare and reliqua. in
Respons. Synodali.
. Besides hereby they run into a new Circle (as if all their former Circles
were not sufficient) If you ask what it is which makes the Faith of the Romish
Church and people sure and Infallible? It is the Infallibility of the Pope and
Council: If you ask again what it is which makes the decrees of Pope and
Council Infallible? It is the Churches reception of them; and yet all this if
granted will not relieve them, for that the decrees of their Popes and Councels
have no such reception of the universal Church, appears sufficiently from the
public dissent of so many famous and flourishing Churches in the World, I
mean the Greek and Protestant Churches which do not therefore cease to be
members of the Catholic Church, because the Papists disowne them no more then
the Popish Churches become true members by their pretending to that Title.

. 25. 3. There is another assertion of the Papists: That Councels are not
Infallible unless they be rightly constituted and ordered: for this I shall
deal with them, as the Apostles did with their Kinsmen the Cretians, I shall
implead them with an (...). Nay, not one but many (...) in their opinion.
Councels (say they) may err if they do not proceed Conciliariter, i.e. in a
regular manner says S. Clara, his words are these: The most Learned Corduba in
Quaestionario lib. 4. qu. 1. (quoting Roffensis in his Prologue against Luther
and Horantius in his places lib. 2. cap. 17.) says, that God has promised his
assistance to a Council, when they do what in them lies -- If they be Bishops,
and Learned and prudent men selected out of the whole Church, if they proceed
without Carnal affections, and with a love to the Truth, then, and not
otherwise it is gathered lawfully, and in Christ name Doctissimus Corduba in
Quaestionario citans Roffensem in Prologo contra Lutherum veritate octava^ and
Horantium in locis l. 2. c. 17. dicit Christum promisisse assistentiam Spiritus
Sancti, quando Concilium facit quod in se est -- si Episcopi and viri Docti and
prudentes ex tota Ecclesia, si sine assertione humana -- sed affectu veritatis
-- tunc and non aliter est legitime and in nomine Christi congregatum. In
system. cap. 20.
. Thus Bellarmine pressed with the Authority of the Council of Chalcedon
against the Popes Supremacy says, A lawful Council may err in those things
wherein it acts not lawfully Concilium legitimum potest errare in iis quae non
legitime agit de ^onciliis lib. 2. c. 7.
. And Petrus a Soto (a man of great account amongst them) tells us this is the
sense of their assertion, That Councels cannot err: They understand it (says
he) of Councels lawfully congregated and acting without fraud and deceit Cum
dicunt Concilia non posse errare, intelligunt legitime congregata et absque
fraud et dolo agentia; In defensione c. 74.
. And Pope Leo speaking of the causes of the errors of the Council of Ephesus
assigns this, because they did not proceed with a pure conscience and right
judgment Eo quod non pura conscientia et recto judicio secundum consuetudinem,
hi qui collecti sunt, de fide et erratibus protulerunt. In Epis. 24.
. So Malderus in his Treatise against the Synod of Dort says: In vain do
Synods assemble, and men go to them, when they do not remove all sinister
affection and only seek that which is Christ's; and he adds, Then indeed they
are gathered together in Christ's name, then Christ is in the midst of them
Frustra Synodi cocunt, frustra ad eas itur, quando non omni affectu sequiori
remote, solum id quaeritur quod Christi est -- Tum demum in nomine Christi --
congregantur, tum demum in medio oerum est Christus in Antisynodico.
. The sum is this: Infallible assistance is not a gift dispensed
promiscuously to Pope or Bishops howsoever they demean themselves; but only
upon their good behavior, being the privilege of those alone who act with
diligence, fidelity, sincere love to the Truth and good conscience; that is to
say, to such persons as few Popes and Popish Bishops have been: so that if any
Popes or Bishops violate the conditions on their parts required, they may lose
the privilege on Gods part promised: If they be unsincere in their intentions,
and biassed with humane affection, if ambition or covetousness be in their
hearts and sway their actions, actum est de Infallibilitate their infallibility
is laid in the dust: It is true S. Clara says We are to suppose that a Pope
and Council do thus proceed unless the contrary be evident Supponendum quod
semper sic procedat, nisi conste^ de opposito. System, cap. 20.
. But I Answer,

1. Thus the Doctrine of Infallibility and the whole weight of the Romish
Church and cause depends upon a mere supposition, and (which is far worse) upon
such an one as can never be proved: for who can know the sincerity of another
man's intentions but himself? What man knows the things of a man save the
spirit of a man that is in him? 1 Cor. 2.

2. I note that these men craftily shift off the proof to us when it belongs
to them for Asserenti incumbit probatio. He that says a Pope or Council
proceeding sincerely and piously is infallible is bound to prove two things. 1.
That such an one is a lawful Pope or Council. 2. That such a lawful Pope or
Council proceed lawfully (as Bellarmine himself requires) and piously. And as
it were an absurd conceit, if I require a proof that such a man is lawful
Pope, to say Supponendum est etc. We must suppose him to be the lawful Pope,
unless the contrary be evident, so is it also when I expect a proof of the
sincerity of his intentions, instead of a Probandum, to tell me supponendum
est, which is to tell me that I must venture my Salvation upon a prooflesse
assertion: And it is a new strain of Popish Logic that suppositions must
pass for Arguments. 3. I observe the desperate issue of Popish principles, the
foundation of their Faith and Hope is the Infallibility of Pope or Council:
This Infallibility they can have no assurance of, which I thus prove. No man
can have assurance of the performance of a conditional promise unless he have
assurance of the performance of the condition; but the promise of Infallibility
is a conditional promise depending upon the honesty and sincerity of man's
intentions which another man can never be assured of. Here we have a remarkable
evidence of the perverse Spirit of our Adversaries and the indefensiblenesse of
their cause: Those very men that are so curious and critical that they will
not allow a man to be sure of his own sincerity now will needs have us to rest
assured of the sincerity of another man: But how are we assured? Why, with a
non constat de opposito: An Ingenious device which will serve for many
excellent purposes: Thus I may be assured that the present great Mogul is
turned Christian, because the contrary is not evident: Thus I may be assured of
the virtue, wisdom, and piety of every person that now lives at Rome, because
the contrary is not evident to me. In a word, according to their Doctrines and
Answers, A Papist has no greater assurance of the Popes or Councels
Infallibility, then I have That there is a World in the Moon: That the day of
Judgment shall be next year: Or that I shall die to morrow: Or that a thousand
souls shall be converted by the next Sermon I preach, because in all these I
may say non constat de opposito, the contrary is not evident. Really the
Protestants ought not to be envious at the assurance of the Papists, for they
are contented with very moderate terms for it. If they would be satisfied with
the same kind of assurance in conveyance of worldly estates as they are in the
Salvation of their Souls, I believe they would get away all good bargains
from their neighbors; but you will find them wiser there.

4. But alas for them I fear I shall be cruel to them, for I cannot allow
their non constat de opposito; They tell us we must suppose that Popes and
Councels have allwaies acted sincerely and honestly, because we do not know the
contrary: an assertion which whosoever will undertake to make good must combat
the Faith of all History: I shall say nothing of the censures of Protestants
upon them (whose interest and opinion may render them suspected of partiality:)
But I hope they will not take it amiss if I represent some few of those
innumerable Testimonies which their own most learned and approved Authors have
given concerning the hypocrisy, impiety, fraud, ambition, avarice of their
infallible Gentlemen, the Popes, and Popish Bishops. And were it not that the
Pope has a power of turning vice into virtue at his pleasure (according to
that saying of Bellarmines, In a good since Christ has given to Peter a power
of making sin to be no sin In bono sensu dedit Christus Petro potestatem
faciendi de peccato nos peccatum con. Barcla. ca. 31. Vide quae supra
allegavimus.
) it were impossible to mistake the Pope for a Saint let us here some few of
the expressions of such as lived and died in their communion: For the Popes he
that reads their own Historians, would think the name of Holiness were given
to them by Antiphrasis, and that in mere pity they were allowed the name who
did not pretend to the thing. The Papal chair is called by themselves
Cathedra pestilentiae a pestilentiall chair. Genebrard himself though a sworn
vassal of the Popes confesses, as I observed before, that for 150 years
together the Popes were Apostatici, Apostates not Apostolicks; as if they
succeeded Peter only in the denying of his master: and yet these are our
infallible masters: who doubts but they can work miracles at Rome, that can
make Apostasy and Infallibility dwell together in the same person: and however
our Savior said No man can serve two masters, and St Paul, What communion can
there be between Christ and Belial, yet the Papists are infallibly sure of the
contrary, for (if their most approved Authors may be credited) diverse of the
Popes have had infallible guidance of Gods spirit and undoubted communion with
the Devil at the same time; for so faith Platina (sometimes the Popes library
keeper) All the Popes from Sylvester the second even to Gregory the seventh
inclusively (which were about 18 Popes) were Magitians Omnes Papae a Sylvestio
secundo ad Gregorium septimum inclusive fuerunt Magi. Platina.
. But I confess all the Popes were not conjurers for some of them were such
silly wretches that they did not understand Grammar according to the report of
their own Authors Cum constet plures Papas ad^o illiteratos esse ut
Grammatican^ penitus ignorent; qu^i fit ut Sacras literas interpretari possent
Alphonsus de Castro ^on, Haereses cap. 4. in editione An: 1543.
: And yet these too were infallible Doctors. And Ludovicus Vives dealt too
hardly with poor Bullardus for saying The better Grammarian, the worse Divine
for here it seems, The worst Grammarians were the best; nay, the infallible
Divines. All Histories are full of the ambition, frauds, forgeries even of
those who were accounted some of the best of their Popes, to say nothing of
more abominable vices: Nor did this corruption rest in the head but from
thence dispers it self into all the members, the Cardinals, Bishops.
Governors of the Romish Church: It was acknowledged by the Pope (and therefore
infallibly true.) Adrianus the sixth by the name of the Popes and prelates, We
have all turned after our own ways, there is none that does good, no not one
Omnes nos declinavimus unusquisque in vias suas, nee fuit jamdiu qui feceret
bo^um, non fuit usque ad unum. I^ instructionibus ad legatos Norinbirga Anno
1525.
. The famous Chancellor of Paris Gerson complains that Learned and godly
Bishops were chosen no where, but carnal men and ignorant of Spiritual things
Nullibi Episcopos bonos and opere ac. Doctrina probatos eligi sed homines
carnales and Spiritualium ignaros -- praelatos adeo superbos esse ut homines se
nesciant. In declaratione defectuum Eccl. siast.
. And so proud (says he) that they do not know themselves to be men. Duarenus
speaks home to this purpose: Most of the Bishops of our time are greater
strangers to Religion and Holy things then any of the secular Nobles, and they
mind nothing but how to defend their possessions by right or wrong Plerique
Episcopi nostro tempore a religione and sacris, quam quosvis satrap as et
principes profanos long alieniores, nec aliud eis curae esse quam ut ditiones
et possessiones suas quo jure, quave iniuri^ ^^^antur De Sacro Ministerio lib.
1. cap. 4.
. Ferus cries out: Who does not see the insatiable avarice and impostures of
the Popes and religious men? with these all things are vendible Quis Sacerdotum
ac Religiosorum and Pontisicum inexplebilem avaritiam and imposturas non videt?
apud hos omnia venalia sunt. In Joh. 2.
. And Stella informs us, There were few possessors of Benefices who had them
otherwise then either by begging, or paying for them Pauci sunt Beneficiarii
nisi aut prece aut pretio. In Luc. 21.
. And yet these were the good men of the Church of Rome, these are they who
acted in Councels sincerely from love to God and his truth, not seeking their
own things but the things of Christ, and therefore without doubt infallible.
And for the state of Councels, take one testimony for all of one that was an
eminent part and member of them, Cardinal Julian, who in his Epistle to
Eugenius the fourth in the council of Basil in plain terms tells him, that all
Councels, since that of Chalcedon, (which was above a thousand years ago) were
instituted, not for the discovery of truth, but for the defense and increase of
the power of the Roman Church, and the liberty of Churchmen Omnia Coacilia
post Chalcedonense potissimum instituta fuerunt, non ut erueretur veritas, sed
ut roboraretur, defenderetur, atque augeretur sember Ecclesiae Romanae
potestas, and Ecclesiasticorum libertas. AEneas Sylvius lib. 2. de geftis
Council. Basil.
.

Should I descend to particulars, and open the several impostures and palpable
frauds, which the Popes and their Partisans have successively used in the
packing of councels, and making voices, and forging decrees, and engaging the
Bishops by hopes, and fears, and interests, to give up their votes and
consciences to the advancement of the Romish power and magnificence, I should
engage my self to transcribe whole volumes, and cut out work for the whole
term of my life; The transactions of the council of Trent are fresh in memory.
And he that shall peruse the words of their own Historians, the Protestations
of Princes, the Censures of Universities relating to it etc. will easily be
satisfied, whether Clara's non constat de opposito be true or no. And therefore
notwithstanding this frivolous excuse it remains a truth, that according to
the principles of Papists themselves, and because of those evident defects in
them acknowledged by their own Authors, whatever Councels regularly called and
ordered may pretend to, their councels must lay down their claim to
Infallibility; and so their faith has no solid foundation, as not in the
Pope's authority, so not in Scripture, nor in the testimony of the Fathers, nor
yet in the infallibility of general councels. And therefore I may safely
conclude, they have no solid foundation for their Faith.

26. There is only one thing which may seem to retard the passing of the
sentence: that is this. That although each of these taken asunder may not be
sufficient, yet all put together make a cord which is not easily broken, Quoe
non prosunt fingula, juncta juvant: and therefore, forasmuch as the Church
stands upon four Pillars, Authority of Scriptures, Tradition of Fathers,
Infallibility of Councels, and the Pope, their Faith is like Mount Sion that
cannot be removed. And if it be deemed an absurd and unreasonable thing (as we
poor fallible creatures have thought) to prove the Scriptures from the
authority of the Church, Councels, or Pope, and circularly to prove the
authority of the Church, Councels, or Pope from the Scripture. The Jesuits have
found out the Quadrature of the Circle, and they tell you, that it is no more
absurd that Scripture should lean upon the Churches authority, and the Church
on the authority of Scripture, then that St. John the Baptist should give
testimony to Christ, and Christ to him again; or that the Old Testament should
be confirmed by the New, and the New Testament by the Old. This is one of their
last pleas: we find them now retired to their Fort-royal, beat them out of
this, and upon the matter all is lost: and truly that will be no hard matter to
do, if the Reader please to consider 1. The great disparity of the alleged
Instances. John and Christ might give testimony one to another, but neither of
them did simply depend upon each other's testimonies: supposing that Christ had
given no express testimony concerning John, yet I say the mission of John was
not only true in it self, but sufficiently evident to the Jews, as plainly
appears from hence: That the Pharisees, when asked by Christ, whether the
Baptism of John was from Heaven or of men, were afraid to deny its Heavenly
original, as being against the common sentiment of the Jews: and Christ
charge the Pharisees with rejecting the counsel of God against themselves,
being not baptized of John, Luke 7. 30. And much more true is it of Christ,
that he did not depend upon the testimony of John, but had other and better
testimony, Ioh. 5.36. But I have greater testimony then that of John. And it is
enough for my purpose, if either Christ or John had an authority independent
upon the others evidence, though the other had not. And the like may be said of
the Old and New Testament: well may they give testimony one to another, for
neither of them does totally depend upon the other. The Old Testament did
sufficiently evidence its authority, before ever the New Testament was written;
and the New Testament too did carry other convincing evidences of its divine
original and authority, besides the testimony of the Old Testament: such as the
voice from Heaven, This is my well beloved Son, 2 Pet. 1.17. and the glorious
miracles he did, Ioh. 5.36. The works that I do bear witness of me, that the
Father has sent me: the holiness of his life, power of his doctrine, patience
of his death. But now (to apply this to our present purpose) it is here far
otherwise; for the Scripture (say they) does not evidence it self any other way
to us but by the Churches testimony, (as we have heard from their own words:)
and Councels, Fathers, and the Pope (we say, and have proved) cannot evidence
their Authority and Infallibility any other way but by the Scripture, (which
according to their principles is impossible) or by their own Testimony, which
is ridiculous.

2. Let it be considered, that the Romanists do not make these four, Scripture,
Fathers, Councels, and Popes coordinate and collateral foundations of their
Faith, as if each of them did contribute a distinct and independent support
unto the Romish Faith; but indeed they make one of them totally to depend upon
another, and at last reduce them all to one, and (to speak properly) to none.
For the Fathers, and Councels, and the splendid name of the Church, however
they are pretended to put a fair gloss upon a foul cause, yet indeed the
authority of them all is as vigorously disputed against by the most and
learned Romanists, as by any Protestants in the world. You remember, what
their great master Bellarmine told you, That Infallibility and Supreme
Authority is not partly in the Pope, partly in the Council, but wholly in the
Pope: what need we trouble our selves further? Those four are now reduced to
two, Scripture and the Pope; and those two must mutually prove one another.
There is no solid and sufficient ground for me to believe the Scriptures, but
the testimony of the Pope, say the Papists; and there is no solid and
sufficient ground for me to believe the Authority and Infallibility of the
Pope, but the testimony of the Scriptures: For the Fathers and Councels
receiving all their authority and infallibility from the Pope, cannot give him
the infallibility and authority they received from him: Now how senseless a
resolution of Faith this is (though most of the Papists have no better and no
other) you may perceive by some few instances. It is as if a Sudent should say
thus: I should not believe such a book to be an excellent book, but for my
Tutor's testimony, who tells me so. And again: I should not believe my Tutor's
testimony to be of any validity, but for the testimony of that book concerning
him. Who would not laugh at such an assertion? Or as if a man should say: I
should not believe the honesty of Richard, were it not for the testimony of
Thomas. And I should not believe the honesty of Thomas, were it not for the
testimony of Richard. Where is there a man that will accept of such security in
a trivial worldly bargain? And yet the Papists are content to venture their
souls upon it. From all that has been said, I conclude, that the pretended
authorities we have discoursed of, do neither severally nor yet jointly afford
a solid foundation for a Papist's Faith, nor prove that Infallibility which
they pretend to; and consequently, there is no solid foundation for a Papists
faith. And here I might discharge my self from further trouble, having
discovered the nullity of all the pretenses which have been hitherto owned by
the Church of Rome.

CHAP. V. Of Orall Tradition, and the Testimony of the present Church.
. 1. BUt because I am resolved to do their cause all the right that may be, and
give them all the favorable allowance they can desire, I shall consider the
singular conceits of their private Doctors, where the authors are any whit
considerable. and their opinion has any thing of plausibility. There is then
another shift, which some subtle Romanists have lately invented; who perceiving
how their brethren have been beaten out of the field by strength of Scripture
and argument, in their conceit about the infallibility of the Pope or Council;
come in for their succor with an Universal Tradition, and the authority of the
present Church. This is the way of Rushworth in his Dialogues, Mr. White, and
Holden, and Sr. Kenelm Digby, and S. Clara. Their defense and discourse is
this, for I shall give you their opinion in their own words. A man may
prudently believe the present Church for her self, and ought so to do: A man
needs not, nor is not obliged to enquire further; -- there he may safely fix,
Prudenter Ecclesiae praesenti propter seipsam credi potest and debet, b. e. --
non est opus, nec obligatur home ad inquirendum ulterius, ibi tuto sisti
potest. System. fidei c. 10. ubi diserte asserit testimonium praesentis
Ecclesiae esie infallibile.
says S. Clara. Thus the L. Faulkland's Adversary: That society of Christians,
which alone pretend to teach nothing but what they have received from their
Fathers, and they from theirs, and so from the Apostles, they must needs hold
the truth which first was delivered: for if they could teach falsehoods, then
some age must either have erred in understanding their Ancestors, or have
joined to deceive their posterity, neither of which is credible. But the Church
of Rome, and they only, pretend to teach nothing else etc. Ergo they must needs
hold the truth. The acute Mr. White explains the opinion more exactly and
fully, and the strength of his and their notion I shall give you in his words.

1. The nations did understand the doctrine taught by the Apostles, and
practiced it, and highly valued it, as most necessary for them and their
posterity, and to be preferred before all other things.

2. Those first Christians even at their death, both could and would, and
therefore doubtless did most vehemently commend this doctrine to their
Children: and the Fathers did always deliver the same doctrine which they
received from their Parents, and under that notion because they had received it.

3. If any delivered another doctrine, he could be proved a liar by the rest of
the world; or if all should agree against their consciences to deliver a new
doctrine, under that notion (scil. of a doctrine delivered from their Parents)
that whole age would be guilty of treachery and parricide, and should agree to
murder themselves, which is impossible.

4. There was a perpetual succession of Pastors, who took care of Faith and
manners; and it is evident, that the Pastors and people had the same faith.

5. And there arose heresies, by which the truth might be more cleared, and
they that maintained the ancient doctrine might be distinguished from
Innovators: which Innovators did not publicly reject the Apostles doctrine,
but pleaded it was not rightly understood, and the other part kept the name of
the Catholic Church.

6. It is necessary, that that congregation, which always kept the ancient
discipline, should alone profess that she received her opinions from Christ by
perpetual succession, and that she neither did nor could receive any thing into
the Canon of their Faith under another notion.

7. As certainly therefore, as one may know, that the congregation of
believers, which at this day is called Catholic, is animated with a number of
learned and wise men, so certainly will it be known, that she is not conscious
of any newness of doctrine, and therefore there is no new doctrine.

8. Following ages cannot be ignorant, what former ages believed about those
things which are explained in Sermons, Catechisms, Prayers, and Sacraments, and
such are all things necessary to the Catholic Faith.

9. This doctrine delivered from hand to hand was confirmed by long custom,
diverse laws, rewards and punishments both of this and the following life,
monuments of writers, by which all would be kept in it.

10. Following Rulers could not change the doctrine of their Predecessors
without schism, and notorious tumult in the Church, as daily experience
proves 1. Gentes intelligebant, quod Aposioli docuerunt, and opere complebant,
eamque doctrinam magni aestimabant, and sum necessariam sibi and posteris
suis and caeteris omnibus negotiis praeponendam. 2. Illi ergo primi Christiani
doctrinam istam filiis and successoribus and potuerunt and voluerunt, etiam
morientes, enixissime commendare, ideoque indubie hoc secerunt. Et patres
filiis eandem doctrinam semper tradiderunt, quam ipsimet acceperant a
majoribus, and eo titulo credebant quia acceperant. 3. Si quisquam aliam
(doctrinam) traderet, mendacii a reliquo orb convinceretur, vel si omnes novam
conarentur eo titulo tradere, conscientia test, perfidiae and parricidii tota
illa aetas condemna^etur, and veluti ad se occidendos conspirarent, quod
impossible est. 4. Pastores perpetuo successerunt, qui curam fidei and morum
gererent; (constat autem quod populi and pastorum una fuit fides, una doctrina.
Idem trac. 2. 5. page 114.) 5. Et haereseso tae sunt quibus veritas magis
elucesceret, and distinguerentur ret^n^ores doctrinae antiquae contra
novatores. Qui quidem novatores non palam aversabantur doctrinam Apostolorum,
sed esse male intellectam. contendebant Reliquae autem parti mansit nomen
Catholicae Ecclesix. 6. Necesse est autem eam fidelium congregationem quae
semper antiquae disciplinae tenax erat, solam profiterise a Christo per
successionem perpetuam dogmata sua accepisse, nec quicquam aliot tulo recipisfe
in fidei Canonem, neque unquam recipere posle. 7. Quanta itaque ceititudine
quisquam agnoscere potest congregationem illam fidelium, quae hodie Catholica
dicitur, esse virorum prudentium and docto^um multitudine animatam, tanta
certitudine ipsi constabit eam non esse consciam sibi de aliqua doctrinae
novitate, ideeque nullam esse novitatem. 8. Nullo modo potest latere succedanea
saecula, qu'd praeeuntia crediderint circa ea quae concionibus, catechesibus,
orationibus, and sacramentis exponuntur: talia autem sint universa ad fidem
Catholicam necessaria. 9. Confirmata erat haec doctrina per manus tradita longa
consuetudine, variis legibus, praemiis and poenis tum hujustum sequentis vitae,
scriptorum monumentis, quibus omnes in ea retinerentur. Thomas Anglus in sono
bu^cinae, De fi et tbeol. tract. 1 parag. 4. and 5. 10. Rectores suceedanei non
poterant decessoris doctrinam immutare absque schismate, and notorio Ecclesiae
tumultu, ut quotidiana experientia comp^ebat. De fide and Theol. trait. 2.
parag. 3.
To the same purpose also Holden discourses in his Treatise of the resolution
of Faith. This is a new Plea, and deserves special consideration.

. 2. For Answer, 1. I give Mr. White and his worthy Partners humble thanks for
the great favor or rather justice done by them to the Protestant cause. For,
whereas this is the perplexing question, wherewith they think to puzzle us, How
we can know the Scriptures to be the word of God without the Churches
infallible authority? and from the supposed impossibility thereof, they infer
the necessity of the Churches authority: these kind-hearted Gentlemen have
helped us out of the briars: for now it seems, and it is a truth, and so far
the argument from Tradition is really conclusive, that we may know the
Scripture to be the word of God without the Churches infallible authority, viz.
by tradition. And the argument of Tradition would not at all lose its strength
if the Church were wholly stripped of the capacity of a Judge, and retained only
the qualification of a witness, and consequently the Churches authority is not
at all necessary. And if the Church should boast of her authority against or
above tradition, it may be said to her according to these men's principles, as
the Apostle said to the Gentiles, Romans 11. If thou boast, thou bear not
Tradition, but Tradition thee, for so say these Doctors. Mr. White spends one
entire chapter upon the proof of this Proposition, That the succession of
doctrine is the only rule of Faith De fide et Theol. tract. 2. Parag. 18.
, and says, that whether we place this infallibility in the whole body of the
Church, or in Councels, or in Scriptures, in each of these their authority is
resolved into and all depends upon Tradition Sive infallibilitatem in corpore
Ecclesiae -- statueris, firmit as and passessio doctrinae, quam habet est
traditio; sive in Gonciliis, -- sive in Scripturis, earum authoritas in
traditionem resolvitur. De fide and Theol. tract. 2. parag. 18.
. And he spends several chapters to show, that neither the Pope, nor Councels
can give any solidity, or certainty to our Faith but what they have from
Tradition: If it be said Tradition is conveyed to us by the Church, and so
there is still a necessity of her Authority. I answer plainly no: It follows
only that there is necessity of her Ministry, but not of her Authority. A
Proclamation of the King and Council could not come to my hands, (If I live at
York) but by a Messenger, and by the Scribe, or Printer: But if any from this
necessity of his Ministry infer his Authority, I may well deny the
consequence; but because it is unhansome to extenuate a courtesy, I hold my
self obliged further to acknowledge the great kindness of our Adversaries, who
not contented to assert the validity of the Protestants foundation of Faith
have also overturned their own, which that you may the better understand, I
shall briefly represent to you the sweet Harmony of those Cadmaean Brethren,
and how God has confounded the language of Babels; Builders: so that they have
little to do, but to stand still, and see the Salvation of God while these
Midianites, and Amalekites thrust their Swords in one another sides.

The opinion and language of most Papists in the world is this. That Tradition
is therefore only infallible because it is delivered to us by the Church which
is infallible: Labyrinthus Cantuariensis p. 68
If you ask Bellarmine what it is by which I am assured that a tradition is
right, he answers, because the whole Church, which receives it cannot err.
Quando Universa Ecclesia aliquid servat, vel aliquid tanquam fidei. Dogma
amplectitur quod non est scriptum, necesse est dicere ab Apostolis traditum.
Ratio est quia cum Ecclesia universa errare non possit. 1. Tim. 3. and certe
quod Ecclesia de fide esse credit, sine dubio est de fide: De verbo Dei lib. 4.
cap. 9.
So the late Answerer of Bishop Laud. There is no means lest to believe any
thing with a divine infallible Faith, if the Authority of the Catholic Church
be rejected as erroneous, and fallible, for who can believe either Creed, or
Scripture, or unwritten Tradition, but upon her Authority. In Lauds
Labyrinthich. 2. page 17.
Nay, S: Clara himself notwithstanding his Romantic strain: That Tradition and
the naked Testimony of the present Church is sufficient, yet elsewhere
confesses the Churches infallibility must necessarily be supposed to make my
Faith certain: His words are these: The Testimony of the Church by which
Traditions come to us, is infallible, from a Divine Revelation, because it is
evident from the Scripture that the Church is infallible: And presently after,
If the Church were not infallibile, it could not produce in me an infallible
Faith, Dico secundo quod testimonium Ecclesiae per quod nobis illae veritates
(traditae) innotescunt infallabile est, nempe. ob. revelatio^em divinam: quia
manifest habemus in Scripturis, Ecclesiam esse infallibilem -- si igitur illa
(Authoritas Ecclesiae) noa esset-infallibilis, non produceretur in nobis fides
infallibilis System fidei c. 10. Number. 3. non quid speciali spiritus sancti
instinctu infallibilitas iis affletur, sed quia irrefragabili testimonio
successionem Doctrinae roborant -- and sunt irrecusabiles testes traditonis,
pro iis decertandum est. De fide and Theol tract. 2. Parag. 25.
And this was the constant Doctrine of the Romish Masters in all former Ages:
Now come a new Generation who finding the Notion of infallibility hard beset,
and that Pillar shaken, they support their cause with a quite contrary
position: That it is not the Churches infallibility that renders Tradition
infallible (as their former Masters held) but the infallibility of Tradition
that makes the Church infallible, and therefore they say, the Church her self
is no further infallible then she follows Tradition. Thus Mr White plainly
tells us that Councils are not infallible, because the special assistance of
Gods spirit makes them infallible, but because by irrefragable testimony they
confirm the succession of their Doctrines, and are such witnesses of tradition
as cannot be refused.

Thus Holden having told us that the Popes infallibility is controverted on
both sides by just, godly, and most learned Catholics, as well ancient, as
modern, and neither ^svde condemned by Authentic censure An summorum
Pontificum decreta sint ex institutione Christi ab omni errore libera -- hec
inquam, in utramque partem ventilata videmus a piissimis quam plurimis and
doctissimis Catholicis Authoribus tam antiquioribus, quam retentioribus quorum
neutram partem audivimus unquam fuisse censuris aliquibus authenticis
prohibitom alit improbatam: Quaepropter evidentissime constat Catholicum
nemiuem astringi aut huic aut alteri parti adhaerere tanguam fidei Catholicae
and Divinae. articulo -- De resolut. fidei lib. 2. c. 1. p. 174.
(which by the way discourses the desparatenesse of the greatest part of the
Romish Church at this day which ventures their Souls, and rest their faith
upon what themselves confess to be a doubtful foundation, viz. the Popes
infallibility) Nec opus est, mea judicio, divinam infallibilitatem. Romanae
sedi annectere (quod omnes Theolgi agnoscunt non esse divina and Catholica fide
certum) id ib. p. 178.
All Divines (says he) confess it is not certain with a Divine, and a
Catholic Faith, he comes to lay down this conclusion that the Infallibility of
the Church is not from any Privilege granted to the Romans sea, or St Peter's
successeur but from the universal and Catholic tradition of the Church
Ecclesiae infallibilitas non Privilegio aliquo aut sedi Romanae, aut Sti Petri
suceessori divinitus impartito -- sed universae and Catholicae traditioni
Ecclesiae -- praecipue tribuenda est: Idem ib. p. 174
and Councels fare no better then Popes. They are (says he) not Founders, but
only Guardians, and Witnesses of revealed truths Episcopi in Consitiis sunt
tantummodo Custodes, ac Testes veritatum revelatarum, non autem conditores
Holden lib. 1. c. 9. p. 153.
so Mr White allows neither Pope nor Councels any infallibility, but what they
have from tradition, as we have seen, and tells us in express terms, that
Tradition is overthrown, if any other principle be added to it: for here lies
the solidity of Tradition that nothing is accepted by the Church but from
Tradition Everfitur traditio, si aliud fedei principium ei addatur. Inde enim
est traditionis firmitas quod nihil nisi ex ea ab Ecclesia acceptetur. De fide
and Theol. lib. 2. parag. 18.
.

. 3. Well, what shall the poor unlearned Romanist do, that finds his great
masters at variance in the very foundation of his Faith: Here are two
contradictory assertions: one of them must unavoidably be false: A man may with
probability at least assert the falsehood of either of them, having the suffrage
of diverse of their own most learned Catholic Authors for him in either
opinion; but whether they be true or false, their cause is lost:

1. If they be true, and 1. If that be true, that Tradition be the foundation
of the Churches Infallibility: then 1. Whence has Tradition this
Infallibility? From Scripture? That they utterly disclaim. From Tradition?
Then why may not Scripture give Testimony to it self as well as Tradition? And
whence has that Tradition its Infallibility? and so in infinitum. Is it from
the reason of the thing? So Mr White implies who attempts to prove it by a
rational and Logical Discourse, but himself has prevented that, while he
says To lean upon Logical inferences is to place the foundation of our Faith
and the Church in the sand Logicis uiti ratiunculis, est fidei and Ecclesiae
fundamina in Sabul^ collocare ubi supra tract. 2. parag. 18.
. And S. Clara gives a check to this: It is more reasonable and wise, even for
the most learned and acute persons to rely upon the Authority of the Church
then to adhere to our own reasonings how plausible soever Dieo igitur quod
rationabilius and sapicntius est, etiam respectu Doctissimorum and
deutissimorum hominum, Authoritati Ecclesiae, quam ratiun^ulis nostris licet
apparentissimis adhaerere: System. fide cap. 12. n. 9.
. And that is largely disproved in the following discourse. Is it then from the
Churches Infallibility? This they deny and allow the Church no infallibility
independent upon Tradition.

2. Seeing they grant the Church may err, if she receed from Tradition I can
never be sure she does not err unless I be sure she keep to Tradition: And
therefore I must examine that, and judge of it, and so private men are made
judges of controversies, which they so much dread.

3. Hereby the Authority of the Pope and general Councels of Bishops is
rendered unnecessary: I prove it thus: If these be necessary only as witnesses
to Tradition, then their Authority is not necessary: For it is not Authority,
but knowledge and fidelity which renders a witness competent: A lay hearer of
St Paul may be as competent a witness of the Doctrine he heard St Paul Preach,
as a Bishop, supposing a parity in their knowledge, fidelity, and converse with
the Apostle, and another Bishop may be as competent a witness as the Bishop of
Rome and consequently as Infallible, and any congregation of discreet and pious
Christians who heard St Peter Preach are as infallible witnesses as the Church
of Rome, and if there were a general assembly of lay men of equal knowledge
and experience, they are as infallible witnesses what the Faith of the next
precedent age was, and what the Faith of the present Church is, as a Council
of Bishops: Nay (to speak truth) they are more credible witnesses, because
less biased by interest affection or prejudice. These rocks the first branch
throws them upon.

2. If they fly from his and make the Churches infallibility the foundation of
Traditions (as the most Papists do) then they must demonstrate that
Infallibility from Scripture, Fathers, or Councels, which we have seen, they
cannot do. So that, if either of their positions be true, their cause is lost.

But 2. If either of them be false, they are gone too: For if tradition be not
Infallible in it self without the Churches Authority (as the one side says)
then the Papists have no certain rule for the Church to steer i^s course by
(for the Scriptures they do not own as such) and if the Church be not
infallible, but by virtue of this Tradition (as the other side says,) then
they confess the insufficiency of all their proofs from Scripture and from
the Authority of Fathers and Councels, and their Authority is no more, then
that of any faithful or credible Historian, and instead of a Divine the
Papists have nothing but an Historical faith. I shall conclude this first
Answer with one syllogism from the words and assertions of Mr White: Tradition
is overthrown, if another principle of Faith be added to it: But the most and
Learnedest Doctors of the Romish Church do add another principle to it, viz.
the Churches Authority and infallibility as I showed from their own words:
Ergo, either Tradition and all this new devise, or the Authority of the Romish
Church is overthrown.

4. Answ. 2. This new conceit directly thwarts the design of God in the
Writing of the Scripture, and indeed the common sense and experience of all
mankind: for hereby a verbal Tradition is made a more sure way of conveyance
to posterity then a Writing. It has been the Wisdom of God in forme^ ages to
take care that those things might be Written, which he would have kept in
remembrance. Exodus 17. 14. Write this for a memorial in a Book: So little did
God trust this (now supposed infallible) way of orall Tradition, that he would
not venture the Decalogue upon it (though the words were but few, and the
importance of them so considerable, both in truth, and in the apprehensions of
the Jews, that if Mr Whites Argument have any strength in it, it was
impossible posterity should ever mistake it) but write it with his own finger
once and again after the breaking of the first Tables: And although, whilst
the Church was confined to a few families and divine revelations were
frequently renewed a verbal Tradition was sufficient, yet when the Church came
to be multiplied and especially when it comes to be dispersed into all Nations
and Revelations cease, then Writing proves of absolute necessity: How far the
first and wisest Christians were from Mr Whites opinion appears from hence,
that not daring to lean upon the broken reed of Orall Tradition, they did
earnely desire the Apostles to commit their Doctrines to Writing. Eusibius
reports that St Peter's hearers were not content with this way of Tradition from
Peter's mouth, but (for want of Mr VVhites presence there to convince them of
their folly,) They earnestly begged it of Mark that he would leave them that
Doctrine in VVriting which they had received by word of mouth A Marco multis
and variis precibus contendebant, at monumentum illud doctrinae, quod sermon
and verbo illis tradidisset. etiam Scriptis mandatum apud eos relinqueret.
Histor. lib. 2. cap. 14.
. And Hierome tells us That St John the Evangelist was almost forced to write by
all the Bishops of Asia Johannes ab Asiae Episcopis pene omnibus coactus est ad
scribendum Praefat. in Evang Mat.
: who (it seems) were raw novices that did not understand their Catechism nor
the first principle in it viz. The sufficiency and infallibility of orall
Tradition. And St Luke gives it us under his hand (not fearing either Mr
VVhites anger or his Argument) that he wrote his Gospel ad majorem (...) that
Christians might have the greater certainty Luk 1 3,4. When Job desires the
perpetual continuance of his words he wishes, O that my words were now
Written! Oh that they were Printed in a Book! Job. 19.23. And David in the
same case would not rely upon Tradition, but takes this course for assurance:
This shall be written for the generation to come, Psalm. 102.18. But because Mr
White undoubtedly is a better Philosopher and Divine then either Luke or Job
or David were, (and therefore good reason they should all veil to his more
penetrating wit and deeper judgment) he shall do well to remember that God
himself was of the same judgment -- Go, write it before them in a Table and
note it in a Book that it may be for the time to come for ever Isa. 30.8. And
to this agrees the common experience of mankind: Vox audita perit, litera,
scripta manet verbal Traditions, quickly vanish, only writings are durable:
Hence those famous Laws of Lycurgus, institutes of the Druides Philosophy of
Pythagoras are upon the matter wholly lost and only some few fragments
reserved, because not committed to writing: but this will be put out of doubt
by reflecting upon the History of mankind, wereby the aierinesse of this
phantasme will be discovered, and the great difference between Tradition and
writing in point of certainty demonstrated: Adam and Noah the two successive
heads of mankind did doubtless deliver the true Doctrine to their posterity
with the same important circumstances, (which Mr White supposes in the
Doctrine of the Gospel) as a Doctrine of everlasting consequence, and they so
received it, and for a season transmitted it to their Children: But alas! how
soon was all obliterated, and in this sense all mankind (some very few
excepted) did agree to murder themselves, and they actually did that which Mr
White says was impossible: And so from hence forward let all Logitians take
notice of it, that Ab esse ad posse non valet consequentia. Well, some
centuries after comes Moses and by Gods command delivers a Law in Writing and
this law abides, and the Jews to this day retain it in remembrance and
veneration and for above 3000 years together have been thereby kept from those
Pagan opinions and Idolatries which all the Scholars of Tradition almost in the
whole World have fallen into: and consequently writing is a sure; and orall
Tradition, an unsafe and uncertain way of conveyance: and this principle has
had universal influence upon the actions of wise men, in all ages, and in all
things: Hence care has been always taken for the writing of Canons of
Councels, decrees of Courts, Acts of Parliament (though the importance of them
were many times so great and evident, that according to this new notion,
writing was superfluous, and verbal Tradition Infallible:) And if those wise
men durst never trust unwritten Tradition with their estates and worldly
concernments, shall we be so mad as to venture our Souls upon it? Let Papists
do so, who having given up their consciences to the Pope cannot say their
souls are their own, but let them not be displeased, if we desire to make a
wiser bargain. But our English Apostate has a distinction to salve this
gross absurdity: It is true (says he) of Doctrines merely speculative, that
the memory is not so safe a depository as Written records, but not of such as
may be made as it were visible by practice: And he is pleased to give us an
instance in the Doctrine of the Sacrament and Christ's real unfigurative
presence in it, which (says he) was more securely and clearly delivered by the
Churches practice, then could be by books Written, their prostrations and
adorations demonstrated their assurance of his real presence, where every man's
saying Amen at the Priests pronouncing Corpus Domini nostri Jesu Christi,
expressed their confession of that presence with exclusion of all tropes and
figures in the business. Exomol.. 1. c. 8. And are these the great and visible
assurances of Doctrines to which all the security of Writings must strike
sail? Are these grounds so evident that the Doctrines could not possibly, have
been more securely propagated and more clearly and intelligibly delivered to
posterity in Writing as Cressy daringly asserts? See Exomolog. Sect. 1. chap.
8. O the besotting nature of Popery! O the tremendous judgment of God punishing
Apostasy with an (...) a reprobate sense! Dare this miserable man say these are
clearer evidences of the real presence then if it had been said in terminis.
This is my body in a proper and corporeal sense, or this bread is converted
into the very substance of this body which you now see? These men may well say
what they please for it appears they can believe what they list.

May I with the Readers leave in few words, discover the shameful weakness
and horrid impudence of this assertion: Is it true indeed that the prostrations
and adorations, of Christians discovered their assurance of the real corporal
presence? And of all men living could Mr Cressy say this, who had so often seen
others receive and himself received the Sacrament in England and Ireland in a
posture of adoration viz. kneeling, with an assurance of the falsehood of that
opinion of the real corporal presence? Why might not the special yet
spiritual presence of Christ in the Sacrament occasion this prostration, as
well as the special and Spiritual presence of God in the Arc occasioned the
Jews to fall down and worship at his footstool? And must the poor Clarke
come in with his Amen to help the lame priest over the style? Why there is not
a Protestant but when he hears these words pronounced this is my body will say
his Amen to it, and acknowledge it so to be, but still Christ's words must be
taken in Christ's sense, and that is, though figurative yet very frequent in
such cases: In short, since these are the practical visible Arguments alleged
as instances of the Infallible certainty of orall Tradition, above all that can
be said in writing: I hope the Reader (who concerns himself either in matters
of credit or conscience) will easily discern and ingeniously confess, both
the absurdity of their Arguments and assertion, and the solidity of this second
Answer, and the advantage of writing above unwritten Tradition.

. 5. Ans. 3. If this assertion be true and solid, and Tradition be an
Infallible foundation of Faith as those men pretend no error could come into
the Church under pretense of Tradition from the Apostles: That is evident in it
self (else an infallible Authority is liable to error which is a
contradiction) and it is granted by our Adversaries, who therefore tell us that
all Heretics recede from the Tradition of their Fathers and broach new and
unheard of Doctrines, as we have seen.

But errors may come into the Church under pretense of Tradition. Here all the
doubt lies, and therefore I shall endeavor to make it good, a task which
would be wholly superfluous if the impudence of our Adversaries, and the
desperateness of their cause did not oblige them to require, and us to give
the proof of the most evident verities: I might insist upon the Doctrine of
the Chiliasts (which the Papists confess to be false) which was commended to
the Church by Papias and Irenaeus too as an Apostolical Tradition, and so
received by the generality of Orthodox Christians (says Justin Martyr:) This
Argument is renderd more considerable by the pitiful evasion wherewith Mr
White shuffles it off, saying, That the Chiliasts were deceaved by Cerinthus
who feigned he had this from the Apostles in private discourses, not in public
Preaching De fide e^ Theolog. tract. 1.. 7. p. 20.
. For (to say nothing of this that the Fathers derive its pedigree from another
root) whatever was the occasion and ground of this mistake in that Tradition it
sufficiently proves what I intend viz. that many or most of the guides of the
Church may receive false Doctrines as coming from the Apostles, and so
transmit them to their Posterity, which is the thing now denied. It was an old
Observation of Irenaeus concerning the Heretics of his time (one would think
the words were not only Historical of them, but also prophetical of the
Papists) When Heretics are reproved out of the Scripture; they begin to accuse
the Scripture, as if truth could not be discovered by those that know not
Tradition Cum ex Scripturis arguuntur haeretici, in accusationem convertuntur
Scripturarum, quia non possit ex his inveniri veritas ab his qui nesciunt
Traditionem, lib. 3. cap. 2. page 169.
. Eam sanctorum virorum semper celebravit eruditio Aug. lib. 1. contra Julianum
and lib. 2. de Bapt. c. 3.
The Arrians pretended they had their Doctrine by Tradition from their
Ancestors: particularly they named Origin, Dionysius Alexandrinus, and Lucian
the Martyr by whose hands their Doctrine had been conveyed to them, as Baronius
acknowledges Epiphanius tells us the Cajani pretended St Paul as the Author and
founder of their Heretical Doctrines: The Pelagians boasted of their Doctrine,
That it had been always celebrated by the Learning of Holy men Eam sanctorum
virorum semper celebravit eruditio Aug. lib. 1. contra Julianum and lib. 2. de
Bapt. c. 3.
. The Doctrine of rebaptisation (which the Papists acknowledge to be erroneous)
was brought in by Cyprian and the African Bishops under a pretense of
Tradition: The words of Cyprian are these: We do not now broach a new Doctrine,
but one long fince decreed by our Predecessors Sententiam nostram non novam
promimus, sed jampridem ab antecessori^us nostris statutam. Epist. 70.
. It is true Pamelius says he means this of his immediate Predecessors
Agrippinus, and the rest: and that will serve my turn, if Mr VVhites Argument
will hold: for then no Age (and consequently not this) could either be ignorant
of, or knowingly recede from the Doctrine of their Fathers, nor they from their
Fathers, and so upward to the Apostles: And indeed Cyprian carries it higher,
even to the Apostles whiles he calls it The Faith of the Catholic Church, and
reckons it amongst the Apostolical and Evangelicall precepts Quare Ecclesiae
Catholicae fidem ac veritatem et teaere debemus firmiter et docere, et per
omnia Evangelica et Apostolica praecepta rationem divinae dispensationis atque
unitatis ostendere. Epis. 73. ad Iulaianum. Nos veritati consuetudinem junginus
ab initio hoc tenentes quod a^ Christo and ab Apostolo traditum est Epist. 75.
Cypr. p. 164. sedit^il. Rigalt.
. And Firmilian expressly affirms it was delivered by Christ and his Apostles
(b). And will these men's confidence yet serve them to assert that no error
could come into the Church by Tradition?

If all those Eminent African Bishops and Churches might either misunderstand
their Ancestors or deceive their posterity (as Mr White cannot deny they did
e^^^er the one or other) why might not the Spanish, or French, or Romish do it.
If it be said, there was a promise to the contrary at least for the Church of
Rome. To say nothing of the manifest weakness of that pretense I answer two
things: 1. That Mr White expressly rejects this Infallibility by promise. 2.
However this Argument being of another nature and depending not upon the
promise of God, but the nature and evidence of the thing is by this instance
irrefragably overthrown.

Answ. 4. That way of proving which was rejected by the Prophets and godly
Jews, by Christ and by the Apostles is not to be approved, much less
preferred before that way which they approved and used; but this way of proving
the truth of a Doctrine by Tradition from their next Ancestors and the
Testimony of the present Church was rejected by the Prophets etc. and by Christ
and the Apostles: Ergo, It is not now to be approved. For the Minor (in which
all the doubt lies) it consists of two Branches: The first relating to the old
Testament; The second to the New:

The first is: That this way was disowned by the Prophets and godly Jews under
the old Testament: It is true some of the Jews did own this Popish opinion as
you may read I^r. 44.17. But the Prophets were of another persuasion. Ezekiel.
20.18. Walk not in the Statutes of your Fathers. And from Tradition they used
to send their people to the Law and Testimony Isa. 8.20. And the godly Kings of
Judah did not make Tradition (as the Papists do) but the written Law (as the
Protestants do) the rule of their reformation: Thus David 1 Chronicles. 16. 40. --
to do according to all that is Written in the Law: Thus Hezekiah 2 Chronicles. 31.
he did all, as it is Written in the Law of the Lord: So Josiah 2 Chronicles. 34.30,
31. and 35.12. The like did Ezra long after Ezra 6.18. and Nehemiah chap. 8.
They dwelt in Booths, as it is Written. Here Scripture recovers what Tradition
had lost, for though God had commanded this, yet since the days of Joshua they
had not done so verse. 17. By all which we evidently discern how different
their opinion was from this of the Papists, and how little confidence they put
in Tradition, Josiah would not so much as make Hezekiahs reformation his rule
nor Hezekiah take his pattern from Iehoshaphats reformation, but still every
one had immediate recourse to the written Word; For it seems it was a Language
that these Holy men understood not, That Scripture was a corrupt writing, a
leaden rule, a dumb master.

. 7. There is indeed one Objection against the consequence from the Jews to
the Christians and from the Old Testament to the New: I shall give it you in
the words of one of the acutest of our Adversaries, i e. Mr White, The Law of
the Jews was delivered in Tables of Stone and the volume of the Law, to which
it is expressly opposed that God will write the Law of Christians in their
hearts. Certissimum est legem Iudoeorum Tabulis lapideis et Deuteronomii
volumine traditam esse, cui op^onitur express in Prophetis Deum legem
Christianorum in cordibus fidelium Scripturum. De fide Trast. 1:. 6.


I Answer, 1. The words are not to be understood absolutely (as they sound) but
comparatively, not as if they did wholly deny that the Mosaicall Law was
written in the Heart (for that is affirmed in other places as Deuteronomy. 30.6. The
Lord thy God will circumcise thy heart and the heart of thy seed) or as if they
did affirm that the Christian Law was written only in men's hearts and not in
Paper (which the Papists themselves dare not assert) but only it is a
comparative expression like that, I will have mercy and not sacrifice, Christ
sent me not to baptize but to preach, i. e. principally and primarily, for else
the one as well as the other was enjoined by God: And so it is here implied
that the Christian Law should be written more eminently, upon the hearts of
Christians, then it ordinarily was upon the hearts of the Jews, and that it
should be writ in a more legible Character.

Answ. 2. If we examine in whose hearts this Christian Law is written, we shall
find it concerns not the Tradition, of the Church by which all things are to
be regulated: For I demand of them was this promise made and performed to all
that are called Christians, or only to the elect and sincere Christians, or
only to the Pope and Bishops? If they say the first then one Christian as well
as another is furnished with this rule of all Controversies, and consequently
as able to judge of Controversies, then laymen and Ministers have this Law
equally written in their hearts; if they say the second, That it is only the
elect and sincere Christians (as indeed it is), then it must be something else
beside Tradition which is no less known to the hypocritical pretender then to
the sincere professor of Christianity; If they say the third, That this Law was
written only in the hearts of the Pope and Bishops met in Council (As what is
there so ridiculous which some of our Adversaries will not say rather then
confess their errors and give glory to God?) They are evidently confuted by
the words of the place, Jer. 31.34. They shall teach no more every man his
neighbor, and every one his brother, saying, know the Lord for they shall all
know me from the least of them unto the greatest -- for I will forgive their
iniquity. And besides Mr White himself says, This Law is written only in
cordibus sid lium in the hearts of the faithful: Now in what Dictionary we
shall find fidelis to be translated Atheist, Sodomite, Magitian, etc.
(Epithetes not without cause given to Popes and Popish Bishops by their own
Authors) I would gladly be informed.

Answ. 3. If we enquire what this is, which is here said to be written in their
hearts, we shall see Mr VVhites invention was better then his judgment or his
conscience: with what Spectales do these men read this Writing in the heart,
that tell us this was the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, Indulgences,
Invocation of Saints, Popes Supremacy, the Churches Infallibility? But you must
know though this Writing was from God, yet the interpretation belongs to the
Pope, whose will stands for his reason, and his word for a Law: But if we
consult the Prophet: If with the Popes good leave God may be his own
Interpreter: He tells you this was the Inscription (...) Know the Lord. The
knowledge of God Ier. 31.33. and the fear of God Ier. 32.39, 40. And this Law
written in the heart was so far from being appointed by God for a rule to walk
by (much less was it to justle out the word, as the Papists now abuse it) that
the use of this was only to help them to make the word their rule Ezekiel. 26 27.
I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes Hence
that in Is. 59.21. My Spirit that is in thee, and my words which I have put in
thy mouth shall not depar^ out of thy mouth: So this objection being
discharged, the consequence remains in full force, and Traditions being
disapproved under the old Testament cannot be approved under the new: But I
shall more fully prove that in the next branch, which is this.

. 8. 2. This way of proving the truth of Doctrines by verbal tradition is
disallowed by Christ and the Apostles: He knows nothing of the Pharisees, and
indeed but little of the New Testament, that knows not that this was the great
Doctrine of the Pharisees: And from their school the Papists had this Doctrine
of the certainty of Tradition: So little reason had Du. Moulin to write a book
about the novelty of Popery when diverse of their Doctrines have such a
venerable Antiquity that they are as old as the Pharisees. No wonder the Church
of Rome has diverse Doctrines that Christ never delivered to them, for they
had a great part of the leaven of the Pharisees left them for a legacy. And
from them they had their bold expressions by which they advance Tradition above
the Scripture: The Author of the book called (...) has this saying, think not
that the written law is the Foundation of our Faith, but the law of orall
Tradition, And again in the book Iuchas. p. 158. Without this orall law (of
Tradition) the whole law would be in darkness; and again, all those things
which our Rabbis taught us we are equally to believe as the Law of Moses. But
this is so known, that it is frivolous to multiply testimonies of this kind:
The footsteps of this principle you may discern in diverse places of the New
Testament: They made the Tradition of the fathers, the rule of their Faith Mat.
15.2. Why do thy Disciples transgress the Tradition of the Elders. St Paul
mentions it as one of his Pharisaicall errors, that he was exceedingly zealous
of the Traditions of his Fathers Gal. 1.14. And St Peter speaks of it as a part
or effect of their redemption by Christ that they were delivered from a vain
conversation received by Tradition from their Fathers. 1. Peter. 1. this
sufficiently shows what their opinion was. Now let us hear what reflection
Christ and the Apostles made upon it: And there you shall find that which would
end the controversy with ingenious adversaries viz. That whereas the Romanists
tell us that the deserting of Tradition is the true cause and spring of all
errors, on the contrary, our Savior makes this the Fountain of their errors,
their forsaking the Scripture, not their receding from the Tradition of their
Ancestors, Mat. 22.29. Ye do err not knowing the Scriptures, we are beholden
to the Papists that they do not say, there is a corruption in the Text, and
Scripture is put in for Tradition: For surely if Christ had been of the mind of
those Gentlemen, he never had a fitter opportunity to utter it, then now, for
the Sadduces were noted as enemies to Traditions. And the Doctrine of the
resurrection, was but darkely delivered in Scripture at lest in the Pentatuch,
and more plainly by Tradition: So now or never was the time for Christ to say
to the Sadduces (as doubtless Mr White would, if he had been present, and
Christ should, if Mr Whites Argument be good) you err, because you take no
heed to the Traditions of your Ancestors. But here is not a syllable about
that, but all is cast upon their not knowing the Scriptures: Thus in the
resolution of that great controversy concerning the Messiah, Christ does not
confute the Jews, nor stablish the Truth from Tradition (though there was
eminent occasion for it at that time, there being such a Tradition then rise
amongst them, that the time of the coming of the Messiah was at hand, Daniels
week being nigh exspired, and with it a general expectation of him) but from
^cripture: Christ proves himself to be the true Messiah by several Arguments,
by the Testimony of John (who was a Prophet, yea, and more then a Prophet) by
his Fathers voice from heaven by his miracles, and above all by the Scripture,
how came Christ to omit that which (if those men do not deceive us) was more
considerable then all the rest viz. Tradition and the Testimony of the present
Church. A strange oversight, you will say, but it seems it was a discovery
denied to Christ, and all the Apostles, and reserved to these last times.
Answerable to this was the practice of the godly Bereans who did examine St
Paul's Doctrine not by Tradition (as the Papists do) but by the Scripture Acts
17.11. And St Paul himself evidenceth the soundness of his Doctrine not by its
conformity with Tradition (which our Adversaries lay such stresse upon that S.
Clara with several others affirm that they receive the Scripture only so
far as they agree with Tradition Prediit quidam Dialogus a Docto Amico men
compositus -- solenniter Parisiis approbatus a Doctoribus deputatis Sorbonoe --
qui express asserit Ecclesiam ideo recipere Scriptur as quia and in quantum
sunt conformes fidei quam ab Apostolis ^er Traditiones accepil, non e converso.
Et hactenus sine dubio rectissime. System. cap. 11. in initio.
but by its consonancy to the Scriptures, saying, That he witnessed none other
thing then what was in Moses and the Prophets, Act. 26.22. and Act. 24.14, 15.
So then, the question now is, which is the more rational way to resolve a
Christians doubts and ground his Faith, whether that which has had the
approbation of all the Holy-men of God in both Testaments, or the ingenious
devise of these witty Doctors that come with their quintum Evangelium into the
World, that is, whether Scripture or Tradition. I know one thing will be said,
That the Apostles did urge Traditions as well as Scriptures, to this purpose we
often hear of that, 2 These. 2.15. Hold the Tradition which ye have been taught
whether by word or our Epistle; To which I Answer briefly:

1. That if the Papists can demonstrate any of their Traditions to be indeed
Apostolical (as these were) we shall receive them, if conformable to
Scripture; but if they be dissonant from Scripture, we have commission from St
Paul to renounce them though they be either of Apostolical or Angelical
original. Gal. 1.18.9.

2. The Argument I confess is right of the Romish stamp viz. The Thessalonians
were bound to receive what they heard immediately from St Paul's mouth in such
things as for the substance of them were contained in the Scripture: Therefore
we are now bound to receive all those Traditions which the Church of Rome tell
us they had from those, that had them from those, that had them from those,
that told them their Ancestors, were told by their Ancestors that some of their
Ancestors had it from Paul 1600 years ago -- risum teneatis amici? This may
serve for the fourth Answer.

9. Ans. 5. If this Doctrine be true, Scripture proof is not necessary for any
point in Religion (for it asserts the sufficiency of Tradition in it self and
without the Scripture:) But Scripture proof is necessary for confirmation of
points in Religion: This I might prove from Scripture, but that has been done
already in the former Answer, therefore I shall here confute this Argument of
Tradition by Tradition and the testimony of the Fathers: To pick up all they
have to this purpose would fill Volumes; I shall therefore single out some few
Illustrious Testimonies: Nothing can more evidently overthrow this goodly
structure then those forementioned words of Cyprian, We ought not to regard
what others have done before us, but what Christ who was before all thought fit
to be done: For we must follow Gods Truth, not men's custom Ex 63. (...) strom.
lib. 6.
. What Protestant can say more in few words then Clemens Alexandrinus in few
words: We assert nothing without Scripture (...) In moralium summa definit. 26.
cap. 1.
: Therefore he thought not Tradition a sure evidence, though so near the
Fountain, much less can it now give us any certainty having conflicted with
hazards and been exposed to the infection of 1300 years. St Basil is express:
It is necessary that every word or thing be confirmed by the Holy Scriptures
(...). bomil. de fide
. And else where he tells you, It is a manifest defection from the Faith and
token of Pride, either to rej^ct any thing that is written, or to introduce any
thing that is not written Evangelici libri sunt and Apostolici antiquorumque
Prophetarum sanctiones, quae nos erudiunt quid de sacra lege sapiamus. Proinde
hostili posita discordia ex verbis divinitus inspiratis sumamus qu^stionum
explicationes. Histor tripart. lib. 2. c. 6.
. And Constantine speaking of the rule by which all things were to be examined
and judged, confines it to the Scripture. The Books of the Prophets, and
Apostles (says he) do plainly instruct us what to think of Divine things:
therefore laying aside hostile discord, from the words which were divinely
inspired, let us take our expositions of quoestions. (e) It is a pitiful shift
of Bellarmines to say that Constantine was a better Emperor then Doctor,
whereas in this particular Theodoret assures us that the whole Synod did highly
approve of this saying, nor did any of the Ancients ever condemn him for it:
And indeed the practice of the Synod shows their approbation of the Speech and
consequently gives us another Argument for they determined the controversy
according to the Scriptures says Ambrose De fide ad Gratianum lib. 1. cap. 8.
, and Athanasius too whose words are these, The Bishops congregated at Nice,
collecting together all things they could out of Scripture to defend their
opinion, they affirmed that the Son was consubstantiall to the Father Niceoe
congregati Episcopi collectis in unum quae ex sacris literis ad sententiam s^am
tuendam faccrent -- filium consubstantialem esse asseverant In Epistola ad
Epictetum.
. And Bellarmine himself confesses it: The Council of Nice, when they defined
the Son to be consubstantiall to the Father, they drew their Conclusion out of
the Scriptures Concilium Nicenum cum definivit filium Patri esse (...)
conclusionem deduxit ex Scripturis. De Conciliis lib. 2. cap. 12.
. Notable is that place of Chrysostomes because it acquaints us with his own
judgment and the judgment of the Christians of that age, If any thing be
asserted (says he) without Scripture the mind of the hearer wavers -- But
when Scripture comes, that confirms the speakers words and settles the hearers
mind (...) -- in Psalm. 95. -- nusquam adhuc legi. Scriptum esse doceat
Hermogenis osficina. Si non est scriptum, timeat voe illud adjicientibus aut
detrabentibus destinatum, con. Hermogenem cap. 22.
. Tertullian thus confutes the opinion of Hermogenes, that things were made of
prae existent matter with, I never read it, let Hermogenes show where it is
written, or else let him fear the woe denounced against those those that add
to the Scripture (e). And again, I do not receive what thou bring of thy
own without the Scripture Non recipio quod extra Scripturam de tuo infers. de
carne Christi ca. 7.
. And again, Take away from Heretics the things they have in common with
Heathens, that they may refer their questions to Scripture alone and they can
never stand Aufer Hereticis, quae cum Ethnicis sapiunt, ut de solis Scripturis
quaestiones suas fistant, and stare non possunt. De resurrectione earnis cap. 3.
. But the Papists are of another mind, for if you will believe them, if
Scripture alone must judge Controversies, Heresies will never fall. Theodoret
professes he was not so bold as to assert any thing wherein the Scripture was
silent (...) Dialog. 2.
. Thus Origin: It is necessary that we call in the Testimony of Scripture, for
without this our expositions have no credit Utrum ipsi Ecclesiam teneant non
nisi Divinarum scripturarum Canonicis libris ostendant. De unitate ecclesioe
cap. 16.
. Austin is most full and plain, I will mention but one place, Whether they
have the Church they cannot show but from the Canonical Books of Scripture:
And yet there is no question wherein Tradition seems more pertinent, and where
the Papists urge it with more vehemence. I might add a thousand pregnant
places more, but either these or none will suffice to prove that the Ancients
did judge Scripture proof necessary for the confirmation of any Doctrine in
Religion, which the Romanists now judge not necessary. The Fathers pretended
Tradition for their opinion, and the Papists pretend it now: Either Tradition
deceived the Fathers then, or it deceives the Papists now: Either will serve
our turn to show the Fallibility of Tradition. If it be said there are no
les^e express Testimonies alleged by the Papists on the behalf of Tradition,
and why should not they be received as well as those on the behalf of the
Scripture. I Answer, 1. If the Fathers do in some places assert the sufficiency
of proof from Tradition, and in other places the necessity of Scripture proof,
these assertions being directly contrary one to another it invalidates their
Authority in matters of Religion: For so say the Lawyers most justly and truly,
Testis pugnantia diceus fidem non facit.

2. But upon enquiry it will be found in the places cited for Tradition
(especially if you compare them with those alleged for Scripture) that they do
plead Tradition only as a secondary Argument to confirm that Faith which is
grounded upon Scripture, but it is as clear as the Sun that they ever made
Tradition strike fail to the Scripture, and made no scruple of deserting
Tradition when the evidence of Scripture Arguments stood on the other side.

Answ. 6. The Romanists themselves are undeniable instances of the vanity of
their own Argument: They tell us Tradition cannot deceive us: Why Tradition
has deceived them: There are diverse contradictory opinions maintained in the
Church of Rome, about 300 are reckoned out of Bellarmine: The dissenters,
though never so implacably divided amongst themselves, do agree in this, That
they believe nothing but what has come to them by Tradition from their
Fathers, and so from the Apostles; Then certainly either Tradition has
deceived some of them, or both the parts of a contradiction may be true: I
shall not launch forth into the Sea of Romish contradictions, nor take notice
of petty differences amongst obscure Authors, but shall instance in two
material points, viz. The Doctrine of Gods grace, and man's will, and the
appurtenances as they are controverted between the French and Italian Papists:
In both of them, it is clear as the Sun that both parties pretend Tradition:
Now the Trumpet of Tradition gives an uncertain found, for Tradition tells the
Jesuits this is truth, That the will is determined to good actions, not by
Gods grace, but by its own inclination and agency: Tradition tells the
Dominicans and Jansenists that this is a gross falsity: So for the Church if
you enquire in whom Supreme Authority and Infallibility resides (for that is
the great question.) Tradition tells the Jesuits, it is in the Pope; Tradition
not long since told the Councels of Basil and Constance that it was in a
Council, not in the Pope, and so it tells many of the French Doctors at this
day; And (I will tell you a thing in your ear) both these are Apostolical
Traditions though you and I think they are directly contrary: It is true that
St James says, No Fountain can yield both Salt Water and Fresh, Chap. 3.
8.12. But that is to be understood only of the Fountain of the Scripture, but
the Fountain of Tradition can yield both Salt and Fresh, both bitter and sweet.
You may well allow Tradition to be Infallible, for you see it can work wonders,
and reconcile contradictions: If this seem strange to you, you may expect the
proof of it in an Appendix to the next Edition of Mr VVhites Apology for
Tradition demonstrating that Contradictoria possunt esse simul vera, to be
dedicated to the Defenders of Transubstantiation; but to return: What say our
masters to this difficulty; why, I will faithfully acquaint you where their
strength lies, and what their pretenses are: I find three things which are or
may with some color be said for them to safeguard the Infallibility of
Tradition against this dreadful shock.

1. They say these are only Doctrines ventilated in Schools, not of any great
consequence to Christians: Thus the controversies between the Jesuits and
Dominicans about Gods free grace and man's free will (they say) are but
Scholasticall niceties, wherein the substance of Religion is not at all
concerned: So for that point of Supremacy and Infallibility it is no great
matter, The dissenters only seek out the decider of Points of Doctrine that
is, by whose mouth we are to know, which be our Articles of Faith, whether by
the Popes or Councels or both, which is not much material (says Rushworth's
second Edition Dial. 3.. 9.) to our purpose whatever the truth be, supposing we
acknowledge no Articles of Faith but such as have descend^d to us from Christ
and his Apostles;

For Answer, I would know whether a private Christian can Infallibly know what
are those Articles of Faith which came from Christ and his Apostles without the
decision of Pope or Council, or not: If they say he can know it, then it
follows that private Christians may be Infallible of themselves, and
consequently there is no necessity of Pope or Councels, for what need any more
then Infallibility? If they say he cannot, then an Infallible guide, judge, and
interpreter is necessary to Tradition as well as to Scripture, and without this
Tradition cannot make us Infallible, and consequently, if it be doubtful and
disputable who this Judge is, it must be also doubtful whether the Tradition
be right; and therefore Tradition cannot make me Infallible: It is an audacity
beyond parallel that they who make it so material as that they assert we have
no certainty in our Faith for want of a decider of points of Doctrine, and make
no scruple of sending us to Hell for want of such a Decider, should say this
amongst themselves is not material, for (as to use and benefit) it is all one
to have no decider of controversies, and not to be agreed who it is, according
to that known maxim of the Lawyers, Idem est non apparere and non esse: As for
the other points between the Jesuits and Dominicans, how material they are we
will take their own judgments: If we may believe either one or other of them,
the points are of great moment: If you ask the Jansenists or Dominicans their
opinion of the Jesuiticall Doctrine, they tell you that it is the very poison
of the Pelagian Heresy, yea, it is worse then Pelagianisme, that they are
contemners of Grace, such as rob God of his honor, taking half of it to
themselves, that it is here disputed, Whether God alone be God, or whether the
will of man be a kind of inferior, yet (in part) an Independent Deity. These
are Mr Whites words in his Sonus Buccinae. quaest. Theolog. in Epis and in
parag. 7.

And for the Jesuits, they are not one jot behind hand with them in their
censure of the Dominican Doctrine; which (say the Jesuits) brings back the
stoicall paradox, robs God of the Glory of his goodness, makes God a liar and
the Author of sin; and yet when we tell them of these divisions, the breach
is presently healed, these savages are grown tame, their differences trivial,
and only some School niceties, wherein Faith is not concerned: And now both
Stoics and Pelagians are grown Orthodox, and the grace, glory, sovereignty and
holiness of God, are matters but of small concernment: and so it seems they
are to them, else they durst not so shamelesly dally with them: But it is
usual with them to make the greatest points of Faith like Counters, which in
computation sometimes stand for pounds, sometimes for pence, as interest and
occasion require. And it is worth Observation, These very points of difference
when they fall out among Protestants, between Calvin and Arminius, they are
represented by our Adversaries as very material and weighty differences, but
when they come to their share they are of no moment.

2. It may be said, Tradition may deceive some of the Romanists but not all:
Now it is the Church which is said to be Infallible, not particular Doctors:
For Answer, let it be remembered that I am not now speaking of the deception of
some few private Doctors, but the points alleged are controverted amongst as
learned and devout men (as they call Devotion) as ever the Church of Rome had;
here is Order against Order, University against University, Nation against
Nation, all of them pretending Tradition for their contrary opinions with
greatest confidence and eagerness. Premising this, I Answer, That Tradition
which has deceived thousands of the best and Learned Romanists may deceive
ten thousand, That which deceives the Jesuits in some points may deceive the
Dominicans in others, the Franciscans in others: If it deceive the French
Papists in some points, it may deceive the Italians in others, and so is not
Infallible in any: Or else, what bounds will these men set to the Infallibility
of Tradition? Will they say Tradition is only Infallible in France, and those
of the same persuasion, who plead Tradition for the Supremacy of the Council
above the Pope? Or will they say the Infallibility of Tradition is kept beyond
the Alps among the Italian Doctors, who urge Tradition for the Popes Supremacy
above Councels? But what security will they give us, That the Fallibility of
Tradition cannot pass over the Alps and get from one side to the other?
Indeed Infallibility may happily be a tender piece not able to get over those
snowy Mountains: But Fallibility can travel to all parts and at all times: In
short, it being certain that Tradition does deceive thousands of them it may
deceive the the rest: Nor can this be any way prevented, but by pretending the
promise of Infallibility; but this is Heterogeneous to the present enquiry, and
they are now pleading for another Infallibility from the nature of Tradition,
and that is hereby disproved; and for the fiction of a promise, I have
discovered that before.

But the third and last pretense is most frequent; That however in lesser
points they may be mistaken and divided, yet they are agreed in all that is de
fide, in all points of Faith, that is, in such things as have been decided by
Pope or Council: I answer in few words, and thus I reinforce my Discourse. If
Tradition might deceive them before such a Decision, it might deceive them
afterward; because the Decision of a Council does not alter the nature and
property of Tradition: It is true (according to the opinion of some Papists)
such a decision of a point may cause him to believe a Doctrine which before he
doubted of or denied, because he may judge the Churches Authority so infallible
and obliging to him, that Tradition with Scripture and all other things must
strike sail to it: But the decision of a Council cannot make that a
Tradition, which was no Tradition, nor can it hinder, but that Tradition did
deceive me before, and consequently might deceive me afterward. For instance:
If the Pope determine the controversy between the Jansenists and Jesuits
about Predestination, Grace, Frewill, etc. his determination in favor of the
Jesuits possibly may change some of the Jansenists judgments, because
peradventure it is their principle that the Pope is the Infallible Judge of
Controversies, to whom they must all submit: But (supposing that the Popes
decides according to the verity of Tradition, and that must always be supposed
a thousand of his decisions cannot hinder, but that all the Jansenists and
Dominicans had until that time been deceived by Tradition: So it seems
Tradition in that point was Fallible for above 1600 ye^rs together after
Christ, and now upon the Popes determination An. 1653. it is momento turbinis
grown Infallible; but neither will this do their work, for the nature of
Tradition being the same, either it must be infallible in the foregoing ages,
or else it must now be acknowledged. Fallible.

. 11. Answ. 7. Although this one Answer might suffice to all their perplexing
Arguments tending to show the impossibility of any mutation or corruption where
Tradition is pretended, viz. that it is apparent, there have been several
mutations and corruptions where Tradition is owned: As it was a sufficient
confutation of that Philosophers knotty Arguments alleged to prove that there
was no motion, when his Adversary walked before him; though happily the other
brought some Arguments, that might puzzle an able disputant to Answer. (which
in that point is not hard to do:) Or if any man should urge a subtle Argument
to prove the impossibility of Sins coming into the World, because neither
could the understanding be first deceived, nor the will corrupted without the
deception of the understanding, it were sufficient to allege the universal
experience of mankind to the contrary: So the undoubted experience of manifest
corruptions in the Church so called, which no man that has the use of his
Eyes, and exercise of his reason or conscience can be ignorant of, might justly
silence all the cavils of wanton wits pretending to prove the impossibility of
it: yet because I will use all possible means to convince them, if God
peradventure may give some of them repentance that they may recover themselves
from the snare of the Devil, I shall proceed farther and easily evince the
possibility of corruption in that case, and point at some of those many
fountains of corruption, from whence the streams of error might flow into
the Church, notwithstanding the pretense of, and adherence to the Doctrine of
Tradition. And because the answer of the Lord Falkland reduces all to two
branches: If (says he) a company of Christians pretending Tradition for all
they teach, could teach falsehoods, then some age must either have erred in
understanding their Ancestors, or have joined to deceive their posterity; but
neither of these are credible. I shall apply my Answer to him, first in
general, and then to the several branches of his Argument.

. 12. In general, the whole Argument is built upon a false supposition, as if
the misunderstanding or deceit must needs come in as it were in one spring
tide, as if it were impossible that the Tares of Error should be sown in the
Church while men slept and never dreamed of it: The basis of this Argument lies
in an assertion of the impossibility of that, which the nature of it shows to
be most rational and probable, and the experience of all ages shows to be
most usual, i. e. that corruption of Doctrines and manners (for in this both
are alike) should creep in by degrees: As Iasons ship was wasted (so Truth was
lost) one piece after another: Nemo repent fit turpissimus: Who knows not
that errors crept into the Jewish Church gradually, and why might it not be so
in the Christian Church? We know very well, Posito uno absurdo sequuntur multa:
One error will breed an hundred, yet all its Children are not borne in one day.
St Paul tells us the mystery of iniquity began to work in his dai^s, but was
not brought to perfection till many ages after. The Apostle has sufficiently
co^suted this senseless fancy, whilst he tells us that Heresy eats like a
cank^r or a gangreen, i. e. by degrees, and is not worst at first, but
increases to more ungodliness, 2 Timothy 2. 16, 17. As that cloud, which at
first appearance was no bigger then a man's hand, did gradually overspread the
whole face of the Heavens; so those opinions which at first were only the
sentiments of the lesser part, might by degrees improve and become the greater,
or at least by the favor of Princes, or power and learning of their advocates,
become the stronger, until at last, like Moses's Rod they devoured the other
Rods, and monopolizing to themselves the liberty of writing and professing
their Doctrines, and suppressing all contrary Discourses and Treatises, their
Doctrine being proposed by them as Catholic Doctrines and the Doctrines of
their own and former ages (which was frequently pretended by several
Heretics) and this proposition not contradicted by considerable persons,
(which in some Ages were few and those easily biased) or the contradiction
being speedily suppressed, (which is very possible and has been usuall^ it
could not probably fall out otherwise, but that their opinion should be
transmitted to their Successors for the Faith of their Age. Rome was not built
in a day, neither in a civil, nor in a Spiritual notion. And de facto, that
corruptions did creep into the Church of Rome by degrees, has been so fully
demonstrated, that I need only point the Reader to those Authors who have done
this work, especially to Momeys mystery of Iniquity, and the excellent defense
of it in French by Rivet against the cavils of Coffetean.

2. I answer particularly, and in opposition to the first branch, I lay down
this position: That the following Age, or the Major part of those called
Christians, might easily mistake the mind of the foregoing Age, of which many
rational accounts may be given. 1. There was no certain way, whereby (for
example) the particular Christians of the third Age, might Infallibly know the
Doctrines which were delivered by the whole Church of the second Age. Remember
the question is not how probably they might believe, but how infallibly they
might know it, for nothing will serve the Romanists turn, short of
Infallibility: It is true, the Christians of Antioch might know what their
Fathers delivered to them there, and they of Ephesus what was there delivered,
but no Christian could without miracles infallibly know, what were the
Doctrines delivered to the Christians in those innumerable places where the
Gospel had got sooting. Hence then I offer this Argument: Either this is
sufficient for the Infallibility of Tradition, that the Christians in several
Cities and places did understand what their Ancestors taught in such places,
and would not deceive their posterity in it, or it is not sufficient, but it is
necessary that Traditions should be compared, and the Truth discovered in a
general Council: If they say the former, then they assert the Infallibility,
not only of the Church or Bishop of Rome, or of a general Council, or of the
Catholic Church, but of every particular City: And to say Truth, Either this
plea of Tradition is fallacious and absurd, or every particular Church is
Infallible: For (to use their own words) if the Christians (suppose of Ephesus)
could be deceived, then either they did not understand the Doctrine of their
Ancestors there delivered, or they did willingly deceive their posterity; but
neither of these were possible: Ergo, The Church of Ephesus was Infallible: If
they will eat their own words, (as they will do any thing sooner then retract
their errors and return to the Truth) and say the Church of Ephesus, might
misunderstand their Ancestors or deceive their Posterity, then so might the
Church of Antioch and that of Alexandria, and so the rest, and what then
becomes of Infallibility? If they say the latter, viz. That there is a
necessity of a general Council to compare Traditions and declare the Truth,
then they are desired to remember, that as yet there had been no general
Council, and consequently no Infallibility, and therefore in that Age there
might be a misunderstanding, yea many mistakes: What else will they say? Will
they say that a Christian might Infallibly know the Truth by traveling to all
places and companies of Christians, and hearing it from their own mouths? This,
though it might give satisfaction to such a Christian, yet it could not satisfy
others who had no such evidence. Or will they say the Christians knew it by
Testimonies received from every Church and particular recitals of their
Traditions? Why such Testimonials are not so much as pretended to have been
required, or given, and if they had been given, yet that could satisfy none,
but those few eyewitnesses of them. It remains therefore that there was no way
whereby the Christians of the third Age might be assured of the genuine
Traditions of the second. (which was the thing to be proved) And the solidity
and satisfactorinesse of this one Answer, (if there were no more) appears
plainly from hence, that the great Architects of this devise make it essential
to such a Tradition that it come from all the Apostles, so Mr White informs
us, since all Catholics when they speak of Tradition deliberately and exactly,
define it to be a Doctrine universally taught by the Apostle\`s we may safely
conclude, where two Apostles teach differently, neither is Tradition. Apology
for Tradition Encounter 6 and elsewhere his reply to our instance of the
Tradition of communicating Infants is this, That it was a Tradition begun by
some Apostles, not all, in some countries not all. Encounter. 2. Hence then I
thus argue, The following Christians could have no assurance what Doctrine was
taught by all the Apostles without a general Council of all the Churches,
severally taught by the several Apostles; but such general Council there was
none in the third Age: Therefore the third Age could not Infallibly understand
the Apostolical Traditions delivered in the second, which was the thing to be
proved.

. 14. 2. There are many instances which may be given of men's misunderstanding
the Doctrines of the preceding age: We have one instance among our selves,
concerning the judgment of the Church of England of the next preceding ^ge in
the Quinquarticular points, The favorers of Arminius his Doctrines tell us,
that she maintained their Doctrines: Their Adversaries tell us, she held the
contrary: and there are Books written, and Arguments urged on both sides; he
that doubts of this, let him look into Mr ^rin on the one side, and Dr H^ylin
on the other: And why might it not be thus in former ages? And seeing there are
great mistakes daily committed, and fresh disputes managed, about the opinions
of those Authors, who have left us their mind (as plainly as words can make it)
in books, which are always present to our perusal; how can it be sense for a
man to say, that one may infallibly know their mind by a transient hearing of
them? what tedious controversies are there about the judgment of S. Augustine,
and others of the Fathers, in sundry points of great moment, wherein they have
as fully explained themselves as any Preacher can do, or uses to do? Suppose
now the Fathers preach the same things and words which they have left us in
writings, (as diverse of their works were no other then their Sermons) can any
man without nonsense say, that the diligent Reader may be mistaken, and the
attentive Hearer is infallible? We all know the five Propositions of Iansenius
condemned lately at Rom^. The Jansenists deny that to be the sense of Iansenius
his words, which the Pope and the Jesuits affix to them: both parties are
agreed in his words, (which seldom happens in Orall Traditions, and
consequently makes the argument stronger) yet they differ in the sense, which
one side says is Heretical, the other aver it is innocent. Why might not in
like manner several parties, though it be supposed they perfectly remembered the
words delivered by Peter in a Sermon 20 years before, (which I would not grant
but that it is a work of charity to help the weak) what hinders but that they
may understand them in contrary senses, and so derive from them contrary
conclusions, and yet both pretend to assert nothing but the doctrine delivered
from S. Peter's mouth? Are there not sharp contests among Popish Authors about
the opinion of the Council of Trent in diverse points, and that too among those
who were present upon the place, and heard their debates? And will these men
still undertake to prove that Snow is black, or (which is equivalent to it)
that it was impossible to do that which is usually done, viz. to mistake the
doctrines of the former age? Let us consider one Scripture instance. S. Paul
tells us, a man is justified by faith ^thout the works of the law, and that
Abraham was thus justified: the Papists remember the words, but mistake the
sense. Now put case S. Paul had preached the same words (as he did
unquestionably the same things) which he wrote, who can say (that has any care
what he says) that they that mistook the sense of those words when they read
them in a Book, could not as easily have mistaken them, when they heard them
from his mouth? Especially if it be considered, that St. James preached and
wrote a Doctrine in words seemingly contrary to these. My Question now is, what
should hinder, that the several hearers of those Apostles, perfectly remembering
their various expressions, might not derive contrary Traditions from them? why
might not the one side have apprehended Paul as excluding all works in the
Protestant sense from Justification, and the others have understood James (as
the Papists at this day do) as conjoying faith and works in justification? And
if this cannot be denied, then it follows unavioidably, that errors may come
into the Church under pretense of Tradition, which was the thing to be proved.
Another instance we have in the Sadduces, whose error is reported to have come
into the world under the color of Tradition: for when Antigonus Sochoeus a
Master in Israel, was teaching, that if there was no future reward, no
immortality of the Soul, no resurrection of the body, yet we ought to serve
God: his Scholar Sadok so mis-understood him, that he broached a new doctrine,
and turned his Hypothetical Proposition into a Categorical, and asserted, that
there was no resurrection of the body, nor immortality of the soul, etc. And
will these men pawn their souls on it, that it was impossible for the Apostles
hearers to commit the same mistakes in the doctrines they heard from their
mouths? Has not S. John given us an Instance of easiness and earliness of
such mistakes in Joh, 21. where, upon that expression of Christ's concerning
John, If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? the Evangelist
observes, that a Tradition was delivered among the brethren, that that Disciple
should not dye, verse. 22.23. In a word, if it be so familiar a thing (as daily
experience shows) for common hearers to mis-understand the words, and mistake
the sense of a Preacher, when they are but newly come from him, and all things
are fresh in their memory, what a desperate assertion is this, that a man can
certainly remember the words, and infallibly understand the sense of those
Sermons he heard from his former Ministers, it may be twenty years ago? And if
it be granted (as it cannot be denied) that the hearers of the second age might
mistake the doctrines delivered by the teachers of the foregoing age in some
things; why might not the hearers of the third age mistake their predecessors
in other thinks, and so of the fourth, and further, until at last the Systeme
of Divinity came to that ruthful habit in which it is delivered in the Church
of Rome? To clear this further, consider (what I have already intimated.)

. 15. 3. The words of our predecessors may be remembered, and yet the sense
wonderfully perverted. Now as it is not words, but the sense of them wherein
the soul lies, so all or most of the controversies in the Church are about the
sense of words. And in this, Scripture and Tradition are equally liable to the
same fate, the words may be agreed, and the controversy arise solely about the
sense of them. For example, the Tr^dition of the first age was this, That God
alone was to be worshipped, not men, not Angels, not Images: Nor is it possible
that any man should express his mind more plainly and positively then the
Fathers unanimously did in this particular. Now comes the next age, and they
receive indeed this Tradition, but then here arises a question, In what sense
they said God alone was to be worshipped? S. Austin takes it up, and says,
they meant that God alone was to be worshipped with Latria, and the Saints with
Dulia. And although it is evident enough, that by Dulia S. Austin meant nothing
but a civil worship (because he ascribes it to the living as well as the dead,
and when he takes Dulia for a religious worship, he appropriates it to God Qu.
94. in Exodum.
), yet this unhappy distinction falling into the hands of his perverse
successors, gave rise to another controversy, viz. In what sense S. Austin
ascribes Dulia to the creature? And thus, as in the throwing of a stone upon
the water, one circle begets another, so does one controversy engender another,
and every one of them is a convincing evidence of the fallibility of Tradition.
Take one Instance more: S. Gregory, the great Pope, delivers this doctrine to
posterity, as his doctrine, and the doctrine of his Ancestors, that whosoever
calls himself Universal Bishop, is proud, profane, abominable, wicked,
blasphemous, and the forerunner of Antichrist. This is confessed. Now Gregory's
successors have an itch after the name and thing of Universal Bishop: in order
to this they start a question (where in deed there was none to men that had
either science or conscience) viz. In what sense Gregory condemned this title
of Universal Bishop? For this is a Maxim, let the Pope speak what words he
please, the sense is always orthodox: Oh, say these Sophi, John of
Constantinople called himself Universal Bishop, as if he were the only Bishop,
and all others but his Vicars. and that they must not so much as have the name
of Bishop, a sense that poor John never dreamed of, nor any man of that age
(for then surely Anastasius the Patriarch of Antioch, and Mauritius the
Emperor would never have written to Gregory (as they did) that it was but a
frivolous thing that John desired:) so now by this ingenuous device, here comes
in a new, contrary, and that too (forsooth) a Catholic Tradition, viz. That
the Pope is, and ever ought to be, and ever was Universal Bishop. But whether
the Popish gloss be sound or rotten, it equally serves my purpose, which is to
show, how controversies may arise about the sense, and errors come in at that
door, though Tradition has made a true report of the words, (which it seldom
does.) I might multiply instances, but these will suffice for a candid
Adversary, and others nothing will suffice.

16. 4. This will be made more probable, if you consider the quality of some
former ages, which might and did give great advantage to error to creep in
under the mask of Tradition, and consequently evinceth how easy it was for one
age to mistake the doctrines of the preceding age. To this end consider with me
the condition of the tenth age, of which I shall desire you to judge according
to the testimony of their own authors. The words of Baronius are these. In the
nine hundredth year of Christ, the third Indiction, a new age begins, which by
reason of its asperity and barrenness of good is wont to be called the Iron
age, from the deformity of abounding wickedness, the Leaden; and from the
scarcity of writers, the obscure age Anno Christi nongentesimo, Indictione
terti^, novum inchoatur seculum, quod sui asperitate a^ boni sterilitate
Ferreum, malique exund antis deformitate Plumbeum, atque inopique Scriptorum
appellari consuevit Obscurum. ad An. 900.
. And Genebrard, though according to the manner of the Beast he charge it
upon the Lutherans, that they only call it saeculum infelix, an unhappy age,
yet he elsewhere forgets himself (therein the more inexcusable, because he was
one of them who ought to have good memories) and in his Chronology plainly tells
us, This is called the unhappy age, being barren of ingenuous and l^arned men
Infelix dicitur hoc seculum, exhaustum homimbus ingenio and doctrina claris. In
Chronol.
: and he tells you, that the Popes of that age (the principal conservators of
Tradition, and the subjects of Infallibility) had altogether fallen from the
virtue of their Ancestors, and were rather Apostates then Apostles Pontifices
a^ majorum virtute desecerunt, Apotartici Apostaticive potiu^s quam Apostolici,
ib.
. Can any man doubt of the power of Papists to make a Transubstantiation, when
we see with our eyes that they can turn every piece of wood into an infallible
Doctor? I think I need say nothing for the confutation of Mr. White's argument,
but barely repeat it, that the Reader may compare it with the state of this
age. It is this: The whole Church, or major part of it in every age were so
knowing, that they infallibly understood all the doctrines of the foregoing
age, and so careful and pious, that they would not deceive themselves, nor
their posterity. Answer the argument I need not, but only observe 3 things in
this age, which will pr^ve (...) not only the possibility but a great
probability both of mistaking their ancestors, and of deceiving themselves and
their posterity. 1. Ignorance, 2. Carelessness and Profaneness, 3. Scarcity of
Writers. No man can adjudg Infallibility to such an age, unless he will offer
violence to all his rational powers.

17. 1. Here was gross ignorance in the generality of the Clergy, the Popes
themselves not excepted. The whole world was overspread with darkness, as thick
as that in Egypt, says Baronius Orbis terrae totus tenebris fuit offusus,
Peccatorum fuit caligo, AEgypti pene tenebras superans, in An. 974.
. It is reported, that at that time there were no public Schools, says
Carolus Sigonius Scholae publicae nullae tum fuisse produntur, De reg^o Italiae
c. 7.
. And the Synodus Rhemensis, cited by Baronius, plainly say, that at that time,
it was reported, that there were scarce any learned men at Rome Cum hoc tempore
Romae nullus pene sit (ut fama est) qui literas didicerit, Baronius An. 992.
. He that says so ignorant an age could not mistake, must needs be in a dream,
and when he awakes I shall give him further answer. If any prudent man (who
will not suffer his eyes likes Sampsons to be put out, that he may grind in the
Pope's mill) reflect upon the state of some ignorant Country-congregations
among us, if he please to examine them, he shall find them so far from
understanding infallibly the doctrines delivered by their Ancestors and former
Ministers 20 or 30 years before, that they do not understand the opinions of
their own age, no nor so much as those which their Minister (though an able
painful and plain Preacher, such as were very few in that age) has been
preaching upon for diverse years together. And yet (forsooth) a company of such
men as these (by Mr. White's argument) are free from all possibilities of
mistakes what were the doctrines delivered by the age before them.

18. 2. There was an universal carelessness and profanesse upon men's spirits.
Neither Ministers nor people did much busy their heads about such matters, but
minded only the advancement of their secular interest, and the pampering of
their bellies, (say their own Historians:) the Clergy then were universally
negligent in teaching and instructing the people, (whose ignorance they saw
most serviceable to their designs) and the people were as careless to
understand the concernments of religion. And if this very carelessness and
profanesse did utterly lose and extinguish all the sentiments and doctrines of
true religion, delivered by Adam and Noah, in their posterity, why might it not
be so after Christ's time? Mr. White and his Partisans venture their salvation
upon the truth of this absurd Proposition: That it was impossible the same
cause should produce the same effects. Nor is it to any purpose that Rushworth
alleges to prove the disparity, viz. That only one man and one woman were
witnesses of those high wond^rs (whereas the Gospel had innumerable miracle^
witnessed to multitudes of people in diverse countries) that the hearers could
hardly b^lieve them, that they had but a sl^ight care of recommending God's
service to their children, and that they were taken up with the worlds
plantation, and other secular affairs: and there was no set form and
institutions of Priests and governors to join all nations in communion, no
chief Bishop etc. Dialog. 3.. 15. For 1. supposing that (which Divines
generally believe) viz. that Adam truly repented of his sin; it is contrary to
common sense to believe, that he who had such a fresh knowledge and lively sense
of the difference between highest felicity and utmost misery, should be
careless in the concernments of religion, that he that had been the unhappy
instrument of ruining all his posterity, should not use all possible diligences
to heal the wound himself had made; and with greatest instances and
importunities endeavor the perpetuation of religion to his posterity. 2. It is
false to say there were then no Priests, no chief Bishop to take care of
religion: for though there were none that had the names, yet there were that
had the office, and did the work, viz. the heads of families, and especially
the great and common Father and universal Bishop of all mankind. And it is both
against reason and experience and charity to think this natural Bishop would
take less care of the conservation of Religion among his own natural children,
then the Bishop of Rome would do among his titular relations. 3. As for the
wonders of the Creation, they were so great and glorious, and innumerable, and
at that time so evident and unquestionable, that it is the greatest wonder of
all how they could disbelieve them, or so soon wear out the memory of them;
especially when Adam lived above 900 years to demonstrate the verity and
inculcate the story of them, whereas the Apostles were dead, and all the eye
witnesses of their miracles in a fourth part of that time. In a word, though it
be easy in this, and all other resemblances, to devise several dissimilitudes
and disproportions, yet in the maine there is an agreement, That the
carelessness of posterity may blast the most powerful and important Traditions.
If it be further pretended, that there is a disparity, because God has
promised his Spirit to guide the Christians into truth, and to preserve them
from mistake: I shall only say two things, having fully answered this before.
1. Whatever promise or privilege of the Spirit is made to Christians, surely
it is a most absurd and unreasonable thing, to pretend the donation of this
privilege, and the performance of this promise unto such, as we have now
described; concerning whom the Scripture expressly tells us, that they are
sensual, not having the spirit, Jud. v. 19. and they cannot receive the spirit
of God, Joh. 14.17. Where the Spirit of God is, it brings light with it, it
turns men from darkness into a marvelous light, it rowseth men out of the
sleep of carelessness, and makes them give all diligence to make their calling
and election sure. And therefore where ignorance and profanesse are allowed and
predominant, (as apparently they were in this age) we may safely say, such have
not the Spirit of Christ dwelling in them, for where the spirit of the Lord is,
there is liberty, especially that which is the principal part of it, a liberty
from the bondage of sin and Satan, by whom that age was so woefully captivated,
that we need not many arguments to show, that they were not influenced by God's
Spirit, but acted by the rulers of the darkness of this world, the spirit that
now works in the children of disobedience. 2. This is impertinent to the
present argument, which is drawn not from the efficacy of a divine promise, but
from the nature of the thing, and the common prudence of men, and that natural
principle of self-preservation, (as you will plainly see, if you look back upon
Mr. White's words.) This argument proceeds as if it were morally impossible for
men wilfully to deceive themselves and their posterity, which is not from the
influence of a divine promise, but from an instinct of nature, and so this
evasion is insufficient. To return therefore (having removed this rub out of
the way) and to make good what I have said concerning the carelessness and
wickedness of the age, that this disease had overspread the whole body Civil
and Ecclesiastical, the Pope himself not excepted, you shall hear from the
approved Authors of the Romish Church. Platina calls several of those Pope's,
Monstra and portenta hominu^, monsters of men. John the 11th is called by
Cardinal Baronius (one who, we may be sure, would do the Popes no wrong, and
the Protestants no right) rather a defiler then ruler of the Roman seat Sedis
Apostolicae inquinator potius, quam rector ad an. 936.
They were prodigious Popes, says Genebrardus Pontifices isti prodigiosi
erant. ad An. C. 913.
. Pope Sergius, says Baronius, was a slave of all vices, and the wickedest of
men Sergius erat vitiorum omnium servus, facinorosissimus omnium ad An. 908.
. And of John the 10th he says, Then whom none was more filthy Quo turpio^
fuit nullus.
. And such characters they give to diverse of the Popes of that age: and these
are the supreme Heads of the Church, the prime subjects and fountains of
Infallibility. And conformable to the head were the generality of the members
of that politic body, the ministers and governors, (as well as the people) of
that age, as you heard acknowledged by their own most approved Authors. Now
compare this with their argument for Tradition, and you will be able to judge of
the solidity of it. The two Pillars upon which the infallibility of the
argument from Tradition is built, are these, (I shall give you them in the
words of Rushworth in his applauded Dialogues 3.. 15.1.) It was no hard matter
for the Church to conserve the truth of her doctrine, if she were careful;
which histories plainly bear witness she was. 2. That nature forces men to
have care of Religion, and therefore it was impossible any error should creep
into the Church. And elsewhere says he, Nature permits not men to be sleepy in
Religion,. 8. To which discourse I reply three things, which plainly evince the
folly of this opinion. 1. That the infallibility of Tradition by these
arguments depends upon the faith of some few Historians, whom all confess to
be fallible, which is a contradiction. 2. That the supposed carefulness (upon
which the infallibility of Tradition depends) being the effect of thatnature
which is equally in all men, if it make any person or Council infallible, it
must make every particular Church, nay every Christian infallible, (at least
such ashave common konwledge and prudence in them:) 3. Observe the impudence of
this sort of men, that dare avouch those Histories for witnesses of the
Churches care, which have so expressly and unanimously recorded her carelessness
both in this and other ages. See chapter 4.

. 19. 3. There is another thing very considerable in this matter, viz. There
was a great scarcity of writers, which cuts the sinews of that grand objection
which they urge in all their Treatises; That there could be no change in
doctrine without schism and a notorious tumult (as White says:) and they prove
there was no change, because we cannot show the Authors, times, and places of
them. (As if one that had got the plague, might say he is free from it, because
he knows not how, nor where, nor from whom he got it.) Now here appears the
unreasonableness of their demand and the absurdity of their argument; how can
it be expected that we should give an account of all the occurrences and
mutations of that age, when they confess so few books were written, and those
that were, were written by such as, were either wholly, or in part leavened
with the corruption of the time, and therefore (for their own honor) obliged
to conceal all such changes and defections, as themselves had an hand in. And
if any reputed Heretic durst venture to betray any of the secrets of the
mystery of Iniquity which was then working, his book was presently suppressed,
and he and it both confuted by an argument fetched out of the fire, or rather
thrown into it. So the Papists do by us, as if a man should blow out all the
Lights, and then blame me for not finding what I was making inquest after; or
as if one should burn my principal evidences, and then charge me that I cannot
make out my Title. And yet notwithstanding all the frauds and force of the
Romish Sea, God has not left his Truth without witness, nor us without
notable testimonies, even from among themselves, of the successive depravations
and corruptions in religion by them foisted into the Church: but that has been
fully proved by others, and therefore I shall say nothing of it. I shall add
only this, that although I have instanced but in one age, yet indeed there
were several other ages overspread with the same deluge of ignorance, and
carelessness, and loosnesse, and consequently liable to the same mistakes: such
as the age before the reformation of Religion was, and diverse others, wherein
learned men were thought to be Conjurers, and reading of Greek was counted as
hard, as the quadrating of a Circle, and skill in the learned languages made a
man half an heretic: and this all records are full of. I think I need say no
more to prove the first branch, viz. That it was possible for some ages, or the
major part of them to mistake the mind of their Predecessors in matters of
Religion. But I must not omit Mr. Whites animadversion upon this consideration,
which he calls a ridiculous cavil, and a slander so palpably absurd, that he
can scarce persuade himself to think they that use it, are not rather blinded
with malice th^n ignorance. You will easily judge his reason runs low, because
his passion flies so high: and what is the reason of this clamor? why (says
he) The Protestants acknowledge the doctrines (of the Roman^ Church) which they
call errors, were already flourishing some hundreds of years before these times
of Ignorance. Apolog: for Tradition, Encounter 1. Shall I return Mr. White his
own language? What shall I ascribe this intolerable mistake to? shall I
attribute it to his ignorance? I cannot tell how to do so to one of his parts
and reading. Dare he say that all the present doctrines of the Church of Rome
were flourishing some hundreds of years before the tenth age, whose ignorance I
have represented and proved? Or if he say and think so, yet dare he say the
Protestants are of this mind, if he ever looked into any Protestant Author? Is
it not evident to the whole world, that the Protestants do both universally
deny, and solidly disprove this audacious assertion, and evidently prove (even
by the suffrages of learned Papists) the far later novelty of many of their
errors? Shall I then ascribe it to his malice? I am loath to do so: although
none more frequently guilty of that crime, then they that most boldly charge it
upon others. One may by this and such like passages imagine, how vain a thing
it is, to expect sincerity and honesty from these men in the handling of
controversies, when such a one as Mr. White. (a person of more repute for
candor and ingenuity then most of their writers) shall not fear to assert in
Print in the face of all the Protestant world, That the Prot^stants do boldly
acknowledge the Roman church has had universal Tradition for the whole body of
its faith, ever since S. Gregory's days, which is now a thousand years! then
which nothing can be said more notoriously false, and monstrously absurd. But
again, suppose the age most famous for its ignorance were after S. Gregory's
days, who knows not (that is not a mere stranger to all Antiquity and
Ecclesiastical History) that there was in some ages before S. Gregory, at least
among the generality of Christians and many Ministers, so much ignorance, as
might easily betray them to mistakes in several doctrines, and pretended
Traditions? And finally if all he aims at were granted, it signifies not much,
and cannot pretend to prove any more then this, That in the first ages errors
did not creep in at that door, which may be granted without any considerable
prejudice to the Protestant assertion, since in other ages most of their great
errors might come in that way, and in all ages they might come in several other
ways.

. 20. The second Branch is this. That as some ages might mistake the doctrines
of their Fathers so they might knowingly deliver to their posterity, not the
doctrine they received from their Ancestors, but some other. And of this many
reasons may be given, but I shall confine my self to three.

. 21. 1. It might be from Gods just judgment, giving men up to believe what was
false, viz. That such doctrines did come from the Apostles by their Ancestors,
which indeed did not. Nay what these men would needs persuade us was
impossiible, the H. Ghost has assured us is certain and future, 2 These. 2.10,
11, 12. Because they receiv^d not the truth in the love of it, God shall send
strong delusions, that they should believe a lie: a place more consi^erable,
because it is particularly levelled at the Romish faction (as might be
evidently showed, if it were not extravagant from my present business. That
the character here described suit, with the quality of diverse ages
forementioned, viz. that they were such, as did not receive the truth in the
love of it, that they had pleasure in unrighteousness; he that reviews what
has been here said, will find no cause to doubt: and therefore that the
judgment here denounced should be inflicted upon them, is no more then what
might be expected from the faithfulness of God, and the usual course of his
providence. And if they might believe other lies of greater importance, and
more dangerous consequence, why might they not believe such a lie as this, viz.
That a doctrine came from the Apostles, which indeed did not? And because the
generality of the forementioned ages, the Clergy and Popes not excepted, were
apparently guilty of the sins here deciphered, and consequently obnoxious to
the judgment here predicted; therefore it is intolerable impudence to assert,
that those men were infallibly g^ided into all truth, whom that God, who cannot
lie, has threatened to give up to believe lies; of which this is not the least
considerable and dreadful, to believe such persons to be infallible.

. 22. 2. The greatest part of the Church in one age might knowingly recede from
the doctrine of their immediate Ancestors, and deliver another doctrine to
their posterity; because they might believe, that the Chu^ches and Fathers of
the next foregoing age might fall into some errors: for that which is actually
believed by Protestants now, might possibly be believed by the Fathers then, Ab
esse ad posse valet argum^ntum. And this is sufficient for the answer of this
argument, and the defense of our cause: but ex abundanti I add, That de facto,
this was the faith of the greatest part of the Church and writers in some ages,
as I have already showed out of undeniable testimonies. To which I shall only
add 2 or 3 passages out of Cyprian, by which the Reader may evidently discern,
how little weight was then laid upon (that which is now said to be infallible)
Tradition, and the testimony of the present Church. Tradition indeed was the
plea urged by the Bishop of Rome against Cyprian and the African Bishops: now
mark what the reply is. Two things Cyprian answers: 1. That they of Rome did
not observe all ancient Traditions, and this (says he) appears from their
opinion about Easter: which, by the way, discovers the vanity of that
supposition, which they lay as a basis of the present position, viz. That the
Church of Rome delivers nothing, but what she professes to have received from
her Ancestors. 2. He answers, That this was but a humane Tradition, and
therefore not infallible Epist. 74. ad Pompeium fra^rem.
. And it is considerable, that he writes thus to the Pope, by which we may
sufficiently understand, what was Cyprian's judgment, and the faith of that age
concerning the infallibility of Tradition, as also of the Pope, and Church of
Rome. And conformable to Cyprians was the decision of the whole Council of
Carthage, When truth is manif^st, (say they) let custom yield to truth, and
although hitherto none did baptize Heretics in the Church, now let them begin
to baptize them Veritat^ manifestata c^dat consuetudo veritati, ut ^tsi in
praete^itum quis in Eccl^sia baerelicos non baptizabat, nunc baptizare
incipiat. Opera Cypriani per Pamil^um; p. 402.
. And in another place, Cyprian speaking of the custom of mixing wine and
water in the Sacrament, has these words: Nor should any one think that the
custom of some is to be followed, for we are to enquire whom they followed,
for only Christ is to be followed: and he adds, that we are not to r^gard
what others have done before us, but what Christ, who is before all, first did;
for we must not follow men's customs, but Gods Truth Non est quod existimet
aliquis sequendam esse quorundam consuetudinem, quoerendum est enim quem ipsi
sunt secuti. -- Nam non nisi Christus sequendus est -- Non debemus attendere
quid aliud ante nos faciendum putaverit etc. Epist. 63.
. And in another place he positively asserts, that when any thing is out of
order, the only way to be satisfied is to go to the fountain, to the head and
original of Divine Tradition, to Evangelicall and Apostolical Tradition Ep.
74.
. From all which it undeniably follows that Cyprian and his brethren, did not
judge the Tradition of the next preceding Age Infallible, nor the Testimony of
the present Church sufficient, (as these Gentlemen now do) and consequently
thought it might introduce opinions contrary to what they received from their
Ancestors, when by these allegations it appears as plainly, as if it were
written with a Sun beam, they judged it liable to mistakes and errors; and
this is the very Doctrine of the Protestants.

. 23. 3. There might be an agreement and design amongst many persons and
eminent members of the Church, to corrupt the Doctrine received from their
Ancestors for their wordly interest and carnal ends, of which almost all Ages
afford us woeful and innumerable instances. With the Readers leave, I will
exemplify this Proposition in a notorious instance, in a Doctrine of great
concernment, (which is the prora and puppis, The foundation stone and corner
stone of the Romish Religion, and if you will take Bellarmines word, necessary
to Salvation) I mean the Popes Supremacy, I beg the Readers pardon, if I do a
little more largely insist upon it, then my manner is, because the story is
remarkable, and strikes at the root of this novel conceit, concerning the
impossibility of a wilful deception: Mr White tells us, the Church cannot be
deceived in Tradition, and especially the Church and Bishop of Rome (who by the
consent of all the Papists have been the most faithful conservators of
Tradition): The Papists generally agree, that they have an authentic and
universal Tradition, on the behalf of the Popes Supremacy, of which the right
of appeals is a principal branch, and the greatest evidence: And this
Tradition (say they) came to them from the Apostles, by the Fathers of all Ages
successively. Well then, to come to the story. In the year 417* There was a
famous Council at Carthag^, (owned by Bellarmine and Baronius by the name of
The general Council of Carthage) consisting of 217 Bishops, among whom was
Alypius and St Austin. Zosimus being Pope at that time, sends his Legates
thither, and pretends a right of appeals from the African Churches to himself
at Rome, and to make this good, he alleges for it some of the Canons of the
Council of Nice, for he ascends no higher, the more silly wretch he! for if
the Doctrine of the present Church of Rome be true, he might have brought that,
which was more evident and irresistible then 100 Canons of Nice, (which now all
the World rings of, and all their discourses are full fraught with) viz. The
institution of Christ, the supremacy of Peter devolved upon him, the universal
Tradition of the whole Church. But of all these here is altum silentium. for
you must conceive these were Arguments laid up in store (like the Treasure in
St Mark^ Chest) for some high future exigencies, or wisely reserved for a
season, wherein the World should wonder after the beast, and be most capable of
such impressions. Well, The Fathers consider his Petition (for as yet the Popes
were not masters of their Art, and had not Learned their lesson of volumus,
statuimus, mandamus) and marvel at the proposition, and tell Faustus and his
colleagues, that they find no such Canons in their Copies of the Council of
Nice as were alleged, and had indeed been forged at Rome (as is acknowledged
even by that Popish Council of Nonne vides Reverende Pater summum Pontificem
Zozimum falsum decretum and non in Synodo promulgatum ad tantum Concilium pro
re tam magna misisse!
Florence) Hereupon a motion is made and agreed, that they send forthwith to
the Bishops of Constantinople, Alexandria, and Antioch, for their Copies of the
Acts of that Council. (A saucy trick it was not only ^o deny the Popes
Infallibility, but also to question his verity) when they receive them, they
find that the pretended Canons were not there, and so conclude, there should
be no appeals from Africa to the Roman Bishop: (A strange boldness in this
Council, to reverse the institution of Christ, and usurp upon St Peter's
jurisdiction, and provoke him upon whom they wholly depended for the
Confirmation of all their decrees! it is great pity they were not better
advised: Well, you may imagine what sad tidings this was at Rome: You will
desire to know what their Answer is, why then for your satisfaction, I pray you
take notice: They have a Tradition at Rome, (it is part of that inscription
upon Seth's Pillars, erected before the flood, which Josephus mentions, the
Counterpart whereof they have in the Vatican) that when ever his Holiness is
gravel'd with an hard Argument, and can do no good about the premises, it may
be lawful for him, or others pleading for him, to deny the Conclusion:
Bellarmines words are express: The African Fathers were deceived through
ignorance Africani Patres ignorantia decepti erant. de Pontif. lib. 2. cap.
25.. Respondemus.
. What pity was it that Bellarmine was not their Secretary to inform them
better? The African Fathers did rashly, and depart^d from the example and
obedience of their Ancestors, says Stapleton Patres Africani temere fecerunt
and a majorum suorum obedientia and exemplis hac in re recesserunt. in Princip.
sid. con. 3. qu. 7. in solut. arg. 2.
q d. they were naughty boys and deserved to be whipped into better manners-
The more inexcusable the Pope that did not thunder them into order by his
Excommunications; But why do I mention these: Behold, a greater then Bellarmine
or Stapleton is here; Enter Boniface the second who thus Writes in his Epistle
to Eulabius (an Epistle owned for his by Pighius, Lindanus, Sanderus,
Turrianus, Alanus, Copus and Harding, though Bellarmine being urged with it,
pretends it is suspected, but dare not say it is forged:) Aurelius with his
colleagues (whereof St Austin was one) by the instigation of the Devil, began
proudly to exalt themselves against the Church of Rome Aurelius cum Collegis,
instigante diabolo superbire contra Eccle^ siam Romanam eaepit.
So it seems these Fathers were wickedly resolved against the Supremacy of the
Pope, with a Flectere si n^queo superos, Acheronta movebo, and they, whom so
many of the Learned Papists affirm to be infallibly guided by the Spirit of
God, his Holiness declares they were acted by the Devil: By this time I hope
the Reader, that is not wholly blind, may see the vanity of this Argument from
Tradition: Catholic Tradition is pretended at Rome for the Popes Supremacy and
Infallibility: This Tradition with others comes to them by uninterrupted
succession from the Apostles, wherein (by the Argument I have now in
consideration) it was impossible for the Bishops or Governors of the Church,
either to misunderstand the mind of their Ancestors, or wittingly to deceive
their posterity: That which they make impossible to be done, the instance
proposed discovers to be certainly done, it being impossible that the Fathers,
should make such a decree, if they had not either been ignorant of such a
Tradition (as Bellarmine charge them) or wilfully and maliciously opposed it
(as the Pope accuses them) And forasmuch as these Fathers pleaded a Tradition
directly contrary to that which the Romanists pretend viz. That there should be
no appeals to Rome, it irresistibly follows that Tradition has deceived,
either them formerly, or the Papists at this day. I shall dismiss this Answer
with a remarke upon the whole matter, that if the Pope and Popish faction durst
for their own base and ambitious designs, use such palpable forgery in a time
of so much light, when they had so many diligent observers and potent opposers,
I leave to the prudent Reader to imagine, what forgeries might be expected from
them in after Ages, in times of ignorance and carelessness, when all the World
was in a deep sleep, and the Pope only vigilant to improve all occasions to
his advantage, and had almost all Princes and People in the Christian World
at his Devotion. And thus much may serve for the seventh Answer, wherein I have
been the more prolix, because it strikes at the root of the Argument, and not
only proves the possibility of deceit in Traditions, but also discovers the
ways and modes, by which mistakes may be committed, and falsehoods introduced
under pretense of Tradition.

I will add but one thing more.

. 24. Answ. 8. and last. If the Tradition pretended, give us infallible
assurance that the Doctrines of the present Church of Rome are come from the
Apostles: then the Romish Church holds no Doctrines, but such as they have
received from the Apostles: But the Romish Church holds many Doctrines which
she has not received from the Apostles: This I might take for granted, having
already proved it in that fundamental Tradition of the Church of Rome
concerning the Popes Supremacy: I might refer the Reader to what I have
reported out of diverse Popish Authors of greatest note, concerning their
acknowledgments of their departing from the Doctrines and practices of the
Fathers: and having said so much there, I shall content my self with mentioning
two particulars: The first shall be (that which has been more large^y
discussed Chap. 3. whither I refer the Reader) about the Blessed Virgins
conception in Original sin. The present Doctrine of the Romish Church (or at
least of the far greatest part and most eminent members of it) is for her
immaculate conception, as I showed before from the decrees of Popes and
Universities, etc. and innumerable of their most approved Authors: How much
this opinion was favored by the Council of Trent, sufficiently appears from
their Decree about Original sin, (though cunningly and doubtfully delivered,
as the Devils Oracles used to be) in which Decree, they declare that they would
not comprehend the Blessed Virgin: The sense of which decree (according to that
favorable gloss which Mr White puts upon it) was this, That the Council did
judge both opinions probable: Now from the business thus stated I gather two
undeniable Arguments to prove the Fallibility of Tradition. 1. Tradition told
the Ancient Fathers that one of those opinions was positively false viz. That
the Blessed Virgin was not conceived in sin: Tradition told the Council of
Trent that either of these opinions was probably true, which is an implicit
contradiction. 2. Seeing in this hot contest not yet ended between the
different factions of the Romanists in this point, both sides pretend Tradition
for their contrary opinions (and both agree in this to hold nothing but what
they have by Tradition) Therefore Tradition must needs have deceived one of
them, Ergo, it is not Infallible To which I shall add that the Doctrine which
the most and learnedest of them hold viz. of immaculate conception was not
received by Tradition from the Fathers, as I have showed from the ingenuous
confessions of their most Learned VVriters, to which I may add those words of
Melchior Canus, That the Blessed Virgin was wholly free from Original sin
cannot be proved out of Scripture, according to its genuine meaning: But that
is but a small matter to give the Scripture a goeby, let us see what he says
of the Golden rule of Tradition, therefore he adds presently, Nor can it be
said that it came into the Church by Apostolical Tradition, for those
Traditions could not come to our hands by any other then those Bishops, and
holy Authors which succeeded the Apostles: But it is evident that those ancient
writers did not receive it from their Ancestors for then they would have
faithfully delivered it to their posterity Beatam virginem a peccato originali
faisse penitus liberam e Libris sacris juxta germa^um literae sensum nusquam
habetur -- Nee vero dici potest per Traditionem Apostolorum id, in Ecclesiam
descendisse. Cum hujusmodi Traditiones non per alios quam Episcotos illos
antiquos and sanctos Authors Apostolis succedentes ad nos usque pervenerint.
At constat priscos illos Scriptores non id a majoribus accepisse. Traderent
enim bona fide and ipsi posteris suis. loc. com. l. 7. cap. 3. conclus. 4.
And yet (if Mr Whites Discourse be solid) in spite of your eyes you shall
believe, not only that no Doctrine is delivered by the Church of Rome which
has not been conveyed to their hands from Fathers to Children, even from the
Apostles days, but that it was impossible any other Doctrine should creep in.

The other instance is that of the Canon of the Scripture imposed upon us by
the Church of Rome, which they say is another Apostolical Tradition, and yet
their own prime Authors, confess the most Ancient Fathers to be on our side,
at least as to several of their Apocryphal Books: Sixtus Senensis gives them
to us in general: The Ancient Fathers did hold the controverted Books to be
un-canonicall Prisci patres Libros controversos pro Non-Canonicis habuerunt
Biblioth. sanct. lib. 1. Sect. 1.
Bellarmine gives us Epiphanius, Hilary, Ruffinus, and Hierom; De verbo Dei
lib. 1. c. 20.
Canus gives us Orig^n, Damascen, Athanasius, and Melito Loc. Theol. lib. 2.
cap. 10.
a famous and ancient Father, who flourished Anno 170, and was a man of great
judgment and ven^rable Sanctity, says Sixtus Senensis, who purposely traveled
to the Eastern Churches (where the Apostles had their principal residence and
employment) to learn out the true Canon, and brings a non est in ventus for
the Apocryphal Books, and returns with the very same Canon which we own, so
that in him we have the Testimonies of all those flourishing and Apostolical
Churches, to which Tertullian directs us for the discovery of the Truth: Nor to
this day have the Papists cited one Father or Council, within the compass of
600 (I think I may say a 1000) years, who did receive their whole Canon, and
consequently none of them (for ought appears in their Writings) knew any thing
of this pretended Tradition, but (as it seems by the story) when the Image of
Diana dropped down from Heaven, she brought this Tradition along with her: The
like might be showed in ^undry other particulars: In the caelibacy of Priests,
which is only de jure humano, not divine, by the confession of Thomas,
Durandus, Lombardus, and Scotus, four principal pillars of the Papal Church,
and Turrianus was noted by Cassander as the only man of all, both old and late
Writers of the Popish party who maintained the jus divinum of it: But if it
were an Apostolical Tradition, it was de jure Divino, and the Council of Nice
would* never have dispensed with a divine Injunction: So in the worshipping of
Images, Transubstantiation, Purgatory, and many other considerable points
wherein I need say nothing, because it has been so fully cleared by diverse
Learned Protestant Writers, particularly, by Jewel, Usher in his Answer to the
Jesuits Challenge; Moulins Novelty of Popery, Dallaeus in several pieces,
Rainolds de Libris Apo^ryphis, Whitaker Chamier, and innumerable others: But
manum de Tabula.

This I hope, may suffice for the refutation of this novell invention,
concerning the Infallibility of Tradition, and the Testimony of the present
Church, where I have been more large, because it is a late plea, and less has
been said of it by Protestant Authors. And so it remains unshaken; That a
Papists Faith has no solid Foundation in orall Tradition, and the present
Churches Authority, which was the business of this Proposition.

CHAP. 8. Of Miracles, and the motives of credibility.
Sect. 1. BUt we are not yet come to the end of our journey; And although the
Arguments urged by Protestants against their resolution of Faith, have probably
convinced the consciences of diverse of them, yet have they not stopped their
mouths. We have showed in the former Chapters, how they have been driven from
post to post, and as in a besieged City, when the Walls and Works of it are
battered down, they raise new fortifications, so having seen their former
pretenses battered about their ears, some of them have devised one shift more;
for finding themselves yet in that ridiculous Circle (of believing the
Scripture for the Churches sake, and the Church for Scriptures sake)
notwithstanding all the attempts of their Brethren to get out; Some of them
have taken up their rest in the marks of a Church and the motives of
credibility.

This (though rejected by former and learneder Papists yet) of late has been
taken up by Turnebull in his T^tragonismus, a discourse about the Object of
Faith, and after him by the late Answerer of Bishop Lauds Book, called Lawa's
Labyrinth, whose words are these: We prove the Churches Infallibility not by
Scripture, but by the motives of Credibility, and signs of the Church, which
are these, Sanctity of life, miracles, efficacy, purity, and excellency of
Doctrine, fulfilling of Proph^cies, succession of lawfully sent Pastors,
Unity, Antiquity, and the very name of Catholic. Then (says he) having thus
proved the Churches Infallible Authority, and by that received the Scripture,
we confirm the same by Scripture, which Scripture* proofs are not Prime and
Absolute, but only secondary and ex suppositione, and ad hominem, or ex
principiis concessis against Sectaries Chap. 5.
This is their plea, concerning which I shall need to say the less, because
the Book wherein it is revived and urged, called Labyrinthus Cantuariensis, is
so solidly and Learnedly Answered by my worthy friend Mr Stillingfleet: Yet
having finished this Discourse long before that excellent work came forth, and
having twisted it into the method of the present Treatise and design, I
thought not fit wholly to supersede it, whereby the body of the work would be
renderd lame and incomplete, but rather to be shorter in it, and as far as I
can, to cut off such passages as happily may be coincident with what is said by
Mr Stillingfleet in that particular; for I do not desire actum agere.

. 2. Answ. 1. Let it be observed, how shamelessely these men abuse their
Readers, when they pretend the Infallibility of the Church is solidly
demonstrated from Scripture; (and this they generally do:) Here you have reum
confit^ntem, they confess the imbecility of those Arguments; For (say they)
they are but secondary proofs, and Argumenta ad hominem: Now such Arguments are
not cogent and concluding in themselves, but only do conclude against some
particular Adversary from his own principles: So they acknowledge that although
their Arguments may persuade one that is docible, yet they cannot convince a
gainsayer: And the strength of their Argument depends upon the Courtesy of the
Protestants.

. 3. 2. In vain are these Marks of a Church pleaded for the Infallibility of
the Church of Rome, when other Churches have a juster claim to them, and so
little color have the Romanists for their monopoly of them; that upon enquiry
it will be found they have no considerable interest in them: This I shall show
in the principal and most important of them. 1. The first in dignity (though
not in order) is the glory of Miracles: The most eminent in this kind are
confessed to be those which were done by Christ and his Apostles: Those
Miracles were done in Confirmation of the Doctrine of the Reformed Churches,
not of the Church of Rome, which appears thus: These Miracles were done in
confirmation of the Doctrine delivered in the Scriptures, but the Doctrine of
the Reformed Churches is the Doctrine delivered in the Scriptures, and the
Doctrine of the present Church of Rome is repugnant thereunto: Ergo, These
Miracles were done in confirmation of the Doctrine of the Reformed Churches:
The Major our adversaries dare not deny: The Minor has been undeniably
evidenced so much to the conviction of our Adversaries, that they dare not own
the Scripture for their Judge, and instead of submitting themselves to its
sentence, bend their wits to except against the judge, and decline its
Tribunal, following that Counsel which was given to Pericles, when he was
studying how to give up his accounts to the Athenians, that he should rather
study how to give up no account at all: And some of them (whose words are
recited in this Treatise) acknowledge the folly of their brethren, who would
manage their cause by Scripture Arguments: But whether the Protestant Doctrine
has been solidly evinced from Scripture or not, thus much undoubtedly
follows, that if any miracles be pretended against that Doctrine which Christ
sealed by his miracles, they are not to be regarded, and the miracles done by
Christ etc. are infinitely to be preferred before them. And consequently the
glory of Miracles is more ours then theirs.

. 4. The like I may say secondly, for the efficacy of Doctrine, which they so
confidently appropriate to themselves: But if the efficacy of their sword were
not greater then that of their Doctrine, the world would quickly see the vanity
of that Argument: And how little confidence themselves put in it may be seen by
the professed necessity of an Inquisition. Next news I expect is to hear this
Argument pleaded on the behalf of the Alchoran, I am sure it may upon as good
grounds, their religion being much of the same complexion, and the Popish cause
being managed most commonly by Mahumetan weapons. But on the contrary let a man
consider with himself, the miraculous success of the Protestant Religion in
the late Reformation, how strangely, speedily, generally, it diffused it self,
in the very same manner as the Gospel did in its first Plantation in the
World, notwithstanding the great disadvantages it was to grapple with; the
horrible ignorance and perverseness of the Age, the mighty power of long
custom and inveterate prejudice, the craft of Politicians, the learning of the
whole World, the might of Princes and Emperors, the threats, fires,
inqu^si^ions of Persecutors, the great offers and multiplied allurements to
Apostasy; I say, he that shall review all these things (as they are recorded by
the Historians of both parties) will quickly understand to whom this Character
belongs.

. 5. For the purity and excellency of their Doctrine: If their and our
Doctrines were to be tried by that test, the controversy would speedily be at
an end. The Word of God is the palace and rule of purity, and that Doctrine
which has most of conformity therewith, has most of purity: Howsoever, it is
too gross a begging of the question, to allege that for a note and evidence
of their Church, which is more doubtful then the Church it self: And for the
Sanctity of their Lives, we are heartily glad to hear of it; if the reports
were as credible as the news is good, it would rejoice our hearts, because
their own Authors in several Ages, have successively acknowledged and
bewailed, the horrible and universal wickedness of their own Church, Clergy,
Popes, etc. All stories are full of their monstrous filthiness, though
ordinarily masked under the pretense of external holiness. And for the
holiness of their Church of late times, I shall only say this: Of all men
they have least cause to dispute against faith alone, for he that can believe
their sanctity had need be a Solifidian, and have neither sense nor reason: But
you must know the Church of Rome lives upon her old stock, it is the holiness
of their Ancestors which they intend. Bellarmine is forced to go far back for
his proofs, for he alleges the Sanctity of the Patriarchs, Prophets,
Apostles, Ancients Fathers as arguments of their Holiness; so the Church of
Rome is all on a sudden grown Orthodox in the doctrine of imputation, with this
proviso, that they allow the imputation of the righteousness of their
Ancestors to the present Church, but not of their wickedness, you may as far
as you please even to Adam, nay, if you will, even to theFather of the
Praeadamitae, impute to them the Holiness of their Ancestors, but for the
prodigious filthiness, the Sorce^ies, Adulteries, Murderers, Heresies of their
Fathers, and former Bishops, and Popes, that ought not to be imputed to them.

. 6. And for the other grand Character of consent with Antiquity, which they
vaunt so much of, among those, that either have not learning to search into the
Ancients, or wit to judge of what they read; to say nothing of this, that the
hoary head of Antiquity is not to be respected, if it be not found in the way
of righteousness; evil doctrines or habits, the more Ancient, the worse, and
the inveteratenesse of a disease, is no commendation to it: He that shall
please to look into the Fathers with his own eyes, or peruse the Discourses of
our Learned Authors upon this point, such as Rainolds, Jewel, Whitaker,
Chamier, Dallaeus, Albertinus, Usher, Morton, Morney, Rivet, and multitudes
more, will soon discover the impudence of this plea; and the fruit of their
labors would quickly appear in the World, but for that piece of their
imposture, that as they deny the reading of the Scripture to laymen, so they
forbid the reading of our Protestant Authors to their Scholars, excepting such
whose consciences they find to be of a Jesuiticall complexion, and free from
the heresy of tenderness.

. 7. I know it will be said, that we want diverse of those marks which they
have, as Duration, Amplitude, Visible succession, Union among our selves and
with the Pope: But al^though the Papists have no colorable pretense to those
Characters, among such as will inquire into the verity of their Assertions, and
not greedily swallow down all of them; though in point of duration, diverse of
the most material Doctrines of the present Romish Church are so far from it,
that they stand convicted of Novellisme by the confession of their own Authors:
And for Amplitude; notwithstanding all their intolerable boasting with the
credulous vulgar, the learned know, the Church of Rome contains not one third
part of the Christian World: And for Succession; their own Authors have
acknowledged frequent and long interruption, yea even in the Papal See: Yet,
if all that might be said upon those points were superseded, If they grant us,
or we can prove the former, viz. That the miracles confirm our Doctrine, the
Fathers prof^sse our Faith, that the efficacy, purity, and excellency of
Doctrine belongs to us, we do not much matter the rest, nor will the Reader who
is satisfied in the former, be at all startled at the latter.

. 8. 3. Consider what rotten Pillars most of these are, upon which the Church
of Rome leanes, and you will find, they need no Sampson to pull them down; one
of them excepted, which Bellarmine therefore puts in the first place, and that
is from the name of Catholic, as being grounded upon that infallible Maxim
Convenient r^bus nomina saepe suis: That therefore cannot be resisted. only I
blame Bellarmines oversight, that being so hard put to it, to prove the
Sanctity of his Church, he did not prove it from the Title of Holiness given
to the head of it: And then here had been a pair of Demonstrations not to be
paralleld in all Euclid.

. 9. And for several other marks, there is this inexcusable error in them,
that they allege those notes to prove the Church which are altogether
impertinent and ridiculous, if you do not presuppose the Church: so they wisely
suppose, what they see they cannot prove: I instance in Duration, Antiquity,
Unity, Amplitude, Succession, against which I thus argue: Either these do prove
the being of the Church where ever they are, and the want of a Church where
they are absent, or they do not; if they do not, then they are absurdly brought
to prove their Church; if you say they do, then where those Characters are
found, there is a true Church, and where they are wanting, there is no Church:
But neither one, nor the other is true; not the first, for there is not one of
those now mentioned but have agreed to Pagans or Heretics. Who knows not the
Antiquity, Duration, Amplitude, and Unity of the Pagan Religion? All those were
the Arguments of the Heathens against the Christians, and the Papists have
these arrows out of their quiver: and to say truth, it is but reasonable, that
they that have borrowed so much of their Religion and Worship from the Pagans,
should also borrow their Arguments: for you know the accessory follows the
princip^ll. the only wonder is, how those Arguments which were weak and absurd
in the Pagans (and so judged and rejected by the Ancient Fathers) are become
strong in the Papists? But I know a reason for that too. The Pope pretends to a
Divinity upon Earth, and consequently he can make weak things strong, and as
the Authority of the Romish Church is Infallible, so their Arguments are
without all doubt irresistible. Who knows not that the Arrian Heresy
overspread the World? That the mystery of iniquity which began to work in St
Paul's days, was not to be finished and destroyed until Christ's second
coming? 2 These. 2. That there was a time when the whole World wondered after
the beast.

And for the latter branch, who knows not that the Christian Church was a true
Church when it wanted those Characters, or at least diverse of them, when it
was in its infancy, and therefore could not have Duration, when confined to a
narrow room Act. 1. and therefore had no amplitude? and consequently, these
are no necessary marks, nor certain discoveries of the true Church, as the
Popish Doctors make their simple Proselytes believe. So succession of Pastors
signifies nothing, unless you presuppose the truth of the Church, whereof they
are Pastors: which forces their own Authors to confess, that without true
doctrine, there is no true succession: and that a local succession alone
without a profession of sound doctrine is no certain note: so Stapleton Etsi
absque vera doctrina non sit vera successio: -- Et post: Sola loci occupatio
non est certa nota, ut carnales Iudaei de suo templo supponebant, sed sanae
quoque doctrinae pariter cum loco professio. Relect. con. 1. qu. 4. art. 2.
. And Bellarmine ingenuously acknowledges, that this argument of Succession is
brought by them chiefly to prove, that there is no Church, where there is no
succession, from whence it does not follow (says he) necessarily, that the
Church is there, where succession is Hoc argumentum probat non esse Ecclesiam,
ubi non est successio; ex quo tamen non colligitur necessario ibi esse
Ecclesiam, ubi non est successio. lib. 4. de notis Ecclesiae c. 8.. Dico
secundo.
: So if this argument should possibly disprove our Church, yet it does not
prove theirs.

10. So for Unity, it is a shoe will fit every foot, and has been urged by
Pagans, (whose great argument against Christianity, was taken from the
divisions of Christians, and the unity of Pagans in their Religion;) and the
Fathers answered the Pagans, (as we do the Papists) that as the Church of God
is one, so the Devil's Babylon is one, as S. Austin expresses it, and that
Unity without Verity is not to be regarded. It was no argument of the verity
and infallibility of the Jewish Church, that they were united against Christ:
nor was it an evidence that the Church of Corinth, Galatia, and others
mentioned in the New Testament were not the true Churches of Christ, because
they were peste'rd with fearful divisions, and worse opinions, then those which
are owned by any Divines of the Protestant confession. But if this test were
allowed, if things be weighed, they would have little benefit by it. I know
there is nothing more familiar with the Romanists, then to possess silly
seduced creatures with an opinion of their unity, and our divisions: I wish the
latter were not more evident then the former, God open the eyes, and humble and
forgive those, who by causing divisions and offenses among us, have laid this
stumbling block in their way! It is no wonder, they that cannot examine things,
are deceived with words. But if any discreet person look within the veil, and
compare their condition and ours, he will find, Clodius accus at moechos; and
that they do, as if a man infected with a leprosy, should reproach one who was
troubled with the itch; or as if a man, whose hand was cut off, should quarrel
with another for having a scratch on his finger. As for our Churches, I know it
is usual for the Papists to charge us with the frantic opinions of Quakers,
the desperate heresies of Socinus, and the like; but they would take it ill, if
we should charge their Religion with all the Blasphemous, atheistical,
heretical opinions of some that have liveed amongst them. Their own consciences
tell them, that these, though they are among us, yet they are not of us. He
that would judge righteous judgment, must take his aestimate from the public
confessions of the Protestant Churches, (whose Harmony is published and proved
to all the world,) and such of our learned Doctors as adhere to it, and there
he shall find the diversities of opinion amongst us are only in some lesser
points, happily about government, or other circumstantiall things: but it is
most certain, and undeniable, that all of them do hold the head, and agree in
all the fundamental points of Religion. But on the other side, what if there be
cloven Tongues in Protestant Churches? Is Rome a City at unity within it self?
How come we then to hear the noise of axes and hammers among the builders of
their Temple? 300 differences have been collected out of Bellarmine's words and
works, and several of them of greater importance then any of our divisions See
Pappus his Contradictiones doctorum Romanae Ecclesiae, and Bishop Hall's Peace
of Rome.
. It is true they have a pretty knack, when we tell them of their divisions;
they say, they are not in things de fide: I see, Duo cum faciunt idem non est
idem. It is a woeful division among us between Remonstrants and
Contra-remonstrants: but the same difference among them, between Jesuits and
Dominicans, that is of no moment. Oh ye foolish Papists! how long will you be
bewitched by such silly impostures! how long will you love simplicity? So for
that great division among them, about the very foundation of their faith,
(which is ten times more weighty then all the Protestant differences put
together,) the Pope's Infallibility; they tell you, it is not de fide, although
indeed it be their fundamentum fundamentorum, and their whole Religion hangs
upon it, at least in the judgment of all the Jesuits, and the far greatest
number of the learned Doctors and eminent writers of the Church of Rome of this
age. It is confessed by themselves, that they are divided in this great point:
so Bellarmine tells you: The second opinion is, that the Pope as Pope may teach
heresy; this opinion (says he) is defended by Nilus, some Parisians, as
Gerson, and Almaine, and Alphonsus de Castro, and Adrian the sixth a Pope, in
his question of Confirmation. So we have the infallibility of the Pope to
assure us, that the Pope has not Infallibility. And this opinion (says he) is
not properly heretical, for we see the Church does still tolerate it; yet it is
erroneous, and very near heresy Secunda sententia est, Pontificem etiam ut
Pontificem, posse esse haereticum, and docere heresin: -- banc opinionem
sequitur and tuetur Nilus, -- and aliquot Parisienses, and Cerson, and Almain,
nec non Alphonsus de Castro, -- and Adrianus 6. Papa in quaestione de
Confirmatione* Et post: Haec sententia non est proprie haeretica, nam adhuc
videmus ab Ecclesia tolerari, qui illam sententiam sequuntur, tamen videtur
omnino erronea, and baerese proxima, De Pontif. lib. 4. c. 2.
. I will tell you how near it is, when the Jesuits have thoroughly leavened the
world with that opinion, and perfectly destroyed the liberties of the Gallican
Churches, and the Pope can do it without raising a commotion in his own
kingdom, then you shall find this Embryo perfected, and it is become a
complete heresy. In like manner says Dr. Holden, speaking of the Pope's
Infallibility: We see it is argued on both sides by many most godly and learned
Catholics, both ancient and modern, and neither part has yet been censured,
or prohibited, and therefore it is evident, no Catholic is bound to this or
that side. By which one instance you may see, how much reason we have to
bespeak them, as Christ did the Pharisees, Math. 7.5. Thou Hypocrite, first
cast out the Beam out of thine own eye, and then thou shall see clearly to cast
out the mote out of thy brothers eye. Thus we see when their pretended signs
come to be examined, they are lighter then vanity, as we have seen by this
short and transient consideration of the most and weightiest of them.

11. But, although other evidences are pleaded, yet the rest of them come in
only as handmaids to the principal Character of miracles, for here it is that
they set up their rest, and so must I too for a season. So the Answerer of
Bishop Land: The Church is proved to be infallible the same way that Moses,
Christ, and his Apostles were proved to be infallible, and that was by the
sanctity of their life, and the glory of their miracles. The works of Christ
did of themselves without Scripture prove Christ to be infallible, Ioh. 5.36.
and 10 25, 38. and 14 11. and the Apostles confirmed their words by signs.
Mark. 14.19. Chap. 5. of Lawds Labyrinth.
. And consequently, the miracles done by the Church of Rome do without
Scripture prove her infallibility. This is their last plea, they are now
brought to their last legs; if this fail them, they are lost.

12. Ans. 1. If the miracles of Christ, and his Apostles did prove their
infallibility in the doctrine they delivered, then they prove the fallibility
of the Church of Rome, and their actual error, because they are visibly
departed from that doctrine; and if they prove any infallibility, they prove
theirs, who adhere to the doctrine of the Scriptures. And so we thank them for
this argument.

13. Ans. 2. Although where miracles are true, and many, and evident, and
uncontrolled, they give a great stroke to the proof of that doctrine, which is
confirmed by them, yet it is false to say, that Christ, or his Apostles did
require an absolute submission to, and belief of, every doctrine, upon the bare
account of miracles, without any reference to Scripture. And it is most
certain, that Christ and his Apostles (notwithstanding their miracles) did
prove their doctrines from, and allow their hearers to examine their doctrines
by the Scripture. This strikes at the foundation of their argument and plea,
and therefore I shall endeavor thoroughly to prove it.

14. 1. This appears from the express commands of Christ, and the Apostles to
that purpose. In the same place, where Christ bids them believe him for his
works sake, he commands them to believe him for the Scriptures sake, Joh. 5.39.
Search the Scriptures: And if the former prove the sufficiency of their
argument from miracles, why should not the latter prove the sufficiency of the
Protestants argument from Scripture? especially, if you consider, that Christ
apparently prefers Scripture arguments before that of miracles: for in that 5.
of John, where he ascends gradually from the weakest to the strongest
testimonies, he places them in this order. First, he urges John's testimony,
verse. 32. next, the testimony of his miracles, verse. 36. and last, the
testimony of Scriptures, v. 39. And this more fully appears from Luke. 16.29.
If they hear not Moses, and the prophets, neither will they be persuaded,
though one rose from the dead. Upon which words Chrysostom's gloss is full
and cogent, (at least to them who pretend to rely upon the Fathers authority,
and exactly to maintain their doctrines:) his words are these: That you may
see, that the doctrine of the Prophets, (and consequently of the Apostles,) is
more to be believed then the preaching of one raised from the dead; consider
this, that every one that is dead, is a servant, but what the Scripture speaks,
those things the Lord speaks (...) etc. Tom. 5. operum de Lazaro. concione 4.
. Whence I thus argue: The authority of the Lord is not only greater in se,
but more credible quoad nos, then the authority of the Servant: This no man
living will deny. But the authority of Scriptures is the authority of the Lord,
and the authority of the Pope, (add a Council to him, if you please) is the
authority of a Servant, yea (if you take that in earnest, which is intended
only for a complement) a Servant of Servants: Ergo the Scripture is more to be
credited then the Pope, or Church. It was a good turn for the Pope, that Greg.
de Valentia has assured him, that if the Fathers do at any time talk sawcily,
Sua tum constat authoritas Romano Pontifici, i.e. The Pope will keep his
authority and infallibility in spite of them: else I am afraid this passage of
S. Chrysostomes might have done his Holiness a discourtesy. And this farther
appears from 2 Pet. 1. where you have the question expressly decided; for after
the Apostle had confirmed his doctrine from that miraculous appearance of God
in the Mount, and that voice from Heaven, he adds, ver. 19. We have a more
sure word of Prophecy. The Bereans did not believe S. Paul's in^allibility,
barely upon the account of his miracles, (nor are they therefore blamed) but
did examine his doctrines by the Scriptures, (and for that they are commended.)
Act. 17.11.

15. 2. It was not the will of Christ, that all miracles should be believed,
but he would have some miracles rejected: therefore he would not have all
miracles in themselves, and for themselves, credited and owned. The Assumption
I prove by three arguments.

16. 1. Christ's will was compliant with his Fathers will, and he came to
fulfill Gods word, not to destroy it: But this was the express will of God,
that all miracles should not be credited. This no man can doubt of, that reads
Deuteronomy. 13. If there arise among you a Prophet, or a dreamer of dreams, and
gives thee a sign, or a wonder, and the sign or wonder come to pass, whereof
he spoke unto thee, saying, Let us go after other Gods, -- and let us serve
them, thou shall not hearken unto the words of that Prophet, for the Lord your
God proves you. Whence it irrefragably follows, that if it could, without
blasphemy, be imagined, that Jesus Christ had delivered such a doctrine as
this, Let us go after other Gods, his miracles should have been disowned, and
rejected, and therefore miracles of themselves are not to be credited.

17. 2. Christ and his Apostles have foretold us, that miracles should be done
by the teachers of false doctrines: Therefore miracles in themselves are no
sufficient evidence of the truth of a doctrine. The Consequence none can deny.
The Antecedent (which alone can admit of doubt) is so evident from plain
Scriptures, that I need only recite them. I will mention only two places: 2
These. 2 9. The coming of Antichrist is said to be after the working of Satan
with all power, and signs, and lying wonders: and that you may see they are
called lying wonders, not so much ratione materiae, (because they are fabulous,
and pretended,) as ratione finis, (because brought to confirm a lie,) it is
said Apoc. 13.13, 14. That he does great wonders, so that he makes fire to
come down from heaven on the earth in the sight of men, and deceives them that
dwell on the earth, by means of those miracles, which he had power to do. I
tell you, the world is well mended with the Church of Rome, that those
miracles, which in the Apostles days were foretold as a character of
Antichristianity, are now become an evidence of Infallibility.

18. 3. That evidence which Christ speaks of, as common to himself and
counterfeit-Messiahs, is no sufficient evidence, nor at all to be equaled with
that evidence which is peculiar to the true Messiah: But the evidence of
miracles Christ speaks of, as common to himself and counterfeit Messiahs. This
is plain from Mat. 24. 24. There shall arise false Christ's, and false Prophets,
and shall show great signs and wonders, that if it were possible, they should
deceive the very elect. The Scripture only is the sure (...): and therefore,
what Divines observe of the Spirits testimony, that it is always conjunct with
the testimony of conscience, (and therefore it is not said, (...), but (...))
the like we may discern in this, That where Christ urges the argument of
miracles, he does it in conjunction with the Scripture, as we saw in Joh. 5.
and the like we have Joh. 10.25-38. where Christ pleads his works only as they
are done in his Fathers name, that is, not only as he pretended his Fathers
name, (for so did the false Christ's Mat. 24.) but he really acted them with his
commission, and in conformity to his will and word: So that the Scripture is
the only (...), and not miracles in themselves, as this argument of the Papists
falsely supposes.

19. Ans. 3. If it were admitted, that miracles (and the like may be said of
all the rest of their marks of a Church) do prove the verity of a doctrine, yet
they do not necessarily prove the Infallibility of him that does those works,
or receives that doctrine. Observe this, for it strikes at the root of this
their last pretense. The notes of a man may prove his manhood, but they do not
prove his nobility, wisdom, learning: these must be proved aliunde from
another head. The Protestant notes of a Church do prove the being and truth of
our Church, but not its infallibility; nor would they do it, if the Protestants
pretended or desired it, (for men's pretenses, or desires do not alter the
nature of things,) I say, the notes do prove the Churches verity. But what are
the privileges of that Church so constituted in being, and whether
Infallibility be one of them, that is another question, and the resolution of
it must be fetched from another Topic: now that this is so, I shall plainly
and briefly, and (if I mistake not) undeniably prove. It is granted, that the
gift of miracles was not peculiar to the Apostles, but was communicated by God
to other Ministers and Christians in the primitive times: either then they must
say, that every such Minister and Christian, singly considered, was infallible,
(which no man ever yet was so impudent to assert,) or confess, that miracles
are no sufficient evidence of Infallibility. It was enough that miracles did
confirm the doctrines delivered, whether by Apostles, or other Ministers, for
the confirmation of our Faith, (though they had been otherwise fallible.) But
if they will do that which never man did, viz. assert the infallibility of
every such worker of miracles, then not only the Pope and Councels and
Catholic Church are infallible, but also Xaverius the Jesuit, (of whose
miracles they tell us so many fine stories, though he himself in his Epistles
speaks not a syllable of them, and bewailes the want of the gift of Tongues, a
miracle (if any) most necessary for the conversion of the Indians, I say, if
their own relations of these miracles may be credited) he must be infallible.
And so here is another article of the Popish Creed: for besides the
Infallibility of the Church, Pope, or Council, here is the infallibility of the
Jesuits: Non equidem invideo, miror magis. Yet farther, if miracles were solid
proofs of Infallibility, yet they prove it only in such persons as do them;
Papae nec seritur, nec metitur. Why should the miracles of Gregory of Nazianzen
prove the infallibility of the Bishop of Rome? or how come the miracles of the
thundering Legion to prove the infallibility of the thundering Church of Rome? or
by what Magical art do those miracles, which left poor Bernard (that did them)
fallible, pass over to Rome, and render his Holiness Infallible? The Jewish
Church was not therefore infallible, because the Prophets, who wrought miracles
amongst them, were thereby proved infallible: (nor do the Papists assert the
infallibility of that Church, by virtue of such a privilege belonging to those
Prophets, but only because of that promise to the High Priest. Deuteronomy. 17.) In
like manner, if their narrations concerning the miracles of S. Francis, S.
Dominick etc., and if it were farther granted, that such miracles did prove
their infallibility, yet this would no way prove the Infallibility of the
Romish Church in which they were done. so in diverse respects you see the
argument falls to the ground.

20 Ans. 4. Miracles are so far from proving the infallibility of the persons
that do them, that they do not so much as prove the verity of doctrines
delivered by them. That miracles have been done, (or at least such things, as
the strictest observation of common prudence could not distinguish from
miracles) by heretics, yea by pagans, is confessed by the Papists themselves,
and evinced by the known examples of Vespasian, (who cured a blind man, as
Baronius himself acknowledges, and all Historians relate,) and Apollonius
Tyanaew, and others. You may see how this troubles Card. Bellarmine, that he is
forced to this answer, That the Devil had possessed the eye of that man, that
he might seem to cure, when he ceased to hurt: Mutato nomine de te Fabula
narratur: For so, whatsoever miracles are done, or pretended by the Papists for
confirmation of the doctrines of Devils, (and such are all repugnant to
Scripture, and two of their doctrines are particularly so called 1 Timothy 4.1, 2,
3.) may as well be said to be done by the collusion of the Devil. And yet (by
the way) this is no blemish to God's providence to permit such miracles, but an
act of his wise counsel, and righteous judgment, that those who will not be won
by the Word, and those glorious, abundant, and evident miracles done in the
confirmation of it, may be hardened by other miracles, which (though far short
in number, and commonly less notorious for observation, and less bebeneficial
for use) God permits to be done, and justly may, having forewarned the world of
such impostures, and forestalled the minds of men with such clear irradiations
of his truth, and such illustrious glory of miracles, that in comparison of
them, the following wonders were no more then the glimmering light of a Gloworm
to the splendour of the Sun in his Meridian: Of which we have eminent Instances
in the wonders of Iannes and Iambres, after Pharaoh had hardened his heart
against the word of God, and his glorious works, and afterward in the wonders
of Apollonius Tyanaeus, when men had wickedly rejected the offers of grace by
Jesus Christ, and resisted the glorious light of his most excellent doctrine,
and inimitable works. To make this more clear, I shall show it under the hands
of the greatest champions of the Romish Church. Estius writes thus: The Fathers
and Historians do every where witness; (so that here you have a multitude of
testimonies in one) that true miracles may be done without the Church by false
Prophets. Heretics, and Schismatics Passim fatentur Patres, and testantur
historiae, fieri vera miracula extra Ecclesiam etiam a Pseudoprophetis,
haereticis, and schismaticis. in sentent. lib. 2. distinct. 7.. 18.
: and he quotes among other witnesses Hilary, and Austin, and Gregory the great
(a Pope, and therefore infallible in this assertion,) and a little after he
does so positively assert our doctrine, and so strongly batter down the pillar
of the Papacy, that if you did not know the Author, you would judge him to be an
absolute Protestant in that point: for after he had said, that wonderful works
may be done by heretics, and Devils in confirmation of false doctrine, he
adds, but against this dec^it Christ has forewarned his faithful ones,
saying, Do not go forth, do not believe. It is to be noted. that he does not
say, Examine diligently whether they be true miracles; for the principal
confirmation of the faithful ought to be the doctrine of the Church of old,
confirmed by Christ and his Apostles by undoubted miracles Fieri possunt ab
haereticis and Doemonibus etiam in confirmationem falsoe doctrinae mirabilia:
-- sed contra hujusmodi deceptionem fideles suos praemunivit Christus, dicens,
Nolite exire, nolite credere. Notandum enim quod non dioit, Disquirite
diligenter signa, number. vera sint miracula. Nam praecipua confirmatio fidelium
esse debet doctrina Ecclesiae, jam olim a Christo and Apostolis per indubitata
miracula confirmata. Estius ubi supra. 19^
. And Maldonate (though as seldom guilty of ingenuity, as most I have read) is
forced to confess, that Hierom. Chrysostom. Euthymius, and Theophylact. do prove
by many examples, that true miracles may be done by unbelievers, and (says he)
Christ admonisbeth us, that we do not believe false Prophets, even when they
work true miracles: So little reason had the Author of Lawd's Labyrinth to call
it a strange Paradox, that true miracles may be marks of a false doctrine, and
to say, that all Divines confess, that true miracles are not feasible, but by
an extraordinary power of God, and that God thereby seals to the truth of a
doctrine, chap. 9 sect. 5. and then to run away, as if he had thoroughly done
his work, when you see his bold assertion confuted by more learned persons of
his own party. Then again the said Maldonate puts a question, Whether no
argument can be drawn from miracles, to prove the truth of a doctrine? and
answers, It follows not, that no argument can be drawn from them, but no
certain argument Hjeron. Chrysostom. Euthym. and Theoph. multis exemplis docent
eliam per ba^ui^es infideles vera fieri miracula. -- Et monet nos Christus, ne
falsis Prophetis credamus, vera etiam miracula sacientibus. -- Qn. An ergo
nullum ad protandam veram doctrinam argumentum ex miraculis sumi possit? Resp.
Non sequitur non omnino nullum, sed non necessarium sumi posse. in Mat. 7. 22.
; that is, the argument from miracles is next door to none; it is probable, but
not undeniable; it is conjectural, but not certain. And yet these new Doctors
dare lay the foundation of all, viz. the Churches infallibility, upon mere
conjectures, and probabilities. One would think the Jesuit had borrowed this,
as he has done hundreds of his best passages, out of Calvin, and unadvisedly
transcribed it into his commentary. And Andradius, the great defender of the
Tridentine faith, is leavened with the same heresy: for he says, S. Augustine
contendeth, that sure and certain tokens of the Church are to be fetched out of
the sacred Scriptures, because they are free from all suspicion of falsehood:
but miracles may be done by the help of the Devil Augustinus contendit
Ecclesiae certa atque firma indicia e sacris literis petenda esse, quia ab omni
sunt falsitatis suspitione libera. Nam ium miracula -- Daemonum opera fieri
posse dicat -- Def. fid. lib. 2. p. 239.
. And Gregory de Valentia tells us plainly, that miracles of themselves do not
beget infallible certainty of the truth of a doctrine and Church, but on the
contrary, the true and lawful Church gives us assurance of the truth of
miracles, as S. Austin shows Ipsa per se miracula non efficient certitudinem
infallibilem de vevitate doctrinae, and de Ecclesia legitima, sed contra potius
Ecclesia vera and legitima certos nos de veritate miraculorum facit, ut Aug.
indicat tom. 3. disp. 1. qu. 1. punct. 4.. 3.
. To conclude this answer, I shall only add Bellarmine's words: Before the
approbation of the Church, it is not evident, nor certain, by a certainty of
faith, concerning any miracle, that it is a true miracle Ante approbationem
Ecclesiae non est evidens aut certum certitudine fidei de ullo miraculo, quod
sit verum miraculum. lib. de notis Ecclesiae. c. 14.
. And therefore the Churches infallibility cannot be proved by miracles,
because it must be presupposed, before these miracles can give us any certainty.

21. Ans. 5. If all the former difficulties were removed, it profits them not;
for when a man comes to look into the pieces of their argument from miracles,
he shall find such horrible mistakes, and woeful impostures, that indeed it
makes their cause the worse, and gives prudent men occasion to discern, that
these are the Badges of the Antichristian faction, that they are the very
signs, and lying wonders foretold 2 These. 2. I shall briefly look upon some of
the parts of the argument.

1 They allege for themselves the miracles of Christ, and his Apostles, and
the first Fathers, which being done in confirmation of a doctrine (as repugnant
to theirs as Heaven is to Hell) are so far from proving their Infallibility,
that they demonstrate their falsehood and heresy.

2. They plead all those miracles as testimonies to the present doctrine of the
Romish Church, which were done by such, as though they lived in the communion
of the Church of Rome, yet did complain of their corruptions, and condemn
diverse of their present doctrines: as appears in Bernard, particularly in the
great doctrine of Merit.

3. They allege such miracles, as were done by Papists, in order to the
conversion of Heathens to Christianity, which if really done by the cooperation
of the divine power, do prove no more but this, That God thereby bare witness
to the common cause of Christianity, (for confirmation whereof such miracles
were done,^ and not to their particular opinions, wherein they stand divided
from other Christians.

4. They allege such miracles, as for the generality of them, their own
Authors (such of them as have not sacrificed to Impudence) acknowledge to be
fictitious and ridiculous. What should I tell you of that known censure of
Melchior Canus, concerning the Legends of the Saints, (which are the great
treasuries of Popish miracles, and received by the poor besotted Papists with
the same veneration, as the four Gospels) That the lives of the Saints were
written with less integrity and faithfulness, then the lives of the Heathen
Emperors were written by Heathen authors Dolenter hoc dico, -- multo a Laertio
severius vitas Philosoph^rum scriptaes, quam a Christianis vitas sanctorum. --
Nostri plerique (Scriptores) vel affectibus inserviunt, vel de industria quoque
multa confingunt, ut eorum me nimirum non soli^m pudeat, sed etiam tae deat.
Canus in operibus lib. 11. c. 6. page 533.
. A dear sentence! it cost him the loss of a Cardinals Cap. Ag^eeable to this
was that of Vives, that the Legends were written by a man of a Brazen forehead,
and a Leaden wit. I shall forbear further particulars, for it were endless to
enumerate all the complaints amongst their own Authors, (in whom there were any
relics of candor and conscience) of the fictions in this kind, and the many
notable instances of those impious frauds discovered upon the reformation of
Religion, which before that time, were reputed such certain miracles, that it
was sufficient to make a man an Heretic to doubt of the truth of them. I shall
add only this, that our Adversaries could not possibly do a greater spite to
Christianity, nor a greater dishonor to those illustrious and unquestionable
miracles done by Christ and his Apostles, in the face of all the world, so as
their greatest enemies were forced to acknowledge the verity of them, then to
compare with them, and equal to them, their fabulous relations concerning some
seeming wonders, commonly done in a corner, and by such who served their own
interest in them, and whose evidence was so dark, that the truth of them was
questioned by their own friends, as you have now heard: as if their design were
to make good that passage of one of their holy Fathers, who called the Gospel,
Fabula Christi, the fable of Christ, in that known expression, How great riches
has this Fable of Christ procured to us! But if every syllable of what their
Fabulists have recorded of their miracles were true, it will stand them in
little stead, for the reasons before alleged, and proved. And therefore I
conclude, that the miracles pretended, or done by Papists, are no certain and
sufficient evidence of their Infallibility, and no solid foundation for their
Faith.

22. Ans. 6. To which I shall only add this word at parting, that if miracles
must pass for arguments, I know no reason, but Protestants have as good a
Title to them as the Church of Rome: For although we do not use to boast of
wonders, nor indeed have any need to use that Argument, having such solid
evidence and sufficient ground for our Faith in the Holy Scriptures, yet if our
adversaries will force us to it, I think our plea is as just as theirs, and we
could very easily fill a Volume, not with such fictitious narrations, as they
stuff their Legends with, but with undoubted Histories of Protestant wonders.
If the Ancients esteemed the first propagation of Christianity by such
contemptible means against such potent and universal opposition, an eminent
miracle; why may we not reckon this for a miracle, that the reformation of
Religion should be carried on by a despicable Monk in despite of all the
power, policy, cruelty, flattery, learning of the last Age? we can tell them of
miraculous cures of Diseases, and dispossessions of Devils by the Prayers of
Gods people, of certain praedictions of future contingencies by Protestant
Ministers, of miraculous preservations and deliverances of Protestant Princes
and Ministers from the bloody rage and deep designs of Papists, of eminent and
unusual judgments of God upon Popish Persecutors, of all these there are
remarkable instances already extant in Print, and such as the Papists were
never able to disprove to this day: so that the Protestant cause is not
inferior to the Romish in this particular, but only here are two things
evident in Protestants which are not so in their Adversaries, viz. 1. The
Modesty of the Protestants that they do not boast of what they might justly
plead. 2. The (...), or self sufficiency of the Protestant cause, that has
evidence enough in Scripture, and has Arguments enough, and to spare, whereas
the penury of the Popish cause forces them to catch at shadows for want of
substance.

. 23. Thus I have considered the several pretenses of their great Doctors, and
all the Pillars upon which this vast structure of the Churches Infallibility
depends: I have stated the several pretensions in the words of their own most
approved Authors: I have weighed (I think I may say) all their considerable
Arguments by which they seek to maintain them, in the balance of the
Sanctuary, and have found them light: I shall close this particular with a
brief reflection upon the whole matter, and the diverse and repugnant courses
of their Learned Authors in the resolution and foundation of their Faith;
wherein we shall see these miserable creatures running (like the false Prophet
in Jeremy) from chamber to chamber to hide themselves.

1. They made a bold venture at Scripture, and fairly offered to try their cause
by it, for which they deserve this Motto -- Magnis tamen excidit ausis: But
their own brethren pulled them by the ear, and told them that would not do
their work. Gainsayers can never be convinced out of Scripture, therefore you
must confound them with Tradition, says their great Salmeron Proter vere
volentes Scripturis refelli non possunt, ideo una Traditione jugulandi sunt.
Salmeron in Tom. 13. lib. 1. comment. super Epistolam Paulis.
: And they soon found that to be true which once a Popish Clergy man said when
he had found a Bible; He knew not who was the Author of it, but sure he was, it
was some pestilent Heretic, for he every where condemns the Doctrines of our
Church.

2. They fly to the Fathers and their Infallible Authority: There upon a fair
trial, they are beaten out of the field: Upon debate they find the Fathers so
(...), so uncertain in some things, so positive against them in other things,
that they presently cry Crucifige to those, whose ears had rung with Hosanna's
before, and down goes the Infallibility of the Fathers and to fetch in
miracles, that they may not want Arguments.

3. Then they fly to Councels, and by all means they must be Infallible;
well, the Protestants follow them thither: That point comes to be scanned.
Instances are given of the errors of Councels (if either Papists or
Protestants may be Judges:) And (which had the greatest hand in the deposing of
Councels) several notable passages are alleged out of Councels against the
Popes Supremacy, and diverse of the present Doctrines of the Romish Church: And
upon the hearing of the cause, the Pope himself, and the most of the learned
and considerable Papists now in the World are resolved to trust Councels no
longer with this jewel, and not content to deny, they dispute down the
Infallibility of Councels, as I have showed.

4. Then they fly to the Pope for help, and Jesuits cry out (...), They have
found the man that is infallible: Now saltat senex, salva res est, well the
Protestants join issue with them upon that, give many shrewd instances of the
errors of Popes, allege the express words of Adrianus Sextus, a Pope
confessing the Fallibility of Popes, (whom Bellarmine himself reckons among
those who hold that the Pope may be an Heretic and teach Heresy Lib. 4. De
Roman Pontifice cap. 2.. secunda sententia.
) And besides all this, two Popish approved Councels are pleaded, viz.
Constance and Basil, who absolutely deny the Popes Supremacy and Infallibility.
Well, what shall they do next?

5. Then there must be another device, a coalition of Pope and Council, and
those meeting together are Infallible.

Thus Infallibility is but a short-lived business, and dies at the expiration
of the Council (for when they are dissolved, their Writings as well as those
of Holy Scripture are incapable of being a judge). And thus they have devised
an Infallibility, made of a commixtion of two Fallibles (an ingenious invention
it is by which one may make an infinite of two finites, and of two guilty
persons make up one innocent) But this also is destroyed by themselves: For
although the divided parties seem to patch up an Agreement, yet indeed they are
as much at variance as ever; For the Jesuits make the Pope alone Infallible
(and the Council only in dependence upon him)* And their Adversaries ascribe
this Infallibility to the Council alone, (and to the Pope only by
communication from them.) And so they are both gone by the Arguments already
mentioned under each of those heads. And if we may believe either, there is
security in neither. And besides all these, diverse of their late Learned
Writers reject the Infallibility both of Pope and Councels, as White, Holden,
Cressy, Sr Kenelme Digby, etc. who assert, that neither one nor other, are
further Infallible; then they keep to the Golden rule of Tradition, and in that
sense every Christian (viz. so far as he keeps to Tradition) is Infallible.

6. The next devise is orall Tradition, and the Authority of the present
Church, who are therefore right, because they say so: So this is a confirmation
of their Faith answerable to his confutation, who answered all Bellarmines
works with saying Mentir is Bellarmine? Bellarmine thou lie: In like manner
do these men confute all the Protestant Writers, and maintain their own
Tenets, by saying, recte dicis Domine Papa or matter Ecclesia, That the Pope and
present Church are in the right. Thus their bare assertion must pass for a
solid demonstration, and their pretense that they hold nothing, but what they
had from the Apostles, must be admitted as a proof that it is so, and shadows
must go for substances: But this besides the ridiculousnes of begging the
question, and craving what they cannot prove, is denied by the greatest Pillars
of their own Church, and such as with whom the Authors of this new and wild
fancy, will not compare themselves, either for number or quality: For this is
the known and most approved Doctrine of the Church of Rome, That Tradition and
Scripture both are two dead letters, and partial rules, and there is besides
these required a living judge endued with supreme and infallible Authority; and
without this judge we cannot infallibly understand, and are not bound to
receive and believe either the one or the other.

7. At last they are so hard put to it, that they cannot leap out of the
Circle, nor extricate themselves out of that Labyrinth in which their conceit
of Infallibility has involved them, without Miracles: In come the marks of the
Church and the glory of Miracles: And thus far I shall discharge them from
that invincible difficulty of proving the truth of their most famous miracles,
for if they can prove the Infallibility of their Church, I will give it under
my hand that they can work a Miracle: for then they can reconcile
contradictions, and they can do that which the ineffectuall essays of all
their greatest wits have showed to be above the wit of man, or Devil either,
(for doubtless those Popes who had familiar acquaintance with the Devil,
would not fail to take in his advice and assistance for the defense of their
Infallibility) and therefore must needs be acknowledged for (...) or workers of
Miracles: Thus I have dispatched their several pretenses, and showed the
nullity of them all, and consequently the nullity of their Faith:

. 24. There is only one thing to be added: They have one Argument more, which
(although if their other cords break, they acknowledge this will not hold, yet
because they use much to insist upon it). I shall consider in a few words: And
that is an Argument taken from the providence of God, and his care over the
Church: It is fit and necessary (lay they) that there should be some infallible
Judge that could finally end all Controversies, and therefore there is such an
one, and they are that Judge. I know no man in the world can leap further at
three jumps. 1. There ought to be. 2. There is an Infallible Judge. 3. Their
Church is it.

25. Answ. 1. Why may not I turn their Argument upon them? God has not
provided such a judge, Ergo such a judge is not necessary. When God thought
fit to appoint a judge for the decision of some controversies in the Old
Testament, he thought fit to express, the person, the place, his work, his
power: And if the Popish doctrine be true, that this Judge is of such
necessity, that without him we cannot understand, and are not bound to believe
the Scriptures to be the word of God, and that submission to this Judge is
necessary to Salvation; it is ten thousand times more incredible that God (to
whom all our present controversies were not unforeseen) should not leave us
some mention of it in those Scriptures which are written for this end that we
might believe, Joh. 20.31. and that we might be made wise unto Salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15. Then that such a Judge is necessary: If God had but said instead of
Tell the Church, Tell the Bishop of Rome, or hear the Bishop of Rome in all
things, all those infinite and dreadful distractions, divisions, persecutions,
errors and mischiefs, which have since risen in the world had been prevented:
So if reason may be judge, who can believe it consistent with the goodness of
God or Christ's care over his Church, or Gods design in giving the Scriptures,
to omit such a necessary point as this, upon which all the rest had depended:
especially when Doctrines of far less concernment are there plainly recorded
and often repeated?

. 26. Answ. 2. If once men suffer their understandings to mount so high as to
teach God what is fit, and positively to conclude that to be done which they
judge fit to be done: It opens a gap to Atheism and to all imaginable
Superstition: What a fine model of Divinity should we have if once this door
were opened? It was fit that all the Translators of the Bible should have
infallible guidance, that they might not mistake in a letter: It was fit that
the Doctrine of the Popes Supremacy and Infallibility should have been engraven
upon every man's heart, or at least plainly revealed in the Bible, this being of
more use then all the Bible besides; (since the Pope could have supplied the
want of a Bible) And as Chillingworth well argues, it was as fit that every
Minister should have been Infallible; that all the Popes should be free from
gross wickedness; (as all other infallible persons recorded in Scripture
were) It was fit that obstinate Heretics should be consumed with fire from
Heaven: Therefore by this Argument all these things are done, how much better
and more becoming is it for a Christian to say with the Apostle, who has
known the mind of the Lord, or who has been his Counselor? Romans 11.34. Then
boldly to measure God by our own fancies, and tie him to our fond imaginations.

. 27. 3. If it be granted that there is an Infallible judge, yet it does not
their work, for particular Christians are not Infallibly assured of the
Infallibility of their Church, (unless they will say that every Papist is
Infallible) And therefore no particular Papist has better ground for his Faith
upon this score then the Protestants have: for they neither have, nor pretend
to better Arguments, upon which they believe their Church to be this Supreme
and Infallible judge, then what Protestants allege to prove the Scripture to
be judge, viz. Texts of Scripture, Tradition, Fathers, Councels, Miracles,
rational Arguments, etc. And if a Protestant may be deceived in these when he
inferres from them the Infallibility of the Scripture, why may not a Papist be
deceived when he inferres from them the Infallibility of his Church, since he
has no better Arguments, nor more Infallible guidance? And therefore as to
particular Christians (of whom the whole Church consists, and about whom alone
the care of Christ and Gods Providence is exercised) God has not taken more
effectual care for their infallible guidance according to the Romish
Principles then according to ours: For as they say, Protestants have no
security for their Faith, though the Scripture be Infallible, because they
cannot Infallibly underitand it, or believe this to be the Scripture: so say I,
the Papists have no security of the Infallibility of their Church (though the
Churches Infallibility be acknowledged true in it self) since they cannot
infallibly know either that there is such an infallibility, or theirs to be the
Church to whom it is promised.

. 28. 4. It is neither necessary, nor suitable to the methods of Gods
Providence and the declarations of his will, that there should be a final end
and infallible judge of all controversies in this life: That which these men
teil us was fit to be done, God has told us he did not judge fit (and who is
most credible do you judge) 1 Cor. 11. 19. There must be Heresies -- that they
which are approved may be made manifest. God has acquainted us, that it is his
pleasure that Tares should grow with the Wheat unto the end of the World. In
respect of wicked men it was fit (in regard of Gods Justice) that there should
be stones of stumbling and Rocks of offense, for the punishment of those that
were disobedient: And in regard of elect and sincere Christians, who live
holily, and humbly believe, and pray fervently, and seek the true way
diligently, such a judge is not necessary, God having provided for them other
ways, by giving them the promise of his Spirit, and guidance into Truth (which
is as good security as the Pope himself has, or pretends for his supposed
Infallibility) by that anointing which teaches them all things, 1 Ioh. 2. 27.
in confidence of whose conduct they may say with David: Thou shall guide me
with thy counsel and afterward receive me to Glory, Psalm. 73. 24. They are
kept by Gods power, 1 Pet. 1. 5. and the care and strength of Christ, Ioh. 10.
And what need a Christian desire more? Truly says Amesius, God has provided
for the safety of the Godly, not for the curiosity or perverseness of other
men. And therefore this plea must go after all the rest, and they are still
lest in a Forlorn and desperate, because in a faithless condition: And thus
having forced my way through all the obstructions which they laid before us: I
know not what hinders, but I may pronounce the sentence, notwithstanding all
their big looks and glorious pretenses of Infallibility, notwithstanding all
the noise of Scripture, Fathers, Popes, Councels, Tradition, Miracles; when
things come to be scanned, it appears they have no foundation for their Faith,
and consequently have no Faith. Lord be merciful to them.

CHAP. VII. Of the Solidity of the Protestants foundation of Faith.
. 1. HAppily they will fay of us, as Jerome did of Lactantius, that he could
facilius aliena destruere, quam stabiline sua, that we can more easily
overthrow the foundation of their Faith, then make our own good: I shall
therefore (though it be besides my present design, which is only to undeceive
the World in that great cheat of Infallibility) in few words enquire whether
the Protestants have not a better and more solid foundation of their Faith,
then the Papists have: And this I shall show only by one Argument.

The Popish foundation of faith is such, as many of their own great Doctors
are unsatisfied in, (There being no foundation laid by any of them, but it is
both denied, and disproved by others, no less eminent of their own communion,
as I have proved at large and such as is unanimously opposed by all Protestants
and solidly disproved) But the Protestant foundation of Faith is such as all
Protestant Churches (of what denomination soever) are agreed in, yea such as
diverse of our most learned Adversaries acknowledge to be solid and sufficient.
You will say if you can prove this, the controversy will be at an end, and if I
do not, let the Reader Judge. There are but three things that need proof. 1.
That the Books of Scripture (which Protestants build their Faith upon) are, and
may be proved to be the word of God. 2. That in the substantials of Faith,
these Books are uncorrupted. 3: That the sense of Scripture may be sufficiently
understood in necessary points.

. 2. For the first: That the Protestants Bible is, and may be proved to be the
word of God: It is true, when they meet with any of our Novices they use to put
this perplexing question (as they call it) to them, How know you Scripture to
be the word of God? what matters it how I know it, seeing they acknowledge it,
and by granting the thing make their question superfluous? But I Answer, I know
it even by the Confession of our Adversaries: So they acknowledge and own the
verity and solidity of our foundation, and the testimony of an adversary
against himself is undeniabe: It may be of good use here a little to compare
the several discourses of learned Papists to different persons, and how
prettily they contradict themselves, and confute their own arguments. When the
Papists dispute against us, they tell us, It is impossible to know the
Scripture to be the word of God, but by the Churches Testimony. But if you take
them in their lucid intervals, and their disputes against Atheists, or
Heathens, then you shall have them in another tune: then Bellarmine can say,
Nothing is more evid^nt, and more certain then the Sacred Scriptures, so that
he must needs be a very fool that denies faith to them At sacris Scripturis,
quae continentur in Propheticis and Apostolicis literis nihil est notius, nihil
certius, ut stultissimum esse necesse sit, qui illis fidem habendam esse neget.
De verbo Dei lib. 1. c. 2.
. Here he can furnish us with several arguments to prove the authority of the
Scripture (distinct from, and independent upon the Churches authority,) the
verity of Prophecies, harmony of writers, works of Providence, glory of
Miracles, consent of Nations, etc. Either then these arguments do solidly prove
the Divine authority of the Scriptures, or they do not: if they do not, then
Bellarmine is a Baffler to use fallacious arguments, and a Liar too, having
said, nothing is more evident, nothing more certain: if they do, then the
Scriptures may be evidenced to be the word of God without the Churches
Testimony, which they so boldly deny at other times. The like might I show out
of Gregory de Valentia, who musters up diverse convincing arguments, whereby
even Heathens may be satisfied, that the Scripture is the word of God, without
the aid of the Churches authority Analys. fidei lib. 1. c. 3.
. And the like is done by several of their learned and approved Authors: from
which it plainly appears, That the foundation of Christianity and Protestancy
is one and the same, and that we have the same arguments and evidences for the
ground of our Faith as Protestants, (viz. for the Divine authority of the
Scriptures, independently upon the Churches testimony) which we have as
Christians; and that the Papists cannot say nor do any thing toward the
subversion of the Faith of the Reformed Churches herein, but at the same time,
and by the same art and arguments, they must oppugn the Christian cause, and
acknowledge it untenable against a subtle Pagan or Atheist. And I desire the
Reader to consider, that this is not an answer or argument ad hominem, which I
now insist upon, but fetched from the nature of the thing, and the verity of
the Christian Religion. And for what they pretend, That without the Churches
Testimony we cannot know that S. Mathews Gospel was written by him, and so the
rest: they shall take an Answer of a very eminent and approved Author of their
own, Melchior Canus: It is not much material to the Catholic Faith, that any
book was written by this ^r that Author, so long as the Spirit of God is
b^lieved to be the Author of it: which Gregory learnedly delivers, and
explaines; For it matters not with what pen the King writes his Letter, if it
be true that he writ it Deinde librum esse hujus aut illius Scriptoris non
admodum interest Catholicae fidei, dummodo Spiritus sanctus author esse
credatur. Quod Gregorius erudite^ tradit and explicat: nec enim refert, qua
penna Rex Epistolam scripserit, si vere scripsit. de locis Theolog: lib. 2. c.
11, p. 75.
.

3. The second thing is, That the Books of Scripture are not corrupt in the
essential and necessary points of Faith. This a man may easily discern by
looking into the nature and quality of those various lections, which are
pleaded as evidences of corruption, where he shall quickly find them generally
to be in matters of less moment, and such upon which Salvation does not
depend. But because the examination of this would be a tedious work, I shall
save my self and Reader the labor, and shall prove it in general (as at first
I proposed) from the confession of the Papists themselves, who condemn the
rashness of those of their own Brethren, (which out of a preposterous respect
to the vulgar Translation, assert the malicious co^ruption of the Hebrew Text,)
and positively maintain the incorruption of the Bible in matters of importance.
Of this opinion are, among the Papists, Bellarmine, Arias M^ntanus, Driedo,
Bannes, Tena, Acosta, Lorinus, and diverse others: If you please, we will hear
the foreman of the Jury speak for the rest. I confess (says he) that the
Scriptures are not altogether pure, they have some errors in them; but they are
not of such moment, that the Scripture is defective in things that belong to
faith and mann^rs. For for the most part, those differences and various
lections consist in some w^rds which make little or no difference in the Text
Scripturae non sunt om^i^o integrae, n^ purae, sed babent suos quosdam error^s.
Caeterum non ^an^i momen^i sunt e^usmodi error^s, ut i^ iis, quae ad fidem and
mores pertinent, Scripturae sacrae integrit as des^deretur. Plerumque enim tota
discrepantia variarum lectionum in dic^ionibus quibusdam posita est, quae
sensum aut parum aut nibil mutant. De verbo Dei lib. 2. c. 2. versus fi^em.
. To whom I shall add the acknowledgment of a late Author S. Clara, whose
words are these: Consid^ring a moral thing morally, it is altogether
impossible, that the Books of the New Testament were or are consi^erably
adulterated Rem moralem, moraliter consideran^o, plane impossible est libros
proesertim Novi Testamenti suisse vel esse notabiliter adulteratos. System.
fidei c. 11. in. 8.
. And so he goes on, proving what he had asserted. This may suffice for the
second thing.

4. For the third particular, (which alone now remains in doubt) concerning the
sense of Scripture. My assertion is this: A Protestant has or may have a
sufficient assurance of understanding the sense of Scripture in things
necessary to salvation. This I shall briefly prove by this argument: God's
promise is sufficient assurance, (the Papists do not pretend an higher
assurance for their Churches Infallibility,) but a protestant is, or may be
assured of this by God's promise, as appears from Joh. 7. 17. If any man will
do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God. Protestants
have the assurance of Reason, and whatever the Papists talk, they have no
other. It is true, they talk of several things, Fathers, Councels, Tradition,
Motives of Credibility, etc. but in these, and all other arguments, both
Papists and Protestants agree in this, that when they go to settle and satisfy
their consciences, though they hear many things, yet reason weighs them all,
and rejects what it judges false, and holds fast what it esteems true and
good: if that will not do, they have the assurance of the Spirit, which God
has promised to those that ask it, Luke 11.13. and this is as much as the
Church her self pretends. In a word, to strike the business dead, you shall
see the perspicuity and evidence of the Scriptures, in things necessary to
salvation, acknowledged by our Adversaries, from whom the force of Truth
extorted these confessions: That part of Scripture is plain and evident, which
conteins the first and chief principles of things to be believed, and the
principal rules of living: so Sixtus Senensis Illam Scripturae partem apertam
and dilucidam esse, qu^ prim^ summaque verum credendarum principia ac praecipua
vivendi praecept^ complectit^r. Biblioth. sanct. lib. 6. Annot. 151.
. We deny not, that the chief articles of faith, which are necessary to
salvation to all Christians, are plainly enough comprehended in the writings of
the Apostles: so Costerus Non inficiamur praecpua illa fidei Capita, quae
omnibus Christianis cognita sunt ad salutem necessaria, perspicue satis esse
Apostolicis scriptis comprehensa, in Enchirid. p. 48.
. And Salmeron, having said, that all Doctrines and Traditions are to be
examined by Scripture, he says, The Scripture is so framed and ordered by God,
that it might be accommodated to all places, times, persons, difficulties,
dangers, diseases, to drive away evil, to procure good, to overthrow errors, to
stablish truths, to instill virtue, to expel vice Scriptura sic est a spiritu
sancto concinnata atque contexta, ut omnibus locis, temporibus, personis,
difficultatibus, periculis, morbis, malis pellendis, bonis accersendis,
erroribus jugulandis, dogmatis statuendis, virtutibus inserendis, vitiis
propulsandis sit accommodata. Salmeron in Proleg. 1.
. And Hieronymus ab Oleastro says, We are to praise God for it, that those
things which are necessary to salvation, he has made easy Gratificandum Deo
valde, quod, quae sunt necessaria ad salutem, facilia fecit, super Deuteronomy. 30.
. From all these things put together, I think I may say, it undeniably follows,
(which I proposed to evince,) That the foundation of a Protestants Faith is
solid and sufficient, our adversaries themselves being Judges.

5. Only I must remove one block out of the way. Peradventure they will say,
that if all these things be true, concerning the word of God in its own
language, yet there is one notorious defect in the groundwork of the
Protestants Faith, viz. That they build it upon the credit of a Translation,
made by persons confessedly fallible. This, because they make such a noise with
it amongst ignorant and injudicious persons, (however to men of understanding
it is but an impertinent discourse) it will be convenient to say something to
it, and but a little. To this then I Answer 1. The Papists cannot in reason
charge us with that fault, of which themselves are equally guilty; nor can they
accuse our Faith of that infirmity, to which their own is no less obnoxious:
for the generality of unlearned Papists in the world have nothing but a
Translation, or, which is worse, a mere Report, for the foundation of their
Faith. If their suppositions were admitted, that the Pope or Council is the
infallible Judge of controversies, and that their Decrees are of undoubted
verity, yet forasmuch as it is the lot of very few Papists to be eye or
ear-witnesses of them, they are forced to receive the rules of their Faith,
(i.e. the Decrees of Popes or Councels) either from the mere reports of such
men, whom they acknowledge fallible, (unless they will (as indeed they may
upon as good grounds, having once fallen into the humor of inventing) devise
Infallible Nuntios, as well as an Infallible Judge) or at best, if they be
transmitted to them in writing, yet since they are written in a strange
language, and unknown to vulgar Papists, they cannot understand them but by a
Translation. And consequently the case of vulgar Protestants, who rely upon a
Translation of the decrees of holy Scripture, is not one jot inferior to that
of vulgar Papists, who rely upon a Translation of the Popes decrees.

6. Ans. 2. Those Protestants that understand not the original languages, have
a sufficient foundation of their Faith in the Translations they enjoy, and that
for two reasons. 1. They have so great a moral assurance of the verity of their
Translation in all matters of moment, that no man can doubt of it, that is not
within one remove of madness: and this is such a certainty, as the Papists
have no reason to quarrel with. It is the observation of a grave Author of
their own, Those things are certain amongst men, which cannot be denied without
perverseness and folly Certa apud homines ea sunt, quae negari sine pervicacia
and stultitia non possunt. Canus loc. com. lib. 11. de humanae historiae
authoritate c. ^. p. 468.
. And again, Such things as are delivered by common consent of histories, it is
a most foolish thing either to deny them, or doubt of them Plurima sunt
ejusmodi, quae communi historicorum consensione traduntur. Haec non modo
negare, sed in his etiam addubitare, stultissinum ^st. ibid.
. Now to apply this. A man may have as great an humane assurance as is possible
of the verity of our Translations, by the collation of differing Translations,
made by several persons in diverse times and places, and they too in several
languages, and sometimes by men of opposite principles in Religion, yet all
agreeing in the main; by the impossibility of a design among some learned men
to cheat the vulgar by a false Translation, there being so many watchful eyes
upon them in every Translation, so little benefit by such a deceit, such
extreme danger and disgrace attending upon it, such improbability of any
success: by the ridiculousnesse and impertinency of Popish exceptions against
our Translations, (as may be seen in the discourses between Dr. Fulk and
Greg^ry Martin upon that Subject) being in the gross so inconsiderable, that
if all were granted they desire, we need nothing else to confute them but their
own Doway Bible, or Rhemish Testament: and several other ways. In a word, the
Papists themselves have not so good security for that, upon which all their
Religion and Infallibility depends, viz. whether Alexander the 7th. be a
regular Pope: for, if he be not a Priest, which he is not, say the Papists, if
his Ordainer did not intend to make him a Priest, (and who knows another man's
intentions?) or if there was any Symony in his election to the Popedom, (which
how is it possible for us to be assured that there was not?) in which case by
their own profession, the Election is null, and all the actions done by him
afterward: so till they have better fortified their own Faith, I am sure they
have no reason to quarrel with ours.

7. 2. There is more then a moral assurance, even a Divine Faith of the verity
of that Scripture which is contained in our Translations. For whereas, amongst
other arguments alleged by Christians, and owned by the Papists themselves,
they urge the Majesty of the Style, the sublimity of the matter, the efficacy
of the Doctrine, and its influence into the hearts of men, (of which Gregory de
Valentia says, I know not whether it be a greater argument for the Scriptures
then all the rest, yea then miracles, confession of adversaries etc) Anal.
fidei lib. 1. c. 20.
. Now the power of these arguments is not confined to the original languages,
but common to true Translations: for it is not the shell of the words, but the
kernel of the matter which commends it self to the consciences of men, and
that is the same in all languages. The Scripture in English, no less then in
Hebrew or Greek, displayes its luster, and exerts itspower, and discovers the
characters of its Divine original. The most unlearned Christians do ordinarily
feel such a supernatural force in the Scriptures, (though conveyed to them
only in a Translation,) they find in themselves, and observe in others such a
sharpness and energy, in often times convincing the proudest sinners, converting
the most profligate wretches, comforting the most distressed consciences, that
it forces them to say, Non vox hominem sonat, God is in this Scripture of a
truth. When a man finds the Law of God in English, converting the soul, and
enlightening the eyes, (which was David's argument for its Divinity, Psalm. 19.)
when men feel the Scripture in the English Translation quick and powerful, and
sharper then any two-edged sword, piercing even to the dividing as under of
soul and spirit, and the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts
and intents of the heart: (which was S. Paul's argument Heb. 12.) and so I
might instance in diverse others properties: what can they infer, but that it
is the voice of God, though he speaks by an Interpreter, that it is the water
of life, though conveyed to them in the Glass of a Translation.

8. Ans. 3. At worst, this may fully stop their mouths, that the argument does
not touch the merits of the cause, nor shake the foundation of our Faith, but
only concerns some particular persons, viz. such as are ignorant of, and
unlearned in the original languages. So the defect lies in the persons, not in
the cause, not in the groundwork of our Faith, but in the neglects of some
men, to build up themselves fully upon it. If any man be unsatisfied with
Translations, he has under God a remedy in his own hands: if he like not the
Cistern, he may go to the Fountain, if he will take the pains of so long a
journey. A little industry, and diligent use of those means and helps which are
offered even to vulgar Christians, will wholly remove this difficulty, and put
a period to this argument.

9. I shall conclude this discourse with the consideration of two particulars.
The first is an objection they urge against the solidity of our Faith. The
second, is one plea more they have for the solidity of their own. The first is
an objection, which they frequently urge in all their Treatises: That circular
way of argumentation, which we justly object against them, they boldly retort
upon us, and tell us, that we have no way to prove the Scripture, but by the
Spirits testimony, and no way to prove the Spirits testimony, but by the
Scripture. This is counted one of the hardest knots, and therefore it will be
worth the while in few words to unty it, (though it may seem a little
heterogeneous to my present design.)

10. 1 They have no reason to object this circle to us, that they cannot free
themselves from. I speak not now of the other famous circle of the Church and
Scripture, (which their most learned Authors of late have ingenuously
confessed,) but here is another Circle: The Papists have Circulum in Circulo.
For they profess a man cannot know the Church, but by the Spirit, nor the
Spirit but by the Church. That a man cannot know the Spirit, nor the mind of
the Spirit, nor distinguish it from false and counterfeit ones, but by the
Church, is their great principle: He cannot know it (say they) by the
Scripture, unless he read it with the Churches spectacles; Revelation they do
not pretend to, therefore this is known only by the Church, (to whom the
discerning of Spirits belongs,) and by others only from the Churches
authority, and infallible testimony. But that is a clear case: the only doubt
lies about the other branch, viz. That a man (according to their principles)
cannot know the Church but by the Spirit: and that you shall have under the
hands of their great Masters. Stapleton's words are these: This secret
testimony is altogether necessary, that a man may believe the Churches judgment
and testimony about the approbation of the Scriptures, neither will Faith
follow without this inward testimony of the Spirit of God, although the Church
attest, commend, publish, approve the Scripture a thousand times over Arcanum
hoc testimonium necessarium prorsus est, ut quis Ecclesiae testimonio ac
judicio circa Scripturarum approbationem credat, ne^; absque hoc in^erno Divini
Spiritus testimonio, etiamsi millies Ecclesia at^ tesietur, commendet,
promulget, approbet Scripturas, fi^es consequetur. Desens. contra Whitak. lib.
1. c. 1.
. So Canus* tells us, that Humane authority, and other mo^ives, are not
sufficient inducements to believe, but there is moreover a necessity of an
inward efficient cause, i.e. the special help of God moving us to believe
Statuendum est authoritatem humanam and incitamenta omnia illa praedicta, sive
alia quae cunque adbibi^a ab co qui proponit fidem, non esse sufficientes
cousas ad credendum, ut cred^re tenemur; sed praeterea opus est interiori causa
efficieule, i. e. Dei speciali auxilio moventis ad ^re(...). Loc. Theol. lib.
^. cap. 8.
. What can be more plain? let them answer themselves, and that will serve our
turn. Either they must leave themselves in the Circle, or help us out. Iam
sumus ergo pares. And it is unreasonable, that they should urge that as a
peculiar inconvenience of our Resolution of Faith, to which their own is no
less obnoxious.

11. 2. It is false, that we have no other way to prove the Scripture to be the
word of God, but the Spirits internal Testimony. They cannot be ignorant, that
we have diverse arguments of another nature, and independent upon that
Testimony of the Spirit, by which the authority of Scripture is solidly proved.
And Papists as well as Protestants have substantially defended the cause of the
Scriptures against Pagans and Atheists. Either those arguments are solid,
rational, and convincing, or they are not: if they say, they are not; then, Be
it known to all men by these presents, that the Assertors of Popery are the
Betrayers of Christianity: If they be, then is the Scripture proved other
ways, then by the Spirits testimony. How can our Adversaries vindicate
themselves, either from shameful Ignorance, if they do not know; or abominable
malice, if they wittingly belly us, that we have no argument to prove the
Scripture, but the Testimony of the Spirit. What, are those glorious miracles,
by which the Scripture was sealed and propagated, now become no argument? Is
the Transcendency of the Matter, and Majesty of the Style, and admirable Power
of the Word of none effect, to prove the Scriptures Divinity? Are not the
patience of Martyrs, the concurring testimony of Jews and Heathens to the
truth of Scripture-relations, the verity of predictions, and the like, as solid
arguments now, as they were in the Primitive times, when the Fathers confounded
the learnedest Pagans by these and such like arguments? If they be, (as they
must affirm, unless they will turn perfect Pagans, as they are in the half way
to it already,) then their Assertion is false, That we cannot prove the
Divinity of the Scripture, but by the Spirits Testimony; and the Circle, which
they impute to us is indeed in their own Brain, and their Argument is the fruit
of their Vertigo.

12. 3. Here is no Circle, because, although the Spirit and Scripture do
mutually prove one another, yet they do it in diverso genere, in diverse ways,
and several capacities: but a Circle is, when a man proceeds ab eodem ad idem
codem modo cognitum, when a man's knowledge proceeds from the fame thing to the
same thing in the same way. But in this case, though the thing be the same, yet
the way of knowledge varies, and that breaks the Circle. The Scripture proves
the Spirit, per modum objecti and argumenti, objectively, and by way of
argument, by suggesting such truths to me, from which I may collect the (...)
of the Spirit, and prove its Divinity. But the Spirit proves, or rather
approves the Scripture, per modum causae effectivae and instrumenti, as a
Divine instrument infused into the soul, whereby I am enabled to apprehend such
verities as are contained in the Scripture. The Papists indeed cannot get out
of their Circle of Church and Scripture, because each of them is the argument
by which they prove the other: the argument, nay the only argument (say they)
for which I believe the Scripture, is the authority of the Church, testifying
it: and the argument, for which they believe the Church, is the authority of
the Scripture. And here the Circle is so gross and evident, that it is
acknowledged by diverse of their own late learned Authors. Holden confesses in
express terms, that they who resolve their Faith in this manner, (and so do
almost all the learned Papists in the world) do unavoidably fall into a Circle
In Circulum hunc inevitabiliter illabuntur, and in orbem turpissime saltantes
etc. Holden de resolut. fidei lib. 1. c. 9.
. So the late Answerer of Bishop Lawd confesses, it is a vicious Circle to
prove Scripture from the Churches Tradition, and the Churches Tradition from
Scripture Lawd's Labyrinth. chapter 5.
, (as they generally do, some few Excentrical spirits excepted:) nor can he get
out of it, but by returning to that Vomit, which his former Masters had
discharged themselves from, viz. to prove Infallibility by miracles, and the
motives of credibility. But in our case it is quite otherwise, for the Spirit
works ut instrumentum, by way of Instrument; the Scripture, ut argumentum, by
way of Argument. It were an absurd aspersion to call this a Circle, if any man
should say: I believe the Sun to be bigger then the Earth, because my reason
tells me it is so, and I believe my reason says true, because Mathematical
arguments convince me it must needs be so. That which frees this discourse from
the Circle, is, that the Mathematics prove it, ut argumentum, Reason proves it
ut iustrumentum: and the same may be said in the present case. I shall farther
illustrate this by a similitude or two: It is here, as when a man, through the
infirmity of his eye, apprehends a thing to be less then it is. There are
three ways, whereby this man may be convinced of his error: 1. By arguments
taken from the thing it self. 2. By bringing the object nearer to the eye,
(which was at too great a distance) whereby it appears in its due proportion.
3. By curing the infirmity of the eye. Thus the Physician, that removes the
distemper of the eye, and restores it to its native strength and vigor, may be
said to convince him. Now to apply this. The Spirit of God does not convince a
man of the Divinity of the Scriptures the first way, as a Philosopher, but the
last way, as a Physician; not by an elucidation of the object by arguments, but
by the elevation of the faculty, or by anointing the eyes with eyesalve, and
curing its infirmity. To which the second may be added, viz That the Spirit of
God brings his word, and the characters of its Divinity impressed upon it,
nearer unto us, and writes it in the heart according to Gods promise to that
purpose, and so we see the object better, by reason of its approximation to us.
Or as it is with a Philosopher, when he reads a book, written in the defense of
some Position, (as suppose the doctrine of the circulation of the Blood,)
possibly his mind may be discomposed, and his brains by reason of some peccant
humor much distempered, and in this case he reads the book, but is not at all
satisfied by it: afterward, Physical means are applied, whereby the brain is
restored to its native constitution, and purged from those distempers, whereby
it was clouded: now he returns to the book again, and reads it over anew, and
yields himselve captive to the opinion. You see here is no change of the old
arguments, nor any addition of new ones; only the impediments which were in
the faculty, or the organ, are removed. Just so it is in the matter now in
controversy: The Spirit of God does not prove the Scripture to me by arguments,
which I never had before, but by the illumination of my mind, to apprehend the
arguments, which I did not apprehend before. It is with men, as it was with
Hagar, Genesis 21. there was a Well of water, but she saw it not, till God opened
her eyes, verse. 19. There is a self-evidencing light in the Scriptures, only
the Spirit of God cures that blindness of mind, whereby the Devil hindered the
world from discerning it. Thus the Spirit convinced the Jews of the Truth of
the Gospel by removing the veil, which was upon their hearts in the reading of
Moses, 2 Cor. 3.15, 16. And so God convinced his elect among the Heathens, not
by discovering any more arguments to them, then he did to the reprobates among
them, for the same doctrine and arguments were preached to both alike, but by
opening their eyes to see what others saw not, Act. 26.18. and by opening their
hearts to receive what others would not receive, as Act. 16.14. To conclude,
forasmuch as the testimony of the Spirit is not the Argument for which, but
only the Instrument by which they believe; and on the contrary, the Testimony
of Scripture is the proper argument for which they believe, it is most evident,
that they work in several capacities, and so we are fully discharged from that
Circle, which they causlesly charge us with, and notwithstanding this
objection, the foundation of our Faith stands sure. This is the first
particular.

13. The other particular concerns the Popish foundation: for some of the
Romanists finding themselves so woefully entangled in the business of
Infallibility, are grown sick of the notion. Cressy, the English Apostate, in
his Exomologesis confesses, That Infallibility is an unfortunate word,
combated by Mr. Chillingworth with too too great success, that he could wish
the word were forgotten, or at least laid by: these therefore tell us, that if
the Infallibility of the Church be denied, yet a Papist has sufficient ground
for his Faith in the Churches authority, in which he is obliged to acquiesce,
and whom he must hear in all things: and this way some others go. This I
thought fit to mention, that the world may see the complexion of a Romish
conscience, and the desperate shifts which the wretchedness of their cause
forces them to. But because the absurdity of this new fancy does sua luce
constare, I shall dismiss it with two remarks upon it.

1. That it is disclaimed by the Romish Church, (and it were a frivolous thing
to concern our selves in refuting all the wild fancies of their particular
Doctors.) It is true Cressy says, No such word as Infallibility is to be found
in any Council: the good man had forgot the definition of the Council of Basil,
wherein they call it a pernicious error, to say, that a Council can err: (the
passage I cited before,) or else he meant to be witty; for it is very true,
that non potest errare is not the same word with Infallibility, though it be
the same thing. Nor do the Papists only assert the Infallibility of their
Church, but generally acknowledge, That without this, their Faith would have no
solid Foundation, nor their Religion any certainty. I shall not multiply
instances in so known a thing: you have many instances in one, in that
forementioned passage of the Council of Basil, That if once that pernicious
error were admitted, that general Councels may err, the whole Catholic Faith
would t^tter In Responsione Synodali.
. And Bellarmine in a forequoted passage confesses, That it is a most
unreasonable thing to require Christians to be finally subject to the judgment
of that Church which is liable to error lib. 2. de Council, motor. c. 3.
. And therefore I need not cast away precious time in confuting those
particular fancies of some private Doctors, which are directly repugnant unto
the confessed opinion of the Pope, and the Decree of a general Council.

2. This is so far from mending the matter, that it makes it far worse: for he
that says, I am bound to believe the Church in all things, because she is
infallible in all things, speaks that which is coherent in it self, and the
consequence is agreeable to reason; the only fault lies in the Antecedent. But
he that says, I am bound to believe the Church in all things, though she may
err in many things, (and none knows how many,) throws himself and me upon such
desperate Rocks, as none but a madman would run upon. When Bellarmine delivers
that desperate doctrine, That if the Pope should command us to sin, we are
bound to obey him: and when others have said, That if the Pope should lead
thousands to Hell, we must not reprove him: their followers mollify the
harshnesse of those assertions with this favorable construction, That the
Propositions are only Hypothetical, depending upon such conditions, as by
reason of the promise of Infallibility, can never be fulfilled, for (say they)
the Pope cannot command sin, and cannot lead men to Hell: and this, if true
were a plausible evasion. But to tell me, that, if the Pope or Church may err,
yet I am bound to believe and obey them in all things, this is to make that my
Duty, which God has threatened as a terrible Curse, 2 These. 2. viz. to believe
lies: This is to confront the Apostle, Act. 5. and to say, That it is better to
obey men th^n God, when their commands are contrary; this is to bring me under
a necessity of that Woe, denounced against such as call evil good, and good
evil, that put darkness for light, and light for darkness, Isa. 5.20. This
is to say, That I am bound to follow my blind Leaders, though it be into the
Ditch; That I am under an obligation of offending God by making him a liar, and
of damning my own Soul. This is to say, That the Israelites were bound to obey
Aaron's Idolatrous decree, concerning the observation of the Feast of the
Calfe: nay more, That the Jews were bound to obey their Church in putting
Christ to death, though they had at that time known him to be the true Messiah.
In a word, such and so many are the prodigious absurdities which would
inevitably follow from that wild assertion, that Madness it self, unless in
its highest Paroxysme, could not equal it: and when the Authors of it come to
themselves, or return to the judgment of their own Church, or when their Church
comes over to their opinion, and lays aside their bold pretenses to
Infallibility, they may expect a farther Answer.

But since I wrote this, I find, Mr. Cressy has saved me the labor of farther
Answer: for in his second edition, (and secundae cogitationes sunt meliores) I
find him sick of his former notion: I suppose he has met with sharp rebukes
from his wiser Brethren, what Penances or censures they have inflicted on him I
know not, but the effect is visible, and the man is brought to a recanting
strain. And that he may have some colorable Palliation for it, he pretends, he
was mis-understood, and that he never meant to deny Infallibility to the
Church, save only in the most rigorous sense that the Term could import, and
therefore he roundly asserts, That the Church can neither deceive believers
that follow her, nor be deceived her self. Exomolog. sect. 2. chapter 21. And,
Infallibility and Authority are in effect all one as applied to the Church: for
to say, that the Church has authority to oblige all Christians to receive her
Doctrines, and withal to say she is fallible, is extremity of Injustice and
Tyranny. Appendix to Exomolog. chap. 5. number. 14. So this pretense is also gone
after the rest: and therefore from all that has been discoursed and proved, I
may take the boldness to conclude, That the Faith of a Papist, if he keep to
his own principles, has no Foundation, or is not built upon the Rock, but
merely upon the Sand, or (in the Prophet's language) they have forsaken (the
Scriptures,) the fountain of living water, to hew out unto themselves broken
Cisterns, that can hold no water.

An APPENDIX by way of reflection upon Captain Robert Everards EPISTLE, and
account of his Conversion and Submission to the Romish Church; and Mr Cressy's
EXOMOLOGESIS.
SInce the finishing of the foregoing Treatise, I was told of an Epistolary
Discourse of Captain Everards, and withal that the substance of it was fully
Answered by what I had there discussed, only it was convenient to accommodate
the passages relating thereto to the several parts of his Epistle: Upon this
sugestion I procured the Epistle it self as enlarged in the second Edition,
and diligently read it once or twice over: And I confess I was at first
dubious whether I should take any notice of it, partly because I saw it was
nothing but a collection out of others (as he most properly calls it) and a
repetition of those old Sophismes, that have been answered and exploded an
hundred times over, and partly because I discerned by the spirit of the man,
and the frame of his Discourse, and the circumstances of his change, that there
was no likelihood at all of retriving and reclaiming him, how clear and
irresistible soever the evidence and arguments were that should be produced. He
that has but half an Eye may see a design in the whole management of the
change: And although he assures us with a test me ipso, that he is not biassed
by worldly interests, and private ends, he must allow discreet persons the
liberty of their Faith in that particular, and not take it amiss, if seeing
the feebleness of his Arguments, and their insufficiency for the producing of
such a change, they suspect it was done by the power of interest, which is so
secret an affair, and its methods so crypticall, and the ways of serving it
so various, that no wise man will believe it impossible, and I am sure the
contexture of his Discourse, and the manner of his p^ocesse does not render it
at all incredible: And these considerations inclined me to silence: But on the
other side when I considered, that the hand of Ioab sufficiently appears in
the penning of this Epistle, that it was a collection of the strength of more
Learned Writers, and a conjunction of abler heads then his own, who were
resolved in this occasion and instance, to represent what could in brief be
said to persuade unsettled persons to change their Religion; and (whatever other
men's opinions are) what a reverend esteem the Author has of it, who tells us he
saw reason enough to believe it could not be Answered page 88. and that he
challenges it as a piece of justice to show him his errors; I thought it not
amiss to take some notice of it, knowing that if what I should say were
unsuccessefull to him, yet it would not be unacc^ptable to God, (since we are a
sweet savor of God in them that believe and in them that perish) and that if I
were not an instrument of Gods mercy to him, in reducing him to the truth from
which he has revolted, yet I should be an instrument of Gods Justice, and a
witness on Gods behalf to leave him without excuse.

In one thing I must crave Mr Everards pardon, if I do not take his Counsel in
Answering him (...) and setting down each of his Paragraphs before the several
Answers: It is a course which I confess I do not approve of in the answering
of other Authors, because it runs a man into personal contests, and petite
animad* versions, and catching at little advantages, and so expends the
answerers pains, and the readers patience, and the buyers money to no purpose,
and if I did like it in some others, yet really he must excuse me if I do not
esteem him so classical an Author, nor his Epistle so weighty a Discourse, as
to deserve such solemn consideration: Yet this I shall promise him (and I call
God to witness it) that I shall not wilfully decline any part of it, wherein
his strength may lie, but shall endeavor to the utmost of my poor skill, to
single out such things as are most plausible and considerable, and such, as if
they be solidly Answered, the rest will fall of course, or need no further
trouble.

What I have to say, I shall reduce to two heads. 1. Personal. 2. Dogmaticall.
The first I shall pass over in few words, because it concerns not the merits
of the cause, and yet it is not convenient wholly to neglect it, because it is
set forth (...), and Mr Everard (whom I would by no means deprive of his due
praise) has showed wit and art in it, something therefore must be said to
disabuse such as are too apt to be deceived with good words and fair speeches,
and the influence of examples: And if there be some seeming harshnesse in my
expressions, it must not be ascribed to my temper (which my friends will
assoyle me from) or principles, or hatred of Mr Everard, (a person known to me
nec beneficio, nec injuria) but to the discharge of my duty (which is to rebuke
such as he is (...) sharply) and the necessary caution of others; My personal
reflections shall only be two, The first upon the quality of the person; The
second, The occasion and manner of the change.

1. As for the quality of the person, I must confess I am not at all surprised
with the Apostasy (for so I must ^all it with St Paul, 1 Timothy 4.1. and 2 These.
2.3.) of a person of his character, as we have it drawn by his own pen, page 4.
When I professed my self against Infant Baptism, I had run through almost (if
not altogether) all the several Professions of Christianity then appearing in
this Kingdom. It is no new thing that a giddy headed man should get a fall: It
is no more then was long since foretold, and this day in this person those
Scriptures are fulfilled which tell us, that the unlearned and unstable should
wrest the Scripture (as this Epistler most horribly does) to their own
destruction, 2 Pet. 3.16. That such as received not the Truth in the love of
it, should be given up to strong delusions to believe lies, 2 These. 2.10, 11.
that such as were ^ver learning and never able to come to the knowledge of the
Truth should be led away, 2 Timothy 3.6, 7. that evil men and seducers (as he now
acknowledges he was) should wax worse and worse, deceiving and b^ing deceived,
verse. 13. that unstable souls should be beguiled, 2 Pet. 2.19.

It is not at all strange, that he that despised the persons, vilified the
function, contemned and forsook the guidance of able and faithful Protestant
Ministers, by whom he might have been easily antidoted against this Infection,
should be betrayed into the hands of Romish Priests: It is not strange that he
that loved to wander should antiquum obtinere, and having passed thorough all
the varieties which England affords, should gratify his temper and follow his
inclinations to see what news at Rome: In the mean time it concerns all
Protestants, and especially persons of the same complexion and condition, with
fear and reverence to behold the just and tremendous judgment of God upon
unsettled and unstable Christians, and such as are given to change, whilst they
see these smaller rivulets of lesser errors leading to the dead Sea of damnable
delusions: And as we have many woeful instances of poor deluded Souls, that
having wandered from party to party, from opinion to opinion, from congregation
to congregation, have at last been swallowed up, some in the gulf of downright
Atheism, others of the besotting dotages of the Quakers; so we have here an
instance of one, whom the same wildness and wantonness of opinion has
betrayed to Popish impostures.

The second personal reflection concerns the occasion and manner of his
change which in brief is this, as himself represents it page 5, 6, etc. He
falls into the company and acquaintance of a Lay-Papist (which he had been
allwaies told and so supposed that they were an ignorant Generation) and he
proposes and presses an Argument, which the Captain could not Answer, and
therefore submits and borrowes two or three Popish Books from that Gentleman
(viz. the question of questions, Fiat Lux, and Knots answer to Chillingworth)
and so the work is done, my Captain is conquered, and become a Papist, or
(stilo novo) a Roman Catholic: Upon this relation I shall take the boldness
to make these following Animadversions.

1. In general, It is very observable how easily he gives up the cause, how
valiantly the Captain fought in the field I know not, but sure I am, if he
fought at the same rate that here he disputes, no man could desire an easier
adversary: Happily because he was about to commence into a belief of the
unbloody Sacrifice of the Mass, he was resolved his Antagonist should not have
a bloody victory: I shall adventure to commend this pattern as an effectual
receipt to make Papists, and (that you may see it is a (...) if not a (...) it
will indifferently serve to make Turks, Jews, Pagans, or Heretics of any
kind: Let a person unlearned or unstudied in the point he debates (such as none
that read this relation will deny this Author to have been unless they be such
themselves) enter the lists with some able Champion of the adverse party (a
Character which the Captain himself ascribes to his then Antagonist) and when
he meets with an objection that himself cannot Answer, let him conclude it
unanswerable (which our Author did) and read two or three such Books as his
Adversary shall put into his hand, if this do not speedily and effectually
work the cure, he may be given over for desperate.

2. Though to determine that this supposed conversion was a plotted business,
may seem an intrusion into the Divine prerogative to judge the heart, yet this
I may safely say, that it looks so like a plot, that it requires more then an
ordinary charity to believe it was not: For as the Philosopher well observes,
no man must (and no serious man will) forsake a solid and well grounded Truth,
for some subtle objection suggested by a crafty disputer, which he cannot
answer; If it was not a designed thing, how can it be imagined, that in a
matter of Salvation and damnation, he should be so grossly negligent in the
use of means to come to the knowledge of the Truth and the answering of his
Objection? Otherwise who can believe that he would not have addressed himself
to some able Protestant Minister or Scholar to see whether he could Answer it,
(unless peradventure, through the pride of his heart he scorned the advice of
Ministers, and thought himself wiser then his Teachers, and then no wonder
such pride had a fall) or would he not by the direction of some knowing
Protestant have rather searched into some Protestant Books for an Answer, (as
here he falls upon the reading of Popish Authors by the advice of a Papist) if
he really were a Protestant at that time when he pretended to be so? for if
this Captain had understood those controversies, and spent that time in the
reading of the solid Books of excellent Protestant Authors, and grounding
himself in the Principles of Religion, which he spent in talking and teaching
others, and scribbling of idle Pamphlets, and railing at Learned and Godly
Ministers; these objections which through his ignorance and unacquaintednesse
with those points seemed new to him, would have been discovered to him as they
are to others, to be but coleworts not twice but twenty times sod; and
Arguments long since exploded.

3. To this let me add, the wonder is the greater, and the design more
credible, to consider that his conversion should be wrought by such Authors: as
Fiat Lux, and Knots Answer to Chillingworth: The former, nothing but an heap of
words and an empty sound, which if stripped of all its gauderies, and rhetorical
flashes, (apt to take none but children in understanding) and all the weight of
reasons were picked out and brought together, it might (without such Art as was
showed about Homer) be put into a Nut-shell; unless happily that was the
Argument that convinced him, that the Author tells us (us I say who are
Englishmen and remember the Marian Persecution, and the Irish Massacre, and
the bloodinesse of the French Leaguers, and the barbarities of High and Low
Germany, and the late Ferities of Piemont) that the Pope is a very honest
Gentleman that never did any harm.

And for Knots infidelity unmasked, that man that shall take that Book for a
solid confutation of Mr Chillingworth, must have lost both reason and
conscience; (for the loss of one of them will hardly serve turn) by which you
may see the Captain was prepared for a change, and like soft-Wax ready to
receive the impression. And this is all I shall say concerning the quality of
the person, and the manner of his change; I shall now come to the Dogmaticall
part.

The first and principal thing will be to consider the force of that Discourse
which did the work, which though it be a very silly one, yet is commensurate to
many men's capacities, and meeting with an ignorant proud or loose Protestant,
sometimes is the mean of their perversion.

The Popish Gentleman asked me (says my Author) whether I was so certainly and
infallibly assured of the Truth of the Christian Religion, that it was not
possible for me, or for those who taught me Christianity to be mistaken
therein; and he gave me this reason for his question, that otherwise, as to me,
Christianity could be no more then probably true, and we could not condemn the
Jew, or Turk, or Pagan, since they were as well persuaded of their several
ways, as we could be of ours, upon a fallible certainty, and for ought we
knew, (not having any infallible certainty for our Christianity) some of them
might be in the right, and we in the wrong way, for it is possible you may be
mistaken, page 5, 6.

This is that, that did the deed, and this is the shield of Hercules, or rather
the sword of Goliath, by which they sometimes do execution upon an ungrounded or
ungodly Protestant, which therefore it will be worth while a little to insist
upon.

1. Let it be observed, what rare Champions the Papists are for the Christian
cause, and what a singular course they take for the Conversion of Jews and
Turks and Pagans: For more clearness I shall represent it in a Syllogisticall
form: If the Church of Rome (i.e. the Pope and a Council) be not infallible,
a Jew, or Turk, or Pagan are as well persuaded of their several ways, as we
of ours, these are the Authors words: But the Church of Rome (whether you mean
the Pope or Council or both) is not infallible. This I hope has been made
evident enough from the foregoing discourse, Ergo, a Jew, or Turk, or Pagan are
as well persuaded of their several ways, as we of ours: a glorious Conclusion!
and most true of Italian Christians: Turks and Pagans are as well persuaded of
their ways, as they are of Christianity. Nor is it without cause that so many
Authors (some of them Popish) complain so much of the swarms of Atheists in the
Church of Rome; for certainly this is as compendious a way to Atheism as can
lightly be imagined; to hang the verity of Christianity and the Pope's or
Councels Infallibility upon the same pin; and consequently those learned
Papists, who doubtless many of them laugh in their sleeves, to see so credulous
and simple a world to believe the latter, can easily shake off the sense of the
former.

2 Let us examine a little the strength of this pretty Proposition: That if we
be not infallibly assured of the truth of Christianity, Jews, and Turks, and
Pagans are as well persuaded of their ways, as we of ours. What a mad
assertion is this, that nothing is credible, but what is infallibly certain,
and that there is no difference between probabilities and improbabilities, and
yet such Whirlpools and quick sands must they needs sink into, that give up
themselves to the conduct of Popish guides and principles. I am not infallibly
certain, that there is such a place as Iamaica, (for it is possible all
Geographers may mistake, and all Travelers may lie, unless his Holiness
should chance to make a voyage to see:) therefore by this doughty argument, I
am as certain, that there is a Sea-passage to China by the North. I am not
infallibly sure, that the Sun is bigger then a Bushel, (for Epicurus thought it
no bigger, as Cicero informs us:) Therefore (it seems) I am as certain that
there is a World in the Moon, or in every Star (as some Philosophers held.) I
am not infallibly certain of the existence and achievements of Alexander the
Great; by this argument it will follow, that I am no less sure of the history
and adventures of St. George of England. What if I be not infallibly sure of
the truth of the Christian Religion, may there not be such clear probabilities,
and cogent evidence, that none but a mad man can deny it? What if in a frosty
morning I should find 2 or 3 verses written upon a glass window, will any man
in his right wits doubt, that some man or other writ them? and yet it is not
impossible (because it implies no contradiction) that the Frost (which often
times carves out various and curious figures) should some time or other have a
lucky hit, and fall into a vein of Poetry. Or what if I see a Calf in a field,
will any sober man question whether it came from a Cow, because I am not
infallibly certain it did not drop out of the Clouds, as once one did? In like
manner, if I be not simply infallible (taking the word in a strict and proper
notion) of the Truth of Christian Religion, yet certainly it may suffice
against any Turk, or Jew, or Pagan, or Papist either, who in this argument, as
in many other things, are confederate with them, whose Reason makes him a
person fit for Discourse, that there are so great and many and pregnant
evidences, that no man can deny without forfeiture of his reason, discretion,
and modesty, and all the principles of humanity.

3 If this argument be cogent, and besides the certitudo objecti, the
infallibility of the thing, there be required a certitudo subjecti, the
infallibility of the Person, to be satisfied, (which here is contended for;)
then not only the Pope and Council, but every particular Christian must have
this gift of Infallibility, (an ampliation of the privilege which his great
Ghostly Father will never allow,) for mark it, that is the thing which the
Catholic Gentleman urged, and where with my Captain was gravelled: He asked me
(says he) whether I was sure and certain, -- and whether I was so certainly
and infallibly assured of the truth of Christian Religion, or else (said he) as
to me Christianity was but probably true, else it is possible you may be
mistaken: and at this rate do they use to talk to such as they desire to
Proselyte. By all which it appears, that the infallibility must be particular
in every individual person, that would be satisfied himself, or would convince
another of the Truth of Christianity. I am not ignorant of a shuffling
artifice, which this Catholic used in confounding two things together,
necessary to be distinguished, as no wonder to meet with confusion of language
in the builders of Babel, whilst he (too cunning for twenty of these Novices)
states the business thus: He asked me (says my Author) whether I was so
certain, -- that it was not possible for me, or for those who taught me
Christianity, to be mistaken in this, p. 5. Here lies the mystery of Iniquity,
and here was the blind cast before the eyes of this unequal combatant, which he
had neither wit enough to understand himself, nor humility enough to learn from
others. But I shall endeavor to bring this Fox out of his hole by this
Argument: Either a subjective certainty or infallibility of belief of the Truth
of Christianity is necessary for particular Christians, or it is not: if it be
not necessary, then in vain do Papists urge this argument, and boast so much of
it, as unanswerable; whereas now they give it up, and confess probable evidence
sufficient for particular Christians, and Infallibility necessary only for the
Pope or Council: and so the poor Captain has lost his Infallibility, and had
best think of his old military word, As you were, for here the cord is cut
asunder, by which he was drawn over to Rome, for now the Protestant stands upon
even ground (at least) with the Papist. For suppose, for once, contradictions
were reconciled, and the Popish opinion of the Churches infallible authority
were true in it self certitudine objecti; so also is the Protestants opinion
concerning the Infallible authority of the Scripture true in it self, and
certitudine objecti, as the most desperate Papists do grant, Stapleton, and
Bellarmine, and all. The Scripture (say they) is Divine, and true, and certain
in it self, but not quo ad nos: therefore hitherto there is no difference: now
to proceed. If it be a sufficient foundation for a Romanist, that he has such
probable evidence of this doctrine of the Churches Infallibility, why should it
not be as sufficient a foundation for a Protestant, that he has such (nay
infinitely more* probable evidence of the doctrine of the Scriptures
Infallibility? since the evidence of the latter is granted by the Papists
themselves, and the evidence of the former not only denied and disputed down
by the Protestants, but also questioned by their own Authors, as I have showed
at large. This question I challenge the whole club of Jesuits, (which happily
contributed to this Epistle) solidly to answer. But now on the other side, if
they will retire to the other part of the Dilemma, and say, That a subjective
Infallibility is necessary for particular Christians, then every Papist in
England not only has a Pope in his belly, but has got his Crown also upon
his head, and communicates with him in that great Prerogative of Infallibility:
and truly I must do them justice; without doubt every Papist in England is as
infallible as the Pope himself.

4. But if nothing will satisfy but Infallibility, let us a little enquire
into it, what it is, and where it lies, and what infallible and irresistible
demonstrations the Romanists have for this grand principle, for which a man
must put out the eye of his reason, and forsake the conduct of the Scripture,
and depose the holy Spirit from his Royalty. Certainly it is madness in the
highest to put us off with conjectures, and suppositions and imagined
probabilities in so important an affair, upon which all the rest depends, and
to which all must strike sail; so then the question will be this, whether this
pretense of Infallibility be not a gratis dictum, a crude and bold assertion,
or rather, whether it be evidenced with such strength and clearness, as to
compel the assent of all reasonable persons: And here I shall do the Captain
and the Popish cause this right, as to consider it in its most advantageous
notion. If there be any Infallibility, most certain it is, that it is in the
Pope and general Council together, which is the most plausible and received
opinion of the Church of Rome. And here it is that our English Apostate, Mr.
Cressy, in the last Edition of his Book, centers; and here also the Captain
casts anchor: The Prelates of the Church (says he) though as men they are
fallible, yet when assembled in a general Council with their supreme Pastor,
they are still made infallible by the assistance of the same holy Ghost, who
was as well promised to them as to the Apostles.

Now for this notion, I might refer the Captain and the Reader to what I have
said and proved in the foregoing ^reatise, which when he, or any of his Fathers
shall solidly answer, it will be time enough then to consider it. But because
this is the sole foundation upon which the Papists build all the rest, and Mr.
Cressy adjures all Protestants, that omitting or deferring all particular
disputes with Catholics, they would examine this point, Sect. 2. Chap. 19. and
because I am resolved by God's help to search and try where the strength of
this Sampson lies, (if there be any in it) I shall a little farther consider
it; and if I find his arguments proportionable to his confidence, and that he
is as solid in proving it, as he is daring in asserting it, surely he will do
the Christian world an inexpressible favor, and infinitely oblige all
Protestants, and he will find us far from the madness of fighting against God
and our own souls. But since all is not Gold that glisters, and our Savor
has commanded us to try the Spirits, and to prove all things, and not to
believe men, saying, Lo here is Christ, or, Lo there is Christ; they must not
take it amiss, if, after such evident discovery of their manifold impostures,
we dare not take all things upon trust from them, nor swallow down so great a
morsel without chewing, and enquiring into it.

It seems to be granted on both sides, and the nature of the thing requires it,
That this being a grand principle should have the greatest evidence, which
things of that nature can bear: and such indeed they pretend for it. So Mr.
Cr^ssy tells us, That as this controversy was of infinite importance,
Providence has suitably furnished us with means of satisfaction -- infinitely
more copious, evident, and powerful, then in any other besides. Exomolog. ^^ct.
2. chap. 18. And again: That which I undertake to make evident to J. P. is;
that the Church speaking by a general Council, confirmed by the Pope, is an
infallible guide, (and that with more evidence then he can produce for the
Scripture it self.) Appendix to his Exomologesis chap. 4. number. 9. It is well
that Saying and Doing are two things, or else the Protestant cause had been
quite in the dust. If Mr. Cressy make this good, his work is done, if not, it
will concern him to remember from whence he is fallen, and repent of his
Apostasy. So now we are come to the point, whether the Churches Infallibility
be so evidently proved, as they pretend? They affirm, and I deny it: and the
grounds of my denial have been a principal part of the foregoing discourse. I
shall forbear repetitions, as much as is possible, and shall here only give two
arguments to show, That this pretended evidence of of the doctrine of
Infallibility is but one of their (...), and a piece of their usual artifice,
to give us confident affirmations in stead of evident proofs.

My first reason is taken from the inevidence of this doctrine to themselves,
and many of their own Brethren. What a desperate assertion is it, to ascribe
greater evidence to the Churches Infallibility, (which is denied by many of
their own Authors,) then to the Divinity of the Scripture? (whose evidence is
so great, that both Protestants and Papists universally acquies^e in it) I have
already represented the differences and dissatisfactions of their own Authors
in this, supposed to be, most evident point. And certainly, it can be nothing
but want of evidence, which hinders the assent of those, whose interest so
powerfully obliges them to it. Particularly I have showed the vanity of that
pretense of agreement between their divided Authors in the Infallibility of the
Pope and a Council together, and that the several Partisans, howsoever they put
them both together in name and show, yet in truth they ascribe the
Infallibility entirely to the one or other, either to the Pope alone, or to the
Council alone, and to the other only in dependence thereupon. Infallibility is
not partly in the Pope, and partly in the Council, but wholly in the Pope, (say
the Jesuits,) and from him communicated to the Council, who are infallible no
farther then they have his consent and concurrence. And on the other side it is
wholly in the Council, and in the Pope only by participation from them, (say
the Gallican Papists, and Anti-Jesuitical party, and of this mind were those
Councels that undertook the censuring and removing of Popes themselves.) And
consequently, the Infallibity of Councels not being evident to the Jesuits and
their party, and the Infallibility of the Pope not being evident to the French
Papists, and many others, it follows, that there is no evidence at all in
either, nor in both together, their own Authors being Judges. For if I can
prove to a Jesuit, That the Pope in Cathedra is not infallible, he will (and
by his principles must) grant, That the addition of a Council does not make him
infallible. And if I can prove to a French Papist, that a general Council
rightly called and constituted is not infallible, he will (and by his
principles must) acknowledge the Pope's consent cannot render them infallible:
so that indeed if either be disproved, both are disproved.

Nor does any thing render this evidence more dark, and the Romish cause more
contemptible, then the consideration of those poor Fig. leaves, wherewith Mr.
Cressy seeks to cover his Mothers nakedness in this particular. For when Mr.
Chillingworth urged this very argument against their infallible Judge, that
themselves were divided about it, who it was, whether Pope or Council etc. all
that Mr. Cressy answers ad rem, is this; That these different Authors of theirs
are all agreed in that decision of the Council of Trent, It belongs to the
Church to be Judge of the true sense of the holy Scripture: an answer so
desperate, that it shows that man, who could acquiesce in it, to be, if not a
Papist by interest rather then Conscience, yet at least one given up by God to
those strong delusions, threatened to the Followers of Antichrist, 2 These. 2.
among whom he has now listed himself. And does this indeed end the
differences? does he offer that for an Answer, which his Adversary before had
acknowledged? and is this all the relief they have toward the ending of all
differences, and the satisfaction of their consciences? When Alexander was
asked, To whom he would leave his Empire? and he answered; To the best: since
he did not at all determine, who this best was, I think no man in his wits will
say, this was a likely or effectual way to end the differences among the
Graecians: It is true the Captains were all agreed in genere, that it should be
left to the best; but some thought one best, others another, and so the
dissensions continued among them, and were not at all healed by that general
agreement. In the very same manner, although they be agreed in the general,
that the Church must judge, so long as they continue at variance, and have
implacable feuds about it who this Church is, they are not one whit nearer
agreement. Suppose in former times a question arose between the Senate and
Emperor of Rome, which was the chief power, and supreme Judge of all Civil
controversies; and the Subjects of the Empire were highly divided about it,
some ascribing the supremacy to the Emperor, others to the Senate: would Mr.
Cressy say, the Romans are agreed, because they were all united in this, That
the supreme power was to end all their controversies? Suppose 3 or 4
Competitors to a Kingdom, and the inhabitants thereof severally divided about
them; will any man on this side Bedlam say, they are all agreed, because agreed
in this general, that the King must rule? or must not every man acknowledge,
that this agreement signifies but little, so long as they differ about this,
which is that King? And is not this the very case of the Church of Rome? They
are all agreed (forsooth) not one dissenting voice among them: but how? why
they are agreed that the Church is the judge. But, Mr. Cressy, the great
difference is behind, who is the Church? the Pope, say some, a Council say
others, a Pope and Council together say a third sort, (and the (several
assertors of each opinion confute and destroy the rest,) and all that hold any
of these opinions are universally esteemed good Catholics, says Mr. Cressy in
his Append, chapter 4. number. 7. So they are good Catholics that dispute down the
Pope's Infallibility, and they good Catholics too that dispute down the
Infallibility of Councels, and (for the reason before mentioned) they good
Catholics, that reject the infallibility of both together. And therefore it is a
m^st impudent position, which Mr. Cressy lays down, (and the Papists are
obliged to own,) That the doctrine of the Churches Infallibility is so
evident, that the Prot^stants are inexcusable, and (...), that do not receive
it: out of thy own mouth will God judge thee, O thou unfaithful Servant, who
have thus expressed thy self in another place; To my understanding there is
some inhumanity in urging Protestants to more then Catholics will be obliged
to, or to think that to Protestants prepossessed with passion and partiality,
that can be made evident, which is so far from being evident to some
Catholics, that they renounce it. Appendix to the Exomologesis, chapter 4. number. 7.

To this might be added, as a farther demonstration of the inevidence of this
point even to the Romanists themselves, those secret checks which they meet
with from their own consciences in the assertion of this supposed
Infallibility, discovered by their haltings, and corrections, and
tergiversations, and self-contradictions in explication of this new
phenomenon. For however Mr. Cressy mounts this Infallibility so high, that it
must not yield to Scripture it self, yet both himself elsewhere, and their
other Authors every where are contented with a far lower proportion. Bellarmine
(whom Mr. Cressy rights and approves) in his comparison of the Infallibility of
the Church and Scripture, gives the pre-eminence to Scripture in five several
respects. See Cressy sect. 2. chapter 21. Truth, and our obligation to believe it,
is in an higher degree in Scripture, then in the decisions of the Church.
Cressy Appendix chap. 5. n. 2. And this Infallibility of the Church, though
they will not suffer us to call it humane and moral, yet they dare not assert
it to be Divine, but only after a sort, and in some manner Divine, as the
Author of Laua's labyrinth informs us. And this Infallibility they farther
confess is not in way of immediate revelation or inspiration from God, but in
the way of argumentation and discourse. And here too they are wonderful
cautious* for it is acknowledged by Bellarmine and Stapleton, and subscribed by
Mr Cressy, That the Church is fallible in the premises, but infallible in the
conclusion. Cressy ubi supra, and sect. 2. chap. 32. and Append. chap. 5. In
the decisions of the Church, the simple conclusion decided is only accounted
infallibly true, not so the principles upon which it depends, or reasons by
which it is proved. Really these Romish Priests are admirable fellows in all
things: Admirable Builders! Vitruvius himself might learn Architecture from
them, for they can teach him how to build a solid and durable Edifice upon a
rotten foundation: Admirable Logitians! Aristotle might go to School to them,
and learn such Lessons as were above his apprehension, for it is resolved, he
must blot out his Axioms, Conclusio sequitur partem debiliorem, and, Non debet
esse plus in conclus^ne quam in praemissis, and Ex falsis nil nise falsum: The
College of Jesuits at Rome are ready to make good the contrary against him,
when Plato's great year shall bring him and them together upon the Stage.
Admirable Divines! that have outdone their Lord and Master, and in spite of
whatsoever is said by him Luke 6.43, 44. will, it he please, maintain a dispute
with him upon this Thesis, That a corrupt tree can bring forth good fruit, and
that of thorns men may gather figs, and of a Bramb^^bush grapes: and this
shall be not probably defended, but infallibly demonstrated. For it were a
silly thing to think, that they that are infallible Divines should be but
fallible Disputants. But to return: The inevidence of this notion of the
Churches Infallibility may sufficiently appear from Mr. Cressy's own
expressions, (which have been observed by others) who by the evidence of the
Truth was forced to this acknowledgment, That Infallibility is an unfortunate
word, that Mr. Chillingworth has combated it with too great success, so that I
could wish (says he) the word were forgotten, or at least laid by, whereas
all, that understand any thing, know, that it was not the word, but the thing
which he combated; and his arguments were not nominal against the Title, but
real against the thing it self. It is true, since this passage was published
and taken notice of, Mr. ^ressy (having doubtless been severely schooled by
his Superiors for such a dangerous passage) is grown more cautious, and has
stretched his wit (and I fear his conscience too) to palliate his assertion,
and make an honorable retreat: and he honestly acquaints us with his design,
i. e. being crafty to catch the Protestants with guile. Sect. 2. chapter 21. He
that reads the Appendix to the second Edition of his Exomologesis, will easily
discern the trepidations of a guilty conscience, whilst sometimes you shall
find him tacitly denying the Churches Infallibility properly so called, and
contenting himself with great Probability in the room of it: at other times you
will meet him crying up this Infallibility in express or equivalent terms, and
in most places having no salvo for himself but this; That his assertion, and
the Protestants disputation did proceed upon the mistaken notion of
Infallibility, which the Protestants advanced to an higher pitch then ever the
Church of Rome did, and so fought against an image that themselves had set up:
which is so notorious a falsehood, that if Mr. Cressy's wit, and memory, and
conscience had not all failed him together, he could hardly have run into it;
since all Protestants of any note ever did, and particularly Mr. Chillingworth
does dispute against the Churches Infallibility, only in that sense and degree
which Mr. Cressy upon maturest advice in this second Edition has thought fit
to express in these words: That God will preserve his Church in all truth, so
as to secure all believers, that she can neither deceive them, nor be deceived
her self. sect. 2. chap. 21. Did ever any Protestant, that understood himself,
or the point pretend to more? Not Mr. Chillingworth I am sure. They all knew
and granted, that abolute infallibility was Gods Prerogative, and neither
pretended by the Church of Rome, nor was that opinion by Protestants fastened
upon them: The only question was, whether God did vouchsafe such infallible
guidance to the Church, that she could not err in her decrees, and decisions;
This Papists affirmed, and Protestants denied: and let me add, that this
Infallibility is as high as was ever ascribed to the Prophets or Apostles and
Penmen of the Holy Scripture: And although their infallibility be said to be
larger or greater extensive, because in them it reached to all sentences, and
words, and Arguments, yet the Romanists themselves cannot say it is higher or
greater intensive, and the Articles of Faith or conclusive decisions decreed by
Councels, are in their opinion as infallible, as the same are when they are
laid down in the Scripture. This was the Notion Mr Chillingworth combated
against, with so great success as Cressy confesses.

The second Argument to prove the inevidence of this notion of the Churches
infallibility, I shall take from the impertinency and feebleness of those
crutches or reasons wherewith they endeavor to support it: I observe the sum
and strength of what he has to say in this point is reducible to five heads.

The first and great pretense is this, Take away Infallibility and you destroy
all Authority; all Authority, that is not Infallible is mere Faction and
Rebellion, and Authority that reaches only to the outward appearance, or the
purse Cressy Appen: chapter 7. number. 2. And elsewhere Infallibility and Authority
are in effect all one as applied to the Church, Ibid c. 5. n. 14. And the
assertions of the Churches Authority which are frequent in the Fathers Mr
Cressy urges as if they had been directly levelled at the Churches
infallibility, Exomolog. Sect. 2. chap. 19. Nay, so daring is this man in his
Argument, that not contented with his own pretended satisfaction in it, he will
needs obtrude the same opinion upon that Noble Lord Falkland (which it is
sufficiently known he abhorred) viz. that if the Catholic Churches Authority
and Infallibility were opposed all other Churches must expire: The Authority of
the English Church would be an airy fantasme etc. Append. chap. 6. number. 9.

For Answer, I durst appeal to the conscience of this very man, but that
Apostates in the Faith do at the same time make shipwreck of a good conscience:
let any Romanist that is not prodigal of his damnation, seriously consider the
gross falsehood of this bold supposition. What! no Authority without
Infallibility? Belike there is no Authority in the King, because no
Infallibility. He will say Civil Authority is but external; But
Ecclesiastical reaches the conscience, and commands the belief of the inward
man: Mr Cressy knew this to be a gratis dictum and justly denied by
Protestants, and therefore he should have proved it, but crude suppositions and
imperious dictates do pass among Romanists for solid demonstrations: Yet
again I would ask Mr Cressy whether the Assembly of the Clergy in France have
Authority over that Church, or no: If he deny it I refer him to his brethren
there for an Answer: If he grant it, then Authority may be without
Infallibility: Again I ask him whether the Pope without a Council have
Authority over the Church or no: If he deny it, it is at his peril; if he
affirm it, then his Argument is in great jeopardy: For Protestants are allowed
to disbelieve the Popes personal Infallibility: And he confesses (I gave you
his own words before) that good Catholics deny it and dispute against it: Yet
once more, When general Councels have been called to determine the pretensions
of Anti-Popes, or to depose usurping Popes, or when they have had differences
with the Popes, I demand whether these Councels had any Authority or no? To say
they had none, or that their Authority was but an airy fantasme I think Mr
Cressy will not dare, and if they had, then either a Council without the Pope
is Infallible (which most Learned Papists now deny, and if Mr Cressy be of
another mind let him tell us) or Authority may be without Infallibility.

In a word that the World may see the complexion of an Apostates conscience,
This very man will grant that there is an Authority in the Superior over his
Convent, in every Bishop over his Diocese, in ever General over his order,
and a weighty Authority too (as their vassals feel by sad experience) yet I
hope these are not Infallible, E. the more impudent is he that argues from
Authority to Infallibility.

A second Argument is much of the same complexion, taken from the style and
practice of general Councels which was to propose their Doctrines as
infallible truths, and to command all Christians under the pain of Anathema,
and eternal damnation to believe them for such: That Authority which should
speak thus not being Infallible, would be guilty of the greatest tyranny and
cruelty, and usurpation that ever was in the World. Append. chap. 4. n. 9.

This has been fully answered before, and therefore I shall here content my
self with these two reflections.

1. The utmost of this Argument (abstracting from the invidious expressions he
here clothes it with, that it may have in tenor what it wants in strength)
would be no more then this: That general Councels in such a way of proceeding
were mistaken and were liable to error: A proposition which he knew very well
the Protestants did universally own, and I hope well may, since the Jesuits
(so great a part and support of the Roman Church) have and do acknowledge that
general Councels and their decrees are not infallible until the Popes consent
be added, yet such Councels (as is notoriously known) have used to put their
Anathema's to their decrees before the Popes assent was given: And yet forsooth
(if you will believe a man that has cast away his Faith) this Argument is more
evident then we can produce for the Scripture it self (for so he says, ibid.)

2. These Anathema's do not at all prove that such Councels either were or
thought themselves Infallible: It is true, it is an Argument they thought one
of these two things, either that the Doctrine proposed by them was Infallibly
true (as indeed they did) or that their Authority was infallibly certain
(which they never pretended) either of these were a sufficient ground for such
Anathema's; and therefore his Argument is infirm proceeding a genere ad
speciem, animal est, E. homo. They owned Infallibility E. they owned it in
their Authority: Particular Pastors have a power to Anathematize and do so in
case of Excommunication of Heretics. Are they therefore infallible? If it be
said they do it only in pursuance and execution of the decrees of Councels: I
Answer: If such persons (confessedly fallible) may Anathematize them that
renounce the Doctrines delivered in Councels, because supposed to be Infallibly
true, why may not the same persons Anathematize them that renounce the
Doctrines expressly delivered in Scripture, which all grant to be infallibly
true? Again, if we look into the Records of Councels we shall find that this
practice of Anathematizing was not only in use in general, but also in
particular and Provincial Counsels which are confessed to be fallible: E. Mr
Cressy look to your Arguments and conscience better; once more, The Popes
Anathemas a^l the World rings of, yet you have seen his Infallibility is denied
by many and Learned Papists, and they too such as are universally esteemed good
Catholics, says Mr Cressy Append. chap 4. number. 7. Therefore how durst he say,
Anathema's are evidences of Infallibility?

The third Argument is taken from the promises of Infallibility made to this
Church. This Doctrine of the Churches Infallibility is the most express in
Scriptures, says Mr Cressy Sect. 2. chap. 26. n. 5. I suppose he told us so
upon the same account that the old Painter wrote under his picture, This is a
Lion, for fear some should have mistaken it for a Bull, for truly if he had
not said it was most express there, any rational man would have sworn the
contrary.

I confess I thought Mr Cressy (as well as Mr White and other Traditionall
Doctors) had been sick of those pretenses, and sufficiently discovered the
impertinency of them to their purpose: and really when I read over the
Scriptures quoted by him to prove this Infallibility, and consider how
insignificant they are to his business, and how plainly, and fully, and
frequently they have been answered by Protestants, (which he does not here
reply to) I must not dissemble that I find a great difficulty to believe his
conscience could be satisfied therewith, sure I am whilst he was a Protestant
(if he understood himself) he would have entertained such proofs with;
contempt: I dare confidently say that most of the Scripture-allegations
produced by the Quakers (in defense of their absurd and ridiculous opinions)
are every whit as pertinent as any that are here cited: It is true they are
material to that purpose to which they are cited by the Fathers, viz. to prove
the Churches perpetuity and just Authority; but for Infallibility, how far the
Fathers were from believing that I hope has been made sufficiently evident
from the foregoing Discourse, where also particular Answers have been given to
their Arguments from these places, which when they solidly vindicate, it will
deserve, and ((...)) shall have our consideration. At present I shall content
my self with this general animadversion.

Those Scripturall promises pretended for the Churches Infallibility, either
they do of themselves, without the Churches sense and exposition, evidently and
solidly prove the point they are brought for, or they do not; if they say they
do, then other passages of Scripture (undoubtedly far more plain and
positive for diverse doctrines rejected by the Papists) do of themselves,
without the Churches sense and exposition prove those points they are brought
for, and so Scripture may decide controversies; if they say not, then the
Churches Infallibility must be supposed, before it can be proved from those
Tex^s, which is I confess agreeable to the Roman Catholic way of Disputation,
and fit for them that cannot endure reason should be judge, but I am sure it
will never satisfy any man that has any care of his conscience or Salvation:
But I can tell the Reader good news, and that which is strange too among
Romanists, who use to confute Protestants by the mere naming of those Texts
that have been substantially vindicated an hundred times. Mr Cressy has one
Chapter entitled the Validity of such Texts etc. so it is called, but I doubt
it was the Printers mistake for invalidity, as will appear upon perusal: He
offers but one Argument for proof of this Capital Assertion, upon which all
the Papacy depends, and it is this: The Ancient Fathers do usually Argue
against their Heretics and Schismatics from those promises, that Christ's
Church should continue for ever, and that the gates of Hell should not prevail
against her: Now (says he) if these promises of Christ be not Infallible and
absolute and that Church Visible: What then? then woe to the poor Fathers, then
the Writings of these Fathers will prove to be the most foolish, impertinent,
juggling, yea blasphemous and p^rnicious discourses that ever were. So Cressy
Sect. 2. chap 28. that is to say (if we take the notion out of this odious
dress) they used fallacious Arguments: Very good! And is this that, that
satisfied Mr Cressy's conscience? O the modesty of the man! you see a little
thing satisfies him; but if he will cheat himself, let him not think to cheat
us with such ridiculous Arguments.

1. The utmost of what would follow is that the Ancient Fathers whose Writings
are extant were Fallible, and liable to mistakes: A Proposition which I have
formerly proved, and the Popish Doctors themselves agree with us therein, I
suppose Mr Cressy will not dissent.

2. If upon every impertinent and unconcluding Argument produced by Fathers,
Councels, or Popes, against supposed Heretics, I should make this inference
that they were all Juglers, Blasphemers, etc. Mr Cressy would think it a very
harsh censure: When their great Lords and Masters argue at this rate (as he
knows who did) Arise Peter kill and eat, and here are two Swords: Ergo, the
Pope has civil and Spiritual power over all men: They that are in the flesh
cannot please God: E. Priests should not be married: God made man after his own
Image: E. Images are lawful. Will Mr Cressy now say these were all Juglers,
Blasphemers, etc? and their Writings the most foolish, impertinent, pernicious
Discourses that ever were? either then let Mr Cressy qualify his censure there,
or apply it here.

3. If the Fathers were supposed infallible, yet they might use impertinent and
unconcluding Arguments: You must remember our Masters the Romanists while they
assert the infallibility of the Pope and Council, they cautiously distinguish
between the conclusion and the mediums or Arguments to prove it: I will only
mind you of him whom they all so highly approve and applaud i. e. Stapleton
(whom Mr Cressy follows and the rest of them) who (as you saw) limits this
infallibility to the Conclusion, not to the premises or Argument: So if the
Fathers were infallible (as you see and the Papists confess they are not) yet
this being only in the Conclusion, it will not at all secure them from
impertinency and error in their Arguments or mediums used to confirm the
conclusions, which is all that this Discourse of Mr Cr^ssy pretends to prove:
So now judge whether the Printer was not a knave (for sure the Author could not
be so since he is a Benedictine) to set in the front of this Argument, The
Validity, etc.

But you know non omnia possumus omnes: Peradventure Mr Cressy is a better
respondent then opponent, and though he cannot at all prove his own assertion,
yet he will at least solidly Answer his Adversaries: But alas! here he is so
jejune that it moves my pity; for when Mr Chillingworth pleaded that these
promises were only conditional, if Christians should make use of Gods means
-- The Church should continue: Hereto (says Cressy) the answer is very ready,
Oh the benefit of a ready wit when attended with an easy Conscience! 1. There
is no warrant from any circumstance in those Texts for such a new
interpretation.

I will not engage in that Argument, only I will refer a parallel place to
his consideration: It is said particularly concerning Jerusalem (which never
was said concerning Rome) I have hallowed this house -- to put my name therein
for ever, and mine eyes and mine heart shall be there perpetually, 1 Kings 9.3.
And it is again repeated concerning that house, that the Lord had said, In
Jerusalem shall my Name be for ever, 2 Chronicles. 33.4. Then (if he have a
conscience) let him Answer, whether there be not as much warrant from these
Texts to prove this promise to Jerusalem to be infallible and unconditional,
(which they grant it was not) as from the other Texts to prove them to be so to
the Church of Rome. He need not take day to answer it.

His second Answer is wholly ad hominem, (and the other you will say was little
ad rem,) That Mr. Chillingworth applies this to future times only, not to past
or present, and therefore it concerns not the dispute in hand about the Roman
Catholic Church, which all English Protestants acknowledge to be a true Church
of Christ. Just so they would persuade their Proselytes, that all Protestants
grant that theirs is a safe way, and Salvation to be had ordinarily in the
communion of their Church; whereas neither the one nor the other are true. But
what if Protestants do, and Mr. Chillingworth did grant their Church to be a
true Church, does it therefore follow, these Texts were pertinently alleged to
prove it? or did Mr. Chillingworth say, these promises were absolute for time
past or present, and conditional only for the future? no such matter: but
these are only his own dreams, and shufflings, who (pro more) when he cannot
answer his Adversary, endeavors to blind his Reader. I have only one thing
more to observe upon that which (he tells us Mr. Chillingworth saw it) That if
there were such promises of Indefectibility, none could challenge them but the
Roman Church, since she only claims them, all others lay down their claim.
But that also is no more solid then the rest: for since this promise of
Indefectibility is general and indefinite, it no more belongs to Rome then to
any other particular Church: neither have they any more interest in the
promise, because they boldly claim the Monopoly of it, (since an Usurpers
claim gives him no just Title to the thing.) Nor have other Churches the less
interest in it, because their conscience and modesty will not suffer them to
appropriate it to themselves, (for though they extend this promise of
Indefectibility to the whole Church, yet they reap the comfort and benefit of
it, in as much as they are true members of that Church, and not upon any local
or particular consideration.)

There is a fourth argument behind, taken from the Tradition or testimony of
the present* Church: but this I have discoursed at large, and I hope discovered
the folly of that new device: thither I refer the Reader.

A fifth argument there is, and that is all I find in Mr. Cressy, (for I have
diligently searched him, and God is my witness I have endeavored to single
out the strongest and most plausible passages in him, which I had not answered
before,) and that is taken from the Churches Unity: One Church th^re cannot be,
without one faith; nor one faith, where differences are irreconcilable; and no
reconciling of differences, but by an Authority, and that infallible. Append.
chapter 6. n. 3. And again: The Sun shines not more clear (I suppose he means in
the Cloisters of his Convent) then that there is no possible Unity without
Authority, nor no Christian Unity without an Infallible Authority. chapter 7. n. 2.

Ans. Very well: it being premised, That their only infallible Authority is,
as Mr. Cressy states it, the Church speaking by a general Council confirmed by
the Pope, Appen. chap. 4. number. 9. then, if this argument be solid, let Mr.
Cressy take what follows: Then there was neither one Church, nor one Faith, for
the first 300 years, when there was no general Council: then when the Pope
dies, or his Sea is vacant other ways (as it often has been) and when there is
no Council (as now there is none) there is no Unity in the Church of Rome: what
thinks this man of the Gallican Church, which (unless they be thoroughly
Jesuited) do still hold (as they used to do) that the Pope, personally
considered, is not infallible, but only with a general Council: will he
justify it in the Assembly of the French Clergy, that they have at this day no
unity among them, and no way to reconcile their differences, because they have
no infallible Authority? But I shall not wast my time any longer with these
impertinent and miscalled arguments: I shall leave the point with this short
Memorandum, That it is a plain evidence of the desperatnesse of their cause,
that all the great wit, and vast learning, and deep cunning of the Romish
Doctors can furnish them with no better arguments then these. And since this is
all that Mr. Cressy can pretend for his Apostasy, I would entreat him in his
next to furnish me with some Answers to those that suspect his Change was not
from Conscience, but Discontent or Passion, or Worldly Interest, (as affairs
then stood:) for I confess I am at a loss, and know not what to say for him;
and the rather, because the pretended motives of his Conversion are so
ridiculously absurd, and incredible, among which I find two that deserve a
special remark. One is the scandalous personal qualities of Luther and Calvin,
which, if all that he says of them were true and material, (as it is either
notoriously false, or inconsiderable,) yet it amounts to nothing against the
Protestant cause, since though we own them for eminent persons, and worthy
instruments, yet we readily acknowledge, they were liable to error, and subject
to passions and infirmities, no less then other men; nor did we ever make them
the pillars and grounds of the Gospel, or the foundation and rule of our Faith.
But that this should occasion his Change, I confess is beyond the faith of
Miracles to believe. This is prodigious, That the supposed mistakes or
miscarriages of two particular Protestant Doctors should really have greater
influence to turn him from the Protestant Religion, then the real Blasphemies,
and abominable filthinesses of their Masters and Pillars of their Faith and
Church, viz. the Popes, should have to alienate him from the Popish Religion:
and these things not feigned by Adversaries, (as most of their Calumnies
against Luther and Calvin are) but acknowledged by their own Authors, who have
left us a particular account of the several sorts of their villainies: so many
Blasphemers, as John 13. Julius 3. etc. so many Heretics, as Boniface 8. John
23. so many Conjurers, as Sylvester the second, and his Successors for many
successions; so many Whoremongers, so many Sodomites, Poysoners, Incestuous,
and what not? 150 Popes (says Genebrard) rahter Apostatical then Apostolical
persons. And yet this tender-conscienced man, who knew all these things, and
could bear with all this, and a thousand more such infirmities in the Popes,
was so squeamish, that he was not able to endure the scandals of Luther and
Calvin. And another motive he adds, not at all inferior to the former, viz.
The bloody commotions of the Calvinists, and the sanguinary Laws and cruel
execution of them upon Catholic Priests in England: And this was a great
offense to him, who was well acquainted with the Massacres of France, of
Germany, and the Low countries, and the English too in Popish times, who knew
the history of the barbarous cruelties of the Inquisition torments, who himself
had been an eye and ear^witnesse of the inhumane butcheries of above one
hundred thousand innocent Protestants in Ireland. But all this did not move the
good man at all: he could swallow Camels, but a Gnat has choked him. O
Divelish Hypocrisy! But God will not be mocked, and I hope men that have any
sense will not easily be deceaved to believe the sincerity of that man's
Conversion, which is brought on by such ridiculous Motives. But to return.

For a close of this great point, I shall leave three things to the
consideration of any discreet and conscientitious Reader, and particularly of
our two English Apostates, with whom I am now treating, if they have any sense
of Eternity or Conscience left.

1. That the principal Texts of Scripture, and arguments urged by them and
others for the infallibility of the Pope and Council together, either prove
nothing to their purpose, or prove more then they would have or dare assert, i.
e. they prove either the Pope or Council to be infallible by themselves, and
without any reference to the other, and are accordingly pleaded by each party
for their opinion. As for instance: Thou art Peter, upon this rock etc. I will
give unto thee the keys etc. And Si^ mon -- I have prayed, that thy Faith fail
not: and the like. If these Texts prove any Infallibility, the prove they
Infallibility of the Pope, or St. Peter's Successor, whether with or without a
Council. So on the other side, the Texts of Scripture pleaded for the
Infallibility of Councels from what was said to or of all the Apostles: H^ that
hears you, hears me. It seemed good to the holy Ghost and us. Where two or
three are gathered together. I am with you to the end of the world: If these
Texts prove any Infallibility, they prove the Infallibility of all the
Governors of the Church, and Successors of the Apostles, at least when they
are assembled together, without any special reference to the Pope, who is but
one of them. And because it is sufficiently evident, that these places do not
prove the infallibility of those, of whom they are acknowledged primarily and
formally to speak, (which is so evident, that we have thousands of the most
learned and resolved Papists consenting to us herein, as is before proved,) it
is therefore a strange presumption to pretend these places cogent proofs of the
infallibility of them, of whom these Texts are confessed not to speak save
only by implication: and consequently the infallibility of Pope and Council
together, (which is the chief retreat of the most subtle and cautious Papists)
is destitute of solid proof, and an ungrounded assertion.

2^ If all that these men say were granted, that a general Council confirmed by
the Pope were the infallible Judge, yet since there is now no such thing, (nor
like to be,) as a general Council in the Church of Rome, but the Pope stands
upon his own legs, therefore the Church of Rome at this day is not infallible*
and has no infallible Judge, and no way to end their controversies, nor any
advantage above Protestants therein. If they say, the Pope has the assistance
and concurrence of general Councels in their writings and Decrees, I answer:
The infallible Judge, which they plead for, must according to their principles
be a living judge, and therefore requires the existence of the Council, as well
as of the Pope. I would ask Mr. Cressy this question: Is the Pope infallible
in his exposition and application of the Decrees of Councels, or no? if he be,
then the Pope alone is infallible without a Council, (which himself confesses
is a proposition so harsh, that Protestants should not be urged to acknowledge
it:) if he be not, then they have no infallible judge at Rome at this time,
(...).

3. Since the present Romanists have now no Anchorhold but the Pope's
Infallibility, (for general Council there is none,) and by Mr. Cressy's
argument, if there be no Infallibility, there is no Authority, and therefore no
Unity, and therefore no Faith: I shall desire the Reader to reflect upon the
character of that person, who is so boldly asserted the Supreme Infallible
Judge of all controversies in Religion: I will not take it from Protestants
(least they should be thought partial,) but as it is drawn by a Papist and he
too one non e multis, one so eminent for learning and prudence, and trustiness,
that he was employed by the French Bishops to manage that great affair against
the Jesuits at Rome: it is St. Amor, in that famous and known book, his
Journal concerning the Transactions at^ Rome, relating to the five Propositions
controverted between the Molinists and Iansenests, where it is left upon
Record, in perpetuam rei memoriam, That when he solicited the Pope (Innocent
the Tenth) to decide that controversy, and to that end presented a paper to
him, desiring him to read it, the Pope (says my Author) would not receive and
read it, because he said this would engage him further, and oblige him to too
great toils, as he knew the discussion of this matter required, even of such
as had applied themselves to that study all their time, but much more pains
must it cost him then others; because (said he, they are the Popes own words)
it is not my profession, besides that I am old, I have never studied Divinity:
Part. 3. chap. 12. And yet this is the ground and pillar of Truth, this is the
prime subject of Infallibility, the great Judge of all controversies, (to whom
Scripture, Reason, Spirit, all must veil,) whose Decisions must be taken for
the Oracles of God. And the same Pope Innocent the Tenth tells this story of a
predecessor of his, Clement the 8. who (says he) after he had caused this
matter (viz. the question between the^ Iansenists and Jesuits) to be debated
in his presence for a long time by the most excellent men, after he had studied
them himself with very great care, (so that as he remembered, some toook
occasion thereby to say, that Clement the 8. began very old to study Divinity,)
yet he could not at last decide any thing therein, but was fain to impose a
perpetual silence upon both sides. This is the man that must infallibly decide
all controversies, that could not decide this, and we (for^ooth) must all
venture our souls upon his unerring guidance, that is not convinced of it
himself, and our Papists most impudently assert the Pope's Infallibility, who
modestly acknowledged his own ignorance and insufficiency. These things I hope
may abundantly suffice for the demolishing of the grounds of their Faith, I
must now speak something to the establishing of ours. The rather, because the
Captain requires it in his Answerer, not to proceed in the way of Negatives,
not to rest in pulling down, but to assert what we would establish. And Mr.
Cressy takes notice of Mr. Chillingworth and his book, That he was better in
pulling down buildings, then raising new ones, and that he has managed his
Sword much more dexterously then his Buckler; and that Protestants do neither
own and defend the positive grounds which Chillingworth laid, nor provide
themselves of any safer Defense. Exomolog. sect. 2. chap. 3. number. 4.

To which it might suffice in general to reply, that if once the grounds of
their Faith be demolished, and their great pretensions of supreme and
infallible Authority subverted; if it be proved, that neither the Pope, nor
Councels, nor Church of Rome be infallible, theu the Protestant Churches at
least stand upon even ground with the Church of Rome, and whatsoever they can
reasonably pretend for the stablishing of their Faith, will tend to the
securing of ours; and if Protestants have no solid and sufficient foundation
for their Belief, neither have the Papists any better: and then one of these 2
things will follow: Either that Scripture, Reason, and the concurring testimony
of former Ages, and Churches, and Fathers are a firm Basis for a Christians
Faith, independently upon the churches authority, and infallibility, (and this
is a certain Truth, though utterly destructive to the church of Rome,) or else
(which I tremble to speak, and yet these desperate persons are not afraid to
assert,) that the Christian Faith has no solid ground to rest upon, (I mean
without the Churches infallible Authority, which is now supposed to be
discarded and disproved.) Now here it must be confessed, that some Protestants
express themselves too unwarily in the point, whereby they give the Adversary
some seeming advantage and occasion to represent our Doctrine to their ignorant
and deluded Proselytes, as diversified into three or four several and contrary
opinions, about the judge and rule of Faith, which some are said to ascribe to
the Scriptures, o^^ers to the Spirit of God within them, others to reason, and
others to universal^ Tradition, whereas indeed all these are really agreed, and
these are not so many several judges or rules, but all in their places and
orders do happily correspond to the constitution of the Protestant ground of
Faith, which I shall make thus appear by the help of a threefold distinction.

1. We must distinguish between the judge and rule of Faith, which the Papists
cunningly, and some others inconsiderately confound, for instance: If I should
assert the Church to be the Judge, or Reason to be the judge, yet the Scripture
is the rule to which the Judge is tied, and from which if it swerve, so far
forth its sentence is null.

2. We must distinguish between Judge and Judge, and here we must take notice
of a triple Judge according to the triple Court, forum coeli, forum Ecclesiae,
forum conscientiae, the Court of Heaven, the Court of the Church, and the Court
of Con^cience. Accordingly there are three Judges.

1. The Supreme and truly Infallible Judge of all controversies, and that is
God and Christ who appropriates it to himself t^ be the alone Lawgiver, Iam.
4.12. And this is so proper to God, that the blessed Apostles durst not ascribe
it to themselves, (however their successors are grown more hardy) not for that
we have dominion over your Faith, 2 Cor. ^.24. This judge is Lord over all both
in the Church and in the conscience, which are all subordinate to him.

2. There is an external and political Judge, placed by God in the Church,
and these are the Governors whom Christ has placed in and over the Church: and
these are subordinate to the Supreme Judge, who if they really contradict His
sovereign Sentence and higher Authority, and require things evidently contrary
to the will of their and our master, must give their subjects leave to argue
with the Apostle Peter (and I tell you it was an unhappy accident that St Peter
should furnish the Protestants with such an Argument, as would puzzle all his
Successors to Answer) Whether it be right in the sight of God to harken unto
you more then unto God, judge ye, Acts 4.19.

3. There is an internal and secret Judge, placed by God in every particular
person, and that you may call Reason or Conscience; for as God has made every
man a reasonable Creature, and capable to judge of his own actions, so he has
not given that faculty (no more then the rest) to be for ever suspended, and
wrap^ in a Napkin, but to be duly exercised, nor would he have men like bruit
beasts that have no understanding, but every where calls upon them to Judge: I
speak to wise men, judge ye what I say, 1 Cor. 10* 15. And the service God
requires of every man must be (...) reasonable service, Romans 12 1. And every
man must be ready and able to give a reason of the hope that is in him, 1 Pet.
3.15.

3. We must distinguish between an instrument and an argument. And here lies
the Golden mean by which a man may avoid those contrary Heresies both
equidistant from the Truth, I mean the Socinian on the one hand, and the Papist
on the other, whereof the former would make reason a sovereign, un^versall
judge to which even Scripture it self must veil: And some go so high that I
remember one of them faith: If the Scripture should say in express terms,
That Christ is the most High God, I should not believe it (because utterly
repugnant to reason) but seek some other sense of those words. And the latter
(the Romanists) would quite put reason out of office, and in terminis submit to
a blind or implicit obedience without any examination, whereas the truth lies
between both. Reason or Conscience is not an Argument (I mean in matters of
Faith purely such) that is, I do not therefore believe such a Doctrine of Faith
to be true, because my reason or conscience, in it self and by virtue of
rational and extrascripturall Arguments tells me it is true (for this were to
make my reason the rule and standard of Truth) but my reason or conscience
believes such a thing to be true, because it reads or hears such Arguments and
evidences from the Scripture as are the undoubted (...) of the Truth. And thus
reason is the instrument by which I apprehend the Argument which compels my
belief: So again the Spirit of God (as in this controversy it is taken for
the gifts or graces of a believing Soul) or its ordinary suggestions in my
mind are not the argument by which I am convinced of the Truth of a Doctrine,
(for I may be deceived by a false spirit under the Title of Gods, and I am
commanded to try the Spirits and not to believe every Spirit) but it is the
instrument (as I may so speak) by which I am enabled to understand the weight
and force of those Arguments which are recorded (suppose) in the Scriptures, or
rather to speak most properly, reason is the instrument, and Gods Spirit is the
great helper and assistant by which that instrument is elevated and fitted to
discern those linearnents of Truth which God has drawn in Scripture or
elsewhere, whence alone the Arguments for proof of the Truth are derived: So
now the state of the question is reduced to a narrow compass, and I shall lay
it down in these Propositions.

1. Supreme and Infallible judge upon earth we know none, and I hope from what
has been said and proved at large it appears that there is none, at least the
Pope and Council and Church of Rome is none.

2. An external political judge in the Church we willingly acknowledge and
reverently esteem, The true and rightful Governors of the Church orderly
Assembled, and proceeding regularly in Councels (whether lesser or larger) are
the external judge, whose decisions are to be highly valued, whose orders are
not rashly to be despised or contradicted, yet three Cautions we must
interpose. 1. That this Judge is not infallible, but subject to error. 2. That
this Judge being subject to an higher Authority, and tied to an higher rule, if
its decisions or commands be manifestly repugnant to that superior Authority
and rule, they are not to be received and obeyed. 3. That this Judge is
constituted by God in the Church, not for the command of men's consciences, but
for the regulation of their actions, and for the preservation of the peace of
the Church, which is not violated by men's inward and unknown sentiments, but by
their external demeanor and sensible effects of them: And therefore this is
abundantly sufficient for the preservation of order and peace in the Church.

3. Every man's own reason and conscience is judge for himself, and for the
guidance of his own actions: State it in this manner, and I know no hurt at all
in making reason a Judge: Christ himself when he Preached in the World he
propounds the Articles of Faith to the reasons of his hearers, and calls upon
every one of them to judge (so far as concerned his own apprehensions or
actions) Luke 12.57. Yea, and why even of your selves judge you not what is
right. Christ no where commands his hearers blindly to submit to the decrees of
the present judge their Church, the High Priest and Council, but calls upon
them to judge for themselves, to beware of the Leaven, i.e. the false Doctrine
of their Rulers, Matthew. 16.12. and (which is more) refers his own Doctrine to
their searching, which is an act of reason, Ioh. 5.39. Search the Scriptures?
But alas this reason is imperfect and corrupt and dimsighted in matters of
Faith, therefore something farther is necessary. Therefore

Prop. 4. That reason may be a competent judge of matters of Faith: It is
necessary that it be assisted and elevated by the spirit of God, whereby of the
rational he is made a Spiritual man, and eo nomine a fit judge of such
affairs. 1 Cor. 2.15. He that is Spiritual Judges all things. As that a man
may exactly see those Heavenly Bodies which are at a great distance from us, it
is necessary to look upon them thorough a Glass, without which a man could not
discern many of them: So are the aides of Gods spirit to help our purblind
reason, which without these could not discern things afar off, according to
2 Pet. 1*9.

Prop. 5. The Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament are the Infallible
rule and ground and touchstone of Faith, by which both Churches and all
particular persons are to be regulated in their faith and manners, from which
all controversies of Faith are to be decided and judged, to which all are
perfectly subordinate, by which all the opinions of men and decisions of
Councels are to be examined, and they that swerve from and are opposite to this
rule, are ipso facto null and void, and so to be esteemed by all Christians. I
rather call it a rule then a judge, because there is an (...) in the word, the
appellation of judge by common use being appropriated to persons, but it is the
voice and writing of our Sovereign Lord and judge by which all inferior judges
are to be guided in their decrees.

Propos. 6. Uniuersall Tradition rightly understood (viz. the concurring
testimony of all Churches, and ages, and persons in their Writing^ left us) is
of great use and force, and is the Vehiculum or Channel by which that
Scripture, (which alone is our rule) is conveyed to us. But here I must add
these two Cautions.

1. Tradition though necessary to convey the rule to us, yet is no part of the
rule. I must here distinguish between res tradita the thing delivered, and
traditio the Tradition or delivery of it: If Tradition be understood in the
former sense (as the Papists understand it) for certain unscripturall
Doctrines delivered by Tradition, we know no such thing, and by comparing the
boldness of their pretensions to such Traditions with the weakness of their
proofs and evidences, we plainly discern they can make out no such thing: But
if Tradition be taken for the conveyance or delivery it self, or for the
Testimony of the Church successively given to the Truths and Books of the
Scripture, we confess it is of great use and in some sort necessary, to bring
the rule to us, yet (as I say) it is no part of the rule: As that bread which
nourishes me, it is necessary that it be brought to me in some Basket or other
Vehiculum, yet it is the Bread alone, not the Basket which nourishes me: The
Water of such a remote but excellent Spring which quenches my thirst could
not come to me, if there were not a channel to convey it, yet it is the Water
alone which refreshes me, not the channel. The decrees or Acts of King and
Parliament are the only rule by which our foreign plantations are governed,
and to which such as are judges there are tied (yea so far tied that if those
Judges should impose contrary commands, as for example; If they should command
the people to rebel against the King, they are bound not only to examine
their commands, but to disobey them) But it is altogether necessary that there
should be a ship wherein such Acts or decrees should be conveyed to them; yet
it were a very absurd thing to say the Ship is a part of the rule, though the
Papists (whilst from the necessity of Tradition they infer that it is a part
of the rule) do apparently run into the same solecisme. In a word, Tradition
was not appointed by Christ as a part of that ground upon which we were to
build our rule, by which we were to try particular Doctrines and Articles of
Faith, but was necessary, not^ ex instituto Christi, but ex natura rei, and
from the condition of humane affairs, there being no other way (without a new
revelation) possible or imaginable to convey the Gospel and Scriptures to
those that were to live so many hundred years after the first publication of
it: Tradition being to us, that which Eyes and Ears were to them that were
Eyewitnesses of his convincing miracles, and Eare-witnesses of his
irrefragable discourses, that is neither their Eyes and Ears were, nor to us
Tradition is the Argument and ground of our Faith, but a necessary mean or
instrument to convey those Arguments and grounds of Scripture which were
convincing and satisfactory.

2. This Tradition is no Act of Authority, but only of testimony, not at all
peculiar to the Church or general Councels, but common to all ancient
VVriters: Yea let it be observed as a very material consideration in this
point, so far is the Capacity of a Church from being necessary to the validity
of this Tradition and Testimony, concerning the great rule of our Faith the
Holy Scriptures, that the Testimony and Tradition of such as neither are the
Church nor any part of it, but enemies to it (I mean Jews and Heathens) are
in some respects more considerable, according to that known maxim --
Testimonium adversarii contra se est validissimum. It being one of the best
Arguments (and at this day so urged both by Protestants and Papists) for the
truth of the Holy Scriptures, and particularly of the Gospel, that the truth
of those Historical relations of Christ's miracles was acknowledged by the most
Learned Jews and Heathens that lived in ancient times: And by those
considerations we may discern the vanity of that trivial calumny of the great
differences among Protestants about the rule of Faith and judge of
Controversies, whereas by what has been said (which is no other then the
common Doctrine of the Protestant Churches and Writers, however sometimes they
seem to differ in modo explicandi) it appears how all these several things
concur like so many Stones fitly compacted together to make up the building
of our Faith; which (that I may in few words present it to the Readers review)
is this:

The Scripture is the Object, the only rule and standard of Faith, by which
all controversies of Faith are to be decided and judged, the res creditae, and
the ratio cred^ndi. Tradition is the Vehicle to conveigh this rule to us and
our times: Reason is the instrument by which I apprehend, or the eye by which I
discern or see this rule: The spirit of God is the Eye Salve that anoints mine
Eye and inables it to see this rule: The Church is the interpreter (though not
infallible and authentic) the witness, the guardian of this rule, and the
applier of the general rules of Scripture to particular cases and times and
circumstances.

And things being thus stated (which is really the sense of Protestants in this
great point, as it were easy to show from the confessors of our Churches and
the Treatises of our most and choicest Authors) is it not at all difficult to
blow away with a breath those pitiful cavils, whereby they endeavor to
perplex the mind of ignorant or prejudiced persons, lest the light of the
Gospel should shine into their minds. One thing is worth our Observation, That
diverse of the Popish arguments do wholly arise from, and depend upon, either
some in commodious expressions of some Protestant Writers, or some false
exposition put upon them by the adversaries; As for instance, when they argue
against the Scripture from the nature of a Judge, that a Judge must hear
parties, must not be mute, but pass sentence, etc. All these and many such
cavillations are thus silenced by saying that which is true, that it is an
(...) and figurative expression when we call Scripture a Judge, in as much as
it is the voice or writing of our Judge, and indeed it is a rule: So their
Arguments against the judgment of reason, either have no weight in them at all,
or else depend upon a scandalous and untrue suggestion, as if the Protestants
made reason the Judge in a Socinian sense: So their Arguments against the
Spirits being judge do proceed I doubt from a wilful mistake (for in their
Learned Writers it cannot be ignorance) as if the Protestants submitted
Scripture and reason and all to the judgment of the spirit in themselves in an
Enthusiastic notion, which is so far from being true, that they try and
judge of the spirit by the Word according to Apostolical prescription. This
being premised, I come now to treat with my Captain, and weigh his Arguments
that have any color or appearance of truth in them.

And first he argues against reasons being the judge of Controversies:
Concerning which let me be bold to say thus much, That the Papists themselves
do make reason judge of Controversies as far as the Protestants do, though
both the one and other tie up this judge to a rule. If it be said the
Protestants make the reason of every particular man judge, (which indeed they
do, in the sense forementioned and for their own actions) so do the Papists
make the reason of the Pope or a Council the judge, For when they say the Pope
or Counsel is the Judge of Controversies: I would know what it is in them, if
not their reason which is the judge; as it is their reason which examineth and
hears and considers, so sure, it is the same reason which concludes and
judges, so that the question between the Papists and Protestants is not
whether Reason be the judge, but whether the reason of particular persons, or
the reason of the Pope or Council.

The Arguments which he urges against the judgment of reason are so
irrational that it is sufficient confutation to mention them.

1. (Says he) Reason must submit to the Judge, E. it is not the Judge. Answ.
It is true, supreme Judge it is not, but subordinate and tied to rule:
Protestants assert no more.

2. The Judge must be Infallible; but reason is Fallible, Ergo: Answ: The Major
is a pitiful petitio principii, They that helped him to make his Book will
tell him what it means.

3. If reason were Judge, a man might please God without Faith, for reason
would teach us sufficiently how to please God. Answ: The same Argument will
overthrow his Church: If the Church be the Judge, then a man may please God
without faith, for the Church teaches us sufficiently how to please God.

4. If Reason be Judge we must not believe what we do not understand.

Answ: Non sequitur, For this Judge is tied up to a Law and rule which commands
us to believe what we do not understand.

But I am sick of such woeful Arguments, though the poor Captain has no
better, and therefore I will quit that work and come to that which is more
material viz. To try whether he has any better against the Scripture: And
here also I shall do his cause that right as with him to take into
consideration what is said by Mr Cressy in his Exomologesis, which I am the
more willing to do, because if the Popish cause have any strength in it, and if
the Doctrine of the Scripture alone being Judge and rule of Controversies be
untrue and indefensible (as they pretend it is) we may expect the demonstration
of it from a man of his wit and learning and experience in the Controversy, as
having thoroughly considered all pretensions and arguments of both parties, and
taken in the advice of the most famed Doctors of the Romish Church: But I must
not dissemble that I was woefully disappointed in the perusal of Mr Cressy's
piece, and whereas I expected something solid and substantial, or at least
very plausible, which I might have some ground in charity to believe might give
at least a color for his change, I find little in him worthy of consideration,
but what has already received satisfactory Answers: Yet because the cause
affords no better Arguments, I shall briefly consider what he and the Captain
and his assistants deliver in this matter.

That the Scripture is not the only rule of Faith and Judge of Controversies,
is the Proposition they attempt to prove, and their Arguments are those which
follow.

Arg. 1. Scripture cannot be this Judge and Rule, because it did not answer its
end, for they that own this Judge disagree among themselves, Everard Epist. p.
33. Scripture does not reconcile them. Thus Cressy, by this rule it is
impossible that ever Controversies should be ended, Sect. 2. chap. 4. n. 1.

Answ. Scripture might be (as really it was) designed instituted and ordained
for the ruling of men's Faith and the judging and deciding Controversies, though
through the depravednesse of men, this end might not be obtained: If this
Argument have any weight in it, I may upon the same ground argue thus:
Preaching of the Gospel was not instituted for the salvation of the World,
because it does not answer its end, but proves to many a favou^ of death: Or
the Law of God was not instituted by God for a rule of life, because it does
not obtain its end, and men will not be ruled by it: In a word let it be
observed, If this Argument prove any thing, it proves what the very Papists
deny, that the Scripture is not so much as a part of the rule, neither of Faith
nor manners, for still according to the present Argument it does not Answer its
end, for there is no one controversy in Faith, which Scripture alone decides,
so as to silence all differences, which is the thing pretended necessary to a
Judge of Controversies. For the further discovery of the impertinency and
vanity of this Argument, however it is their Goliath which they boast most of, I
shall offer them this Dilemma relating to that power of ending all differences
among Christians which they suppose was necessary for, and by Christ committed
to the Judge of Controversies, Either (I say) that power is absolute,
unconditionall and effectual, and if so, there could be no Heresies, Schisms,
or differences in the Christian World, which we see is most false; or it is a
conditional power sufficient of it self for the ending of differences, though
frustrable and impedible in its effects by the ignorance or perverseness of
men (which is the real truth) And in this sense the Scripture may be judge, i.
e. there is enough in it said and clearly delivered, by which all Controversies
might be ended, if men would be humble, studious, and self-denying: and in the
former sense the Church of Rome is no judge of Controversies. Peradventure it
will be said that all men are bound to submit and hearken to all the decrees of
the Church of Rome, and when they do so submit, it is an effectual mean to
end all differences: In the very same manner and upon far better grounds I
say of the Scripture, that all are bound to submit and hearken to all its
Councels and decrees, and when they do so, it will effectually end all
Controversies: If it be further said, that the Church has a power of coercion
to compel dissenters to submit: I Answer either that coercion they speak of is
spiritual by Church censures and excommunication, etc. or civil by corporal
penalties death, etc. If they understand it of civil coercion, that is not at
all necessary nor intrinsecall to an Ecclesiastical judge of Controversies,
otherwise the Apostles (who had not this civil power:) Nay Christ himself
(who denies that he was judge or ruler) should not be such a Judge, and the
Church for the first 300 years had no judge of Controversies: Nay, the Papists
themselves in pretense at least abjudicate this from the Church, and refer it
wholly to the Civil Power: If they speak of a Spiritual coercion, then the
Scripture has such a power of inflicting Spiritual penalties upon its
violaters and contemners, such as obduration, and ejection from the presence of
God, and such excommunication as the other is but a shadow of it: And whether
they speak of one or other, the Protestant Judge of Controversies is not
destitute of either advantage: If it be remembered that the Protestants own an
Ecclesiastical Political Judge, which Judge although their modesty will not
suffer them to pretend to Infallibility, and a power to oblige all people to
receive all their decrees though anti-Scripturall, without enquiry; and though
they say with the Apostle, they have their power for edification, not for
destruction. 2 Cor. 13.10 and they can do nothing against the Truth but for the
Truth, and though it is their advice to their people, which was the counsel of
the Apostle to his people. 1 Cor. 11.1. Be followers of me even as I also am of
Christ: Yet they have a power to explain and maintain the Doctrines of the
Scripture, and they acknowledge a power in the Magistrate by civil sanctions
and penalties to suppress and restrain such as shall corrupt the Truth and
infect peoples souls with the poison of Heretical Doctrines. And this may
abundantly serve for Answer to their Achilles or principal argument which
makes such a noise in the world.

Arg. 2. Scripture cannot be a perfect rule, because some books of Scripture
are lost, and it is the whole Scripture which is this rule.

Ans: 1. Then Tradition also cannot be a rule, for diverse Traditions are lost
as Cressy confesses, Sect. 1. chapter 8. n. 5. and all the Papists acknowledge.

Answ. 2. It does not at all appear that any one of those Books are lost which
concerned controversies of Faith, or the rule of Life; All which to this day
has been proved is this, That some Books Written by Holy men and Prophets are
lost: But it is a vain imagination, without the shadow of a proof, that all
which was written by such men was a part of Canonical or Divine Scripture, for
we read that the Holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost,
which inspired them not at all times, but only when he pleased, there being
this difference between the spirits inspiration of Christ and all other Holy
men, that it was in Christ without measure, and without difference of time, but
in the Apostles it was a gift, confined to such seasons and proportions as God
saw fit for them. Is any man so absurd as to think that every letter which a
Prophet or Apostle might write about any private affairs was a part of the
Sacred Scripture? Or if Solomon's Herball were extant, must it needs be admitted
into the Canon of the Sacred Scripture? Or how can they prove (and if they do
not prove it, this Argument is impertinent) that the Histories which Joshua, or
Nathan, or Samuel, or Gad, etc. might or did write concerning the Wars of the
Lord, or the Civil transactions of the Kingdoms of Israel and Judah must
needs be a part of the Canon? Or did the temporary transient and extraordinary
inspirations of the Holy-Gost deprive them of their common gifts and faculties?
And was the capacity of a Prophet inconsistent with that of an Historian? or
because Balaam was once inspired, must we needs Canonize all that afterward he
spoke, if it were extant? or because Hannah was once inspired, 1 Samuel 2. and
Simeon, and Elizabeth Luke 1. did ever any man, unless in a dream, imagine
that all their after Discourses were Canonical?

Answ. 3. Although fragmenta auri sunt pretiosa the least shreds of Scripture
are of inestimable value, yet we must distinguish between the essential and
integrall parts of the rule of Faith, every part and parcel of it is a choice
blessing for our been esse and more abundant direction and consolation, yet is
it not an essential part of the rule of Faith, for the far greatest part of
those sacred Books is spent in the explication of such general laws and
directions as were of themselves sufficient stricte loquendo, or the repetition
of the same things which man's dullness and backwardness to such things made
highly expedient and beneficial: The five Books of Moses were sufficient to
Salvation before any of the other Books were indicted, and the following
Writings of the Prophets were but Comments upon them, which if by Gods
providence they had been lost, no doubt the first five Books would have been
sufficient for Salvation for that state of the Church: So when St Matthew had
Written his Gospel wherein the Doctrine of the person and office and works of
Christ (who is the marrow of both Testaments, and the sole-sufficient object of
saving knowledge Ioh. 17.3.) is clearly revealed and fully proved, I do assert
(and let any of our Adversaries prove the contrary if they can) that that had
been sufficient for our Salvation: And yet it must be acknowledged a wonderful
favor from God that he has so plentifully provided for us, and so carefully
watched by his Providence for the preservation of the several Books of
Scripture, that all the wit and learning of Adversaries can only furnish them
with two instances of Apostolical VVritings which they suppose to be lost viz.
one Epistle from Laodicea, and another to the Corinthians.

Arg. 3. A rule must be plain and clear, but the Scriptures are dark and
doubtful, and that in things appertaining to Salvation, as appears from 2
Pet. 3.16. -- things hard to be understood which they that are unlearned and
unstable wrest to their destruction: Now this could not bring destruction, if
they were not hard in things appertaining to Salvation: And here the Captain
musters up several necessary Doctrines which he supposes not to be clearly
laid down in Scripture.

Answ. The Scripture is plain and clear in things necessary to Salvation, as
has been abundantly evinced by Protestants out of express Scriptures and
consent of Fathers: But that belongs to another point, and I do not love to
mingle distinct questions together, therefore to them I shall refer the
Reader, only I shall take notice of such assaults as he has made upon this
Doctrine.

For the Text 2 Pet. 3.16: I confess I do not meet with any passage so
plausible as this in his whole Book: But the solution of the doubt is not
difficult: If you consider, 1. To whom these things are said to be dark even
to ignorant, unstable, ungodly men: When Protestants say Scripture is clear,
they do not mean it is so to those that are blind, or to them that shut their
Eyes, or have discolored Eyes, (and such are they of whom those things are
said) but unto such as are humble, and diligent in the use of means to find out
the Truth; not only some passages of St Paul but in general all Divine and
Spiritual Truths are dark to the natural man (and such there is no reason to
doubt these were) as is positively asserted by the Apostle S. Paul, 1 Cor.
2.14. The natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they
are foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned: and consequently, if the Popish argument from this place
have any force in it, not only some parts of Scripture will be dark, but not
any part of it will be plain, which the most impudent Papist durst never yet
assert. 2. The wresting of the Scripture in any of its truths or doctrines is
so great a sin, that it may well be called destructive, though the doctrine
wrested be not simply necessary to salvation: as the disbeliefe and contempt of
any Truth or assertion plainly delivered by God, is confessed to be damnable,
though the matter of the assertion be merely circumstantial, and not at all in
it self necessary to salvation.

3. S. Paul's (...), or difficult passages, might be wrested to destruction,
although the matter of them was not necessary to be known, or understood in
order to Salvation. As for instance: That passage of St. Paul's, All things are
lawful for me, (scil. all indifferent things; for he there speaks of the use of
meats, or observation of days,) This, I say is not a fundamental Truth, nor is
the knowledge of it necessary to Salvation, yet when the Libertines do abuse
this Scripture, to justify themselves in the practice of all wickedness,
doubtless they wrest the Scriptures to their own destruction. Besides, the
matter of a Text may be of lesser importance, and the knowledge thereof not
necessary to Salvation, and the first and immediate mistake of it may be in it
self inconsiderable, and yet that may usher in other, and those higher
mistakes, (as we see error is fruitful, and grows worse and worse,) and at last
end in destruction; as that Cloud, which at first was no bigger then a man's
hand, did quickly overcast the whole Heavens. The doctrine of Predestination
the Papists confess is no fundamental, since their own Doctors are divided
about it; yet if any man from St. Paul's assertions of the efficacy and
immutability of Predestination, should infer the unnecessarinesse of
Sanctification to Salvation, (as some have done) doubtless this man would
wrest the Scriptures to his own destruction. But the Captain is not contented
with a general imputation of darkness to the Scripture, but pretends several
Instances of things necessary to Salvation, which are not plain and clear in
the Scriptures: his Instances are these. 1 The nature and number of the
Sacraments. 2 The number of the Canonical Books, and that the Scriptures are
the word of God. 3. The incorruption of the Scripture. 4. The understanding the
true sense of Scripture, which is literal, which mystical. 5. The number of
fundamental points. 6. The doctrine of the Trinity: and 7. other doctrines
concerning the baptizing of Infants, and women's receiving the Eucharist, and
the observation of the Lords day, and the doctrine which condemns
Rebaptization. All these (says he) are necessary to Salvation, and yet
Scripture is not plain and clear in them. So that here are two assertions, and
both of them false in most of the Instances, and all are false in one of them.
It pitties me to trifle away time in the particular answer of such impertinent
allegations, did not the weakness of some in believing all that is boldly
asserted, make it necessary.

For the 1. The Scripture is plain enough in describing the nature of those two
Sacraments, which Christ has instituted, as the Captain might easily have
informed himself, if in stead of going to Knot, and Fiat Lux etc. he had looked
into almost any of our Protestant Systems, or common places of Divinity,
whither I refer the Reader, having somewhat else to do, then to transcribe
common places: And for the other 5 Sacraments I cannot say they are delivered
in Scripture more clearly then the others, but I may say, they are less
darkly, because indeed not delivered there at all, being only a fiction of
their own, of which God may say, They never came into my mind.

For the 2. It is a crude and false assertion which the Captain lays down,
That it is necessary to salvation to believe all the books of the holy
Scriptures to be the word of God, and to believe nothing to be the word of God
which is Apocryphal. If the latter part be true, woe to the Church of Rome that
now is, which has owned those writings for the word of God in the Council of
Trent, which by the judgment of so many most learned Fathers, and grave
Councels, and the Church of so many successive ages have ever been held for
Apocryphal, as no rational man can doubt, that shall take the pains to read
either of those excellent pieces, Raynoldus de libris Apocryphis, or Bishop
Cousens his Scholastical history of the Canon of the Scripture. And if the
former part be true, then we must damn all those Fathers, and Churches, who
(as both Papists and Protestants acknowledge) did sometimes doubt of some books
now universally received: nay farther, we must damn all the former ages, and
Churches, and innumerable holy and learned writers, and even many of the most
famous Papists themselves, who did all disown and disbelieve some at least of
those Books, which (if we take the judgment of the Tr^nt Council) are and were
a part of the word of God. The truth is, (and so it is generally owned by
Protestant writers) That the belief of those Truths contained in the Scriptures
is necessary to Salvation, though happily a man through ignorance or error
should doubt about some one Book. It is necessary that I should believe the
history of Christ's life and death, but it is not necessary to Salvation simply
and absolutely to believe that the Gospel of St. Mark (for instance) was
written by Divine inspiration. This may appear from hence, because Faith is
sufficient for Salvation, and faith comes by hearing, Romans 10. as well as by
reading: now as Faith might be, and really was wrought by the hearing of the
doctrine and history of Christ, when preached by such Ministers as were not
divinely inspired, so might it be wrought by the reading of such things, when
written by the very same persons; and consequently it was not, and is not
necessary to the working of Faith, (and therefore to the procuring of
Salvation,) to believe, That St. Marks Gospel was written by Divine
inspiration. And yet I do not assert this, as if I thought that it were not a
very great sin, (especially in and after so much light about it) to disbelieve
any one book of the Scriptures, there being so many evident characters of a
Divine inspiration upon the particular books, besides the general assertion 2 Timothy 3.16. All Scripture is given by divine inspiration, and other convincing
places, but only to show, That (which is a certain and evident Truth) it is
not simply and absolutely, and ex natura rei necessary for every person to
believe every particular Book to be the word of God, but a serious and
practical belief of the Truths contained in those Books, may be sufficient to
Salvation, even where there is an ignorance (if not wilful and affected) of the
Divine Authority of some book or books of Scripture.

3. For the Third thing, the incorruption of the Scripture, I Answer

1. The Scriptures incorruption in substantial and considerable points, besides
that it is confessed by the learned Papists (as I have showed before,) does
sufficiently appear from it self, by the collation of one place of Scripture
with another, as also by the collation of several copies. And one great
argument of it may be fetched from (that which seems to twhart it,) viz. the
various readings which learned men have observed out of diverse copies, let any
man look into them as he finds them collected in the late Polyglotte Bible, and
his own eyes shall witness, that howsoever the differences of Readings are
numerous, yet they are not of any moment; and indeed the differences in lesser
matters are a considerable evidence of the Scriptures uncorruptednesse in
greater, wherein the copies do wonderfully consent.

2 If the Scripture not evidencing its own incorruption, hinder its being a
rule, then neither can the Scripture be so much as a part of our Rule, (which
yet is granted by the most insolent of our Adversaries) for so the argument
will carry it, if there be any strength in it, nor was the Decalogue a rule of
life to the following generations of the Israelites, nor can the old and
unrepealed Acts of Parliament be a Rule to England, nor yet can Tradition be a
Rule to the Papists; for the Papists not only confess its insufficiency to
evince its own uncorruptednesse, but acknowledge its actual corruption in
several points, (as has been showed before:) nor can the Decrees of Popes and
Councels be a rule, which being writings, must needs be liable to the same
imperfections and corruptions, that the Scriptures because writings are said to
be subject to: and consequently there is no rule neither for Papists nor
Protestants, but every one may do that which seems right in his own eyes.

4. He pretends it is necessary to Salvation to understand which is the true
sense of Scriptures, when it is to be taken literally, when mystically, and
this (says he) cannot be understood from sole Scripture.

Ans. Here also both Propositions are remarkably false. 1. It is not necessary
to Salvation to a Christian to understand the true sense of every Scripture: if
it were, what shall become of those Legions of poor deluded Papists, into whose
devotion ignorance is so considerable an ingredient? who neither understand the
sense, nor are permitted to read the words of the Scripture. 2. The ^ense of
Scripture in fundamental points is clear and intelligible, and that from
Scripture, which is its own best Interprete^. And if we consult the best
Expositors, either Popish or Protestant, we shall find, they never so well
unfold Sc^pture riddles, (if I may so speak) as when they plow with the
Scriptures Heifer. Every puny knows the collation of parallel, or seemingly
repugnant places; and the observation of the scope and cohaerence, and the
like, are the best Keys to find out the true sense of the Scripture, and
sufficient to discover it, unless the readers ignorance or negligence, pride
or prejudice stand in his way. I will take an instance from the Captain himself
of those Scriptures which confute the Arrians: Joh. 10.30. I and my father are
one: but (says the Captain) the Arrian will say, this is meant of Oneness in
affection, as Joh. 17.21. And here my Captain is gravelled, and half made an
Arrian; and because he could not answer the Arrian, he concludes again, no body
else can: But wiser men would have told him, That this Arrian gloss is
confuted out of the Scriptures, both out of the present chapter, (the Captain
and Arrian being more blind then the Jews, who understood Christ's meaning
better, viz. That he made himself God, v. 33.) and from other places of
Scriptures, where Christ is expressly called God, Joh. 1.1. the true God, 1 John
5.20. and thought it no robbery to be equal with God. Phil. 2.6. And indeed the
Council of Nice (as I showed in the foregoing discourse) did confute the Arrian
Heresy out of the Scriptures, they saw no need of going further.

5 He alleges the number of fundamental points, which (says he) the
Scripture determines not.

Ans. This is most false. The Scripture does sufficiently determine fundamental
points: I must not here run into another controversy concerning the number of
fundamentals. This may suffice at present, That the Scripture does not press
all Truths with equal vehemence; that there are some points, wherein the
Scripture does, though not approve of, yet dispense with differing opinions in
Christians: such as those were concerning days, and meats, and ceremonies in
Religion: and there are other points, which it urges upon us with highest
penalties; such as that in Joh. 8.24. If ye believe not that I am he, ye shall
dye in your sins. To me this is a rule: That to which God promises or annexeth
salvation, is surely sufficient for salvation; I care not one straw for all the
Roman Thunderclaps of Damnation, where I have one promise from God for my
salvation. I am assured by God that to fear God, and keep his commandments, is
the whole duty of man, Eccles. 12.13. That he that fears God, and works
righteousness, is accepted of him, Act. 10.35. That this is life eternal, to
know thee to be the only true God and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent: Joh.
17.3. and consequently if I know him, and believe in him, his person, and
office, and work, I may humbly put in my claim for eternal life, and have not
so much reason to fear their cursing of me, (knowing that the curse causeless
shall not come) as they have to fear the curse of God, and an addition to their
plagues for adding to God's word. Rev. 22.18. In a word, the fundamentals or
substantials of Religion do apparently lie in two things, the Law, and the
Gospel: the Scripture tells me, that love is the fulfilling of the law, Romans
13.10. that he that loves Christ shall be loved of his father, Ioh. 14.21.
that hereby we know that we are passed from death to life, because we love the
brethren, 1 John 3.14. It tells me also, That faith in Christ is the fulfilling
of the Gospel: ye believe in God, believe also in me, Joh. 14.1. and these
things are written, that ye might believe, that Jesus is the Christ the son of
God, and that believing ye might have life in his name. Joh. 20.31. Christ has
^^sured us, (it seems he should have asked his Vicars leave for it,) He that
believes on me has everlasting life. Ioh. 3.36. For my part I am not afraid
to venture my salvation upon this promise: and for Popish comminations and
curses, I shall only say with the Psalmist, Let them curse, but bless thou,
Psalm. 109.28.

By these things we see the Scripture sufficiently informs us of fundamentals.
To which I might add the common sense of Gods Church, and the learned
Ministers in all ages, it having been acknowledged by the most eminent Doctors,
both ancient and modern, both Popish and Protestant, (as may be seen at large
in Dr. Potters want of charity charged upon Romanists, and Mr. Chillingworths
Defense of it,) That the Creed, commonly called the Apostles Creed, does
contein in it a complete body of the fundamentals of salvation for the
Credenda, and all the Articles of the Creed are sufficiently evidenced from the
Scriptures, as I could with great facility demonstrate, but I study brevity.

But you must know, the Church of Rome has another notion of Fundamentals, a
rare notion I tell you, for you shall not find the like either in Scripture, or
any ancient Author. They make the Churches definition the rule of Fundamentals:
That is a Fundamental Truth, and de fide, which the Church determines and
decrees, though never so inconsiderable, and that is no Fundamental, nor de
fide, which the Church has not determined, though it be never so material.
Thus to fast in Lent, on Fridaies, if the Church command it, is now become a
Fundamental, and if any man obstinately refuse it, God will assuredly condemn
such a person, says an English Apostate, Cressy sect. 2. chapter 13. n. 2. though
he there confesses it is but an action little more then circumstantial: yet on
the other side it is no Fundamental to hold, That all men (except Christ) are
conceived in sin, because the Church (forsooth) has not determined the
Question of the Blessed Virgin. Thus with the Romanists it is a fundamental
doctrine to believe that Paul left his Cloak at Troas, (namely if the Church
enjoin you to believe it, for there is the knack, it is not Fundamental,
because St. Paul asserts it, 2 Timothy 4 13 but because St. Peter's successor or
the Church injoyns you to believe it:) but it is no Fundamental, that Christ is
God, if the Church does not oblige you to believe it. Did I say it was not a
Fundamental? I do them wrong in not speaking the whole truth; for so far are
they from owning it for a Fundamental Article, that they will not allow it to
be an article or object of our Faith, without such confirmation and injunction
from the Church, as I showed in the beginning of the foregoing Discourse. But
this is so gross a cheat, and such a groundless imposture, wholly destitute of
all appearance of proof, that it is a vanity to spend time in the confuting of
it. If any Papist think otherwise, let him give us solid proofs, That the Pope
or Council have such dominion over our Faith, That Fundamentals are all at
their mercy; though me^ thinks the very mention of such a conceit is abundant
confutation, nor can any thing be more absurd, then to say, That it is no
Fundamental to believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder of them them tha^
diligently seek him, (unless the Churches Authority command us to believe it,)
and that it is a Fundamental to believe that (which so many of the Ancients did
not believe,) viz. the falsehood of the Millenary opinion, or of the admission
of departed Saints to the Beatifical Vision before the day of Judgment,
(because these are determined by the Church:) And there is nothing which more
essentially overthrowes the Popish conceit of Fundamentals, then the
consideration of the Pillar upon which they build it, which is the Churches
Infallible authority, as the Answerer of Bishop Land Discourses, whose great
argument is this: whosoever refuses to believe any thing sufficiently
propounded to him for a truth revealed from God, commits a damnable sin: but
whosoever refuses to believe any point sufficiently pr^pounded to him or
defined by the Church as matter of faith, refuses to believe a thing
sufficiently pr^pounded to him for a truth revealed from God: this is proved
from hence, because general Councels cannot err. Where to say nothing of the
Major, you see this man proves (and the Church of Rome has no better proofs)
incertum per incertius, their notion of Fundamentals from their opinion of
Councels infallibility: and the infallibility of Councels having been
abundantly evinced to be but a Chimaerical Imagination, I must needs conclude,
That the foundation being fallen, the superstructure needs no strength of
argument to pull it down, if any desire to see this wild conceit baff^ed he may
find it done in that excellent discourse of Mr. Stingfleets, part. 1* chap. 2,
3, 4.

For the 6. particular, the doctrine of the Trinity: it is true, that is a real
Fundamental; but to say, that is not clearly proved from the Scripture, and for
one that pretends he was a Protestant to say thus, I confess it is one of
those many arguments, which gives us too much occasion to ascribe the Captains
change to any thing rather then to the convictions of his conscience, or the
evidence of his cause. Behold the harmony between Socinianisme and Popery!
Rather then not assert the Churches authority, these men will renounce the
great principles of Christianity, and put this great advantage into the
Socinians hands, to confess that they cannot be confuted by Scripture. But the
learned Papists are of another mind in their lucid intervals, and some of them
(as Simglecius) have sufficiently overthrown the Socinian Heresy from Scripture
evidence: however I am sure Protestants have abundantly evinced it. Let any man
read but those excellent discourses of Placaeus about the Praeexistence of
Christ before his birth of the Virgin, and his Divinity, and he will be of
another mind. But this shows the Captain was prepared to receive any thing,
that could so easily believe a proposition, which he could not but know from
his own experience to be horribly false, unless he were shamefully ignorant.

7 For the remaining points, they split upon the same Rocks with the former,
for there is none of them but is sufficiently evident from Scripture, as has
been fully proved by those who have treated of those matters: (but I must
forbear digressions.) And besides, (in the sense he intends) he will find it an
hard matter to prove their necessity to salvation: if he think otherwise, let
him try his strength.

And this may satisfy the third argument concerning the Scriptures darkness in
things said to be necessary to salvation,

A fourth argument urged against the Scriptures supremacy is, that we have not
the Originals, but only Copies and Translations, and these made by fallible
men, and therefore it cannot be a certain rule to our Faith. This has been
answered in the former Discourse, it will suffice therefore briefly to suggest
some ^ew things.

1 This argument (if solid and weighty) will prove that no Copies nor
Translations can be a Rule to us, that only the Original Decalogue, which was
written by Gods own finger, was a Rule to the Jews, and consequently, that
Transcript of it which by Gods appointment the Prince had, and was obliged to
read, was no rule to him: which how false it is, will appear from Deuteronomy. 17* 18,
19. -- When he sits upon the Throne, -- he shall write him a Copy of this
Law in a Book out of that which is before the Priests the Levites, -- and he
shall read therein, -- that he may learn to keep all the words of this Law, and
these Statutes to do them. By which the Reader will quickly discern what weight
is in this part of the Discourse: That a Copy cannot be a certain rule, for the
Princes rule is but a Copy, and the Transcription of that not limited to an
infallible hand. When Moses of old time was read in the Synagogues every
Sabbath day, Act. 15.21. it is to be presumed, each of them had not the
Original of God's writing yet was it never rejected from being a rule upon that
account. What rare work would this Notion make in a Kingdom, if thoroughly
prosecuted? Belike the Captain does not hold his Statute book a rule to him,
because it is not the Original. And observe the horrible partiality of these
men: The Decrees of the Pope or Council, suppose of Trent, are a Rule and a
certain one too to our English Papists, though they have nothing of them but a
Copy and a Translation; but the Scripture cannot be a Rule, because it is only
a Copy and Translation. The law of God or of the Church is a rule to the
hearers, when it is delivered only by a Popish Priest (and he confessedly
fallible) by word of mouth, and it cease to be a rule, when it is delivered
by writing by a fallible hand: yet surely the one is but a copy as well as the
other, though made by diverse instruments.

2. The copies and Translations of Scripture are a sure and certain rule,
because they do sufficiently evidence themselves to be the word of God, and the
same for substance with the Originals. The incorruption of the Scriptures in
substantial things is sufficiently evinced from the confession of its greatest
Adversaries the Papists, from the consent of Copies taken by persons of several
ages, and far distant places, and contrary principles, from the innumerable
multitude of copies every where dispersed, and the constant jealousy and
watchfulness of so many wise and zealous Christians, ready to observe the
least considerable corruption, and give warning of it, and many other
considerations. All those arguments which are pleaded both by Papists and
Protestants for the Divinity of the Scripture, they reach to copies and
Translations: In these, as well as in the Original is the majesty of the Style,
the sublimity of the doctrines, the purity of the matter, the excellency of the
design: To these as well as the Originals God has given so many signal
testimonies by the conversion of thousands, by frequent and illustrious
miracles, by the cooperation of his Spirit with them in the hearts of his
people, and many other arguments, which (when a Papist is in a good mood, and
disputing with a Pagan) must pass for undeniable demonstrations of the truth
of Christianity and the Divinity of the Scriptures. And for the differences in
Translations, (either noted by the Papists, or confessed by any of the
Protestants,) which the Captain makes a great Flourish with, and other Papists
make such triumphs at, they are so petite and trivial, and so little concerning
the substance and foundation of Religion or the Scriptures, that to me it
affords an unquestionable evidence, That our Translations are unblameable in
fundamental places, because all their great wits and learned Doctors to this
day could not discover any such mistakes, though they have made it their
business to find them out. But I shall say no more to this argument in this
place, having in the former part of the Treatise spoken to it.

A fifth argument is taken from the seeming contradictions which are in
Scripture, not resolveable by the Scripture. Hence (says the Captain) Reason
conceives her self to have this infallible demonstration, viz. no one who
speaks two things, the one contrary to the other* is infallible in speaking;
but the Scripture so speaks, therefore says Reason the Scripture is not
infallible in speaking. Nay (he might and should have said) the Scripture is
not credible in speaking: and therefore say I, by the virtue of this argument
the Captain must either acknowledge himself an unreasonable man, or an
Atheist* I tell you it was good hap, That in stead of the Catholic Gentleman
he did not meet with an Atheist, for the arguments which convinced him are
indifferently calculated for either Meridian. But for all those seeming
contradictions, the short Answer is this.

1. That there are no such places, but are capable of convenient
reconciliations, as has been already made good by several learned men both
Papists and Protestants, who have professedly treated of those matters, and
discovered the vanity of this objection. And if it were granted, That there are
some places which men have not yet hit upon the right way of reconciling them,
that is no evidence of the impossibility of it, since we can give instances in
others, which in former times were thought as insoluble, as any now are, which
the learning and diligence of after ages has fully cleared from all semblance
of contradiction.

2. Those seeming contradictions are either reconci^eable out of Scripture, or
else are but historical difficulties, not at all necessary to salvation. The
Captain should do ^ell to put the parts of his discourse together, and see how
they agree, because he will not, I will do it for him. The Proposition which
Protestants assert, and he attempts to disprove is, That the Scripture is a
perfect Rule in things necessary to salvation. This he disproves by instancing
in some insoluble difficulties in matters unnecessary to salvation. But we must
pardon him, it is vitium causae, the cause affordes no better arguments.

A sixth argument is this* Scripture is no sufficient rule, because it is
liable to diverse and contrary expositions.

An invincible argument, by which a man may dispute all Rules out of the world!
Probatur. The Decalogue is no rule of life or manners, for the Pharisees
understood it one way, Christ another, Mat. 5. The Statutes of the Kingdom are
no rule, for learned Lawyers differ in their expositions. The Decrees of Popes
and Councels are no rule, because liable to diverse and contrary expositions,
so far, that Gratian the compiler of their Canon Law has one entire Title De
Concordantia, Discordantium Canonum, i. e. concerning the reconciling of
disagreeing Canons: And there is this remarkable difference between the
condition of the Romish and our affairs: our differences are in the exposition
and accommodation of the rule, but Popish differences are in the Text and rule
it self, since there are amongst them not only diverse and contrary
expositions of the same Canon, (which yet is sufficient to take off all their
glorying over us, and to bring them to our level) but indeed there are
contrary Texts, the decrees and sentences of one Pope directly contrary to
another, and one Council to another. Pope Steph^n nulls the decrees of
Formosus, the three next Popes null the decrees of Stephen, and re-establish
those of ^ormosus. Sergius the third comes after, and again nulls Formosus his
decrees. But I will tell you of a greater matter, even no less then the
Authentical Translation of the Bible: S^xthe 5th* sets forth one Bible An.
1590, not rashly, but deliberately, with the advice of his Cardinals, the
assistance of the most learned men of all the Christian world, (they are his
own words,) corrects the errors of the Press with his own hand, imposes this
upon the whole Church. Within 3 years comes Clemens the 8. and he puts forth
another Edition, not only diverse, but in several passages directly contrary
to it, (for which I refer the reader either to those two Bibles themselves, or
to Dr. James his Bellum Papale, and the Defense of it, where he shall find
above a thousand differences between them,) yet Cle^ens suppresseth all other
Translations, and enjoynes this for the one^y Authentic Translation, and so it
is held to this day. The like I might show of Councels, as it were easy to
furnish the Reader with many instances not of the seeming but real
contradictions of Popes and Councels among themselves, and yet (forsooth) the
appearance of a contradiction must exauctorate the Scriptures, when real
contradictions shall not prejudice the Authority of Pope and Council; so true
it is, That some may better steal a horse then others look over the ^edge.

The seventh assault which the Captain makes is this. If the Scripture be our
sole rule and Judge, then it was so in the Apostles days, and if so, the
Authority of the Apostles ceased when they had done writing.

I Answer 1. The Consequence may very well be denied from the Apostles times to
ours. The argument is this: Scriptures were not the only rule, when there were
several governors of the Church acknowledged on all hands to be infallible
both singly and jointly: Ergo it is not the only rule now, when there is no
person nor persons in the Church, but who is proved to be fallible. For this is
the case at this day, unless the Captain and Mr. Cressy and the rest will
change their notes, and in stead of the Pope and Council combined, say that the
Pope alone is infallible, wherein I desire to understand their minds. 2. The
other Consequence has not a Dram more of Truth in it: for if the Scripture
were the sole rule, yet did not the Apostolical Authority cease. It is no
diminution to their Authority to say, they had not a power superior to the
Scripture or the word of God, i. e. That the Servant was not above his Master;
the Apostles never pretended to such a power, but rather carried themselves in
all things as became those who professed their subjection to the word of their
God and Lord. Observe the manner of their proceeding in that great Council,
Act. 15. still you shall find the Scripture is the rule, by which they guide
the whole debate, and from which they draw their conclusion, as none that read
that chapter can deny. You may observe that an Apostle (and he too of so great
Authority that he durst reprove St Peter to his face Gal. 2.) makes no scruple
of circumscribing his own Authority within the limits of Gods Word, and he
repeats it in reimemoriam, Though we or an Angel from Heaven preach any other
Gospel unto you then that which we have Preached unto you, let him be
accursed, Gal. 1.8. I know it is said by Mr White in his Apology for Tradition,
that this place makes for Tradition rather then for Scripture, and for what the
Apostles delivered by word of mouth, not what they left in Writing: To which
the reply is most easy, that since the Doctrine delivered by the Apostles,
either by word or Writing is and must be confessed to be of equal Avthority
(the Council of Trent goes no higher while they assert that Scripture and
Tradition are to be received pari pietatis aff^ctu ac reverentia, with equal
piety and reverence) it consequently follows, that he who renounceth all
pretensions of Authority Superior, or not subordinate to the one, cannot be
said with any color of sense to challenge a Supremacy over the other: The
Apostles had not so learned Christ as they who arrogate the name of their
Successors have: The power they claimed was not Autocratoricall and
despoticall, having dominion over the peoples Faith, and being Lords over Gods
Heritage, but only Ministerial, not for destruction, but for edification, not
coordinate, but subject unto their Master and his Word.

The last reason he urges is, that this opinion of sole Scripture makes every
man Judge who take upon them to read and understand the Scripture.

Answ. 1. If it be meant a private Judge, so far as it concerns his own
actions; It is true, and that Judgment (as I have showed) the Scripture allows
and enjoynes to private Christians, and informs us of the sad condition of
those that neglecting their own judgment, give up themselves to a blind
obedience to their rulers (an error common to the Jews of old and the Papists
now) assuring us this is no excuse nor security to them, but if the blind lead
the blind both will fall into the Ditch, Matthew. 15.14.

2. The Papists themselves however they renounce this principle of every man's
being Judge in words and show, yet they receive it in truth and practice upon
it, and whatever noise they make of Fathers and Councels and the Pope and
Church, yet in truth they make particular men the Judges for their own actions;
For instance if we examine the grounds and manner of the Conversion (as they
miscall it) of any man to the Romish Religion, (take Cressy and the Captain
for instances) we shall find the Papists that dealt with them, made them
Judges: And when the Captain yields to that great Argument, viz. That if he did
not turn Catholic he had no infallible assurance that Christian Religion was
true, was not he himself Judge of the validity of this Argument? And when
Cressy or others are perverted by that great Title of the Churches Authority to
which they think all should be subject, what do they but make themselves Judges
of this question upon which all depends, whether the Churches Authority be a
sufficient and safe foundation for a man's faith to rest upon? So if I come to
any Papist who is capable of Discourse, I would ask him whether he continues
in the Popish communion and belief with reason or without it? If he say,
without reason, I shall forbear discoursing with bruit creatures* If with
reason, I demand what it is; and here he will enter into a large harangue,
concerning the necessity of a living and infallible judge for the ending of
Controversies, and that the Pope or Council is this Judge: In this case I say,
the Romanist makes himself the Judge of the first and principal question, upon
which all the rest depend, viz. whether such a Judge be necessary, and whether
the Pope or Council be this Judge: And certainly as St Paul argues 1 Cor. 6.
They that are fit to judge the greater and weightier causes cannot be unfit to
judge the smaller matters.

Thus I have gone over all the Arguments or appearances of reason which the
Captain or others for him have collected, and what Mr Cressy has pleaded for
any of them: I shall in the next place proceed to answer what farther Arguments
I meet with either in Mr Cressy, or in that famous (or rather infamous) piece
called Rushworths Dialogues, or in Mr Whites Apology for Tradition; For
doubtless si Pergama dextra Def^ndi possent, dextra* hac defensa fuissent: And
if men of their parts and learning and study in the Controversy can say nothing
to purpose against the Scriptures being a perfect rule. I shall with greater
security a^quiesce in the Truth of the Protestant Doctrine.

Another Argument therefore against the Scriptures is taken from the occasion
of VVriting the Books of the New Testament of which Cressy Treats, Sect. 2.
chap. 10. And it is observable that his Argument (however it regularly ought to
reach the whole Scripture, yet) is only (upon the matter) levied against the
Epistles in the New Testament, which (says he) were never intended to be
Written as Institutions or Catechismes containing an Abridgment of the whole
Body of Christian* Faith for the whole Church, for they were Written only to
particular Persons or Congregations (without order to communicate them to the
whole Church) and they were written me^rly occasionally, because of some false
Doctrines* which if those Heretics had not chanced to have broached, they had
never been Written: And therefore surely are very improper for a rule of Faith
(which must be so true and clear and evident that there can be no rational
possibility of contradiction or diversity of opinion) and for a man to venture
his Soul upon. This is the sum of that Discourse (excepting what he says of
the obscurity of the Scriptures which I have considered before.)

For Answer, 1. Since Mr Cressy requires it in a rule of Faith that it be so
true and clear and so evident, that there can be no rational possibility of
contradiction or diversity of opinion, let him, or rather any other
disinteressed or unprejudiced person seriously consider, what has been
discoursed in the former Treatise, and Answer it to his own conscience as he
will give his account to God another day, whether the Popish rule of Faith be
so true and clear and evident, etc. as is pretended to be necessary, or
rather, whether it be not so dark and doubtful, that it is not only rejected
by Protestants upon solid and cogent grounds, but also disputed and denied by
diverse of their own great Doctors: The question under favor is not this,
whether our rule be so clear as to admit of no possibility of contradiction,
(for who can dream of this that ever heard or read of the Academicks whose
great principle was to contradict every thing and be confident of nothing?) but
whether the Popish rule or ours be better, whether is more true, clear, and
evident? And this one would think should not be very difficult to determine:
And whether the Protestant rule be so evident that it may satisfy the
Conscience and Reason and prudence of any modest, humble, and diligent
enquirer, though it may not silence the clamours of every bold caviller, since
there have been (and probably yet are) in the World men so absurdly
scepticall, that they have cavilled against the certainty of this Proposition,
that two and three make five.

2. The occasionality and particularity of those Writings is no impediment to
their being a rule, (though this is a notion the Popish Writers often mention and
vehemently urge upon the simpler sort of men) It neither hinders their being a
rule, nor their being a perfect rule: 1. Not the former, the Papists themselves
being Judges, for they acknowledge it to be regula partialis a part of the rule
(I tell you Christ is exceedingly beholden to them that will acknowledge thus
much and allow him any share in the rule of his Church.) The Council of Trent
in its Decree concerning the Canonical Scriptures, notwithstanding this
objection ascribes this to the Scriptures no less then to Traditions, That
both of them together are the Canon or rule of Faith and manners, and to both
they allow equal Piety and reverence as I said before. Will any man say the
law concerning Inheritances delivered Number. 27. was no Law or rule to the
Israelites, because it was delivered upon the extraordinary occasion of
Zelophehads daughters Petition? Or that the Law against the Priests drinking of
Wine, when he was to go into the Tabernacle Levit. 10.9. was no rule to the
Priests, because delivered peradventure upon the occasion of some intemperance
of Nadab and Abihu? 2. Nor does this at all hinder the Scriptures being a
perfect rule, partly because this Objection concerns only one part of the
New Testament viz. the Apostolical Epistles: But for the Gospels which of
themselves are a sufficient rule (though the addition of the other is an
abundant consolation and a rich mercy:) Mr Cressy confesses they were Written
upon no special occasion, but for the common benefit of all succeeding
Christians as an History of his Life and Death, and a sum of the principal
points of his Doctrine, (They are the Authors words, and we need no more to
justify the Scriptures sufficiency) and partly because the occasions, however
casual to men, yet were foreseen and foreordained by God to be such as would
recurre in all following Ages, and partly because the Apostle extends his
thoughts and instructions beyond the present occasion upon which, or particular
person, or persons to which he Writes even to following Ages, and consequently
intended them for rules and directions not only to them, but to others, yea to
all succeeding Christians. What else means St Paul in charging Timothy to keep
the command there mentioned -- until the appearing of Christ, 1 Timothy 6.14.
which St Paul knew was at a great distance, 2 Th^s. 2.1. if he did not include
his Successors? The Books of the Old Testament, at least diverse of them were
written upon special occasion, and yet St Paul has given it under his hand,
That whatsoever things were Written before time were Written for our learning,
Romans 15.4. and that all those Scriptures are profitable (to us) for Doctrine,
repro^fe, etc. 2 Timothy 3.16. An irrefragable Argument that what was Written upon
a special occasion may be a standing rule. And the constant universal
practice of all the Ancient Fathers and Counsels confirming Truths or Duties,
and reproving sins or errors in after Ages from the Testimonies of the
Apostolical Epistles, does unquestionably evince that they judged them however
directed to particular persons or Churches, yet indeed designed for a rule of
the Church in all following Generations.

That particular occasions have given the rise to such general rules and laws
as have been of perpetual force and use, no man that knows any thing can be
ignorant: And that really this was the case, and that the Principles,
Doctrines, and Instructions which are laid down by the Apostles in their
Epistolary Writings, how particular soever the occasion might be that drew them
sorth, are in their own nature and quality indifferently calculated for, and
equally fit to be a guide to other persons or Churches, needs no proof, but
the reading of them, and a reflection upon the daily practice of all Preachers
as well Popish as Protestant which from time to time deduce such documents from
them as are singularly useful in whatsoever age or place they live in.

And this may serve Mr Cressy's turn, for I meet with nothing else
considerable to this point in his Book. In the next place I shall consider what
Mr Rushworth says (who in the opinion of the Romanists is (...)) in his famed
Dialogues: His Arguments against the Scriptures being Judge of Controversies
are two: The first is (that which has been already handled) from the errors
and corruptions which must needs be in our Bible, by Copists and Translators:
And here he set his wit upon the rack to devise whatever could be said to blast
the credit and the Authority of the Scripture: Here he tells us of the many
hazards, doubts, and mistakes, from multitude of Copies, depravations of
Heretics, the Jews at Tiberias and Greeks elsewhere, mistakes of the
negligent or ignorant Transcriber, multiplicity of Translations, equivocation
of words which are used in several senses according to the variety of times,
places, and persons, the ceasing of these Tongues in which Scripture was
Written, and the quality of the Hebrew and Greek Tongues: He computes how many
erro^s probably might be in the Copies of the Bible, we may well allow (says
he) 336 errors in one Copy, which admitted, you will find the number of errors
in all the Copies made since the Apostles time fifteen or sixteen times as many
as there are words in the Bible, and so by this account, it would be 15 or 16
to one of any particular place, that it were not the true Text, (These are his
words Dialog. 2. Sect. 5.)

When I read these and other things of the same tendency, I began to reason
with my self: Are these the Discourses of William Rushworth a Romish Priest?
Are these the Arguments which must make men Christians or (which in their sense
is all one) Roman Catholics? Is this the man that affected the rigor of
Mathematical discourse even in his Controversies, as we may perceive by this
work? (for so Mr White is pleased to tell us?) Is this the Book that so
learned, so ingenious a man as Mr White must commend to the World, as that
which was very satisfactory to diverse judicious persons: Surely it is a
mistake these are not Rushworths, but Vaninus his Dialogues, or it is a
newfound remnant of Julian the Apostate, which some unlucky Heretic has set
out under the name of a Romish Priest.

May I be so bold as to ask our Holy Mother the Church of Rome Number haec est
tunica filii? Is this thy sons voice? No sure, It is some Priest of Apollo,
bidding defiance to the Christian cause, and striving to render the Holy
Scriptures contemptible and ridiculous. But you see what desperate men will do,
in a desperate cause, rather then not maintain the Papal Authority, they will
subvert the very foundations of Christianity: The Jesuits tell us that in
order to the coming of Antichrist, Rome shall turn Pagan; I am perfectly of
their mind, and I think the turn is half wrought already: Ecce signum! for
none short of a Pagan could talk at this rate: The insolency of the Discourse,
and confidence of the Disputer, and the applauss of his party makes it
necessary that I should say something farther by way of Answer.

The first Answer (which alone may silence this impudent Objection) is this:
Either this Argument proves nothing against us, or it proves more then the
Papists, at best such of them as are not quite out of their wits and
consciences too would have it; let us reflect a little upon the premises and
then forecast the Conclusion. Take all his discourse for granted, that by
reason of the many mistakes, corruptions, doubts, difficulties, there is
nothing but incertitude, that it is fifteen to one of any particular place,
that it is not the true Text, that it is as ridicul^^s to seek the decision of
Controversies out of the Bible, as to ^ut with a Beetle or to kn^ck with a
straw: These are the Authors words Dialog. 2. Sect. 2. Go, say these are
faint-hearted fellows if you can: Give me those honest souls that tell us
plainly what they think of the Scriptures, and how little they value them. It
were an hard case if all the the Churches Adversari^s were crafty companions:
Now (say I) if these things be true then certainly it was not without cause,
that the Papist forementioned said, that without the Churches Authority the
Scriptures were of no more value then AEsops Fables. Their Father Costerus had
good reason to say it was a Sheath that would admit any Sword, and Pamelius did
rightly call it a Nose of Wax. If this were true, we might throw all our Bibles
into the Fire, for Controversies cannot be decided thence, nor errors detected,
nor truth evinced, (there is nothing there but uncertainty and darkness) and
consequently our sins cannot be reproved, nor duties pressed from the Scripture
for the same reason, unless these men will say (who we see will not stick at
small matters) that the Copists or Translators errors did happily hit only
upon such places as concercerned Controversies (that the Church alone might
rule there) not at all on such as concern duties and sins: But if this be
true, whence come those high Characters and ample Testimonies which the most
learned Papists and their Councels have given to the Scripture, that they
acknowledge the Scriptures or Bible (and they spoke of that which we have) to
be the word of God, as much to be reverenced as Tradition it self: How came
Bellarmine to say of those Books of the Prophets and Apostles (which we have)
Nibil notius, nihil certius, etc. i. e. nothing is more evident, nothing more
certain then that they are the Word of God, and none but a fool can deny them
credit* de verbo Dei, lib. 1. c. 2. Whence is it that the Papists accuse the
Protestants of slander, for saying they exauctorate the Scripture? How is it
that they all pretend the Church may not contradict those very Scriptures which
we have? In my opinion the Church of Rome was woefully overseen in disputing
with the Protestants out of the Scripture, or troubling themselves to answer
the Scriptures which Protestants brought, for Mr Rushworth has furnished them
with one Answer which will serve for an universal Plaster, therefore I would
advise them thus to Answer once for all, when a Protestant argues against merit
from that Text, When you have done all that you can say you are unprofitable
servants, Luke 17.10. Let them say it was the error of the Copist, and should
have been profitable servants: So when it is made a Character of the Apostasy
of the latter times forbidding to marry, 1 Timothy 4.3. It is but saying, it was
an error of the Copist that put forbidding instead of commanding, (a familiar
mistake at Rome) and then I think the Heretics are paid home: And so when
Christ bids the people Search the Scriptures, say the Copist left out the word
not, it should have been Search not, for so Tradition assures us: And so in a
thousand other cases, I need no more then give the hint, A word is enough to
the wise, as doubtless they at Rome are in their generation: In short, what do
these men and such Arguments tend to but debauch the consciences of men, and
depreciate the Scriptures, that if men have not so much grace as to abhor
such heathenish discourses, it is enough to make the Scripture as insignificant
a VVriting as the most contemptible Pamphlet that ever the World was pestered
with.

I easily apprehend there is one subterfuge, that the Adversaries of the Holy
Scriptures will think to make an escape at: They will say all this is true,
there neither is nor would be any thing at all certain, or credible, or clear
in the Scripture, and the Sacred VVritings we now have, but for the
Infallibility of the Church, which from Infallible Tradition receives them and
delivers them to us: But I Answer, 1. Woe to us Christians if all the validity
of the Scripture depended upon the Infallibility of the Pope or a Council. Is
not this a rare piece of intelligence for Heathens and Atheists and scoffers at
the Scripture? Are not these men worthy pillars of the Christian cause? 2.
Tradition is not at all concerned in the present dispute nor Infallibility
neither: For suppose the utmost of what can be or is said by the Romanists in
this matter viz. that by Tradition we are Infallibly assured that the
Scriptures are the Word of God, and that the several Books reputed Canonical
by them are indeed Canonical, suppose I say we should take all this for
granted, what is this to our business? Tradition (I hope) does not Infallibly
assure them that the Copists committed no errors in Transcribing nor the
Translators in Translating. Tradition did not infallibly assure Sixtus 5th,
that his Translation was right, for it assured his Successor Clement 8, that it
was corrupt in above a thousand places: And when those Popes put forth their
Translations it sufficiently appears and they confess it, they were not
guided by inspiration, but proceeded in all things more humano, by collation of
Copies, advice of learned men, as I mentioned before out of the Popes own
words: And consequently if all Copies be so corrupt that we can have no
certainty from them, no more could the Pope and his consultors have from those
Copies they used, and therefore are liable to the same uncertainties.

2. However Mr Rushworth pleases himself in this Argument as if it were
unanswerable, and Protestants were mad that did not yield to it; there is one
plain evidence able to assure any rational man that there is no weight and
force in it, because, although these things have been formerly and frequently
objected against the Scripture (for Mr Rushworth was not the first
Antiscripturist) yet diverse of the most learned, and discreet, and resolved
Doctors of the Romish Church (who doubtless were too wise to let slip any
real advantage, and knew very well how much their cause needed it) do utterly
reject and deny it, and together with us do assert the uncorruptednesse of the
Books of Scripture now extant among us, as I before proved out of their own
words.

3. Here is not any one convincing reason to persuade us of the corruption of
the Scripture in substantial things: All that Mr Rushworth offers in liew of
those solid Arguments to disprove the Authority and purity of our Bible is a
collection of probabilities (which witty men can easily multiply upon all
occasions) to show that errors have been frequently committed in Copies and
Translations (which no man denies:) But alas how far short do they fall in
proof, if they come to be scanned by any indifferent person: That which seems
to threaten most is the corruption of Heretics, and we are told of the Jews
at Tiberias who pointed the Bible, when enemies to Christ, and thereby had
opportunity to change the whole Text, as also of the Greek Heretics: I am very
willing the cause should be decided by this one point: For (as it is well
argued by the Assertors of the Integrity of the Hebrew Text, to whom I refer
the Reader, such as Buxtorf and Glassius and many others) if those Jews have
corrupted the Hebrew Bible maliciously to weaken the Christian cause, certainly
they have done it in those places which are of greatest importance to evince
Christianity: But this it is notoriously known they have not done, since most
of the convincing proofs of Christ's being the true Messiah are taken out of
that very Bible which came out of their hands: And for the Greek and other
Heretics, it is very true that some of them did attempt the corruption of some
few Texts of Scripture, but the very attempt made such a noise in the Christian
World, and the whole Church took such an alarm at it, that it was presently
discovered and abhorred, and they severely censured for it, and even Papists
confess the Doctors of the Church were so vigilant, that there could not be
any wilful and material depravation of the Greek Testament, and the like may
be said for the neglects or oversights of Copists. The Christians of former
Ages had such an high opinion of the Scriptures necessity and transcendent
excellency, that they kept it with all possible care, such exact acquaintance
and familiar knowledge of the Scripture, that they could not but discover the
least considerable error, such conscientious strictness, that they abhorred
the least depravation, and such jealousy and watchfulness to observe and
secure that inestimable treasure, that it cannot with any probabi^ity be
imagined that substantial corruptions should come into the Texts, and much
less can the contrary position be taken for a demonstration.

4. As there is no cogent reason to argue the Bibles corruption, so there are
sufficient evidences of its incorruption: Some I have now mentioned, to which
may be added the general inconsiderablenesse of those various lections (which
Popish Writers triumph so much in) the samenesse for substance in all the
citations of Scripture in Authors of diverse Ages, and distant places and
several languages, the acknowledged uncorruptednesse of several other Authors
(as to material points notwithstanding all the different readings) which yet
were not read with that diligence and observation, nor received with that
veneration, no^ kept with that Religion, nor watched with that jealousy, nor
were the corruptours of them terrified with such threatenings, nor men's own
interests so deeply concerned in the conservation of their purity, and
consequently were far more liable to errors or violations then the Scripture:
To all which may be added that (which alone is sufficient) even the providence
and goodness of God, which as it mercifully gave these excellent Writings for
man's conduct to eternal bliss, so it gives us just ground for a comfortable
and confident expectation that it would preserve them to our use, and not
suffer these (Holy VVritings) to see corruption: This is so material a
consideration even in the judgment of our Adversaries, that it is their
principal Argument, and urged by them with greatest vehemence and
p^ausibility, for the Churches Authority and Infallibility, because (as they
pretend) it does not consist with the providence and goodness of God to leave
his Church without an Infallible guide; so that both Papists and Protestants
own the solidity of the principle, and differ only in the application of it,
whilst they urge it for the Infallibility of the Pope and Council (which as
you have seen their own Authors are not satisfied in) and we urge it for the
infallibility and incorruptibility of the Scriptures, (which all Protestants
and diverse Papists assert:)

Thus I hope I have fully satisfied that first Argument.

The other Argument which Mr Rushworth suggests is taken from the nature of the
Books of Scripture: If a law were to be given in Writing it must be thus; First
the common things must be commanded, then by degrees they must descend to
particulars, still observing that several matters should be under several
Chapters or divisions, and not one piece here, another there, and things must
be plain and distinct: From which it is evident enough that the Scripture was
never intended for a Law or Judge of Controversies, because the Book is so
large, and so many things mingled unappertaining to the substance of our
belief, as Historical, Epistolar, Mystical, and so many repetitions; and
lastly it is left to a mere conjecture what may be the meaning of it: Thus
Rushworth Dialog. 2. Sect. 2.

Is this the Mathematical man? Is this the rigor of Mathematics? This is
enough to make a man forswear the study of the Mathematics, if it produce no
better demonstrations: We poor Protestants may well be content to submit to the
Laws of these men, for you see they give Laws to God himself, and it is
already enacted in the conclave of Rome, that if God do not speak in Mood and
Figure he shall not be heard, and that if he put forth any Law-book wherein he
does not rigorously observe the orders and methods of a Systeme it shall not be
received: Believe me it was a good turn that Mr Cowell Writ his Institutiones
Iuris Anglicani, wherein he reduced the English Laws to a Method, for else woe
had been to the poor Statute-Books and all Records of our Laws, for as sure as
a club they had been voted to be no Laws, nor Judges of Controversies between
men and men, for so says our Theological Euclide that scorns to speak under
a Demonstration; for we know how much more large a book they make then the
Bible, and how many things are mingled unappertaining to the substance of our
estates and lives etc. The sum of the Argument is this* The Scripture was not
intended for the Law, because it is so large, so miscellaneous, so full of
repetitions etc. Shall I need to say any more for the answer of such an
Argument wherein there is nothing evident, but the disputers confidence, and
the Papists credulity, and the desperateness of their cause?

Answ. 1. If this Argument hold the Old Testament or the Pentateuch was no Law
to the Jews, But this is false, and it was a Law to the Jews, Ergo, the
principle is false from which such a conclusion is deduced: The Major I prove
from his own words, and besides he particularly disputes against the Old
Testaments being a Law: The Minor I hope I shall easily prove: Where to prevent
equivocation or mistakes, take notice I meddle not with the ambiguous term of
JUDGE, we are now disputing whether it were a Law; nor do I meddle with that
question whether it be a Law to us; But to the Jews: This then I assert that
the Old Testament (notwithstanding this objection) was a Law to the Jews, and
a man would think the very mention of the proposition should cut off all
necessity of proof: It is so absurd and portentous a thing to Christian ears
to hear so evident and received an Assertion questioned, I prove it only by
this Argument: That Book by which both people and Priests, and Princes of the
Jews were to be guided and ruled and commanded in their decisions, was
certainly a Law to them; But such was the Old Testament, 1. For the people it
is plain: They are commanded to observe to do all the Words of this Law that
are Written in this Book, Deuteronomy. 28.58. And Moses makes bold to call it a
Law-book, notwithstanding all the mixtures, repetitions, etc. and a curse is
pronounced to every one that continued not in all things written in the Book of
the Law to do them, Gal. 3.10. and for the guidance of the people, those Books
were to be read by or to the people, Deuteronomy. 31.9. Ios. 8.35. Neh. 8. and diverse
other places: 2. For the Princes it is no less evident that it was a Law and
rule to them, Ios. 1.8. This Book of the Law shall not depart out of thy mouth,
but thou shall meditate therein day and night, that thou may observe to do
according to all that is Written therein: And Deuteronomy. 17.18, 19. When he sits
upon the Throne -- he shall Write him a Copy of this Law in a Book out of that
which is before the Priests the Levites, and he shall read therein all the
days of his life, that he may learn to fear the Lord, -- to keep all the words
of this law and these statutes to do them. Thus it is undeniable, it was a Law
both to Prince and People, and that is sufficient to overthrow the whole
argument. But I add 3. It was a law to the Priests too. I do not now dispute
whether the people were absolutely tied to follow the Priests decisions, (I
think the contrary has been sufficiently evidenced,) but my present assertion
is only this, The books of Scripture were a law to the Priests, by which they
were to be ordered and regulated in their proceedings: The sentence which the
Priests were to pronounce, it must be the sentence of the Law, Deuteronomy, 17.11. and
the Priests are often censured and condemned for neglecting or transgressing the
Law, which plainly shows it was the law and rule of their proceedings.

Ans. 2. But what shall we say if the Papists themselves deny their own
Conclusion, which here they endeavor tanto molimine to prove? You will say we
have little reason to believe those that do not believe themselves, or to
assent to that Conclusion which they deny. To make good this, you must
remember, the question is not about the Judge, properly so called, but about
the Rule or Law, to which we suppose the Judge to be tied: for if the
Scriptures had been compiled in the form of a law with the greatest
exquisiteness, this would not have satisfied our Masters the Jesuits, but
there must have been another, and that a living Judge of controversies. This
premised, I thus proceed: Either they of the Church of Rome have a Law, by
which they regulate all their Decrees and decisions, or they have none: if they
say, they have none, then they act lawlessly and arbitrarily, and we have found
Antichrist by his character (...), or Lawless, 2 These. 2. but if they say, (as
they all pretend and profess) they are guided by a law, then I enquire, what
that law is? Here it is true they are divided, while some make the judgment of
the ancient Church and Fathers their law, others the Popes Decrees, others the
Acts of Councels, but all of them pretend some law or other, and which opinion
soever of their Church they take, (for they have good choice,) either their
argument has no force against the Scriptures being our Law, or it equally
militates against their own Laws. As for instance: if they make the judgment of
the Fathers their Law, are not they liable to the same exceptions with the
Scripture; of largeness, aliene mixtures, repetitions, etc? And the like may
be said of Popes Decretals. and the Acts of Councels, (which they generally
pretend to own as their Law:) and it is no less true of Tradition, of the
largeness whereof one may say, (as was formerly said of Livy,) Quas mea non
totas Bibliotheca capit: for according to the estimate which a learned Author
of their own makes, (Charron by name,) the Scripture is but minima pars
veritatis revelatae, the least part of revealed Truth: He that pleases, may
see good store of them collected by that great terror of the Papists, Moulin,
in a Treatise of his in French, concerning Traditions. Nay (to put all out of
doubt) these very men, that argue at this rate, though they do not acquiesce in
the Scripture as a Judge, yet they do own it for a Law: they confess the word
of God is their rule and law, only they make (as I may say) this law to
consist of two Tables, the written and the unwritten Word, which you saw the
Council of Trent receive with equal piety and reverence. Now certainly they
that subscribe to this (as the Papists generally do,) they own the Scripture
for a Law, though not for a complete and sufficient Law: nor does the investing
of Tradition with the quality of a Law, divest the Scripture of it, any more
then the addition of new Acts of Parliament does derogate the name and
authority of a Law from all former Acts and statutes, that is, not at all. Much
more might be said to show the folly and absurdity of this argument, but if I
should spend more words about it, I should both question my own, and too grossly
distrust the Readers discretion.

And now having done with the Mathematics, let us come to the Politics, the
best argument the Church of Rome has. Politic Mr. White, who seeing their
Scripture arguments in the suds, and for the Fathers pila mi^ nantia pilis,
comes in to succor a falling cause with Politic considerations, and moral
conjectures, and fine-spun probabilities. No man can deny that it was
politickly done, when they saw their Church could prove nothing, to assert,
that her bare saying was sufficient, that the testimony of the present Church,
that she holds nothing but what she has received from Christ and the Apostles,
is security enough for a Christian's Faith: but this notion I have largely
examined, and I hope Mr. White will abate something of his confidence in it;
therefore I have nothing to do here, but to consider what he alleges against
the Scriptures being a Rule or Judge of controversies, and (excepting what has
been before discussed) I find only one argument that can pretend to merit any
consideration, and it is delivered by him pro more with great confidence and
contempt of his Adversaries. When the Protestants ask the question, as well
they may, Cannot the Bible make it self be understood as well as Plato and
Aristotle? (a question which all the wits of the Roman Church, not excluding
Mr. White, were never able to answer,) and thence infer, that the Scripture is
sufficiently intelligible, and able to decide controversies: Mr. White's answer
and argument against the Scriptures is this: That this depends upon a most
false supposition, viz: that the Scripture was written of those controversies
which now are: whereas it is a most shameless proposition to say, the
Scriptures were written of the controversies long after their date, sprung up
in the Christian world: beginning from Genesis to the Apocalypse let them name
one Book, whose Theme is any now controverted Point between Protestants and
Catholics. Apology for Tradition, fifteenth Encounter. And consequently the
Scripture is no fit Judge for our controversies. This, you must know, is the
argument of another Mathematical Papist, who cries out of Protestants for
resting in probabilities, yet can satisfy himself (or at least pretends to do
so) with such absurd and improbable ratiocinations* O the power of prejudice or
interest! (for I cannot tell which it is that blinds such men as Mr. White.) Be
of good cheer, Protestants, the Papists are upon their last legs: you see their
arguments run very low.

The Answer is this in short, (for truly it needs no long nor laborious reply,
how much soever Mr. White is conceited of it.) It is not a most shameless but
a most shameful proposition, to say the Scripture is unable to decide any of
those controversies, which are since sprung up in the Christian world. Is there
any Freshman in the University ignorant of this, That Rectum est Index sui and
obliqui; that the assertion of a Truth is sufficient for the confutation of all
contrary errors, wheresoever or whensover broached: I may say to Mr. White, as
they did to Moses, Will thou put out the eyes of these men? Does Mr. White
think his Readers would have neither wit nor conscience? I ask whether those
passages of Scripture, In the beginning was the word, and the word was with
God, and the word was God, Joh. 1.1. who is over all God blessed for ever, Romans
9.5. This is the true God and eternal life, 1 John 5.20. Before Abraham was I
am, Joh. 8.58. do not solidly and sufficiently confute the late sprung Socinian
Heresy, and prove Christ's Divinity and prae-existency before his Incarnation?
If he say no, I will promise him hearty thanks (though not from Christ, nor
peradventure from his Vicar, yet) from all the Socinians in the world, and then
he would do well to answer what Placaeus, and other of the Protestants, or
rather (as a demonstration of the unity of the Romish Church) what Smigl^cius
and others of his Brother. Romanists have argued from those places, or else let
him give us the reason, why his Brethren should play the knaves, and own and
urge those things for solid arguments, which they did not think so. If he say,
yea, then down falls all this goodly structure, and Mr. White must seek for a
new prop to their declining Babel, and Scripture is not unable to decide
controversies of a later Date. Yet again: I will prove Jesus Christ was not of
Mr. White's mind, for he thought Scripture (yea even such parts of Scripture as
were not written upon those Themes or controversies, nor designed against those
errors) able to decide supervening controversies. Thus he confutes the
Pharisaical opinion about Divorce, from a Text well nigh as old as the Creation
of the world, even the institution of marriage, Math. 19.4, 5, 6. So he
confutes the error of the Sadduces against the resurrection, from a Scripture
long before delivered, (and such an one too as seemed to have no respect at all
to such an Heresy) Mat. 22.29, 30, 31, 32. May it please this worthy Gentleman
to give us leave without offense to prefer our Saviors opinion before his. I
am ashamed to spend time in confuting so senseless a cavil, (but that the
reputation of an Author sometimes makes Nonsense pass for an Argument) I need
only advise the Reader to read over the New Testament, and (if he have either
reason or conscience) it is impossible he should be of Mr. White's mind. Did
not the Apostles decide that controversy Act. 15. from ancient Scriptures, and
from such places as seem as irrelative to the matter debated, as any which are
urged by any considerable Protestant against the Popish errors? And why then
may not we tread in their steps? why may not a Protestant as well confute the
opinion of Justification by works (in the Popish sense) from that Scripture we
conclude we are justified by Faith without the works of the Law, as S. Paul
might and did confute the same doctrine (when held by the Jews) from that
passage of David's, Blessed is the man whose iniquities are forgiven, Romans 4? If
these words long before delivered, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him
only shall thou serve, Deuteronomy. 6.13. were sufficient to decide the controversy
between Christ and the Devil, to confute the opinion of Devil-worship, why may
not the same words as urged by Christ be as sufficient to decide the
controversy between the Papists and us, to confute the opinion of
Image Worship? But I am not at leisure to transcribe all the New Testament. I
cannot think of Mr. White (as it is said of many Popish Doctors,) that he never
read over the Bible, but I would desire him once more to read it, and to put on
his Spectacles, and then tell me if he be still of the same mind. If this will
not do, let him reflect upon the Fathers, whether it was not the universal
practice of the Fathers to confute later Heresies out of the Scripture: this
they did either pertinently or solidly, (and then it may be done still,) or
impertinently and fallaciously, (and then Mr. White makes them mere Juglers.)
In a word, as upon supposition that Aristotle was authentic, and (...), it
were no hard matter out of him to confute all the new opinions of the Modern
Philosophers. So the Scriptures being confessedly such, it may suffice for the
confutation of later Heresies. Lastly, if all this will not serve turn, it is
(to use his own words) a shameless proposition, to say the Scripture does not
speak of the matters now in controversy between us and the Papists; and whoever
asserts it, either understands not what he says, or must be presumed never to
have read any of our Protestant Controvertists, who have fully confuted all the
Popish errors and heresies from express Scriptures, or (which is all one) from
genuine consequences evidently deduced from them. Nor does it matter at all to
say, the Scripture treats not of the controversies at large, since it is by all
acknowledged, that every part and parcel of Scripture is Canonical and
Authentical, and the Papists make this the difference between the Divinity of
the Scriptures and Conciliary Decrees: That these are Divine in the main
Conclusion, but not in the premises or mediums, but the Scripture they say is
Divine in all, every verse, every word being Divine; and consequently if but
one verse of Scripture speak against an error, it does as solidly (though not
so fully) confute that error, as if a whole Book were written against it. For
instance: that Text, This is the true God, if the sense of the words be agreed,
(and if they be not, it would do nothing, though an whole Epistle were written
about it, and so far there is no difference) does as substantially confute the
Socinian Heresy in that point, as a larger Discourse upon it would do; and
therefore Mr. White's argument is empty and inffectual, and must go after its
fellows. And so all their arguments (of any note) against the Scriptures being
Rule or Judge of controversies are I hope sufficiently answered, and the
Protestant doctrine or Truth of Christ, viz. The Scripture is a sufficient rule
or judge of controversies, stands-like a Rock, at which their Waves are dashed
in pieces.

And now I should come to the other part, by positive Scriptures and arguments
to prove the Scriptures authority and sufficiency, but this is fully done by
many learned pens; only because our principal arguments for it are assaulted
by the Adversaries I now have to do with, I shall therefore consider their
pretensions against the evidence of those places alleged by us in defense of
the authority and sufficiency of their Scriptures, for I am forced by them
(against my own desire and inclination) to confound found these two heads, and
treat of them together. I know there are several Texts rightly urged by the
Protestants, and vainly cavilled by the Papists: but because the handling of
this point was not my first nor is my main design at present, and one solid
argument or convincing Scripture is as good as a thousand, and both parties are
upon the matter willing their cause should stand or fall by the verdict of one
place, as it does, or does not convincingly prove the sufficiency of the holy
Scriptures, and because above all places the Romanists most eagerly combat
this, I shall therefore more largely insist upon it, and clear up the force and
evidence of it, notwithstanding all the clouds they cast before it.

The place is 2 Timothy 3.15, 16. From a child thou have known the holy
Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto Salvation through faith which
is in Christ Jesus. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished to all
good works.

To ingenuous and dis-interested persons the very reading of these words is a
sufficient confutation of the Popish opinion: but that you may see the
Romanists have (if no conscience, yet) some wit, they are able to darken the
clearest Texts, and to perplex what they cannot answer. Our arguments from this
place are plain and cogent. 1. That which can make a man wise unto Salvation is
sufficient for Salvation. 2. That which is sufficient for the conferring of all
those things which are necessary to salvation, is sufficient for salvation: but
so is the Scripture. For there are but two things necessary to salvation, viz.
knowledge of the Truth, and practice of righteousness and holiness.: and for
both these the Scripture is said to be sufficient. 3. That which is sufficient
for a man of God or Minister, is much more sufficient for a private Christian:
but so is the Scripture: Ergo.

But let us see what our Adversaries pretend against this evident place: Excep.
1 It is able indeed, but that is through faith, E. it is not of it self
sufficient, says our Captain. It speaks not of making Timothy a Christian by
the Bible, (since it supposes Timothy's being already made a Christian by
Paul's institutions viva voce) but it speaks of the perfecting of his faith,
not the first choice of it: and this faith is a belief of Christian verities
delivered by Oral Tradition; says Mr. Cressy sect. 2. cap. 6. And consonantly
to him Mr. White thus glosseth upon the place: The Scriptures will contribute
to thy salvation, so that thou understand them according to the faith of Jesus
Christ, which I have orally delivered unto thee. Apology for Tradition,
Sixteenth Encounter.

Ans. 1. The necessity of Faith is no argument of the Scriptures insufficiency.
The Scripture is sufficient, i. e. in genere objecti, in respect of the object,
or doctrine, or revelation, and yet Faith is necessary in genere instrumenti,
as an instrument, (for it is plain enough, the faith he speaks of is the grace,
not the doctrine of Faith.) By this argument Scripture and Tradition together
were no perfect rule, for both will not make a man wise unto salvation
otherwise then through faith.

Ans. 2. It is falsely supposed, and can never be proved, That the Faith here
spoken of is the fides quae creditur, or the doctrine of Faith, not fides qua
creditur, or the grace of Faith, and that by Faith are here intended Christian
Verities, delivered by Oral Tradition from St. Paul, or the other Apostles: and
this Supposition is the Basis of their Answer. The contrary sufficiently
appears from diverse considerations. 1. This contradicts the Apostles scope,
which apparently is to commend the Scriptures, as able to make wise to
Salvation etc. But this were no commendation at all to say, they together with
such Christian verities are sufficient for salvation: for according to this
argument it might be said of any one verse in all the Old Testament, what is
here said of all the Scriptures, viz. That that Verse together with Faith, i.
e. with the Christian verities delivered by Oral Tradition, is sufficient for
Salvation, which no Papist will deny: and therefore that Answer is absurd.

2. Timothy's faith here supposed, is of the same kind with the Faith of his
Mother and Grandmother, 2 Timothy 1.5. When I call to remembrance the unfeigned
faith that is in thee, which dwelt first in thy Grandmother Lois, and thy
mother Eunice. Was the faith of his Grandmother too the Christian Verities
delivered by Oral Tradition from the Apostles after she was dead?

3. It is not said, The Scriptures are able -- with the faith, but through the
faith; not (...), but (...), which plainly shows, that this Faith is not
another object distinct from the Scriptures, but an instrument to apply the
Scriptures; especially if we consider a parallel place, Heb. 4.2. The word
preached did not profit them, not being mixed with faith, i e. with the grace
of Faith: for none can be so senseless, as to think they were damned for want
of oral Tradition.

4. The Faith here spoken of is together with the Scriptures sufficient for
salvation: and so is the grace of faith: But the Dogmatical belief of Christian
Verities delivered by Tradition, together with the Scriptures, is not
sufficient for Salvation, as the Papists confess: E. the grace of Faith is the
thing here spoken of.

5. The Faith here spoken of is a thing distinct and totally differing from the
Scriptures, and not at all coincident with them. But the Christian Verities or
Traditions delivered by the Apostles were not things so different, but
coincident with the Scripture, as evidently appears from Act. 26.22. where S.
Paul in terminis professes, he said (preached) none other things, then those
which the Prophets and Moses did say should come. But I would have you to wit,
that the Church of Rome know what Paul preached better then himself: a plain
evidence of their Infallibility.

Exc. 2. By this argument the Scriptures of the Old Testament (for of them he
speaks) are sufficient for salvation, and so the New Testament is not
necessary. So the Captain p. 29. and Cressy ubi supra.

Ans. 1. It is very true, the Scriptures of the Old Testament were in those
times sufficient for salvation: This appears from the place now cited, Act.
26.22. compared with Act. 20.27. where S. Paul says, he delivered the whole
counsel of God Hence I argue: The whole counsel of God was delivered by S.
Paul, and is sufficient for salvation: but all that S. Paul delivered was in
Moses and in the Prophets, Act. 26.22. If the Old Testament was deficient in
any doctrine, it was that which the New Testament seems to supply, viz. the
doctrine of Christ, and yet the Old Testament was sufficient to teach Christ;
for it did both instruct men about the Person, and Office, and work of the
Messiah, (as our Divines do abundantly prove against the Jews, to whom I refer
the Reader for the proof of it) and also did sufficiently prove that Jesus was
the Christ, as appears undeniably from Act. 18.28. and consequently there was
no defect, but a sufficiency (for that time and condition of affairs) even in
the old Testament in things necessary to salvation.

A Third Exception they take against our argument from this place is, That it
speaks only of perfection after faith, but here is no question about the first
choice of faith, much less is there any mention of convincing in foro
contentioso) about which is all our controversy. Thus Mr. White's Apology for
Tradition, 16. Encounter.

Ans. Since then all our controversy is about that, whether the Scriptures are
so convincing, it will be worth our while to examine the point; for it is not
my desire to catch at little advantages, but to attaque the Aversary in his
strongest Fort.

But before I come to the proof, let us inquire into the meaning of the Phrase,
What it is for the Scripture to be convincing in foro contentioso, i. e. in way
of disputation. I take it for granted, he is not so absurd as to expect that
the scripture should be so convincing, as actually to convince, and satisfy,
and silence the most importunate and unreasonable Caviller. In that sense the
clearest demonstration in the Mathematics is not convincing: but without doubt
Mr. White takes his Apology, and so his Treatise de fide, and Mr. Rushworths
Dialogues to be convincing Discourses, because though they do not actually
convince the stubborn Heretics, yet they are apta nata to convince them, there
is so much evidence in them, as may and ought to satisfy any understanding,
unconcerned, inquisitive, and prudent adversary: and in this sense I do assert,
that the scriptures are convin^ing in f^ro contentioso, (which is the great
thing Mr. White sticks at:) I prove it thus.

1. The scriptures make a man of God, i.e. the Minister (as they acknowledge)
perfect, and thoroughly furnished to every work: but this is one of his chief
works, to convince Gainsayers Ti^. 1.9. Ergo scripture furnishes him with
convincing arguments.

2. The Scripture is here expressly said to be profitable among other things
for Conviction, (...), first for doctrine, i.e. for the confirmation of Truths,
then for conviction, (for so the Greek word more properly signifies then for
reproof, which is mentioned in the next particular, for correction) or for
resutation of errors. But surely Scripture were not profitable for conviction,
if it be insufficient to attain that end, and be unconvincing: nay more,
Scripture is not profitable for doctrine, if it only beget conjectures and
opinions, and does not give solid and satisfying evidence of its doctrines: and
if it do evidently assert or prove a Truth, it must by consequence as evidently
convince and consute the contrary error. For example: if any Scripture
positively assert, that Christ is the true God, and equal with the Father, (as
de facto it does,) does not the same Scripture sufficiently convince even in
foro contentioso the Socinian Heretics, who make Christ but a Creature, and
inferior to the Father? Neither let him tell me of their cavils against such
places, for so Anaxagoras did cavil against those that said Snow was white,
(and gave a reason for it, says Tully, because the water of which it had its
rise was black,) yet no man I think will deny, that there is convincing
evidence (even in foro contentioso) of its whiteness.

3. The Scripture was convincing formerly, and therefore it is so still, (for I
do not know that it has lost any of its virtue.) Christ proved himself to be
the Messiah out of the Scriptures in sundry places, and I think Mr. White will
not deny, that all Christ's arguments were convincing. So Christ proves his
Lordship and Divinity out of the Scriptures, and I think convincingly, (for his
Adversaries were not able to answer him a word,) out of the Psalms. Read Mat.
22.42. etc. When Peter and Paul disputed against the Jews out of the
Scripture, and proved (as they did) out of the scriptures, that Jesus whom they
crucified was Lord and Christ; I would know, whether their scripture-proofs
were solid and convincing, or no: if they deny it, they make the Apostles
deceivers, and wresters of the scriptures; if they affirm, then scripture is
convincing. Once more: we read Act. 18.28. of Apollos, that he mightily
convinced the Jews, showing by the scriptures that Jesus was the Christ. I am
ashamed to mention more arguments in so clear a cause: and yet we must believe
these men against our senses, and reason, and conscience, that the scriptures
are not able to convince men in foro contentioso; and Mr. White (who sometimes
writes as if he believed an everlasting state) dares hazard it upon such false
and frivolous suppositions.

Excep. 4. This word (All Scripture) must signify either every Scripture, as
the Original word (...) ought to be rendered, (and then all Scripture save one
Book is useless,) or all the Scriptures that ever were, (and then we have them
not,) or all that were then written, (and then all since written are
superfluous,) or all that we now have. Epist. page 29.30.

Ans. The Text speaks not of every scripture, but of all the scriptures that
then were. As for the word (...) two things are evident enough:

1. That it may be taken collectively, and the use of the word will warrant it.
I see the Captain is grown a Grecian, therefore I shall desire him to look
only into two places which his masters the Rhemists intepret collective, not
distributive: Mat. 8.32. (...) the whole herd, not every herd, and (...) the
whole city, v. 34.

2. That it must be so taken here, our Adversaries being judges: for else this
confessed inconvenience will follow, That any one verse of the Scripture is
profitable and sufficient to all these purposes: nor does it at all follow,
that all the rest are superfluous, because not precisely necessary. The
Pentateuch alone was a sufficient law for the Jews, yet none will say the
Books of the Prophets concerning the explication or application of that Law
were superfluous.

Excep, 5. He says not the Scriptures are sufficient, but only profitable.
Cressy.

Ans. 1. He says they are profitable (...), for every good work, and what is
so, is undoubtedly sufficient.

2. He says they are profitable, so far as to make one wise to salvation, and
I think that is sufficient.

3. He says, they are profitable to the producing of all things necessary to
salvation, which are acknowledged to be only two, Faith, and Life, and they
are profitable to both of them: 1 for doctrine, i. the demonstration of the
Truth, 2. for conviction or reproof, i.e. the consutation of errors: 3. for
correction, i.e. the reproof of sins: 4. for instruction in righteousness, or
the discovery of Duties. And what is thus every way profitable, cannot with any
color be charged with insufficiency.

Excep. 6. It is a clear case, the Apostle speaks of the benefit of Scripture*
when explicated and applied by a Preacher.

Ans. 1. By this argument all these high and various elogiums, which are here
so emphatically given to all the Scripture, do as truly belong to any one verse
of Scripture. By this, those two words, Dic Ecclesiae, Tell the Church, are
able to make one wise to salvation, and furnished to every good work etc. for
so they are or may be (through God's blessing) if explicated and applied by an
able preacher. So those words, Abraham beg at Isa ac, are able to all these
mentioned purposes, viz. if explicated and applied. So you see the Church of
Rome is grown superlatively orthodox, for they who ere while would not allow
all the Scripture to be sufficient, are now so abundantly satisfied in the
point, that they allow any one verse in the Bible (not excluding, Tobit went,
and his dog followed him) to be sufficient.

This, I hope, may suffice for the vindication of this Text, wherein I have
been the larger, because it is most plain and impregnable to our purpose; and
sufficient of it self to decide the whole controversy. I shall not concern my
self, or trouble the Reader with the vindication of other Texts to the same
purpose, (which are many, and considerable, and with great facility defensible
against all the Romish assaults,) because to him that submits to the authority
and self-evidencing light of this Text, that labor is superfluous; and to him,
whose Conscience will suffer his wit to quarrel against such forcible and clear
expressions, and arguments, as this Te^t affords, it is frustraneous. And
therefore upon the evidence that has been delivered, I shall take the
boldness to conclude, That not the Church, but the Scripture is the sufficient
Rule and Infallible Guide, by which we are to be regulated in all things
pertaining to Faith or Godliness.

FINIS.

