A PAPER Delivered to His HIGHNESS the Prince of Orange, By the COMMISSIONERS
Sent by His MAJESTY To Treat with Him. And His HIGHNESS's ANSWER.
WHEREAS on the 8th of December 1688. at Hungerford, a PAPER Signed by the
Marquess of Hallifax, the Earl of Nottingham and the Lord Godolphin,
Commissioners sent unto US from His Majesty, was Delivered to US in these Words
following, viz.

SIR, The King Commands Us to acquaint You, That he observes all the
Differences and Causes of Complaint, alleged by Your Highness, seem to be
Referred to a Free Parliament.

His Majesty, as he has already Declared, was Resolved before this to call
one, but thought, that in the present State of Affairs, it was advisable to
defer it till things were more Composed.

Yet seeing that His People still continue to desire it, He has put forth His
Proclamation in Order to it, and has Issued forth His Writs for the Calling of
it.

And to prevent any Cause of Interruption in it, He will Consent to every Thing
that can be reasonably required for the Security of all those that shall come
to it.

His Majesty has therefore sent Us to attend Your Highness for the adjusting
all Matters that shall be agreed to be necessary to the Freedom of Elections,
and the Security of Sitting, and is ready immediately to enter into a Treaty in
Order to it.

His Majesty Proposes, That in the mean time the respective Armies may be
Restrained within such Limits, and at such a Distance from London, as may
prevent the Apprehensions that the Parliament may in any kind be Disturbed,
being desirous that the Meeting of it may be no longer delayed than it must be
by the Usual and Necessary Forms.

Hungerford the 8th of December. 1688. Signed Hallifax. Nottingham. Godolphin.


WE with the Advice of the Lords and Gentlemen Assembled with US, have in
Answer to the same, made these following PROPOSALS.

I. That all Papists, and such Persons as are not qualified by Law, be
disarmed, disbanded and removed from all Employments, Civil and Military.

II. That all Proclamations which reflect upon Us, or any that have come to Us,
or declared for Us, be recalled, and that if any Persons for having so
Assisted, have been Committed, that they be forthwith set at Liberty.

III. That for the Security and Safety of the City of London, the Custody and
Government of the Tower be immediately put into the Hands of the said City.

IV. That if His Majesty shall think fit to be at London during the sitting of
the Parliament, That We may be there also with an equal Number of Our Guards.
Or if His Majesty shall please to be in any Place from London, at whatever
distance he thinks fit, That We may be at a Place of the same distance. And
that the respective Armies do remove from London Thirty Miles. And that no more
Foreign Forces be brought into the Kingdom.

V. That for the Security of the City of London, and their Trade, Tilbury Fort
be put into the Hands of the said City.

VI. That to prevent the Landing of French, or other Foreign Troops,
Portsmouth may be put into such Hands, as by Your Majesty, and Us, shall be
agreed upon.

VII. That some sufficient Part of the Public Revenue be Assigned Us, for the
maintaining of Our Forces, till the Meeting of a Free Parliament.

Given at Littlecott, the Ninth of December, 1688. PRINCE of ORANGE.


Printed by Joshua Churchil for William Churchil, 1688.


