THE Polititian's Downfall; OR POTAPSKI's ARRIVAL AT THE NETHERLANDS: And the
Congratulation of the Protestant Joyner At their Meeting.
Flectere si nequeo superos Acheronta movebo.
Virg.
IS Tapski Dead? Why then the Statesman ly'd,
Who would Immortal be and Deify'd.
Strange Pride! the exalted Lucifer is hurled
By strong impulse of Fate from the Belgic World.
The Burgomaster's baffled in's intent,
Descends from Watery to a Fiery Element.
But stay! could his vast Soul retire from hence?
And quit the ruins of decayed sense,
Without some prodigy in Nature shown?
No swinging Thunderbolt from Heaven thrown?
No dismal Harbingers of Fate come down?
Sure Nature slept, when Fate did strike the blow;
No Earthquakes; no Convulsion-Fits below?
No Star or Fiery Comet in the Sky
To Usher in this Man's Mortality?
It Is strange, that thus in Bed he took his Nap!
Could all the Putrid Excrements of the Tap
Support the hollow Cask no longer here?
Was It so infirm the Lees it could not bear?
Bless me! thus free from both the extremes,
From Tower Hill Sledge and Smithfield Flames,
Serenely did he moulder into Dust,
And Monsieur Ketch he disappointed most.
His busy, active Soul (that long was pent
Within a Putrid, ill contrived Tenement)
Is quietly retired; but clogged with Sin,
And Treason, in Elysium cannot get in.
Denied his rest thus in the Seat of Bliss,
He sinks below into the damned Abyss:
There he roves now, and restless, till he find
Some black mouthed Villain suited to his mind.
Blessed be his Fate! in a Dark Prison nigh,
Old Tapski does St. Stephen there espy.
What Salutations past the Devil can tell,
The loud report has circulated Hell,
Of this great Man's Arrival here to Dwell.
And here he shows State-Gambols and his Tricks,
(For Hell and Holland love good Politics)
The Livery Men now meet with one intent
To Choose this Feind-like Tapski President
The Carpenter transported laughs to see
His Patron brought in Hell to this degree.
He grins with his extorted ill-look't Face,
And makes now Devil-like a damned grimmace,
To see Old Tapski mounted in this Place.
Brave Fortune sure! (...) if it still run even
Farewell our Saint, it will be Captain Stephen.
The new State-Puppet does now Act with care,
With damned Old wheedling Tricks grows Popular.
He at the Helm sits, says all things sure,
No dismal fear of Arbitrary Power.
Puff't and exalted thus he hates those near
The affections of his Master Lucifer.
His Soul is like as 'twas when pent in clay
Still forming black Designs for Anarchy,
To Stab Hells well compacted Monarchy.
He Swears by Styx and Acheron to see,
That Hell like Holland a republic be,
To this the discontented damned agree.
In order to it this Pest of every Nation,
Does sneakingly produce the Association.
The damned themselves start at the bold Adventure,
Do there deny to Seal the Indenture.
He frets at this, yet Swears he'l-use more Tricks,
He Will win 'em with his City Politics.
He Will buz the Ignorant Rabble in the Ear,
And them with his Rhetoric possess with fear:
Tell 'em of Jesuits Plots and Plots forsouth,
All which these credulous Hell Hounds snap for truth.
He bawls that Property may be secured,
Without it all these Flames cannot be endured.
Their stench says he will Vex us when confined;
We Are doubly damned if once it be designed,
That we should lose the Freedom of our mind.
The Fundamental Laws of Subjects gone,
When we cannot range for satisfaction.
When Chained in Dungeons we are past relief,
Resolved by stratagem I Will be Hell's Chief:
The Joyner with his Two Foot Rule draws near,
Shows his fine Raree-show against Lucifer.
To hear his Wit about him they do throng,
And in a Lord's Appartment there 'twas Sung.
The Joyner Swears he came to this intent,
To Square and Plain this Form of Government.
They all Applaud this Man, a Man of parts,
Well skilled in State, as in Mechanic Arts.
Next him a Bull-fac't Lawyer here approaches,
And with extended Lungs the matter Broaches.
He there pleads high, makes tedious Speeches,
Which pleased the miscreant Authors of the Breaches.
Old Bradshaw with his Black Catalogue there stood,
Of Rebel Whelps bedaub'd with Monarch's Blood;
Tho twing'd with pains, tormented with despair,
Yet smile to see their Brother Tapski there.
These Quondam Judges, Lawyers, Clerks combine
To alter Government, and the State refine,
To Purge the Court from Counselors that are Evil.
They Are seeming kind to their Old Chief the Devil.
Thus Tapski well surrounded with his Friends
Republic Demons and stinking sulphurous Feinds,
Slyly pursues his Interest and by ends*
At this the Hellish Brood begin to frown,
They see this damned Committee're Factious grown,
Their Principles and Practices they disown.
But Tapski's cunning, still he laughs and leers,
No disappointment in the matter fears.
Infernal Government his squint Eyes view,
But Beelzebub its Charter will renew,
Lest Tapski look and find a flaw in it too.
Suspicious Members of the lower House,
By strong resolves the Statesman indispose
From bearing Office in their Black Cabal.
(Green-Ribbon Clubs are Epidemical*)
Tapski degraded thus! What now remains;
What is the consequence but Links and Chains?
A draught of liquid Brimstone amongst the Flames?
Strange fate! He Is seized and hurried off the Stage,
And cannot escape the Daemon's Popular Rage.
Infernal Officers do rant and tear,
And drag him into Dungeons of despair,
Amongst Croaking Toads and Adders he is confined*
Which is but sad diversion to his mind;
Their dismal noise cannot lull the Feind asleep,
They are but frightful comforts in the Deep.
Now Tapski racks his Brains for a release,
And tries all methods which he thinks may Please.
He Flatters and Collogues in hopes to gain
Some Intervals of ease from lingering pain:
But still his sly attempts are all in vain.
Baffled by this his Kind, Persuasive way
He Will vindicate himself by force of Law;
The Hellish Presidents and Customs reads,
And Bradshaw on his side profoundly pleads,
To have an Habeas Corpus this they guess,
Will Tapski's Wicked Grievances redress.
But Pox! the Learned Sophisters of Hell
These Artificial Cheats do know full well.
The things denied; cast out, and in the sense
Of Learned Men its deemed an high offense.
Tapski a mild recanting Paper brings;
(He fawns still after disobliging Kings:)
His flattering style they jointly do refuse,
His Treasonous Crimes admit of no excuse.
He is impeach't, to Trial he must come,
But Tapski hopes for to divert his doom.
If Bethel's Friends in lower Regions be,
He doubts not but the Law will set him free.
He Will laugh at Malice and Infernal Furies,
If there he finds his Ignoramus Juries.
And there is one picked to Tapski well affected,
But they fail now, because not well directed;
The Pilkingtonian Sneaking Trick's detected.
Last thus; Old Tapski's Tongue begins to faulter;
And tho by Knaves he has escaped the Ax and Halter,
Yet now lies mute, dejected and forsaken,
And all the Accomplices of the Treason taken.
In deepest Dungeons are these Traitors pent,
For thus conspiring against the Government.
A Fury Engines new and strange provides,
To clapperclaw and thwack his Leach'rous sides,
They Are whip't with Rods well soak't in Devils Piss:
(That Is worse then Mother Creswells flogging is.)
They lowdly roar, and grunt like Hogs in Stye,
Have burning Sulfurous Flames to drink when dry.
They feel the strange variety of Evils
What Is worse, they are piss't upon by Tiny Devils,
No Habeas Corpus can these Imps remove
From dismal Bonefires or from burning Stove,
For ever must they be confined to Chains
No intermission from their horrid pains.
Farewell Old Tapski, cursed at thy Birth,
Thou public scorn of Hell, as well as Earth:
Farewell Old Treason, since the Traitor now
Is gone a Pilgrimage to Hell below.
Written by a Gentleman of Quality.
London, Printed for Walter Davis in Amen-Corner. 1684.


