Mr. MATTHEW POOL, Author of that Elaborate Work, Sinopsis Critticorum. His
Late Sayings a little before his Death: Concerning the most Material Points of
the Popish Party; Charged against the Protestants; Wherein the Desperate Tenets
of Popish Jesuitical Principles are Detected and Sollidly Censured. For the
Settlement of all Real Professors, and Practical Opposers of those Damnable
Delusions, in few words to the Wise.
He Dyed the 12th. of this Instant Stilo Nova, at Amsterdam:
1. THe Felicity of Protestant Professors, is, that they are not only
Permitted, but exhorted by their Ministers, not to take Matters of Salvation
upon trust; but to search the Scriptures concerning Truths delivered.

2. Whilst Unhappy Papists are obliged to their Implicit Faith to follow their
blind Guides, and must believe all they say; it is a plain sign that their Gold
is Adulterate because they dare not suffer it to come to the Touchstone.

3. The Romish Churches Infallibility is, that one Neck is their strongest
hold; all the rest are but the Payring of their Nails, and cutting the Hair,
which will quickly grow again; but if this fails all falls; Wound them here and
it goes to their heart.

4. Christ's Prayer for the Perseverance of Faith, makes him Infallible for
whom Christ's Prays, then all Elect and Persevering Believers are Infallible;
The Consequence thus appears from John 17. I Pray not for these alone, but for
them also which shall believe on me through their word.

5. And there is not one Persevering Christian in the World, but owes his
Perseverance to the Prayer, Care, and Intercession of Christ: Hence they are
said to be preserved in Christ Jesus, Jude 1. 7.

6. The Infallibility of Popes and Counsels has no Foundation in the Sacred
Writ.

7. Every Champion of God's Truth is a Pillar of the Truth, but not Infallible.

8. Let me see that Papist that will give it under his Hand, that every one
with whom the Spirit abides as a Comforter, is Infallible.

9. The Church of Rome stands upon four Pillars: 1. Authority of Scriptures. 2.
Tradition of Fathers. 3. Infallibility of Councils. 4. And the POPE.


Which Absurdity the Jesuits thus Heal: That it is no more Absurd that
Scripture should lean upon the Churches Authority, and the Church on Authority
of Scripture, than that Saint John the Baptist should give Testimony to Christ,
and Christ to him again: or that the Old Testament should be Confirmed by the
New, and the New Testament by the Old.

10. But the Four before mentioned, are Reduct to Two. 1. To Scripture. 2. To
the POPE.


Which must prove one another. 1. There is no solid and sufficient ground for
me to believe the Scriptures, but the Testimony of the Pope, say the Papists.
2. There is no solid and sufficient ground for me to believe the Authority and
Infallibility of the Pope, but the Testimony of the Scriptures.


11. By all which it is clear there is no Solid foundation for a Papist's
Faith, nor Proof of the Popes Infallibility, which they so pretend to.

12. Hence Note, That those that Contemn and forsake Faithful Pastors, are
easily Betrayed into the Hands of Romish Priests; Hence it concerns all
Protestants, with Fear and Reverence, to behold the just Judgment of God upon
Unsettled and Unstable Christians, and such as are given to Change.

13. And as we have many Woeful Instances of poor deluded Souls, that having
wandered from Party to Party, from Opinion to Opinion, have at last been
Swallowed up, some in the Gulf of Downright Atheism; and others whom the
Wantonness of Opinion has betrayed to Popish Impostures.

14. The Supreme and truly Infallible Judge of all Controversies, Is God and
Christ, who Appropriates it to himself to be the only Lawgiver, James 4. 12.
This Judge is Lord over all, both in the Church and in the Conscience, which
are all Subordinate to him.

15. Supreme and Infallible Judge upon Earth we know none, at least the Pope
and Council, and Church of Rome is none.

16. The Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, are the Infallible Rule,
and Ground, and Touchstone of Faith, from which all Controversies of Faith are
to be Decided and Judged.

17. In a Word, Tradition was not appointed by Christ as a part of that Ground
upon which we were to build our Rule, by which we were to try particular
Doctrines and Articles of Faith.

18. The Scripture is the Object, the only Rule and Standard of Faith, by which
all Controversies are to be Decided and judged: Tradition is the Vehicle to
convey this Rule to us and our Times; Reason is the Instrument by which I
Apprehend or Discern this Rule: The Spirit of God is the Eye Salve that Anoints
mine Eye, and enables it to see this Rule. The Church is the Interpreter
(though not Infallible) the Witness, the Guardian of this Rule, and the Applyer
of the general Rules of Scripture to particular Cases, and times, and
Circumstances.

19. To me this is a Rule; That to which God Promises or Annexeth Salvation,
is surely sufficient for Salvation.

20. I care not one Straw for all the Roman Thunderclaps of Damnation, where I
have one promise from God for my Salvation.

21. In a Word, The Fundamentals or Substantials of Religion do Apparently lie
in Two Things, the Law and the Gospel.

22. The Scripture tells me that Love is the fulfilling of the Law, Romans 13. 10.

23. It tells me also, That Faith in Christ is the fulfilling of the Gospel,
John 14. 1. and 20. 31.

24. The Scripture sufficiently Informs us of Fundamentals.

25. But the Church of Rome you must Note, has another Rare Notion of
Fundamentals; the like is not to be found in Scripture or any Ancient Author.

26. That is a Fundamental Truth which the Church Decrees, though never so
Inconsiderable.

27. But we must have most Sollid Proofs, That the Pope or Council have such
Dominion over our Faith; That Fundamentals are all at their mercy.

28. And there is nothing which more Essentially overthrows the Popish Conceit
of Fundamentals, than the Consideration of the Pillar upon which they Build it,
which is the Churches Infallible Authority.

29. The Infallibility of Councils being but a Chimerical Imagination, I must
needs Conclude, That the foundation being fallen, the Superstructure needs no
Strength of Argument to pull it Down.

30. Concerning the Coppies and Translations of Scripture, they are a sure and
certain Rule, because they do sufficiently Evidence themselves to be the Word
of God, and the same for Substance with the Original.

31. The Divinity of Scripture in these, as well as the Originals, for the
Majesty of Style, the Sublimity of their Doctrines, the Purity of the Matter,
and the Excellency of the Design.

32. To these God has given Signal Testimonies by the Conversion of Thousands,
by Frequent and Illustrious Miracles, by the Cooperation of his Spirit with
them in the Hearts of his People.

33. Value precious time while time does last, and not when it is utterly lost.

34. Woe to those Souls! whose Eyes nothing but Death, and Judgment will open.

35. If the Reward of Religion would be presently in hand, who would not be
Religious?

36. God will have no Peace with that Soul that is at Peace with Sin.

37. Let Men's Opinions be what they will, Without Holiness no man shall see
God.

38. The way of Carnal Liberty, is not the way that leads to Eternity.

39. Every Morning remember that thy Walking with God, is the Business of that
Day.

40. Consider a Dram of Grace, is better then a Talent of Wealth.

41. He that has but little in the World, must keep the shorter Table.

42. None ever lost by Jesus Christ, though they lose for him, they shall never
lose by him.

43. Rejoice you whose Riches are reproaches for Christ, his Cross your Crown,
the Shame of him your Glory.

44. You must Enter in at the Door of Heaven, by the Key of Saving Knowledge.

45. Lay up continually in Heaven, further your Account, add to the heap of
Increasing abundantly.

46. Whatever thou do for God, God keeps a true Account, believe it, and
Plow and Sow in hope.

47. A good Soul is like the Compass in the Needle, restless till it be turned
toward the Pole.

48. My Soul! thou have made thine Everlasting Choice, though the World answer
not thy Expectation, the Lord is thy Portion, and Heaven thine Inheritance, is
it not enough?

49. Hold on yet a little while in Faith and Patience, and Self-denial, and you
are sure of the Crown.

50. If to be Religious will make you Vile, resolve that you will yet be more
Vile.

51. He that can use aright the Prospective of Faith, to see approaching
Judgment, will easily avoid the Worlds Vanity, and embrace the Crown of
Everlasting Glory.

52. Have you made Heaven sure? if that be done, you are prepared for the worst
that can come.

53. Have you past the Straits of the New Birth, do you bear upon you the Marks
of the Lord Jesus?

54. Can you prove from the Book of God, that you are past a mere Persuasion?

55. Is not this your rest? Where is your Treasure, and your Heart?

56. Do you long for the Purchase of your Savior, the Fruit of your Prayers,
the Harvest of your Labors, and the End of your Faith?

57. Catch at Opportunity, away with Lazy Prayers, Cold and Heartless
Professions, and a Lifeless Religion.

58. Consider, now is your time, what you do you must do quickly.

59. God's Patience waits, Christ knocks, the Spirit of God strives, and Death
waits.

60. Take heed of a Mistake in the Two great Gospel Graces. First, Of Faith.
Secondly, Of Repentance.


And know, Where one goes to Hell by Despair, hundreds go by Presumption.

61. Let your first Morning Thoughts, and your last Evening Thoughts, be, what
shall become of you to all Eternity.

FINIS.
Printed for P. Brooksby, at the Golden-ball, near the Hospital-gate in
VVest-Smithfield.


