LASPHOKTONA: THE BLASPHEMER SLAIN With the SWORD of the SPIRIT: Or a PLEA for
the GODHEAD OF THE HOLY GHOST.

Wherein the Deity of the Spirit of God is proved in the demonstration of the
Spirit, and vindicated from the Cavils of John Bidle.

The second Edition with many Additions.

By Matthew Pool, Master of Arts of Emmanuel- College in Cambridge; and Pastor
of the Church of God at Michaels Quern in London.

London, Printed by R. and W. I. for John Rothwell at the Fountain and Bear in
Goldsmiths Row in Cheap Side, 1654.

To my dearly beloved friends, the flock of God in Michaels Quern Parish in
LONDON.
Dearly beloved in the Lord:
IT was my earnest desire, when first I published this Treatise, for many
reasons, as far as possibly I could, to have the Author undiscovered, and
therefore I could not preface any Dedication to it. But notwithstanding all my
endeavors for secrecy; what I thought to conceal is commonly known, and I am
looked upon as the Author of it. As long as there was a possibility of privacy I
labored for it, seriously and sincerly; but since, now is it become public,
it would be, both a vanity and folly to endeavor any longer to smother it. I
thank God, I am not ashamed of that cause that I have undertaken, only herein
I desire pardon of ingenuous Readers, that being so young and raw, and
confessedly unfurnished with those treasures of knowledge that are necessary
for one that appears in Print, I should engage my self in so weighty a cause,
in so public a manner.

And now having adventured thus far, to whom should I dedicate these
first fruits, but to you, to whom I am obliged both by the providence of God
that has fixed me among you, and set me over you, and by those many favors,
by which I stand engaged to some of you.

It has been my desire, since I have been among you, to approve my self to God
and to your consciences, in that work that the Lord has entrusted me with, and
I can say in sincerity, I have endeavored that you (as well as I) might be
able to give up your accounts with joy in that great Day. And as I have often
considered, and sometimes told you; that the work of a Minister does consist in
two things in building up his people; 1 In Knowledge, 2 In Grace: and that
these two are like Hippocrates his Twins, that laugh and weep, live and die
together; so have I really and sincerely, though in much weakness, endeavored,
both that your hearts might be cleansed from hypocrisy, and your heads from
heresy, that you might neither make shipwreck of faith, nor of a good
conscience, that you might be antidoted both against the gangrene of erroneous
doctrine, and the leprosy of a vain and sinful conversation.

God has made us that are Ministers, Shepherds, we are therefore to preserve
you (as far as we can) from those grievous Wolves that come in and devour the
flock: Watchmen, we are therefore to give you timely notice of approaching
enemies: Salt, we are therefore to season you against corrupt principles and
practices: Light, we are to acquaint you with the ways and works of darkness,
that you may avoid them: Husbandmen, we must pluck up the weeds that hinder
your growth: Leaders and Commanders, we must go in and out before you, and
fight your battles: Witnesses of Christ, we must continually bear witness to
the cause and truth of Christ, however despised and reproached.

Accordingly I have employed part of that time, which I have spent among you,
in endeavoring to establish you in some of those truths, that are most opposed
in our days. Here is another truth that I have not yet had occasion to speak
of in the course of my Mininistery, which in this Treatise is briefly defended.
A Truth not concerning some circumstantials in Religion, not a matter of
indifferency, that may with safety be either maintained or opposed, but a
Truth that concerns the very heart and soul of Religion; a truth that relates
to the vitals of Christianity; a Truth that concerns the Holy Ghost, and that
in no less a matter then his Deity: Which however some bold and insolent
persons may contemptuoufly, and as they think, without danger speak lightly of;
yet our blessed Savior does so highly value it, that he tells us in express
terms though a blasphemy against himself shall be forgiven, yet blasphemy
against the H. Ghost shall not be forgiven to men, Matthew. 12. 31, 32.

A Truth, which whosoever opposes, opposes also the deity of Christ, and
therefore he that is well grounded in the former, will never question the
latter. This is the truth that is here asserted, which I present to your
solemn and serious consideration: It is not sufficient that you hear truths
in a Pulpit, men's unfaithful memories will soon deceive them, it is very
expedient that you also be frequent and diligent in reading those that have
most briefly, plainly, and solidly writ about them: You have one great
privilege (o happy you, if you aid well understand and seriously consider your
happiness!) there is scarce any error, but it has been substantially
encountered, and fully refuted in the English tongue. It would be your wisdom
to get one or two of every sort, and to take some time to peruse them, that so
you might the better be enabled to give a reason of that hope that is in you to
any one that asks it.

It may please God to suffer wicked and unreasonable men so far to prevail, as
you may be deprived of the Ministry, and be left as sheep having no Sh^phe^d,
which if once Satan and his instruments can effect: you may expect, (...) the
deluge of Errors sh^^^^ break in upon you, with greater violence when there is
no Standard to be lifted up against it, that those grievous wolves will tear
the poor flock more fiercely, when there is none to deliver them. Ministers
are living Books, and Books are dead Ministers; and yet though dead, they
speak. When you cannot hear the one, you may read the other. Do not say, You
have no time. Either you must find a time to mind the saving of your souls,
or else God will find a time to afflict your souls. I may say of these
heretical opinions, (what he said of Ministers, though in a far different
sense) they watch for your souls. Certainly it deserves a little time to look
to a matter of that concernment. And how can you watch against your enemies if
you are not furnished with defensive weapons.

This, therefore, I do earnestly desire, and as an Ambassador of Christ and
your Pastor require at your hands, that you would make conscience of
increasing your know ledge according to your opportunities; That you would
every day labor to be deeplier rooted in the faith, and abundant in the work
of the Lord. And that you may so be, is the daily prayer of

The unworthiest of all that call Christ Master, and your Servant for Jesus
sake, M.P.

Christian READER;
ALL Heresies come from Hell; the Apostle calls them the Doctrines of Devils, 1 Timothy 4. 1, 2.
and the ancient Ignatius, (...), The inventions of Ad Tralenses.
the Devil.

All Heresies lead to hell; S. Peter styles them (...), 2 Pet. 2. 1.
Damnable Heresies. Epiphanius, (...). The Gates of Hell; Haeres. 74*
they involve (though some men think otherwise) both the Seducers and the
Seduced in everlasting Ad Ephesians.
vengeance, in the judgment of Ignatius.

Amongst all Heresies, none are more dangerous nor infectious then such as
assail the Sacred Trinity, God blessed for ever. These are most dangerous,
because they raze the whole foundation of Christian Religion, and by reason of
the blindness, curiosity, wantonness, pride, etc. of man's wit, the most
infectious.

In all Ages of the Church Satan has bestirred himself to sow and disperse
these Heresies. I intend not a catalogue of all (see this in Danaeus) but in
stead of all, the Story of this one denying the Deity of the Holy Ghost in this
short Treatise confuted.

It was at first taught by Arrius, implicitly: after him publicly maintained
by Macedonius, Epiphan. Haeres. 74. N^ceph. Hist. lib. 9. cap. 42, 47.
the furious Bishop of Constantinople: After him propagated far and near by
Marathonius Eleusius, and their Associates. It was censured and condemned in
the second Council at Constantinople, by 180 Bishops, upon this occasion
Haeres. 74.
met together; and confuted largely by Epiphanius; yet it lived obscurely in
aftertimes, as Haeres. 42.
is observed by Danaeus and Prateolus; and in the last Century began again to
fly abroad, broached by Servetus, and dispersed by S^cinusand his followers.

What endeavors have been used to infect, and prevent the Infection of the
Belgic Churches with this Heresy, is discovered by the Learned Cloppenburgh,
in his Compendiolum Socinianismi Cloppenburgh ann. 51. Hoornbec. pr^sat. ad
Socin. confutat. par. 1. Mares. Hydra Socinianism. Dr. Cheynel, Rise and Growth
of Socin.
Confutati, in the Preface. What stickling amongst us in these times of
distraction, is most lamentable to rehearse; the whole body of Socinianism,
that Hydra of Blasphemies, that Racovian Catechism (which walked only in the
dark, and in the Latin tongue in the Bishops times) is now translated into
English for the more speedy corruption of the people; many bold Factors for
these Blasphemies, which in those times durst not appear, do now both
publicly, and from house to house disseminate their Heresies without fear:
amongst these is Mr. John Bidle, who both in print and private does deny the
God head of the Holy Ghost, and dispute against it, David thought it time Psalm.
119.
for God to work, when men made void his law; and thou ( Reader) can not but
think it seasonable for his servants to watch, and for thy self to stand upon
thy guard, when the enemy is sowing tares.

Bless God for those Watchmen who stand upon the Towers to give warning of thy
approaching danger, and take warning at the sound of the Trumpet, that thou
Ezekiel. 3. Heb. 13.
may deliver thy soul, and thy blood may not be upon thine own head: this
will be grievous to us, and unprofitable to thee.

(...), Fly from Ath^isticall* Heresies, Tpist. ad Trallen.
was the last counsel of dying Ignatius to the Trallenses; agreeable to the
grave advice of Solomon, Proverbs 19. Cease, my son, to hear the instruction
that counsels to err from the words of knowledge. O that this counsel might
take with thee! But we have a further request to thee, Reader, Labor that thou
may stand fast, rooted, and grounded, and established in the faith. In
Infectious times, it is usual to take Antidotes, and wear Amulets: in these
times of seduction it is no less necessary to arm our selves against prevailing
Errors.

This Book of Mr. Bidle's is not now at first confuted; the Reverend and
Learned Mr. Estwick has some years since answered it in a Just Treatise; and
since him Dr. John Cloppenburgh has in Answer to it, put forth a Plea for the
Deity of the Holy Ghost in the Latin Tongue, in the year 1652. This short and
full Manual, written by a Workman that needs not be ashamed, is added for thy
advantage. In it thou shall find the Arguments proving the Deity of the Holy
Ghost fully asserted, against Mr. Bidle's Caviss; the Sophisms which Mr. Bidle
makes use of to darken truth, and pervert thy faith clearly refuted, as
Epiphanius has it, Haeres. 74. (...), to the stopping of the mouths of
gainsayers, and the satisfaction of the Docible. That the Spirit of Wisdom may
be given thee to try all things, discern the things that differ, and hold fast
that is good, is the Prayer,

( Reader) Of thy Servants for Christ's sake, James Cranford. Arthur Jackson.
Thomas Manton.

Imprimatur,

Ed. Calamy.



To the READER.
THere is scarce any Truth contained in the Scriptures that has not been
opposed by Heretics in some ages of the Church; and amongst the rest, this
Doctrine of the Blessed Trinity has not been without exception; nay indeed, it
has found as much resistance as any other; partly from the ignorance of men
that could not apprehend it; partly from the pride of men that will believe no
truth, but what does fully suit and comply with their (though corrupted)
reason. It is very observable, how the Antitrinitarian Devil has transformed
himself into several shapes; sometimes telling us that there was but one
Person, only it was called by three several names, and so they made a Trinity
of words, but not of persons; thus he spoke in the mouths of the Simonians,
Montanists, Noetians, etc. Sometimes telling us, that the three Persons are
three Gods, and so they give us a Trinity of Divine Essences, not of Persons
only; so he spoke in the Trith^itae. Sometimes telling us, that the three
Persons are only three qualities; so he spoke in the Aetiani. These H^^^ticks
like Samsons Foxes, though their heads looked diverse ways, yet their tails
were tied together, and firebrands in them to set the standing Corn of the
Church on fire. Particularly, the Deity of the Holy Ghost has been opposed at
sundry times, and in diverse manners: Some Heretics saying, It was only a
name; some saying, it was a man; many saying, That it was not God, but a
Creature, as the Arrians, Origenists, and especially Danaeus de Haeresibus.
the Macedonians; which last pestilent Error has been of late revived, and
particularly defended by John Bidle, in a Pamphlet entir^^^ed, Twelve
Arguments, etc. whereby the Deity of the Holy Ghost (as he pretends) is clearly
refuted; wherein, although I profess, as in the presence of God, I find
nothing but common, trivial, absurd, and foolish Arguments; yet I observe the
spirit of the man to be extraordinarily lifted up, as if he had said that which
would puzzle all the universities in Europe to answer. He tells you in his
Epistle, that he had waited upon, and contested with sundry Learned men, and
could never get a satisfactory answer: nor I doubt, everwill in his own
judgment: I fear God has given him up to a spirit of delusion, to believe
lies. To convince an Heretic, is but a little below a Miracle; and therefore
it is not that I expect in this Treatise, but only the establishment of those
that are yet free from this infection, and the reducing of them (if there be
any such) who have followed this wretched Apostate out of the simplicity of
their hearts.

I am sensible, that this Treatise of Bidle's is fully answered by learned Mr.
Estwick, to which Mr. B. has never yet made a reply, nor ever will be able:
But there are many that are unwilling to bestow either much pains or cost about
books of that nature, and so that error does yet spread, and some (as I am
informed) are lately infected with it. I was therefore importuned to put forth
a short and plain confutation af Bidle's Treatise, which might require less of
the Readers money and patience, and so might serve as a common Antidote against
that Pestilential Doctrine. Which motion I did at first utterly reject, being
conscious to my self of mine own utter unfitness for such a work. And had I
been left to my self, I should sooner have put my finger in the fire, then my
pen to paper upon such terms. But being solemnly almost adjured by the honor
of God, and good of souls, and being uncessantly urged; I confess, I durst not
deny, lest I should prefer mine own credit, (which I thought might be justly
blemished, by publishing my weakness in Print, with a Noverint universi, as
thousands have done before me;) I say, lest I should prefer my credit to the
glory of God (which was here so nearly concerned, and I hoped might be a little
promoted by mine endeavors.) I therefore consulted not with flesh and blood,
but immediately betook my self to the work. And if such fools as I write,
learned men may thank themselves, who suffer so many pestilent books to lie
un-answered (as are daily put forth;) with what satisfaction to their own
consciences, I know not; but I am sure with the great prejudice of the Church,
and dissatisfaction of pious souls. I wish they would seriously lay this to
heart, and take heed they be not found among them that wrap their talents
(whether they be preaching or writing talents, all is one) in a napkin. And in
this work I confess I was helped by the labors of some that went before me,
Mr. Estwick, Doctor Cheynell, and Cloppenburgius; though I may safely say,
there are some things added of mine own, which (I hope) may not be altogether
useless and inconsiderable. Such as it is, here thou have it: read, consider,
examine seriously, diligently, reverently; and the Lord open the eyes of thy
mind that thou may receive this truth in the love of it. If thou art
already drawn into that pestilent error, that is here confuted, by the cunning
craftiness of those seducers that lie in wait to deceive; thou have the more
need to look to thy self; for as thy distemper cannot be less then mortal,
(if it be an error, as indeed it is, because it strikes at the very Deity of
God himself) so it is almost incurable. And therefore it is high time for thee
to awake out of sleep, for now is thy damnation nearer then when thou did
first Apostatize. It is hard for thee to kick against the pricks. Remember
therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent. Seriously bethink thy self,
whether those foolish cavils thou please thy self with here, are likely to
bear thee out, and pass for current at that great day. Besides what is in this
Treatise, (which will either satisfy thee, or else I fear one day condemn
thee) consider one thing further, (whereas your Champion cries out upon us as
Idolaters) whether it be probable, that God (who has promised to lead his
people into all truth, to be with his Church to the end of the world) should
suffer all his people, (those that did most sincerely love and worship him,
most firmly believe in him) to fall (...), live and die in such a foul and
indeed damnable sin as Idolatry is, and that for so many ages together. Take
one Caution more; do not think to comprehend this Mystery in thy shallow
understanding: How should divine mysteries be depths, if a creature could
fathom them? Do not make thy reason the rule of thy faith. So did the wise
Grecians, the rational Romans; and that was the great cause why the preaching
of the Cross was foolishness to them. The riches of Christ are unsearchable;
shall we therefore dis-believe them? the peace of God passes all
understanding; shall we therefore dispute it out of the world? For you that are
not yet tainted with this soul-murdering doctrine: 1 Bless God for it. 2 Take
beed, lest you also fall. 3 Be wise unto sobriety. And the Lord give you a
spirit of discerning to distinguish between things that differ: So prays he,

Who passionately labors for thy Conviction and Conversion, or Establishment
and Edification, M. P.

The DEITY of the HOLY GHOST PROVED.
BEfore I come to answer Mr. B's. Arguments, I shall lay down some Arguments to
prove the Deity of the Holy Ghost. I shall not follow his way, in contending
more by number and multitude, then strength and force of Arguments, in
multiplying words without weight: I shall forbear to bring many Arguments, that
might be alleged, and that upon good grounds; and shall only ^ull out some
chief ones, and vindicate those which B. has cavill'd against. And thou
blessed Spirit, the Spirit of Truth, plead thine own cause; s^nd out Thy Light,
and Thy Truth, that they may guide me in the handling of this controversy,
that Thy Divine Majesty may be fully vindicated, Thy people solidly
established, and Thine enemies may be either con^^^ted or confounded. Amen.

Arg. 1. He whom the Scripture calls the Great and the True God, is God: But
the Scripture calls the Holy Ghost the Great and the True God: Ergo the Holy
Ghost is God.

I make that addition in the Premises, the Great and True God, because it is
known and confessed that Magistrates are said to be gods, though they are never
so called; but there is something added by way of qualification and diminution,
I have said, You are gods; but you shall die like men, Psalm. 82. 6, 7. So, I
have made thee a god to Pharaoh, Exodus 7. 1. A made god, and a god to Pharaoh.

The Major will be confessed: All the doubt will be about the Minor: For the
proof, I shall only urge two places of Scripture.

The first place is, Acts 5. v. 3. why has Satan filled thine heart to lie
unto the Holy Ghost, compared with the end of verse 4. Thou have no^ l^^d to
men, but to God: That he speaks concerning the great God, is confessed by the
adversary, and needs no proof. So that in the Apostles judgment, these are
equivalent terms, to lie to the Holy Ghost, and to lie to God.

For the confirmation of this Argument (though it is in it self so clear, that
he that uns may read it; yet) I shall add four considerations.

1 They are said to lie to the Holy Ghost, because only the Holy Ghost knew
their sin, he only searched their hearts and knew their hypocrisy; and
therefore, Verse 9. they are said to tempt the Spirit of the Lord, that is, to
try whether he could discover their sin, and would p^nish it. They lied to him,
whom they tempted, for in lying to him, it was, that they tempted him.

2 Peter's intent was to aggravate their sin by this expression of lying to the
Holy Ghost, that it was committed in a more special and immediate manner
against God; Now if the Holy Ghost were only an Angel, as our Adversary
asserts, it had been as great a sin to lie to Peter, Gods extraordinary
Messenger, as to lie to the Holy Ghost; because, as B. himself says, What is
done to any Messenger redounds to him that sends him; whether the Messenger
were Angel or Apostle, that varies not the case; For though Ambassadors may
differ in their private conditions, yet all of them do equally represent their
Lord and Master.

3 Peter does make a Dicho^omy here, acknowledging only two sort^ of lies, a
lying to men, and to God. But according to our Adversaries opinion, here should
have been a Trichotomy, Peter should have said, Thou have not lied to men, nor
to the Holy Ghost only, but to God: But now seeing the Apostle has made only
two members of the Division, Thou have not l^ed only to men, but to God also:
Choose which you will, for one of the two you must acknowledge, either that the
Holy Ghost is man, or God.

4 Consider that Pet^r in the fourth verse, does explain what he meant by that
phrase in the third verse: Thou have lied to the Holy Ghost; this he explains
thus, Thou have not lied to men, to a creature, but to God, to the Holy Ghost
which is God.

By what has been said, B's first Exception falls to the ground; which is
this, That a man may lie to God, and yet lie only to his messenger, because
what is done to Gods messenger, is done to God.

Answ. It is true, that a sin committed against Gods messenger, is committed
against God; but withal Peter does here intimate, that this was not only
committed against God in that common and general respect (in which indeed all
sins and all lies are committed against God) but that it was in a special,
immediate, and extraordinary manner committed against God, that is, against the
H. Ghost, as he before expressed it.

But this Exception he himself distrusts, and therefore he flies to another,
and that is, he finds fault with the Translation, and tells us, that the Greek
word (...) being joined with an Accusative Case, does signify the same with
(...)* that is, to belie and counterfeit, and so the words must be rendered, Why
did thou belie or counterfeit the Holy Ghost? But neither will this relieve
him, for (although it might be instanced that (...) with an Accusative Case
signifies to lie, and though the fourth Verse does interpret the third, (...)
being there but with a Dative, and so necessarily signifying to lie, yet) if
his Exposition were true, the force of the Argument is not at all abated; still
it holds though in other terms, Thou have in counterfeiting the Holy Ghost, not
counterfeited men, but God: Or in counterfeiting the Holy Ghost, thou have not
lied to men, but to God. I might add, that it may be rendered thus, as B.
confesses, and Streso with others render it; Why has Satan filled thine heart
to deceive the Holy Ghost? Why have thou been persuaded by him that the Holy
Ghost might be deceived? as if he did not understand thy thoughts and secret
practices, as if thou could put a cheat upon the Holy Ghost, and make him
believe thou art as good a Christian as the best. However to endeavor to
deceive the the Holy Ghost, and to lie to the Holy Ghost, are phrases of the
same signification.

But there is yet another Objection, that some of our weak Brethren make (which
I suppose is a part of B's Cabal) for he is the great Homer, whose vomit the
inferior Poets his Proselytes do lick up. It is this, Exodus 16. v. 7. Moses
and Aaron said, What are we that ye murmur against us? And Verse 8. it is said,
Your murmurings are not against us, but against the Lord. Hence say our
Adversaries, it will follow according to your reasoning, that Moses was God.

I confess, it is beyond my Logic to frame an Argument out of it. And it is
observable, B. their Schoolmaster was ashamed to mention it, yet because I see
they pride themselves much in it, lest they should be wise in their own
conceit, I shall answer it.

That text proves the quite contrary, that Moses is not God, because he so
fully separates and distinguishes himself from God: even as it follows out of
Act. 5. that Peter was not God, because he says, Thou have not lied to us, but
to God. And (observe it) Peter and Moses are Parallels, not Moses and the Holy
Ghost, as they absurdly fancy; for them it should have been said, Thou have not
lie to the Holy Ghost, but to God. If you would make that place parallel with
this, you must first suppose Moses to speak thus, Why murmur you against the
Holy Ghost, or holy Spirit? and then to add, your murmurings are not against
us, but against the Lord. And if so, not only the seeming fallacy vanishes,
but it will be a strong argument to confirm this instance in Acts 5.

Take another instance. Suppose David's Ambassadors had said to Hanun, when he
was abusing them, 2 Samuel 10. 4. Why do you abuse our Lord and Master? And
presently after, This injury is not done to us, but to the King of Israel.
Every vulgar eye would see two things. 1 That those Ambassadors were not the
King of Israel. 2 That the King of Israel was their Lord and Master: So it is
in this case, as any one may easily apply it.

Another place to the same purpose we have, 1 Cor. 6. 19, 20. What, know you
not that your body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost? -- Therefore glorify God
in your body. The Apostles Argument is this: He, whose temple you are, ought to
be glorified, served, etc. But you are the temples of the Holy Ghost: Therefore
he is to be glorified; or in the Apostles words, Therefore glorify God. What a
miserable Argument were this? If the Holy Ghost were not God: It were in plain
English to argue thus, You are the temples of, you are consecrated to, an
Angel, therefore glorify God. For the illustration of this Argument, compare
it with a parallel place, 2 Cor. 6. 16. -- You are the temples of the living
God, as God has said, I will dwell in them. We are temples of God in one
place; of the Holy Ghost in another. If this will not satisfy (as that will
satisfy a blind mind and a perverse spirit?) It Is proper to God to have a
temple, as it is proper to him to be worshipped; especially for such a creature
as man to be a temple to, to whom can this belong, but to the Creator of man?
The Adversary of the Holy Ghost talks much of reason and wisdom, etc. It were
to be wished that he would make a little use of it here. Well, what says he to
this clear place? He is resolved to say something, ne nihil dixisse videatur.

1 He says, Indeed it would follow, the Argument would hold, if it could be
proved that our body is so the temple of the Holy Ghost, as to be his by
interest, and dedicated to his honor.

Well said; but who ever did understand any thing else? or how can any thing
else be understood, especially by him that pretends so much understanding? What
is it for a temple to be crected to one, but for his honor, worship, and
service? was ever temple duly consecrated for other ends?

2 He says, That God is here distinguished from the Spirit.

And did not B. know that we allow a distinction between the Persons, though
not in the Essence of the Sacred Trinity: Also that we distinguish between the
divine nature, and a divine person. But this will more fitly and fully be
answered under his second Argument. I might mention 2 Cor. 3. 17. The Lord is
that Spirit, and where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberly; and many
other places: but I study brevity.

Arg. 2. He to whom Religious worship is duly and truly exhibited, is God: But
Religious Worship is duly and truly given to the Holy Ghost: Therefore the Holy
Ghost is God.

For the Mayor, one would think a few words would suffice to satisfy a man
that calls himself a Protestant. But when once men relinquish principles, they
rest no where* And so B. lays down t^^s a^^ertion, that the Holy Ghost is the
intermediate object of worship, and so may be worshipped. But, 1 Worship is an
incommunic^ble prop^rty. God may as soon appoint that a cre^t^^e shall be
Omnipotent (which is a contradiction) as that a creature shall be worshipped (I
mean with Religious worship, for a civil I worship or respect we confess is due
to many men, and to Angels.) 2 It is quite contrary to express* Scripture,
Deuteronomy. 6. compared with Matthew. 4. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him
only shall thou serve. Paul calls (...), the worshipping of Angels, an error,
Coloss. 2. 18. So Revel. 22. 8, 9. observe, Worship not me, I am thy
fellow servants; now so all the Angels are Heb. 1. 14. Are they not all
Ministering spirits? If then the Holy Ghost be an Angel or Ministering spirit (as
B. says) he is not to be worshipped. Again, worship God, let him have all thy
worship; what can be more clear or pregnant? So you have the Major confirmed.

But the Minor is principally to be proved. And I shall prove it.

1 By Isai. 6. 1. I saw the Lord sitting upon his throne; This Lord was
worshipped by the Seraphims, ver. 3. they cried, Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord
of Hosts: This Lord sends a message by the Prophet, verse. 9, 10. Go ye, and
tell this people, etc. Now go along with me to Act. 28. 25. 26, 27. where you
have the very same message, and Paul brings it in thus, Well spoke the Holy
Ghost by Isaiah the Prophet; Paul says, the Holy Ghost spoke, and in the sixth
of Isaiah, The Lord spoke; nor can it be said, that the Lord spoke by the Holy
Ghost, as being one of those Angels; and that the same action may be attributed
to several persons; as God is said to save men, and Paul is said to save men.
For though that is a truth, yet here it cannot be so understood; (as if the
Holy Ghost were Gods Instrument in delivering this message, as Paul was in the
saving of souls,) for he that spoke immediately, is evidently distinguished
from the Angels. Verse. 6, 7. you read, one of the Seraphims flew, and touched
the lips of the Prophet; then verse. 8. he passes from the Angels, and tells
you, he heard the voice of the Lord. The Lord that was upon his throne, verse.
1. that was worshipped, verse. 2. If it be yet said, There is a difference in
the text^, for in the one, the Lord speaks these things to Isaiah, i. e. in a
vision; in the other it is, that the holy Spirit spoke them by Isaiah to the
Fathers. I answer, that alters not the case; for the Scripture informs us, that
it was the same Author that spoke to the Prophets, and by the Prophets to the
people. It was God that spoke unto the Fathers by the Prophets, Heb. 1. ^.
which is parallel to this place, The Holy Ghost spoke by Isaiah to the Fathers.
The meaning of it is only this, that the Holy Ghost sent this message by
Isaiah to the Fathers. Now he that sent that message was God immediately, as we
have proved.

2 That worship is due to the Holy Ghost, will appear from Psalm. 95. 8. It is
said, verse. 6. O come, let us worship and how down, let us kneel before the
Lord our Maker, Verse. 7. -- If you will hear his voice, ver. 8. Harden not your
hearts.

But you will say, How does it appear, that the Holy Ghost is here intended. I
answer, by comparing this place with Heb. 3. 7, 8, 9. wherefore, as the Holy
Ghost says, To day if you will hear his voice, etc. How did the Holy Ghost say
it? By the mouth of David. Whospake by the mouth of David? Why, God, Heb. 1. 1.
And observe it, Saint Paul, or whoever was the Author of that Epistle to the
Hebrews, brings in the Holy Ghost speaking thus of himself, Your fathers
tempted me, and proved me, and saw my works forty years: and so, Verse. 11. I
swear they shall not enter into my rest: Who was it whom they tempted? They
tempted the most High God, Psalm. 78. 18. Who was it whose works they saw forty
years? Who can do those mavelous works, but God? They are called Gods
mavelous works, Psalm. 105. 5. Who was it that swear? it was the Lord, Numb.
3^. 10, 11. The Lord swear, saying -- None of them shall see the Land; The word
in the Original is Jehovah, a name peculiar to God: and never given to any
Angel. And that it was the Lord himself that swear immediately, is beyond all
contradiction, especially, if this place be compared with Numbers 14. And yet
here all these things are attributed to the Holy Ghost.

3 Swearing is a part of worship, and we ought to swear by none bur God. Now
the Apostle swears by the Holy Ghost, Romans 9. 1. -- My conscience bearing me
witness in the Holy Ghost. Swearing is nothing else but a calling God to
witness; and as God alone does search the heart, he alone is able to judge the
heart, whether he that swears* swears in*truth: So he only is to be sworn by.

4 This appears from Revel. 1. 4, 5. Grace b^ un^o you, and peace from him
which is, and was, and is to come, and from the seven spirits which are before
his throne, and from Jesus Christ, etc. You see Saint John prays to all the
Persons in the Trinity, amongst the rest the seven spirits. The Spirit of God
is called the seven spirits, because of its manifold gifts and operations:
Seven is a note of perfection, and seven spirits in relation to the seven
Churches: The seven Churches were as liberally provided for, as if they had had
seven spirits: These seven spirits cannot be meant of Angels: for 1 these seven
spirits are put before Christ, whereas the Angels are far below him, Heb. 1. 2
The good Angels would never accept of Prayer or Worship, Revel. 22. 8, 9. 3
Prayers are not to be directed to any creature, to any Angel, for we are to
pray to none but those that know our hearts, Romans 8. 27. We must pray to none
but him that is the object of our faith. Romans 10. 14. God has commanded us
only to call upon himself. Psalm. 50. 15. Call upon me, not upon an Angel, in
the day of trouble. Christ bids us pray only to Our Father, And much more might
be said, but I am ashamed to see that we should need arguments to dispute down
such rotten Popish Tenants out of those that profess Protestancie. From all
these it clearly follows, that these seven spirits cannot be understood to be
created Angels. 4. Nor are the Angels the fountains of grace and peace: The
seven spirits here prayed to, are so.

If it be said, though they are not the fountains, yet they are instruments. I
Ans. 1. The instruments of grace must not be prayed to. Ministers are Gods
instruments in the working of grace, yet we must not pray to them. 2 The
Scripture never in the least hints that Angels are Gods instruments in working
of grace. And if it were true (as it is most false) that the Holy Ghost were an
Angel, yet will it not follow because one Angel is said to have some causality
in the working of grace, therefore 7 have; rather because it is attributed
only to one, the rest are excluded. 3 If Angels are instruments then either
moral or natural; not moral, for that consists in persuasion, etc. Angels do
not persuade, etc. nor natural, for grace being created must needs be
immediately produced by God; and besides, B. and all the Socinians are so far
from allowing such a Physical influence of Angels upon the will, etc. that they
deny it to God himself, and tell us he can only persuade the heart, but not
work physically upon it.

The best of creatures are in the condition of those wise Virgins, that have
oil only for their own use. If it be said, Here the seven spirits are put
before Christ, whereas Christ being the second Person should be put before the
Spirit. I answer: 1 Nothing can be gathered from this order: Sometimes the Son
is mentioned before the Father, 2 Cor. 13. 14. The reason is, though there be a
priority of order among the Persons of the blessed Trinity, yet there is no
precedencie in dignity. 2 The Spirit of God is superior to Christ as
Mediator, and so he is spoken of here, as is evident.

Arg. 3. He in whose name Baptism is to be administered, is God: But Baptism
is to be administered in the Name of the Holy Ghost: Therefore the Holy Ghost is
God.

For the Minor, that cannot be denied, it is express Scripture, Matthew. 28. ^9.

The Major will easily be proved. ^ If you consider what it is to be baptized
into ones name: it is to be baptized into ones worship, faith and do ^r^ne; and
further to be baptized by the authority, or at the appointment af one. 2 If you
consider what Baptism is: it is a Seal of the Covenant of Grace. Now in whose
name is Baptism to be administered, but in his, who is able to seal to us Gods
part of the Covenant* and to whom we owe the performance of our part? To whom
does it belong to appoint Sacraments, but to God alone? 3 If you consider how
much Paul dreaded the thoughts of it, that any man should say, He was baptized
in the name of Paul, 1 Cor. 1. 13, 14, 15. And no reason can be given, why, if
it was lawful to baptize in the name of any servant or Minister, it were not as
lawful to baptize in the name of Paul, as in the name of any Angel. 4 If you
consider, that, Ephesians. ^. One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism; where it is not
obscurely implied, that Baptism is to be in the name of none but the Lord, and
also that these three mentioned in Baptism, are but one, one Lord.

But the Theomachist objects, The Jews are said to be baptized into Moses, 1
Cor. 10. 2.

I answer: 1 There is difference between these phrases, being baptized into
one, and in his name. Certainly, there was as much reason why the Corinthians
might be baptized in the name of Paul, as the Israelites in the name of Moses:
And therefore as Paul abhorred the thoughts of it, that any should be baptized
in his name; so doubtless Moses would not have arrogated it to himself, nor
Paul have given it to Moses.

2 Moses is taken several ways: To omit other senses, sometimes it is taken for
the Law and worship of God, delivered by the hand of Moses, Luke 16. 31. If
they hear not Moses and the Prophets; Why Moses? where was he? And the
Prophets do they live for ever? It was only the Word of God, written by Moses
and the Prophets, Acts 21. 21. Thou teach all the Jews to forsake Moses: so
the meaning of it may be only this: They were baptized or initiated into the
Law and worship of God delivered by Moses; now, what is this to the purpose? Or,

3 The Preposition (...) may be put for (...), as it is in other places, Acts
7. 35. The Law was given, (...), into the dispositions of Angels, for by the
dispositions of Angels, according to Gal. 3. 19. It was ordained by Angels.

Whereas B. says, We are baptized into the guidance of the Spirit, into the
confession and obedience of it, it being the chief instrument whereby God
guides, governs, sanctifies the Church.

Alas, whither will a wandering creature rove? We use to judge the Papists
sufficiently absurd (and I doubt not but B. will join with us in it) for making
a visible head of the Church distinct from Christ. Now B. makes an invisible
head the Vicar of God and Christ, and that one of those Angels, that are so far
from being heads of the Church, that they are Ministering spirits to wait upon
the heirs of salvation; for so all the Angels are, Heb. 1. 14. And observe it
is one argument Paul there brings to prove Christ to be higher then all the
Angels, because he is the head and governor of the Church, Verse 8. where as
the Angels are but his Ministers, Verse 7. and 14. strongly implying that the
same person cannot be both a ministering Spirit and head of the Church. Again,
It is wholly against the analogy of faith, and indeed that common sense and
reason that B. so much cries up, that one of Gods servants should be joint
commissioner with him in the appointment or honor of his ordinances; that was
the very reason why Paul would not endure the thoughts of it, as we saw even
now. But indeed the very naming of this far fetched fancy, is enough to confute
it.

Arg. 4. He to whom the Properties of God are communicated, must needs be God:
But the Properties of God are communicated to the Holy Ghost: Therefore the
Holy Ghost is God.

For the Major, it is unquestionable. The Minor I prove by particulars, I shall
instance only two. 1 The Holy Ghost is Omniscient. 2 He is Omnipresent.

1 He is Omniscient, 1 Cor. 2. 10. The Spirit searches all things, yea, even
the deep things of God: The very ways of God are said to be unsearchable, Romans
11. 33. and his judgments past finding out; that is, by any creature: and yet
the Spirit searches even the deep, secret things of God. It is ridiculo^s that
B. replies, that this Omniscience will not prove the Holy Ghost to be God,
because, if he have it, he has it not originally and from himself, but
communicated from God. For it is impossible (as all that understand any thing
in Philosophy know) that God should make a creature Omniscient, or a creature
that could search his deep things. No finite being can possibly search or know
the depths of an infinite being. And the Argument is confirmed by the reason
added, Even as the spirit of man: So that as the spirit of man is in man, so
the Spirit of God is in God, and so is God; for whatsoever is in God is God. It
matters not that that is not expressed in the text, that the Spirit of God is
in God, for it is necessarily implied, otherwise the Apostles reason were
invalid; and it might be replied, Paul, your instance is not to purpose; for
the spirit of a man is in him, and so may know his depths; but, the Spirit of
God is not in him, and therefore may very well be ignorant of it. The Son of
man himself, as he was man, and every other creature was ignorant of the day of
judgment; but the Spirit of God knew it; for that searches even the deep
things of God: it knew far greater mysteries then that, much more did it know
that. If it be said, It searches them, that intimates, that it was ignorant of
them; as in a search we look for something we want. I answer; even God himself
is said to search, I search the heart, Jer. 17. 10. God, and so the Spirit are
said to search, not in regard of thein former ignorance, but because their
knowledge is an intimate and piercing knowledge.

2 The Spirit of God is Omnipresent, Psalm. 139. 7. whither shall I go from thy
Spirit? etc. The place is clear and full, and will admit of no answer: The
Spirit is extended as far as the presence of God; and therefore the Spirit is
every where. And it is worthy our observation, how the Propher instances to
prove the Omnipresence of Gods Spirit, Verse 8. If I ascend into Heaven, thou
art there? whereby it is fully implied, that God and the Spirit have but one
essence, otherwise he could not argue from the presence of the one to the
presence of the other. But further to confirm it, I lay down two Conclusions.

1 There is one Spirit that dwells in all the people of God wheresoever they
live: Ephesians. 2. 18. Through Christ both they that are afar off, and they that
are near, have access by one Spirit unto the Lord; Ephesians. 4. 4. One body, one
Spirit.

2 The Spirit dwells in all the Saints: Their very bodies are the temples of the
Holy Ghost: as is expressly asserted, 1 Cor. 6. 19. And whereas B. is forced to
th^^ shift, that when the Spirit is said to be or dwell in us, it is to be
understood of the gifts of the Spirit (there in forsaking his great Master
Crellius, merely to avoid the dint of this argument.) This is false, for the
Spirit that is said to dwell in Believers, is contradistinguished from his
gifts, John 14. 5, 16. -- He will give you another Comforter, that he may abide
with you for ever. -- H^ dwells with you, and shall be in you. Then go to
Verse 26. He shall teach you, etc. Here are the effects of the Spirit dwelling
in them, which you see are clearly distinguished from his essence, Romans^.^. --
The love of God is sh^d abroad, etc. (th^re is the effect of the Spirit) by the
Holy Ghost which is given to us; (there is the Spirit it self.) So, Romans 8. 15.
If it be said, The in-dwelling of the Spirit is the privilege of Saints, but
by its essence it is in all men.

Answ. Therefore that is not all (though it be one thing) that is required to
make up this in-dwelling (for so he is present not only in all men, but in all
beasts, all stones, all things, in whom yet no sober man will say he dwells.)
But it is further required that he be there not only by natural necessity, but
voluntary consent; not only by an essential presence, but also by his gracious
presence, by his gracious communications. And thus he is only in his people.
Well, what answers B. to this? That if the Holy Ghost be Omnipresent, then
Satan is Omnipresent, because he is wherever the Word is preach^d, Mark 4.
And this answer he delivers with as muchconfidence, as if he had made a knot
that no man nor Angel could untie; which makes me adore the wisdom of God,
that has so far besotted him, as that he pl^c^th so much confidence in that,
which any man that has but a dram of sound reason in him, will acknowledge to
be the very weakest passage in all his Book, though it is all weak enough: I
confess, I fear sometimes (in this especially) he went against the light of his
own conscience. The answer in a word is this: There is but one Holy Ghost,
which is Omnipresent, but there are abundance of evil spirits, Mark 5. 2, 8. a
legion was in one man: observe, it is called in the singular number an unclean
spirit, and yet there was a legion; a legion among the Romans ordinarily
contained above six thousand.

Arg. 5. He that dictated, or was the Author of the Scripture, is God: But the
Holy Ghost was Author of the Scripture: Ergo, The Holy Ghost is God.

For the Major I prove it:

1 Because the Scripture attributes that word that was spoken and written by
Prophets or Apostles, unto God: Heb. 1. 1. God spoke in times past by the
Prophets. Here is the principal cause, God; the instrumental cause, the
Prophets. To one of these the Holy Ghost must be referred, Luke 1. 7^. And so,
1 Th^ss. 2. 13. Paul commends the Th^ssalonians for receiving his word, not as
the word of man, but, as it is indeed, the Word of God. Hence all the Scripture
is said to be (...), of divine inspiration, 2 Timothy ^. 16. or inspired by God;
But so it could not be, if it were inspired by any creature, whether Angel or
man: and indeed it cannot be otherwise, but that God should be the inspirer of
it, because the Scripture cannot be founded upon the authority of a mere
creature, for then it would not be infallible, nor would our faith be a divine
faith. Let us suppose that the Holy Ghost were an Angel, as B. affirms: I say,
we could not believe him with a divine faith, nor look upon his Word as
absolutely infallible; which if I mistake not, is fully proved from Gal. 1. 8.
Though we, or an Angel from Heaven, should preach any other Gospel unto you,
then that which we have preached, let him be accursed: Where evident it is, the
Apostle puts himself and Angels both into the same rank in that respect, and
supposes that neither of then were simply in fallible, and that we could not
safely rely upon either of them with a divine faith. But now we may safely rely
upon the Word and authority* of the Holy Ghost; for that is called a fure Word,
yea, more sure then a voice from Heaven, as you may see, 2 Pet. 1. 19. and
therefore so sure, because it was spoken by the H. Ghost, V*. 2^.

For the Minor; it is proved, 1 By that place forementioned, Acts 28. 25. The
H^ Ghost spoke by I says. 2 By 2* Pe^. 1. 21. Holy men of God spoke as they
were moved by the Holy Ghost: Where the Deity of the Holy Ghost is not
obscurely proved; for he tells us, Verse 20. Scripture is not of private
interpretation; that is, it is not to be interpreted according* to men's private
pre-conceived opinions, but according to the mind of the Holy Ghost, who was
the Arthour of it. A parallel place you have* H^b. 9. 8. The Holy Ghost this
signifying, etc. where the mind of the Holy Ghost is made the genuine sense of
the* Scripture* now Scripture* is to be interpreted* according* to the mind of
none* but the Author of it* Many other places might be added, but I do not
desire to multiply places.

Whereas B. says, the H. Ghost is* an Angel; that cannot be; for the Holy*
Ghost^* you* (...) i^ the Author of the Scripture* and does fully understand
all Scripture-mysteries, but now the Angels are ignorant of them; they knew not
the day of judgment, they are ignorant in great pair of Gospel-mysteries, 1
Pet. 1. 12. The Apostles preached the Gospel, (...), with, or by the Holy
Ghost, -- which things the Angels desire to look (...). Observe 1 The Angels
are ^^^aly ^^stinguished from the Holy Ghost. 2 The Holy Ghost is the Dictator
of Gospel-myst^ries, the Angels are Students, learners in them.

Arg. 6. He who is ^^^ in natu^^ and essence with the Father, is God: But the
Holy Ghost* is one with the Father: Therefore the Holy Ghost is God.

The Major will not be denied. The Minor is proved from 1 John 5. 7. There are
three that bear record in Heaven, the Father, the word, and the Spirit, and
these are one. Consider, 1 If the Spirit were an Angel, there were three
thousand witnesses in Heaven. 2 Again, there is a clear variation of the phrase
in the next Verse: there it is, they agree in one, (...); but here it is not,
they agree in one, but (...), they are one; it is (...), not the personal
number (...), but (...) the Neutral, to note, that though there is in the
Trinity (...) and (...), a person and a person, yet there is not (...) and
(...), a thing and a thing; though there are three Persons, yet there is but
one nature, but one Essence: Had the H. G. bin an Angel, John had committed a
wilful and gross offense in varying the phrase, whereby just cause of suspicion
was given, to think that he was one with God, not only by consent, (for so the
Water, Spirit, and Blood are one, they consent in their testimony) but also in
Essence. 3 ^ook to Verse 9. If we receive the witness of men, the witness of
God is greater: He takes notice only of two Witnesses, the witness of God, and
the witness of men. The witness of the Holy Ghost is not the witness of men;
nay the contrary is most clearly implied, that it is the witness of God.

But this place is no better then its companions, and therefore B. offers
violence to it.

1 He says, This phrase is never taken to signify one* in ^^ss^nd^, but
always one in consent.

I answer, This is false; the contrary is evident from John 10. 29* I and my
Father are one: Had Christ meant only one in consent, the Jews would never have
been ready to stone him* Again, he gives this as a reason why none could pluck
hi^ sheep* out of his hand, because he had one and the same power, and so the
same Essence with God. For if he had only been one in consent with the Father,
one might as soon have plucked his sheep out of his hand, as out of the hand of
any of his Disciples, for they also were one in consent with God. But here lies
the sorce of the argument, My Father is greater then all, and therefore none
can pluck them, out of his hand. And I am as great as the Father, for I and he
are one, *and therefore it will be as hard a work to pluck them out of mine
hand. And it is observable when the J^ws charge him with making himself God, he
does not fly to B's refuge, to say he meant only one in consent (which if
true, had been the fairest and best way) but he argues from their own
principles, that they allow Magistrates to be gods, and therefore he may be
called God, because lie has a^tority from God (as Magistrates have) and was in
a more ^mi^^^nt way sanctified by God, and sent into the World, by the way,
holding forth that he had another nature and being, and was a person before he
was sont into the World (how could nothing be sanctified and sent into the
World?) and therefore had not only the humane n^^^ which he received from the
Virgin, after he was sent into the world) but also a divine nature, by which he
was God: But B. faith, That it is contrary to common* sense, that three should
be (...). Thus it fares with men, when they will make sense and reason the
Judge of Scripture* controversies. Has B. never read, that the naturalman
receives not the things of God? 1 Co^. 2. ^4* that when Pe^^^r said, Christ
was the Son of the living God, Christ told him, Flesh and blood has not
revealed this to* thee, Matthew. 16. that The carnal mind is enmity against God,
Romans 8. 7. The truth is, not* only common sense cannot reach these mysteries*
But a man must have more then common faith to subject his reason to them: not
that reason may not clearly discern this mystery in the Scripture, but that it
cannot invent o^ fathom it; not but that the* (...) is clear from the
Scripture, that there is a Trinity* but that reason cannot find out the (...)*
how can these things be? All men are Socinians by nature, they will believe God
and the Word of God no farther then they can see reason.

But B. adds, the C^m^lut, Bible has this place, otherwise, I answer* What
then* It must be here as it is in* many other cas^s of the some nature, that
must be overruled by the consent of other Copies. But B. goes on, and tells
u^, that this place is not to be found in many Copies. I answer, It is certain
that ancient* Heretics have offered violence to many Scriptures, that did most
clearly confute them, as might be instanced in many other places, and yet the
providence of God has always countermined their designs by keeping some*
Copies pure, when others were corrupted by Heretics; and some perfect, when
others were defective; and for this particular, it is certain, it was extant in
the Greek Copy before ever your fore-father* Macedonius broached that Heresy
that now you have revived. And if in some Copies* it* be wanting, we may* thank
those* ancient* Heretics, in whose steps you tread, for taking it away.
Certtain it is, that Cyprian cited this place, (who flourished about 250 years
after Christ) his words (as I find them cited by Vedelius*) are these; Dicit
Dominus, Ego* and Pater unum sumus. Et iterum de Patre and Filio, and Spiritu
Sancto scriptum est? Et tres unum sunt, etc. Saint Hierome also cites it (as
our adversaries acknowledge) and diverse others. And if it be wanting in some
other Copies, let it be considered that it was the complaint of diverse
Ancients, that the old Heretics did corrupt and deprave the Scriptures in
several places that were most pregnant against them. And the A^titri^itarians
were as guilty in this as any. Socrates complained that those that were against
the Deity of Christ, blotted out those places* that proved his Godhead, and in
particular some places out of this first Epistle of John, lib. 7. c. 32. An
other names two old Heretics, that made this their business to alter and
corrupt the Scriptures. The truth is, it is rather a wonder that any Scripture
is preserved from infection, then that any place is corrupted. Indeed, the
fraud of Heretics about this place is very discernable, they fumbled so
unhandsomely about it, that some of them left out one word of this Verse, and
some another, and some all; as any one that would further be satisfied, may
sufficiently inform himself out of Vedelius, in a discourse upon this place.
But that it was there Originally, and that it ought to be there, will evidently
appear, if you consider, 1 The end of the sixth Verse, which does necessarily
require that that should follow, for it is given as a reason, why the Spirit is
truth, because there are three, etc. that is, it is all one with the God of
Truth, and with the Son, who is called Truth; and so this place is parallel to
John 16. 13. He will* guide you into all truth, for he shall not speak of
himself, but from the Father; that is, he shall speak nothing but that wherein
the Father and he agrees. 2 From the ninth Verse* If we believe the witness of
men, the witness of God is greater, for this is the witness of God, which he
has testified of his Son: Now, I beseech you, where is this witness of God
here hinted and pointed at, if not in the seventh Verse? Howsoever if there
were not such a place as this in the Scripture, there have been several other
places alleged beyond all exception.

Arg. 7. He to whom those actions are ascribed that are proper to God, is God:
But those actions which are proper to God, are a^cribed to the H. Ghost: Ergo,
the H. Ghost is God.

For the Major, it will readily be acknowledged. The Minor is proved in
particulars*

1 In Creation: The H. Ghost creates, Job 33. 4. The Spirit of God made me. Nor
can it be said, God made him by the Spirit as an instrument; for instrumental
causes in creation are ridiculous, and rejected by all men that understand any
thing in Philosophy. And therefore B. betrays his ignorance in saying, that the
Spirit was Gods instrument in creating things. For, 1 It implies a
contradiction; for every instrument must work in some subject: and therefore
presupposes a subject: but Creation does not presuppose a subject, but make
it. 2 Every instrument requires some time for its work: But Creation was done
in an instant, and that by God himself, as Genes. 1. does expressly inform us,
He said, Let there be light, etc. B. speaks as if he had never read Genesis.
And therefore it is a most illiterate exposition that B. gives of that place,
Job 35. 10. where is God my Maker? (Heb. Makers) which he is forced to confess:
argues that Creation was the work of several persons, but the one (forsooth)
most learnedly and profoundly he makes the instrumental cause of that Creation,
which I dare say, all the Universities in Europe would hiss at. Luke 1. 31*
the Holy Ghost created the body of Christ, which was neither convenient nor
possible for a creature to do. He that spoke by the mouth of David, made both
heaven and earth, Acts 4. 24. and who that we read Acts 1. 16. The Holy Ghost
spoke by the mouth of David: To pass by that known and clear place, Genes. 1.
2. The Spirit moved upon the face of the waters; and many others.

2 The Spirit works Miracles* Miracles are actions above nature; and none can
do acts above nature, but he that is above nature. Christ proved himself to be
God by working miracles, Matthew. 9. 5. That you may know the Son of man has
power upon earth to forgive sins, he says to the sick of the Palsy, Aris^*
None but God can forgive sins: now miracles are ascribed to the Holy Ghost,
Matthew. 12. 28. Christ cast out Devils by the Spirit of God: and that which adds
weight to it is that parallel place, Luke 11. 20. I by the finger of God cost
out Devils: What Matthew calls the Spirit, Luke calls the finger of God, or the
Omnipotency of God, which is the same with God, Exodus 8. 19. The Spirit of God
was greater and stronger then Christ as man. Again, Romans 15. 19. Mighty signs
and wonders were wrought by the power of the Spirit. Those Miracles which the
Apostles wrought, they professed they did not work by their own power, Acts 4.
12. but by the power and strength of Christ: And doubtless, it had been as
sacrilegious to say, they wrought them by the power of an Angel, or any other
creature: And therefore whereas sometimes they ascribe them to Christ, Acts 4.
16. sometimes to the Holy Ghost, as in the place now mentioned; sometimes to
God the Father, Acts 5. 30. it hence clearly follows, that every one of these
is God; and because the Scripture tells us there is but one God, Deuteronomy. 6. 4.
therefore we conclude, there are three persons, and these three are one. Again,
Romans 8. 11. The Spirit of God raised up Christ from the dead, and yet he raised
himself; I will raise up this temple, John 2. 19. Hence also it follows, that
Christ and the Holy Ghost are God, and are one God.

3 It is proper to God to govern the Church, I mean to govern it (...) and to
send Ministers, and yet this is attributed to the Holy Ghost: Acts 13. 2. The
Holy Ghost said, Separate unto me Barnabas and Saul, for the work whereunto I
have called them: Was this a comely dialect for a creature to use? far
different I am sure it is from the language of created Angels; see Revel. 22.
9. So Acts 20. 28. Take heed to the flock of God, over which the Holy Ghost
has made you Overseers; and compare this with 1 Cor. 12. 28. and you shall
find, that it was God that sets Officers in the Church; Jesus Christ himself
was sent by the Spirit, Luke 4. 18. Again, Acts 1^. ^8. It seemed good to the
Holy Ghost and to us, that is, to the Holy Ghost in us, to decree: You see the
Holy Ghost is the Lawgiver of the Church, and yet God is the only Law givet,
Jam. 4. 12.

4 The Holy Ghost acts according to his good pleasure, according to the
counsel of his own will (which is the property of God, Ephesians. 1. 11.) 1 Cor.
12. 11. All these things works the Spirit, dividing severally, as he will.
All creatures must say, Not my will, but thy will, Lord, be done; Jesus Christ
himself, who is far higher then all the Angels, said it, and the Angels in
particular are said not to do their own will, but to do Gods Commandments,
hearkening to the voice of his word, Psalm. 103. 20. And again, Paul would have
gone and preached in Bithynia, but the Spirit suffered him not, Acts 16. 7. Who
is this that undertakes, whom he will to save and whom he will to destroy? Non
vox hominem sonat: It is not the language of a Creature, but of the great God.
Jesus Christ himself (whom yet the Author to the Hebrews proves at large to be
better then all the Angels, Chap. 1. and so according to B's. supposition,
better then the Holy Ghost, yet he) did not dispense the Word according to his
own pleasure, as man, but according to the pleasure of his Father, Matthew. 15.
24. I am not sent, but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel.

I might add, that the Holy Ghost sanctifies us, and it would easily amount to
a Demonstration: But I have said enough for the proof of a point, so clearly
expressed in the Scripture: I have done with the Cataskeuastical part; I now
come to the An aske^astical, I mean to detect the fallacies and cavils
wherewith the enemy of the Holy Ghost endeavors to dispute him out of his
Throne and Deity.

And truly one may rationally expect that he that comes to dispute a truth out
of the Church, that has had so long possession; to throw down a doctrine that
has so firm a foundation in the Scripture; should write like Tertullian, and
have as many sentences as words, and as many argnments as sentences. But
contrariwise, I find in this Pneumatomachist nothing but a heap of words, a
Jury of arguments that are neither good nor true, bold dictates imperiously
obtruded upon the World without any proof, ancient Landmarks removed, quia
ipse dixit, because the Schoolmaster would have it so, and such things which
Non sani esse hominis, non sanus juret Orestes. You will say, Why then do you
answer him? Because of that of Solomon, Answer a fool according to his folly,
lest he be wise in his own conceit, Prove. 26. 5. Besides, God has in just
judgment sent abroad a spirit of delusion, and there are multitudes that will
sooner comply with a new and erroneous opinion upon the appearance of one
argument, then embrace a truth, though confirmed by several solid
demonstrations and evident Scriptures; even as one stroke will carry a man
further with the tide, then five against it. And therefore that I may cut off
an occasion from the^ that seek an occasion to fall from the truth, that I may
leave those inexcusable that are resolved they will not be convinced, that I may
lay up an evidence to justify God, and to be a witness against them, (who I
perceive will not see) against that dreadful day of judgment; (...), I come to
answer his arguments.

This only in the general: There is one consideration, that will utterly
enervate all his Arguments: It must needs be acknowledged, and B. himself
confesses it, That there are many things that are spoken of God, (...), after
the manner of men, and must be understood (...), so as it do not reflect
dishonor upon God. And therefore when he tells you. The Spirit speaks from
God, hears from God, receives from God, is sent of God, is the gift of God,
changes place, makes intercession for us, etc. The answer in a word is this,
(and it would suffice to stop the mouth of any sober-minded man) that all these
things are spoken of the Holy Ghost improperly, and must be so expounded, as
may consist with the divine Majesty of the Holy Ghost, which is so clearly
asserted in other Scriptures, as you have heard.

But I shall add one thing more in the general, That we all confess there is an
order, though not an in equality among the divine Persons; and so all that B.
objects may be answered, if one do apply it to his several Arguments. But I
come to particulars.

Object. 1. His first Argument is this: He that is distinguished from God, is
not God: But the Holy Ghost is distinguished from God: Ergo the Holy Ghost is
not God.

Answ. To the Major I answer, He that is distinguished from God really and
substantially, is not God, so your Major is true, otherwise not; for there is a
modal distinction among the persons, and then in your sense the Minor is false;
for the Holy Ghost is not substantially distinguished from God; for though
their persons are distinguished, yet the Essence is the same. But B. foresaw
this answer, and seeing he wanted arguments, he falls a railing. 1 He calls
this, an ignorant refuge; A bold censure, for a rustic Paedagogue to pass upon
so many learned men, whose shoes he will never be worthy to bear. He adds, That
no man can conceive it in his mind. Alas, vain man, do thou think to
conceive these great mysteries, which the very Angels adore? But come a little
lower, can thou conceive what the eternity of God is? What his infinity or
immensity is? All the conceptions of thy mind are finite. Yet a little lower,
Can thou conceive what a Spirit ^s? What a soul is? wiser men then B. could
never yet do it, and therefore they can only describe them by Negatives, and
tell us what they are not, but cannot tell us what they are. Yet a little
lower, Can thou tell how every quantity may be divided into infinite parts?
What is the nature of the Lodestone? nay, Why thy hair is black or white?
Can thou tell what is the essence of a pebble? can thou give the definition
of a Feather? Away, vain man, lay thy hand upon thy mouth, and henceforth never
grudge that thou can not conceive such a mystery as this is in thy mind.

I believe B. can as hardly conceive the resurrection of the body, especially
when one Canibal eats another, and a beast him, and another man that beast,
etc. will he therefore dis-believe the resurrection of the body? Can B.
conceive how the soul and body are united together? it has puzzled other
manner of Philosophers then B. is; will he therefore conclude, that the soul
and body are not united together?

But he faith, It is a distinction unheard of in Scripture.

Answ. That is false: 1 It is clearly, John 1. ^. The word was with God, and
the word was God* wi^h God; there God is taken personally, the Son was with the
Father* was God, there it is taken essentially* the Son was God, had the
Essence of God* It is a silly cavil of B's. that the word (...) is not to be
understood in the same sense, because the Father is called (...), the God.
Christ only (...) a God. Nay not only B. brings this exception, but which is
the wonder, his fellow creatures, his puny disciples, that I dare say, never
saw Athens, are all on a sudden turned Grecians, they that were the other day
but Graculi momento turbinis, are become Graeculi, before ever they could
construe this Latin Graecum est, non potest legi. But let not B. think to do
(as other Heretics have done) to justle out an article of faith by an article
of Grammar. Such (...) may satisfy a pedantick Grammaticaster, or (...), but
will never sway with serious or judicious men. The observation is false and
foolish. For the Father is many times called (...), without an article, -- Seek
the Kingdom (...), Matthew. 7. 8. (...), Mat. 10. 6. And Christ is called (...)
with an article, Heb. 1. 8. and 1* John 5. 20. So that being all B. has to say
to that place, it does 1 Fully prove the Divinity of Christ. 2 By consequence
give good ground for our distinction between the divine Essence, and a divine
Person. 3 This also we read in Scripture, These three are one, 1 John 5. 7. 4
Two things are clear in the Scripture: 1 That there is but one God. 2 That yet
the Father is God, the Son is God, the Holy Ghost is God. But he goes on to an
argument (as he thinks) a very subtle one.

If the Person be distinct from the Essence of God, then it is either something
or nothing; if nothing, how can it be distinguished? (By the way, friend, is
there no distinction, no difference, between something and nothing?) If
something, then either finile or infinue; finite, we will not say; if infinite,
then there are two infinites in God, the Person and the Essence. An old
argument new sodden.

I answer, 1 But what if I should say, a person barely considered is neither
yes, a thing properly, nor yet nothing; but modus r^^, the manner of a thing:
modus substautialis. Had B. studied Philosophy a little better, before he had
made such a bold Essay in Divinity, he would not have wondered at it. The
folding of my hands is not a thing, (for then I should be a Creator, and make a
thing) nor is it plainly nothing, (for there is a difference between my hands
folded, and stretched-out) but nothing cannot make a difference, as B. says.

2 I answer, a person considered, precisely, and by it self, is neither finite
nor infinite (for these are the properties of essences.) Indeed, every essence
or being is either finite or infinite; but the person singly considered is not
a being, but the manner of a being. Or,

3 The Persons considered with the Essence are infinite, and yet they are not
three infinites, because they have but one Essence, and so one infinity.

But he adds, To talk of God Essentially taken, is ridiculous, because God is
the name of a person. Wretched ignorance! B. does not understand the meaning of
his Adversaries. None ever took God essentially in that sense, for an essence
abstracted from a person: but the meaning is this, that I may a little instruct
him in this principle; We say, God essentially considered, acts, not as if the
abstracted nature of God did act, but because it is an act common to all the
Persons: Thus to create, is an act of God essentially considered, because all
the Trinity creates; but to beget the Son is an act of God personally
considered, because that is an act proper to the first Person.

Object. 2. His second Argument is this, He that gave the holy Spirit is
Jehovah alone, Neh. 9. 6, 2c. Therefore the Spirit is not God.

Answ. This exclusive Particle does exclude Creatures and Idol-gods, but not
the other Persons of the Trinity; So it is used in many other places, Matthew.
11. 27. The day of Judgment none knows but the Father only, and yet Christ as
God could not be ignorant of it, for he knew even the thoughts of the heart*
Math. 9. 4* which is much more; nor could the Spirit be ignorant of it, for
that searches even the deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2. 10. so, 1 Cor. 2. 11. the
things of God knows, (...), (not only no man, but) no person; for so the
word signifies, but the Spirit of God: Shall any weak or perverse Disputant
infer from hence, Therefore the Father knows them not, or knowledge is not
properly attributable to God, as Mr. Goodwin, tells us* So Rev. 19. 1^. Christ
had a Name which no^^ knew but himself; what, did not God the Father know it?
So, Deuteronomy. 32. 12. The Lord alone did lead them: and yet Christ is said to lead
them, 1 Cor. 10. 4, 9. and also the the Spirit, Neh. 9. 20. So, Psalm. 136. 4.
The Lord alone does great wonders; and yet* we have proved that the Holy Ghost
does great wonders.

Object. 3. His third Argument is this, He that speaks not of himself, is not
God: But the Holy Ghost speaks not of himself: Therefore the Holy Ghost is
not God. The Minor is proved from Joh. 16. 13.

Answ. This is the fruit of Gods condescensions to unthanfull men, they take
occasion to slight him for them. Thus because Christ was pleased to assume the
nature of man, some have rendered him this thanks, to dispute him out of his
Godhead. Thus, because God in Scripture condescends to our capacity, therefore
they have requited him thus, to say that all things must be understood properly
of God, how much soever they tend to his dishonor. Ungrateful wretches!
assure your selves, this wicked unthankfulness shall not go unpunished. But to
answer: 1 This phrase does note an order, though no inequality in the Divine
Persons. Now as the Holy Ghost, in regard of his person, is not of himself, but
from the Father and the Son, so he acts also from them. 2 This phrase does note
the consent that was between the Father and the Spirit; as if Christ had said,
The Spirit shall not speak one thing, and the Father another, but both shall
agree; according to that, There are three that bear record in heaven, 1 Ioh. 5.
7. There is not the single testimony of the Spirit, but the joint attestation
of all the three Persons. He shall not speak from himself (alone,) the
exclusive particle is often understood. So Deuteronomy. 6. 13. is expounded by Christ,
Matthew. 4. 16. But he shall speak what he hears, the very same things that the
Father speaks, and he hears, he shall speak. Nor does this hearing argue any
inferiority; one man may hear another that is no more learned then himself: As
if I should say of three Ambassadors of equal parts and power, Such an one of
them, you may safely treat with, for he shall not speak of himself, but
whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak. My meaning is not, He shall not
speak by his own power or virtue, nor from his own knowledge, but only to show
that there is a consent between them all. 3 The words may be taken thus; He
shall not speak of himself, concerning himself, only or principally, but
whatsoever he shall hear concerning me, etc. that is fit for you to know, he
shall ^^ew you. So that it notes not his manner of sp^aking, but the matter
that he shall (...) of.

But B. says, This phrase in Scripture, to do a thing not of himself, notes,
to do a thing by the teaching, command, authority of another. I answer: There
are many phrases, which are spoken both of God and man; but B. must know, that
things are not attributed to God and man univocally, that is, in one and the
same sense. God is said to repent, and man is said to repent; yet I hope B. is
not so brutish as to think God repents and grieves properly; how then should he
be perfectly happy? But since I writ my last, I have ground to recall my hopes;
for B's. followers (who, it is like, dare not speak a word without their
Masters warrant) are such things, that they say, God is grieved properly. Lest
any man should think I wrong them, and that the World may see what rare
intelligent creatures these are (that cannot believe the Deity of the Holy
Ghost, because of too much reason) I will give you their own words, as I had
them out of a p^tifull Manuscript, which is much applauded by that party: They
are these, We must either conclude, that God does repent and grieve, and that
properly too, or else we must, in effect say, Scripture, thou lie. Oh
prodigious wit, profound judgment, quintessence of learning, mirro^r of
reason! And yet these are the only Animalia vatioxalia, and we poor mortals
that believe Personalities, Trinunities, etc. it is a favor, if they will
allow us to be Animals, but for rationality we must leave it with them, and it
is confessed, they have great need of it. But to return: God is said to have
hands and feet, etc. and so are men; yet I hope not in the same sense. And yet
a man might as well urge these e^p^^ssions, to prove that God has hands, etc.
because when it is spoken of men, it is so to be taken, as to infer with B.
because when a man is said not to speak of himself, it is meant, he speaks by
the direction and at the appointment of another: therefore it is so to be
understood, when it is attributed to God the Holy Ghost. And yet it is false
that it always is so taken among* men. Suppose a King should say, I will leavy
such a tax, or do such a thing, but I will not do it of my self, but I will
confer with my Council about it; does this note, that he levies the tax by
the teaching, command, authority of another, and not by his own authority?

Object. 4 His fourth Argument is this, The Spirit hears from another, Ioh.
16. 13. Therefore it is not God.

Answ. This Argument is the same for substance with the other, and the same
answer will suffice* But B. soresaw what answer* would stop his mouth, and
therefore* he lays a strict charge upon us* not to say, this is spoken
improperly. Well, but ^ Shall we take it properly, has the Holy* Ghost bodily
ears to hear? 2 Or was the* Holy Ghost to learn? was he to seek in
Gospel-mysteries? How can that be imagined of him that dictated the Scripture,
and fully* understood all the meaning of it? Heb. 9. 8. Besides a Text that B.
himself cites, will not permit this; which is Isa. 40. 13, 14. compared with
To. 11. 34. I confess I cannot but admire both the wisdom of God, and the
besortednesse of this man, that should cite such a Text that is enough to
overthrow all* he says: I beseech you follow his directions* compare those*
Texts* together; what in one place, Romans 11. 34. is said of the Lord, Who has
known the mind of the Lord? or who has been his Counselor? that in* Isai.
40. 13. is spoken of the Spirit of God; Who has directed the Spirit of the
Lord? or being his Counselor has taught him? The same independency and
selfsufficiency is attributed to them both. Again, that Spirit of the Lord,
Isai. 40. 13. is there called the Lord God, verse. 10. is said to be infinite,
ver. 12, 15. is said to be he to whom sacrifices belong, ver. 16. which is Gods
prerogative; is called God, ver. 18. All which, if I listed to prosecute them,
would make so many unanswerable Demonstrations. It is a sign of a desperate
cause that B. is forced to this refuge, that by the Spirit* of God* here is not
meant the Holy Spirit, but only the mind of God, which indeed deserves not a
refutation; for that phrase is never so taken in all Scripture, or any other
Author. Nor does B. cite any place, wherein it is so taken (the more his
boldness to foist in such a novell interpretation, without any example.)
Wherreas he parallels it with 1 Cor. 2. 16. Who has known the mind of the
Lord? that is nothing to the purpose. For, 1 By the mind of the Lord may very
well be meant the mind of the Spirit, or the mind of Christ rather, as
appears by the Antithesi^ in this place, but we have the mind of Christ. 2 If
it were the mind of the Father, it would give him no help; for the Father,
Son, and Spirit have all one mind, and so that is all that would follow; not
that the Spirit of the Lord and the mind of the Lord are the same, (as B.
groundlesly fancies) but that the mind of the Father and the mind of the
Spirit is one and the same.

Object. 5. His fifth Argument is this, He that receives of another, is not
God* But the Holy Ghost receives of another* Ioh. 16. 14. He shall receive of
mine, a^^ show it to you: Therefore the Holy Ghost i^ not God.

Answ. This also is but the same Argument over again, repeated only (I suppose)
to make up the dozen. The answer to the third Argument will suffice for this,
yet something may be added* For suppose the Holy Ghost did properly receive any
thing from the Father, yet could he not properly be said to receive any thing
of Christ (according to ^'s supposition, that looks upon Christ but as (...), a
mere man:) for contrariwise, Christ as man received all his fullness from the
Spirit, Joh. 3. 34. He received the Spirit without measure* Isai. ^1. 1. Again,
it is not said, he shall receive of me, but of mine; that is, he shall take my
wisdom, righteousness, holiness, my death, resurrection, etc. and shall show
them to you, shall make a full discovery of those mysteries to you, he shall
take my blood and sprinkle it upon your consciences; my death, and thereby
destroy the body of death in you; my resurrection, and by showing that to you,
and working a serious consideration of it in you, shall quicken you to newness
of life. The meaning* is not (as B. ignorantly supposes) that the Holy Ghost
receives any knowledge of Christ for his own perfection (seeing he did so
perfectly understand all* Scripture-mysteries before, as we have proved,) but
only that he shall receive or take these things to show them to you.

Object. 6* Arg. 6. He that is sent of God is not God: But the Holy Ghost is
sent of God: Therefore he is not God.

Answ. Still the same mistake: the same answer will suffice again, (for indeed
for substance* this is still but the same Argument:) The Holy Ghost is not
properly sent, nor can be, that is, from one place to another, for he fills all
places, as I have proved already, and therefore this must not be so brutishly
understood as if the Spirit were sent a long journey from heaven to earth; but
only this, I will undertake (says God) that my Spirit shall be a Comforter to
you; and this God might will without any disparagement to the Holy Ghost,
because the Father and the Spirit have both one nature, one will, and so what
the one wills, the other wills also, and so the Holy Ghost did actually consent
to this promise of the Father; now by consent one equal may send another. Thus
Christ, who thought it no robbery to be equal with God, Phil. ^. 6. yet was
sent of God.

Nay even in civil States one may, be sent as an Ambassador by his equals.
Suppose a State governed Aristocratically by eight men: four of these may send
the other four with their consent upon an Embassage, and yet all of them are
equal in power and dignity.

Object. ^ Arg. ^. He that is the gift of God is not God* But the Spirit of God
is the gift of God: Ergo he is not God.

Answ. I confess here are new words, animus ^amen idem, but the same sense. In
a word, the Major is false; God gives himself in Covenant to his people* I will
be their God, Jer. 32. 3^. Let us see whether his Argument will not as well
disprove the Godhead of the Father, as of the Spirit. He that is the gift of
God is not God. But God the Father is the gift of God: for he given himself (as
Christ also is said to give himself, Gal. 2. 20.) The conclusion, then is,
according to B's. principles, God the Father is not God; a conclusion indeed
suitable to the premises, but both to be abominated by every pious soul. But
B. adds, A gift is in the power and at the disposal of another. I answer 1,
That is false* I may give my daughter to a man to wife, and yet she is not in
my power, for this I cannot do without her consent* So neither can God give the
Spirit without its consent* 2 What if I should grant the Holy Ghost were at the
disposal of Gods will* remember that the Father and the Spirit have but one
will, and so that is no more then to be at its own disposal* 3* This Argument
may be strongly retorted; therefore the Holy Ghost is not a created gift,
because he is at his own disposal, as we have proved in the seventh Argument.

Object. ^. His eighth Argument is this, He that changes place is not God: But
the Holy Ghost changes place, Luke 3. ^^, 22. Therefore he is not God.

Answ. 1 Certain it is, that God is often said in Scripture to change place,
Psalm. 18. 9. God bowed the Heavens, and came down: Hos. 5. ^5. I will go and
return to my place: Genesis 1^. 21. The Lord came down to set the City, though
elsewhere he is said to be Omnipresent, 2 Chronicles. 6. 18. Psalm. ^^9. Jer. 23. 24.
But he saw the weakness of this Argument, and therefore he adds this, Nor let
any man allege that thus much is said of God, Exodus 3. For it is not God that
came down, but an Angel, as you may see, Acts ^. 30, 35, 3^. Which (by the way)
is a transition to another Argument: Yet I shall follow him even in his
extravagancies. I answer therefore, 1 This does not at all weaken our answer;
for what though Angels came down at some time, and not God, yet it remains a
truth, that the great God is said to change his place (though not properly) as
has been proved. 2 Nor does it follow, because sometime an Angel came down and
spoke, therefore God never came down, nor spoke. 3 God himself is called an
Angel, Mal. ^. 1. Christ is called the Angel of the Covenant: The Angel that
wrestled with Jacob, Genesis 32* was the Lord, for Jacob made supplication to him,
Hos. 12. 4. Genesis 32. 26. Now worship is peculiar to God. 4 Evident it is that
this Angel, Exodus 3. was the Lord; for he says expressly, I am the God of
Abraham, whereas the good Angels and messengers of God never spoke in that
manner in the first person: I am thy fellowservant, said that Angel, Revel. 22.
So the Prophets used to speak of God in the third person, Thus says the Lord.

Object. 9. His ninth Argument is this, He that prays unto Christ is not God:
But the Spirit prays to Christ to come to judgment, Revel. 22. Therefore it
is not God.

Answ. It can never be proved, that this Te^t is to be meant of the Spirit of
God, it may very well be meant of any Angel. For, 1 Certainly the Angels desire
to see the happiness of the Saints completed. 2 In the very verse before the
Text, there is mention made of a created Angel.

Object. But then it would not have been Spirit in the singular number.

Answ. There is no necessity of that, for why may not one good Spirit signify
more good Angels, as well as one unclean spirit signify a legion, Mark 5. 2, 9.

But what if it were meant of the Spirit of God? The meaning only is this, the
Spirit speaks in the Spouse, and dictates to the Spouse; It is (...), a
Figure very frequent both in Scripture, and in other Authors: though the
Adversary does magisterially forbid us this Interpretation, without giving one
real proof against it,

I shall add here what B. has in his twelfth Reason, which indeed properly
belongs to this place. He quotes, Romans 8. 27. The Spirit makes intercession
for us with groans unutterable. The Spirit (says B.) poures out petitions
apart in our behalf. This our adversary calls an invincible argument; but I
hope by that time we have done with it, it will be found like the invincible
Navy, Nomen, and praeterea nihil.

I answer, The Spirit is said to intercede, because it makes us to intercede:
For proof of this, 1 It is ordinary in Scripture for God to be said to do that
which he makes us to do; thus, Genesis 22. 12. God is said to know, when he
makes others to know: So, Matthew. 10. 20. The Spirit of your Father speaks in
you, which is thus expounded, Luke 21. 15. -- I will give you a mouth and
wisdom, which all your adversaries shall not be able to gainsay: So that the
Spirit speaking in them, and they speaking by the Spirit, signify the same
thing. Thus a Scrivener is said to write, when by directing our hands he makes
us to write. 2 It is the Spirit within us, not without us, that makes
intercession for us, our prayer therefore is called (...), Jam. 5. 16. happily to
note, that it is wrought in us by the Spirit. 3 This interpretation suites best
with the Context; all along he is speaking of the Spirits operation in us, ver.
11. If the Spirit of God dwell in you, Verse 15. is parallel to this 27. Ye
have received the Spirit of Adoption, by which we cry Abba, Father: These are
equivalent expressions, the Spirit in us cries Abba, Father, and we by the
Spirit cry Abba, Father. And the same thing you since expressed both ways by
the former phrase, Gal. 4. 6. by the latter, Romans 8. 15. which if well
considered, will fully answer B^ales Argument. But indeed we need to go no
further for an antidote against B's. poisonous interpretation, then the 26
verse, and we may add the 27 verse to it. Thence I argue, 1 Such an
interpretation must be understood as helps our infirmities in praying: But our
infirmities in praying are helped by the Spirits inabling us to pray, and not
by I know not what intercession of the Spirit apart.

2 Such an intercession of the Spirit must be understood, as teaches us how to
pray as we ought; but it is not a supposed intercession of the Spirit of God
apart from us that does that: (how the prayer of an Angel, which we neither
hear, nor know, should teach us to pray, is not easy to conceive) but the
Spirit in us enlightening our minds, dictating to us what we should ask, that,
and that alone helps us against our ignorance.

3 Whose the groanings are, his the intercession is: That is clear to any one
that reads the 26 verse, The Spirit makes intercession for us with groanings,
etc. But the groanings are ours, as appears, 1 So they are said to be, verse.
23. 2 They are groanings that cannot be uttered: I suppose B. will not say, but
the Spirit is able to utter all his mind. 3 Nor can it easily be imagined,
that the blessed Spirit which is our comforter, and the Spirit of glory should
be subject to groaning, seeing the very glorified Saints are freed from them,
then whom the Spirit cannot be thought to be less happy, or more miserable.

4 If the mind of the Spirit be our minds assisted by the Spirit, then the
intercession of the Spirit, is our intercession helped by the Spirit. But the
mind of the Spirit is meant of our minds, or our desires assisted by the
Spirit; because Gods searching the heart is given as a ground of Gods knowing
the mind of the Spirit. Now there were neither coherence nor consequence
between the searching of our hearts, and the knowing the mind of the Spirit,
if the mind of the Spirit were to be understood properly.

5 The intercession of the Spirit is according to the will of God: But the
Spirits interceding for us apart, as B. supposes, is not according to the will
of God. Nay, that an Angel (for such B. says the Spirit is) should intercede
for us, is contrary to the will of God, for this is the will of God, There is
but one Mediator, 1 Timothy 2. 6. that is, one Mediator of Intercession, as well
as one of Redemption (as we generally say against the Papists;) for of
intercession he is speaking in that Chapter, ver. 1. And on the other side it
is the will of God, that the Spirit should intercede for us in our sense, that
it should help us in our prayers and intercessions, by convincing, comforting,
enlightening, guiding, and teaching us, by helping our infirmities; and
therefore so it must be here understood.

To add one thing, I should desire nothing more then that both our doctrines
might be tried by this Text, I durst willingly venture all upon its arbitration.
For besides, what has been said, let this be considered: How it can possibly
be that the Holy Ghost should be only a created Angel, and yet here be said to
know the particular wants and most secret desires of every particular Saint? --
Considering 1 That it is the property of God to search the heart, Jer. 17. 9,
10. The heart is deceitful, -- who can know it? I the Lord search the heart.
Where nothing more evident then that he speaks exclusively. So here in this
very place, these 26 and 27 verses. 2 That it is not imaginable, that that
person that is ignorant of the day of Judgment, can know all men's hearts. But
so all the Angels, yea Christ himself as man is, Mark 13. 32. 3 God does
venture all his Godhead upon a less matter, Isa. 41. 22, 23. Let them show
things to come, what shall happen, that we may know ye are gods. And yet some
men have been so bold as to dispute whether Angels might know things to come,
but no man before B. durst say that they knew the hearts of men. Nor will any
man say so, that understands any thing either in Philosophy or Divinity. But to
return.

B. objects, None can intercede for himself. For that I answer, Intercession is
taken sometimes more strictly, when the word is (...), and then indeed it is
most commonly understood of one that inrercedes as a Mediator between two
parties: but sometimes it is taken more largely, and so is the word (...) often
taken for interpellare, or compellare, to entreat, whether for a man's self, or
for another; In Thucydides, Pars adversa adversae parti hostiluer dicitur
(...): So that it notes only compeltare, whether supplicando, or expostuland^.
So in the eighth Chapter of the wisdom of Solomon, verse. 21. Knowing (says
he) that I could never be wise and good except God gave it, (...), I
interceded, or made request to God for it, (...). A like place is, wisdom 16.
28. where the word is so used. And though these places be Apochryphall, yet it
matters not, for it shows how that Greek word (...) is sometimes used for a
simple praying, though for a man's self, (...), which was the thing to be shown.
For the addition of the word, (...), that may refer either to a person, or a
business, Oro pro negotio aliquo, as well as pro persona altera. Nay not
only, (...), but which is more, (...), is applied to God himself in reference
to man without any third party, Heb. 6. 17. Deus (...), he established, or
confirmed with an oath, but properly it signifies, he mediated to himself or
interceded to himself with an oath. And therefore, if the Spirit be said to
intercede to God, let not B. infer, therefore it is not God, for we see God
intercedes to himself.

But he adds, To intercede, notes inferiority; and though in Scripture
some-things are spoken after the manner of men, yet no where is any thing said
that argues Gods inferiority to, and dependence upon another.

I answer, 1 This is very false; God says to Moses, Let me alone, Exodus 32.
Does not this expression argue inferiority and dependence too? Yes surely, B.
cannot deny it; but only he must say, it is improperly taken; and must be so
interpreted, as may consist with Gods Majesty and Glory: and so he will also
enervate all his own Arguments. 2 I observe hence, that B. does positively
conclude, that Christ (because he intercedes) is inferior to God, though he
professed he would not meddle with that* But alas! we need not now run to
consequences to prove that B. denies the Deity of Christ: for that same
wretched hand that lift up it self against the Holy Ghost, has in the same
manner, and with the same weakness too endeavored to dethrone our Lord Jesus,
and written many leaves expressly against the divinity of our ever blessed
Savior, who (doubtless) will plead his own cause, and will one day show how
ill he takes it at the hands of those men that pretend to be bought by his
blood, and yet can quietly suffer every unworthy fellow to preach and write
high treason against the King of heaven and earth; and in the mean time,
prosecute even to the death those that do any way abet any treasonable design
against the State.

Object. 10. His tenth Argument is this, Some have been Disciples and
Believers, and yet have not so much as heard whether there be an Holy Ghost,
Act. 19. 2. and so they could not believe in him.

Answ. 1. The meaning of the Text is quite mistaken; for they did not doubt
whether there was an Holy Ghost or no, they could not be ignorant of this: John
doubtless having instructed them before ^^ did baptize them, and there being
so many clear testimonies of the Spirits existence in the Old Testament. But
the meaning then is this, We have not heard whether the Holy Ghost be come and
manifested in so eminent a manner as is promised; for you must consider, that
the Jews after the Babylonish Captivity had lost those glorious discoveries,
and the gracious presence of the Holy Ghost, which once they had; this being
one of those five things, wherein they used to complain the second Temple came
short of the first. And further, they knew that God had promised the
manifestation of the Spirit in an extraordinary manner, Joel 2. Now that this
is the real meaning, and not a fancy, I will prove, 1 By a parallel place; you
have the very same phrase, Jo. 7. 39. The Spirit was not yet (given, is not in
the Original only (...)) why? the Spirit was, and had descended upon Christ
long before; but this is the meaning, the gifts of the Spirit were not so
plentifully shed abroad as afterward they were upon the Apostles and others. 2
It appears from the Context, that he speaks of the gifts of the Holy Ghost; see
verse. 6. The Holy Ghost came on them, and they spoke with congues and
prophesied. So th^^ I cannot choose but laugh at, and pity the ^old and
conceited ignorance of B. who says* It is without example to take the holy
Spirit ^^ the gifts of the Spirit; whereas you se^ must needs be so taken in
the places now mentioned, and in many other places: see, Act. 2. 17. So, Joh.
20. 22. He breathed on them, and said, Receive ye the Holy Ghost. The person of
the Holy Ghost they had received before; They were the Temples of the Holy
Ghost before: Nay, B. himself (that you may see error does not only oppose
the truth, but it self also) does elsewhere contradict this very assertion, and
tells us, That when the Spirit is said to dwell in us, the meaning is not, that
his person or essence dwell in us, but that he dwells in us by his gifts or
effects. Well, but what if B's. interpretation were true? nothing of moment
follows. What an Argument is this? Some were ignorant of the Deity of the Holy
Ghost, therefore it is not God: As if a man should argue, B. is a Disciple and
a Believer, and he believes not that the Holy Ghost is God; therefore it is not
God.

But (says he) Many now tell us, that without the knowledge of this point (of
which they were ignoraat) we cannot be saved. Answ. 1. They were not ignorant
of it, as has been proved. 2 But the times or states of the Churches wherein
men live, do much vary the case: according as the means of knowledge are more
or less, an error may be damnable or not. To instance, in the first infancy
of the Church, Circumcision was an error winked at, Act. 15. and 16. 3. but
afterward it proved no less then damnable, Gal. 5. 2. If you be circumcised,
Christ shall profit you nothing: So the Apostles word once ignorant of, and did
not believe the Death and Resurrection of Christ* but if any man now doubt of
them, we may upon much better grounds doubt of his salvation: So though God
might wink at this error in former times, let not B. now think that God will
hold him guiltless in times of so much light and means; let him look to it,
God is very jealous of his honor, and particularly of the honor of the Holy
Ghost, Matthew. 12. 32.

Object. 11. Arg. 11. The Spirit of God has an understanding distinct from the
understanding of God, for he hears from God, Ioh* 16. 13, 14, 15.

Answ. This is the self-same Argument with the third and fourth, as you see,
and therefore I pray you go back for an answer. Only one thing he adds, That
the Spirit is said to search the things of God, 1 Cor. 2. 10. But to search the
depths of one, necessarily supposes one understanding in him that searches,
and another in him whose depths are searched; then which nothing is more false
^^d foolish: For, 1 By searching there, is meant nothing but knowing, as
appears from ver. 11. where instead of searching is put knowing, The things of
God knows the Spirit of God: and again, God is said to search the heart, Romans
8. 29. that is, to know it. 2 Does not God know himself? nay, cannot we search
our selves? cannot our understanding reflect upon it self, and search its own
nature? are not we commanded to search, try, and examine our selves?

Object. 12. His last Argument is this, The Spirit of God wills conformably
to the will of God, Romans 8. 27. He makes intercession for the Saints according
to the will of God. But this Argument is already answered under the ninth
Objection; the sum of what is there at large proved, is this, That the Spirit
is said to pray, intercede, will, because he makes us so to do, because he
makes us to pray, according to the will of God. And thus I have detected all
the fallacies wherewith the Adversary labored to oppose the Deity of the Holy
Ghost: and so notwithstanding all that he has said, i^ remains a sure truth,
and will do so to eternity, that the Holy Ghost is God. And therefore Trinuni
Deo, Patri, Filio, Spiritu^ Sancto sit Laus, Honor, and Gloria,

Amen.
FINIS.

