A RATIONAL CATECHISM; or, An instructive Conference between a FATHER and a SON.

Licensed August 11th. 1687.

LONDON, Printed, and sold, by Andrew S^wle, at the Crooked-Billet in
Holloway-Lane in Shoreditch, and at the Three Keys in Nags-Head-Court in
Grace Church Street, overagainst the Condiut, 1687.

Advertisement TO THE READER.
NOtwithstanding that this ensuing Treatile has not been designed by the
Author for public View, yet some Friends of his, unto whom it has been
communicated, have thought fit therein to exceed his Intention. They do not,
however, judge it needful for them to usher it into the World by any prefatory
Discourse. The thing it self is short, and will soon speal its own Errand.
Wherefore, without other Ceremony, they commit it to the Reader's Judgment, and
to God's Blessing.

TO MY Daughters, M and K.
My dearest Daughters,
SInce the time that Providence separated your Mother and you from me and your
Brother, tho al my melancholy Hours have seemed to run exceeding slowly, yet
those especially have been unto me the most heavy and irksom, which we were
formerly accustomed to employ in your Brother's and your Instruction. My
Pleasure was then great, to observe your daily Proficiency in diverse commendable
Qualifications, under your Mother's discreet Conduct; and it was consummated in
those Evening-Conversations wherein we exercised your discursive Facultys.
Wherefore, the Interruption of that Pleasure has not a little augmented unto me
the Tediousness of her and your Absence.

Now the best Remedy that I have been able to find for this Trouble has been
to exercise my own Thoughts in the same Meditations wherein we formerly
exercisea yours. And after having don so some while, I resolved in my Mind to
draw them up into such a Form as I ordinarily made the Method of my Teaching.
You remember, undoubtedly, how I have often told you, That our Knowledge is at
least seemingly, if not really, a kind of Remembrance: I mean, That there are
such Seeds of it in our Nature, as ar always ready to sprout out in the same
manner, when they are assisted by the same convenient Culture; such an
Uniformity in our general Ideas of Things, as upon the same Hints and
Admonitions, and with the same strictness of Application, will resolv into the
same particular Conclusions. This, I say, has made me digest my Meditations
into the Form of a Conference; In the first part of which (it being properly
Catechistical) the Respondent is led by a natural Order of Questions to draw
his Answers out of his own Stock.

In the doing of it I have made use of your Brother's Name, and have thereby
given him a peculiar Title to the thing. But as I am desirous that it may be a
common Memorial of me unto al of you, when I shall be no more, I therefore make
it yours also by this Dedication: And for the same Reason, I have likewise
added unto it a Copy of that Advice which I formerly gave him, in such Verse as
my unpracticed Muse then dictated.

The Subject I have treated is the most important of any Subject. And my Design
in handling it is to give al of you some real Help to conduct your selves in the
true Way to Happiness: Which I take to be the only warrantable End of any long
continued Study. How far I have succeeded in that Design will be best known by
the Fruits you shall bring forth in your Liwes and Conversations. But now that
those Fruits may spring up the more easily, and without Danger of being choked
by the Weeds of Prejudice, I will endeavor a little to facilitate the one, and
remove the other, by acquainting you with some particular Rules which I
prescribed unto my self in this Undertaking, and by which you may take a right
Measure of the Performance.

I have often, with Grief, reflected upon the great Differences that are in
Men's Opinions about Matters of Religion. And in seeking out the Causes thereof,
tho I know many have concurred, yet this has seemed to me one of the most
universal, viz. Because Men have not examined things to the Bottom. They have
failed in their Foundation-Work. They have too much slighted that Philosophy,
which is the Natural Religion of al Men; and which being Natural, must needs be
Universal, and Eternal; and upon which therefore, or at least in Conformity unto
which, al instituted and revealed Religion must be supposed to be built. They
have also forsaken the Rule of Right Reason, which only is capable to produce
true Synemetry in their intellectual Buildings: And they have applied
themselves, without any Rule, to the Interpretation of Words and Phrases, which
being easily susceptible of various Senses, have produced as many deformed
Irregularitys. Nay this Disorder has been so great, that, instead of digging in
the least for their Foundation, they have frequently begun to frame their
theological Systems at the highest Points of Revelation: And in that they have
acted as extravagantly, and uncertainly, as that Man should do, Who would
undertake to frame a Roof for some Fabric, of whose Dimensions be had no
Cognizance. Toremedy this Evil, I have begun my Catechism at the first
Principles that I could discern in human Nature, and I have proceeded to build
therupou as gradually and regularly as I have been able. So that I hope the
whole Business of Religion, whether natural or instituted, will appear in this
Draught to be a steady Prosecution of one and the same regular Design, in God
the Author of both. And I am sure that a right Under standing of that Truth will
give great Satisfaction to any considering Mind.

Another thing that has yet more troubled me than the former, has been to
observe the sad Consequences in which Mankind has been involved by the
forementioned Differences of Opinion. Rash Judgments and Censures, Hatreds and
Animositys, Disputes and Wars. The mild and sociable Nature of Man has been
thereby transformed into a greater Ferocity than that of Bears and Tigers. And
what is the most deplorable Consideration of al, is, That these Mischiefs have
been more frequent, and more violent, since the Propagation of Christianity in
the World, than before: As if indeed Jesus Christ, Matt. 10.^^. Luke 12.^1.
according to his own Expression, were not com to giv Peace upon Earth, but
Division and a Sword. Far be it from us, nevertheless, to attribute any such
thing to the Genius of his Religion, which consists wholly in Humility,
Meekness, Moderation, Benignity, and other such like Social Virtues. No, the
Mischief arises from the Perverseness of Men's Spirits, who have turned the
wholsomest Food, nay the highest Elixir, into the rankest Poison. They have not
been content with the Simplicity of the Gospel, which is a plain Rule of living
well, but have sirove to out-wit one another in finding out hidden Misterys: And
as any one has hit upon a conceited Distinction, he has immediately called that
Fancy the Essence of Christianity. From thence have sprung the various Sects
into which the Christian World is divided. And secular Interests being now
interwoven with this vainglorious Humor, the distinction of Sects is kept on
foot, and looked aster, far more carefully than the essential Dutys of Life.
This is the deplorable State of Things at this time. And the Consideration
hereof has been the Needle that has chiefly directed my Course in the
management of my Subject. For having seen the fruitless Effects of al
controversial Undertakings; Fruitless, I say, in any thing that is truly Good;
but exceedingly too fruitful in nourisbing the Seeds of Enmity and al manner of
Evil; I resolved with my self, in undertaking this Work, to avoid studiously all that ever is controverted by any that call themselves Christians; and to draw up
only a Scheme of such things as they are al agreed in, and which lead directly
unto Practice.

These, I say, have been the particular Rules unto which I have thought fit to
consine my self, in the Conduct of my main Design. And therefore I advise you to
apply your selves only to the making use of what I have clearly expressed, and to
be very referved in drawing Inferences from my Omissions. Because I prosess
plainly to you that I have not handled every point that I my self judge useful,
but only such as I judge most useful, and most conformable to the foregoing
Rules.

Now, to conclude, I must declare to you that I am strongly persuaded something
of this Nature might be of great Use in the World, toward the healing of our
sad Divisions in religious Affairs; by drawing men off from their vain Nicetys,
to solid and useful Doctrine. Tho I know also that any such Design would, in its
first Appearance, be violently opposed by all those who have embraced the
Interest of any particular Sect. If this very Writing of mine should com to the
Sight of any such Persons, I am confident, that, tho they should find nothing
expressed in it but what they themselves approve of, yet the Omission of other
things which they delight in, would make them condemn it. Al Sectarya ar so
fond of their own Badg of Distinction, that they are ready to cry out against
every thing which bears not that Mark, as Antichristran at least, if not
Atheistical and Diabolical. Nevertheless their Approbation, in such a Case as
this, is of greater Weight than their Censure: Because in the one they al
agree; but in the other they al differ. Neither Papist nor Protestant, nay nor
any of the Subdivisions on either side, but approve of al Instructions tenaing
to Piety and Virtue; which are the only, things here aimed at. In that they are
unanimous. But in Matters of mere Speculation, and outward Economy, (which are
the Things here omitted) they are as opposite to each other as the Poles of the
Heavens. I lay hold therefore upon the Encouragement which arises from their
general Approbation; and refer unto them the Task of reconciling their own
Differences, before I shall esteem the Consideration thereof to be of any great
moment. Yet I do not, for all this, in any wise presume to think that these
Meditations of mine ar proper for public View. An undertaking of that Nature
requires far greater Abilitys in every respect than mine ar, and a more entire
and uninterrupted Leisure than I enjoy. If God see it fitting, he will in du
time raise up some other that may perform it more worthily. In the mean while,
however, I hope the Endearment of a Fathers Recommendation will ad some Strength
unto what may be otherwise but weakly inculcated to his Children; and that so
this present Performance will be of some use unto wine, for whom especially I
have writ it. I am,

Dear Children, Your truly affectionate Father. B.
July the 1st. 1686.
A RATIONAL CATECHISM: or an instructive Conference between a FATHER and a SON.
F. Com Son, since we are now at some leisure from our ordinary Occupations, and
have thereby the advantage of enjoying that freedom of Thought which is
inconsistant with the Cares of the World, I am desirous to take this
Opportunity of exercising thy Mind in Speculations of nobler Use, and even of
universal Influence upon thy whole Life. Compose thy self therefore to
Seriousness: Lay aside, and if it be possible, for one hour, forget all that
ever thou have hitherto learnt: Attend only to the genuine Result of thy own
present Reflections: And in that manner answer me with a manly Liberty to what I
shall ask thee.


S. I am infinitely obliged to you for your constant care of my improvement in all things laudable, and shall at this time endeavor to observe the Rules you giv
me as exactly as possibly I can.


F. Tell me then, in the first place, what it is that thou love best.


S. I know you will not have me distinguish between your self and my Mother, and
I hope you doubt not but you ar both of you the joint objects of my best Lov.


F. No matter what I think, or what I doubt of. I desire only to hear thy
Thoughts, but to hear them pure and undisguised. That thou may not therefore
either deceiv thy self, or dissemble with me, consider this case. Suppose both
thy Parents and thy self had been any where locked up together, so long,
without Food, that we were al well nigh ready tody for Hunger, and that in those
Circumstances some Friend sent thee privately a small morcel of Meat, capable
only to sustain thy Life for a few Hours, and withal sent word that we could
none of us in that space have any more. In such a case, tell me truly whether
thou would eat that Meat thy self in private as it was given thee, or
discover and giv it unto either of us.


S. You put me to a hard choice, which I would willingly be dispensed from.


F. I know very well where the Difficulty pinches thee. It Is not in choosing, but
in declaring thy Choice. Wherefore I once again exhort thee to deal freely and
sincerely with me, and I assure thee that I will not be offended with any
Determination thou shall make, but on the contrary much pleased to hear one
made in Simplicity and Truth.


S. What you intimate of Offense assures me that I need not make any
Declaration at al upon that matter. For I perceiv thereby that you know the
weakness of my Nature, and fee into those secret movings of my Heart which I am
ashamed to discover.


F. It Is enough. I will spare thy Blushes. And now taking for granted that, in
such a case as we have supposed, thou would prefer the Preservation of thy
own Life before ours, I desire thee to consider again, and tell me whether thou
love thy self or us the better.


S. What shall I say! You force me to acknowledge that I lov my self better than
perhaps I ought to do.


F. That is not the thing that I am now enquiring after, whether this supreme
Inclination of Self-love be well or il, but only whether it be so or no.
Consider therefore, further, if there be nothing else in Nature that more nearly
affects thee than thy self. I mean not Persons, but Things. Do tho not feel
in thy Heart some desire of Hnor, of Power, of Pleasure, or of Riches? I know
thou do. Tell me therefore in what rank thou placest those things.


S. I do not find that I lov any of those things simply for themselves; but
only as they have relation unto me and because they may be of some Convenience or
Advantage unto me: So that my lov of them is but secondary, and for my own
sake. And therefore, for ought I now see, I must remain of Opinion that I lov my
self primarily, and the best of any thing.


F. No doubt thou do so: Nor shall I ever advise thee to do otherwise. But
here I must admonish thee that the management of this Principle requires thy
utmost Care. For upon the right or wrong use thereof depends thy Happiness or
Misery. Observe therefore that, tho this self-lov be a single and general Rule of
Nature, yet those things which thou have well observed that we lov secondarily
ar exceeding various; and that nothing is more easy nor more ordinary than for
Men to er therein, and out of a wrong conceived Opinion of some good, to place
their Affections upon such things as ar really evil. Now the sad Consequence of
such il-placed Affections is at the best a certain Frustration. For tho those
Persons do obtain that very thing which their Desires ar let out after, yet
finding not therein that real Good which they expected, their Disappointment is
the same or greater than if they had obtained nothing at al. And this alone is
no small degree of Misery; but instead of Good to find an Evil, is a great one;
and to be continually obnoxious to such like Miscarriages, is the greatest.
These ar the Effects of Precipitancy, Ignorance, and Error. But, on the
contrary, to weigh deliberately the true Valu of things, to understand it, and
accordingly to direct our Affections unto the prosecution of such Objects as ar
truly valuable, these ar the Methods in which our Principle of selflov must be
conducted, and in that manner it will not fail to lead us to a happy Issu. These
things I tell thee beforehand that thou may be sensible of their Importance,
and thereupon apply thy Mind with du Circumspection to the discussion of such
Questions as I have now design to propound unto thee.


S. Alas, I am at once so sensible both of the Necessity and Difficulty of that
Work, and thereupon so fearful of miscarrying in it, that I am forced rather to
beg the benefit of your Instruction than to expose my self to such an
Examination.


F. Be not so diffident of thy self. Take Courage. Remember only to observe my
Advice of attending closely to the genuine Results of thy own Reason, and let
us try whither that will lead us.

Seeing that in the general thou find thy self inclined to lov or desire
nothing but as it appears some way conducive to thy own Good, consider a little
which of those things that I have propounded to thee appear most so; and tell me
thereupon which of them thou most desire. I will repeat and a little explain
them, that thou may deliberate maturely. By Honor I would have thee
understand such a repute and fame of some thing excellent in thy self as may
excite Admiration and Respect in others. By Power I mean not only strength of
Body, but such an Authority over some number of Men as renders them subject to
thy Commands. By Pleasure I intend not only those childish Sports which thou
have hitherto delighted in, and begin'st now to abandon, but al other manner of
Delights that may be suited unto the variety of Desires which thy Progress in
Years will bring along with it. And By Riches I would have thee represent unto
thy self the means whereby Men ordinarily procure unto themselves al outward
Enjoyments. Tell me therefore which of these things do thou now conceiv most
conducive to thy Happiness.


S. As you represent them they al, seem good upon different accounts. And for
ought that I know many other things besides these may be represented unto me in
the same manner. So that truly I find a great Difficulty to make any just
Comparison between them, and thereupon to determine which has absolutely the
most good in it.


F. What, art thou so unresolved in thy Judgment concerning the valu of these
things that thou bear an equal Indifferency toward them al, and have no
Inclination or Desire after any of them?


S. To proceed with that Precaution which your Lesson requires, it certainly
behoovs me to govern my Desires by Judgment, and therefore to restrain al desire
of those things until I be convinced of their different valu.


F. Well, but for all this, I am of Opinion there is something else, which thou
doft already so far understand to be for thy good that thou can not choose but
desire it earnestly: And I had rather hear thee remark it thy self than that I
should name it.


S. Let me see. Thus far we are com. There are many things which present
themselves unto my Choice under the appearance of Good; some of which are indeed
such as they seem to be; others notwithstanding al their specious Appearance ar
real Evils; but how to discern and distinguish between the one and the other I
am yet ignorant. You ask me now what it is that I most desire. Absolutely it is
nothing else but such a Knowledge of al things relating to my own Good as may
enable me to choose and prosecute that which is really most conducive unto it.


F. I perceiv then that Knowledge is the primary Object of thy Desire. And I am
not a little pleased that thou make it so: Because indeed it ought to be the
first Spring of al our Motions. But that is yet too general. Tell me therefore
what particular Study of Knowledge thou art chiefly addicted unto. Is it the
Knowledge of God, of his Essence, of his Attributes, of his Laws? Is it the
Knowledge of Nature, of the Universe, of Mankind, of thy Self? Is it the
Knowledge of any particular Arts and Contrivances that are effected by Men? Or is
it any other thing that humane Understanding is or may be conversant about?


S. I must answer again unto these Particulars as the former, that I am rather
confounded with the Consideration thereof than any ways able to determine which
of them is indeed most worthy to be elected. But however this general
Circumstance, which I stick close unto, viz. That my Knowledge may be such as to
enable me to choose and pursu the proper means of my own Happiness, will I hope
by degrees conduct me unto some further Discovery.


F. Thou ghessest right. It will infallibly do it. Let that therefore be the Rule
of al thy Researches. And now, applying that Rule to those particular heads of
Knowledge that I propounded, God, Nature, Man, etc. tell me which of them seems
to thee the most important Object of thy first Study.


S. My aim being to seek my own Happiness, I conceiv easily that it is not
obtainable, first, without some competent Knowledge of my self who am the Subject
of it; next, without some Knowledge of that Happiness which is the Object of my
Desire; and lastly, without the Knowledge of the Means that lead unto it. And
therefore I conclude it may be proper enough for me to begin my Study with an
Enquiry into my own Nature. That, I suppose, will also show me what sort of
Happiness I am capable of: And I esteem that it will then be seasonable to look
after it.


F. Very well. I like thy Method. It is orderly. And the prosecution of it will
probably bring into consideration whatever other Topic may be material to our
Subject. Now, that we may proceed therein, I would have thee reflect seriously
upon what thou judge most observable in thy self, and then tell me what manner
of thing thou take thy self to be.


S. I can not but observe that where ever I am I fill some place, even as al other
material things that surround me: And therefore what ever I am, I think my self
to be framed of the same matter as they are.


F. So far right. But do thou not further perceiv some Facultys in thy self
which are peculiar to Mankind, and which none of those other material things
that surround us ar endued with?


S. Yes. I have Sense, which is not found in Stocks and Stones. And I have
further this Faculty of thinking, reflecting, or reasoning, wherein you now
exercise me, which I take to denote some Excellency in Mankind vastly different
from any thing even in Animals, and that not only in Degree but Essence.


F. These two Observations of thine lmply this Definition of our selves; That we are thinking Substances. But it remains still to be enquired, Whether that
forementioned material part of us which thou have observed to fill some place
(or, as others express it, to be extended) I say, Whether that be not the very
same thing with that which thinks, and that so this thinking and reasoning be
nothing else but an effect produced by the different Modification and Motion of
that Matter whereof we are composed; Or, on the contrary, Whether our thinking
Faculty proceed from any other different and really distinct Principle. This
Consideration is important. Weigh it carefully.


S. I hope I have not been too rash in hinting already that I ghest that
Faculty to denote some Excellency in us essentially different from any thing in
Animals, whose Composition. I suppose to be one of the perfectest Productions
of modifyed Matter.


F. I do not say thou have been too shra in that Assertion. But however,
without determining any thing about Animals, the knowledge of whose Nature is
of little Consequence to us, I desire to hear thee explain more particularly
upon what ground thou fancyest any Principle in thy self to be essentially
different from Matter.


S. If I find any Operation whatsoever in my self abov the Power of matter, I
must needs conclude that it proceeds from some Principle of a different Nature.


F. Can thou giv me any Instances of such like Operations?


S. When I reflect upon the nature of Matter, its extension, its divisibility,
its aptitude to receiv never so various Modifications and Motions, yet, into
what ever Form or Motion I conceiv it put, I can not for my life find any such
thing to result from thence as that bare Sensation which I am endowed withal.
Much less therefore is it to be reputed the Principle of my nobler Facultys.


F. What ar those nobler Facultys which thou think mere Matter least capable
to produce?


S. They are chiefly Memory and Ratiocination.


F. Why do thou affirm that Matter is not capable of Memory?


S. If we were composed only of mere Matter, then all the Remembrance that we
have of any thing would be effected by material Impresses or Characters placed
in that part of our Body where that Faculty resides.


F. I grant it. And why may we not believ that it is so?


S. The multitude of things that we remember, would, upon that Supposition,
require such a multitude of different Characters, that it is impossible any
such part of our Body wherein that Faculty can be placed should contain them;
much less could it retain them in that Order, and represent them in that manner
to our Imagination as we find we have them.


F. It dos indeed seem absurd that so many various things as we have in our
Mind should have there so many distinct material Existencys. And that will
appear yes the more absurd if we observe that amongst those Ideas which
replenish our Mind, there are some of them of things immaterial; as Truth and
Falsehood, Virtue and Vice, Honor and Dishonor, and the like. But lot us go on.
Explain to me now why Ratiocination can not be performed by mere Matter.


S. That needs no further explaining than only to settle the meaning of the
word. By Ratiocination, therefore, I understand that Act of the Mind, whereby,
comparing together such Notions as either have been long or ar but newly
implanted therein, we from thence draw Consequences, and raise other Notions,
which we were formerly ignorant of. Now if Memory alone be beyond the Power of
Matter, it is past al doubt that this further Act, which revises, and compares
such things as ar already in the Memory, must needs be much more so.


F. These Difficultys of explaining diverse Operations that we find in our
selves, by the Power of Matter, I allow to be invincible. But therefore, since we are still sure that we are capable of those Operations, it remains that thou
explain unto me by what other means they are performed, and show me that
different Principle from which they proceed.


S. Alas, you now pose me. I am not able to do it. Those very things, Thinking
and Reasoning, ar themselves the most essential Characters that I know of that
Being which exercises them. I am only sure that I have them in my self, but
how they are performed I am utterly ignorant.


F. If it be so indeed that thou can go no further, yet consider now at least
what all this disquisition we have hitherto made into Humane. Nature amounts
unto, and what consequences arise from thence for thy use.


S. My knowledge hitherto amounts to this, That we have in us two distinct
Principles; the one whereof is material, whose eminent property is Extension;
the other immaterial, whose eminent property is Thought.


F. Those two principles ar termed Matter and Spirit, or in ordinary speech,
Body and Soul Let us make use therefore of those received expressions. And now
do thou go on to tell me what consequences thou perceivest to arise from this
distinction.


S. The most important consequence thereof is this, That our Bodies and Souls,
being of different natures, ar disposed for different enjoyments and
sufferings. The Body is not capable of those pleasures which are peculiar to the
Soul. Nor is the Soul, by any evident necessity, to be esteemed subject unto
that change and dissolution which attends the Body.


F. The necessity of the Souls dissolution with the Body is indeed not evident
from any thing thou have observed upon their natures. But neither is this
distinction of their natures so full a proof, as might be wished for, of so
comfortable an expectation as that of the Souls duration hereafter. As we
proceed further we shall infallibly meet with other arguments that will yet
better confirm those hopes. And other consequences also, of less importance,
will fall occasionally in our way, as we com to treat of other matters with which
they are connected. In the mean while, it is time now that we look back unto the
method which thou first proposed'st for thy inquirys, and strive to discover
what sort of Happiness that is which this nature of ours, such as we have
described it, is capable of.


S. I conceiv the ground and Substance of al bodily Happiness to consist in
Health. The gratification of our several Appetites may indeed increase the
degrees of it, but Health is the most essential ingredient, without which our
Bodies will be always miserable. And as for the Happiness of the Soul, I think it
may be esteemed complete whenever we enjoy entire Satisfaction and
contentment of mind.


F. Since thou distinguishest our Happiness into these two kinds, it is
necessary to fix the just estimate of each of them; that we may theruption
direct our chief pursuit after what shall appear most important.


S. I have no difficulty to determine the Happiness of the Mind, such as I have
described it, to exceed that of the Body: not only because the Soul is the
nobler Being, ('it is that which rules the body) but more especially because my
Idea of that Happiness is the more complete. For where the Mind is entirely
satisfied there is nothing wanting. Nevertheless, I would not despise the
other. For I confess the business seems to me yet surer when both ar joined.
But that consideration afflicts me: Because I observe daily, that,
notwithstanding al imaginable precautions, the Bodies of al men ar frequently
afflicted with painful diseases, constantly obnoxious to accidental hurts, and
inevitably subject to final decay; which things make that sort of Happiness
imperfect, or the attainment of it impossible. I look therefore chiefly toward
the other: but, alas, I look yet in vain. My Soul seems capable of it: but it
knows not where to find it. I beg of you therefore to direct me speedily unto
that object of my search: for I now despise al other study in comparison of it.


F. This is what I have already hinted to thee, That the regular pursuit of thy
Happiness would lead thee into the consideration of other topics than those
thou have hitherto mentioned. Consider, therefore, the nature of al things in
this visible World. Consider the Improvements that are made upon nature, for our
convenience, by the art and contrivance of ingenious men. Ar any of these
things, or al of them together, capable to confer that sort of Happiness which
thou judge to be peculiar unto thy Soul?


S. No, they are not. For, being al of them corporeal substances, they can have
no operation but upon my Body: or, at least, they cannot affect my Soul but by
the means of those bodily Organs unto which it is now united. Since therefore we
have already concluded the Perfection of Bodily Happiness to be unattainable,
it is in vain for me to expect that of my Soul by those means.


F. Where then wilst thou look for it?


S. I know not well. But since it is not to be found in any corporeal existence,
nor is my Soul singly able to work her own happiness out of her self, I must
either find it in some thing more perfect than my Soul, or despair of ever
finding it at al.


F. What Idea have thou of any thing more perfect than thy Soul?


S. I have yet no clear Idea of any such thing. But this I am sure of, that
What soever made my Soul is perfecter than it. The Principle, what ever it be,
from which it sprung, must contain in it self more eminent perfections than
those that I perceiv to be in me.


F. Thou see how Mankind is born into this World, one Generation succeeding
another; and that we are born at once of such a double nature as thou have
observed, both Body and Soul. Do thou therefore intend that answer as a mark
of respect unto me, thy Father, as the Author or cause of thy subsistence?


S. I am deeply sensible of the respect I ow you. But I confess that I now look
further. It Is not only the Principle of my own Being, but that of Mankind,
which I seek for. The propagation thereof from Father to Son will not serve my
turn. For tho I revolv in my thoughts never so many thousand Ages backwards;
nay tho I should go so far as to find one single Man, the first of al men,
from whom the Species has been derived; yet I have still the same question to
ask concerning him as concerning me. He made not himself. Who, or what, was it
therefore that gave him his Being, and his capacity to beget others like
himself? Whatever that was, it must necessarily contain in it great
Perfections. And it can be no indifferent thing for us to know, or to be
ignorant of it. For, as in the course of Generations there is a strict relation
between Father and Son, the latter depending upon the former, and being
naturally obliged to certain dutys toward him; so, much more ought we to
conclude, that the general Author of Mankind dos neither abandon his Offspring,
nor leav it free from Tys of Duty. And if I could once be so happy as to
discover Him, and pay those dutys which I ow him, I doubt not but I should
therein find that further Perfection of happiness which I search after.


F. I perceiv this thought has warmed thee. But let us not overshoot our mark.
Thou inquirest after the original Cause of the first Man. Is that so difficult
to conceiv? Consider the various Productions of nature. This Earth whereon we
live, our general Mother, being invigorated with the lively heat of our
universal Parent, the Sun, produces yearly innumerable objects of equal
astonishment with this thou stick'st at. Neither ar her productions confined to
so exact a regularity that we may not imagine her capable to have some times
brought forth other manner of Beings than what she now ordinarily dos. The od
irregularitys that we yet meet withal ever and anon ar an undeniable proof of
it. And why may not therefore the first Production of Mankind be attributed to
the happy rancounter of some convenient Matter, which, cherished and actuated by
a du proportion of nutritive Heat, sprung up into that form we see it? If this
do not satisfy, we shall be to seek for the first Cause of al other Animals as
well as of our selves, and so involved in endless disquisitions.


S. No, no, I now perceiv that our disquisitions upon this head will not be
endless. We draw near to a resolution of them. Tho I should grant the
possibility of man's production in that manner which you have endeavored so
plausibly to describe, that dos not at al extricate me from my first
difficulty; but rather intangles me more in it, and obliges me to look further.
Let it be so, that both Men and Beasts have been originally produced by the
Earth and Sun. Yet, Who is it that made that Earth and Sun, and also those
other innumerable numbers of gloroius bodies that environ us at greater
distance? They have al had their First Cause as well as we. And the close
relation they have unto one another, with their dependence upon one another,
dos evidently demonstrate that the first cause of them al is one and the same.
There is one, only, original and universal Cause of al things. And that being
so, I must raise my Idea of its perfections yet so much higher than I first
conceived them, as the universal frame of al things is a compleater production
than that of me in particular. This consideration makes me conclude those
Perfections to be no less than infinite.


F. Thou have rightly concluded. That Being which formed al other Beings must
of necessity be absolutely perfect. And that is it which we call GOD. The
evidence of this conclusion depends upon such undeniable Principles that it
cannot be doubted of. In the order of things that produce one another some one
must necessarily be first. Whatsoever that First be, it must contain
supereminently in it self al those Perfections that are scattered amongst the
rest. And the uniting of those scattered Perfections makes the Idea of their
Author absolutely complete. I have repeated these heads that they may be firmly
rooted in thy Memory, and that so the Foundation of this important conclusion
may never be shaken. But we must not rest here. This Idea of God is a Fountain
of light. Let us follow the streams that it sends forth, and see whither they
will carry us. Tell me therefore more particularly what thou conceivest to be
comprehended in this notion of A Being absolutely perfect.


S. So great a perfection as that is surpasses my weak capacity. And indeed I
cannot imagine it possible for any Man, being finite, to comprehend the extent
of those Perfections which we have concluded to be infinite.


F. Tho we cannot comprehend al, yet we may some. Attend therefore closely to the
sense of that definition, and thou wilst not find it difficult to descend into
some Particulars.


S. Thus far indeed I think I see clearly; That a Being absolutely perfect
neust have in himself whatever is necessary not only to his own Being and
Happiness but likewise to the Being and Happiness of his Creatures.


F. That is one step. Mind now the consequences of that answer, and thou wilst
advance further. But do it by degrees. In the first place, examine what thou
find to result from the first part of thy answer, which relates simply to
the Being and Happiness of God himself.


S. If he have in himself whatsoever is necessary to his Own Being, (without
which he can in no wise be esteemed perfect) and if he have not received any
thing from without himself, (which has been already demonstrated, in showing
that he is the First Cause of all things) it then follows that his Being or
Existence is necessary; that it always has been, and that it always will be;
which is to say that it is Eternal. Again: If He have in himself whatsoever is
necessary to his own Happiness, (without which also he must fall far short of
perfection) it follows not only that his nature is incapable of a final
dissolution, but even of any suffering or change; which, being Affectations
incident to al Matter, I make use of the term you have allowed me to signify
its contrary, and call him Spirit. Then, joining together these two conclusions,
I say that He is an Eternal Spirit.


F. What ar the consequences of the second branch of thy answer, viz. That He
has in himself whatsoever is necessary to the Being and Happiness of his
Creatures? Orra there, first, what is the Reason upon which thou groundest that
proposition? For it appears not so evident as the other.


S. The first part of that proposition is evident enough from the very
existence of the Creatures. For since they are, and ar from him, it is clear
that he has in himself whatsoever was or is necessary either to produce or to
conserv them. And to prove the second, I need only observe wherein the general
Happiness of the Creatures consists; which I conceiv to be in their attainment
of that End for which their Author designed them. For it cannot be doubted but
He, who had in himself the power to producethem, can much more easily by the
same power conduct them to that end for which he produced them. So that I find
in him the Original spring both of the Being and Happiness of althings.


F. Proceed then to draw the inferences of that proposition, as it relates to
the Creatures.


S. His giving Being and Happiness unto the Creatures seems to me to imply
principally his Sovereign Perfection of Goodness, of Wisdom, and of Power. His
Goodness is apparent in the design of al his works, his Wisdom in the
contrivance of them, and his Power in the execution. The one prompts, the other
directs; and the third accomplishes. These I think ar the main Branches into
which that consideration may be divided: and as we can perceiv the connexity of
others with these, we may safely refer them to the same original stock of
absolute perfection; which is God.


F. Wilst thou go on to particularize any others that thou find to have
their Rise from these?


S. That pursuit would be long. And I know not whether at this time it be very
needful. For other Inferences will of themselves occur in particular occasions.
And in the mean while I perceiv that we have in these three a solid Foundation
of that Happiness which I am seeking after. For seeing my notion of God's
Wisdom assures me that he knows what is best, and his Goodness and Power that
he is both willing and able to do it, I cannot doubt but it is already don.


S. What, do thou mean that by this discovery thou art now actually stated in
that Happiness which thou wast a while ago inquiring after? For that is best
for thee. And thou seem to infer that whatsoever is best is already don.


S. No. Tho I am assured that whatsoever is best for the Universe is don, yet
my comprehension of that general good is too short to determine me in the
particular application of it. On the contrary, rather, since I find my self to
be yet short of that Happiness which my nature is capacitated for, I conclude
that it is in order to some more general good that I am so. And, in effect, tho
I cannot comprehend the depth of al God's workings, yet I easily see a
possibility that it may be for the advantage of the whole that some sort of
Creatures pass unto their Perfection by degrees. And probably I my self may be
of that sort. This state wherein I now am may be a Passage. Which being so, it
is sufficient for me in particular that I am put into the Way, and have a
Capacity given me to work out in time that further Degree of Happiness which I
yet want. And that I am really in such a Condition is clearly deducible from
the forementioned triple Idea of God's Perfections. For, since I am capacited
for a further Degree of Happiness than what I now enjoy, and since I am
naturally bent upon the pursuit of that Happiness, it is unconceivable that
infinite Goodness, Wisdom, and Power, should have given me that Capacity and
that bent of Nature to be always frustrated. I say therefore that my attainment
of it in the end, provided I swerv not from the way, is as certain as if
already effected.


F. Since thou wilft not now pursu this search into the particular Perfections
of the Deity any further, consider with thy self once again how far we are yet
com; and see, according to thy own proposed method, which way thou ought
next to bend thy thoughts.


S. I can do it easily. For I take care not to let slip that Clew which you
directed me in the beginning to hold fast. I seek my own Happiness. In order to
that, I have considered what I am; what is the chief Happiness that I am
capable of; and where that Happiness is to be found. I have determined that the
noblest part of my Nature is Spiritual; that my chief Happiness must therefore
also be Spiritual; and that it can only be found in God. I have proceeded to
take some view of those Perfections which the Idea of God presents unto me. And
there we stick. Methinks therefore it lys now naturally before me to look after
the Way or means that lead unto this Happiness which I have proposed for the
ultimate object of my search.


F. It Is well observed. Continu therefore to reflect attentively upon what thou
have hitherto discovered; and try still, in thy own thoughts, whether the
consideration thereof will direct thee unto those means or no.


S. I have indeed perceived some glimmering thereof al along as we have
proceeded, but now methinks I begin to discover a clearer light. You were
pleased to turn me aside as I was once hinting at the consideration of our
lying under some tys of Duty toward the Author of our Being: and I acknowledge
that you did it with reason. For, as I had not then cleared up to my own mind
the Idea of that Author, it would have been impossible for me, in those
circumstances, to have framed any right apprehension of my duty toward him.
But now that I have attained to some competent knowledge both of him and my self,
I doubt not but from the comparison of those Ideas I shall find some Rule of
duty to result. And I doubt yet less that my following that Rule is the direct
and only means of bringing me to my desired Happiness.


F. Thou say thou doubtest not of these things. But, once again, why so fast?
Why may it not yet be doubted whether He have given us any such Rule or no?
What importance is it to him what course we take? We see that al Men, who
follow never so various ways of living, arrive indifferently, and without
distinction, at their last end, which is the Grave. And what Happiness then
can thou propose unto thy self to find in one course rather than another?


S. I perceiv that I have been too hasty, in starting a double conclusion
without explaining the premises from whence I draw it. My mind has run quicker
than my tongue, and has caused my expressions to take that leap which your
questions now bring me back again to walk over more leisurely. I must do it
therefore Step by Step, and endeavor to tread sure as I go along.


F. Do so. I wait thy Motion.

S. I must prove then, in the first place, that the Author of our Being, which
is God, has really obliged us unto some Duty; in the next place I must inquire
what that Duty is; and in the last place, examine how my Happiness arises from
it. My first Proposition is general. And methinks this general Consideration
may serve to clear it. If God be the Author of al things, then Whatsoever we
find our selves obliged unto by the Nature of things; I mean either of God, of
our Selves, or of Others; we are obliged unto it by God himself, who framed and
disposed things in that manner.


F. Yes, if we are under any such obligation, I will not deny but that obligation
is laid upon us by God. But how dos it appear that we are under any such
obligation at al?


S. If I mistake not, we have already sufficiently established that, in the
beginning of our inquirys. The desire that every man has to procure his own
Happiness is general, and whatsoever is general is natural. The ways indeed in
which men seek it ar different, and therefore some of them must necessarily be
preternatural. But the general bent after, and desire of Happiness, is the same
in all men, and therefore the pursuit of it is an Obligation laid upon us by
Nature her self; that is to say, a Duty injoined us by God.


F. Grant that the search of Happiness in general be a natural inclination and
by consequence our duty; yet, since al men ar subject to er in the particular
ways of pursuing it; what can it avail us to know in general that we are under
such an obligation, while we have no rule to direct us in the particular
observance of it?


S. You are pleased in that Question to make a Supposition which I must not
grant. The Errors of some Men do not prove that we have no Rule given us to walk
by; but only that, if there be any such Rule, those Men do not observe it. And
I think we have already agreed upon a Principle from which it will necessarily
follow that we have some such Rule given unto us, whether they observe it or no.
If it be inconsistant with our Idea of God that he should have given us this
bent of Nature after Happiness, and at the same time have subjected us to a
perpetual Frustration (which I prove to be inconsistant, in that such a
Frustration is real Misery, and that it is directly repugnant to his Goodness
to have framed Creatures on design to make them miserable) I say then, it is
absolutely necessary that he should have given us some Rule whereby to direct us
in the particular Pursuit of that Happiness, which he has obliged us to seek
after: because otherwise we should be for ever frustrated of it. Which is
absurd.


F. Can thou show me a Rule which is capable to guide us exactly in this
Pursuit, and which is general to al Mankind? For such it must be, or none.


S. I think I can. And if I had not ghest at it beforehand, this last Character
which you require in it is too evident a Distinction to leav any Doubt
thereupon. In a Word. The Rule of al our Actions is, or ought to be, Right
Reason. This Faculty of Reasoning judges of Truth and Error, of Good and Evil;
weighs one thing with another, and chooses the best. The Progress you have
already helped me to make therein assures me of a greater Perfection hereafter
than what I have yet attained unto. I now indeed grope after an unknown way,
and advance not without some Doubts and Fears; But I am persuaded that a
continued sincere, and strict Application to this Exercise will produce a steady
firmness of Judgment, capable to direct my Practice. And, abov al, I say that
your last forementioned Character takes away al Doubt upon this matter. For if
God have given any such Rule unto Mankind (as it has been already proved that
he must of necessity have given some) it can be no other than this Rule of
Reason: Because none other, than this, is or can be General: And this being so,
must therefore be esteemed Natural; that is to say from God; and by consequence
also Sufficient.


F. I'wil not just dispute against these general Arguments, which thou have
made use of to prove that God has obligedus unto some sort of Duty, and given us
the means of knowing it. But however, I shall esteem the thing yet better
proved, as well as illustrated, when I shall see thee go through thy next
proposed Enquiry with any Accuracy, and show me those particular Dutys that we are obliged unto.


S. To do that, I must refer our Dutys unto certain principal Heads, which are
very obvious, and from which al particular Branches take their Rise. They are
these. To God, to our Neighbors, and to our Selves. And I choose to begin with
the last of them. Let us reflect therefore upon our own Nature, which we have
concluded to be composed of two Principles, Matter and Spirit, or Body and
Soul. These two Principles in us contest frequently between themselves, drawing
several ways. The Body delights only in the present gratification of its
Senses, without knowing any Bounds thereof, or foreseeing any Consequences. The
Soul has not only its own Delights of a more refined nature, but it also
judges concerning those of the Body. It weighs a sensual Gratification with a
spiritual Inconvenience, a present Good with a future Evil; and it is able upon
the Comparison of al Circumstances to choose what is most conducive to the
Happiness of the whole Man. Now from this simple Consideration of our own
Nature, I affirm that there results this plain Duty, incumbent upon us, viz.
That we ought to keep our Bodies in continual Subjection unto our Souls, as
Servants unto their Masters. And the reason of that Duty will appear yet more
evident by the Mischiefs that follow a contrary Practice. For where this
Subordination is not established, al corporeal Gratifications grow excessive:
And the Excess of such Gratifications breeds enless Inconveniencys. Those of
eating and drinking cloud and darken the Understanding, by the gross. Vapors
which they send up into the Brain. Others enervate the Strength of the Body.
The very Desire of any of them with earnestness excites Passions, breeds
Disorder in the Mind, and unfits it for Deliberation. And the too frequent
Indulgment thereof possesses the whole Soul, and stifles al Thoughts of any
nobler Enjoyment. In a Word therefore, it is our indispensable Duty to use
great Moderation in all bodily Satisfactions, and to preserv the absolute
Dominion of the Soul over the Body unviolated.


F. This is very well. But it is nothing else than what thou sayd'st even now;
That we ought to govern al our Actions by Reason.


S. I am very glad it is so. And I hope what I shall have occasion to say
further in the remainder of my Researches will continu to prove so likewise: I
mean that Right Reason and True Interest will be always found to be but one and
the same thing.


F. Proceed then, in thy own Method, to what thou think fit to explain in
the next place.


S. My next Task is to inquire into those particular Dutys which we are obliged
unto toward our Neighbors. And that I may discern them clearly, I judge it
convenient to take a View of my own Circumstances, and of the Relations wherein
I stand toward others. I consider my self as born naked into the World,
incapable to provide or help my self even with the Necessarys, much less with
the Conveniencys, of Life; and therefore standing in absolute need of others
Assistance. From that Estate, by the Assistance of others, I grow up gradually
unto some measure of Strength, and become capable of many things. But with all
that Capacity I am yet far short of being able to provide alone for my own
Subsistence. For, in effect, that Provision implys no less than to cultivate
the Earth, and prepare the Fruits of it for Food and Raiment; to kill the
Beasts, and prepare likewise their Flesh for Meat, and their Skins and Fleeces
for clothing; to dig up Stones out of the Entrails of the Earth, to hew down
Trees, and build Houses for Defense against the Injurys of Weather; The least
of which things requires so many Instruments wherwithal they are to be don, so
much Art and Labor in the doing, that few Men ar capable of executing any one
of them without taking Advantage and making use of some thing don by others;
much less can any Man be ever capable of al. Nevertheless al these things ar so
absolutely necessary for us, that it is not possible without them to preserv
Life; or tho it could be preserved, yet even Life it self in that Condition
would not be desirable. This being so, I have continual need of my Neighbor's
assistance in one thing or another: and my Neighbor has the same need of mine.
To obtain his I must therefore giv him mine; and to obtain mine he must giv me
his. It is not to be had on either side at any other price. Thus the Necessity
of mutual Succor tys al Mankind together in one common bond. It makes it as
necessary for each individual Person to endeavor the good of the whole as of
himself in particular: because he cannot enjoy the one but in contributing
toward the other. There is the obligation of intrest which inforces the duty.
And our duty resulting from hence is plainly this; That we bear an universal
Lov and Goodwill toward al Men. Or more particularly, That we look upon our
Neighbor's concernment as our own, and that so we be as ready to serve him in
any occasion as we desire he should be to serve us; Nay, that we look upon the
general Conternment of Mankind as far more important than our own, and that so
we preser the public Good, and the establishment thereof upon Principles of
universal rectitude, before any sinister private Advantage. This I take to be a
summary of that Law which Nature, or God, obliges us unto toward our
Neighbors. And whoever carrys this in his mind will need no great comment to
teach him his Duty in particular occasions. This hearty Benevolence prohibits
the doing any manner of Injury, and injoyns the doing al manner of Good. It
lays also the foundation of Government, and it obliges us to Truth and Justice,
and to al other virtues which are necessary to the preservation of Societys. In
fine, it secures the Happiness of each man in this World, as much as that
Happiness can possibly be secured. And therefore I conclude again, that this
Friendly Disposition toward al men is a reciprocal Dury, nay the Fountain of
al such Duty, required of each man by God himself.


F. I will not interrupt thee with any objections. Go on to thy next head.


S. My next and last head is to examine what ar those particular Dutys which we
ow unto God himself. I represent therefore unto my self that Idea of absolute
Perfection which we have attributed to the Author of our being. And the very
first fight of so daz'ling an Excellency strikes me down before him in humble
Adoration. The further contemplation of it shows me my duty of submitting
patiently unto all the dispensations of his Providence; as being assured that
whatever is ordered by such an Almighty Principle of infinite Wisdom, and
Goodness, cannot choose but be for the best. I see therein the ground of my
praising him for what I have, and praying to him for what I want: because he is
the distributer of al things. I am enamoured with the beauty of his
Perfections, and thereby drawn into an ardent desire of enjoying those of them
which are communicable, and of imitating those of them which are imitable,
according to the degree of my capacity. That reflection fixes my thoughts
praticularly upon his Wisdom and Goodness: the first of which remindes me to
guide al my Actions by that measure of Wisdom, that principle of Reason, which
he has given me: the other is a new incitement to al Acts of Kindness toward
those that are within my reach, and to an unlimited Benevolence toward al men.
Al these things, and all the rest that I have deduced from former Heads, ar
enforced upon me by the Authority of this supreme Lawgiver. And this is the
Perfection of al my Dutys, that I perform them in Obedience to his command, and
with so exact a Sincerity, as may giv me confidence before him who beholds the
inmost Secrets of my Heart.


F. Methinks thou have omitted, upon this last head, to show how those
particular dutys toward God com to have the force of a Law upon us. At least
thou have not don it, as in the former heads, by showing their connexity with
our Intrest.


S. If I have not don it so expressly as I should have don, yet I think I have
tacitly employed it. Besides that al those Dutys I have hinted at, ar evident
means of rendering me acceptable unto my Maker, and consequently of obtaining
the fruits of his favor, which must needs include a high degree of Happiness; I
say, besides that, the last ingredient which I required in all our Dutys (I mean
that of Sincerity) dos carry along with it its own Reward, viz, that
Satisfaction of Mind which is not otherwise to be had, and which we have some
while ago concluded to be the highest degree of Happiness that we can here
attain unto. So that this Set of dutys, as well as the rest, have the
inforcement of Interest to makethem a Law.


F. Well; since thou have now gone through thy proposed Classes of duty, I will at
this time take a little review of what thou have said; that we may see whether
any difficulty yet remain, and what further is to be inquired after. Upon our
Moderation in corporal enjoyments, and the apt disposition of our bodily
Organs, follows a clearness of Mind capable to direct us in the choice and
prosecution of our greatest Good. Upon our Kindness toward others follows
their kindness toward us, and the effects of that Mutual Kindness ar private
convenience, and public security. Upon our humble and sincere Adoration of an
al-seeing God follows that inward Comfort and Satisfaction of mind which
surpasses al other Worldly Felicity. And upon the contrary of al these
practices follow the contrary inconveniencys. So that our Obligation unto these
natural Dutys is confirmed by the natural Effects of their Observance or
Neglect; that is to say, by Rewards and Punishments. This is the substance of
thy discourse upon those heads. Let us now examine if it be clear and
uncontestable. I ask thee therefore; Do these Consequences so necessarily follow
their Premises, these Effects their Causes, that whoever practices those Dutys
cannot fail to obtain that Happiness, and who neglects them to fall into those
Inconveniencys that we have discoursed of?


S. I must acknowledge that those two first sorts of Happiness, which I have
described as appertaining to the two first Classes of Duty, do not indeed so
necessarily follow those Dutys but that they may sometimes fail. The Soul has
not so absolute a Superiority over the Body as not to be sometimes disturbed
thereby in her Functions, And the kindest natured Persons ar sometimes exposed
both to Want and Injury. Nevertheless those Dutys ar the plain and ordinary
means to avoid these Inconveniencys. The first of them goes as far as the
Frailty of our bodies can admit; and the second would be Infallible if it were
universally received. The Rule therefore must not be wholly rejected because of
some few Exceptions; especially when those exceptions arise (as here) from
extraneous causes. But however that be, the condition of Integrity, which I
mentioned under the last Classis of Duty, and required as a necessary
circumstance in all the rest, dos necessarily and infallibly produce the
Happiness which I ascribed to it. An Upright Conscience establishes the Mind
in an unsbaken Peace, and fills it with joys unspeakable. That therefore supplys
the deficiency of the rest, and is an inforcement sufficient to make the Law,
which injoyns all the forementioned Dutys, indispensable. For tho it do not giv
an absolute, complete Happiness, Happiness without al allay, yet it gives the
best that our Natures in this World ar capable of.


F. This would indeed be well, if it were really found to be so in practice as
thou imaginest it in Idea. But I doubt it is otherwise. Nay I must tell thee
plainly, that in the course of this World, the Despisers of those Rules do often
times seem to enjoy that very Felicity which the Observers of them seek in
vain. Those that indulge themselves in bodily Excesses, have nevertheless their
spiritual Facultys both quick and strong. Those that have no Bowels of
tenderness toward their Brethren, advance themselves in Riches, Honor and
Power, by Fraud and Violence. And those that have no Sense of a Diety content
themselves in these wordly Successes; and so enjoy Tranquillity of Mind, without
looking any further. These things being so, thou wilst do well to consider
whether they do not in some measure invalidate thy reasonings, or interfere with
thy conclusions.


S. Yes, they seem indeed to do it. For if the Reward of Duty do not follow
upon the Performance of Duty, but rather upon a Practice directly contrary unto
it, then ar all the Tys of Duty broken, and Mankind let loose to al manner of
disorders. I say this seems to be the Consequence of that State of things which
you have now represented. But I think I have the Solution of that difficulty
ready at hand. And, first, from the Absurdity of that consequence I argu in
general, that the thing is either not so as you have represented it, or else
that that Consequence is not necessary. For, if there were no Restraint of an
inward Law in the Hearts of Men, with regard to the general Good, then would al
Means of obtaining a private Advantage be indifferently made use of as they
might appear likely to giv Success; and by that means Fraud and Violence, which
reign now but in some few disorderly Persons, would then overspread the Earth,
and expose al Mankind to eternal Confusion or utter Ruin: Which Consequence I
say is so inconsistant with the infinite Wisdom and Goodness of God, that it is
in no wise to be admitted. I proceed therefore to a more particular Examination
of the Question: And, in the next place, I deny the Supposition, that those Men
of Excess and Violence, those that have no regard either to God or Man, do ever
attain to any competent Degree of tolerable Happiness. They may indeed
accumulate Riches, and other worldly Enjoyments, but that is al they can do.
Their Excesses will infallibly, by degrees, obscure and weaken their
Intellects; and the Consciousness of the Wrong they do unto others will gnaw
their Minds, with Jealousys and Fears of the like Returns from thse they have
injured: Which is more than sufficient to corrupt their Joys. If they have any
Intervals of Tranquillity, it proceeds only from a stupid senselesness; and not
being built upon a true Knowledge of their own Condition, nor supported by any
Idea of the Deity, it can be of no durance. Thus al their pretended Happiness
dwindles into a mere Nothing, and so leaves the Objection arising from it
without any Force. But if it should still be urged, that these worldly
Enjoyments ar so accommodated to our worldly Condition, that, in spite of al
Reasoning, our very Sense will force us to acknowledge that they are necessary
Ingredients to our Happiness here; and if it be thereupon argued, that the
unequal Distribution of them takes away the Force of that Law which I have al
along endeavored to establish: To this I will answer, in the last place, by
conceding the Supposition, and denying the Consequence. Grant that deceitful
and violent Men obtain a greater Share of those things than do the Candid and
Benign. What then? I must not immediately reject things already proved; but
rather first try whether this Supposition be really inconsistant therwithal or
no. And in reflecting thereupon, I think I see their Agreement so easy, and so
happy, that, instead of loos'ning any Joint of my Fabric, it will prove the last
Pin to fasten all the Parts of it indissolubly. I review therefore my Idea of the
Divine Perfections, and from the Conjunction of Wisdom and Goodness I find
another of equal Evidence (not yet named) to result; and that is Justice. By
his Justice I am assured that, if he have obliged us unto any sort of Duty by
the expectation of Reward, and forbidden the contrary by fear of Punishment, he
will not, he can not, fail to confer that Reward upon al those that shall perform
that Duty, and inflict that Punishment upon the Transgressors of it. Since
therefore it happens that this Retribution of Rewards and Punishments in this
World, however considerable in general, yet is not so perfectly exact in every
particular, as to be void of al Difficulty; I hereupon call to mind the Hopes I
saw of a future Being, when I considered the nature of my Soul as capable of
it; and now I see not only that Possibility, but even an Absolute Necessity of
the thing. For if God be perfectly Just, and if the Rewards and Punishments
which his Justice ingages him to distribute or inflict, be not distributed or
inflicted in this World, we must necessarily have some Subsistence hereafter, in
which Estate he may distribute or inflict them; and he then will certainly and
infallibly do it. This, I say, not only answers your Objection, but it ads a
new Force to all that I have hitherto endeavored to establish.


F. I acknowledge it dos so. And therefore I will now trouble thee with no more
Objections, but expect the Prosecution of what thou have further proposed unto
thy self to inquire into.


S. Truly I do not see what further I have to prosecute. I had indeed
propounded to examine how my Happiness, that perfect Happiness which I thirst
after, would result from the observance of those Dutys that I am bound unto.
But you have already brought me to the Resolution of that Inquiry. Since the
Almighty God is obliged by his Own Essential Propertys, upon Condition of that
Observance, to confer that Happiness upon me in a future Life, I have but to
walk steadily in the Way that he has prescribed (I mean in that way which the
Nature of Things, the Course of universal Good, obliges me to) and I am assured
that I shall not fail to obtain it.


F. Ad only one word further, and tell me what sort of Happiness that is which
thou expectest to obtain in another Life, and I have don.


S. It is impossible for me to describe that future Happiness in such a manner
as those things that are the Objects of my Senses, or matter of present
Enjoyment. But it suffices me to know that it will be suited to my Soul; that
therefore it will advance the Facultys of my Soul to their highest Degree of
Perfection, which is to say, into a Conformity unto the Divine Nature, from
whence they sprung: And that its Duration will be Eternal. This is an Abyss in
which my Thoughts ar drowned: No wonder therefore if Expressions fail me.


F. I expect no more from thee. Thou have followed thy natural Light so far as
it shines with any Clearness. What further remains to be known, that may be
useful in the pursuit of Hapipness, has been communicated to Mankind by Divine
Revelation, and is therefore a Subject of Instruction, rather than Reflection:
It is rather to be listened unto, than studied for. I will therefore some other
time endeavor to explain unto thee my Conception of those things. But in the
mean while I advise thee to revolv often in thy own Mind the Force of al these
Considerations that we have now gone through. They will engage thee to an exact
Performance of thy Duty in all Occasions. And the Performance of that Duty will
not only carry along with it the Reward of a temporal Felicity, but secure an
eternal one.


S. Dear Sir, I beg of You not to defer the Instruction You promise me, until
another Time. Since there remains further Matter to be inquired into, I can
have no Rest til I have discust it. My Mind is now so warmed with these
Things, that there can be no Time fitter for me than the present, to continue
the Meditation of them. And besides also, We are already so far advanced upon
our Way, that I cannot think our remaining Journey will be very long. I
earnestly entreat you therefore to continue your Instructions, without
Interruption, to the End. And seeing I am, henceforwards, to learn more
directly by your Lessons, than heretofore, while you were pleased to lead me in
the Exercise of my own Reflections; I desire you now to suffer me to propose
such Inquirys as I find my self least capable to comprehend; that so your
Lessons, being properly suited to my Wants, may the more easily supply them,
and remove al Doubts or Difficultys that shall arise.


F. Seeing thou art not wearyed with this Conversation, I am not only willing,
but shall take Pleasure to continu it. I approve also of the Method thou hintest
at, of thy proposing, and my resolving, what Questions or Difficultys thou
may find needful. The Pursuit thereof, with such Attention of Mind as thou
have hitherto exercised, will still lead us, in a natural Order, unto the End of
our Way. Do thou therefore, at this time, act the Part of the Catechizer; I am
content to be the Respondent.


S. That Condescension is suitable to your accustomed Goodness: And I shall use
utmost Care, in the Acceptance thereof, not to transgress the Bounds of my Duty.
The first Difficulty then, that I desire to propound, arises from your last
Words. Since you acknowledge that those Discoverys which are made by the Light of
Nature, ar capable to conduct a Man to eternal Felicity, I do not readily
perceiv what furtber Need there was of any other Discovery by Divine
Revelation, nor what need there is now (I say, upon that Supposition) for me
to look into it.


F. The need of some further Help than what the mere Light of Nature affords us,
is urgent upon Two Accounts. The one, to open our Understandings, the other, to
incline our Wills. These Discoverys that we have thereby made, ar the Effect of
deep Meditation, which the Vulgar sort of People are not capable of. They
therefore have need to be instructed therein by some Person of such Credit as may
deserv to be trusted upon his Word. And as for those who discera these Things
in some measure, by the Strength of Reason, even they, too frequently, do either
slip or break the fine-spun Thread of their own Consequences, and stand in need
of a stronger Force to subject them unto their Duty.


S. I now perceiv that Necessity; and therefore entreat you, in the next Place,
to show me how it has been supplayed.


F. This has been admirably don by the coming of Jesus Christ into the World:
By his Doctrine, his Life, his Miracles, his Death and Resurrection. It Is, in a
Word, the Christian Religion which givs us new Degrees both of Light and
Strength, surpassing those of common Nature.


S. You will oblige me in explaining these Things more particularly.


F. Remember then that thou have already demonstrated, That to obtain the
perfect Happiness me aspire unto, there are no other Means afforded us than the
hearty and sincere Compliance with those Dutys that are required from us. I say,
there are no other Means that we our selves can make use of, or at least, that
can be effectual without this. For whatever other Motives may have influenced
the secret Counsels of the Almighty, to incline him to bestow that Happiness
upon any Number of Men, they are abov our Comprehension, and ought therefore to
be discoursed of with great Reservedness, or rather admired in humble Silence.
We are taught that Deuteronomy. ^^.^^
Secret Things belong unto the Lord our God: But those things which are revealea
belong unto us, and our Children, for ever; that we may do all the Words of his
Law. That being so, I will undertake no further than to consider how the coming
of Jesus Christ into the World is helpful to us in the performance of those
Dutys which we have determined to be the only Way which leads unto Happiness.


S. I desire also nothing further. For I comprehend already that the Uniting,
in this manner, revealed, and natural Religion (if in effect they are capable of
such a Union) will render the whole Business of Religion so uniform, that I shall
the more easily digest it in my Mind, and have need to make the fewer
Objections. Wherefore I beseech you to continue your own Design.


F. In the first Place, I say, That the Doctrine of Jesus Christ affords us one
very great Help toward the Performance of our Duty, in that it drives at the
greatest Purity, and is delivered with the greatest Perspicnity imaginable.
None that read his Sermon upon the Mount, or the other Instructions that are
interspersed throughout his whole History, and the other Writings of his
Disciples, but may clearly understand what is required from them. Joh. 4.24.
Spiritual Adoration. Matt. 5. 8. 1 Cor. 5. 8.
Purity and Integrity of Heart. Phil. 2. 15. 1 These. 2.10. 1 Timothy 5. 7. 1 Pet.
2. 12.
Unblameableness of Life and Conversation. Act. 24.16. 2 Cor. 1.12. 1 Pet.
3.21. 1 John 3.19. 20.
A Conscience void of Offense both toward God and toward Men. These
Principles ar frequently inculcated throughout the whole New Testament, and
explained in numerous Instances of particular Dutys. But the Essence of al is
said to be Romans 13. 8, 10. 1 John 2. 9. etc.
Lov: which our Savior himself extending both to God and Matt. 22. 37. etc.
Man, teaches us that thereupon depend both the Law and the Prophets.
Intensively, Matt. 10. 37. Luke 14.25.
toward Gods, our Low must be superlative; extensively, toward Matt. 5. 43.
Man, it must be universal. In a word, the Sum of al his Instruction is reduced
to these three Heads, of Tit. 2. 12.
living Soberly, Righteously, and Godlily, which are the very same into which
thou did even now distribute our Duty. But nevertheless the Advantage Mankind
receivs by our Savior's teaching that same Doctrine is very great: Because he
has don it with a Clearness suited to the Matt. 11. 25. 1 Cor. I. 26, 27.
meanest Capacity, and with an Matt. 7. 29. Luke 4. 32. 1 Cor. 2. 4.
Evidence irresistible.


S. I acknowledge that Advantage to be really great: But as you have hinted
also at some others, I humbly entreat you to continu to illustrate them.


F. The next Advantage that I observed to accru unto Mankind by Jesus Christ
arises from his Life. He has in that given us an Examble of Obedience to the
Will of God, both in Matt. 3.15. John 17. 4.
doing and in Matt. 20. 39. Luke 22.42. Heb. 2. 10. I Pet. 2.23.
suffering: An Example of Phil. 2.7, 8.
Humility, I Pet. 2. 22.
Purity, and Matt. 11. 29. 2 Cor. 10. I.
Meekness of Spirit: An Example of John 15. 12, 13.
Lov and Act. 10.30.
Benevolence toward one another: A Pet. 1.15.
Perfect Example in respect of every Duty that he requires from us: And an
Example which we ought therefore to John 13. 15. I John 2.6.
follow. This is an Advantage that was not afforded either to Jews or Heathens.
And it is no small one. For it both removes al Doubts that might have risen
about the Interpretation of his Commands, by showing us their Meaning in their
Performance; And it strengthens us against al Difficultys that might have
appeared therein, by showing us that Performance accomplished by one who was in all Heb. 2.17.
things made like unto us, and subject unto the same Infirmitys as our selves,
yet Heb. 4.15.
without Sin.


S. I acquiesce in this also; And shall listen with Pleasure to the rest of your
Observations.


F. A Third Advantage arising unto Mankind by Jesus Christ, is from the
Consideration of those Miracles that were wrought by him. That Testimony was
necessary to make his Doctrine more easily received. For Matt. 12.38. John.
4.48. 1 Cor. 1.22.
without Signs and Wonders Men would not assent to it. But when they saw the
Miracles which he did, they John 2. 23. John 6. 14.
believed in him, and concluded that he was a Teacher Matt. 11. 2. etc. Luke 7.
19. etc.
sent from God, because ( said John 3.2.
they) no Man could do such things except God were with him. Thus God Act. 2.22.
approved him unto the World by Miracles, and Wonders, and Signs, which he
wrought amongst them: And that gave him Credit and Matt. 7.19. Mark. 1.22.
Authority abov other Doctors, and added an extraordinary Luke 4.32.
Power unto his Words.


S. This indeed is of great Weight; And that not only in it self, but it ads
also a new Force unto your two foregoing Remarks. For when Jesus Christ had
both taught and shown Men what they were to do, they might still have demanded
(as indeed some of them did) by what Matt. 21. 23. etc. Mar. 11.28. etc. Luke
20. 2. etc.
Authority he required those Things at their Hands. But when, by the visible
Effects of his Divine Power, he had demonstrated unquestionably his Divine
Commission, it was hard then to refuse Subjection unto him.


F. Thou observest well. But the greatest Force of all the Evangelical
Dispensation remains yet behind. It lys in that clear Evidence that he has
given us of a future Life, in which wear to expect either Rewards or
Punishments answerable to our Conduct in this. That was also requisite to make
his Law still more obligatory. And the great Advantage we have by him, abov all the Discoverys of natural Light, is that the one gave but faint Glimmerings of
that Truth; but the other has cleared it up like Noonday, beyond al
possibility of doubting. He taught it plainly, declaring that his John 18. 36.
Kingdom was not of this World; Exhorting us to lay up our Matt. 6.20. Luke
12.33.
Treasure in Heaven, where it would be secure and incorruptible; Showing us
that the means of getting an Matt. 25. 31. etc.
) Entrance there was by the Practice of those Virtues that he had required; and
that those who did John 5.29.
) Good should at the last Day com forth unto the Resurrection of Life, but
those who did Evil, unto the Resurrection of Damnation. This, I say, was his
Doctrine. And the Belief of this being of the greatest Importance, He was not
content to confirm it only by that general Credit which his other Miracles
acquired him; but he also Matt. 18. 22, 23. Mar. 9.31. Luke 18.32, 33. Matt.
20, 18, 19.
foretold both his own Death and Resurrection, and after having suffered the
one, he Matt. 28.6. Act. 1. 3.
accomplished the other; that so he might, by a peculiar Miracle, adapted to
the very Case, prove the Truth of this Doctrine even by ocular Demonstration.
Thus it is, that by him Life 2 Timothy 1. 10.
and Immortality ar brought to light. Not only his own, but Ours. For that is
the 1 Cor. 15. 12. 1 These. 4.14. 1 Pet. 1.3.
) Consequence the Apostles always firmly maintained. And the Application they
made of that Consequence to Practice was, that those who admitted it should live
answerably to the Hopes it gave them; that is to say, Tit. 2.12, 13.
Soberly, Righteously, and Godlily, in all 2Pet. 3.11.
Holy Conversation, 2 Pet. 3.14.
Blameless and without Spot, 2 Cor. 7.1.
cleansed from al Filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, perfecting Holiness in the
fear of God, and 1 John 3.3.
purifying themselves even as God is Pure; to the end that by such Romans 2.7.
strict Continuance in well-doing they might obtain Eternal Life.


S. You have great Reason to represent this as the utmost Force of the Gospel.
It is indeed the same in kind with that wherewithal I concluded my
Disquisitions, but infinitely stronger, and more proper to incline Men's Wills,
and bind them to the exact Performance of their Duty. And now I am abundantly
satisfied that those several Advantages, which as you say occur unto us by
Jesus Christ, do perfectly supply those Defects and Imperfections under which
our natural Condition labored. But that being so, I perceiv the great
Importance of another Inquiry, which might indeed more naturally have preceded
these Explications of yours, but is not yet unseasonable. It is this. Seeing the
Gospel of Jesus Christ is so proper and efficacious a Means to direct and help
us in those Ways which lead to Eternal Happiness, I would gladly know by what
kind of Proof we may be fully, assured of its Truth: I mean, that such Things
were really said and don as ar therein recorded. For there lys the Stress of the
whole Matter. And it behoovs us to see that the Foundations be very sure, upon
which we build so important a Structure as this is.


F. Thou judge rightly of the great Importance of the Inquiry thou now
make. For if the History of Jesus Christ be not true, then ar al Consequences
drawn from thence vain and frivolous. But if it be true that he said and did
what the Evangelists record of him, then are al my foregoing Conclusions
strong. Now the Proof hereof appears to me most evident in the historical
Series of what followed his Appearance. It is matter of fact that we inquire
after: viz. That he lived, and taught, as is recorded of him; and that he
confirmed his Teaching during his Life by Miracles; and much more after his
Death, by his Resurrection. This is attested by the Apostles, Disciples, and
primitive Christians: in whom therefore we are to examine two things: First,
Their Capacity to judge of what they saw and heard, (I mean only that they did
really see and hear it:) and then their Fidelity in reporting it. Now the
Capacity necessary to discern such apparent matters of fact as ar the
foundation of Christianity, is (...) final, that every Man of common sense is
sufficiently endowed with it: and therefore it cannot be doubted of in those
Witnesses. Their Fidelity has several Confirmations: as, The exemplary Purity
and unblamableness of their 2 Cor. 1. 12. 1 These. 2. 10.
Carriage in all other respects: their Act. 2. 33, 34. 2 These. 3. 8.
Disinteressedness even in this respect, in that they sought no worldly
Advantage by their Testimony: nay more, their Suffering almanner of Act. 8. 1.
1 Cor. 4.11, 12. 2 Timothy 3.11.
Persecution, and even Act. 7. 58. etc.
Death it self, for confirmation of its Truth: and finally the concurrent
Testimony from Heaven which accompanied their Ministry, by inabling Them (even
as Christ himself) to work Signs Mark. 16. 20. Act. 19. 11. 12. Heb. 2. 4.
and Wonders and diverse Miracles. Let this be applied to those who were
themselves Ey-W^^nesses of our Savior's per^^^mances, those many Tho(...) who
saw and believed in him. Then let us look into the Fruit of their Ministry, the
historical Series of things as I even now called it. After his Death these
Witnesses spread themselves into several Act. 8.4, 5. Act. 11. 19. Act. 16. 8.
and c. Act. 27.1. Act. 28. 12. etc.
Regions andCountrys, and Act. 2. 41. Act. 4. 4.
Milions were convinced of the Truth of their report, by the irresistible
Evidence which they gave of it. These Milions again produced others, being al
accompanied with a divine 2 Cor. 10. 4.
Blessing, and very many during the first Ages) with a Act. 4.31. Act. 10. 44.
Romans 15.19.
divine Power, so long til Christianity over spread, in a manner, the face of
the whole Earth. This is plain Matter of Fact. The Records these things,
whether in the Gospel itself, or in the Sea the Authors quoted below Folio. 87.
Historys of the next succeeding Ages, do al agree in the same account thereof.
And fince that time, those Records have, through the succession of several
Ages, been conveyed unto us, with the same, or greater, certitude than any
other History of such Antiquity can boast of. I say, not only with the same,
but greater Certitude. For the Memorials of other Historys ar now no where to
be found but in Books or Monuments. Not only Emperors ar dead, but their
Empires also ar buried in a confused Chaos of vicissitudes: so that there
remains no living Witness, no real Effect now operating upon the minds of men,
that can be an Argument they ever subsisted. But with the History of Jesus
Christ it is otherwise. For the World is yet full of living Christians. And
therefore it cannot be doubted that Jesus Christ had once an existence amongst
men. Unless some other Reason could be assigned for the spreading of his Name
and Religion throughout the Earth, and the propagating of it from generation to
generation, than what I have now touched at, it must be allowed that these two
Propositions, viz. That there are now Christians in the World, and that their
first Author was Jesus Christ, ar chained together by the same necessity as
Effect and Cause. But none have yet dared to undertake so manifest an
Absurdity. Even the boldest Atheists, who have attempted to giv some account of
the Existence of the Universe without the concourse of a Deity, have not
presumed to giv the least explanation how it could be possible there should be
now any such People as Christians in the World if there had not once been such
a Person as Jesus Christ. Therefore it is even as absurd to doubt that he once
was (together with the forementioned Consequences of his being) as to doubt
that we our selves now ar. This is but a light Touch at some of those numerous
Arguments which the subject affords. But the Importance of it deserves thy
strictest Application in examining them al. Wherefore I recommend those Authors
who have expressly treated this matter to thy most serious Study. In them thou
wilst find al these Allegations that I hint at, and much more to the same
purpose, both proved and illustrated. Many there are who have labored in that
province: But it shall suffice me now to address thee unto those that I am my
self best acquainted withal. They are, The incomparable Grotius, in his
excellent Treatise of the Truth of the Christian Religion: Our Countryman Dr.
Parker in his Demonstration of the divine Authority of the Law of Nature and of
the Christian Religion: and the French Monsieur Abbadie, in his Treatise (also)
of the Truth of the Christian Religion. These Authors have al handled this
Subject, in their Different Methods, with so much Strength and Clearness, that
I cannot forbear to affirm (in Dr. Parker's words) that they are sufficient to
giv Satisfaction, in that point, to any Reasonable, or almost to any
Unreasonable Man.


S. I am much obliged to you for giving me this present prospect of the Proofs
of Christian Religion, and shall not fail to observe your Directions in the
further study of those Authors that you recommend unto me. Nothing is so
important as this; and therefore nothing shall have so much of my care. This is
indeed so very important, that, supposing a Satisfaction therein, I scarce know
any thing else worth the while to inquire after. And if I could perfectly
attain to that freedom from al preoccupation which you required from me in the
beginning of this Entertainment, I should certainly here cease from troubling
you with any further Difficultys. For I must acknowledge that I have now none
left but such as arise from those confused Notions which I had formerly perhaps
too carelessly heaped together. Nevertheless I confess that some of them yet
stick with me: and the little relation that I can find they have unto this
even Path, wherein you conduct me, leaves yet some relics of uneasiness in my
mind.


F. Hear not to propound them, whatever they are. We shall perhaps find some more
easy, and more general Way to solv them than thou art aware of.


S. If it be so indeed, That the Way to Eternal Happiness lys only in the
strict Performance of those Dutys which the Nature of Things, the Law of God,
requires from us; what shall we then say to all that ceremonial Outside of
Religion which bears so glorious an Appearance in the Eyes of the World? How
shall we esteem al those notional Systems of Theology, those numerous Articles
of speculative Belief, that have little or no Influence upon our Practice? And
lastly, what shall we judge of the Condition of those Persons who fall short of
that Perfection in Practice, which these Rules require? I know you see the full
extent of these Questions, and therefore I desire not to descend into
Particulars; but choose rather to leav them in this general Form, that they may
be the more fit to receiv that general Answer which you make me expect.


F. Thou do very well. But now, before I enter upon that Answer, I think
fitting to premise one Word in further Confirmation of thy Supposition, That
our Eternal Happiness dos really depend upon the Performance of our Duty. Tho
that Supposition be the plain Consequence of the strictest Reasoning we have
been able to make by our natural Light, yet it will be useful unto us to observe
also what Ground it has in Scripture. For we must remember that the View we are
now taking of Religion is properly to be confined unto that Knowledge we have of
it by Divine Revelation. And in this Method I think I shall establish the same
Conclusion by as clear Testimony as it is possible for Words to express. If we
examine it (First) by those figurative Expressions, of 1 John 21. 3, etc.
knowing Christ, of John 14. 21. John 15. 10, 14. 1 John 2. 5. 2 John 6.
loving Christ, of Jam. 2.14. 1 John 5. 5.
believing in Christ, of Romans 8. 1. Gal. 5. 24. 1 John 2. 6.
being in Christ, of Romans 8.14. 1 John 5. 4, 18. 1 John 2.29. 1 John 3. 9.
being born of God, and the like, which al import a Title to future Happiness,
we shall find no other Mark whereby to know that we are in such a Condition, than
by our Obedience to God's Commandments. Again: If we look into the great End
of Jesus-Christ's coming into the World, we shall find indeed that it was to
save us. But how? By Matt. 1.21. Act. 3. 26. Ephesians. 5. 25, etc. 1 John 3. 5.
sanctifying us. It is said, That he became the Author of Eternal Salvation.
But to whom? To Heb. 5.9.
them that obey him. He offered himself a Sacrifice, and bare our Sins in his
own Body on the Tree. But why? That we might be Heb. 10. 10. 1 Cor. 5.7, 8.
sanctified by his Offering, and that being Heb. 9.14. 1 Pet. 2. 24.
dead unto Sin we should live unto Righteousness. He redeemed us, also, it is
true. But from what? From Tit. 2.14. I Pet. 1. 18.
Iniquity: And only consequentially thereunto, from Punishment. This we must
needs take to be the Sense of those Expressions, and that the great Design of
his Appearance was to I Joh. 3.8.
destroy the Works of the Devil. For it is expressly said that nothing Rev.
21.27.
Unclean shall in any Wise enter into the new Jerusalem, and that no Man without
Heb. 12. 14.
Holiness shall see God. And hence it is that Jesus Christ himself so plainly
tells us that it is not Matt. 7.21, etc.
every one that faith unto him Lord, Lord, (which is to say, that acknowledges
him to be the Messiah, or that believes in him so far only as to pray unto him,
and to expect Salvation by him) that shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but
he that does the Will of the Father who is in Heaven. And the Apostles also,
therefore, so carefully precaution us against the Mistake of Thinking that the
Romans 2. 13. Jam. 1. 22.
hearing of the Law could profit us any thing without the doing of it. Let no
Man deceiv you (says 1 John 3. 7, 8.
one of them) he that does Righteousness is Righteous, and he that commits
Sin is of the Devil: And Call. 6. 7.
another, Be not deceived, God is not mocked, for what soever a Man sows that
shall he also reap. There lys the Stress of al: It is in doing. Or if this be
not yet sufficient to prove it, we have but to reflect, in the last place, upon
those Conditions by which the Scripture declares we shall be judged at the last
Day. What ar those Conditions that will be then demanded in us, so as that with
them we shall be received into Happiness, and without them condemned unto
Misery? In one Word, they are nothing else but Good ps. 62. 12. Jer. 32. 19.
Eccl. 12. 13, 14. Ezekiel. 18.26, etc. Ezekiel. 33.10, etc. Matt. 16.27. Matt. 25.14,
etc. Romans 2. 5, etc. 2 Cor. 5.10. Rev. 20. 12, etc.
Works. Works of Piety, and of Charity. Such Works as we have already found to
be required from us, both by the Natural and Written Law of God. The Places
that witness this Truth ar full and clear: Wherefore I refer them (with all others
that I hint at) to thy careful Perusal. And I think I may now conclude this
Point firmly established; That the performance of our Duty is the only Means
by which we cannot expect Success in the working out of our Happiness. Tho it
had hinted at this before, yet thy last Questions have made me think it needful
to repeat and fortify it.


S. And I can not but acknowledge that tho I was also in a great Measure
persuaded of it before, yet I have now received a new Satisfaction in this
clearer Conviction. But I see not yet the use you intend to make of it, in
order to the solving my foresaid Difficultys: Because those Difficultys ar
grounded even upon the very Supposition that this Doctrine is true.


F. Thou wilst quickly perceiv that Use. For this Principle, being once firmly
established, will open us an easy Passage through al manner of Obstacles. Let
us apply it to thy first Inquiry. What shall we say to all the ceremonial Outside
of Religion? I answer, That it is just of so much true Valu as it contributes
Help to lead us in a Course of Obedience to the Will of God: And no more. For
that is the only thing of Consequence unto us, and nothing is to be esteemed
further than as it has a Tendency thereunto.


S. Since you keep so strictly to that Rule, I beg leav to ask one Question, by
the by, before we proceed any further. And it is this: Whether has this
Ceremonial Outside any such real Influence upon that more substantial part of
Religion which you place in Practice, or no?


F. Yes, it has. The public Assembling of People to profess their Adoration of
a supreme Deity is an Honor absolutely du unto that Deity, and in that Respect
is it self a part of natural Religion. It is also a proper Means of preserving
that awful Sense of Reverence toward the Deity in the Minds of Men, which
mightily curbs their disorderly Inclinations, and preservs Regularity and
Moderation in their very Hearts. And further, it is a great Help to the
entertaining of Brotherly Lov amongst Neighbors, and thereby to the Setlement
and Peace and Wel-Being of Societys. These ar al essential Parts of our Duty.
And therefore an external Profession of Religion, having so great an Influence
thereupon, ought not to be slighted. But to prevent Mistake, I will ad this Word:
That, as several Circumstances, of Persons, of Time, and of Place, may require
different Methods of making this outward Profession, because one may be more
succesful in some Occasions than in others, therefore it is not to be supposed
that one and the same exact Form thereof is always necessary: But that several
Alterations may be allowed in this Ceremonial Part, according to the Exigency
of those Circumstances: And that which way soever contributes most at any time
to the main End of Religion is then to be esteemed and chosen as the most
perfect.


S. I now conceiv this well enough. And therefore I entreat you to proceed to my
Second Inquiry, which is about the more Notional Part of Religion, those
Speculative Articles of Belief which seem not proper to have any great
Influence upon our Practice.


F. To that, I say, That if those Speculations have really no Influence at al
upon our Practice, then ar they to be looked upon as mere Trifles, of no real
Valu. But if they have any Influence that way, then, as I said before, they are
to be had in more or less Consideration, according as that Influence is
stronger or weaker. The fundamental Point of al Points, without which the Heb.
11.6.
Apostle has observed there can be no such thing as Religion, is the Belief of
the Existence of a Deity, and of future Rewards and Punishments. The Influence
of this is Universal, it being adapted to the natural Facultys of al Mankind;
and especially to work upon those main Springs of Hope, and Fear, which are the
chief Movers unto Action: And therefore it is Romans 1.16, 18.
called the Power of God unto Salvation: and it is in effect the powerfullest
Engine of al others to engage Men to their Dutys. There are other Points also,
inferior indeed to this in Strength and general Usefulness, tho of a more
refined and nobler Nature; yet of great Efficacy also, where they are on the one
side judiciously inculcated, and on the other side received into Minds that are
fitly disposed; Such Points or Articles (I mean) of Belief, as Work by a
Principle of Romans 5.8. 2 Cot. 5.14. Gal. 5. 6. Ephesians. 2. 3, etc. Ephesians. 5.2, 25 1
John 4. 9 19
Love, and whose particular Foundation is in Christianity. But I judge it not
needful to branch out these general Heads into so many Subdivisions as some have
don. On the contrary, I rather blame the too great Curiosity of those Spirits,
who by such like Nicetys have rendered our plain Duty an intricate Science; and
by laying too great Stress upon Points of small Moment, have enervated the
Strength of the most substantial ones. Nevertheless I condemn not the Intention
of any Man, who, finding the Force of any such particular Topic upon his own
Mind, makes use of it to incite himself to his Duty. Let him in that freely
use his own Liberty. Only let him not offer to impose his Fancys upon other
People. For, when al is don, the true Estimate of Opinions, as well as Ceremonys,
is only to be made by their Aptitude to influence our Practice. What so ever
may be helpful to us in the Performance of our Duty is to be pursued: What
soever may be a Hindrance in that Performance ought to be avoided; and what
soever dos neither help nor hinder may be looked upon as indifferent. But, as
all Men are not equally wrought upon by the same Motives, so there may and ought
to be some Latitude allowed in this kind as well as in the other.


S. I entreat you, permit me to interpose one Word more before we quit this
Subject. The great Indifferency which you teach me to have for Doctrins that are
merely speculative, and the narrow Reduction of Things absolutely necessary to
few Heads, which you seem to aim at, an so opposite both to the common Opinion
and Practice of the most part of Christians, that I would gladly learn either
how to comport my self amongst them in those Respects without Offense, or if
possible, how to oppose them with yet more Strength. Wherefore if you judge any
thing further may be conveniently added upon that Subject, I beseech you not to
refuse me that Satisfaction.


F. Truly if thou attendest rightly to what I have said already there is little
need of adding further. But however I will do it in a few words, that may answer
both those different Ends which thou aimest at. And, first, in opposition to
those Multiplyers of speculative and abstruse Notions. Let such Men consider
that the end of Religion is to help the meanest and the ignorantest of mankind
to Salvation, as well as the richest and the learnedest. Any such Notions
therefore as pass the comprehension of the meanest Capacitys are not to be
reckoned as things whose knowledge is of absolute and indispensable necessity to
every one. Because those that fall short of that comprehension would thereby be
excluded from a possibility of Salvation: And I may ad that it is to be feared
even the subtilest of those Doctors themselves would, in some case, (...) great
hazard. If this simple Consideration will not make them more modest in their
speculations, and more reserved in broaching them, it may be justly doubted
they are wedded thereunto by some other Ty than the bare lov of the Truth. But if
they will hereupon complain of an imaginary Injury don to them, in confining
their lofty Fancys to that low rank of contemplations which occupy the vulgar,
thou may rectify their mistake by looking back to what I have already
declared unto thee, viz. that every man may make use of such speculations as he
finds really to have the most effectual power upon himself to engage him to
the performance of his Duty. Let that only be their end, and in order thereunto
let them freely exercise all the Facultys of their own Souls: the more the
better. But I must still repeat, that in matters of such abstracted Speculation
as we now speak of, no Man ought to impose upon another. One man's Opinions
ought no more to be prescribed for the entertainment of another Man's mind,
than one man's Appetiteought to be the rule of choosing food for another Man's
Stomach. Whatsoever is universally found useful by every one, either for Body
or Mind, may be determined to be universally necessary: but nothing else. At
least (I say at leaft) nothing can be determined to be universally necessary
which the far greatest part of Mankind ar utterly incapable of receiving. Oh
that we could once see an expurgatory Index of School Divinity framed upon
these Principles! How would the Peace of the World be restored and secured, by
rooting out the very ground of al contention! The work is not hard to
comprehend. These Rules ar easily applied to particular Cases. But I must leav
those general Reflections, to return to thee, and tell thee that if thou
applies^ that I have said to the desi^^ ^^ou intimated'st of learning how to
comport thy self amongst other Men of different Opinions, thou wilst perceiv
thereby that things indifferent are not worth the pains of contention, nor can
they compensate the Evils that may attend it: wherefore a prudent compliance
therein is for the most part advisable. But at the same time, nay always, thou
art bound to preserve thy own Thoughts inviolated in matters essential; and
neither to Act nor declare any thing contrary thereunto; and also not in any
wise to be an Instrument of violating that Privilege in others which thou
claimest unto thy self. The faithful observance of these Rules, this gentle and
peaceable Disposition, will (I assure thee) help much to carry thee smoothly
through the roughest Passages that (...) may happen to meet (...) in thy
Life. And this is now full enough for me to say upon that Head. The further
application thereof I refer unto thy own Sagacity.


S. What you have said, is indeed abundantly sufficient. And I will be careful
to make use of it in my own Practice, with all possible Modesty and
Jnoffensiveness. Only one Difficulty more remains, which I have already
propounded, about the Condition of those Persons who fall short of that
Performance which your preceding Rules seem to require. But that Difficulty, I
consess, seems to me very considerable, and withal something formidable. For I
am sensible of the general Defectiveness of Mankind in that respect, and
therefore dread the Consequences thereof in my own Person. If you can free me
from that Anxiety I acknowledge that my Mind will be at great Eas; and I shall
then cease from importuning you any further with such manner of Questions as
these have been.


F. Expect not that I should eas thee by any Dispensation from those Dutys
which the Law of God exacts. No: I Sam. 15, 22, Ps. 51.16.17,
With him Obedience is better than Sacrifice. And I have already sufficiently
proved that we can have no other certain Mark, but our Obedience, of our having
any Interest in the Sacrifice even of Christ himself. That therefore is the
thing that lys upon us to look after; To assure our Interest in him that way;
and then we need not doubt of our participating of those Benefits which he ^^me
to procure unto Mankind. I say then, That our Obligation to actual Obedience
is indispensible. But nevertheless I would not have thee look upon it with so
uncomfortable a Prospect as thou seem to do. For tho I will acknowledge it to
be hard, yet I must assert that it is not impossible to be performed. And that
being so, the Encouragements propounded ar abundantly sufficient to engage any
reasonable Man in the Attempt. This Argument is Copious. But I will endeavor, as
I have don hitherto, to bring al to the shortest and directest Issu that I can.
Remember then that in thy natural Researches, thou have established one of the
most essential Propertys of the supreme Deity to be Goodness. Now observe how
inconsistant it is with that Idea, to suppose him to require more from us than
he has capacitated us to perform. It Is the unjust Charge of the slothful Matt.
25. 24. etc.
Servant, that his Lord expected to reap where he had not sown; than which
nothing can be more injurious to the Divine Perfections. The Obedience therefore
that he requires must be such as is suitable to the Capacity of Humane Nature
accompanied with those Assistances which he affords it. He expects not from us
the Perfection 1. Cor. 1^. 9, etc.
of pure Intellectual Spirits, but such things as Men clothed with Flesh may
attain unto. And from every Man in particular he expects Performances
proportionable to the particular Circumstances of his Condition. This is
perfectly reasonable in it self, and it is no less perfectly established in
Scripture. Our Savior declares in many places Matt. 20. etc. Luke 10. 12, etc.
Joh. 15. 22 24.
that the Measure of Men's Transgressions should not so much be taken by the
Acts themselves, as by the measure of Light and Conviction against which they
were committed. And in one Place Luke 12. 47, 8.
he dos it in these express Words, That the Servant who knew his Lord's Will,
and prepared not himself, neither did according to his Will, should be beaten
with many Stripes: But that he who knew it not, and did commit things worthy of
Stripes, should be beaten but with few. For he ads unto whomsoever much is
given, of him shall be much required. Thus therefore it is evident that the Dutys
required from us bear a Romans 12. 3, etc. Ephesians. 4. 7. etc.
Proportion to the Knowledge, and Strength, and Opportunity, or (in a word) to
the Capacity given us. So that they are not absolute Impossibilitys, and
therefore neither ought we to be dejected with despair of their Atchievment.


S. I can not well answer either your Argument or your Proof. But nevertheless I
find in effect, by Experience, that al Mankind fall much short of Perfection.
And therefore this seeming Appearance of it in Theory dos not yet free me from
those Anxietys which arise from its manifest and real Defect.


F. Have Patience a little. We shall quickly com to a better understanding of
the thing. Thou allowest my Proof to be good, that the Perfection required from
us is attainable; but yet thou affirmest that in effect it is never attained.
These things ar inconsistant one with another. Let us inquire therefore whether
there be not some Mistake in thy Notion of Perfection. For probably it is in
this as in other Debates, that the Knot lys only in the right Explication of
some Term. Our Wranglings ar ordinarily more about Words than Things, and most
Men would be of the very same Mind, if they did but once rightly understand
one another. This Mistake of thine (for such. I presume it to be) I had
designed to obviate, by telling thee already that the Obedience required from
us is such as is suitable to the Capacity of Humane Nature. Now I desire thee
to observe that if thou look for such a Degree of Perfection in that
Obedience as is absolutely abov that Capacity, thou art in a manifest Error:
For that can not be the Degree that is required from us. Let us see then what
it is. The Expressions truly ar very comprehensive and strong: viz. That we
must be Holy, Pure, and Perfect, as our Father who is in Heaven is Perfect.
Well, what can this signify? The absolute Perfection of God is certainly not
attainable by such Creatures as we are. Wherefore the Sense of that, and al such
like Commands, must needs be, that as the Nature and Essence of God is placed
in the highest Degree of al Perfection, so We should tend to the highest Degree
of that Perfection which our Natures ar capable of; and that we should
faithfully improve the Talents that are put into our Hands, the Opportunitys and
Advantages that are offered us, to that purpose. This, I say, is possitively
required of us, and less than this will not serve the Trun.


S. I beg your excuse that I cannot yet yield a full assent to what you drive
at, until you pleas to explain more particularly to me what is that very degree
of perfection which you say our Natures ar capable of, that so I may examine
whether in effect it be ever attained or no.


F. Thou do well: and I will endeavor to satisfy thee. Remember then that it is
not the Perfection of God, nor of Angels, but of Men: and that neither is it
the same Degree of Perfection in each individual Man, but different according
to Men's different capacitys. In a word, it is not 1 King. 8. 46. Eccl. 7. 20.
1 John 1. 8. 10. Jam. 3. 2.
Impeccability, but 1 Cor. 5.8. Tit. 2. 7.
Sincerity. And now I will further show thee what this Sincerity means; and that
it is the very thing required of us; as also that it is attainable; and that it
has been attained. After which I advise thee to dispute no longer about it, but
to apply they self to practice, and let the effects thereof shine forth in thy
life. Sincerity is nothing else but an Honest, Upright, Hearty, and constant
application of Mind, accompanied with the same faithful exertion of al
possible endeavors, to do the thing required. It Is the doing of all that possibly
can be don, and not more. That this is required appears from God's demanding
the whole Deuteronomy. 10. 12. Matt. 22. ^7.
Heart, and declaring the Matt. 6. 2^. Luke. 16. 13.
inconsistancy of his service with that of the World: I say this shows that he
requires the utmost exercise of al our Powers in the obeying of his
Commandments. And where the Heart is thus sincere and upright, the Intention
honest, and the Mind willing, I do not say that the will is taken, for the
deed, but I affirm that the Deed is accepted according to the Measure of the
Capacity, Cor. 8. 12.
according to that a Man bath, and not according to that be bath not. And hence
it is that in. Scripture a willing 1 Chronicles. 29.9.
Heart is frequently styled a perfect Heart. And the Apostle Paul Phil. 3. 12
15.
in the same place where he acknowledges that he had not really attained to
Perfection, but was only pressing forwards toward it, nevertheless accounts
himself amongst the number of those that are perfect: undoubtedly, because his
endeavors were sincere and constant. Now that this sort of Perfection is
attainable is evident in it self, beyond any Proof that can be made of it. For
it is nothing else but doing all that ever a Man can do. And surely no Man is so
absurd as to deny the possibility of his doing what he can do. But here it will
be good to subjoin, that this notion of doing al a Man can do is not a
palliation for gross and frequent miscarriages. On the contrary, it is an
absolute obligation to overcom them. For there is no Man but by a constant
watchfulness may be so far Master of his own actions as not to fall frequently
into the same known fault. Let us consider it in a familiar example. What so
common as Swearing? Now can it be doubted but any habitual Swearer may, with a
strong Resolution and diligent Care, retain himself one quarter of an Hour from
that Sin? Surely it can not. But if a quarter of an Hour, why not then half an
Hour why not an Hour, a Day, a Week, a Month, a Year? The same Care will still
produce the same Effect. And not only so, but the Work will be more easy in the
End than in the Beginning. For the strength of the Habit, which in the Beginning
swayd powersully toward Vice, and made the first Resistance difficult, will in
the End help as effectually toward the Work of Reformation, and make the
Conquest easy. Then will be experienced the Truth of those Sayings. That the
Commandments of Christ are not I John 5.3.
grievous, but that his Matt.11. 30.
Yoke is easy and his Burden light. And what I say on this particular Instance
of Swearing will hold in all other known Transgresfions. Resolution and
Watchfulness will overcom them. He that makes it as much his Business to reform
his Life as another dos to learn some Trade, or Art, will succeed as effectually
in that Design as the other in this. The one may fail now and then: But in the
main he practices his Art exactly, and is therefore reputed a perfect Master.
And so the other, tho he be not exempt from al possibility of Miscarriage, yet
he can not choose but attain to such a Conquest over Sin, as that it shall have
no longer any Rom, 6.12.
Rule over him, and to such a general and habitual Practice of Virtue as may
truly denominate him a righteous Person. And doing so, that Man may have
Comfort; for the Scripture is most evidently clear that his Prove. 28. 13. Is.
1.16, etc. Is. 55. 7. Ez. 3.18, etc. Ez. 18. Ez. 33, Romans 2. 7.
former Transgressions shall be no longer imputed unto him, but that by
Perseverance in an habitual Course of well-doing he shall save his Soul. Thus
then, I say, this Perfection is attainable; and with it, Happiness. The
Importance is, That we apply our selves heartily to the Work: For where such
Application is real, it fails not to be effectual. In the last Place, I have
promised to show thee that this sort of Perfection, I say, perfect Sincerity,
has in effect been attained: And for that I here give thee a List 2Kin. 20.3.
Neh. 13. 14. 22. Job 27.5, 6. Job 31. 6. Psalm. 7. 8. Psalm. 26. Is. 38. 3. 2
Cor. 1. 12. Luke 1. 6.
of diverse Persons who ar recorded to have thereby experienced both Comfort and
Assurance in their Condition. I will ad no more. But to conclude, because of the
Importance of the Matter, I refer thee, for the removal of al other Doubts upon
it, unto that honest and plain, yet excellent, Discourse of the Reverend Dr.
Tillotson's upon 1 John 3. 10. (In this the Children of God ar manifest, and
the Children of the Devil: Whosoever does not Righteousness is not of God.)
which single Sermon of his will teach thee more solid and useful Religion than
many Volumes of notional and disputative Authors.


S. I can not but now acknowledge that this Scheme you have given me of
Christian Religion is so plain and intelligible in all its Parts, so suited to
the Facultys of Humane Nature, and so agreeable to the revealed Will of God in
Scripture, that I am constrained to acquiesce in every thing you have said. And
the great Clearness that I now perceiv therein makes me astonished at the
Perverseness of those Men, Who, rather than follow the Guidance of this Light,
and walk in that Even Path which it discovers unto them, choose to throw
themselves into intricate and obscure Labyrinths, where they have no Assistance
in their Conduct but from the faint and uncertain Glances of dark or dazeling
Misterys; or, to use a Scripture Metaphor, who Jer. ^. 13
forsake the Fountain of Living Waters, and hew out unto themselves Cisterns,
broken Cisterns, that can hold no Water.


F. Thy Astonishment is not without Cause. Yet the Reason of this Miscarriage
may be easily perceived. Interest in the Guides or Governors, and Ignorance in
the general Herd of Men, contribute much unto it. But our Savior himself has
shown us the great Reason thereof, in telling us that Job. 3.19.
Men lov Darkness rather than Light, because their Deeds ar Evil. They are
conscious to themselves of the Evil of their Doings, and ar loath to be at the
Pains of reforming: And therefore they endeavor to frame unto themselves such a
System of Religion as they fancy may save them in their Sins, rather than from
their Sins. This is the great Obstacle to the Advancement of Truth, that they 2
These. 2. 30, etc.
receiv not the Lov of it, but have Pleasure in Unrighteousness. But without
troubling our selves further in searching out the Occasion of these Men's
Miscarriage, I again exhort thee, unto whom this true Light now shines, that
thou make it thy special Care to Romans 13. 12. Ephesians. 5. 11.
cast off the unfruitful Works of Darkness, and to let Matt. 5. 16.
thy Light so shine before Men that they may see thy good Works, and glorisy
the Father who is in Heaven. That will be a far more effectual way of convincing
them, than all that I have said has been to convince thee.


S. I thankfully receiv your Admonition, and resolv now to cease al useless
Inquisitiveness, and by the Grace of God, to apply my self so diligently to the
Regulation of my Life by these Rules, that I may in the end be made Partaker of
that Happiness which attends the Observance of them; and that you may, in the
mean time, receiv the Comfort to see that your Labor has not been bestowed upon
me in vain.


F. The good God, I beseech him, strengthen thy honest Resolutions, and crown
them with a suitable Success. To facilitate thy Work, I will sum up al in a few
Words, and then leav thee to his Blessing. Thou have learnt that the Substance
of true Religion consists neither in Ceremonys nor Notions, but in Sincerity and
Practice. It lys not in outward Romans 2. 25. 29. Gal. 6. 15.
Profession and Show; not in Heb. 9. 10.
Meats and Drinks, and other carnal Ordinances; not in Is. I. II, etc.
Sacrifices, tho even of God's own Appointment; not in Jam. 2. 14.
Faith; nay not in I Cor. 13. 2, etc.
Gifts, how excellent soever; nor even in the knowledge of deepest Misterys.
These things indeed ar Means and Instruments. But the End of al is Romans 14. 17.
Righteousness, and the Effect thereof is Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost. What
God requires at our Hands, toward himself, is That we adore him in John 4.23,
24.
Spirit and in Truth. What he requires of us toward our Neighbors, is I Cor.
13. I, etc. 2 Pet. I. 7.
Brotherly-Kindness and Charity. St. James explains this last Branch, in
telling us, that Jam. I. 27.
pure Religion and undefiled before God the Father, consists in visiting the
Fatherless and Widows in their Affliction, and in keeping our selves unspotted
from the World: And the Prophet Micah comprehends both Branches, in requiring
us, To do Mic. 6. 8.
justly, to lov Merty, and to walk humbly with our God. These then ar the
Eternal and indispensable Laws of God to Mankind. The Gospel of Jesus Christ
is so far from dispensing therwithal, that its great Design is to enforce them
more strongly, and to bind us thereunto more firmly than either the Law of
Nature, or the Law of Moses had don before. It teaches us that to fear Act.
10/35. Romans 14 18.
God, and to work Righteousness, ar the means to procure Acceptance with him,
and to secure our I Pot. 3. 11 etc. Mitt. 10. ^2 2 Timothy ^^. ^.
Happiness both here and hereafter: Wherefore amuse not thy self about useless 1 Timothy ^^.5.
Questions, and verbal Controversys, avoid 1 Timothy ^
profane and v^in Bablings, and Opposition of Science, falsely so called: For
thereof com 1 Timothy 6 4. 5.
Envy, Strife, Railings, evil Surmisings, perverse Disputations,
Uncharitableness, and al manner of Evil. But study thou the Tit. 2. 1, etc.
things which become sound Doctrine, to know thy Duty in all Occasions, and to do
it. Be careful to Tit. 3. 8.
maintain good Works: Be 1 Timothy 6. 18.
rich therein: Make thy self a 1 Timothy 6. 19.
Store thereof against the Time to come, for they will enable thee to lay hold on
Eternal Life: Exercise 1 Timothy 4. 7, 8.
thy self continually unto Godliness, for that has the Promiss both of the
Life that now is, and of that which is to com. Now that thou may always
remember these Instructions, that they may not Prove. 4. 21.
depart from thine Eyes, but be deeply engraven even Prove. 3. 3.
upon the Table of thy Heart (because indeed they will be Prove. 3. 8.
Health to thy Navel, and marrow to thy Bones) I will seal them up with the
Words of aged David; and as he to his Son Solomon, so I advise thee, my Son, 1 Chronicles. 28. 9
Know thou the God of thy Father, and serve him with a perfect Heart, and with
a willing Mind: For the Lord searches al Hearts, and understands all the
Imaginations of the Thoughts: If thou seek him he will be found of thee, but if
thou forsake him he will cast thee off for ever.


THE END.
Advice to a Son.
My Dear and only Son,
Now that thy infant Years ar don,
Al childish Toys at once giv over.
To manly Thoughts thy Mind prepare.
Receiv these Marks of my paternal Care;
And lend both Ear and Heart unto my Lore.
A Father's Lore no less requires.
It Is Lov, pure Lov, that it inspires,
Lov without Mixture of base Ends,
Lov that from Heaven proceeds, and thither tends.
Be Wife.
All that ever Mortals prize;
Honor Pleasure,
Power, Treasure;
Ar often obtained,
Oftener disdained;
But still, with or without them, Happiness is gained
By what that Syllableimplys.
Wisdom! Ocomprehensive Theme!
Who can fathom, who can teach,
How far Wisdom's Power does reach?
He that attempts to draw that Scheme
Must soar full high, full deep must pierce,
Must lustrate all the Universe.
Wisdom through each part dos dispense
A constant vigorous Influence.
To meanest Works she gently bends,
To highest nobly she ascends,
And unto al her self extends.
Her Voice Divine, of Laws the best,
Secretly penetrateseach Breast:
Is felt more easily than expressed;
And known to him that silently attends.
Hail glorious Fountain of Eternal Light!
Thy great Idea grows too bright.
Either increase and strengthen my weak Sight,
Or check my too adventurous Flight.
Teach Me, that I may teach thy Ways,
In humble, modest Lays,
Conceived with eas, and easily understood;
Do thou reduce
My wandering Thoughts to use;
And teach that to be Wife is to be Good.
Blessed Conjunction, happy Band,
Wisdom and Virtue hand in hand!
Blessed Soul that yields to their supreme Command!
By mutual Helps they guide us as we go:
The first Step is to know, the next to do.
And the search of Knowledge too, from thence
We learn this useful Inference;
That tho She various Objects may present,
Some for Delight, and some for Ornament;
To each of which, our studious Minds to cheer,
Some Moments may be fitly given;
Yet none deserves our Soul's main bent,
Nor wholly clears from Guilt of Time misspent,
But what directs our Practice here,
And leads to Heaven.
It Is in Religion's School we learn that Skill:
Not human Schools, which al with Noys do fill.
Deep Truth, like Rivers deep, runs smooth and still.
Religion, Sov'rain Mistress of Man's Life,
Is in those Schools so rudely tossed,
The Bond of Peace becoms the Bal of Strife,
And often is in the Hurry lost.
The Learned, forsooth, in Notions so delight,
That for mere Notions they contend and fight;
Notions confessed so high that they escape our Sight.
Whilst Vulgar Souls, alas, to Earth deprest
In Shows of Pageantry take up their rest,
And only for Corporeal Rites contest.
Thus most pursu an empty Name,
A Fantom which themselves do frame;
( Solia Religion few discover:)
And therefore, erring in their Aim,
Must needs shoot short or over.
Religion ne'ertheless subsists.
Nay She in obvious Truth consists.
'Tiswethat her involv, then seek, in Mists.
Hence al Chimeras vain,
The vap'rous Products of a heated Brain.
Her Seat in in the Heart.
Hence al adult'rate Dress of Art.
Her native Beauty shines through every part;
And al her Paths ar straight, her Precepts plain.
Her School stands open. Hark! She bids us look,
Whilst She unfolds her Double Book,
God's Word, and Nature's Law.
"These Two (says She) al Truth contain,
"And Each the Other best explain.
"Who reads but One may false Conclusions draw,
"But who compares them Both never misses in the main.
"You that willearn (again Shecrys)
"Reflect on your short possibilitys;
"And frame not Projects vain above the Skys.
"Your several Relationsview;
"And render, as you can, to each its due.
"Do not so much aspire
"At Speculations high'r,
"As unto what you know still to be true.
"For I no Task abov your Force require;
"And Knowledge best by Practice will accru,
"To God pay pure and humble Adoration.
"To Man bear Universal Lov.
"Let Reason in each Breast rule every Passion,
"Al Dutys on these Hinges move.
"Meditate on their Use, and it improve.
"The Opposite to these is Sin;
"Ore which a Victory sure to win,
"Consult, believ, obey your God within,
She said. And I, my Son, will ad no more.
These Truths ar pregnant. Fill thy Store;
Then Til, then sow thy Ground. Blow thine own Spark;
And sit not sleeping in the Dark.
Be bold; but cautious. On, with docil Mind,
And with Integrity of Breast.
In following her Instructions thou shalst find,
Or safely may ignore, the rest.
THE END.
ERRATA.
PAge 5. line 1. for this, read his, p. 1^. 1. 8. f. shra, r. rash. p. 32. 1.
7. f. Orra there, r. Or rather. p. 83. 1. 20. f. Records these, r. Records of
those. p. 7^, f. k Pet. 1. 15. r. k 1 Pet. 1. 15.


