THE Pope's Advice TO HIS SONS.

A Conference IN THE Castle St. Angelo, Between the Pope, the Emperor, and the
King of Spain.

Printed from an Ancient Manuscript.

LONDON, Printed for J. S. near the Grate in Little Britain. 1679.

The Consult.
Pope, Emperor, King of Spain. Pope. Welcome, dear Sons, unto our Court of Rome,
Blessing Apostolic and Holy Doom
Shield all the House of Austria from mischance,
And both their Fortunes and their Crowns advance.

Emperor. Thy Foot, most Holy Father, do I kiss,
Of Churches Benediction do I miss;
Th'Emperial Crown from Austria will be gone,
Which Heavens forbid; for then we are all undone.
Bohemia's Rebels with Hungaria join;
The Heretics from Danube to the Rhine,
Their Heads, their Arms, their Forces they combine,
Against Rome and Austria. Oh, the Frederick Prince Elector Palatine of the
Rhine, Father to Prince Rupert, whose elder Brother is now Prince Elector
Palatine.
Palatine!
That cursed Calvinist, with his Partakers,
Those damned Schismatics, the Church forsakers,
Upon our Ruins to build their Fortunes seek,
Which makes me thus before thy Holiness speak.

Pope. The Keys of Peter, and the Sword of Paul,
Shall shut and open, cur in pieces, all
The Gates of Heaven, Nations, Laws, and Rights,
And turn clear Days into the darkest Nights,
E're one of Calvin's or of Luther's Sect
With Roman Bays or Eagles shall be decked.

Emperor. The Threats and Curses of the Catholics
Are now despised by those vile Heretics:
Help us by your Counsel therefore, Holy Sir,
And show us means to quiet all this stir.

Pope. Thou may by Reasons and Embassages,
By Questions, Answers, and like passages,
Win time awhile: But these are our of date;
Now Swords, not Words, do Kingdoms arbitrate.
To Neighbor Friends and Subjects quickly send,
That from Surprise thou may thy self defend.
My Nuntio's and my Legates I Would dispatch,
More Forces amongst the Catholics to hatch:
Mentz, Cullen, Triers, Catholic Bavier,
Have thou in Germany, with others there;
Thy Uncle Albert, and the Polish King,
Unto thee quickly may their Forces bring;
And though my self, with Florence, may not send
Our Arms so soon, yet Money will we lend.
The Cantons of the Switzers shall be waged,
Which to our See do hold themselves engaged:
So is the Saxon Duke with his Estate,
To thee in Dresden, and the Electorate,
Whose elder Cousin's Hopes will make him fear,
And to thy Fortune and thy House adhere.
I Will also send to Savoy and to Venice,
To France our eldest Son, and to S. Denis: The King of France is styled by the
Pope his eldest Son, and most Christian, and the King of Spain his most
Catholic Son.

I Will fetch the Saints from Heaven, the Fiends from Hell,
But I Will these drunken German Rebels quell.
Besides, thy Spanish Cousin present here,
Whom Europe and the newfound World do fear,
The Church's Atlas, and the Empire's Prop.
By Strength, by Wit, by Friends, or Gold, we'll stop
These proud Attempts and Darings of the Dutch,
And break their Forces, cost it never so much.

King of Spain. If Caesar and your Holiness have done,
Observe the Answer of your Spanish Son.
Not German Prelates nor Bavarians can,
Nor King of Pole, your self, or any Man,
Nor Tuscan's Duke, nor Albert my poor Brother,
The Canton Catholics, nor any other,
Bring timely Succors against the Conjurations
These Almain-Graves have made throughout all Nations.
Expect not help from Savoy or Venetia.
Who fear and deadly hate the House of Austria:
I look for nothing from the King of France,
For he would gladly by our Fall his Throne advance.
And why should you from Saxon hope for more,
Than Charles my Grandsire reaped from him before?
Who gave him all, and more than you do mention,
Yet shortly after in the great Contention
'Twixt him and German Rebels he forsook
His Benefactor, and part against him took.
And, Caesar, if at home thou lookst for Aid,
Thy Kingdoms both are lost, thy Strength decayed;
Thine Austrian Subjects also are infected
With Luther's Heresy, and have rejected
The Papal Dignity, and may do thine,
And with their Fellow Lutherans combine.
Spain, then must help, or what will Caesar do?
And how shall Spain help Rome and Caesar too?
Shall Indian Armies be recalled from thence?
Italian Forces march away from hence?
Leave Milan, Naples, and our Silver Fountains,
Unguarded, naked, to march over Mountains?
Through Grison's Country lead the strength of Spain?
In 1588. the Spaniards invaded England with an Armada of 134 Ships, of which
only 53 returned home again.
Or venture our Armada once again
To Narrow Seas, and so at once lose more
Than we have got in six score years before?
So thou at Habspurg, I in Arragon,
May shave our Crowns, turn Monks, and live alone.
You count your Friends, but count not all your Foes,
Whose Strength, whose Number, you cannot oppose.
The Northern Tract of Europe from Britannia
Protestants not inferior (if united) in strength to the Papists.
Tending to East as far as Transylvania
(Save Poland and some trifles) is their own:
Oh me! in fourscore years how are they grown?
Three Kingdoms, England, Scotland, Ireland, be,
With Denmark, Norway, Sweden, six you see;
Besides those two which they have won from thee,
Being eight in all, and our Kings are but three.
The Number of their Princes, Dukes, and Counts,
With their Free Lords and States, ours far surmounts.
And as their Number, so their Spirits are
Made great with hopes of the prodigious Star, This Comet appeared as far above
the Moon, as the Moon is above the Earth, as was observed by the Learned Dr.
Bembridge.

Which over Almain blazed December last,
The dire Portents of which they on us cast.
Alas for Rome! alas for Ferdinand!
Alas for Philip! Must he needs withstand
His own, the Empire, and the Church's Foes,
And so himself, the Church, and Empire lose?
Have all my Ancestors to five descents,
By Conquest, Wedlock, and like Ligaments,
Tied Earldoms, Dukedoms, Crowns, and Empire fast,
And is the Period of our Greatness past?
And our Declining now begins to have,
Who hoped for Western Monarchy at last.
Ah William of Nassau Prince of Orange, Ancestor to the ^^asent Prince.
Nassau! Nassau! hateful Son and Father,
Cursed be your Name and House; you, you did gather
The Fearful Rebels into warlike Bands,
Which now do State it in the Netherlands:
There, there you writ Nil Vltra once again,
And set up Eastern Pillars, Bars to Spain.

Emperor. Thus are our Dangers, thus our Fears related,
Thus be our Minds perplexed, our Hearts amated.
If Rome have any secret wisdom hid.
Laid up for evil times, or ever did
Make wicked Heretics seel Church's Power,
Then Father now is the time, and this the hour:
Remember how two Fredericks heretofore
Frighted thy Predecessors: this may more.
Hazard thy Fortunes, utterly oppress
The Roman Church, thy Self, and Us, unless
By some prime Stratagem fetched from the Deep,
Thou do thy Self and Friends from danger keep.

Pope. And are our Friends so few and so untrusty,
And be our Foes so many and so lusty?
One Innocent in Rome in former Ages
Has used three Kings for Lacqueys and for Pages:
And dare they now against our liking make
Both Kings and Caesar's? Then ye Furies wake!
Help me to store of Pistols, Poisons, Knives,
To Fire and Powder, Manacles and Gives:
Bid Raviliac murdered Henry III. and Clement Henry IV. of France. Lopez was
executed for attempting to poison Qu. Elizabeth. And Faux and Garnet (the
Provincial of the Jesuits) were the chief Actors in the Powder Plot. Ignatians,
Jesuits so called from Ignatius Loyola their first Founder.
Ravilac and Clement hie them hither,
Let Lopez, Faux, and Garnet come together;
Come ye Ignatiuns, bring Assissinates,
Left Handed Eliuds, that do rule the Fates,
And cut the Threads of Princes Lives asunder;
These Roman Scevola's shall make men wonder,
To see the upstart King, with his Partakers,
In every Nation slaughtered by Massacries.
I Will raise up Parsons, Parsons wrote a Book against King James 's Succession
to the Crown of England in behalf of the Infanta of Spain.
Suarez, Bellarmine,
Loyola's self, their Father, and refine
All Humane Wit to one pure Quintescence,
Against whose Virtue shall be no defense:
Therefore, Fair Sons, at nothing be dismayed,
Remember what your Father now has said:
You to Vienna, you to Sivil go,
Help as you may to give the Fatal Blow.

King of Spain. Come, Lerma, look not sadly on thy Friend,
But let us with Spanish Patience wait the end.

Pope and Cardinal. Cardinal. Father, what news with Caesar, what with Spain?
Why are they both so soon gone home again?
What strange Disaster makes thee look so sad,
Whose Fair Aspect was wont to make men glad?

Pope. Thou art my Son, my Friend, my Cabinet
Of Secrets locked from others: Thou I Will let
Know all my hidden Thoughts, my Doubts, my Fears,
And how these Austrians left me drowned in tears:
Yet in their presence I my Sorrow hid,
Seemed fearless, careless, confident, and bid
Them second Roman Wisdom with their Strength,
And they should see these Dutchmen bleed at length.
But now a thousand thoughts upon me seize
Concerning Friends and Foes, which much displease:
Wherefore say some thing prithee to relieve me,
For thou were wont to help when ought did grieve me.

Cardinal. It Is not for King nor Caesar thou art sick;
Thou dread'st the Name of Emperor; Spain's a Prick
In both thy sides, whose Neighborhood and Growth
Rome ever hated: Why then art thou loath
The Dutch should pare their Nails unto the quick,
Ever they be longer grown, and then do kick
At thy Authority, like Charles their Father,
Who like the Heathen Goths sacked Rome? Nay rather,
If France again claim Naples, seize on Milain,
Or on Navar. Let me me be held a Villain,
If I see cause of shedding but a Tear
For weak'ning him, whose Strength so much we fear.
But thus the Faction of more feared Foes
(Thou Wilt say) is stronger, and more dreadful grows;
And Bohemians and Hungarians Losses
Make open way to further nearer Crosses;
First to the Iron, then to the Triple Crown,
And so we hazard all if Fortune frown.
As though Bohemian's King were like the Day Star,
Forerunning Phoebus, and must needs be Caesar:
Or that from Prague or Hidelburg he will
Adventure over the Alps to us, and fill
The World with Tumult: Italy will fear
To see his Lance-Knights or his Reysters here.
These are Chimera's, Bugbears, Fancies, Toys,
Fit to fright Absaloms or some little Boys;
Not wise Italians, Cardinals, or Popes,
Who know that Towns are not pulled down with Ropes.
Think you the Palsgrave, or this Prince of Dacia claiming the Hungarian Crown,
and commanding a puissant Army against the Emperor.
Bethlem Gabor,
Will not account their Wages worth their Labor,
If he Bohemia, this Hungaria keep,
And in their new Possessions safely sleep?
Is It like they will adventure all their Winnings,
T'aspire the Empire on so small beginnings?
Or if they should, when Ferdinand is dead,
Set the Imperial Crown on Frederick's Head,
Another Adolph he were like to be,
When Error in their Choice the Electors see:
For who shall guard their Frontiers against the Turks
But Austria, whose they are? What danger lurks
Under the Greatness of this Transylvanian.
Who to the Turk's a Friend and a Companion?
The Heretics themselves would see their Error,
When once the Heat were past, and that new terror
From Turks and Catholics had hemmed them round,
And then to our advantage they would compound.
But say the Turks be still, and we endure
To see the Palsgrave triumph, seated sure
In Caesar's Chair, can any one suppose
That he is not yet contented with our Woes?
Or that he will elevate his thoughts so high,
To think on Rome, or look toward Italy?
Why, 'twere a harder task to undertake,
Than Caius Julius Caesar's self did make,
When over the other Alps from France he came
Against Rome and Pompey, to his lasting Fame.
Yet let us admit this Youth dares more than he,
Or like Macedon's Alexander be,
Must his Success he like? why nothing less;
For one may dare that is dying, you will confess:
The Romans then were most of Caesar's Faction,
He had their Heads for Counsel, Hands for Action:
But Frederick now has neither Head nor Hand
'Twixt Trent and Rheggium on his part to stand.
And if the modern Action of the Gauls
(The Old being fearless) now thy Heart appales;
To think how Charles of Valois came like Thunder,
Brought Milan, Naples, Genoua, Florence under
Within few months: Or how another Charles
Of Bourbon did besiege, and (after Parles)
Assaulted, won, and sacked this famous City,
Whose Soldiers to the Clergy showed no pity.
Alas thou know Valesius was invited
By Lod'wick's Force, when he was disunited
From Naples, for usurping Milan's Crown,
And so the State of Italy went down.
And as for Bourbon, 'twas a Civil War
He managed here at home, came not from far;
Who to relieve his own and Soldier's need,
To unprovided Rome he runs with speed.
Our Land is now united, rich, and strong,
Who can, who dares to do us any wrong? Porsenna a King of Hetruria, who
besieged Rome on Tarquin 's quarrel. Mutius Scaevola, a Nobleman of Rome, went
into Porsenna 's Camp in the habit of a Beggar, with an intent to kill him.

And if Porsenna could revive once more,
We'd have a Mutius Scaevola in store.
Thus is the Falsehood of thy Fears detected,
And I have answered all can be objected,
Not from the Promises to Peter's Chair,
(Which we in secret count not worth an hair)
But from sound Reasons whereon we may rest,
And at the Folly of our Foes may jest:
Wherefore put on the Spirit of This Hildebrand made the Emperor Henry IV.
wait before his Palace barefooted without any food, from morning till night,
before he would admit him into his Presence.
Hildebrand,
And neither King nor Prince can thee withstand.

Pope. Ah my dear Heart, thy words are passing sweet,
And do with all my Fears and Sorrows meet.
But things themselves another way present
Unto my Fancy; nothing will content.
Chiefly in the Night, when others are at rest,
Why then my Cares abound, my Heart's oppressed;
A little sleep alas mine Eyes do take,
Yet when they do, I Am worse than when I wake;
For then I dream of Emperors, Princes, Kings,
Of Sword, of Fire, and such like fearful things:
A Frederick, Henry, or a Charles does stand
Ready to strike me with a Sword in's Hand.
Sometimes methinks I see the Northern Nations
Come down the Mountains like to Inundations,
As did the Goths and Vandals in their times,
Who marred our Language with their buzzing Rimes.
Sometimes this Frederick shows a Printed Book
To all his Lords and Princes, bids them look
How therein Britain James his Learned Father
Choice Arguments and Strains of Wit does gather
To prove me Antichrist, and to incite
European Princes against me for to fight.
The Belgicks talk much of the Inquisition;
The French methinks I hear make repetition
Of the Massacre: The Papists made use of the Marriage of the King of Navar a
Protestant, and the Lady Margaret the French King's Sister, to draw the
Protestant Nobility together, under the pretense of settling by this Match a
lasting Friendship, and then most barbarously and treacherously murdered them
on S. Bartholomew 's Eve, 1573.
Both do whet their Swords,
And speak against Rome and me most cruel words.
I see methinks the English reading still
Of Fox and Brightman, which their Minds do fill
With much desire and certain expectation
Of my Destruction and Rome's Desolation.
And then methinks from Venice comes a Post,
And he brings News that all will there be lost.
Another comes and says that Ferdinand
Cries out for help, and can no longer stand,
Unless expected Aid come in with speed,
And with delays no longer him they feed.
And then methinks the Agents thither sent
Excuse their Masters by Impediment:
Spain says, the ways by Sea and Land are blocked;
The Youngling France is by his Subjects mocked.
Albertus dares not stir from home, he says;
The Pole methinks answers with Yeas and Nays.
The German Catholics begin to wrangle,
And say, these Wars in mischief them entangle.
And when at last with much ado I find
Some high resolved Spirit of This Gerard murdered the Prince of Orange at
Delph, 1584.
Gerara's mind;
Yet then his Knife's not sharp, or Powder dry,
Or else he struck too low, or shot too high.
Or else like Scaevola mistook the Man,
And so our I abour's lost do what we can.
I cast Romes Fortune, and mine own on thee;
Save Rome then, if thou can, and pity me.

Cardinal. If Dreams for them, and Reasons make for us,
These Controversies quickly we'll discuss.

FINIS.
THere is newly Printed a Vade Mecum, or Necessary Companion; containing, 1.
Sir Samuel Morland's Perpetual Almanac, in Copper Plates, with many useful
Tables proper thereto. 2. The Computation of Years, comparing the Years of each
King's Reign from the Conquest with the Years of Christ. 3 Reduction of Weights
and Measures. 4. The ready Casting up any number of Farthings, Halfpence,
Pence, Shillings, Nobles and Marks; with Sir Samuel Morland's New Table for
Guinneys. 5. The Interest and Rebate of Money, the Forbearance, Discomp^, and
Purchase of Annuitices, at 6 per Cent. The Rates of Post-Letters, both inland
and Outland, with the Time for sending or receiving them; also the Post-Stages.
7. The Rates or Fares of Coach-men, Car-men, and Watermen. And is sold by R.
Northcot, Bookseller, either next St. Peter 's Alley in Cornhill, or at the
Anchor and Mariner on Fish Street-Hill; and by Charles Blount, Bookseller, at
the Black-Raven in the Strand, near the Savoy 1679. Price bound 1 s. 6 d.


