POPERY AND TYRANNY: OR, THE Present State OF FRANCE: In relation to Its
Government, Trade, Manners of the People, and Nature of the Country.

As it was sent in a Letter from an English Gentleman abroad, to his Friend in
England.

Wherein may be seen the Tyranny the Subjects of France are under, being
Enslaved by the two greatest Enemies to Reason, as well as to Christian or
Humane Liberty, I mean Popery and Arbitrary Power.

Tunc tua res agitur Paries cum proximus ardet.

London, Printed in the Year 1679.

SIR,
HAving received from you so good and so large an Account of your Affairs at
home, with the great Fears you are in, I thought it some small Retribution to
give you some little Account of the Government here, and some little
Observations I have been able to make since I came hither, which may something
inform you both of the Manner the Subjects of France live in, and the Strength
of the French King, in case of any Design upon us.

Concerning the Government.
As to the Government of France; It is an Absolute Monarchy, imposed upon the
People by a standing, illegal, and oppressive Army. It is the Corruption of a
Monarchy from the best tempered one (before the Use of States of France was
laid aside) to the double Tyranny of Popery and Arbitrary Power. Here you will
find that Government in its Perfection, being supported by all the Machiavilian
tricks of a corrupt Policy, and suffered by a People, who having first
submitted the freest part of them to the slavery of Popery, are easily brought
to submit the other to the Yoke of Oppression.

Here the Prince is now only upon the Defensive part, only to keep what he has
got, which he has brought about now to be no very hard Task, having instilled
into the People so great a Vanity of Conquering abroad, that they are prouder
of having their King take a Town, than of possessing any thing as their own,
without being subject to the Griping hand of an Arbitrary Publican. I must
confess, it has wrought so much with me, that it has made me, as often as I
meditate upon the Afflictions of my Neighbors here, thank the Almighty, as
much for having placed me under so good a Prince, and so good a Government, (as
that of England) as for my daily Sustenance: And really, Sir, it is only to be
attributed to the goodness of Almighty God, and the Excellency of his Majesty's
Temper, that we are not under as great Misfortunes as our Neighbors, having
not wanted Ambitious and Ill men among our selves, who had they not been
discovered, and curbed by some Noble Patriots, as well as discountenanced, and
removed by his Majesty, from his Person and Councels, might too soon have
effected their wicked Designs.

You must excuse me, Sir, if I have made such a Digression, it being in a thing
so much concerns Me, and all of us; but fearing to trouble you with my thoughts
of things, you (being upon the place) can best see into: I shall return to what
I have promised, viz. Something of the present Government of France; or the
manner of proceeding, after Tyranny and Arbitrary Power is come to be the
settled Government, under an Active Popish Prince.

The Government of France is to considered, either in relation to its Subjects
or Foreign Interest. As to the Subjects, the present state is this: The
Nobility of all sorts are very much Oppressed, and their Interests are to be
broken, and rendered absolutely dependent upon the Crown by these Means:

1. No Favorite suffered to form a Faction, or oblige Dependents, Affairs
being Managed by three Upstarts, only Assistants to the Prince, who Acts, and
Determines all himself: and thus the Nobility and Gentry are totally laid aside
as to the Administration of Government.

2. As to Council, they are rarely and with great Caution made Use of; and that
only upon extraordinary Occasions; none of them being admitted to those Charges
that do render it necessary: as the Prince of Conde, Marshal Turin, who are
only made Use of in matters of War, and Foreign Enterprises.

3. None of their Mediation admitted between the Prince and his Subjects, as to
public or private Favors, Rewards, Preferment, or any Affairs; laying them
aside as to the Court-Interest.

4. All those Charges Military or Civil, that may render them Considerable,
suppressed or eclipsed, as the high Constable, high Admiral, and Colonel of the
Infantry.

Governors of Provinces, Towns, Fortresses, are eclipsed by these means, by
Intendants who are Superiors, placed in every Province, who usurp the whole
Power under the Notion of Intendants, over Justices, Policy, and Finances, at
first only ordained for Finances.

These render Account only to the King, who admits of no Superior Intendant,
or high Treasurer, nor Mediation of the Governor; who being thus divested of
Power, is reduced also to his bare Pension; also the Profits and Privileges
taken away which were considerable, and in Truth is now much the same thing
with our Lord Lieutenants, as to quartering Soldiers, and other Military
Affairs.

As to Towns and Fortresses, all Inland ones are demolished, and Frontiers,
such only as are thought necessary, kept up and maintained, all the French
Companies formerly belonging to the Governors, suppressed, no Possibility of
false Musters, or making Use of Townsmen to fill up the Places, the King
supplying his Garrisons out of his standing Army, and taking the Pay of the
Provinces toward their Maintenance, and charging them every three Months, by
select Companies out of the several Regiments, that the Governor and their
Officers may not be able by any Correspondence to have Intrest in them, or reap
any Advantages for themselves, notwithstanding all which, the Charges are
saleable, and rarely the greater Nobility admitted to them.

2. All Charges both in the Army, Law, Court and Revenue, are diminished in
number, and retrenched in Profits, upon which the Nobility heretofore depended;
they are beside much impoverished,

1. By the late Expedition into Flanders, from which they were dismissed
without Pay or Recompense:

2. By retrenching their Privileges, as to Exemption from Tally, restraining it
to one Farm or Mansion, and that in one Place, not exceeding two Ploughs.

3. By Project of reviewing the ancient Nobles.

4. By re-assuming all the demesne Lands of the Crown as upon a Mortgage.

The Clergy is also overawed,
1. By strict Visitations, in point of Manners and Employment of their Revenues.

2. By upholding the Jansenists against the Jesuits, the Jesuits upholding the
Kings Authority against the Popes.

3. By threatening to subject the Religious to Episcopal Jurisdiction; to which
I may add by having the Pope under his Girdle, whereby he extorts from the
Religious great Aids, and suppresses all religious Societies, not exceeding
such a number, or wanting Royal Establishment.

What concerns Offices and Officers, in this Manner.
1. Multitudes of them both in Reference to Law and Finances are suppressed.

2. The Profits of Offices relating to the Law are diminished by Code Lewis,
and the Fees and Salaries of others regulated by new Edicts.

3. The Privileges of many of the Officers as to Tally are diminished.

4. The Pollet is granted upon very hard Conditions, viz. to contribute to the
new Company of Trade and Candia-Expedition, which is now at an end, by the
Surrender of Candia to the Turk.

The Pollet is an ancient Payment of a certain Sum by each Office, in lieu
whereof, the Officers have Power to dispose of the same, though they dye (by
Will or otherwise) but still at the Election of the Prince, that if he refuse,
their Offices are but for Life; yet rarely, till this Princes time, has this
Pollet been denied.

5. All sorts of Officers and Partisans that have got considerably by Farming
or Lending upon the Kings Revenue, are required by the High Court of Justice,
in an Arbitrary way; viz. by comparing what they have got, with what their
Places and Farms in Reason ought to yield them, and with what they were worth
before, forcing to answer to the King the overplus.

6. All the Courts to which they relate, are awed; especially that of
Parliaments: who are forced to Register, and Pass the Kings Edicts of Course,
without the usual Formalities: such as oppose him therein, being usually
banished by him by Letters of Cachet.

7. The King takes away Offices at his pleasure, and gives what Recompense he
pleases.

As to what concerns Protestants, they are diminished in their number, and
weakened by these means.

1. By making them incapable of all Offices and Charges of Judicature, the
Court of Parliament, and other high Charges in State or Army; and in truth, by
making their Profession an obstacle to all Preferments.

2. Forbidding all Marriages between them and Catholics.

3. Whenever they are turned, to make it highly Penal to Return.

The Names of the Nobility turned Roman Catholics of late years, Marshal
Turin, Le Duc de Duras: and the Count de Lorge his Brother: the Count de Lorge
Mountgomery, Messieurs de Pons, two Brothers: Mounsieur de St. Miscna in
Xaintoign: Mounsieur de la Roachel: Mounsieur de Pellison: Mounsieur the Prince
de Tarrant Son to the Duke of Tours.

4. Under Pretense that their Temples have been erected since the Edict of
Nantes without License, or upon holy Ground belonging to the Catholic Church,
as they call themselves, demolishing Multitudes of them thereby, forcing them
to the Inconveniency of four or five Leagues if not more, out of their
respective City and Towns, and suppressing all private Chapels belonging to
the Protestant Gentry, upon Pretense of Non-residence.

5. Demolishing all Places of Strength where they abode in Numbers, and
erecting Cittadels to awe these Towns where they are numerous,

6. By taking away Hospitals and all other Provisions for their Poor, given by
Protestants, not allowing them to make any Gifts for Perpetuity, nor admitting
them the Privilege of other Hospitals provided for the rest of his Subjects.

7. By conniving at the Clergy, when contrary to Law, they force their Children
from them, and concealing them from their Parents, bred them up in their own
Religion.

8. By restraining Catholics from taking Protestants Children their
Apprentices, and prohibiting Catholics from placing their Children with
Protestants.

Touching the Commonalty, his Subjects, first the Burgois.
1. His Impositions are heavy upon them, saving, in such Places where they
exercise Foreign Trade, so that most of the inland Towns are much decayed.

2. He admits of no Corporations, or Companies amongst them, whereby they might
be formidable, as to Interest, or make themselves Considerable in acquiring
Wealth.

I have been informed by Peasants, that out of that little which belonged to
them, they constantly paid near two Thirds to the King: and that those that had
only what they Earned by hard Labor, were not exempt from great Impositions;
nor were they yet free from the Imposition of Salt, viz. from being forced to
take it at their prices, what they will think fitting they should spend.
Secondly, The Peasant, or lowest sort of Common People, are more favored than
the rest, as to Impositions; the Tallie being diminished some Millions, the
manner of leaving it much Regulated, and multitudes made Contributors, that
were not heretofore; which is done for two Reasons:

1. Because there was Necessity for it.

2. Because they are the Kings Laws, that are to yield to him daily Increase,
and therefore to be Encouraged and Cherished. To which I might add, the Design
the King has of altering that Tax, and making it real, by charging it upon the
Land, which, by throwing it upon the Gentry, and easing the Personal Estate, he
hopes to bring to pass. Nor has he been less favorable to them in the Gabel
of Salt, changing, in most places, the way of Imposing it, and contenting
himself to be the sole Merchant; to which end he purchases all Salt-pans in
private hands, finding, that these things were improved by the Partisans to a
destruction of the Duty it self; and his People and the Government, is at
present Vigorous in Execution of Laws, and Impartial in the Execution of
Justice, Laboring to free the People from the Oppressions of all others but
the King, and to encourage and render them capable of being a Trading Nation.

What concerns Foreign Interest.
I shall not say much, though I could, it being rather Matter of History than
Reflection; only this present King has never omitted his Advantage for any
regard of Honor or Faith, either in making of Treaties, or observing of
Alliances: The Militia of France consists either of Maritime, or Land Forces;
of the latter, I have no exact Account, but by Computation the King has fifty
or sixty thousand Horse and Foot, since the Disbanding; but according to the
best Information, as to the Goodness, I hear they decline daily very much, and
that for three respects.

1. The Discipline and Duty being so rigorous, that for want of five men, the
Captain shall be cashiered, though they ran away, and he not able to supply it.

2. The Pay is so small, that neither Officer nor Soldier can scarce live upon
it, beside Deduction to Horse and Foot for Clothing, Hay and Oats; and the pay
of a Captain of Foot, per diem being fifty Soulz; a Lieutenant thirty Soulz;
Ensign fifteen Soulz; Soldier five Soulz: a Captain of Horse six Livres,
Lieutenant three, Cornet two Livres five Soulz.

3. The great Discouragement of old Officers, and new ones too, by the late
Disbanding without Pay, and keeping only such in Pay, as were able at their own
Charges to keep up their Company; and taking away all Privileges in Muster, or
otherwise, for so many Horses, for so many Servants, and their allowance for
Table, beside most of their old Boys are spoiled by Disbanding of part: to
which I may add, that the Switzers, Scottish, and Protestants are under such
discouragement, that they have almost quitted the Army: but yet to do the King
right, he entertains all reformed Officers at half Pay, and daily forbids the
sale of Military Offices, and, for the most part, bestows them according to
Seniority, unless it be in his Guards, keeps them under good Discipline, Pays
punctually, Exercises them frequently, makes them take their turn in Flanders;
and lastly, gives many considerable Pensions, and the truth is, Endeavors to
destroy all other Supports, both of them and of the Nobility and Gentry, and to
make them all to depend absolutely upon him and his Pensions.

As for the Militia by Sea, all that I shall say by way of Reflection is, that
he does vigorously endeavor the Increase and Propagation of Trade and building
of Ships, to which end, he is reported to make up his Fleet 100 Sail, and daily
increase his Stores, by purchasing and cutting down Timber he finds fit for it,
and also has found out great Store of Masts of Timber of his own, with Pitch
and Tar, procuring men out of Swethland to teach the making of it here, some
Defects I find at present, which time may rectify; his Ships are built too
high and too narrow, the Guns carry not above 28 l. Bullet: they want Guns, and
treat Strangers but ill after they have got them into Service; the Pay of
Seamen is but ten Livres a Month, wherein Diet is reckoned; this undertaken by
each particular Captain; their Galleys worst served, only by condemned Persons,
which they change perpetually. They have received an Opinion, that by the
Goodness of Powder, and manner of Charging, that they can make their Guns equal
the Force of those which are bigger; and in pursuit hereof, they daily cast
great Guns they find in Garrisons into this Proportion, which may do well enough
for Land, but not for Sea Service. To which I may add, the Port he has caused
to be built at Charante, Haure and other Places, he has laid out several
Millions at Charante, but to little Purpose, through the Knavery and
Indiscretion of those that are Overseers, that he is laughed at by most that
sees it, with a Reparation of Fortifications of the rest of the Ports and
Havens, and the many Works he has provided in several Places for the casting
of Ordnance, Anchors, and providing Materials for shipping and all warlike
Munitions, and the great Encouragement he gives to all Gentlemen to go to Sea,
and above all these the manner whereby he promotes Trade and building Ships of
Force by private men, (which shall farther be showed under the Head of Trade.)
As for the Governor himself the King of France, I shall be sparing in his
Character, because he is so well known that I might run the Danger of Flattery,
I shall only remark the most eminent Virtues in him.

1. Industry; being the Doer of all things himself, making choice of fit
Instruments to act under him, both for Advice and Execution; not such as can
incline him, reserving the Determination and account of all that is done unto
himself; and but one day in the Week that he is not personally present in his
Councels.

2. A well-stated Reserve in his Comportment; being easy of Access to all men
of Business, and incommunicable to all other Familiarities.

3. The great Command over his Passions; which he expresses upon all occasions,
and government of his Tongue, whereby he obtains a great Secrecy, and renders
his Councels insearchable.

4. His unparalled Constancy in these and all other his Measures, not
quitting Friendship with any one he has once made choice of, whether of his
Favorite, Ministers, or beloved Mistresses, notwithstanding the unsuccessful
Undertakings of the first, as in the business of Gydgery in Africa, East and
West India Trade, and new Manufacturies.

To this I may oppose, by way of Balance;

1. His great Parcimony; which may rather serve an Excess of Virtue than of
Vice; whereby the Services done to him are not so well rewarded; all the
Estates of men depending upon him, not supported, they by that means being
Indigent and Discontented. This seems grounded upon the Experiment he had of
the Misfortune of his Ancestors, by their contrary Practices, not from any
inclination in him to Avarice; which is sufficiently confirmed in him, by his
Enterprises, which have always been carefully sustained by his Magnificent
Buildings Furniture, and Fortresses, as also by his sumptuous and spl^^did
Entertainments (the Ballad represented five or six Carnavals ago, stood him in
180000 Livres, which is 14000. Sterling, with the care he takes to bestow
liberal Pensions, Preferments and Rewards, upon such as have deserved well of
him in Civil or Military Employments, not suffering them to make any Advantage,
or to take one penny more than their Wages or Salary, from any of his Subjects,
or others, for the discharging of their Offices, and turning them out
infallibly, and punishing them severely when they do otherwise, thereby
obliging them to Fidelity, Industry, and an absolute Dependency upon him, and
by his employing the meaner sort in Buildings, Manufactories, Fortresses, in
Flanders and France, Magazines, new Chanells, Havens, Shipping and Trade at his
own Expense, thereby making the Money circulate quick.

2. He is too rigorous in his Discipline and Execution of Laws and Reformation
of Business even to a degree of seeming Injust, as the Military Discipline,
Treatment of Fawket and the Partisans Reduction of Offices and Officers do
evidence.

3. His personal Vices are too public to the World, and too open in his own
Kingdom, whereby Corruption of Manners is produced in his Court, and amongst
the Nobility, even to the spreading it self to all Degrees and Sexes.

4. Amongst his Defects may also be reckoned his not being regardful enough of
his Faith and Honor in matters of Alliances where his Interest is concerned.

Concerning Trade.
The Enlargement and Advantage of Trade seems to be one of the greatest Designs
of this Crown, nor is there any Cost spared therein; as well appears by these
ensuing Particulars.

1. Their Endeavors to enlarge both Foreign and Domestic Trade; as to
Foreign, the erecting of East India and West India and Northern Companies, the
encouraging and Countenancing them with great Privileges, both real and
personal, and exempting the Commerce from derogating Nobility, their
Commodities from all Inland Duties either Provincial, or Entries into Towns or
otherwise.

2. Assisting them with great Sums of Money, viz. a fifth part of their Stock,
and fifty Solz for all Goods outward, and seventy five for all Goods inward,
out of his Coffers; engaging all his great Officers with Privilege of
Exemption from Residence and Duty there, and imposing upon all Persons of
Ability, to go a share in the Stock, thereby not only engaging them in point of
Interest, but Experience and Knowledge of the Trade. As to Domestic Trade by
encouraging all Manufactors already settled here, and introducing all Others,
this Nation is capable of, or his Use of at his Expense, (he is blamed for
attempting also such as are not for their Use, and which they can never afford
at the same Rate which others sell at) as also the great advance of the Trade
of Silk, Salt, and Linen, and the setting upon the Dutch and foreign
Manufactures do sufficiently evidence.

3. Having reduced all Home Duties into one receipt, to save the Expense of so
many Officers, and of Time, is another great Encouragement of Domestic Trade;
to all these I may add, the Advance of Duty upon all Foreign Merchandise, the
Defense made against all Foreign Manufacturies, the Favoring the Artizan, as
to Table; but above all, the Example of the Prince, in confining himself to the
wearing his Manufacturies, and obliging all his Dependents to the like
observance, is of great Importance.

4. The Increase of Navigation and Shipping is procured by these means.

1. Giving 500 l. out of his own Customs, by way of Encouragement for every
hundred Tuns of Shipping his Subjects shall build, of above 100 Tuns burden,
and 400 Livres for all they shall buy.

2. Rendering all Persons incapable in Corporations relating to Trade, that have
not an Interest in Shipping, to put a proportion appointed to each Officer.

3. Electing an Northern Company to furnish his Subjects with Provisions of
Shipping at the best hand, and also endeavoring to find the Materials in his
own Country, as I have already observed.

4. Giving their Shipping Preference of Employment, as the late Edict for Salt
shows, obliging all his Officers to fraught French Ships at such a Rate before
any Strangers, as also fifty soulz per Tun imposed upon Foreign Vessels.

5. Endeavoring to make his Subjects sole Merchants of all Trades, as well
imported as exported, and not only by the Privileges already mentioned upon
their Commodities and Ships, but also by putting all manner of Discouragements
upon all Foreign Factories and Merchants by Difficulty in their Dispatches,
delays in point of Justice, subjecting them to Foreign Duties and Seizures,
not suffering them to be Factors to the French or any other Nation but their
own, and in case of Death to have their Estates seized as Aliens, and the
Countenance and conceiving the French have as to all Duty when employed in the
Service of Foreigners.

6. The great Care taken to set the Poor on Work, to the Increase of Trade, and
disburdening the rest of their Fellow Subjects, as Workhouses over all France
manifests; but especially at Paris, and at Lions, which has Hostels de Dieu,
far better than a Tax to support them in Idleness.

The Care taken to Encourage Foreigners to Travel, or abide in France, and so
increase the number of Subjects, as shows:
1. By a general Naturalization of all Nations, except English, Irish, and
Spanish; the People of Flanders are comprised in that benefit.

2. Convenient Academies, Schools, Colleges, Pensions and Tables de Hosts.

3. Convenient Passages, by Messages, Coaches, and Boats.

4. Impartial and speedy Justice to all Strangers, as well as their own
Subjects, especially in Courts-Merchants, and before their Commissaries,
considering Contracts made by Strangers; to which I may add, the late care of
setting up Posts Places.

For every Winter the King does not keep his Court at Paris, he is obliged by
Covenant to abate sixteen hundred thousand Livres to those that Farm his Excise
for that Place.

In two years time, soon after the Kings Marriage, when the Kingdom was in
Peace, the King drew from the Parisians six score Millions of Livres.

Some Defects and Difficulties in the way of their Trade managed.
1. The Wealth of the Burgois seem inconsistent with the Policy of this Monarch.

2. The Arbitrariness of the Tallies discourageth the meaner sort, seeking
after no more than suplying absolute Necessity, and makes Towns fearful to
receive new Manufactures for fear of Increase of their Tallies.

3. The Prejudice the Trade lies under as to the Nobility, being inconsistent
with it, the Policy of this Monarch designing them all for Arms and Art, and
not for Trade.

4. The unsettledness of the Books of Rates and great Arbitrariness of the
Kings Officers and Farmers, which are too much favored by Laws.

5. The present Policy admits not of any Corporations of Trade to be Elective.

6. Want of able Merchants amongst them, and putting the Directions of all
their present Companies, into the Hands of Persons ignorant in Trade,
Favorites of the present Ministers; whereby they have lost the third part of
the Stock of the East India Company already, making all the new Manufactures
Monopolies, whereby most of them are come to nothing, as that of Silk-Stockens
and Cloth.

7. The Increase of Churchmen and Soldiers, with the Design this Monarchy
has of enlarging it self by new Acquisitions at Land.

Lastly, The natural Idleness and Luxury these People are addicted unto, but
that Necessity forces them to the contrary, together with the forcing them to
enter into Companies of Trade, and imposing their new Manufactures upon Places
and Buyers, with the evil Treatment of those Strangers, that teach them after
they have once learned their Trade, and the Difficulty of finding a Market and
Credit, (which attends all new Beginners) especially where others are in
possession of Trade, are Obstructions not easily conquered; yet should the
Project hold, of making the Tally hold real, and Salt Merchantable, succeed,
and Trade and Manufacturies be made free, and the Book of Rates be Regulated,
under the present Encouragements; and the great Advantage of the cheapness of
Work, and great Industry of Workmen, it were much to be feared, that the rest
of the Difficulties would be overcome.

Since I wrote this, the King has passed an Edict, declaring, That the Trade
of Merchandise never ought to have been, nor never should be, in any time to
come, esteemed a Derogation to Nobility; and Ennobling it with many Privileges,
and by the diminution of the Profits and Privileges of all Charges Military and
Civil (as I have before observed) endeavoring to Necessitate the Gentry, and
Sons of the Nobility themselves to Merchandise.

Concerning Revenue.
The whole Revenue of the Crown is Eighty Millions; all Charges deducted, comes
to sixty Millions of Livres yearly, not possible to be augmented; the Clergy,
Nobility, and Partisans being already pared and pilled, the Tallies and Gabals
in most places, upon the meaner sort, being so far stretched, that they require
abatement: Especially in respect of Cessation of War, and Interruption of Trade
with Foreigners, by reason of their new Projects about Trade; but in general,
this I must say, that there never was more care taken in managing of the Kings
Revenues by Superior, as well as Inferior Officers, and am informed, that the
Tally is so regulated, that the Expense in Levying it comes not to above a
twentieth part; but its Arbitrary manner of Collecting the Tally, is thus: The
King sends down to the Intendant what he intends to Levy upon the Province by
way of Tally; the Intendant consulting the Elect of each Division, returns up
word what he thinks it able to bear that year, with the reasons thereof; then
the King sixeth the Sum; then the Elects are convened to distribute the Sum
upon each Division; And lastly, the Intendant advises with the Elect; fixes
the Sum upon each Parish, as he pleases, (which is practiced very Arbitrary)
and also appoints the Assessors in the Parish, (who are answerable for the
Taxes upon the Parish out of their own Estates) and may impose the same
Arbitrarily upon their Neighbors, yet most of them of any Substance take their
Turns, and are much regulated by new Edicts, in imposing and levying the same.
If there be any complaint made, that the Parish is over-burdened, the Remedy is
by Petition to the Intendant, who, upon Examination, does as he sees cause; and
the Appeal from him is only to the King, which is rarely or never practiced;
for those that are great men, and concerned at Court, are always favored by
the Intendant, and for the rest he matters them not. The Intendant, as I said
before, is an Officer Elected to Govern and Oversee the Affairs of the Revenue
and Finances, but his Power is since enlarged to Examine and Determine all
Complaints concerning the good Government of the Province, and every Member,
and now lately to oversee the new Manufacturies and Trade, and all other
things, except the Militia, and he gives a constant Account to the King by a
Master of Requests, of the Estate of the Province, and Trade, and of all such
Grievances, Inconveniences, and Complaints, as are not in his Power to remedy,
and is become a very necessary Officer; yet rarely any of Quality is preferred
to this Employment, but men Industrious, bred up to the Law. If there be any
complaint between the Assessours and their Neighbors, this is determined at
the Court of the Elect. Now it is to be known, these Elects are certain
Officers, who buy their Offices, and are appointed by the King for each
Division, though possibly in their beginning they were elected by each
Division. There lies an Appeal from them to the Courts of Aids, where also
Process issues forth against the Assessors, if any Sum be behind; which Courts
are assisted with the Chamber of Accounts; these hold Plea generally of all
Matters relating to the Revenue, and the Edicts concerning the same, are now
used to be Registered there, and not in Parliament.

An Account of the Clergy, and their Revenue.
The Roman Church of France has in it fourteen Arch-bishopricks, viz. Lions,
Sens Auches, Arles, Remis, Bourdeaux, Toulouse, Burgers, Narbone, Aix, Vienne,
Roan, Paris.

Under which are contained 95 Bishoprics, 120000 Parishes, or Cures; it has
1356 Abbeys, 12400 Priories, 256 Commanders of Malta, 452000 Monasteries, that
have all Chaplains; besides the Monasteries of Religious Women, of which the
number is 557. Beside these, there are 700 Convents of Cordelis, without
comprehending the Jacobins and Carmelites, the Augustines, the Charteva, the
Belisines, the Jesuits, the Minims, and other Religious Houses, the Number
whereof is 14078 which Ecclesiastics possess, 9000 Castles, Palaces and
Houses, which have high, mean, and low Justice.

They have also 259000 large Farms and 10000 Arpans of Vines, so that it is
found that the Revenue of the Church, per annum, amounts to 312 Millions of
Livres.

Concerning the Manners of the People.
The Nobility and Gentry (unless it be such as are assured of Ecclesiastical
Preferment) are Unlearned, yet generally well bred, and very capable of the
Court and Camp, or Charges belonging to the Law.

The Gentry, when they are past the Grammar School, are usually sent to the
Academies, where they learn to ride the great Horse, Dance, Fence, and some of
them some part of the Mathematics; especially Fortifications.

The Burgois are very Ingenious, the Artisan and Peasant very Laborious, of
which latter sort, not a hand is Idle from break of Day till dark Night; all,
except the great Nobility and Gentry, Devout; they are Civil to Strangers,
Servile to their Prince, and Good to their Relations and Families.

Their Defects and Vices.
They are superficially Learned, or knowing naught but Law, Physic,
Surgery, and Art of War, horribly addicted to Luxury, and Vices of the
Court, as plain Building, great Trains, Courtship and Entertainments, which
seems to be the Butt and Scope of all men of all Degrees, except peasants;
Proud, Boasters, Despisers of others, Envious of their Superiors, and
Tyrannical to their Inferiors; Slighting in their Friendship, Unreasonable in
their Askings, Unjust in their Dealing, extremely given to Lawsuits, and
Exacting upon Strangers, joined with a Court-Confidence, from the Highest to
the lowest. The Sum of all; they employ themselves to a Court-Deportment, are
not Naturally Industrious, except to acquire money for their Luxury; which the
Peasant also would be inclined unto, were not his Condition such as puts him in
despair of it.

As to the Country; the Air is generally very wholesome, the Towns wel^ built,
the Soil very fruitful, and well improved in all but Herbage, abounding in
small Walled Towns and Buroughs, through the multiplicity of Lords that shared
the Lands, now generally decayed, an ill People, delicious Companies, and full
of Elegant Seats and Country-Houses, generally small, but embellished with
Groves and fine Gardens; the great Cities are full of Sumptuous Buildings, well
Peopled, and overrun with the Religious, with Officers of all kinds, and small
Artizans: there is abundance of Wealth, but collected no where but in the
Crown; the rest, the Lawyers, Clergy, and Officers hitherto have the best share.

Reflections on the Alliance of France, and its Foreign Interest.
They are suspected by all their Neighbors at present, though some, out of
Necessity or Interest, are forced to depend on them; such are the Princes of
the Rhyne, and the King of Portugal, the Dukes of Savoy and Lorraign, the
Dutch, in Case of Difference with England, the Dane is generally opposed to the
Swedes, and joined to Holland, the Pole upon the Defensive against the Swede,
Moscovite, and the Cosack, the Swede and Swiss, upon Occasion for Money, if not
otherwise employed; the Italian perfectly Spanish, except the Duke of Modena;
the Turk, upon occasion, may make a Diversion upon the Empire with these
several Respects; they regard France, whose great Hopes that England will be
corrupted, as it has been hitherto with the Designs of changing the
Government, their flattering Hopes of Assistance in that Behalf, are also to
ruin the Dutch, and make us sharers in Flanders, beside the Sums of Money to
assist the King in his Necessities; and to corrupt his Ministers, are the
Baits by which they have hitherto prevailed, and hope still to catch us. As
for their Tripple Alliance, their present Design is, to get an Opportunity to
fortify Flanders, subdue all Parties and Interest at Home, settle the Revenue
of the Crown, to keep up a considerable Army always in Preparation, to take
Advantage of the first Occasion, and to oblige the Spaniard to a constant
Charge of entertaining the Swede; by keeping us from all further Occasion, to
render us cool in the Prosecution of Alliances, unprofitable to the Spaniard,
burdensome to our selves, without Prospect of future Advantage, and to give us
Leisure of dividing among our selves. To this I may add, the fomenting the Duke
of York's Interest, and Don Ivans in Spain, and their Pretense in Weakening the
Dutch, in directing their Trade by their new Impositions, and new introduced
Manufactories, whilst we in our Manufactures suffer most by them, the Dutch
looking well enough to themselves and their Concerns.

Paris May 12th. SIR, Your most Humble Servant.
FINIS.

