THEOLOGIA MYSTICA, OR The Mystic Divinity Of the AETERNAL INVISIBLES, Viz.

The Archetypous Globe, or the Original Globe, or World of all Globes, Worlds,
Essences, Centers, Elements, Principles and Creations whatsoever.

A Work never Exstant before.

Isa. LVII. 15. Thus says the High, etc. who inhabiteth AETERNITIE, etc.

Rev. I.8. I am ALPHA and OMEGA, etc.

(...).

By a Person of Quality IPMD

LONDON, Printed, Anno Dom. 1683.

THE most speculativ and highest Myster^^^ (...) no incongruities to (...)
Moral conceptions, nor yet contradictions to Natural ratiocinations ( how
unproportionat a knowledge, and how incomprehensibl soever in their intrinsic
Nature, as being only out of Reason's Sphaer and the Reach of its Axiom) but
rather so many humiliations of our intellect, gracious astonishments and
unconceivabl endearments of our Souls and Spirits to Faith, Love and Obedience,
yea very conducive to the ends of Religion, viz. the Glory of God, and the
furtherance of true Godliness, in the happiness of the Univers: and that with
strong and Heroic Assent and the most vigorous Acts and Transports of Adoration
and Devotion: Yet, without determining our Opinions, or Persuasions, or being
any of our Catechisms, Confessions, Creeds, or Public Service: much less any
sort of Illusions, or Phanatacisms, from the heat, or sublimation of
contemplativ, of Splenetic Heads; but the Agreeabl Attestation and United
Experience of mani chois Christians of more fixed and (...) Brains^ ^o One of
our datest Orthodox and Elegant Wri^e^^.

EH: MAMP CENSORI. VEL LIBER LECTORI.
Tu mea non cernis; nec Ego Tua crimina: Recte.
Null' ERRATA patent. Nulla latere putas?
Imo, alibi qae sint peccantia, Corrige, Qaeso.
Sic facile facies Paginam utramque Vale.
PRAY, in the supplies of the Good Spirit and peruse, without praejudice and
partiality, and ponder, with profound sobriety, before you pronounce your
final sentence, either on the praecedent Title Page, or the subsequent TRACT of
AETERNAL INVISIBLES; but rather suspend ( at less'st, some small time) your
judgment, and let your Moderation be known not here and to me only, but
elsewhere and to all men

The Lord is at Hand.

Hora Novissima, Tempora pessima sunt: Vigilemus. Imminet, imminet: En venit!
O! venit Ille supremus Arbiter and Iudex! Cujus nunc ante Tribunal Subsistens
paveo. Tu Cav, Lector, Ave. Sic apud Ovid de Tristibus: Erg^ save^

A Distich by one of the Prime, though private, Poets of our Age.
He who shall read this Book, He may behold
The Best of men; but in an Ampler mold.
Ita Testatur. R. S.
To the impartial and well-disposed READER.
FOR as much as some Part of the Author's most sublime and mystical Writings are
now brought forth to public view, according to the said Author's Intent and
Desire in his Life time, committing it to the Trust wholly and soly of Dr. Ed.
Hr. as a Person he put all his Confidence in for that most excellent Service;
as being one that he, and many others, knew to be not only very worthy, but
also singularly just, and far from worldly, or Self-designes; and moreo^er had
really tasted and savoured very much of the Author's Spirit, as well before, as
during the Time of his Acquaintance with him (although more satisfactorily and
fully since that Time) which made him to be so affected with the Matter that is
now published, as that he reckoned all La^our easy and Pains pleasant to serve
him, both in Life, to my knowledge, and also after Death: so ^reatly loved he
him and honored him in the Lord for his Work's sake: as you may easily
un^erstand when you shall have perused thoroughly, and pondered seriously those
learned and elaborate ^ines of his, which he entituleth THE PRAE^ATORI EPISTL:
to which I refer you. And now I come to give you some brief Account ^f what I
knew concerning the Life and Death of ^his great Saint that now is received up
into Glory. It seemed good unto me, having had clear understanding and
knowledge of that high and glorious Ministration, in which he lived and died,
(and therefore holding my self obliged) to bear my Testimony concerning this
Author. Know then, my first Acquaintance with him was in the Year 1663, (the
Memory of which shall ever be precious to me, because of those great and
spiritual Advantages, as to the Information of my Judgment about some deep and
weighty Points of Divinity: which none could answer that I could meet with,
nor satisfy my searching Mind in those Things, like this holy Man of God, who
had profound Ability given him in the holy Anointing: (for which I so
reverence him) and I affirm, that since my acquaintance with him till the Time
of his Death, he was evermore employed and busied in an internal contemplative
Life: the Spirit in him still searching the deep and hidden Mysteries of the
Kingdom. And truly he was not only a Seeker, but a successful Finder of that
rich Pearl of the Gospel. And albeit his mortal Part is now expired, in which
he enjoyed great Inspiration and Prospect of that Light-world, into which he
now is entered, having put off only the weak and less honorable Body, and put
on Immortality and Glory, which in his sick and languishing Bed he gave great
Assurance of. And although he had such a foresight and taste of the Powers of
the invisibl World, with all the Glory which is expected in this latter Age to
break forth, yet he was brought into a great Resignation in the Spirit of his
Mind to give up his Right, as to what he might here have enjoyed yet in the
Body of Mortality. For sure I am I knew none that had a more deep seeing and
prophetical Spirit than he had But when that the Symptoms of a dying State
came upon him, he then, most patiently and cheerfully, acquiesced in the Will
of God his Father. The Truth of which I shall give you in one remarkable
Passage amongst many more that fell from him in the Time of his Sickness: which
is this. Some few Days before his Departure, perceiving Death's Approach, and
being in some Agonies, he called and commanded to have me sent for, judging
the Time of his Departure might be at hand: being come to him, he said, Friend,
I have this to desire ^f you, that you would be free to give me up for
Dissolution of my Body: I know you have been earnest by Faith and Prayer with
God to continue me yet in this weak and weary Body, but I am to go from
hence: for this Night the Lord Christ has appeared to me, and embraced me in
his Arms, and has given me that Satisfaction, that it is my Soul's Hunger to
taste of Death: the Vision of whose Glory has so refreshed me, that I long to
go through the Passage-Gate of Death, to meet him, and be ever with Christ my
Lord. And after some Words which then I spoke to him, he further said to me, I
would not have you dismayed, though I leave you in the Work that we have bin
travailing in together: for do not think my being taken away shall stop it; for
it shall live and flourish. And doubt not but God will raise up that good
Spirit, that has bin a guiding Light in and to me, in some others, that shall
assist and go forward with you, for the finishing of that great Mystery which
we have mutually rejoiced in. But be you steadfast, abiding in the Faith
thereof, according to what has been made known b^ the Spirit of our Lord and
Savior touching these Things. And so he concluded with a desire to speak with
his trusty and dearly beloved Friend Dr. Ed. Hr. concerning the Publication of
the Writings which his Mind was much upon: who also declared his Mind, some
small Time after, in my hearing, to the Doctor concerning them; as leaving them
in trust with no other; though some Breach of his Will did after happen, which
will be sad indeed, should the same not he repaired, that so his Will may be
fullfilltd concerning his Writings so left in trust. After he had thus
delivered his Mind, his animal Spirits grew hourly faint and weak, yet as he
was able, many refreshing Speeches and gracious Sentences came still from him,
both to his near Relations and other Friends then about him, who performed
their dutiful and Christian Part to him: for which they received his Blessing,
and had his Prayers to God in their behalf. Much more might be recited, but I
shall forbear further Enlargement, and refer the Inquirer to those living
Testators, to whom this Author was sufficiently known. It may now be expected
that we should give some more Satisfaction as to the Life of this Person, how
he carried it as to all holy Deportment, both toward God and toward Man. For
as his Light was great and eminent, so his Life is answerably to be measured. I
shall not affirm it to be so perfect as nothing of defect could be found
therein; he was a Man that might be subject to Passions and Infirmities, as
Elias was: yet this I can boldly, and as truly say on his behalf, since the
Time of my acquaintance, he groaned and travailed hard in himself after the
Birth of Perfection, forward pressed he toward the Mark of the Resurrection,
which was still in his Eye, daily preaching it to himself and others; being of
late Years more than ordinary in Mortifications and daily Dyings to all things,
that came in as the Effect of the Fall. And indeed for the later Years of his
Life he took up so much with God, as he cared to be very little known among
Men, (always excepting his dear Friend Dr. Ed. Hr. whom he would not willingly
be without at home, even when most retired) I say, he cared not to be known in
the World; as a Preludium to his not long staying among the Inhabitants
thereof. For thus far I made my Observation upon him, that I often saw the
Spirit of his Mind translated, and was gone up, beforehand as it were, to
prepare a Mansion for his Soul, which then groaned to be set loose from so
unagreeable a Body: yet as little so (by reason of its habituated heavenly
Inclination, and sometimes extraordinary Exertion and Elevation), as a mortal
Body could lightly be. Hence it was that he so often let fall this Expression,
Olr! how little do I care to live, without I might come to put on the Body of
the Resurrection, by and in which I might do the Will of God in this lower
World with as great Liberty, Alacrity and Constancy, as Mount Sion's Saints
now in Glory. Thus in grand Soul-Introversion, and Body-Exertion he spent this
later part of his Days, delighting much (as the Dr. E. H. and several more
know) in an abstracted Life, and coveted Solitude, withdrawing from his public
Ministry, wherein he had formerly exercised himself, but of late, after the
Example of the holy Apostle Paul, he retired to a little convenient Place of
his own; yet not refusing any that would come for spiritual Direction and
Counsel, freely giving, as he had freely received from the Lord Thus painfully
did he labor in the Vineyard of his own Soul, and for others, in the Name of
the Lord. In the Time of this his Solitude he writ more, as much more, as what
is now brought forth into public View: wherein are many great and mystical
Truths that were opened unto him from the pure central Light that rose from the
morning-Star^ whereof this Tract shows something, though but as a Glance of
what lies hid in the fuller Body of the Golden Remains: which some-bodi^ does
retain, for the present, which when they shall see Light ( as we will yet hope
they may) the will appear as the Express of a deep Spirit, which had great
Liberty of access to, and Ability of diving into the infinite Ocean of divine
Mysteries, through the favorable Gift of a faithful and bountiful Lord, the
Almighty God. Therefore he being so greatly good, let not thine Eye, O Reader,
be evil: nor let any one stumble or be offended at either the Author or matter,
Method or Expression; but give place to that pure Light, which gave him such an
Understanding and Sight. If the Meat be too strong for thee, thou have liberty
to refuse, and may set it by, till thou art grown stronger in Spirit: it was
the Author's Judgment not to impose, he left that for the Lord alone, to
dispose the Mind for reception. But doubtless it is prepared as a living
Portion for such as hunger after spiritual Dainties and heavenly Mysteries. Let
me therefore beseech you to be censureless, till the Day of the Lord comes,
without Clouds, to arise in the Heart of your Earth, so as to clear up all
doubtful matters of this kind; observing the Doctrine of that large spirited
Apostle; which is, To abide in that Spirit of Love, which can hope, believe,
and bear all things, and cover and comprehend what we may not yet perfectly
understand or reach, as not being happily come to that clear inspection of
things; thereby to be so imboldned as to pass Judgment with an infallibility
thereon, but rather give room and grant Christian Liberty to and for the
various Gifts and Operations of the Spirit in each one. For, sure I am, it is
that which will secure us in the Peace of God, which passes Understanding,
which will guard our Hearts from the evil of Controversies, which this Author
did study to avoid, though of sufficient Learning and Ability to manage them,
yet of late Time kept himself from all such Engagements, quietly resting under
the droppings (or rather Pourings) of the holy Anointing. Of which I shall give
you some particular, as the groundwork of this Subject here treated of, being
the Knowledge of God out of Nature, and yet to be known in the Globe of eternal
Nature. This you must know he came to understand by his Spirit, being caught up
into the still Eternity for several Days together; which in some Part of his
Writings he gives an hint of: and so from what he in the still Eternity saw
and heard, he wrote ( behold who can the Copy, and then, but not before,
compare the Writings therewith), and the Springs in him did daily sill. Of this
I was Witness, being conversant then with him, and making Remarks, and taking
Observations, with all Exactness possible, of those wonderful Transportations
he had, (or rather they had him) for the space of three Weeks together,
insomuch as I can do no less than bear my Testimony concerning his Spirit's
Height, whilst his outward Body lay in passive Stillness in this visible Orb.
Surely, we may conclude, he was as another Moses in some sort, taken up into the
Mount with God, as a Friend and Favorite of the most High; where he did see,
hear and learn these so deep and excellent things, which are, by great Care,
and no less Conscience, brought forth to Light. Therefore, pious Reader, be
satisfied, that here is a true and real Draught or Copy taken from the
Original; yea, drawn by the blessed A^thor out of the Original of all Worlds;
where he saw what he saw in pure Abstraction of Spirit. The Publication of
which the Author intended before his Dissolution, being encouraged thereunto by
the abovenamed Doctor, his true hearted and right worthy Friend, who well
understood his Worth, Writings, and Spirit as well, if no^ better, than any Man
living; as also readily promoted by another Person, who therefore is in the
Prefatori Epistle very honorably mentioned, and most worthily and nobly
decyphered and described, if not perfectly delineated: Both of them jointly
rejoicing, that they had found out such an one, so abundantly filled with God's
blessed Spirit of Love, Wisdom, Holiness and Meekness, and influenced so
extraordinarily by the same; sufficiently apparent in the Gifts and Graces he
was endued and adorned with. Whereupon they could not choose but freely offer,
both of them their Assistance; the one his Head and Pen, the other his Hand and
Purse, to go through with, and carry on the Work, for, the easily-foreseen,
universal Benefit: Nor can I doubt but both of them will receive no small
Reward from the hands of Him, who will not suffer only a little cold Liquid
(or, as we read in our English Bible, a Cup of cold Water) given to any of the
little ones in the Name of a Disciple to drink, to be unregarded; nai, not him,
whosoever he should be, that gave to such an one thereof, to go unrewarded: for
our Lord expressly declares his Mind therein, and that with this Asseveration,
Verily I say unto you, he shall in no wise lose his Reward. Yea, I have good
Ground moreover to believe, that the same good Spirit of Grace and Glory that
lived in, and rested on the Author, may multiply on them both also: even so and
Amen O Lord God: And let the Residue of the Spirit to all the just and faithful
ones come, for the perfiting what this Author had so clear a Prospect of in his
enlightened Eye. Now give me leave, good Reader, to conclude with this holy
Challenge to all, that are Lovers of heavenly Truths, mystical or plain, if any
be of that high Evangelical Order he was of, come forth, bear your living
Witness, and go on and forward valiantly to the furthering, and strengthening,
and finishing the great Work, which this Author was daily laboring in. Let us
speak and write, love and work, fast and pray for a continual flowing down of
that pure and holy Unction, for the consummating in and amongst us, that which
this holy and heavenly Man left to be fulfilled and accomplished: which,
verily, will be Joy, Praise, and Glory even to him, who according to the Flesh
died, but now lives among the perfect in Spirit; who also waits for the
bringing up those that shall make up the Number of the Church of the
Firstborn, who are enrolled in Heaven; of the Number of which let us strive,
press, and pursue to be, that the Love-Hallelujahs may in our Day be sung to
him that sits upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb, who is crown^d King in
Love's Kingdom: where only I would be known, and found also truly

Yours in that pure Fellowship. Into which the Lord himself vouchsafe to lead
you; So heartily prays I. L.

THE PRAEFATORI EPISTL.
By one Who is studiously ambitious and earnestly contentious, as well, if not
more, to promote the common Salvation, as these, o^ any other uncommon
Mysteries, the most abstracted whereof is never without Morality, moving upon
the Affections.
Christian Reader.
FOR so in nature unfeignedly, as in Name professedly I would have you to be.
Miscalled you, I hope, I have not in this Compellation. If I have, then are you
utterly incapacified as to the Concerns of these Mysteries and Sublimities. So
bold am I to tell Sed antequam de re, paucula de te, itidem de me: quippe intra
nos est, quod contra nos est.
you, and such and Anointed one am Sed antequam de re, paucula de te, itidem de
me: quippe intra nos est, quod contra nos est.
I; whatsoever Judgment may pass upon me, or if I be not, yet do ^prai,
resolv, endeavor, or purpose; or at les^'st, desire, or wish to be. No mo at
all of this, yet this beleev we all of us, that it is a most rare Thing in it
self, were there neither Rewards, nor Punishments, to be realy and truly
Religious in the Old way, which is the Good way, out of which there is no
Rest. But you may sai, who comes here? whence you? what Religion are you of?
you are, I beleev, a pure one! Well for me if I be. However to the Quaestion
(not asking you who made you an Examiner) and in Meekness and Fear, as I ought,
I answer, and that in the Words of a Servant of God, and of the Lord Jesus
Christ, viz. I am of that Iam. I. ver. last.
Pure Religion and undefiled before God and the Father, which is, to visit the
Orphans and Widows in their Tribulation, and to keep mi self unspotted of the
World. Of which Faith, or Persuasion, Judgment, or Mind, was blessed Paul (in
whom alone were evn the Apostles All) who further acquainteth you that Christ
Jesus his Master and Lord was of the same, as to the whole Church; which He
loved and gave himself for, that He might sanctifi it, etc. not having spot,
or wrinkl, or aught of such, but that it should be holy and without blemish, or
rather Amomous, so the Ephes^ V. ver. 27.
Word is, that is irrepre^ensibl, safeguarded from the bitings of Religion is
no mormo, Mom^s, nor frowning Fury.
Momus, one of the feined Gods among the Gentiles, who would be ever carping
(such was the suarl of his goodli Godhood) at everi thing, and who is, I fear,
worshipped evn among our own selves. So Idolatrous, or superstitious are we,
all almost, become. But more particularly, if that may be more for your
Satisfaction, and to let you know, by the way, that neither the insinuating
Jesuit has deceived me, nor perilous Books poisoned me, nor fantastic
Teachers seduced me, nor corrupt Churchmen carried me away with everi Wind
of Doctrine, I here, publicly, to the Interrogatorie about mi Religion, repli,
Sir, I am of, that termed, the Reformed: but let me tell you how: sciz. as
Reformed not against either Pagan, or Papal Roam, and yet fairly and fully I
may safely affirm, from both: and this too without the dividing addition of
that new cast Name, Protestant. To be ingenuously free, if I must protest
against any thing, it must be among other Matters, against 1 Cor. IV. ver. 1, 3.
Schismatic Names (for those I As much as carnalitie: though had I been in the
ARC (a Type, supposed, of the visibl Church) with cursed Cham, I should hardly,
for all mi hatred, I beleev, have leaped out: except I had been out of mi wits,
as out of the waters.
hate with a perfect hatred) which so basely, through the iniquity of the Times,
to the grand disservice, damage and disgrace of the Christian Religion, at
praesent abound. Nai, I cannot pati^ntly enough bear, or hear such Names; no,
not evn then, when those be used, or rather abused, only for Distinction's
sake. Certs, at the very best, these can be no better than Nicnames, I was
about to call the same, for the sake of the mani, Old Nick's names. The
consideration and ponderation of which verily makes me not so promptly to
approve, or thoroughly like, evn that Name it self of Reformed, either Catholic,
with Mr. Perkins; or Church, or Churches, with most, if not all: All the name I
desire is an honest good Fellow;
Or a pure pu^e Christian, inoffensively mellow:
V^hyp^chondriacous, or touched with the yellow.
Son of a Church, or Son of a Chapel, if there be no more in it than the mere
Name, is alike to me. Member of this, that, or the other Classis,
Congregation, or Body, is all one and the same thing, if any thing at all, to
me. Nai, Plainly, a like to me, (or rather unlike to me) is a Friend with
Thou and Thee, and Hat on Head, and that Supererogation of the demure look, or
long Gaze, and of the formal putting forth of the Hand, which appears, to
such a Mortal as me, a deceptio visus; and though pretti; yet not half so fair,
or neat, (mithinks) as the Trics of Legerdumein. I care no more for Luther, or,
that Patriarch of Presbytery, Calvin, Cramner, or Hooper, Jewel, or Hooker,
Perkins, or Preston, Huit, or Love, one, or other, courteous Reader, than for
thee, that is, to pin mi Faith upon any Man's Sleev; for fear he may carri it I
know not whither: yet I care not if I tell you, nai, I dare not but tell you,
that, of a truth, I am no Respecter of Persons, at less'st in this respect, and
that I own and love you, as I do mi own self; and if that be not fair, hang
fair: I dare not say yourself, if you will: which saieing is commended,
forsooth, for a great Piece of Wit and Law as it were, nai, it is avouched to
be one of the best that ever was, will, or can be made. But all this while I can
discern therein neither Law, nor Love, Wit, nor so much as good Manners; I am
so dull and dim too. Whilst Hypecrisie lies under the cloudi Brow of a
Pharisee: a ^heerfull countenance is the Emblem of Innocence, which excl^d^th
as well Moreseness, as Madness.
I never hitherto could understand, see, or hear, that Christianity and
Civilitie have at any time given the less'st bad, or unbecomimg Word, either
before the Faces, or behind the Backs of each other: much less fallen out, or gone
together, as w^e phrase it, by the ears. I must acknowledge mi small self greatly
engaged to both for their teaching me better Manners, and a more genteel Mode
than that of making personal Quarrels, or Reflections. Nor have I only of the
two, abovenamed, learned, but of other, too. I learn sometimes something of any
thing, or Person, yea, or Word. Word? O brave! Word? what do words signi^i?
what? in the ^udgment of wise Men, much; and in the Day of Judgment more: much
more than I need, or can indeed tell you. But a word to the Wise-Wel, I have
heard of a certain Word, O! it is Aposiopesis. That is, truly, a strange Word,
for it speaks by holding its Tongue. Peruse that Verse of the Evangelic Isaiah
XXII. 12.
Prophet, if this iniquity be purged from you, til you (or rather ye) di --
thus dreadfully in the Original, and nothing after it, but a silent Punctum.
There is another too, ( and but two shall I name in all). This is Prosop^poeia,
which is a wondrous Word, as strange as the former. This speaks to things
void both of Reason and Sens and Life. Consult with the same Chap. I. ver. 2. 1
Kings XIII. 2.
Prophet, and that Man of God mentioned in the Book of Kings. Nai, it
frequently among the best of Orators brings up the very Dead, and when so
raised and fetched up, makes them alive, and next to speak, and that
articulatly and distinctly, mightily well, and both audibly and laudably. Have a
care now of your Words, mind we, all and everi of us, all and everi of our
Words. You know who said, Man shall not live by Bread alone, but by everi Matthew.
IV. 4.
Word that proceeds out of the Mouth of God, was it not our Lord Christ? Told
he not the Devil that? Quoted He not the Scripture too for it? If I should sai
the Tongue is a Iam. III. v. 6.
World of iniquity, would not St. James be mi Compurgator, if any should tax,
blame, or quaestion me for so saieing? Mo, I dare venture to sai, there is a
World in a Word: yea more than that, vouch, that this whole World, and the other
likewise, were both made by one Ioh. I. v^ 1, 3.
Word. May be, you will beleev not one Word of all this? Well be it so, or not:
of this not a word more, than said, of this matter from me; who yet dearly
love words in their propriety: I wish it prove not to an excess, which I may
justly fear; seeing, that Great Linguist and Apostl evn of the Gentiles,
reproves (...) Ephesians. V. v. 4.
it self. What? Good words quaestioned, prohibited, spoken against? Urbanitie
it self ill-thought of, or, at best, a vanity? What shall we sai then, or
think of Cramp-words, or Criticisms, Iocs, or Witticisms, Railleries and
Drolleries, Quirks and Quillets, Trics and Trangams, Kniff-knaffs, Bimboms,
etc.? What of Whims and Shams, Punns and Flams, Stultiloquious Dialogs? What
then of Obscoenities and Scurrilities, Huffings and Dingings, AEquivocations
and Lies, Invectives and Satyrs, base Railings and malicious Detractions,
Accusations, Condemnations? But what of common Oaths, cursed Dejuries,
monstrous Perjuries, damnings most dreadful, Imprecations innumerous,
Execrations horrendous, Blasphemies stupendous; to pass by their Autors, the
infamous Inventers; their Vtterers, the villainous Venters; their We all may
^igh to sai, what we sadly see, o^r Rents like to prove our Ruin, our
Distractions our Destruction.
Abetters, the odious Fomenters? Why? were none wiser than I, with the Man
after God's own Heart, I should refrein from evn good words, in their praesence,
and be silent; or with the Archangel, disputing about the Body of Moses,
only say, O what a Rout There is about Roam's Outward Man of sin!
Look into self, What, art an Elf? Rout Antichrist within.
Bona verba, quaeso. E. H.

(though they were Devils I contended with) The Lord rebuke you. But the new Mode
is quite of another guise and other, far other-gets, Words, are the Courant,
pass for current Coin, and the newer-minted the more curious counted, yea, laid
up in store to be brought forth upon some public, or special occasion evn some
thereby worded to death by the learned anger of the Archilochus's of the Age.
What words can utter the Devilish Nois we make and that one against the other?
But what a confounded Bomb about the Pope? I know not the Man, (as Peter said
in another case, and a sad one we know it was) and, sure I am, I ow him nothing
but as he is, I suppose, a Man: so, I confess, I do the duty of Civil
Language. May I not say, I honor him as (if he be as they sai) a Temporal
Prince? If this may offend any of the littl ones of Christ, I can forbear: yet
these littl ones may, and ought, to bear a littl with me likewise: forasmuch as
I speak 2 Timothy I. v. 13.
sound Words, yea the very Words of the great God, as delivered by an Apostl,
who commands me to Tit. I^I. 2.
speak evil of no man, yea more (and as to love the Brotherhood so) to I P^t.
2. 17.
honor all men, and then -- And so much for this pra^sent of this particular
Point. Not meddling with Popish Doctrines and Policies, by which the very
Pillars and Foundations of the intellectual World, Reason, Morality, Civil
Government and Religion are all not only out of course, disordered and shaken,
but undermined, removed, rased down and dug up. Nor take I any delight to
relate what is credibly reported, if not recorded, of Pope Paul the third, who
as he lai on his Deathbed was heard to sai, he should shortly be resolved of
two Things, Whether there were a God and a Devil, an Heven and a Hell? Less'st
of all shall I have a Rencounter with the Apocalyptic Beast ( mark that) from
which, O God, keep Thou us; else all our watching, warding, training, guarding
and the best of endeavors will be in vain. For, as one divinely, it is the
immediate Praesence of the Lord, that must (not that in the inter, we may not
interpose and oppose with true Courage and Zeal, as well as renounce and abhor
with heart and soul all man^er of A Priestl^ Brat, by them engendered on
Ignorance, Fear and Sup^rs^it^on.
These three completly maks the triple Crown;
And still support old Rome's Imperial Throne.
How stily do the Priests by help of these
Make men beleev and then do what the^ pleas.

Papism foisted in among us; not barely that Popery which is openly and
publicly professed and propagated in their known and common Positions and
Principles, but that likewise, which is more un^^soernably, yet not less
dangerously, masqueraded and disguised in Sects; whether under the Name of
Faction, or Conscience) yet still, as above, it is the immediate Praesence of
the All-wise and the All-might^ that must both conduct us and secure us
Victory: by this alone we can hope to withstand the Fury of the Nations, the
Gates of Hell, and Plots of Papism that is a secular Devise,
Mere Trick of State in Reverend Disguise,
The Ambitious Spawn of later Centuries.

Papists.

But all this while setting aside the Whore, or Beast; how visibl are the nasti
and beastli sai-ings and doings that are amongst, nai against our The Church
is wounded and rent most desperately by the ev^^ Spirit of Division. Remember
we all the Apolog of Bessarion^ So humbly r^q^esteth E. H.
selves! What an Age, O! Oo! oh, ah, woe and aloss! do you the Reader and I the
Scribler live in! How am I After all that can be writ, or said, this same motto
mu^^ be subscribed, Peccatur, plu^ quam exaratur; in^^ vereor quam ^^
intelligatur. E. H.
nonplust for Expressions! Is it not ( to synchronize and symphonize a little)
an Anti-Ecclesia^tic, Anti-Fanatic (and to mouth out more) an Anti-phrastic and
Antichristian ( or more mildly, and where best) an Hyper-Caco-Critic Age? so
^illed and overgrown ( not to mention speculativ Infidelity, practicous
Atheism, horrid Lewis King o^ France severely punished Blasphemies, searing
their Lips with an hot Iron. And because by his comin and it was executed on a
great rich Citizen of Paris, ^m said (...) was a ^viant. He hearing it, said
before mani, I wol^ ^^ ^o^^ by searing mi own Lips, I could banish out of mi
Realm all abuse of Oaths.
Blasphemies, and all manner of Diabolism) with so much peevish passion and
pestilent pride ( by which only a Man becomes contentious) that men will not
yield one gry, iota, jod, or Chirik parvum ( bit, or whit, is a thing too big)
one unto the another. I would not be understood, or conceived, Candid Reader, (
if so you can be) to speak this of wise men ( wheresoever those be) who albeit
ever so much contended with, yet never so much as contend: well knowing, that
though men may have the right on their side, yet, for want of having their Spirit
right, be very erroniously censorious, short breathingly nosi, superstitiously
supercilious, immoraly obstreperous and most inevangelicly malevolous, vicious,
vitilitigious; wronging both themselves and other they convers with: being mani
parasangs ( in regard of their, so paratragaediating, mani Degrees ( in respect
of their so domineering with Rodomontado-language, brandishing, as it were,
with the Sword of their Mouth, as well as the Mouth of their Sword) not only
from the lowliness and meeknes of the Holy Lamb, but evn from the harmlesnes,
or hornlesnes of the common Dove, yea from the noted commendableness of the
English good Nature ( so proper to our Nation, that no other Language can tell
what Good Nature in Terminis, what the same verbatim translated, what the
Idiotism of it neaneth) nai, further, from the fair serenitie, fine sedateness,
charming sweetness, obliging candor and conquering Patience, notoriously famous
in mere Ethnic and Pagan Constitutions and Tempers. But a littl to imitate
Ahimaaz and to go, as he, by the way of the Plains. In these our days everi
man is for himself, is not then the Devil for him? Or, is God for us all, when
we are Dum singuli pugnant, universi vincuntur.
all one against another? Yet so it is. Everi man's Hand against Adam, and
Adam's against everi man. N. B. All more Ismaelites, than Israelites, or
Iesuelites. Loving Brethren are as rare Birds, as black Swans: not to talk of
remote Relations, Acquaintants, or Strangers. A Brother's Knife, Sword; against
a Brother's Throat, Heart. Iniquity abounds ( I fear to sai, yet I may) with
a Vengeance^ There are as mani Sins, as Saints, as Men: What prate I? Men? were
men ever so mani, one man might reckon all the rest; but the Sins of one Man
are more than he can count; how much more then, for which he can giv account?
No man's Head can number his Sins, being far more than the Hairs of it.
Assuredly in these 2. Tim 3. v. 1.
last Days there will hang over us, or stand upon us periculous tempestivities,
hard (...).
Seasons. Nations are become Abominations. Since the World was, never was the
World so wicked as now. It was in old times the wickedness of the World, but in
our, it is (the Tabls being terribly turned) a world of wickedness. I should
shamelesly, said I otherwise, li. What says the Apostl 1 Ioh. 2. 19.
John, confirms he not what I have affirmed? The whole World, says he,
lie's in wickedness; not wickedness, only, in the World. The case I take to be
damnably base, no less than abominably different, and such, as confounds (
however in mi thoughts) Philosophy it self: being in a Diameter and
absolutely opposite to the Rule of all Reason, Right Reason; for the Accident to
be recipient of the Subject. I know not, I speak solemnly, how to call the
wickedness of these last days; may I not write, according to all Chronologic
computation, the last hours; considering the time now and reflecting on that
past when those words were penned? I resume and acknowledge miself woefully at a
loss, so ineffably comprehensiv is the iniquity of this Centurie, that it self
alone contains the whole World: which heretofore was called a Seat of
Wickedness; nai all the Wickedness that was in it, was once concluded within the
compass of one Gardin. To make the best of a bad matter, we the most
degenerate Offspring of the first Adam (let us not name, for shame, without
better Manners, the name of the Second) have far ex^^^ed our Fore-father's
evil, and for and in our time have set up Sin at such a pitch, rate, height,
that it is moraly ( shall I sai, or immorally?) impossibl to imagine, how
Posterity should add to our iniquity! Sin is not only now customarily,
obstinatly and obduratly, in private, connived at, consented to and committed;
but autoritativly, exemplarily and Diabolicly, in public, countenanced,
encouraged, taught and ( what is our woe and worst of all) men are become ( to
add one drop of Mercy more to our Misery) irrevocably and irrecuperably and
impudently impious. In plain English we are from the Crown of the Head to the
Soal of the Foot, not barely wounded, bruised and putridly sore, but mortaly
Sick, senlesly diseased, and, as I dread, gasping and dieing, if not dead and
gone, without all Remedy: (...) Unless the Almighty appear in the Majesty, as
originaly, a Fiat and create Salvation for us.
(...). OF Great B^^^ain! how litl art Thou dwindled to! O England, the Land of
mi Nativitie, once the Terror and Wonder of foreign Nations, now may Thou,
with dread and shame too, wonder at thiself! Within thy Walls and Palaces
Goodness and Truth have not more Praecepts and Counsils than Contradictors and
Adversaries. Religion (aloss) is but taken up ( I wish I were mistaken in what
now I write) underhand, while Piety and Honesty li under-foot, and what more
foul Iniquity than feigned Sanctity? the old Proverb proclaims, NB. Ta^e
heed of those Serpents that are of the color of the ^ro^nd. Holy Paul does
beseech you to mark them: Romans 16. ^7. Lam misin^orme^ if the same, rendered
contrari may not as ^el be readd nigh. There are no Doctrines so perilously
r^p^g^ant to the Truth, as th^se that nearest resembl it. E. H.
dissembling Piety to be double iniquity. NAI, How may we lament, to see the
loathing of Manna, evn among Israelites! But if we look into the World: Oh ^he
monstrous Havoc that is made of Moralitie^ The manners of Men ( out of which
being bad, good Laws were bravely made) have now brought the very Laws
theirselvs, most basely, under their Subjection. Never more Laws than at this
Day, never any more lawless than at this Day. The Laws which men, suffering
wrongfully, run to for succor (as silli Sheep in a Storm for shelter to
Briars, or Brambls) prove littl better than those and serve but to tear off their
Skins; or, at softest and fairest, to turn their Fleeces all to tatters. Yea, a
pau'r man has now enough offended, if he be not abl to defend himself. Nai,
what one man does now, is an heinous crime, huge transgression and severely
punished: when what mani do is thought and judged well of, though much wors and
far more abominably base: provided it be done by Great Ones^ To stabb and kill
are both valor and skill. Men perish merely for and at Men's pleaceurs. It is
both the Rule and Practice to repel and repa^^ force with force and fraud with
fraud, most un-Christianly. The Christian's Laws are bought and sold: the
Christian Chraritie dead and buried, if not stinkingly rotten too. Lusts now
are become Laws; or if any venture to make these Sins, be bold to sai those
must be, very venial: and yet, which is strange, a man shall be made a preie for
a word.

As for Wealth that rides (up-a-Cock-hors ( pass by the term) while Worth
holds but the stir up. Yet if the Devil should com to me, as formerly, when
Job i. 6.
the Sons of God presented themselves before the Lord, he came likewise among
them and mon lately to the very Son of God Mat. iv. 5.
Himself, though with an If and should show to me all the Glories of this lower
World, as he did to our Lord and sai to me, as to mi Jesus, (...), and then
com again with his Devilish If, yet I hope, I should be so strong in the Grace
which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, as not to take him for mi Lord and deni Him
who bought me and fall to worship that Fiend for all the World. For, to speak
as a Man and somewhat as a Philosopher, Mat. iv. 9.
I never One being readi ( I should have said, nigh) to di, clap^^ a 22 s piece
into ^his Mouth, and said, some wiser than other some, if I must leav all the
Rest, yet this I will take with me.
coveted to be master of any thing without me; insomuch that I have ever
thought ( since I knew how to use mi thinking faculty) a mere worldli man to
be the greatest wonder in the World. But woe! and so it is. The World, the
Flesh, and the Devil are, indisputably and indubitably, the Trinity, which is
best understood, and in sequel most adored. Hence we see Praecepts will do no
good against Sins, no not Jehovah AElohim's Decalog, the Lord God's Law of the
Ten Words, against men's Lusts, animosities, enormities, Anomies. Nai Mercies,
the most tender, melt us, mend us not and Judgments, the most severe, harden
and make us wors and what will be the end thereof? Are not these a Lamentation
and will be for a lamentation? O! Where are the Moses's, the Jobs, the Samuels,
the Daniels, and the Ieremiahs, the Mourners in Israel for the Abominations
thereof? It is, I confess, a good fault ( be favourabl, I prai, to the Phrase)
to afflict our selves for others Faults and to be grieved thereat; so we be not
guilti thereof: but to me it seems next to impossibl to look at praesent to
other men and yet have a praesence of mind at the same time and be our selves.
Howl we therefore woe Ezechiel xxx. 3.
worth the Daic! shall it be the time of the Heathen? How i the nobl Vine turned
into a degenerate Plant of a strange Vine to the Lord God! What, though we wash
with Nitre and take much Soap, yet our I^r. vi. 22.
iniquity is marked before Jehovah. O the Wickednesses perpetrated with an
high hand and repeted in the sight of the Sun! Oh! the stupendous prodigies of
the innumerabl impieties that are daily, hourly, minutely and more, heard,
understood, felt, smelt, acted under (or according to Copernicus, above) the
Sun. Surely (I speak it in sober sadness, the oneli Sercher of Hearts knows)
the universal Fabric of the World turns, til it be overturned and burned too,
as it will be for a Witch (of which there is enough and but too much proof and
evidence) I sai the whole frame of the World ( seems to me and I think and
take miself to be very free from any vertigo in mi cerebello) to circumgyrate,
to wheel, whirl and turn round about in a Topsi-Turvi ( excuse the expression)
as if everi man went the wrong way to work; All Arsi-varsi ( words are
wanting, what shall we sai?) the clean, nai soul, contrari way.

NB. Lord have Mercy upon us! Christ have Mercy upon us! Lord have Mercy
upon us! we need all cri and cri again and make it, at less'st, our Common
Prayer; if peradventure that may praevale and be proper for this day and time
we live in; where not only the Whore, the Beast, and the false Prophet are, but
the Red Dragon, the Devil and Satan sit upon the Throne reigning in great
state, holding out the Scepter. For without dispute, or doubt, less can neither
be said nor seen, so true and apparent it is. We now celebrate, as it were, the
very Incarnation, yea, the Inauguration, yea, the Aggrandization, as I may sai,
and Exaltation and very Glorification of the O Res! O mores! bone vir, vel
Daemona adores. E. H.
Prince of Devils; such a damning crew we cannot but sadly view reigning,
raging, roaring: that, to sai no more, Torie hisself must turn out of door. For
the Abyss of Hell is opened^ and Hell it self unspeakably has Isa. 5. 14.
enlarged it self, having been til now confined, but now is com up and broken
loos upon us publicly, got above ground to act its part here on the stage of
this World. But I draw the Curtein and go and glad I can escape too so, and
leav it to the Rev. 22. 11.
Angel's Judgment, but the God of this 2 Cor. 4. 4.
Age, I mean, the Devil's Commandment, He who is filthi, let him be filthi still
-- Nevertheless let him remember withal that he must and shall (who is thus his
most humbl and obedient Servant, remane, nolens volens, without, evn the very
Gates, ( where dogs are) of the holy City, the New Jerusalem. For there is no
entrance thereinto but by these Rev. 22 14.
Gates. What then will the woeful consequences hereof be? No less, nor more, nor
other than these, that when the inexorabl Messenger, whose Name is the First
Death, shall com (as certainly, and yet, as uncertenly he will) and uncloath and
unflesh him too; the Second Death, when the first has done, shall follow and
Hell (which he shall find to be more than a Bugbear, or Scarcrow) when he
goes through the Gulf, that Luke 16. 26. Job. 26. 7. Datur ergo vacu^m contra
Pagan^rum omnium Philosophiam (...).
empti place, void space, or great fixed Luke 16. 26. Job. 26. 7. Datur ergo
vacu^m contra Pagan^rum omnium Philosophiam (...).
passage to it) H^ll, I sai, (once again, because I would not have him forget
where it is, least he unhappily fall into it) shall, must and will have him and
hold him fast too (whatsoever loos opinion he in his Lifetime, here on Earth,
might have been of as to it) or grant, it should, or could not; yet he falling
in, and it being, confessedly, the Ezec. 26. 20. Psalm. 88. 6.
lowest part of the created World, and under the waters too, and that far
beneath the Sea in a much lower place, vorago, or, as abovesaid, Abyss;
moreover, (if the Scriptures of Truth may be credited) a Prove. 27. 20. and 30.
15.
Craving (beyond the Hors-leeche's two daughters, the Grave, or the barren
Womb, the Earth, or the Fire) and 1 Pet. 3. 19. Matthew. 25. 30. Mark 9. 45,46.
hid and horribly dark, and a certain definit 2 Samuel 22. 6. Psalm. 18. 5. and
116. 3.
doleful place: But how Psalm. 86. 13. Prove. 19. 18. Revel. 21.3. Non est ab
orco qui te reducat Orpheus.
deep, tho the remotest from heven, the most high God, alone, knows. To
repete, for the sake of a persisting and persevering Sinner, by way of
caution, should Hell have no hands to hold him, or were there no keys to these
Chambers of Death, wherewith to lock him in, (both which are as falls as Judas,
or the Devil) yet still (I cannot sai non obstante) nor still, in the sens we
most commonly take it, if there were no more nois, than the wailing and
gnashing of teeth there) Yet still, I continue and proceed to ask (and let him
answer) what can he hold on, when in; or what can he hold by to help him to
get upward; much less up and out out again. Hic labor, hoc opus est -- But to
help a littl at this dead lift and it is but a very littl and that badly too,
He need not fear falling into it, for he and such as he is, so continuing
and forgetting God, shall be Psalm. 9. 17.
turned into, nai, rather than that should fail, Isa. 14. 15. Psalm. 88. 6.
brought, Mark 9. 45. and 18. 9. Mat. 5. 30. 2 Pet. 2. 4.
cast and thrust, or drivn down into Hell; that Hell, on the other side and far
beyond and below the profundities of Sheol, where the Psalm. 9. 17.
Gehenna of Fire is, and where are (to speak a litil of it) the profoundest
sorrows, the Plaguiest miseries, the worst entertainment (...)olt damned
Company; whose very languag^ (...)h, oo, o, woe, and, at most and best,
Belching (...)sphemies for ever, ever.

This is but littl to what the Scriptures tell
Of this confounded dreadful place of Hell;
But what is meant, may some sai, by all this?
Nothing, but that we may not walk amiss,
But enter through the Gates to the City of Bliss;
Where the AEternal Tabernacles are:
Whither Christ is ascended to praepare
Mansions for his Discipls, that there He
And they together may for ever be.
For in this high, this holy, happi place
Thei'l see Him, as He is, evn face to face.
' O strive we then, strive all to enter in,
' It Is only violence does heven win,
' And keeps, through Grace, from Hel^, the Devil and Sin.
' Not that, although the Gate, yea and the Way,
' Be The famous Sir Thomas Moore meeting Bishop Fisher of Rochester going
before the King's Commission^rs at Lambeth, saluted him thus, Well met mi Lord,
I hope, we shall meet in ^eaven. To which the Bishop r^plied, This should be the
way, Sir^ Thomas, ^or it is a very strait Gate we are in. They both, says my
Au^hor, suffered for refusing the Oath of Supr^macie.
strait and nar^ow, as the Scriptures sai,
' The difficulty must in these two li:
' Not so, it is in the It was the saieing of a Person of Honor, an elect
Lady, very usual with her: How easi Conveniences are to be found, and yet how
hand is it to find them. This I take to be apposite.
Persons. Ask you, Why?
' Because I see, so is the Mat. 7. 14.
Scripture's mind.
' Where? in the next words, Few there are it do find
That is, the way. Away then with such thoughts,
Which lai the hardness there; Thei're good for noughts.
T'affirm th'access hard, is the Devil's Sons;
High violation of God's Providence!
We All, as well for, as by Him, were made,
Then how can Goodness infinite be said
To hold from us, concealed, the needful thing,
The better part that should us to Him bring?
Since that is the prime intent of our Creation;
The contrari, Blasphemous Defamation.
No, no. The Tree of Life, in Paradise,
(Th'AEternal Life's true Type) does in a trice
Sweetly and clearly make it to appear,
Because we know 'twas not forbidden there.
The Freedom givn to it and to all the rest,
Except the Tree of Knowledge, it is confessed,
Wel-weighd, much aggravate's the first offens:
But sweeten's, heighten's Divine Providence.
And since the Goodness in the Deity
Is full the same, and never can lessened be.
For all that wretched, horrid, Hellish Baul^
Men, wors than Adam, make about his fall,
We well may think, concei^, conclude, the way
It self's not so perplexed, as Erasmus was wont to f^i in his Time^ That to
preach with mani Ministers, was (...) perfricare frentem and linguain yolver^.
Pulpits sai.
But less'st of all can it conceived be,
That finding this right way, should, as we see,
Be made depend on curiosity
Of Arts and Sciences; on Knowledge, which
Created in pure Adam such an itch
After Divine Perfections' highest Pitch,
To be like God, ( This Satan well did know,
Would bring him with a vengeance down below)
That 'twas his fall; Preachers your selves less show.
Leav quaestions curious, much more those uncouth,
The Word is nigh Thee, evn in thy Mouth,
And in thy Heart, we need not stretch, climb, Reach,
That is the Romans x. 6.
word of Faith which we do preach:
That if thou with thy mouth shall Christ confess,
And in thine heart beleev and that, no less,
God raised Him from the dead, Thou shall saved be.
This Gospel is, this the Evangelie.
Not, Learning's Gunpowder, One said that Aristotle's Schoal was a great Scold.
School-subtiltie.
Here no divisions are, no offenses here,
Repugnant to sound Doctrine do appear.
Which who make, wee're to Romans xvi. 17.
mark, void ev'ri where
It is reported of Iovinian that Pious Emperor ( whose symbol was, Scopus
vitae Christus) that he said to the Orthodox and Arrian Bishops, contending
about Faith: Of your Lea^ning I cannot so well judge, nor of your subtle
Disputations, bu^ I can obse^v which of you have the better behavior.
Priests no Divisions sow, less spread abroad.
O studi peace with truth. Keep to the Right Road.
All captious notions, long deductions shun.
Do not torment the Text; nor from it run.
With Words don't darken Knowledge: that is not good.
The pure milk of the Word don't turn to blood.
Don't wrong us of our food: for that is too much.
Lai not on us those burdens, Yee'l not touch.
Christ's yoke is easi and his burden light.
He speak's, write's Love: Ye love to speak and write
And ye ^gno what ^ Howso'er, don't make us fight.
Dear Reader, this Digression pardon, prai.
Yea, think that truth and I no less could sai.
Com, let us be friends, why should we not agree?
Nai, we must love, would we our Lord's Friends be.
This caution let not slip, but on it sleep.
Remember whose Commands we are to keep.
Let old things pass, do Thou the New John xiii. 34, 35.
Command,
S^udi thou that; enough you will The way has been always the same since the very
moment of Christ's consummatum est. E. H.
understand
And moderate be to all. The Lord's at hand.
He com's; He com's Who Will judge both Quick and Dead.
What? You judge either? Better off your Head.
The Truth is I am not a littl pleaced with that common saieing among the Scots
upon one Dead, tho De mortuis nil nisi been.
hanged. Of whom when they hear any speak ill, they cri Hush, He is justified.
There is no Observator, with There is none but Ghosts and Goblins that fight
with the Dead, was the sai-ing of Plancus, being told that Asinius Pollio had
written certain invectives against him; which should not see light til after his
Death, to the end he might not answer aught.
allowance, in any such way, upon any person deceased: Speak well, or not at
all, of the Dead, is an old honest sai among our selves: May I not Sai it is a
good Proverb? Undoubtedly the Devil showed himself more a Gentleman, or if that
may offend, more civil however, to poor Job than mani are to the Deceased: who
in this are baser Accusers of the Brethren than He. For St. Job, was then
alive and might, because he was abl and had the opportunity (which was fair)
to answer, plead, or travers. Recollecting mi self, we have another ancient
and excellent Adage by way of a severe Reprehension and strict Prohibition,
Rake not up the Ashes of the Dead, as if he were more than a Rascal, or Rogue,
that would offer that inhumanitie, which the scientific Graecs called (...),
Graeculus esu^iens renegabit, juss^ris. E. H.
gnawing of dead men's Bones; They gave such a Dog that Bone to pick, or rather
threw it to him and at him. History Lege Historiam, re fias historia.
(whereof mi reading has not been much, and wherein I never affected to show
that littl of which I am a Register, Master, or Possessor) tells us, that one
of our Monarchs, by name John, King of England, would not have the Bones of one
(who while living had been his great Enemy) untombed, though wished and
solicited by a Courtier, no small Favorite, so to do. Oh no, cried the King,
would all mine Enemies were as honorably buried. Com, let all us Englishmen be
Gentlemen and shame all sli Observators by the Candor of our convers and
Carriage. O let our Moderation be known to^ Phil. 4. 5. Peruse, p^nder and
practice the profound Morals of verse the 8, That littl Bibl you know it to be
without peradventure, all pure good Divinity. E. H.
all men. The Lord is at hand and Judgment at the Door. The best of us all would
be glad at the Day of Doom (though now we be dooming daily one another) to have
our grains of allowance and why not now? May we not fear in this our Day
Belshazzar's TEKEL, i. e. Thou art weighed in the Balances and art found
wanting? Christan Reader, why should you and I be found, I sai not so much
wanting, but so much as wanting to our own selves; specialy in ^o plain and
perilous a point? Pleace, I beseech you humbly, to accept of this Distich: It Is
one man' work to have a serious sight
Of his own sins and judge himself aright.
O judge not, least you be judged: but if you will judge, judge this Rom xiv. 13.
rather, that no man put a stumbling Block or an occasion to O preserve the
Conscienc^, whatever you do, from being offended: which may slumber ^erhaps,
but never slee^eth pro^ound^y; and is armed, as one said, wi^h a power more
than Papal; by which it erec^eth a Tribu^al within Psyc^e's own Quarter^, (as
is wi^^lly and wor^hily expr^ssed) summoning, arraigning, judging, excusing,
and mani times condemning herself, I me^^, the Soul, that Mistress, Governess,
Qu^en within her own Family, Province, Territories.
fall in his Brother's way: chiefly, thy weak Brother's, for whom Christ died:
you will find it, at the long-run, the best and safest way, be sure. Happily yet
you may sai your Judgment in this matter is you know not how. Giv me liberty
to sai, as a Physician was wont, pleasantly to delicate Dames, when they
complained they were they could not tell how, but yet they could not endure to
take any Physic; Your only way is to be sick and then you will be glad to take
any Medicine. Away, away with such indifference in such a dangerous point, you
will turn a conscientious Persecutor, if you have not a great care and so be
condemned by the very Turk. For I read of a certain Sultan, or Sultan ( taken
among them for their Prin^e, King, or Emperor) who died at the Siege of Zigetum
(the Inhabitants of which are now, not called Zigae or Zigi, but, Circassi,
upon the Coast of the Euxine Sea, in Sarmatia Asiana) being persuaded by the
Mufti (the High Priest, Chief Churchman, Metropolitan, Archbishop, Supreme
Clergiman, Spiritual Superintendent, Superlative Minister, Head, Pope, as it
were, among the Turks, created by the Emperor himself, I would have all
understood) This Turkish Emperor, I sai, who was persuaded by this Mufti, or
rather extremely urged by him, by no manner of means, to suffer so mani
Religions as were in his Dominions, as judging all such dreadfully dangerous to
the wellbeing of the Empire, He replied, I have heard you, now hearken to me,
remember what I sai, and know and beleev with me, That a Nosegaie of mani
Flowers smells far more sweet than one Flower only. Which said, he had
done, and ( if my Author has not lied) immediately died. O that our The first
Principle of Policy is for a State to praes^rv it self: of Divinity for to
excommunicate spiritual Anim^siti^ (E^gla^d's Epidemic diseas) and quite slai
self! E. H.
animosities had so done here; but I am much afraid, it will fall out To reform
things by a Civil War is, at best, but to let on^ blood by giving him a base
dash on the n^se.
among us, or be as much dove, as the Sermon, a good honest Englishman was
asked about by one of his Nighbors, if it were don? No, says he, it is said,
but it is not done, neither will be, I fear, in haste. So, I fear, as to the
state of things, I could ( as a certain King in the company of Bion the
Philosopher did) for grief tear mi hair, but that some man might sai of me, as
Bion did of this King so doing, Does this Man (said he) think, that baldnes
will assuage grief? But is not this given as meat to an Elephant, that one is
afraid of? As Augustus used to sai, Petitions to Princes should not so be. Or,
it is likely, I shall be served by most Readers as one was by Aristotl, who,
after a long idl Discourse, concluded (as I was going to do, if I had not
thought of this) thus: Sir, I have been too tedious to you with mani Words: In
good sooth (said that Old Philosopher and Sage) You have not been taedious to
me, for I gave no heed to any thing you said Howsoever, I will venture to fetch
you (now mi hand is in) one Story more, and that is of the Ambassadors of
Samos, who (and who can tell how this may take?) being come to King Cleomenes
of Sparta, praepared with a prolix Oration to stir him up to wage war against
the Tyrant Polycrates, g^eedily expected his reply: The which after he had
listened a great while unto them, was this ensuing, Touching your Exordium I
have forgotten it; the middl I remember not, and for the Conclusion, I will do
A Soldier of Augus^us when his Adversar^e's through it was in his power, he ^^ng
^he Retre^t sounde^, gave over his violence with these word^, m^lo obedire
D^ci, q^am hostem occidere.
nothing. So I shall now conclude this Scoene with that of Alexander the Great,
when one wondered why he not only not killed his Foes, but took them to be his
Friends: It seems, says he, to thee profitabl to kill an Enemy while I
fear him, and make him mi Friend, while I advance him. Nor is there any way,
when all is thought, said, writ, or done that can be like to it; and therefore
to one, telling Henry the fourth King of France that there is nothing does
sooner make those who are out of their wits to become temperate than the
punishment which is inflicted on them: the King did bravely interrupt his
Speech, and Divinely told him, Mercy pardons those who have not deserved it,
and the juster the Lewis ^he twel^^h King of France, when he heard that the
Pope had ex^^emely cu^sed him, mildl^ said, This Pope was made to c^rs, but ^ot
^o prai.
wrath is, the more commendable is Mercy. Nor is that of Lewis ^he twelfth
King of France less remarquabl, who ^ooking upon the Roll of King Charles his
servants, and finding two who had been his deadli Inimies, upon each of those
names he made a But why do the wicked so persecute the Righteous? Because ^he
Devil is in them; for it is worth observing that before Judas ^ent to the
High Priest to inform against and betrai his Master, (...) is said that the
Devil en^red into Him. see Luke xxii. verse. 48. ^mpared with John xiii.27.
(a sad omen, ^s these two thought) wherewith they, being in ^reat
perplexity, supposed the Gallows to be prae^ared for them: which their fear
being discovered to the King, He sent them word, To be of bon ^orage, of good
cheer ( as we sai) for He had crossed ^ll their evil deeds out of his
remembrance. Nor can forget (tho I well know, where you may, gentl Rea^er, sai
that I did, and that not very far from this ^^ace) that memorable passage of
Antoninus Pius, ^ost worthi of that name, some speaking in his prae^nce of wars
and battles, that Julius Ca^sar, Scipio and Hannibal had fought and overcame in
the field, ^ee responded, let everi man hold what opinion he ^^inketh good,
and prais what pleaceth him; but for mi ^on part, I do more glory in conserving
peace mani ^ears, than with wars to conquer mani Battles. ^he Emperor He was
lik^wise wont to sai that to compel the Couscience, (...) to force heaven.
Maximilian the second could not en^^re that war should be made for Religion,
and was ^ont to sai, That it was a deadli sin to seek to force men's
Consciences, the which belongs to God only. Here is much Gold in a littl
ore; or Diamonds, and ^^ch (and so polished, that further labor is su^er^luous
to fit these for use; these need but using: ^^ke some I have read of which grow
purely smooth. may sai of these Potentates abovenamed, their ^ords are
Sententiae potius quam sermones, qua^que ^^gnificant verius quam exprimunt.
When I am very serious I am all for Isidores of whom it is said that he spoke
not words, but the very Substance a^ Essences of things. Other worders as there
are t^^ mani, not to When a Pirat said to one o^ his fellows, VVo to us if w^
known; an honest man in the same s^ip rep^ied, And woe to^ if ^ be not known.
conceal some ( I hate tho all personal ^^^^lections) of our impertinently idl
Pulpit-Prate^^ or, if you will, too busily laborious Cushion-Cuffe^^ such and
mani mo such lungs, were it not boie-is^ co^ld hiss out of doors. Not that if
such Asses s^^ kick me, should I set mi wit to their, and kick them ag^ as
Socrates said to one who wished him to rev^^^ himself of a Fellow who had realy
kicked him. W^^ not this Repartee like a Socrates? It was certe^^ As the old
Cynic, being told that mani despised hi^ well answered. It is the wise man's
part and port^ to suffer Fools: Why not? Fools are often foils (to^ o^f and make
the Wise mani times far more O^posita ju^ta se posita elucescunt magis. This i^
known Maxim.
i^^^^strious. The truth is there is no avoiding them, (...) here. If any would,
or that he may not, greatly fea^ I shall be bold to tell him he must not be
here. T^^ Proverb instructs us all in this point, sai-i^^^ He who is afraid
of everi pile of grass, must not piss a meddow. Which puts me in mind of a
mem^^rabl That this Re^ation is undoub^edly true, I the more (...) be^^ev,
b^^a^s ^f that Dutch Proverb, which tells me (...) b^ing^th himself i^to
nee^less dangers, di^th the Devil's Ma^^
passage of Sr. Horatio Vere, when in the Pa^^tinate a Council of war was
called, and debat^^ whether they should fight, or not? some Dutch Lo^^ said ( a
name King James would nevr to them allow, (...) Honor's Fountain never in them
did flow) nai, t^^ argued, urged, that the Enemy had mani pee^^ of Ordinance
in such a place, and therefore it (...) extremely dang^rous to engage in a
fight: That br(...) Nobleman retorted, Mi Lords, if ye fear the mouth of ^he
Cannon, ye must never com into the field. The ^ike may be said of Knaves, but
I turn away from them, and beg your diversion, kind Reader, bee^^g it is such a
sad, glad, bad, mad world we live (...), so take leav to tell you the sai-ing
of a merri ^^llow, ( an ounce of Mirth being worth a pound of Sor^^w, and
Burton's melancholy into the Bargain) It is ^is. That in all Christendom there
were neither Scho^^rs enough, Gentlemen enough, nor Jews enough. Not the (...)st, for
that then so mani would not be doubl and ^^^ebl Beneficed; Not the second, in
that so mani ^^^sants are put in and ranked among the Gentry; ^or the last,
because so mani Christians profess so ^uch Usurie. I hope, you will not sai of
me now, ^^at is said of the Germans, that they understand more ^an they can
utter, and Henry the fourth King of France seeing the Chapel which Family of
Bass^m Pierce had builded, and reading this verse ^e Psalm, which was set down
for an Emblem, Q^id retri^m Domino pro omnibus quae retribuit mihi? He said,
Bas^ Pierce, as a German, should have added, Calicem accipiam.
drink more than they (...) carri^. I have not, I think, so carried the ^atter,
or miself. If any should of me speak so ^^l, I must subjoin, or rejoin that of
the wisest of (...)n (then so accounted and declared by the Oracl) (...). Alak!
the man has not yet learned to speak well, (...) I have learned to contemn what
he speaks. This ^^courageth me to mention here that sai-ing of ^^smi di
Medici, accounted one of the Wits of Ita^^ whose following sai-ing so mani find
so much (...) son as to make it Renowned, when he said, I have ^^rned by the
Scriptures to love mine Enemies; I never there read, that I was to forgive mi
^^^ends. To me this seems more a flash of wit in^^^d, than any Light of
Wisdom, or the soliditie of (...)d sens. He should have com forth with Cardinal
^umnus, one of his own Countrymen, and spoken as he to the purpose, who when
the Pope threatn^^ to take away his Cardinal's Hat, faced Him wi^^ this answer,
evn His own Holiness: That then (...) would put on an Helmet to pull Him out of
his Thr^^ A ^l^wn accosted the Bishop of Collen ministering i^ Templ like a
Bishop, but as he was a Duke, g^ing guarded a Tyrant, Whither thin^est thou the
Bishop shall go, when Duke is damn^^?
This is something like Steph^n's Cap, as we s^^ not the Cardinal's. However I
should be loath to (...) listed under him, remembering that of Luther (w^^ was far
from a Coward, for he feared not to (...) under that Roof that was tiled with
Devils) (...) He would be very unwilling to be a Soldier in that ^^^^mie where
Priests were Captains: because the Chr^^^ (to add nothing else) not the Camp was
their pro^^^ place. May I not praesume now to praedict, co^^^dering the pains I
have somewhat taken to be Compilator, (or rather as one of the common C^^^ctors)
not to be dealt with for these mi citations, by Theocritus, an ill Poet
repeting mani of her ^^^ses, was; to whom when he asked him, which (...) best
liked? answered: Those which he omit Well enough. If this sli Sarcasm should be
mi (...) I shall not fall into any passion: I have had a s^^^ Chancerie, which,
a Gentleman said, (who chec^^ for his choler by one who proposed Job to him a
pattern of Patience) Job, he was confident, ver had. So I will on, yet a while,
for fea^^ omitting what some may like; To giv you some (...) though very few;
which, if dislik^d, I shall not re^^^ to take again. Not that I take miself to be
like, near aequal to, that man full of Words, I have (...) of, who took himself
to be a great huge mi^^ wit, made his boast, always bragging, that was the
leader of the discourse in what Comp^^^ soever he came, and none, said he, dare
spe^^^ mi praesence, if I hold mi peace, for fear of some such Reprimand as this
( givn then to this Bragadocio) viz. No wonder, answered one, for they are all
struck dumb at the miracl of your Silence. How far was this babbling fellow
from that judicious Statesman whose Apophthegm this was: He who knows to
speak well, know^th likewise where to hold his peace: wisely concluding, Think,
before you speak, an hour; before you promise, a day. Now, Reader, if I may
ask what you I think, tell, prai: An Hodg-podg it is I say. Lick enough. I
heard one Dutchman spraken that variety is perplexity. I read in one Seneca,
and he wrote varia lectio delectat. Now am I almost at mi wit's end. You will
happily reflect and sai that may soon be, because I had but a littl way to it.
Farther likely, that this Praefacing Porch will be bigger than the whole House:
These Gates than the City. I know you allude to Mindum, but mi mind to me is
a There is a Story of the Persia^ Counsilors, wh^, when aske^ by their King,
(supposed Cambyses) in love with his own Sister, If any of their Laws did, or
could admit a man ^o marri ^is Sister? responded negativly; but yet affirmed,
there was a Persi^n Law, which declared that their King mo^ght do what he
pl^aced.

-- Credat Iudaeus Apella,
Non ^go; Tu, Lector, f^rsan mihi dicere possis.

Ki^gdom. You Retort, He who his humor will ^ull^ill: His humor is himself to
kill. This is ominous if not abominous: This praesage's something more than that
is ordinari: Therefore refrein. O Wo^^^^^full! This causseth me to call to
mind the Gr^^e ^ato, when one asked counsil of Him in s^ber earnest ^ What harm
he thought aboded him ( so was the word then as I understand) because Rats had
gnawn his Hose. He merrily, for all his Gravitie, answered: That it was a
strange thing to see that; but it ha^ been more strange, if his Hose had
devoured the Ra^^. This Story makes me troubl you with that Tr^^dition of
King Henry the Eighth's Fool, commi^^ into the Court and finding the King
transpor^^^^ with an unusual joi, boldly asked him the cause there of: to whom
the King answered: It was, beca^^ his Holiness had honored him with a Style more
em^^nent than any of his Ancestors. O good Harrie (quo^^^ed the Fool) let thou
and I defend one another, a^^ let the Faith alone to defend it self. What a
va^^ glorious point was this? How plainly did the fo^^ evn point at them both
for a coupl of Fools I re^^koning it all vanity. Which last words force me (
nolentem and I know not how to sai volentem) t^ acquaint you with a Kentish
famous Story: A Knig^^ whereof having spent a great Estate at Court, a^^
reduced himself to one Park and a fair House in it was further ambitious to
entertain Queen Elizabe^^ ( of blessed memory) at it. To that purpose he h^^
new painted his Gates, with a Coat of Arms, and Motto overwritten thus, o^a
VANITAS, i^ great golden Letters. The Lord Treasaurer Bu^^leigh, attempting to
read, desired to know (...) the Knight what he meaned by oia: who told hi^ it
stood for omnia. The Lord replied, Sir, strange at it very much, you having
made your omn^ so littl as you have, you notwithstanding make yo^ VANITAS fo
large. To enlarge not mu^^ more, because of this Box I have given miself; o^^ly
I am bold to endeavor the recoverie of one o^^ Story though far inferior to
either of the former; b^^ yet more proper to what will follow. It is of on^
Enatius at Roam, a certain man so named, somwha^ aged and of a condition,
complexion, or constitution, naturaly, importune, ambitious, quarrellous,
querilous, mutinous, and full of tumult, hubbub and garboil. The Emperor
Adrian (He who said, Turba Medicorum perii, and under whom 10000 Soldiers
were at one time martyred) being advertised, that Enatius was dead, He
strangely fell into a great laughter, and protested, vowed and ( some add he
knowing Enatius so well) swear, That He could not a littl wonder, how he
could intend to die; considering his so littl leisure, and his so great This
Enatius was more mischi^vo^sly busi than the Lord of Eppi^g's Fool, of whom it
was said, Tha^ he was allwaies busi and had nothing to do.
business both night and day. Thus you have an end here of squabls and brabls
and a Gallimaufreie of Stories. I shall close with this Epitaph on two
contentious coxcombs that were pecking at each other as long as they could
stand to weet, (to wit, to blunder and be daub) or rather, to wet, cons^dering
all circumstances, viz. Two falling out into a Ditch ^hei fell;
Their falling out, was ill: but in, was well.
Whether this be true or not, is not so much material: were it altogether a
Fabl, yet if you put it all together, you will find it not at all impertinent,
for in the first Line the Parallel is obvious; in the other the moral good;
NB. in both the end aequal, yea Excellent: far better (I cannot but beleev than
we, in all probability, shall Our Church and State-Divisions and Feuds with
the bitter Zel^, undue contentions and irregular Heats (the effects of our
Lusts and not of our Religion) have done more mischi^f than all the
Perse^btions put together. E. H.

Audito nomine Pacis ^biit Papa Sixtus. Morn, Mist. p. 593.

To^ mani, like the Sarmatians, are so barbarous as that they know not what it
means, quid sit non, intelligatur. Florus Hist. Romans l. iv. p. 403.


com to. We, who are so desperately blinded with the mists and clouds and
darkness of praejudice, passion, pride, envy, hatred, malice, and all manner of
uncharitablnes, that though we be fallen into the Ditch, notwithstanding, we are
falling upon one another in the Ditch; that is visibl: and there plunging one
the other over head and ears ( as we mouth it) and that so: that see, we shall
never ( I fear so) the way out again: at less'st to me it so ( rebus sic
stantibus, vel verius obstantibus) seem invisibl. Ye have heard that it was
said by them of old time, Happi is the man whom other men's harms do make to
beware: but I Cautelam abundantem non nocere a^^irmatur: Ubi vero ipsam videmus
expertentiam non docere negatur. Ita E. H.
sai unto you who am but one and of new time, How unhappi is the man whom
neither other men's harms, nor yet his own, do make to beware! What Wars! what
Bloodshed! what De^tructions have we beheld in the State! what Factions! what
Fractions! what Di^tractions do we behold in the Church! what in all men's
minds! In a word what? or rather, indeed, what not? Let me now tell you, sweet
Reader, ( possibly you may sai it was but reasonabl, I dare sai it is
seasonable) what, with a greedi Ear, and a bl^ed^ng Heart, I heard from one,
sai-ing, Gladly do I remember those happi days ( now happi only in the
remembrance) that Golden Age, wherein we had but one Truth, but one Way, in
which men walked lovingly, without contentious Rob, Will. and Davy
Keep well thy Pa^er noster and Ave;
And if thou will the better speed
Gang no farther than thy Creed.
Sai well and do none ^ll,
And keep thy self in safety still.

justling one another, when those Silver Trumpets of the Sanctuary gave no
uncer^en sound; when the way to heaven was, though a narrow, yet ( as the
Poetaster above sung, sounded, or noised) a plain and direct path, i. e. not
blocked up by envious Censures, by Bulki Doctrines, by distracting clamors. An
humbl and hearti practice of the sober, righteous and godli Truths, ( though as
common as the Common-Praier it self, or as homo is a common name to all men) in
those days, alone necessari, without doubt, to Salvation, is far more safe
and sure, more blessed and happi, than all the lofti notions and towering
speculations of bustling Heads and too busi Brains. Which considering
compels me to think, sai, conclude, and beleev that there is some Reason in
the old Scotch Rhythm which I put at the Illyricus, when on^ quaeried of him,
why ^he Old Translations (of ^he Bible) had no Vowels? I think (says he) that
they had no Consonan^^, for the^ could not argree among ^hemselvs.
Bottom for their perusal. The way, in the very Jewish Church, was easi
enough, for the Peopl in general and had littl, or no difficulty in it, as to
the apprehending what was to be by them performed: ^or as for the Ceremonial
Law, which, I confess, was full of Mystery, that only concerned their Clergy
and Scribes. And in the Christian Church our way is far from being taedious,
or our burden heavi: why then should we add length to the one and weight to
the other, by an addition of unnecessaries. The whole of man's Being, Business
and Blessedness, is not involved in much difficulty. Nai the Christian
Religion, Praecepts and Practice are all plain, clear easi, fully guiding one
in all natural, civil and religious Duties: And for Points of Faith, these are
neither mani, nor hard to be ^ound: yet to think those atteinabl by the reach
Textus non fa^lit. Multos speciosa fe^ettit
Glossa. Dei ver^o nit^re tutus eris.
But when Glossed upon by Tallow-chandler, may not one truly sai that there i^
a Thief in the Candle?


of Reason ( the praesent attemt of most of our modern Doctors) is to make
divine Revelation it self unnecessari; and though the use of Reason, I
acknowledge, to be one of mi best Weapons, yet I shall not dare so to manage it;
for the force of it in me is such as causes me to conclude the contrari: for
without controversy, not any one work of the Deity is, or can be guilti of
any needless varitie. Nevertheless, as to the way of Salvation that is as
plain, as he who runs may, almost, read it, and consequently Unus, apex
verbi ratione vale^^ior omni
Milleque Decre^is Consilissque vi^um.

Foundational Doctrines, either few, or clear, or both. The The Truth is,
Foundation, in a strict acceptance, is no more than only one, according to
that of the Great Apostl, which is Jesus Christ, and which is laid: for oth^^
Foundation can, than this, no man lai. As for Doctrines Traditional,
Superstitional, and Deduc^ional, these are (world!) without end: for everi The
good Agenda, the easi C^e^enda, and the exc^llen^ Petenda, as I am not (so
neither ^eed ^ni almost be) ignorant of. Let me add, nor the Participanda^ as
generaly necessari to ^alvation, acco^ding to the Chu^ch-Catechism. S^^ sic a^t
E. H.
Church in everi Age, according to its praesent Power, for the interest of its
own beloved Tenets, and for the upholding of their own Authority will be,
infallibly, imposing. Nai, the very Ten Commandments, which either literaly
taken, or, as spiritualy by our Lord interpreted, are as clear as the day. Yet
by Preachers and Writers deduction of particulars without number, out of everi
Commandment, are made evn ( contrari to what the Scriptures of Truth speak of
all Christ's Commandments) grievous; and not only so, but absolutely impos^ibl
for the mobile ( that monstrous Head, or mani headed Monster of Confusion) I
mean the mani, the multitude, the vulgar, the Populo ( what shall I name them?
the Commow Peopl) to keep in their memories. Now take Fundamentals in a larger
sens, as I confess such there are, yet are these as plain, as true and few too.
For our blessed Jesus has reduced ^ll the Commands into Two. And His holy
Apostl Paul those two into One; And without you would have none ( I know not I
must needs acknowledge) how you can have less. Now that all this is no less than
all Truth; pleace to consult the Citations of holy writ; which, for your
satisfaction, both of information and confirmation, I have placed Ecclesiast.
chap. last, vers^^ last. Psalm. cxix. 143 in the later part of the verse. Prove.
vii. 2. so M^t. xix. 17. l. p. Mat. xxii 37 to 40, and 41. Marc. xii. 27. to
35. Romans xiii. 8, to 11. 2 Thessalonians. ii. from verse 10. to verse 13.
at the Bottom: add for a Conclusion, be sure you forget not, what follows,
that is to sai, The Peremp^ori Negation of this Foundation will be man's
Positive Destruction and final and aeternal Damnation: To which He being so
contrari, disobedient and ungodli, shall, irrevocably, be adjudged. But this is
not the thing we matter, we are for showing of fancy and wit and that in
serious, yea, sacred Subjects: which is, as a great a crime, as We are for
salving the (...) and stating the (...) an^ if ^h^t were all, it were well: but
we are far from approving (...), I am afraid, and farther from aiming at the
(...). E. H.
wearing a Crown of Roses in a time of common ^alamitie; like that man, whom
for so doing the Romans condemned to Death. Not that I am, any jot, affected,
much less infected, with the Haeresie of some Holders forth, who count, yea
censure, both wit and Pelican, a German Divine s^id, concerning his learning,
When I app^ar before God, I shall not appear as a Doctor, but as an ordinari
Christian.
learning, as the Scumm of the bottomless Pit (for I know how to prise both as
much as I am deprived of both, and that is not a littl) but I am grandly
afflicted with the high abuse thereof, sorely lamenting the evil effects which
com there from like so mani filthi Satyrs, or rather fierce Fiends, debaubing
each other, and falling out with and upon, nai biting and devouring one
another, yea plotting the destruction and that of pau'r innocent Christians:
Though it be welknown Wit was given for more worthi ends. A Spanish Verdugo
replied to Sir William Stanly railing against his native Country, Though you
have offended your Country, your Country never offended you. It is storied of
Marius that he was never offended with any report whatsoever it were, that
went of him, sai-ing: If it were true, it would sound to his prais: if falls, his
Life and manners should prove the contrari. Diogenes us^d to sai, when the Peopl
mocked him, They deride me, yet I am not derided: I am not the man they take
me for. V^spasian the Emperor was not moved with the mocks and scoffs of
Demetrius Cynicus, but contemned them, sai-ing slightly, I use not to kill
barking Dogs. Philip of Macedon acknowledged himself much engaged to his
Enemies ( the Athenians) for speaking evil of him: For they made me (said He)
an honest man, to prove them Liars. Plato, being asked how he knew a Wise
man, answered, When being rebuked, he would not be passionat; and being
praised, he would not be proud. Nai, when Dionysius the Tyrant Those who upon
no account will tolerate other persons are thei^se^vs to be, upon that very
account, reckoned and doomed intolerabl. E. H.
had plotted the Death of Plato ( His Master) and was defeated by Plato's escape
out of his Dominions; when the Tyrant thus disappointed requested Him by a
Letter conveied afterward to him, not to speak evil of Dionysius, what was the
Philosophers reply? only this, That he had not, truly, so much time as once
to think of him, knowing there was a just God would one day call him to an
account. How much nobler was that of Iugo an ancient King, who set all his
Nobles, being Pagans, in his Hall below, and certain pau'r We should never be
at rest while we see the followers of our meek Lord, Prince and King Jesus,
^alli^g out one with another, maug^e that whole Sacietie of Angels, that slight
of Phoeni^es, as the Jesuits style themselves. E. H.
Christians in his Praesence-Chamber with Himself: at which all standing
amazed, He told them, This He did, not as King of the Drones, but as King of
another World, wherein these were his Fellow-Princes. Marquess Pawlet, there
being at Court in his time strange factions and animosities, yet was he
greatly esteemed, yea, beloved of all parties: and being seriously demanded,
how he stood so right in the jndgment of all the contentious Courtiers,
replied: By being a Willow and not an Oak. This makes me call to mind that
of Dion of Syracuse, who suffering exile came to the Court of Theodorus, a
Suppliant, where having his Audience long delaied, and hardly getting
admittance, He accosted his Companions with these words, mildly and patiently
sai-ing, I remember I did the like, when I was in the like dignity. There
goes a story of the old Cynic abovenamed, that rather than he would want
exercise of his patience he would make an humbl address to and a great while
beg Alms of Dead men's Statues, and being demanded why he did so? He said,
that I may learn to take denial from other men more patiently. It was a pretti
and unpassionate When one deman^e^ of Socrates how h^e was abl to bear such a
one's bitter railing so patiently? He replied: It is enough for One to be
augri a^ a time.
reply, that a Steward once made to his angri Lord, who called him Knave, etc.
Your Honor may speak what you pleace, but I beleev not a word that you sai,
for I know miself an honest man. Nor was that answer amiss from Diogenes to a
base and bawling fellow, who told him, that for all his being now reputed (
forsooth) a Grand Philosopher, he had once been a Coiner of Money, viz. It Is
true, such as thou art now, I once was; but such as I am now, thou will never
be. This base bawling mentioned, remindeth me of Alexander, who when one of
his Commanders in the wars did speak loudly but did littl, told him, I
entertained you into mi service, not to rail, but to act the part of a Soldier.
I read of Isocrates who always asked, of a Scholar givn to babbl and prattl, a
doubl fee before his admission, One (quoth he) to learn him to speak well;
another to teach him to hold his tongue. Assuredly, to have learned to speak
good Words is well: nai to speak such always is a great Atteinment: yet to have
not learned to speak those se^sonably, is not a small reflection on the Speaker
how great soever: as the Blessed Bernard, coming to the great Church of Spire
in Germany, was no s^oner therein, but the Image of the Virgin Marie there
erected ^reasently saluted him, and bad^ him Good morrow, B^rnard: Whereat He,
not at all ignor^ng^ the ^ugling ^^i^s of the Friars, responded out of St.
Paul, Oh, your Ladyship has quite forgotten your self, It is not lawful ^or a
Woman to speak in the Church.
Narrativ beneath will Verily and Merrily demonstrate. What is it then to be
rarely gifted in the two virtues of our Times, lieing and slandring? what? in
the injurious Hulls and Huzzae's of rich rough men? with whom, as Melancthon
was wont to sai, whosoever deals, had need to bring a Divine, a Lawyer and a
Soldier to get his Right. (Far from that nobl Commander, who, in the wars
having taken great Spoils, said to a Soldier behind him, Toll istos, ego
Christianus.) But as to revenge, or passion, right good was that Speech of the
Lord Tresaurer Burleigh and worthi of Remembrance, sciz. That He used to
over^^m envy and ill will, more by patience than by Pertinacie. This puts
me in mind of a Philosopher, who gave thi^ answer to one asking him, how he
was abl to endure so base and brawling a Secundus the Philoso^her her being
as^ed what was a Wife? Answered, She is contrari to an Husband.
Wife, I have hereby, said he, a School of Philosophy in my house and learning
daily to suffer patiently, I am made the more milder with other persons. Why
should I let pass here the retort of an undaunted Captive, who contemning the
domineering Braves and insulting Braggs of him who took him: Thou hold thy
conquest great in overcoming me; but mine is far greater in overcoming miself.
What think you of that Speech of the Grecian Statist who had extraordinarily
deserved of the City he dwelt in, when one told him, that the City had
elected four and twenti O^ficers and ejected him, or omitted rather, and left
him out; his answer, left upon Record, i^ only this, I am glad the City
affords twenti fou^ abler than miself. Here was no nois, nor any reprochful
words from him upon the City for their ingratitude; no, nor so much as an
expression of any pride, or good conceit he had of his worth, or parts, (
like that story put in the Plutarch reports of two men, both hired at Athens
for some public work: one of which was full of tongue, but slow at hand; the
other blunt in words, but a curious Workman: Being sent f^^ by the Magistrates
to tell them how they would proceed: when the first had made a prolix Harangue
in describing it from p^int to point; the other seconded him with this sh^rt
Speech: Ye men of Athens, what this man has said in words, that will I make
good in true Performance.
Bottom of this Page) tho^ he might have most righteously re^lected on the
whole City. But the Ancient way seems to go quite another way, as is
apparent by this notabl Speech which proceeded from the lips of one Nemon
(General then of Darius's Army) to one of his Soldiers (listed under him in
that war which was then against Alexander, whom this fellow reproched: This
Generalissimo, hearing it, came to him and smote him, telling him, Sir, I did
not hire you to repro^h Alexander, but to fight against him. How contrari to
the Temper of this Soldier was William Prince of Orange, who to satisfi those
who reproved His too much humanity, said, That man is well bought, who costeth
but a kind Salutation. Such an^ one must Scipio certainly have been, or better,
of whom it is recorded, that viewing his Army he sa^d, There was not one who
would not throw himse^f from the top of a Tower, in service to and for the love
of him. But, I fanci, some will sai, what is all this to us, or the Author?
Nothing, that I know, but Paterns and Praecedents for reasonabl and seasonabl
speeches; ^n short, mani good words and good manners, if we can speak thereof
and not offend. However, I ^hansi again, that I see one repraesenting me,
amidst these Historic relations, quaerieing if any one have ^eard the like: as
the story goes of the Lydian Croesus, enthroned in his Chair of State, and
asking a Sage, if he at any time beheld a more beautiful, or graceful
Spectacl? Yes, replied the Wise man, Dung-hill-Cocks, Phesants and Peacocks:
for these are clothed and adorned with their own nativ beutie, but your is but
borrowed glory. This is mi State, I confess; nor have I any thing to sai in
the pra^sent case to the contrari; being in the same Praedicament, if you put
it home so closely, Dear Reader, and so severely, evn with him; who being an
Answerer, when a Professor pres^ed him, (a better Christian than a Clerk, says
mi Author) with an hard Argument; Reverende Professor, quoth he, ingenue
confiteor, me non posse respondere huic Argumento. To whom the Professor, Re^te
respondes. Whether you will speak so to me, or what further you will sai I
cannot tell; yet this I can tell, that this is not the ingenuous Talk of the
times; nor are we so kind to convers, as to make use in public, of such kind
of Quaestions and Answers: No, our words are like those of Woodrofe It ^^,
without dis^ute, a most deplorabl thing, that the Christian Religion professed
so by and among us should b^, e^n to the pe^il of exsp^ring, crucified, as it
were, twixt^ Ritualitie and Scru^ul^sitie^ though the later man be of God, the
^ormer of good men. E. H.
the Sheriff to Mr. Rogers the Proto-martyr in Queen Marie's Days, Thou art an
Haeretic. I wish our Answers were like the Martyr's, That shall be know^ (says
he) at the day of Judgment. Such like words evn Religionists too often use in
Repartees, mutuously. So retorting the same, or in as gross terms, specialy
when accused: much unlike the condu^^ and prudence of Scipio, who being one
day accused before the Roman Peopl, evn of no less than a^^ huge and capital
o^^ens and Crime, in liew of excusing himself, or insinuating into the favor,
or opinion of the Judges, turning to them, He said, (...) will well become you to
judge of his Head, by whos^ means ye have Authority to judge of all the World
Here (mi thinks) I hear one sai-ing, what mo stories? no end of these Tales?
judging of these Lines, as Apollidorus of old did of the Books o^ Chrysippus,
s^iz. That if other men's Sentences w^^^ left out, the Pages would be void. But
this has bee^ the portion of mi betters: so, I may well be co^^tent. For so, or
near so and with less Reason wa^ the illus^rious Erasmus served, of whose
Enchein^dion one said, That there was much more Devotio^ in the Book, than in
the Author. Nai this is ver^ modest, I dare sai, in the opinion of our mode^^
Saints, H^c in re queis fas totam concedere palmam.
as Maximilian (the Emperor abovementioned) in a^^ other, but f^r better case,
and in a public meeti^g, or general Conv^ntion of the common Peers o^ rather
Di^t, so called, with all the Princes of Ger^manie: where the Duke of Saxon
magni^i-ing hi Metals and rich Veins of Earth: The Duke of B^^varia migh^ily
extolling brave Cities and stron^ Towers: and the Duke P^l^^ine (^o name but
(...) mo) praeferring his Wines and the fertility of h^^ Lands, the Duke of
Wittenberg said, I can lai mi Head and sleep upon the Lap of any of mi
Subjects, I have a broad in the ^ield ev^ri where. Giv Him the Palm, said the
Emperor. Now such judging I dearly like. But that Lot of his falls rarely in
so good a ground: Princes rather treading in the steps of the Praedecessors of
Domitian, who perceiving mani of them to have been hated, was so wise as to ask
and inquire of one, How He might so Empire it, so Govern and Rule as not to
be hated, or envied? The Person replied, Tu fac contra, by not doing what they
did. But it is not mi place to correct the Errata of Consult that o^ the
Prophet Amos chap v. 13 What then is h^e who says to the King thou art wicked,
and to Princes ye are ung^dli? What he who would strike Princes for equity?
n^ Job, no Solomon.
Kings, those Arcana Imperii shall never puzzl mi^ pericranium: God grant me
the continuance of his Grace to govern miself. I must acknowledge I am not of
the Religion of that Monck, who, covetous and ambitious of Martyrdom, told the
Sultan, that he was com into his Court to di for telling and declaring the
Truth, was answered, He needed not have rambled so f^r for death, for he
might easily ^ind it among his Princes at home. Much learneder, modester and
wiser was Favorinus ( under favor of more correct judgments) telling Adrian the
Emperor, who had much censured him in his own Profession of Grammar, that he
durst not be learneder than He who commanded thirti A Legion at first
c^nsis^ed of 3000, or 4000 foot, and ^00, or 400 horse; after it was incres^ed
to 6000 foot and 600 horse, eve^i o^dinari Foot-Legion consisting of 10 Cohorts,
a coho^t of 3 Mani^les, a manipl of 2 Centuries, and each c^nturie of a 100
men. So everi Hors-Legion consisted of 6 Turmae, or Troops, a Turm^ o^ 10
Decuries, and each Decurie of 10 men.
Legions. I cannot but commend in such perilous Points specialy, the modesty
of piety, and the prudence o^ Silence; with that obligation that lies upon
all men to live peaceably with one another, bu^ p^incipaly o keep the peace
with their Prince; or to k^ow however, in such grand Circumstances, how ^^ hold
their p^ace: In a less case, where speaking ra^ no-Risc, and the Speaker stood
(...), out o^ harms way ( as we sai) Silence has been solemnly chosen as the
best and most commendabl. At a most solemn Con^ention of Philosophers, before
t^^ Em^ass^do^s (...) a foreign P^^^ce, and that e^eri one, a^co^d^n^ to his
s^^e^al ab^lities, mad^ d^monstration of their wisdom that so the Ambassador
might have matt^r to repor^ o^ the a^m^ed wisdom of the Graecia^s: Among those
one there was (...) stood still and sp^k^ nothing in the Assembly, insomuch
that (...) Embassad^r comi^g t^ him, said: And what is your Gift, th^^ I may
^epo^t i^? T^ whom the Ph^losopher, Repo^t unto yo^^ King, that you^ fo^nd one
among the Graecians that knew ho^ to hold hi^ ^e^ce.
Consult that famous Story beneath. But oh tha^ praejudice, envy, rancour,
malice, the censures, the hard speeches and proud judgings of one another
daily! far from committing the judgment to him wh^ judges righteously, The God
of all the Earth^ Whose justice triumphs over, and exalts it self in the
destru^^ion of those P^t^e, a flower that grows in the Devils Gardin. Lu^ thy
^onsci^nce be thy Judge here, that it be not thy Accuser her^after.
Luciferian Sinner^, who seem to arrogate and assume no less to themselves than
a kind of Divinity, while they think conceiv, plot and contrive, yea determine
and conclude, their own multiplication, augmentation and addition of glory,
advance and all advantages to be ^he alone ^it, proper and adaequate objects of
all their aims, intentions, designs, resolu^ions, endeavors and actions. O man!
know thou all this time where thou art? Thou art go^ into the Iudgment-Seat
of the Lord, not only as to thiself, but likewise as to other. But who art Thou
Romans xiv. 13.
who judge another? There is but one James iv. 12.
Lawgiver who is abl to save and to destroi. Dread you not to have judgment
without mercy? James ii. 10, 11.
so speak you, and so do you, as one who shall be judged by the Law of
Liberty, which is Perfect and but one; which whosoever shall keep whole, and yet
offend in one James ii. 13.
point, he is guilti of all. But thou art so far from being a Doer of the
Law, that thou art become a Iam. iv. 11.
Judge: for he who judges his Brother judges the Law, and judge his brother
that man does, who speaks evil of him. How dare one man then speak evil of
another? seeing who speaks evil of his Brother speaks evil of the Law, and
consequently speaks evil of and judges the Lawmakers and Giver, evn the Lord
God himself. Trembl then to detract from, traduce, or speak evil of and judge
another. But rather than not drive this devilish Trade ( which surely we
praeposterously conclude to be of grand consequence) we do, make, and will
argue, (and too often swear) men to speak and write evil by consequence, who
never did so much as think so in the less'st. Shall I praesent you, judicious
Reader, with two lines? May Prayers get Syllogisms into their Den,
And Ergo all go sweetly into Amen.
O when shall we keep Heretofore in the Kingdom of Arragon at the King's
Cor^nation and other solemn times, there was a public declaration made in the
King's own hearing, That justice was superior to him: but the Monarchs of Spain
have abolished it; tho they theirselv^ still do subsist by Justice. E. H.
the golden Rule to do, or not do to another, what we would have another do,
or not do to our own selves! so should we b^ rich toward God and store up
treasaur on the oth^^ side of the Grave, that we may not be bankrup^ for ever.
Other doing will be our utter undoo^ing; but this doing, thus living we shall
fare, ^^ nigh, as well, as if we were Qi suadet sua det; may some sai who look
out sharp in and for this b^w^tching World. E. H. To that Obj^^tion this
solution, Eleemosy^a no^ est di itiarum dispendium, s^d ditescendi compendium,
quaestusque omni^m ube^rimus. Yet to giv the Pe^^^^o^s in alms will not (NB.)
satis^i ^or steali^g the P. g.
Alms giving. Which wh^^soever plentifully giv, are provided for aeternaly^ as
having procured a Tresaur which they may safe^ly praeserv ^or themselves by
putting it ( through God^ gracious grant^ into such bags, as wax not old. O the
AEternitie of the Divine Dil^ction, Exclus^^^ of all Faith, or Hope! O the
fertility of the greatest of the three Theologi^ Graces, namely Lov^ when
habitual in us! O the peculiaritie of the perfec^ly Christian virtue of
Charity! so frequentl^ exhor^ed to in the new Covenant: and seldom or not at
all mentioned in the Old; however no^ in the English Translation thereof;
without which no admittance into the rest of holiness here; no entrance into
the heaven of happiness hereafter. Now who would be so wretchedly cruel to his
own wel-beeing, as to be without this dilection, love, charity toward God,
and toward, His Image, man? who would be thus wanting to himself evn while
here, specialy, if he consider himself as wanting everi kind of way, the very
same love and kindness, or loving kindness. None need for this to us make any
leg:
For we the same Boon need and should it beg.
The Best of men being but men at the best.
The Proof's apparent, if brought to the Test,
Thus like Christians, indeed, we should and ought not only to forbear one
another in love, but to bear, too, one another's Burdens, so fullfilling the
Law ^f Christ and owing nothing to any man but Love: everi one Tho it seem a
Paradox that giving is a richer Trade than lending, evn use upon use: yet it is
an infallibly Orthodox Axiom: for he who gives to the pau'r, lends to the
Lord. E. H. vide Prove. xix. 17. The Poor are God's Rec^ivers, and the Angels
are his Auditors.
giving to everi one a Manifesto of the same, by making and taking all means
and methods, opportunities and advantages to oblige mankind (ali^s, the man of
thy kind) both body and soul: but chiefly the later, which i^ the best
charity in the world, and best pleacing to Christ who overcame the world, and
while therein, went about doing good, and whose mea^ and drink it was to do
the will of God, which was to have all men to be saved and to com to the
knowledge of the Truth, evn Christ, the way, the Truth, and the life. Into
whose Crown (who now lives for ever more) if he be gained ther^by to him,
Thou have put and set a Jewel, a fair one, evn of grea^e^^ price and highest
value. O how far then from the right are unmercifulness, uncharitablnes,
hardheartednes, strife, rancour, envy, judging, censuring, slandering,
backbiting, speaking, or whispering evil! specialy of and against Persons and
Things neither known to thee, nor understood by thee! How far, I sai, from
right, I dare not take upon me to judge! This only I sai, to such Practicers,
what Christ did to those Luke xii. 57.
Hypocrites, who could discern the face of the Skies, Yea, and why evn of your
selves judge ye not what is right? Now if such things be right, then, surely,
nothing's wrong;
Let Us all, like Devils, fight and damn, in the cursed throng;
God, Christ and the Spirit 'spite and mock'em in a Song.
Yet still I should beleev it to be the better, safer and wiser way to humbl our
selves under the mighti hand of God ( taking holy James for our council in the
case) and praepare to meet our God, who is a God of Judgment and a consuming
Fire and everlasting too; into whose hands to fall it is a fearful thing: He
likewise being the living God and no Person-Respecter, but recompensing everi
one according to his work. If we therefore would not fall short of felicity
here and hereafter, let us fall, out of hand, upon doing and mainteining good
works, and for ever abandon falling on, or out with one another: but if there
be a The Lord Burl^igh being at Cambridg with Q. Eliz. ( o^ ever blessed
memory) visiting the several Schools, said, Here I find one School wanring,
The School of Discretion.
wise man among us and one endued with knowledge, let him be persuaded by and
with blessed James to show out of a good conversation His Works with me^kn^s of
Wisdom; evn tha^ Wisdom from above Iam. iii. 17. Let Reason persuade Thee,
Before it invade Thee.
which, first, truly chaste and pure is; further more pacific, qui^t, not rigid
for its own right, moderate, obsequious, p^rsuasibl, yi^lding; full of mercy
and good fruits; without disceptation, o^ controversy, not doubting, certain;
without Hypocrisy, not stage-plaier like, not dissembling its judgment, not
a^^ing any way counterfei^ly. O that we were thus wise and in the meeknes of
this wisdom walk; (...) simus, let us go to and fro' one another, pass things
easily to and again, having such a praesence of mind always, as to become all
things to all men, with the Doctor of the Gentiles that 1 Cor. ix. 19. and 22.
St. Paul an Omniformist, proved so by his own self: not by E H. MAMP.
Omniformist: who tho He were free from all, y^^ He made himself a servant to
all, that He might gain the more, by all means save some. This he did ^or the
ends of the Evangelie. When s^al such glad Tidings befall us, bless Church and
State! O what a glorious state should we and our Churchmen and women and
Children and all things else be in! Of this pure temper wa^ the Author ( as you
may see evn by that littl he speaks to the Reader before this Discourse) yea
renownedly clothed with the meek Spirit of our only Lord, Jesus the Christ, (
the Author and Finisher i. e. the Beginner and Ender not of our, your, or
their, but of the H^b. xii. 2. compare this with Acts xiii. 39, ult.
Faith, with reference to all times and persons, according to the tenor and
T^stimonie of the Scriptures of Truth) I must tell you it again. The Author had
the Spirit of meeknes, with the Faith and Lov which is in Christ; for the
excellence the of knowledge of whom his Lord he su^^ered ( like another Paul as
is well known to all, sciz. who knew him) the loss of all things, which he
reckoned at no higher rate than Dogs-meat ( but not such as is givn to dogs in
^hese days, which good Christians would be glad of) that he might win Christ
and be found in Him, not having his own Righteousness, but that which is by the
Faith of Christ, that He might know him and the power of his Resurrection and
the Fellowship of his Su^ferings, being made There is the Con^ormist indeed.
conformabl to his Death; if by a^i means He might attein to the Resurrection
of the dead: Which undoubtedly He ( maugre all whisperings, Nai, now, the hard
mouthed Bl^o^h^un^, ^ele, bites through,
R^li^^o^ hunts and hungri Iaws pursue.
To what strange Rage is Superstition driven,
That (...) ca^ out ^^o Hell to ^ight ^or Hev^n! E. S.
It is the (...) Re^ormation to turn Order to Con^usi^n^ and Su^^^stition to
(...). In quae, ^o^e D^ns, ^eservam^^ (...) ^. H.


backbitings, censures, or praejudices of unbeli^f to the contrari) did did
follow after and ( to t^^ ^^^^citie of mortality) atteined the nearest to ^^,
o^ all that, in this Age, I have known, or heard of. Thus much I can testif^
since mi acquaintance with him, for He was not only a bare liver by the Faith
of Jesus; but in the Work and Service of Love (Faith's best demonstration and
the Law's Fullfiller) a true Laborer: and as to winged Mysteries ( if I may
speak mi sens without essens) a littl incarnate Cherub ( or rather S^raph) or (
that I may not excede the words of Truth and Holiness, to the extending, in the
less'st, the lines of Modesty) a very highly mystic and transspiritualized
Person. A specimen of which not more great than just and due Eulogie and
Encomium, this Tract, though a small one, is. Which Writings He ( before his
Asscension to the Spirits of Just men perf^ctly sancti^ied) advised and
consulted with me about, as is sufficiently known not only to his Hous-keeper,
but to his most agreeabl and supersensual Companion and Fellow-laborer in the
Evangelic-angelic Work, viz. ^. L. mi Praecursor, or Prae-Epistoliz^r and a
daili Exsp^c^ant to be clothed upon with the heavenli Body to com down from
above, waiting in the Spirit for the fullnes thereof, and who has not long
since appeared in, to, or from the World ( pleace to take which Praeposition
you best approv) in an Heavenli Cloud. A product fairly and fully meriting the
Titl, as is clear, notwithstanding the Cloud to any spiritual Discerner. Favor
me with so much freedom as once again to affirm, that the Author, excluding all
other, (by what names, or Titles soever dignified, or distinguished, or
wheresoever praesiding, or residing in Court, City, Camp, or Country)
committed these Papyrs, according to the certain knowledge of the Person, ut
supra, hinted, or lettered, to the custody and Correction so continued, (under
correc^ion be it spoken) and so confirmed was his confidence herein of Me; who
highly ^steemed him in love for his Works sake, not forgetting evn this, which
now ( through the Divine Providence according to mi trust, word, or (as some will
have) words too, is now com forth, with an open face, to public view, from its
recess, or privacie. (^ere hearken and heed hereto) by the wholey unasked,
therefore freely of^ered benignity and generositie (of which I am a witness,
and which likevise witnesses the) dignity and Divinity of the Soul and
Spirit of the Person so acting, viz. W. B. that famous Anti-Satanic Athleta,
Anti-Daemoniac Pal^strita, and Hell's black Regiment's Antagonist: yea,
moreover ^^^^aptive's Redeemer and the mani-mani poor and needi, oppressed and
distressed People's most readi and praesent Refuge and Asylum, wheresoever he
resorteth: though, more principaly at the place of his Residence at Wilminton in
Kent. Where beside, or rather about, evn, all Vox Populi vox dicta Dei est.
Proverbia quid sunt?
Sunt Pop^li voces, Ergo divina loquntur.
So the Catalunian Proverb, La voz de pleu, voz de Deu.



the Country over, He is well known and well nigh from everi quarter, or corner
thereof addressed unto, as an honest, diligent, expert, long experienced and
very successful ^hysician. Let this brief Character of this gallant, generous,
resolute and religious man be, I prai, kindly admitted and accepted from mi
welmeaning meanness: til a larger and fairer appear: which when it does, will be
but his due: though his modesty, I may safely sai, will not be abl to suf^er it:
such is the tenderness of his Spirit v^sibl enough, in any thing that may but
verge toward his own advantage: whom therefore I would willingly more discover
to the World ( to which he does so Well knowing and beli^ving that Gallican
Adage,
Fient de chien and marc d'argent,
S^ront tout un, au jour du Judgment.

much good and in which he has done so great things) and declare his Name, in
words at length and not, as now, in letters, were I not afraid that his
humili^ie would be thereby highly o^^ended, which does and can endure all
things, except his own Eulogiums and Commendations. To the Sun-^hine of which
and his manifold virtues I have only lighted, or tinded (though ex officio) this
my Rush-ca^dl which is one (I must confess to mi shame) of the shortest,
less'st and worss'^t. For this do I here When you have a Petition to make buie
your Paper of Mr. Humble.
humbly crave his candid construction and heartily beg the boon of his pardon;
being too sensibl of the great need I have thereof: albeit I may happily go
without it, in that I have, so openly and boldly (as being without his leav,
or knowledge) attemted though but this: unless by the seasonabl request and
importune intercession of some intimate Friend, or other, it may happily com to
be givn to me. I am not so sage as to foresee how he will handl me for this
mi fool-hardiness; nor can I praesage what the event may be, His Quite contrari
to that Sai of the French, Il n'y a si petit Saint, qui ne desire la Cha^delle.
Resentment of this mi boldness will be so great. I must now run the Risc, the
hazard, jacta est alea. I must take mi Lot, how fair, or foul soever I be in
his Books. As to this praesent Book I am bold to sai I foresee (such clearness
there is in mi eyes) the Crystal Streams thereof, going to be perturbed by the
over diligent and silthily dirti feet of mani grim and ugli Satyrs: which seem
to me to call for and to have already praevaled with, several fallen Angels ^o
mingl with them and become their Coadjutors and Coagitators; that so these
purely fluent Wa^ers may the more suddenly and surely be made mere stagnant and
putrid Puddls, or most foul stinking Pools. Nevertheless, I adventure herein to
praedict (though I be no Prophet, nor the Son of a Prophet) for all the
possibility, probability, or proximitie of the feat, or fact; the
impossibility, for all this, of the accomplishment; yea, I am more than
confident (for I am Sure) that the contamination thereof by their so complotted
commixture will prove no other than a Chimaera: unless I may add (as I beleev it
will be) a slurr and blurr, or a basefoul Iilt upon themselves. Nai further, shall
conclude it never feacibl; til that very day, when I shall behold the dazzling
Beams of the glorious Sun in its Zenith, darkened by the mere steams of some
Dunghill lieing on the lowest ground. But enough if not too much of this dirt
and ^ilth. Now not to be dirti miself, however not so dung-hill-bred as to
account so wretchedly of the Reader, as if He were unworthi to have any
account of the Book: or to giv a^i ^aus wher^by the Publisher thereof should be
thought so av^rs from Apologies as to judge all of lit^l value, much less to
condemn all evn the best (with some Some affirm a printed Apology to be like
Penance in a white Sheet. This remindeth me o^ that of the Italian, si io
casca^^^ in dietto, mi ^ompe^ei il n^so, so^ tanto disgratiato.
G^andees) as idl and useless at best; at less'st far below Prudence A Fool
still may confute a Philosopher, as the Philistine^ were knocked down by the
Iaw-^one of an As^.
by way therefore of obviation, praevention, praeoccupation and anticipation,
in company with a fair praesolution of some praemised objections, which it is
not improbabl mani ill-natur^d and ill-mind^d men may make evn to the
suspecting, or, at fair^st, scrupling, if not severely quaestioning, first, how
honestly this worthi Writer, (...), came by these high Mysteries and grand
Arcanums, viz. The Knowledge of what in the ensuing Pages is argued and
discoursed: then, What necessity of their being now, or, at any time, exposed
and published, This I here offer and praesent. To the First. mi Respons is,
though not dubious, yet doubl, h. e. Negativ and Affirmativ, Thus; He, as a
Philosopher, not falsely so called, and a Divine indeed, came to the reception,
perception and cognition, or rather introspection, intuition and introreception
of the praementioned; Not by reading, or poring on Books, or Manuscripts; nor
by the teaching of men, brethren, or Fathers; nor by any conferring with Flesh
and Blood, but by the pure Revelation of the Holy and Blessed Spirit of God,
who is the Sercher and Reveler of the deep things of God, as St. Paul 1 Cor.
ii. 10.
testifies. Now in regard I have mentioned the Reve^ation of the Spirit, I
cannot apprehend it an imper^inence to speak somewhat of, yea, enlarge so much
^he more, upon the several sorts and different kinds ^hereof, as properly
praelimina^i, antecedaneous and very requisitly assistent to the advance of the
^nquisitiv Reader's judgment and belief of, about and concerning these divine
rarities, mysteries and ^ublimities.

The first way is by Vision, when the Spirit of God praesenteth the heavenli
species, or ideas to the ^ntern senses of the inward man. ( Quid quaeris,
^rudite S'el Sol mi splende, non curo la Luna.

Mouro que naon podes aver, forrao por tu alma. Refian Portuguez.


Lector, vin quid species, vel Idea potius? sci^e certius ut queas, consulas
Platonem, velim; cui, ^uid esse videatur, audi. Idea est, earum quae natura
^unt inviolabile, immutabile, immortale and aeternum ^xemplar. Vide porro si
dubious animi es, Aug. L. lxxxi. quaest. 46.) This of Vision I look upon as one
of the ^owest Form or Degree.

The second is by Illumination, when the Spirit of the mind is thoroughly
illustrated, or enlightened by a Raie, or Beam proceeding from the Holy Spirit,
and purely apprehends the Truth and the very Sens of the Blessed Spirit
beside and without any praesentation of extern Objects. Of these kinds the
glorious Apostle Paul makes plain mention, where He 2 Cor. xii. 1.
says, I will com to Visions and Revelations (...) the Lord.

The third is by Transportation, or ( if you will n^^ bear with that Term)
Translation. When the Spir^^ of the Mind is, in very deed, truth and realitie
rap^ and caught up, transported and translated tran^scendently and divinely
into the very Principl (...) self, there to view, introspect and comprehend,
(...) well as apprehend, the Wonders of Jehovah AE^^^ him, the ever adorabl,
holy and blessed Triune^ Deity. Of this Degree the same glorious Apo^^ tells
us, when he declares that He was 2 Cor. xii. 4.
caug^^ up into the third Heaven, So from the Earth, out of Hell, above the
Clouds: ^he^ clearly, in no Purgatory of any kind: where some idly enough (if
not too, impiously) place such Devotions and Transports. E^^
into Paradise, when He heard wordless Words (so the Graec most emph^^^^ticly)
Words unutterabl, unexpressibl, unspea^^abl, un^^oidabl, -- Nihil heic nisi
vota (...) persunt. This is an higher Degree than either (...) the former ( the
pair praeceding being far inferior (...) this) for here ( as much as possibly
you may, or can mi^^ the very Spirit of the Mind is elevated, supersens^^^ly
and superrationaly sublimed, or lifted up to (...) into that Principl, where
the things theirselvs do ^^aly subsist, have their Essence and Existence. No^
it is observabl and meriteth an Asterisc large and (...) both in the Line and
below, that by this very wa^^ of Apocalyptic Manifestation this Highly
Spiritu^^ Person had, ( through God's free love and to the prais^ the Glory of
His Grace) the things here treated (...) made known to Him and seen by Him. For
(...) Spirit of his mind was without any peradventure ( (...) above in mo Words
was uttered) taken, carried drawn, fetched, or catched up So from the Earth,
out of Hell, above the Clouds: ^he^ clearly, in no Purgatory of any kind:
where some idly enough (if not too, impiously) place such Devotions and
Transports. E^^
far, far away, from ^is Body, evn up to and into the very Can the knowledge
of the holy On^ do less than make one's ^nowledg holy? E. H.

As much wit is shown in a pertinent Question, as judgment in ^ wise answer. Ut
sono nola, sic h^mo loquela.


Arche^ypous Globe of all Globes, that of all originals the ^riginal it self:
where, unclothedly, uncoveredly, ^akedly, uncompoundedly, abstractly and
simpli^edly He stood, appeared, was in His Spirits a^ong, with and in the
Praesence and Company of, ^e innumerabl ( numberless number of) the
Throne-^ngels, who are the Inhabitants of the Still AEter^itie. Nor are these
Sublimities in Religion becau^ ^naccountabl as it were, and uncondescendabl to
^^e merely Rational, or uncompliabl with the ^ules of Syllogism to be reputed (
much less reproch^^) as the Phrensies of an overheated Devotion, or ^^e Visions
only, or apparitions of an old doting ^ermit's Cell, separated from verity and
departed ^^om entitie, as only some Phantasm, Spectrum, ^ngastromyth, or Ghost;
nor any supererogating ^^rfections, or rather praesumptuous and temerarious
^nthusiasms at best; their Heads swimming in an ^^finit Vacuum and all
^ss^ntial thought lessning ( like ^^m soaring hawks) into a strange
transcendence and ^t last passing away into invisibl atoms, or nothings ^r (
however to make the most thereof) imperceptibl ^btilities of unconvervably
profound Contempla^^rs; whose Eyes have never a more immutabl fixa^^on, than at
that very moment when they see no ^ind of thing; as if all were stupefaction
rather ^^an Satisfaction, nai hus^ing Fanaticism by such, ^amely, who beleev
any such atteiments impossibl without cracking the Soul's Hypostasis by the
im^oderate displaies ( as th^i call such) of immediate ^evelation: not
considering so much as that true Metaphysics are to this day ( non obstante, or
for all (...) glori^ing in discoveries upon discoveries) a Grand D^^sideratum
in Philosophy. But pure 2 Timothy i 10. John vi. 45. Ephesians. v. 18. Habb. ii. Ioh.
xiv. 17.
Religion which has brought Life and Immortality to lig^^ will teach us to
look up and wait for larger me^^sures and fuller pourings forth of the Holy
Spirit (...) all be taught of God, according to Scripture-Proph^^ties and
Promises, through the Blessed Spirit, assure to us to abide for ever with and in
us. All the while I am not ignorant how those, who look aft^^ such promises
with an eye of Faith, are looked upon evn as the Commanders of Ramoth Gilead
look^^ upon the Prophet sent to anoint Iehu King of Isr^^^ to wit, as so mani
mad men: But Luke viii. 35. Matt. xiv. 19.
Wisdom (...) been justified, or more clearly judged, or the sent^^ has, as in
judgment been pronounced of Wisdom by (...) her children, as few Sons as they
be. The Truth (...) were all Truths evident to man's understanding would not
only set an undervalue upon Truth, Truth, like the God of Truth, has its nubes
and calig^^ in circuitu ejus, which is its venerabl Veil and makes it my^ and
realy (as it ought to be) revered. E. H.
b^ swell man with Pride evn to a bursting. Nor is p^^^fect knowledge of
immediate causses altogether ^^^quisite for finding out Truth. Here
notwithst^^^ding give me leav to persu and take ( and th^^ too) mi wretchedly
sawci, stubborn, refractori a^ too often rebellious Reason to an O! the Hights,
and and there to lose, a littl, both it and miself in t^ vision and
contemplation of these Divinest My^^^ries and then to descend gradualy and
sacredly gen to visit and convers here below, but not wit^ out a Seraphic kind
of Lov, that noble and cert^ ^onsequence and Fruit of an operativ and activ
^aith. For and to which there do (mi thoughts) want mani mo objectiv Matt. xvii
20.
impossibilities, far more ^han as yet have in this our Age appeared to any
^erson: all which will be found yet ( when any such ^hal arise) too low, easi
and littl for a nobl Spirit ^f Faith: which is an higher Principl by mani
de^rees of Demonstration, than the most recti^ied ^eason, being it is no less,
^or lower than (...), the firm and evidential ^robation of invisibls, things
out of sight Heb. xi. 1.
(that most ^nlimited Sens which extends its Roialtie through the ^hole
Universe; purvei-ing for all the capacity of the ^nderstanding faculty and
pointing at what it can never ^ake any perfect discovery of: for by the very
visibl ^^ings of the Creation the invisibls are collected) so far (...) I from
not being persuaded, convinced and ful^^ satisfied of and concerning the most
abstruse and ^nigmatic Verities and Mysteries in Theology.

The fourth and last degree of Revelation, and which is of all the highest, is
the Coming Down of How falls that famous Maxim of Nihil est in intellectu, quod
^n fuerit prius in sensu; I appeal to thee, O judicious Reader, declare. E. H.
^et the Catachresis, I prai, be heartily interpreted for ^e sake of that Dove)
the Holy Spirit, into the Essence ^^ the Soul, there to complete, finish and
accom^^ish the work of Regeneration; and to fix it in its ^ate of
Glorification, unveiling the beuties and ^^ening the Glories of the New
Jerusalem, coming ^om God out of Heven into the Soul's Center. ^o this degree
of Revelation came the holy Apostls ^^ the Day of Pentecost by the Descent of
the Holy ^host, Gust, Wind, Breath, or Spirit; to be ^ow once again, once again (
as one of the Marian Martyrs said, known it is well enough about what) ^^vived
and renewed, as the Prodromus, or For runner of the AEternal Evangelie ( the
Everlasti^^ Gospel so called) to the Honor and Glory of the ^^^jestie on High,
the shame and confusion of the D^^vil with his Angels and Agent^, which shall,
at (...) be most low, and to the intermediate and intermi^^bly triumphant joie
and unexpressabl refreshing the Heavenli, longing, panting and longsufferi^^
humbl, waiting, faithful Servants of Christ, (...) all oppre^^ions,
oppositions, or supplantations the World, yea the hearing and being evn in
(...) midst of all, the too often, unheavenli Plantatio^ or unwholsom words not
of our Lord Jesus, (...) of the 1 Timothy vi. 3. Too mani make the Holy Bible like
the (...) ^^teria Prim^, and draw Qidlibet ex Qolibet, to the (...) pr^judice
and reproach of Religion; now evn like the Poet's ^ almost. E. H.
Doctrine according to Godliness in Church, (not to meddl with the Great ones)
in State, whose Bibl is the Statute-book and the Art^^ of whose Faith are
mostly grounded, I fear, (...) Positiv injunctions and who look no further
happily (...) the peru^ing the Arguments of the three grand ^^^ postors, the
Leviathan, or ( which is more pla^^ the Law of their Prince; which I renegue no
furt^^^ than as repugnant to that of the Prince of Kings of the Earth: it
being sufficient for (...) I can in mi place and s^a^ion, as to that Qu^stion
Point, be taught through Grace, mi duty to Go^^^^nors in God and for God, out of
the Book Biblia ri^e docet, qi sic docet ut doceat se:
Qi facienda doce^ qique docenda facit.

God ( that God, as I may sai, of Books) as hither have had the repute of a
reasonabl, apt and (...) Scholar at that lesson^ Maulgre, I continue, whole
Matt. xv. 13.
Plantation which the Father, who the Hevenly, has not planted of what
denomination soever, whether rotten Foundations, superstitious superstructions,
Antichristian innovations, unchristian Dominations, falls, unwritten
Traditions, inhumane inventions, unscriptural institutions, injunctions,
impositions, or propositions, appositions, or suppositions of what are, Some are
of that Faith that Refiners of Religion frequently turn Quack salvers.
as cunningly as commonly, called convenient contrivances, innocent
indifferences and orderli decences, under the plausibl praetext, placent
notion, specious name, prudential guise and fair construction of that famous
Euangelic Canon, or Rule ( the grand Ecclesiastic Cynosura) sciz. 1 Cor. xiv.
verse last.

(...) Clemens Romanus, Paul's Fellow-laborer in his Epistl to the same Place.


Let all things be done decently and in order. Which To exalt Christ's Church
upon the Devil's back
I^ zele that wit and grace does lack. E. H.

(...), at best, is not so much an (...), as (...); which I humbly conceiv and
offer, (...), purely for sweet, dear, holy, hevenli Peace sake and in a sens
and conscience of mi ( by me as yet believed) duty, omnibus and singulis
qibuscunqe fortassean seu (...), seu (...), seu (...), seu (...), seu (...),
seu Sacerdotum, seu Praefectorum nominibus and titulis indigitentur and
insigniantur. Which Words so rendered, to proceed in the way of Peace and Truth
( a Conjunction which I would ever call Copulativ, and make, if I could,
perpetuously Consummativ) some Godli and learned Writers upon very probabl
reasons Scholar like tendered ( which I like) and wit^ out any bitter reflection
( which I love) and not wit^ out accurate retrospection, inspection and
circu^^spection, as to the design of the Apostl's discour^^ and their very
serious meditation and ruminati^^ on the scope of the Text, with fervent
supplicati^^ ( after What a commendation is Deliberation! whereas he w^^ does
a serious (much more a sacred) busin^ss in haste, rideth^^ upon an Ass, and
check by Ioul with the Devil. E. H.
Consultation too of the best Commentators (...) the place) through the supplies
of the Spirit of Grace and in the name of Christ, the Wisdom of the ^^^ther, to
God the Father of Lights and the Spirit of all Flesh ( which I cannot, neither
may, loath) have after all, apprehended and thereupon do beleev That, if the
Reading were according to natural D^^cencie and Scripture-Order in the room,
place o^ stead of decently and in order, those foregoing word would be much more
consonant to and with the S^^gnificance of the Two British, or old Cambrian
Proverbs and Cymra^ca^ Adages s^em to spe^k to this concern, A noddo, Duw, ry
nod (...). The other; A gai^ Daw in ^chaf. This Tongue making li^^ us^ of
^rticls and insi^nificant Ligaments of Speech than our de^ivereth more matter
in sewer words, which makes it m^^ difficult to be En^lished The first of the
ol^ said Sawes, th^^ ^^ God says, it must be so. The second thus, God's Word
uppermost.
Original and by consequen^^ ( though still under Correction of more illuminated
Head^^ be assented and consented to ( specialy by the Church of Christ coming
out of Mysterie-Babylon, gathered or scattered) as the fairest and best
interpretation and exposition. O who will giv, that our sight (...) be happily
cleared by this small foretast, or any ^^ther ( as Ionathan's was by tasting a
littl honey from (...) end of his Rod) and who can tell but it may, speci^^ if
we look up for Eie-salv from Heaven, whi^^ our Eyes are looking upon the
letters and words and not be wholey taken up with the Letter without the
Spirit, which will quicken us and put Life into our Spirit: otherwise we may li
dead at the letter til we di. The Word of Life will be most welcome to enlivened
Spirits. O that the Spirit of Prayer were raised again from the dead ( as one
may sai) what happi hopes then should we have of a glorious and spiritual
Resurrection after so great a death has passed upon the Churches! Oh it is
high time to beg as for Life that the Blessed Spirit would come as Floods upon
dri ground, since the chois Gardins of the very Saints, for want of Spiritual
dewes from Heven, are withered; that the Churches may be as watered Gardins and
the Saints and Servants of the most High may at less'st at last, like the
Willows by the watercourse, grow up; evn into him, in all things, who is the
Head of everi man and over all things, to the Church which is His Body: the
fullness of him who fills all in all, and who will make good His Great last
Testament-Promiss of a doubl portion of his Gal. iii. 14.
Spirit in a plentiful and powerful effusion thereof, in the later glorious
Science, or Conscience is but at best our Guide, not our Rule. E. H.
Ministration, to The Church'es Authority is not coercive, but directive; not
imperativ, but declarativ. So. Bp. Davenant. de jud. cont. C. xxvi. p. 145.
counsil and comfort, suppli and support the Saints, til the conspicuous
appearance of his Personal Praesence: without which his Praesence ( which can be
no less, wheresoever it be, than Spiritual) no Communions, Ordinances, or any
extern Administration can be effectual. Let us all therefore look upon it as one
main work of the day to set Faith at work on the Promises, and be earnest with
the Father of Spirits to send down a special Unction from on High for the new
spiriting of His Peopl, e^n that other spirit which Caleb had, Seeing a commune
Spirit will never carri them fully through in the work of their Generation. Let
us al prai that the Golden M. Luther used to sai that Reading Prayer and
Tentation made a Preacher: the first a full; the second an holy; the third an
experienced Man: and I am misinformed if his motto were not Been orasse est
been studuisse: and that ^ustus Jonas said of Luther, that He could have of
God what he pleaced.

Zech. iv. 11, 12.


Pipes may, more and more, empti their golden ill out of their selves from the
Olive Tree and that they, who desire and endeavor to keep the Commands of God
and the Testimony of Jesus, may be anointed with the Oil of Gladness in more
abundant mensures. Prai we all that the Spirit of Glory may com down and rest
among and upon us, as a Refiner's fire to purifi us ( for our Gold is dim and
our fine Gold changed) considering, He who has the seven Spirits is too
visibly turned aside from our golden Candlesticks, that so we may offer up
pure offerings in truth of Righteousness and holiness, being renovated in the
Spirits of our minds, which may be placent to the Lord, as in the days of old.
Prai we all ( for I praefer it before Preaching Much Preaching, like great
sounds, has made mani deaf^ Albe^t ^aith is not so voluminous and explicit as
is now exhorted to in the Pulpits, nor so required by any praeceding Age, as in
this praesent. E. H.
in this our Day) and set we upon the Prayers like Petards break open
Heaven-Gate.
Gates of Heaven with an holy violence knocking day and night: for the Devil is
com down in great Rage, wrath and violence throwing round about ( and that with
grandest fury) his fieri darts toward his Catastrophe, or period: He sadly
foreseeing the short time he has to rant, or rage in.

O Tri we all what Power we have with the Father of Lights to set his Power on
work to shake the Powers of Darkness in this hour of Tentation that is com upon
all the Dwellers upon Earth and to help us in the Discovery of that now above
5000 years experienced Master of the Black Art, transformed too often into the
most dangerous white Devil, yea, an Angel of Light, though disguising himself and
setting his face in secret (so the Holy Mother-Toung) to be then less'st in
sight, when, without doubt, most at work; that so he may soonest defile and
safest beguile us and we not aware of him, while we shall (like those
mentioned in the Rev. ix. 8, 10.
Apocalypse) be taken with the fine hair of the Locusts which asscended out of
the bottomless Pit, that stung them as Scorpions with their Tails. O let the
Remembrancers of the Lord, who loves to be put in Remembrance of the good
thing Ier. xxxiii. 13, 16. Rex ^st qi R^gem, Maxim, no^ habeat.
promised, make mention thereof before him, that the Hyperpanonomous Jesus the
Christ, the Lord of Righteousness, the Lord of Lords, Tzion's King and King of
Kings, may be set upon this Holy Hill, that the Heathen may be His inhaeritance
and the uttermost Parts of the Earth His Possession (taking to himself his
great Power and Reign) and put the Government upon his shoulder and arise to
shake the Earth, yea and the Heavens terribly once more for the introducing and
setting up that Kingdom which cannot be shaken and the things that shall remane,
according as is Prophesied Hebr. xii. 26, 27, 28.


O when shall the sounding of the Seventh Angel be heard as the great voices in
Heaven, all the world over, sai-ing, The Apoc. xi. 15.
Kingdoms of this World are become the Kingdoms of the Lord and of his Christ
and he shall reign for ever, or into the Ages of the Ages. And how long, O Lord
holy and true, shall the good old Promises, to be renewed in these later days,
rest unaccomplished!

Oh when shall the Saviors com upon Mount Zion Obad. xxi.
to judge the Mount of Esau and the Kingdoms be the Lord's and the Lord raise up
Carpenters to break the Horns that scatter Judah, so that no man can Zech. i.
20, 21.
lift up his Head; and put the Honor upon his Saints, to expedite the
Judgment, as it is Psalm. cxlix. 6, 9
written, with a two-edged Sword in their hands and the high praises of God in
their mouths to giv Blood to drink to the Woman who is drunken with their Blood
and the Martyrs of Jesus, and destroi that great City which reigns over the
Kings of the Earth, and overcom all his and their Inimies in the Blood of the
Revel. xvii. 6. 19. 21.
Lamb, that so, at last, the loftiness and haughtiness of men being bowed down
and made low, The Lord alone Isa. ii. 11. 17.
may be exalted in his Day.

Here permit me, kind Reader, to speak a word, or two, or mo, as to the parts
and piety, meekness and humility, conscience and judgment of this illuminated
Author, specialy, as to Forms and Ceremonies and Controversies. He was then as
far above all kinds of Church-divisions, differences, or indifferences ( yet
still keeping the unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace) as the Light of the
Sun at middaie is above that of the Glowworm at midnight. For He lived,
specialy in his later years, wholey givn up to God. If at any time he
discoursed, it was Love, Life, Spirit; and if he proponed any Quaestions to
any, those were, ( to the best of mi information, and, when by him, of mi
memory) always heart-serching to tincture and quicken them, in lieu of
heart-separating God Allmight^ is the Center and the Religions of the W^rld are
as so man's differing Lines tending from the Circumference to the Center: though I
cannot sai of Religions, as of Regiments, or Autorities, better any than none
at all: for some Religious (or ra her Superstitions) are to be abhorred as
Hell; from whence their Origin was. E. H.
Quaeries to turmoil, or deaden them. He walked with the best Charity at this
day ever when abroad, to provoac perpetuously to lov' and good works and to
visit some very sick Souls, who lai languishing under spiritual Consumptions, in
the Name of the Lord. Nor could he be found without a bright purely discerning
Eye and a brave chois heart, not barely enlightened, but blessedly inflamed,
being and living such a Luminarie, as moved in a much higher and diviner Orb
than to me ((...)) men happily will giv credit: though the Powers of the World to
com fell sometimes wonderfully on him and wrought in Him ( prai peruse and
profoundly ponder His beloved 2 of Cor. v. to the 14.) to such an Elevation and
clarification of his very mortal Body, when he was fervent in the Spirit of
Prayer, that, I fear and therefore forbear to express, least it should be
reputed by some ( those principaly who despeir of atteining such perfections, or
arriving at any such Hights theirselvs, so, consequently, are more readi to
beleev it) a Sp^ritual Romance: though I mi self have more than once been thereof
an (...), Testis oculatus, Pato, Ganso y Ansaron tras cosas suenan y una son
may some sai: and of all this discourse here, as the Spaniard of a Woman, viz. De
la mala muger te guarda; y de la buena no fies nada^ Let't be: well enough.
Aranda del Duero, para mi la quiero. A Sai-ing of Philip the second. And why
may not I be King over mi self, as he over other Folk? E. H.
Eie-Witness. All this while now Somos Gallegos, y no nos entendemos^
where is the wonder? To me there is no more in it than the Bubbling up in a
Quick-spring. It is true, where there is no stirring up of the Grace of Christ
in any, there the Grace of Christ will never stir up any. Fire that lies
covered under Embers will not rise, without being blown, into a flame. There is
never any Exsultation of Spirit, where there is no Actuation of the Graces of
the Spirit. O the incredibl intern exercitations and extern exertions of the
very visibl form of some Persons! they are so divinely transformed! O that I had
the Wings of a Dove that I might flee away, etc. cried St. David, a man after
God's own Heart and most like him, when he was lifting up his all to God in
hearti Prayers and high Praises. Does not the very Creature wait with an
outstretched neck, or rather with the Romans ^iii. 19.
Head put forth, or thrust out for the manifestation of the Sons of God? And
shall the Sons of God theirselvs, whom the world knows not and whose Life is
hid with Christ in God, neither have, nor do any thing extraordinari in
themselves, nor in the work the Lord is carrieing on in the World; which is high
and heavenli, much above the World. It is very observabl in the Dove, that it
casts its Head this way and that before it takes its flight. But that which
is reported by the Humanists of Oryx ( a kind of Goat in Egypt) is most
remarquabl, that it is so affected with the fear of scorching heat at the
rising of Sirius, i. e. the Dog Star, that it stands with tears in the Eyes,
as if it seemed to deprecate the intolerabl heat thereof, and to thirst with an
unquenchabl desire for some humiditie and refreshing moisture from heaven. What,
is there nothing will make a man excellent above his Nighbor? yea sure, and that
visibly too, if he be righteous, or else Solomon's Prove. xii. 26.
sight was not right. Not so much as a gaietie in the looks of a godli man
above another? not a littl Wisdom to make a Sainct's Face to shine a littl more
than ordinarily is discerned: Wisdom does sometimes as it were magicly
transfigure a man, as has been found in experience; Hence not unlikely that
Topic Proverb among the Spaniards, There are two Magicians in Segura, Dos
Adevinos ay en Segura, uno experiencia, el otro cordura.
the one Experience, the other Wisdom. though I well know Italy is the School of
Prudence: for it is said, that whereas the French is wife after the fact, the
Dutch and English in the fact, the Italian is wise before: but an Englishman
Italionat is a Devil incarnat. True it is, yet it does not appear what the Sons
of God shall be, shall it therefore at no time appear that such Sons of God there
be? Never, acknowledgedly, acting in the Demonstration of the Spirit and Power?
What are become of all the Promises and Prophecies concerning the later
Daie-Glorie? Where is the shining forth of your good Works, that men may see
those and glorifi your Father who is in Heaven? Is it not dreadful for children
of the Day to walk as dark Lanterns? nai wors, to put out their lights Surely
there cannot be a position more pernicious to pure pieta in the power thereof
than that which holds exterior delectatio^ to excede interior Satisfac^ion.
E. H.
within likewise, that they may not see themselves? Will not the Lord God search
such, as with Candles? O arise ye Sons and Daughters of Tzion, rows up your
selves and lift up your heads, for your Redemption draws nigh. A Christian
must be so altogether, or not at all. He must be thoroughly pure, the very
Name of Christ taken upon him, obliges him against a An altogether Christian's
not depraved.
Almost a Christian shall almost be saved. E. M.

depraved conversation, he must depart from iniquity. Up then and be doing
and let it be seen by some singular thing, which neither profane, nor Professor
have don, or can do. You ^gno who it was that asked this Quaestion Mat. v. 47.
(...); But some wicked one may sai this looks like the Wisdom of those of
Zago P^^ pazzi che quei da Zago chi davan del letame al Campanile perch
cresces^e.
who dunged the foot of the Steepl ^o make it grow higher. Here is enough of
all conscience about purity. It is known well enough how the Devil climbeth, b^
the skirts of the Vicar, up to the Por las holdas del Vicario,
Sube el Diablo al Campanario.

Steepl. I could repli, -- Sed Cynthius aurem
Vellit, ait motos melius componere fluctus.
Compose we therefore our selves, paus and make a stop, least an Hue and Cry
com after us. Forget not the beloved, that darling Motto of Sr. Matthew Hale,
the greatest, most perfect and inimitabl pattern of the eminentest Virtue,
deepest Learning and most indefatigabl Industry the Age praecedent, praesent,
or subsequent has, does, or will ( such ^s mi judgment and belief in the case,
or point) enjoied, afford, show: whom to speak less of, were greatly ^o lessen
him, and could not but be looked upon as such an Heterodox Paradox, as nothing
but the basest of ignorance, envy, malice and (that omnia in uno) ^ngratitude
to his name and memory could be guil^i of, or durst adventure to be the Author,
or Promulgator of. Pass by civily the Digression, or rather pass it nobly into
the Archives, Rolls, or Re^ords of Fame out of dear love to his du Honor, who
has, so confessedly, surpassed all; and having neither aequal, nor superior,
by consent of all, ^ould merit no less Titl than that ( which yet his ^reater
Humility voluntarily resigned ^o the best of Matters and most Clement and
Serene of Princes) viz. of ^he renowned Lord chief Justice ( at less'st) of
England. But what is become of his beloved Mott?
Reader, albeit I know you had it not,
Yet know you too, I had not it forgot.
No, no: Engraven as it was on the Head of his Sta^f; so impressed it was and
is in the thoughts of mi Head, sciz. Festina lent. A sai-ing mani of our
Hous-wives cannot, surely, abide; and they stick not to tell us as much very
roundly, when they rown in their maid's ears so frequently and ^iercely, What
slow haste make ye? Ye are good, rarely good, to go on a Deadman's Errand.
But still the Wisdom of this Motto is, will and must be great: which too mani
witti men by the neglect thereof, too o^ ten, to their no small disgrace and
detriment ha^ found. Thus Canis festinans coecos parit catulos. N^ more haste
than good speed is sure good Advise for Qi nimium properat, serius absolvit.
The curi^ous English of which I take to be that sai-ing, (...) usual, of the
great Secretari Walsingham at the Council-Tabl, Mi Lords, stai a litl, and we
shall ^^^ner make an end. O! who knows the incon^^^niences and The patient man
is always at home and out o^ har^ way. E. H.
mischiefs of It was not improperly said by him, who having passed (...) grand
climacteri^ Year, said, That he was got loos from ^ ^nruli passi^ns, as from
so m^ni Lions and Wolvs.
Passion and Praecip^tance. Nai we do sai too commonly of wit it se^^ When
Gowry was led to the Tower, a Fri^nd o^ his told hi^ Ah! mi Lord, I am sor^i
you had no more Wit. Tush ( qu^^ he) thou know not what thou say; when
saw thou a ^^com hi^her?
whither will thou? How rare is it to have the spoken of it, which was reported
to have been, b^ the ever memorabl Sir Henry Wotton, of the wit (...) Sir
Philip Sidney, that it was the measure of Wit in the Brain of man mostly, but,
specialy if he be (...) Complexion Cholorie, is like Quicksilver in an hot
Loaf: ^^^ler having more heat than light. E. H.
C^^grui^ie. O vain, wild, pitiful, follifull, (...) man! how hardly art thou
persuaded to be eas^^ thy self, or constant to thy resolution, or serious^ thy
convers! Was it not somewhat, more than barel^ a witti speech of him who said
that Men's Acti^^ were like Notes of Music, sometimes in spaces, somti^^ in
lines, sometimes above, sometimes below; and seldom, (...) never, streit, for any
long continuance. How do yo^ Reader, relish this? Is there not harmony in it
But I may here forget that of the sweet Singer of our Israel, holy Mr. Herbert,
who in his Templ has given you the exact Est pictura loquens, mutum Pictura
Po^ma.
Picture of poor man's impotence, while he tells you How weak a thing is
man, how far from power,
Being twenty several things, each several hour!
How sad then do we all find all things at home, and truly not much better
abroad. Do we not see the greatest are but in and out, and that too with their
greatest, highest and best Stet quicuuque volet
Aulae culmine lubrico. Sen. in his Thyestes, Act. 2.
So it is, so it was, and so will it be
Acted over and over again, you will see.

Favorites, who are no better than mere Tenants at will. See we not the
brightest Star twinkl? Yea the biggest, those of the first magnitude which we
judged to have been fixed in their Glory, to have fallen wors than Comets, most
strangely and basely? Alvaro de Luna whom Don Iuan King of Castile so loved,
admired and almost adored, that he knew not how to advance high enuf: This
Favorit used so sai to them who wondered and stood aghast, as it were, at his
Grandeurs ( or, as our foolish Phrase is, Fortunes) Judge not of a building
before it be finished. What is the meaning of that? He ( I dare not sai was
murdered, but) died by the hand of Justice. Can you hold out, and your peace
too, a littl longer, while I only demand of you, if this, as a Babbler did of
Aristotl, the Philosopher's P^p^, no less:
Ipse dixit, so I guess
The latein to be,
Of (...): the infallibl He.

Aristotl, if his discourse were not strange? The Philosopher said, No. So happily
you may repli But then, I fear, you may com with a surreplie, ^ he did,
sai-ing, But a man having feet (giv me^ leav to put in, and those two at
liberty) should not gi^ himself so much patience as to hear thee. Sai you s^
too? Then I have don ringing, the Clapper ^gon, as, like it is, you wish these
Crotchets. Well am apt to think yet, that you have some Music, (a^ well as I) in
you, gentl Reader: which if it pro^ so much as not to be out of Tune while I
shall b^ strike one string; I will praeengage, that the Clo^ shall com off
sweetly, con la bocca dolce, as the As the Italian Poet ingeniously Opera di
natura e che l'huom' Favella,
Ma se cosi o co^i,
Natura lascia al' A^te secondo che t'abbella.



Italian way and wording is. I shall put it into a kin^ of verse, that you may
be the more kind to it, ^f less avers As the Italian Poet ingeniously Opera di
natura e che l'huom' Favella,
Ma se cosi o co^i,
Natura lascia al' A^te secondo che t'abbella.



from it. If I fail therein and it shol^ fall out to be barely a bald Rhythm;
however ^ Sir Thomas More said to the poor poring Scholar i^ that known Story,
Now it is something. Now something has, the Proverb says, some savo^
Nai something more, it has sometimes a flavor.
To High-gate in one's mouth, A great Merchant, but not so wise, as the Mayor
of Ban^^^ie, who would prove that Henry the third wa^ before Henry t^^ second:
Being as true, as that report of the Papists, viz. t^^ ^he Devil ran away with
Luther, Calvin died blaspheming, (...) ^^ recanted, and Iunius had a cloven
Foot. Now what shall i^ don to th^e, thou ^als Tongue? vid. Psalm. cxx. 3.
one man did sai,
From London 'tmought be carried. You cri away;
I will: To the Crotchet came into mi Crown,
Which I crave License now to set it down.
A Scazon it is, with which I may be bold,
Of one more Honorabl far than old;
( Yet older far than most) and mi dear Friend,
But now deceased. Now too I will end.
And that with the Music, which is worth the harkening too.

Placere singuli^ volam; sed ut prosim.
Nec displicere metuam; dummodo prosim.
To mee't's above the Music of the Sph^rs,
And he, who hears it not, must want his ears:
His taste too: for it does outflavour Wine.
It is the Elixir, Reader, make it thine.
O! take, keep, use, ponder and prize each line:
For, sure, in each there is a Spirit Divine.
Once, these a Great Divine's were: but now Thine.
Thei're great too, Greater than I can divine.
These to translate int' English I Have a mind;
But the translated left'em so behind:
So I Will be just to Him; to me, prai, you be Outdoo all F^ench Women, who are
so kind, that at first Entrance you may have acquaintance; and, other some sai,
at first acquaintance you may have entrance.
kind.
Allow me to be a small Critic, (I dare not aim at being an Observator) on the
Word A Translator is an Author, as a Cobbler is a Shoo-maker.
translated: Evn til he was not.

So temperate was He in all things, that I have heard him sai, He was never
sick in all His Life; and from this World, in soundnes of Mind, Memory and
Senses, like another Moses, He went away; though, by the way, discoursing all
along, Divinely, to his very last minute; and then this mighti man and as
greatly meek did (not di, should I sai that should I not li? but) fall asleep in
Jesus.

Tibi, Domine; qui velociter venis, Amen.
Nae, veni, Domine!
O com and feed all thy Supplicants with the perpetuous influence of thy purest
Divinity! Let thy Heavenli Highness sublime them to the Zenith of thy dearest
and nearest Society; and here, evn now, not only raie, beam and warm them with
thy Ardors, Flames and Powers; but likewise ensoul-spirit-Heaven them in
Thiself. This all thy longing and humbl Petitioners, at thy Throne of Grace,
crave, beg, prai; beseeching, that Thou, who dwell in Love and art Love,
would condesscend and cause vehement-divine Love, thoroughly, to penetrate,
transmute and transfigure them into it self; yea further convince and convert (
if it may consist with the good pleaceur of thy holy Will) all the Rational
Powers of humane Nature into a Lov of that Lov, which fullfilleth all thy
Commandments, as in heaven, evn so on earth. In the inter, let all Thine,
wheresoever dispersed, or howsoever distressed, understand and beleev, that it
is their You will make me (some will sai) beleev as soon, that the Spanish Moon
is as hot as the Swedish Sun.
Strength, not to make haste, but to sit still, and see the Salvation of God,
and that it is no more in their power to ^hange Kingdoms and Governments, than
the course of the Luminaries which are set in the blu visibl firm Expans, the
Out-spread; or to unhinge the Positure of the whole created World. It is Thou
and Thou only, who art Lord of Lords and King of Kings, the Great and Mighti
One, who must do these great and mighti things. It is Jehovah AElohim the most
high God, who reigns in the Kingdoms of men, and who soley is He who gives
these to whom soever He pleaceth, and who will make all Adam know, that all
bold A rebel and man Dog knock in the head,
The^'l bite no more when t^ei are de^d.
The rebel uses to fire the Beacon when there is no danger: and unfortunate
Princes steer their cou^s by them who know not the use of the Compass.

A War is a Fire struck in the Devil's Tin^erbox.
Civil Wars like Fire in the Bed-straw.

rashness carries certain ruin within it self; but overcoming With Time and
Art, the Mulborrie Leafs grow to be Satin. Zele, like Fire, dangerous; if it
b^eak out of the Funnil ^f the Chimnie. E. H.


Patience it is which perfecteth both God's and Man's Works. Amen.

Now I exspect mi Reader to sai, let me prai, to wit, that you would no longer
Tantalize me, but giv me the favor of the Great Person's Name, who was so
translated.

Doubtless I am not worthi him to name,
But should be counted worthi of great blame,
To bring this Person here to me, while I,
Chius ad Coum, venture to stand by:
This needs must be a grand indignity.
But seeing for all this, need there is to get ou^ of this lurking hole, and to
com abroad with hi^ name for his Honor, which should be sacred to everi serious
Soul; as not being possibl to be spread abroad so much as his merits may
challenge mo^^ righteously; Therefore it would be injustice to withhold Him from
you any longer, to conceal hi^ Name by not answering to your Quaerie, and
Complieing with your Request. It was then the truly Honor and, and it will be as
true and right if I sai ( rebus sic stantibus caeterisque non paribus, which, I
judge none will gain-sai) the most Reverend Father in God, or ( if that offend
any) with God ( that is most sure ^ any be) the most humbl Lord and meek Lord
Bishop Sanderson, of happi memory, more happi Judgment, and most happi Life
and Death; latel^ put sorth by the elegant Penn of an excellent English Writer:
who modestly acknowledges the bold undertaking, as being very unworthily
inferior to the Merits of that Apostl of a Bishop (certainly so he was, if any
such have been) without any Adulation I speak the truth before God and I not,
mi Conscience likewise bearing me witness in the Holy Spirit, I do not ignore,
what some affirm, that Cases of Conscience are, at best, but a spurious kind of
Divinity: which I repudiate not, I spurn not against, but receiv and embrace
with this proviso, that these be downright such, as are terminated on the
lowest deg^ee of Goodn^ss and Justice. E. H.
Now seeing I have put mi Conscience so to it, let me put, too, this to
Conscience, and be so far his Abetter (for want of a better) therein, as to
conclude a better Resolver thereof in all cases England never saw, never knew.
Whereupon I further venture ( and with all safety) to vouch that he was the
Non-such Casuist in all Christendom, nemine, certe Anglorum, contradicente. So
great a Master of right Reason and sound Judgment was he, which rendered him,
without dispute, as inimitably judicious, so incomparably precious to all
Posterity: nor will his Works di, while Worth shall live. Of which, I mean his
written Works, that I may speak some few words, I humbly beg, in regard of our
miserably and uncharitably divided and subdivided Principles and Practices, but
more particularly, of Ceremonial Controversies: which are so bandied about,
like a Ball, to and again and make such a nois and racket in our Nation. O the
sad circumstances, sans ceremonee, that we are now in! How strangely though are
we converted into Wolvs (which are far wors than Sheep, or yet Dogs) and that
about the very Worship of God! Monstrum Italy a great Bordell, France a great
B^diam, Germany a great Brew-hous, England a

The greatest Arms the Turks at any time used against the Christians were the^r
Divisions and intestine broils: the readiest way to ruin any Country.


horrendum! O the Metamorphosis of our Manners! O the Metempschosis of our
Souls! It is not a mere Acatastasis of our minds that marreth all the Beutie
and Glory of our Religion and Nation. May we not lamentably fear an Ichabod?
May I proov, I prai God, a Pseudoprophet. But ye best of Professors, tell me
truly what you think, is not God going about to take away his Glory, Grace,
Euangelie, Spirit and all with Him?

What said Herbert long ago?
Religion stood on its Tiptoe:
He did mistake: may I do so?
O ye Professors, can I have any hopes that ye will hinder his departure from
our Land? May he not go fast and far away for all you? Why? Who, or what
staieth him, sai ye, save yourselvs? I tell you, truly, his dear hidden littl
ones who cri greatly after him day and night. An handful it is, as it were,
of wrestling Saints, who have been so spiritualy cunning that they have got
within Him and hold him (with reverence and humility be it spoken upon the
In-turn) and will not let him go, but there keep him. Else were he got loos, woe
to you and us all. How would he lai about? and what a deal hand the living Lord
has, where he strikes, let Heaven, Earth and Hell trembl to think. But
blessed be God there are some few, to whom he has said, concerning the work of
mi hands command ye me, and these hold him to his word, an^ that so, til He
is readi to cri out, as of old to Israel (quondam Jacob) Let me Genesis xxxii. 26,
27.
go: As if he should have said, I never met with such a Fellow in ^ mi life.
What is thy The Divine goes to Heaven by Jacob's Ladder; the Astronomer by
Jacob's Staff: so making, as well as he can, Heav^^ com to him, in stead of his
going to Heaven. E. H.
name? So that of God to Moses, let me alone, as if the hands of Omnipotence
were held: All which holding of God Allmightie's Hands is but by lifting,
purely, up o^^ Eyes, Hearts and Hands to him our Father, who in the Heavens.
Surely so did Sanderson Among all our late fury and bloodshed this Man of God
^^^ver was within the view of a Battle, or Skirmish; neither (...) see so much
as a Pistol discharged, or a Sword drawn against a^^ singl Person. This I had
from his own mouth; and as he live^ all his d^^es in piety and peace; so, in
the same, those ^hee ende^, and was not: for God took him.
, abo^^ ( whom for singular honor's sake I singly now name) before he
desscended into the Sand to wrastl wit^ his dissenting Brethren about Religious
Co^cerns, Church-ceremonies so controverted, that upon the Hypothesis (for so I
would be understood that ^here be things Adiaphorous in the Church, or Churches,
I shall not fle^ away. I hope, from Christ and his Church for ear of any, or
mani Hymeneus's, Alexanders, or Iudass^s.
if Christ has any more than one) San^erson, I sai, has, through God's blessing
upon his ^^udious and pious wrastlings, without Controver^^e ( as that great is
the Mystery of Godliness) most Dia^hanously, perspicuously, no less clearly (
unless ^oecis, may I sai, auribus and mente?) than the Sunbeams upon a Wall of
Crystal; if not as transpa^ently, as the Streets of the new Jerusalem,
cleared, ^lustrated and adjudged that cloudi gloomi moot^ase, or point, that
perplexed AEnigma, that A^han of our Israel, or rather Abaddon and most
^ertenly Church-confounding Controversy ( for I ^an call it no other) while it
so continues, as dan^erously ( the Devil knows it does and ^hereat joieth)
^preading like a Leprosy and eating as a Gangraen (...) and Cancer, and will
infallibly and inevitably de^our and destroi (but so will it not be in God's
Holy Mountain) without the opportune interposition of ^rudent indulgence,
mutuous toleration and grand ^oderation; or, what is not over so much, as upon
all God's Works, evn his (unesxpected, undeserv^d, though I trust, not undesired
and unbegged) Mercy, ^oth Root and Branch, us and our, as in a Day, ^ur name
and place being taken away, to the Dicite Io Paean, and Io bis dicite Paean
of them, whom none of us can be any such Ignora^us, as not apparently at this
time of day to ken, ^s well as their cruelty and fraud; which God of the same
His immens Mercy is the inseparabl Inmate of a magnanimous S^irit.
Mercy, infinite Love, and for the sake of his own Son and Name Avert; Amen and
Amen. And let both the King ( who Who may not without much ado
Tell which is highest of the two? E. H.
Parlement-bills without the Royal Assent, like matches with^^ Fire.


repraesenteth God) and the Parliament ( who Who may not without much ado
Tell which is highest of the two? E. H.
Parlement-bills without the Royal Assent, like matches with^^ Fire.


repr^senteth the Peopl) sai Amen; and whom that the all-wise, allmighti and
most merciful God may salvifi, fortifi and grandifi; sanctifi, tranquillisi
and felicifi ( if it may stand with the good pleaceur of his Will heartily
prays the poor Praefacer. But now tho^ late (yet better late than never, so
the Proverb)

To the Second Quaestion, sciz. Why, or what n^^ have we to expose to public
view these Arcanums, o^ Mysteries of the Archetypous Globe, Original World^
Principl of AEternitie, etc.

Answ. It was, among other, for these reasons grounds, persuasives, motives,
or, if you pleace inductives and incentives.

First, He did suppose and humbly conceiv the the Holy Spirit of God did not
communicate wit^ him, and revele to him these Highest Mysteries for his own
knowledge and proper Satisfaction.

Next and in sequel He looked at this Tresau^ as a Talent given to him and
entrusted with hi^ not to wrap it up in a Napkin ( as the deservedly ^proved
Idlness ^he Devil's couch, and lust his cushion. E. H.
Sloth breeds the Scurvie.
An Idl man tempts the Devil to tempt him.

slothful Servant did his) but to put it out (...) his Master's use. Quite
contrari to the Principl^ Practices and custom of selfi men.

Add to these, His generous Clothes warm the body, and the body the clothes
by way of thank full correspondence.
Benignity would not allow him to engross to himself, or envi to other of his
own make, specialy his Countri-men, these purely A S^ate of pleaceur (take it
in any kind of sens whatsoever) is not only lawful, but laudabl (because a
proper medium, when moderate, to obtein the needful) and above all things evn
by the most superlatively sublimed souls and spirits eligibl and concupiscibl.
E. H.
pleasant sensations, glorious introversions and divinely true intellections of
his mind, which he could not but conclude to be serviceabl in some way, or
other, of spiritual instruction, improv, advance, or use.

Nor is the burning Fire of Charity ( or rather divine Love that centred in
his Heart) to be buried ( neither indeed could it be) under the Ashes of
Oblivion, or secrecy: which never seeking it self but the good and benefit (
and quod been fit bis fit) of his Nighbor, extorted these from him by mani,
manifold and those very great, strong, restless and importunate impulses:
which, without manifest disobedience to the heavenli Visions and Revelations,
could not be repulsed, resisted, or refused.

Besides, or rather persuant to what is already urged, the Publication was for
the sake of his School-Fellows ( as He was wont to word it) who were, or are,
would, or should be taken up into this same High-School, and taught the same
Lessons (most proper to the Day) by the same Schoolmaster: that so they (
principaly the more cautiously curious; spiritualy ambitious and sacredly
inquisitiv of and among them) might be gratified and satisfied in viewing (
through this purely pellucid medium) the What is the Beatifi^ Vision it self ( I
ask no Braggadoc^ Sch^olist this Quaestion) but the (...) of ^he purest
sensati^^ sai you? s^ve-tru. E. ^

Christianism and Epicurism to the truly spiritual discer^ li^^l l^s^ than a
needless LOGOMACHIA. E. H.


celestial Fabric frame and most inward work in the very spring everi wheel
within a wheel, yea everi the minutest movement thereof, and be thereby
infinitely confirmed by these exarations of His Penn and Em^^nations ( as I may
sai) of his divinely tinctured Sp^^rit; as those reciprocously ratified by
these Test^^monies: not that I would have the mind of any i^^genious and
spiritual Indagator blindly acquiescei^ any assertions, or conclusions neither
arising upon Principles of Faith, nor from necessari praemilles but praeserv
his opinion and particular persuasio^ as indeed he cannot well omit, or
decline the t^^king this mi caution and counsil.

Moreover, He allowed the printing and publi^^^ing of these Writings, that
there might be e^^stant a Characteristic, an appropriate and disti^^guishing
Character, in truth and in very deed, of i^^maculate Divinity, by
Demonstration, as it (...) and likewise Praelibation; as an What is the
Beatifi^ Vision it self ( I ask no Braggadoc^ Sch^olist this Quaestion) but the
(...) of ^he purest sensati^^ sai you? s^ve-tru. E. ^

Christianism and Epicurism to the truly spiritual discer^ li^^l l^s^ than a
needless LOGOMACHIA. E. H.


Antipast, or giving a foretaste to the Universities ( from w^^^ he had his
Doctorate, though he took few of these Degr^^ there) and ( had these been in all
Languages) to t^^ Univers it self, as of the certentie, soliditie a^^
sublimitie of the Mysteries and Powers of the (...) vine Magia, so of that
vastly grand and verily i^^compatibl ( I had almost added yet incredibl)
differe^^ and dis^inction twixt the Rational and Intellectu^^ Power, or
Faculty, the apprehension and co^^prehension in Men and Saints, in order and
^^^dence to and toward their being filled Ephesians. iii. 18, 19. compared with Romans
v. 5.
with, or into, all the Fullness of God, through the Love of God in Christ (
which passes knowledge) shed abroad in their Hearts, by the Holy Spirit which
is given to them.

Surely, we do not know by any other means that we are the Children of God,
but because God seals unto our 1 Ioh. iv. 13.
Heart, by his Spirit, our Adoption of us out of free Grace, and we by Faith
receiv the assured Pledges of Him given in Christ's Love: for though everi
Believer has the Testimony of His Faith from his Works, yet it comes a
posteriori probatione, from a later, or secondari proof in stead, or place of a
sign. It is only an addition, or inferior Help for a prop to Faith, not for a
Foundation to lean on. True it is, everi one may be confirmed and assured in
their calling by their sober, righteous and godli Life: But how? As a proof,
not from the Cause, but from the Sign, or Effect: The Assurance of Faith does
wholey rest and reside in the Grace of Christ. Evn in Nature Children do not
first com to know their Parents, either by their love to their Brethren, or ^y
their Obedience to their Parents, but from their Parents Lov desscending on
them. So we read in 1 Ioh. iv. 10, 19.
Holy Writ, and so it is, that we loved him, because He first loved us. Let
men boast of their mighti Reasonings, their close Deductions, their
strong-^inked Consequences and their elaborate Demon^trations, made out by the
most Metaphysicous Divines, in Arminius meeting Baudius one day disguised with
drink, ^ee told him, Tu, Baudi, dedecoras nostram Academiam. Et ^u, Armini,
(answered he) nostram Religionem.
Religion; when they have don all ^o justifi themselves ( as a late Writer
rarely) in a cautious advance toward Heaven, they will find, that The best
Divinity consists in the Unions of Love (...) Wonder; that there are such
Doxologies, transsce^ding Reason's reach, as may be dignified with the Title of
Faith's Triumphs; such Eucharistic (...) Theologic Enlargements and
Exspatiations in the Heart and Spirit, springing and arising and exsu^ing from
the wondrous affection of Love, accompanied with that immuculate and ineffabl
Joy, as no^ can signi^i, or hint; none can beleev, or concei^ but those who
have felt and enjoied that beatifi^ Romans v. 4.
Experience: which is only inferior to, or only le^^ in, some Degrees of being,
that, which we cal^ Heaven. That the capacity of Reason is much la^ger than
that of Sens, I cannot but concede: (...) that the largeness of the Will and
Affections, wh^ are in it, far surmounteth Reason, I cannot li^^wise but
confess. Wherefore else, I prai, has Go^ required that our desire and love of
Him should (...) more complete and perfect than our knowledge (...) Him? Are we
not obliged by the express Co^^mand of God Hisself to entertein and embrace
(...) Perfections with the closest adhaesion of Heart (...) Soul? Albeit those
we can apprehend only wit^ partial and rather a lax aenigmatic, than strict so
enti^ic knowledge.

Of the two I should rather praefer In^gination, than Ratiocination in
Discourses co^^cerning divine Subjects; the former being, con^^^sedly, the
Spring and Engine of the Affection through its nobl suppli-ing Reason by raised
and ^^^gurativ adumbrations and its admirabl affordi^^ all those agreeabl
illustrations, which serve to ki^^ it into vaster conceptions, to sweeten the
severi^^ of it, and then beutifi it with all those allurements and adornments
which fairly and e^fectualy ( and that not unusualy) recommend a cold, dead
speculation to a warm, liveli affection. And this is properly and totaly the
(...), opus, Work of the Imagination, when it has warily received and
enterteined the verity and dignity of its Object from a superior Faculty.
Nor can it but be so, in strictness of propriety, allowed; and not only Reason
and Judgment, ( which all permit, conclude and approve) but Imagination and
Fancy, the meanest and most trivial Power of Man's Soul, likewise: seeing evn
the Psalm. cxlviii, 2, 3, 4, 8.
Meteors are called upon, as well as the Psalm. cxlviii, 2, 3, 4, 8.
Firmament, (as is finely by one noted and observed) to prais the Lord. Nai
more, Fantasy may be, and, under a good menage, mostly, is, an admirabl Organ
and incomparabl Incentiv of heavenli Prais and divine Adoration: in like manner
as the Omnipotent Jehovah AElohim deemed it most fit to choos Genesis ix. 13.
the Rainbow ( that Circl of Phantastic Colors, as one called it) for the
Symbol ( shall I not sai ^he Sacrament?) of his Darling Attribute ( if
At^ributes be not more properly God, than in God) namely Mercy. Nai, I heard
one sai, that the strength and vehemence of Imagination, Fantasy, or Phan'sie
will, sometimes, carri forth the Reason and Judgment to make new Worlds of
discoveries, excite both to take such Circuits and Travels in the contemplation
of AEternal Entities, til the very Soul is readi to be vertiginous, to swim and
grow giddi, and the Speculation turns almost Apoplexy. Yea further, actuate
the Rational Power beyond its praesent Order, without any illusive Phana^icism,
etc. to a taste and immature Anticipation of unproportioned Knowledge: yet still
with this proviso, that the Intellectual and Rational Power and Faculty are
far from being the same. Deig^^ therefore to take notice that the intellectual
The ex^rcise of the Faculty of the Intellect, sp^cialy ^ some things, wherein
it is absol^te, is not only one of the greate^^ of man's delights, and
excluding any thing of Sens, as not app^^^teining to it (so far it is
acknowledg^d by all the Learned) (...) further is and may be sty'ed an Umbrage
of the contempla^i^^ Satisfaction that is asscribed to the Godhead it self. So
another v^ry divinely.
knowledge is only learned from the Spirit of the mind (...) man, standing in
the Center, being then only an^ there purely receptiv and divinely scient, (
what (...) I sai sentient?) of the supercoelestial things the^^selvs. Whereas
the Rational, which the confounding Jesuit would make the pure Religionist
beleev to b^ Mechanism ( the Diana of this inquisitiv Age) and the whole
Encyclopoede of Arts and Sciences but (...) brisk circulation of the Blood, and
all thinking an^ reasoning Power a mere local motion, and that to^ tumultuous;
He notwithstanding well knowing (...) to be most admirably rare in its due
place ( which (...) does as well, too, make use of) and without which and the
exercise thereof a Man is below the Bea^^ that perishes; Yet ( for all this) I
sai the Ratio^^ speaks, writes and acts from its rolling suggestions,
cogitations, conceptions, motions, (...) shut out of the Center So giving us no
more direction (much less any introspectio^ as to those My^teries) than the
finger of a Mercurial Statue (...) men when they are blundring groping and
puzzling in some da^^ passage, or ^lace. E. H.
.

Finaly, These intern manifestations are ma^^ out and put forth to public use
and perusal, for t^^ vindicating and asserting Truth, and for period^zing, or
putting an end, in fair probability h^^^ever, to the several, otherwise
endless, altercations, disputations and dubitations of, in and about Mystic
Theology; as may most clearly appear to the diligent, judicious and spiritualy
illuminated Peruser of the same. He having set before his Eyes, one of the
first and fairest Objects, deserving to be set in Letters of Gold and engraven
upon all our Minds and Spirits, as with the point of a Diamant. For here He
makes and gives a Diaphanous Manifesto and perspicuous Demonstration ( and
you will not, I dare sai, nobl and Christian Reasoner and Reader, deni, or
gain-sai that it is a Priori) evn from supersensual Sight and intellectual
Vision; which amounts to littl less than a Divine Apocalypse, or ( style it
what you pleace) Revelation, Manifestation, Inspiration, Communication,
Certification, Declaration, Notifica^ion, or, if you will, Information, that
there ever was, and now is and will be an Original and AEternal Globe, or World,
which did exist before AEternal Nature (here I had need as I do indeed,
heartily prai you not to be impatient, nor out of good humor by reason of ( no
reason for, you will sai) this startling Epithete, (...)! seeing the following
Pages will make it, as you will find, fairly co-incident with Nature) and all her
pure Forms, Powers and Properties; so in sequel, anteceding ( that is more
strange than all the rest you may repli; nai, I beleev, will: so I must admit,
or however permit you in this most wonderful point, (...)) I revert and, as
above, averr it, i. e. by consequence, praeceding all other Worlds, Globes,
Centers and Creations whatsoever. He furthermore declares ( as it is made
apparent by this Tract) that the Spirit and Soul are two distinct Essences, the
former being of a more sublime Origination, or ( as we vulgarly) of an higher
Descent. Is it not so? Why? Do not the Golden Rules delivered by ancient
Philosophers seem to set forth as much? How came those famous Lights of Wisdom
set up almost all the World over? Nai, what issue is there of the precious
Dictates of our gracious Savior and His holy Apostls who spoke as never man,
or mere So^^^ spoke? Nai, what becomes of the Image of G^^ impressed on Man at
the first, and wherein ( setti^^ the Angels apart) he excels the whole
Creation^ NB. When the holy Jesus, the Christ of God, vouchsafed and
condescended to be conversant among men, He made it his chief Work ( what
Christian will be against the ensuing Truth?) to improve the mind and spirit of
man far above the hight of the Soul's Reason: and we are so far from
conforming to our Blessed Lord's course, as Reason it self, if (...) sens
almost, is yet too sublime for us: except so^^ few who Apparent rari nantes in
Gurgite vasto.
( as the Poet sings) bravely looking up and beari^^ up their Heads in this
Universal Sinking towar^ ( and I prai God it may go down not woefully further,
^^ dolefully deeper than) the Profundities of I Sam. ii. 6. Hos. xiii. 14.
Psalm. xxx. 3.
Sh^^ out of which some are saved. Com along with me^ kind Reader, if thou be
not quite tired, and ma^^ use of the strongest legs, of thy reason, nai
exercis^ the Brains of it, yea let the Head and Crown of (...) asscend to that
of Isai. lvii. 15.
AEternitie (leaving far below, those effects of curiosity and accidental
emergences, the Arts and Sciences Yea proved so far from being so realy in
their nature, or (...) that they have been some of the most Tyrannous enslavers
of (...) ju^gments, and imprisoning fetters of their understanding (...) the
Divi^e Mr. F. B. in the Praeface to his Book entit^l^^ (...).
liberal, falsely so called and highest natural Philosophy too, upon which the
Great Diana of this Mechanic Age, h. e. Natural Theology is reared, buoied,
hoisted, built up) and let thy Reason, I sai, soar aloft, evn, if possibl, up
to AEternitie, being environed with Time (as it is a part of that Prius and
Posterius without which the beginning and end of any being cannot be conceived
to be, not as it is defined the Measure of Motion, which had a Beginning) on
that Foundation; that of an AEtern Being Deuteronomy. xxxiii. 27.
of Beeings ( nothing being abl to make it self) Reason existeth, subsisteth,
stands, builds and finisheth, I mean concludes, That AEternitie it self
is: but Quod Deus est scimus: sed Quid si sci^e velimus
Ultra nos imus. Sed quod sit summus and im^s,
Ultimus and primus scimus. Plus scire nequimu^
That God is we do know;
But what God is they who
Would know, themselves out-go.
That He Is most high and low,
The first and last we ^gno.
Further we cannot go. E. H.
All this the old Proverb makes littl, or no wonder, sai-ing^ We can go no
where, but we have God over and under.


what it is, the imbecillitie of any rational Faculty is such as it cannot
possibly comprehend, i. e. how any thing should have being without beginning
and ending; yet such a being there must be, or no God there must, or can be,
and where now will Reason be? I fancy ( and you know what has been written
already of Fancy) that Reason, notwithstanding all the sublimitie and
vivacitie Fancy can afford, or give to it in all its best conceptions, like a
sorri-silli Guide, does but lead me with confidence and leav me in confusion
in a dull dark Labyrinth, or Maze, in a Maeandrous passage, or Place. Hence evn
the most Metaphysic Subtilissimoes after that they have fatigated, or quite
tired and wearied ( and but worsted) themselves with their Divisions and
Subdivisions, I must affirm, they have not arrived at so much of immodestie, as
to make Reason the adaequate measure of Truth whence soever it comes, does com
from God
Truth, but do ultimately resolv it into a Conformity with the Divine
Intellect, which a Plat^nist would after this manner ( as one more excellently
expresses and exactly humoreth, than that ut supri lateine) by way of an
Exegematic Character, thus^ That there is an AEternal Mind that comprehends
the intelligibl natures, species and ideas of all things, whether actualy
existing, or possibly only, and that comprehends it self and all the extent
of its own Power, ^^gether with an Exemplar, Platform, of the wh^^ World,
according to which He produced the sam^. What of all this? Why dato and
concesso, the Praemisses granted and allowed, yet still the Conclusion will and
must be, in spite of all our Reason, assisted with the clearest imagination,
we are no less in the dark: for unless notice be vouchsafed to us by the
AEternal Mind of what is conformabl to His infallibl and infinite Intellect,
there will be littl, or no certentie of Truth obtained by us. Such is the
peculiar Province of Revelation which is the true (or praetended) foundation
still of all knowledge whatsoever. Moreover, it has all the benefit of
Philosophy and natural Religion's light in its best progress of Reasoning, in
its highest Zenith, exaltation, elevation, sublimation and Acme (to be silent
as to a further and unfailing ratification from Divine Testimony and the
Transscendence of the Objects, proper quarto modo to an Apocalypsie, which
gives it freer admission and makes a more solid, valid and durabl impression
upon our intellect: Though we acknowledge, when all is don, how magnificously
soever we History informs us, that not only Religion and Laws, but all Arts
and Sciences^ all nobl Inventions have ever boasted of their AEgeria's, their
assisting Demons, too.
bragg and vapor and taper of our Reason, or Faith, Intellect, intelligibl
Ideas and aeternal Verities, these will never conduct us to enter into Paradise,
or our Master's joie; but only as these are conjoined with our There must be of
necessity in the passions, or affections some kind of Spiritualitie, otherwise
incorporeous things could never by these be made as objects of their election.
E. H.
affections, which commix, co-incide and as it were identifi with that grandest
and Divinest Mystery of Love, sciz. God made Flesh: which gave ( as one
superexcellently) the Angels new Anthems, a new Scaene of Knowledge and
consequently a new Heven. So much, if not too much, of the distinction of these
Powers, and of that refined one of Soul and Spirit in man, I sai Man, who
certainly is more, than is contained in that old definition Animal Rationale, if
he were no more than Animans intellectuale; though were I worthi to define Him
it should be rather by Religiosum than by either, or both mentioned. Nai,
seriously thinking, considering and ruminating of the Rarities and Merits of
his Creation by Jehovah AElohim, who breathed into his Nostrils Genesis ii^ 7.
the Breath of Life's, and who, as the Father of Spirits forms that in man, I
can scarce forbear calling Him Animal Divinum; though I be not such an Animal,
without the faculty to think, nai, and to foresee this definition deemed,
forthwith, by the acute as unphilosophi^; yea the Terms doomed, o^ however if
not so adjudged, yet ( to speak favorably) impleaded, as carri-ing in their
very Bowels a self-duelling, by some: chiefly those, who have b^ great Labors
procured unto themselves a deep-read^ confusion of thought. Let me complete
this Paragraph with the three constituent Parts of man according to the
Apostl's Philosophy, or Judgment in that Prayer of his where mention is made
of Body, Soul and Spirit; which Spirit, or (...) Romans ^iii. 16. Gal. vi 18.
These. v. 23.
what it signi^ieth in the New Covenant, or Wh^^e y^u shall not find the B.
Virgin ( nor in any of o^^ (...) rosly ab^sed as by the Pap^sts themselves, not
only wh^^ (...) sai their Ave Mary's ( ^^ prai-ing f^r her, which is most (...)
as well as to Her^ which is unlawful an^ (...) but when ^he^ make her mend
T^^mas a B^ck^r's (...), there, sing to a third, ^^twixt Man a (...), sapplia
N^n's place which was (...) a ^aw ^^ House, ^ring an Abbiss (...) with child ^y
(...) serving (...) (...).
Testament, the Places at the Bottom, and mani mo, do tell. But to interpret
it, as most do, by the (...), the Graces of the H. Spirit, would make the
Apostl's Prayer so impertinent, improper, strange, if not ridiculous, unless
those Graces had at any been found blame-worthi, that I cannot but appear most
exceedingly blameabl miself, should I add one Word to contra-argue it. However
let me add the following words tending toward the conclusion of this
prodigiously prolix and strange sort of a Praeface, viz. that seeing the
Architypous Globe, or Original Being is the Basis and Foundation as well of
AEternal Nature ( to use you a littl to the Term that you may be the less
terribl against it) as of all other Essences, Globes, Worlds, producted,
educted, or brought forth out of the Womb of pure Nature supranominated, we
have therefore, first of all, made known (as is fit and order requires) the
Primari World of all Worlds. Next to it Nature (an empti name to some, I know,
and wors) Then the Angelic World, had we not been praevented and obstructed by
the pertinacie and (I will not add) perfidie of one Person: who has not only
not complied with the fair desires of the Living (which is disobliging and
disingenuous) but contradicted (which is foully ominous) finaly frustrated, I
fear to sai (that would be dreadfully dangerous) the very will of the Sit Divus,
modo non s^t vivus. Caracalla said to them who desi^ed that some Honors might
be spent upon his Brother Geta, Now dead out His way. This by the way for a^i
unnatural B^other, w^om it may concern.
`O AKAPITS, `O 'EN 'AGIOIS. With whom and whose Writings I have altogether
don, after I shall have told thee, candid Lector, that this Spiritual Man, as
he cared not to be counted prolix (which has made me the longer and the more
to imitate him) provided, He could profit but any Person: though with repetition
upon repetition (which to captious, or curious Critics, I am no such Novice, or
Idiot, as not to ^gno to be very nauseous) so neither sought he the Prais of
men, which he was far above: albeit I, like an ambitious and praesumtuous
Friend and Free-willer, have made an offering in this pitteous Prae^ace to the
Memory of his precious Name: which will rise higher and shine brighter, more
and more ( for, so, Prove. iv. 18.
the path of the Righteous is as the shining Light that shines more and more
unto the perfect Day) though to those who love darkness, abominably; and to
Moles, Bats and Owls, invisibly. To proceed, as he wrote not any uncouth, much
less, untrue things; so he slighted censures, as much as any thing: ( fit only
like I slight men's censures as the Charcoal-sparks,
Or as a base ill-natured Curr that bark's:
The one frights Children, and the other Men.
But Sparks go out, and Dogs run in again.
NB. Reader, though it is modesty to decline prais, yet it is a Pride not to care
what the World speaks of thee. That from me. E. H.


Charcoal-sparks, to affrig^^ Children) he never concerning himself at all, as
to any thing, men should unworthily I slight men's censures as the
Charcoal-sparks,
Or as a base ill-natured Curr that bark's:
The one frights Children, and the other Men.
But Sparks go out, and Dogs run in again.
NB. Reader, though it is modesty to decline prais, yet it is a Pride not to care
what the World speaks of thee. That from me. E. H.


sai, or Satyricl^ write against what he had surely found and sweetly felt.
Take therefore now I do mi fair leav of him, who being raised on high ( above
the God of the World ( or Age rather) which blinds the minds of them who
beleev not, least the Light, etc. as the Apostl goes on) and placed near the
Regal Throne of the most High (evn when here ( Hear ye this all y^ Wonderers)
He knew and saw, that there was a Spirit in man, when illuminated by the
Spirit of Go^ ( the Father of Lights and Spirits) which is abl to search, find,
feel, apprehend and comprehend what words cannot utter, and so transscendently
above any things in this Book written by him. The more interior Portraicture of
whom could only be drawn by himself, not by any other Pencill; how much less
then by mi Penn? Nai it is far from being drawn by, though possibly designed and
as it were in the outlines on and in these Tabls of his own Heart, the praesent
papyrs: therefore no exact Lineaments can be here exspected. Leav likewise here
I do the Issue and Success to the Benediction of the holy, good and gracious,
the immortal, invisibl, aeternal and only wise Spirit, who reveled these deep
things to him, and made him and me willing to impart the same spiritualities
Rom i. 11
for, as is hoped, the service and benefit of mani, the consolation and
confirmation of some few, the confutation, redargution and conviction of
unbeleevers, ill-beleevers and One may go to Heaven off the Devil's back, viz.
the Gallows; yet know, that though true Repentance (that Laundress of ^he
Conscience) be never too late; yet late Repentance is seldom t^u.

He is happi who ends his journie before he be quite tired: sciz. before
he be too old.


ill-livers, and for the rectification and illumination of the base mesprisions
of most, and dark conceptions of mo; who have other Ideas and apprehensions,
than do, without doubt, become the only True, semper eadem, sempitern
ever-adorabl and super-benedict Tri-une Deity. For ( as one excellently and
admirably) that man does but beli God, in plain English, when God is said, or
thought to be All things, those things, or like any thing men, or Angels can
imagine: it being altogether unproblematic and without the less'st shadow of
scrupl, and may well be accounted as an Axiom ( if not spoken as the 1 Pet. iv.
10.
Oracls of God) that he belieth God, who speaks falsely of God, and truly (
will that Word here pass?) so he does, who says more, or less than the Truth.
In which as it is Ephesians. iv. 21.
in Jesus the Christ, our High Priest, Prophet, King and Judge; so am I ( and in
the Faith and Lov that is in him) though the very offscouring of the whole
Creation, so consequently most unworthi of the Name of your Friend,
Acquaintante, or Compatriot, yet cannot but subscribe miself to be,

Dear Christian Reader, Yours, as your self, and your own Soul (...). Isidor.
Pelusiot. Epist. lib. iv. epist. 67.
E H. MAMP.

THE AUTHOR TO THE READER.
Judicious Reader.
SO I would have you to be. Read, then weigh and seriously consider what you
read, and then judge, and then reject what thou do not like. But yet not
rashly condemn what thou in thy present state cannest not comprehend. Let it ly
by thee, it may be better understood in another State. Because the Author's
Philosophy proceeds, note sha^, from the Center, and not from others. And so
writes in an unknown way and unusual Method. And therefore at first reading
the style and the expressions of it may seem something unpleasant; but let
Patience be thy Companion to carry thee in reading it, from the Beginning to
the End, and then the bitterness and harshness of it may be turned into a sweet
pleasantness, and may cause a delight in your reading it over the second time.
I only court your appetite to read it over with judgment, and then judge what
you please. I write not to gain Disciples, nor to make a Sect or Party, nor to
make Divisions in the World. There are too many Sects, Schisms, and Divisions
in the World already; but only to declare the interest of Truth, who is able
to preserve herself from all the falsities of this present age. Therefore do
not blind your own mind with Prejudices before you read, for how then should
you understand, or perceive what you read? So I rest

Yours, In the Love of Jesus I P MD.

(...).
Page xiii. line 19. read Hewet. p. xiv. l. 26. for both, even. p. xviii. l.
38. for them, they. p. xxxi. l. 9. read man's. p. xl. l. 8. joie. p. xlii. l.
12. seems. l. 31. persecutions. l. 34. non intelligatur. penult. ita. p.
xliv. l. 33. by a^ p. live. l. 8. (...) p. lx. 16. soberness. p. lxvii. l. 5.
abstractedly. p. lxxv. l. 26. His holy.

What further, Reader, you amiss may find.
As like enough you may, if that you mind;
Prai let your Penn amend. Sir, be so kind.
A POSTSCRIPT From the Praefacer to the Peruser.
AS I have been humbly bold before the Throne of Grace to praefer some few
Petitions to the King of Kings, of Saints, and the only Sovereign of Men and
Angels ( as you may see before, and elsewhere i^ two small Divine Breathings, and
a Notion ^or the Ocean.
piec^^ of mine, peradventure not unworthi of your perusal) so now here again I
praesent to your hearts the flaming Ardors of a great Soul, who panted after
God ( David like) after the living God ( as the Heart braieth after the Waters)
and was most vehemently earnest, when in the body, with the God of Grace,
Peace and Truth, beseeching and beseeching that he would forthwith Disce,
miser, pigris non flecti numina voris.
Praesentemque adhibe, dum facis, ipse Deum.

( if so his blessed Will were) break up the Fountains of the great Depths of
Spiritual knowledge, celestial understanding and divine wisdom ( yet greatly
sealed up) both in his Word and Works, before Men and Saints; principaly those
heavenly Heroic Persons, who loved the Truth at a better rate and higher value
than to Plato knew much of God, but (as Josephus shows) durst not set it
down. B. Augustinus does ^s much for Seneca telling us: Colebat qod
rep^ehendebat, agebat qod arguebat, qod culpabat adorabat. De Civ. Dei L. vi.
c. 10.
fear the shame of being reckoned and counted erroneous for the True Grace and
Christian Zele are of an Heroic Nature, readi to endure any thing for Jesus,
the Christ, His Worship any Truth. Hence Constantine the great, as face^iously
as piously, told Acesius the Novatian, that if he would not take up with
persecutions and such like dealings, he must provide a Ladder, and climb alone
to H^ven. Unless we will be satisfied without Heven, or spi some other way to
it, than ^he Saints have found, we must praepare and look for, meet, and
undergo, with hol^ submission and Christian chearfullnes, thank fullnes and
joiful^nes, all and all manner of Trials and Tribulations. E. H.
Profession of it, that, once more, the Waters of Life ( which he thirsted
after, here, unsquenchably) might gush out exceedingly and flow forth
abundantly for the watering and refreshing the driparched-scorched-barren Root
of the World round about. Then shall all mesprisions and whatsoever is amiss be
for ever drowned, as with a divine Deluge: which yet too much and too high are
kept aloft, swimming in too-too mani of our best Heads.

Dear Reader, whosoever you may be, I verily beleev that should you pleace to
lai the same Ear of conscientious unpraejudicateness as close to the voice of
these Mysteries as I did, and then hearken; you would hear it, as well
deliciously harmonizing and ravishing, as distinctly admonishing and advising
you, evn to steer the same course of thoughts with miself. Nevertheless I
cannot, courteous Reader, (let me have, I prai, mi wonted freedom in delivering
plainly, if not prudently, or placently, mi opinion) I sai, I cannot praevale
with mi self to become a Counselor to you to advise you, as yet, to drink of
these Aquas vitae coelestes: except and with this Proviso, that you draw, with
me, the same, from the very same Fountain: yea drink and eat and sleep too (as
was said of one) aeternal Life. That you may not be startled at the sound of
these Words, deign to view and review the Words of the holy Jesus, and ruminate
upon the reason, why our Lord (who was so meek and lowli in heart) rather
reproved, than received that good (I should have called it) salutation, or
salutation of good (in that Titl of Dignity dearly merited) which he bestowed
on him, Matt. xix. 7. Well. This I must openly confess, namely, miself to have
been built up in the Belief, wherein I formerly was; which as it was, through
Grace, gradualy obtained: so by this Master Builder greatly advanced: who
likewise aequaly with (I should sai far more excellently than) miself forsook
his most familiar and best Friends (not prostituting the Nobility of His
Spirit i^ the way of his Judgment) and not only those, but one particular and
principal Darling (more dear and ne^^ than all the abovenamed) evn his own
very self. Everi one therefore ought ( with no small submission I spea^ it) who
shall be his Reader, to be very kind, courteous, favorabl, compassionat,
tenderhearted and most Christianly loving to Him in His Name and Memory, and
that without any Nabalism, or dissimulation, yea as far as (...) may, can, or
will extend: according to the direction and injunction of Jehovah AElohim i^
holy Writ. I can assure you, candid Praelector, the Author was Meekness of
Spirit and Behavior is more according to Christ than the most watchful Zele;
yet should all never be quiet wh^^ they see the Prince of Peace's followers
falling out one with ^^^other. E. H.
so to all: then why cannot you at, less'st (...) such an one? I conclude with
that Distich of Dea^ Donn, and two, or three mo, and then I have don.

They who to Lords do write Rewards to get,
Are they not like Singers at Doors for meat?
And I who write, 'caus all do write, have still
That plea for writing, and for writing ill.
Why should Malfido then look now so grim?
Sure, Proximus postremus is, with him.
-- Vt ameris amabilis esto. sic P. Ovid. Naso.
Est etenim Magnes magnus amoris amor.
Haec omnibus obtulit

E H. MAMP. alias, DRAWDE REKOOH
An Explanation of the Scheme of the eight worlds, Gl^^ Centers, and their
Situation.
THE Letter A affords the view of the Arch^^ Globe or World which is the
first and contei^ the other in its circumference; as the figure monstrateth.

B would have you b^hold Eternal Nature; whose (...) see, does enclose all the
Worlds.

C Carries you to the Angelical World.

D Declares the Dark Fire-World.

E Enters you into the Fire-Light-World.

F Points forth the Light-Fire-World.

G Gives you the sight of the four Elementarie-Worl^

H Holds out the Light Fireless-World.

We may further observe from this Figure that (...) Worlds, or Principles, are
comprehended in the first (...) is the Eternal World; because it is the first of
all Worlds, teining all, it self contained of none, and the beg^^ and e^d of
all Worlds, Principles, and Creations.

Another thing to be observed is that E^ernal Natur^^ is the second World, and
does contein 6 Worlds in its en^ as was before mentioned; which are situated
in the order in which they were produced. 1. The Angelic^l^ next the
Dark-World, then the Fire-Light-World, in the^^ place Paradise or the
Ligh^-Fire-World, in the fifth (...) outward visible four Elemental-World, and
in the sixt^ last place the Ligh^-Fireless-World.

Finally we are to take notice of a thing which ca^^ expressed in this Figure
which is the penetration (...) Worlds one through another, without mixing with
one there. Thus the Eternal World passes through all the (...) which it
comprehends within its circumference; for else (...) who fills this World and
dwells in it, could not be an ^^s^lent, Omnipotent and Omnipraesent God: for as
Go^ seth through all, so does this World which in good and sense may be called
the Body of God. So llkewise does nal Nature pass through and penetrate the six
Worlds, (...) are contained in its circumference: besides every o^ the six do
penetrate one another; yet without mixi^^ one another, as being each of them a
distinct Center, (...) and Principle.

Thus much shall suffice to have spoken in general co^^ning the import of this
Scheme, tho this Book explain's two of the Globes, Worlds, Principles, etc.

The Archetypal A Globe


THE Introduction.
This first Treatise is concerning these four general Heads.
THE First is, What is God in the primary Being of himself before the Globe of
Eternity was in existency? The Second is, What is God in the original ^eing of
himself, in the Globe of Eternity, be^^re Eternal Nature was in being? The
Third is, What is pure Eternal Nature ^ith all her working forms, Elements,
Princi^les and inseparable Essences? The Fourth is, What is God in pure Eternal
^ature's Essence?
All these four Particulars are handled in or^er to a second Treatise, which is
to speak of those many particular and distinct principle which were extracted
out of the Eternal Prin^ciple of pure Nature; according to Jacob Beb^me's
Philosophical Hypotheses and his The^^logical Maxims, in order to take off that
vail obscurity, that seems to spread it self over a^ through all his deep and
Mystical writings.

The First Head. What God is before the Globe of Eternity.
THE subject of this Chapter is, What God is in the primary and original being
of himself, before the Globe of Eternity did exist.

Quest. If you ask me, What this God is, that was before the Globe of Eternity
was brought into manifestation?

Answ. I answer, That by God in this place I understand the Spirit of Eternity
himself, as he is an Eternal Unity and Simplicity. But what this Eternal Unity
and Simplicity of himself is, who can tell but himself, it being unknowable to
any besides himself. For no creature can comprehend an infinite, unsearchable
and incomprehensible Creator: therefore none can know what the Spirit of
Eternity is, out of the Globe of Eternity, but himself alone. The first
manifestation of himself is in the Globe of Eternity, there he first becomes
knowable to Intellectual creatures: but without and beyond it, he is as a
Nothing to all created understandings, being hid and wrapped up in his own
unsearchable Mystery. Wherefore we conclude, That God considered, as existing
before the Globe of Eternity, is absolutely unknowable to all Creatures; and
this leads me to the second Head or Particular which is handled in the next
following Chapter.

The Second Head, which makes the second part of this Treatise. What God is in
the Primary, and original Being of himself, in the Globe of Eternity, before
Eternal Nature's Principle was in Being.
IF you ask me what God is, as he exists in the Globe of Eternity, without and
before Eternal Nature's Principle? I must, before I come to give you a more
particular Answer to this Query advise you, that the knowledge of God as he
exists in the Globe of Eternity, without eternal Nature, is a very deep and
Mystical Knowledge, though it is true withal, that in the Globe of Eternity
God is much more Knowable, than without it in the solitary abstracted Being of
himself, for so he is altogether unknowable and incomprehensible. Having
premised this, I now come to answer the foregoing question by explaining these
two following particulars, viz.

1. What God is, with relation to the Globe of Eternity. 2. What the Globe of
Eternity is, wherein God, the Spirit of Eternity, does manifest himself.

Which Particulars I intend to make the subject matters of two Chapters, which
are to make up this second part.


CHAP. I.
Concerning what God is, in relation to his existence in the Globe of Eternity.
THE Deity existing in the Globe of Eternity is nothing else but, First, A
Spirit of Eternity; and this Spirit of Eternity is an uncreated Essence: for he
could not be a Spirit, without being an Essence, and were not he uncreated, He
could not be the Spirit of Eternity.

Secondly, Again the Spirit of Eternity, or God, as he ^s an uncreated Essence,
so he exists and subsists in himself and from himself; for there is nothing
before him or above him, from whence he might receive his Being; and if there
was, he c^^ld not be God; for the notion of a God (in the sense in which it is
here taken) im^lie a first original Being or Existence, that is before and
gives existence to all other beings, being himself ^ndependent of them all. And
therefore it is, that God ^^yles himself the Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and
^he End, the first and the last. Therefore we must ^onclude that all Worlds and
all Creatures derive their ^eing from this Spirit of Eternity, and consequently
that the Globe of Eternity, or Eternal World, has its ^xistence from him;
since there is nothing can be ex^epted from being the effect of this Universal,
all-com^rehending cause. This the Scripture does often in^ulcate to us, 1 John
3. By him all things are made, and without him nothing was made. And again,
Col. 1.16. All things were created by him and for him. Now if this ^e so, it
follows that the Eternal World or Globe of ^ternity was also created by him.
And as the Spirit ^f Eternity, is the Creator of the Globe of Eternity; ^o by
consequence he must be supposed to be before it, as the cause is before the
effect, which neither may, no^ can be confounded together.

In the third place^ I say that the Spirit of Eternity is the Essence of all
Essences, and the Cause of a Causes. For this Spirit of Eternity is the one
only tru^ God, from whom all other beings do at first deriv^ their being, and
in and by whom they are continued i^ their subsistence; neither could He
otherwise be the fir^^ and the last, the beginning and end of all things.

Lastly, The Spirit of Eternity, is an Eternal, incom^prehensible, and
unmeasurable Unity. Now this Et^^nal Unity is nothing else but pure Deity, and
pur^ Deity is an Eternal Unity: for as an Unity is the begi^^ning of all
Numbers; so is this Eternal Unity the b^^ginning of all beings. Now if God be
an Etern^^ Unity, it follows, that there can be no more than o^^ God, because a
plurality of gods would destroy t^^ Nature of Unity. Besides if t^^re were a
plurality ^^ gods, there must be supposed to be many firsts a^^ many
beginnings, and so the one only God, the Sp^^rit of Eternity, could not be this
Alpha, or first a^^ beginning of all things. But the Scriptures do
pere^^ptorily assert that there is but one God, so Deuteronomy. 6^^ Hear O Israel, the
Lord our God is one God.

Concerning the Holy Trinity.
From this Eternal Unity, the Holy Trinity is man^^fested, of which I must
speak somewhat in this plac^ because they subsi^ted in the Eternal Unity of
th^^^s^lv^s before the Globe of Eternity was manifeste^ and were the
manifesters of it, and therefore m^^ needs be before it. Now we must know that
the H^^^ Trinity are inseparably united, and do subsist in ^^^ Eternal Unity of
themselves, and are co-operators in a^ Generations and Creations whatsoever.

Concerning the nature of the Holy Trinity as they subsist in the Globe of
Eternity.
The nature of the Holy Trinity considered in themselves, as they exist in the
Globe of Eternity, without and before eternal Nature, is a very great Mystery.
Many disapprove that the word Person should be applied to the Trinity, because
their Spirits, in the sight of Vision, and light of Revelation, never could
perceive any personality in the Holy Trinity. And indeed nothing is more true,
than that there are no figurative persons in the Deity. Neither does the
Scripture in any place tell us of three persons in the Trinity, but when it
speaks of the Trinity it expresses it self thus; There be three that bear
record in Heaven, the Father, the Word and the Holy G^^^^ and these three are
one; 1 Ioh. 5.7. Hence it is that Mystical writers instead of the word Person,
make use of the words of Number to signify the Trinity by, calling the Father
Monas, the Word, Duas, and the Holy Ghost Trias, which may be ^nterpreted the
first, second and third Number. And if all would keep to these expressions it
would take away much contention about words.

There are others who are so far displeased with the word Person that they
would only have the Trinity to be three denominations of one and the same
thing: but this is too short to express the essential distinction of Father,
Son and Spirit, and is as much in one extreme, as the word Person is in the
other.

I now proceed to open the Mystery of the Holy Trinity which consists in two
particulars, viz. Unity in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity.

And first concerning Unity in Trinity.

The Eternal Unity varies forth it self into an Eternal Trinity: were there no
Unity, there could be no Trinity, because from the Unity, the Holy Trini^^ does
proceed, as from its Eternal ground.

Object. But you will say, if the Eternal Unity be ^^^ ground whence the Holy
Trinity does proceed, then there i^ Quaternity in the Godhead.

Answ. This is a mistake, for the Eternal Unity, ^^ the Father; were there no
Father, there would be n^ Son, nor Holy Ghost, therefore here is no Quaterni^^
but a Trinity. Thus you see the Father has va^^^^ forth himself into the Son
and Holy Spirit. The F^^ther is not the Son, nor the Son the Father, and t^^
Holy Ghost is neither the Father nor the Son, but the^^ are distinct in
themselves. This distinction of the H^^ly Trinity, the Scripture teaches us in
the place fo^^ cited, 1 Ioh. 5.7. where they are distinguished, First, By their
Names, Father, Word and Spirit. Secondly, By their Order, the Father first, the
S^^ second, and then the Spirit. Thirdly, In their Numb^^, as one, two an^
three. Fourthly, By their relative properties which are i^cluded in their Names
of Father, Son and Spirit. Were there no Father, there could be no Son, and if
no So^^ neither could there be a Father: and if neither Father nor Son were,
there could be no Spirit proceeding from them both.


The Trinity being thus distinguished, let us spe^^ briefly of each of them a
sunder.

Quest. What is God the Father?

Answ. God the Father is the first original beginning of the Trinity: were
there no beginning, there could be no end; were there no first number, there
could be no second or third in the Trinity. God the Father therefore is the
Eternal beginning of the Holy Trinity. God the Father must be either from
himself, that is from his own Divine Essence, or else from the Eternal World,
or Eternal Nature's Essence; but neither of them were yet existent; wherefore
we must conclude that except the Father had taken his Beginning from his own
Eternal Unity, he could not have been the first beginning of the Trinity.

In the second place, I say that God the Father, is the Eternal Generator of
the Son, or word who is the second person in the Holy Trinity.

Quest. What is God the Son?

Answ. God the Son is the Second number of the Trinity, were there no Son,
there would be no Father. He is the Center and Heart of the Trinity. He is
generated of the Father before the Eternal World, or Eternal Nature were in
being. He is the only begotten Son of the Father, and is coeternal,
co-essential, and coequal with him. He is the essential Word of the Father. He
is the delight of the Father, and his well beloved Son, in whom he is well
pleased.

Quest. What is the Holy Ghost?

Answ. He is the third and completing number of the Trinity. He is an
out-flowing breath, life, or power, which proceeds from the Father through the
Son, and does execute the will of the Father. This out-flowing life and acting
power proceeds from the Divine Essence of the Father and the Son, and therefore
is coeternal, co-essential and coequal with the Father and Son.

Quest. Why is not the Holy Ghost said to be begotten of, but to proceed from
the Father?

Answ. If the Holy Ghost were begotten of the Father, then the Son could not
have been the only begotten of the Father, and so the Father would have had
more Sons then one; neither would there have been a distinction between the Son
and the Holy Ghost. Therefore the Holy Ghost is not said to be generated of the
Father, but to proceed from the Father and Son, as an out-flowing breath of
Life and Power. The Holy Ghost does complete the Trinity, and make up the
number three, so as nothing can be added thereto, or diminished: the Father
cannot be without the Son, nor the Son without the Father, nor the Holy Ghost
without both Father and Son.

Quest. How is the Unity in Trinity distinguished in the Eternal World?

Answ. I have told you before that the Trinity is distinguishable by their
Names, Number, Order, and by their relative properties, but not by their
Natures, because they have but one Nature and Essence; in which oneness of their
Nature their Eternal Unity does consist. Therefore they that would distinguish
the Holy Trinity in the Eternal World, otherwise than before expressed, do run
into great confusion. The Father is an Eternal Unity, and so is the Son and
Spirit; the Son is pure Deity, and so is the Father and Spirit: the Holy Ghost
is an Eternal Liberty and so is the Father and Son. Therefore these are no
distinguishing properties of the Holy Trinity in the Eternal World. Some do
thus distinguish the Trinity, they say the Father is Light, the Son Life, and
the Holy Ghost Love: but these cannot be the distinguishing characters of the
Trinity, because the Father is Light, Life and Love, and so likewise the Son
and Holy Ghost. Others would have the Father to be Light, the Son Love, and the
Holy Ghost Power, but all these belong to every one of the Trinity, and
therefore cannot be the distinguishing characters of them. Others again would
have the Father Fire, the Son Light, and the Holy Ghost Air: but these are
elements which are rooted in Eternal Nature's Principle, and are not to be
found in the Globe of Eternity. Others distinguish the Father by the severity
of Divine Justice, the Son by Love and Mercifulness; whereas in the Eternal
World there is no severity of vindictive Justice known, nor any thing of anger
or wrath; because the Holy Trinity stands wholly in the Unity of Love. The only
distinction of the Holy Trinity in the Eternal World is this, That the Father
manifests himself as a wonderful all-seeing Eye: the Son manifests himself as
the Center of the Eye, and Heart of the Father; and the Holy Ghost as an
out-flowing Power proceeding from the Father's Eye, and the Son's Heart,
effecting whatsoever the will of the Father in the Eye, through the
Love-essence, seated in the Heart of the Son, would have done. And thus the
Holy Trinity do manifest themselves distinctly in the Eternal World, though
they all stand in the Eternal Unity, and are not only three Denominations, as
will be clearly manifested in the third Chapter of this following discourse, to
which I refer you.

Now I come to speak of the other particular in the Mystery of the Holy
Trinity, viz. Trinity in Unity. This Mystery I will endeavor to open, as I have
seen it with the Eye of my enlightened mind, and show how the Holy Trinity do
subsist as one in one only ground, or Divine Essence.

Object. You will say if three do subsist in one only essence, that seems to
make a Quaternity and not a Trinity.

Answ. This is an ill drawn consequence and a mere mistake which may easily be
rectified thus. The one only ground or essence in which the Holy Trinity do
subsist, is the Eternal Unity; and this Eternal Unity in the Father, and the
Son, and Holy Ghost, subsists in the Father's Unity: so that the Holy Trinity
is one with the Eternal Unity, from whence they flow forth: and as they have
their beginning from the Unity, so they end in the same. The Holy Scripture
teaches us this fundamental truth, that the Holy Trinity are one, and yet
three in that oneness, 1 Ioh. 5. 7. There are three that bear record in Heaven,
the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one. They are all
one in the Eternal Unity, the Father is in the Son, and the Son in the Father,
and the Holy Ghost in the Father and Son; so that one cannot be without the
other, and are but one ever blessed God, though distinguished in their goings
forth, and the manifestations of themselves.

Now if it be asked what the Nature of the Holy Trinity is? I answer, it is
pure Unity, and pure Unity is pure Deity; and this is the Nature of the Father,
Son and Spirit, they are all Unity and pure Deity. And as they have but one
undivided Nature, so they have but one Eye, one Understanding, one Will. But if
any one inquire further what this Eternal Unity and Deity is which is the
Nature of the Holy Trinity? I answer, that none knows this, but the
unsearchable Trinity. Neither is it any further knowable by Angels or Men, but
that it is, what it is.

But notwithstanding that we say, that the Unity is unknowable in it self to
Angels and Men; yet it may be known, forasmuch as it relates to the Trinity,
and as it is the one ground in which they subsist; and in this respect we say,
that the Eternal Unity, is a most simple Essence free from all duality and
contrariety. It is most true that variety may consist with Unity, but
contrariety destroys its nature, which admits of no mixture whatsoever. Now if
the Nature of the Trinity be Eternal Unity and simplicity, free from all
contrariety and mixture, it follows that Light and Darkness, Love and Anger
cannot be in the Holy Trinity, as they exist in the Globe of Eternity; because
these contrarieties would necessarily destroy the Nature of Unity.

But you will say that God is styled in Scripture, a God that is angry, and a
consuming fire, and in other places he is said to be Light and Love, which
implies that there is a mixture of contrarieties in the Essence of the Holy
Trinity.

I answer, that these Scriptures speak of God as he has introduced himself
into apostatized and impure Nature's essence after the fall, whereas I in this
place speak of God as he exists in the Eternal World, before Eternal Nature was
divided by the fall; and in this state the Holy Trinity is nothing but Eternal
Unity, free from any contrariety or mixture whatsoever.

And thus the Nature of the Trinity, if well understood, manifests clearly h^w
Father, Son and Spirit are distinct, and yet are but one Eternal Unity. And
thus much concerning the Trinity in Unity.

Now I will further treat of the Nature of the Holy Trinity. The Triune God,
considered in himself in the Globe of Eternity, is pure Deity; which pure Dei^y
is the highest purity, clarity and brightness of glory beyond all imagination.
This high purity of the Trinity is free from all impurity and imperfection
whatsoever: and in this high purity consists the righteousness and holiness of
God. This bright purity is the Nature of the Trinity in the Globe of Eternity,
which they equally partake of; for as the Father is all purity, so is the Son
and Spirit, an^ from this purity of their Nature are called the Holy Trinity.

But to proceed to a further opening of the Nature of the Trinity. God is said
to be Good, and the one only Good, the chiefest Good wherein Eternal Bliss and
happiness does consist; in which ground of Eternal Goodness the Father, Son and
Spirit are all one. The Father is all Goodness, and so likewise is the Son and
Spirit; and consequently Good and Evil cannot be in God; for so there would be
a mixture of contrary natures in the Divine Essence, which as has been said,
is all Eternal Goodness.

Evil of sin cannot be in God, because sin is an imperfection; now no
imperfection can be found in the Divine Essence which is perfection it self.

Neither is the evil of punishment to be found in the Trinity: for if the
Nature of God be all Goodness, Mercy, Pity and Compassion, where shall
severity, fierceness or bitterness be found? Or any vindicative Justice? From
whence proceeds the evil of punishment? I say, none of these are to be found in
the Nature of the Holy Trinity, as they subsist in the Globe of Eternity.

If you ask me further, what the Nature of the Holy Trinity is? I answer, That
the Holy Trinity are i^ themselves a free Eternal lib^rty: The Father is an
Eternal Liberty, and so is the Son and Spirit. But wh^^ is this Eternal
^iberty, which is the Nature of the Holy Trinity? I answer, It is their
subsisting in their ow^ Eternal Unity, simplicity and pure Deity; free from a^^
other Essences, neither touching them, nor being touched b^ them. For as they
exist in the Eternal World, before and without Eternal Nature they are free
from all Es^sences whatsoever and exist in their own eternal Li^berty.

If you further inquire what the Nature of the H^^^ Trini^y is? I answer, That
their Nature is all happi^^^ and blessedness; no misery, torment, or anguish is
t^ be found in them, or proceeds from them: wherefo^^ Hell, death and the Curs
never proceeded from the H^^^ Trinity; because their Nature being all happiness,
^^ such thing can be found in them or proceed f^^^ them: because such a mixture
would necessarily de^stroy the happy and blessed Nature of the Holy Tr^^nity.

I say further, That the Nature of the Holy Trinity (...) all perfection in the
abstract, and ther^^ore at an infini^^ distance from all imperfection
whatsoever: Which p^^^fection of the Holy Trinity results from the Unity and
Si^plicity of their Nature, which admits not of any mixture (...) contrariety.
By means of this perfection the Holy Tr^^nity are complete in themselves, so as
nothing can b^ added to it, or taken from it; forasmuch as it is t^^ Nature of
absolute perfection to be complete and entire in i^ self, lacking nothing. The
Father is the Beginning, the Son the Center, and the Holy Ghost the End and
consummation of the Holy Trinity. Thus they are compl^^ and entire in
themselves, rejoicing from Eternity to Eternity in their own Eternal fullness,
compleatness and absolute Perfection. They wanted not the Eternal World, nor
the Essences of Eternal Nature, nor the Angelical Creation, for they were
complete in their own enjoyments without them. Wherefore the Eternal World and
Eternal Nature were not created out of necessity, as if the Holy Trinity had
stood in need of them; for they were completely perfect and happy before they
were, and would continue so, if they were no more.

To finish this particular concerning the Nature of the Holy Trinity, I shall
add these few lines, for a farther explanation of what the Nature of the Holy
Trinity is. I have formerly told you that the Essence of the Trinity is Eternal
Unity, which Eternal Unity is pure Deity, and now come to tell you, That this
Unity of the Divine Nature, is nothing else but Love: in which Love the Holy
Trinity stand united, and are nothing else but Divine Love. And therefore in
the Eternal World, in pure Eternal Nature, and in the Angelical World, there is
no other manifestation but that of Love: because the Holy Trinity who manifest
themselves in these Worlds Principles are themselves nothing but Love. Thus we
see that the Holy Trinity have exalted the Love; to be the Alpha and Omega, the
beginning and the ending Essence of all Essences. We cannot ascend higher than
this Love, because there is no Essence above, before, or beyond it. For as in
Number we cannot pass beyond an Unity, which is first of Numbers; so neither
can we, when we speak of Essences, go beyond the Love-Essence; which is all in
all in the Eternal World, which is the first and the beginning of all Worlds.
Oh wonderful, unsearchable and incomprehensible Love! Who can find out thy
originality? Who can declare thy Generation? Thou wast before all, and wilt be
the last of all: and blessed, yea thrice blessed are they who have found thee
and enjoy thee! We conclude then that the Nature of the Holy Trinity consists
in the Divine Unity of the Love-Essence.

I shall conclude this Chapter with this Proposition, That the Trinity in Union
with the Eternal World is the first Principle of all Principles: for there is
none before it or beyond it. This Eternal World or Globe of Eternity is
enclosed in its own circumference, and is therefore called a Principle,
according to the Definition of a Principle given hereafter in its proper place
more fully.

CHAP. II.
Concerning the Eternal World, wherein the Holy Trinity do manifest themselves,
as in a clear Chrystalline Glass or mirror.
THIS Eternal World was called the Globe of Eternity, at the time when I was
taken up to have a view of it. In which Globe of Eternity I then distinguished
three distinct places, which yet make up but one undivided Globe or Sphere. The
first of these places was called the Outward Court; the second, the Inward
Court, or the Holy Place; and the third and last was called the inmost Court,
or the Holiest of all. My Guide first led me into the Outward Court, concerning
which accordingly, I do intend to speak in the first place.

In this Outward Court I took notice of two things, the first was the Globe or
circumf^rence it self called the outward Court; the second was the Eye placed
in the Center of the said Globe or circumference.

As concerning the Globe it self, we are to take notice that it is the first
and highest of all; not created by God, but generated out of himself: as also
that it is substantial, though of a very refined and Spiritual substance, for
it is the Essence of Essences, and Substance of Substances.

Concerning the second thing which is the Eye placed in the Center of this
Globe, we must know that it represents the Spirit of Eternity, which is God
himself, who is not only the efficient, but also the material, formal and final
cause of the Globe, in the Center of which he manifests himself as an Eye:
which essential Eye of God, looking into it self, and finding nothing besides
it self, by dilating it self, gives a beginning and end to it self; which
beginning and end entering into, and joining with one another, do constitute and
form the Globe of Eternity. So that the Globe of Eternity is nothing else, but
the dilatation of the Eye of Eternity, from the Center to the Circumference.

But if any ask why this first emanation of the Spirit of Eternity, was formed
into a round figure, rather than into any other? I answer, because a round is
the most simple, perfect and comprehensive of all Figures, and therefore most
proper for him who is Simplicity and Perfection it self, and the wonderful
all-comprehending All.

I have already told you that the final Cause of this Globe, is God himself;
but to speak more particularly concerning the ends God proposed to himself in
the Generation of this Globe.

1. I say that the first end, why God generated the Globe of Eternity, was,
that he might dwell therein as in an house or mansion.

2. A second end, why God generated this Globe out of himself, was, for the
manifestation of himself to himself: for the Eye turning it self inward into it
self, comes to know it self, and to see, feel and taste it self; and if it look
outward it sees nothing but it self neither, because as the Eye is God, so is
the Globe nothing but the dilatation of the Eye.

I now come to give you some properties or qualifications of this Globe, from
which it may appear wha^ kind of Principle this Globe of Eternity is.

1. The first property is, that it is the first of a^^ Globes in order of
existence, nothing being before (...) but the Eye, by the dilatation of which
it was s^^^med.

2. The second is, that this Globe is the Cause an^ original ground from whence
all other principles (...) proceed.

3. The third is, that this Globe was immediatel^ formed by the Spirit of
Eternity out of himself.

4. The fourth is, that this Globe is an all-compre^sive Globe, because it
conteins all other Globes an^ Principles whatsoever, but is it self
uncomprehend^^ of none. And it must needs be so, for this Globe be^ing nothing
else, but the Spirit of Eternities dilati^^ it self, it will follow, that if
there were any thing (...) of the bounds of this Globe, it must also be out
(...) the reach and comprehension of the Spirit of Eternity which cannot be,
because this Spirit of Eternity is God himself, who is All in All, and contains
all Worlds^ Centers and Creations whatsoever. And therefore it is that God
calls himself the first and the last, the beginning and end of all things; to
signify that the^ is nothing besides him, nor beyond him; but that h^^
wonderful immense Being, does contain and comprehend all other beings
whatsoever.

This Globe of Eternity, to speak more particularl^ does contain seven several
Principles, Globes or Centers, of which we shall give you an account hereafter.

If any one ask, what if it should please God to make more Worlds or Principles
than those already brought forth, where would he find room for them?

I answer, that the Globe of Eternity is of sufficient Capa^ity to contain not
only those Worlds already formed, but also those that may be formed hereafter:
for since the Circumference of this Globe is nothing else but a dilatation of
the Eye of Eternity, who can put bounds to the same? Or conclude that the
Spirit of Eternity cannot at pleasure further dilate the same to those
dimensions, which may be correspondent to his purpose and design?

The immense comprehensiveness of this Globe of Eternity does yet further
appear, in that it comprehends, quo ad nos, the incomprehensible Spirit of
Eternity it self, which is far more than its comprehending all Principles and
Worlds whatsoever. But you will say, if the Spirit of Eternity be incomprehensible
and infinite, how can it be contained and comprehended by the Globe of
Eternity? To which I answer, that such a being is truly and properly said to be
incomprehensible, which cannot be comprehended or contained by any thing but it
self; when we say that God is incomprehensible, we do not mean that he is not
comprehended of and by himself, but only that nothing besides himself can
comprehend him: now the Spirit of Eternity does comprehend it self in the Globe
of Eternity, because (as has been said) the Globe is nothing else but the
dilatation of the Eye.

5. Property, This Globe of Eternity though it contain several Globes, yet is
distinct from them all, and all the Globes contained in it, are distinct from
it, and from one another, without any mixture or confusion.

6. Property, This Globe of Eternity is an Abyssal Globe (for so it was named
to me, and the Eye in the Center of it, the Abyssal Eye) that is of an
unsearchable depth, without bottom or ground; for the Abyssal Eye looking
downwards into it self, and finding nothing but it self, did set a bound to it
self. For as God looking upwards with his Eye, found no beginning of himself,
and therefore put a beginning to his own heights; so when he looked down he put
an end to his own depth, and by the dilatation of his Eye put bounds and limits
to his own immensity. And thus this Abyssal Globe of Eternity was formed in
height, depth and breadth; and all this was done suddenly even as in the
twink of an Eye; for the Eye looking up gave it height, looking down gave it
depth, and on each side gave it breadth: which dimensions are such as no Spirit
can comprehend besides the Abyssal Eye, who is the former and maker of them.
This is the outward Court of the glorious Palace of the King of Kings, whose
height, depth and breadth is proportioned and suitable to the incomprehensible
Majesty that resides in it. Himself is the builder, himself the matter of it,
and therefore the matter of this Palace may well be called Almighty Matter, but
not the matter of this outward World, as some wis^ Men falsely so deemed, would
have it to be. And indeed nothing is more apparent from what has bee^ said,
than that Spirit is before matter and the cause of it, since even that most
pure substance or matter which fills the Globe of Eternity does proceed by way
of Emanation, from the Spirit of Eternity, dwelling in the Eye of Eternity; now
say I, if the matter of the Globe of Eternity did not produce it self, but
proceeded by immediate Emanation from God, much les^ did ever any other matter
produce it self, and consequently could not deserve the Name of Omnipote^^
matter; Omnipotence being a title only due to that Spirit, from whom all matter
proceeds, and who acts and moves in it according to his good pleasure.

I now come to speak of the second Particular, viz. Concerning the Eye placed
in the Center of the Globe of Eternity, called by God himself, the Abyssal Eye
of Et^rnity. This Eye is the Seat of the Spirit of Eternity, which Spirit of
Eternity is God himself, as he subsists in his own pure simple abstracted
Essence, before his introducing of himself into the principle of Eternal
Nature. It is the Name which God gave to himself, those other Names which are
made mention of in Scripture, do for the most part express God only as he
stands related to the Creature, but this Name Spirit of Eternity, expresses
only his relation to the Globe of Eternity, of which he is the former, by
immediate Emanation from himself.

If you ask me, why did the Spirit of Eternity introduce himself into the Eye?

I answer, it was for manifestation of himself, as has been said already.

But if you ask me further, why was the Eye just placed in the Center of the
Globe of Eternity?

I answer, that thereby it might appear, that the Spirit in the Eye, was the
generator of the Globe of Eternity; for the natural formation of a Globe or
Sphere is by the Center's dilating and expanding of it self: a circumference
being nothing else, but a center dilated, or a central emanation bounded by it
self.

For the further illustration of the Nature of this Eye, I will present you
with these following particulars.

I. This Abyssal Eye is but one, not two or more, even as every Circle or
Sphere has but one Center, and as the beginning of all numbers is an Unity not
two, three, etc. and so it must needs be, because it is the manifestation of
the Spirit of Eternity, who is the most perfect and absolute Unity and
Simplicity: For as there not two Gods, that is two Eternal Beginnings, but one
only; so there is but one Eye, in and by which the one God, who is the Spirit
of Eternity, does manifest himself.

II. This Abyssal Eye, is the first Being of all Beings, none before it nor
beyond it; for it is nothing else but the first manifestation of the Spirit of
Eternity, therefore nothing can be before it, even as nothing is, or can be
before the Spirit of Eternity.

III. This Abyssal Eye is distinguishable from the Globe of Eternity, because
as has been said, the Spirit of Eternity in the Abyssal Eye is the generator
o^ it by way of emanation: now all emanations whatsoever are distinguishable,
from the being from whenc^ they proceed.

IV. This Abyssal Eye, is Gods all-seeing and all-knowing Eye: it is the
Wonder-Eye of God, which searches out all things and from which nothing is
hid. Bu^ here arises a Question, viz. Whether the Spirit o^ Eternity through
this Eye do see all things past present and to come with one simple act of
intuition togethe^ and at once? Or whether he sees them successively^ I know
the first is maintained by the Schools, and b^ the generality of Divines;
neither will I positively ^^sert the contrary, but shall only give you the
groun^^ which hinder me from being fully satisfied with the truth of that
assertion.

First, Because the Scriptures, which the defenders (...) this opinion do
allege for it, do not convincingl^ prove the point: we will instance in some
of the (...) of them, and which are most insisted upon. Let t^^ first be that
place of Acts 15. v. 18. Known to God (...) all his works from the beginning of
the world. It is pl^i^ at first sight that this Scripture does not fully prov^
the thing in question, which is not whether all things be known to God? But
whether God sees all things past, present and to come, in one single act,
altogethe^ and at once? Besides that Scripture only tells us tha^ God knows all
his own works, which is not at al^ here in question, but whether God knows all
the actions of Men and Angels past present and to come a^ one view, and in one
single act? Concerning which this place makes no mention at all. Another plac^
they allege is Heb. 4. v. 13. All things are naked an^ ^pen unto the Eyes of
him with whom we have to do. Which place does only prove that all things are
known ^o God, but it makes no mention at all of the man^er how God knows all
things; and therefore cannot determine the point in controversy. The last
place we shall instance in is Acts 4. v. 28. For to do whatsoever thy Hand, and
thy Council determined before to be done. Neither does this afford any
confirmation to that assertion, that God knows all things in one single
intuitive act, but only shows that God knows and determines things before they
come to pass. For I do not in the ^east question Gods knowing all things, all
secrets, and much more all his own purposes, before the foundation of the
World; my only scruple is whether he knows all these in one undivided single
act, or successively? Which the forementioned places of Scripture do not
determine.

My second ground, why I cannot fully come over to this assertion, is, because
this way of knowing all ^hins at one single act, is altogether unintelligible
to Creatures as Creatures, and consequently can be of no service or use to them.

In the third place it seems most probable to me, since it has pleased God to
introduce his Eye into the Globe of Eternity (which Globe is the Glass of his
Wisdom) that God has set this miroir before his Eye, that in it he might see
all things as they come to be represented there, which representation being
successive, his seeing and knowing of them must needs be such also.

I formerly told you^ that this Globe of Eternity was distinguished into three
parts, viz. into the outward Court, the Holy Place, and the most Holy;
concerning which I come now to speak in particular. In the outward Court the
Eye of Eternity is shut up or contracted; in the Holy Place, the same Eye is
dilated; and in the Holiest of all the state and majesty of the Trinity is
displayed.

I begin with the first, viz. the outward Court; (...) which as was just now
said, the Eye of Eternity is contracted, that is, in which God shuts up himself
in hi^ own Mystery; and this contraction of the Eye o^ Gods shutting up of
himself is that which makes ^he outward Court; here the Eye of Eternity only
appears as the Point and Center of the Globe of Eternity, and yet therein the
total Deity is shut up, or rathe^ hides it self in his own Mystery. By the
total Deity (...) understand the Holy Trinity, with all their essentia^
Attributes, Power and Virtues, which are all hid i^ this contracted Eye, or
Center of the Globe of Eternity, and in a word the whole fullness of the Deity
i^ contained and as it were locked up in this contracte^ Eye, which gives being
to the outward Court. No^ this contracted Eye or Center does very properly
represent the Deity as he hides himself in his own Mystery, for he is the most
absolute and first Unity, he is invisible, indivisible, without organs, shape
or figu^^, and what can be more proper to represent such a Being, than the
Point or Center of a Circumference, which in it self is invisible, and without
parts, shape or figure. The highly illuminated Jacob Behme gives us this
following account concerning this contracted Eye of the Deity: It is, says he,
the Eye of the Abys^ concerning which we have no Pen, Tongue nor utterance
(...) write or speak of it, only the Eye of Eternity leads the Eye of the
Soul into it, and so we see it, else it must r^main in silence, and this Hand
could not describe any thing of it. Consider it according to its precious
Depth, for we speak not here according to Nature in a figure, but according to
the Spirit above Nature in the Divine Character T. Again, he says expressly
that this Eye of the Abyss did form it self into a Globe, and so gave a
beginning and end to himself; of which you may see more in the fourth and fifth
p. of his forty Questions. From which words of his it clearly appears, that
his Spirit had been taken up into the outward Court of the Abyssal Globe of
Eternity.

But in the second place, like as the Abyssal Eye by contracting it self into
the Center, and shutting up it self, does constitute the outward Court; so the
same Eye opened, and dilating it self throughout the whole Globe makes the
inward Court or Holy Place. In the first the Deity hides it self; in this
second place, the Deity manifests the Mystery wherein he had wrapped up himself
in the first or outward Court. So that as long as the Eye is shut, the whole
Globe of Eternity is the outward Court; but as soon as the said Eye is opened,
it is no more the outward but inward Court: for the Deity manifesting himself
makes the outward Court to disappear, and instead thereof presents the inward.
Wherefore no Spirit can pass at will from the outward Court to the inward, but
must wait the opening of the Eye; which as it makes the inward Court, so it can
only give an entrance into it, and a sight of all the wonders, heights and
depths of the Deity, which by the opening of the said Eye are presented to the
Spirit of the mind.

Quest. But you will ask me what are these deep Mysteries which are made known and
manifested by the opening of the Eye of Eternity?

Answ. In answer to which I shall give you an account of some particulars
which, by the opening of the said Eye, were presented to the intellectual sight
of my Spirit: not that they were presented all at once, but at several distinct
openings, every opening of the Eye presenting a new Mystery concerning the
Deity.

1. The first Mystery discovered at the opening of the Abyssal Eye, is, the
Mystery of the Being and existence of God in himself, before Eternal Nature or
any Creatures were; and herein these three particulars are opened,

First, That God is the Spirit of Eternity, filling the Globe of Eternity with
himself, that is, with power. For the further illustration of which we are to
know that though God has several Names given him in the Scripture, yet the
most, if not all of them, speak his relation to Eternal Nature, as he has
introduced himself into it, and clothed himself with it; but this Name the
Spirit of Eternity expresses him only with regard to his solitary and
abstracted Being, as he exists in the Globe of Eternity, without any relation
to Eternal Nature.

Now as God by the opening of the Eye discovers himself to be the Spirit of
Eternity, existing in, and filling the Globe of Eternity; so likewise this
Spirit of Eternity is manifested to be All-power, Universal Power, and pure
act, as the Schoolmen term it, filling the whole and every part of the Globe
of Eternity. Here is also discovered that this Spirit of Eternity, as it is
All-power, so it is one undivided Power, as perfect Unity without any
separation, distinction or division. So as from this manifestation we may
define the Spirit of Eternity to be the one total and Universal Power which
fills the Globe of Eternity.

2. The second particular is this, That the Spirit of Eternity is not only
Essential and Substantial in it self, but also the Primary Essence of all
Essences, and Substance of all Substances. That the Spirit of Eternity is
Essential appears, because it is all Power, now there can be no power but what
is Essential; Power implying Essence in the notion of it, for we cannot
conceive of Power without Essence, nor of Essence without Power. It appears
also that this Spirit of Eternity is the original Essence of all other
Essences, because the opening of the Eye discovers this Spirit to be the first
Essence, not only in order of time, but also by nature and way of caus^lity or
efficiency; nothing being above, beyond, or before it. Moreover, as was said
before, this Spirit is discovered to be an All-power, a total and universal
Power; that is, a Power including and comprehending all Powers, and from
whence, as from a fruitful womb, all Powers whatsoever are derived and do
proceed; now if this Spirit of Eternity be the Power of all Powers, it must by
consequence be the Essence of all Essences, because, as was just now hinted,
the one cannot be without the other. No Power can be without Essence, nor
Essence without Power.

But you will say, if the Spirit of Eternity be the first beginning of all things,
and the Essence of all Essences, then it will follow that God is the beginning
as well of evil Essences as of Good?

To which I answer, first, That when we say that the Spirit of Eternity is the
first beginning and Essence of all Essences, it must be restrained to good
Essences, actions and motions, which do proceed from the Spirit of Eternity and
not those that are evil.

In the second place, when we say the Spirit of Eternity is the Essence of all
Essences, it must be thus understood, that from the Spirit of Eternity does
proceed the first Eternal beginning of all Essences in relation to himself,
that is, in relation to the Abyssal Eye, which is himself and from himself; and
in relation to his Abyssal Globe, which is himself and from himself: now
nothing can be in God but that which is God, and therefore contrary to all
evil; for there is no evil originally in himself: therefore they are wholly out
that would draw Good and Evil from Gods Eternal beginning of himself When
indeed the opening of the Eye does only manifest what is shut up in the Eye of
the Abyss, and manifests nothing that is without the Abyss. Now there being
nothing but God himself manifested in the Abyss of Eternity, and no evil
Essence being to be found in him, therefore it must follow that the Eye of
Eternity does only manifest God to be the original of all good Essences and not
of evil; because the Eye of Eternity cannot manifest that which is not, it being
plain that no evil can be in God. Therefore when we say that all Essences
proceed from God, it must be restrained to all such Essences as do immediately
proceed from God, even such as God is the immediate Author of, and those are
only all good Essences; for whatsoever does immediately proceed from God, the
highest Good, must needs be good and no ways evil.

3. The third particular, which the opening of the Eye manifests, concerning
the Being an existence of God, is this; That the Spirit of Eternity is the
original Essence of all Essences; that is, that the Spirit of Eternity is not
only the first of all Essences, but also that he subsisteth in and from
himself, and owes his existence to none but himself, as being the only
original of self.

And thus we have done with the first Mystery which is discovered to the Spirit
of the mind, by the opening of the Eye of the Abyss, viz. the Mystery o^ God's
being and existence, that he is the only true God and Father of all, who is
above all, before all, through all, and in all.

The second Mystery which is discovered by the opening of the Eye of the Abyss,
is, the Mystery of the Holy Trinity, viz. how the Eternal Unity brings forth
the sacred Trinity, coeternal, co-essential, coequal with himself? The
Eternal Unity is the Father, who brings forth his Son and Spirit out of
himself. Were there no Eternal Unity, there coud be no Trinity; if there were
no first, there could be no second or third; were there no Father, there could
be no Son or Spirit; and thus you see that the Holy Trinity proceeds from the
Eternal Unity.

But you will say, how does this agree with what you said before, viz. that the
Spirit of Eternity is an Eternal Unity, and an indivisible power, without
duality, diversity and contrariety; whereas now you say that this Eternal Unity
has diversified it self into a Trinity?

I answer, that the opening of the Eye of the Abyss does reconcile this seeming
contradiction: for at the disclosing of the Eye, the Spirit of the mind clearly
sees that the Holy Trinity is one with the Eternal Unity; because they are one
in another and proceed one from another, and do not exist severally in
distinction from, or without one another: for thus the indissoluble band of
God's Eternal Unity would be broken and his indivisibility taken away. But here
it appears that the Eternal Unity abides indivisible, notwithstanding that the
Holy Trinity proceeds from it; because they subsist one in another, the Son and
Spirit subsisting in the Eternal Unity of the Father.

Further we must know that though Unity does ex^lude all manner of Contrariety,
yet it may consist with Harmonious variety: now the Father is not contrary to
the Son and Spirit, nor they to the Father, but their ^ariety is harmonized in
Unity.

Again though Eternal Unity cannot consist with an ^bsolute distinction,
division and separation, such as is between things which subsist independently
of one another; yet it may consist with such a distinction, as is ^ound in
things which are one in another and cannot be without one another, as being
united in the root of Unity.

For the illustration of which look upon the figure in the Margent, the round
Circle represents the Abyssal Globe, the Eye in the midst of the Heart,
represents the Father, the Generator of the Son, who is the Heart of the
Father: the Heart in the midst of which the Eye is placed, typifies the Son of
God, the only begotten of the Father, Coeternal, Co-essential and Coequal
with him; and the out flowing exit of powers, like a breath, represents the
Holy Ghost, proceeding from the Father^ through the Heart of the Son. Thus the
Birth of the Holy Trinity is manifested, in the opening of the Eye, to be a
Trinity in Unity: the Eye is in the Heart, and the Heart is the Eye's Center,
and the Spirit is a proceeding Spirit from the Eye and Heart; and thus they are
one in another, in one Essence, undivided and inseparable: the Father is one
with the Son, and the Son with the Father, and the Spirit proceeds from the
Union of them both, and abides one with them Wheresoever the Eye is, there is
the Heart, and wheresoever the Eye and Heart are, there the out going of powers
stream's forth from them. But yet notwithstanding this their undivided Unity,
they are i^ this manifestation represented with a distinction from each other:
for the Eye is not the Heart, nor the on^ going breath either Eye or Heart. We
must not think that the Holy Trinity are three distinct origanical persons, for
so they must be three distinct Gods; but we must keep to the Scripture
expression, which tells us, There are Three that bear record in Heaven, the
Father, Word and Spirit, and these Three are one. 1 John 5.7. And accordingly
the Ancients used to express the Trinity not by the word Persons, but by the
Numbers, Monas, Duas, Trias, the first, second, third Number^ I know there are
many, who are so great Enemies ^^ the word Person, that they suppose the
Father, So^ and Spirit only to be three denominations; but this is a great
mistake, for the Eye of the Father is an Essential Power, and not a mere
denomination; the Sons Heart is an Essential being, generated out of and from
the Father, and is the seat of the Eye of the Father, and the Holy Ghost is an
Essential Breath proceeding from the Father's Eye, through the Son's Heart. The
most unblameable expression therefore for to signify the Trinity, is the
Number Three, being an exp^ession which the Scripture warrants. Behme, in his
^^cellent writings, compares the Trinity to the Sun in the firmament, from
whence fire, light and heat do proceed, which three are one in another, and yet
so as the one is not the other: which resemblance holds forth the Holy Trinity,
as they have introduced themselves into Eternal Nature's Essence: but the
Father's Eye opening it self, does not manifest the Trinity in similitudes
taken out of Eternal Nature's ground, but does manifest their very Essence as
they are in themselves, before the existence of any Creatures out of Eternal
Nature's ground.

We next come to speak of the Locality or Vbi of the Holy Trinity, which
according to the foregoing figure, is in the midst or Center of the Abyssal
Globe: When the Eye is closed or shut up, then neither the Eye of the Father,
nor the Son's Heart, the Glory of the Eye, nor the breathing forth of the
Spirit from both is to be seen, but are all shut up in the Eye; but when the
Eye opens, then the Heart of the Son, and the Holy Ghost are seen; so that when
the Eye of the Unity in the Center opens, then the blessed Trinity becomes
visible in the midst of the Abyssal Globe, being otherwise shut up and
concealed in the Eternal Unity of themselves. Thus the Trinity is hid in the
Eternal Unity of it self, and from that Unity they proceed and become visible
in the opening of the Eye. So we see that the Unity is in Trinity, and the
Trinity in Unity. The sight of the Holy Trinity from the open^ng of the Eye, in
the inward Court of the Holy Place, is a lively, operative, reviving, and yet
amazing and surprising sight; a sight worth the whole World, ^nsomuch as I am
ashamed to present you such a dead ^iveless figure of it: but no pen can
decipher it, on pa^er, it is only the Spirit of the Eye that can open it ^elf,
and give you the living and ravishing sight of its own essentiality without
similitudes or figures, though can express it outwardly no better than I have
in the ^oregoing figure.

Let no man here object that I do not make use of Scripture for the
confirmation or illustration of these deep Mysteries: the reason is because the
Holy Sciptures speak of God as he has introduced himself into Eternal Nature,
and not as he exists out of and before Eternal Nature, in the Globe of
Eternity; therefore you must not expect my alleging of Scripture, whilst I am
treating of a Subject which they do not reveal: though it be certain also that
the opening of the Eye, cannot discover any thing contrary, or opposite to
Scripture revelation, but rather what is agreeable thereunto, though it cannot
be so readily confirmed from Scriptures; because, as has been said, it is not
the scope or design of the Holy Scriptures to speak of the Being of God before
and without Eternal Nature. Neither do I in this speaking oppose or disparage
the Holy Scriptures; if my subject were to speak of the Fall, and the
Redemption of sinners by Christ, then I should not be wanting to confirm my
writing from Scripture; but as long as I am writing of the solitary being of
God in the Globe of Eternity, the Spirit of God in the Eye must be my Guide and
Witness in stead of the Scripture. And thus much shall suffice to have spoken
concerning the second opening of the Abyssal Eye, whereby the Mystery of the
Holy Trinity is revealed to the Spirit of the mind.

The third opening of the Eye discovers the Mystery of it self, that is, by
opening it self, it discovers and reveals what is in it self. Now the Eye
opening divides it self into three parts, the first of which is the Abyssal
Eye, the second is the Heart, and the third is the out-flowing breath. The Eye
is first, before the Heart, that is in relation to order and for distinction
sake, else being Co-essential and Coeternal there is no first and last; and
the Heart is the Eye's Center, and the breath proceeds from the Eye and the
Heart. The Ey^ is before the Heart, and generates the Heart; the Hear^ ^s
generated from the Eye, and the breath proceeds from both. The Heart is the
Eye's seat and Center, wherein it is fixed, and the Spirit is the virtue or
power proceeding from the Eye and the Heart: and ^n those three Eye, Heart, and
Spirit, consists the fullness and compleatness of the Deity, nothing can be
super-added, neither can any thing be subtracted.

To speak more particularly, this third opening of the Eye does manifest all
those Powers commonly called the Attributes of God; for this Eye of the Abyss
sparkles forth from it self, its own perfections, beam^ng forth its own beauty
in many lustrous rays, like the Sun. These beams proceeding from the Eye, are
God's Eternity, Infinity, Immensity, Incomprehensi^ility, Omnipotency,
All Sufficiency, etc. as being the out-flowing powers and perfections of the
Eye, and of the Spirit of Eternity in the Eye; they are God's es^ential
perfections, without which he cannot be God; ^ccordin^ ^^ that saying of the
Schoolmen, Whatsoever ^s in God, is God: therefore they are inseparable from
him, because they are himself.

But here it may be objected again, how this multiplicity of Powers and
Attributes in God can consist with his being the most absolute, and perfect
Unity?

1. To which I answer, First, That a diversity and variety of powers may
consist with perfect Unity, pro^ided there be no contrariety or opposition in
those powers to one another: now nothing is more plain ^han that the attributes
of God are without any con^rariety whatsoever among themselves.

2. In the Second place, I say, That Eternal Unity ^oth not exclude a diversity
of powers, if they all do ^rise and stand united in one root. Now all the
At^ributes of God are inseperably united in God's Es^ence, they spring from,
and are rooted in the same, and are one and the same with it and in it. And
this ^he opening of the Eye of the Abyss discovers, that all the Atrributes of
God are but one Power diversified^ they stand one in another; his Infinity,
Omnipotency, etc. are shut up in his all sufficiency, and when they beam forth,
they proceed from thence as from their Root and Original. So that all God's
Attributes proceed from one Power, and are shut up in on^ Power, and are but
the Variation of one and the same Power; and consequently are but one Power,
and s^ cannot take away God's Eternal Unity.

These Powers or Attributes of God are ^ixed in the Eye, being nothing else but
the various beamings for^^ of the Eye, and may be called the Head Powers of the
Godhead, as being seated in the Eye, and from them glancing forth themselves.

We must know that this was one chief end of God bringing forth the Abyssal
Globe, even the manifes^^tion of his Attributes and Powers to himself: for ^e
Eternity is manifested in this Abyssal Globe, to h^^e ^ beginning and end,
which else would be without beginning or End, and so his Infinity, Immensity
(...) Incomprehensibility, are bounded and limited by the circumference of the
Abyssal Globe, which else wo^^^ be without all bounds or limits, without all
Heigh^^^ Depths, or Breadths, and thus they come to be ma^ifest in the Abyssal
Globe. St. Paul says, that this ^^sible Creation does manifest God's Eternal
Godh^^^ and Power, and so it is; but if so, how much mO^^ then does the Abyssal
Globe (which is the first man^^ on of the Holy Trinity) manifest all the
Eternal A^tributes and Powers of his Godhead?

This sight of God's Attributes from the opening o^ the Eye in the Abyssal
Globe, is both a ravishing an^ amazing sight, for you do not behold Ideas or
Similitudes of things, but the things themselves intellectually, which causes
most unexpressible joys, and ecstasy in the Spirit of the Soul; to which
nothing in t^^ World can be compared. Neither can any Letter Words or Images,
manifest or discover these Attributes to us, but themselves only are the
manifesters and revealers of themselves; and the Spirit of God alone has the
Key to unlock the Eye, at the opening of which they are clearly and lively
manifested. So that this writing can do no more but point you to the place,
where they may be intellectually seen and discerned. We proceed now to the
fourth opening of the Abyssal Eye.

The fourth opening of the Abyssal Eye, discovers and manifests the Eternal
faculties of the Godhead, viz. his Intellect, Will and Divine Senses, under
which are comprehended his Wisdom, Praescience and Omniscience, all which
faculties subsist in God, and are inseparable from him, and are himself; and
therefore he cannot manifest himself in the Abyssal Globe without them.

But you will say that these faculties, as likewise the Senses of Seeing,
Hearing, Tasting, Smelling and Feeling, are only attributed to God to comply
with our weakness, and to make him intelligible to our understanding, not that
there are any such faculties or senses in God, but only by way of Analogy and
likeness.

To which I answer, That all the forementioned faculties and senses are most
really and truly in God, even far more really than they are or can be in any
Creature; for in him they are originally and in truth, and in the Creature only
by way of participation, and by way of Analogy and resemblance. So that
Understanding, Will, Wisdom, Hearing, Seeing, etc. are in God Primarily,
Essentially, and by way of Eminence; and in the Creature only derivatively, and
by way of resemblance, as the Copy resembles and expresses its original.

Neither does this variety ^^ Faculties and Senses in the least contradict
God's most absolute Unity; because as they all proceed from ^he Unity of God's
Essence, so they are all harmonized into a perfect agreement, in and by the
said Unity, from whence they display themselves as so many branches springing
from, and united to the same root: for, as was said before, they subsist in
God, and are inseparable from him; they are also in one another and penetrate
through one another, and so are but one Faculty in the Eternal Unity of God's
Essence, and notwithstanding in that oneness, have their distinct offices and
Objects.

But you will further object, That by attributing these Faculties and Senses to
God we seem to espous^ the Error of the Anthropomorphites, who supposed that
the Spirit of Eternity was in the likeness of a man.

To take away this objection, I shall declare to yo^ the opinion of the
Anthropomorphites, by which it will appear how far I am from asserting their
Errors in this writing.

First, It is to be noted, that the Anthropomorphites attributed these
Faculties to God, more Humane, after the manner of Men, that is according as
they are in Men, and thereby framed God after the Image of a Man: but we
attribute these Faculties and Senses to God after a Divi^e manner, Primarily,
Originally, and by way of Eminence, as may be consistent with the
Super-excellence of the Divine Being.

In the Second plac^ ^^ is to be observed, that the Anthropomorphites d^d
^^ppose in God distinct Seats, M^mb^rs and Organs, to every one of the
forementioned Faculties and Organs, and thereby attributed unto God an
Organical Image: whereas, we say, that all these Faculties and Senses are in
God after a Spiritual m^nner, without being fixed to particular and distinct
Members or Organs, which cannot be in God, forasmuch as he is a Spirit, and is
such a perfect Unity in himself, that all his Faculties and Senses, are one
with himself, and with one another, as has been before declared.

All these Faculties and Senses forementioned are seated in the Center of the
Eye, even as the Eye is seated in the midst of the Abyssal Globe; and
accordingly when the Eye is shut up they are hid, and are manifested when it
opens and displays it self, and discovered to be Essential Powers, and
Faculties subsisting in the Eye, being one with it, and therefore absolutely
inseparable from it.

We now proceed to a further consideration of the Nature of this Eye;
concerning which our first assertion is this, That the Abyssal Eye is the
Head-Eye of the Spirit of Eternity^ not that God is to be conceived to have an
Organical Head like Men; but it is therefore called God's Head Eye, because in
this Eye is the seat of the Head-Powers of the Deity, Understanding and Will,
and the senses of Seeing, Hearing, Smelling, Tasting and Feeling; which by way
of resemblance of what is in the Deity, are all seated in the Head of Man and
other inferior Creatures. Besides as the Head in Man governs all the Members,
by reason of the Intellect and Will seated there, which are the ruling Powers
of Man: so the Eye and ruling Powers in the Eye, do rule and govern throughout
the whole Deity.

The second thing which I assert concerning the Nature of this Eye is,

That this governing Abyssal Eye is God's Face; for when this Eye does open
fully upon us, then it is that we see God, Face to Face, that is, clearly as he
is in his own Essence, and without any vail or covering whatsoever. When this
Eye beam's forth its brightness upon the Spirit of the Mind, then God's Face is
said to shine upon us; and again the shutting of the Eye is that which we mean,
when we say God hides his Fac^ from us. This Eye is the Face of the total
Trinity, and it is not to be conceived, though we have attributed the Eye of
God the Father, as if the Eye was only the Face of the Father, and not of the
Son or Spirit, no by no means, for this Eye is indeed the Face of the total
Godhead, Father, Son and Spirit, and is (...) otherwise to be conceived of by
us.

We may also observe the order of these Head-Powers, as they are in the Deity:
in the Eye of the Aby^ is seated the Eternal Wisdom of God, and in his Wisdom
or Intellect, is seated his Will, and from the Divine Will and Intellect, flow
forth the senses of the Deity, by which he is an all-seeing, all-hearing, etc^
God. And all these are one in another, and flowin^ from one root, viz. the
absolute Unity of the Deity and standing upon that root, they are all but as
(...) Power or Faculty, and do all belong to the total Deity^ Father, Son and
Spirit, without any distinction whatsoever.

The fifth opening of the Abyssal Eye does manife^^ and discover the Heart of
the Deity. And in the fir^^ place here is discovered the relation of the Heart
to the Eye; the Heart is the seat, and resting place o^ the Eye; for the Eye
(as you may see in the figure in the Margent) is placed in the Center^ or mid
part of the Heart. And though one be not the other, yet they are in one another
undivided. Here is order indeed, here is first and second, as the Eye first and
then the Heart, generated out of the Eye, and yet both in conjunction: the Eye
is the Center of the Heart, and the Heart the seat of the Eye; the Heart is
generated out of the Eye, and is co-essential with it without any separation or
division: wheresoever the Eye is, there is the Heart, and wheresoever the Heart
is, there is the Eye also; neither is there any other ^istinction but that the
Eye begets the Heart, and the ^eart is begotten by the Eye, which makes the
order ^etween them, so as the Eye is the first and the Heart ^he second; yet
both co-essential, co-eq^^ and in ^oint union. We must speak thus in relation
to Or^er (though co-essential) else we cannot be under^^ood in relation to
distinction. And in relation to Manifestation, for the Holy Spirit does
manifest to the Soul's Eternal Essence, that the Eye is before the Heart, ^lse
no distinction could be apprehended between the one and the other: Therefore I
must write thus, else ^t could not be apprehended, what the Spirit of God
manifests, neither could it be otherwise expressed in words, to be made
Intelligible.

If you inquire of me, why the Heart was generated out of the Eye?

I answer, That the Eye did therefore generate the Heart, that it might have a
place to dwell and rest in; a subject in which it might rule and govern, and a
medium through which it might conveigh the Spirit of Life.

But you will say to which of the Trinity does this Heart belong?

I answer, It is the Heart of the total Godhead; for as the Trinity has but
one Eye, so likewise they have but one Heart between them. Yet notwithstanding
when we speak of the Trinity with distinction, the Heart is attributed to the
second Number of the Trinity as being the manifestation of the Son of God.

We come now to speak more particularly concerning the manifestation made by
this fifth opening of the Abyssal Eye, and we say that it discovers these
particulars to the Spirit of the Mind.

1. That the Holy Trinity has a Heart. 2. It discovers the Nature and Office
of this Heart. 3. It shows what is comprehended in this Heart.
And in the fourth and last place, it discovers wha^ flows forth and proceeds
from it.

I. Part. In the fist place, this fifth opening of the Eye does discover the
Trinity to have a Heart, even an Essential Heart, wherein is seated the Life of
the Deity as the Understanding, Will and Senses are seated ^^ the Eye: yea this
Heart is the very Life it self of the Deity; for God has no Soul, neither can
he have any and that for these reasons.

First, Because all Souls do proceed from the Womb of Eternal Nature; but the
Spirit of Eternity o^ whom we here speak, is, before Eternal Nature had (...)
being. Secondly, God has no Soul, because he has n^ need of one, his Heart
supplying the place of (...) Soul. Thirdly and lastly, God has no Soul, that
hereby he might be distinguished from all Angels and Men, none of which are
without Souls.
And though the word Soul be in some few places o^ Scripture attributed to God,
yet this is only done by way of Analogy, and after the manner of Men, and not
with relation to his Primary abstracted being in the Globe of Eternity.

II. The second Particular discovered is, What this Eternal Heart of God is,
and its Nature and Office in the Holy Trinity. The opening of the Eye manifests
this Heart to be the Essential Heart of God, generated by himself, out of
himself, and for himself; and therefore is himself, as being co-essential, and
coequal with him; all pure Deity, all Holy, all Pure, all Perfect. But more
especially the opening of the Eye does discover, this Heart of God to be of a
flowing Nature like to the Sea, without bottom or bounds; it is like a spring
in a Fountain, and bubbling Well which can never be drawn dry; it is in a
perpetual motion, and in this motion there is a perpetual communication of it
self, from it self, through it self, to it self; and this out-flowing of the
Heart, is nothing else but the original Divine Purity, Righteousness and
Holiness. This Heart of God is the overflowing Sea of the Deity, which flows
from himself, that is, from his own original Purity, Righteousness and
Holiness, and flows into, and fills the whole Eternal Abyss, with its fullness:
it is so immense in its flowings forth, that the deep Abyss of the Eternal
Globe would not be able to contain it, but that the Spirit of the Eye, by his
Omnipotency sets bounds and limits to the out-flowings of his own Divine
Nature. The outgoings of the Deity, are deeper than the Abyss, and broader
than the Abyss, but the Spirit of Eternity says to the out-flowing of his own
Ocean Deity, thus far go, and no further, be ye bounded within the
Circumference of the Abyss. And this out-flowing Ocean of the Deity, is, by the
opening of the Eye, manifested to be a clear, transparent mist or vapor,
filling the whole Deep of the Abyssal Globe. This sight from the opening of the
Abyssal Eye, is a lively, spriteful, rejoicing, triumphing and amazing sight,
and cannot be expressed in dead words or letters, neither can any Idea, form or
likeness fully represent it, as it discovers it self by the opening of the Eye.
O ye seekers of the Divine Mysteries, when your Spirits are let in, to a sight
of this Divine Mist, then you will understand what this pen has written.

Having spoke something concerning the Nature of this Heart of the Deity, come
we now to speak of the function o^ office of this Heart in the Holy Trinity.

1. The first office of the Heart is this, To be the fixed center and fountain
of the out-going, overflowing Ocean of the Deity. Hence this Heart is called an
ever rising, bubling, spring of living waters, which fails not: because the
fullness of the Deity is continually flowing and streaming forth from this
Heart, and returning to the same again. This Heart is a golden pipe of
conveiance by which the fullness of the Deity is conveyed from it self, through
it self, to it self, and there is fixed as a center or middle point in the
midst of the Holy Trinity.

2. The second office of this Heart of the Holy Trinity is, to be the Center,
Fountain, and Treasury of Life in the Deity: for as the Heart is the Fountain
of Life in Man, and all other living Creatures; even so is this Heart of the
Holy Trinity, the Spring and Center of the Essential Life of the Godhead.

3. The third and last office of this Essential Heart of God is, to bear the
express Image and likeness of the whole Deity: for as this Heart is the Center
and Spring from whence the Divine Nature continually streameth forth, and to
which it returns again; and as it is the seat and Center of Life to the Holy
Trinity, so it must needs be the express Image and representative of the whole
Godhead: for God's Life flows from this his Essential Heart, and his Divine
Nature flows from his Life, through his Heart; and his Image being nothing else
but an outward expression of his Life and Nature, therefore the Image of the
Total Deity must needs be impressed upon the Essential Heart of God.

III. The third Particular discovered concerning the Heart of God, by the
opening of the Eye of the Abyss, is the manifestation of all that which is shut
up^ contained and comprehended in it; and they are there, viz. the Nature of
God, his Image and likeness, and his Essential affections.

1. In the first place therefore, the opening of the Eye shows, that the Divine
Nature is contained in this Essential Heart of God; which Divine Nature is a
perfect Unity and Simplicity, without the least mixture of contrariety: for
though the Scriptures and other Divine writers speak of Love and Anger in God,
yet we must not think that they speak of God as he exists in the Globe of
Eternity, for there he is nothing but a perfect Unity, without any duality or
contrariety whatsoever; but they attribute these opposite affections to God, as
he has introduced himself into the divided properties of fallen Nature^ for in
them he is angry and fierce against sin and ev^^^ thing that is opposite to his
own Holy, Pure, Divine Nature, which is the most perfect Unity and Simplicity.
The Nature of G^d as it is a most perfect Unity, so it is also unalterable and
unchangeable; because that which is perfectly one cannot be subject to any
change or alteration, which always proceeds from Duality and Contrariety.
Having thus declared that the Divine Nature is a perfect unchangeable Unity and
Simplicity, and having elsewhere told you that this Divine Nature, from the
opening of the Eye is manifested in the form of a clear transparent mist; if
you should ^urther inquire of me, what this Divine Nature is? I must tell you,
that this Divine Nature is nothing else but Love. And accordingly the Scripture
tells us, That God is Love, and that he that lives in Love, lives in God, and
God in him. And this Love is seated in the Essential Heart of God, from thence
it stream's forth, and thither it returns again: and therefore it is called
God's flaming Heart, because the Essential Love does continually burn and flame
in it. This Eternal Love, which is the unchangeable Nature of God, is a most
pure Virgin, it is Love without lusting or desire; it wills and acts nothing,
but in the Will of God, and is guided by the Eye in all its out goings. What
pen can express the high purity of this Eternal Love? It is the Eternal
Liberty, being free from all things, it is a mere passive nothing. The
Essential Love of God is said to be merely passive in relation to its own
motion, for it acts not but is acted only by and from the Spirit of the Holy
Trinity. It cannot mingle with any thing of Nature contrary to it self, and
indeed with nothing but with its own purity: neither can any thing touch it,
for then its Virginity and Purity might be defiled. In this consists the High
Liberty of Love's Nature, it is free from all things, and all things free from
it; it touches nothing, neither does any thing touch it. No wonder that St.
Paul cries out concerning this Essential Love of God, O the height, depth,
breadth and length of the Love of God, which passes knowledge! For its
dimensions are equal to the Abyssal Globe, this Love being the fullness of God,
which fills it throughout. I have declared to you the Mystery of the Divine
Nature, that it is nothing else but Eternal Love; but if you should further
persist to enquire of me, what this Eternal Love is? I must tell you, that it
is as a mee^ nothing to us, because it is beyond all humane comprehension and
knowledge, and we can only say of it, that it is, what it is; an Angel's Tongue
being not able to express what this Eternal Love is.

But you will say, how can this Love be termed the unchangeable Nature of God,
when we are told from the Scriptures, that God is angry, and fierce against sin
and evil?

For answer to this, I must only put you in mind of what I said before, viz.
that when I say, that Eternal Love is God's unchangeable Nature, I speak of
God, as he exists in himself in the Globe of Eternity, before Eternal Nature;
but when Anger and Severity are attributed to God, then the Divine Nature is
considered as clothed upon with the properties of Eternal Nature; but we speak
of God here in his own primary abstracted Being, which is nothing else but
Eternal unchangeable Love.

2. In the next place, the opening of the Eye shows that the Image of God is
contained, and shut up in his Heart; for since the Divine Nature does
continually flow from, and return again to this Essential Heart of God as its
Center, and Spring; and since the Image of God is nothing else but the
expression and manifestation of his Nature, therefore this Image must needs be
impressed on the Heart of God, which is the very Center of his Divine Nature.
And therefore this Heart of God is called the face of God, because it is the
true and living expression and representation of God, the Essential Image and
likeness of the total Deity.

But you will object, that the Scriptures of Truth tell us, that God has no
Image.

To which I answer, that indeed God has no organical outward Image resembling
that of Angels or Men; and thus the Scripture is to be understood when it tells
us that God has no Image. But the Scripture does not contradict God's having
an Essential inward form or Image, according to which Image we are told, in the
first of Genesis, that God created Man. Let us create Man in our own Image, and
after our own likeness. If we ask what this Image of God is, and wherein it
does consist? The Apostle Paul will tell us, that it consists in knowledge,
righteousness and true Holiness; and to comprehend all this in one word, this
Essential living Image of God, is nothing else but Eternal Love; this is God's
Nature, this is his Image, and this is All in All in the Deity, considered in
his solitary and abstracted being, before the introducing of himself into the
properties of Eternal Nature. Now from this Eternal Love do flow and beam forth
all those Eternal excellencies and virtues, which together with the Love do
complete this Divine Image; such are the Wisdom, Righteousness, Holiness and
Goodness of God.

Now that the Image of God does consist in these, the Scripture will inform us,
if we compare Colos. 3. 10. with Ephesians. 4.24. so that we see that God's Image
does not consist in his infinity, immensity and omnipotence; but in his Divine
Virtues proceeding from Eternal Love, viz. Wisdom, Righteousness, and true
Holiness.

3. The third and last thing, which the opening of the Eye discovers to be hid
and contained in the Heart of God, are the Divine Affections and Passions.

But you will object, and tell me that God has no Affections nor Passions, as
being immutable and unchangeable in his unchangeable Nature of Love?

To which I answer, in the first place, that it is true God has no Passions or
Affections like to those which are in Men.

Secondly, There are no evil, and unordinate affections in God.

But in the third place, I say God has Divine and Godlike affections, such as
become the Deity, and are suitable to the perfection of his Nature.

Fourthly, God has such affections, as are always in Harmony and Unity,
without any contrariety or opposing of each other.

Fifthly, God's affections are at the greatest distance from all weakness and
imperfection whatsoever.

In the sixth and last place, God's Affections and Passions do all flow from his
essential Heart of Love, and are all rooted and centred in the same.

These Affections contained in the Heart of God, are chiefly these three, Love,
Joy and Delight: For God eternally Loves himself, rejoices in himself, and
delights in himself; neither can God any more cease to Love himself, or to
rejoice and delight in himself than he can cease to be; therefore these are the
Essential and inseparable affections of the Divine Being.

IV. The fourth and last Particular, which the opening of the Eye discovers
concerning the Heart, are God's Divine Qualities, Virtues and Excellencies;
which do all proceed from the Heart of God, as from their Source and Center;
and they are these following, viz. his Love, Purity, Truth, Faithfulness,
Unchangeableness, Goodness, Perfection, Righteousness and Holiness. These are
the Essential inseparable Virtues and Perfections of the Divine Nature; for
they proceed from himself, subsist in himself, and are himself, and from the
opening of the Eye are manifested to be such. Neither does this variety of
perfections in God in the least destroy, or take away his most absolute Unity
and Simplicity; because they all proceed from one root, and stand all united in
the same, as one, which root is Love; in which all the Excellencies and
Perfections of the Divine Nature stand Harmoniz'd in Unity, and are but as one
Virtue and Perfection.

Having thus treated of the several Particulars contained in the Heart of God,
I shall next proceed to a view of some particulars which are not contained in
God's original Essence; and that from a hint of the Spirit, which said expressly
to me, search diligently, what is not to be found in the original Essence of
God: I did accordingly, and I found, that no pardoning Mercy, nor vindictive
Justice, nor Wrath, nor Death, nor Curse, neither any Anguish, Sorrow,
Darkness, Evil, or Elements, were to be found in the solitary abstracted
Essence of the Deity.

I say, first, no pa^doning Grace or Mercy; because there was nothing besides
himself, and consequently no Object which stood in need of Pardon or
Forgiveness.

No vindictive Justice; because no object capable of punishment.

No Anger nor Wrath; for God could not be Angry with himself; for so
contrariety and enmity would be found in the bosom, and Center of Eternal Unity
and Simplicity.

No Death; for the Deity is a living God, yea life it self, and the Author of
it, wheresoever it is.

No Anguish nor Sorrow; because God is the Highest and Chiefest Good, and
consequently must needs be All-triumphing joy, All-delight, All-pleasure.

No Darkness; because God is all Light, Light it self, and the Source and Center
of it.

No Elements; because the Deity is the most perfect and absolute Unity and
Simplicity without any mixture or composition whatsoever.

But you will object, that I seem to reject Gods vindictive Justice, and to
deny his Anger against Sin and Sinners.

I answer not at all; for I do not simply deny God's vindictive Justice and
Wrath, but only say, that none of these are to be found in the solitary and
primary Being of the Deity, and are only attributed to him, forasmuch as he
has introduced himself into the properties of Eternal Nature. And thus much
shall suffice to have spoken concerning the Discovery and manifestation, which
the opening of the Eye gives of the essential Heart of God.

But in the next place, as the opening of the Eye discovers it self and the
Heart, so it likewise manifests the Deity of the Holy Ghost to be the exit or
outgoing emanat^on of both Eye and Heart, even a sweet, pleasant out-flowing
life or power like to a breath or gust of Air, proceeding from the Abyssal Eye
of the Father, as from its Eternal Root and beginning, and conveyed through
the Heart of the Son, as the Golden-Oyl transmitted through the Golden Pipe of
the Son's Essential Love. It is the active Life and Power of the Holy Trinity,
which finisheth the work of true Regeneration in Apostatized Creatures. Thus we
see that the opening of the Eye does reveal the total Deity, Father, Son and
Spirit, by a true and vital Representation.

In the sixth place when the Eye of Eternity opens, it manifests God's
Corporeity, or the Divine Body.

Object. But you will object that God has no body, as ^^ing a pure Spirit.

Answ. To which I answer first, by way of Concession, that God has no
organicall body like men, neither like those of the glorified Saints and Angels.

But in the next place, I say that God has a body, such as becomes his high,
spiritual and refined Nature; ^or indeed the opening of the Eye does clearly
discover to the Spirit of the mind, that the immense deep ^f the Abyssal Globe
of Eternity is God's Universal, incom^rehensible, omnipresent body. This is the
Eternal Cor^^^eity of the Holy Trinity, which comprehends all things, being
comprehended of none, but it self: it is univer^^lly in all Beings and
diffuss'd through all Beings; nothing can keep it out, neither can any thing
shut it up. It is a free Liberty in it self, it stands free from all ^ssences,
only so far as it pleases to unite it self with any essence: With relation to
this Universal Body, it is, b^t God styles himself the Alpha and Omega, the
beginning and end of all Beings; all things proceed from it, and therefore it
is the first, and all things subsist in it, and therefore it is the last. Thus
we see that the Holy Trinity have the Globe of Eternity for their body in which
^hey act and move. This Body is Wisdome's Crystalline ^lasse, wherein all
things are truly and intellectually ^epresented to the eye of the mind: it is
in this deep A^ysse of the Globe of Eternity, that all those divine mysteries
^^e discovered and manifested, which in the foregoing trea^ise have been made
out to you; for in this Miroir of Wisdom all the Depths of the Deity stand
openly represen^ed to the Eye of the Spirit, when a glance from the Eye
illustrates its hidden deep. We see then that the Globe of Eternity, is the
body of the Spirit of Eternity, yet not an organical Body; for what Organs are
there in a Globe or Sphere? It is such a Body as the Spirit of Eternity can by
contraction draw into it self, or by dilatation diffuse its. into infinity.
This Body comprehends all worlds and globes within it self, and is therefore
called the Universal, all containing, Body of the Deity. By means of this Body,
the Spirit of Eternity has brought forth himself into Heighths, Depths and
Breadths, which are formed and distinguished by the Eye, for the Eye looking
upwards gives an immense height to the Globe of Eternity; When it look's
downwards it forme's the Depths, and when on either side, the Breadth: because
without the Eye, none of these would be determinable in a Globe, concerning
which, we cannot say, that it has height or depth. So that though the Spirit
of Eternity in it self be without any bounds or limits, yet he has been
pleased to bound himself in the Globe of E^e^nity, and that for the
manifestation of himself, without which we could have no other, but a Negative
knowledge of Him. We may here also take notice of the figure of this Body,
which is round or Sphaerical, being the most perfect of all figures, and
therefore most proper ^or the Body of the Deity; Who in this also differs from
all Creatures, who have their distinct organical bodies with great variety of
figure; whereas the blessed Deity has the most simple and perfect of all
figures to be the outw^^^ form of his Corporeity.

Lastly, the opening of the Eye of Eternity discover^ God's External Form or
Figure: we have before spoken of Gods internal Form or Image, and declared that
it i^ nothing else but his Essential Holiness. I know it wi^^ seem strange,
that I speak here of God's figure, sinc^ the Scripture forbids us to make any
figure or likenes^ of God. But to this I answer that though God forbid us to
Frame any likeness of himself who is the Spirit of Eternity, in resemblance of
any Creature whatsoever, yet cannot this debarr the Holy Trinity from
representing themselves according to the pleasure of their own will: who is
above them to control them? Or who is their Councelor to advise them? Or who
dare say to them, why do you thus represent your selves? For, as has been said
before, at the opening of the Eye, the Father appears in the figure of the
sight or black of an Eye, which yet is no o^ganical eye: the Son appears in the
likeness of an heart, in the midst of which the Eye of the Father is centred:
and the Holy Ghost is represented in the likeness of an outgoing Breath, Wind
or Air, which proceeds from the Eye, through the Heart, and is in its own
essentially, an active Power, which effect's whatsoever the Eye or Heart will
have done. Now the Triune Diety brought it self into these visible figures for
their own manifestation, that we might thereby learn, how the Father, Son, and
Spirit are in one another Eternally, and yet notwithstanding this their Unity,
they are distinguished by those three figures of Eye, Heart, and outgoing
breath, which are distinguishable one from the other. So that here this great
Mystery of the Unity and distinction of the Trinity is fully discove^ed, and
made out to the Eye of the mind: for though the Eye, Heart and outgoing breath,
do appear in one another, yet they appear with distinction, so as the Eye is
distinguishable from the Heart, and the Heart from the outgoing Breath.

But before I leave this point, I shall endeavor to give you some account
concerning the Nature of these forementioned figures, in these following
particulars.

In the first place, I say that those Images and Figures which the opening of
the Eye Manifests are not Shadows and Empty representations, but Real and
Substantial ones, they are not only figures of Heavenly things, but the
Heavenly things themselves.

In the second place, I say that these Figures, are living and spiritful
representations, not dead Images, for the fullness of the Living God fills them
all with Life and Spirit and Power.

In the third and last place, these Figures are unchangeable, and that because
they are Essential to the Holy Trinity. So the Eye is Essential to the
Father; the flaming Heart of Love is Essential to the Son, and the out-flowing
breath of Power is Essential to the Holy Ghost. For though in Eternal Nature,
in the Darkness the Eye of the Father appear dark, wrathful and terrible; and
contrary, in the Light, shining pleasant and full of Love; yet the Eye is not
changed by th^se variations, but remains still the unchangeable Essential Eye
of the Father, though diversifyed by the Light and darkness. Thus we see that
the unchangeable Image of the Father, in the Globe of Eternity, is the sight o^
black of an Eye, into which likeness he has been pleased to contract himself,
for the manifestation of himself: for though we as Creatures are commanded to
make no Representation or Image of the Trinity, yet this does not hinder, but
they may bring forth a divine Imag^ and representation of themselves. What has
been said concerning the Eye, may be also said concerning the Heart, viz. That
it is the Unchangeable, Essential and Substantial Image of the Son: for he
manifests himself to Angels and Saints in this figure of a central Heart, all
flaming with Love, otherwise this Hand could not have writ of it. And the
out-flowing breat^ or air proceeding from the Eye and Heart, is the immutable
and Essential Image of the Holy Ghost.

Thus we see that the Eye by its opening of it self does clearly discover to
us, that the one only true God, who is the Spirit of Eternity, has brought
forth himself into a Beginning and End, into matter and form, into Corporeity
and Figure, (in the sense as has been before expressed, else it may seem harsh
to common Philosophers,) who without the Eternal Globe is without any of these,
even an unmeasureable, incomprehensible Unity, concerning which we can only say
that it is what it is; for what it is, none can tell but it self. And so I
proceed from the second place of Purity in the Globe of Eternity called the
Holy Place, unto the third which is the most Holy or Holiest of all.

And here before I begin to speak of the most holy Place, I think it not amiss,
once more, to hint to you, that these three distinct Places or Courts, make up
but one Globe or Sphere, for they proceed one from another, and penetrate one
through another, and subsist in one another, yet with the distinction, above
mentioned, of outward, inward and inmost, the first leading to ^he second, and
the second to the third.

Concerning the most Holy Place.
I shall reduce all that I have to say concerning the most Holy Place to these
four Particulars, First, I shall give you the several Names which were given to
it by the Spirit of God. Secondly, I shall speak of the Nature and condition of
^he Place. Thirdly, I shall give you an account of the Wonders which are to be
seen in it. Fourthly, and Lastly, I will speak of the Ends of its formation.


1. As to the first of these, viz. the Names and titles which were expressly
given to this third Court by the Spirit of God, they are these following: it
was called the Still Eternity, and that by reason of the unutterable Rest,
Silence and Stilnenss which Eternally dwells in this third Court; for as the
outward Court was called the Globe of Eternity, and the inward Court the deep
Abyss or Abyssal Globe of Eternity, so the third Place of Purity is called the
still Eternity, because nothing but Eternal Rest, Silence and Stilness is to be
perceived by those who live in this most Holy Place. This Holy Place is not the
Trinity but distinct from it, and is the still Eternity in which the holy
simplified Spirits live. It was also called the Chamber of State, the presence
Chamber of the Spirit of Eternity, the King of Kings, where his unexpressibly
glorious Majesty is to be seen. Besides it was called the Rock of wonders, with
reference to those wonders which do appear in it, of which we shall speak in
the third particular.

2. The second particular is what the Nature and condition of this place is,
and this is hinted to us in the Name which is given to it by the Spirt of God;
for Names ought to express the Nature of the thing which they signify, and the
whole excellency of Names consists in this: Now we cannot imagine but that
those Names by which the Holy Spirit does call any thing have all the
excellence and truth which a Name is capable of, and consequently must very
properly and significantly express the Nature of the thing, named; the name of
this third Place you have heard is the still Eternity, and consequently have
reason to conclude that the Essential difference of this Place is the
Majestic silence and awful stillness with which it is continually filled. This
is such a stillness as surpasses, not only all expressions, but likewise all
thoughts and imaginations; and because of this Majestic silence, and
unexpressibly awful stillness this most Holy Place is also called the
Presence Chamber of the Deity; this supernatural silence and stillness being
the ornament, state and pomp of it, to which all the Glory and magnificence of
Monarchs here is but as a shadow or nothing.

3. The third particular is the Wonders which are to be seen in this place, in
respect of which, as was mentioned before, it was called the Rock of wonders;
and these wonders are five in number, viz.

1st. The Spirit of Eternity, or the Eternal Unity. 2dly, The Holy Trinity.
3dly, The Virgin Wisdom of God. 4thly, The Seren Spirits before the Throne.
5thly, and Lastly the Inhabitants of the Still E^^rnity.
1. The first wonder which manifests its self in this Rock of wonders is the
Spirit of Eternity, or the Eternal Unity, which does fill the total deep Abyss
with it self, that is, with all Power. Here the Spirit of Eternity discovers
its self to be the first and original Power, the Power of all Powers, yea
All-power it self. And this manifestation of the Spirit of Eternitie's being
All-power, is more full, magnificent and glorious in the still Eternity than in
the inward or outward Court, where the Deity does also discover himself to be
All-sufficient and Omnipotent, but not in that Sovereignty and Majesty with
which he appears to the Eye of the Mind in this his Presence Chamber. Here the
Glory of the All-power of the Deity is seen Nakedly, openly and without a
veil, eye to eye, and face to face; the sight of which does cause ravishing
Ecstasies, unexpressible Ioys, and transporting admiration to fill the heart of
the beholder; it being a sight so glorious as no words can express, nor no
thoughts represent to the mind, as being beyond all comprehension.

The second wonder in this Rock of wonders, the still Eternity, is the Holy and
ever blessed Trinity, Father Son, and Holy Spirit.

The Father is the Original power of all powers, subsisting in, by and from
himself; which Original power of the Father is most clearly and openly
discovered in the still Eternity, in the highest magnificence, Majesty and
Glory. This supreme power of the Father, is the beginning of all power, and the
fullness of all power, filling the Heighths, Depths, and Breadth o^ the still
Eternity: this Power of the Father is an Eternal Unity and simplicity, that is,
it is free from all manner of contrariety, divisibility, composition or
mixture, as being an Uniform, Universal, diffusive power, which is nothing else
but pure Deity; and further we cannot search into this Power of the Father to
know what it is, for none knows what pure Deity is, but God himself. It is this
Paternal power, which fills the still Eternity throughout, in the appearance of
the clearest transparency and brightness. I have now given you an account how
the Father manifests himself in the still Eternity, to be All-power, yet before
I leave this particular for fu^ther explanation, I shall show you negatively
what this Power of the Father is not.

First then say, I that this Power of the Father is no personal power, for
nothing of personality is manifested in the still Eternity, only a Uniform,
Universal diffusive Power in the appearance of the greatest brightness fills it
throughout.

2. Neither is this Power of the Fathers any Organical Image resembling that of
Angels or men, having distinction of parts and members, for nothing of this
kind can be found in the Eternal Unity of the Father's All-power. And thus much
shall suffice to have spoken concerning the Father, who is the First in the
Trinity. We now proceed to the second, viz. the Son of the Father.

The Son is an Essential power immediately generated by the Father, out of his
own divine Essence: and therefore he is co-essential and coequal with the
Father. For the Son's power dilateth and co-extendeth it self in, with and
through the Father's power, to the utmost bounds and limits of the still
Eternity, and fills the deep Abyss with his own Power's, in the Father's
Power, as being co-essentiall and co-equall with the Father. Again this Power
of the Son is also the coeternal with the Father: for though the Father may be
said to be before the Son in order of Nature, forasmuch as he is the generator
of the Son, yet we cannot say that the Father is before the Son as to priority
of time, for the Son exists from all Eternity at once, and together with the
Father, and therefore is the Eternal Son of the Father. If you would further
know what this generated Power of the Son is, I say it is an Eternal Unity, and
pure Deity even as the Father's Power is.

But for the further opening of what the Son of God is, you may take notice of
these following particulars.

1. In the first place the Son of God is the first begotten of the Father; He
is the first born of all Beings, as being that Essential word, Coeternal with
the Father, by whom the Father made all things, and without whom nothing was
made. By him were all things created whether they be in Heaven, or on Earth,
whether visible or invisible, whether Thrones or Dominions, Principalities or
Powers, all things were created by him, and for him; and therefore he must
needs be before them all, and consequently be the first begotten of the Father.

Secondly, this Son of God is the only begotten Son of the Father: all other
Sons whether Angels or men receive their filiation or sonship from this only
begotten Son of the Father, and are called Sons forasmuch as they part^ke of,
and are centred in this only begotten Son: they are Sons in and because of this
only begotten Son, and beloved in the only beloved of the Father.

Thirdly, this Son is the Co-essentiall Son of the Father, of the same essence
and nature with the Father: now the Nature of the Father is Purity, Holiness,
Righteousness, Meekness, Love, Goodness and Perfection, and such is the Son's
nature also, and therefore the Son is called the Brightness of his Father's
Glory, and the express Image of his subsistence: But the Image of the Father
is no organicall Image, but consists in Light, Life and Love: The Father is all
Light, and in him is no darkness at all; he is all Life, and in him is no
Death; he is all Love, and in him is no Wrath; and the Son being the
co-essential Son of the Father, must also be all Light, all Life and all Love.
Thus the Father is in the Son, and the Son in the Father; Neither is the Nature
of the Father and Son distinguishable in the still Eternity, the Nature of the
Father is not severe and wrathful, and that of the Son, sweet, mild and
gentle, for this is no way consistent with the one simple nature of the Deity.
The Father is all Light, Life and Love in the Son's Nature, and the Son is all
Light, Life and Love in the Father's Nature: the Nature of the Father flows
from himself, ar the Fountainhead and spring, into the Son, and from the Son
again into the Father; and therefore the Son is called the Heart of the Father;
because he is the fixed Seat of the Father's Light, Life and Love. Thus we see
that neither Angels nor Saints are in this degree codeisied and
consubstantiated with the Father, for he fills the still Eternity with the
Light, Life and Love of his Essential Deity in co-equality with the Father.

Fourthly, this Son, is the well beloved Son of the Father, the Son of his
Loves, in whom he is fully well pleased satisfied and delighted. And indeed how
can it be otherwise? since he is one being and one nature with the Father, the
very Heart of the Father, and his express Image; when he is the Beauty,
Brightness and Excellence of his Father's Glory, and exalted to an equality of
honor and dominion with the Father, as sitting in the same Throne with the
Father, and possessing the kingdom with him. This is the Son whom the Father
will have honored and worshipped as himself, and to whom the Father has
committed all Judgment, neither can the one be worshipped without the other,
they subsisting in each other. This is the Son who is exalted by the Father to
be Heir of all things.

In the fifth place this Son is the Essential Christ of God. I would not have
you stumble at this Expression, I might indeed have omitted it, but for the
matters sake: for you must take notice that I speak here of the Holy Trinity,
as they exist without Nature, and in this state the Son of God cannot properly
be called the Christ that is, the Anointed; because thus considered he is not
Anointed to any office, for it is after his entering into the properties of
Nature, that he is Anointed to be the Mediator: yet bear with me for using this
word improperly, because I do it only for this end to give you a more clear and
distinct knowledge of what the Son of God is as he exists before Nature, as
well as what he is in the properties of Eternal Nature.

But you will ask of me, why I speak of the Holy Trinity out of, and before
Nature, and particularly, why I speak of the Essential Christ of God as
existing before Nature? I answer that my speaking of the Holy Trinity, and
particularly of the second person, who is the Christ of God, as he exists
before Nature, is only in order to give you a more distinct knowledge of the
Son and Christ of God in Nature, and to enable you to distinguish between his
being out of Nature, and his exstence in the properties of Nature.

This Essential Christ is one with the Father, it is who is the same
yesterday, to day and forever, even before all time and before Eternal Nature,
and he is the Co-creation with the Father: He is the Word, Wisdom, Power, the
Light, Life, Love, the Heart, Reighteousness, Purity, Brigtness, Excellency and
Glory of the Father in the Father: for we must not conceive of him as a
distinct Person from the Father, because that would destroy the High Unity and
Simplicity of Divine Nature, which admits of no composition, or division: nor
on the other side must we conceive the Son of God to be only a distinct
denomination, for we see that in the still Eternity, there is a distinct
repersentation of the Son, from that of the Father, and the Holy Ghost: For the
Son is represented in the Image of an Heart, the Father of an Eye, and the Holy
Spirit in the stream or emanation which issues from both.

But you will say, is then this Christ the Son of God the Redeemer, Savior,
Iustifier and Reconciler of Mankind? I answer, that to speak properly, the Son
of God, as he exists out of and before Eternal Nature, is not a Redeemer,
Savior, etc. and that because in this state he has no relation to any
Creature whatsoever; and therefore as long as there was nothing for to be
redeemed or saved, he could not properly be called a Redeemer or Savior.

But you will say this essential Christ, the Eternal Son of the Father, is not
the Christian's Christ, in whom they trust for Redemption, Salvation and
Glorification?

1. I grant that properly he is not, first because the object of the ^aith of
Christians is a God-man; a Christ clothed with Humanity, in whom two natures,
pure Deity, and pure Humanity are hypostatically united, so that according to
his Deity he is true God, and according to his Humanity pure man: whereas^ the
Essential Christ is not made up of two Natures, but is whole Deity, Unity and
Simplicity, being co-essentiall and co-equall with the Father, which he could
not be, if the Humane Nature was joined with him; for then he could not be one
Eternal Unity and Simplicity with the Father.

2. The Christ of the Christians is born in time, even in the fullness of time
of the blessed Virgin Mary; but the Essential Christ is Co-eternall with the
Father, and exists from all Eternity with the Father, before all time.

3. The Christ of the Christians is a personal Christ, found and brought forth
in flesh, in the figure of man; being made like unto us in all things, sin only
excepted: but the Essential Christ of the Father has no human figure, or
organical personality; and conseqneutly ^t was impossible for him, as such, to
shed his blood upon the Cross for the Redemption of sinners, which was the
great work of the Christian Christ.

4. The Christ of the Christians arose from the Dead the third day and
ascending on high, is sat down on the ^ight hand of the Father, being made the
Head and King over all Angels on mount Sion, and over all his Saints and
members within the walls of the New Jerusalem: but the Essential Christ of God
reigns and rules on the same Throne with the Father, in the Globe of Eternity
over all World and over the Person of Christ in his glorified Corporeity.

6. The Christ of the Christian was before promised to be the seed of the
Woman, and the treader down of the Serpent, and it was with reference to this
Christ that the Covenant was made with Abraham, that all Nations should be
blessed in his seed, Isack being a type of him and his Birth, Life, Death,
Resurrection, Ascension and Glorification, were shadowed out by the dark types
and figures of the Ceremonial Law. Now we see that these things are not
applicable to the Eternal Son of God, as he exists in the Eternal Unity of the
Father, without any humane Nature.

Now because I have been misrepresented by some as if I were a Socinian, and
denied the Deity of Christ, I think it not amiss to give this following
declaration of my Faith concerning Christ, viz. I believe him to be perfect God
and perfect man^ that he was born of the Virgin Mary, being made like unto us
in all things, sin only excepted; that he dyed on the Cross at Jerusalem, and
rose from the Dead the third day; that he ascended into Heaven, and is sat down
at the right hand of the Father, being constituted head and king over all
Angels and Saints, All which points I cordially assent to, and do from my very
Soul abhor those ranting principles, which deny that ever there was such a
person as Jesus Christ, who was born at Bethlehem of the Virgin Mary, and who
acted all those Miracles the Scriptures of truth relate of him; which deny his
death on the Cross at Jerusalem, his Resurrection, Ascension and personal
Glorification: for they reject and deny the true Gospel-Christ, the personal
Christ, to whom the Scriptures bear witness, even that Christ, who is the
Object of the Faith of Christians, whereby they destroy the Christian faith,
and make the Scripture an heap of allegorical confusions and untruths: Which
principles I am so far from owning, that I here once more declare that I do
from my heart and soul detest and abhor them.

I come now in order to speak of God the Holy Ghost^ who, as was said before,
is the out-flowing power, proceeding from the Father and the Son. It may be
distinguished from the Father's power, in that the Fathers power is the
original, primary, fountain-power of the Trinity, without which no Trinity had
ever been; whereas the power of the Holy Ghost is the consummating and
finishing Power which makes the Blessed Trinity perfect and complete. And it
differs from the Son's power, forasmuch as that is a power begotten and
generated out of the Divine Essence of the Father, but the Power of the Holy
Ghost is only a proceeding out going power, not from the Father only, but from
the Father and the Son: it proceeds from the Father Originally, as being the
fountain-spring of it, and proceeds Derivatively through the Son, and for so
much as distinguishable from Father and Son; though indeed it be Co-essential,
Coequal and Coeternal with the Father and the Son; for the Holy Trinity are
centred and rooted in the most perfect Unity.

In the first place, I say that the Holy Ghost is Co-essential with the Father
and the Son, that is, of the same Nature and Essence, being all pure Deity,
even as the Father and Son is.

Secondly, this proceeding power of the Holy Ghost is Coequal with the Father
and the Son, for even as the power of the Father and the Son is dilated from
the Center to the Circumference of the Abyssal Globe, so likewise is the
out-going power of the Holy Ghost.

In the third place, the power of the Holy Ghost is Coeternal with the Father
and the Son, for the Holy Trinity exist from all Eternity at once, and
altogether; and as the Father never was without the Son, nor the Son without
the Father, so likewise the Father and Son were never without the Holy Ghost
proceeding from them.

In the fourth place, this out-going power of the Holy Ghost was manifested to
be a bodily power, I do not mean that it appeared as an organical and visible
body, capable of division into parts, but as a body of power filling the whole
circumference of the still Eternity. Hence it is that this all filling power of
the Holy Ghost is called the Temple and Tabernacle-body of the Holy Ghost,
because as the Father dwells in the Son, and the Son in the Father, so both
Father and Son dwell in this Body of power of the Holy Ghost, as in a Temple or
Tabernacle.

But you will object, that here I seem to contradict what I said before, viz.
that the Abyssal Globe of the still Eternity was the body of Corporeity of the
Holy Trinity, Father, Son and Holy Ghost, whereas here I make the all-filling
Power of the Holy Ghost to be the Temple-body of the Deity.

To which I answer, that I do not attribute two distinct bodies to the Deity,
for these are as a wheel within a wheel, and as an inward skin covered with an
outward: in like manner the outward cover or body of the Trinity is the Abyssal
Globe of the still Eternity, but the inward covering or Corpor^ity is the
all-filling power of the Holy Ghost, and both make up one Divine Corporeity,
which is the place and Temple of the Holy Trinity. And this is one of those
wonders which are manifested in this Rock of wonder's viz. that the all-filling
power of the Holy Ghost is the innermost Temple and Tabernacle-body wherein the
Father, Son and Spirit have their mutual Co-habitation.

The Fifth and last property of the out-flowing power of the Holy Ghost is
this, it is an Essential creating power, insomuch as nothing can be effected
or created without it. It is by this acting power of the Holy Ghost, that
Eternal Nature and her forms were brought forth, it is this Power brought all
things, all worlds, into act, according to the will of the Father; so that this
Divine body of power, is the united acting power of the whole Trinity. The
Father operates from himself, as being the beginning of power, through the
heart of his Son, with and by the acting power of the Holy Ghost; the Son
operates from the Father, in himself, by the effecting power of the Holy Ghost,
The Holy Ghost works from the Father, through the Son, with and by his own
effecting power: Thus the Holy Trinity act harmoniously from through and by one
another in this Ghostly body of power, which fills all in the still Eternity.
This body of power is a most Spiritual, divine, refined Body, which nothing can
shut out, neither can any thing keep it in: it is far more refined and subtle
then any personal organical body whatsoever of Angels or men; and it is so
infinitely powerful, that if it were in Hell, Hell would not be able to keep
it, but it would raise it self thence to Glory, the omnipotency of the Holy
Trinity being lodged in it.

Hitherto I have spoken of the Unity in Trinity, viz. how the Eternal Unity and
simplicity manifests it self in Trinity; I shall now come to speak something
briefly of the Trinity in Unity, and show you how the blessed Trinity, as they
pr^^^ed from Unity, so they return to it and are cen^red ^^ it. St. John hint's
both these mysteries to us, 1 John 5. 7. There are three which bear record in
Heaven, the Father, the Son and Holy Spirit, and these three are one: as if he
had said, these three Father Son and Spirit proceed from one Eternal Unity, and
yet they are three distinguishable powers, so as one is not the other from
Eternity to Eternity, and can never be confounded together.

For first they are distinguished by their names Father Son and Spirit, and
this distniction of Names does necessarily imply some distinction of Nature.

Secondly, they are distinguished according to order, the Father first, the Son
next, the Holy Spirit last of all.

Thirdly by number, as one, two, three, and are therefore well called the Holy
number three.

In the fourth place the Apostle distinguishes them by their relative
properties of Father, Son, and the outgoing Spirit of power.

Now after he has spoke of their distinction, he tells us that notwithstanding
all this, these three are one, that is, that they are all centred, and rooted
in one undivided Unity and Simplicity, which is the pure Ess^^^ial Nature of
the Deity. And indeed if the Holy Trinity were not thus centred in the most
perfect Unity, they would be three distinct Deities, which is contrary to the
Christian faith and divine Revelation. No, the Holy Trinity have but one Divine
Nature, one Eye, one Heart, one Body of power between them, for to dwell in.
And thus much shall suffice to have spoken concerning the second wonder, which
is to be seen in the still Eternity, viz. the Unity in Trinity, and the Trinity
in Unity: though no words are able to express the Majesty and transparent
Clarity of this Sight as it presents it self in the still Eternity, where the
Trinity app^ars in the triumphant glorious Body of the Power of the Holy Ghost.
I now pass to the third wonder.

The Third Wonder which was presented to my intellectual sight was God's
Wisdom, concerning whom I shall speak under these three heads.

First I shall speak of the Birth and Nativity of the Wisdom of God. Secondly
of its Nature. Thirdly and lastly of its office.
1. First then, as to the Birth and Nativity of Wisdom, we are are to know
that it spring's and flows from God's Eternal Eye, as from its Eternal root and
original, and here it is fixed as in its proper seat and center; for it is by
this Wisdom, that all all the desire and motions of the Deity are most wisely
Ordered, conducted and governed, for it proceeds from and is seated in the same
Eye with his desiring mind, and willing will, these three are in one another
and penetrate through one another, and make up but one inseparable, indivisible
power. I say they all three exist i^ the Eye as one power, yet distinguishable,
and without the least disorder or confusion; the first is the wisdom, then the
mind, and next the will; for as the wisdom proceeds from the Eye, so the mind
proceeds from the wisdom, and the will from the mind. And thus much for the
birth and Nativity of Wisdom.

2. I come now in the next place to speak of the second head, viz. what the
Nature of the Wisdom is: I say then, that the Divine Wisdom is a flowing,
moving power, a moving motion immediately proceeding from God's Eternal Eye.
God's Wisdom is a bright ray, or glance issuing from the Eye of Eternity:
therefore she is termed the brightness or Clarity of the Godhead, and a pure
breath or efflux from the Majesty of the Almighty. We can say nothing of her
but that She is the brightness and glance of the Eye of Eternity; who as she
proceeds from the Eye, so she is moved by, and only by the same; for she is a
mere passive bright shining virtue, that swiftly passes through and pierces
all things, by reason of her high purity and subtilty, which can be compared to
nothing better, than to a lustrous shining glance, being perfectly passive and
moving only according to the motion of the Eye of the Father, which makes her
more swift and piercing than any thing whatsoever.

But for a further illustration of the Nature of God's Wisdom, I shall a little
enlarge my self upon these following Particulars, which are so many Essential
properties of the said Wisdom.

I. In the first place this Wisdom is Co-essential with the Holy Trinity:
Because as has been said it proceeds from the Trinity, as an outgoing ray,
glance or brightness; now nothing does immediately proceed from God, but what
is of the same nature and Essence with him, and consequently what can this
bright shining glance from the Eye of the Majesty be else, but pure Deity, as
proceeding from, and fixed in the Eye of Eternity. II. The second Essential
property of this Divine Wisdom, is this, that she is Coeternal with the
ever-blessed Trinity. God was never without his wisdom, nor the Eye of Eternity
without this glance and bright ray which proceeds from it; for else God could
not have been an All-wise and All-knowing God. Therefore according to order of
time the Divine wisdom, is Coeternal with the Holy Trinity, though in order of
Nature and dignity, the Holy Trinity are before Wisdom, which is nothing else
but a passive effiux from the ever-blessed Trinity. Wherefore you are not to
imagine that the wisdom of God, as she is Co-essential and Coeternal, is also
Coequal with the holy Trinity, because as was said before, she is perfectly
passive, and moves not her self, but as the Eye is moved, whereas the Blessed
Trinity is all Act, all acting power; she is indeed said to be a Co-operator
with the Trinity, but yet so as that she moves not, except she be moved, nor
acts except she be acted: thus far indeed she may be said in some sense to be
Coequal with the Trinity, forasmuch as she fills with her glance and
brightness the whole still Eternity; but this cannot amount to a proper
co-equality, because she is wholly passive, and depending of the Trinity.
Besides she is clearly distinguishable from the Eye, and the Spirit of the Eye,
as being only a brightness, Glance or ray proceeding from it, and is
consequently inferior, and subordinate to the Blessed Trinity. III. The third
and last Essential property of the Divine Wisdom, is her Virgin Purity, which
consists in this, that she is free from all desire, will and motion of he^ own.
She desire's and wills nothing, but as the Eternal mind, and will, desires and
wills in her; she moves not, but as she is moved, and acts not, but as she is
acted by the Spirit of Eternity; for she is nothing but a bright passive glance
from the Eye of Eternity. She is an Eternal stillness in her self. She is not
the Majesty it self, nor the Eye, but she is only the beauty, glory,
brightness, luster and glance of the Majesty in the Eye, and that such a
transparent clarity and brightness as is without all spot or blemish. And in a
word, She is nothing but perfect, absolute purity, she is a thousand times
brighter, and purer than the Sun, and fairer than the Moon, and indeed nothing
can be compared to the Excellence of that her Virgin-purity.
But her pure virginity does not only consist in this, that she is free from
all manner of spot, blemish or mixture, but especially in this, that her bright
glance is from all Eternity fixed upon the flaming heart of God's love, which
is the Center of the Holy Trinity. This flaming ^eart of Love is the sole
Object to which her regard is fastened continually: she receives nothing into
her self but this divine Love, from the heart of God. She espouseth her self to
nothing, inclines her self to nothing, but only to this essential Love, the
Word of God, fixed in the Heart of the Deity. Thus the Holy Trinity have their
delight with wisdom, and again the whole joy and delight of wisdom is the
flaming Love of the blessed Trinity. She is exalted above all things, because
of her beauty and immaculate purity; she is the highest purity; she is purity
and virginity in the abstract. She cannot be touched by sin, evil or self,
because she cannot mix with, nor incline to any thing, but only the essential
Love of God. She is free from all essences whatsoever, being nothing else but
the unspotted mirror of the glory and excellency of God: and thus we have
declared to you what that pure Virginity is, which is one of the essential
properties of God's wisdom.

3. I now proceed to the third and last head, viz. What the office of Wisdom is
in the still Eternity. I find that Wisdom discharges these two offices, viz.

1. She is a revealer of the Mysteries, and hidden wonders of the Deity. 2. She
is an enlightner of the still Eternity.
First, As for the first of these, Scripture and Revelation assure us, That
Wisdom is the revealer and manifester of the unsearchable secrets of God: she
is the golden Key of the Eternal Eye, by which all the wonders of the Trinity
are unlocked. As the office of the Holy Ghost is to effect and create all
things, so the office of Wisdom is to manifest and reveal all things. She never
brings forth any thing, and upon that account also, is called a pure Virgin,
but only discovers and manifests whatsoever the Holy Trinity, by their
effecting-creating-power, are pleased to bring forth. This Wisdom is the
companion of the Eye of Eternity, by her out going glance, revealing the
wonders contained in it: She is as an Handmaid waiting upon the Holy Trinity,
to declare, publish and make known their counsels, secrets and wonders.

Secondly, The other office of Wisdom is to give Light to the deep Abyss of the
still Eternity. It is Wisdom's bright glance which is the day and light of this
most holy mansion, not a created Light, but a pure divine Light, in that sense
as God is called a Light in whom is no darkness at all, and no otherwise.

But you will object, That the Holy Scriptures and Divine Philosophers seem to
give a different account concerning Wisdom than I have here given?

To which I answer, That I easily grant that the Scriptures of Truth, and holy
enlightened Men, have spoken concerning Wisdom after another manner, than here I
have done; and the reason of it is plain, for they speak of Wisdom after the
production of Eternal Nature, as Wisdom is introduced into the seven forms of
Eternal Nature: whereas I speak of Wisdom's existence with the Holy Trinity, in
the still Eternity, before ever Eternal Nature was brought forth.

The fourth Wonder (which my Spirit was made to take notice of) in the still
Eternity was the Seven Spirits of God which stand before the Throne of the Holy
Trinity. Saint John does often make mention of these in the Revelation, but he
speaks of them there, as they were seen by him on mount Zion, in the New
Jerusalem, after their being introduced into the working properties of pure
Nature; whereas I treat of them here, a^ they were seen in the still Eternity,
before the existence of pure Nature, out of which the New Jerusalem is created,
and brought forth by the Holy Trinity. And accordingly we are to distinguish
between these seven Spirits here mentioned, and those seven generating
fountain-Spirits, out of which pure Nature and her ^lements were generated,
according to the highly en^ightned Behme, for those are the working powers of
Eter^al Nature; whereas these are in the still Eternity, which ^as before
Eternal Nature, co-existing with the Holy Tri^ity, and Divine Wisdom in the
still Eternity.

What I have further to declare concerning these se^en Spirits, I shall refer
to these following particu^ars.

First, I shall speak of their Number; in the second place, of their Birth and
Originality; thirdly, of their Nature; fourthly, of their Office; and fifthly
and lastly, of their place in the still Eternity.

1. For the first, viz. their Number, which is Seven; for so they were named to
me, the Seven Spirits of God. They do indeed subsist one in another, and
through another, and appear but as one power, yet they are seven in number;
even seven distinguishable powers flowing from, and rooted in the Unity of the
Trinity. They were not distinguished to me by their several Names, but only by
their Number: though, I know, that as they are in Eternal Nature, they enjoy
their several distinct Names; but it is not time now to speak of them, because
here we consider them as existing in the still Eternity, out of, and before
Eternal Nature.

2. As to their Birth and Originality, they spring and proceed from the
Temple-body of the Holy Ghost, as well as they have their subsistence in the
same: for as Wisdom is a beam or glance proceeding from the Father's Eye, and
subsisting in the same; so these seven Spirits, or seven lustrous Powers
proceed from the Divine Body of the Spirit, as from their source and original,
and subsist in the same, as in their true ground.

3. The third particular I am to speak to, is the Nature of these seven
Spirits, which I shall endeavor to declare to you in these following
Propositions.

1. The first is this, The seven Spirits of God are (...) many various outgoing
Powers, immediately proceed^ing from the Body of the Holy Ghost; they are the
true fruits of the Spirit, they are as so many derive^ streams, from the head
and fountain-stream, the Hol^ Ghost. They are a variation of that one
all-effecting power of the Holy Spirit. For as the supreme Unity varieth it
self into a Trinity, so the all-effecting power of the Trinity varieth it self
into a Septenary, or seven Spirits. 2. In the second place, these seven Spirits
are co-essential Powers with the Holy Ghost, and consequently with the whole
Trinity; for they immediately p^oceed from the Essence of the Holy Ghost, they
are essences out of his essence, and therefore must needs be co-essential with
him. 3. Thirdly, the seven Spirits of God are co-etern^l with the Holy Spirit,
for they exist together with the Holy Trinity, which was never without these
Spirits proceeding from them, and consequ^ntly these seven Spirits must needs
be coeternal with the Blessed Trinity. But here we must not think that their
being co-essential and coeternal with the Holy Trinity, does make th^^
coequal with them: no, the Spirit of Eternity does not bring forth Spirits
equal to himself; but such as are subordinate and dependant, otherwise he would
make other Gods besides himself, which cannot be supposed. Besides, their
subordination and inferiority in this appears, that they are not shut up in the
Unity of the Trinity, but appear distincl^ from the Holy and ever blessed
Trinity, as shall be more particularly declared hereafter. 4. The fourth and
last particular is, What are the offices and functions of these seven Spirits?
Which I find to be these following. 1. In the first place, their office and
function is to wait upon the Majesty of the Trinity, in the still Eternity, in
the Holiest of all. They are waiters and attenders on the Majesty of the
Father, Son and Holy Spirit, in the Presence Chamber of the still Eternity;
where these glorious waiters make a great part of the pomp, s^ateliness and
magnificence of the most Holy Place, and Presence Chamber of the Holy and ever
blessed Trinity. 2. Another office and function of these seven Spirits, is to
execute and perform the will of the Holy-Trinity: whatsoever the blessed
Trinity will have done, these can, and do effect in a moment: there is nothing
too hard, or difficult for them: so that these are the high Princes and
officers of the supreme Majesty, always attending in the most Holy Place, the
Presence Chamber of the Deity, to effect and execute the will and pleasure of
the blessed Trinity. These are those miraculous powers continually assisting
before the supreme Majesty, who have manifested and effected their mighty works
of ^^nder in all ages, for which end also the Deity has introduced them into
the working forms of Eternal Nature. 3. In the third place, the office of these
seven Spirits, is to be the high Princely Councelors of the Divine Majesty: all
the secrets of the Holy Trinity are revealed to them, all their purpose and
will is made known to them, for the Holy Trinity does nothing without them: for
they perform and execute all the will and purpose of the Deity. 4. In the
fourth and last place, their function is this, they are the high Favorites,
Friends and Companions of the supreme Majesty; for they are not only always in
his presence in the most Holy Place, but they are admitted to his most secret,
bosom-councels, they are exalted to a degree next to the Holy Trinity, which
argues the high favor the supreme Majesty has for them.
5. Having thus declared to you the office and functions of these seven
Spirits, I come now to speak of the fifth and last Particular which I was to
open concerning them, viz. the place they have in the still Eternity:
concerning which we are to know, that they are placed next to the supreme
Majesty of the Holy Trinity, and therefore are said always to stand before the
glorious Majesty of God in the most Holy Place, not in the outward or inward
Court, but in the Holiest of all, which is the presence Chamber of the Deity,
where the highest Pomp, Glory and Magnificence of God is displayed. Here they
behold the supreme Majesty, Face to Face, and Eye to Eye; that is, most clearly
without any veil or similitude whatsoever.
I shall now briefly show you what these Spirits are not: they are no personal
Spirits, as the Angels are, who appear in organical bodies: they are pure
simplified Spirits, without composition, they resemble the supreme Unity and
Simplicity of the Deity, from which they do immediately proceed. Neither can it
be otherwise, for that in the still Eternity nothing but what is pure Spirit
and Power is to be found. It is true St. John in the Revelation represents them
as burning Lamps, but he speaks of them there, not as they exist in the still
Eternity; but as they appear in the properties of pure Nature, where they are
^inctured with the fire and light in Harmony.

I now come to speak of the fifth and last Wonder, which was seen in this Rock
of Wonder, the still Eternity, viz. the Inhabitants of this most Holy Place.
You must not think that the Deity is solitary or unattended, except only by
those seven Spirits before mentioned, for there are an innumerable number of
pure simplified Spirits, that stand ready in all humble resigned obedience, to
execute the will, and perform the good pleasure of the Father of Spirits. As to
their number they are ten ^^ousand times ten thousand, and thousands of
thousands, and indeed are innumerable as to us. And as I told you, ^hey are all
pure simplified Spirits, not like the Angels, ^ho were created out of the forms
of Eternal Nature, ^^t they are pure abstracted Spirits, proceeding from the
^^preme Unity, who is the Father of Spirits.

I intend here for a further illustration of the present ^^bject to speak
something concerning the nature of ^pirits: and before I proceed any further,
shall di^^inguish between pure, simple Spirits, and mixed Spi^its. Pure and
simple Spirits are such as exist without ^ternal Nature in the still Eternity:
mixed Spirits are ^uch as are created out of Eternal Nature, and exist in the
^^me, as all Angelical Spirits do, and are therefore said to be mixed, because
they do not immediately proceed from ^he supreme Unity, as simple Spirits do:
but are created (...) of Nature's forms. Wherefore they that suppose the Angels
to be Spirits of the first degree of perfection are ^istaken: they are indeed
the most perfect that were created out of the principle of Eternal Nature; but
they do not reach the perfection of those simple Spirits, who proceed from the
Unity, and cohabit with the Unity in the ^ill Eternity. If you ask of me a
description of these ^imple Spirits? I say, That they are most simple essences
and powers, free from all manner of mixture, or duality, without any Angelical
or other figure, and are Eternal Unities, proceeding from the supreme Unity it
self.

I shall here subjoyn a Figure, wherein by way of likeness you may conceive in
what manner these simplified Spirits, the Inhabitants of the still Eternity,
were represented to the Eye of my Spirit.



THIS Figure represents the still Eternity, or most Holy Place; the black spot
in the midst or center of this Circle, figureth the Central Eye of Eternity;
and the black points, with which the whole circumference is filled, denote
those pure simplified Spirits, which are the Inhabitants of the still Eternity,
or the most Holy Place: From which representation of them, we may learn, First,
That they are Numberless. Secondly, That they compass ^he Deity, and fill the
whole Round of the still Eternity, ready to execute the commands of the High
Majesty. In the third place, The Figure shows us, that they ar^ distinct one
from another, like the Stars in the Firmament. Fourthly, They are all alike
unto and coequal with ^^e another, they are all of the same Essence, and all
(...) them equally Eternal, all of them equal in Fun^^ion, Charge and Dignity,
all being obedient Chil^^en and Servants of the Deity: they are all alike in
^^eir external form and figure, appearing all like bright ^^ints, Sparks, or
Eyes. In the fifth and last place, The Figure shows us, that ^^ey all resemble
and are like the central Eye of the Dei^^, from which they do not differ but as
a less from a ^^^ater: for as the Spirit of Eternity represents him^^lf by the
sight or black of an Eye; so these simplified ^^irits, the Inhabitants of the
still Eternity, appear ^^ke so many bright Points, Sparks or Eyes, all
multi^^ied and derived from the Eye of Eternity: So that these ^pirits are true
resemblances of the Spirit of Eternity, ^eing of the same nature, only with the
abovesaid dif^rence of greater and lesser, and of original and copy, (...) they
are Lights from Light, and nothing else but the (...) of Eternity multiplying
it self through the unmeasu^^ble extent of the still Eternity.


Having thus opened the figure, I proceed now to ^ive you a definition of
simplified, pure Spirits, and it (...) this,

Simplified Spirits are Spirits generated ^y That is by the whole Trinity, not
as the Son is generated by the Father.
God, immediately out of himself, (...) the likeness and similitude of himself,
and for himself.

This definition is made up of a genus and diffe^ence, the genus or general
comprehensive notion, is Spirits which is common to these simplified Spirits
with all others; the difference, or that whereby these ^ure Spirits are
distinguished from all others, is laid ^own in the causes, viz. the efficient,
material, formal and final causes of simplified Spirits.

We shall begin with the first of these, viz. the ^^^ficient Cause, which is
expressed in these words (...) the Definition, generated by God which intimates
t^ us, that God is the efficient Cause, and sole generat^^ of those pure
Spirits, which are the Inhabitants of the still Eternity. I have told you
before, that these S^^^rits are simple, pure Powers, and no wonder, since her^
you see that they are the offspring of the Deity, who (...) all pure Power:
they partake of his Nature, and E^^sence, as Children partake of the Nature and
Essence (...) their Parents, and therefore it is that God is called the F^^ther
of Spirits, in reference to these pure simplified Spi^^^^ who resemble him in
the Unity, Simplicity and Purity (...) his Divine Nature. But you will say, How
and af^^^ what manner were these pure Spirits generated by God^ This I confess
is a great Mystery, yet for the satisfaction of the inquiring mind, we shall
speak somethin^ of it. We are to know that these simplified Spirits^ did from
all Eternity exist ideally in the Eye of Eternity, and the said I^eas were
actually and essentiall^ manifested by production, before all Worlds: The m^ner
of their generation we may thus conceive of, their Id^^^ being conceived in t^^
Divine mind, raised a desire for their manifestation, and this desire awakned
the omnipotent will of God to their actual production: for in the will of God
stands the Omnipotence, which effects all things: This all-effecting power,
is the power of the Holy Ghost; who is the producer, and actual manifester of
whatsoever lie's hid in the Eye of the Father Ideally; Neither could the Spirit
of Pow^^ ever have brought forth these pure Spirits, had not their Ideas
pre-existed in the Eye of the Father, as their first ground and original
pattern, according to which they were brought forth actually by the Holy Ghost.

I next proceed to speak of the material Cause of these simple Spirits, the
Inhabitants of the still Eternity^ which is expressed in these words of the
definition, immediately generated out of himself.

Though these pure Spirits be immaterial, that is, free from all gross
materiality and corporeity, yet are they not without a material cause, from
whence they derive their substance and Essence; so that materiality in this
since is taken for essentiality. Now this material cause is expressed to be God
himself, for there was nothing in the still Eternity but the blessed Trinity
and the seven Spirits immediately proceeding from them; therefore they must
needs be generated out of God himself, for there was no other subject matter,
no Eternal Nature, out of which they might b^ taken. The Word immediately is
added in the Definition to distinguish these pure simplified Spirits from the
Angels who were brought forth out of Eternal Nature, as their material cause,
and not immediately out of the Divine Essence, as these are. Now this Divine
Nature, out of which these Spirits are generated, is no other than the Heart of
God, which, as I told you, is the Central Heart of the Deity; and this Heart of
God is the Eternal flaming Heart of God's Love, it is Love it self, and the
fullness and perfection of Love, and accordingly St. John gives us this account
of God, that He is Love, and that he that dwells in Love, dwells in God, and
God in him. Though this Scripture has relation to man literally; yet we may
here apply it for illustration that God is Love, which Love is the Generator of
these simplified Spirits. And it is out of this Love's Eternal Substantiality,
that the numberless number of the Inhabitants of the still Eternity were
actually manifested, for the Glory of the supreme Majesty.

Now because I have told you, that Love's Eternal Essentiality is that, out of
which all pure simplified Spirits were brought forth; I think it not amiss to
open to you the nature and properties of this Divine Love; to the end you may
have a clearer understanding concerning the Nature, and quali^ic^tions of thos^
pure Spirits, which did proceed from it: for by opening unto you the Nature of
this Divine Love, which is the Cause, I must needs at the same time lead you to
the knowledge of these Spirits, which are the effect or product of it.

1. In the first place, then I find the Nature of Divine Love to be a perfect
Unity and Simplicity. There is nothing more one, undivided, simple, pure,
unmixed and uncompounded than Love. You will say how do I prove this? Very
well: for this Love is God himself, now it is well known that there is nothing
more essential to God, than Unity and Simplicity, nothing more contrary to the
Divine Nature than duality, division or composition. Besides it is this Love,
which gives Unity and Harmony to all things. There is no Unity in Heaven nor on
Earth, but what derive^ from Love, and must acknowledge him the Author^ and do
you think Love can want that Unity, which it gives to all others? No certainly,
rather conclude, that that which makes all things one, which harmonizeth and
agrees the most different and discordant Natures, must needs be Unity it self.

2. In the second place, I find Love to be a most perfect and absolute Liberty.
Nothing can move Love, but Love; nothing touch Love, but Love; nor nothing
constrain Love, but Love. It is free from all things, it self only gives Laws
to it self, and those Laws, are the Laws of liberty; for nothing acts more
freely than Love, because it always acts from it self, and is moved by it self;
by which prerogatives Love shows himself allied to the Divine Nature, yea to be
God himself.

3. Thirdly. Love is all strength and power. Make a diligent search through
Heaven and Earth, and you will find nothing so powerful as Love. What is stronge^
than Hell and Death? Yet Love is the triumphan^ Conqueror of both. What more
formidable than the (...) of God? Yet Love overcomes it, and dissolves and
changes it into it self. In a word, nothing can ^ithstand the prevailing
strength or Love: it is the ^ery munition of Rocks, and the strength of Mount
^io^, which can never be moved.

4. In the fourth place, Love is of a transmuting and ^ransforming Nature. The
great effect of Love is to ^urn all things into its own Nature, which is all
good^ess, sweetness and perfection. This is that Divine Power which turns Water
into Wine, Sorrow and ^ellish Anguish into exulting and triumphing Joy; Curse
into Blessings; where it meets with a barren ^eathy Desert, it transmutes it
into a Paradise of de^^ghts; yea it changes evil to good, and all imper^^ction
into perfection. It restores that which is fallen, ^^d degenerated, to its
primary beauty, excellence, ^^d perfection. It is the Divine Stone, the White
^^one with a Name written on it, which none knows, (...) he that has it. In a
word, it is the Divine Na^^re, it is God himself, whose essential property it
is ^o assimilate all things with himself; or (if you will ^^ve it in the
Scripture phrase) to reconcile all things (...) himself, whether they be in
Heaven or in Earth; and ^ll by means of this Divine Elixir, whose transform^ng
power and efficacy nothing can withstand.

5. In the fifth and last place, Love is of a fruitful, ^rolifick, multiplying,
diffusive and communicating Nature. It is Love makes all other things to be
fruit^ul and multiply, and to be diffusive and communica^ive of themselves;
therefore Love which gives to others this property, must needs possess it by
way of ^minency it self. Upon this account it is, that Love ^aith, Shall I
cause others to bring forth, and shall I not ^^ing forth my self? I shall speak
no more of this pro^erty of Love now, because I shall have occasion to ^^ntion
it again in the next paragraph.

It was out of this fruitful womb of Eternal Love, th^^ the acting power of the
Holy Ghost, in Union with Wis^dom, brought forth these simplified Spirits, as
out of their first matter; and consequently all these Spirits mus^ needs be
co-essential, as being all brought forth out o^ the Essence of Love, which is
the common matter to th^^ all; neither are they only co-essential with one
another^ but also in some sort co-essential with the Deity, being immediately
produced out of the Divine Love-essence^ yet with this difference, that the
Divine Love-essence is t^^ Cause, and the Spirit are Effects, and so are
subordinat^ and inferior to him who is the Father of Spirits. Thi^ Love-essence
(as you have heard before) is the Cente^ and Heart of the Holy Trinity, and is
consequently the first of all Essences; as being before Eternal Nature^ and all
things else, and will be the last and reign an^ triumph over all to Eternity.

But here it may be objected, That it does not s^^^ consistent with the Unity
and Simplicity of ^ternal L^^^-essence, to be the producer of so many distinct
Spirits, because Unity and Multiplicity are opposite to one ^^ther?

To which I answer, That if these Spirits be conceived to be taken out of the
Love-essence, as so man^ divided parts, or parcels torn or separated from the
whole; this cannot consist with the Unity of Love^ but it is not so, for it is
the fruitful womb of the Love-essence, which has brought forth all these
innumerable Spirits, without the least division or separation of its o^^
simplified Essence. But as we see here in this World^ that one seed (by reason
of the blessing of the Love-essence hid in it) brings fort^, and varies it self
i^ many, not by dividing it self into so many parts, bu^ by a Magical
Multiplication: even so must we conceiv^ that this Eternal Love-essence did
Magically Multiply i^ self into this innumerable number of Spirits, without
making the least rent or division in its own mo^^ united and simple Essence.
These Spirits are first in the Eye of the Father, as so many Ideas, which Ideas
afterward are fruitful seeds in the womb of Love, and are brought to actual
manifestation by the all-effecting power of the Holy Ghost, with the assistance
of wisdom. So that hence we see that these Spirits, which were only Ideas in
the Eye of the Father, receive their essentiality and become fruitful seeds in
the Love-essence, which is the womb that cherishes them. Wherefore it does not
appear impossible or unintelligible, that the Unity of Love'^ Essence, should
multiply and vary it self into an innumerable offspring; because we see both
the Light and Fire of this outward Creation to multiply themselves without any
division or loss of parts: How many sparks do proceed from one fire? And how
many candles may be lighted by one? But how much more than, must we suppose,
that the Heart of God, the Eternal Love-essence, is able to multiply it self;
since all the multiplying virtue, which is found in things here below, are only
the effects of the all-fruitfulness of Love, which is communicated unto, and
diffused through all Creatures, causing them to multiply, and bring forth
according to their several kinds. So that it appears, That this Love-essence is
the Mother of all Essences, but more immediately and peculiarly of these
simplified Spirits, which are the Inhabitants of the still Eternity, as being
her own immediate offspring, without the intervention of Eternal Nature:
wherefore they also partake of the Nature and Essence of Love, being all meek
and pleasant Essences, beautified with all the graces, powers and perfections
of Love, and exempt from all contrariety whatsoever.

I come now to speak of the formal Cause of the Inhabitants of the still
Eternity, which in the definition is laid down in these words, in the Image and
likeness of himself: intimating to us that which makes these simplified Spirits
to be what they are is the Image and likeness of the Holy Trinity; which is
their internal essential Form.

I now ^roceed to a more particular explication of the forma^ (...) of these
pure Spirits; and to this end shall give you an account of what was declared,
to the Spirit of my mind, concerning them in the still Eternity.

First, I was expressly charged to observe diligently wha^ difference I could
find between the Holy Trinity and t^ese Spirits; and upon observation, I could
find no other difference, but that of greater and lesser; whereupon it was
further expressly told me; that these Spirits, were Spirits generated out of,
and to the Image and likeness of the Spirit of Eternity. And again, That they
were lesser Wonders, proceeding from the great Wonder, as we may say, lesser
Deities generated by the Universal Deity of Love: and what can more
significantly express the formality of these Spirits, than these words which
were revealed to my Spirit in the most H^ly Place? Insomuch as it seems
superfluous to add any thing further: but yet if any should desire further to
be instructed, what this Image of God is, which is the Essential form of pure
Spirits, I say, This Image co^tains the whole Nature, Essence, and all the
perfections of the Deity; yet with the distinction of greater and lesser,
original and derivative, independent and dependent: For example, Do you find
God to be a perfect Unity? So are these Spirits an Unity in themselve. Is God
Love? So are these: Is God Wise, Good, Powerful? So are these. And the same may
be said of all the excellencies and perfections of the Divine Nature, in the
perfect Image and likeness of which they were brought forth, by the acting
power of the Holy Ghost.

I come now in the last place to speak of the final Cause, expressed in these
words, For himself, that is to say, these simplified Spirits were brought forth
for the Manifestation of the Deity: for had the Divine Nature always continued
shut up in it self, in the still Eternity, without bringing forth it self,
without it self, it would never have been known to any, but it self wherefore
for the manifestation of the Triune Dei^y were these simplified Spirits brought
forth to be the Inhabitants of the still Eternity.

1. But more especially these simplified Spirits were brought forth for the
manifestation of the attributes, vir^^es and excellencies of the Divine
Essence, in the still E^ernity, viz. His Eternity, Infinity, All Sufficiency,
Immensity, as also his Unity, Simplicity, Liberty, Goodness, Perfection and
Happiness. For though all these were well known to themselves, yet they were
not manifested to others, till these simplified Spirits were brought forth.

2. Again they were brought forth for the manifestation ^f the Divine
Sovereignty, Majesty and Dominion, in the still Eternity: which could not be
known or manifested till there were Spirits which might be the Subjects of this
Dominion and Sovereignty.

3. In the next place, one of the ends of the producti^^ of these Spirits was,
that the mystery of the Divine Being, and subsistence might be known to others
besides it self, i^ the still Eternity. Therefore were these Spirits produced
which are all Eye, and every way capacitated eternally to dwell upon the
blisful contemplation of the Triune Deity.

4. Another end why these Spirits were brought forth, was to manifest the
generating and multiplying fruitfulness of the Deity, in his abstracted Nature
in the still Eternity, ^i^hout Eternal Nature's principle. There being nothing
more essential to the Divine Nature than to multiply, diffuse and communicate
it self, which essential property had (...) been known in the still Eternity,
without this production of simplified Spirits.

5. Again, a main end, why these pure Spirits were brought forth, was for the
manifestation of God's Glory, which consists in the triumphing exulting Nature
of Love, O in the still Eternity. Now that this pleasant and all glorious
Love-essence might be revealed, in the still Eternity to others besides the
Trinity; therefore were these pure Spirits brought forth, that they tasting,
seeing and enjoying this glorious, pleasant and blisful Love-essence, might
celebrate the praise and glory of the Triune Deity to all Eternity.

6. Lastly, These pure Spirits were brought forth for the manifestation of the
hidden will and good pleasure of the Trinity. The Divine Will from Eternity was
to bring forth Spirits in the still Eternity, to be the Inhabitants of it;
which might know him and enjoy him, and in so doing, be Eternally happy: Which
Will of God could not be manifest till such Spirits were actually produced, who
were capable of knowing and enjoying him; and such were these simplified, pure
Spirits; and therefore were they brought forth by the Holy and ever blessed
Trinity.

The Divine Wisdom very well knew, that nothing less than Spirits of the
highest degree of purity, and simplicity could be capable of receiving the
manifestations of the Trinity in the still Eternity, that is, in their pure,
simple, abstracted and solitary being. Therefore were these Spirits brought
forth in the perfect Image of the Deity, as he subsists, all pure Spirit, and
Unity, without and before Eternal Nature; that they might be vessels capable of
receiving the Divine fullness; for which they were brought forth.

Having now finished the manifestation of the Nature of these simplified
Spirits from their Causes, I shall next come to give you a brief account of
some of their ^ssential qualifications, properties, and adjuncts; the
explication of which may afford a fuller and clearer understanding of their
Nature.

1. In the first place then, I say, That these Inhabitants of the still
Eternity are most highly simplified Spirits; which simplicity of theirs
consists in this, that they did immediately proceed from the most simple and
abstracted Essence of the Deity; and were not brought forth out of Eternal
Nature's Principle as all other Creatures were, which therefore want much of
the simplicity and unity of these pure Spirits. And again, these Spirits are
justly said to be simplified Spirits, in that they have no Souls, or any
personal organical corporeity; but are mere, pure Spirits, that is, nothing but
Spirit, all Spirit. Yet I do not deny but these Spirits h^ve a Body which is
common to them all; which Body is the Temple Body of the Holy Ghost: which
fills that whole circumference of that most Holy Place, in which Body they do
all dwell; yet reserving their numerical distinction.

2. These Inhabitants are Intellectual Spirits, that is, they were endued with
understanding and will; for otherwise they could not have resembled the Father
of Spirits, neither could they have been capable of knowing, loving and obeying
him, and consequently would have been unmeet for the company of the Holy
Trinity, in the still Eternity.

3. These Spirits are endued with the Spiritual senses, of seeing, hearing,
smelling, tasting and feeling, whereby they are enabled to discern the object
of the still Eternity. They behold the Trinity face to face, they hearken to
his still and awful voice, they are refreshed by perceiving the ravishing odors
which continually perfume the most Holy Place, they taste and feed upon the
outflowing sweetness of the Deity; and they feel nothing but the Eternal
goodness of him, who with his fullness fills the still Eternity.

4. In the fourth place, These Spirits are endued with a Spiritual kind of
materiality from the Love-Essence in the Heart of God. But because I have fully
spoken of this in the material Cause, I thither refer you.

5. In the fifth place, These Spirits are all of them Coeternal, I mean in
relation to themselves, not to the Holy Trinity who were before them, in order
of Nature; as the Cause is before the effect, and the Generator before that
which is generated; though we cannot deny but that in some sense these Spirits
may be said to be Coeternal with the Trinity, because we cannot say that the
blessed Trinity ever were without the company of these Spirits in the still
Eternity. But in thi^ place, when, I say, that these Spirits are Coeternal, my
meaning is, that they were all brought forth at once in the still Eternity,
without any priority or succession of time, which is not to be found in the
most Holy Place.

6. In the sixth place, These Spirits are all of them coequal with one
another, I say, with one another, not with the Holy Trinity: for though these
simplified Spirits may in some sense be said to be Co-essential and Coeternal
with the Blessed Trinity; yet can they (...) be said to be coequal with them.
They were indeed the offspring of the Divine Essence of multiplying and
propagating Love, proceeding from the Heart of the Trinity, and so may be said
to be co-essential with the Deity, as immediately proceeding from the Divine
Essence of Love; and they were brought forth in the still Eternity, where time
is not to be found, and so may be said to be Coeternal with the Blessed
Trinity; who were never without ^he company of these pure Spirits in the still
Eternity: yet notwithstanding all this, they were never admitted to a
co-equality with the Deity, because it is contrary to the Nature and right of
the Deity, to bring forth Sons which should be equal with them in the
Sovereignty, Kingdom and Dominion; for so the Holy Trinity must have brought
forth many absolute, independent Deities like themselves, which cannot be
admitted. It remains then that this co-equality, which we attribute to these
Spirits, is only to be understood with respect to themselves, viz. that they
are all alike, without having any pre-eminence the one before the other.

As first, In their birth and original: they all have ^^t one Father, the
Father of Spirits, and but one Mother, as proceeding all from the womb of
Eternal Love: They are all Children, and Brethren alike: They a^^ all equal in
Dignity and Glory. Here is no Electi^^ or Reprobation takes place amongst these
Spirits, as being all of them the Sons of God's Eternal Love. They are all of
them Coheirs alike of all their Father's Goods, even of all the Riches and
Glory of the still Eternity: they enjoy the Beatifical Vision, and Union to and
Communion with the blessed Trinity alike. All the wonders of Eternity are
their's in Community, and are all alike sharers in the Powers, Raptures and
Ioys of the most Holy Place. They are all members of the same Body, viz. the
Divine Love-essence. They are all Citizens of the same City. All Subjects and
obedient Servants of the same Soverain Majesty. They are all equal in the
Divine perfections, and heavenly gifts and graces: they are all of them most
Lovely, Holy, Pure and Righteous. They are equally meek, humble, obedient,
resigned, etc. so that they may very well be said to be coequal with one
another.

7. In the seventh place, These Spirits are all fixed Spirits, that is, they
are unchangeable and unalterable, and by the power of the Holy Ghost filling
them throughout, become fixed and unmovable pillars in the most Holy Place.
The reason of this their unchangeable fixation is, that the Holy Ghost is the
Life of their Life, the Spirit of their Spirits, and the moving Power in all
their motions. They desire not, think not, will not, speak not, move not; but
the Holy Spirit desire's, think's, will's, speaks and moves in and through
them. Not that they want these faculties and powers, but because the Holy Ghost
alone is the acting and moving power in and through all their faculties;
themselves being purely and merely pas^ive. And therefore it is impossible that
any of these Spirits should fall, because they stand all fixed in and by the
unchangeable power of the Holy Spirit, owning no will, but that of the Blessed
Trinity; so that there is no way for sin or self to enter in and take
possession of these Inhabitants of the still Eternity, forasmuch as the Holy
Ghost, who performs all the good will of the Trinity, is become their acting
and moving power.

8. In the next place, These simplified Spirits as to their Number are
innumerable as to us, though not to the Holy Trinity, to whom their number is
exactly known, and who calls them all by their Names. This innumerable number
of Spirits, proceeded (as I told you before) from the overflowing stream of
Love's Eternal Essence; for when the Father and Spirit moved in the
Heart-essence of Love, then the Heart of the Son's Deity opened it self; and
then the Love-essence shut up in the Heart, did flow forth as a stream from the
Heart-center; out of which essentially the Holy Ghost, in Conjunction with
Wisdom, formed this numberless number of simplified Spirits. And this infinite
fullness of the Divine Love might have sufficed to the production of many more
of these Spirits, than were brought forth; therefore the out-flowings of this
ocean Sea, what shall I say, of Eternal Love, were bounded by God's Will and
Wisdom, who brings forth all things in Number, Weight and Measure; and so were
these Spirits also produced according to the will and good pleasure of the Holy
Tri^ity.

9. In the ninth place, We may consider the place or Vbi of these Spirits,
which is no other than the most Holy Place, the still Eternity; the Heaven of
Heavens, differing from the Angelical and all other Heavens, in that they were
brought forth out of Eternal Nature, but this was before, and stands without
Eternal Nature: and is the most Holy Place, and Presence Chamber of the Divine
Majesty in its own pure abstracted Essence. But to speak somewhat more
particular concerning the place of ^hese Spirits; I say, that they are placed
round about the Eye of Eternity, not in the very Eye: which situation of
^^^ir's is a mark of their inferiority, subordination unto, and dependence upon
the Trinity.

10. In the tenth and last place, I shall speak something concerning their
outward form and figure, which as was told you before, is the very same with
the figure of the Eye of Eternity, only with this difference that the Eye of
Eternity is greater, and these also many lesser Eyes encompassing it round.
According as you see it represented in the figure which is in the Margin: where
the Great Spot in the midst deciphers the Eye of Eternity appearing like the
black or sight of an Eye; and the lesser spots round about it represent the
Inhabitants of the still Eternity, exactly resembling the Eye of Eternity, with
this only distinction, that they are less than it. And here we may also take
notice, that as these Spirits do exactly in their outward figure resemble the
Holy Trinity, as they exist in the shut up Eye of Eternity, so also they
exactly resemble one another without any the least difference, appearing all
not only in the same figure and form, but also of the same bigness; so that
there is no distinction between them, but only a numerical distinction, whereby
one of them is not the other. And one of the greatest Wonders of the still
Eternity is this, to behold this innumerable number of Spirits bearing the
exact and perfect resemblance with the Deity both outwardly and inwardly. At
which sight my Spirit was in a manner all absorbed quite swallowed with wonder
and amazement.

Having thus spoken concerning these qualifications and adjuncts of these pure
Spirits, I should now draw to a conclusion of this Subject, but because some, it
may be, will be curious to know what the manner of living and employment of
these Spirits in the still Eternity is.

As to the first, We must know that being living Spirits, their life requires
to be maintained with food: for no life, though the most spiritual can be
continued without a supply of meat and drink, according to its kind. It is not
to be thought that we speak here of any gross way of eating and drinking, but
of that which is purely and highly Spiritual; for the food of these Spirits is
nothing else but living powers, or rather powers of Life proceeding from the
Holy Trinity. Their Eternal Mother that brought them forth to be living
Spirits, does feed, nourish and maintain them with her Divine influences and
distilling powers; which Mother of theirs is the Eternal Heart of Love, which
is the Center of the blessed Trinity: from whence proceed these impregnating,
penetrating powers which do feed and maintain these Spirits, which powers are
the very Blood, Life and Spirit of Love, which is the food of those Inhabitants
of the still Eternity. And thus much shall suffice concerning the manner and
way of Living of these Spirits in the still Eternity: I shall now come to speak
a word or two concerning their Employment.

Their employment is to attend in the presence of the Holy and everblessed
Trinity, being ready to perform the will of the supreme Majesty. Their Minds
are continually taken up, and delighted with the Beatifical Vision of the
Deity; their Wills fully satisfied in the immediate enjoyment of the chiefest
Good; their Senses pleased with most suitable and ravishing objects; and they
continually bathing themselves in those Rivers of unknown delights^ which
proceed from the Heart of the Deity without intermission. Thus they spend that
Eternal day in never ceasing Praises and Hallelujahs to the ever blessed and
incomprehensible Trinity.

Quest. If any one do further enquire concerning these Spirits, what Speech or
Language they have, or how they communicate their thoughts to one another?

Answ. I answer, That their speaking to one another is (...) thought; what ever
they do but think, is answered ^^mediately; their thoughts are all known to one
another, (...) forthwith answered: which awful silence adds ^uch to the Glory
of this Presence Chamber of the su^^me Majesty.

But it is not only their Language which is Won^erful, they being full of
Wonders; for they all see (...) through one Eye, hear through one ear; they all
live (...) one Heart, and from one Center of Life; they move from one moving
Cause, they all breath from one ^reath, they all will from one Spirit, and they
all stand ^n one Body. For God the Holy Ghost who is a breath, ^ir, life and
power, proceeding from the Father's Eye, through the Son's Heart of Love, is
all in all (...) these Spirits, so that the will of the Trinity is fully
^erformed in them, and by them.

I have but little more to add, and that is concerning the Nature of ^his still
Eternity, and the ends why (...) was brought forth. To the first of these I
shall speak ^n these following particulars: 1. In the first place, then I say,
That the still Eternity is a Principle; now what a Principle is, I shall
afterward set down, to which therefore I refer you. 2. Secondly, The still
Eternity is the first Eternal Principle; because there is none before, above or
beyond it: But God alone who is the Cause of it. 3. In the third place, This
still Eternity is the Original Principle of all Principles; because all other
Principles proceed from it. 4. In the fourth place, This still Eternity is the
original Principle of Eternal Love; and therefore it is called the Kingdom of
Love, because here is the birth of Love, and here the blessed Trinity dwell in
the Eternal Unity of their Love-essence, which is the first and last of all
Beings and Essences whatsoever.

But you will object, That Mount Zion, the New Jerusalem, and the Angelical
World, are called by the sa^^ Names, viz. the Kingdom and World of Love.

To which I answer, by granting, That it is true Mount Zion, etc. are called by
the same Names, as i^ the still Eternity, but yet with this difference, that
the still Eternity is the Kingdom and Mansion of the Love, as it exists without
and before Eternal Nature's Principle: but Mount Zion, the New Jerusalem, and
Angelical World, are called the Kingdom of Love, manifested in and through
Eternal Nature: so as the (...) is the Kingdom of Love out of Eternal Nature,
and the others are the Kingdom of the said Love, brought forth i^ Eternal
Nature's Principle.

5. In the fifth and last place, The still Eternity is ^ simple undivided
Principle, without any distinction of parts, composition or mixture whatsoever.
It is all Light, and all Love, without any thing of Contrariety ^^ Disagreement
whatsoever.


I now come to speak briefly concerning the second head I just now propounded,
viz. the ends why this still Eternity was brought forth.

1. In the first place, The still Eternity was brought forth, that it might be
the Palace and Habitation of the ever blessed Trinity in their abstracted and
solitary Being. 2. Secondly, The still Eternity was brought forth t^ be the
Council Chamger of the Holy Trinit; when all their Eternal Decrees, Counsels,
Purposes, and Predestinatious are agreed upon, and from whence they proceed.
And because we here have made mention of the Decrees and Counsels of the
blessed Trinity, it will not be amiss if we speak something concerning the
Nature of these Decrees, etc. We are to know that all the Decrees and Counsels
of the Holy Trinity do wholly and solely depend on the Will of their Eternal
Love, wit^out the least regard to any thing without themselves; being nothing
else but the pure results of the will and purpose of their Love. But if we
consider the Holy Trinity as being invested with the Principle of Eternal
Nature, so their Decrees and Counsels, concerning Angels and Men, may be said
to have a conditional regard to Faith, Obedience, Perseverance, etc. which
distinction, if well understood, will put an end to all those disputes, which
have been concerning the Decrees and purposes of God, whither they be absolute
and independent, or conditional, and with regard to things without them; for
both opinions are true, if rightly and distinctly taken. In the still Eternity
all the Decrees and Purposes of God are unconditional and independent of any
thing, but their own wills; but in Eternal Nature their decrees do not
absolutely and solely depend on the sovereign will of the Trinity, but upon
conditions and qualifications found in things without them. As for example in
Angels and Men, concerning whom God's decrees are limited, and conditional
according to the several dispositions of those Creature.
And thus I have finished the second head, viz. What God is in his original
Being, in the Globe of Eternity, before Eternal Nature was in Being. And now
shall proceed to the Third Part of this Treatise, wherein the third Head is
handled, which is concerning Eternal Nature's Essence, with her working Forms,
subsisting in her own Eternal Principle.

Soli Deo gloria.
A TREATISE OF Eternal Nature WITH Her Seven Essential Forms, OR Original
Working Properties.

Ezekiel. 1. 16. Their appearance and their Work was as it were a Wheel in the
midst of a Wheel.

Ezekiel. 1. 21. For the Spirit of the living Creature was in the Wheels.

Rev. 5. 1. And I saw in the right Hand of him that sat on the Throne, a book
written within, and on the back side, sealed with Seven Seals.

James 3. 6. And sets on Fire the Wheel of Nature.

IPMD.

LONDON, Printed, Anno Dom. 1681.

The Author to the Reader.
Christian Reader,
I Here present you with a little Tract of Eternal Nature with her seven
Original Essential forms: ^^ere is multum in parvo, for this Orb of Eternal
Nature, is the origi^al Ground of all Worlds, both Visi^le and Invisible, of
Heaven and An^els, of Hell and Devils, of all Spi^^ts whether good or bad, and
indeed ^f all Created Essences. Hence origi^^lly spring Light and Darkness,
Good and Evil, Life and Death, Joy and Sorrow, Wrath and Love, Blessing and
Curse, Happiness and Misery, and ^nity and Contrariety. It is indeed a ^rand
Mystery, and not made known to ^ormer Ages; for in^ this, all Secrets and
Mysteries belonging to our salvation do ^riginally subsist, being the Ground,
or Womb, from whence all Worlds have their Birth. In coming to know the
Mysteries of this Eternal Nature, w^ shall come to know and comprehend the deep
Mysteries of God, for the triu^^ Deity has brought forth himself into E^ternal
Nature, as into a ground whereb^ he might be the better manifested to h^^
intellectual Creatures, who without the Eternal Nature, would not be able (...)
know or understand any thing of his Ma^jesty, Greatness, Omnipotency, Clarit^^
Love, Holiness, Righteousness, Purit^ and Glory. By it is also manifested the
true knowledge of Things, which with^out this we do but grope after as in the
Dark. In a word, it is the first origina^ and true ground of all created being^
and so of all true knowledge. By the right understanding of the Nature o^ this,
we s^all come to know and under^stand, the secret meaning of many my^stical
Scriptures. It is a Library, an^ Academy of it self, and can teach u^ the
original ground of all Arts and Sci^ences: It is worth our Labor and Stu^dy,
to read, peruse, and consider thi^ ^^ttle little Book, which will teach the ^ay
of true Wisdom and Knowledge. The ^umber seven is a number of perfection, which
is here to be found, with the num^er ten, the number one hundred, and ^^e
number one thousand, and so ad ^nfinitum, for beyond this we cannot go. ^ may
seem to write in the dark to many, and this perhaps will seem a new and ^^range
paradox to others, but it has ^een before revealed by the Holy Spirit, ^o that
enlightened Philosopher Jacob Behme, he first indeed manifested this ^ystery to
the World; which was, I say, ^ very great manifestation, though re^eived by
few, who could understand the Writings of that deep Philosopher, which had many
Vails and Coverings; but I have in this Tract, endeavored to show you Eternal
Nature, as she is in her original Creation, and to lay open to your view, all
her seven working forms or properties, being the original ground of all things,
without any coverings, and in as plain Words and Terms as I could invent, that
the meanest capaciy, w^^ is willing to Learn, and who is n^ through pride, envy,
and high-minde^^ness, prejudiced against the teaching of the Spirit, may be
taught and bene^^itted: for the time of the Lily is (...) hand, and the
Morning^star is alrea^^ risen, and the Sun of the Eternal Go^spel is about to
rise, its dawn or day^break already strikes our Eyes, with (...) glimmering of
that glorious Light whose splendour rejoices the Hearts of the faithful, who
wait for this glorious da^^ The Eternal Gospel shall then be preach^ed, and all
mysteries revealed. I say the day is at hand, even at the door^ In the mean
time, I desire thee Reader to accept of this small Tract of Eternal Nature, as
a preparative to the opening of other mysteries, and that thou will consider it
seriously^ and without prei^dice: Speak not against that thou do not
understand, and judge not others that you be not judged. I have many Years
studied this little little ^ook, not little for the value, but that (...)
contains but seven leaves, which are ^he seven properties of Nature, locked ^p
under seven Seals, all which I have ^^und opened in my Soul's Essence, and ^^d
I have not repented me of my study; ^or I have experimented the excellency
^hereof. Have a care of vain Philoso^hy, and the rudiments of Men, it is St.
Paul's advice, who was acquainted ^ith the Teachings of the Spirit; out^ard
notions and academical knowledge, have devoured the Spirit of God, and have
served only to make Men high-^inded and proud, and to despise their Brothers,
and to cry out all is fancy and delusion, that agrees not with their Tenants; I
am not against humane learning, I have known what it is; but I would not have
it set above the Spirit of God; nor the teachings of the Spirit to truckle
under it: For God has said, He will destroy the wisdom of the Wise, and he will
make himself known to babes, and such who in a childlike Innocence wait for the
teaching of the most high, and bring to nothing the understanding of the
prudent. The wisdom of this World is indeed but foll^ at the best. I confess my
self the lea^^ of all Saints, and not worthy of the knowledge of those deep
mysteries, which God has revealed to me, and which has been manifested to my
Eternal Spirit, but God has thought Good to use me as an Instrument in his
Hand; the effect of which I leave to God, desiring to be serviceable to thee,
in my generation, and remain

Yours in the Love of JESUS IPMD.

THE ABYSSAL NOTHING.
The Explication of this Figure.
THIS Circle represents the Principle of Eternal Nature, which is the Subject
of this discourse.

The Black spot in the midst of the Circle, represents God's Eternal Eye, and
type's out the Trinity in their Eternal Unity, who have placed themselves in
the midst of Eternal Nature's Principle, for the ordering and governing of it.
And also the Holy Trinity's introducing of themselves into Eternal Nature.

The wide space within the Circle type's forth the Chaos or the Abyssal
nothing; the ground of all Essences and yet no Essence to be seen in it.

Now because I have in the foregoing discourse often made mention of the word
Principle. without having any where declared what I meant by it, I think it
proper in this place to give you the signification of it, according to the
sense in which I take it.

And in the first place, I shall tell you negatively, in what sense it is not
in this place taken by me. By the word Principle, I do not understand the first
constitutive beginnings of things, whereof they consist, and from whence they
take their Being, in the same sense, in which the four Elements by some, and
Salt, Sulphur and Mercury, by others, are called the Principles of all things.

But by a Principle, I mean an Original Source, and Fountain-Essence, formed by
an Agent, into a Sphaerical Circumference, by which it is distinguished from
all others.

1. To explain this definition a little, I say, in the first place, that a
Principle is an Original and Fountain-Essence: for it is not every Essence does
make a Principle, but such an one only, as is the fruitful Mother of all the
Essences contained within its own Circumference and Kingdom, and affords them
being and sustenance from its own Bowels.

2. In the second place, it is said to be formed by an Agent, because a
Principle of it self is Passive, considered without the Active Spirit in the
Center, which is the Mover of it.

3. In the third place, you have the form and figure of a Principle, a
Sphaerical Circumference, which is the common form of all Principles.

4. In the last place, you have the end, why a Principle is formed into a
Sphaerical enclosure, viz. that thereby it might be distinguished from all
other Principles, Worlds and Centers: for all these are the same with me in
this place, and therefore many times one of these is put for the other.

Having thus given you the Definition of a Principle in general, I shall now
subjoyn the particular definition of Eternal Nature, in these words: Eternal
Nature is a Principle created by God out of the Abyssal Chaos, containing the
seven operative powers, for the production of all things. The Genus or general
Notion of this definition is the word Principle, which but just now we have
explained to you. The difference of this definition contains the four Causes of
Eternal Nature, viz. the efficient, material, formal and final. The efficient
Cause, which is God, is expressed in these words of the definition, created by
God. The material which is the Abyssal Chaos is expressed in these words, out
of the Abyssal Chaos. The formal Cause are the seven operative Powers, which
the definition tells you, that Eternal Nature does contain. The final Cause of
Eternal Nature is, that it might be the fruitful Mother of all things: which
the definition expresses in these words, for the production of all things.


What Eternal Nature is.
The Third Head, (Which makes the third Part of this Discourse) What Eternal
Nature is.
I. THE subject of this Part is concerning Eternal Nature's Essence, it is a
most noble Subject to look into. I acknowledge that none could lay a deeper
ground, as to this Subject, than divine Behme has done; yet I find withal that
he has brought it forth something obscurely, so that he is understood by few,
and misunderstood by most: This has moved me to search into the Nature of this
Subject for my own private satisfaction, according to the innate light of my
own intellect, and the inward discoveries of the Triune Deity to the Spirit of
my Soul.

In this Third Part I shall confine my discourse to these two general Heads;
The First, What Eternal Nature is in its first original purity? The Second,
What kind of Essence, or Principle pure Eternal Nature is?


I begin with the first of these.

II. Quest. What is Eternal Nature's Essence, in its first original, birth and
being, as it came out of Wisdom's hand?

Answ. Eternal Nature was a pure Essence, and then called pure Nature, being
free from sin and evil and all mixture of imperfection: she was then all fair,
clear, spotless, faultless and sinless. Now for the manifestation of this great
mystery of Eternal Nature, what it is, I will open it in the original Causes of
it, viz. the efficient, material, formal and final.

III. Concerning the efficient Cause of Eternal Nature. Who can be the Author
and Creator of Eternal Nature, but the Triune Deity? The Father, Son and Spirit
must be the Creator of Eternal Nature, not the Father without the Son and
Spirit, nor the Son without the Father and Spirit, nor the Spirit without the
Father and Son, but the Triune Deity in joint Cooperation. Therefore the
Triune Deity in the Globe of Eternity, subsisting in their own pure Deity, must
be before Eternal Nature by way of efficiency, as the Cause is before the
Effect, and are distinct as the Cause and Effect. God therefore is not Eternal
Nature, nor Eternal Nature God, because Eternal Nature is formed by God, as the
efficient. And thus we see that God can subsist without nature, but Eternal
Nature's Essence cannot subsist without the Triune Deity: God comprehends
Eternal Nature, but Eternal Nature cannot comprehend him, who as being the
efficient cause of Eternal Nature, is higher essenced in his own Eternal Unity
and Simplicity. Now that God is the Creator of Eternal Nature Scripture
teaches us, when it tells us, That by the Word all things were created, and
that without him nothing was made that was made. Now if the Triune Deity was
the Creator of Eternal Nature, he must needs in order of Nat^re be before it,
and distinct from it, and subsist in a far higher graduated Essence, than
Eternal Natu^^'s Essence is. For if any should ask me what is above, before and
beyond Eternal Nature's Essence? I can only reply the Triune Deity, in the
Globe of Eternity, who is the efficient Cause of Eternal Nature, and here we
must st^p, for we cannot go beyond the first Cause of all things.

IV. We proceed to sp^^k of the efficient Cause of Eternal Nature, which is
God, and will briefly declare how God does not only create Eternal Nature by
way of efficiency, but also that he creates it out of and from himself by way
of Essentiality. Thus the Divine Philosophy instructs us, Romans 8. 36. Of him,
and from him and to him are all things. That is, all things proceed essentially
from him; and if all, then Eternal Nature must proceed materially and
essentially out of God's Essence; 1 Cor. 8. 6. To us there is but one God, by
whom are all things, efficiently, and of whom are all things, essentially.
Neither can it be otherwise, for when God was to create Eternal Nature, there
was nothing besides Himself out of, or from which he might create it; wherefore
it follows that Eternal Nature must proceed essentially and substantially from
God. And indeed God could not be the first original Essence of all Essences, if
there were any Essence which was not created out of God's Essence. Wherefore we
must conclude that Eternal Nature's Essence did proceed from God's Essence by
way of essentiality, as well as by that of efficiency.

V. But the Great mystery lye's here, to know how Eternal Nature does proceed
from God's Essence, and what God's Essence is, from whence Eternal Nature does
proceed: Now to this, I say, that Eternal Nature proceeds from God's Abyssal
Essence, generated out of himself; for as was said before, there was no other
Essence to generate it from. You will say, what is this Abyssal Essence, which
is the original ground of all Essences? I answer, It is an immens^, deep, empty
space, a bottomless and boundless Abyss. Yet I do not say it is without
beginning: for God generated this Abyssal Essence out of his own Eternal
Essence, as was manifested to my fight by God's Spirit, else I could not write
of it as I do, had I not seen the pattern in the Mount of Eternity^ When, I
say, God was the original of this Abyssal Essence, I mean the Triune Deity, in
their Eternal Unity, for they are the joint co-operators in every created
Essence; they work inseparably, one does not work without the other. But the
Mystery is yet in the manner how God does generate this Abyssal Essence out of
himself; to clear this, you must know, that in God there is an Eternal Will,
and this Eternal desiring Will looks into himself, and finding nothing but
himself, does make a beginning and end to himself; and so the beginning entering
into the end, and the end into the beginning of himself, there is formed out of
himself this round Abyssal Globe. Thus you see, that the Will of God is the
beginning and end of this Abyssal Essence. The materiality also of this Abyss
is generated out of himself, because there was nothing besides himself to
generate himself from, therefore the Eternal desiring Will must generate this
Abyssal Essence out of it self. Last of all, you see the form or figure that
God's Eternal Will formed this Abyss into, As in the foresaid Figure.
even into a Circle or Globe, and the manner how, viz. that the desiring Will
looking into it self, and finding nothing but himself, does put an end to
himself; and so the beginning closing with the end there is formed ae Round or
Globe. Thus you se^ the highest ground that we can have of this Abyssal
Essence, viz. the desiring Will of God, which Will is the first and last cause
of all things, from which free, efficacious Will, God does style himself the
First and the Last, the Beginning and the End of all things; the Scripture
teaching us, that from this Will, by this Will, and for this Will all things
were created. And thus much shall suffice concerning the beginning of God's
Abyssal Essence.

VI. Now we will proceed to consider the Nature of this Abyssal Essence, which,
as was hinted before, is a deep, immense, boundless, empty space, and is
therefore called the Abyssal Essence, or ground, without ground. When, I say,
this Abyssal Essence is without bounds, I do not mean in relation to God, by
whose Will it is bounded and comprehended, but in relation to our Spirits. In
this empty, immense space there is nothing to be seen, no darkness, no fire, no
light, no creature, but is indeed an unsearchable deep without any Essence,
though indeed it be the ground of all Essence, and that from whence Eternal
Nature's Essence does proceed. And though the Spirit of the Creature sees no
Essence in it, yet God's Eye sees all things in it; because it is the original
ground of all Essences, yet is no visible Essence to be seen in it. This
Abyssal Essence generated out of God, to be the ground of all Essences, is
called by Mystical Writers the Divine Chaos, and the original Essence of all
Essences, from whence all created Essences, Principles and Centers do proceed.
Thus I have brought you to the first original of all Essences, under the Triune
Deity, which is this Abyssal ground or Essence; with respect to which Abyss,
God calls himself the First and the Last of all Essences. Concerning this
Subject Behme speaks thus, in his deep writings; If the Spirit of the Soul
could come into the Eternal Nothing, then he would come into that Original
ground, whence Eternal Nature and all Creatures did proceed. He also term's
this Eternal Nothing, the Eternal Stilness, because as no Essence is to be seen
in it, though it be the ground of all Essences; so there is no life, no motion,
no working source to be found in it, but an Eternal Stilness, though indeed it
be the ground whence all life, motion and working power does proceed. This
Divine Behme well understood, therefore he says, If the Spirit of the Soul
could sink down into this Eternal N^thing and Abyssal still Essence, then he
would come into that ground, where God was when he brought forth Eternal Nature
and Creatures, and from which he brought forth Eternal Nature. And thus I have
led you to the original ground of Eternal Nature, even the Abyssal still
Essence of Eternity.

VII. To recollect briefly what has been said; I have told you that this
Abyssal Essence is an immense, empty space, where no Essence is to be seen by
us. Secondly, I have told you that it is the original ground of all Essences.
Thirdly, That it is an Eternal stilness. Fourthly, That it had its birth from
the will of God. Fifthly, I have declared also the manner of its formation into
a Globe, by the desiring of the Triune Deity. Sixthly, I have too manifested to
you, that it is the original ground whence Eternal Nature's Essence does
proceed. Seventhly, That this Abyssal Essence is God's Divine Chaos, wherein
God's Eternal Eye does see all things lie hid, yet without Essence. All Eternal
Essences, Centers, Principles, Worlds, Elements, Colors, and whole Eternal
Nature with her seven working Powers are hid therein, and from hence are
brought forth by the Wisdom of God.

VIII. If your searching mind do not rest satisfied with this, but be still
enquiring what the Nature of this Abyssal Essence is; I say further, that this
Abyssal Essence, is an Eternal Essence generated out of God's Essence; that is,
out of himself, by himself and for the good pleasure of himself, and is
himself. But if you will ask further, what this Essence is, which is thus
generated out of himself? I can give no other answer, but that it is, what it
is; and further than this none but the Triune Deity can tell. But I can tell
you the end why God brought it out of himself, even that it might be the
original ground of all Essences, this was the end why the Holy Trinity
introduced themselves into this Eternal Beginning. God indeed is without any
beginning, but the Will of the Trinity has been pleased to generate it self
into a Beginning, which is the Abyssal Essence, the b^ginning of all Essences
whatsoever, and particularly of Eternal Nature, as well as of the high and
lofty Globe of Eternity.

We are to observe here that his Eternal World, where the Majestic Soveraig^ty
of the Deity is manifested, called the still Eternity, is far different from
the Eternal nothing, and Abyssal Essence of which we have been speaking.

Quest. If you now ask me, what is above and before this Abyssal Essence?

Answ. I answer, the All-seeing Eye, the Eternal Free Will of the Deity, in the
still Eternity, in the original Globe of the High and Lofty Eternity; where the
Triune Deity manifests the bright flaming glances of his Majesty, and the Glory
of his Sovereignty, with his Perfections, called Attributes, viz. his Infinity,
All Sufficiency, Omnipotency; which are not manifested in this Abyssal still
Essence. Wherefore it appears that the Original Globe of Eternity is above it,
and distinct from it: this Divine Chaos being set by the Eternal Will of the
Deity, as a middle Gulf between the Eternal World (where stands the still
Eternity in all its Essential Goodness, viz. in its Eternal Unity, Simplicity
and Pure Deity) and between Eternal Nature's Essence and her working Powers.
You are likewise to distinguish the Globe of Eternity, from the Light World, or
Light Eternity, in which Paradise, the Angelical World, the Glassy Sea, Mount
Zion, and the New Jerusalem are placed; and though these be called by us the
Heavenly World, as in truth they are, yet they differ from the still Eternity,
in the Globe of the High and Lofty Eternity. All those Worlds forementioned,
Paradise, the Angelical World, etc. spring out of the Light Eternity, and the
Light Eternity is born out of Eternal Nature's Essence, and therefore they are
distinct: for the still Eterni^y in the Eternal World stands before, above and
without Eternal Nature's Essence. These things being premised, we come to speak
of Eternal Nature's Essence, which is generated out of the Abyss^l Ess^nce.

IX. Quest. If you ask me, what is Eternal Nature's Essence?

Answ. I answer, it is an Eternal Essence, genera^ed out of the Divine Chaos,
or Abyssal Essence, and ^educed into matter and form for the good pleasure of
^is Will. Here you see the efficient Cause of Eternal Nature, God's Eternal
Free Will, willing and desiring it.

Secondly, You see out of what or from whence Eternal Nature is produced, viz.
out of God's Divine Chaos, not out of the still Eternity, nor out of the
Eternal Unity of the Triune Deity.

Thirdly, It is brought forth by God's Will out of this Eternal ground into
matter and form, which I am now to speak of.

Fourthly, The final Cause is also signified, in these words, for the good
pleasure of his Will. Now the Will ^f God was to bring forth Eternal Nature,
with all her working Essences to be the original Essence, and ground of all
created Essences whatsoever, nothing being created without it, but from it
essentially and originally.

Quest. But you will say, what is the difference between the Abyssal Essence,
which is the original Essence of all Essences, and Eternal Nature, which is the
ground of all Essences?

Answ. There is a very great difference; the Triune Deity does see that all
things lie hid in his Divine Chaos, but without Essence: but in Eternal
Nature's Ground he sees all things essentially, and that he has actually all
sufficiency of materials and instruments to bring forth all things from Eternal
Nature's Ground. So that Eternal Nature is God's workhouse, wherein he has
whatsoever materially are required to Creation. In the Eternal Nothing is no
actual Essence, but in Eternal Nature, all Essences for creation are actually
brought forth by God's Wisdom and Power.

Again, In the Divine Chaos there is nothing but an Eternal stilness, no life,
no motion, no moving power ^ but in Eternal Nature, God sees an actual working
Source, Power, Life and motion to create from and with; in the Abyssal Essence
he sees indeed that all these lie hid, all life, all power but only
potentially, not actually.

X. Now I proceed to the third Particular, to show the manner how God by his
Eternal Will brought forth Eternal Nature, out of the Abyssal Essence into
matter and form. Here I must open two Particulars, First, What is the Matter
Eternal Nature is created of? And secondly, The manner how performed by God,
and then pass to the formal Cause.

First Particular.
Concerning the Material Cause of Eternal Nature.
If you ask me, What the Original matter of Eternal Nature is?

I answer, It is made up of Fire and Light with their essential properties
belonging unto them, and the four Eternal Eleme^^s of Fire, Water, Air and
Earth, are the materials of Eternal Nature's Essence, for if these were taken
away, Eternal Nature would cease to be.

Concerning the Eternal Element of Fire.
XI. This Element is the first matter and ground of Eternal Nature's Essence,
and therefore we will speak of it in the first place.

If we would understand the nature of this Element, we must know the birth of
it, and how it was brought forth by God. When it pleased the Eternal Will of
God to move on the face of the deep Abyssa-Essence; he from thence brought
forth the four Eter^al Elements, to be the first Principles of Eternal Na^^re,
and the Element of Fire in the first place, together with its intrinsecal and
essential properties, to be the ^riginal beginning of Eternal Nature's Essence.
Here you see the Creator of it, is the Eternal Will of the Triune Deity,
Father, Son and Spirit, for they have but one will among them.

XII. In the second place, you see the ground whence the Will of God brought
forth ^^is Element of Fire, viz. ^^t of the Divine Chaos or Abyssal nothing; I
do not say it came immediately from the Deity in its Eternal Unity and
Simplicity; for in the pure Deity there are no Eternal Elements, no duality, no
contrariety, because the pure Deity is an Eternal Unity in it self.

XIII. In the third place it is necessary to speak a word how the Eternal Will
brought forth this Element (...) Fire, out of the Divine Chaos. The Eternal
Ele^^nt of Fire was brought forth from the Abyssal Es^^nce by the Wisdom and
Omnipotence of God, neither need we to enquire further into the manner of its
production, because a multitude of words will but darken the manner of its
birth. The highly illuminated Behme has set it forth from its deep ground, how
this Eternal Element was brought into existency by, through and from, the
Eternal will of God; but there are but few that can understand him, and those
that do, comprehend a great Mystery; for reason with all its Academical
knowledge cannot comprehend it, it being only to be discerned by an
intellectual sight. And though in the glass of Divine Wisdom I have seen how
this Ele^ent out of Eternal nothing was brought into an Eternal something, viz.
to be essential Fire, not only by and from God's Will, but also through his
Will; yet I do not find it necessary ^o explain it any further at this time.

XIV. In the next place let us consider, what is the Nature of Eternal Fire?

This Eternal Element is created by God to be a fierce, mighty, penetrating,
consuming Essence, as appears from its essential and inseparable properties, it
is created with, all which do manifest the nature of this created Fire-essence.
The first of these properties is Darkness which consists in astringent
harshness, from which dark harshness does arise Bitterness with its
prickliness, and out of this bitter prickliness does arise the Eternal woe and
tormenting Anguish, called the sting of the bitter Anguish, and from this
bitter sting is born the fierce Fire-essence. Thus Behme sets it forth, to whom
I subscribe; thus he makes the Fire-Essence the fourth form of Eternal Nature.
The Dark astringent harshness is the first form to the bringing forth of the
fire; the Bitter sting the second; the Anguish the third; and the fire-flash
out of the Anguish the fourth form which compleats this This word Eternal when
thus applied is only to be understood a part post, and not a part ante, as
the Schoolmen distinguish, for so nothing is Etern^l but the Triune Deity of
the Holy Trinity.
Eternal fire-essence. But to make the Nature of this Fire-essence more plain,
I will add to the former these following properties: To the Fire-essence do
belong, Fierceness, Fieriness, Wrathfulness, Sternness, Sulphureousness,
Salnitrousness, Consuming, Devouring, Flying up and Elevating it self: these
are the essential properties of the Eternal Anguishing Fire-spirit, because it
cannot subsist without them, nor be separated from them. Now it is easy by
these properties to give a Description of the Nature of this Fire-essence, viz.
that it is a Dark, Harsh, Bitter, Anguishing, Fierce, Fie^y, Wrathful, Stern,
Brimstony, Salnitrous, Consuming, Elevating Fire-Spirit: and the strength and
force of this Essence consists in the forementioned properties, and more
particularly in its Fierceness, Consumingness, and self-elevation; for without
these it would be weak and feeble.

Quest. If you ask me wherein the Goodness of this ^ire-essence does consist?

Answ. I answer, in all its essential properties, for ^hey are all good and
serviceable to the end for which ^^ey were created, and the Eternal
Fire-essence by ^eans of them becomes a fit instrument for God to ^ork with.
Therefore there is no evil property to be ^und in this Fire-essence, for if
there were, God must be the Author of it, he being the Sole Creator of the
^^re. But indeed God created it to be a good Servant, ^o serve his Eternal
Will, not that it might Lord it and reign over the Deity, for this would not
have s^ited with his Eternal Wisdom by which all things were brought forth:
since therefore it was created by God, it must needs be good, for no evil can
proceed from God by way of efficiency.

XV. We will now proceed to the Element of Eternal Water.
This Element is the next matter of Eternal Nature's Essence, and consequently
to be handled next to the Fire. Its efficient Cause is the same with that of
the Fire-essence, viz. the Eternal Will of God; the Center from whence it is
produced, is the same, viz. the Eternal Nothing, or Abyssal Essence; and the
manner how, is also the same, viz. by the Divine Power and Wisdom; wherefore we
refer you to what has been said before concerning the Eternal Element of Fire.
But our present work is to consider

What the Nature of this Eternal Element of Water is.
The Eternal Element of Water is a Meek, Mild, Soft, Gentle Essence: for as the
Fire-essence is the ground of Fierceness, so the Water is the ground of
Meekness: and this will appear, if we consider the essential Properties of it:
The first of which is Meekness, the next Sweetness, then Softness, Mildness,
Gentleness, Coldness, Refreshingness, Sincking down, Heaviness: so that we see
from these properties that the Water must needs be a Meek and Mild Essence: and
this Meek Essence is the Ground of Eternal Light, it is the Womb of the Meek
Light, from whence springs Pleasantness, Delightfulness, Ioyfulness and
Gladness.

All which properties are in one another inseparably and make up but one Meek
Essence, as the several properties of the Fire make up one fierce Essence:
which Meek Essence we may call the Meek Water-Essence, the Meek Light-Essence,
or the Meek Love-fire-Essence. This Essence Divine Behme makes to be the fifth
form of Eternal Nature, and so it is. But I would have you further to consider
the end of its production, which is to mitigate and allay the fierceness of the
Fire-Essence, and to be its Antagonist: So to the fierce, fiery, harsh,
darkness, the Water opposes its meek, soft, gentle and pleasant Light; to the
bitterness and prickliness of the Fire, it opposes its sweetness and
pleasantness; to the anguish, wrathfulness and devouring property of the Fire,
it opposes the joyfulness of its Love-fire-Essence; and to the Mounting
elevation of the Fire, it opposes its ponderosity and sinking down.

Here you see that the Beauty, Excellence and Strength of the Water consists in
its Meekness, Mildn^ss, Softness, Gentleness, Sweetness. Its riches are the
Meek Light, and the trium^hing joy of the Love-fire's-Essence, which stop's the
fury of the devouring, anguishing Fire. Its goodness consists in this, that it
is a serviceable instrument in the Hand of its Creator, to stop the pride and
flying up of the Fire by its ponderosity: And thus it appears that both these
Essences are good in their kind, as proceeding both from God's Will, and from
one ground, viz. the Divine Chaos or Abyssal Essence. And thus much concerning
the Ele^ent of Water.

XVI. We now proceed to the third Element, of which Eternal Nature does
consist, viz. the Element of Air.
Its efficient Cause, its ground from whence, and manner of production are the
same with those of the two former Elements. But if you would know the Nature of
this Eternal Air; I say, it is a Brisk, Cooling, Refreshing, Reviving,
Quickening, Pleasant Essence, Breath, or Wind. It is very useful and
serviceable in Eternal Nature's Essence; to blow up the Fire, lest it should be
suffocated; and therefore it is appointed by God to blow up the Fire, to give
motion to the Water, and to drive away the dark clouds from the Light-Essence,
when need requires. It is a necessary Instrument to blow up the
Love-Fire-Essence, that so it may penetrate through all Properties; when it is
too weak and passive it makes it blossom and break forth; it is the food of
all the Properties; it is also the Chariot of the Spirit of God, who rides upon
the wings of this wind, and is a good separator in his hand to separate between
the precious and the vile, between the wheat and the chaff: Its essential
properties are Clarity, Transparency, Volatility, Levity, Celerity, and
Penetrability. Behme refers this Air-Essence to the sixth Property, to which we
assent.

XVII. We now proceed to the last Element, viz. Eternal Earth.
To know what this Element is, we may consider the efficient of it, the ground
whence it proceeded, the manner how it was brought forth, and the end for which
it was produced, which are the same with those which are mentioned in the
Element of Fire. The essential properties of this Earth are Ponderosity,
Corporeity and Transparency. For you must know that this Eternal Earth, is not
like the outward Elementary Earth, so gross and opacous, but it is a
transparent Crystalline Earth; yet it gives essentiality and Corporeity to the
three forementioned Elements: and it was therefore created by God to make
Eternal Nature's Essence substantial. For Fire, Water and Air must have one
ground or substance to subsist in, and to move in and through one another,
which substance is the Element of Earth. This Element Behme makes the seventh
property, in which, he says, all the six do move, in one only ground, as the
Soul in the Body, which is very well expressed by him. And thus much concerning
the matter of which Eternal Nature does consist, viz. Fire, Water, Air and
Earth.

XVIII. Concerning the formal Cause of Eternal Nature.
The formal Cause of Eternal Nature's Essence, is nothing else but the mixture,
and harmonical composition of the four Eternal Elements; for they are one in
another, and flow one through another. Let us now consider who is the mixer of
these Eternal Elements, and their properties, for they would never mix of
themselves to all Eternity, because of the Contrariety of their Natures;
wherefore we must conclude that the Divine Wisdom, is the Artist who mingles
these Elements together.

XIX. In the mixture of these Eternal Elements observe with me these following
Particulars.
First, Wisdom's Art appears in the manner of their mixture, they are mixed one
with another, and one thro^gh another; Fire with Water, Light with Darkness,
and penetrate through and through one another, neither can their contrariety
hinder or oppose the Art and Power of Wisdom.

Secondly, The Art of Wisdom appears not only in mixing them, but in reducing
them to a harmony and equal temperament, she does proportion them to an
equality in Number, Weight and Measure.

Thirdly, Wisdom's Art appears in that being thus proportionally tempered
together, they qualify act and move in and through one another, and that in
the greatest harmony and friendship, as the members of one body: the fierceness
of the fire is mitigated and allayed by the Water, the harsh astringency of the
Darkness, is dissolved in the meekness of the Light, and so of the rest.

Fourthly, Wisdom's Art appears, in this, that in the harmonizing of these four
Eternal Elements, she has made all their contrary properties to be useful one
to another: The Harsh Darkness is serviceable to the Meek Light, for Darkness
is the subject through which Light displays it self; were there no Darkness,
there would be no Light: the fierceness of the Fire, gives strength to the Meek
Water-Essence, and meekness of the Water allays the fierceness of the Fire: so
Air is very useful to the Fire to keep it from being suffocated; and the Earth
is useful to them all, because it gives them a Body to act and move in: We may
yet further consider the usefulness of the Elements to one another, as they
stand harmonized and tempered together by the Hand of Wisdom. The Fire gives
Life, Mobility and Strength to the Meek Wat^r, and the Water gives Food and
Nourishment to the Fire^ and thereby allays the fierce hunger of the Fire: so
that Darkness subsists in the Light, and the Light in the Darkness, and
satisfies the harsh bitter hunger of the Darkness, being as food unto it: and
in this their serviceableness to one another consists their Natural Goodness:
for how can any evil be in them, since they all serve the Will of their
Creator, and are useful to one another; the Darkness is as useful as the Light,
and the Fire as the Water, and consequently they are all good, their
contrarieties being harmonized, and reconciled by the skilful hand of
omnipotent Wisdom.

Fifthly, Wisdom's Art appears in that, in this temperature of the Eternal
Elements, she makes them qualify and serve one another in triumphing
joyfulness, and to rejoice in each other's qualifying: for though these Eternal
Elements are not understanding Spirits, yet they have an innate hunger in
themselves (which is their intrinsecal form) which makes them desire each
other: thus the Fire-Essence hunger's after the Meekness of the Water, as its
daily food, wherewith its ravenous fierceness may be satisfied and allayed; and
again the Water hunger's after the Fire, as its Life, Strength and Motion. The
astringent Darkness hunger's after the Meek Light, and the Light after the
Darkness, that it may shine through it, and subsist in it. And from this inbred
Hunger it is that they rejoice to qualify one with another; it is as their
sport and past time to penetrate one through another, and to be sometimes above
and sometimes under another in this wrestling wheel of Nature. For you must
know that all these qualifyng powers of Nature have sensibility and mobility in
themselves, whereby they can feel and taste one another's properties, and are
sensible of the pleasure and satisfaction they receive one from another, which
continually awakens the hunger in every property, to qualify one with another.
So the Fire is sensible that the Meek Water does allay its fierceness, and
therefore it does hunger after it; the anguishing Darkness is sensible, that
the amiable pleasantness of the Light is a refreshment to it; and thus each
property feels and taste's the other's goodness, and this makes them still to
hunger after one another, and to penetrate one another with all triumphing
Ioyfulness. Oh let us for ever admire this unsearchable Art of the Divine
Wisdom! who alone can pe^form this Masterpiece.

Sixthly, Wisdom's Art appears in nothing more than in the orderly placing of
these Elements; for Wisdom makes the Fire, with all is Harsh, Bitter, Dark,
Anguishing and Brimstony properties to descend, and makes it elevating pride to
buckle, bow and become a Servant to the Water-Essence; and causes the Water
with it Meekness, Gentleness and Ponderosity to ascend and command the Fire;
the Light to rule over the Darkness; the Meekness over the Fierceness; and the
joyfulness of the Light over the Anguish. For Divine Wisdom well understood the
force of self elevating Fire, and therefore she caused it to sink down, and
become a Servant to the Meek Light: she foresaw that the Fire-life with its
fierce properties would be but an ill Governor, therefore she made the elder,
viz. the Fire-Spirit, ^o serve the younger, viz. the Water and Light-Essence,
which could be done by no other Hand but that of Omnipotent Wisdom. If we
proceed to consider of this order how incomprehensible will the Skill of Wisdom
appear! For the Darkness was hid in the Light, and though it was there with all
its properties, yet nothing of it was to be see^ or felt; for it was swallowed
up of the Light, as the night is swallowed up of the Day; so the fierceness,
bitterness and Anguish of the fire were perfectly dissolved in and swallowed up
of the meekness, mildness, softness and pleasantness of the Water, and nothing
remained but the pleasant glances of the Fire arising from the mixture of Fire
and Water. This was the Beauty and excellence of Eternal Nature, that all her
divided, contrary properties were united into one undivided property in the
Eternal Earth, where all their contrarieties were reduced to the most perfect
union, agreement and harmony.

XX. Quest. If you further ask me what Eternal Nature's Essence is in relation
to her formal being, as she stood in her original Purity and Beauty?

Answ. I thus define Eternal Nature; Eternal Nature is an Eternal Essence
subsisting in a six fold working property, inseparable one from the other. For
the Darkness generates the Harshness, the Harshness the Bitterness; this the
A^guish, the Anguish the Fire; this the Water, the Water the Light; this the
Love-Fire, and the Love-Fire the Air; thus they generate one another, and
qualify one in another, and through one another inseparably and undivided; but
in the se^enth they all rest as in one only ground. So that Eternal Nature
subsists of six working properties in one only ground or substance. And all the
properties of Eternal Nature considered in relation to this one ground, are all
equally Eternal, none of them can be accounted before other; they have all but
one beginning, one Mother, and subsist in one ground; and in this their Union
they constitute the wrestling wheel of Eternal Nature, wherein sometimes one is
uppermost, sometimes another, sometimes Darkness, sometimes Light, sometimes
Anguish, sometimes Joy. Yet notwithstanding though they be all undivided, and
none before the other, for distinction sake, we may place the Darkness and
Harshness in the first place, as being the root of the dark Fire-Essence, which
Fire-Essence is the Center of Eternal Nature; the Prickly Stinging Bitterness
in the second place, the Brimstony Anguish in the third place, the Fire in the
fourth place: From which Fire the Water is generated, together with the Light
and Love-Fire, which belong to the fifth form of Nature; and in the sixth place
out of the Light and Love-Fire the Eternal Element of Air, from which Air
proceeds the seventh and last viz. the Eternal Element of Earth, in which the
six foregoing properties subsist in perfect Unity and Harmony. Now according to
this order we can better understand the beginning and end of Eternal Nature's
Essence, and how it is distinct from God's Eternal Unity and pure Deity; though
indeed in i^ self it be an Eternal indissoluble band, in which property is
distinct from or before another; but all coequal and coeternal in one only
ground and substance. So that we conclude that the original beauty and
excellency of Eternal Nature did consist in this, that the six working
properties were Harmonized into a perfect Unity, and triumphing joyfulness in
the seventh form: which Harmony, Peace and Unity is the true form or formal
Cause of Eternal Nature.

XXI. But me thinks I hear some body object against what has been said, that I
seem clearly to contradict Behme, who place's Darkness and Light back to back,
as opposite to one another, and makes the Fire, a distinct center from the
Light; speaking of a Cross birth in Eternal Nature, which divides the fourth
^orm of the Fire, from the fifth of the Light?

To which I answer, that what Behme says is most true, but it must be noted
that he speaks this of Eternal Nature in its fallen and degenerate state,
whereas I speak of it, in its original spotless purity. Behme speaks of God in
Nature, but I speak of Eternal Nature's birth in order to God's introducing
himself into Nature's Essence. So that it appears that I do not in the least
contradict Behme's writings.

XXII. Concerning the final Cause of Eternal Nature.
Though it be true (to speak in General) that the final cause and end for which
all creatures, and consequently Eternal Nature was brought forth, is the Good
pleasure and will of God, according as the Holy Scripture in many places
teaches. Ephesians. 1.9. According to the Good pleasure of his will purposed in
himself: again verse. the 11. Who works all things according to the pleasure
of his own will; Rev. 4.11. And for thy pleasure all things were created. Yet
where it pleases God to reveal the grounds and reasons of his creating will,
we may then look into them, and consider of them.

XXIII. The first end why Eternal Nature was produced, was for manifestation,
that the Triune Deity might manifest themselves, and together with themselves
the still Eternity; this was the reason why the Trinity raised in themselves an
Eternal Will, for the production of Eternal Nature, that they might no longer
be hid in their abstracted Nature of pure Spirit and naked Deity.

A second end why Eternal Nature was created, is, that all the glorious
attributes of God, his All Sufficiency, Omnipotency, Wisdom, Goodness and
Immensity might be displayed, and made known.

A third end was, that all the wonders of the Deity might be manifested and
brought into act.

Fourthly, Eternal Nature w^^ produced, that it might be the Subject matter out
of which all Creations, and all Worlds should be brought forth: Eternal Nature
being the store House of the Holy Trinity wherein all sufficiency of
instruments and materials required to Creation are treasured up. So that if
Eternal Nature, with its Eternal El^ments, forms and working Essences, had not
been brought forth by the Trinity, then no Worlds or Creatures had ever been,
nor any thing besides the still Eternity, which was contrary to the Will which
the Holy Trinity had raised in themselves, to manifest themselves by Creation;
for the accomplishing of which will, Eternal Nature's Essence was produced.

Quest. If you ask me, what moved the Eternal Will of the Trinity to bring
forth Eternal Nature in order to Creation?

Answ. I answer, that it was the Eternal desire of their mind; for from the
desiring mind the Eternal Will proceeds.

Quest. If you enquire, what moves the Eternal Mind of the Trinity to desire?

Answ. I answer, the Spirit of Eternity it self.

Quest. But you will say what awakned the first thought in the Spirit of
Eternity to create Eternal Nature?

Answ. I answer the Divine Magia moved and awakened the Spirit of Eternity to
desire; from the desiring mind proceeded the will, and from the will it came to
be brought forth into existence by the creating ^^at; which being placed in the
Divine Omnipotence brought forth Eternal Nature's Essence out of the Divine
Chaos.

Quest. If you ask further, what moved the Eternal Magia of the Holy Trinity to
awaken the first motion in the Eternal Spirit to create Eternal Nature with her
Elements and working Properties?

Answ. I answer, that none can tell this, but the Spirit of Eternity it self:
and therefore here we must rest: because we cannot go beyond the first. Hence we
may learn that the Spirit of the Holy Trinity is Magical, viz. and that it acts
magical. Thus God brought forth the Eternal World, viz. the still Eternity,
with all its wonders out of Himself, by Himself and for Himself to dwell in
Magically; and after the same manner the Divine Chaos and Eternal Nat^^^ were
brought forth. The Spirit of the Holy Trinity does will desire and act from
nothing else but from its pure Magia; for it is not a rational Spirit, but a
wise, intelligent Spirit, which wisdom and intelligence is grounded in the
Divine Magia. There is no use of Reason in the still Eternity; for the Divine
Magia supplies its room; neither is reason made use of in Paradise, nor in the
Angelical World, nor in the New Jerusalem, because reason belongs only to the
Spirit of this outward World: and however enlightened Reason may be exalted by
some, yet my Spirit knows it to be an Eternal infallible Truth, that there is
no use of Reason but in this Babylonish Principle, and the Kingdom of the beast.

Sixthly, Eternal Nature was brought forth, that it might be a garment of the
Holy Trinity, and a vesture wherewith their pure naked Deity might be clothed
upon: for as the Soul is hid and wrapped up in the Body, and the Body in its
clothes; so the Holy Trinity is covered and wrapped up in Eternal Nature's
Essence, and in the Creatures thence proceeding. Blessed are they who through
all these wiles and disguisements can find him, who is the desire of all
Nations, who in this Rubbish can find the pearl of price; which yet if we can
search deep enough we cannot fail of, for the Holy Trinity in their pure Deity
is the most innermost kernel of all things, being hid under Eternal Nature's
Essence and all her working forms and Elements.

Seventhly, Eternal Nature was to be an Habitation for the Holy Trinity. For
though the Eternal World be the most glorious Palace of the Deity and the most
Holy place, yet it was the will of the Holy Trinity to have the outward Court
of Eternal Nature added to it, in which they might dwell, as the Soul in the
Body.

Eighthly, Eternal Nature was produced, that it might be a Medium between tw^
extremes, God and the Creature, whereby God ^ight communicate himself to
Creatures, and Creatures might have fellowship with him.

Ninethly, Eternal Nature was brought forth, that the Eternal Unity of the
Deity might be displayed in variety, diversity and multiplicity.

Object. But you will say, was there not a variety of properties and attributes
in the Deity, even before the birth of Eternal Nature, viz. his Power, Wisdom,
Goodness, Mercy, Truth, etc.?

Sol. I answer, that all these perfections are all one in the Deity and make up
but one most simple Essence, for else God would be divided in himself, and
could not be the supreme Unity and Simplicity, as before has been proved at
large.

But by the Elements and working forms of Eternal Nature, this Unity displays
and as it were dissolves and dilates it self into an infinite variety and
diversity of Creations, according to the purpose of his Will.

Tenthly, A tenth end was, that the still Divine Essence by entering into the
contrariety of Eternal Nature might bring forth the Glory of the Majesty, and
triumphing and exulting joy, which were not to be found in the still Eternity,
before the working properties of Eternal Nature were brought forth.

Eleventhly, Eternal Nature was brought forth, that it might be the true Primum
Mobile, or the first source and spring of all motion and action. For this end
it pleased the Trinity to produce this Eternal turning wheel, and indissoluble
band of the seven forms of Eternal Nature: for in the still Eternity there is
nothing but stilness, quiet and rest: and that such as passes all the thought
and conceptions of Man; and that Spirit only knows it, who has been taken up
into it.

Twelfthly, Eternal Nature was produced, that the one single Essence of the
Holy Trinity might be manifested in distinction, according to the distinct
Essences and properties of Eternal Nature. Thus the Father is manifest in Fire,
the Son in Water, the Holy Ghost in Air. Thus you see how the Holy Trinity may
be distinguished from one another in Eternal Nature's Essence.

Thirteenthly and Lastly, Eternal Nature was produced, that all the Ideas forms
and patterns in the Divine Mind might become actual and substantial, which
could not be brought to pass in the still Eternity, nor without the working
properties of Eternal Nature, which do bring all that into act and existence
which in the Divine Will and Mind, is only in purpose and Idea. And thus much
concerning the ends for which Eternal Nature was created by God.

Having hitherto discoursed of what Eternal Nature is, I shall next come to
show you (according to my method propounded at the beginning of this third
part.)

What kind of Principle Eternal Nature is?
Quest. If it be asked what kind of Essence Eternal Nature is?

Answ. 1. I answer, first, that it is a Created Essence, as has been
sufficiently declared before.

Answ. 2. Eternal Nature is an Eternal Essence, for whatsoever is immediately
created by God out of the Divine Chaos, is Eternal, because it proceeds from an
Eternal root; now since Eternal Nature is immediately brought forth from the
Abyssal Chaos it must consequently be Eternal.

Answ. 3. Eternal Nature is an Original Essence, that is, it is the first
created Essence out of whose fruitful womb all created Essences do proceed: it
is the first Essence of all Essences, and the ground and source of them. There
is nothing above, before or beyond it, but the Holy Trinity in the still
Eternity. All Essences proceed from it whether Temporal, or Eternal; for time
it self is rooted in Eternity.

Object. But it will be objected, how can Eternal Nature be the first Original
Essence, since the Eternal World and the Divine Chaos are before it?

Answ. The answer is obvious, for I do not say that Eternal Nature is the first
Essence, but the first created ^ss^^ce; now the Eternal World and Divine Chaos
were not created by God, but generated out of him: therefore it remains
unshaken, that Eternal Nature is the first Original Created Essence.

Object. But you will object again, that God himself is the Essence of all
Essences, and the original Cause and first matter of all things, which I own to
be true but with distinction.

Ans. For first, God is the original Essence of all Essences, ^^ he is the
efficient Cause, and Creator of Eternal Nature's Essence, out of the Divine
Chaos.

Secondly, I say, God is the Essence of all Essences remotely, but not
immediately, for all created Essences do immediately proceed from Eternal
Nature, and not from God; because both the Divine Chaos and Eternal Nature ^and
between them and God. Now that created Essences ^id not immediately proceed
from God, will appear by these following reasons.

First, If all creatures had immediately proceeded from God, they must all have
been a perfect Unity, without all duality, diversity, or contrariety; because
God's Essence from which they immediately proceeded was such: But we find that
all created Essences are ^ot a perfect unity, but that diversity and duality is
found in them, which is not in the Divine Essence; therefore we must
necessarily conclude that they did not immediately proceed from God's Essence.

Secondly, If all crea^^d Essences do immediately proceed from God, it ^^ll
follow, that God's Di^ine Essence is not unintelligible and incomprehensible;
but may be easily known from the nature of those Essences which immediately
proceed from him, for such as their Essence is, such must God's be, if we allow
this immediate procession; because whatsoever does immediately proceed from any
Essence, is of the same Essence with that, from whence it proceeds. We conclud^
therefore that Light, Fire, Darkness, etc. are not i^ God, nor do they
immediately proceed from him, for if they did, we might then know what God's
Na^ture and Essence is, viz. that it is Light, Fire, Dark^ness, etc.

Answ. 4. Eternal Nature is a distinct Essence from the Divine Chaos out of
which it was created by God which appears, First, Because that which is brought
forth differs, an^ is distinct from that which is brought forth, as the frui^
is distinct from the tree, the Son from his Father wherefore Eternal Nature
being created out of the Di^vine Chaos must needs be distinct from it.
Secondly, Eternal Nature is distinct from the Divine Chaos, because in Eternal
Nature, the Elements an^ the working powers of Nature are essentially an^
actually; whereas in the Divine Chaos they are only potentially and remotely.
Thirdly, In Eternal Nature there is order and distinction; there we find the
four Eternal Elements^ and seven working forms of Nature; whereas in the Divine
Chaos all things lie hid without any order o^ distinction; and therefore this
Principle is called (...) Chaos or confused mixture, Genesis 1. 2. because in this
Principle there is no Essences to be found, but all things are in it in a
hidden dark confused manner.


Answ. 5. Eternal Nature is a middle Essence, because it is placed by God
between the Eternal World and the Angelical, and this vis^ble Creation, and is
the original ground from wh^nce all middle Worlds and Creations do proceed.
Were not Eternal Nature a middle Essence there would be no middle Worlds, no
middle States, nothing but the still Eternity. But the Scripture tells us of
Worlds in the plural number, Heb. 1.2. which must be these middle Worlds of
which here ^ have spoken.

Answ. 6. Eternal Nature is in it self an invisible Essence, for it is the
ground from whence all invisible Worlds and Creations do proceed, and we are
taught that even this outward visible World was made of an in^isible matter,
viz. Eternal Nature's Essence, Heb. 11. 3. The things which are seen, were not
made of the things that do appear.

Answ. 7. Eternal Nature's Essence, is a mixed and compounded Essence, it is
mixed and compounded of the four Eternal ^lements and their essential forms;
and thus it is an Essence compounded of multiplicity, va^iety and contrariety,
and therefore must needs be distinct from the Divine Essence, which is an
Eternal Unity and Simplicity, which cannot admit of any mixture or composition
whatsoever. Now we must further know that this mixture and composition of the
Eternal Elements in Eternal Nature is wrought by the Art of Divine Wisdom in
such a manner, that all their contrarieties are reduced to the greatest harmony
and agreement; insomuch that they qualify in and through another, with the
greatest concord and amity, as brethren and members of the same body. This
harmonious mixture and composition of the Elements in Eternal Nature is the
beauty and perfection of Eternal Nature; and that whereby it is fitted to
become the fruitful Mother of all things. If we consider Eternal Nature only as
made up of fighting contrarieties, we shall find nothing but deformity and
disorder, in her; but if we regard her as she is mixed and compounded by the
hand of Eternal Wisdom to a perfect temperature harmony and concord, so she
appears and is ina^^^d all beautiful and lovely.

Answ. 8. Eternal Nature is a Good Essence: there is no evil in it,
notwithstanding it is made up of Contrarieties; for God who is Eternal
Goodness, could not make that evil, which he designed to be the original matter
of all created Essences: for so he would have entailed evil upon all his
Creatures, which were to proceed out of its womb. Neither was it partly good,
and partly evil; for this is a mixture that God declares against, and therefore
would never be a cause of it himself. Neither can we say, that evil is in
Eternal Nature's Essence, but that it is swallowed up of the good, because
nothing can proceed from God, but what is wholly good. The Darkness in Eternal
Nature is as good as the Light, and the Fire as the Water. All the ^orms of
Eternal Nature must needs be alike good for these following reasons; First,
Because they have one efficient cause, one Creator even God. Secondly, Because
they all have but one Mother, viz. the Abyssal Chaos out of whose womb they
proceed. Thirdly, Because God has implanted in them all an hunger and desire to
answer the end of their Creation: Now whatsoever answers the end for which it
is made, that we may truly say is good. Fourthly, All the forms of Eternal
Nature are equally good, because they all obey the Will of their Creator.
Fifthly, Because they are all serviceable and helpful to one another; as appears
by their qualifying together, and union in the sixth form, where the Darkness
is serviceable to the Light, and the Light to the Darkness, the Fire, to the
Water, and the Water, to the Fire.


But here is to be observed, That when I say that all the forms of Eternal
Nature are good, I do not mean that they are the chiefest ^^od; for that is
only to be found in the Divine Essence; but that they are endowed by God with a
Natural Goodness, suitable to their kind, and such as they are capable of, and
free from Evil.

Object. You Will say, evil is not in God, therefore it must be in Eternal Nature?

Sol. Yet the inconsequence of this argument does appear, in that it may be so
easily retorted, for say I, because evil is not in God, therefore neither can it
be in Eternal Nature, which was created by him; for such as the cause is, such
must the effect be: no evil is in the Cause of Eternal Nature, therefore
neither can there be any evil in Eternal Nature, which is the effect.

Quest. But you will question further, if evil be not in God, nor in Eternal
Nature, where then will you place it? What will you make the ground and source
of evil?

Answ. I answer, that the mutability of the Creature is the Cause of evil. For
though all things be created good by God, yet they are not immutably so; but
may become evil. But we will speak no further of this matter, because this is
not the proper place to speak of the original of evil and sin, for we are here
only a treating of Eternal Nature, as it came out of God's hand, and before any
Creatures were created or brought forth out of it.

Object. It may be you will object, that Jacob Behme makes Eternal Nature the
ground of Good and Evil.

Sol. To which I answer, that what Jacob Behme writes concerning Eternal Nature
is very true, for he does not make it the ground of evil^ in its state of
purity, as it came out of God's hand: but the cause of this mistake is, that
Behme is not well understood, because sometimes he speaks of Eternal Nature in
its state of original purity, and presently after speaks of it, with reference
to its fallen state, and this being not sufficiently distinguished by unwary
readers, makes them conclude that Jacob Behme makes Eternal Nature in its
original purity to be the ground of evil; which indeed is contrary to the whole
scope of his writings. Behme was very sensible that many would be apt thus to
mistake his writings, which made him say that there was a vail upon his
writings which would hinder all those who were not born again, from having a
right understanding of them. Jacob Behme, whenever he attributes evil to
Eternal Nature, considers it, in its fall^n state, as it became infected by the
fall of Lucifer, in this second or hellish Principle, and so I do fully agree
with him; but I am a speaking of Eternal Nature in its pure undefiled state, as
it came out of the hands of God.

Object. But you will say that Darkness is an evil Essence: but say I, how can
that be evil, which is the cause of the Light?

Sol. For Darkness is the root of the Fire, and from the Fire proceeds the
Light, so that if there were no Darkness, there would be no Light; wherefore
Darkness is no evil Essence.

Neither is the bitterness and sting of the Anguish evil in it self, because
they are the cause of the triumphing joy. Nor the Fire though it be a fierce
and devouring Essence, because its ^ierceness and wrathfulness is the strength
of Eternal Nature: and when these qualities of the Fire come to be penetrated
by the Water they are changed, and become the cause of pleasure and triumphing
joy. Therefore you see that Fire as it was originally in Eternal Nature is no
evil Essence.

Neither can it be said that the contrariety which is found in the forms and
properties of Eternal Nature makes them to be evil; because all the six forms of
Nature are united and harmonized in the seventh, where no strife contrariety or
opposition is to be found, nor any thing from whence they might with truth be
denominated evil. In this harmony and agreement of all the essential forms of
Eternal Nature does the essential and intrinsecal goodness of Eternal Nature
consist. This was the beautiful garment wherewith she was arrayed when first she
came out of the hand of her great and wise Creator: for the Darkness was not at
odds with the Light, nor the Light with the Fire, nor the Fire with the Water;
but all the forms in the greatest harmony qualified in and through one another;
this I say was the state and condition of Eternal Nature, as she came out of
the hand of God, she was all pleasing and beautiful, for all her appearing
contrarieties were swallowed up of Harmony and Unity.

Answ. 9. Eternal Natures Essence is a perfect and complete Essence. She is
perfect in the perfect number of her seven forms and properties, nothing can be
added to her, neither can any thing be taken from her; because in the
forementioned seven forms she contains whatsoever is required to her
completing and perfection. And these forms are in one another and through one
another, they generate one another, and are generated from one another, so that
none can be without the other, but all make up one Essence in the seventh form:
and in this unity and inseparability of the forms of Eternal Nature does her
perfection consist. All the forms of Eternal Nature are co-essential and
coeternal with her self and with one another; none is before the other, because
all are one and make up but one Essence which is Eternal Nature her self.

Object. But you will object, that this seems to contradict your former
discourse, wherein you have spoken of the 1, 2, 3, etc. forms of Nature,
distinct from one another?

Sol. I answer that when I spoke of the forms of Eternal Nature under a
distinction of order and number. I considered them is they were a making and
forming under God's hand, a^^ not as already made into an ever circling wheel,
and fixed in an indissoluble band in the seventh form, for so they are but one
Essence and have neither beginning nor end, nor can they be said to be one
before the other in number and order. In this full and perfect Union of the
sixth forms in the seventh, consists the perfection of Eternal Nature: for if we
consider the six forms a part and distinct from one another, w^ shall find them
all wanting and imperfect, and plainly discern that Eternal Nature's perfection
consists not in any one of the forms, as distinct from the others, but only in
the Union and fixation of them all in the seventh, which is as the common body
and receptacle of them. The truth of this will appe^^ by taking a view of all
Eternal N^ture's forms, in which prospect we shall clearly discern, that the
perfection of Eternal Nature does not consist in any one, or more of her forms
apart; but in the joint Union and fixation of them all in the seventh form.

First, We Will begin with the Darkness, and the Essences which pertain to it,
viz. harshness, bitterness and the sting of Anguish, which make the three first
properties of Eternal Nature, and are the beginning and root of it: if these
were not, there would be no Fire, if no Fire, no Light, and if no Light, no
Love-fire-essence. But we cannot say that God intended to place perfection in
this root of Darkness, as being only the foundation of that complete structure
which God has raised upon it. This Eternal Darkness was extracted by God out
of the Abyssal Chaos, the hidden root of all things: and is the beginning and
ground of Eternal Nature and her forms, and is made up of Harshness, Bitterness
and Anguish; and therefore this darkness of which we treat here, is not a mere
privation or nonentity; for if it were so, God could not be said to create the
Darkness, as the Scripture expressly tells us: therefore we lay this as a ground
that this darkness is essential, as being the root and ground of ^ternal
Nature's Essence: but perfection not being found here, God proceeds, and

In the second place, God out of the forementioned Darkness, brings forth the
Fire, being the fourth form of Eternal Nature: its properties are Fierceness,
Elevation, Co^suming and Devouring all things that cannot endure its trial, it
contains Sulphur, Sal-Nitre and Mercury; it was no sooner added to that
Darkness, but it communicated to it (as it were) Life, Sense and Motion, so
that they embraced each other most willingly. The Fire said to the Darkness, I
cannot subsist without thee, for if I were not preserved in thy Essence, as in
a furnace, I should perish and vanish away. The Darkness replied, Dear
Fire-spirit, live for ever in my Center, for without thee I am as Dead, thou
art my Life and give me sensibility and mobility; let us live together as
members of Eternal Nature in Love and Unity for ever.

We will now take into consideration the Nature of this Fire, and whence it
burns and flames continually, without ever being extinguished. God, the most
wise Artist and great Chemist, took great care that the Fire might never go
out, for then he knew that Eternal Darkness would become a Dead Essence; and
therefore he placed in the bowels of this fire its Eternal food of Sulphur,
Mercury and Sal-Nitre, which is the Fuel that maintains its everlasting
burnings.

Quest. If you ask me from whence this Eternal Fire does proceed?

Answ. I answer, not immediately from the Divine Essence, for in it no Fire to
be found; but out of the Abyssal Chaos, by the Eternal speaking word of power.
The Essence and Nature of this Fire-spirit is nothing else but an Eternal
hunger, and a dry painful thirst in it self; and from this hunger ^t attracts
eagerly and earnestly, and yet finds nothing in its self to attract, but its
own burning Sulphur, poisonful Mercury, and infected Sal-Nitre, and the more
it attracts, the more it hunger's; and the more it hunger's, the more it prey's
on its own Fuel. But God does not stop here, because perfection is not found in
the Fire: for the great Artist knew very well, that if this eager attraction of
the Fire-spirit were not allayed and pacified, it would bring it self into
anguish and pain, as having nothing to feed upon and refresh it self with, but
its own burning Sulphur, poisonful Mercury, and ^nfected Sal-Nitre. Wherefore
that the Fire-spirit might have no reason to complain of its being so fierce,
wrathful and anguishing, the great Artist resolve's to palliate, cover and
allay the harshness and bitterness of the Fire-spirit, so that it might never
know them, nor perceive its own burning Sulphur, Mercury and Sal-Nitre. God
knew that the Fire in the elevation of its might and power would devour all
that^ come in its way, if once it should be inflamed with his own Sulphur,
Mercury and Sal-Nitre, and so spoil the work which he intended to bring forth.

In the third place, God brings forth the Water-essence, being the root of the
fifth form, viz. the Light-essence. This Water is the food of the Fire, whereby
its eager hunger is allayed, and its painful attraction stilled, and the
effects of its Sulphurous, Mercurial and Salnitrous properties, palliated and
concealed. This Water-spirit is placed at the bottom of the Fire-root, where
the Fire finds its own Eternal refreshment in it self, and needs not to seek it
elsewhere: yet the Fire-sperit cannot reach it by flying upwards, but by
sinking down deep into his own root. Thus God brings down the pride of the
Fire, by placing its food and refreshment in the deeps below it. No sooner had
the Fire-spirit by sinking down into its own root, allayed its fierce hunger,
and quenched its dry and unsatiable thirst in the Water-essence, but it became
as transported with joy, and said, O Blessed Element! How came thou to be so
near me, even in my very root and center and I not aware of thee? Behold! I
have drunk deep of thy fountain and am satisfied: I have tasted thy sweetness,
and am refreshed. O come and mingle thy softness and meekness with my strength
and fierceness, that my anguishing hunger and painful thirst may no more be
felt by me, but be swallowed up in satisfaction and delight! Thus you see how
the fire, by sinking down into its own root, mingles with the Water, and the
Water raising it self penetrates the Fire, by which means the hunger and thirst
of the Fire are mitigated and assuaged; not that they are quite taken away, but
the attraction being more moderate, the thirst and hunger, which before were
painful and anguishing, now become pleasing and delightful. It is worth our
observing here how all this is brought about, viz. by the Descent of the proud
and self-elevating Fire-spirit, and the Ascent of the meek and humble
Water-spirit: thus the Great Creator is pleased to abase the proud, and to
exalt the humble and the meek.

Quest. If you ask me whence this Water-essence derives its Original?

Answ. I answer, not immediately from the Divine Essence, but from the Abyssal
Chaos, as has been said before concerning the Darkness and Fire.

But in the fourth place, how excellent soever this Water-spirit is, yet it is
not the full perfection of Eternal Nature; wherefore the Great Artist does not
stop here, but to the Water-essence superadds the Light-essence, which is the
fifth form: for God knowing that the Wrath-fire desired the Light, as a further
step to its complete joy and satisfaction, he said, Let there be Light, and
there was Light, which immediately darted its luster and brightness through all
the preceding forms of Eternal Nature: it made the Water clear and transparent,
the Fire bright and luminous, and hid the Darkness in its own glory. Thus we
see how useful and pleasing the Light is, to all the forms of Nature, causing
them to move and penetrate in and through one another with great joy and
delight. Here the Wrath-^ire thus salute's the Eternal Light: Oh dear and
precious Light, how welcome art thou unto me? Thy pleasantness, meekness and
soft sweetness have fully satisfied all my longing desires. Again the Light
embraces the Fire and in the Fire the Darkness, and says, Ye are both most
dear unto me: thou Fire art my strength and might, thy fierceness is my Life,
as my softness and pleasantness is thy food, wherefore let us delight to dwell
in one another for ever.

Do you desire to be further informed concerning the nature and properties of
this Eternal Light? You must know that words are not able to express the
gladding sweetness, and meek-softness of its nature, the Fire-spirit only can
feel it, and is thoroughly sensible of it; for it transmutes its sullen darkness
into smiling brightness, and its anguishing stinging property into a reviving
and quickening warmth, such as the Sun gave forth in Paradise before the strife
of contraries was known. Such is the blessed state of the Fire, when the Light
comes to rule over it, when it sinks down and resigns it self to the Light,
that its ^ierceness may be qualified with the soft meekness of the Light. Oh
the wonderful pleasant birth of Light! Which by penetrating the Essences of
Eternal Nature makes them wholly meek, sweet, soft and delightful, so that
nothing but a pleasing sight, sweet smell, delightful taste, ravishing sound,
and soft pleasant feeling is to be found amongst them. Here the Darkness
becomes lustrous, the Fire loses its burning and scorching property, and
becomes mild, luminous and quickening, and the Water clear and refreshing.

This Light (if we further enquire into its originality) does not immediately
proceed from the Divine Essence, which is an increated Light, but this is
^reated by that, and brought forth out of the Abyssal Chaos, as the Darkness,
Fire and Water were before. It is placed by God in the root of the
Water-essence, and from thence it shines forth; and with its meek bright
virtue penetrates and tincture's all the forms of Nature.

In the fifth place, God brings forth the Air, which blows up the
Love-fire-essence, and together with it constitutes the sixth form of Eternal
Nature. The Creator of all things knew, that the Fire-essence was placed
between two dangerous Enemies, the Darkness on the one hand, and the water on
the other; either the thick smoke of the Darkness might stifle and smother it,
or the Water might overwhelm and drown it: wherefore that the Fire of his
Eternal furnace might never be in danger of being extinguished, he brought
forth the Air-essence to blow up the Fire that it might not go out. It is this
Air-spirit that keeps the Wrath-fire in its due bounds, that it may neither be
too strong, nor too weak: for when it is too strong, it is in danger of drying
up the Water, and when too weak, its attractive hunger will not be great enough
to maintain its own being; for the Hunger of the fire is the cause and source
of the Fire-life, in the Fire-essence. If the moderate thirst and hunger of the
Wrath-fire were not preserved, the cause of Life, Sensibility and Mobility
would be taken away, and there would remain nothing but an unactive dead
Darkness, the Fire being extinguished.

This Air-spirit does not only m^d^rate the W^^th-fire, but it also blows up
the Love-fire-essence, with which being united ^ constitutes the sixth form of
Eternal Nature. This Love-fire has its root in the Meek-water, from whence it
springs, as the Fier^^-fire from the harsh astringent Darkness. It rises
(...) through the Meek-light, as the Wrath-fire through the Darkness, and is
blown up and preserved by the Air. This Love-fire does not immediately proceed
from the Divine Essence, which is an increated Fire-life, but this is created
and brought forth out of the Abyssal Chaos. But the Love-fire, which proceeds
immediately from the Divine-Essence, is the Loveliest, pleasantest and sweetest
birth of all, as Jacob Behme says, for it makes all the forms of Nature
Joyful, Pleasant and Lovely. As soon as this Child of Love is born the whole
birth of Eternal Nature stands in great Triumph of Divine Joy; all its Powers
and Essences become substantial, and they so see, hear, smell, taste and feel
one another in the most ravishing joyfulness beyond words and this pen's
expression. For the Love-fire gives forth it self for food to all the
properties of Nature, it becomes unto them Eternal Bread and Wine, wherewith
they are fed and refre^hed for ever; which makes them all cry out, O Love! thou
have satisfied our Hunger and quenched our Thirst, nay thou have filled us with
the highest exulting Ioys; behold, we desire no longer to have any will of our
own, but that all our wills may be thine, and so thy will may be our will; thou
shall have the dominion over us, only feed us with thy Heavenly food, and give
us thy Wine to drink Eternally. When this Love-essence mingles with the Spirit
it begets in him a Divine and Spiritual understanding, and opens his spiritual
senses of Seeing, Hearing, Tasting, Smelling and Feeling: thus the blind
properties of Nature come to see Spiritually and Intellectually, the Deaf to
Hear, the Dumb to Sing, and the Barren to become Fruitful. This is the feeling
Life of Nature, and proceeds from the Love-fire's-dominion in and over all its
properties. When this Love-fire-tincture enters into the Dark-fire-forms, and
comes to penetrate the burning Sulphur, poisonous Mercury and Salt-Nitre of
the Fire-spirit, and to change them into its own Nature, there arises such
triumphing Joy, charming Pleasure, ravi^hing Ecstasy and Exultation, as none
can imagine but those that have felt them, and tincture's them with such
variety of beautiful sparkling colors, as surpasses all the precious Stones
and Gems of this visible Creation. This Love-fire-Tincture (as Jacob Behme
declares) proceeds from the Union of the Fire and Light, and it is the joy and
end of Eternal Nature; neither is there any birth to be looked for, or enjoyed
beyond this birth of Love; in which the Eternal beginning has found the end of
its own handwork, and is indeed the perfection and accomplishment of the five
preceding forms of Eternal Nature.

And now in the last place, for a conclusion of all, the Creator brings forth
the seventh form, in which the ^ix forementioned working forms and properties
do act and qualify, as the Soul in the Body. It is the House and dwelling
place, and is the Eternal Earth, which gives ^he Eternal Substantiality and
Corporiety to them all. Here ^hey dwell in triumphant Joy; here they are all
fed, with the Eternal food which the Love-essence gives ^orth unto them, and
circle in and through one another, in the greatest Unity and Harmony in the
triumphant joy of the Love essence, which pierces through them all. Thus you
see the birth of Eternal Nature ^ull, complete and perfect; you see her in
comely garments wherewith she was arrayed when she came out of the ^ands of her
great Creator: you see all her Variety and Diversity Centred in Love's Harmony,
all contrariety and ^^rife banished from her Court.

But before we leave this prospect of Eternal Na^^re's excellence and
perfection, Let us consider,

First, That amongst all her distinct forms there is ^o disorder or confusion.

Secondly, That the variety and diversity of forms which are in her do not
produce the least strife or ^ontrariety, but are all reduced to a perfect
agreement ^n Love's Harmony. All the seven have but one will, one ^^sire, and
one joy and pleasure: And indeed how could it be otherwise? Since the God of
Love, Peace, and Unity could not be the Author of contrariety in Eternal
Nature's Essence, out of which he was to bring forth his whole Host of
Creatures; And thus much concerning the perfection of Eternal Nature's Essence.

10. Ans. In the tenth place, Eternal Nature's Essence is a Blessed and Happy
Essence; I do not mean that she is the Summum Bonum, the most High and
Sovereign happiness, for that is only to be found in the Divine Essence; but
that she is so far happy and blessed as a created Essence is capable of being.
This happiness of Eternal Nature consists in this, that she is free from all
contrariety, strife, misery and anguish, as has been but even now declared at
large.

Neither indeed could it be otherwise, except we will make God to be the Author
of contrariety, Misery, Pain and Death, which is directly contrary to his
Nature, and to what the Holy Scriptures testify concerning him; No, Eternal
Nature as she came out of the Hand of her great Creator was all Beautiful, all
Spotless, all Happy; no Strife, Misery, or Death to be found in any borders of
her Dominion. Neither do I in this Assertion contradict Jacob Behme, because he
speaks of Eternal Nature in her divided properties, as she was after the fall
of Angels; but I speak of her as she came out of God's Hand, all Good,
Harmonious, Perfect and Blessed.

Now since it has been declared before, that the Perfection, Happiness and
triumphant joyfulness of Eternal Nature is chiefly placed in her sixth and last
active form (the seventh being only as the body, or hou^e, wherein they
operate) viz. in the Love-essence, the Question may be put,

Quest. Why God placed the happiness of Eternal Nature neither in the
beginning, nor middle, but in the end of it?

Ans. To which I answer, That the Holy Trinity created Eternal Nature to be a
Palace for them to dwell in; now as in a Royal Palace we must pass through many
rooms and apartments, before we come to the Presence Chamber of the Prince; so
in Eternal Nature the forms of darkness must be passed through and after these
the Fire and Water, before we can come to the Love-fire, which the Holy Trinity
has chosen for his Presence Chamber, out of all the forms of Eternal Nature.
God will not have his Creatures to rush in of a sudden into his all-glorious
presence, and therefore has so ordered it that many doors must be passed by
them, and many locks opened, before they can come to His Presence, whom to see
and know is Eternal bliss and happiness. Wherefore thrice happy is the man, who
by walking this path of pure Nature, has passed the Gates of Darkness,
Bitterness and Anguish, and after them the Gate of the Fierce-fire, and at
length through Water, Light and Air has made his way to the Love-fire-essence;
where he meets with Eternal Rest, Liberty and triumphant Joy, as being come to
that point where the end has found the beginning, and where the beginning and
the end are joined together never to be parted again for ever.

Ans. 11. The Principle of Eternal Nature, is a Passive Principle; the Active
power of it being derived from the Holy Trinity, who have introduced themselves
to act and work in the same, and to bring forth Creatures out of it. She is
indeed the Mother of all beings, but as a Woman cannot bring forth without a
Man; so Eternal Nature would have continued barren for ever, without the Active
power of the Deity had impregnated her, to the end she might be the fruitful
Mother of all things.

Ans. 12. The Principle of Eternal Nature is a subjected and subordinated
Principle, as appears, because she is created by God, and therefore cannot be
coequal with the Deity, no more than the Creature can be with the Creator: she
is placed below the Globe of Eternity, is influenced from the same, and does
depend upon it: therefore must needs be a subjected and subordinated Principle.
We may hence gather the absurdity of that Athiehical Principle which makes
All-mighty Matter to be the Cause of all things; for we see here clearly that
Eternal nature, the matter of all things, is wholly Passive and subordinate to
the will and power of her Great Creator, in whose Hand she is as clay in the
Hand of the Potter.

Ans. 13. In the last place if it be asked, what kind of Principle Eternal
Nature is? I answer, that it is an useful and serviceable Principle, and that
because it fully answer's to all those ends for which it was created by God: but
more especially the usefulness thereof appears in these following particulars.

First, Because the Principle of Eternal Nature, is as it were the body of the
Holy Trinity wherein they live, act and move; as the Soul does in our Bodies,
and is therefore called the Eternal Humanity, and Eternal pure substantiality:
for without this Principle of pure Nature, the Holy Trinity is all pure Deity,
without any covering whatsoever; whereas in this Principle, the Deity is
clothed upon with Eternal Humanity,; which conjunction of the Deity with
Humanity is the greatest mystery, n^xt to that of the Holy Trinity; by means of
which the Holy Trinity convey their pure Deity, which is all Life, Power and
Virtue through the Principle of Eternal Nature.

Secondly, The usefulness of E^ernal Nature's Principle appears, in that it is
become the Palace and Habitation of the Holy Trinity. God's first and most
glorious Palace is the still Eternity, or the Eternal World which he generated
out of himself, that it might be the first and most proper habitation for
himself; but his second Palace, or dwelling place is the Principle of Eternal
Nature.

Thirdly, In the third place, the usefulness of Eternal Nature's Principle
appears, in that it is God's workhouse wherein the great and wonderful Potter
has laid up not only a sufficiency of Materials, but also of Tools and
Instruments for all Creations. Here is the great and Universal treasury of that
Clay of which all things are made; and here is the Eternal turning wheel with
which they are framed and fashioned.

Fourthly, Eternal Nature's Principle is the Wardrobe of the Deity, where all
the variety of vestures and clothing, wherewith the Holy Trinity are pleased
at any time to cover themselves, are laid up. All the forms of Eternal Nature,
Darkness, Fire, Light, Water, etc. are but so many vehicles, or rather vestures
of the Deity, wherewith he vaileth his pure-naked essential Glory. Wherefore he
is also termed a God that hides himself, even his pure Deity with and under
the forms of Eternal Nature.

Fifthly, In the fifth place, the usefulness of Eternal Nature's Principle
appears, in that it is the Conduit-pipe through which the golden oil and water
of Life, together with the Divine Virtue of the Heavenly Tincture, is conveied
to the Creature. Pure Nature's Principle is the silver-pipe through which the
Golden oil of the Holy Tincture, which flows from the Union of Fire and Light,
is conveied, and is the mean by which the Holy Trinity, with the wonders of
Eternity, come to be manifested, felt, tasted and enjoyed; and therefore must
needs be a very useful and necessary Principle.

Sixthly, In the sixth and last place, Eternal Nature's Principle is the field
wher^in is hid the inestimable Pearl of the Holy Trinity: it is the Cabinet
wherein is contained the Jewel of wonder, viz. the Deity in pure Humanity:
whosoever it is that finds this Pearl does, together with it, find all the
wonders of the Holy Trinity. The ^earl indeed is one thing and the field, or
rich Cabinet another, yet is both field and Cabinet very useful to keep and
conceal the precious stone of Eternal Wisdom, which is fast locked up in this
Cabinet, and lye's deep buried in this field, and whosoever will find it must
dig deep for it.

But you will say, where shall I find this field? I answer the field is thy
self: if thou can find in thy self the Union of Fire and Light, and these two
qualifying together in one Essence, then thou have met with the place where
this noble stone is hid, and thou need seek no further. And thus much shall
suffice to have spoken concerning the Principle of Eternal Nature. I shall now
proceed to the fourth general head, or the last part of this discourse,
concerning God's introducing of himself into Eternal Nature.

The end of the Third Part.
Soli sapienti Deo Gloria.
The Fourth Part.
Concerning God in Eternal Nature.
THE Mystical Divines do make mention of two great Mysteries in the Divine
Nature; the first is the Trinity in Unity and Unity in Trinity, which respect's
the Deity in their single, solitary and abstracted Essence: the second Mystery,
is the Deity in Humanity and Humanity in the Deity, which concern's God as
being introduced and subsisting in Eternal Nature. I have in the former part of
this discourse treated of the first of these; and do now intend in this Chapter
to speak of the later, and that by opening this proposition, that God has
introduced himself into the principle of Eternal Nature.

Which Proposition you will find explained in these following particulars.

1. In the first place, when I say that God has introduced himself into
Eternal Nature, I understand that the Blessed Trinity, Father, Son and Holy
Ghost, have introduced themselves into Eternal Nature. The Father with his
intellectual, all seeing Eye, the Son with his all flaming Heart of Love, and
the Holy Ghost with his out-flowing acting Power.

2. Secondly, when I say that God introduced himself, etc. I do include the
Eternal Wisdom which God introduced together with himself into the principle of
Eternal Nature.

3. In the third place, God introduced himself into Eternal Nature together
with his essential Love, which is the holy Nature of the Trinity, according to
that of the Apostle John, God is Love.

Object. But some may object, That the Divine Nature does not only consist in
Love, but also in Light and Life, which are attributed to the Holy Trinity as
well as Love.

Sol. To which I answer, That Love, in the sense I take it, does include both
Light and Life, for this essential Love, is all Light and all Life; so that
neither death, nor darkness can come near it. Now we must know that this
essential Love is the unchangeable Nature of the Trinity, and therefore we must
not think that the Divine Nature is changed by being brought into and clothed
upon with Eternal Nature, and from Love turned to Wrath, or from Meekness to
Severity. No, by no means: for as God is all Love in himself, so he is the same
in Eternal Nature.

Quest. But you will say, how can this be reconciled with Scripture which
attributes Wrath, Anger, Severity and Justice to God.

Ans. I answer, that when the Scripture speaks of God's Anger, Wrath and
Severity, it has regard to God's manifesting of himself in and through Eternal
Nat^re as it is infected and defiled by sin. Whereas when I say, that the
manifestation of God in Nature is all Love, I speak of Nature in its purity,
before it was infected by the fall of Lucifer, and when all its forms and
properties were harmonized to the most penfect concord and Unity: for in this
state nothing but Love, which is the unchangeable Nature of God, was to be
found in Eternal Nature's principle.

4. In the last place, I say, God introduced the seven Spirits before the
Throne together with himself into Eternal Nature; else these seven Spirits
could never have been seen, or manifested in Eternal Nature's principle; but
the Scripture often makes mention of them as introduced into Eternal Nature; so
they were represented to John, in the first Chap. of the Revelation as existing
in Mount-Zion, or the New Ierusalem-principle, which was brought forth out of
Eternal Nature.

And thus much shall suffice to have spoken of the first part, or subject of
this proposition, which is God: we now proceed to the praedicate which is
Eternal Nature.

2. Now by Eternal Nature, into which it is said that God has introduced
himself, we are to understand Eternal Nature in its puriey, not as defiled with
sin; for the Holy Trinity would never of their own free will have introduced
themselves into any thing that was defiled, or impure. Again, we are to
understand that when Gnd introduced himself into Eternal Nature, that she stood
yet in her original Unity, Simplicity and Harmony, without any duality, or
contrariety: for the Holy Trinity would never have entered with their Divine
Nature of Love, into that where division, disagreement and contrariety had
taken place. No, Eternal Nature was without strife or contest, without any
mixture of Good and Evil, or Light and Darkness, but was all perfectly
harmonized; or else the blessed Trinity could not have made it the habitation
of their Divine Love-Essence. And thus we see in what sense we are to take
Eternal Nature, when we speak of God's introducing himself into it.

3. I come now to the third and last particular in the foregoing proposition
which may need some explication, which is the word introduced how it is to be
understood, and in what sense we are to take it in this place. When we say that
the Holy Trinity have introduced themselves into Eternal Nature, we mean
nothing else, but the Union of the Blessed Trinity with Eternal Nature, and
Eternal Nature's Union with the Blessed Trinity, which is the full meaning of
God's introduction of himself into Eternal Nature's principle. Here the Deity
subsist's in its Eternal Humanity, and Eternal Humanity subsist's in Union with
the Deity: God in Nature, and Nature in God; and thus God and Nature are in one
another, because God has introduced his Divine Nature of Love into Eternal
Nature's pure principle.

The Nature of which Union I shall explain and open to you in these following
particulars.

1. First, then I say, that this Union of God with Eternal Nature is a true,
real, essential and most intimate Union. In every Union these three things are
to be found, and meet together, viz. the Uniter, the thing United, and the
Union it self, which joins the Uniter and United together. In this Union of God
with Eternal Nature the Uniter is the blessed Trinity, the thing United is the
principle of Eternal Nature; and the Union of them both is the Divine Nature of
Love, now this Love, which is the link and tie of both the Uniter and United,
is the essential Love of the Deity, wherefore this Union must needs be an
essential and most intimate Union: It is a kind of incorporation, the Uniter
and United penetrating and mixing with one another: and therefore this Union of
God and Eternal Nature in Love's Essence is compared to a Nuptial Union, because
God has as it were espoused himself ^ith Eternal Nature, as a pure, spotless
and undefiled Virgin, in an indissoluble band, which is the band of Essential
Love.

2. In the second place, this Union of God with Eternal Nature is an Eternal
Union; for no sooner was the principle of Eternal Nature brought forth, but the
Holy Trinity introduced themselves into it, and this was before the foundation
of the Angelical World was laid, and consequently from Eternity Quo ad nos, so
it must be understood by us --

3. In the third and last place, this Union is an unchangeable and inseparable
Union; and that because the band and tie of this Union is the Eternal
unchangeable Love of God.

Quest. But you will say, that God's Love may be changed into anger, which is
the bond of this Union, and consequently the Union it self may be changed?

Ans. To which I answer, by denying that God's Love can be changed into anger
in Eternal Nature, as she stands in purity and perfection, before the coming in
of sin; because in that state neither Eternal Nature, nor any thing in it could
be the subject of God's Anger, Hatred, Severity, or Justice. Wherefore tho in
fallen Nature we perceive the effects of God's Love and Hatred, Mercy and
Justice, Sweetness and Severity, yet in pure Nature, into which God has
introduced himself and concerning which we speak here, nothing can ever be
found but the effects of an unchangeable Love: which unchangeable Love is that
bond, which makes the inseparable Union between God and pure Nature, between
the Deity and Humanity. This Love is that which after a vital manner does pass
through and penetrate all and every part of Eternal Nature, and Eternal Nature
presses into the Love, which makes the Union of them both most intimate, vital
and inseparable: so that we may say, who shall, or who can separate God and
pure Nature? Or who can disannul the Eternal Covenant between them? But yet
notwithstanding all that has been said concerning this Union between God and
pure Nature's principle, we are to understand that this Union is without
confusion, so as God is not pure Nature, nor pure Nature God, for tho one be in
the other; yet God comprehends Nature, but Nature cannot comprehend the Deity.

Quest. But here it may be enquired, what were the ends and motives why the
Blessed Trinity introduced themselves and entered into so intimate a Union with
pure Nature's Principle?

Ans. To which enquiry I shall answer with these following particulars.

1. Reas. Why the Trinity brought forth themselves into pure Nature's
Principle, was for the manifestation of themselves in it and by it. For tho
they were manifested to themselves, and simplified Spirits in the still
Eternity, yet they desired a further manifestation of themselves to Creatures
which lay hid in the womb of Eternal Nature, and for this reason did they enter
into Union with it. 2. Reas. A second motive or reason was, that the Holy
Trinity might glorify and exalt their own Divine Nature of Eternal Love in
those Worlds and Creatures, which were to be brought forth from the womb of
Eternal Nature. In the still Eternity there were indeed an infinite number of
simplified Spirits, who dwelling in the Cen^er of Love, did glorify and exalt
the Divine Nature of Love, which was all in all to them. But the design of God
was to have his Eternal Love glorified and exalted in an infinite variety of
Creatures and beings, who might all in their several ranks and according to
their several capacities exalt and glorify Love; and so make up the Divine
Consort and Harmony, which cannot be without variety. 3. Reas. Why the Holy
Trinity have introduced themselves into Eternal Nature was, for the
manifestation of their Sovereignty and Supremacy. For how could their
Sovereignty be manifested without variety of Dominions and Subjects? Now both
these were brought forth out of the womb of Eternal Nature by the Holy Trinity.
The Dominions were those several Worlds which were created out of Nature's
principle, and the Subjects were the numberless number of Creatures, which were
the Inhabitants of each of those Worlds and Principles, and by both of these,
the Sovereignty of the Holy Trinity was fully declared and manifested; which
was one reason why they introduced themselves into Eternal Nature. 4. Reas. Was
for the manifestation of their Eternal Power, Wisdom and Goodness in the
creating of so many Worlds visible and invisible, together with such an
infinite variety of creatures to store and replenish them. As also in the
ordering, governing and disposing of them for the obtaining those glorious ends
for which they were created. Nothing can more expressly declare and manifest the
divine Power, Wisdom and Goodness, than the Creating and Governing of so many
Worlds and Creatures, as were brought forth from the womb of Eternal Nature for
this very end. 5. Reas. Why the Holy Trinity introduced themselves into Eternal
Nature, was, for the executing their Eternal Goodwill, decrees and purposes and
bringing them into act. For the Eternal Goodwill and purpose of the Holy
Trinity was to manifest their own Glory in the Creation of Worlds, and an
infinite variety of Creatures which were to be the inhabitants of the same, out
of Eternal Nature's Principle: wherefore for the effecting and bringing about
of these designs they introduced themselves into Eternal Nature, that so it,
being impregnated by the Divine Love-essence, might give a being to those
Worlds and Creatures, which had been from all Eternity in the purpose and
decree of the Holy Trinity. 6. Reas, The sixth reason why God introduced
himself into Eternal Nature, was, for the glorification of Nature, by means of
its union with the Divine Essence of Love^ I told you before, that one main
reason why the Trinity introduced themselves into Nature was for the
manifesting of the Glory of their Divine Nature, and now I come to tell you,
that it was for the Glorification of Nature; that Nature might be exalted to
the highest degree of Glory, it was capable of, by its union with the Deity.
Eternal Nature indeed in its own Essence was pure and spotless, but its Glory
is from the union it has with the Deity^ who penetrates it through and
through, and communicates of his own glory unto it, glorifying it in, with and
through himself. Now to the end that Nature might thus be made partaker of the
Divine Glory, it pleased the Holy Trinity to enter into and unite Eternal
Nature to themselves. 7. Reas. The last reason, why the Holy Trinity united
themselves to Eternal Nature, was, that they might ^e the supreme acting,
governing and moving power in and throughout the pure principle of Nature, and
thereby become the sole author, and the all in all of the motions of Nature.
But I do not say that the Trinity is the sole mover in the principle of defiled
and fallen Nature, for there the Dragon and the Beast have established their
Dominions, and are very active and stirring in it. And tho we cannot deny but
God is in fallen Nature, yet not to the same e^d, for which he was pleased to
introduce himself into pure Nature; for he introduced himself into pure Nature,
that he might be the sole mover and actor in it, and thereby to keep and
preserve it in its original purity: whereas the end why God entered into fallen
Nature was that he might redeem it and restore it to its original purity, from
whence it is fallen.
Quest. But you will say, How can the high purity of the Divine Nature be
preserved in the unclean vessel of defiled and corrupted Nature?

Answ. To which I answer, That if we consider what has been said of the Divine
Nature, we shall find this objection fully satisfied, for I told you that the
Divine Nature is the highest unity and simplicity, and consequently cannot
admit of any mixture, or composition with any thing: and again I told you that
the Divine Nature was an Eternal Liberty, being free from all; tho being in and
penetrating through all, like the beams of the Sun, which tho they pierce the
Air and Water penetrating them throughout, yet are they not mixed, or jumbled
with them, but abide in their perfect liberty and untouched from either of them.

And now for a Conclusion, we may draw this corollary from what has been said,
that the Divine Nature and glory of the Deity is hid i^ Nature, as a Jewel in a
Cabinet, or as a treasure hid in a field. Indeed in pure Nature this Jewel is
easily found, for there it lie'^ open, and shed's its luster, whereby it
discovers it self; but in impure Nature it lie's deep hid and buried, and
cannot be discovered, but with great pains and difficulty. Yet some holy souls
have found this Pearl in their ^wn fallen nature, through great earnestness and
continual labor, and thereby have attained to the possession of the Blessed
Trinity in themselves, and through their Baptism into the Nature of the Father,
Son and Spirit, are arrived to perfection by the redemption, purification and
transmutation of their impure natures, and so restored again to their Original
purity. These were called in those days wise men, and Lovers of wisdom, and
holy souls, from their high Union to and with the Divine Nature of Love.

Thus for a Conclusion you see how God the Father has introduced himself into
the principle of pure Nature, as an Eternal Eye, to see through all Nature's
Globe, and together with himself, his Eternal flaming Heart of Love, as an
Eternal spring flowing continually through all the principle of Eternal Nature
for its delight and refreshment, and his Spirit of Life to be the supreme
moving motion throughout the whole Essence of pure Nature. Thus much may
suffice to have been spoken of what God is in Pure Nature.

Having hitherto given you an account concerning the Principle of Eternal
Nature, we are next to speak of the Generations of it, that is, the numerous
offspring of Worlds and Creatures which were manifested from her fruitful
womb, which I intend shall be, and now have made it to be the Subject of my
second Tract, Treatise or Book, namely of the Angels, and herewith shall put an
end to the first, wherein I have endeavored to declare these three
Propositions: What the Nature of the Holy Trinity is out of Eternal Nature.
What Eternal Nature is. What God is in pure Eternal Nature, Cujus nullus:


FINIS.
(...)
ALL the Errata to your outward look
Correct within your self, that inward Book.
Be wholey God-taught; wholey, if you can:
Be not a Skreen to Antichrist, but Fan.
No other Book you then need read of man.
But while in weak and childish state we dwell,
We must have Letters, line on line to spell,
And so let Faults ^e mended, and all is well.
So sai'th and prai'th your humbl
DRAWDE REKOOH.
THE Printer likewise prays that yo^ would pleas to mend the matter, some
what a little Marred, he confesses, for wan^ of these words: whi^^ ^e
requesteth may be read in the room of the other. Thus,

For impli page 3. line 17. imprieth. for Seren in p. 55. l. 7. put in Seven.
p. 59. l. 23. He, twixt is and who. and l. 30. brightness l. ult. ^
Repraesentation. p. 89. l. 18. Sovereign. p. 91. l. 31. up with. p. 94. l. 30.
praedestinations. p. 95. l. 21. creatures. p. 129. l. 28. Magicaly. p. 139. l.
penult. six. p. 142. l. 27. Spirit. p. 145. ^. 33. Nature. p. 151. l. 13.
Tresaurie. p. 154.


