POEMS UPON SEVERAL OCCASIONS.

By S. P. Gent.

LONDON, Printed by W. G. for Henry Marsh at the Princes Arms in Chancery Lane,
and Peter Dring at the Sun in the Poultrey near the Counter, 1660.

A PANEGYRIC TO HIS EXCELLENCY General MONCK March 28. 1660.
NOW almost twenty years have roul'd about
Since first the flames of our late Wars broke out;
And Britain fainting with the loss of blood
Under a lawless Yoke subjected stood,
When now at last her groans by Heaven are heard
Her fainting Soul and dying Hopes uprear'd;
Her sable night of sorrow done away
By the new dawning of a Royal day.
As from the North her first distemper grew,
Thence slowes the Sovereign Medicine, to renew
Her joys again: She hopes secure to stand
Upheld by her brave Generall's Warlike hand.
Over the British Seas flies his great Name
Born on the swift wings of no common fame,
Our Enemies tremble, and our friends are glad,
To these it is joyful news, to those it is sad
The mighty shouts, and the Stentorian voice
Of the glad multitude that now rejoice
Awak's the drowsy Genius of this I Will,
Who wept so long over Charles's Funeral pyle
Till his swollen eyes with a Lethargick sleep
Were sealed up, having no more tears to weep.
He understands the cause of Englands joy
And least Ambition should their hopes destroy
He boldly does his mind to Monck express
And shows how he may Britains ills redress.
The Genius Speech.
GReat man by blood, by virtue greater made,
Whose presence Banishes the gloomy shade
Of Britains night; the fair Aurora too
The Royal Phoebus ushered in by you:
Thy Sword has cut our Chains of slavery
Thy hands the Gordian knots of Tyranny
Untied; thy strenuous Arms unhinged our Gates
To show thy strength, the greatest pride abates,
To show what thou could do, that we thereby
Might on thy more than Samson's strength rely:
But what thou did was at another frown,
Thou hung'st them up, that kindness was thy own.
Great Heronles of our I Will at last thou'st slain
That Hydra never more to rise again,
Though often crushed, that Monstrous Tail, (which bit
Her own head off) did resurrection git,
But now she is dead, and never more shall rise,
Tryumphs, not tears attend her Obsequies.
And now but one step more and thy great name
Registered stand shall in the Book of Fame
In so great Characters the world may read
Thy marchlesse story when that thou art dead:
The World too little for thy fame shall be
And Princes honor shall thy name and thee.
See then great General, Britains Genius now
Before thee stands, and willing is to owe
A happiness to thee, wherein thou may
Raise honor to thy self; if thou delay'st,
Time and necessity will thee prevent
And spoil the luster of thy great intent.
Now drooping Britain raises up her head,
Inspired by thee she arises from the dead,
Her War-made breaches now are cured again,
And joys and ease succeed her grief and pain,
Her spotless Virgin Chores begin to sing
Io Paeans in honor to their King:
Fail not her now-bigg hopes but be content
To raise an everlasting Monument
To thee and thy posterity; that bays
May Crown thy Brows and Ages speak thy praise.
Thou see our wants, and what it is we would have
It is a King of Charles's race we crave;
Since all the people in one voice agree,
God's Oracle, it is God that asks it thee,
Who having scourged poor Britain for her sin,
Returns her Baulme to cure her wounds agin.
We 'ave tried, and too too long, a Commonwealth,
Such as it was, a Bane to Englands Health,
Where fifty Tyrants with one mouth agree,
To eat up Law, Religion, Liberty*
Monsters that Kings and Bishops Lands devour,
Kept by extorted sums the Nation poor;
Philosophers that changed all to gold,
And let go nothing that their gripes could hold;
Yet these were they that needs would styled be
The Keepers of our England's Liberty;
But by thy power great Monck wee'r freed again,
And George most bravely has the Dragon slain.
Ambitious Cromwell put the purple on,
And having slamn the Father, robbed the Son
O^ right and title, to a royal Crown,
To set himself up, pulled another down,
And what he got by rapine, he made good,
Though by Religion cloak'd, by sorce and blood,
All what our Heroes once contended for,
With the sad tempest of a civil War
Himself usurped; and gloryed in his pride
To have with peace what was to Kings denied;
But yet you see the Nation scourged, that God
Renews his mercy and has burned his rod,
And Cromwell's name grows odious every where,
Which was obeyed not out of Love, but fear.
Let his example your ambition curb,
Do not our growing happiness disturb,
By mounting of a Throne is none of yours,
For be assured that the sacred powers,
Will blast the first fruits of thy tyranny,
Fraud must preserve what is got by policy.
And now our people used to subtleties,
To be deceived by crafts are grown too wise,
So that the faces deny thy Regiment,
And people to obey no more are bent,
Till he arises in the British sphere,
Whom all desire the royal Crown to wear.
Thou see our griefs and know the ways to cure,
Our Maladies, thy Faith we knows too pure
For to be tempted to betray our hopes,
Who doubts thy loyalty, to treason opes
A way; no though tho say thou wilt us deceive,
Such is our confidence we will not believe,
Since one so good and great as Monck must be,
The only Man can give us liberty.
Britain in sackcloth has mourned long enough,
It Is time to lay aside the Sword and Buff,
It Is time to pull those Puny-Nobles down,
Who speak against, and yet affect a Crown,
That those by blood and virtue truly great,
May be installed in their long-lest seat
These shining in their ermin gallantry,
Beget a reverence due to Majesty.
Now I have done, and you have this to do,
To bring him in for whom the Nations sue,
Great Charles, who more then by sev'n twelve months tried,
And in afflictions Furnace purified,
Must come forth brighter then tried gold, more bright
Then lustrous Sol after a darksome night;
Whose brighter beams of Love shall raise the slain,
And make our Halcyon days to live again;
England shall bless thy name when this is done,
And style the Phosphor to the rising Sun,
To thee shall Britain pay her anuall vows,
Whilst Ducall diadems crown thy Princely brows.
A PANEGYRIC ON HIS MAJESTY'S Entrance Into LONDON.
THE Heaven's great Star since He saluted Earth
With his diurnal Light, never yet gave Birth
To such a joyful Day, as that wherein
Charles to his native England came ag'in.
His loyal Subjects Hearts grown big with joy
The best expressions of their Love employ,
To give a cherefull welcome to their King,
From whose arivall all our blessings Spring,
Whilst Foes, and Traitors to his royal Sire,
Grown mad through Envy, in their rage expire.
Now Phoebus ushers in the happy day,
Which for posterity recorded may
In golden letters ever stand; and be
A festival for regained liberty;
And gilding all the Heavens with his Rays,
Dispenses smiles, Serenity displayes.
Revived Subjects throng to see their prize,
Joy sparkles in their faces, and their eyes:
Their tongues, and hands with powerful Eccohs sound
And joyful shouts against the heavens rebound.
The Air is filled on every side with noise;
The voice of War, and death now speaks their joys.
The Bells have tongues, which sound our Joys aloud,
And say that Charles is come: the Drums are proud
To speak his march. The silver Trumpets say
Charles over three Kingdoms does triumph to day:
Which conquest got by virtues has more charms
To hold a lasting peace, than that by Arms.
London in all its gallantry does shine,
Conduits convert their water into wine.
Adorned the female beauties of the Land
To see their Sovereign in Ballconies stand,
The bravest Heroes of the British Isle
Usher our Caesar through the streets the while;
Whose sacred face with beams of Majesty
Surrounded, far out-vies the bravery
Of his adornments: and the lustrous fire
Of's eyes dismays those who denied his sire
And him to reign; now they their folly see
Converted by one look of Majesty.
Ten thousand Hearts and knees do humbly bow,
As he goes by; each heart a solemn vow
Prepares, of praise, and of obedience too,
For long and happy days to Heav'en they sue.
Long live great Charles, and may his sacred Name,
Swell to that worth, not to be spoke by Fame,
May Nestors years his Happy reign attend!
May heavens his breast with Solomon's choice befriend!
The people cry. Loud shouts conclude the day,
Phoebus to the other world hasts to display
The joyful news: Night now would take her turn,
But flaming fires in every Corner burn,
Which Night to Day change: Phoebus place supply,
And make a Day without the Heaven's great eye.
It Is true whilst Charles possesses his own right,
That loyal Britains can expect no night.
Our regal Sun, since Charles the first was slain,
Eclipsed has been, but now shines bright again.
By Heaven enthroned thus, in his peoples hearts,
He shall withstand all Machivilian Arts:
Laurells of peace about his brows shall spread,
And three great Crowns surround his royal Head.
Ita Precatur S. P.

SOME TEARS Dropped over the Hearse OF THE INCOMPARABLE PRINCE HENRY DUKE OF
GLOUCESTER.
FAtal September to the Royal Line,
Has snatched one Hero of our hopeful Trine
From Earth; it is strange Heav n should not prae-
A loss so grievous by some Blazin^ Star, (declare
Which might our Senses overjoyed, alar'm,
And time give to prepare for so great Harm.
The Springtide of our Joy was newly Flood,
Paying our Thankful Vows for so much good
We gather now, under a gracious KING;
Inspired Bards began strong Lays to Sing,
When (oh sad Fate!) Ebbed are our Flowing Seas,
And Epiques changed to Doleful Elegies.
Cruel Extremes! thus robbed of Joys the chief,
Thrown down like Lightning into Seas of Gries.
It Is past the reach of Mortals to divine,
Why Heaven so soon has broke our Threesold Line;
We may not pry without a black offense
Into the Arcana's of his Providence,
But may believe, since with a Bounteous Hand
God has restored the Blessings of this Land,
That he has flung us into Griefs extreme,
Not out of Wrath to Us, but Love to Him.
He was Fair Fruit sprung from a Royal Bud,
And grown as great by fair Renown as Blood;
Ripe too too soon; for in a Youth so green
An Harvest was of gray-hair'd VVisdome seen.
Minerva's Darling, Patron of the Gown,
Lover of Learning, and Apollo's Crown
He was; the Muses he began to nourish,
Learned Men and Arts under his wings did flourish;
But lest we should commit Idolatry,
Heaven took him from our Sight, not Memory;
For though he is carried to th Immortal Sphere,
Our Loves will make his Fame Immortal here.
It Is Autumn now: and Ceres to our hands
Has poured the Annual Blessings of our Lands;
VVe'ave robbed the reeming Trees of all their fruit,
And left them naked till the Spring recruit
Their store again; till then they hang their head,
And stand like Mourners, leaves for tears they shed;
So the high powers cropped from the Royal Stem,
What was too good for us, and fit for them,
VVhilest we lament, till a new Spring arise,
And CHARLES his Firstborn clear our weeping eyes.
A general Sadness locks up every Tongue,
Amazedness host struck the Laureats dumb: (bears,
And who would weep, through too much Grief for-
Excess of Grie^ gives yet no vent for Tears,
But when the coming Springs begin to rise,
Grief then will draw a deluge from our Eyes;
Till then these Loyal Drops fallen into Verse,
Shall wash the Cypress on his Royal Hearse.
POEMS ON Several Occasions.
His Mistress.
AS Phoebus does excel the Moons dim light,
Or as the Moon excells the dullest Star,
Her Beauty, and Complexion in my sight
Excells all others I have seen, so far:
Her Sun-like beams of beauty shine so bright,
That others in her sight Eclipsed are
The fairest faces are but foiles, each one
Wears but a borrowed luster from her Sun.
Her Shape in Wax it were most hard to frame,
Nor Painters to express their rarest Skill
Could ever counterfeit so near the same,
But blemish their's her better Beauty will;
Though Venus who for Beauty had the Name
Compare with her should, she would be fairest still;
Paris gave her the Ball as beauties Queen,
But she had mist it had he mine but Seen.
Her Aubourn Hair in Crisped Curles do dangle
Upon her Ivory shoulders, where it spreads
Sly nets, where Hearts themselves do soon entangle,
And captive lie, enchain'd by those bright threads;
Spreading sost chains, and snares in every angle,
It takes all Hearts, whose eye those mazes treads:
Hearts here imprisoned (never can get out)
Those sost Meandres wander must about.
Her Ivory pollish'd Front with seemly cheer,
Graced at the bottom with a double bow,
Where all the Graces in their Throne appear,
Where Love, and awful Majesty do grow,
Expands it self, and shows a field more clear,
Than Candid Lillys, or the virgin snow;
Her Eyes like Suns shoot rays more sharp than Darts,
Which wound all Flinty, Love-despising Hearts.
Those twinkling Stars, those sparkling Diamond stones,
Those glorious Suns, where dwells the Eastern Light,
Pierce with the vigor of their Charms the bones
Of daring Him, who gains of them a sight;
Beholding Kills, yet he their loss bemones,
And 'd rather dye, than they shut live in Night.
Her Nose a comely Prominence, does part
Her Cheeks, the mirror of Dame Natures Art.
Her cheeks are damask Roses blown in June,
B'ing equally with Virgin Lillies mix't;
Or snowy milk with blushing Strawb'ries strewn,
Where equal strife the red, and white's betwixt;
Or pure ver million on white Satin shown,
By Painters rarest Skill, and pencil fixed:
Those cheek no Colors livelest dye can paint,
Scarlet, and snow seem to their true ones faint.
Her lips are snips of Scarlet, Iuliflowers,
Spread with the tincture of Vermilion hew,
Blessed in Self-kisses; past our humane powers
To touch; so high a bliss what Mortal knew?
Between those rubie Gates slide spicy showers,
Which, those slain by her eyes, with life imbue:
Angellick sounds, and charming smiles, so nice,
Thence flow which make her presence Paradise.
Within the portal of her Mouth's locked fast,
(Which when she sings she is enforced to show)
The Orient's Treasure in due order placed,
Of more than precious pearls a double row;
Which stand in Sea-born Coral borders chased,
Like Crimson Satin purl'd with silver snow.
Her smooth, and dimpled Chin does under lie,
Where envies self cannot a fault epsy.
Her Neck's a graceful Tower of spotless snow,
An Alablaster prop to that fair head,
Where Wit, Arts, Wisdom in perfection grow,
Its Basis where are beauties also spread;
For azure streams through milky feilds do flow,
Where blew, with white like Heaven is married:
Her Breasts like lilly'd Globes, or Mounts appear,
Whose summetts Crowned with Crimson cheries are.
Her Arms due measure of proportion have,
Her hands the types of snowy Excellence
With Onyx tip'd; her legs, and feet enslave
Our eyes, and Captive hold from falling thence:
Her whole frames equal Symetry is brave,
And to spectators pays a recompense:
Argus himself cannot discern the rest,
But I presume the hidden beauties best.
The Protestation.
Before bright Phoebus had his beams displayed,
Whilst yet Aurora ushered in the Day,
The prat'ling Echo to my ears betrayed,
As I among the trees in ambush lay,
The amorous whispers of Amyntas, who
With protestation did his Cloris woo.
What went before I cannot tell, but she
Replied to something that Amyntas said,
The murmuring Echo by the Air to me
These gentle sounds in whispering notes conveyed.
Alas! Amyntas would that you could prove
To my distrustful Heart that men can love.
How often are we poor sily maids beguiled
By charms of flattering words? when we believe
To break their oaths men will not be so vild,
Being so poor a conquest to deceive
Disarmed virgins? when we them reward
With Love, they are cold, and us with scorn regard.
It Is best to keep our own, for when we yield
Our Hearts, men supplyants soon forget to be,
And our affections caught, with scorn repelled
We are subjected to their tyranny:
That maid is more then mad who will be kind,
To men, who waver oftener than the Wind.
Blame not our Natures, but your follies blame,
For we should sooner yield were Men more true,
But since weak virgins to deceive no shame
They think; denialls Cruelty is due.
But yet Amyntas would that you could prove
To my distrustful Heart your constant love.
Amyntas with a sigh replied. It Is true,
Some men are faulty in what you accuse them,
But let not all be blamed for a few,
Nor Women men despise, 'cause some abuse them.
For if I went about it, I could prove,
Men equal Woomen in a constant Love.
Our sexe's cause I will not plead; my own
With you, sweet Cloris, will I only plead,
My constant Love must by Obedience shown
Be; else I cannot be truly scanned till dead:
Constant obedience it is does rightly prove,
A Heart's possessor of a constant Love.
Things that the least of drossy mixture hold,
Last longest; my Hearts flames Aetherial be,
More pure than seven times refined Gold,
Than Cedar's flames: rays of a Deity
They are. It is the purity of Love
Which best of all its constancy can prove.
My love like Adamant endure the stroke
Of strong repulses shall; full draughts of smiles,
Nor worlds of beauties, shall my Heart provoke
TO inconstant Change; nor all the intising guiles
A proffered Love can give. The world shall be
First changed, e're I yield to Inconstancy.
The twinkling tapours of the Night shall fall
First from their azure lodging; Hecate
Shall loose her light, and a perpetual
Mask wear of pitch; And Heavens bright lamp shall be
With darkness overcome: Night into Day
Shall change; and cold November into May.
The Sun shall backward course the World about,
The fire shall cease combustibles to burn,
Soft gales shall put the flinty Rocks to rout,
And Neptune shall his fry to grasing turn,
Mountains to Vailes; valleys to Hills shall rise,
Plains shall be made of Craggs that touch the Skies.
All beasts shall Metamorphos'd into stones
Be, and all Mortals shall their exit prove,
Tormented Souls shall cease to fetch sad groans,
The Heavens rent from their center first shall move,
E're I to thee fair Cloris be unkind,
Repent me of my love, or change my mind.
My Tongue may't faulter, may my lips never move,
If unto other but to thee they shall
Make protestations of a Serious love!
Cloris believe! I Heavens to witness call!
The Maid converted joined her lips to his,
Gathering the first fruits of a greater bliss.
The Passionate Lover,
HAd I but wind and Lungs enough to tell
How much I Love; Had I a Stentor's voice,
Had I ten thousand Tongues it would do well,
To speak how much I Love my dearest Choice,
Since wholly filled, If I should not impart
Loves might, its energy would break my Heart.
Say my five senses has not Love's delight
Bound all your powers with its amourous chains,
Disarmed your Subjects? Spoiled and robbed you quite?
Can you ought relish but Love's pleasing pains?
You now disgust all objects of this Ball,
Phillis is the only object of you all.
When that my eye has light on Phillis face,
It tells my amorous Heart news good, or bad;
By which or well the alarmed pulses Pace,
Or ill: my looks by it are light, or sad:
Does sorrow dimm the Light of Phillis eye,
Joys, and Contentment from my Bosom fly.
Does threatening Anger, or disdain appear
Clothed in the Tyrian blushes in her Cheeks,
No Poet's art in verse can paint my fear,
Nor the Horror and dismay my vitalls strikes:
I dumb, and movelesse like a statue show
Struck with the Thunder of her Angry brow
The fearful Lightning, nor the dreadful voice
Of roaring Thunder, nor the horrid Night,
Nor Ghosts, nor Goblins, nor tempestuous noise
Of winds, nor Earthquakes can my senses fright,
So much as when Phyllis with anger glows,
And from her quick Eyes scorn-tip't Arrows throws.
If pleasing smiles sit on their rubie Throne,
If Joy is painted on her smoother brow,
My senses wrapped beyond the Spears, are thrown
On bedds of pleasure; and forget all woe:
With less Content the Miser does behold
His Stuffed Chests, and full-cram'd bags of Gold.
My Eyes devou're each smile; the more they gaze
On Hers, the more Contentment still they draw;
Her smiles the clue that leads me in that maze;
Her eyes give my obsequious Heart a Law:
For by her smiles, or Frowns I meet delight
Or Woe; or mirth or Grief; or Day or Night.
Seek all the World for pleasing objects, and
Dive to the bottom of the deepest Se as,
Fetch all the Treasures of the Indian strand,
The world's best Beauties, none my fancy please
Can, like the Heaven of a pleasing smile,
Which kills me with excess of Joy the while.
The sparkling Diamonds of the East I prize
Below the value of her pretty Stars,
There comes far richer glances from her eyes,
Her lips than Pogues, better Rubies wears;
Who round the World for daintest Roses seeks,
May find them growing in my Phyllis cheeks.
The richest Treasures of the Earth seem poor;
Pearls, Gold, and Diamonds Natur's richest Gems,
The World's great Treasury, and Neptunes store,
A Lover (such as I) far less esteems
Than th object of his Love: for more delight
Than in all these I take in Phyllis sight.
But when the sweeter Music of her tongue,
Like the blessed voice of Angels, strikes my cars,
I harken us to Oracles; a strange
Lute in the hands of Orpheus; the Spheres
Sweet Melody; the smooth tongued Orator,
Seem but a duller Harmony to Her.
She charms me to a statue, and amazed
With so much Eloquence, dumb I return
No answers but by eyes; my soul is raised
Beyond the sphere of Words: though joy'd I mourn
To hear her pause, or periodize her speech:
I then her to begin ag'in beseech.
When in the sweetest quavers of a song
Her voice she raises, and with marchlesse strains
Runs over division with her warbling Tongue;
Hearts she (as stones Amphion's music) gains.
Harps, Harpsicall, all Violls, Organes, Lute,
Trumpets, and all noise else for shame be mute.
Cease duller strains, all other voices cease,
Sweet Philomel, I prithee hold thy tongue;
You early Larkes, and Thrushes hold your peace;
The best of Music, and of Birds among
The humane, and the feathered Chores, your choice
Lays, reverence do unto her sweeter voice.
Though all the Music in the World should be
By Musick-masters of the rarest kind
Fingered, my ears would taste no Harmony,
No joy my soul, nor no content my mind,
(Nor the Angelick Songs by me I fear
So prized) like that when I her Sonnets hear.
Had Sickness imprisoned me in my Chamber long,
Or bound with closer fetters to my Bed,
As some by music cured, I by a Song
Chaunted by her divine mouth, should be fed
With that Ambrosiack Essence, that would give
Ease to my pains, and dying make me live.
My Ear then ravished equal with my eye,
'Counts all sounds harsh, but her sweet Music, and
Commands all others to her melody
To veil, and to her notes attentive stand;
As high Apollo to the Muses, she
(Or Philomel among other Birds) must be.
The fragrant blasts of spicy Arabie,
Panchaean Myrrh, Musk, Civet, Ambergreece,
All the perfumes of Indian Spicerie,
Must to the Sweetness of her breath give place:
Flora's sweet garlands in the Month of May,
No such delicious gales of sweetness pay.
My Soul, as if exhaled by her sweet breath,
Flies to that membrane which receieves the sent,
Raising the sluggish fantasy from Death,
Revives the brain, and gives my Genius vent:
The cherishing Odors her sweet Hybla yields,
Excel the Diapasma's of the fields.
My soul upon no other food can feed,
But the rich Banquet, and delicious fare
Of her sweet presence, when before her spread;
Then eased from trouble, free from duller care
She feeds: the Stomach can no dainties taste,
Nor hunger, whilst this better Banquet lasts.
When that with ardent boldness I aspire
To touch with my profaner lips, her hand,
I think no blisses, in the World are higher,
No joys to that in competition stand:
My soul enflamed, into my lips does fly,
Whilst on that bed of Lillies soft they lie.
But when (a favor, seldom shown) I kiss
The seat of smiles, her tender rubie lips,
Joye spirits dilates, and I expire in bliss;
Called back again from Death by an ecclips
Of so great ravishment, through a withdraw,
As much as Joy did, grief now breaks the Law.
Thus my five senses banquet at that feast
Of beauty, which shines in my Phillis face;
My passionate Heart swells high within my breast,
And grows too tumid fot its strickt embrace,
Oh! cloud my Phillis! hide her from my eye,
Of too much pleasure I with surfeit dye.
CORYDONS Complaint.
THose joys that used to flatter me
o Phyllis when I courted thee,
Under yon' shady beechen tree
To cruel grief are changed
Torments my pleasures; griefs my joy,
Pains my quiet rest destroy,
Since you are to Corydon grown coy,
And from my Love estranged
Did e're I your commands neglect?
That thus my suit you now reject,
And pay my love with disrespect,
My kindness with disdain?
Say how I purchase may releife,
Or murdered must I be by grief?
Speak that my torments may be brief;
Give death to ease my pain.
If you are pleased to martyr me,
Or bind me unto slavery,
There is another tyranny
That you may exercise;
Those burning flames, your eyes can give:
A Slave, bound by Loves Chains I live
May, without Hope of a reprieve;
Thus you may tyrannize.
Since that my words are spent in vain,
Whilst Cruel you laugh at my pain,
I at the feet of your disdain
Will fall, and prostrate lie.
Henceforth I Will banish all my pleasure,
Since you the chiefest of my Treasure,
Have heaped my Griefs beyond all Measure,
I Will yield to destiny.
To SYLVIA Weeping.
FAir Sylvia, you possess more Treasures than
The rubie East; those weeping eyes more Gems
Than the rich Store house of the Ocean,
For you at pleasure can those Crystal streams
Which trickle from the fountains of your eyes
Convert int' orient pearls; but richer prize.
What taking charms lie in your sweeter Face,
When freed from cloudy-weeping Griefs you smile
With a clear brow! If tears with such a grace
Become? if so much luster has the foil
To Beauty? what excess of Glory then
Will bud from those sweet lights when fair again?
Now the (like silvered Cynonthia's beauty, when
The interposing Earth hides her bright face)
Do suffer an Eclipse; thy tears restrain
Thy beauties radiant beams; Tears fill the place
Of bounteous Light; yet is that shadow fair;
Others with which (at best) may not compare.
Phoebus now hides behind a watery cloud
His brighter head; by which we better may
Gaze on his Light: thy suns (fair Sylvia) shroud
Themselves behind a cloud of Tears to day;
Our of like kindness, and suppress their bright
And splendid beams, to favor my weak sight.
Enough, fair Sylvia! clear those Cynthian Lights,
From that eclipse of sorrow; wipe away
That hanging cloud of Tears; which still excites
Your stillborne Grief such pearly price to pay:
Were you enflamed with scorching Love, as I,
Its ardor soon those dewy pearls would dry.
After Aurora with her silver showers
Has washed her Grandame Tellus chapped face,
A pleasant Zephyrus the dark Heaven scoures,
And Sol steps out with a far greater Grace:
After a Storm fair weather does suceeed;
Let fable Grief your whiter Joys then breed.
I long to see those fairer Suns to shine,
Freed from the dewy moisture of a Tear,
Now they would seem (after this) more divine,
As Phoebus after an eclips more clear:
Let Day the Night succeed, and cease to mourn,
Banish Grief's night, whilst Joy's day takes its turn.
THYRSIS in despair.
SAd night of sorrow! sable night of grief!
For Lovers torments is there no releif?
Must still my bitter food be grief, and fears?
My thirst quenched howerly with my brinie tears?
No glimmering of the Day of hope arise!
Nothing but darkness mussle up the skies
From my numm'd sight? I in the Bed of care
Do roll; distress behems me round; despair
Like curtains shuts me up. Come pale faced Hag,
And let not leaden plummets make thee lag:
With open arms I do embrace thy Dart,
Which can give physic to my wounded Heart.
They say grief that descends to words is weak
Mine is grown so I can no farther speak.
But by my Death I to Corinna prove
Will, that she tryumphs over me and my Love.
ABSENCE.
SUch is the melancholy Earth, when light
Flies thence, and leaves its room to sable night;
When darkness, Cold and Shadows dwell upon
Her Surface; some pale glimerings of the Moon
Is all she can expect; a mourner then
She is 'till Phoebus brings his day again:
Such is the matchless, mateless Turtle Dove,
Sighing its murmurs for its absent Love:
Such is the body when the Soul is fled:
Such Pyramus supposing Thisbe dead:
Such the male Palm the female broken down,
As I am now, my fairest Sylvia's gone.
My withered Head declines apace, my green
And growing youth to sprout no more is seen.
My blood's grown cold, and frozen; every limb
As if it wanted heat, and life does seem.
My hoarse complaints the very rocks do move,
Who echo the last accents of my Love.
A silent night inhabits my sad breast,
And now no cheerful thought will be my guest.
Till her return, whose eyes will cause a day,
Thus must I in my own unquiet stay;
Wishing for the bright morning, which must rise
From the Luminaries of fair Sylvia's eyes.
DAPHNIS Fled.
I Will echo in the tell-tale groves
Lycidas and Daphnis Loves
Now she has left this place;
Go grave names in the tender rind
Whisper my trouble to the VVinde,
He Will tell where Daphnis stays:
Send kisses by the Soft lipp'd air,
Beg charming Philomel to stay her
With raptures of her voice:
Bid Zephyrus gently hold her back;
Smooth fronted sand to show her track,
That thus forsakes her choice.
Not all the charms the spring affords,
The pleasures of delicious gourds,
Flora's enameled dress,
Or what is beautiful and fair,
Or what delights above compare,
Can sorrow dispossess.
For Nature now is unkind to me,
And my request denies I see,
For Daphnis will away,
In vain I prattle out my plaints,
She cannot hear my loud laments,
Nor would they cause her stay.
By yonder spring down will I lie,
Whilst one as great flows from my eye,
To mingle with its stream
Till her return, thence I Will not move
But weep the absence of my Love,
With waves as great as them
If my soul flies out in a tear,
And she returns, and that you hear
Her call a loud for me,
Good Nymph that answers him that speaks,
Say if that Lycidas she seeks,
He Is joined to Niobe.
To LUCIA playing on her LUTE.
GReat Orpheus when he struck his Ivory Lyre,
Drew all the Savage Creatures to admire
The sweetness of his charming Music; and
Forgetting their fierce natures tamely stand.
The Wolf, Lamb, Lion, and the Kid agree
To Love, whilst charmed by his sweet harmony.
Stones move themselves called by Amphion's Lute;
And Thebes build, without man's hands to do it:
Yet fairest Lucia when I heard you play,
I soon confess you have more skill than they:
Your fingers strike a far diviner strain,
And men's Hearts harder than the stones you gain.
Brute Beasts when Orpheus played stood still and gazed;
When you, stiff-necked men are more amazed.
He could unreasonable beasts control,
But you command a reasonable Soul,
For men more fierce than cruel Tigers, lay
Their necks down, and like captives yoked obey.
Who then to bondage powerfull'st captives drew?
Orpheus tamed beasts, a harder task, Men you.
ANOTHER.
WHen last I heard your nimble fingers play
Upon your Lute, nothing so sweet as they
Seemed; all my soul fled ravished to my ear,
That sweetly animating sound to hear.
My ravished Heart with play Kept equal time,
Fell down with you, with you did Ela climb,
Grew sad or lighter, as the tunes you played,
And with your Lute a perfect measure made:
If all so much as I, your Music Love,
The whole world would at your devotion move,
And at your speaking Lutes surpassing charms,
Embrace a lasting peace, and fling by Arms.
To CELIA on some verses sent her by another.
DEar Fair if that some riper wit
In rapt of some (...)
To ease the fan(...)
Writ of Love, and Love shall fain,
Shall those lines acceptance have?
Not those indicted by thy slave?
Whose troubled brains no muses move,
But the darling God of Love.
If my lines you 'Count a toy
You know Cupid is a boy,
Yet his trifles often find
Fair acceptance from the kind;
Such are they whose search does sift
The givers mind above the gift.
Let others write to show their wit,
When I; Love shall be Cause of it.
On Love.
LOve is a fire, Love is a flame
Which darting came
Th'orow the azure sky;
And just like the rays, in Sol's hottest days
peire'd me from on high.
My heart before so chill, and cold,
'gan to unfold
It self in those fair beams,
But its mighty flame, soon it overcame
Martyred 'twixt extremes.
Lov's masterlesse, and cruel fire
if it grow higher
Will kill with martyrdoms,
As heat forces heat, to a gentle retreat
Love, Love overcomes.
Song.
Ask me not why I am so sad, nor why I here
The Nymps forbear,
Do with my Arms a Cross walk in this grove?
Within the hollow concave of my troubled breast
Which never rests
Lies the true cause, and my tormentor Love.
It Is jealous fear, causes my care,
And burdens thus my Lovesick Heart,
I fear that she, my deity
Delights to see my smart;
For still she frowns, and Knitts her brows
And does abhor my Company,
Whilst Lycon Courts her, with her sports,
I dare not do it though by.
O cruel fair! why do thou thus delight to kill
Thy slave who will
Whilst he has life adore thee? and will be
Courted by none for to neglect his duty, though
you are his foe
And with tormenting pains would murder me.
And since that you, forbid me sue
Or ask for mercy, I will never
With my complaints, and sad Iaments
In vain disturb your ear;
No, death will do as much as Love has don
VVith's dart he will pierce me through;
Death will be found, to Cure that wound
Which Coelia would not do.
DAMON to a foul Maid that courtedhim.
WHat mean thou Bacca, Can my senses feast
Upon the members of a parboyl'd Beast?
What boarish appetite think thou I have
That thou should court me, who'd first wed a grave,
And death hug in my Arms, then such a hag,
Whose hide pouch'd like a shrivl'd, pudding-bag,
Reaks like another Aetna; thy sous'd face
And hawkle nose has not so good a grace
As Madam monkies; few Hairs on thy scalpe,
Thy mouth is Taenarus, thy Teeth an alpe,
But that no snow, but soot lies always there,
In other parts like a deformed Bear
Not yet licked into fashion. Think thou Man
Not turned Beast, forsake his reason can
To fall int' such a sink: Thou stinking Trull
Thou must like Pasiphae lie with a Bull,
Or couple with a boar thy next of kin;
For never hope you Man can tempt to sin,
For he that do^st it, were I to judge his pain,
Should be (and it is enough) to do it again.
To LYDIA being retired privately into the Country.
NOw to the secret Groves is Lydia gone
Stoll'n from us all, meaning to live alone
Among the silent woods, where she may be
From busy servants entertainments free,
And hear the pleasant songsters of the Groves,
With whistling lays resound their growing Loves:
With uncontrouling freedom view the trammells
Of Flora which the fragrant meads inammels,
With pleasure walk and see the crystal brooks,
Catching the sportive fish, with silver hooks.
Conversing with the flowery Napaeae,
Making diversity of flowers agree
Bound up together: among the shady trees
Dance in a Circle, with the Dryades,
Feeding on cleanly, though but homely food,
Esteemed the only Goddess of the wood.
O how I fear those rural pleasures may
Entice her there to make a tedious stay,
But I with vows will Frosty Hyems move,
To have the ruins of the leavy grove;
Pray cold mout'h Boreas kiss her tender cheek,
To make her shelter in the town to seek,
Where conversation, and warm fires do bring
Though frost without doors lies; within a spring.
Poema Valedictorium Perdilecto intimoque Suo amico transfreturo.
ALas! what fate (or rather providence)
Is this (dear C) unthought of rapt's thee hence?
What makes thee leave this Isle, and seas pass over
To seek the blessings of a foreign shore?
Cannot ours content thee? yea but thy free hand
Transports the panneous blessings of our land,
And (for exchange bring's back what ours has none
Of,) by exoticks to enrich our own.
Since then it is for public good, and thine,
That thou leave us, it must needs be for mine.
I Will not complain, since truly one friend should
Suffer disasters for another's good,
And this is one (and that of no mean weight)
That thee, and I, (dear C -- must separate.)
Vota Auspicata.
Farewell! farewell! may fruitful Neptune please
To sound retreat unto the surging seas,
By Triton's voice! may his resounding shell,
The threatnig rage of all the billows quell.
May great Oceanus, and Tridentiser
(Lest in the envious liquid paths you err)
Be your conductors; Let the Sea-Gods place,
Themselves about your ship for greater grace,
May Amphetrite and the Neriedes
With all the Gods, and graces of the seas,
Assembling sing Io-paeans to thy Honor,
And may the sea for joy thou rid'st upon her
Expressed with gentle leapings! May the twinns
Be never seen apart! The God of winds
Great Aeolus, may he reflateing gales
Enchaine within the Hyperborean vales!
And let none 'Scape but Aura's from his hand
To drive you forward to your wished for land!
May glorious Titan pleasant make the days,
And gild the Sea, with his projected rays!
Serener nights attend you! may the bright
Phaebe, at full, give you her borrowed light!
May Mercury the Negotiators God
Attend you too, with his Cyllenian rod,
And cause your gains ariseing from the fleece
Of English Sheep, Surmount that brought to Greece
By Iason's hand! May these on you therefore
Attend and bring you safe to this blessed shore.
Vero Panomphaeo.
Thou thou true Neptune who the seas command'st,
Without a Trident still the billows can,
And with one single word make all obey
Whether in Heaven, in Earth, Hell, Land, or Sea!
Take thou my C -- under thy safe protection,
Guide him and favor ^im, with thy sure direction,
And he will not fear the threatening of the waves
Anchoring his hope upon a God that saves.
Be thou propitious to my prayers, and then
I shall be sure to see him once again,
Coronis.
Fare well, dear C -- I wish you well, adieu!
My tears stop words, once more farewell to you.
Sospitet Te Deus: Opt. max.
Epigram.
Stay Triton, hold your breath, and over the main
Conduct my C -- reduce him safe again
To Albion's shore: then sound your shell, brave boy,
And make the waves leap to the skies for joy.
THE DEPART.
ADieu sweet Chloris, for the Fates deny
Me longer life and longer liberty.
I'ave lost the one in gazing on that face,
Which justly may ot'h Paphian Queen take place
To thee my liberty's resigned the grave
Tomb shall bespeak me Chloris constant slave.
How can I longer think to live when I
Ravished from the clear Sunshine of thine eye
Feel chilling colds; and winter frosts begirt
Continually with fatal blasts my heart?
No'tis those beams, which thy bright eyes display
That must dispell, and chase these snows away,
That killing absence brings: naught but thy breath
May now redeem me from the dart of Death.
But there is no hopes, no other hopes but I
Banished your presence, must resolve to dye:
Cloris adeiu! for ever now adeiu,
For dye I must being forced to part with you.
TYSTIRUS complaining.
BReak sadded heart, burst thou with griefs complaint
Let thy laments
The hardest marble unto tears provoke:
Make flints to weep
Increase the deep
With drops expressed from that cruel stroke.
Wounded I lie, and suffer from that hand
That gave the wound
Unto my bleeding Soul. And from those eyes.
Lightenings proced
Which strike me dead
Nor w'thout she raise me can I ever rise.
Torment of cruel silence breeds this woe
I undergo;
My tongue is fettered, and I dare not speak
Although my heart
Feels deadly smart
And swelled with sorrow at the last must break.
But here is a joy which feeds my sadded mind
None has divined
The cause of my sadness and distress,
First shall my Love
My murder prove
Before, to wrong her, I my Love confess.
Damon on Amarillis dancing in a Ring
SEE my fortune; See my fortune
How she flies me
And denis me
Woe alas! woe alas too soon
Still I follow! still I follow!
But she flies me
And denis me
And cannot be wonn.
Cruel sport; In this sort
With woes to fill me
Which will kill me
Ah! from this pain release me.
For whilst she flys, my eyes
They discover
I Am a lover
And that it is her self must ease me.
Round we go, round we go,
But she flys me
And denis me
Still I follow wrapped in woe.
She moves swiftly, and yet sweetly
Don't forsake me
I Will over take thee
If thou will pity bestow.
Cruel sport, in this sort!
To increase my fires
And desires
And to exhibit my despair:
She Shifts her place, apace
I after move
Be'ing urged by Love
But in vain still my endeavors are.
Acrostick.
FEar-killing Faith, Bold-zeal, declares thy name,
Art picked it out but nature laid the frame.
If ever name and nature did agree,
It Is thine which are in perfect Harmony:
Heav'n-blessed Faith, which shakes the Ethereal towers
Cold-burning zeal against Heav'n-opposeing powers
Offer themselves to view: Thy virgin breast
Loves Heaven alone, does for did Loves detest.
Death cannot shake thy Faith, nor ever may
Zeal like to thine, a purer breast display.
Eternal flames of Heav'n-refined zeal
And soreing Faith, thou in thy breast do feel,
Live ever happy! Faith and zeal with thee
E're stay, to effect this thy name's Prophecy.
Acrostick.
AGe bles't I hope thou art: May many years
Run their swift courses, and the rouling spheres
Tire in their motions; May the circl'ing Sun
About this round globe the row the zodiac run
Giving a hund'red springs and Autumns e're
Earth or the Silent grave entomb thee there.
Bles't be thou here with Age: with virtues more,
Let graces, with thy years increase; thy store
E're multiply: So as thou have begun
Shine thou in virtue till thy race be run:
Death fear to touch this blooming blossom; Now
In April stay until December bow
Her head with age and mak't the earth to kiss;
Open then thy fatal arms; bear her to bliss.
Pluck her from hence, before Age does call thee to her,
E're cursed be, for thou pulls the worlds chief flower.
The Recovery.
HAil gentle virgin! now my joys renew
Their plumes, for they were Sick as well as you,
And had you died they had been buried too.
How often betwixt my hope, and fear I died;
Each symptom that my watchful eyes espied,
My heart with thousand Torments crucified.
When scarlet seas' did double dye thy face,
Mine pal'd to see how strong thy fever was,
How great a Tyrant to usurp that place.
When thou grewst pale I even sunk for fear
Lest Death's cold ashes had been strowed there,
Or that, that Tyrant came to dominere.
When thou did sound, my heart was made a prize,
To pallid fear, nor could it ever rise,
Till hope to raise it sprouted from thine eyes.
My heart yet trembles, now I think upon it,
The thoughts often with pale sadness paint my front:
Thou liv'st: such mercies e're forget I will not.
My Muse did languish by a Sympathy,
As if her life depended had on thee,
It seems thine was her numbers Treasury.
Distressed she sat in Mourning Liveries,
Whilst the clear Fountains of her crystal eyes,
Wept in sotf Tears most doleful Elegies.
As thy cheeks Hyacinths over come their snows,
As vanquished are their Lillies, by the Rose,
So on my muse new heat and vigor grows.
This Day mythought thy starry orbs were pressed
With wonted luster: and new beauties dressed
Thy Face: which gave flames to my Muses breast.
Inspired thus she now begins to sing,
New ardors now her spritely Numbers wing,
And as thy health does, so her raptures spring.
Both consecrated are my Muse, and I,
To sing the bliss of thy recovery,
And chaunt Io Paeans until we dye.
May Heaven as he has raised thee from the Dead,
(Whose Name be blessed!) his mighty bucklar spread,
From Death's fell arrows to defend thy Head.
Daine but to cherish (with a gentle glance
Of Favor shot from thy bright countenance)
These lines, and it my Numbers will advance.
Such mercies cannot but my spirits raise,
In highest Notes to chaunt my sprightly lays,
And for thy Health to Heaven sing songs of praise.
Innocentia and Politia. Veritas and Panurgia.
WHen that Astrea took her flight from hence,
To find in Heaven a better residence,
Dame Innocentia wanting her protection
Was scorned of all: And Pollicy's infection
Spreading the row Cities, Courts, and such great places
Exposed that Dame to thousands of disgraces.
Sly Subtlety the Merchant entertains,
Deceit the Tradesman, to increase his gains,
The Great man Honor; that vain puf'd-up Pride,
With covetousness of every one; beside
Protean Policy, whose great resort,
Is in the City, and the Prince's Court,
Wherein Deceit so often does frequent,
That Dame's inseparable accident:
But Innocence, of all men was discarded,
Her nackednesse laughed at and disregarded.
At last a Countryman, whose smoother brow
Never entertained Deceit; nor's mouth knew how
With flattering words to speak; with Court intent
To utter that thing which his Heart never meant,
But being taught of Truth his words to spell,
His Heart, and Tongue rann ever parallel:
He 'Spies this naked Dame's distress with ruth,
Invites her with him to go dwell with Truth:
She soon consenting, thanks him for his pity,
And bids adieu both to the Court and City.
The stately buildings of the Court she shuns,
Thence swifter than the Eastern-wind she runs,
Far from the City, and the infections Court
She finds where Truth is wonted to resort:
Met, they as Sisters join, delighting so
That never since they would assunder go,
Their cottage low (free from all Courtly state)
Strong built on holy ground is Situate:
Two moats surrounding mak't an Amnick Isle,
The better to keep forth Deceit and Guile,
A strong-built Wall does it defend, whose Gate,
Like that of heaven is made angust and strait,
That every one who is admitted there
May Not enter if Deceitful clothes they were;
For Truth gives entrance unto none, but those
Who'r naked like her self; or else whose clothes
Prove tegments for to hide Truths parts divine,
From the perverting Eyes of muzling Swine.
Within the closure of Truth's cottage wall
No high Ambition that aspires (a fall)
No twy-fac'd Guile, no Discord, and no Pride,
Are by these Dames permitted to reside:
But Love and Meekness, and such Heavenly Graces
Cohabit still in those serener places.
The Shadowic Groves with a perpetual spring,
Sweet Philomel making the woods to ring,
With other birds peirch'd on the tender sprays,
Whose notes from warbling Throats salute the Days
Approach; whose trebles to the murmuring water
According, make sweet Music to their Maker,
Makes as if the Earth in Heaven were placed
Or Heaven descended Earth with his Joys had graced,
Such is the state, (and far more full of bliss)
Where truth conjoined to Innocence is.
Thus dwell these Nymps enriched with the Treasures
Of rural joys, and of Celestial Pleasures,
Useing to travel all the Country round,
'Till the strange echoes of the Trumpets sound,
'Till Mars with blood bedy'd, and horror fell,
Affrighted them back to their closer cell:
Deceit, and Guile, and Policy then flew,
With speedy feet about the Country too
Where they increased so their Progeny,
That never Since the country could be free,
So that pure Truth, and Innocentia fair,
Unto some secret place, confined are.
But now when Hyem's frosty snow-beard swelld
With chilling cold; and neveous mantles held
The World enwrapt; and Mountain tops did show
Their losty Heads encircl'd round with snow,
Dame Innocentia clothed all in White,
Her usual Badg, Steals from her secret site;
Leaving the Country to the Court she goes,
To view the Quarters of her bitter foes.
B'ing thither come, the first she met was Guile,
Whose clothing made that spotless Dame to smile,
For like to her in every thing she seemed,
So that most men her Innocentia deemed:
Look what she wore Guile ever wore the same,
And counterfeited still that purer dame.
In pure White Garments was she dec't, the snow
Could not than she a color purer show:
But she whose eyes pierced her base covering,
Saw her all bloached with foul spots within,
And the row her plaster'd White, and painted face
Saw that with all men she usurped her place.
The next she met with was Dame Policy,
Who with a thousand shapes deludes the eye,
Her clothes were changeable, and her disguise
To every color would Camelionize,
Her shapes so diverse and her forms so many
That none could truly say that she had any.
Her handmaid Guile who still attends upon her
Bowing her Head full low unto her Honor
Held up her train, when that she near was come
She thus salutes her, Dame we have no room
To lodge you here, our bedds are all impletc,
Nor may this court, for you become a seat,
For your carbasious regment, which does vie
For whiteness with the snow, cannot come high
Our sullied garments, but it shows our stains
And Truths perspective shows to all our blains,
Our albeous Garments seem as white as thine,
Our Laws seem holy, our decrees divine,
If thou art absent; but if thou art by
Our white shows black, our seeming truth's a lie,
Our Laws deceitful, and it does appear,
Our Kingdom falls if thou remainest here.
My niece Ambition cannot be displaced,
Her Sister flattery 'ld think her self disgraced,
Should I dislodge them for your sake, they would snuff,
And pride would think you were not fine enough:
But adulation who her words can change
T'as various shapes as there are humors strange
Shall entertain you, and with Speeches fair
Shall fill you full, if you will be filled with air.
We two are inconsonant; we cannot agree,
I you oppose, you are opposite to me,
And it is as hard for us to join (it clear is)
As pale faced Famine to conjoyn with Ceres,
I am not wont apertly thus to speak,
However now my mind I truly break
To you, and tell you, se'ing we cannot agree,
That you must hence, and leave this place for me.
Contraries cannot conjoyn, we here no room
Have, therefore pray depart from whence you come.
Dame Innocentia soon perceived, the place
Nothing afforded to her but disgrace,
And scorn, therefore lest thence she should be thrust
And her white garments spoiled with the dust,
And stains of sin, the court unto her foes
She leaves with speed (while Guile dirt at her throws)
And to truths cottage, where she was before
Returns; and vows to see the Court no more.
Aula procul Innocentia.

An Elegy on the matchless Murder of Charles the First of Happy and Blessed
Memory.
SInce Britains great Apollo left the land,
Laurells are blasted, and dejected stand;
Poets are dumb-struck, and amazed to see
So strange, unutterable Prodigy,
Charles forced to swim in his own sacred Gore
From this accursed, to an immortal Shore,
So that none dares, all struck with silent dread,
To say, Much less to sing that Charles is dead.
For many months my Soul and Blood was froze,
Till Anger thawed this Ice, and Zeal arose
Through all my Veins, which gave me Liberty
To weep out first, then write an Elegy.
Lame, and unequal as the woeful times
Painted with Sighs, and Tears, must (...) my rithmes,
For who can, struck with so much grief, erect
A Verse, but in a faultring Dialect?
He must forget the rugged times the (...),
That can indite ought in a pollisht style
Who will not blush, and fire his Face with Shame,
That thinks by Verset' immortalize that Name,
Which charactrized in our Rithmes, will give
Life to our Lines, and make our Fumes to (...),
Whilst Charles shall flourish in man's memory,
Which shall till times supped up b' Eternity
B^e? Royal Phoebus gains no ray of Light
By mortals praises; he it is gives them Sight,
So Britains Son, shall never live by verse,
But Men and Rithmes, whilst they his Name rehearse
Shall flourish; for the Theme these shall be read,
And live soul'd by him, though himself be dead.
Dead! ah more! murdered, and martyred too,
By cursed hands (who once their deed shall rue)
That by Pretext of guilt and crimes do draw
To the block of Death the Head of Church and Law;
Both fell with thee great Monarch, when that Fate
Made thee a Martyr of the Church and State.
The Earth and all her mighty Monarchs stand
Amazed, and drooping dare not now command,
Benumbed their Fingers cannot the Scepter sway,
Kings cannot rule, nor people well obey,
Since by thy Death the Soul of Monarchy
Has suffered, and the Head of Majesty
Chopp'd off; no King now thinks himself secure
Since Laws (the Walls where Princes did immure
Themselves from vulgar rage) are wrested so
That murders issue whence Justice used to flow.
Ashamed and blushing Princes stand, to see
Themselves, and regal acts outdone by thee,
To see the Glory of thy setting Sun
Damp all the luster of their splendid Noon.
Heaven, and the Lamp of day, Nights Tapors tell
England, that they an Act to parrallel
Its bloody deed, never yet beheld; thy Stage
O raging Isles! the wonder of this Age,
And thou shall blush died with a Tyrian Stain,
(Unless thou wash it quickly off again
By some notorious Act, as great as good,
And take away the stains of blood, with blood)
And be the scorn of Nations, whilst the Sun
Shall in the twelve roads of the Zodiac Run.
No Pen can reach to words sufficient
To speak thy Death; no Elegy lament
Thy fatal loss can in a strain that is fit,
The more we strive the more fall short of it,
For thou 'rt a Theme too great for thoughts, much less
Can weaker words speak thee; o'r unhappiness
In floods of brinie tears we will ever tell,
And loyal hearts shall make the Ocean swell
With sighs; which will at last bring judgment down,
And 'wake the Almightie's Justice for his own.
Rebels think not 'twas his over. weight of sin
That pressed him down, alive he still had been,
But for the Nations crimes; we first his life
Took from him by our sins, then with the knife.
God for a Notion's sins often deals so,
Takes off the Righteous, lets the wicked go,
In mercy to the first, to set them free
From following plagues, and sudden jeopardie.
So our yet bleeding Monarch was a gem
Too good for us, and we too bad for him.
Although the murderers grant no monument
Crowned Hero! Fame his hasty missives sent
To all Earth's Monarchs! who already have,
Counting the World two little for thy grave,
Reared up a pyramid of high renown,
Which shall out-last the longest Monarchs crown,
Where long-live'd Fame upon its summit sings
The fatal trag'die of the best of Kings:
In vaulting thee so close, think let them not
That e're their Regicede shall be forgot,
For though thou hidden under ground do lie,
Their Names above ground rot, and never shall dye.
God turns Hells spiteful Arrows on his head,
The world Salvation gained, Christ Crucified,
And murdered Charles the Name of Martyr gains:
Though Life and three Crowns lost: more now remains
For him a Life immortal, and a Crown,
Of Shining Glory, and of high Renown.
Which spite of Rebels Acts, though he be Dead,
Shall now for ever Crown His Royal Head.
THE END.

