SABBATUM.

The Mystery of the Sabbath DISCOVERED.

Wherein

The Doctrine of the Sabbath, according to the Scriptures, and the Primitive
Church, is declared. The Sabbath Moral, and Ceremonial, are described, and
differenced. What the Rest of God signified, and wherein it consisted. The
fourth Commandment expounded. What part of the fourth Commandment is Moral, and
what therein is Ceremonial. Something (occasionally) concerning the Christian
Sunday.
By EDM. PORTER, B. D. Sometime fellow of St John's College in Cambridge, and
Prebend of Norwich.

Aug. Cont. Adimant c. 2. Tom 6. Sabbatum, non repudiatum (est) sed intellectum
a Christianis.

Epiphan. Haer. 30. Christus est magnum illud Sabbatum, and perpetuum; Cuius
figura erat parvum Sabbatum, quod inserviebat usque ad ipsus adventum.

Prudent. in Apotheosi -- En tibi Christum,
Infelix Judaea, deum! qui Sabbata solvens
Terrea, Mortales aeterna in Sabbata sumpsit.
Origin in Math. Tract. 29. Venient autem Dominus noster Sabbatum nostam, and
requies nostra, attulit nobis requiem Sabbati sui. etc.

London, Printed for Charles Webb, and are to be sold at the Bore's Head in St
Paul's Churchyard.

To the Right Honorable, THOMAS Lord Richardson, Baron of Cramond. AND, To the
truly Noble and Virtuous Lady, the Lady ANNE Richardson, his right worthy
Consort. PEACE, and TRUTH.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
OF all the mistakes and misunderstandings of men, in the grand Mysteries of
our Religion, there is none that may more deservedly be put into the catalogue
of popular, and (almost) universal errors, then the erroneous conceivings and
misapprehensions of the doctrine of the Sabbath; wherein, not only the Ancient
and Modern Jews, but also many Christians, both learned and lewd, did, and do
alike err: Insomuch that now of late, the old saying is come to pass,
Communis error facit jus; for we have lived to see Sabbatarian errors to be
grown up into a Law, and to be confirmed. And the very appllation of Sabbath
(which in the Moral part of the fourth Commandment, signifies Christ our
Redeemer; and in the latter or Ceremonial part of the said Commandment,
signifies the seventh day from the Creation, or last day of the week) to be
applied to our Sunday, which is the first day of the week, and the eighth from
the Creation. And this, even by many Preachers, some of them being very
learned; whereby the less learned sort of Christians are misled into the same
error with the Jews, who would see no further into the great mystery of the
Sabbath, than only the consecrating of the seventh day, as ours at this time
do the eighth day: And neither of them will be as yet persuaded, to look more
deeply into that most divine and gracious Law of the Sabbath.

The principal misleader into these errors in our days, is, I conceive, that
otherwise pious and learned Book, entitled, The Practice of Piety; the right
Author whereof, I think, is concealed: A late Advice to a Son.
Writer thinks, that it has been too often printed, because (as he says) it
is contrary to the Church Protestant in the doctrine of the Sacrament: page
513. and 515. Edit. 32.
I think it far more contra^y to ^he Church Catholic, in the Doctrine of the
Sabbath; which word Sabbath, this Writer not only applies to our Sunday, but
also labors vehemently, with multitudes of Arguments, unnecessary, uncogent,
and also untrue, to prove it the Sabbath meant in the fourth Commandment.
Seneca says, Sen. lib 3 Cont. 22.
Suspectus est judici, qui plus quam se defendit. Verily, his over-many vain
prooss, and superfluous pleadings, may, to a judicious Reader, make his cause
to be suspected the more, either of error, or (which is worse) of design and
collusion.

For some of our own learned Writers have long ago declared in their printed
Books, that the late, or yesterday use, of calling our Sunday, The Sabbath, was
set on foot by that sort of men, who have made it their trade to asperse, both
the Doctrine and the Discipli^e of this Church, on purpose to please and
accommodate those turbulent spirits, that have for a long time waited for an
opportunity, to make a prey thereof. And these their instruments may justly be
suspected, to carp at this Church for their own designs; as Politian says of
one of his opposits, Polit. l. 7 Epist. 2.
Non ideo me carpit, ut carpat, sed ut victum quaerat: And indeed, our Zelot
Sabbatarians, by such practices, have of late well feathered their nests,
though with the ruin of the most renowned Church in the world; but, aliter non
fiunt Floralia. And they have moreover abused the present State with this word
Sabbath, whereby our Sunday is of late rebaptized, or Turkened into a Sabbath;
which our former Parliaments in their Statutes, in the days of our
forefathers, and until the reign of our late gracious King Charles of blessed
memory, and inclusively; and the Church of England also, for weighty reasons;
called by none other name but Sunday. But such things need not seem strange,
when the Nobles and Worthies of David, and also the Sage and Reverend
Aaronites, and their Learned Levites, are excluded from the Sanedrim.

As for the appellation of Sabbath, so misapplied to our Sunday, no authority
of Scripture, can, with any color of right reason, be alleged, either
directly, or derivatively, from thence. The Jews that were converted, and made
up a Body of the Primitive Church, and first began the celebration of this day,
did never call it Sabbath, nor did any Apostle so call it, nor indeed any of
the ancient Fathers; nor was this day meant by Sabbatum Christianum.
Origin, who is untruly said to have called it, The Christian Sabbath, as will
appear in this Chap. 4.
Book.

As for the other late and new name of Lord's Day, which they would derive from
(...), in the Apocalypse, Rev. 1. 10.
because our English Translation does so render those words, (which yet they
will not bear) the right reddition whereof is not, The Lord's Day; but, The
Dominicall day, as our Englishmen generally ever did before, and yet do, call
the Sunday-Letter, not The Lord's day Letter, but, The Dominicall Letter. And
the Western Church in all Ages, called this day, either, Dies Solis, or
Dominica. For in Scriptures, the Lord's Day, (...), and (...), are all one, and
are often used by St. Paul and St. Peter, and are 1 Cor. 5. 5 Phil. 1 10. 2
Pet. 3. 10.
rightly rendered, The Day of the Lord, and, The Day of Christ; but in a far
different signification from that, which these men now call the Lord's Day; for
those words signify The Great Day of Universal Judgment.

Besides, a judicious Reader will consider, how harshly and uncouthly this
appellation sounds; for when they speak of many Sundays, they call them, Two,
Three, or Four Lord's Days, as if we had more Lord's days than one. If they
will needs use the name of the Lord in calling that day, 'twere far more
consonant with the phrase of Scripture, and Euphony, to call i^, The Day of the
Lord; which yet will not come home to their purpose.

Therefore, those prudent S^atesmen, and learned Prelates, which were
interessed, both in composing our Statutes, and also in compiling and
authorizing our Leiturgie, did, with great caution, decline this appellation,
and called it Sunday, as some of the most ancient Fathers did before, both in
the Greek and Justin. Mart. and Tertul.
Latin Church; and this, in likelihood, before the appellation of (...), or
Dominica, was generally received; although the word (...) was in some
particular Churches used, before those Fathers wrote, as may appear by that
authentic Epistle of Ignat. Epist. 3. Edit. Plant.
Ignatius, ad Magnesianos.

Neither did those Primitive Christians, before mentioned, who first began this
solemnity; nor the Apostles, who approved thereof long before the Revelation
was written; ever call this day so as it is now called. We find it recorded
under the title of, The first day of the week, or first day after the Sabbath,
Act. 20. 7. and 1 Cor. 16. 2. ((...), and (...)) but we find no mention of
Sabbath, Lord's day, or Resurrection day; nor did they then call it Sunday,
because the naming of the seven weekdayes by the seven Planets, was never
before, or at that time used by the Jews, nor by the Romans, their then
Magistrates. Whereby it is evident enough, that the assigning of the first day
of the week for holy assemblies, was not originally, upon consideration of
Christ's Resurrection on that day.

Notwithstanding, the succeeding Church did conform unto that day, because
their Predecessors had fixed thereon. And they further alleged new reasons for
the retaining of it; They considered, That Christ did indeed rise that day from
the dead, That the descending of the holy Ghost at Pentecost, That the creation
of Heaven, and Earth, and Light; That Manna rained from Heaven first; and all
these, on this first day of the week. Bellarmine adds, (if you will believe
him) Bell. de Cultu Sanct. l. 3. c. 11. To. 2.
That by his, and other learned men's calculations, the Nativity of Christ fell
on this first day of the week. These were the reasons for retaining this day,
though not of instit uting it.

But, in succeeding times, the Jewish appellation of days, by First, Second,
Third, etc. of the Sabbath, or Week, was disused, Therefore the Church affixed
a new name to that day, according to the Custom of their Country, or Ordinance
of the Church; and hence came the denomination of Dominica, and Sunday,
respectively.

We cannot with reason, account this appellation, Sunday, to be any
disparagement to the solemnity of the festival, in regard, that our Savior
himself, (for whose Honor we sanctify this Day) is called by his Prophets,
The Sun which shall no more Isa. 60. 20 Mal. 4. 2. Matthew. 17 2. Matthew. 13 43.
Rev. 1. 16. and 10. 1. and 12. 1.
go down) And the Sun of Righteousness, his glorious Transfiguration is
resembled to the Sun; his Saints are promised, at their glorification, To shine
as the Sun; his own Countenance, and his mighty Angel, and his Spouse, are
described by the glory of the Sun: so that this Name is high, and glorious; The
disusing of this word Sunday, and Dominica, of late among us, is upon some
reason of State, as of some other good old words also; as, The word Kingdom,
and Three Kingdoms, and Bishop, and Common Prayer, Leiturgy, and Letanie, are
now left; And instead of them, We have Commonwealth, Three Nations,
Presbyters, Independents, Directory, Sabbath, Lord's Day, etc. but o^d words may
return again, and new words may grow obsolete, when the State sees it
needful, as one says,

Multa renascentur quae jam cecidere: Horace.
cadentque
Quae nunc sunt in honor vocabula; Si volet usus.
As for the warrant, and authority for hallowing, and assembling thereon; We
say, That it is not grounded on the fourth Commandment, which does not in the
least mention, or meddle therewith; Neither did Christ, or any Apostle command
it, as Chemnitius, a Learned Protestant grants: Exam. Conc. Trid.
But we keep it, rather by virtue of the fifth Commandment, which requires us
to Honor our Parents, wherein, lawful Magistrates are included, and their
just laws authorized: Our reasons are these, 1. The institution of the Church
Primitive, 2. The Apostolical approbation thereof, 3. The Imperial decrees,
and also, the Regal laws of this Realm, 4. The constant practice of the
Church Catholic, in all ages thereof, 5. The scripturall authority for it,
which is derived (as is said before) from the fifth Commandment, although not
directly, or expressly, and downright, but secondarily, consequently, and
collaterally in these, and the like passages: Submit your 1 Pet. 2. 13
selves to every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake. And, Obey them, that
Heb. 13. 17
have rule over you, and submit your selves, for they watch for your souls.
Christ also said, If be neglect the Church, Matthew. 18 17.
let him be as an Heathen man, and a Publican. For these, and such like
reasons, we adhere to it, and esteem them so ponderous, that we account it an
high insolency, and pride, either to abrogate, or but to alter the day, (as
some have attempted.) Thus far we agree in the thing; but we dissent from the
name Sabbath, and Lords day, and also from all superstition therein practiced.

As touching the Mysterious Apocalypse, from which the late appellation of
Lord's day is taken, by a Translation of (...), which is not rendered exactly to
the Original Letter, as is showed before; Although this Scripture be still
confessed both by the Church Protestant, and Roman, to be Theopneust, and
Canonical; yet, it cannot be denied, that many Learned men, both Anciently,
and Lately, have doubted concerning the Writer thereof, and also, have been
anxiously perplexed with the obscurities therein.

First, for the Writer. That he was named John, the Book often declares; But
whether he were St. John the Apostle, the Text does not declare, nor do the
Ancients agree therein; in so much, that in consideration of former disputes
concerning the Writer, and also, of the style, phrase, form, or manner of
speech therein used, Prolegom in Apoc.
Beza is inclined to conjecture, that, if it were not written by St. John the
Apostle, yet, that it was written by St. Mark the Evangelist, who was also
named John, because we read of John, surnamed Mark, Act. 12. 12. and Act. 15.
37.

But Beza's conjecture disagreeth with the History of St. Mark, who is recorded
by Hier. in Marco.
St. Jerome, to have suffered death, in the eighth year of Nero, ( Origines,
Alexand. p. 38.
Mr. Selden's Eutychius says, he died in the first year of that Emperor)
whereas, the Apocalypse was first showed, long after, in the Reign of Domitian,
by whom, St. John the Apostle was sentenced to death, in a vessel of flaming
oil, as Tertullian, and Jerome, and Eusebius. Emis. report, and that he came out
of that vessel unhurt: And because, that sentence was executed near the Latin
gate at Rome, (as other Writers say) therefore, the Church Calendar records
this Porta Latina, on the sixth of May, and in memory thereof, a feast is held
yearly on that day, (or for it) in St. John's College in Cambridge.

After this, St. John was exiled to the I Will of Patmos, where this Revelation
was ^^ewed; and after the death of Domitian, he was recalled from banishment,
and retired to Ephesus, and there lived, and died in the Reign of Trajan, and
was there buried, and his Sepulcher remained there in the days of St. Jerome.

Now because there was another, named John, of that time, who was also buried
at Ephesus, and that, two Monuments were there showed, and both superscribed
with the Name, or Title of John; and both remained there, until the days of
the said, Hier. de Script. in Joanne.
St. Jerome, as himself says, and so also says Hist. l. 3. c. 39.
Eusebius, who further adds, Fortassis, secundus hic, erit Joannes sub cujus
nomine Revelatio habetur. And Dionysius, the Famous, and Learned Bishop of
Alexandria, although he was Confident, that it was written by inspiration of
the divine spirit, yet, says he, Eusebius. Hist. l. 7. ^ap. 23.
Non liquido videtur, quodillius Joannis sit, qui Evangelium scripsit. And
adds, Fieri potuit, in illis temporibus, fuisse alium aliquem Joannem ex
sanctis, cui haec revelaverit Deus. i. e. That it did not clearly appear, that
St. John the Evangelist was the Writer of the Apocalypse; but possibly, that
some other holy man in those times, named John, was he, to whom God revealed
those things: thus he. Neither need it seem strange, that this Revelation
should be unduly attributed to St. John the Apostle, seeing, we find other
Revelations, as Early as this, which went abroad, untruly, under the name of
St. Peter, and also of St. Paul, as Hist. l. 3. c. 3.
Eusebius, and in Joan. Tract. 98.
Austin, and lib. 7. cap. 19.
Sozomen report.

Secondly, for the obscurity of this ^.
book; it is confessed on all sides, and particularly by Proleg. in Apocal.
Beza, who acknowledges himself to be one of those, Cui haec mysteria val^e
obscura videntur; And both Mr. Seldom, and Mr. I. Gregory of Oxford, two
Learned men, have affirmed, from the Testimony of Bodinus the Learned
French-Writer, that Calvin acknowledged, that He knew not what this obscure
Writer meant. So our late Reverend Diocesan, Bishop Hall, called this
Apocalypse, A Revelation unrevealed: and this he said particularly, in respect
of the Mystery, of the Thousand years of Martyrs reigning here, with Christ,
Revel. 20. 4. The like he reports of the most Learned, and Reverend Bishop
Andrews, that he professed, that he had not proceeded so far, as to understand
it; much less can we Pygmy-Theoiogues. It is now fifteen hundred years old,
and not yet understood; Mr. Brightman has not cleared it, nor has Mr. Mede's
Key unlockt it. Nor will it ever (I suppose) be perfectly understood, until
such a Commentary be made thereon, as Divines say of other obscure Prophecies,
viz. Irenaeus l. 4. cap. 43.
Prophetiae prius aenigmata sunt, sed peractae intelliguntur. And, Aug de Civit
l. 18. c. 31.
Prophetiae obscurae sunt, antequam fiunt: sed factas, quis non agnoscit? And,
Eusebius. Emiss. hom. de Not. Martyr.
Prophetiarum adimpletio est earum expositio. (i. e.) Prophecies are Riddles:
the only or best Expositor of them is their fulfilling.

Amongst the many obscurities of this Apocalypse, this may go for one; viz. What
day of the week or year the Writer meant by Dominica dies. That he meant our
Sunday, or anniversary Easter, (which is so called, from the Rising of Christ)
will be hard to prove. It may possibly signify the day of the Nativity, or of
the Ascension of our Lord, or the day of Pentecost, for ought can appear; for
none of these are inferior to his Resurrection, either in mystery, or value, or
benefit to man. Or he might mean the day of the Passion of our Lord; of which,
possibly, Christ spoke, when he said, Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my
day. For indeed, the Joh. 8. ^
Passion of the Redeemer was showed to Abraham, in a mysterious Scene, or
dumb-shew; as, when he acted the resemblance of Christ's Passion with his son
Isaac, laying first the wood on him, Genesis 22.
then, him upon the wood; just as was afterward really done to Christ. As for
his rejoicing, it is no marvel if he rejoiced, for his own and his Abrahamites
Redemption. Nor is it strange, that Christ should call the Passion-day, His
day; it was indeed, the day of the Jews, of which it is said, Haec est hora
vestra; Luke 22. 53*
but it was also the day of the Lord. We find both, Tradidit Judas, and,
Tradidit Deus, Romans 8. 32. And, Filius Dei tradidit seipsum, Gal. 2. 20. Ephesians.
5. 2. Judas, for money; but Christ gave himself for us. The day of his Passion
was a day of sorrow, and also a day of joy, in several respects. We know, that
the Primitive Church solemnized the Natalitia, (so they called the passion
days of Martyrs) with joy and feasting; and so they did also the Parasceue, or
day of Christ's Passion, in St. Austin's time, as himself says, in one of his
Passion-Sermons, Aug. de Temp. Ser. 130.
Propter hanc crucem, Diem festum agimus, and Epulamur. So St. Paul gloried in
the Cross of Christ, Gal. 4. 16. And seems to appoint a Festival for the
Passion of Christ, when he said, 1 Cor. 5. 7. Christ our passover is
sacrificed. Therefore let us keep the Feast. Which St. Jerome reads, Itaque
Epulemur. So, it is no novelty, to apply the word Dominica to the Passion; for
we know, that there is another Dominica, which has been called by the Church,
more than twelve hundred years together, Dominica Passionis; as we find in St.
Ambr. To. 5. Ser. 44.
Ambrose, and in Aug. de Temp. Ser. 107.
St. Austin, and ever since in the middle-age Writers, and later Postillers:
And even in our time, and at this day it is called, Passion-Sunday, which is
the fifth Sunday in Lent; and is so called, only in a memorial of the attempt
of the Jews to stone Christ in the Temple, recorded, Joh. 8. 58. which passage
formerly was, and now is, appointed to be read in the Gospel for that day.
Therefore it may reasonably seem questionable, whether the Dominica in the
Revelation may not possibly relate to the grand Passion of our Lord. Lastly,
This Dominica might possibly point at the old Sabbath Day, which was really a
day of the Lord's appointing; which yet, the Writer abstained from calling it
Sabbath, (...) the Day-Sabbath was then utterly dissolved with the City and
Temple, and long before this Revelation was written. And if there were not
something of greater concernment to be considered in the Sabbath-Law, than
Hallowing of a day, there can be no sufficient cause alleged, why the ancient
Sabbath Day was not still retained; which yet ought not to be in any wise,
albeit some Sabbatarians would have it, and others would have our Sunday to be
the Sabbath.

These two disagreeing in the day, yet agree in misunderstanding and abusing
those words of Christ, Pray that your flight Matthew. 24. 20.
be not in Winter, neither on the Sabbath day. By which words, each party would
have their several Sabbaths confirmed and continued.

To this we answer, First, This was said to the Apostles, when as yet they were
but Disciples; and they were all dead (except only St. John) before the time he
spoke of came. Therefore this monition was intended, as to be declared to the
Jews, whom Christ knew to be entangled in Sabbaticall superstition, and that
they would so persist, (as that people do to this day) for it had been no sin
to fly for life on that day, even when it was a Sabbath really in force, much
less afterward, when it was abrogated.

Pray that it be not in the Winter; surely no Jew would think it a sin to fly
for life in winter, (only because 'twas winter). But Winter and Sabbath are
here joined, to show the reason of both to be the same, and that, not to be
sin, but only danger, trouble, and inconvenience. First, for Winter; Because
the days would be short, the ways foul, the season cold, and dangerous to
themselves and their little ones, especially to abide in desolate Mountains,
unto which verse. 16.
they are directed to fly. Secondly, for the Sabba^h; Because their fellow
Jews, being involved in that superstition, would account them enemies to their
Religion, and so neither join with them, nor afford them any succor; and
moreover kill them, as they did many, upon pretense that they were flying to
the Romans.

Eusebius) Hist. l. 3. c. 5 de Them. l. 8.
at the time of begi^^ing Jerusalem, not one Christian was left in that great
City: they were all departed before to Pella beyond Jordan, to which they were
warned by that Divine Oracle, Migremus hinc, as Eusebius thought.

Woe be to them that are with child, and give suck in (...). 19.
those days. he woe must signify temporal woe of affliction, and not
eternal woe; for no man will say, that childbearing, or giving of suck, are
sins, because in Scripture, both are accounted blessings. So that praying
against this Sabbath-Hight, or Winter-flight, is but to pray against temporal
calamities.

Pray that it may not be; but he would absolutely have forbidden it, as he did
all transgressions of the Moral Law.

Joh. 5. 18. What will they do when their enemies invade them on the Sabbath
day? for then, they must either break their Sabbath by flight, or else die in
their sloth and superstition. Therefore they have need to pray, that this
pressure come not on them, upon their Sabbath day.

Saturday or Sunday. 1. If Saturday, we ask, Why themselves do not keep it. 2.
If Sunday, we say, This place will appear miserably invalid to prove, because
Christ never at all mentioned it, nor did any Apostle command it, (as is showed
before) nor did any of the Sabbatizing Jews then apprehend it, or to this day
believe it.

For these, or for better reasons, the late Learned and Reverend Bishop of
Worcester, (my most dear Country) when he was Professor of Theology in Oxford,
doubted not to conclude publicly upon this very place: That it is ridiculous
for any to argue for a confirmation of a Sabbath Dr. Prideaux, de Sab. Orat.
An. 1622.
from these words, which Christ foretold but only as an inconvenience, which
would arise from the Judaicall superstition.

I find also another pretty argument used of late, to prove our Sunday to be a
Sabbath; for, The word Sabbath signifies Rest; therefore Sunday being a day of
Rest, ought to be called Sabbath. If this will hold, Why should not our late
frequent Fasting-dayes, and Thanks-givings, be called Sabbaths, which were
enforced by watchmen, and under penalties, with as great caution as our
Sundays, from working and traveling? Or why should not Nights, the time of
general Rest; and our Beds, the place thereof; and even our Graves, be called
Sabbaths? But if the Inventer of this Argument had considered, that the Fourth
Commandment, or Scripturall Sabbath, does not signify only the corporal Rest
of man, but only his spiritual Rest; and moreover, and most principally, the
mystesterious Rest of God, (as it is said, God Heb. 4. 4.
Rested) he might easily have answered his own argument with a better. For the
true Sabbaticall Rest cannot otherwise be rightly understood, but only of the
Rest both of God and Man; and this Rest can no where be found, but only in
Christ the Savior.

There is yet another scruple, occasioned by our translation of the fourth
Commandment, which either ha^h, or may divert men, from the right understanding
thereof; for thus our English read it, Remember to keep holy the Sabbath, etc.
Hence some imagine, that to keep holy relates only to a Day, and not to
Christ. But the more clear, and true, and unscrupulous Translation might have
been, by our old English word, Hallow, or by the word, Sanctify, borrowed from
the Latin; thus, Remember that thou Hallow (or Sanctify) the Sabbath day.
This doubt will be plen^ifully cleared, by the perusal of the Chap. 9.
ninth Chapter of this Book.

Notwithstanding all this; it may be granted, that Christ giving that monition
to pray, did foresee and relate to some kind of Law, whereby the Jews of that
time would be girt and obliged, to keep the old Sabbath. But if we enquire by
what Law, we shall find it to be neither the Moral, nor the Ceremonial Law of
God, but only a popular Club-Law, or Law of Arms; which was indeed the
tyrannical and superstitious Law, of those grand Zelots and Rebels, which
cruelly insulted over their Countrymen the Jews, as Simon, John, and Eleazer,
(of whom we read much in Jos. de Bello. lib. 8.
Josephus) who then rebelled against Caesar, their Lawful Prince at that time,
(though Nero) and thereby caused the utter and final ruin of their Ci^y and
Country.

If we now examine the Jewish superstitions, and compare them with the
practices or commands of some sabbatizing Christians, we shall find them
running parallel, Buxdo f.
as they are recorded, both by our own, and by foreign Writers; as 1. If a Jew
fell History of the Sab.
short of home on a Sabbath-Eve, he must stay there, in wood, wilderness, or
highway, till the Sabbath were past. 2. A blind Jew might not carry a staff.
3. A wounded man might not wear a plaster, nor a woman a fan. 4. A Jew might
not carry money in his purse, nor knock at a door with an Hammer, or Ringle; nor
wear Clogs or Pattens; nor a Tailor his Needle; nor milk Kine, nor lift a beast
out of a ditch, nor kill a flea on that day.

So some Christian Sabbatarians have Mr. Tho. Roger's Preface on the 39 Artic.
taught publicly: 1. To work on Sunday, (Lord's day, they call it) or throw a
boule, is a sin as great, as to kill a man, or commit adultery. 2. To kill a
cock, as bad as to kill a servant. 3. To make a Feast, or dress a
Wedding-dinner, as bad as for a father to cut his own child's throat. 4. To
ring more Bells then one, as to commit murder. They say, one may not carry
provender to an Horse; a Maidservant would not sweep her Kitchen, nor wash her
Dishes; a zealous son would not ride for a Bone-setter, when his Father's
bones were broken. Some schoolmen among the Romanist's, have bin as eager in
this superstition as ours; They taught, that it is as great a sin to stitch a
poor Man's broken shoe on Sunday, as to kill a Thousand men, Advers. Council.
Trident.
as Doctor Tuppius reports. Besides all this, some of our own Sabbatarians
have labored, to revive, and bring in the old Jewish saturday-Sabbath. Thus
has this Sabbaticall Law, and our Christian Sunday been abused by
schismatic Demagogues, who, notwithstanding, have bin of late both
permitted, and encouraged for such politic ends, as we see, are now fully
effected. The consideration whereof, moved me to endeavor a right
understanding, and vindication of the Divine Sabbath Law.

I have also addressed this discourse to you, My most Honored Lord, and Lady,
for an acknowledgement of your many favors, to my self, and to my more dear
Consort in these hard times; and for a Testimony of my most thankful
apprehension thereof; And also, for that I am well assured, that you, My Lord,
in your love to Truth, and Piety, have taken pains to inform your self in this
very Mystery, by careful attention in hearing, and by your more private
readings, and conferences, besides your secret Meditations, (best known to your
self). Of which Christian employments, because I was in some part, Conscious;
it stirred me the more, to hasten this Work, wherein, I trust you will find
satisfaction, when your leisure will permit you to read it through.

I beg both your pardons for my tediousness in this address, being not so
much Epistolar as Isagogical, which I so designed, to be instead of an
Introduction, needful for the more easy, and unscrupulous perusal of the
ensuing Treatise; which I have clothed with ordinary and coorse Apparel, in a
low, and vulgar style, as to be the more fitly accommodated, to the ordinary,
or middle sort of Christians: just so, as the Books of our Sabbatarians are,
whereby they have gained too much upon the easiness, and credulity of their
adherents; This book is therefore of the like alay with theirs, as one says,
Mart. l. 7. ep. 89.


Aequales scribit libros Calvinus, and Umber. In old time, Writers were thought
to procure a kind of immortality to them, whose Names they recorded in their
Books; therefore, Plin. l. 7. ep. 33.
Plinius the younger, (a man of singular worth, who procured a stay, and
mollifying of the persecution under Trajan) desired Tacitus (his contemporary)
to record his Name in his History, because he thought that so, it might
continue as long as the World: And before him, Ovid, by the same way, promised
the like to himself, and to his Wife, Ovid. Met and Trist. l. 5 eleg. 15.


-- Nomenque erit indelebile nostrum. And
Perpetui fructum donavi nominis --
So when Picus Mirandula wrote a book, and dedicated it to Politian; he
returned this answer, P lit. lib. 12. Epist. 5.
Ago tibi gratias ob immortalitatem. Just so did ^ips. cent. ep. 65.
Lipsius to another.

But I may not promise, or hope for any such production, or issue, by these
papers, to you, or to my Lady, though I wish I could; yet I am well assured,
that the Doctrine herein delivered, (being of the greatest concernment, and
comfort for Christians) is such, as ought to continue in the Church, as long as
it is Militant.

Neither do either of you need any such immortalizing Pharmacum, or paper-charm
for that, which your own eminent, and shining virtues may by themselves
procure; your piety to God, your sincerity, and constancy in true Religion,
your mercifullnesse, and charitable compassion, and bountiful relief of the
poor Members of Christ; your general goodn^sse toward all sorts of people, and
particularly to the now oppressed Churchmen in these ^ad times, will be your
Testimonialls, or Epistles (as the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 3. 2.
) and Comforts to your Consciences whilst you live here, and Monuments or
Trophies to posterity, when both of you, in a full and good old age, shall
follow those Prayers, and Alms which are gone up before you, for a Memorial
before God, Act. 10. 4.
with whom I trust, you will find your names recorded with an everlasting
Character, in the blessed Registry of the Book of Life. In the m^an time,
whilst my now aged life shall last, I will not forget to recommend you, and
yours, in my Prayers to the Merciful protection of our Lord Jesus, and remain.
My Noble Lord, and Lady,

Your devoted and obliged Servant, EDM. PORTER.
Marsham in Norf. October. 1. 1658.
THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. THE Church disturbed about the doctrine of the Sabbath. Of Sunday
Sabbatism. Of works practiced therein, and Recreations forbidden. That the
celebration of Sunday is pious, although not commanded by the fourth
Commandment. How the ancient Patriarks did Sabbatize, yet kept not a seventh
day. That all the ten Commandments are still in force. A passage in St. Austin,
and another in Isychius explained. An abuse of the Commandments in the
Roman-Catechisms, showed. CHAP. II. That the word Sabbath signifies Rest. Of
the Rest of God, and the Rest of Man. Of our Rest Corporal and Spiritual. The
differences of Sabbaths. The several sorts of Jewish Laws, which commanded or
enforced the Sabbath. Of the Judicial Laws of the Jews, and that they are not
fit to be imposed on Christians. CHAP. III. Of Ceremonial Laws. Why God
expressed a dislike of them before they were abrogated. Of the dissolving of
them, and particularly of the Sabbath by Christ. Why Christ dissolved the
Sabbath. The judgment of the Fathers therein. That it is now pernicious to
Sabbatize as the Jews did, and yet do. That Christ appointed no new Sabbath Day
instead of the old. CHAP. IV. Of Laws Moral, and why they are so called. More
of Sunday-Sabbatizing. Of Origin, and of his Christian Sabbath. That Saturday
was a Church-day for Sermons, Sacraments, and Scripture-Lessons; and a
Fasting-day, long after Origen's time. That Christians did more reverently keep
Saturday, then the Jews did that Sabbath. That Sunday is not to be called
Sabbath. Why Easter Day was altered from the Jewish Paschal-day. The Author's
reverent esteem of the Christian-Sunday. CHAP. V. Of the fourth Commandment,
what part of it is Moral, and what is Ceremonial. Why a Ceremonial is taken
into the ten Commandments. Of the Memento, and some other prerogatives proper
to this fourth Commandment. The excellent benefit of this Sabbath-Law. Why it
is placed in the midst of the Commandments. How the whole Law (by it) is
performable by men. CHAP. VI. That Christ is the true Moral Sabbath. Why he is
concealed under the word Sabbath. That the Scriptures do declare him to be the
Sabbath. The difference of the Lord of Sabb^oth, and the Lord of the Sabbath.
Of that Sabbatism mentioned, Heb. 4. 9. A passage of Isaiah, and another of St.
Paul, applied to Christ's Sabbathship. That Sabbath-breaking is not called a
sin in the New Testament. CHAP. VII. The doctrine of the Primitive Church
concerning the Sabbath, showed out of Tertullian, and other Father. How the
Patriarks kept the Sabbath before the days of Moses. The doctrine of the
Church herein. The meaning of the Prayers at the rehear sing of the ten
Commandments. How the Law may be written in our hearts, and how it is so
performable. CHAP. VIII. That Christ is called a Day. Why Christ and the
seventh day are both called Sabbath. The first institution for keeping holy the
seventh day. Why the first seventh day of the world is described without
mention of evening and morning. The Sabbath described by Philo the Jew. That
the Sabbath and Melchisedech were parallel types of Christ. CHAP. IX. The
sanctifying of the Sabbath. How the Godhead is said to be sanctified. How the
human nature of Christ is sanctified. Of the name of God. That it signifies God
himself. That the name Jesus signifies the Person of Jesus. How God sanctifies
us, and how we sanctify God. How Christ, being the Sabbath, is to be
sanctified or kept holy. CHAP. X. Of God's Resting. That it is not acessation
from working. Nor meant of his ending the Creation. Nor of layi^^ aside his
care and providence in Government. That his Rest and Working do consist
together. Something concerning the Original of human Souls. Of Universalls,
what they are, and where to be found. A Question discoursed, Whether God
created any new kinds of Creatures, since the first seventh day. Two Queries
propounded. CHAP. XI. That the Rest of God is fixed on the seventh day only,
although he did intermit Creation for some time in every former day. That his
Rest did not consist in any mere creature. Of the Rest of God before the
Creation. That God performed part of the Creation on the seventh day, and what
that was. Jewish Fables concerning the creation of Adam and Eve. CHAP. XII. Why
the Rest of God is not mentioned until the seventh day. Why it is fixed on the
Creation of mankind, rather than of any other of the Creatures. Answers to
certain Enquiries. That the consideration of Christ; to be propagated from the
man and the woman, was the only cause of this expression of the Rest of God.
CHAP. XIII. That the Rest of God consisted in his purpose of producing Christ,
is proved by Scripture and Reason. Of the Image of God. Why the Woman was taken
out of the Man. Of the union of Christ with Mankind. That this union was showed
by Christ in the Sacramental Bread and Wine. That the Soul of Christ was
derived or propagated from the first man. Something concerning Universal
Redemption. CHAP. XIV. Of Adam's solitude, and something concerning Monastic
life, with the reasons thereof. That the help by the Woman consisted not in
respect of Society, nor of Childbearing, (simply considered) but only in
respect of the propagation of Christ. Of Childbearing, and that it is not
salvificall, without faith in Christ. Of Good and Evil, occasioned by the
Woman. Why she was called Vita, or Life. Why God permitted the Woman to
occasion the Fall. CHAP. XV. An Answer to the Question, How God can be said to
Rest? That the Rest of God is only in Christ, and Why? That the Tabernacle and
Temple are called God's Resting place, only as they were figures of Christ.
That the Ark is called God's strength in the same respect. That God's Rest in
Sion is also meant of Christ. That the union of God and Man in Christ, was
ordained only in order to man's Salvation, and everlasting Rest. That man's
Rest is called God's Rest. Certain Conclusion concerning this Rest of God.
CHAP. XVI. That the Rest of Man, is called God's Rest, is showed by other like
passages of Scripture. That Christ is called the Rest of God; Only, because he
is the Rest of Mankind. An Answer to the second Querie above mentioned, viz.
Why God is said, to Rest, only, on the first seventh day, and not before. The
Conclusion of the Doctrine of God's Rest; and St. Austin's judgment therein.
CHAP. XVII. An exposition of the Ceremonial part of the fourth Commandment
begun. That the six days labor is not a Precept, but only a Permission. That
the seventh day is called a Sabbath, only, because it was a figure of the true
Sabbath. That the Seventh-day Sabbath was not changed by Christ to the eighth
day, but utterly dissolved. That it was never instituted till the days of
Moses. St. Jerome's translation, and our English, examined. The Jewish Sabbath,
and Christian Festivalls compared. Of works on the Jewish Sabbath. That their
corporal Rest was but a figure of our spiritual Rest in Christ. CHAP. XVIII.
The Exposition continued. Why the Woman is not here mentioned. That sons or
servants sinned not, by working upon command. The miseries of servants. Why
Cattle might not be wrought on Sabbath days. That strangers were not obliged
to Sabbatize, except they resided within the Jewish pale. Why cattle are
mentioned before strangers. Why servants, cattle, and strangers, are not
mentioned at the beginning of this Law, with the Memento. That by these
circumstances, the Seventh-day Sabbath is proved to be merely Ceremonial and
Judaical. CHAP. XIX. The Exposition continued. How God is said to have made all
in six days, and yet that he ended not his work until the seventh day. Why
the Creation was prolonged six days. Of the order of Creatures; first, Heaven;
then, Earth. When the Heaven of Angels was made. That their Heaven was intended
principally for mankind. Why Heaven and Earth are mentioned together. Why the
making of Hell is not mentioned, although it was prepared within the first six
days. Why the Creation is mentioned in this fourth Commandment, and not in any
of the other nine. That the Moral Sabbath does signify the Creator, which is
God the Son. That he is called the Beginning, the Word, and the Wisdom of God;
and is therefore here commanded to be sanctified. CHAP. XX. The Exposition
continued. That all the divine persons co-operated and joined, in Creating,
Resting, Blessing, and Sanctifying. How the Second Person, or Son of God, is
the Rest or Sabbath of the same Son of God. How he rests in himself. Of the
diverse considerations of God the Son, in respect of his Godhead and Manhood. Of
his several Appellations respectively. Why the seventh day was preferred above
the former six. That the Seventh-day Sabbath was instituted for a memorial of
the Resting, and (...) of God. CHAP. XXI. The Exposition concluded. The meaning
of blessing and hallowing the Sabbath day. The difference of hallowing God's
Name, and hallowing of Creatures. The differences of Holiness. When the
seventh day was first hallowed. How, and when, it was dis-hallowed. Something
of Sacrilege. How the Prophets spoke truly of things to come, although they
spoke as if they had been past. Of the Prophetical figure called Anticipation.
The directions of the Fathers, and Scripturall examples thereof, applied to
this Sabbath. CHAP. XXII. Reasons, why God having conferred honors on the
seventh day, did also lay some slurs upon it; as 1. That this Day-Sabbath was
not made known till Moses time, nor at all mentioned by zealous David, nor this
Sabbath-Law by Christ. 2. In that God expressly commanded some works on that
day. 3. That no Manna fell on it. 4. That Christ lay dead on that whole day. 5.
That God called it but a sign, and that it was nothing else. 6. That it is
said to be made for man. 7. That it was impossible to be generally kept, and
also inconvenient occasionally to the Jews. The Conclusion. That the
impossibility both of the Seventh-day Sabbath, and also of the Moral Law, was
designed by God, on purpose to drive man to seek for Rest and Salvation, only
in the Lord Jesus Christ.
Errata.
Page 5. line. 8. read, force, and necessity, p. 8. l. 3. tell us, p. 13. l.
27. Judaical, p. 25. l. 6. Onera. p. 26. l. 23. Judaical, p. 32. l. 31. We are,
p. 34. l. 16. Judaico, p. 37. l. 6. Speaks, p. 41. l. 23. Pharisaical, p. 46.
l. 34. killing law, p. 48. l. 5. Law of God, p. 65. l. 5. (...). l. 6. (...),
p. 89. l. 17. intermundium. l. 18. (...), p. 107. l. 6. God added, p. 134. l.
ult. And in him, p. 166. l. 16. judicial l. 20. judicial, p. 168. l. 1. 10 act
a part, p. 227. l. 1. Jeremie In the Margin, p. 13. l. 1. Ignatius, p. 125. l.
3. Laertius in Diog.

De minutioribus, viderit lector.

The Mystery of the Sabbath Discovered.
The Sabbath Moral.
CHAP. I.
The Church disturbed about the Doctrine of the Sabbath: Of Sunday-Sabbatism:
Of works practiced therein, and Recreations forbidden. That the celebration of
Sunday is pious, although not commanded by the Fourth Commandment. How the
Ancient Patriarks did Sabbatize, yet kept not a Seventh day. That the ten
Commandments are still in force. A passage in St. Austin and Isychius
explained: and an abuse of the Commandments in the Roman Catechism, showed.

THE various opinions of men in the Doctrine of the Sabbath, (as it is
delivered in the Fourth Commandment of the Moral Law) has more disturbed the
Christian Church in these latter times, then they did the Fathers, and the
Zealous Christians in the Church Primitive; yet then, was the Doctrine of the
Sabbath mistaken and perverted by Ebion, who taught, that Christians should
necessarily keep the Jewish Hebdomarie, or seventh-day Sabbath; (as some among
us have done), and is therefore by Epiph. haer. 30.
Epiphanius and Theod. haer. fab. Lib. 2.
Theodoret, branded with the mark of a Judaizing Heretic.

And now, although the rejection of the Jewish Seventh-day Sabbath is almost
generally agreed among us, yet a new Sabbath is set up on the Eighth day, or
first day of the week, to be observed with as great strictness, as the old
Sabbath was on the Seventh day by the Pharisees; for now not only labou^s are
forbidden, but also honest recreations, such as we do not find to have been
forbidden by those very Jewish zelots. Which late strictness has given an
occasion, or pretense, to some, to think it to be required, rather in
opposition to former permissions, then for any new light, or religious zeal;
because they have observed, that by order of the same Superiors who forbad
Recreations, Soldiers have been commanded to march, and the utensils and
luggage of War, Carts, Wagons, and Artillary, have been drawn out, and most
cruel and bloody battles fought on that very new Sabbath Day; and all this,
upon pretense of either private and personal necessity, or necessity publik,
which is now called Reason of State; whereupon some of the approved Preachers
of these times have openly in the Pulpit declared their dislike, and said, that
now the State Civil is become like a Ship; and the Church like a Cock-boat,
which must follow the motions and turnings of that Ship of State: intimating
hereby, that our Religion must be reformed so, as to be subservient to the
interest and accommodations of the Civil governors, which is quite contrary to
the desires of those men, who hoped, and expected, that their Kyrk should have
bin made the Ship, and the State should have bin the Cock-boat.

Mose and Aaron were brethren, and agreed that Moses might be directed by Aaron
in Spiritualls, and Aaron Supported by the Brachium temporale, or civil
authority of Moses for stablishing true Doctrine, and godly Discipline: which
formerly was the happy, and peaceable usance of this kingdom, wherein the
state civil was supreme, because, as Optatus truly said against the disturbing
Donatists, Optat. lib. 3. p. 83.
Non est Respublica in ecclesia, sed ecclesia in Republica est, i. e. The
Commonwealth is not included in the Church, but the Church is in the
Commonwealth. And yet the civil power will not excuse those governors before
God, which authorize the breaking of the Commandments, and Moral law of God.

For if the Seventh-day Sabbath, practiced in the Jewish Commonwealth, or the
Eighth, among Christians (which some yet call the Sabbath) were indeed one of
the ten Commandments of God (which certainly are moral, and perpetual), then
did the Jews sin in performing the works of War, and of Circumcision, and
Midwifery, and Sacrificing at the Tabernacle and Temple, on their Sabbath day:
And if our Sunday be really commanded by this moral law of God, or grounded
thereon by a moral equity, (as some have untruly affirmed) then neither private
necessities, nor public reason of State, can quit us from the guilt of
Transgression thereof.

The Rule of Divines is, (which I firmly believe to be true) Non licet in
quavis necessitate, leges Dei morales, seu naturales, violare. i. e. It is not
lawful in any case of necessity, to violate the moral, or natural, laws of
God. For example, In the times of Persecution, the ordinary commands of
Persecutors were Optat. lib. 3.
Nega Deum, Incende Testamentum, Thus pone. i. e. Deny thy God, Burn the Book
of God, Worship the idol. And these were enjoined upon pain of present torment,
and death. And what greater necessity can be imagined then these? and yet the
Martyrs refused life upon such unlawful conditions. Joseph would not yield to
adultry with his lady though he knew the consequence of imprisonment; nor the 3
Hebrews Genesis 39. Dan. 3.
worship the golden im^ge, though they were assured of the fiery furnace. All
inconveniences dangers and necessities must submit to the moral law of God;
better it is to bu^n or die, then to deny Christ, or blaspheme God, and bear
false witness. There is a necessity to obey God, but no necessity of
continuing our natural life by ungodly means. In times of Persecution the
Martyrs might have escaped torment, if Necessity might have excused them.

But it is far otherwise in laws merely Ceremonial, whether Jewish, or
Christian: the transgression of this sort of laws is excusable by necessity,
if it be a true, real, and pressing necessity; in this case the Proverb will
take place Aug. in. Soliloq. c. 2. To. 9.
Necessitas non habet legem. i. e. Necessity has no law; and Inter arma silent
leges. Laws [humane] are dumb in time of War.

Therefore because the Seventh day Sabbath of the Jews was merely a law
Ceremonial, it might, without sin, upon necessity be slighted. Upon this reason
it was, that Mattathias the wise and zealous Macchabean priest with his
associates decreed, and first taught the Jews, that they might, upon
necessity, fight, and repel their enemies on the Sabbath day, as we read both
in Ios. Antiq: l. 12. cap. 9. 1 Mac. 2. 41.
Josephus and 1 Maccab. 2. 41. So likewise the Jews of Antioch, when they were
by force of necessity compelled, refused not to Work on their Sabbath day; as
the same Josephus reports. And our Savior excuses his disciples for
plucking ears of corn, and causes Jos. de Bello lib. 7 Mat. 12. John. 5.
the impotent man to carry his bed, and declares that the priests who by their
great labors about sacrifices in the Temple do profane the Sabbath, yet are
blameless. Thus David did in necessity of hunger eat the holy Shewbread; and
the people of Israel for 40 years together in the wilderness abstained from
Circumcision as being very dangerous in their marches, although it was imposed
on them with great 2. Chron. 30. 2. Ex. 12.
charge. And in the days of Good Hezekiah the Passover was celebrated in the
second month, which was otherwise then the law prescribed. Ex. 12. All these
things were done upon necessity, or some useful convenience, without any
offense to God * because the Sabbath day, and Circumcision, and Shewbread, Number.
9. 11.
and Passover, were but Ceremonialls, and not moral laws. I doubt not, but
aged Eleazar and the 7 brethren mentioned both by h Josephus Iosep. de Maccab.
2 Mac. c. 6. and 7.
and in 2 Macchab. cap. 6. and 7. (who were put to cruel tortures and death for
refusing to eat Swines-flesh offered to Idols) might have eaten thereof in that
necessity, and have saved their lives, without offense to God; because that law
was but Ceremonial; Only they knew, their eating might have given Scandal or
offense to their brethren the Jews, and therefore they abstained; just as St.
Paul says in the like case 1 Cor. 10. 27. 28. Whatsoever is se^ before you,
ea^e, asking no question for conscience sake; But 1 Cor. 10. 27.
if any say unto you, This is offered in sacrifice unto Idols, eat not for his
sake that showed it.

Just so it is with our Christian Ceremonies, whereof Sund^y is one; and
therefore the Solemnity, and celebration thereof in case of pressing dangers and
necessities may be omitted. But let us be sure that the said necessities be so
indeed, and not sinful, or contracted by our own faults, or only pretended;
and then God will excuse us, though some men will not. Thus some Christians, in
time of Persecutions were condemned to the mines, and listed under the title
Metallicae Condemnationis, and were forced there to sore work every day, Sunday
and all, as we read in Eusibius, and Hilarie. and Chrysostom. ^ Eus. Hist. l.
8. c. 13. Hill. cont. Constant. lib. ^. Chrysostom. de. laudibus Martyrum hom. 70.
So at this day, those Christians who are in Slavish captivity under the Turks,
are compelled to undergo hard labors, even on Sundays: and yet thereby,
neither the former Christian Confessors, nor these, do offend God; which yet
they would, if our Sunday were a branch of the moral law of God.

There is not (I think) any good, and prudent christian, that does not approve
of, and most willingly submit to an holy celebration of our Christian. Sunday;
although they do not think it to be enforced by virtue of the 4th Commandment
of the moral law, or any equity thereof; but upon another reason and ground,
because the equity pretended, must be derived, not from the Moral Sabbath; but
from the Jewish, Ceremonial Seaventh-day-Sabbath: the equity whereof is only
this; That as God, under the law, required one day in seven to be Sanctified,
as a figure, and shadow of his people's rest in their Messiah to come So the
Christian Church has ordained one day in Seven to be a memorial of our rest
in the same Messiah our Savior who is come; and our Sunday may also be called
a kind of shadow, as the Jewish Seventh day was: only, their shadow went
before the body (as shadows sometimes do) and our shadow follows after the
body; for the body of both, is Christ.

The Sabbath which is truly Moral, and perpetual, and which is intended, meant,
and enjoined in the 4th Commandment, is another manner of Sabbath, and much
differing from the Jewish seventh day Sabbath, or the Christians Sunday, and is
not such a sabbath as is by many now adays supposed: neither is the vigor and
force of that Sabbath-Commandment as yet antiquated, or expired; but stands
in as full strength, and in an obliging power as much, or rather more then it
had, during the Jewish Synagogue or before the incarnation of our Lord. And I
trust I shall make it appear that this Sabbath-law is written in our hearts
evidently and convincingly as much, or rather more, than any other of those
Moral Laws; and that this Sabbath was to be kept from the very Creation of
man, or from that very time, when God commanded man to abstain from the Tree of
knowledge.

And yet in this Assertion, I shall not in the least gainsay the Doctrine of
those Ancient and most learned Fathers, as Just. dial. cum Tryph. Tert. Adv.
Iudaeos. Eusebius. de. Demonst. lib 1. c. 6.
Justin Martyr, and Tertallian, and Eusebius, who tells us, that neither Adam,
nor Enoch, nor Noah, nor Melchisdeck did ever Sabbatize And Athanas. in Synopst.
Athanasius also, who affirmed very truly, That the observation of the 7th day
sabbath, be an not, until the days of Moses; All which I firmly believe to be
true; provided, that we understand their Assertion in the same sense that they
meant it, viz: of the hebdomary, weekly, or 7th day Sabbath, which verily is
not that Sabbath which is meant, and mysteriously implied, in the fourth
Commandment.

For the Sabbath, which in the fourth commandment is required to be Sanctified,
is the true, substantial, mystical, and eternal Sabbath, which is the Son of
God, the Messiah, the great Peacemaker, even the Lord Jesus Christ: of which
true Sabbath, the Jewish, Leviticall, Ceremonial, or seaventh-day Sabbath, was
but a mere shadow type or figure, which shadow is now vanished as other legal
shadows are, such as, Circumcision, and Sacrifices, both which were far more
ancient, then the weekly Sabbath was; whereas the Sabbath, meant, and intended,
and commanded in this 4th commandment, was in force, and kept by all the holy
Patriarks before Moses was born; and, before it was written in stone, it was
written in man's heart, as all other Moral laws were; and it was, and is to
last until the end of this world and in the next world also, and not to be
Antiquated at all, as the seaventh-day Sabbath was and is.

For the Moral law, which was written by the finger of God consists of ten
Commandments, just so many, no more, nor less: which number the holy Scripture
mentions, Ex. Ex. 34. 2^
34. 28. Ten commandments, or December verba Foederis Tenn words. And so again,
Deuteronomy. 4. 13. Tenn words or Commandments. And God wrote them on two Tables of
Stone, to signify the durablenesse of them all: and therefore the Moral
Sabbath there meant, must continue as long, and as firmly, as any of the other
nine. We must still have Ten Commandments, which is the reason that St. Austin,
and generally all our Divines to this day, call this Moral law Decalogum, as
consisting of Ten words, or Commandments.

The same Father in his book entitled Aug. Tom 3.
Speculum, reciting the Moral law out of Ex. 20. does quite omit the fourth
commandment which is of the Sabbath; and this he did because 1. He knew that
the Seaventh-day Sabbath was none of the Moral laws of God, but that it is
totally antiquated, and expired. 2. Because he perceived that men did mistake
the meaning of the true Moral Sabbath, by fixing the duty thereby required,
only, on the keeping holy of a day, whereas they should have known, that the
Sabbath there meant is only Christ. So that by this misconceit, men slighted
the Substance, and magnified the Shadow; for the same Father had said before.
Aug. epist 86.
Judaeus si sabbatum observando Dominum negat, etc. i. e. If the Jew by
observing his Sabbath day does thereby deny, that his Lord Messiah is come, how
can the Christian safely observe the Sabbath day? And again in his 119. Epistle
to c Epist. 119. cap. 12.
Januarius cap. 12. he thus writes. c. Praeceptum de Sabbato, solum figurate
praecipitur. de requie quae in solo Deo certa invenitur-ergo non ad literam
jubemur observare diemillum; nam nisi aliam Spiritualem requiem significet, lex
ridenda judicatur. i. e. The law of the Sabbath day is only figurative
signifying that Sabbath or rest, which is no where to be found sure and
certain, but only in our God; Therefore we are not hereby to observe a day as
it is literally set down: for unless some other Spiritual rest be thereby
meant, that Sabbath law might seem ridiculous, Thus he.

Upon the same reason Isychius of Jerusalem affirms, That the sabbath day
which the Jews observe, is none of the Ten Commandments although it was
written among them: for the Sabbath there meant signifies Isych. in Levit. lib.
7. c. 26.
Requiem intelligibilem, says he, i. e. not a Corporal but a spiritual or
intelligible Rest; which rest is only in our God. He added, that if we will
take the words going before, viz [I am the Lord thy God that brought thee out
of the land of Aegypt] for one of the commandments, we shall still have Tenn.
Indeed, The mysterious Sabbath which is really meant, and intended in the
morality of the 4th Commandment, is, only, that God which delivers us out of
(not only Egyptian, but also) Hellish Slavery, which deliverance is implied,
and couched in this word Sabbath; so that we need not put out one of the
commandments, and in the room of it, take in a new for preserving the number of
of Ten, for that number will be found therein without such chopping: and we are
offended with the Romanists for such practices about these commandments, who,
to hide the second commandment which forbids image worship have in their
Catechisms quite omitted it, although it continues perfectly in their Bibles;
and to supply the defect, they have obtruded the fallacy of Composition, in
making but one Commandment of the two first: And the fallacy of Division, in
making two of the last, as is apparent in their books, and particularly in
Ledesma's dial. p. 81. Ferus. libell. precat. p. 59. 60.
the Catechism of Jacobus Ledesma a Jesuit, and also of Ferus.

CHAP. II.
The word Sabbath; That it signifies Rest. Of the Rest of God, and the Rest of
man. Of our rest Corporal and Spiritual. The diffferences of Sabbaths. The
several sorts of Jewish laws, which command, or enforce the Sabbath. The
Judicial laws of the Jews, not fit to be imposed on Christian

WHat this word Sabbath signifies, we are certified by two learned Jews:
first, Philo. de cherubin.
Philo says, Sabbatum interpretatur Quies, i. e. The interpretation of
Sabbath, is Rest. With him Joseph. Antiq. l. 1. c. 2.
Josephus agrees, Sabbatum significatrequiem i. e. that it signifies quiet or
Rest. With them our Christian writers generally consent as, Eusebius,
Nazianzen, Epiphanius, Jerome, and Austin.

The Rest, which is signified by this word Sabbath, is 1 The Rest of God,
mentioned Genesis 2. 2. God rested on the 7th day from all his works. And so
again, Ex. 20. 11. (How the most blessed Godhead, can be said to rest, which
never labored or was weary, we shall inquire hereafter.) Secondly, The Rest of
man; and this Rest is of two Sorts: First Rest Corporal, by ceasing from
worldly servile labors on the 7th day, both himself, and his family, and his
poor beasts also, Secondly Rest Spiritual; which consists in the quiet, and
tranquillity of our minds, and consciences, when we are freed, and quitted from
the disturbing perturbations of our Consciences, and turbulent horrors of our
Souls, upon consideration of our sins, and fear of divine vengeance.

This Spiritual rest, is not confined to a Seventh day only, but is a
continual Rest or Sabbath to every holy Christian. St. Austin says, Aug. de
Genesi ad lit. l. 4. c: 13.
Fidelium, perpetuum Sabbatum observatur. i. e. The faithful keep a continual
Sabbath. And again, he says, Ibid. in Psalm. 91.
Nostrum Sabbatum est in tranquillitate conscientiae est gaudium spei
nostrae-intus est in cord Sabbatum nostrum. i. e. The Christian man's Sabbath
consists in the quietness and tranquillity of his conscience-It is the
joyfulnesse of our hope* Our Sabbath is inward, residing in our heart We are
also taught by St. Jerome, that the Jewish Seventh day Rest, was but a mere
figure of the Christians Rest. Hieron. Tom. 9. 11. n. 40.
Judaeis, Sabbatum in ocio corporali significabat sanctificationem in requie
Spirit^s sancti. i. e. The Sabbath which the Jews observed by a corporal rest
did signify a Sanctification of the rest wrought by the Holy Ghost. And Origin
tells us Orig. in Math. ^ract 29.
Qui vivit in Christo, semper sabbatizat a peccato. i. e. He that does live, or
abide in Christ, does always Rest from sin. His meaning is not, that a
Christian is always without sin; but that the infirmities of holy men do not
discontinue, or extinguish their resting in the mercies of God through Christ,
and that they are freed from the dispairing terror of Damnation. This is the
true real and spiritual Sabbath, or rest in Christ; to which we are exhorted
by old Ignatius, Inat. ep. ad Magnesianos.
. Non Sabbatizemus Judaico m^r^-sed Sabbatizemus spiritualiter. i. e. That we
should not deceive our selves by keeping a Sabbath day only, as the Jews did,
but to apprehend thereby a more excellent spiritual Sabbath, viz. the true
rest of our souls in Christ. So b^ these p^ss^ges we learn, that there is not
only a day Sabbath of external, and corporal rest, to be considered in the
Scriptural doctrine of Sabba^hs, but moreover and principally, a secret,
mysterious, and spiritual Rest or Sabbath, which is the Grand Sabbath; whereof
the other Sabbaths are but mere figures and shadows.

For the more clear understanding of the difference of these two sorts of
Sabbaths, we must inquire of the Original of them; as when, and by what law
they were inacted: And this we cannot with plainness set forth, but by
examining the several kinds of laws imposed upon the Jews, whereby the
Sabbath was both established in the judicial commonwealth, and is also binding
to us Christians: Wherein I shall not need to meddle with the Sabbath of years,
which was every Seventh year, wherein the whole land rested from husbandry,
Nor with the Jubilean Sabbath, which was every fiftieth year, when old owners
returned to their ancient inheritances. But our inquiry must must only be, for
the authority of the Saturday, weekly, or 7th-day Sabbath, with the
signification, meaning, and mystery thereof; and what that true, real,
substantial, and spiritual Sabbath is, which was but only typified by the
Seventh-day Sabbath.

For the Jewish laws: we find 3 several diferent sorts of them, viz. 1 Mor^l.
2. Ceremonial. 3. Judicial, by all which the Sabbath is established; all which
laws are distinctly mentioned (as Expositors say) by those words of Moses,
Deuteronomy. 6. 1. Now these are the Commandments, the Statutes, and the Judgments,
which the Lord your God commanded to teach you] The ancient Latin Translation
thus renders them: 1. Praecepta to signify the ten commandments; 2.
Ceremoniae, to signify the ceremonial or Leviticall laws; 3. Judicia, to
signify the laws Judicial. My design of discoursing of them, requires that I
begin with the laws Judicial.

1 The judicial Law
1. The Judicial law of the Jews is such as we now call the law Politic,
Civil, Common, or Statute Law, ordained for the ordering and governing of the
commonwealth; by this law, punishments were enacted to be inflicted on the
transgressors both of these judicial laws, and also upon them that transgressed
other laws; for, by it, Sabbath Breakers were punished with death, Ex. 31. 14.
And Ex. 35. 2. The gatherer of sticks on the Sabbath day, is stoned to death.
Number. 15. 35. Idolaters are adjudged to be utterly destroyed, Ex. 22. 20. To
curse Father or Mother was death, Levit. 20. 10. Bearing false witness in
matters capital, was death, Deuteronomy. 19. 18. 19.

This judicial (I say) appointed punishments for the transgressors of the
other sorts of laws, when in those other laws no punishment was mentioned for
transgressors; As in the ten commandments we find no visible nor temporal
penalty mentioned for the sins of Idolatry, Sabbath-breaking, Dishonorers of
Parents, adulterers, or falsewitnesses; the punishment being either reserved to
God, or referred to the laws Judicial or Politic.

There are some, that have thought fit that these judicial laws of Moses should
(with some additions) be made the laws Politic of Christians. But I conceave
that those laws are now most unfit for any Christian kingdom, or State; nor
can they now have any binding power over us by virtue of that authority which
they had from Moses, or, through him, from God; for these resons, 1. Because
they were ordained, only, for the Jews commonwealth whilst it stood; without
any intention to continue them any longer.

2. Many of them were enacted purposely to serve for the discovery of the
Messiah, and to be an evidence of the fulfilling of some Prophecies which
concerned the Tribe and genealogy of Christ before his actual manifestation in
the flesh.

3. Many of them are but Typical, and therefore not to be used now, since the
Types are fullfiled by Christ the Antitype, so that now they must needs be
antiquated, and quite out of date, as well as all the other Leviticalls or
ceremonialls, (which are typical laws) are, and ought to be disused; such as
Circumcision, Sacrifices, and New Mons, etc.

4. These judicialls would not be convenient for the very Jews themselves, now
since the Death of Christ, although they had to this day continued a People,
and State, in their own Country and City, because the practice of these laws
would still harden them in their infidelity against the true Messiah, as we
see, their Sabbatizing and Circumcising yet do; Much less can they be fit for
us Christians, because of many and great inconveniences which would ensue
thereupon. Such as these:

1. If the Jewish 7th year-Sabbath were in force with us, wherein the whole
land was to rest from Tillage, and Husbandry, as is commanded Ex. 23 11. and
Levit. 25. 4. how many thousands of poor people would be famished, and the
richer people undone? Indeed, God did extraordinarily provide in such years for
that people, being under that command; but we have not any such command, nor
warrant now to expect such miraculous provisions.

2. If the Jubilean Sabbath law, of repossessing estates by the Ancient and
rightful owners should now take place with us, as was commanded Levit. 25. 13.
This would bring much sorrow to our late purchasers, or intruders into other
men's estates, and would reduce many of our new Gentry to their former trades,
and much disappoint their Gentle-homified posterity.

3. If all those which by ordinary works transgress the law of the Jewish
Sabbath (which is our Saturday) should be put to death, as was commanded Ex.
31. 14. What would become of traders, manufactors, market-keepers, husbandmen,
and of the greatest part of the Christian World?

4. If all false Prophets should be put to death that speak to turn us out of
the way which the Lord our God has commanded us to walk in, as is commanded,
Deuteronomy. 13. 5. it would be ill with many of our new Time-serving Preachers; for,
Preaching in the New Testament is often called Prophesying, as Mat. 7 22. and 1
Cor. 14. 1.

5. If those that Curse their Parents, though but a Domestic Father, only, of
a family. should be put to death, as is commanded Ex. 21. 17. Levit. 20. 9.
what should become of those Sons of Be^^al, which have cursed, and blasphemed
their Public Father, Patrem Patriae?

6. If Sacriledg should now be punished with death, as it was, Jo^h. 7. 25; Or
false witnesses, Such as our Bithynian, and Iuvenal. Sat. 8.
Cappadocian knights of the post are; Or if all young married women, which are
discovered after marriage, to have bin deflowred before marriage, as Deuteronomy. 22.
21; Or if no usury must be taken of our brethren, as Deuteronomy. 23. 19; Or if all
debts must be released freely to our neighbor or brother, every seventh year,
as it is commanded, Deuteronomy. 15. 2: Such Judicials would much displease a great
number of people of this kingdom.

He that imagines that he can compose one frame of laws Politic, or
Ecclesiastic that may fitly serve, and accommodate all christian Commonwealths
and Churches, may as easily phansy (as it is in the fable) that he can make a
coat for the Moon. Let him first perswadeour Nobles and Gentry, to keep them to
one fashion of apparel, and our Legislative Statesmen never to make new, or
abrogate old Laws, either of the Commonwealth, or of the Church. But we have
seen both Politic, and especially ecclesiastic laws changeable as the Moon.
To Solomon, the Church appeared fair as the Moon, Cant. 6, 10. Upon which
words, the Gloss. says [Variatur status ejus, nunc clara, nunc dehonestata
vitiis pravorum] i. e. The Church is sometimes clear, sometimes denigrated by the
vices of men; her state is variable. Doctor Donn was a profound Divine, and a
rare Poet (Poets are called Divine, and the Scripture calls them Prophets Tit.
1. 12.) Luna, est Ecclesia quia a filio illuminatur, qui est Sol. Aug. in Psalm.
10.
This learned Doctor, as a prophetical Divine, entitled one of his books
Ecclesia Lunatica i. e. The Church Lunatic, as St. Austine calls this life Aug
in Solilo. c. 11. Tom.
Vitam Lunaticam.

This I trust, is enough, to show that the keeping holy of the Jewish Sabbath
or Saturday, or a weekly Seventh day, cannot be enforced by any authority or
virtue of the Judicial law of Moses.

CHAP. III.
Of the Ceremonial laws. Why God expressed a dislike of them, before they were
abrogated. The Dissolving of them; and particularly, the Sabbath, by Christ:
And why Christ did dissolve it. The judgment of the Fathers herein. That it is
now pernicious to Sabbatize; as the Jews did, and do yet. That Christ
appointed no new Sabbathday in-stead of the old.

2 The Ceremonial Laws.
THere is another sort of laws imposed on the Ancient people of God, which are
called the Ceremonial Laws, such as concerned the Covenant, and the worship
of God, consisting of Ceremonies and Rites, to be used by the Abrahamicall or
Mosaicall or Jsraeliticall people, until the ending of the Leviticall
Preisthood, and no longer; as Circumcision (far more ancient then the seventh
day Sabbath having bin imposed on the Abrahamits long before Levi or Moses were
born, and afterward it was also inacted as a law by Moses Ex. 12. 49. Levit.
12. 3.): So the Pascall feast, and Sacrifices of certain beasts and birds, to
be offered only at the Tabernacle, or Temple: So Feastivalls are appointed, of
new Moons of At-onements or Expiation, and other Festivalls besides the 7th day
sabbath, which are recorded Levit. 23. and are also called Sabbaths as the
At-onement, Levit. 16. 31. And the 7th year Lev. 25. 4. And the feast of
Trumpets Lev. 23. 24: and of Tabernacles Levit. 23. 39. All which were but
Types, Shadows, and Figures. Which are now expired, because the Substance and
Antitype of them is come, which is Christ, who was but only prefigured, and
represented by those Ceremonies.

Now because those Ceremonialls, were of none other use, but only to prefigure
Christ with his benefits; And because the Jews did not rightly use them to
that purpose and intent, for which they were appointed; God himself who
Ordained them, did nevertheless reject them, even whilst they were in force,
and to be performed by Command of the Ceremonial law: And this was, because
the Jews did not rightly understand their Significations, and therefore did
misuse them. Hence it is that God expostulateth with the Jews, Isa. 1. 12, 13,
14. To what purpose is the multitude of your Sacrifices -- bring no more vain
oblations-the Newmoons and Sabbaths, I cannot away with them-your appointed
feasts my Soul hates, they are a trouble to me, I am weary to bear them. The
same rejection of these Ceremonies we find again J^r 6. 20. And particularly
of their feasts he says, Amo^ 5. 21 I hate and despise your feast-dayes. And,
before these prophets, the holy Psalmist had said, Psalm. 40. 6 Sacrifices and
offerings thou did not desire. All these reprehensions were, only because
the Israelites of those times did err from the true meaning and intent for
which those Sabbaths and Sacrifices were set up; for they supposed that the
Opus Operatum, or bare outward work and literal performance (without any faith
or consideration of the Messiah thereby signified) was all that God required of
them.

But afterward, when Messiah was come, and by preaching published, those
Ceremonies ended; so, that not only the abuse of them, but the very use of them
was utterly rejected, and became sinful. For St. Paul tells us of the grand
ceremony, Circumcision, Gal. 5. 2. If ye be Circumcised, Christ shall profit
you nothing; And of Sabbaths, and other ceremonies, he says Col. 2. 16. Let no
man judge you in meat, or drink or in respect of an Holy Day, or New Mood, or of
Sabbath days; which are a Shadow of things to come, but the Body is Christ.]
By which we are fully assured that the very Seventh day Sabbath was but a mere
figure, and Type of the true Eternal Sabbath, which is Christ; That the Jewish
Sabbath was but the shadow; And that the body thereof was Christ.

Justly therefore are the Jews reproved for doting so much on the
Shadow-sabbath, and utterly neglecting the Substance, and body, which was but
only represented by that shadow, like the dog in the Gabriae fabula. 32.
Fable, which let-go and est the Substantial flesh out of his mouth, by
snatching at the shadow thereof in the water; So the great Orator Demosthenes
perceiving the Greeks to neglect the weighty matters of State which he
delivered in an Oration, tells them a tale, and then reproves them for
listening with more attention to a ridiculous case, Plut. de 10. Orat.
of two men contending for the shadow of an Ass, than they did to the great
affairs of their Country. This surely was the reason that our Savior so often
took occasion to slight, and decry the Jewish seventh-day sabbath, because he
saw the Scribes and Pharisees so strict, and curious in keeping that shadow,
and utterly to neglect the true Substantial Sabbath, which was their Messiah,
in whom only, true Sabbatical Rest was to be found, and no where elss.

And now since Christ is come, and fully made known to his Church; the Jewish
Ceremonies are useless and quite gone, as may thus appear.

1. For now what need have we of the shadow of a Paschal Lamb, seeing the true
Lamb of God is slain? 2. What need of the blood of Sacrifical beasts for us;
since Christ is Sacrificed, and his precious blood powered out? 3. Now, there is
no need of the Jewish earthly Tabernacle, or Temple; because Christ is come,
whose body was the Substantial Temple. 4. No need now of Corporal Circumcision,
because Christ has taken away the Superfluity of Sin, even of Original Sin,
which was but only Figuratively signified by that Sacrament of Circumcision;
which Sacrament was (as I conceive) therefore performed, or executed on that
part of the body, and none other part, through which Original Sin is
propagated. 5. No need now of the Jewish Calends, or New Mons, because men are
now really renewed by the Spirit of Christ: The Sun of righteousness has
enlightened us; we need not the darker shadowy type of Moonlight, at Noon day.
6. Nor need we the Ceremonious festival of At-onement, or Reconciliation, now,
by the High Priest, entering into the most holy place of the earthly Temple;
because Christ has really made our Atonement by his own blood, and has
himself entered into the most holy Tabernacle of Heaven, and thither carried our
Nature with him. 7. Finally, we have now no need of the Jewish weekly, Typical,
and Ceremonious Sabbath, because the true Sabbath is come, even Christ, who is
the Sabbath or Rest both of the Godhead, and of us men.
It is evident enough, that Christ did, on purpose and design, take special
care both to discountenance, and also to dissolve the Jewish Saturday-Sabbath,
that by his example, the Jews might be withdrawn and weaned from the Ceremony
to the S^bstance; and from the Letter to the Spirit and meaning thereof: for he
commanded the I^potent man to carry his bed on the Sabbath day, Joh. 5. 8. The
Jews therefore charge him with their Sabbath-breaking, which Christ did not
deny, and they therefore sought to kill him, verse. 18. Afterward, He makes
clay, on the Sabbath day, Joh 9. 14. which he needed not to have done in order
to the curing of the blind man: therefore it was done upon another d^sign, of
Nulling the Sabbath, as the Jews also apprehended it, verse. 16. He also
excuses his Disciples for plucking ears of corn on the Sabbath day, Math. 12.
And tells the Pharisees that their own Jewish priests did profane the Sabbath
by working on the Sabbath in their Temple, and yet the priests were blameless.
For indeed they did on that day make the Shewbread, and brought in fuel for
the Altar, they killed, washed, skinned, dressed, and Sacrificed beasts; and so
labored as much, or more then ordinary Butchers, and more also on the Sabbath
day, than any other day of the week, except it were a Festival; which Festivals
were also called Sabbaths.

To this dissolution, and nulling of the Jewish Sabbath, the Fathers, and other
Christian writers generally agree (except some few Sabbatarians). Saint Austin
upon occasion of those words Joh. 5. 18. says, Aug: Epist. 11.
Christus sabbatum solvi, i. e. Christ has dissolved the Sabbath, again he
says, [ de Gen: ad lit: L: 4. C. 13.
Jam ab usu fidelium observatio Sabbati abla^a est; perpetuum Sabbatum
observatur i. e.] The observation of the Sabbath is now taken away from
believers, who now keep a perpetual Sabbath. (For our constant adhering to
Christ is our continual Sabbath), And again he says. de spiritu and litera. C:
14.
Quisquis nunc observat Sabbatum sicut litera sonat, carnaliter sapit, quod
mors est. i. e. That man which now observes the Sabbath literally, is carnally
minded; and to be carnally minded is death, says Saint Paul, Romans 8. 6.

With him agrees Saint Ambrose using these words, An. br. de fide. l. 2. c. 4.
. Christus Sabbatum sol^it etc. Hinc Judaei ad necem ejus commoti] Christ did
dissolve the Sabbath: and therefore the Jews sought to kill him, Ioh. 5. 16.
Again he says, Epist. l. 5. Ep. 42.
. Sabbatum, and Circumcisio, cessant sub Evangelio] i. e. Both the Sabbath, and
also Circumcision do cease, under the Gospel. By these words he declares, that
the Jewish Sabbath is but such a typical, and temporary Ceremony, as
Circumcision was; which Circumcision (we know) was forbidden, not only by St.
Paul Gal. 5. 2. but also by the whole Council of the Apostles, Act. 15. 24.

St. Jerome also thus writes of St. Paul. Hier. proaem. in Gal.
Nullus Apostoli Sermo est, vel per epistolam, vel praesentis, in quo non
laboret docere, Antiquae legis Onra deposita, id est Sabbatum, Circumcisionem,
Calendas. etc. The Apostle, in every Sermon of his, either written by Epistle,
or delivered where he was present, teaches, that the troublesome Ceremonies of
the old law are taken off, such as Sabbaths, Circumcision, and New Mons, etc.

Before him, Athanasius had thus Written, upon those words Mat. 11. 27. All
things are delivered to me of my Father]. Athan. Tom. 1. 294.
Sabbatum injunctum est priori populo-sednovae creaturae non praecepit
observationen Sabbati]. i. e. The Sabbath was imposed on the first people (The
Israelits) but not on the new people (The Christians) The Jewish Sabbath was
appointed to be on the last day of the week, which might intimate that is was
near Ending: for when Christ, the true Sabbath, and the true light was come,
the Sabbaticall ceremony was useless, as candlelight at Noon day. St.
Chrysostom also observes in his Sermon on the Paralytick. Chrysostom. Sermon. 7. Tom.
5
Christus quando solvebat Sabbatum, maximum aliquod meraculum edebat, ut sic
Sabbatismum auferret.] When Christ dissolved the Jewish Sabbath, he did withal
perform some great miracle, that it might appear, that Sabbatizing was
dissolved by Divine authority.

The ancient and grand Heretic Marcion, upon this truth of Christ's dissolving
the Saturday Sabbath, took occasion to ground his false heresy, denying Christ
to be the Son of that God who made the World, and Ordained the Law; supposing,
that the true son of the Creator, would not null the law of the same Creator.
By this it appears, that even this Heretic so far agreed with the Catholic
Church, as to acknowledge the dissolution of that Sabbath by Christ, as
Tertullian also does in his writings against that Heretic, whereof he gives
this reason. Tert. Cont. Mar. Lib. 4.
Quia Deus est Dominus Sabbati, ergo destruere potuit]. i. e. Because our Lord
Jesus is the Lord of the Sabbath, therefore he might dissolve it; The same
Father says again, in another book. De Idololatria. c. 4.
[Nobis (Christianis) Sabbata extranea sunt, sicut Neomen ia]. To us
Christians, Sabbatizing is a stranger, as much as New Mood days are; This he
wrote because he knew that Sabbath-keeping was a fading and temporary Ceremony,
as much as the feasts of New Mons.

In some Epistles yet extant, which passed between St. Austin, and St. Jerome,
concerning their differing opinions in some Judicial ceremonies; St. Austin
thus writes and faith. Hier. Epist. 97. Tom. 2.
That after the death, and Resurrection of Christ, those Ceremonies also dyed;
but that they were to be allowed some convenient time for burial, and an
honorable funeral.] And indeed the public Preaching up of Christianity, was
their Funeral Oration, and the Burning of the Temple, was their Funeral pile;
But when these Sepulture-offices were once performed, then those Typical
Ceremonies became, not only dead, but deadly, pernicious, and mortiferous. To
this St. Hierome adds this aggravation. August.
In Barathrum Diaboli devolvunt eum qui observat] to which St. Austin also
consents To use those Ceremonies now, is the ready way to drive men into
Hell. So St. Chrysostom, having in his Sermons often forbidden the people under
his charge to use Sabbatizing, as the Jews then did at Antioch, where
Chrysostom then was a preacher, he adds, Chrysostom. Homil Antioch. 34.
That, after his admonition, if any did Sabbatize, himself was innocent of
their blood] So deadly did he think it. And before him Origin had both
affirmed, and preached Orig. in Jeremi. Hom. 9.
That now to observe Sabbaths, is to return to those beggarly Elements of
Ceremonies-Quasi nondum descenderat Christus] That the Sabbatizer thereby
declares, that he does not believe that Christ is come, who is the true
Sabbath, which now is to be kept.

For this cause, it may reasonably be thought, that our Lord Jesus neither at
the dissolution of the Old Jewish Sabbath day, nor at any time after, did
command, or so much as intimate any new Sabbath day for Christians, lest
Christians also, like the Jews, should erroneously think, that the Moral
precept, for Sanctifying the Sabbath, confisted only in the strict observation
of a day, and thereby utterly neglect the most holy, most necessary and Grand
Sabbath, which is Christ: who is the Only Sabbath that we Christians can, or
ought to have. For at this day we see that the Sabbath which is Commanded in
the Fourth precept of the law Moral, is, by the greater number of people
thought to be meant only of Sanctifying a day; for so they are now taught by
the greater number of our Preachers: But herein, the People deceive themselves,
and the Preachers deceive others; for that Commandment has a more noble,
excellent and beneficial meaning then so, as I trust will appear anon.

To the judgment of the Ancients before mentioned, I crave thy patience, good
Reader, that I may add one more, of a late Writer, the learned Mr. Mede, which
I esteem ponderous: who in one of his books thus writes, Mede Diatrib, 15
We may not now keep the Jewish Sabbath, lest we should thereby seem not to
acknowledge our Vbi Been Nemo melius. Cassi^d. de Orig.
Redemption performed, but expect still: Their Sabbath was but a shadow]. Thus
he, most truly and correspondently with the Primitive Church. It was indeed but
a Shadow of our Redemption by our Redeemer, which being performed (as the
Psalmist speaks) it is passed away like a Shadow.

By what has bin said, I trust the Reader Psalm. 144. 4.
apprehends, that the weekly Jewish Sabbath is no more but a branch of the
Ceremonial Law, now Antiquated, and, by the authority of Christ himself,
totally abrogated; So that I may for certain conclude, that neither the Jewish
seaventh-day, nor any moral equity deduced from it, can be that Sabbath which
is enjoined to be Sanctified, by the Moral Law of God; Of which we are next to
Consider.

CHAP. IV.
Of Laws Moral, and why so called. Of Sunday-Sabbatizing. Of Origin, and his
Christian Sabbath. That Saturday was a Church-day, for Sermons, Sacraments and
Scripture-lessons; and then also a fasting day, long after Origens time.
Christians did more reverently keep Saturday, then the Jews themselves did
that Sabbath. Sunday, not to be called Sabbath. Easter day why altered from the
Jews Paschall day. The author's reverend esteem of the Christian Sunday,

3 The Moral Law.
THe third Sort of laws recorded in the Scripture, and imposed upon Gods
People, are the laws of the Decalogue, the Ten Commandments. Which Divines,
commonly call (though improperly) The law Moral. So called, because they were
ordained as rules to guide, and direct us in our demeanours, or Manners; for
therein, we find precepts Ethicall for our private persons, against Murder,
Adultrey, Theft, Coveting. And Oeconomicall, for our deportment in a family, as
honoring of Parents, Mercifullnesse to servants and poor Cattle. And
Political, against Idolatry, and for Reverencing superiors, as Magistrates, and
especially Kings who are the Public Parents of Subjects. All these Ten
Commandments, are laws Moral* And more also, they are laws Natural, they are
written in our hearts. And more yet, they were laws, and binding too, before
they were written in stone, and so would be to the end of the World, although
they never had binne written, therefore they are perpetual, all and every one
of those Ten; never to be abrogated or antiquated. I say, there are Ten of
them, (although I do not believe, or affirm that all the words in the fourth
Commandment are so, viz. the words which mention the seventh day Sabbath, of
which I shall give an account anon) for we shall find Ten, without them.

The reason why I said, that these Ten laws are but Improperly called Moral,
is, Because (if we speak critically, and Logically) All laws whatsoever, are
Moral; for all are but Rules for men's manners, and demeanours. So are the laws
Judicial, and Ceremonial before handled: So are the Evangelicall precepts.
And all Politik (both Imperial and Municipall) laws. So are the Edicts of
Supreme Magistrates: So were anciently the Roman Senatus-consulta Pleb^scita;
Consular, Tribunitial, and Praeterian Edicts; and even the Canons, and
Constitutions of Counsels and Synods, were Moral; but with his difference, The
Ten Commandments are Moral (...). i. e. by nature, though they never had binne
openly Commanded, either by Word, or Wrting; The other Morals (most of them),
are so, Only (...) i. e. by Constitution. Nor could they have the appellation,
or the force, and power of laws, except they had binne inacted.

Of the Ten Commandments, Nine are confessedly still in full force and vigor,
whereof no doubt or question is made among prudent and sober Christians, but
only by another gang of those that are Leavened with the Antinomian dotage;
Only the fourth Commandment concerning the Sabbath, is that which many good
men stumble at, which has occasioned much distraction, and trouble, and
bitterness; and also many unprofitable written books by some that would have
the Seventh day kept literally on our Saturday, as the Jews did. And by
others who would ground the Christian Sunday upon this fourth Commandment, and
thereupon press the Jewish and Pharisaical strictness of Sabbatizing on the
Sunday, as if all the Scriptural admonitions for keeping of the Jewish seventh
day, did by a kind of moral equity (as they say) require the same to be
performed on our Sunday; and therefore both themselves and their proselytes,
call Sunday, The Sabbay day -- Nimium patienter (as one says) too tamely, and
unadvisedly. For in Horace.
all the New Testament, they cannot find that our Sunday, (which is the first
day of the week) is ever called Sabbath, unless they will call every day a
Sabbath, because the Gospels do, in their account, reckon several week-dayes by
the Sabbath, For they call our Sunday, (...) i. e. the first day from the
Sabbaths: we translate it, The first day of the week, Mat. 28. 1. And so it is
Joh. 20. 1. 1 Cor: 16. 2. Act. 20. 7.
again Mar. 16. 2. So the Pharisee is brought in, boasting that he fasted,
(...). i. e. Twice in a Sabbath, we translate it, Twice in the week, so that
any weekday might be named Sabbath as well as the first day or Sunday. But
this is so weak an argument for their Sabbath, that the Learned Sabbatarians do
not vouchsafe so much as to mention it.

Neither can they find that our Sunday, or first day of the week, was ever
called the Sabbath day by any of the Ancient Fathers, but only by Origin (as is
pretended) and by him but once, that I could find. His words are these. ^
Sabbatum Christianum observare, est desinere ab operibus secularibus, ad
ecclesiam convenire, lectionibus and tractatibus aures praebere, etc.] i. e.
The observation of the Christian Sabbath, is, by laying aside our worldly
business, to assemble in the Church, and there to give attention to what is
readd out of the Scriptures, and to what is delivered by the Preacher.]

This is pretended to be spoken of our Sunday, but it is not certain, whether
he said it of the old seventh day of the Jews, or of the eighth day of the
Christians; for it is affirmed by our greatest Sabbatarians, That Christians
did assemble in Churches on the Jewish Saturday-Sabbath, long after Origen's
time: And the Fathers do also acknowledge that Saturday, and Sunday, were, for a
long time, Church days; and so they were with us in England, in mine own
remembrance in Cities and Corporations, and so had continued until this day,
if the Long-Parliament had not disturbed us; yet, even that Parliament, dated
their Saturday-Orders under the title of Die Sabbati.

That Christians did so assemble, are we assured by Sozomen. And ^even in the
days Soz. Hist. lib. 7 c. 19.
of Theodosius the Elder (long after Origin was dead) for he thus writes.
Sabbato and Postridie Sabbati, Constantinopoli, Conventus Ecclesiasticus erat):
-- In multis civitatibus Aegypti, lib. 7. c. 9
vespere in Sabbato mysteriorum participes fi^nt]. Just so says Socrates also,
in the reign of the same Theodosius. Soc. Hist lib. 5 cap. 21.
Licet omnes ubique Ecclesiae, singulis septimanis die sabbati mysteria
celebrent; tamen Alexandrini and Romani, id facere ^enuunt: Aegyptii, finitimi
Alexandriae, synaxin sabbato exequuntur] i. e. On the Sabbath, (or Saturday,)
at Constantinople, and in many Cities of Egypt, the Church assembled and
communicated in the holy Sacrament, in the Evening: and, Although all other
Churches do weekly, on the Sabbath, celebrate the holy Communion, as also,
those Egyptians which border upon Alexandria, do, notwithstanding, the
Alexandrians, and Romans refuse to observe that Order.

S^. Austin also mentions the Custom of Preaching on the old Sabbath Day;
even there and then, when that day was made a fasting day. Aug. de verb. Dom.
Ser. 43.
Sermo in die Sabbat -- non erattum prandium, eo die ven^ebant maxim, qui
esuriebant verbum D*] there was preaching on the Sabbath day, wherein no dinner
was; on that day came most of all those who hungered after the word of God. This
he said of the Saturday. Besides, it is very likely, that Origin in using those
words of christian Sabbath, did only compare the holy practices of Ch^istians,
with the evil customs of the Jews, which lived in his time, showing that
christians did more reverently use the Jewish Sabbath, then the Jews themselves
did; for christians did on that day go to Church, and hear Scriptures, and
Sermons, and Communicate But the Jews spent that day Aug, Ps. 91.
luxurioso ocio i. e in idleness and luxury, as Austin says, and in dancing
also. The Jews of Alexandria spent their sabbath in Theaters, or Play Houses
in beholding Stage Plays and Pageantry, as Soc. Hist. lib. 7. Cap. 12.
Socrates affirms. So Christians were better Sabbath-keepers, than the Jews
were. This does not, in the least, prove that Christians called their own
Sunday a Sabbath (...) that Origin did so mean.

For the same Origin, had before called our Sunday, Diem Dominicum, i. e. The
Dominical, or Lords day, and quite distinguished it from the Sabbath day, as
Orig, in Ex. Hom. 7.
Manna non descendebat in Sabbato, sed primum in Dominico die -- In Nostra
Dominica, Dominus semper pluit Manna -- Intelligant Iudaei, etiam tum praelatam
esse nostram Dominicam Iudiaco Sabbato. i. e. Manna never came down on the
Sabbath day, but God first rained it on our Sunday. The Jews may hereby take
notice, that our Sunday was even then (so early,) preferred before their
Sabbath.

And though we should grant that those words (Christian Sabbath) do there
signify our Sunday: yet this will not amount to any solid proof of the
Sunday-Sabbath, because Origen's authority is invalid, having bin condemned by
the Church as erroneous, and his Sectaries are put into the Catalogue of
Heretics by Epiph. Haer. 64.
Epiphanius, under the title of Origianistae: and yet, that book of Origin, is
now not extant in that Language wherein he wrote it, but was translated into
Latin by Ruffinus, who is generally noted, to Deteriorare as St. Ambrose
speaks, i. e. to be a depraver of all books, that he took in hand to
translate or reform.

Notwithstanding I have Entitled this book, Sabbatum. By which word, I mean
that Sabbath which is Moral, and natural, and is commanded in the fourth
Commandment, which is still in force, and binding both Jews and Christians,
and all men in the world; and so it was before any Law was written, and should
have so continued although it had never bin written in stone, or although no
Day-Sabbath had bin commanded. For this fourth Commandment injoyneth, and
obliges us to a more noble and needful Sabbath, than ever any seaventhday
Sabbath was, or could be: which surely, the holy Patriarks did apprehend before
the days of Moses; but the Scribes and Pharisees and vulgar Jews after Moses,
did not, nor yet do to this day. The true substantial and moral Sabbath,
intended in that Law is their M^ssiah, our Christ, who is the Jesus, i. e, the
Savior, and therefore the perfect and only, and everlasting Sabbath or Rest of
all believers: Which truth I trust will hereafter clearly appear.

But if our Brethren do indeed believe, that our Sunday is that Sabbath which
is literally or but equitably (as they say) commanded in the Moral Law, then,
verily, they should perform all those duties, and services which the Law giver
commanded to be done on the Sabbath day; then they must offer bloody
Sacrifices; two Lambs for the Sabbath, besides the two which were for every
weekday; and B^ke 12 great loaves or cakes of Shewbread which was to be done
on the Sabbath, and in order heerunto, they should join 1 Chronicles. 9. 32.
with the Jews and help them to build their Temple once more at Jerusalem,
where these duties are to be performed, and with them set up the Fifth
Monarchy, or Earthly Kingdom of Saints.

If it be said, that the Sunday-Sabbath differs from the Jewish; in that,
theirs was on the last day of the week, but this on the first: This will not
help, because other festivals of the Jews were Sabbaths, and all required
sacrifices, and might fall on any day of the week, as the Passover, and
Pentecost, and the rest; for they were moveable feasts, depending on the Moon.
But the performance of such shadowie ceremonies now, would be a real denial of
Christ, as if he were not come, and were not the grand Sacrifice, of which the
former were but mere Figures, which figures now are but Ciphers.

All good and prudent Christians do believe, and confess, that the Jewish
Ceremonial Saturday-Sabbath is now quite gone, expired and vanished; and that
since the true body of them, and the true light is come, the Jewish figures and
shadows are not to be any longer used by us, (among which shadows, the
Sabbath was one, and the most principal of all). Surely, we ought to abstain
from applying the appellation of Sabbath to our Sunday, lest therein we should
seem to Judaize. Justin Martyr says just. Dialog. cum Tryph.
Gentes and Christiani non observant Sabbata, ne Judaei putarentur]. i. e. The
Gentiles, or Nations which are Christians, do now abstain ftom observing the
Sabbath, lest they might thereby be thought to be of the Jewish infidelity: and
seeing, that the thing it self is gone, there is no cause why we should retain
the name. For the very word Sabbath, applied to our Sunday is not only a sign
of our ignorance in Religion; but it is, moreover, Scandalous, in that it
hudwinketh the people with a Mosaical, and Jewish veil, as the Apostle
sepaketh, 2 Cor. 3. 15. And thereby hinders them from discerning the true
Sabbath, which is Christ, and leads them into the Jewish error; so as to
think, that the whole duty required in the fourth Commandment consists in
keeping holy one day of the week, as if that were the only, or principal, and
ultimate duty thereof: which is not only untrue, but dangerous also. And this
error, of Sabbatarians mixed with their too hot, and ignorant zeal therein, and
in some other Judaizing practices has given our adversaries occasion to detest
our Persons, and also to blaspheme our Religion, and (as a Luther an once did
some Calvinists,) to call us Baptized Jews.

For this reason it was, in all probability, that the Ancient-fathers, and most
learned Christians in the very primitive times of the Church, did so warily,
and cautiously abstain from putting the appellation of Sabbath upon the
Christian Sunday, lest they should be thought to Judaize. And the same reason
also, moved the Church, to alter the Jewish day of the old Passover (for the
solemnity of our Easter is the remembrance, and confession of the Easter, that
is, the Rising or R^surection of Christ,) from the precise fourteenth day of
the Moon, to the Sunday; and this, lest Christians should be thought to
celebrate only a Typical Passover as the Jews did, as if Christ the true
Passover were not come, and therefore Tessares-cae-de catitae.
the Church adjudged, and condemned those that held to the fourtenth day, for
Heretics, under the appellation of Tessares-cae-decatitae, or Quar^ adecimani,
as we find in Epiph. H ar. 50
Epiphanius. The same reason also, moved the holy Apostles themselves to meet
in Council, on purpose against the errors of some Pharisees, and Judaizing
Christians, in their days; who said that the Converted Gentiles ought to be
Circumcised, and to be commanded to keep Moses law, (they meant the law
Ceremonial) as we read, Act. 15. 5. So early did they decree against the danger
of Judaizing.

This is not said by me as in dislike, or in the least to disparage the
Christians godly and zealous care in Sanctifying the Sunday, devoutly and
seriously, to the service of our God, and by joining in our holy assemblies, in
praying, and praising God, and hearing his Word readd, and opened to us, and
also privately meditating thereon: Far be it from me, so to ^ilipend the godly
usance of the Church in all ages thereof, and the sacred laws and decrees of
Christian Princes, upon which, as on two pillars, the Authoritative
sanctification of our Sunday stands, and not otherwise; Only, in all
humility, I offer this caution to the less learned, and more credulous
Brethren. Rem tene, linguam corrige. Good Christian, keep the Sunday or (as now
it is in England called of late, though not by the Church of England) the
Lord's Day and keep it holy, in the name of God, but abstain from calling it a
Sabbath day; Because the Sabbath was but a figure, and is gone; and because
neither the old Jewish Sabbath, nor the Christian Sunday, are that Sabbath
which in the fourth Commandment is so strictly required, and that with a
Memento also, more than any other Commandment; as being indeed, the greatest of
them all, and most nearly concerning our everlasting Rest and Happiness, as
hereafter will appear.

CHAP. V.
Of the Fourth Commandment; what part of it is moral, and what Ceremonial. Why
a Ceremonial, is taken into the Ten Commandments. Of the Memento, and some
other Prerogatives, proper to this fourth Commandment: The Excellent benefit of
this Sabbath-law. Why it is placed in the middle of the Commandments. How the
whole law is performable by men.

FOr the right understanding of this great mysterious Sabbath, we must first
diligently examine the words of the fourth Commandment, which I here set down
fully, as I find them recorded Ex. 20. 8.

Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy. Six days shall thou labor, and do
all thy work. But the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God; in it
thou shall not do any work, thou, nor thy Son, nor thy Daughter, thy
manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor thy Cattle, nor the stranger that is
within thy Gates.

For in six days, the Lord made heaven, and earth, the sea, and all that in
them is, and rested the seventh day; wherefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath
day, and hallowed it.

All our learned Divines generally agree thus far, that this Commandment is
partly Moral; so that the Moral part thereof is to be obeyed, and kept, at this
day, and also during the continuance of the world. They also agree; that part
of it is Ceremonial, appertaining only to the Jews, and binding them to the
observation thereof until their M^ssiah came in the flesh, and was made known
unto that people; or during the Pedagogie of them; or, at most, during the
Judaical state and polity. All this I conceive to be very true.

But the main difficulty consists only in the right dividing this
Commandment, by seperating the Moral and everlasting part, from that part which
is but Ceremonial, and temporal, and typical. Which that I may truly, and
Christianly perform, I here most earnestly implore the assistance, and
illumination of thy Divine spirit, O gracious Lord Jesus, that, in this
needful and concerning mystery, I may appear to thee and to thy Church, (as
thy servant Paul exhorted Timothy), a workman rightly dividing the word of
truth.

For the understanding whereof; I here present ^. Tim. 2. 15.
to the Consideration of the pious and learned Reader, What (after much labor
of mind, and long deliberation, and after diligent and serious Consulation with
the Ancient Fathers) I have conceived to be the true, and most necessary
meaning of this Commandment, and what is the right Division, or Separation, of
the Moral, Mysterious, and Perpetual part thereof, from that which is only
Typical, Ceremonial, and Temporal; And what part of that precept binds us
Christians to observe it as it did also the Ancient Israelites, and the
Patriarks, and Prophets, and even Adam himself, and all his posterity; And
also what part thereof was proper to, and concerned only, the Mosaicall, or
Judaical people, and does not at all concern the Christians, or Gentiles, nor
did in the least oblige the Patriarks which lived and died before the days of
Moses.

The want, or neglect of a right distinction of these differing parts of this
Commandment in our later Theological Writers, has occasioned much trouble,
heart-burnings, and Schisms among Christians, and also many Phraisaicall
curiosities in the observation of an eighth day Sabbath. Which was never
intended to be put upon the people of God by this 4th Commandment. And
moreover, it has also obscured the most needful, most holy, and Mysterious
Sabbath Spiritual, by which we only can expect an eternal, and heavenly
Sabbath, and salvation of our Souls and bodies.

For many good, pious and well-meaning Christians are hereby mislead into the
same arror and mistake, that the Jews were in, by thinking, that the whole and
ultimate duty commanded, and intended in this 4th Commandment, consists only,
in keeping holy One day of Seven; Which is but a very mean and low conceit,
and far short of the High and Weighty intendment of that Precept, and is also a
very stumbling Block in the way, to retard men from apprehending the true
Sabbath, therein secretly and mysteriously Veiled, Which is Christ; Who only,
is the everlasting Sabbath, or Rest, both of the Godhead, and also of us Men.

It is now time, that I set down plainly what I conceive to be the Moral part
of this Commandment, and in what words it is contained, that so it may appear
how much of that long Precept concerns us at this day, and is an everlasting
Law, and a law Natural, and Written in Man's heart, and binding not only
Christians, and Jews, but Heathens, and even all Nations; as also it did all
the Patriarchs before Moses was born, and before it was written in stone. These
are the words, Ex. 20. 8.

Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it holy.] In these few words, is contained
the whole Morality of that Law: So that no more of the words are to be
accounted Moral, or binding us: for all the following words are but a branch of
the Ceremonial law. And although they are here joined with the truly Moral
Sabbath, and also, by the same God, written in the same Tables of Stone;
Notwithstanding, this will not make them to be a Moral law, because they are so
annexed: for this reason only, to serve as a Type and figure of the Grand
Sabbath; To keep the Israelites mindful by a weekly Sabbath, or rest, of that
everlasting Rest which they were to expect in their Messiah, and not otherwise.
For now, we see that all learned Divines have rejected, and the whool Christian
world have long since disused, the old Jewish, Typical, or Seaventh-day Sabbath.

These later words, which are so annexed to the fourth Moral Law, are to be
considered by themselves in their proper place: but for present, we must insist
only on the former words which I have affirmed to be truly moral, and an
everlasting law.

For the understanding whereof, the Reader may observe diverse things
Considerable; and some of them proper, and peculiar to this Commandment, so as
not to be found in any other of the Nine.

1. In those words recited, There is no mention of the Seventh day (for that
was merely Typical, and Ceremonial) but the Sabbath Day: Therefore surely there
must be understood some other Sabbath day, besides the Seventh day Sabbath: for
otherwise, it had bin enough to have said Remember the Seventh day to keep it
holy: But the Seventh day is one thing, and the Sabbath day is another. They
differ as much, as Shadow and Substance; as Type, and Antitype; as Signum, and
Signatum, i. e. as the bare sign, from that which is signified thereby: for
the Jewish Seaventh-day-Sabbath, which was but only a sign, and shadow of the
Substantial, Mystical, and Spiritual Sabbath, which is Christ.

2. To this Commandment, the Word [Remember] is prefixed, as a John Baptist or
fore runner of Christ; which Memento, we find not in any of the other Nine.
Surely, there is something in this Commandment, of most weighty concernment,
and more than is in any other of the nine; for if in this Commandment God had
only intended the keeping of the Seventh day, (which we know was but
temporary, and to be left in its due time) he would not have said, Remember;
Because all those laws, which are truly Moral, are also unexpirable, and
undispensable, and to be kept, (at least,) to the end of the world; and this
Sabbaticall law especially, so long and longer also, even to Eternity:
therefore, it deserves a Remember.

From this Memento, Some do argue, that the Seventh day Sabbath was observed
before the days of Moses; as if Remember, related only to former usances. If
that were true, it will make against their Seventh day Sabbath, and for our
truly Moral Sabbath, i. e. Christ; because they may see that the Memento is
prefixed to the Sabbath day, but not to the Seventh Day; for that was not
always to be remembered.

3. In this Sabbatical Commandment, we find, not only a Memento, going before;
but also another remembrance following after it, as a type and shadow of the
grand Sabbath for direction of God's people, as the Pillar of ^ire, and Cloud,
sometimes before, and sometimes behind the Israelites, Ex. 14. 19. For so it
pleased God to ordain a weekly Shaddowy Sabbath, to keep them in a continual
remembrance, and expectation of their Messiah; in whom only, true, certain, and
eternal Rest was to be found. Indeed Joshuah was to lead them into the Earthly
Rest of the land of Canaan, the land of Promise; but he was but a type of the
Messiah, and is therefore called Jesus, Acts 7. 45. Heb. 4. 8. and Canaan but a
shadow of heaven; and the weekly Sabbath, but a figure of the Substantial
Sabbath; Only their Messiah, our Jesus, was to lead his people into the blessed
and everlasting Sabbath or Rest in heaven. Now the adding an annexion of a
ceremonial type to this Sabbaticall and Moral law, which is not found in any
other of the Nine, does clearly show, that the Grand Sabbath here intended, is
of the most weighty and Considerable concernment of all, and is therefore most
principally to be Remembered. For if it were possible for us men precisely to
keep all the other Nine Commandments, such a performance would not be
Sufficient for our Eternal Rest without the keeping of this. For this Sabbath
is Christ, in whom alone resideth all our hope, and confidence of heaven, and
there is none other name whereby we must be saved, Acts. 4. 12. And moreover,
although we have transgressed, and broken all the other Nine, yet if we shall
afterward constantly and faithfully keep this Sabbath, we shall find therein
an help and remedy, to preserve us from the dangerous consequences, that
otherwise will follow us, upon such disobedience.

The consideration of that terrible sentence in the Law, Deuteronomy. 27. 29. (Cursed
is he, that confirms not all the words of this Law to do them,) and of that
in the Gospel, Jam. 2. 10. Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offead
in one point, is guilty of all] may drive Christians to restlesness of
conscience and despair, if this Sabbath, or Rest, in Christ be not
apprehended, which is principally that One point in which we must be most
cautelous. Christ himself has said Mat, 10. 32. Whosoever shall confess me
before men, him will I confess: But whosoever shall deny me (totally, and
finally) him will I deny before my Father which is in Heaven,

The two Tables of this moral law, would Plut. in vit. Solo^. and in Moral.
be to us most uncomfortable, and formidable, and like those cruel Grecian
laws of Draco, and Lycurgus, which are said to be written (...) and (...) a in
blood, and death, because all transgressions were by them Capitally punished.
These divine laws would be far more severe in everlasting punishments, if they
were not mollified by a gracious Sabbath law; Aust. says, he disrellished that
famous book of Cicero called Hortensius. Aug. conf. l. 2. 4.
Quod nomen Christi non erat ibi, i. e. Because the name of Christ was not
there: and so should we these two tables, if Christ were not included therein.
But, blessed be our gracious Law giver, there we find Christ under the name,
and appellation of Sabbath, just as (in the Gospel) he is called Mat. 11. 30.
The Lord of the Sabbath: and this sweet name only, makes this yoke easy and
burden light.

If there were nothing but the bare letter in this Moral Law, woe unto us, it
would be but a kling law, and (as the Apostle sairh) A killing letter, if
Christ were not in it; But there is also in those sacred Tables (as the same
Apostle says 2 Cor. 3. 6.) a spirit that gives life, (that is) there is a
secret, mysterious, and spiritual meaning, not openly or plainly expressed, but
employed, and covertly intimated, and that spirit is Christ, who only gives
life, and he is that mysterious and spiritual Sabbath which is here intended.

By virtue of this secret spirit, this Law (which of it self, and considered in
the bare letter does only, as the Apostle says of it, Rom, 4. 15. The law
works wrath] becomes good and vital, and brings healing in it is wings,
viperae cineres medentur morsui. lact. deira. cap. 13. p. 716.
There are some venomous, and mortiferous creatures, which (as learned men say)
have in them an Antidote, or remedy, to preserve men from the danger of their
poison, as we read in Pliny of Plin. lib. 29. c. 4
Theriaci pastilli. i. e. cakes or pills of Treacle. made of the venomous
viper. So, in a nightvision, a Dragon presented an herb to Great Alexander,
which cured his friend Ptolomy of a mortal wound by a poisoned arrow, as Diod.
sic. lib. 17.
Diodorus writes. Antiochus had a Theriaca or Treacle that preserved him
against all poisons, as the forenamed Plin. lib. 20. cl. 24.
Pliny reports; such as Homer phanfied of his (...) Homer. Odyss. lib. 20.
Verily, this Law (which in the letter, and outward appearance of it, seems
so deadly, and impossible) has in it a precious, and sure Antidote, with being
faithfully apprehended, and piously applied, will preserve us from the killing
quality thereof: and moreover it will show us how the whole law may by us be
perfectly performed. And this Antidote, is wrapped up, and covered in this
Sabbath law; For the Sabbath, is Christ, and Christ has performed the whole
law, and we that are united to him as members of his mystical body, have also
in him, and by him performed the whole law God, because we are one with him as
the Apostle says, We are members of his body, Ephesians, 5. 3. And, Ye are all one
in Christ Jesus. Gal, 3. 28,

The J^wes placed this fourth Commandment of the Sabbath, not in the last, but
in the penultimate place of the first table, supposing the fifth Commandment
of, Honoring parents, to belong thereunto, and therefore they make it the last
Commandment of the jos. Antiq. l. 3. cap. 4.
said first Table, as we find both in Philo. de Haere. Divinorum.
Philo, and also in Josephus. And this they did, because they understood not
the right meaning and ^mportance of this Sabbath-precept. But our Christian
writers generally present this Sabbath commandment, as the last of the first
table, as standing in the midst, and confines of both Tables. And this they
did (as may probably be conjectured) because they understood, that this
Sabbath-Law shows us the only way, and means, whereby the whole law of both
Tables may be by men performed, and that is, By keeping, or sanctifying this
mysterious Sabbath, which is Christ.

If it were not for this Sabbath, God had herein made such a law for man as
never would have bin kept and obeyed; and so his laws must have bin like the
laws which Theod. de Cur. Grae. affect. lib. 9.
Plato phansied for his imaginary Commonwealth, which were never executed.
But, as one says of the invention of Poets.

Plautus. in Pse^d. Act. 1. sc. 4.
-- Poeta cum tab^las cepit sibi, Quaerit quod nusquam est gentium, reperit
tamen.] As the Poet when he takes his pen, seeks that which is no where
extant, and yet finds it: so our Legista^or, writes a law, requires obedience,
which was not possible to be found in any of his Liege people, and yet finds it
in his own Son, who thereby becomes the Sabbath or Rest both of God and Man.

For we well know, That the Transgression of the law is sin 1 Ioh. 3. 4. That
the wages of sin is death Romans 6 23. That all men are sinners, the Psalmist
says; There is none that does good, no not on, Ps. 14. 3. which the Fathers
thus read, usque ad unum] i. e. none but one. And yet Christ says, If thou
wi^t enter into l^fe, keep the Commandments, Math. 19. 17. These words of
Christ are most certainly true, No entering into life without keeping these
Commandments. If we enquire, How sinful man can be saved, and how we have k^pt
the law: The answer can be none other but this, That the law is performed by
man, but that man is Christ. That the due sentence of Death is executed on man
but that man is Christ: And with all, that all faithful men, and true members
of Christ have both performed the law, and suffered the punishment due for
transgression, because, that, which Christ has done, and suffered must be
really, and justly accounted their's, in regard, that Christ, and they, are
One. For they are really united with Christ in one body by the cement of the
Spirit; for the same Spirit which is in the Lord Jesus, is given and
communicated to them, whereby Christ dwell^th in them, and they in Christ. So
that the keeping of Christ faithfully, is keeping of the Commandments; And
keeping this Sabbath, is the keeping of Christ, for Christ only is thi^
Sabbath: all evangelical exhortations for believing in Christ, are but precepts
for ke^ping this Sabbath. As, he that believes, and is baptized, Mar. 16. 16.
Joh 3. 15. Act. 16. 31.
shall be saved. That whosoever believes in him should not perish. And Believe
on the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved. These are the productions, and
gracious effects of our union with Christ, who thereby, and not otherwise,
becomes our Rest, and everlasting Sabbath.

CHAP. VI.
That, Christ is the true Moral Sabbath. Why he is concealed under this word
Sabhath. That the Scriptures do declare him to be the Sabbath. The difference
between the Lord of Sabbath, and the Lord of Sabbath. Of the Sabbatism,
mentioned Heb. 4. 9. A passage of Isaiah. Another of St. Paul. applied to
Christ's Sabbath-ship. Sabbath-day-breaking, is not called a sin, in the New
Testament.

THis Sabbath, as is said, does signify Christ, whereof I nothing doubt. But,
under the law, both Christ, and his gracious intentions toward mankind, were
covered (as Moses himself was) with a vail, and (as yet) not to be made
public. Thus the Grand mystery of Christ's union with his members, was veiled
under the Typical eating of the Paschal lamb, his Cross under the shadow of an
Altar, His Passion and bloodshedding, under the figures of sacrifice^ beasts;
And that everlasting Rest and Blessedness which he purposed to procure for his
people, is here covered under the vail of Sabbatical rest. This Secrecy of
Christ, and of his benefits, was signified by the Ark, and Vail of the Temple:
the meaning whereof was, that Christ would be concealed, as shut up in a Chest,
or hidden behind a Curtain, until he had actually performed his merciful
purpose, especially, by his Cross, and Passion, and Death; for after them, was
the vail rent immediately, and not before. And therefore he had formerly charged
his Diciples, to tell no man that he was the Christ, Mat, 16. 20. Luk, 9. 21.
left the certain knowledge of him should hinder his passion; for so the Apostle
tells us 1 Cor. 2. 8. Had they known, they would not have Crucified the Lord of
glory. And after him, Tertullian renders the same reason, Tert. Cont. Mar. lib.
3.
Nisi ignoratus, pa^^ n^n potera^. i. e. If Christ had not bin unknown, he
could not have suffered. And upon those words, Joh. 8. 28. When ye have lift up
the Son of man, then shall ye know hat I am he] Austin says: Aug. in Joh.
^ract. 40.
Differo cognitionem vestram, ut ^mpleam passionem meam i. e. he suffered his
own Disciples, (as yet) to be ignorant of his purpose, that so he might
accomplish his Passion. And again he says Idem de Temp. sermon. 174.
Si Christus man festus venisset, quis au leret judicare? i. e. If Christ had
bin publicly manifested, who he was, who durst have judged him?

These are the reasons (as may be thought) why Christ is so veiled under this
word Sabbath: for otherwise the Law giver might and would have written this
Sabbath-law in plainer words, such as these; Rememb^r t^ sanctify Messiah; And,
in memory, faith, and expectation of Him, thou shall keep ho^^ the 7th day of
every week until his coming and therein do no manner of work]. Verily, I
firmly believe this, to be the meaning, and main importance of this fourth
Commandment.

But yet, for our better satisfaction, we must further inquire, Whether the
holy Scriptures, and also the Christian Church, do declare Christ to be that
Sabbath, which in the Moral part of this Commandment is intended? and whether
Christ be thereupon called, the Sabba^h? For if so, then I trust, this Doctrine
will be assented to, by the Christian Reader.

To this we say, That the Scriptures do clearly put the appellation of Sabbath
upon Christ; for as the Son of God considered in his pure Divinity, and
without, and before, his incarnation is called The Lord of hosts, Isa. 1. 9.
Jer. 11. 20. which in the New Testament is rendered The Lord of Sabbath, Romans
9. 29, Jam. 5. 4. (...) which word Sabbath is by some Divines Polan. p. 140.
affirmed to be one of the names of God: So the Church of England accounts
it, and ascribes it to every one of the Three Persons, in the Hymn; singing,
Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Sabao^h. And so it was heretofore esteemed in
this Kingdom, as we perceive by an odd story of one of the Bishops of London,
reported by Bishop Godwin, out of Matthew Paris, thus: As this Bishop lay
musing in his Bed, he heard an unknown voice saing to him,

O Gilberte Foliot, Dumrevolvis tot, and tot Deus tuus est Astarot.

The Bishop presently* and undantedly replied,

Men^^ris Demon! Deus meus est Deus Sabbath.

If therefore, the Lord of Sabbath were the name of the Son of God, before his
commng in the flesh, (which name signifies the Lord of Armies,) as if by this
name it were signified that the Godhead was at defiance, and war with mankind,
before our Peacemaker appeared for us; Then why should we doubt to affirm
that. The Lord of the Sabbath, (...), Mat. 12. 8. Mar. 2. 28. Lu. 6. 5. is the
name of the same Son of God, since he is become The Son of man, and God
incarnate, and Emmanuel. And this, in order to be a person fitly prepared, and
qualified to perform the law for us, and to suffer for our Transgressions, as a
Redeemer, a Savior, and procurer of an everlasting Sabbath, and Rest to our
otherwise unquiet, restless, and troubled souls and consciences. As also
himself professes, Mat. 11. 28. Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy
laden, and I will give you Rest. And ye shall find Rest unto your souls.
Surely, every good Christian will find, that to be true, which one said to the
same purpose Aug. confess.
Inquietum est, Domine, cor meum, done^ requiescat in te. i. e. My heart is
unquiet, O Lord, until it may find rest in thee. Now if that Sabbath, mentioned
in this Commandment be not meant of Christ, then, there is no precept in all
the Decalogue of faith in Christ, without which the Law is to us impossible,
and we should be Restless. And further also, If, that Sabbath, do not signify
Christ, then have we Christians no Sabbath at all; and if so, what will become
of us?

But, we are assured by the great Apostle, that, although the Jewish,
Ceremonial, Seaventh-day-Sabbath be quite gone; yet, Heb. 4. 9. There remains
a Rest to the people of God] This rest is there called (...), i. e. a Sabbath
or Sabbatism. And that it may appear to what people of God this Sabbath
appertains; he tells us before, Verse. 3. We which have believed, do enter into
Rest] Therefore this Sabbath, or Rest, belongs to us Christians. He further
adds, verse. 6, They to whom it was first preached, entered not in, because of
unbeleif.] The Rest, or Sabbath here mentioned must needs signify Christ. The
Jews are they to whom this rest was first preached, that is, to whom the Gospel
of Christ was preached, as Christ commanded, Luke 24. 47. to begin at
Je^usalem]. The Jews entered not into this Rest, because of their unbelief i. e.
they could not be received into the body mystical of Christ, as members
thereof, because they did not believe in him, but rejected him. But the
Apostles, and other faithful Chrisians do enter into this Rest through faith,
as it is said, We which have believed, do enter (that is) they enter into
Christ, they are united with him and thereby obtain this R^st, and so partake
in the benefits which Christ merited by his most holy life, and precious death.
And those benefits are inde^d our everlasting Sabbath. For, what can be so
truly called a Rest and Sabbath as our repose, and resting in the Lord, which
leads us to an everlasting Sabbath in heaven; For all our restings, or
Sabbatizings which are Earthly, are but as dreams, in respect of our Rest in
Christ; for he is that Sabbath, whose Rest is called Blessedness and his, after
this mortal life is ended, as we read, Rev. 14. 13. Blessed are the dead which
die in the Lord-that they may rest from their labors.

The Apostle in that place, Heb. 4. uses two several words for Rest: 1. (...)
2. (...), i. e. Rest, and Sabbath. This he did, because he was to speak of two
several Rests. 1. The Earthly Rest of the Israelites after they were put into
quiet possession of Canaan by Joshuah (who is there called Jesus.) 2. The
everlasting Rest of Gods People, by entering into Christ through Faith, and this
Rest is called Sabbatism; so that Sabbath and Sabbatism do plainly signify
Christ, and our Rest in him.

For confirmation hereof, it is worth our observation; That the great Prophet
Isaiah. c. 58. v. 12. speaks of the Sabbath, as of a Person: If thou turn
away thy foot from the Sabbath, from doing thy pleasure on my holy day, and
shall honor him.] He calls the Sabbath Him, which must signify a Person, and
cannot be said of a mere Day. Who is meant by this Him, is declared, in the
next verse, to be the Lo^d; for so it follows, Then shall thou delight thy
self in the Lord.] So that the Sabbath, here meant, is the Lord; even the same
Lord, who in the Gospel calls himself, The Lord of the Sabbath: whereas other
typical Sabbaths, whether weekly, or annual, were but signs of this grand
Sabbath, as we are taught by another great Prophet, Ezekiel. 20. 12. I ga^e them
my Sabbaths, to be a sign between me and them, that they might know that I am
the Lord that sanctify them.]

St. Paul, to me, seems to make this Doctrine evident, and past exception,
when he says, Col. 2. 16. Let no man judge you in meat, or drink, or in
respect of an holy day, or of the new mood, or of the Sabbath Days; which are a
shadow of things to come, but the body is of Christ.] What can be more plainly
said then this, to show, That Christ is the true, real, and substantial
Sabbath? And that all other Sabbaths, are but signs, types, figures, and mere
shadows of Christ, who is the Body that projecteth these shadows; for God
himself had so said before, concerning the seventh day Sabbath (which only is
that type which is mentioned in this fourth Commandment) Exodus 31. 13. Verily
my Sabbath ye shall keep; for it is a sign between me and you -- that ye may
know that I am the Lord -- ] So this, which was the principal and most frequent
Sabbath of all, was no more but a sign, and what the signatum, i. e. the
signification of it was, is showed, to be the Lord.

The Scriptures often mention Sabbaths in the plural number, as Lev. 19. 3.
Keep my Sabbaths, and also Sabbath in the singular numb^r: and I doubt not, but
the Jews were charged to keep other Sabbaths (as that which is appointed in the
Feast of Trumpets, Levit. 23. 24. and that in the Feast of Tabernacles, Levit.
23 39. and that in the Feast of Atonement, Levit. 23. 32.) as well as the
weekly Sabbath, because we find that transgressors of the yearly Sabbath are
threatened with destruction, as well as the breakers of the weekly Sabbath,
Levit. 23. 29. But now, all these Ceremonial Sabbaths are vanished: This being
granted, it will follow, in regard of the authority and perpetuity of the Moral
Law of God, That there must needs be some one special, singular, and mysterious
Sabbath of greater necessity and concernment to be still kept, than all those
Hebdomarie, or Annual Sabbaths, and that surely is Christ, The Lord Paramount
of all Sabbaths, which were but shadows of him. Whosoever therefore shall
imagine that the keeping of any weekly, or yearly Day Sabbath, is the
principal, or only duty required in this Moral Law, he is such an one as the
Psalmist describes, Psalm. 397. A man that walks in a vain shadow]

It is very considerable, and surely for some weighty reason, That our Savior,
very often in the Evangelical Histories, occasionally mentioning these Moral
Laws, and many of them distinctly and severally, yet never spoke in the least
expressly and openly of the Sabbath Law, although that fourth Commandment (so
far as it is Moral) is as necessary to be pressed, and rather more, than any
one, or indeed, then all the other (as is showed before:) And yet it is not to
be doubted, but that he meant, and also did covertly press this very Sabbath
Law in the true intent and meaning thereof, to be for ever carefully observed
and sanctified. I do not take upon me to render a full account, of what moved
Christ to forbear the reciting of that Law so openly, as he did other Moral
Laws of the Decalogue; yet, it may reasonably be thought that he on design and
purpose omitted that Law, and indeed all the particular Laws of the first
Table, because he saw that the Jews did misunderstand that Commandment of the
Sabbath, and that they were zealously obdurate for keeping the seventh day
Sabbath, as if that had been the full and only intendment and duty required by
that Commandment: for, if Christ had urged it, the Jews had been by him
countenanced in their erroneous Sabbatizing, which he came to dissolve;
therefore he forbear the naming of that particular Law, and for the same cause
he abstained from mentioning any of the other Laws of that Table; lest if
amongst them this Law should be omitted without any mention, the Jews would
have been more exasperated against him, before his time was come to suffer:
This omission of the Sabbath Law, the Reader may observe, Mat. 19. 17. Where
Christ said, If thou will enter into life, keep the Commandments.] And when he
was asked, Which Commandments? he answered, Thou shall not murder, nor commit
adultery, nor steal, nor bear false witness: and, Honor thy Father and Mother,
and Love thy Neighbor as thy self:] See the same again, Mark 10. 19. and Luke
18. 20. In all which places, there is no express mention of the Sabbath Law, or
of any other Law of the first Table.

But when he was more strictly questioned by a knowing-man, a Lawyer, or
Scribe, being a Professor of the Law, Mat. 22. 36. Master, which is the
greatest Commandment in the Law?] Yet then, he answered him but in general
terms, including the Laws of both Tables, without mentioning any one particular
Law of either Table, thus, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart,
etc. This includes all the four precepts of the first Table, Sabbath and all.
He that performs this, does thereby keep the Sabbath. Therefore, to love,
honor, and sanctify our Lord Jesus Christ, who is our only Lord God, our God
Incarnate, the Emmanuel, our Creator, Redeemer, and Savior, is to keep this
Moral Sabbath: for he only is that Sabbath, which is mysteriously commanded to
be sanctified in that Law; and this Sabbath Law continues in full force and
vigor at this day, and so shall to the end of this world, and for ever, when
all other observations of seventh-Days, or any other worldly Sabbaths are quite
forgotten and vanished; for the true intended Sabbath is a Person, Christ, the
Son of God, and the Son of man;

Finally, This Commandment, which I have set down in these words, [Remember the
Sabbath day to keep it holy] is certainly a Moral, and an everlasting Law: This
Sabbath, if it be confessed to signify Christ, we have what we desire; but if
it should signify only the keeping of a Day, whether the last day of the week
(as the Jews think) or the first day (as some Christians suppose;) then surely,
the not keeping of one (at least) of these two days, is a sin, and must be so
accounted, now under the Gospel; for the Apostle tells us, 1 Ioh. 34. Sin is
the transgression of the Law] He means, the Law Moral. But we are well assured,
that the Gospel does not account the Not-keeping of both, or either of those
days, to be a sin against the fourth Commandment, or against any other of those
ten Moral Laws (except indirectly, and by consequence): for in all the New
Testament, we cannot find such Sabbath-breaking to be so much as once
mentioned, in any of the black Rolls of sins, as other transgressions of all
those Commandments are particularly and often, by the great Apostle: See 1 Cor.
6. 9 Neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor effeminate, nor
abusers of themselves with mankind nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards,
nor Revilers, nor Extortioners shall inherit the kingdom of God.] See more,
Gal. 5. 19. Uncleanness, lasciviousness, wi^chcra^t, hatred, variance,
emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, envyings, murders, revilings,
and such like.] See more 1 Timothy 1. 9. Lawless, disobedient, ungodly, and
sinn^rs, unholy, and profane, murderers of fath^rs and of mother^,
man-slayers, men-stealers (such as are now called Spirits), ^yars, perjured
persons:] Among all this Rabble, we find not Sabbath Breakers.

Yet, the abusers, or neglecters of the true Moral Sabbath (which is Christ)
are deeply threatened; as Judas for betraying him, the Jews for crucifying him,
and All that shall deny him: So the Sanctifiers of him are gloriously promised
(as the confessors of him, the believers in him, the relievers of him, or of
his poor Members for his sake,) to be rewarded with the kingdom of Heaven. This
is the Scriptural Doctrine concerning the Sabbath-ship of Christ* What the
Church Catholic conceived thereof, is next to be enquired.

CHAP. VII.
The Doctrine of the Primitive Church concerning the Sabbath, showed out of
Tertullian, and other Fathers. How the Patriarks kept the Sabbath, before the
days of Moses. The Doctrine of the Church of England herein. The meaning of
Prayers at the rehearsing of the ten Commandments. How the Law may be written
in our hearts, and how it is performable by men.

TErtullian in that Book which he wrote against the Jews, affirms, That the
Law which God imposed upon our first Parents in Paradise, was obligatory both
to them, and also to all the world in their succeeding generations, which Law
if they had obeyed, had been a Law large enough. He says again, Tert. Advers.
Iudaeos.
In hac lege Adae data, omnia praecepta condita recognoscimus, quae poste^
pullul averunt data per Mosem.] In that Law which God gave to Adam, all the
Laws of Moses were secretly couched. And again, id. lib.
Primordialis lex est data Adae and Evae, quasi matrix omnium praeceptorum Dei,
i. e. That first Law given to Adam and Eve, was as the womb of all the Laws of
the Decalogue.] Then he reckons up all the Moral Laws; first, generally as
Christ does, Mat. 22. 37. Thou shall love the Lord thy God wi^h all thy heart:
And, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.] Then he particularly
mentions the Laws of the second Table, Thou shall not kill. Not commit
adultery. Not steal. Not bear false witness. Honor thy Father and Mother. Thou
shall not covet]: Now the Law given to Adam was only in these few words. [Of
the tree of knowledge of good and evil, thou shall not eat.] Yet, in them, all
the Laws of the Decalogue (says he) are implied. His reason is, If they had so
loved God] They would not have disobeyed his Command. If they had loved their
neighbour] that is, one another, themselves and their posterity, they would not
have killed them, by bringing in Mortality, and Original corruption of Lust.
Nor would they have stolen the fruit which belonged not to them. Nor h^ve
complied with the Serpent's false witnessing, concerning the fruit. Nor have
dishonored their Father and Creator, by that Transgression. Thus he.

From this passage, we may observe, that in the judgment of this Learned
Father, the whole Decalogue having been thus imposed upon our first Parents;
therefore the Law of Sabbath keeping amongst the rest, must needs be put upon
them.

We observe again, That it being confessed by this Father, in the same Book,
and immediately after the words before alleged, That neither Adam, nor Abel,
nor Enoch, nor Noah, nor Melchisdeck nor Abraham, did ever Sabbatize, although
the whole Decalogue was imposed on them, also, so as is said; and although the
laws of the Decalogue be every one of them, the law of Nature and therefore
written in man's heart; and also that all those Patriarks must be obliged to
keep this Sabbath law, as well as any of the other Nine: This being granted;
how shall we quit this learned Father from contradicting himself in these two
propositions, first, The Patriarks were bound to keep the Sabbath; second, The
Patriarks neither did nor were bound to keep the Sabbath.

This Riddle is easily unfolded, by distinguishing the Sabbath Moral from the
Sabbath Ceremonial; that is, The true Real, Natural, and Substantial Sabbath
from the Figurative, Typical, and Umbratical Sabbath; Or. the Body from the
Shadow. We affirm therefore, that the Jewish, Hebdomarie, seaventh-day, or
Saturday-Sabbath, was but the shadow or type; and that the Messiah, even Jesus
Christ, our Lord Emmanuel was, and is, the true substantial Sabbath, and the
true Spirit and meaning of that Sabbatical law, and is the Lord of the
Hebdomarie, or Typical Sabbath.

We also affirm, that neither Adam, nor any of those forenamed Patriarks did
ever keep, or sanctify any seaventh-day, or Saturday-Sabbath; and also that
such a Sabbath day was never known, or imposed on Gods people, before the days
of Moses. And for this, we have the confession of a learned Jew even Philo,
more than once. Philo. de vita Mos. lib. 1.
Israelitae ignorabant mundi not alem, prinsquam ex Manna didicissent] i. e.
The Israelites knew not the first day of the world, until the Manna fell]
therefore not the seventh day. Again he says, idem lib.
Ante Mosem, Sabbati diem ignor abant homines]. Before the time of Moses, men
were ignorant of the Sabbath day]. This he affirms although with a Judaical
excuse, as if the former knowledge thereof had bin obliterated by Calamities.

But we also confess, and firmly believe that all those holy Patriarks, were
bound, and therefore did, certainly keep and sanctify the true substantial
Sabbath, before Moses was born: for their Sabbath was the Son of God, even
their true and only Lord God, who in due time was to take our humane nature on
him, So to be the Emmanuel, and in our nature to perform the whole Law which
the Godhead imposes on man, in our steed: and this, not only by an actual
keeping and performing the Commandments, but also by a passive obedience in
suffering the punishment of our transgressions; to quit his faithful ones from
the sentence of condemnation, and thereby to give comfort, ease, tranquillity,
and so a Rest or Sabbath, to our otherwise wearied, and trembling souls. For
Christ only is that promised Seed of the woman which should bruise the Serpents
head: and the birth, and manifestation of him in the flesh, is that day which
our father Abraham rejoiced to see, and he is that well beloved Son, in whom
alone the Godhead is well pleased, and rests satisfied, and at peace with us.
If those holy Patriarks had not kept this Sabbath, they could not enter into
the eternal Sabbath of heaven.

That Christ only is the Sabbath Moral, to the sanctification whereof, we all
are perpetually obliged, was the Doctrine of the Ancient Church, as may appear
by many expressions of the Fathers. Origin says Orig. in Math. Tract. 29.
Qui vivit in Christo, semper Sabbatizat.] He that lives in Christ, lives in
a continual Sabbath. The holy man Macarius, calls the weekly Sabbath Marcar.
Hom 35.
(...) i. e. but a Typical Sabbath; and says It was only (...). i. e. That it
was but a branch in the shadowie or Ceremonial Law. But, Hoc est ver^m
Sabbatum, vera requies animae, quae conquiescit in vera quiet and laetitia
Domini] The true Sabbath is the quiet of our souls, resting in tranquillity and
joy of our Lord. Thus he.

After him, Epiphanius most evidently declares the same Doctrine more than
once: for thus he writes, Epiph: Haer. 8.
In lege figurae erant, in Evange^io veritas; illic Circumctsio inservit usque
ad magnam Circumcisionem, id est Baptismum; illic Sabbatum, detinens in ma^num.
Sabbatum, id est, Req^iem in Christ] Under the law were figures, but the truth
of them was showed in the Gospel, in the Law, carnal Circumcision was used
until the great Circumcision by Baptism, came in; There, was a Sabbath also,
which lasted until the great Sabbath came, which is our Sabbath or Rest in
Christ] He tells us also, that Eb^on the Ancient Judaizing Heretic, raised a
report, Id Haer. 30.
That Saint Paul had desired the Jewish High-preist's d^ughter to be given to
him in marriage: but being denied; in revenge, he wrote against their S^bbath
an^ Circumcision] But the true cause of the Apostle's decrying the Jewish
Sabbath was this, Id. i^i^.
Christus est magnum Sabbatum, quietos nos faciens a peccatis nostris.-Ejus
figura, erat parv^m Sabbatum, quod inserviebat usque ad ipsius adventum] Christ
is the grand Sabbath, for he sets us at rest, from the troubles of our
souls by reason of our sins: the Jewish little weekly Sabbath, was but a
figure of Christ our great Sabbath; and was to last, but until his coming.] To
this doctrine the learned Romanist's do assent, as Bishop White has observed
out of Pet. Damianus, Bishop of Ostia above 500 years since, who thus writes,
Pet. Damiani. lib. 2 Ephesians. 5.
Quid per Sabbatum intelligere debemus nisi Christum? in Illo siquidem Sabbato
requiesc^mus-and spem ponimus] i. e. What should we understand by the Sabbath,
but Christ? for in him is our rest and hope.

St. A^stin is most plentiful in asserting this doctrine; for besides what I
have observed before out of him, he further says of Circumcision, and Sabbath;
Aug. Cont Admantum. c. 16. To. 6.
Circumcisionem approbamus spiritualem-and Sabbatum, nam ad aeternam requiem
intendimus.] We Christians approve of Circumcision, but it is Circumcision
spiritual (mentioned Romans 2. 29. Circumcision in the heart, not in the letter,
but in the spirit, and Colos. 2. 11. -- Circumcision made without hands) and we
approve of that Sabbath by which we intend, and trust to obtain everlasting
Rest. Of this Sabbath he says again, Id. Cont Adiman. c 2. To. 6.
Sabbatum non est repudiatum a nobis (Christianis) sed intellectum] We
Christians do not utterly reject the Sabbath, but we understand it more truly
than the Jews do. Of the same mysterious Sabbath he says again. Id de Genesis ad
lit. lib. 4 c 13.
A fidel bus, perpetuum Sabbatum observatur.] They that believe in Christ, do
keep a Sabbath perpetual. What he means by this Sabbath is declared by these
words, Id. Cont Fa^stum lib. 19. c. 9.
In Christo Sabbatum habemus, nam ait, Ego faciam ut requiescatis.] Our Sabbath
is in Christ, for he it is that says, I will give you rest, Mat. 11. 28. And
to show the difference between the Typical, and the Substantial Sabbaths, and
to what Purpose that Jewish Saturday-Sabbath was ordained, He says: The Jews
were offended, because Christ commanded the infirm man to carry his bed, on
their Sabbath day, Jo. 5. 10. But Christ might have answered them. Aug. in
Joan. Tract. 17.
Sacramentu^ Sabbati, and signum observandi unius diei, ad tempus datum
Judaeis; impletionem vero Sacramenti illius in illo venisse, Sabbatum ad
significationem meam vobis praeceptum est] The Sacramental Sabbath, or sign of
keeping that day, was imposed on the Jews, but for a time, because the
fullfilling of it was performed by the coming of Christ; for that Sabbath was
given, only, to signify Christ. To this of Austin, Calvin seems to me to
subscribe, where he says Calv. instit. 2. 8. 31.
Christus est verum Sabbati Complementum.] The keeping of a
seaventhday-Sabbath, is but a vain and empty shadow except it be filled with
the apprehension of Christ. So that as all Typical, and Ceremonial shadows were
to cease when the thing was come which they signified; the Sabbath, (being but
such a sign) must also, so cease; as Justin Martyr long ago taught, Just.
Dialog cum Triph.
Sabbata finem habuere, nato Christo). When Christ came, Sabbaths went away.

Lastly, it would be inquired, what the Church of Englands doctrine is,
concerning that Sabbath in the fourth Commandment (which Church, I firmly
believe to be, in her doctrine, and discipline, the most truly Catholic Church
in the world;) This, we may discover by considering that prayer or suffrage,
which this Church has required to be by us said at the rehearsing of this
Sabbath-Commandment, as at each other of them, in these words.

Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law. This prayer,
has much troubled the minds of some of our Religious, and well-meaning
Countrymen, because their teachers did not aright inform them in the true
meaning of that Sabbath; for both in their pulpits, and also in their p^inted
Catechisms they expound it, to be meant only of sanctifying a day as the Jews
did. But if they so mean, this prayer would be not only vain, but also an
impious mocking of God; seeing the Commandment mentions only the seventh day,
and that precisely, and none other, and that is our Saturday, which both we,
and all other Christian-Churches have utterly rejected; but if they thereby
understand our Sunday, that is not so much as mentioned, much less intended
there; nor may it be called a Sabbath day, nor is the celebration of our Sunday
to be enforced by virtue of that Commandment, but otherwise, as is before
showed.

But those Judicious, Leanred, and Godly men, and also heroical Martyrs, who
were the compilers of our English Liturgy (as, Cranmer, Ridley and others,) did
rightly understand, that Sabbath to signify Christ who only is our Christian
Sabbath, and in this sense only we ought to understand it, and then this Prayer
must needs be confessed to be pious, and necessary, and not otherwise; for the
keeping of Christ, by faith in him, and sanctifying him, that is, considering
his worth, and benefits; and demeaning our selves toward him, so reverendly as
becomes us, and belongs to his super-eminent hollness, is the only way to
procure an everlasting tranquillity, Rest, and Sabbath to our Consciences: For
without this Sabbath all our care will prove vain, and the very Godhead will be
but a terror to us. But if by God's merciful assistance, we keep our selves
fast in faith, and so in Union with this blessed Sabbath; we may then with
comfort apply Ps. 42. 5.
that expostulation of the Psalmist to our own souls; Why art thou cast down O
my soul? And why art thou disquieted in me? Hope thou in God, for I shall yet
praise him for the help of his countenance.

Now, because the prayer above mentioned (though it were granted to us) is not
full enough to supply, and satisfy our defects, and necessities: for neither a
good inclination, readiness, or willingness; nor yet our earnest desires no,
nor our laborious endeavors to perform the Law, do amount to the real, and
perfect keeping thereof, without which we cannot enter into life, as Christ
has said, Mat. 19* 17. Therefore the Church has added another prayer, at the
end of these Commandments, which is full, and perfect; In these words

Write all these thy Laws in ou^ hearts, we beseech thee. This prayer is
grounded on the promise of God, recorded both in the Prophets, and also in the
Gospel: Jer. 31. 33. Heb. 18. 10. I will put my law in their inward parts, and
write it in their hearts. If we enquire what that Law is, and how God does
write it in our hearts and to what intent it is done: The Answer is, That this
Law is Christ; The putting or writing of it in our hearts, is the mission of
the Spirit of Jesus into us. The intent or purpose thereof is; that by a
spiritual union of Christ with us, we may fulfill the Law: For, because Christ
and his Members are united by this Spirit, and so become one mystical body,
therefore what Christ has done in obedience to the Law, must be accounted as
our obedience, and so imputed to us, that because he has performed the Law, we
also, in him, have performed it. The Apostle tells us: 2 Cor. 13. 5.
Jesus Christ is in you: and Gal. 2. 20.
Christ lives in me, and Ephesians. 3. 17.
Christ may dwell in our hearts: And Christ himself says, Matthew. 28 20.
I am with you always, even unto the end of the world. And the Apostle again,
Gal. 3. 28.
Ye are all one in Christ Jesus; And, that we may know, that when we have the
Spirit of Jesus in us, then we have also the Lord Jesus himself in us: Another
Apostle tells us; 1 John 4. 13.
Hereby know we, that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he has given us
of his Spirit.

But how shall it appear, That the putting of Christ into us, is the putting of
the Law of God into our hearts? The Answer is, That Christ is the Law there
meant, and he is called the Law, and is really the Law; Moses is called by
Ph^lo, (...), much more is Christ so.
and not only so, but he is moreover, The Law with all advantages to us, for he
is the Law fulfilled. That Christ is called the Law, the Psalmist tells us,
Psalm. 2. 7. Romans 8. 2.
I will preach the Law, whereof the Lord has said unto me, Thou art m^ Son.
Here the Son is called the Law, or Precept of the Lord. Then that Christ is the
Law fulfilled, or the fufilling of the Law; Of him it is said in another Psalm:
Psalm. 40 10. Heb. 10. 7
In the volume of thy Book it is written of me, that I should fulfill thy will,
O my God: I am content to do it, yea thy Law is within my heart. And this
Christ himself professed; Mat. 5. 17.
I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill, the Law. This also was signified by
his Type, the Ark, wherein Heb, 9. 4
the Law was put: for the Ark represented Christ, and the Law, in it,
signified, that Christ should keep that Law, and this he did perform, only to
our behoof, that his obedience might be accounted ours. Upon this reason only
it is, that the Apostle so confidently says; Phil. 4. 13.
I can do all things through Christ which strengthens me. If he can do all
things, then he can do all the works of the Law: But we are well assured, that
he could not in his own proper person alone considered, perform the Law, but it
must needs be thus only performed by him, in and through Christ; And in this
consideration only, Christ is our Rest and Sabbath. For this reason our Church
prays, that God would incline our hearts to keep this Sabbath-law, which is,
Christ, That by keeping him, the whole Law of God may be kept by us, through
and in him, so as is here expressed, by having the Law thus written in our
hearts.

Thus, this Moral Law, which (as Divines acknowledge) is altogether impossible
to the Natural man (especially as it is exegetically aggravated and heightened
in the Gospel) is by this Sabbath made possible and easy to the Matthew. 5.
Spiritual man; so the Apostle tells us; Romans 10 4.
Christ is the end or perfect on of the Law for righteousness to every one that
believes: that is, He that believes in Christ, has the benefit of
performance of the Law brought home to him: So St. Ambrose tells us, Ambr. in
loc.
Perfectionem leg is habet, qui credit in Christum.

CHAP. VIII.
That Christ is called a Day. Why Christ, and the seventh day, are both called
Sabbath. The first Institution for keeping holy the seventh day. Why the first
seventh day of the World is described without Evening and Morning. The Sabbath
described by Philo, Paralleled with Melchisedech; and both Types of Christ.

IF Jesus Christ be the only Sabbath, which is mysteriously covered, and
spiritually meant, and really and ultimately intended in the Moral part of this
fourth Commandment, (as certainly he is) because he only is our Redeemer, our
Mediator, and the Peacemaker of God with man* We must next enquire, how this
Sabbath (if it be so understood) can be called a Day, as here it is; Remember
the Sabbath day; for by this word Day, a man may reasonably-imagine, that the
principal intendment of this Precept, was only for the Celebration, or
Sanctifying of a day, as the Jews do yet think, and many good Christians among
us do still (though erroneously) believe, although they agree not in the self
same day with the Jews. Their reason is, because, not only in this former part
of the fourth Commandment, which I have showed to be a Moral, Natural, and an
everlasting Law; but also in the latter words annexed, which are a part of the
Law ceremonial, and therefore but temporal, and transient, it is also said: The
seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, by which words, a man at first
hearing would think that the Sabbath, in both parts of this Law, is nothing
else but a day: for, if the seventh day be a Sabbath, why may not the Sabbath
be thought to be a Seventh day?

1. Our Answer is, That the seventh day is called a Sabbath, because it was a
type and figure of our true Sabbath and Rest, which is Christ: as the Jews
corporal rest was but a figure of our spiritual rest in Christ. And because it
was so appointed for a figure or sign, therefore it has the name of the thing
figured, or signified thereby as other signs and types have; for so, the
Paschal Lamb is called the Passover, yet we know, Christ only is the true
Passover, as the Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 5. 7. So the Rock is called Christ, 1
Cor. 10. 4. So of the Eucharistical bread it is said, This is my body, though
it was but a Sacrament, or holy sign of the body of Christ. And the seven Ears
are seven Years, Genesis 41. 26. Just so, the seventh day is the Sabbath, that
is, the sign, type, and figure of the mysterious Sabbath, which is Christ.

2. As the sign has the name of the thing signified, so the thing signified
has the name of the sign: for Christ is not only here called the Sabbath day,
because he is the thing signified by that day, but he is also called by the
names of other typical festivals, as the Passover, as is 1 Cor. 5.
before said, and by the name of the great festival Sabbath of Propitiation, or
Atonement, described Levit. 16. And this, because he only is that Lamb of God,
that causes the destroying Angel to Passover us untouched; and he only is (as
the Apostle calls him) 2 John 2. 2. The Propitiation for our sins.

It was full four and twenty hundred years (by our English account) after the
Creation, when God first appointed any Seventh day to be celebrated as a
Sabbath, or Rest, yet the very first seventh day of the world is so described
by Moses, Genesis 2. 2. as to signify Christ, as may reasonably be conceived; for
that day is there set down without any mention of its Evening or Morning: And
this is the observation of St. Austin on the 92. Aug. in Psalm. 92. 7
In Sabbato non invenitur vesper, etc. 1. In that Sabbath day described Gen, 2.
where the first mention is of Gods Rest, the Reader shall not find any
limitation of it by Evening or Morning, although in every other of the former
six days, it is expressly said, The Evening and the Morning were the 1, 2, 3,
4, 5, 6th day.

Pbilo lib de festis.
Philo the Jew, and his fellow Jews, called the Sabbath (...), i. e. without
Mother, I know not what this Jew's meaning was, to call this day so, more then
other days; possibly God might extort a truth from him, without this Jew's
right understanding thereof; Christ our true Sabbath was indeed without Mother,
in respect of his Divine Nature, as also without an earthly father in respect
of his humane Generation, and therefore Melchisedech being the figure of
Christ, is (for the same reason) described without father and without mother,
Heb. 7. 3.

Yet, as we are well assured, that Melchisedech had both a father and a mother:
so are we as certain, that the first Seventh day had both an evening and a
morning. But as Melchisedech is said to be without father and mother, for this
reason only, because there is no mention of his parents in holy Writ; and this
also was, that thereby he might be a fit representative of Christ: So the first
Seventh day is set down without any mention of Evening and Morning, that so it
might be a fit figure of Christ, who had no beginning in respect of his
Godhead, nor ending in respect of his Manhood and Godhead also. The Prophet
says of Christ, Mich. 5. 2. His goings forth have been from everlasting. So
the Gospel says of him, Heb. 1. 8, out of Psalm 45. 6. Thy throne, O God, is
for ever and ever. The very Jews confessed, John 12. 34, We have heard out of
the Law, that Christ abides for ever. Christ therefore is not only a Sabbath,
but a day also, and an everlasting day without any evening or morning.

The holy Priest Zacharias, Luke 1. 78. calls Christ, The Dayspring from on
high: And the Prophet Zechariah calls him Orientem, i. e. the East, which is all
one with Dayspring, Zech. 3. 8. Adducam servum meum Orientem. And Chap. 6. 12.
Ecce vir Oriens nomen ejus, i. e. Beheld, I will bring forth my servant, the
East. And, Behold the man whose name is East Our late Translators have for East
rendered Branch (I know not why, except they were out-voted by some that are
fallen out with the East); but how unfitly, has been lately unanswerably showed
by that learned Writer Mr. J. Gregory of Oxford. Christ. calls himself, John
8. 12. The light of the Joh. 8. 12.
world. Old Simeon calls him, Luke 2. 32. A light to lighten the Gentiles.
Christ is so much a Day, that the Prophet styles him, Dan. 7. 9. The Ancient of
Days; which the Hebrews affirm to be said of Ben-David, that is, of Christ the
Son of David, as Mr. Broughton has told us, for he indeed is the Creator of
all days, because he is our only God; as the very Heathens God is by them
called Horace.
Diespiter, i. e. the Father of Days. Whether the Psalmist meant Christ, when
he said, Psalm. 118, 24. This is the day which the Lord has made? Or whether
Christ meant himself and his own humane nativity, when he said, Joh. 8. 56.
Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day, and he saw it. Let those that list,
examine: But St. Austin upon these, and such like passages in Scripture,
doubts not to affirm, Aug. in Psalm. 54.
Christus est dies aeternus; i. e. Christ is an everlasting day, This I trust
is enough to show, that Christ is called both, our Sabbath, and also a Day, and
therefore he only is this Sabbath day which we are required to keep holy, or
sanctify, which is next to be considered.

CHAP. IX.
Of Sanctifying the Sabbath. How the Godhead is said to be sanctified. How the
humane nature of Christ is Sanctified Of the name of God, and that it signifies
God himself. That the name of Jesus, signifies the Person of Jesus. How God
sanctifies us, and how we sanctify God. How Christ is to be kept holy.

THere is yet another scruple in the words of this Moral part of the fourth
Commandment to be examined, and that is, How we can truly affirm, that the
Sabbath Day there mentioned, does signify Christ, seeing, that whatsoever is
meant by those words, the same is required also to be Sanctified, or kept holy,
Ex. 20. 8. Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy, And Deuteronomy. 5. 12. Keep the
Sabbath Day to sanctify it] It may therefore be demanded, how Christ can be
said to be Sanctified or kept holy; for the word sanctify seems to signify
to be made holy, and no man will say that Christ can be by us made holy,
especially, more holy than he is already: for both the Godhead, and Manhood of
Christ, are called Holy. As Holy: Holy: Holy: is said of all the Divine
persons: And, Holy is his name. And, Thy holy Child Jesus. And, the Holy one of
Israel. And Be ye holy as I am holy.

To this our Answer is, that it needs not to seem strange, or uncouth, that
our Lord Jesus Christ is required to be by us sanctified, or kept holy,
especially in respect of his assumed humanity, by which only he is our Sabbath
and not otherwise, seeing the pure Godhead considered without Incarnation, is
also required to be Sanctified; as the great Prophet tells us, Isa. 5. 16. God
that is holy, shall be sanctified in righteousness] and Christ so teaches us
to pray Hallowed (or sanctified) be thy name]. Let it not be thought, that this
word (Name) does signify no more but an appellation of God, as if the only
meaning were, That whenever we use this word, God, we should do it with great
and awefull reverence (which yet we ought to do) but the name of God does her^
signify God himself, as we are well taught by St. Austin. Aug. in Joh. Tract.
29.
Non est Deus duae syllabae, and duas syllabas colimus; manet aliquod magnum,
quod est Deus, sono non manente] i. e. When we mention God, or Godhead think
not that we mean a word, a sound, a syllable or two, as if we worshipped
sounds, words, or syllables; for that great thing which is God, remains, when
no sound or syllable is heard. Just so, he says of Christ, upon those words,
Joh. 14. 13. Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name]; Id. lib. Tract. 102.
Non est intelligendus Dominus de sono and syllabis -- qui hoc sentit de Filio
-- non petit in ejus nomine, etiamsi non taceat literis and syllabis Christum]
i. e. When we ask in the name of the Lord, Name does not signify only that
word, Christ, (as if it were a Charm) he that thinks so, does not pray in the
name of the Son of God, though the word Christ be in his mouth. Thus he.

The Son of God, is by St. John, called ^oh. 1. 1.
The word; yet he that shall think that The Word, in that place signifies only
a Grammatical, or vocal word, and sound, does err dangerously; for it
follows, The word was God] so it signifies the real, and substantial Son of
God: It is therefore a very slander, that someof late, have put upon this
Church, for requiring an adoration of our Lord Jesus, when that name is
mentioned. They say, we worship only a name. But we worship only the Lord Jesus
himself, as the Apostle means, in whom the name Jesus, signifies the Person
Jesus, as the name of God signifies God himself.

Those phrases of Blessing, and Magnifying, and Glorifying, and Justifying, and
Sanctifying God, and The name of God which we find in the Scripture, are all to
be understood in the same sense. For, when it is said, Job. 1. 21. Blessed be
the name of the Lord] it is all one with that of Luke 1. 68. Blessed be the
Lord God of Israel]. so Mal. 2. 2. Give glory to my name] is all one with that
of Josh. 7. 19. My Son, give I pray thee glory to the Lord God of Israel]. That
of Ezech. 36. 23. I will sanctify my great name] is all one with that of 1
Pet. 3. 15. Sanctify the Lord God] Where, for those words (Lord God, both the
Syriac, and old Latin read, The Lord Christ, as Beza. in Loc.
Beza notes. There is also mention of Justifying God, Ps. 51. 4. yet neither
Justifying, Blessing, Gloryfying, or Sanctifying, can make any addition by any
of these Attributes, to the plenitude of God; These are but the expressions of
man; not* to make God holy, but to declare him to be so, and to show that he is
so accounted, and esteemed by us; indeed God does sanctify us Really
Effectually, and Actually, by induing us with sanctifying Graces, but we cannot
sanctify God otherwise, than affectionately, declaratively, and verbally; and
also by conforming our selves to his Commandments. And so, Christ, our Sabbath,
is to be sanctified by us, by an holy imitation of his Virtues, as the Apostle
says, 1 Pet. 1. 16. Be ye holy as I am holy; and to keep this Sabbath, is to
be wary and mindful always to keep Christ by a firm faith; to be fixed to him,
never to deny or reject him: And to keep him holy, is to purify ou^ hearts so,
as to be clean and prepared Mansions, fit for so holy a Guest, and to walk
worthy of so holy and so merciful a Savior in our private demeanor, and
outward conversation.

As the Godhead did really magnify the Lord Jesus, by uniting it self in a
Personal union with that man, and thereby made him the Christ, or the Anointed
One, (in which consideration only, he is our Sabbath) and being so anointed, he
was thereby really sanctified by the Godhead, and also (as that word signifies)
he was separated, distinguished, differenced, and preferred above all others,
as it is said of him, Psalm 45. 7. God, thy God, has anointed thee with the
oil of gladness above thy fellows, that is, above all other Kings, Priests, and
Prophets. And Philip. 2. 9. That God has highly exalted him, and given him a
name which is above every name. So we ought to sanctify the same Lord Jesus
our Sabbath, in a way of pre-eminence, distinguishing him by the reverence and
honor which we perform to him, from all other persons and honors; in a word,
we must sanctify, honor, and worship him, far more then any one, or then
all the Creatures of Heaven and Earth.

God has many holy Ones, but none so holy as our Lord Jesus; He is said to be
sanctified by the Father, John 10. 36. so are others; but Christ
super-eminently, and (...). The Angel calls him, The most Holy, Dan. 9. 24. And
the same Angel again calls him, That holy Thing, Luke 1. 35. And even Satan
confessed him to be The holy One of God, Mar. 1. 24. Therefore Christ our
Sabbath being thus by way of excellency declared to be the holy One, and the
most Holy of all Holies; surely he ought to be so esteemed, and also to be so
declaratively sanctified by us, in the most humble and reverential manner that
possibly we can, according to his infinite holiness. This I firmly believe to
be the Spirit, and meaning of this Moral Sabbath, and the sanctifying thereof.

We find many sanctifyings of Creatures, as of Prophets, and Priests; and of
Places, as the Tabernacle, Temple, and Vessels; of Days and Times, as
Sabbaths, and Festivals but none to be so highly sanctified as Christ our
Sabbath; for the Sanctifying of him is a Separating of him in a preferment,
above all other hallowings, or sanctifyings, which are performed to Creatures;
forasmuch as we find, that his very humane Nature was by the Godhead produced
in an extraordinary way, distinct and separate from other men, as it is said,
Heb* 7. 25. Our High Priest is holy -- separate from sinners; for he was born
of a Virgin; and this, to separate him from the common contagron of Original
pollution. It is also declared, Heb. 10. 29. to be an heinous sin, worthy of
sore punishment, to count the blood of the Covenant (which is the blood of
Christ) to be (...), i. e. common, which is to esteem his blood no better then
the blood of another man, or indeed, of all men in the world; and so not to
separate, or prefer, or sanctify it, above all others: This is the grand Sin
there intended, because neither all men in the world, nor all the Angels of
Heaven, if they could and would suffer in man's stead, yet they would not be
sound of sufficient value to Redeem us, and to procure our everlasting Rest, as
Christ has done, whom we therefore most worthily account, and call, our
Sabbath: Yet this is not all, for we shall find, that Christ is not only the
Rest of men, but that he is also the Rest of God, which is next to be
considered.

CHAP. X.
Of Gods Resting. That it is not a cessation from working, Nor meant of his
ending the Creation. Nor his laying aside his care and Providence in
Government. This Rest and Working do consist together. Something concerning
the Creation of Humane Souls. Of Vniversals, what they are, and where to be
found. A Question discoursed, Whether God has created any new kinds of
Creatures, since the first Seventh day.

CHrist is our Christian Sabbath, we know none other Sabbath besides him for
none but he can give sure and lasting Rest to our Souls; he only has wrought
our peace with God, and appeased the just displeasure of the Godhead, he has
effected our Reconciliation, and he is that Atonement, by which God and man are
reunited, or set at one: By his mediation it is that a Quietus est, or
Acquittance of our debts is signed by God; so that, if we can keep this Sabbath
holy, and persevere therein, we may with true comfort and cheerfulness say with
the great Apostle, Who shall Romans 8. 33.
lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? It is God that justifies, -- it is
Christ that died.

Those that teach others, or that do imagine, That the only duty required by
this Sabbath-precept, is the sanctifying of a day, whether the last day of the
week, as the Jews do; or the first day, as some Christians think, and therefore
presume to call it, not only the Lords day (which is but a novelty with us in
England, as is said before) but also the Sabbath day; They are far short and
beneath the great purpose and intendment of this fourth Commandment, and
conceive too meanly and lowly of that most high and mysterious Sabbath, which
signifies not only the Rest of man from bodily labors, but also our rest from
labors, and terrors of our Conscience; and moreover, it represents to us the
Rest of God, as it is said both in this Commandment and before also, Genesis 2.
2. He rested on the Seventh day.

For to say that God labored in these six days of Creation, is a weak and
heathenish conceit, such as we read in that Epicurean Dispute in Tully, Tull.
de Not. Deor. lib. 1.
Si in mundo Deus inest aliquis, qui regat, qui gubernet, qui cursus astrorum,
muta ionesque temporum, rerum vicissitudines, or dinesque conservet, terrasque
and maria contemplans, hominum commoda, vitasque t^eatur; nae ille est
implicatus molestis negotiis, and operosis: If there be a God in this World,
ruling and ordering it, and continuing the motions of the stars, and seasons
of the years, and the various order and changes of times, and taking cognizance
of the Land and Sea, for support of man's life and welfare; surely he is a God
encumbered with many troublesome and stirring businesses. As if the Almighty
Demiurgus could not both create and govern this World, except he took great
pains and labor therein. And yet those Christians, which say, that Gods
resting on the Seventh day signifies only his cessation from that great Work,
do in a manner affirm the same. But the resting of God has a more high, and
more noble signification than so, as I trust we shall anon make evident. In
order whereunto, these two Queries are to be discoursed: 1. What is here meant
by Gods resting? 2. Why he is said to rest on the Seventh day, and not on any
of the former six days?


To the first Querie: What is meant by 1. Querie.
Gods resting? We say, this resting does not at all signify, or intend any
cessation of the Godhead, or any suspension or intermission of his operation or
working; for although it be said, He ended his work which he had made; and
also, That he rested from all his works which God had created, Genesis 2. 2. yet
it is not said, that he ceased: resting and ceasing are not all one.

Nor can this Rest be meant of any ease or refreshment of God, as after some
motion, or stirring work, or labor; for such a rest was needless to him who
never labored at all. Nor can it be meant of any weariness of God; that were
impossible. St. Austin says truly, Aug. de Civit. lib. 12. c. ^^^
In opere Dei non est labor, nec in quiet desidia: quiescens agit, agens
quiescit: And again, Deus nec creando defessus, nec cessando refectus; i. e. In
Gods working there is no labor, nor in his resting any cessation; he rests
working, and working rests; he was neither weary in creating, nor refreshed
by ending it.

Nor can this Rest of God be so understood, as if he then laid aside, and cast
off all care and providence for his Creatures which he had newly made. This
cannot be imagined by us; for all Christians, and Heathens also, do acknowledge
Gods perpetual management and government of the World: for he did even that
very Seventh day, and all other days since, cooperate with his Creatures; by
his assistance it is, that these great wheels of Heaven are continually
turning. Nazianzen says, God is called (...) of (...), for his perpetual
operation. Both Divines and Philosophers call God Actum Purum, and the
Schoolmen call him Nature am nature antem, i. e. God is purely Active, and he
that continually supplieth his Creatures with the ability of Operation, which
we call Nature; for in him we live, and move, and have our being. Of him Act.
17. 28.
it is said, in St. Austin, De Civ. l. 4. c. 12.
Deus est anima mundi, Mundus est corpus Dei; e. i. God is operative in the
World, so as our souls are in our bodies. And the Poet says of the divine
Spirit;

Spiritus intus alit, totamque infusa per artus. Virg. Ae^. 6.

Men's agitat molem, and magno se corpare miscet.
All which is signed for a Scriptural-truth by St. Paul, 2 Cor. 12. 6. God
works all in all. So then, this Rest cannot signify Gods cessation from
working, nor the withdrawing his Providence from his Creatures.

But our Neoterick Theologs have found out another Answer, and do generally
expound this Rest of God, to signify only a cessation from the work of
Creation: for they say that, although God does continually work, or operate, or
cooperate with his Creatures which are already made, yet he does not create or
produce any new Creatures; indeed he daily makes individual or particular
Creatures, as Men, Beasts, Fishes, Plants and Herbs, hut all these new
productions are of the same Species, i. e. sort and kind, that God made at the
first.

1. In this Answer we observe two things.

First, It is confessed, that this Rest of God is not an absolute cessation
from Work, but only a cessation from one particular Work, viz. from making any
new species or kinds of Creatures.

Secondly, It is confessed, that this Rest of God may consist together with his
working, for indeed the working or operation of God is as vigorous and stirring
now, and ever since the Creation, as it was then; God did never intermit, or
lay aside his working. St. Austin says of himself; Aug Epist. 110.
Meum ocium, magnum habet negotium: It is most true of God, whose Rest (here
meant) is not without great working. Christ says, My Father Ioh. 5. 1 ^oh. 15
works hitherto, and I work: And again, M^ Father is the Husbandman ((...))
so his Work is without any intermission, as the Georgick-works are circular, as
one says;

-- Redit Agricolis labor actus in orbem. Virg. Georg. lib. 2.
God does work unto this day, as he did also on that first 7th day, wherein he
is said to rest, and so he has done on every 7th day ever since, and so he
will do till the end of the World. And moreover, although it should please God,
still to make new Creatures, of new kinds, such as were not created at first;
yet such a new Creation would not in the least hinder, or disturb this blessed
Rest. Therefore this Answer will in no wise satisfy us.

Besides all this, Those Writers that tell us, Gods Resting signifies only his
finishing or ending the Creation; yet themselves affirm, that God does yet
daily create new Souls; and this, because they do not believe, that our Souls
are propagated from our Progenitors, as our Bodies are; so that even by their
own confession, the Creation did not end on the first sixth, or seventh day.
Now although I do not assent to their opinion of the daily creation of humane
Souls, because I do not understand how that doctrine can consist with the
doctrine of Redemption, if our Souls and Christ's Soul be not derived from Adam;
yet it is evident, that their opinion makes against them, (whether it be true
or false) for by saying, that our Souls are daily created, they must confess,
that the Creation is not yet ended.

To that which they say, That God does not create any new kinds of Creatures,
such as in Schools are called Genera, and Species, and Universals, although he
does still make particular Creatures, as Men, Beasts, Fishes, Fowls, and
Plants: We answer, That God does make Creatures now so as he did before, and
not otherwise; (except only the manner of making, immediately by himself, and
by way of creation). As he then made particulars only, Adam and Eve, so now he
makes Man and Woman: God did not otherwise make Universals, or Species then,
than he does now; for then he made only particular Crea^ures, and not
universals but only by creating particulars: The universal is but the common
nature of each particular, and these universals are no where to be found, but
only in particulars, though we should seek them in Plato's Region of Idea's, or
in that Tull. de. Not. Deor. lib. 1. Diog. Laert. in Epic.
Intermundum ((...)) which Epicurus dreamed of; for who can show me Man, except
he show me some particular person: For, although it be granted, that these
universals are realities, having an essence or being, yet they have no
existence or subsistence, nor are any where to be found but only in
particulars; and we know, that our Acutest Schoolmen have much contended about
these universals; some said, they are realities, others, that they are but
words; and others, that they are but mere notions and conceptions of man's
brain; and therefore those dissenting Sects are severally called, Reales,
Nominales, Conceptuales. In a word; as God made Man and Woman at first, so he
does still; his Resting is not to be understood of ceasing from making his
Creatures, for he does it to this day, and thereby declares his Omnipotency
now, as much as at the first. The Psalmist says, It is God that Ps. 100. 3.
made us, and not we our selves: And again, I am fearfully and wonderfully made
in the Psalm. 139. 14.
lowest parts of the earth; that is, in the Womb: In our vulgar Catechisms, the
first Question is, Who made you? It Is answered, God; and the Answer is true: It
is all one with God to make Man of Earth, or in the Womb, or of a Rib, or of
Nothing; for all these ways of making are Acts of his Almightinesse.

Finally, If it may appear unto us, That God has indeed made new Creatures,
and such as were not created in the six or seven first days of the World but
since; then I trust the Reader will perceive, that this Mysterious Rest of the
Godhead implies a far greater matter, then only a cessation from making new
sorts or kinds of Creatures. For manifestation whereof, I offer these
considerations following, to the learned Reader.

1. That after the fall of Man, God inflicted sorrow upon Eve, and all other
Women, in Childbearing, Genesis 3. 16. which Sorrow was not at first made, yet
that sorrow is something, (as our good Matrons know); it is not nothing.

2. The Earth was cursed for Man's sin, Thorns and Thistles are ordained, Adam
is condemned to sorrow, and sweating labor, verse. 16, 17, 18. All which are
Realties, yet not made at first.

3. We are assured by our Divines, That Buc. p. 56. and 58.
Mors and Morbi ordinata sunt a Deo, i. e. Mortality and Sicknesses were
ordained by God; and also, that hurtful Creatures, such as Vipers, Toads,
Spiders, Hornets, Waspes, Caterpillars, Gnats, and such like Non pertinent ad
opera primae Creationis, i. e. that these were no part of the first Creation;
therefore they must be ordained since: If it be said, that these and other
hurtful Creatures, such as Lions, Bears, Wolves, were at first, but yet
without their noxious malignity and hurtful qualities; this Answer will not
satisfy us, because even those qualities are realties. So Earthquakes,
Famines, Pestilences, were not at first created, nor any Sicknesses or
Diseases, which came into the World later, as the Heathens acknowledged,

Post ignem Aetheria domo
Subductum, Macies, and Nova febrium Hor. Cor. 1. Od. 3.

Terris incubuit cohors.
4. What can be said against the newness of the Egyptian Plagues? The burning
of Sodom? The last Destruction of Jerusalem? and the tribulation brought upon
that People, of which Christ said, That it should be such as was not from the
beginning of the world to Matthew. 24 21.
that time? Now, that God is the Author of such kinds of evils (viz. evils of
punishment), the Prophet has taught us, Amos 3. 6. Shall there be evil in the
City, and the Lord has not done it? And Moses declares, that all those evils
which are threatened, Deuteronomy. 28. (and are now come to pass) to be from the
Lord, which yet are but new in respect of the Creation.

5. What can be said against the newness of those Wonders or Miracles wrought
by the finger of God, by the Prophets, by Christ, and by the Apostles? were
they at first created? I suppose, No.

The blind man, when he received sight, told the Pharisees to their face (which
they could not deny) John 9. 32. Since the world began was it not heard that
any man opened the eyes of one that was born blind.

6. What can be said against the newness of Monsters, or of mixed Creatures,
such as Leopards, and Mules, etc. which now are extant, but were not so at
first created?

7. It is said, Jer. 31. 22. The Lord Movi coeli, and terra* extractio, Movi
Adami generatio, miracula, morbi novi, non sunt opera primae extractionis.
Mart. Borrhai. in Genesis 2. in verbum Requievit.
has created a new thing on the Earth; a Woman shall compass a Man: Which is
meant of Christ to be conceived in the Womb of the Virgin Mother, which was a
new thing indeed, and a peculiar Signal mark to know the Messiah by.

8. The same Creator professes, Isaiah 65. 17. Behold I create new Heavens,
and a new Earth. If you say, it is meant but of a new State, or condition of
the Church under the Gospel; I say so too; But this new State or condition is
not nothing; it is not such as it was before, and is new: So is the creating of
a clean or new heart, Psalm 51. 10. it is a work of Regeneration, or
re-Creation, and better to us than the Creation thereof.

9. The same Creator professes, Isaiah 57. 19. I create the fruit of the lips:
therefore the holy Apostolical Eloquence, with all the excellencies of
Rhetoric, and Languages, and Arts, are the Works of God, which are not
reckoned among the Works of the first Creation, and this is confirmed by Christ
himself, when he said; Matthew. 10. 19. Dabitur in illa hora: And by that which
others said of him, John 7. 46. Never man spoke like this man: And all those
new Languages at Babel were of Gods creating. Genesis 11.


Our Answer to this first Querie, for present, shall be but only Negative,
(because our Discourse is not yet ripe for a full positive Answer) viz. That
this Rest of God does not signify only his cessation from creating the World;
And moreover, we affirm, That although God had made more such Worlds, as Diog.
Laert. in Epicuro.
Epicurus thought; or if he had made innumerable ((...)) Worlds, of mere
Creatures, as Plut. de Placiti^ Philos. l. 2. c. 1.
Democritus in Plutarch, said; yet all such Worlds would not be of value and
worth sufficient to procure this Mysterious Rest, and complacency of the
Almighty Creator. But I proceed to the second Querie.

CHAP. XI.
That the Rest of God is fixed on the Seventh day only; although he intermitted
creation for some time in every former day. That his Rest did not consist in
any mere Creature. Of the Rest of God before the Creation. That God performed
part of the Creation on the Seventh day, and what that was. Jewish fables
concerning the creation of Adam and Eve. A short Answer to the second Querie.

OUr second Querie, is; Why God is said to Rest on the Seventh day, and not on
any of 2 Querie.
the former six days. There is, surely, something more then ordinary, implied
in this Rest of the Godhead, more then the bare Letter expresses, and more
then a mere cessation from the work of Creation; because this Rest is fixed and
appropriated to the Seventh day only, and not said at all of any of the former
six days, wherein God did both create, and also cease, by some pause or
respite from creation, which interval is by us Mortals called a Rest; as the
labouring-man at Midday is permitted to take some small time for sleep, or
rest, and therein intermitteth his work.

Doubtless God did not bestow the whole compass of each several day, with its
evening and morning, in a continual creation, or forming of his several
Creatures; for each of them were created by the Will, or Word of God, which
might be in a moment. The Psalmist says, By the Word of the Lord were the
Heavens Ps. 39. 6, 9
made, and all the host of them by the breath of his mouth -- for he spoke, and
it was done. It is not likely that this word or breath of God was produced to
the length of each whole day, but that there was some respite, and some time of
cessation, between the Acts of creating the several Creatures, each several
day: yet this respite of God is never called his Rest until the Seventh day;
That there was a respite, we read, that Adam was first formed, 1 Timothy 2. 13.
then Eve.

It is also very considerable, That although it is said, Exodus 20. 11. In six
days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, the Sea, and all that in them is: Whereby
it appears, that all the Creatures were made, as the Angels of Heaven, the
Fowls of the Air, and Man, Beasts, Plants, Fishes of the Earth and Sea:
Notwithstanding God is not yet said to Rest on this sixth day. Surely this Rest
of God consists in something else besides these; it seems he rested not in
any, or all these mere Creatures, but in something that was more noble and
worthy of this great honor, of being the Acquiescence or Rest of the Godhead.

But what shall we say of the pre-existence of God before the Creation, and the
infiniteness and eternity thereof before all times, when nothing was in being,
but only the pure Godhead in the three eternal Persons? when neither Heaven,
nor Earth, nor Man, nor Angels were created? We cannot say, or imagine, that
God was then without Rest; for besides, that He withheld himself from
creating, and from all external working, we know that he was at Rest in
himself, in his own blessed contentment, and all-sufficiencie, needing nothing:
which Rest of God could not then be interrupted by any business, or outward
operation. What the immanent or internal Actions of the Godhead were then, we
know but little, and that only, which the holy Apostles have taught us, in whom
we read of the eternal purpose of God to o^dain Christ, before the foundation
of 1 Pet. 1. 20. Ephesians. 1. 4* 2 Timothy 1. 9. Tit. 1. 2.
the world; and of choosing us in him. But we find no mention of any transient
or external Works of the Godhead, such as Divines call Operationes Dei ad
extra, and such as Creation is. Yet in all that infinite and incomprehensible
duration from Eternity, it is never said, that God Rested, nor until this
Seventh day. Therefore this Rest of God consists in something else, besides a
cessation or suspension of working, and also, besides that blessed quiet and
tranquillity, which for ever was, and is in the Godhead; of which the heathen
Philosophers rule is true; h Nisi Quietum, nihil Bea^um est; i. e. God could
not be happy if ^ Tull de Not. Deor. lib. 1.
he were not at Rest.

The Rest of God must be in something that is proportionable and equivalent in
worth to himself; therefore not in the whole great Creature of the World, nor
in any one particular parcel thereof, which is no more then only a Creature:
and moreover the Rest of God must be like himself, eternal, without any ending,
or intermission, or ceasing, therefore not in mere worldly Creatures; for
Heaven and Earth Mat. 24. 35. Psalm 102 ^^.
shall pass away: And, they shall wax old and perish]. Indeed, men set up
their Rest [in poor worldly temporalties, and for them lose eternal Rest; So
does not the Godhead. So that this Rest of God must be grounded on some most
worthy Subject, or occasioned by some most excellent Object, better than the
world, or any mere creature thereof; and what that is, we will enquire anon.

In order whereunto, I offer to the consideration of the learned Reader one
thing more: viz. Whether the Godhead did not perform some part of the Creation
on this very seventh-day, on which God is said to Rest?] For if it may appear
to be true, that something was then made, or perfected, which was not finished
in the six days; This may happily afford us some light to guide us into the
meaning, or cause, or occasion of God's Rest on that seventh-day, more then on
any, or all the former six days.

To this, our Answer is: first, That no man doubts, but God did work on the
first seventh day, and all seventh days ever since; as is showed before.
Secondly: That the Scripture seems* expressly to declare, that the whole
Creation was not completed, or finished on the sixth, but on the seventh-day:
for so we read Genesis 2. 2 On the seventh day God ended his work which he had
made] If it were not ended, but on the seventh day, then surely it was not
ended on the sixth day.

If it be here said, that although it was ended on the 6th. day, yet it might
be truly said to be ended on the seventh day, because it was ended before. As
one in Plutarch said, Plut. de Ira cohib.
If Alexander be dead to day, he will be dead to morrow]* But this evasion will
not serve turn, because the Ending of the work, and the Resting, are both
affirmed to be on the seventh-day precisely, and on none other day. For
otherwise it might be said as well that God ended his work, and rested on the
eighth, or ninth, or any other after-day.

The Septuagint, instead of the Seventh-day, rendered The sixth-day, Genesis 2. 2.
For they being Jews, and zealous for their Sabbath, would not have it thought,
that God wrought on the seventh-day. But St. Jerome discovered the imposture,
and says, Hier. Quaest. in Genesis To. 3.
In Hebraeo; diem septiman habet] That the text in Hebrew, has the
seventh-day. And adds, Arct abimus Judaeos, qui de ocio Sabbati gloriantur --
dum Deus oper atur in Sabbato complens opera sua in eo. etc.] We shall by this,
much press the Jews against their Sabbatical-Superstition, -- seeing God
himself wrought on the Sabbath, and therein finished his work]. That God did
not end, or finish, and complete the work of Creation; but on the seventh-day,
is the opinion, not only of St. Jerome, but of many other Later, and
right-Learned Divines.

If it ^e further enquired, What particular work God made or finished on the
seventh-day, which was not so made on the sixth day? In this we are Resolved by
many great and Learned Divines; That Adams side was not opened, until the
morning of the seventh-day. And this may with great probability be observed out
of the narration of Moses Genesis 2. Where, after the Creation of the man, (which
was performed on the sixth day,) it is said, 1. God put the man into the garden
of Eden. verse. 15. 2. God gave him the Law against eating the forbidden fruit.
3. God said, he would make him an help, meet for him. 4. God brought every
Reast of the field, and every Foul of the air unto Adam. 5. Adam gave names to
all Cattle, and to the fouls of the air, and to every Beast of the field v.
20. 6. God caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam. And then took one of his
ribs, and of it made the woman.] All these transactions required a good space
of time, which reasonably, might extend until the end of the sixth day, and so
unto the beginning of the seventh, which we know was to commence, and be
accounted from the evening of the said sixth day. His travel Estward to Eden,
and his naming that multitude of Creatures, might well cause weariness, and
weariness might incline him to that deep sleep, wherein the woman was made, and
this may justly be judged to be within the compass of the seventh-day. For I
think no man will deny, but that, between the Creation of the Man, and the
extraction, and forming of the woman, a good portion of time intervened.

But then, (If Eve were not made or formed, before the seventh-day) how shall
we salve the truth of the Scripture which says, [In six days the Lord made
heaven, and earth, the sea, and all that in them is]. To this the Answer is
obvious, and frequent; for in the Creation of the man, the woman was
substantially, and materially included, Civit. l. 15. c. 17.
St. Austin observes. That Genesis 2, The* man, and woman are both called Adam.
And the Text says, Genesis 1. 27. Male, and female created he them]. This was
said before the woman was taken out of Adam's side. Walfridus Strabus, (or
whosoever was the author of the Ordinary Gloss,) upon those words, tells us.
Prothemata gloss, in Genesis
Faemina nondum erat facta; gloss. Genesis
jam homo masculus and femina perhibetur, sed quia ex latere Adae erat
processura, in illo computatur per substantiam, a quo fuer^t producenda per
formam], i. e. These words are said of the time before Eve was formed; the man
is here presented both as male, and female, for Eve was accounted in Adam,
because she was then Originally, and Substantially enrolled in him, and soon
after to be extracted and built out of him. And again, the same Glosser upon
the same words tells us. 1. c. Mulier nondum a viro divisa.] i. e. When those
words were said, they were to be understood of a time, before the woman was
taken out the man.

This truth was acknowledged by the Jewish writers, who, nevertheless invented
fabulous conceits thereupon. They said, that Adam, and Eve were created as One
person, their backparts were joined together until God divided them. -- And,
That Adam was created with two faces. Some of them called Adam Androgynum. Lyra
in Loc.
(as Lyranus and the Glosser affirm) i. e. an Epicene, of both sexes, just as
the poet fained of his Ovid. Met. l. 4. Aelia, laelia, Crispis, nec vir, nec
mulier, nec Androgyna etc. Chytraeus in Epitaph. Bononiens. p. 173.
Hermaphroditus, The truth is, that the woman, was then in Adam, though but
rough-cast (as we use to say) and not taken out of the mould, not finished or
polished. For it is as easy to apprehend, Eve to be then in the side of Adam,
as it is for us to believe, and acknowledge, that all we which now live were
even then, in the loins of Adam; for which we have a strong Apostolical
evidence, Heb. 7. 10. Where it is said of Levi, before he was born, that he was
in the loins of Abraham] And so upon the same reason, we were certainly with
Levi, and Ahraham, in the loins of Adam.

So, our Answer to this second Querie for present, shall be only this, That,
therefore, God is not said to Rest until the seventh-day. Because, (that until
then,) the principal work was not finished, in which alone, the Rest of God
consisted. And what that is, will now soon appear.

In the mean time, I will lay this for my conclusion, and for a Truth which I
firmly believe; that the seventh-day or Ceremonial-Sabbath, was not ordained by
God for a memorial of the Creation of the world, and all the mere Creatures
thereof, or, for his ceasing from the work of Creation; But for an Evangelical
memorial of the Rest of God. Of which we are next to enquire.

CHAP. XII.
Why the Rest of God is not mentioned, until the seventh-day. Why it is fixed
on the Creation of Mankind, rather than of any other of the creatures. Answers
to certain enquiries. That the consideration of Christ, to be propagated from
the man, and the woman; was the only cause of this Rest of God.

IT may justly seem strange, and wonderful; that the most blessed, most
glorious, and Almighty God, who is Blessedness, and Happiness it self, and
that, so infinitely, and incomprehensibly, that it is impossible that any
addition of happiness, or rest can be added to him, so as to make him more
happy, or more at Rest, than he was from Eternity; And yet so it is, that God
is here, and now, said to Rest, and also, to Rest so now, as not before this
seventh day.

Certainly this Rest, must be occasioned by something that is External, and
Extra-essential to God. And therefore it must be such a Rest, or complacencie,
or acquiescence, as the Godhead assumed, and took in some special creature; and
yet not only in that creature considered singly, and merely in it self, for it
must be derived from some work of God, unto which God intended some excellent,
and beneficial addition of worth, and goodness, by which consideration the
Godhead was inclined to express a delight, and chearfullness, and contentedness
in it; and, for it; in all the other creatures.

This, (as to me seems) Moses darkly implies (for he is yet veiled) in these
words, Genesis 2. 2. He rested on the seventh day from al his work, which he had
made]. This Rest then, seems to be occasioned from his work; for it is not
said that he rested in his work, but (occasionally) from his work] It
follows, verse. 3. God blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it, because
that in it, he had rested from all his work, which God created to make]. This
sudden repetition of the Rest of God, does intimate something of greater
moment, and consideration than ordinary. Good reader, observe with me, that in
this later expression of God's resting, there is much more implied, than in the
former; for in the first, it is said He rested from all his work which he had
made]: But in the later it is said, He rested from all his work, which God
created to make]. These words (created to make) signify more than only a
creation. Our last English Translation reads this text, [created, and made,]
yet in the margin, it is there confessed, that according to the Hebrew, it is
to be read [created to make] which is indeed the true, and far better reading;
so, both St. Hierome, and our other masters in the holy tongue read it; so does
the Latin, of Sixtus, and Clemens. Quod creavit ut faceret] i. e. which he
created to make].

By which expression, I humbly conceive, that the holy Spirit does secretly,
and mysteriously imply that this Rest of God consists in some creature newly
made; upon which, the Godhead purposed to conferr some preferment, and honor,
greater than the bare creation of it, because it is said, he created it to
make] so says the Expositor upon those words creavit ut faceret] Martin:
Borrhaius in loc.
Ut ad certum usum pararet, ac destinaret] i. e. God rested from that work
which he created, that he might prepare, and appoint it to a certain use. So
that, To make, must signify, that God intended to make some further, and
greater, and more excellent use of that creature, than it had of it self, in
it is own single, and created nature; and that he would effect some more
glorious, and gracious work by it; which that creature, (of it self, and by
it is own power) would never be able to perform. Now what creatur^ this is; And
what further use God intended to make of it; And what prerogative of honor he
would add to it we are diligently to enquire.

1. We can not, with reason, and judgment, fasten the occasion of this Rest of
God, upon any one particular creature, but only upon the creation of Man; for
from the creation of Adam, God did first take occasion to express a
complacency, and acquiescence or Rest,

2. We may not think that this Rest of Go^, was occasioned only by the creation
of the first Adam, considered singly by himself, and as a (...) creature,
without any further reach, or consideration; But it was, indeed, occasioned by
a pre-consideration of the second Adam, which is Christ, who is styled by St.
Paul, 1. Cor. 15. 45. The last Adam, because, wh^^ Adam was made, Christ also
was made, Christ as a creature in respect of his humane nature) for as Eve was
then Originally, and Substantially in Adam's side (as is before said): So was
Christ seminally in his Loins; so that the consideration of Christ, now
wrapped up in this Root of Adam, was that which occasioned the first hint of an
expression of complacencie in the Godhead upon the Creation of the Man; for
thereupon, that was said by God, which was not said before upon the Creation of
any one, or of all his other Creatures, and it is said with a note of
Remarkableness, Genesis 1. 31. Behold! it was very good. Indeed his other
Creatures are said to be good, but not any, nor all, said to be very good till
now.

3. Though Adam was now made; and in him Christ was seminally couched: yet it
is not presently said, that God Rested; nor until some other Act was performed
by the Godhead: For God is not said to Rest, until Eve was taken, and formed
and finished, out of Adam's side, and this was not done until the Seventh day
(as is before showed). This was, because Christ the Savior of Mankind was not
otherwise to come into the open World, that there he might perform the grand
Work of a Redeemer, and Savior, but only through the Woman: Our merciful God
does then, and not till then, declare his Rest, when he had laid and completed
the foundation of the Rest of us his (otherwise wretched*) Creatures, For
neither Adam himself could be saved (supposing his fall) but through the
fertility of the Woman; nor could Eve, or any of their posterity, obtain
Redemption and salvation otherwise, than so; as the Apostle teaches us; 1 Timothy
2. 15, She shall be saved in childbearing; that is, by Christ, who should
descend from Eve, and be born of a Woman; for God confined our Redemption, and
our Redeemer so, when he said, The Seed of the Woman should bruise the Gen: 3:
15
Serpents head: And in the Gospel, God sent forth his Son made of a Woman. So,
early Gal: 4: 4
and late the Godhead was pleased to signify the conception of Christ by a
Woman, signally, without mention of the Seed of Man; promised to David in these
words, Psalm 132. 11. Ex fructu ventris, the fruit of the belly, which St.
Austin Aug: in loc.
observes, to be meant of Christ, because he was only from the Belly, or Womb
and not from the Thigh: And prophesied by Isaiah, chap. 7. 14. to be conceived
by a Virgin. And performed in the person of the ever blessed Virgin Mary.

Now we may easily return an Answer to the above mentioned Enquiries,
concerning the Rest of God.

1. In which of the Creatures God is said to Rest? To this we say, That his
Rest was only in Mankind, not in the man alone, but (for the honor and
everlasting comfort of all holy Women) he expressed not his Rest until he had
formed the Woman out of the Man, although the manner thereof is declared, after
the expression of God's Rest.

2. What further use (besides their Creat on) God intended to make of the Man
and the Woman? To this we say, That God purposed out of the Man and Woman to
raise and produce Christ, to be the Savior and Redeemer of Mankind, from
eternal and deserved misery; and also through the same Christ to crown Mankind
with everlasting glory; and for this most gracious use only, did the Godhead
declare it self to Rest; so that in Christ alone is the true, real, and final
Rest, and Sabbath, comprised, both of God, and of us Men.

3. What prerogative or peculiar honor added God to this Creature Man, more
then to any other Creature? To this we answer: 1. He made Man in his own Image,
so, as not any other Creature was made. 2. From the Seed of Man, he ordained
that the Redeemer should proceed, and not from any other Creature, although
some others were more high and excellent than Man, as the holy Angels are, as
the Psalmist says, Thou have made him a little lower than the Angels: Yet the
Apostle tells Psalm: 8: 5
us, Heb. 2. 16. That Christ took not on him the nature of Angels, but he took
on him the seed of Abraham. 3. God purposed (which he also performed) to unite
himself, so with Man, as not with any other Creature, to be one person with
Man; even this very Creator, at this very time of Man's creation, intimated,
that himself would one day become Man, that he would be incarnate, and so
Emmanuel; which is obscurely signified by those words; In the Image of God
created he him. And Gen: 1. 27
this Incarnation was most needful for Man, because in it only the everlasting
Sabbath and Rest of Man consists, and in nothing else.

From these Premises, my Conclusion is, That the principal (and indeed the
only) cause of this Rest of God consisted in the consideration and gracious
purpose of the Godhead to produce the Messiah out of the Man and the Woman, to
be united with our humane nature, and therein to fulfill the whole Will of God
in our behalf, and so to become the Redeemer and Savior of Mankind. Which
conclusion, being a Doctrine of our greatest concernment, we will in the next
place endeavor, (by God's assistance) to make plain and evident, even to the
capacity of ordinary understandings.

CHAP. XIII.
That the Rest of God consisted in his purpose of producing Christ, proved by
Scripture and Reason. Of the Image of God. Why the Woman was taken out of the
Man. Of the Union of Christ with Mankind. Why Redemption is only of Mankind.
The meaning of the Sacramental Bread and Wine. That the Soul of Christ was
derived and propagated from the first Man. Something concerning Universal
Redemption.

THat the Divine purpose of the Incarnation of the second Person in the Trinity
was the sole motive, that the Rest of God was now (and not before) declared,
may appear by many overtures, or expressions, in and about the Creation, and
other affairs, concerning the first Man and Woman.

1. It is said by the Godhead; Let us make Genesis 1. 26
Man. Whereby the concurrence of all the Divine Persons in the Creation of Man
is signified; As if the Godhead would express a special care, and deliberation,
and also a consultation about the Creation of Man, more than in the Creation of
the whole invisible World of Angels, or this visible World of all the other
Creatures; for it was never said before, Let us make, but God created, and, Let
there be Light; and, Let there be a Firmament; and, Let the Earth bring forth,
etc. Now, although we know that all the Three Divine Persons did cooperate in
the creation of every Creature; (as the sure Rule of Divines is), Opera
Trinitatis ad extra sunt indivisa: Yet their concurrence is not so declared
until the Creation of Man, Therefore, surely, a greater matter was intended,
than the making of a mere Creature, and that certainly was Christ, even He that
is better than all Creatures, and of whom it is said, Let all the Angels of God
worship Heb. 1. 6.
him,

2. Not only the making of Man is decreed, but it is added; In our Image and
likeness; and, In the Image of God created he him. Here is Our Image,
Plurally; and, The Image of God, Singly. Our Image, signifies the Image of the
Three Divine Persons stamped on Man. Power, Wisdom, Holiness; which are the
Characters of the Father, Son, and Spirit (as Divines say). But this is not
all, for, so much of this Image was soon desaced: Nor was this Image proper to
Mankind, but is found also in the holy Angels, and also more eminently in them
than in Mankind.

But because these words are said of Man, and not said of any other Creature,
therefore we must find out some other Image or likeness of God, which is so
peculiar to Man, as that it is not to be found in any other Creature, as Theod.
in Genesis quaest. 20.
Theodoret most judiciously observes. This being granted, the Image there
mentioned must needs relate and point to Christ, who is the same God, which
made Man, and said these words; so that the meaning is, That Man should be
made, in the same Image and Similitude, which in aftertimes the same God
himself would assume in the person of the Son: And this was fulfilled, when the
Son of God became the Son of Man. This is the exposition of Tertullian upon
these words; Tertul. advers. Prax. p. 387.
Ad Imaginem Dei. i. e. Ad Imaginem Filii, qui homo futurus erat. And again,
upon the same words; Idem de Resurr. p. 39.
Christus cogitabatur homo futurus: i. e. The Image of God signifies the
humane nature; and shape, which God, in the Person of the Son, would one day
take upon himself. Just so does Orig. in Gen Hom. 1.
Origin expound this Image of God; and so does the above mentioned Theod. in
Genesis quaest. 19. Isa. 7. 14. and 9. 6. Ioh. 1. 14 1 Timothy 3. 16 Romans 8. 3
Theodoret. The performance whereof was prophesied by Isaiah, when he called
the Mighty God, Emanuel; and fulfilled also, when The Word was made flesh, and
when God was manifested in the flesh, and the Son of God was sent in the
likeness of sinful flesh. This surely is the Image of God there meant, which
continued in Man after the fall, and so does until this day.

This Exposition is made more credible by another passage, from the mouth of
God, uttered after the fall of Man, when he said, Behold! the Man is become as
one of us, to Genesis 3. 12.
know good and evil. Some Expositors have thought this to be spoken ((...)) as
an Ironie or scoff on proud Man: I dare not say or think so, for fear of
Blasphemy; doubtless, the merciful Godhead did not flout, but pity, and also
comfort (the now-wretched) Man by this saying; which I firmly believe did
intimate and point at a Redeemer, even Jesus Christ, to be a Redeemer of him
from deserved misery; and so to be a solace, ease, and rest to his troubled
Conscience. The Reader may observe, that whereas before there was mention of
Our Image and likeness; (that is) the likeness of the whole Trinity, it is now
otherwise said, Like one of Us: so that Man, who before was made like all, is
now become but like one of the Divine Persons: This one does surely signify
Christ, who was then intended to be that Seed of the Woman before promised; to
be Incarnate, to be Mortal, to be made a curse for us, Gal. 3. 13. to be a man
of sorrows, -- to be wounded for our transgressions, Isai. 53. 3, 5. To know
good (for he was Goodness it self); And to know evil, of sorrow and affliction;
and this in order to the Rest, Sabbath, and Salvation of Man; for this reason
only it is said, The Man is become like One of us.

3. It is greatly to be considered, that the creation of the Woman was unlike
the creation of the Man; for Adam was made of Earth, immediately, Genesis 2. 19.
but the Woman was not so made, but of the Man; she was flesh of his flesh, and
bone of his bone, yea, and Soul of his Soul: for we find not, that God breathed
a Soul into Eve, because she was to receive it from the Man.

By this we may understand, that the Redeemer was then intended (together with
the whole race of Mankind) to be derived from that one root of Adam; for
otherwise, Christ could not have been qualified so fitly, as to be our
Redeemer. But because the Redeemer, and the Redeemed, must needs be united in
one humane nature, therefore the wise and merciful Godhead (as the Apostle
observes) has Acts 17 26
made of one blood all Nations of men, Christ and all: And hence it is, that
the same Apostle tells us, That we are members of his body, of his flesh, and of
his bones. And this, because Christ, and We, and all Mankind, the Woman and
all, took our nature from one and the same Lump of Adam; for therefore was the
Son of God Incarnate, and became Emmanuel, that he might fulfill the Law of God
in the same flesh, or nature, upon which the said Law was impose^. All this was
done in order, and preparation of an everlasting Sabbath or Rest for Man, by
thus producing fitly, the most holy Jesus to be a Redeemer and Savior of
Mankind, in whom alone the Just Godhead might be well pleased, and acquiesce.

For, except Christ and Mankind be united in one humane nature, and so be as
one Man, or as one Person, neither Christ's fulfilling the Law, nor his Death,
can serve for us; because the obedience of one cannot serve for another: nor
does the Just Godhead punish one for another; but (as the Prophet tells us)
Every Ier. 31 30 Eze. 18. 4
one shall die for his own iniquity: And, The Soul that sins, it shall die.
Neither could the Godhead justly punish the righteous Son for us unrighteous
Men; nor justify us, and condemn him, except we were one and the same; So the
Wise man says; He that justifies Pro. 17. 15
the wicked, and he that condemns the just, both are abomination to the Lord.
Therefore Eve must needs be made of Adam, and not of another piece of Clay,
that she and all her posterity may in that one lump be united with Christ.

For this reason it is said of Christ, Sacrifice and offering thou would
not, but a body Heb. 10: 5 7 Psa: 40: 7
have thou prepared for me: And, In the volume of the book it is written of me,
to do thy will, O God; That is, The Son was to perform the Law of the Godhead
in the behalf of Mankind; which that he might do for us, God prepared him a
body, derived from the same flesh, from which all the bodies of Mankind came,
and were originally united therein; That he might be a fit, and an identical
Person, for that great Work (as the Apostle speaks) of Reconciling us (to
God) in the body of his fle^h through death. Col. 1. 21, 22


Upon the same reason it is, that Redemption by the death of Christ extends
only to Adami^es, or Mankind, whose nature Christ has assumed, with them, in
Adam; So that the benefit and merit of his obedience cannot reach unto the
apostate-Angels, because he took Heb. 2: 16
not on him the nature of Angels, who are therefore left in their apostacy,
and perdition, without any remedy; for as they did not fall by the first Adam,
so neither shall they be resto^^d by the last Adam; and although our ^^^aking
in the same flesh with Christ, be ^ot the only means and aptitude of our
Redemption by him, yet it is a part thereof, and necessary thereunto for our
capacity thereof, and such a kind of cause, as Schoolmen call, ^^ne qua non.

Hence it is also, that Christ himself said, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son
of Man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you. (This Ioh: 6: 53
was spoken before the holy Supper was instituted; and must stand firm, and
true, although that Sacrament had never been ordained): To eat his flesh,
signifies, to be united with his flesh, as our meat is with us, which grows
into one entire body with us. And, to drink his blood signifies, to be united
with the Soul of Christ; for without an union of our flesh and soul with his
flesh and soul, Christ cannot profit us: Therefore our Mother Ev^, and we, with
Christ also, in her, must have taken both our flesh and soul from Adam; else
Eve must perish, and so must we. The Roman, and also our Anglican Divines, do
greatly mistake the meaning of the Sacramental Cup, in teaching, that the Wine
signifies, only, the blood of Christ; whereas, indeed, it presents, not the
blood, but the Soul, or Life of Christ; It was not the shedding of his Blood
(literally taken) that redeemed us, (for that might have been done without his
death; and he was dead on the Cross, before either his vital blood or Joh: 19:
34
water issued out of his body). But the principal Act of our Redemption
consisted in the giving up his Ghost, or pouring out his precious Soul for us,
as himself had before professed, The good Shepherd gives his life for the Ioh:
10 11
Sheep, ((...)) that is, his Soul for us; and this fully correspondeth with the
words of the Covenant, first made with man, In the day thou eatest thereof,
thou shall surely die. And we know, that blood in the old Testament did
signify the life or soul of Creatures, as a visible sign thereof, because the
Life or Soul it self is invisible: So we read Deuteronomy. 12. 23. The blood is the
life; and so St. Austin expounds those words, both there; and Levit. 17. 14.
Cont: Adimant: cap* 12 Cont: Advers: legis l: 2: c: 6
Anima Sanguis; viz. in signo -- Non quia hoc erat, sed quia significabat sicut
dicitur Petraest Christus: i. e. The blood is the life: Not as if blood were
our soul; but because blood signifies the soul; just so as it is said, That
Rock was Christ, 1 Cor. 10. 4. Even the Heathen Poet calls blood the soul of
Man;

Virg: Aen: 9
-- Purpuream vomit ille animam -- Verily, if the Sacramental Wine represented
nothing else but blood, literally, and not the Soul of Christ, Romanists would
be more excusable for withholding the Cup from the People, upon their own
excuse (which is indeed true) That the body of Christ does also include the
blood. But blood signifies more than so, which they either know not, or will
not acknowledge, although the same doctrine was formerly taught by their own
Master of the Sentences, even Peter Lombard, about the year 1150. in these
words, Lomb: Sent. 4 did: 11
Panis ad carnem refertur, Vinum ad animam -- ut animae, and carnis susceptio
in Christo, and utriusque liberatio in nobis significetur. The Sacramental
Bread relates to the Flesh, and the Wine to the Soul; that hereby the assuming
of a soul and body by Christ, and the deliverance of both in us, might be
signified. Thus he: which is also observed by Mr. Perkins. Perk. Probl. p. 146
Mat. 26. 26


When Christ ordained the Mysterious Eucharist, he said of the Bread, Take,
eat, This is my body; he did not say, here is my body, not hic est, but hoc
est; his meaning was, my body to you, is such a thing, as this bread is to be
to you it will be united with you, and be one body with you: so must you with
me be united in one body; that so, by this union, my obedience, both Active and
Passive, may become your obedience. Hereupon St. Paul says, The Bread which we
break, is it not the Communion of the body of Christ? Communion 1 Cor. 10 16
(we know) is all one with Co-unio, or unio-cum; i. e. Communion signifies the
mutual union or conjunction of Christ and his Members; so, not his Natural, but
his Mystical body is here to be understood.

In like manner, Christ himself said of the Wine; This is my blood of the new
Testament; Mat. 26. 28
for the blood of the old, typical, or ceremonial Testament, was only the life
or soul of sacrifical Beasts which were killed, and were but only a figure of
Christ: But the blood of the New Testament, was the Life and Soul of Christ
poured out for us.

Just so the Apostle says; The Cup of blessing -- *s 1 Cor. 10 16
it not the communion of the blood of Christ? that is, The Wine received into
us, mysteriously signifies, the communion or counion of Christ with us in one
Soul: And Christ had said before, Drink ye all of this; that he might thereby
show, that all, who can have benefit by Christ, must needs communicate, or be
united with Christ, as well in soul as in body.

For the Passion of Christ is not to be looked on, as the passion of one
private or single person, for he was an universal man, in whom all Men were
comprehended; so that in his Passion, Death, and Resurrection, the Death,
Burial, and Resurrection of all his Members is included, as the Apostle says,
Romans 6. 8
If ye be dead with Christ -- And, Col. 2 12
-- buried with him -- And, Col. 3. 1
If ye be risen with Christ: by this union, that saying of the Prophet (before
mentioned) is performed, Ier. 31 30
Every o^e shall die for his own iniquity; because all Men, with Christ also,
were one in Adam, as Austin says against the Pelagians, Lib. 3. c. 7. Tom. ^
In ejus natura, nostra insita fuit -- omnes, ille unus fuerunt; that is, Our
nature was planted in Adam, so that all we were that one Man; for there is no
man in the World, whose nature was not assumed by Christ, whereof this reason
is rendered by Prosp. de Providentia. fo. 216
Prosper in his Poem, though in a faulty verse, in my Edition, thus,

-- ut semine ab ipso Idem homo in Christi corpus nascendo venire^. This is
that weighty reason, why Eve, the Mother of us all must needs be taken out of
that one Lump of the first Man; That she, and all her posterity (having been
therein united with Christ, both in body and soul) might by that Union be
capable of Redemption by the same Christ; of which Redemption none can be
partakers, but the Sons or Progeny of Adam.

This was the method of our merciful Creator, in producing the Redeemer in this
manner, that so the benefit of his Incarnation might be tendered to all. Which
Doctrine (being admitted for truth) is well worthy the serious consideration of
our Contra-Remonstrants, to show cause, why we should not acknowledge the
benefit of his Death, as well as of his Birth, to be offered universally to
mankind; seeing, that both his flesh and his soul; and his whole humane nature,
were with ours assumed, and propagated from the first Man; and also (as
Athanasius most truly affirms) De Incarnat. Christi p. 552.
In the work of Redemption his body was given for our bodies, and his soul for
our souls, and his whole man for our whole man.

Many of the Fathers, and those of them who are most eminent for learning, were
much taken with a common fame, and also persuaded thereunto as a truth, by a
Tradition of the Tert. Poem. n. 11. Cyp. n. 97 Or^g^n 43. Athan. n. 25 Basil.
Mag. n. 23 Basil. Seleuc n. 14. Hier n. 4 Aug. To. 10 n. 55 Epip. Haer. 49
Jews, That Christ was crucified in the very place, where Adam was buried; as
we find in Tertullian, Cyprian, Origin, Athanasius, in both the Basils, in
Epiphanius, Jerome, and Austi^. And that, because Adam's crany, or scull was
there found, therefore that place was named Golgotha or Calvaria, which is
noted by all ^he four Evangelists, and called, (...); Just as other Writers
report of the Roman Capitol, that at the foundation thereof, the head, or scull
of a Man was found, and because the name of that Man (when he lived) was ^olus
(as Arnob. Cont. Gent. lib. 6.
Arnobius says) therefore they named that building Capi-tolium. The Fathers
took such special notice of this tradition of Golgotha; because they conceived,
that it was to signify the benefit of Christ's death to be extended to the
whole Adam, that is, both to his own person, and also to all his posterity. The
words of St. Jerome, in an Epistle to Marcella, are these, Hier. Epist. 17
Calvaria appellata esi, quia ibi Calvaria Adami condita est, ut sanguis
Christi stillans de cruce, peccata ejus dilueret. For, as Christ is the head of
the whole body, or corporation, Mystical; so is Adam the fountain and head of
the whole corporation Natural, of Mankind.

There was lately a book printed and published, wherein the Writer labors to
prove, that there were men before Adam. If the Author so believed, he was very
ignorant in Christian Doctrine; and if not, then it may be thought he wrote it
purposely to deride Christianity, as a Pagan, Turk, or Jew would do; for such
another thing did the Jews invent, and report as a Tradition, that, For the
first Man God created two Wives or Women: And hence it was, that the Jews
forged many vain Genealogies, which are the same that St. Paul forbids, as
fabulous and endless, 1 Timothy 1. 4. As Cont. Advers. legis l 2. c 1. Tom. 6.
St. Austin thought. This fancy does disturb the Doctrine of Redemption by
Christ, who was necessarily to proceed from on Man, and through that one Woman
of whom it is said, The Seed of her shall bruise thy head: therefore for our
comfort, and for confirmation of our faith, and for the manifestation of the
just proceedings of God in the way and manner thereof, he has in the holy
Scripture named the Man and the Woman, from whom all Mankind, together with
Christ, were propagated.

CHAP. XIV.
Of Adam 's Solitude, and something of Monastic life, and the reasons thereof.
That the Woman's help consisted not in society, nor childbearing (simply
considered); but only in respect of the Generation of Christ. Of Childbearing,
that it is not salvifical, without Faith in Christ. Of good and evil occasioned
by the Woman. Why she was named Vita, or life. Why God suffered the Woman to
occasion the fall of Man.

4. MY fourth Reason, why I have said, that this Rest of God consists in the
consideration of Christ, is grounded upon these words of the Godhead; It is not
good that Man should be alone, I will make him an help meet for Genesis 2. 18
him

The Heathens accounted Solitude a great infelicity, although they abounded in
all other provisions; One says, Tul. de Amic.
Si Deus nos in Solitudine c^llocare^ -- And -- Si quis in coelum ascendisset;
in suave foret, nisi aliquem cui narraret haberet -- i. e. If God should place
a man in a desert, or if a man were in heaven, alone, it would seem unpleasant,
if he wanted a companion to discourse with. He thought also, that Id. inter
frag.
God himself could not be happy if he were alone. Solitariness does, indeed,
incline some to carelessness, and, nemo videt, is an encouragement to vices. The
great Philopher soid of a solitary man Arist. Pol. lib. 1. c. 2.
(...). He had need be exceeding good, and likeunto God, or else he will be as
bad as a beast; The Poet says. Ovid d^ Remed.
.

-- Loca sola nocent, loca sola caveto; Semper habe Pyladen aliquem, qui cures
Orestem. The man is now placed in his pleasant Paradise, yet even there it is
said, It is not good to be alone.

But the Church, does not absolutely condemn solitude: It has bin accounted a
great help to piety in two respects, 1. as being a refuge from the scandals of
sin, and aversions from God; The Ancient Eremitical, and Monastic Christians,
were so called, because they retired on purpose, to apply their service to God
only, (...) as Naz. in Poe^.
Nazianzen says, and therefore such were called Salvian. de gub. lib. 8.
servi Dei, as being the principal servants of God. 2. The desert was a refuge,
and a preservation of holy persons in the time of presecution, which as Soz.
lib. 1. c. 13.
Sozomen thought, was the chief c^^se of Eremitical retirement. Elias fled in
^^ ^he wilderness from the fury of Jezabel; 1 Reg. 19. Rev. 12. 14.
So the Church in the Apocalypse is described, flying into the wilderness from
the Dragon; John Baptist was sent into the wilderness by his father, to escape
Herod's massacre, as Basil of Seleucia thought Basil. Seleu. in Erist. can. n.
17. Mat. 23. 35.
, where it seems he continued until the time of his ministry, for which cause,
and also for asserting the virginity of the Virgin mother, his holy father
Zacharias the son of Barachias was slain, as many of the Fathers affirm. These
two are by St. Jerome accounted the precedents of Eremitical solitude,
practiced by many holy men such as Antonius, and Paulus, who continued many
years so, and Didymus, who continued 90. years without any society of men. as
Soc lib. 4. c: 18.
Socrates writes. The piety of such Eremites as these, caused the desert to be
thought the chief school of virtue. St. Jerome said, that Hier. Epist. 22.
he retired into the desert, That thereby he might escape hell. An holy woman
in Chrysostom. cont. vituperatores. l. 3. To. 4.
Chrysostom desired that her son might be brought up in a solitary life, that
thereby he might obtain heaven; This kind of life was accounted a continual
repentance by St. Jerome; and other Ancient writer's called such Livers: (...).
as curing the diseases, of the soul. And (...), as exercising virtues, and
striving against vices. And (...), as perpetual supplicants to God. And (...),
as being ever in contemplation of divine wisdom. Thus Adam might have
continued solitary as well as any of these, if some other inconvenience had not
bin foreseen, (besides want of company); for prevention whereof the merciful
Godhead said, It is not good that man should be alone.

These words, (as all the words of God,) are weighty in truth and in mystery;
In these, the mystery of the Messiah is employed. God had said before of all the
creatures, man and all, that they were very good. But now He says, It is not
good etc. Divines say, In sinu Dei non est contradictio] God does neither
harbor, nor utter contradictions; The woman was in the man Originally, when
God pronounced the creatures very good; but she was not yet separated, and
formed out of the man; she was intended by God, and, by her the Savior; but
she was not yet extended, or exhibited. The man was indeed very good even in
his own very creation, being but newly come out of the Creator's, hand; but
yet, if man had so continued singly, and alone, without the woman, it had bin
finally ill for him, by his own fault (the fall being foreseen); for he must
have perished thereby, being remediless.

Neither may we think that this Solitude of the man, was much bettered by the
society of the woman (considered merely, and singly of her self) without any
further intendment; the man had not yet need of her in respect of any corporal,
or worldly necessity, for as yet, concupiscence was not entered into him; and
moreover, he had society, and conversation with God, and so might have had with
holy Angels.

If nothing, but only society had bin intended, God would have produced more
creatures like unto the man, as he did Angels, without any distinction of Sex;
and so the world below, might have bin like the Angelical world above, or as
the people of Rome are said to have bin at first, Flor^^ l. 1. c. 1.
Populus virorum] a people of men, without any women. If it be demanded, How
mankind should have continued, if no supply had bin by generation, if no woman
had bin; or if all men would have resolved on continency? St. Austin,
answers that this question is Aug. de Bono viduit. b. 23. To. 4.
Querela vanorum i. e. but a vain querie. For God could have made Immortal
bodies of men, as well as Immortal souls, and men might have continued, as
Immortal Angels do.

Besides, If the help here intended, had bin only for propagation of children,
and for replenishing the earth, without any further, or greater consideration;
this might have bin don by creating several men, and women, at first; and
these, of several parcels of earth, or other materials, nor should the woman
have needed to be made of a piece of the man; another lump of clay would have
served, for so the earth might have bin replenished. St Jerome upon those words
Genesis 1. 28. Be fruitful, and replenish the earth] Thus writes to the noble
virgin Eustochium Hier. Epist. 22. cap. 8.
Crescat ille qui terram impleturus est, tuum agmen in Caelo est]. So the wise
and merciful Godhead intended this help for man, not only to replenish the
earth, but also to supply heaven; by producing the Savior of the man, and
woman, from both.

The Loneliness here meant, is in another respect, far more grievious than the
want of such companions, as either women. or men, or Angels could be; and the
help intended, is better than the society of any of these; and better yet than
an External communication, or society, with the most holy Godhead; For we find
that, not only wicked men, as Cain Genesis 4. 9. and Baalam the conjuter. Number, 22.
12. had external conference, and communication with God, but even Satan also,
as we read, Job. 1. 6. And in the Gospel, when Satan not only conversed, and
talked with God the Son, but also took him up, and carried him to the top of
Lu. 4.
an high mountain, and to the Pinnacle of the Temple; Therefore without another
kind of society, and communion with God, neither Adam, nor we his posterity can
find any help meet for us, though with the Prophet we seek one, in the streets
of Jerusalem, or with Jer. ^. ^. Lanct. in Diog.
the Philosopher, in the populous Citiy of Athens. For only the Son of God,
(which is hereintimated to be derived from the man, and through the woman,) is
that help meet for man; without whom, (in any other condition), it would not be
good for man to be.

For, without this help, man had continued alone, although he had not wanted
other company, because he had bin nothing but mere man, if God had not
vouchsafed to be come Emmanuel, or God-with-Man; The Jewish Doctors have
observed, that in the appellation of man, and woman, (Ish, and Isha,) Gen, 2.
23. the name of God (Jah) is inserted; and this was to intimate, that God was
to be incarnate, and so united with our humane nature personally; and this was
the society principally meant to quit man from miserable solitariness such as
the Apostle mentions. That they might not be without Christ having no hope, and
without God in the Ephesians. 2. 12.
world; But might be of The society of Jesus, (rightly understood.) Without
this society, the sentence of Solomon would be verified on the man, Woe to him
that is alone, when] Eccl. 4 10.
he falls, he has not anot her to help him up.

Christ the Redeemer was already in the loins of the man, but not yet in the
womb of the woman, nor could he be actually produced, without the woman, of the
incarnation of the Son of God. It is truly said by St. Austin in Psalm. 44.
That it is Conjunctio nuptialis, Thalamus est uterus Virginis] i. e. A
matrimonial union, and the mariage-chamber was the Virgin's womb. This marriage
was now contracted in Paradise, and consummate, when the word was actually made
flesh; But the Bride is not yet brought home to the bridgroom's house; This is
that great mystery which the Apostle mentions, They two shall be one flesh-but I
speak of Christ, and Ephesians. 5. 31.
the Church].

This is that help meet for man, which the merciful Godhead intended; without
which man had continued woefully alone, without God, without a Savior; though
he had an Eve with him, yet both had bin miserably solitary, and as one says
Terent. ^ Eun.
solus cum sola; neither could they have bin such an help to each other, as was
meet for both: They had (indeed) at the creation a life natural given them; but
(without this Divine help) Eve could not have procured that spiritual,
heavenly, and most happy life, which yet was to be effected through her
fertility, and not otherwise, as one says of a companion,

Mart. 12. 47. ex Ovid. l 3.
Nec tecum possum vivere, nec sine te.

This mysterious truth, surely, was known by Adam, who was a Prophet, (and is
so accounted both by Orig in cant. hom. 3. Aug: de Gen: l. 9. c: 19.
Origin, and Austin,) as may also appear by his prophetical words before the
fall, Genesis 2. 23. but especially by his so naming the woman after the Fall,
whom he called vitam, that is, life, Genesis 3. 20. as both Hier. in Genesis Ambr. de
Parad: c: 14: Joh. 14. 6.
St. Jerome, and St. Ambrose read that place, and the word Eve, or Cavah,
signifies life; whereby he declared both his expectation, and faith in the
Messiah, to proceed from the woman; even that Messiah who calls himself, The
way the truth, and the life] for thereby, only, could she be an help meet for
man now fallen, and in this respect only was she called life, because from her,
Christ was to come; so that she was, indeed, the first (...), or parent of God,
as the blessed virgin is often called by the Fathers, and (...), or mother of
God. viz. of God-incarnate; otherwise she was not an help meet for man, but
rather quite contrary: Nor could her ch^ld-bearing have saved her self, or
others; except Christ the Savior had bin in her progeny: nor yet, could her
bearing of Christ originally in her womb have helped her, except she had also
conceived him in her heart by says as St. Austin very truly affirms of the
blessed Virgin Mary, (who was nearer akin to Christ, than Eve was) Aug. de vir.
c. 3: To. 6.
Nihil Mariae profuisset materna propinquitas, nisi felicius Christum cord,
quam carne gestasset etc. Neither Eve, nor Mary, could have bin saved by
propagating, or bearing Christ in the womb, if they had not conceived him in
their hearts.

If we lay aside this consideration of Eve, and consider her only as a woman
she will appear rather an impediment than an help to man, for she occasioned
the fall of the man by conversing with Satan: in which respect, Tertullian says
of her Tert. de habit Mulieb.
Fae^^na, est janua Diaboli] The first inlet of Satan, was the woman, as
Chrysostom, calls Job's wife Chrysostom. n. 56.
The Instrument of Satan: and Orig. n. 17.
Origin calls her c muscipuiam. i. e. The trap of Satan, And says moreover,
that Satan destroying the goods and children of Job, yet touched not his wife,
but left her on purpose to supplant the holy man.

But God looked otherwise on Eve when he called her an help; and considered her
so, as the Fathers speak of the blessed Virgin Mother, whom they call Ambr. de
Spirit. lib. 3. c. 12.
Templum Dei. And Fulg. sermon. 3.
Fenestram Coeli And id. ibid
Scalam Coeli And Eusebius. Emis. Homil. in Vigil. Nativ.
Portam Coeli. i. e. A Temple of God; The window of heaven; The ladder and gate
of heaven: for all these was Eve in respect of her fruitfulness, and the
propagation of Christ from her.

For in other child bearing she was unhappy, as first in Cain, then in the
holy, but unfortunate Abel; some of her posterity are called, a generation of
vipe^s, and also said to be of their Father the Devil, and one of them ^^
called Joh. 6. 70.
a Devil. The consideration of such miscarriages, has made some parents wish
themselves childless. The great Emperor Augustus wished that he had died without
wife and child, Suet. in Aug. c 65.
his issue proved so ill. Capitolinus says of the good Emperor Antoninus the
Philosopher. Capit. in M. Aut. c. 8.
Felix fuisset, si fi^ium non reliquisset i. e. he had bin happy, if he had not
left a Son: (he meant, wicked and bloody Commodus.) Dead Tantalus, in the
fable, is brought in, desiring rather to return to hell, whence he came, than
to see, and promote the wickedness, and calamities of his posterity Sen. in
Thye^te. Lu. 23. 29.
. In which respect Eve might rather have desired barrenness, as Christ also
said for such reasons, Blessed are the barren. So the help which Adam had by
his wife, was not in regard of her society, nor in her childbearing, (generally
considered) neither was she named Life, only for that she was to be the mother
of all other men and women to come; nor for any amorous or lascivious
apprehension (as wantons since used to their minions, Ju^. Sat. 6.
(...). And, Ter. in Eun.
Anime mi, mi Phaedria) But it was surely in a far greater consideration, and
in prophecy, and faith, of the Messiah to come by her, and of redemption, and
immortal life, (which would be only through him) that he named the woman,
Vita. or Life.

This certainly was the reason, that God called the Woman, An help, and meet
for man,] and for nothing else, but only the preconsideration of the Savior
to descend from her; for so the holy Psalmist has taught us, Our help Psalm.
124. 7.
stands in the name of the Lord, which has made heaven and earth.] For
without this help, he says in another place, O be thou our help in trouble,
for vain is the help of man:] And more vain is the help of Woman.

Finally, for this cause, it may reasonably be thought, that the wisdom and
providence of the Godhead permitted the fall of man to be occasioned by the
woman, that so, the man might be induced, and necessitated, to seek for Life
and Help otherwise; and not in the Person, but in the blessed Seed and
posterity of the woman. To which purpose, St. Ambrose thus writes; Ambros. de
Parad. cap. 10.
Et si mulier prior peccatura erat, tamen Redemptionem sibi paritura, salva
erit per generationem siliorum inter quos, generavit and Christum.] (i. e.)
Although the woman first sinned, yet Redemption was to come by her; therefore
she shall be saved in childbearing, because amongst her children, Christ was
one.

By this time, I trust it appears to the Reader, that the grand, and only
reason, of the expression of the Rest of God at that time, was the
providentiall, and merciful consideration of Christ, the Seed of the Woman;
and Savior of her, and of the man, and of their posterity.

CHAP. XV.
An Answer to the Question, How God can be said to Rest? That the Rest of God
is in Christ; and why? That the Tabernacle and Temple are called God's
Resting Place, only as they were figures of Christ. That the Ark is called
God's strength, in the same respect. That God's Rest in Sion is also meant of
Christ. That the Union of God and man in Christ, was ordained only for man's
Salvation, and everlasting Rest. That man's Rest is called God's Rest. Certain
Conclusions concerning this Rest of God.

WE are now come to the last, but the greatest difficulty of this Sabbaticall
Doctrine, touching the Rest of God, and to give some Answer to those two
Queries, mentioned before in the 10th Chapter:

How God can be said to Rest, who never labored, or was at unrest?

Why his Rest is fixed, first, on the seventh day of the world, and not
mentioned before, or declared to have been from Eternity, (as certainly it was)
seeing this Rest was only in consideration of the Messiah, now secretly laid
and couched in our first parents?

We may not think, that this expression of the Rest, Contentment, or
Complacency of God, was occasioned only by the newness of that work; as man
pleases himself in new apparel, new fashions, or new buildings. This could
not be the cause of God's Rest, unto Whom, all his intentions and works were
known from Eternity, and were all present to his Divine Providence, with whom
there is no futurity; because, whatsoever is future in respect of our human
apprehension, is ideally present to God. In which respect, the words of Solomon
may be rightly understood, There Eccles. 1. 9
is no new thing under the Sun,] for nothing is new to the Godhead. And, the
Apostles have declared, that this very mystery, in which (as we have showed)
the Rest of God consists, is, The eternal purpose which he purposed in
Christ Jesus our Lord.] And, That our Redemption Ephesians. 3. 11 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19,
20.
-- with the precious blood of Christ -- was foreordained before the
foundation of the world.] And moreover, That God has also chosen us in him
before the foundation of the Ephesians. 1, 4.
world.] This being undeniable, we may wonder, that this Rest of God is
confined or limited to this one time, and not mentioned before, although it had
been from everlasting.

To the first of those Queries, our Answer is, That the only Rest, or Sabbath
of God, is 1 Querie answered.
the Messiah; because, in the Obedience of Christ, both active and passive, the
Godhead does rest satisfied, contented, and well-pleased; not only with the
proper and individual person of Christ, but also (for, and in him) with all
the holy Members of his Body mystical, being by faith united, and One with him.

For therefore does God rest in him, because by him, the whole Law was to be
(and now actually is) performed; so that all the duties, debts, and penalties,
which, in justice, are requirable of his servants, are fully paid by Christ,
and thereby the just Godhead is satisfied to the uttermost farthing. So that
the Rest of God is in no wise to be ascribed to him, in respect of any
cessation from the work of Creation, but only in consideration of the
acquiescence of God, in Christ's satisfaction, and thereby man's acquiescence,
or acquittance from the wrath of God.

That the Rest of the Godhead consists in Christ only, may appear by many
passages in the Old Testament, something obscurely, and in the New more
clearly; for so we read in King Solomon's Prayer, Arise, O 2 Chronicles. 6. 41.
Lord God, into thy Resting Place, thou, and the Ark of thy strength.] This he
said of the Temple at Jerusalem. The like was said before by his father David,
of the Tabernacle; Arise, O Lord, into thy Rest, thou and the Ark of thy
strength.] And the like was said, Psalm. 132. 8 Numb. 10. 35.
before both, by Moses, Numb. 10. 35. And it came to pass when the Ark set
forward, Moses said, Rise up, Lord, and let them that hate thee flee before
thee.] God is gone up with a shout,] Ps. 42. 5. was said of the Tabernacle and
Ark, Lyranus in loc.
Observe here, good Reader, that Moses calls the Ark, Lord; and, that David and
Solomon call the Tabernacle and Temple, God's Rest, and Resting Place. These
speeches must needs point at, and signify Christ, for therefore only did Moses
give the title of Lord to the Ark, because it was the type and signal of his
presence with his people. And therefore only did David and Solomon call the
Tabernacle and Temple, God's Rest, because they were the figures and types of
Christ's Body, wherein the Godhead was to rest; but the very substantial Body
of Christ, was the real and true Temple of God indeed; so Christ said, Destroy
this Temple -- Joh. 2. 19. 21.
But he spoke of the Temple of his Body.]

That the Ark was the figure or representative of Christ's Body, we are taught
by St. Jerome, upon those words, Thou and the Ark of thy strength.] Hier. i^
Psalm. 132.
Tu, and corpus assumptum, quo divini^as tegeba^ur.] So does St. Austin expound
those words, Aug. in loc.
Corpus Christi, quod ex Maria natum est.] (i. e.) The Ark signified that body
which God the Son assumed of the Virgin Mary, in which his Godhead was covered.

But the Resting place of God cannot be meant principally, or ultimately, of
the typical Temple, for that is destroyed long ago: nor of the Ark, for that
is also lost; nor is the Godhead now hid in a Chest. The true Resting Place of
the Godhead, is only the human Nature of Christ, in which it rests, and
abides for ever, so as not to be separated from it all. Of this residence of
the Godhead, John Baptist thus spoke, I knew him not; but he Joh. 1. 33.
that sent me -- the same said unto me, Upon whom thou shall see the Spirit
descending, and remaining on him, the same is he, etc.] For Christ is he on
whom the Divine Spirit, or Godhead, not only descended, but rests and
remains for ever.

The holy Psalmist, in the place before mentioned, says, For the Lord has
chosen Sion, Psalm. 132. 13, 14.
he has desired it for his habitation. This is my rest for ever, here will I
dwell.] What was Sion literally? but an Hill or Rock; and how does God dwell
there? Verily, no otherwise than in any other common part of the world. Nor can
it truly be said to be his Rest for ever, (if literally understood) because we
are sure, Sion is long since forsaken, as was prophesyed by Isaiah, Jeremy, and
Micah; and that this Sion should be plowed as a field.] Which prophecy, Jer.
26. 18
Eusebius: de Demon. lib. 6. cap. 13.
Eusebius says, he saw performed with his own eyes.] Which dereliction is
thought to have been intimated by that strange voice which was heard in the
Temple, a little before the final destruction thereof, Joseph. n. 24. Heges.
n. 34 Eusebius. Hist lib. 3. cap. 5. Hieron. n. 4
Let us depart hence;] of which, special notice was taken by many Writers, as
Josephus, Hegesippus, Eusebiu, and Jerome.

But, in Sion was the house of David, and the Tabernacle, and the Ark; and the
Temple also stood on a part of that great hill of Sion, all being figures of
Christ; for this reason only it was said of Sion, This is my rest for ever,]
because the everlasting Rest of the Godhead was to be in the family, posterity,
or Son of Mat. 1. 1.
David] and is him, who was represented, typified, or prefigured by the
Tabernacle, Temple, and Ark; and that is, only in the Lord Jesus Christ. And
so Arnobius expounds that Prophecy, Arnob. i^ Psalm. 131.
Requies Dei in Jesu evidens est, and specialis; in quo est arca.] This Rest of
God is meant evidently of Jesus, in whom especially was the Ark of God.]

That which the great Prophet Isaiah says of the progeny of Jesse, may put us
out of doubt, that Jesus only is the Sabbath or Rest of the Godhead, Is. 11.
1. There shall come forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse, and a branch shall
grow out of his roots*: and the Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him.] For,
from Jesse came David, from David came Christ, and upon Christ does the Divine
Spirit or Godhead for ever rest. And this Rest of the Godhead is the very same
thing, which was signified by that heavenly voice of God the Father, uttered
(more then once) in the Gospel, This is my beloved Son in whom I am Mat. 3. 1
17. 5. Beza in Math. 3. 17.
well pleased;] which Beza most pertinently, and for weighty reasons, renders,
In quo acquiesco,] (i. e.) In whom the Godhead does acquiesce, or, is at rest.
For if God were not well pleased, and satisfied, and at rest with mankind by
Christ, the expostulation of the Psalmist might, with trembling, be taken up by
us all, Wherefore have thou made all men Ps. 89. 46.
for naught?

If it be here said, that this Rest of the Godhead in Christ, may possibly
signify the continual and sempiternall mansion, conjunction, and union of God
and man in Christ: So that by these two ingredi^nts of Godhead and Manhood,
thus joined, one Hypostatical or Personal union is made, whereby God and Man
are become one Person, and shall so rest inseparably for ever.

To this we answer and affirm, that all the said allegation is true, and that
Christ may rightly be called the Rest of God, in consideration of the
everlasting union of the Godhead with the human nature of Christ. But withal
we say, that there is more to be considered in this Rest, than only a mere
union of God with man. For we must further enquire, Why it pleased the Almighty
Godhead to condescend to this abasement, and Exinanition, so as to be
personally united with a creature, and to be in the form of a servant, whereby
the mighty God, in the person of the Son, became mortal, and subject to all
the infirmities of mankind, (except sin) and even death also.

By the serious meditation hereof, we shall find, that the final cause, or
motive of this union of the Godhead with our human nature, was not intended, or
effected, for any rest, contentment, or complacency of the Godhead for it self,
because God, in respect only of himself, did not stand in need of any such
Rest o^ he had from eternity all possible blessedness, rest, and Ineffable
happiness, and so would have had everlastingly, although neither Man, nor
Angel, nor the World had been crea^ed; or, although God the Son, or Word, had
never been incarnate. Therefore it must needs be granted, that the Incarnation
was designed by God, for the rest and benefit (not of God, but) of mankind; as
we are excellently taught by Atha ser 3 cont. Ari^n.
Athanasius, that God the Son had never been ordained to become Emmanuel, or
Incarnate, if Man's necessity (for Redemption) had not wanted, and necessarily
required it. Thus he.

It being thus evident, that this Rest of God is not called a Rest in respect
of himself, but only in respect of that Rest, which by his goodness and mercy
he has ordained for his poor Creatures. It must needs follow, that God calls
that his Rest, which is indeed (not only principally, but) solely, the Rest of
Mankind* For our Lord Jesus, the Emmanuel, is therefore the Rest or Sabbath of
the Godhead, because he is the Rest or Sabbath of us Men, in whom and through
whom only, our (otherwise languishing and fainting) souls may find consolation,
rest, and refreshment; he is the only solid hope, and Sabbath, upon whom we can
depend, and rest, and expect, and hope for an eternal Rest, for in and by him
only, the offended Godhead is reconcilable, so as to be at peace and Atonement
with Man, and to rest satisfied, or well pleased, as the Angels sang at his
Nativity, Glory be to God -- and on Earth peace, Good will toward Men; Or, (as
Beza more truly reads it) To Men Beza in Luke 2
of good will ((...)) that is, To Men designed by Gods free Grace and good
pleasure.

From these premises I infer the 4 conclusions following, which I offer to the
consideration of the Christian Reader: and do here set them down, that in this
Doctrine of the Sabbath I may be rightly and plainly understood.

First, That Christ is that only Sabbath, or Rest, both of God and Man, which
is mentioned and meant in the fourth Commandment; and also in Genesis 2. 2.

Secondly, That Christ is therefore called the Rest of God, because God has in
mercy ordained him to be the Rest for Mankind*

Thirdly. That God cannot otherwise be said to Rest in Christ (for our good)
but only because all faithful and holy Men do set up their Rest in Christ.

Fourthly, That the Rest of God (here meant) consists only in the Rest of
Man; and that God calls that his Rest, which indeed is primarily and properly
Man's Rest.

The Rest of God cannot be meant of any new rest, in respect of himself only,
because it is impossible that any increase or access can be added to
infiniteness, such as is the blessed, eternal, and unspeakable Rest of the
Godhead: Therefore there must needs be some other external respect, in which
God is said to rest otherwise, than before, and that surely is the Rest which
he has procured for Man, which God calls his own Rest.

The holy Scriptures do very often ascribe the passions or affections of Men
unto God; as when God is said to repent, to be angry, to be greived, and vexed,
and displeased; although we are sure that no such changes can consist with the
immutable Godhead; for the same Scripture that says, in one place, It repented
Genesis 6. 6. 1 Samuel 15. 29
the Lord: In another place says, The strength of Israel will not lie, nor
repent. Therefore such speeches are but Anthropo-pathetical, or after the
manner of Men; as a Man pulls down an house which himself built, because he is
angry or displeased with it; so God in justice destroys some Creatures which
himself made: yet God is not angry, but because he does such a thing as Man in
Anger does, therefore he is said to be angry. Just so, the Rest which is only
in Man, is here for the like reason called Gods Rest. As when a provident
Father has settled a good and firm estate upon his Children, he will say, that
now he is at rest and quiet, although he neither intermit his work, nor
personally enjoy that estate, yet calls his Childrens good his own; even as
God does here call the rest of his Creatures his own Rest. Of which more in the
next Chapter.

CHAP. XVI.
That the Rest of Man is called Gods Rest, showed by other like passages in
Scripture. That Christ is called the Rest of God only, because he is the Rest
of Mankind. An answer to the second Query above mentioned, showing, Why God is
said to Rest on the first Seventh day only, and not before. The Conclusion, and
St. Austin 's Judgment in this Doctrine of Gods Rest.

THere are many passages in Scripture concerning God, which can in no wise be
verified, except we acknowledge this Doctrine, That the properties of Man are
there transferred and assumed by God, and called his actions, passions, or
dispositions, as may thus appear.

Genesis 22. 12. It is said by God, in the person of his Angel. Now I know that
thou fear God -- seeing thou have not withheld thy Son -- from me. This God
did know before; but because by this grand trial, God made both Abraham and
others know it, therefore it is said, Now I know. Aug. de Genesis l. 4 c. 9
Quia nos cognoscere facit, says the Expositor, i. e. God is said to know
only, because he now made man to know. It is said of one Sabinus in Seneca,
Sen. Ep. 27
Putabat se scire, quod quisquam in domo sua sciret; so God accounts the
apprehension of his People to be his own knowledge.

Deuteronomy. 13. 3. The Lord your God proves you, to know whether you love the Lord
your God. Not as if God did not know before and without trial; but because
hereby Man might perceive whether he does really love God.

Genesis 18. 21. God says of Sodom, I will go down now, and see whether they
have done altogether according to the cry of it -- if not, I will know. What
need was there of this going down to see and know, when God knew what was
before* and what would be after? But only, to convince the Sodomites, by making
them see and know their own wickedness, in attempting that Sodomitical sin.

In the like sense also, even Nescience or Ignorance is transferred on the Son
of God, as Mark 13. 32. But of that day knows no Mat. 24 36
man, no not the Angels -- neither the Son, but the Father only. It were
blasphemy to say absolutely, that God the Son did not know it, who is the same
only God with the Father, and is also called by the great Prophet. The mighty
God, and The everlasting Father, (for every Person is the Father in respect of
Isai. 9. 6
all Creatures, although only the first Person is the Father of the Son). But
when it is said, Neither the Son; the meaning is, as St. Austin and other
Expositors with him, generally agree; Lib. 83 quaest. quaest, 60
Nescire filii est, cum non prodit hominibus, quod inutiliter scirent. -- And
De Genesis Cont. Manichae'os l. 1. c. 22
Quia discipulos nescientes reliquit: Because Christ would not reveal the day
of Judgment to his Disciples, therefore he is said not to know it. In this
sense only it is, that St. Hilary says, Hill. de Trin. lib. 9. Luke 13 27 Mat
7. 23
Habemus nescientem Deum; our God professes to some, I know you not. For
otherwise we say with Austin*, Aug. Psalm. 10 1 Cor. 1. 24
Domine quid ignorabas? Lord! how is it possible, that the Wisdom of God
should not know all things? so, that God the Son is said not to know that day,
only, because Men do not know it.

Isai. 1. 24. God is represented by this Prophet, as being disturbed of his
Rest, and Ease, and saying, Ah, I will ease me of mine adversaries. So the
Psalmist speaks, Psalm 2. 4. and 37. 13. The Lord shall have them in derision
-- The Lord shall laugh at him. So Romans 8. 26. The Spirit it self makes
intercession for us with groanings. And Ephesians. 4. 30. Greive not the holy
Spirit of God. And 1 These. 5. 19. Quench not the Spirit. These sayings must
needs be understood (...), as relating only to Man; for God cannot (In himself)
be eased: Nor can the holy Spirit make intercession, or be Mediator, nor groan,
nor be greived, nor quenched; nor does God deride or laugh Men to scorn: But
because holy Men, in whom the Spirit of God dwells, are disturbed, and
persecuted, and greived, and quenched, therefore Gods Spirit is said to be so;
The groanings of the Spirit are the doleful Ejaculations of holy Men. The
easing of God, is the removing of Adversaries, Oppressors, and Persecutors of
his People. Gods laughing, is the exposing of proud Tyrants to the scorn and
derision of them, over whom they have domineered; just as the hunger, and
thirst, and nakedness, and imprisonment, and persecution of the Members of
Christ, are said to be of Christ himself, Mat* 25. Acts 9.

So the Rest or Sabbath of the Godhead must be meant only of that everlasting
Sabbath, which God in Christ has ordained for his Servants. The Psalmist
says, The Lords Psalm. 147. 17
delight is in them that fear him. Now because no delights or pleasures can
possibly be added, or new, to the unspeakable blessedness of God, therefore
this delight must be understood of Men, That Man's delight in God, and his
well-being in a course of godliness leading to the everlasting delights, and
joys of Heaven, is here called God's delight; just so as man's Rest is called
the Rest of God.

For we may not think, that the Rest of God is confined, limited, or
circumscribed in the single person of Christ, for indeed Christ is not
otherwise the Rest of God, but only in consideration of us Men, and in regard,
that in Christ the Sabbath or Rest of Men is included; so that Christ cannot be
the Rest of the Godhead, but as he is looked on, and considered as a Jesus, or
Savior of Mankind, and in this respect only it was said, This is my beloved
Son, in whom I am well pleased. The Reader may observe, that it is not said,
With Whom, as if the complacencie or acquiescence of God were only with the
particular person of Christ; but it is said, In Whom, ((...)) To signify, that
in, by, and through him, God would be at peace, and well pleased with others,
even with all the Members of the most holy Jesus.

And indeed the whole Economy and design of the Godhead in preparing the
Messiah, was only in the behalf of Mankind; so the Prophet has taught us, Unto
us a Child is born, and unto us a Son is given. Here is both Isai. 9. 6
the Nativity and the Death of the Messiah given to us. Then he is called, The
Prince of Peace: This signifies, that he was to be the maker of Peace, or
Atonement, or Reconciliation of Man with God; He is called Messiah, or Christ,
(that is) anointed, fitted, and prepared for the great Work of Man's Redemption:
Then he is properly named Jesus, and this, in order to the benefit of Man; for
so the holy Angel said, Thou shall call his name Jesus, for he shall save his
People from their sins. Mat. 1. 21
And that it may appear that this Person Jesus is qualified and endowed with
sufficient power to effect that great and merciful purpose of the Godhead
toward Mankind; the same Prophet calls him, Wonderful, Counselor, The Mighty
God, The Everlasting Father. This, I trust, is enough to show the meaning of
Gods Rest.

Now to the second Querie above mentioned, 2. Querie Answered.
viz. Why God is said to Rest on the Seventh day, precisely, and not before.
Our Answer is

1. Because on the Seventh day, and not before, the Creation of Mankind was
completed: for on that day was the Woman taken and built out of the Man, and
not before, as is above showed.

2. God is not said to Rest, until he had actually begun the Work of Man's Rest;
which was not done, until the Man and the Woman were both of them finished:
for then, and not before, was the Savior of Mankind really and actually laid,
as the foundation of Man's Rest; in which Rest or Sabbath of Man, the Rest or
Sabbath of the Godhead consists, and in nothing else.

What God (in his Divine and Secret Counsel) had determined before all times to
be done; that did he now on this Seventh day begin; which was the building of
his Church; for now the first stone was laid, even Christ, who only is the
founda^ion, and the Rock, and the chief cornerstone thereof; The house built
upon a Rock, Matthew. 7. 24. signifies the Church; when Peter had said, Thou art
Mat. 16 16
Christ, the Son of the living God, Christ presently replied, Upon this Rock
will I build my Church. The Apostle tells us, Christ was 1 Cor. 10 4.
the spiritual Rock. And, Other foundation can no man lay, then that is laid,
which is Jesus 1 Cor. 3 11
Christ.

Now this foundation of Rest must needs be made known unto the Man, for
otherwise it could not be his Rest; and consequently it could not be the Rest
of God until Man did so know it, that he might rely, and trust, and set up his
Rest upon it; that is, upon Christ. Therefore the holy Scripture does by diverse
intimations signify, that this great Mystery was then revealed to Adam, for he
was illuminated with prophetical Wisdom. He knew (as well as Moses) that he was
made in the (...) of God, that is, in the same shape which God his Redeemer
would one day assume (as is before showed). He knew, the Woman was taken and
built out of him, on purpose to produce a Redeemer in that only way, which
might fitly serve for that Work, when no other way could; for upon the forming
of her, he said, This is bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh. This speech
does show, that the Man was not ignorant in the great Mystery of the Union of
Himself and the Woman, and their future progeny, with Christ also, in one
lump; which union was contrived by the Godhead, only in order and necessity to
the Redemption of Adam, and his offspring, and nothing else; And it is the
same, which by the great Apostle is applied to the mysterious union of Christ
and his Church. They two shall be one flesh -- This Ephesians. 5. 31 32
is a great Mystery, but I speak concerning Christ and his Church.

After the Fall of Man, it pleased the merciful Godhead to give a more open and
evident notice, by an express promise, of this Rest, than was before; when it
was said, The Seed of the Woman shall bruise the Serpents head; for after this,
the Man named the Woman Vita, i. e. Life, as is before showed; whereby he
declared his Faith, and expectation of a new and better life to come, by the
fruitfulness of the Woman, than that Life which he forfeited by his fall; as
may reasonably be thought.

All these intimations and overtures being but descriptions of the great
Savior to proceed from the Man and the Woman, in whom they might set up their
Rest (as surely they did). And God having now actually begun that great Work of
Redemption, and laid the foundation thereof in the Earth of ou^ first Parents,
and made it known unto them: Therefore he does now, and not before, call this
blessed Rest of Man, His own Best.

For the Church of God, which consists of Christ and his Members, united not
only in the nature of our first Parents, but also cemented by one and the same
Spirit of God, residing both in Christ the Head, and also in all holy Men, as
inferior Members under that Head: This Church, I say, is very often in
Scripture represented as a building, even from the beginning of the World, and
so continued in the Gospel. The Woman is said to be builded of the Rib
(aedificavit costam in Genesis 2. 22
Multierem). Rachel and Leah are said to build the house of Israel. The natural
Body of Ruth. 4 11
Christ is called a building by King Solomon, Wisdom has built her an house:
So is his mystical Body also; Ye are Gods building. Prove. 9. 1 1 Cor. 3. 9
And Acts 9. 31. The Churches had rest -- and were edified. The Word of God,
and preaching, and brotherly exhortation, are resembled to buildings; The Word
is able to Act. 20. 32
build you up. St. Paul calls preaching there, where Christ was named before,
building on another man's foundation; and Romans 15 20
exhorts the Thessalonians, to edify one another. 1 These. 5 11


The prime foundation of this building is Christ; upon Him the Prophets and
Apostles are laid as Super-structures, or second Foundations: Of Christ the
Prophet says, Behold Isa. 28. 16
I lay in Sion, for a foundation, a Stone, a tried Stone, a precious
Cornerstone, a sure foundation. And this is so applied to Christ, by St.
Peter, who also calls the Members of Christ, Lively stones, built up a
spiritual 1 Pet. 2 5, 6
house. And Sion is mentioned, because (as the same Prophet foretold) Out of
Sion shall Isai. 2. 3
go forth the Law, and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem: For so indeed, the
Law of Christ, and the preaching thereof, began there, as Christ appointed,
Luk^ 24. 7. And of Apostles and Prophets, and Christ; St. Paul tells the
Ephesians, That they are built upon Ephesians. 2. 20
the foundation of the Apostles, and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the
chief Cornerstone.

It has been an ancient Custom amongst Men, to express a joy and delight,
both at the laying of the foundation, and also at the raising, and dedication
of magnificent or holy Edifices. So did the Jews at the laying of the
foundation of the second Temple; praising the Lord, with Trumpets, and Cymbals,
and Ezra 3 10, 11
Songs. So they did before at the Dedication of Solomon's Temple, The Levites
a^ayed in 2 Chronicles. 5. 12, 13
white linen, singing, with Cymbals, Psalteries, and Harp^, and an hundred and
twenty Priests sounding with Trumpets, and saying, For his Mercy endures for
ever. This custom was also continued by the Christians, in their Encaenia, or
Dedication of their holy Edifices, as the Fathers and Church-Histories do very
often report.

The most noble, and most holy Edifice in the World, is the Church; Whereof God
himself is the Builder; The Materials of it are, the Son of God, together with
all his holy Members. Therefore when Christ (who is the first stone and
foundation of this Church) was first laid in the Earth, that is, in our first
Parents, just then it pleased the Divine Founder to express a joy and
complacencie therein, under the notion of Rest; as it is said, God Rested: And
in another place, Exodus 31. 39. He was refreshed. And this was done only to
signify the Love and Goodness of God to Man, for whom he had now actually
begun a certain Rest, Ease, and Refreshment, which the Godhead (for it self)
needed not.

Then again, at the Nativity of Christ, when this building was raised for that
gracious purpose of Man's Salvation, it pleased the Godhead to send a whole
Quire of Heavenly Levites to sing, Glory to God on high. And at the Dedication
thereof, at his Baptism, God the Father, by a voice from Heaven, declared Mat.
3. 17
his complacencie therein; so that the joy of Angels, and the Rest,
complacencie, or acquiescence of the Godhead, consisted only in Christ; and in
him, for none other reason or respect, but only because he brought Peace on
Earth to men of good will. This is enough, to the second Query.

The Conclusion of the Moral Sabbath.
THe sum of this Doctrine concerning the Rest or Sabbath of God, consists
in these two Propositions following: 1. The Rest of God is only in
consideration of Christ. 2. Christ is called the Rest of God, for none other
reason, but only because the merciful Godhead intended by him to procure and
effect the everlasting Sabbath and Rest of of Man.


This Doctrine concerning the Sabbath, which I have here delivered, is not New,
nor of mine own invention; I utterly disclaim all novellism, and that which is
now adays (but falsely) called new light, especially in so concerning and
weighty matters of Religion; for I have showed before, by many testimonies of
the Fathers, that this Doctrine is the same which by them was taught and
believed in the Ancient Church; and now again, for a close, I will sub join
only the Testimony of St. Austin, who surely was the most profound Theologue of
them all, who thus writes upon those words, Psalm. 132. 14. This is my Rest for
ever: Aug. in Psalm. 131
(Haec) verba Dei sunt Requies mea, ibi requiesco; Fratres, Quantum nos ana:
Deus, ut, quia nos requiestimus, se dicat requiescere: non enim, ille aliquando
turbatur, aut sic requiescit; sed ibi se dicit requiescere, quia nos in illo
requiem habebimus: i. e. These words of God (This is my Rest for ever) are my
Rest, therein do I rest. Brethren, so great is the Love of God to us, that,
because we rest (in Christ), God says that he rests; for God is not at all
disturbed, nor can so rest; yet he says, that he rests there, only because
there (in Christ) we shall have our Rest.

The same Father upon those words, God Rests, says, De Genesis cont. Man. lib.
1 c. 22. Tom. 1
Significat Requiem nostram post bona opera. And again, Epist. 119. c. 10
Significat se daturum nobis requiem aeterndm. And again, God rests: De Genesis
ad. lit. lib. 4. c. 9. To. 3
Quia nos quiescere facit. And again, upon the same words, Requievit Deus, De
Civit. lib. 11. cap. 8
Deus fit Requies eorum, qui in eo requiescunt per fidem. That is, When God is
said to rest, it signifies only our Rest after our labor. And -- That he will
give us everlasting Rest. And -- because he makes us to Rest. And because --
He is the Rest of all them that repose their trust in him. Thus does this
learned Father most judiciously and truly expound this Sabbath, or Rest of God.

This Doctrine, which declares the Lord Jesus to be the true and substantial
Sabbath, which is intended in the fourth Commandment (because he only is the
Rest, both of the Godhead, and also the only perfect and solid Rest of us Men)
if it be again readmitted into the present Church, as it was received and
believed by the Fathers, and the Church Primitive (as is before showed) it will
quit us from many doubts, waverings, and quarrels, and will quench those
Pen-Polemicks about Sabbatism, which have of late disturbed the minds of many
good Christians; For by this Exposition we shall easily discern that
Sabbath-Law to be still in force as much, or rather more, than any, or all the
other Nine; And so we shall have still Ten Commandments, and not only Nine (as
some have objected); And that this Law is truly a Law Moral, and Natural, and
written in our hearts. For I beseech the Reader to consider, what precept can
possibly be imagined to be more naturally imprinted in man's heart, than to
sanctify, and reverence him, who is our ^ll: Of him the Psalmist says, Whom
Psa. 37. 25
have I in heaven but Thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire besides
Thee. He is our God, our Creator, Preserver, and Maintainer, from whom we have
our very being, our life, and motion; And more than all this, our Lord Jesus,
the Lord of the Sabbath, or the Lord Sabbath is He, that has redeemed us from
everlasting perdition; and more also, He only has prepared for us, and
tendered to us (if we will accept his offer) the everlasting and unspeakable
Sabbath, Rest, and joys of Heaven. This is that Sabbath, which himself
included in those general words, representing the sum of the first Table of
the Law, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all Lu. 10. 27
thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy
mind. This multiplicity of words argues a weighty and most concerning Charge.

In this Faith I conclude, and thus confidently pro^ess, That the Lord Jesus
Christ is my only Sabbath: In his Bosom do I repose my self: All my hope and
expectation of everlasting Rest is treasured up in him only: And I trust, I
shall with faith and comfort on my deathbed* say with the holy Psalmist, I
will lay me down in peace, and take my rest, for Psalm. 4. 6
it is thou, Lord, only that make me dwell in safety.

Thus having, as I trust, retrived the most true and most ancient Sabbath, I
now close up this discourse with our Church-prayer, both in behalf of my self,
and others; Lord -- Incline our hearts to keep this Law: Amen, Amen.

Thus much concerning the Sabbath Moral: Next, of the Sabbath Ceremonial.

Macrobius Saturnaliorum lib. 6. cap. 9.

Quia seculum nostrum ab -- omni Bibliotheca vetere descivit: Multa ignoramus,
quae non laterent, si Veterum lectio nobis esset familiaris.

A Discourse of the Jewish Hebdomarie, or Ceremonial Sabbath: wherein is
contained an Exposition of the Later and Ceremonial Part of the 4th
Commandment.

CHAP. XVII.
An Exposition of the Ceremonial Part of the 4th Commandment begun. That the 6
days labor is not a Precept, but only a Permission. That the 7th day is
called a Sabbath, only because it is a figure of the true Sabbath. That the
7th day Sabbath was not changed by Christ to the 8th day, but utterly
dissolved. That it was never instituted till the days of Moses. St. Jerome 's
Translation and our English, compared. The Jewish Sabbath, and Christian
Festivalls compared. Of Works on the Jewish Sabbath. That Corporal Rest was
but the figure of our Rest in Christ.

HAving thus far proceeded in the search of the Sabbath Moral, which is
commanded in the fourth Precept of the Moral Law of God, in these words,
Remember the Sabbath day to sanctify it.] In the next place, we are to
consider the other words of that Law, which we have declared to be merely
Typical, Ceremonial, and Temporal, and obliging the Jews only, and not
other Nations; and to be now antiquated, ever since the manifestation of the
Son of God in the flesh. Which ceremonial part takes up all the words of this
Law, except only those few above mentioned; the several branches whereof we
will now endeavor to expound, as they are in order laid down.

Six days shall thou labor, and do all thy work. 1. These words are no
Command, so as to require our labor, all the other six days; but they are
only a Permission, by which the Jews were invited to a diligent and cheerful
celebration of their Sabbath, in regard God had given them six days for their
own occasions, and reserved but one in the seven to himself, when he might have
left them but one in the seven; which yet was not for any need that God had of
it, but only for the benefit of his people; just as be permitted all the Trees
of Paradise to Adam, except only one. Thus far Calvin and other Divines
generally agree.

2. For if these words were a Command to work all the other six days, they
would contradict other Laws, whereby the Jews were commanded to Rest; as at the
Feast of the Passover* (...). 12. 16. and at Pentecost, Levit. 23. 21. and at
the Atonement, Levit. 23. 28. at the Feast of Trumpets, Levit. 23. 25. and at
the feast of Tabernacles, Levit. 23. 35. These Feasts did all depend upon the
Moon, and therefore might, and did fall on any, and every one of the other six
days respectively.

3. If this Law were Moral, how could we Christians lawfully abstain from
working on our Sundays, and Fasting-daies, and days of Thanksgiving, and
other Festivalls, commanded by lawful Authority? It follows,

But the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God.] These words (as I
conceive) are not rightly rendered by our English Translators: of which we will
enquire anon, and for present take them as they are presented.

In what sense the seventh day is here said to be the Sabbath of the Lord our
God, we have showed before; namely, That it is therefore called the Sabbath,
because it was appointed to be a ceremony and figure, to represent to the
Israelites the true and real Sabbath, or Rest in the Messiah. So that it is
called a Sabbath, just as we call Pictures by the names of those things which
they represent; as the Painter in Aelian wrote over his pictures, (...) lib. 10
c. 10
This is an Ox, this is an Horse, this is a Tree] So in Scripture, the Ark is
often called JEHOVA, as Catech. part 2. p. 45.
Beza observes; the Altar is also so called, Exodus 17. 15. and the Dove is
called the Spirit, Joh, 1. 33. the seven Kin^ are seven years, Genesis 41. and the
Rock i^ Christ, 1 Cor. 10. 4. For if the seventh day were the only Sabbath
intended in this Commandment, we Christians should at this day be bound to keep
it, as much as the Jews were.

That Christ, or the Apostles, changed the seventh day to the eighth, or
Saturday to Sunday, is often too boldly affirmed by our Sabbatarian Writers,
and too tamely swallowed by their followers; which, as yet, they never have, or
ever can solidly prove.

But to say that Christ utterly dissolved the Ceremonial, or seventh-day
Sabbath, and yet left the true Sabbath unaltered to us, (which is our firm Rest
in himself); and that the Church first, then Christian Magistrates also,
assumed another day, even our Sunday, instead of the Jewish seventh day, for
their holy Assemblies, is true, and easily proved; although they never called
this Sunday a Sabbath. Nor can the Jewish seventh day possibly be that Moral
Sabbath which is meant, and intended in this fourth Commandment, because it is
here said, The seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God.]

For we are well assured, that the seventh day is not so to be accounted the
Rest of God, as if God ceased from his operation on every, or, on any one
seventh day; but his Rest was only in consideration of the Savior of Mankind,
because on the first seventh day of the world, he formed the Woman, (as is
before showed) and even then, on that seventh day, and ever since upon every
seventh day, he has been operative in governing the world, and cooperating
with every creature therein, without any intermission at all. But he is said to
rest on that seventh day, because then our first parents were completely and
fully finished, and in them was laid the foundation of the future Church, (that
is) Christ; who, together with his holy Members, was to be propagated jointly
from the Man and the Woman. So that Christ only was, and is, the Sabbath, or
Rest, of God and men.

Upon this reason it was, that the seventh day was long after sanctified, or
set apart, for a day of bodily rest, that thereby it might be a type, figure,
and ceremonial remembrance, or commemoration of Christ, the great and
mysterious Sabbath.

Therefore the Seventh day, and the Sabbath day, are two distinct and several
things, and differ as much as the shadow and the body, or as Christ and the
Lamb, that is, as much as Type and Antitype: For, as the Lamb literally was
not Christ, but his figure; so the seventh day, literally considered, was not
the Sabbath here meant; but, typically, the shadow or representation thereof.
Just so the Apostle says of this Seventh-day Sabbath, and of other such like
ceremonies, that they are a shadow of things to come, but the body is Col. 2.
17.
Christ.]

The Reader may further observe, that it is not here said, The seventh day was
the Sabbath,] but Is, in the present tense; and this, because God never
declared, that the seventh day should be observed, until the days of Moses,
although the Godhead did ever, from the first seventh day, acquiesce in Christ:
and not only upon the seventh day, but every day, and every minute, and so
will do to eternity, when no distinction of days shall be any more, but one
everlasting day. Therefore they are mistaken, that think the seventh day to
have been appointed to be observed, on the first seventh day of the world, as a
Sabbath; for in all the Histories of the Patriarks, before the Flood, and also
after the Flood, in the Mosaicall History of Noah, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
the Reader will never find the word, Sabbath, so much as once mentioned, until
Moses wrote the History of his own time, which was about 24 hundred years after
the creation of the world.

We observe also, that in St. Jerome, (according to the Original) and generally
in all the Latin Writers, Calvin and all, these words are otherwise read than
our English Translation has rendered them; for we read them thus, The seventh
day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God;] but they, Septimo die, Sabbatum Domini
Dei tui est.] i. e. On the seventh day the Sabbath of the Lord thy God is.]

By these words it may appear, that the seventh day was not the true and real
Sabbath here meant, but that the celebration and memorial of the Moral
Sabbath was to be performed on the seventh day: so that the Sabbath and the
seventh day are two distinct things, and differ as much as substance and
shadow. For, the Rest of God in Christ, is the true Sabbath both of God and
men; and the corporal rest of men was no more, but only the memorial and
celebration thereof.

Just so the Fathers spoke concerning the great Christian Festival of the
Nativity of Christ, on the 8th of the Kalends of January, or 25th. of December;
Cyp. n. 99
Adest Christi Nativitas. And, Orig. n. 46. and Hieron. n. 41.
Hodie verus Sol mundo ortus est. And, Chrysostom. n. 61.
Deus hodie factus est homo. And, Aug. de Temp. Ser. 16.
Hodie natus. est Christus.] i. e. Now is the Nativity of Christ come -- This
day the true Sun is risen -- This day was God made Man -- To day was Christ
born.] In all which passages, every one knows, that these Fathers meant not,
that Christ was really born on that very particular day, wherein they spoke or
wrote these words; but only, that the celebration of his Nativity was
performed on that day. So it is here, the seventh day was not the true, real,
and moral Sabbath, but only the day appointed for the memorial and
celebration of that Sabbath. for the true Sabbath was the rest of God and men
in Christ; and the seventh day was the time appointed for the celebration
thereof. Nazianzen says of Christian Festivalls, Naz. O. rat. 39.
Festi celebratio est memoria Dei: i. e. Christian Festivals are but memorials
of God. So God himself said of the Sabbath-Feast, Verily my Sabbath ye shall
keep, for it is a sign between me and you -- that ye may know that I am the
Lord (JEHOVA) that does sanctify you.

In it thou shall not do any work. First, this branch, doubtless, belongs
only to the Ceremonial, Jewish, or seventh-day Sabbath, but not at all to the
true substantial Sabbath; and therefore it does not, in the least, concern us
Christians, by virtue of this Law, because the seventh day, or Saturday-Sabbath
is antiquated and quite gone.

2. If this branch did belong to the Moral Sabbath, or, if the sanctifying of
the seventh day were the only Sabbath, meant in this Commandment, surely it
would be a great sin to do any of the prohibited works on that day, in any case
of necessity or inconvenience; because the Moral Law of God is indispensable,
and so may not be transgressed upon any pretense whatsoever, as is before
showed.

3. If this branch were Moral, it must needs be in force at this day, and
then, No fire must be kindled, Exodus 35. 3. No sticks gathered, Numb. 15. 32.
Nor Manna, Exodus 16. 26. No burden carried, Neh. 13. 19. Jer. 17. 21. No
journeying, or going out of our place, Exodus 16. 29. No harvest-work, Exodus 34.
21. In a word, we might not feed our Cattle, or milk our Kine, or draw a Beast
out of a pit, nor perform the works of Surgery, of Midwifery, or quench a
burning house.

But if we can show, that such works were done on the seventh day; and also,
that they are sufficiently warranted to be inoffensive to God, then, I trust,
the Reader will perceive, that this prohibition of works does not at all belong
to the keeping of the true, moral, and everlasting Sabbath, but only to the
Jewish sanctifying of their ceremonial and temporal Sabbath. And therefore
this Law was dispensable, in case of necessity, or of charitable convenience,
as may thus appear.

1. The Israelites performed the works of Journeying and War, in their marching
about ^ericho seven days together, (one of them must be the Sabbath day.) This
was done by God's express command, in the Old Testament. And in the New
Testament, there is also express mention of a Sabbath day's journey. Act. 1.
12.


2. The Priests in the Temple carried fuel, and kindled fires, offered
Sacrifices, and baked bread; and so (as Christ said) they profaned Mat. 12. 5.
the Sabbath; that is, the seventh day, or ceremonial Sabbath, and yet were
blameless.] And this, because there was a necessity laid on them, even the
commandment of God; who yet, would not have so commanded against his own moral
Law.

3. As for carrying burdens, we know, Christ commanded the impotent man to take
Joh. 5. 8.
take up his bed. And for Cures, himself performed many on the Sabbath day, on
set purpose to undeceive the Jews* in their Sabbaticall and Pharisaicall
superstitions: And also excused his own Disciples for gathering corn on the
Sabbath.

4, As for the works of mercy and charity toward our brethren, and even to our
poor cattle, how many general precepts have we? A righteous man regards the
life of his Prove. 12. 10. Mat. 12. 11
beast.] It is Christ's own orgument, If a sheep may be lifted out of a pit on
the Sabbath day, much more may a man in danger be helped. This he grounded on
the Word of God, by his Prophet, Hos. 67. I will have mercy and not sacrifice:]
That is, God will rather dispense with his own due for a while, then thereby
retard the works of mercy and compassion. The Psalmist says, O Lord, thou
preservest ^sal. 36. 6.
man and beast.

Thus, As Moses cast the two Tables of the Law out of his hands, and brake
them, and yet Exodus 32. 19.
thereby brake not the Law of God; so may the people of God keep and sanctify
the true substantial Sabbath, though with the breach, or (as Christ said)
profanation of the seventh day, or ceremonial Sabbath.

If it be here demanded, why God so strictly required a cessation from work,
and a corporeal Rest on the seventh day, seeing he did not expect so exact an
obedience thereunto? To this we answer; That, as the seventh day was but the
type of the true Sabbath, which is Christ; so the corporal rest therein, was
but the figure or sign of our spiritual and eternal rest in Him. Therefore,
as the Ceremonial, or seventh-day Sabbath, in some cases, might be
transgressed, yet without any breach or neglect of the true Sabbath, (which is
Christ) so our corporal rest might be disturbed many ways in this life, by
labors, sorrows, sufferings, and persecutions, yet without any disturbance of
our spiritual rest, comfort, settlement, joy, and peace, in the God of all
consolation; for so Christ has said, These things have I said unto you, that
in me ye might have peace, in the world ye shall Joh. 16. 33
have tribulation.] For the tribulations of the world do not extinguish or null
the peace of God in his servants. So he says again, concerning the agonies of
this present life, Come unto me all ye that labor Mat. 11. 28
and are heavy laden -- Take my yoke -- and ye shall find rest unto your
souls.] By which it appears, that the spiritual Rest, or Sabbath in Christ,
possibly, may consist with labors, burdens, heaviness, and even with bearing
the cross of Christ.

There is moreover a further reach and reason, why God imposed this
inconvenient, and almost impossible cessation, on the Seventh-day Sabbath,
which we will declare hereafter in its due place.

CHAP. XVIII.
The Exposition continued. Why the Woman is not here mentioned. That sons or
servants sinned not, by working upon command. The miseries of servants. Why
cattle might not be wrought on Sabbath-daies. That strangers were not obliged
to Sabbatize, except they resided within the Jewish Pale. Why cattle are
mentioned before strangers. Why servants, cattle, and strangers, are not
mentioned at the beginning of this Law, with the Memento. That, by these
Circumstanstances, the Seventh-day Sabbath is proved to be merely Ceremonial
and Judaical.

Thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter. THey that ask, why the wife was not here
named; may as well ask, why the man or husband was not; for neither are
particularly mentioned, because both are alike obliged, and both included in
this word, Thou. A woman may have a son, and daughter, and servant^, and
cattle, and a stranger within her ga^es, (especially in her widowhood) as well
as a man. But if they be joined in matrimony, then no need of particular
mention of either, because both are one. The woman was included in the man at
the creation of both Male and female created he them. And both the Old and the
New Testament account them as one, They Genesis 2. 24 Ephesians 5. 31.
shall be one flesh*] In Grammar, there is, Hic and haec homo; and in Theology,
the wife is esteemed as haec vir, or, as St. Jerome translates the original
word, Virago; and Lyranus yet nearer, calls the woman, Vir^. Both are invested
with superiority over their children and servants, and both interested in the
fruition of their goods. At Heathen marrriages, the woman said, Plut. Quaest.
Rom
Ubi tu C^ius, ego Caia. And at our Christian matrimony, the man says, With
all my worldly goods I thee endow.]

Nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy manservant, etc.] This is added, because
otherwise the Jews might have thought it no transgression in themselves, to
have caused their children or servants to work, if the parents or masters
wrought not. But by these words, the contrary will appear, that if their
children or servants were by them compelled to work on their Sabbath day, the
sin was not to be imputed to the son or servant, but to the parents or masters
that so commanded: For, if it had been sin, or a transgression of this Law, in
sons or servants to work, upon command and compulsion; then it must follow,
that cattle also, even the Ox and the Ass, must have been under the obligation
of this Commandment, and they also must have sinned, (as Against Mr. N. Byfield.
Mr. Brerewood has observed) which to affirm is most ridiculous. But if the
Jewish sons, or servants, or subjects, had wrought on their Sabbath at their
own choice, without command, or compulsion of their Rulers; then the
transgression, or Sabbath-breach, must have been their own, and the punishment
thereof inflicted on themselves only, and not otherwise.

Thy manservant, nor thy maidservant. The condition of servants was
lamentable, their masters power over them was great, and so was their cruelty.
God therefore provided some ease for them; otherwise, the unmercifull and
covetous Jews would have afforded no rest to them at all. Neither did the
Judaicall Laws of the Jews, wholly provide against the cruelty of masters; for
if a Jew, by cruel Ex. 21. 20.
stripes, had killed his servant, the master was not punishable by the Law
Judaicall, if the abused servant continued alive a day or two after; nor,
except he died under his hand: Although (no doubt) the master sinned against
the moral Law, Thou shall not kiil,] and was therefore answerable to God for
murder.

But their condition under the Gentiles was far worse, who had legal power of
life and death over them. They were not only bought and sold like cattle, but
also esteemed as vile, or worse than their beasts. One makes it a question,
Tul. Offic. l. 3.
Utrum equi a^ servi jactura eligenda? Another says, A^g. Ps. 143.
Carius equum, quam servum emunt?] and another, Ambros. n Ser. 41. To. 5.
Quidam canum magis quam servorum curam habent,] Their labors were such as
cattle are used for; they called them, Laert. in Diogen.
(...), as if they were nothing but feet. They ground in the Mill, and carried
their Masters in Litters great journeys, as horses now do. And when they were
old, and past work, they were cast out of doors to perish by famine; which was
the practice of their wise Cato the Elder, as in Cato Major.
Plutarch says. Besides, great were the cruelties and tortures inflicted on
poor servants, for light or no causes: Juvenal Sat. 6.
Pone crucem servo -- Nil fecerit, esto. Hoc volo, sic jubeo -- Seneca says of
them, Sen. Epist. 47.
Tussis, sternutamentum, magno malo luitur. One Vedius Pollio, a Roman, Dion.
in Aug. c. 15.
commanded one of his servants to be cast into his pond of Lampries, only for
breaking a drinking-glasse. And when Pedanius, a Roman, was secretly slain in
his own house, the murderers being not known, 400 of his houshold-servants were
all put to death, as Tacit. Annal. lib. 14.
Tacitus reports. But most barbarously cruel was that fact of Parrhasi^s, a
Painter, which is related by Sen. lib. 5. cont. 35.
Seneca, (either as a true History, or, at least, as a case in Law, which then
was casus dab^lis) who to^tured his captive-servants in flames to death, that
so he might have a pattern to paint Prometheus by. Nor was this all, but for an
aggravation of their miseries, they were so far from being pitied, that Poets
and Players made them a common argument of public mirth and derision, in open
Theaters, wherein they were described as Plautus.
catenarum coloni, ulmorum Acharuns, verberea statua, Gymnasium flagri,
Plagipatidae, Plagigeruli, Sexcentoplagi, etc. And sometimes were forced to a
part in some Tragedy of Phaeton, or Hercules burning, or of one crucified; and
in stead of dying in jest, they were in earnest really put to death, as
appears by the Spectacula of Mart. Spect. Ep. 7
Martial. And this was done to please the people.

Thus were the Jews and Heathen-G^ntiles cruel, but God was, and is,
merciful; and therefore in consideration of the hard-heartednesse, and power
of masters over their servants, whereby they might by tortures compel them to
work on forbidden days, he has by this Law, in such cases, laid the
transgression, and consequently the punishment thereof, not on the compelled
servant, but on the masters own head. And there is no doubt, but the equity of
this ceremonial Law of the Jews, does also reach the Christians and Gentiles.
All men are but servants, and fellow servants under one Master, who, in his
Gospel, has thus threatened, That servant which shall smite his
fellow servants -- shall be cut in sunder, and shall have his portion with Mat.
24. 49.
hypocrites.

Nor thy Cattle. The merciful Godhead, by his Law, takes care even for poor
cattle, more then the Heathen Laws did for mankind, as Philo de Charitate
Mosis. p. 710
Philo observes; in imitation whereof, the Jews had a Tradition, belike from
some of their holy Ancestors, concerning mercy to be showed to dumb creatures
in distress, as Eusebius reports in these words, Eusebius. de Praep. l. 8. cap. 2.
Nuilius animalis preces, cum ad te lamentanti simile refugiat contemnas. The
meaning was, that if a poor beast or bird, pursued by ravenous beasts or birds,
or birds of prey, shall fly to a man for safeguard, he should protect it from
the pursuer. This provision for cattle is annexed to this Sabbath-Law for two
reasons.

1. Because the Jewish-Sabbath was a type or figure of Rest, not only of
mankind after the end of this world, but also of the rest and freedom, of other
worldly and domestic creatures, which are now subservient to man, and toiled
with labors; as the Ox, and Ass, the Horse, and Mule, and Camel, etc. A
merciful man cannot choose, but many times to pity and commiserate the
excessive labors, and daily slaughterings of the creatures; of which, the
Apostle says, that one day, They shall be delivered from the bondage -- under
Romans 8. 21
which the whole creation groaneth.

2. Because the working of domestic cattle, must needs require the assistance
and cooperation of man. Therefore it is here forbidden.

Nor the stranger that is within thy gates. By this Law, other Nations are not
restrained from working on the Jewish Sabbath, which did not at all concern
them: Only if aliens, or forrainers, did sojourn within the Jewish-gates, that
is, within the jurisdiction, either Domestic, or Politic, of the Jews; then
the Jews are required to cause them to forbear working on their Jewish Sabbath
day. So that this restraint of aliens or strangers, was confined to be only
within the Jewish limits and territories; for, strangers or aliens abiding in
other places, out of the Jewish pale were at liberty to work and for so doing,
the Jews are not, by this Law, required, to forbid or hinder them.

That sons, servants, and even cattle, are here placed before strangers, the
reason is, 1, Because they are the Jews own peculiars, of nearer relation, and
more subject to their commands, than strangers are. 2. To intimate, that the
Jews should first practice and obey the Law in their own persons, and families;
for otherwise it would seem vanity, pride, or hypocrisy, to require obedience
or compliance from others. There is a woe to such as lade other men with
burdens, which themselves will Luke 11. 46.
not touch with one of their fingers; which may concern those, which lay the
restraint of Jewish Sabbatizing on others, under the penalties of pecuniary
mulcts, or the Stocks, or Sequestration; which yet themselves slight, by
marching, traveling, fighting, and killing on the same day.

Certain Observations, arising from this Exposition. By what has been said, it
may evidently appear to a diligent Reader, that this seventh-day Sabbath was
merely Ceremonial, and concerned only the Jews, or Israeliticall people, and
not other Nations, as may be collected from the premises, for these reasons
following:

1. Because the transgression or violation of this Sabbath-Law, by sons or
servants, by command or compulsion of their Rulers, is here declared to be the
sin of the commander only, and not of the son or servant; which could not be,
if this Law were Moral.

2. If this seventh-day Sabbath-keeping were a Law Moral; then it must follow,
that whosoever transgressed therein, whether by his own will and election, or
by command, or fear, or compulsion, greatly sinned. Otherwise, the Christian
Martyrs might have been as well excused, if they had worshipped the
Heathen-Idolls, when they were commanded by their lawful Princes, and,
moreover, terrified by excessive torments and death. But they knew, that
Idolatry was forbidden by a Law Moral, and therefore refused to obey. But this
seventh-day Sabbatizing is not commanded by a Moral, but only by a Law
Ceremonial.

3. These words, [Thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, thy manservant, etc.]
are not said of any other of these moral Laws; Not, of having other gods, nor
of Idols, nor Perjury, nor dishonouring Parents, nor Murder, nor Aduliery, nor
Theft, etc. Because sons, daughters, and servants, transgressing any of these
truly Moral Laws, though by any command or terror of their Governors, yet
the sin must be their own. But if sons or servants did work on this Ceremonial
Sabbath, by command and compulsion, the sin was in the commander, and not in
the obeyer. Therefore this must needs be a Ceremonial Precept, and not Moral;
and it is imposed on Parents, Masters, and Governors, because the fault is not
in the servants obedience to his Master, but in the Masters disobedience to
God. The Apostle says, Children, obey your Parents; but Ephesians. 6. 1. Col. 3. 18.
20. 22.
he adds, in the Lord. And again, Wives, submit your selves to your own
husbands; he adds, as it is fit in the Lord. And, Children, obey your parents
in all things -- Servants, obey in all things your masters; he adds, Fearing
God. So that if their commands be of things indifferent only, or, though
against some Laws of God, which are but merely ceremonial, (as working on the
Jewish Sabbath was) then servants must obey actively; but if their commands be
against the Moral Law of God, the servant must in no wise perform his master's
command, nor obey him therein; otherwise than passively, by bearing his
punishment patiently. In this case, we have Christ's own direction concerning
parents, He that loves father or mother more Mat. 10. 37. Luke 14. 26.
than me is not worthy of me. And, If any man come to me, and hate not his
father and mother -- yea, and his own life also, he cannot be my disciple. For,
although it is not lawful in any case to hate the persons of our parents,
(otherwise than we must hate or slight our own lives or souls) yet, in
obedience to God, we may, and must, hate and detest their pernicious commands.

4. If this seventh-day Sabbath had been in force from the first seventh day of
the world, as some have too hotly and unadvisedly affirmed) and if the
Israelites, in their Egyptian bondage, had been thereby obliged to Sabbatize,
(as they must have been, if it had been a Moral Law) they must have obeyed God
rather than men, notwithstanding the Egyptian rigor toward them. But surely,
they had never heard of such Sabbatizing, until they were delivered out of
Egypt. For when they petitioned Pharaoh, by Moses, to have leave to go into
the desert three days journey to sacrifice, Exodus 5. 3.
it seemed but a pretense for idleness; and much more would their weekly
Sabbatizing have been accounted by him, who never had heard of any such thing.
For surely, neither Jacob nor Joseph, nor any of those other Patriarks,
Sabbatized, while they continued in Egypt, which they might have done at their
first coming, and also during the great authority of Joseph; and also would,
if any such moral Law had been imposed on them. Therefore, if they had
neglected their Exodus 5. 4.
Bricks, upon an allegation of Sabbatizing; not only the inferior Israelites,
but even Moses himself, and Aaron also, had been relegated; as one says:
Plaut. in Asin.


Apud Fustitudinas, Ferri-crepinas insulas.
Ubi v. vos homines, mortu^ incursant boves.
But in the Babylonish Captivity, when this seventh day-Sabbath was actually in
force; although (no doubt) the captive Jews were commanded and forced, and
therefore did work on this seventh day; yet they did not offend God thereby,
because that Law was but ceremonial, and so must give place to necessity, and
to the great inconvenience of force and stripes.

In that book entitled, Quaestiones Vet. and Novi Testamenti, which goes under
the name of St. Austin; The Author very judiciously thus writes, Aug. part 2.
quaest. 23. To. 4.
Quod semper non licet, non habet excusationem; Sabbatum non observare, quand
que excusationem habet, sed Adulterium, etc. nunquam. i. e. That which to do is
always unlawful, cannot be excused from sin upon any color whatsoever; but
the breaking of the Jewish Sabbath Day, in some cases is excusable, whereas,
the transgression of the Moral Laws of God, as by Idolatry, Perjury, Murder,
Adultery, etc. is not at all to be excused, in any case. Thus this Writer
evidently shows, that the Jewish Seventh-day Sabbath was none of the Moral
Laws of God.

5. Finally, Let it be considered, that these words, [Thou, thy Son, Servant,
Cattle, and Stranger] are not placed at the beginning of this fourth
Commandment, as (Remember) is; nor mentioned until the Moral part of this Law
was described, and finished: But they are with great wisdom warily reserved,
to be put into the Ceremonial part thereof; because they do not belong to the
Moral Sabbath, which commands the keeping holy, or the sanctifying of the
Messiah; for Cattle cannot sanctify this Moral Sabbath. Nor was there any need
of requiring Parents, or Masters, to cause their Sons or Servants so to do,
because the Son and Servant were by themselves bound to it; and if they did
not, the sin was in themselves, and not in the Parent or Master. For the Moral
Sabbath (which is Christ the Messiah) might be kept holy, or sanctified, by
Servants, even in the midst of their sorest labors. As our Christian Martyrs
did keep this Sabbath, even in the time when they labored in the Mettal-mines,
and also, in the midst of flames and other agonies. Whereas the Ceremonial, or
Seventh-day Sabbath, is here appointed to be kept by resting from ordinary
works, without any mention of any other kind of sanctification; which not only
Servants, and the most ignorant Idiots, but Cattle also, might keep: For so the
Heathen Romans had a Festival, which they called, Ovid. Fast. l. 2.
Festum Stultorum. And at Syracusa in Sicilie there was a Festival called,
Plut. in Nicia.
Dies Asinarius. And among the Greeks Ovid. Fast. l. 2.
Feast, which they called, Athaeneus l. 3.
Porcalia ((...)). And another they called, (...): i* e. The Feasts of Fools,
Asses, Swine, and Dogs. So indeed the Jewish Seventh-day Rest, or Sabbath, was
not only for Masters and Servants, but also for Cattle, as requiring only
bodily Rest; which therefore Bishop Andrews doubted not to call, B. Andr. Cat.
on the 4th Com.
Sabbatum Boum, and Asinorum. In a word, the Ceremonial Sabbath belonged, not
only to Men, but to Cattle also, who had their interest therein: Therefore
those words [Servants and Cattel] are jointly placed in the ceremonial part of
this Commandment, and not in the moral part thereof with the Memento.

But the true Moral and Mysterious Sabbath (which is Christ) belongs only to
Mankind; which the great Prophet does therefore thus describe; Isa. 58. 13.
Si vocaveris Sabbatum, Delicatum; and Sanctum Domini gloriosum; and
glorificaveris eum: i. e. If thou call the Sabbath a Delight; the holy of the
Lord, Honorable; and shall honor him. Here the Sabbath is described as a
Person, and not as only a day (as is before observed): And these Titles, of
Delight, and Holy of the Lord, and Honorable, belong only to Christ, who is
indeed the only true, real, and substantial Sabbath both of God and Man.

The Stranger, or Gentile, includes all other Nations besides the Jews, even
us Christians also; and so the Jews at this day account us, but as Gentiles,
and Strangers; although the wall of partition between them and us is broken
Ephesians. 2. 14.
down. But we Gentiles do at this day keep the true Moral Sabbath (which is
Christ) so do not the Jews. And the Jews keep the Saturday, shadowie, and
ceremonial-Sabbath (unseasonably, now when it is out of date); but so do not we
Christians, except there be any left among us that judaize.

CHAP. XIX.
The Exposition continued. How God is said to have made all in six days, and
yet that he ended his Work on the Seventh day. Why the Creation was prolonged
six days. The order of Creatures, first Heaven, then Earth. When the Heaven of
Angels was made, and that it was intended principally for Mankind. Why Heaven
and Earth are mentioned together. Why the making of Hell is not mentioned,
though it was prepared within the first six days. Why the Creation is
mentioned in this fourth Commandment, and not in any of the other Nine. That
the Moral Sabbath does signify the Creator, which is God the Son, who is
called, The Beginning, the Word, and the Wisdom of God; and is therefore
commanded to be sanctified.

For in six days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, the Sea, and all that in in
them is, and rested the Seven^h day.

IT is here said, That the World was made in six days: and before, Genesis 2. 1.
that the Heavens and Earth were finished, and all the host of them. And yet it
follows immediately, That on the seventh ^^y God ended his work which he had
made. How both these Propositions are true we have showed before, namely, That
although the Woman was not extracted, and separated, nor builded, or formed out
of the Man until the seventh day, yet it is truly said, that the Creation was
finished in six days, because the Woman was included in the Man Materially,
Substantially, and Originally, although as yet Informiter, as the Gloss says,
that is, not formed, fashioned, or completed, which work was respited until
the seventh day; and thereupon it is said, that on it he ended his Work, and
not before.

In six days.] Although God could have made the World in one minute, yet he
prolonged the work for six days, whereof St. Austin and other Writers attempt
to render some account; as 1. To intimate, that after the toylings and labors
of the six days, or Ages of this World, his Servants should have rest with
Him. 2. To teach us that we should not expect, that God will do all that he can
do for us, on a sudden, either in conferring Mercies temporal, or Graces
spiritual; but orderly, and by degrees, (as calling, justifying, glorifying)
and in his good time. The promised Seed of Abraham was not born till the old
age of his Parents; nor the Egyptian deliverance performed, nor the Land of
Canaan possessed, till four hundred years after the Promise.

Heaven and Earth. The order of these Creatures is observable; First Heaven,
then Earth. The blessing of Jacob was, The dew of heaven, and the fatness of
the earth: But Esau's was, The fatness of earth, and the dew of heaven; A true
Character of Worldlings, and Epicures, who prefer earthly things before
heavenly; as one in the Claud. de Rapt. Pros. lib. 1.
Poet says,

-- Salve gratissima tellus Quam nos praetulimus coelo -- So the Epicure in
Nazianzen professed, Da mih^ praesens; i. e. give me my portion in this World
-- (...), Let God reserve the future to himself. Which is but the same that
some among us profess, even by their own words; and others far more wickedly
practice by bloody deeds, prosecuting earthly profits, pleasures, and honors,
with the manifest neglect and disclaiming of heaven, and trafficking for hell,
as Witches do; and all this at a much lower rate than Satan offered Mat. 4 8.
to Christ.

Heaven. Genesis 1. 1. It is said, In the beginning God created the heaven and the
earth. The Heaven there meant, I take to be that which St. Paul calls, The third
Heaven, (which to us is invisible); 2 Cor. 12. 2.
that it might be the Paradise, or habitation of Angels, as both Aug. de Civit.
lib. 11.
Austin, and other Divines have thought: because, as God ordained the earthly
Paradise for Man, at, or before his creation; so he prepared the Paradise of
Heaven at, or before, their creation; and this, because it is said, Genesis 2. 1.
The Heavens and the Earth were fini^hed, and all the host of them: The word
Heaven, alone, implies the creation of Angels, as Austin says in the place
before cited; or, if not, these words, all the host of heaven, will include
them. And here it is said, The Lord made heaven and earth -- and all that
therein is: By which words, we conceive, that not only the house of Heaven, but
also the Inhabitants thereof, were finished.

So the Heaven, which is said to have been created in the beginning, must
signify the Empyreal, or highest Heaven, because the Creation of this lower
heaven, which is visible, is said to have been done in the second day's work,
and it is called, The Firmament, Genesis 1. 7. And this Firmament is also called
Heaven, verse. 8. To p^t a difference or distinction between the former and
later, or the highest and lower Heavens; and this to me seems to be confirmed
by the words of Christ; Come ye blessed Mat. 25. 38.
-- inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the World: By
which words, surely, he meant that Heaven, which was created in the beginning
for blessed Angels and Men.

Now although this highest Heaven was made, and also inhabited by Angels, yet
God is not said to rest in that Work; nor, until he had finished the Man and
the Woman, and in them had laid their Savior to conduct them to that Heaven,
which was not intended only for Angels, but principally for Mankind; as Christ
said, (prepared for You.) In order whereunto the Angels were to be
instrumental, as we are taught by the Apostle; (Are Heb. 1. 14
they not all ministering Spirits, sent forth to minister, for them who shall be
Heirs of salvation. By which most gracious provision, our God has declared
himself to be a true Philanthropus. And also, a lover of Mankind, rather more
than a lover of Angels.

For, out of this heavenly Paradise the apostate-Angels were soon cast, and so
left without a Redeemer, or any hope of return: One of them it was that
deceived Eve; therefore the fall of Angels was before the fall of Man: Indeed,
Man also was sent out of the earthly Paradise for sin; but yet he was not left
without a possibility of Reconciliation, and return to a better Paradise, which
was to be effected by the Seed of the Woman, even the Messiah, who is therefore
the true and real Sabbath of Man. And herein, also, is the love of God to Man
highly expressed, in that he rested, only in consideration of Mankind, and the
Savior of us; and not in the creation, either of Heaven, or of Angels.

Heaven and Earth. See how our merciful Creator, in the very beginning, joyneth
Earth with Heaven, although the Earth was then invisible, clouded in darkness,
and in an abyss of waters between it and Heaven; yet they are here joined, as
to intimate, so early, that, notwithstanding the powers of darkness, and the
worldly insultations of proud Oppressors, God would in time bring together, and
unite Earth with Heaven; which he performed by and in Christ: Even the first
Adam was composed of an heavenly Soul, and an earthly Body, as a resemblance of
the second Adam, who consisted of his Heavenly Godhead, and his Earthly
Manhood: He was that prophesied Starr, as being heavenly; but out of Jacob, as
to his humane generation. Which was also signified by his appellation Numb. 24
17. Isa. 7. 14.
Emmanuel, by whom this merciful intention was to be effected; for which
consideration only, He is that Sabbath, wherein the Godhead is said to Rest.

The Sea, and all that in them is. Here we find Heaven, Earth, and Sea, and all
the Creatures in them mentioned which words include both Men and Angels also.
But we find not any mention of Hell, or its inhabitants, which yet (doubtless)
was ordained within the compass of the first six days; and also inhabited by
those apostate Angels mentioned by St. Jude, as Reserved in everlast^ng chains
under darkness. Jude 6.


They that imagine Hell to be implied in the word Earth, may change their
opinion, when they consider, that Hell, and its fire, are said to be
everlasting; but the Earth is a Matthew. 25 ^1. Matthew. 24 35. 2 Pet. 3. 10.
very cold Element as yet: but it must be burnt up, and also, pass away, as
both St. Matthew and St. Peter tell us; but so shall not Hell, which is
everlasting.

That, Hell was ordained at the beginning of the World, is not to be doubted:
The Prophet speaks of it under the figure of ^ophet, Isa. 30. 33.
(which in the Gospel is called Gehenna, or Mat. 5. 22.
Hell) That it is ordained of old; (ab heri) as it is in the Original, and is
so acknowledged by our Translators in the Margin, (tha^ is) ^ophet is ordained
from yesterday. What (yesterday) this Prophet meant, we are told by the
Expositor, (probably and ingeniously at least, if not solidly;) Lyranus in loc.
That it signifies, the first day of the world; because, that day was the
first that ever could be called yesterday. And, That as God on that day made
Heaven for his Elect, so he made Hell for the Reprobate: and the Gospel
teaches us, That the everlasting fire was prepared for the Devil and his
Angels. For, when the Angels fell, they became Devils, and their fall was very
early, as is before said.

If now it be enquired, Why no mention is made of Hell in all the history of
the Creation? We may suppose the reason is, because the punishments designed,
or inflicted by God, on his Enemies, are of that sort of Works, which Divines
(out of Isai. 28. 21.) call, Isa. 28. 21
Alienum opus Dei; that is, the extorted, forced, unvoluntary, or strange Works
of God; unto which he is drawn by the iniquities of his Creatures, and the
strictness of his Justice, with which he cannot dispense. To this purpose
Tertullian says, Tert. de Resur. p. 44
Deus est Optimus de suo; Justus de nostro: nisi homo deliquisset, Optimum
solummodo Deum nosset. And again, Ibid. Cont. Marc. l. 2. p. 178
Bonitas Dei est secundum naturam; Severitas secundum causam. Just so Clemens
says, c Deus est bonus per se^psum, justus propter nos. And this even Philo
the Jew perceived, and said, Philo. Quod Deus immutab. p. 309.
Boni^as Dei, est Antiquissima Gratiarum. Their meaning is, That the Acts of
Mercy, Grace, and Goodness flow from God naturally, of himself, and of his own
mere motion; but his Acts of Severity, and Justice, are not executed, but only,
upon external provocation by sin. We often read, that God was gre^ved with his
People, for their sins; as Psalm. 78. 40. and 95. 10. which is but an expression
of unwillingness to punish. Aust^n says in one place (if that Book be his)
Aug. de Spiritu, and An. c 6. To. 3.
Plus cruc^at Deum P^ssio Miseri, quam ipsum; i. e. God is more greived in
punishing, then the patient is in suffering. The Heathens said the like, both
of their Princes, and of their Idol-gods, as not punishing, but with grief; and
not at all, without external provocation. Even Ne^o himself, when he was to
subscribe a Warrant for Execution, said, Quam vellem nescire literas; as Suet.
in Ne^. c. 10.
Suetonius writes. Another says of Augustus;

Ovid. de Pont.
Sed p^ger ad poenas Princeps, ad praemia velox
Qui que dolet quoties Cogitur esse ferox.
And of the Heathen-Gods another says; Horat. Od. 3.


Neque -- Per nost^um patin^ur scelus
^^acunda Jovem ponere fulm^n^.
The Jewish Talm^d says, That God at certain times weepeth for that People, in
consideration of his wrath, and their calamities. Indeed, God did once weep for
them, when Christ wept over Jerusalem: Which Orig. in Lu. Hom. 38.
Origin calls, The tears of God. And, before the Deluge, the Scripture tells
us, That (either for the si^s, or for the ensuing punishment of the World) it
g^eived God at the heart. In the Genesis 6. 6.
Prophet God professes, I have no pleasure in the death of him that dies. And
Christ Ezekiel. 18. 32.
in the Gospel declares; It is not the will of Matthew. 18 14.
your heavenly Father, that one of these little ones should perish.

But the Heathen-gods have a character of cruelty fastened on them, by some
other of their own Idolaters (for indeed, they were but Devils, as the Psalmist
says): One thus Daemonia Psalm. 69. 5
writes of them; Tacit. Hist. l. 1.
Appro^atum est -- Non esse Deis curae securitatem nostram: Esse Ultionem. And
another before him;

Luc^^. lib. 4.
Faelix Roma quidem --
Silibertatis Superis tam cura fuisset
Quam vind^cta placet --
By which we see that confessed, which Moses said of the false and the true
God: Their Rock Deuteronomy. 3^. 31.
is not as our Rock, our enemies themselves being judges.

It is right worthy of our serious consideration, That God has annexed to this
Sabbatical Commandment diverse great and peculiar privileges, which are not to
be found in any of the other Nine. As 1. The Memento, or, Remember. 2. The
Ceremonial Type of the Seventh-day Sabbath (of both these we have taken notice
before): But 3. Here is another special property, far greater than the other
two, or than is expressed in any of the other Commandments, contained in these
words, [For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, etc.] which is a
strong argument to provoke us to obedience*

The Heathens (it seems) thought all such motives to be needless in Laws. One
of them says, Sense. Epist. 94.
Lex-jubeat, non disputet. And, Nihil mihi videtur frigidius, nihil ineptius,
quam lex cum prologo. He would have Law^ to command only, and not to persuade.
It seemed otherwise to our Merciful Lawgiver, who to his Laws has added both
a Prologue, and an Epilogue also; by which he not only commands, but
disputes his Leiges into obedience, as being most expedient and profitable to
themselves: for it should strongly induce Man to obedience of that Law, which
is imposed on him by the mighty Creator of Heaven and Earth.

In the first of these Laws, (which a man would imagine to be the greatest) God
uses only this motive, [I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the
Land of Egypt.] This was to move them, by way of gratitude, to adhere only to
him, their Deliverer, and not to acknowledge any other God.

But the motive used in this fourth Commandment of sanctifying the Sabbath, is
far stronger; because the deliverance of his people out of bondage, might
possibly have been performed, either by Treaty, or by the Arm of flesh,
without those plagues of Egypt, and wonders at the Red Sea; for the Israelites
were numerous enough to have fought the Egyptians, and to subdue them; they
wanted only Arms and Utensils of War, which yet might reasonably have either
been forced from the Egyptians, or supplied by a foreign power; we well know,
^gypt was not invincible, having been so often subdued.

Now the motive used in this Sabbath Law, is proper only to the Almighty, and
absolutely incommunicable to any Creatures, for none but God did; or could make
heaven and earth, which is generally confessed by Heathens, Jews, and
Christians. Plato called God, Plut. in Symp. c. 1.
(...). So by Philo the Jew he is called, (...): And by Dyonis. Areop. (...):
And by N^z* (...): And by St. Paul, 2 Cor. 6. 18.
(...); which is but The Almighty Father and Maker of the World.

Among the wise Sentences of old Pythagoras, this is recorded for one, If any
man come and boast that he is God, let him create another World, and we will
believe him. And in the holy Scripture, This making of Heaven and Earth is
often mentioned as a peculiar character of the true God? As, In the beginning
Genesis 1. 1.
God created the Heaven, and the Earth: And, Psa. 146. 5
Happy is the man, whose hope is in the Lord his God, which made Heaven and
Earth. So it is in the New Testament, Acts 14. 15. and 17. 24. And by this the
true God is differenced from false Gods; as, The gods that have not made Heaven
and Earth shall perish. And, All the Jer. 10. 11
gods of the Nations are Idols, but the Lord made the Heavens. And this
character of God is put into the very front of our Creed. First, As a strong
motive to incline us to believe, and trust in him. Secondly, To inform the
weaker sort of Christians, who cannot appre^^end what God is, or what to make
the object of their faith; That it shall be requisite and sufficient for them,
at first, T^^ believe in God under this notion, thus; Whatsoever he is, that
made Heaven and Earth, in him do I believe; for so the Psalmist declares, My
help Psa. 121. 2
comes from the Lord, which made Heaven and Earth.

This great motive here used, to incline us to sanctify the Sabbath, does
evidently show, that this Sabbath-Law is of greater concernment to us, than the
first Law is. The reason whereof we have declared before Chap. 5.
. And moreover, That the Sabbath which is here principally meant, does not
consist in keeping of a day, whether the last day of the week (which God
imposed upon the people of Israel only, and that but for a certain time): Or
the first day of the week (which God never at all commanded): But another kind
of Sabbath is here commanded to be sanctified; which Sabbath being rightly and
deeply considered, will prove and appear to be that very same Lord God that
made Heaven and Earth.

For we have proved before: First, That the Sabbath day, mentioned in the Moral
part of this Commandment, does signify God the Son, because in him only the
Godhead can be truly said to Rest, and not otherwise. Secondly, We have proved,
That the Jewish Seventh day Sabbath was appointed only, to be for a type,
figure, and memorial, or commemoration of that true and grand Sabbath (which is
Christ). From these premises we here infer, That the making of Heaven and
Earth is mentioned in this Commandment on purpose, for a motive to incite us to
a serious, and most reverentiall sanctification of this true, real, and
substantial Sabbath* because he that is here called the Sabbath day, is the
great Dayspring from on high; and is really, He that made heaven and earth. So
that if we will acknowledge, that the Creator of heaven and earth is to be
worshipped and sanctified by us, then must we also confess, that this Sabbath
which is the Son of God, is so to be sanctified.

No learned or prudent Christian (I suppose) will deny, that this Son of God
was the Creator of Heaven and Earth; or, if any do, the Scriptures and
primitive Church will gainsay them.

The Fathers expound these words, Genesis 1. 1. In the beginning God created, to
signify God the Father in God the Son. And Joh. 1. 1. In the beginning was the
Word; that is, the Word or Son was in the Godhead, even that Word, by which all
things were made. For the Word Principium, ((...)) as Tert. Advers. Herm.
Tertullian observes, does not signify only, Ordinativum, (i. e.) a
Beginning, in respect of the order of time; but Potestativum, (i. e.) a Primacy
in power, and authority. For, from this word, (...), Princes, Potentates, and
Magistrates on earth, are by him called Id. Advers. I^daeos.
Archontes, and by others Demarchi, (i. e.) Powers, Princes, and Rulers of
People. One of the sayings of Pittacus the Philosopher, was, Laert. in Pittac.
(...), (i. e.) Magistracy or power will show the disposition of a man. Hence
also are the words, Archangelus, in St. Paul; Archiepiscopus, in Chrysostom
and Epiphanius; and Archipresbyter and Archidiaconus, in St. Hieron. Epist. 4.
Jerome.

As to the appellation, Word; The Psalmist says, By the Word of the Lord the
heavens Psalm. 33. 6
were made: just so the Evangelist tells us, All things were made by him. That
this Word was Joh. 1: 3.
God the Son, every one knows. The Psalmist says again, verse. 9. Let all the
Earth -- and all the inhabitants of the world stand in awe of of him, for he
spoke the Word and it was done. The Word by which the world was made, and of
which Moses thus wrote, God said, Let there be light -- and, Let there be a
firmament, is not to be thought a transient or vocal word, as Austin says, De
Civ. lib. 11. c. 8.
Non sonabili verbo, sed intelligibili. And by such a word, as, In Ioh. Tract.
37.
Manebat, non sonando transibat, (i. e.) The world was made by that internal
and substantial Word, which did not pass away from God, (as our words do from
us) but by his Word permanent, of which St. John says, The Word was with God
-- and, The Word Joh. 1. 1.
was God.

Psalm. 104. 24. O Lord, how manifold are thy works, in wisdom have thou made
them all. Who this Wisdom, and Beginning, and Word is, by which all things were
made, the Gospel has taught us, that it is Christ, who is not only the
Beginning, and the Word, (as it is said) but is also called, The Wisdom of God,
1 Cor. 1. 24. And, All things were made by him, Joh. 1. 3. and, All things by
him were created, that are in heaven, and that are in earth, Col. 1. 16.

The Jews, in disparagement of Christ, Man. 6. 3. Matthew. 13 55.
called him both a Carpenter, and the son of a Carpenter; so did Celsus in
Cont. Cells. lib. 6.
Origin, and Theod. hist. lib. 3. cap. 23.
Julian the impious and apostate Emperor. Justin Martyr does indeed affirm,
that Christ on earth was literally a Carpenter, and did make ploughs and yokes;
((...)) Justin. Dial. cum Tryph. Ambr. Ser. 10.
but withal, both St. Ambrose, and St. Austin, tell us, That he was also that
Carpenter that built Heaven* and this mighty fabric of the world. Finally,
because this Son of God Aug. de Temp. Ser. 3^.
was, both the Creator, and also the Sabbath both of God and Men* therefore,
for the sanctifying of him, this Motive is here mentioned, of making heaven and
earth.

And rested the seventh day. Touching this Rest of God, what it was, and why it
is fixed on the seventh day, we have said much Chapter 10, 11, 12, 13, 15, 1^.
before; and something more must be added, which will be more fit to be
discoursed in the next, that this Chapter may not swell too big.

CHAP. XX.
The Exposition continued. That all the Divine Persons concurred, in Creating,
Resting, Blessing, and Sanctifying. How the Son of God, or Second Person, is
the Rest and Sabbath of the same Son of God. How he rests in himself. Of the
diverse considerations of God the Son, in respect of Godhead and Manhood; and
his several Appellations respectfully. Why the seventh day was preferred above
the former six. That the Ceremonial Sabbath was for the memorial of the
Resting, and not of the Working of God.

And Rested the seventh day. THe more literal and exact reading of these
words, is, [And rested on the seventh day] for thus St. Jerome renders them,
Requievit die septimo; and the Clementine-Edition, [In die septimo.] For, it
was not the day that was considered by the Godhead, but something that was
performed on that day, that occasioned this Rest; which if it had been so done
on any other of the former six days, certainly, it would have been said of
that day, as it is of this, that God rested on it. What that thing was, we have
showed before at large, namely, that it was in consideration of the Messiah, or
Christ.

It would now be enquired, what is meant by, The Lord, who is here said to have
made heaven and earth, and to bless and sanctify the Sabbath day; whether it
be meant of the Person of the Father only, or of the Person of the Son, or of
the Person of the Holy Spirit, or of all of them; because all, and every one of
them, is the Lord, and the Creator, and the Sanctifier. Of the Father, no man
doubts; and of the Son, we have proved before; and of the holy Ghost, holy
Job says, By Job 26. 13
his Spirit he has garnished the heavens; and the Psalmist also, Thou sendest
forth thy Spirit Ps. 104 30
and they are created; and the Church, at the opening of Councils, used to sing
that Hymn in St. Ambrose, which begins, Inter Hymnos Ambros. To. 5.
Veni Creator Spiritus.

For when our Vulgar Catechisms ascribe Creation to the Father, and Redemption
to the Son, and Sanctification to the holy Ghost, we are not so to understand
them, as if these actions were of each several person; or, as if the Father
had no interest in our Redemption, or Sanctification; nor the Son or Spirit in
Creation; far be it from us to think so. But we believe, that the whole
Godhead, and every Person therein, did jointly cooperate in all these acts.
Indeed, the Father created, but it was in and by the Son, and both, by the holy
Ghost. So, the Son Redeemed, but it was from the Father, and by the Spirit. So,
the holy Ghost Sanctifies, but he does it from the Father and the Son. So also
in this place, the Rest of God is not to be accounted, the Rest of one single
Person only, but of the whole Godhead, and of every one of the Three most holy
Persons therein.

If it be now granted, that the Son of God is this Lord, and Creator, that made
heaven and earth; and He, that is here said to Rest; and also He, that is the
only Rest and Sabbath, both of God, and of us Men, (which we have proved
before:) then it must follow, that the Rest it self is here said to Rest, and
the Sabbath it self to rest in the Sabbath, and the Son of God must be the
Sabbath of the same Son of God: Which, at our first hearing, may seem to be a
violent Exposition; which yet is not so, as will presently appear.

The Reader may easily apprehend, that although God is entirely One, yet he is
often represented to us under diverse and several notions and capacities, as
if he were not the One and the same God; for so this Son of God (who is the
only God) is set forth in Scripture, and is so by us to be apprehended and
believed; as Immorta^l, and yet mortal; as the M^ker of all things, and yet
made; that he was from Eternity, and yet born in time; the Father of all men,
and yet the Son of man; the Creator of his Mother, and yet her Son. All these
speeches are true of this Son of God, considered in his several and respective
capacities; neither ought they to seem incredible or strange, because we find
the like diversities in one and the same Man.

One (in Plutarch) said openly to a King sitting in judicature, Pl^t. in Apoph.
Provoco a Philippo ad Phil^ppum; I appeal from King Philip to King Philip, but
in another temper. So Nazianzen represents the same person, both as a Judge,
and as one arraigned, Naz. E^ist. 79.
Te accuso apud te, justum judicem. So does St. Ambrose to one, as if he were
both Client and Counselor, Ambr. Ser. 64.
Stulto consiliario usus es teipso. Upon these words, Psalm. 140. 1. Deliver me,
O Lord, from the evil man, St. Austin says, Aug. Hom 29. and de Temp. Ser.
233.
a te, ^e liberat, (i. e.) God does deliver a man from himself. And upon those
words, Deliver us from evil, he says, Deus te liberat, a teipso malo. We have
a Proverb, that a man is his own neighbor. Proximus egomet mihi. Ter.
And we often read of, Alter tu; and, (...); and, Ille ego; and, Ego ille; as
if a man were another, and not himself. Just so, the forenamed Father speaks
of God, Aug. in Joh. Tract. 27.
Domine, repellis nos a te, da nobis alterum te. So we may often observe
P^eachers, in their Prayers, appealing from God to God; when they mean, from
God, as considered only in his Court of Justice, to the same God, as sitting
in his Temple of mercy, which is only Christ.

In like manner, the great Apostle speaks of God and of Christ severally, as
of two, 2 Timothy 4. 1. I charge thee before God and the Lord Jesus Christ; and
this is usual in Scripture. Act. 4. 2^ Romans 1. 7. 1 Cor. 1. 3
Although we know, that the Lord Jesus is that very same God. But the Second
Person in the Trinity is described in holy Writ, as if he were distinct and
different from himself; and this is, in regard of a two fold consideration of
his Person.

First, If we look on him, and consider him only in his pure Divinity; then
(according to the Scriptures) we call him, The mighty Isa. 9. 6.
God, the everlasting Father. The Creator, by whom all creatures were made. God
the Word, God the Son. And the eternal Son of the eternal Father. And, the
Lord JEHOVA. Of him it is said, Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever.

Secondly, When we consider him together with his assumed Human Nature, then we
call him Messiah, Christ, God's Anointed, Emmanuel, The Word made fle^h, God
inc^rnate, God manifested in the flesh; God, in the likeness of sinful flesh;
In the form of a servant, Made of a woman; and, The Son of man. Which
appellations cannot appertain to this Second ^erson, but only in respect of
his Incarnation.

The Premises being acknowledged and granted, these Mysteries will be
discovered: 1. How God the Son is both the Creator of all creatures, and also
the Rest or Sabbath of the God head. 2. How the Son of God may be truly said to
Rest in himself. 3. How the Rest it self is said to Rest in it self, and the
Sabbath in the Sabbath. All which the Reader will understand, by considering
these few Aphorisms following, which are deducible from those two
Considerations of the Person of Jesus, just now mentioned.

1. The Son of God, considered only in his pure Divinity, is the Lord, and the
Creator, who is here said to Rest.

2. The Son of God, considered in respect only of his Godhead, cannot be truly
called the Rest or Sabbath of God and Men.] The reason is, because the
Sabbathship of this Son of God con^steth not in his pure Divinity; for if so,
then this Sabbath, which is fixed only on the first seventh day, must have
been before, and also from eternity. But it consists in consideration of the
human Nature, assumed into personal union with the Divine Nature.

3. The Son of God, considered only as incarnate; or, as the Son of man; or,
as Christ; cannot be called the Creator of the world. The reason is, because
the Creation was performed by this Son of God, before the foundation of his
Incarnation was wholly laid, (as is showed before) or, before he could be
called the Son of man.

4. The Son of God is (and may be truly called) the Rest or Sabbath of the same
Son of God. This Proposition is thus to be understood, That God the Son, or
Word, who is the only eternal God, did, and still does, rest in himself, so
as is said in this Commandment; but his so resting is only in consideration of
his Incarnation, and as he is Emmanuel, and not otherwise: So that he is not to
be called the Sabbath or Rest, either of himself, or of us men, as he is only
the Son of the Father, but as he is also the Son of his mother; for in this
consideration only, he is styled in his Types, the Rest of the Godhead, and
the Resting place, the Habitation, the Temple, the Delight, and the
well-beloved Son, in whom God is well pleased, or (as Beza most judiciously
renders those words) in whom the Godhead does acquiess, (as is before noted.)
This is that Sabbath or Sabbatism of which the Apostle speaks, Heb. 4. 9.
that there remains a Rest ((...)) to the people of God. The sum and
conclusion is: 1. The Son of God is the Creator even of the Son of man, and of
all the world. 2. The Son of man is the Rest or Sabbath of the Son of God, and
of all holy men.


Rested the Seventh day.

In the whole History of the Creation, we find mention but of seven days, and
no more; for all succe^ding days are but the re-iteration of the first seven.
Of these seven, the last only is blessed, and graced with the Rest of God, and
therefore preferred before the first day, wherein Heaven was made; and also
before the sixth day, wherein Man was created. And this without any injury or
slur to any of the former days.

When the noble General, The mistocles, was twitted and repined at, by some
succeeding and inferior Commanders, because he only had the name and glory of
those Victories, which had been obtained by their joynt-labours and valor; the
General answered them with this Apologue; Once, said he, the working-day
contended with the Holy Day for pre-eminence, upon this reason, that the
Working-day, by labors and molestations, prepared all things ready for the
solemnity; but the Holy Day, without labor, only rested in quietness, and
enjoyment of those labors. The Holy Day replied, Plut. Quaest. Romans
Sed e^o nisi fuissem, in nunquam esses. (i. e.) Had it not been for the
Holy Day, Working-daies had not been at all. His meaning was, that without his
wisdom and policy, (whom they accounted but as an idle Holy Day) they had all
been defeated, captivated, and utterly lost. So is it here. The seventh-day is
therefore preferred before all other the former days, because it represented
the great Creator of all days, and the Redeemer of the Man, and the Woman, and
of all their posterity; without whom, no days had been at all; or if any had
been, yet (without this Sabbath) they had been to us but days of misery, and
but woeful Parasceues against the day of wrath. Whereas this mysterious Romans 2.
5* Romans 5. 9.
Sabbath is he, by whom we shall be saved from wrath. Wherefore, as all the
elder sons of Jesse passed before the Prophet, and not one of them was chosen
to the honor of Unction, that it might be reserved for the youngest, even
David; so, not one of the elder days is graced with the honor of God's
Resting, but that preferment is deservedly reserved for the last, or youngest
day; which day did indeed signify David, yet not the literal or typical David,
but Christ the Son of David, who is very often in Scripture expressly called
David, as Jer. 30. 9. Ezekiel. 34. 23. Hos. 3. 5. In a word, he that understands
in what particular thing the Rest of God consists, may, by the same, easily
apprehend, why it is fixed on this seventh day.

Wherefore the Lord blessed, etc. That which our English reads, [Wherefore]
St. Jerome and the Latins generally read, [Therefore] idcirco: From which word
we observe, that the Judaicall or Ceremonial Sabbath, was not appointed in
consideration of the work of Creation, or that men should on that day
contemplate and meditate only on the creatures of the world, (although those
wonderful works are also right worthy of our serious consideration, and should
be a great motive to incite us to glorisie the Almighty Creator) but it was
principally ordained, to put both the Jews, and us Christians also, in mind of
the Rest of God, and to move us all to consider, in what this Rest consists,
which does far more concern us and our happiness, than all the world without
it; because otherwise, neither the world, nor any creatures therein, nor the
perfect knowledge by our Studies and Arts, of all the excellencies and secrets
thereof, can bring us to that everlasting Rest, which was but typically figured
by this Ceremonial Sabbath: For, What is a man profited if he gain the whole
world, and lose his own soul? Mat. 16. 26.
Now that this [Wherefore] or [Therefore] relates to the Rest of God, and not
to his creating of the world, we are expressly taught by Moses, who tells us,
That God blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it; because that in it he had
rested from all his works. So that the Genesis 2. 3.
Rest of man on that day was afterward enacted by a Law, for a memorial of
the Resting, and not of the Working of God. Concerning the blessing and
sanctifying whereof, we are next to enquire.

CHAP. XXI.
The Exposition concluded. The meaning of blessing and hallowing the Sabbath
day. The difference of hallowing God's Name, and hallowing of Creatures; and of
the differences of Holiness. When the Seventh day was first hallowed; and how
it was dis-hallowed. Something of Sacrilege. How the Prophets spoke truly of
things to come, as if they had been past. Of the Prophetical figure called
Anticipation, with Rules and Examples thereof applied to this Sabbath.

The Lord blessed the Sabbath day (or Seventh day.) THe Leiturgie of the Church
of England reads (the Seventh day); but the Original has, the Sabbath day.
Both are read indifferently; as Genesis 2. 3. has the Seventh day, and so have
some of the other languages in this Commandment, as appears in the late
incomparable and renowned work of our new Great Bible. Indeed, both are one in
this place; For the Sabbath Ceremonial is but the Seventh day; and the Seventh
day only is that Sabbath which is here meant, it being but a Sabbath Typical.

Blessed the Sabbath day. To bless (Benedicere) is, to speak some good of it;
as in the Leiturgie of St Basil this Prayer is found, Basil. n. 2
Domine, loquere bonum in cor Regis, pro Ecclesia tua. When God blesses, he
conferreth some favor, or special privilege; as here, on the Sabbath day,
such as it was capable of, and in order to that purpose, for which it was
blessed; which was to signify Man's Rest in Christ. The blessing of a Day, is
not like his blessing of a Man; on whom, by blessing, he does effectually
confer something that is beneficial to him, as spiritual Graces, or temporal
Favors, as in Children, Lands, Cattle, Basket and Store, mentioned Deuteronomy. 28.
and as Isaac blessed his Sons, with the dew of Heaven, and fatness of the
Earth. But the Sabbath being incapable of such benedictions, the blessing of it
must consist in such respects as these. 1. God chose that day for his own
Mysterious Rest. 2. He appointed that day only, and not any of the other six,
to be for a memorial to his people of the grand blessing of their Rest in
Christ. 3. He ordained it for a corporal rest, both for Men and Cattle. 4. He
gave most strict command, upon pain of capital punishment, for the keeping
thereof. 5. He appointed larger Sacrifices on that day, than on the former
days. 6. He appointed a larger portion of Manna on the Parasceue, as a
provision for the Sabbath. 7. He appointed this holy day to be weekly, that is,
two and fifty times in the year, whereas other Festivals (except New Mons)
were but once. These, or such like, are the blessings thereof.

And hallowed it. Hallowed is holied, or sanctified; The meaning is, that God
designed it to be an holy or hallowed day.

To be an hallowed, or sanctified day, is, to be divided, separated, or
distinguished from other common days, by way of preferment, honor, and
pre-eminence, and to be set apart so, as, that work which might lawfully have
been done on that day, before it was hallowed, might not be done on it, after
the hallowing thereof.

We read of hallowed, or holy oil, holy vessels, holy vestments, and holy
places, which might not be used or applied to any other service, but that only,
for which they were hallowed and destinated; So this hallowed day, was not to
be employed in common works, as other unhallowed days were (for that would
have been a profanation thereof;) but it was wholly to be bestowed and spent in
the service of God the Sanctifier, by the serious and thankful consideration of
that blessed Rest, which he had procured and designed for Man; And this
hallowed use was to continue from the first institution thereof, until the
period, and repealing of it, by the same God, who hallowed it. Which was
performed evidently by Jesus Christ, who is the same God, which did sanctify
it; and this he did not, until God had actually, and visibly, exhibited in the
^lesh, the real and substantial accomplishment of that Typical, Ceremonial,
and Temporary Sabbath, in the Person of the said Lord Jesus.

But yet (during the vigor and continuance of this hallowing) the Sabbath day
was not altogether and absolutely quitted from all manner of working; We know
the Priests did then work hard, and Soldiers marched, and other works were
lawfully done; the reason was, because this Sabbatical Hallowing was but merely
figurative and ceremonial, and therefore dispensable in case of pressing
necessity, and charitable accommodation toward our brethren, and in duty to
God; and also, because such workings are commanded by a Superior Law, even the
Moral Law of God, whereby we are required, To love the Lord our God with all
our heart, and our neighbor as our self. This Law has been in force ever
since the Creation was finished, and so shall continue until the end of the
World; but the hallowing of the Seventh day, was neither from the beginning,
nor was it to last to the end of the World, being but Ceremonial and Temporary;
and therefore ought to give place to the Law Moral.

We find Hallowing, or Holiness, applied diversely, to several things, and for
diverse considerations.

First, There is an Holiness Essential, which is only in God, who is the
Fountain of all inherent Holiness, and is Holiness it self; which we are to
acknowledge, and which we do confess, when we pray, Hallowed be thy Name.

Secondly, There is an Holiness Moral, or of Qualities, derived from God, the
Fountain thereof; such is in holy Men, as Piety, Righteousness, Justice, Truth,
Sincerity, ^ear, and love of God, Faith, Hope, Charity; This is that which
Divines call Inherent Holiness.

Thirdly, There is an Holiness by Dedication, or Assignment, as of Places,
Vessels, Vestments, Men, and other Creatures, and of Times, as this Hallowed
Sabbath day is; Hence we say, holy Temple, holy Church holy Day, holy
E^charist, for the Bread and Wine, to be used therein, are of themselves but
Elements; but after Dedication, or Consecration of them, or Hallowing (which
our forefathers called Howseling) them to that Mysterious use, we Fox in Hen.
8.
call them Sacraments, Divines call this Holiness, Relative.

It is but a srivolous cavil, or excuse, of Sacrilegers, who make no scruple of
abusing or demolishing hallowed places, as Churches and Chapels, or robbing
them of their vessels, goods, lands, and Revenues, which were consecrated;
because (they say) such things have no holiness^, or holy qualities inherent in
them, as, no pie^y, no faith, or hope, etc. I wish such to consider also, what
inherent holiness the Jewish Sabbath had; or Achan's Wedge of Number. 15. 35.
gold; or Ananias his money, except only the Josh. 7. 25. Act. 5. 5.
holiness, or hallowing of dedication, or destination; Yet the profaning and
subducing of these, was punished by stoning, burning, and by sudden death; and
all this by the Sentence of God himself, although the hallowing (in the case of
Ananias) was not by God, but voluntarily, only by himself. It may reasonably be
feared, that the strict injunctions and commands of some such Sacrilegers, for
observing the Christian Sunday, which was not hallowed by any Command of God,
but only of Men, will one day condemn their abuses of other things, which were
also ^hallowed by Men; as Christ said, -- Ex ore tuo, serve nequam, etc.

But then, the Sabbath Day having been thus hallowed, or sanctified by God, How
comes it to be unhallowed, and laid common with other days? Would God revoke
that which himself had constituted? Or, durst Man presume so to do? This
seems to thwart that heavenly Voice, which said to Peter in a like case, What
God has cleansed call not thou Act. 10. 15
common.

To this our Answer is. First, Man might not presume to alter or null any of
Gods Ordinances, without Divine warrant: But the dissolution of this
Sabbath Day was done by the grand Warrant of the Son of God, and by him then,
when he was the Great Son of Man. Secondly, We say, That God never unhallowed,
or revoked any Sanctions which Himself ordained, during the time, and purposes
that were by him intended for them to continue in force and use. For some
Divine Constitutions were inacted to continue but for a set-time, as the Types
were, Sacrifices, Circumcision, Passover, Tabernacle, and this Sabbath; all
which, and many such, were but Ceremonial Sanctions: But others were ordained
by him to continue to the end of the World; as all the ten Commandments, which
are Sanctions Moral: These God never yet revoked, nor never will: But the other
sort, which were but Ceremonials, and intended to last but during the Pedagogie
of his People, and so for a certain limited time, viz. until the manifestation
of the Son of God in the flesh. Which being accomplished, those temporary
Ordinances were to cease; and this, without any Mutability on Gods part, or
Sacrilege of Men. Just, as when a Man gives a pension, or rent, to a pious use,
for a limited time of ten, twenty, or thirty years, and no longer; when that
time is expired, the Pension may cease, without any Sacrilege of the Doner.

Hallowed. The principal Question in this hallowing, which has most perplexed
the minds of many good Christians, is, concerning the Time, when God did
actually hallow, or set apart the Seventh day, whether on the first Seventh day
of the World, or, whether not before the days of Moses, and the Egyptian
deliverance.

To this we answer confidently and resolutely; That although it is most
certain, that God did rest on the first Seventh day of the World, (but so, as
has been at large showed before), yet he never appointed or hallowed a weekly
Seventh day for Man's rest, until the days of Moses: Our Reasons for this
Assertion are these.

First, If the weekly Seventh day had been hallowed at the beginning, as a Law,
it must have been, either written in Man's heart, as all Moral Laws of God were
ever since Man was made; or else it must have been openly declared as a Law
positive. But the Seventh-day Sabbath was not written in Man's heart; For if
so, then it must have bound all Nations in all Ages, which as yet it never did.
Neither was i^ then declared overtly as a Law positive; for if so, then
certainly we should have found some mention, or footsteps of it in the History
of the Patriarks, which lived before Moses: But we ^ind nothing of it in all
that long time; and we are well assured, that neither Adam, nor any of his
posterity, did ever so Sabbatize until the days of Moses. This is the
Doctrine of the Fathers generally, and of the Church Primitive.

Secondly, The Preface before the ten Moral Laws, which contains the date or
time of their Promulgation by writing, to me seems to be annexed to them, on
purpose, to prove this Assertion concerning the first establishment and
original of the Seventh-day Sabbath; For thus we read, I am the Lord thy God,
which brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, Thou sha^t, etc. By which it may
appear, that the publication of the Laws was after the deliverance out of
Egypt. Just so the Prophets date their Prophesies at the beginnings of them;
as, The vision of Isaiah in the days of Uzziah, etc. And, To Jeremiah the
Isai. 1. 1. Jer. 1. 1, 2
word of the Lord came in the days of Josiah. And, In the first year of
Jehoiakim's captivity, the word of the Lord came expressly to Ezekiel Eze. 1. 2,
3.
the Priest. The like we find in Daniel, Amos, Micha, Zephani, Haggi, Zechari.
And in the Gospel also. In the days of Herod. -- And, Caesar Augustus. And
Tiberius Luke 1. 5. 2. 1 3. 1.
Caesar.

Here I desire the learned Reader to consider with me, why it pleased the
Divine Wisdom to put so late and low a date to the whole Decalogue of the Law
Moral, which we are well assured was in force from the creation of the first
Man? If not for this reason only, because there was something inserted, and
added to these Laws, which was new, and was not written in Man's heart, nor
ever imposed on the People of God, until they had been delivered out of Egypt:
And, That new thing was, this Ceremonial Precept of hallowing the weekly
Seventh-day Sabbath.

If it be here urged, That M^ses expressly writes in the history of the first
Seventh day, That God blessed he Seventh da^, and hal^ow^d (or sanct fi^d) it.
Therefore if it were hallowed so early how can we truly affirm that it was not
hallowed until four and twenty hundred years after?

To this we say (although it has been most solidly answered before by a right
worthy and learned Writer Hist. of the Sabbath.
), That Moses does not write, that God hallowed it ^hen, and on that very first
Seventh day, nor does he there show when it was hallowed; but only why God did
choose the Seventh day in aftertimes to hallow or sanctify it, and none other
of the six. The words of Moses may well justify this Exposition; for thus we
read, God blessed and sancti^i^d it, because in it he had rested. Had rested,
^ignifies the time, not present, but past. So the meaning is; That because God
had formerly rested on the first Seventh da^, herefore afterward, when he had
drawn his people together out of Egypt, he chose and preferred that day above
the other days, and commanded them to keep it holy.

If it be further pressed, that even in this fourth Commandment, the words of
Blessing and Hal^owing are delivered in a Tense, which signifies the
^ime-past, as Benedix^t, and Sanctificavit: that is, He has blessed and
sanctified: Which words do indeed relate to a former hallowing thereof, before
the giving of the Law. And if so, Why may they not point to the hallowing on
the first seventh day?

To this we answer, and grant, that the Hallowing here signifies the time
past; for otherwise it would have been said, He blesses and halloweth, in the
presenttense. But this Past, or former ^ime, refers us only to that time,
when the Sabbath day was first actually and declaratively hallowed, or set
apart; and was no further off, than the time of the falling of Manna: So we
read, Exodus 16. This is that which the Lord has said, To morrow Exodus 16. 13.
is the rest of the holy Sabbath unto the Lord. And, verse. 29. See, the Lord
has given you the Sabbath -- So the people rested on the seventh day. This is
the first Seventh-day Sabbath that ever was ordained by God, and made known
unto his People.

But let it be supposed and granted, that the Seventh-day Sabbath was blessed
and hallowed on the first seventh day of the world, as we read, Genesis 2. 3. yet
that Hallowing will no^ gainsay our assertion. For the better understanding
whereof, I will here set down two Propositions to be examined, which at first
will seem opposite one to the other, and yet will both prove true.

1. The seventh day was hallowed in the beginning, in the days of Adam. 2. The
seventh day was not hallowed until the days of Moses.
(The seventh day was hallowed in the dai^s of Adam) If Moses had said, that
God hallowed the seventh day, not only in Adam's time, but also before the
Creation, and from Eternity, he had said nothing but the truth. But this
hallowing was secret, in the Divine Mind only, in God's Decree and Purpose in
his Counsel, Providence, Predestination, and good Pleasure. For whatsoever God
has done before these days, or now does, or shall do hereafter, were all
present to him from eternity; for, to him, Was, Is, and, To come, are but as
one moment. All things and times were present to him from everlasting. So that
in consideration of this Decree, we say, that the seventh day was hallowed
before the days of Moses, and also before the days of Adam. Just as we may
also truly affirm, that the world was in Being before the actual Creation
thereof. But this Being is to be understood only of the Idea in the Divine
M^nd; and so is this early hallowing of the seventh day. And this is really
true, and may be affirmed in plain downright speech without any Rhetorical
figure.

[The seventh day was not hallowed till the days of Moses] this is to be
understood in respect of the actual performance and execution of the aforesaid
Decree, and of the patefaction, manifestation, or declaration thereof. The
hallowing was Praescitum, but not Praestitum; The Pre-science of God was before
man's Cognizance. God's hallowing by his Decree was from E^e^nity, but the
execution and actual effect thereof was afterward in ^ime, even in the time
of Moses, and not before.

It must needs be granted, that the world, and all its creatures, had some kind
of Being before their actual creation, because the Scripture thus teaches
us, Known unto God are all his works from the beginning of the world; Act. 15.
18
yet then, most particulars were unmade. And, The Lord knows who are his,
surely he knew 2 Timothy 2. 19.
them before they were actually made. And, He has chosen us in him (in Christ)
before the foundation of the world; every one knows, Ephesians. 1. 4.
that E^ection was before Creation. We read also of the Purpose of God, and of
grace which was given us in Christ Jesus before the 2 Timothy 1. 9
world began. These truths cannot otherwise be understood, but only in
consideration of the Being of Creatures in the Idea, or Divine Mind, before
their existence in Nature. Tertullian says, Tert. Advers. Prax. p. 38^.
Ante omnia De^s era^ solus, q^ia nihi^ extrinsecus praeter ill^m. The
Schoolmen have also taught us these Maxims, Non entis n^lla est scientia. And,
Non ens non intelligitur. And, In D^o s^nt omnia. Therefore, because neither
the Knowledge of God, nor his Election, nor his Giving grace, can be said of,
Non entities, and mere nothings; it will follow, that these known and chosen
objects and s^bjects of grace had a being, before their actual creation, and
this Being must be only in the same Knower and Chooser, and that is God.

If it be enquired, why Moses mentions this Hallowing so early, seeing it was
not declaratively enacted, till so la^e, as is said? To this we answer, That
there was great and weighty reason why he did so, Because the true and ^eall
S^bbath (whereof the Seventh-day Sabbath was but a figure) is indeed the
greatest, and most-concerning, and most beneficial mystery of true Religion;
for it signified Christ the Savior, and our only means and hope of
everlasting Rest in him. And it will be a great consolation to us if we rightly
consider, th^^ our merciful God ordained a sure means for our blessedness, so
early, as, not only at the beginning of the world, but also from eternity;
although the external publication and celebration thereof, was not constituted
until the days of Moses.

Just so, the latter Prophets spoke of the Birth, Passi^n, and Death of our
R^deemer, as if all had been performed before their days; which yet was not
actually effected till long after the death of those Prophets. And this they
spoke and prophesied by a (...), or antici^^tion, as St. Augustine calls it,
without Aug. lib. locut. in Nu. To. 3.
which Figure, the truth and actual performance of their prophecies cannot
appear. And for our right understanding of those prolepti^al Prophecies, the
Fathers have left us many rules and instances* such as these.

Tertullian says, Tert. de Trin.
Scriptura, Quae futura su^t, pro^factis annuntiat. After him, Eusebius
observes, Euseb-Demonst. l. 4. c.
Prophetica consuetudo est, Quod futurum est, quasi prae^^ritum enuntiare. St.
Rasil says, Bas. in ^^a. c. 1. ^ Naz. Or^t. 35.
Prophetae ennarrant futura, quasi praeterita. And Nazianzen, d In Scriptura
sepe ^empora invertuntur. The same is observed by Cyril, Chrysostom, Ambrose,
and very often by St. Austin.

The great Apostle has also taught us, that ^o 4. 17.
God calls those things which be not as though they were. ((...)) Upon which
words the Gloss says, ^los. in ^oc.
Apud ^um jam s^nt, quae futura sunt; With God those things are present which
to us are to come. And, Habet electos suos quos creaturus est, -- quos habet
apud semetipsum, non in nature sua, sed in praesentia sua. (i. e.) God has his
Elect, which yet are not born; he has them in himself, and present with him,
though not existent in nature. All this we find to be confirmed by the writings
of the Prophets, in whom God spoke: Isaiah says of Christ, Unto us a ch^ld is
born, and unto us a son is given; yet Isa. 9. 6.
this Prophet died about 600 years before the birth of Christ. He says again
of the Passion of Christ, He was wounded for our transgressions, Isa. 53. 5, 7
he was bruised for our iniquities. He was oppressed, afflicted -- brought as a
lamb to the slaughter, etc. Just so the Psalmist spoke long before, They
pierced my hands and Psalm. ^2. (...) 18. Psalm. 69. ^1.
my feet. They cast lots upon my vesture. They gave me gall and vinegar. All
these, and many more such prophecies, are meant of things not then past, but to
come, and yet were true; because, as St. Austin says, Aug. cont. Max. lib. 3.
^. ^6. To. 6.
Pradestinatione ^am faclum e^at, quod suo ^empore futurum e^at. (i. e.) These
things were actually dec^eed in heaven, though not acted on earth: As Herod and
Rilate are said to have done, ^. 4. 28.
wh^t the hand and counsel of God determined before. So we read, He
predest^nated -- called -- justified -- glorified, To. 8. 30.
as if all these were already performed; yet many are to be called, justified,
and glorified, who then were, and as yet are, unborn. So Christ is called, The
Lamb slain from the foundation of the world. All Rev. 13. 8.
these Futures are spoken as if they had been past, because to the All-seeing
Godhead, they were as evident and present, as if they had been performed: and
this, in respect of the Div^ne Providence, and Eternal Decre^. Upon the same
ground, Moses might truly assert the Hallowing of the seventh day at the
beginning of the world, although it was not so declared until the days of the
said Moses. Thus much may serve for Exposition of the Ceremonial part of this
Sabbaticall Commandment.

CHAP. XXII.
The Reasons why God conferred honors on the seventh day, and why he also la^d
some s^urs upon it; as 1. That the Sabbath day was not made known till Moses
time, nor at all mentioned by David, nor the Sabbath-Law by Christ. 2. That God
commanded some works on that day. 3. That no Mana fell on it. 4. That Christ
lay dead on that whole day. 5. That God called it but a sign, and that it was
nothing else. 6. That it is said to be made ^or man. 7. That it is imp^ssible
to be kept generally, and also inconvenient, occasionally to the Jews. That the
impossibility both of the seventh-day-Sab^ath, and also of the Moral Law, was
designed by God, to drive Man to seek for R^st and Salvation only in Christ.

THe Jews greatly erred in misunderstanding the fourth Commandment, as if the
hallowing of the seventh day had been the only scope and purpor^ thereof;
whereas inde^d that day was but a mere figure of the true Sabbath, which is
Christ; for he only is the Sabbath or Rest, both of the Godhead and of us men,
as has been at large showed before.

Yet because the seventh day was a figure of so great a mystery and blessing,
therefore God did hallow and honor it with many privileges, such as are
before rehearsed: But withal, he clogged it with many encumbrances and
inconveniences, and some disparagements and s^^rs also, and disgraces, more
than any other day, as an allay or abatement of honor; like the Boy's Memento
to King Philip, who every morning called upon him with, (...); so did God with
this Aelian. l. ^. c. 15.
Sabbath day. And at length, when the period of the use thereof was
accomplished, he cast i^ quite away. And this he did on purpose, to withdraw
his people from doting on the shadow, to the apprehension of the true, real,
and substantial Sabbath.

When Princes confer honors or estates upon their subjects, they usually
Onerate their Patents with some reservations of fealty, homage or service, for
an acknowledgment of their minoration, and subj^ction to their Sovereign. Upon
such divine Policy it pleased the Godhead, so to reserve the supreme honor to
himself, in the whole economy of his isntrumental Types and Servants; and
therefore he chose things, which in themselves were but of low condition, and
base esteem amongst men, that so the principal honor and efficacy of their
service, might be ascribed to himself. Thus he appointed those poor creatures,
Sheep, and Neat, and Goats, as sacrifices, to represent the grand Sacrifice and
mystery of the death of Christ. Then, by the brazen image Number. 21. 8. Joh. 3.
14.
of a Serpent, lifted up upon a pole, he represented Christ as crucified,
although a Serpent is, of all creatures, esteemed most vile and cursed. The
great Sacrament of taking away sins, called Circumcision, was to be performed
on that part of man's body, which is called uncomely, and pudendum. Indeed, the
Temple was a splendid and glorious type; but even this, and the other, were
slighted, when they had served their due time. All this was to instruct his
people, not to adhere and rest on the figures, but principally to regard and
consider the signification and substance of them. For when they con^ided in,
and boasted too much of their Templum Domini, God suffered Jer. 7. 4.
it soon after to be destroyed; and when they magnified the brazen Serpent,
with offering 2 King. 18. 4.
incense to it, the good King Hezekiah brake it in pieces.

The like policy was used by the Divine Wisdom in the New Testament, by
choosing contemptible men to administer the Gospel, as Fishermen, Idiots,
unlearned and ignorant, Act. 4. 13. Foolish things, weak things, the base,
despised, and the ((...)) Nothings of the world, 1 Cor. 2. 27, 28, And such as
were esteemed the filth, and the offscouring of all things, 1 Cor. 4. 13. And
also, the foolishness of preaching, 1 Cor. 1. 21. The Apostles were suffered
to be poor, naked, hungry, to be stoned, scourged, imprisoned, crucified,
beheaded, slain with the sw^rd. The reason of these dispensations may thus
appear: When the Lystrians esteemed too highly of Paul, as Act. 14. 12
if he were a god, presently God suffered him to be stoned almost to death; of
which, and all such like permissions, the same Apostle has left us this true
and useful document, We have this treasure in earthen vessels, that 2 Cor. 4.
7.
the excellency of power may be of God, and not of us. Just so, that the people
of God might be induced to consider, and look after a far more high and noble
Sabbath, it pleased the wise Godhead to incumber the Seventh-day Sabbath with
such disparagements as these following.

1. The Sabbath Day was never made known or mentioned, until 24 hundred years
after the Creation, although other Ceremonialls had been enacted long before,
as Sacrifices, and Circumcision, and the Passover also some time before it. It
seems, that in all that long time, there appeared no necessity or use of a
Seventh-day Sabbath. St. Augustine further observes, Aug. in Psalm. 37.
Non invenimus Davidem aliquando recordatum Sabbati secundum observationem
Ju^aeorum. (i. e.) David, (or whosoever with him was the Psalmographer) never
mentioned the Jewish Sabbath, although in the Title of that Psalm, the Sabbath
day was mentioned, in, or before, Austin's time, as appears in St. Jerome. But
surely, Austin knew that Title to be added by some other, and not by David. We
have also observed before, that Christ himself, in the Gospel, did never
rehearse the Sabbath-Law.

2. After this Sabbath-Law was set up, God laid a necessity on his people by
command, of breaking and profaning it, in Marching, Sacrificing, and
Circumcising; as also by human necessities, in the works of Midwifry, milking,
feeding, and helping their cattle. And, by the precept of loving their
neighbors, to assist them in the casualties of fires, sickness, wounds, and
in wars defensive, of themselves and their brethren; or else they must have
perished, as many did in the Maccabean 1 Mac. 2. 38.
times, by their Sabbaticall superstition, in not defending themselves; for
upon this needless nicety, they suffered their City to be taken by Ios. Ant.
l. 12. c. 12.
P^olemaeus Lagu^ on a Sabbath day; and their Temple also afterward by ibid.
l. 14 c. 8.
Pompey the Roman, whereby the Jews became first subject and Tributaries to
Rome. After this, when the Jews rebelled against the Romans, ibid. de Bell. l.
1. p. 808.
King Agrippa exhorting them to submit, told them withal, That they keeping
their custom of so Sabbatizing, must needs be easily vanquished. Whereas the
true mysterious Sabbath might have been truly sanctified, with all these
workings, as is said before.

3 No Manna, in all the forty years, ever fel^ from leaven upon any Jewi^h
Sabbath day, although it fell on every other day of the week. This surely was
intended as an abasement, a slur, or disgrace thereof. We know that Manna
represented Christ, as himself said, Joh. 6. 35. 51. No Manna on the Sabbath
day, that is, no Messiah to them, that will not apprehend him in his Type, but
content themselves in the mere Day shadow. St. A^stin judiciously says, Aug.
de Diverse. Tract. 13. To. 9.
Non credentibus, Manna sola; sed credentibus, idem qui nunc Christus. (i. e.)
By believing Israelites, the Manna was not received alone, (as by unbelievers)
but, with it, the substance and mysterious Manna, which is Christ. Just as with
faithful Communicants in the sacred Eucharist, not only Bread, but Christ
also, by ^aith and love, is entertained and united with them.

The Manna did represent both God the Word, (as Incarnate) and also the Word of
God, (as delivered in holy Writ); So Orig. in Ex. hom. 7.
Origin and Aug. de Temp. Ser. 91.
Austin affirm. Now, although this Manna of the Word did fall in the Jewish
Synagogues every Sabbath day, when the Scriptures of Moses were read unto them,
as St. James said; yet, to unbelieving Jews, this Act. 15. 21
Manna did, vermes generare, it bred worms, and stanck, as the forenamed
Fathers observe. For, by misunderstanding the excellent Word of God, and
misapplying it; and in it, this mysterious Sabbath, only to the shadow of a
day, and corporal idleness, they bred the worms and stinck of superstition,
blindness, misbelief, and pertinacy therein. Just so, even at this day by sad
experience we have found, that the Manna, or good Word of God being abused, by
misunderstanding or misapplying, or else by hypocrisy, has been made a
stumbling block, and bred heresies, schisms, sacriledges, rebellions, wars, and
unchristian Massacres. There never yet was in the Church any heresy so
impudent, but brought some pretense or letter of Scripture to back it. The
bloody Glosser, that taught Subjects to kill their good King, by a cursed
Gloss upon Genesis 9. 6. yet so, he brought Scripture in his mouth, as Satan did
Matthew. 4.
to Christ, which surely himself knew to be most falsely applied and abused.
Such abuses by hypocrites and heretics, occasioned some late Romanists, as
Hosius, Pigghius, Eccius, and others, to utter blasphemies against the holy
Scriptures; they called them, A nose of wax, a leaden rule, a dead Letter, a
dumb Doctor, an occasion of contention, a sphinx or Riddle, and like Aesop's
Fables. Every charitable Reader will easily conceive, that such learned men
meant not these speeches of the pure word of God, but only of the abuse
thereof. In which consideration, Luther also (as Surius says) called the
Bible, Librum Haereticorum; and Hosius called it, Verbum diaboli. (i. e.) The
book of heretics, and, The word of the devil. For so, before all these, St.
Jerome, without any blasphemy, said, Hier. in Gal. 1. 5. To. 6.
Interpretatione perversa, de Evangelio Christi, hominis fiat Evangelium, aut,
quod pejus est, diaboli. (i. e.) By false Expositions, the Gospel of Christ
may be made the Gospel of men, or, which is worse, the Gospel of the devil.
Thus he: and thus also our new Sabbatarians, abuse both the Manna of the Word,
and the true Sabbath of God.

Some of the Fathers much pleased themselves with a conceit, which they took up
either from a passage, Wisd. 16. 20. or from Wisd. 16. 20.
Philo the Jew, That the Manna had a several taste, agreeing with every man's
appetite; as, of bread, or flesh of beasts, or of fouls, or of fish. Thus Orig.
in Mat. Tract. 35.
Origin writes, and ^as. Epist. 406.
^asil, as from Philo, and Aug. Epist. 118.
Austin often, and Prosper. de Provid.
Prosper, in one of his Poems, thus:

Nam quis tantarum evolvat miracula rerum,
Mannae imbrem, and cunctos in coeli pane sapores?
And we in our days have perceived some Sabbatarian innovators, misapplying
the Manna of the Word, and the sacred doctrine of the Sabbath, to their own
gusts, or wicked designs. Bishop Montague observed, Act. and Mon. c. 7. s. 27.
that the Jews, in their last times, were not charged with the grand roaring
sins of their forefather's idolatries, but with superstitious traditions, too
strict sabbatizings, and hypocrisy; and yet they were then worst of all, and
committed that horrid sin which Christ called, The filling up the measure of
their fathers; Mat. 23. 32.
and that was, their killing God's Anointed. How near some Sabbatarians have
approached to that sin, I take not upon me to judge, but leave it at their own
conscience, where they will surely find it one day.

4. Christ the Savior lay dead in his grave on the whole Jewish Sabbath day.
This surely was intended as a disparagement of that Sab^ath, because he did not
so on any other whole day from his death to his resurrection. And this may be
well conceived to intimate the death of that Sabbath, and also the deadness of
the Jewish misapprehension thereof: For Christ was the life and spirit, both of
the Sabbath Day, and of his people; so that without the apprehension of him;
the Sabbath-Law was but a dead letter, and no better then a morticine, or dead
carcass; which if the people under the Law had but touched, it made Numb. 19.
11.
them legally unclean. His lying dead might moreover have taught them, that he
inspired not, or breathed any vital graces, into such vain and empty
Sabbatizers.

Christ, we know, is often called Life, as, Joh. 4. 6. and 5. 12. Col. 3. 4.
Gal. 2. 20.
I am the way, the truth, and the life. And, H^ that has the Son has life.
The Apostle says, Christ is our life; and, Christ l^veth in me. All this is
said in respect of the union of Christ and his servants, who apprehend him by
faith and love. But to those Jewish and faithless Sabbatizers, he was as one
dead, in respect of their neglect of the living substance and doting on a dead
sabbatarian shadow, as it were upon the fallacious apparitions of dead men,
which are not really the things which they seem to be; and therefore our old
Wr^ters call them Umbras, (i. ^.) Shadows. When Tremelius (a learned man, and
well deserving of the Church) lay on his deathbed, and perceived, that some
suspected him to retain in his heart the Jewish Religion, because he was of
Jewish parentage; the good man, to put them out of that suspicion, cried out,
I. W. Exercit.
Vivat Christus, pereat Barabbas. So we profess of the shadowie Jewish
Sabbath, Let it die and vanish, whilst the true Sabbath, Christ our Lord, shall
continue for ever.

7. Another discountenance of the seventhday Sabbath, is, That even in the O^d
Testament; whilst this Ceremony was in force, God called it but a Sign, Exodus
31. 17. Ezekiel. 20. 12. and the Apostle afterward called it but a Shadow, Col,
2. 17. And moreover, God professed, that he could not away with (or endure)
their Sabbaths, Isa. 1. 13. And Christ, in the New Testament, in his own
person, dissolved it by cures, clay-tempering, and causing a bed or couch to be
carried, etc. None of these things would have been said or done, if the seventh
day had been the only Sabbath, intended in this fourth Commandment.

The Reader may further observe, that the same God who did so much slight the
Sabbath, sometimes; and also at length quite nulled it; yet at other times he
exceedingly magnified the Sabbath, and gave most strict and frequent commands
to keep it, to hallow, and to sanctify it; as Exodus 31. 16. Jer. 27. 22. Ezekiel.
20. 20. and 44. 24. and promised great favors and blessings to his people that
kept it unpolluted.

These passages at first sight appearing so contrary, might justly seem Riddles
to us; but that we assuredly know, that there is included in this Commandment,
a twofold Sabbath, the one Ceremonial, and but temporary; the other Moral, and
eternal.

The Cerem^nia^ consisted only in the Typical hallowing of the Seventh day* And
this day-S^bb^^h is it, that God so much slighted, because his people would not
understand the true signification, meaning, and intention thereof.

The Moral, Spiritual, and Mysterious Sabbath, is Christ the Savior; and He
only is meant, and only He it is which God did so much magnify, under the
Appella^ion of Sabbath, of whom the Seventh-day Sabbath was but a sign, or
shadow, and was to vanish in its due time, whereas the Moral Sabbath was to
continue everlastingly.

This twofold Sabbath to me seems to be signified by the words of God, in the
place before cited, ^xod. 31. 16. Where the word Sabbath is doubled without any
other cause Exodus 31. 16.
appearing, when we thus read, The Children of Israel shall keep the Sabbath,
to observe the Sabbath throughout their generations. Here is a Sabbath, and a
Sabbath. First, the Ceremonial, to be kept weekly, that by it they might be
^nduced to apprehend the Second, even their Messiah* throughout their
generations.

Of this Moral and everlasting Sabbath, I take the words following to be meant
(although Ibid.
I know, that some expound them otherwise) Israel shall keep the Sabbath -- for
a perpe^ual covenant, it is a sign between me and the children of Israel for
ever. These words, for ever, and perpe^ual, do indeed sometimes signify but a
finite and limited time, which Divines call, Perpetuita^em periodicam, or
^mitatam; as Deuteronomy. 15. 17. He shall be thy servant for ever. So again of
Samuel's Ministry, 1 Samuel 1. 2. called for ever: Which Je^ome more fitly
renders, J^giter, that is, continually, or perpetually; for the word Perpetual,
does signify any time, though but short, so it be without discontinuance, or
interruption; for so Gramma^ians teach us, Perot.
Perpetuum dicimus, integrum, non interruptum: As in Plau^us, Pla^t in Rud. and
in Stich.
Perpetua nox, signifies but one whole night; and he also calls ten years, December
perpet^os^annos. But sometimes also, these words signify sempiternity, and
absolute everlastingness, as they do in that place abovesaid. Which way soever
we take them, they must relate to the Moral Sabbath, because that Sabbath was,
and is, to be kept c^n^inually, perpetually, for ever, without any vaca^ion, or
interruption at all; but so were not the Ceremonials, or Seventh-day Sabbaths,
between which there was weekly six days intermission.

The Covenant which is there said to be perpetual, and for ever, signifies
Christ, and is the same which in Jerm^e, is called a new Covenant, of which
that Prophet thus writes; This shall be the Covenant -- I will put Jer. 31.
31, 33.
my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts. That this Law is
meant of Christ, I have showed before: Chap. 7.
And that Christ only is this everlasting Covenant, the Gospel often declares:
Christ says, This is my blood of the new Testament, Matthew. 26. 28. Or, as St.
Luke reads it, This is the new Testament in my blood, Luke 22. 20. Testament
and Covenant signify the same thing, but only, that a Covenant is a Promise
Conditional: And a Testament there, is the same Promise, or Covenant, given and
bequeathed. So Hebr. 13. 20. The blood of Christ is called, The blood of the
everlasting Covenant ((...)) which Beza renders, Aeter^ foederis, i. e. Eternal
Covenant: So these words, Testament, and Covenant, both to our own, and also to
foreign Translators, seem all one; so Christ must be this everlasting
covenanted Sabbath.

But then, if this everlasting Sabbath be really Christ, how is it called a
sign, as the Typical Sabbath is; for so we read, Exodus 31. 17. It is a sign for
ever?

To this we answer: That this Sabbath is no otherwise called a sign, than
Christ himself is so called, Luke 2. 34. This Child is set -- for a sign that
shall be spoken against. And, Then shall appear the sign of the Son of Man in
heaven. This sign signifies the very Person of Christ, as both Origin and
Chrysostom expound it. Only, the Covenant of Christ's Sabbathship is an
everlasting sign, but so is not the sign of the Ceremonial Sabbath, as has
been proved In this sense only the Sabbath is everlasting, as it signifies
Christ, of which there is no doubt to be made.

In a like case, when question was made by Act. 13. 22.
D^lci^^us, how D^v^d, being a great sinner, could be styled, A man after Gods
own heart? St. Austin answered; De 8. Quaest. Dulc. To. 3.
De Christo intellige, and nullus nodus est. So we say, if we understand that
this Sabbath Moral signifies Christ (as certainly it does) then there will be
no question of the everlastingness and eternity thereof. The Ceremonial, or
Day-Sabbath was taken away, that so the true substantial Sabbath might the
better take place in men's minds: Just as Typical Sacrifices were rejected by
God, that so the grand Sacrifice of Christ might be by faith apprehended; of
which the Apostle expressly thus writes, He takes away the first, that he may
establish the second. Heb. 10. 9.


This is also to be observed for a sign of the depreciating, or undervaluing of
this Typical, or Day-Sabbath, that Christ said, The Sabbath Mar. 2. 26
was made for Man, and not Man for the Sabbath. This he meant (no doubt) of the
C^remonial Sabbath, in that it was ordained, only to be ministerial and
subservient to Man, as a Conducter and Guide to the true everlasting Sabbath;
for if he had spoken of the Moral and Mystical Sabbath, he might truly have
said, That Men was made for the Sabbath; because the true Sabbath is God the
Son, by whom, and for whose glory, all Men, and the World it self were made:
And he was before all Creatures, and not made at all, nor created, but begotten
from E^ernity.

But yet, this Son of God may truly be said to be made the Sabbath for Man, yet
not as he is merely the Son of God, but as he is also, the Son of Man. He was
made Man for us, and by that he became the Mystical Sabbath. For the Son of God
considered in his pure Divinity, cannot be the Sabbath; neither can the Son of
Man be so, if considered without his Divinity, but jointly with both Natures:
So that in consideration of his assumed humane Nature, and therewith his
Sabbathship, he was made for Man, and came to help, and minister to Man, as
himself most graciously acknowledged; The Son of Man came not to be ministered
Matthew. 20. 28.
unto, but to minister.

7. Finally, The most notorious slurre of all, was, That this Seventh day,
which God appointed to be hallowed, could not possibly be so kept on that day
in all places of the Earth, as any Man that has but mean knowledge in
Geographie may easily apprehend; for when in one part of the Earth it is
Mi^-day, in another part it is Midnight, and when Day begins in one part,
Night begins in another; so that the Jews themselves, in their remote
dispersions, cannot possibly Sabbatize at the same time. By this it may clearly
appear, that the seventh-day Sabbath was only a national Constitution, during
the standing of the Judaical Commonwealth, and that the Seventh day was not
that Moral Sabbath which God required in this fourth Commandment; because a
Law Moral binds all Nations in every part of the Earth: but some other
Sabbath was intended, which possibly might be kept by all Nations; and that
Sabbath is Christ. Who therefore sent his Apostles Mar. 16. 15.
with an universal Commission, Go ye into all the world and preach. And not
only to the Jews, but, Go and teach all Nations. Matthew. 28 19.


These and such like encumbrances, impossibilities, and inconveniences, did the
Godhead p^t upon this Ceremonial Sabbath (as no fire-kindling, no
burden-bearing, no meatdressing, no stirring out of their places) and thereby
made that People ridiculous to other Nations, as the Prophet says, The
adversaries did mock at her Sabbaths: And the Manichee Lam 1. 7.
called their Saturday Sabbaths; Aug. Cont. Fa^st. l. 18 c. 5.
Catc^as Saturn^acas, i. e. the fetters of Saturn. Logicians use to say, Uno
absur do dato, mill sequuntur: The misunderstanding of this one Sabbath Law,
led the Jews into strange and ridiculous Superstitions, and also to the ruin
of their Persons, and City, and Temple. A Jew, in a boisterous Sea, refused to
tug at the stern, because it was his Sabbath day, and so he perished. Another
would not be drawn out of a loathsome draught upon the same reason, but rather
miserably perished, as our own Histories record.

The Jews could not be ignorant, that God himself did work on every
Sabbath Day, and that he did also occasionally command others so to do, as the
Priests, and sometimes the Soldiers; therefore they might easily have
perceived, that both the Sabbath, or Rest of God, and also of his people,
consisted in something else, and not in a mere cessation from worldly works.
Some Sabbatarian Writers tell us, That Man should work when God works, and
rest when God rested. But God works always, so cannot Man: If they had said,
that Man should rest in that thing, which God rested in, they had spoken home
to the true Sabbath indeed: For God rested only in Christ, and so should we;
otherwise all Seventh-day Sabbatizing is utterly vain and superstitious.

By these Reasons a pious and judicious Reader will clearly perceive, that
these slurrs were put upon the Day Sabbath by our Wise God, on purpose, and
design, to withdraw his people from the shadow to the substance, and from the
Ceremonial to the Moral, and substantial Sabbath, which is Christ: for just
such a design God had in his Dispensation, even of the Moral Law, which was
first written in Man's heart: Then afterward, when it was to our lapsed and
depraved nature impossible, yet it was again imposed on us, and engraven in
stone: And this he did, that thereby he might direct us, both to perform so
much of it as we can, and also to seek help and mercy of him, for what we
cannot do.

There had been no need of writing this Law in Tables of stone, which was
written defore in Man's heart, but only, because, as St. Austin says, Aug. in
Psalm. 57.
Tu fugitivus eras cordis tui; i. ^. Man was a runaway from his own heart and
principles; for we find, that Man now perpetrateth wickedness, which his own
conscience judges to be so, and also condemns; as an Heathen confessed;
Juvenal Sat. 13.


-- Se judice, nemo nocens absolvitur. The reason why God did impose this Law
on Man, then, when it was impossible, is singularly rendered by the Apostle,
thus; The Scripture Gal. 3. 2^.
has concluded all under sin, that the Promise by faith of Jesus Christ might
be given to them that believe. Now, although the impossible Law is by faith and
union with Christ made possible to Man; yet it was imposed on us with all its
literal impossibilities on purpose to be (as the same Apostle says) Our
Schoolmaster, to bring us unto Christ; or indeed, to Ibid. v: 24.
drive, force, and necessitate us, to seek some other means and way for our
justification, and salvation, besides the Law; which way is only the Lord Jesus
Christ, in whom only our peace with God, and our everlasting Sabbath
consists. To Him therefore, with the Father, and the holy Spirit, be rendered
blessing, honor, praise, and thanksgiving, for ever and ever. Amen.

Laus Deo.
FINIS.

