REPORTS AND CASES, COLLECTED BY THE LEARNED, SIR JOHN POPHAM, KNIGHT, Late
LORD CHIEF JUSTICE OF ENGLAND.

Written with his own hand in French, and now faithfully Translated into
English.

To which are added some Remarkable CASES Reported by other Learned Pens since
his death.

With an Alphabeticall Table, wherein may be found the Principal Matters
contained in this Book.



LONDON, Printed by Tho: Roycroft for John Place, and are to be sold at his
Shop at Furnivals Inn Gate in Holborn: 1656.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
ALbeit the name of the Compiler of the greatest part of the ensuing REPORTS
(for Denominatio fit a part majori and meliori) would be a sufficient
invitation to any understanding Reader, not only to cast his Eye upon, but
seriously to peruse them; yet because these two Questions may (and no doubt
will, and that upon good ground) be made: as, 1. Why they should lie so long in
private hands, without being exposed to the public view? 2. Why they should
be now Printed?

To the first I answer, That by the handsome composure and connection of them,
it may (and that very probably) be conjectured, that the honorable Compiler at
first intended them for the public, but they (after his death) coming into
private hands, they who became possessors of them, did rather intend their
own, and their friends private knowledge and advantage by them, then to let
others communicate therein, for it has not formerly been (neither yet is) a
thing unusual, for the great and learned Professors of the Law, to ingrosse
into their own hands the best and most authentic REPORTS, for their better
help, credit, and advantage in the course of their practice, which being
unknown to other men, they cannot upon sudden occasions, be ready to make
answer thereunto; and that might be the reason why they have not been as yet
published.

To the second I answer, that the Copy (out of which this Translation was made)
coming out of the Library of a reverend and Learned Sergeant at Law now
deceased, and said therein to be written with the proper handwriting of the
Lord POPHAM (a good ground to conceive that it was Authentic) the Gentleman in
whose hands it was, was earnestly importuned for the Copy that so it might be
made public, to whose importunity there was at last a cond^ssention, so as
such due care might be taken both in the Translation and Printing, as not to
prejudice the Author, or the matter therein contained: And whether that
condition be fully performed, shall be now left to the candid interpretation of
the judicious Reader, who cannot but know that some Errata's (let the Printer
or Correcter be never so careful) will follow the Press; but it is hoped that
nothing material or substantial is committed or omitted to the prejudice of
the Work, or of the Compiler thereof. There is an addition of some later Cases
in the time of King JAMES, and the late King CHARLES, which were taken by
judicious Pens, as will evidently appear by the Cases themselves; and I dare
say, that whoever reads them, will neither think his Time or Money misspent,
they being such as are well digested, and very practical. I shall add this
one thing more, that the principal end of this Edition is, the advancement of
knowledge, and to impart the good thereof to those who heretofore vvanted
what is hereby made public, which may (peradventure) be a means to invite
others more learned to publish other things of the like nature, for the benefit
of Students, and Professors of the Law.

THE NAMES OF THE PRINCIPAL CASES: and other CASES vouched in this BOOK.
P. Stands for Principal Case.

B. Stands for Avouched Case.

A
fol. ARton and Hares case 97p Arthur Johnsons case 106p Austins case 183b
Arnold and Dichtons case 183p Austen and Monks case 186p Aud^ey and Joices case
176b Abbingtons case 196b Arrunstels case 201b B
LOrd Burleighs case 26b Bullock and Diblers case 38p Burtons and Wrightmans
case 56p Baynes case 84p Butler and Bakers case. 87p Burtons case 100p
Baskervill and Brooks case 132p Brett and Cumberlands case 136p Bennet and
Westbechs case 137p Sir Baptist Hixe case 130p Bernard and Beales case 146p
Brabin and Tradurus case 140p Blaxton and Heaths case 145p Sir John Bingleys
case 147p Bowyer and Rivets case 153p Bowry and Wallingtons case 159p Block and
Harris case 168b Brole and Michels case 173b Bidles case 179b Sir William
Burtons case 180p Beven and Cowlings case 183p Barker and Ringroses case 184p
Buffeild and Byburos case 188p Brokesbyes case 189b Brooks case 125p Sir
Robert Brown, and Sir Robert Strowds case 198p Bell and Stranguryes case 203b
Bagnols case 206p C
CRocker and Dormars case 22p Caesar and Curtines case 35p Callard and Callards
case 47p Cawdry and Attons case 59p Case of Arms 1^1p Cowper and Smiths case
128p Lord Chandos and Scullers case 145b Constable and Cloberys case 161p
Challoner and Mores case 167b Chamberlains case 185b Calf and Neiols case 185p
Cadmor and Hildersons case 186b Chambers case 202p Crab and Tookers case 204p.
Caryes case 207p D
DAcres and Culpeppers case 19b Davies and Gardiners case 36p Dillon and
Fraines case 70p Dabridgcourts case 85b Dickenson and Greenhows case 156p Day
and Drakes case 170b Dabborn and Martins case 177p Drope and Theyars case 178p
Dickar and Molands case 200p Desmond and Johnsons case 201b E
EArl of Bedfords case against Russell 3p Sir Francis Englesfields case 18p
Edwards and Halinders case 46p Earl of Shrewsbury and Sir Tho. Stanhops case
66p Eton and Monnys case 98p Everets case 107p Earl of Pembroke against Sir
Henry Barkley 116p Earl of Shrewsburys case 132p Earl of Northumberland and
Dewels case 141p Empson and Bathirsts case 176b F
FEnner and Fishers case 1p Sir Moile Finches case 2^p Forth and Halboroughs
case 39p Finch and Riseleys case 53p Sir Moile Finch and Frogmortons case 53b
Fulwood and Wards case 86p Fennors case 109p Fulcher and Griffins case 140p
Foster and Tailors case 196p G
GIbbons and Maltyards case 6p Gravener and Brooks case 32p Geilles and
Rigewayes case 41p Greenhingham and Heydons case 98p Goodale and Wyats case 99p
Glover and Humbles case 120b Gouldwels case 131p Godfrey and Owens case 148p
Gilbert and Hoptons case 152p Gores case 173b Goodwin and Willoughbys case 177p
Giffords case 186b Goldsmith and Goodwyns case 186b Sir Henry Gemhams case 144p
Goods case 211p H
HUnt and Gotelers case 5p Hayes and Allens case 13p Haycock and Warnfords case
24p Hughes and Robothams case 30p Humble and Olivers case 55p Hal^ and Pearts
case 60p Harry and Farceys case 61p Sir Rowland Heywards case 95p Herbin and
Chards case 96p Hall and Arrowsmiths case 105p Holme and Gees case 112p
Havengate and Hares case 126. 147p Harlo and Wards case 127b Hare and Brickleys
case 128b Hide and Whistlers case 146p Hodges and Mores case 164p Hemdon and
Crowches case 167b Holcome and Evans case 169b Hobs and Tadcasters case 186b
Hord and Paramours case 201b Higgs case 201b Harrison and Erringtons case 202p
Hebborns case 206p I
JEne and Chesters case 151p Jenning^ and Mayst^^^ case 102b Jorden and Ayliffs
case 168b Jenkin and Vivians case 201p K.
Kettle and Masons Case 50p King and Berys Case 57p Kellies Case 104p Kirton
and Hoxtons case 115p The King and Brigs case 150p Kebles case 18^b Knights
case 187b King and Merricks case 2o L
Lee and Browns case 128p Jews and Jeofferies case 153p Lemasons and Dicksons
case 189p Laurking and Wylds case 126p Leechford and Saunders case 194b Liverel
and Rivets case 206b Lathams case 210b M
MIchels case 8b Morgans case 52p Morgan and Tadcastles case 55p Montague and
Jeofferies case 108p Mounson and Wests case 110p May and Kets case 129p
Middletons case 131p May and Samuels case 134p Mingies case 135p Sir Arthur
Mannarings case 145p Morley and Sir Richard Molineuxs case 1^5p Millen and
Fandries case 161p March and Fandries case 161p March and Newmans case 163p
Mayor of Maidstons case 180p Mills and Parsons case 199b O
OAks and the Lord Sturtonrs case 65b Overton and Sydalls case 120p Old and
Estgreens case 160b Owen Wards case 187b P
PIgots case 94p Porramor and Veralds case 101p Pollard and Lutterells case
108p Sir John Pools case 128p Powels case 139p Pack and Metholds case 160p
Probe and Maynes case 192b Petit and Robinsons case 203p Ployden and Symes case
205p R
ROper and Ropers case 106b Robinson and Walkers case 127p Rawlinson and Greens
case 127p Rones case 133p Richardson and Cabells case 142p Sir George Reynalds
case 165p Ryman and Bickleys case 129p Reynor and Hallets case 187p Rochester
and Rickhouse case 203p Rosse and Harvies case 206b Risley and Hains case 209p S
STocks case 37p Smiths case 53p Southwell and Wards case 91p Sawyer and
Hardies case 99p Stainings case 102p Scot and Mainys case 109p Strowd and
Wyllis case 114p Southern and Howes case 143p Silvesters case 148p Stone and
Withipoles case 152p Sary and Pigots case 166p Sharp and Rasts case 181p Snaggs
case 187b Sherry and Richardsons case 15p Smithers case 169b Scheverel and
Dales case 193p Sanders and Meritors case 200p Staple and Kings case 206b
Savile and Wortleys case 207p Sparman and Sherwoods case 222p T
THompson and Traffords case 8p Taunton and Raries case 106p Tailours case 133p
Thurman and Coopers case 188p Talbot and Sir Walters Lacens case 146p Turner
and Dennis case 169 V
VAughans case 134p W
WOod and Downings case 10p Webly and Skinners case 85p Wood and Matthews case
102p Westcot and Cottons case 130p Wrenhams case 135p Wootton and Byes case
136p Wards case 144p Webb and Paternosters case 151p Westermans case 151p Wales
case 160p Welden and B^sies case Wicks case 186b Williams and Vaughans case
186b Willers case 197b Whelhorseys case 208p Woodroof and Vaughans case 210q

CASES Reported by SR. JOHN POPHAM Knight, Lord chief Justice of ENGLAND, In
the time of Queen ELIZABETH; and written with his own hand in French, and now
faithfully done into English: to which are added some remarkable CASES,
Reported by other Learned, and Judicious Pens, since his death.
Fenner versus Fisher. Mich. 34. and 35. Eliz. Reginae, in the Kings Bench
IN Trespass brought by Justice Fenner against Andrew Fisher, for a Trespass
done in the Parsonage house of Cravfords in the County of Kent, 30. Maij 34. of
the Queen, the Defendant pleaded that one (...) was seized of the same Message
in his Demesne as of see, and being so seized, the (...) day of, in the same
year, did demise it to the Defendant for two years, from such a Feast then last
past; by virtue of which he entered and was possessed, until the Plaintiff
claiming by color of a Deed made of the said Wrigh^ where nothing passed by
the Deed, upon which the Defendant entered, etc. The Plaintiff replies by
protestation, that the said Wrigh^ was not seized as the Defendant has
alleged: And for Plea says, that the said Wright did not let it to the
Defendant, as the Defendant has alleged; upon which being at Issue, and found
for the Plaintiff; Ackinson moved, that Judgment ought not to be given for the
plaintiff, because that he has not made any Title by his Replication, for by 9
E. 4. 49. In Trespass the Defendant pleads in Bar and gives color to the
Plaintiff; it is taken for a Rule that the Plaintiff ought to make Title: Cook
answered, that he needs not to make Title in this case, but that it suffices
to traverse the Bar without making a Title, and said that in 22 E. 4. Fitzh.
Trespass, It is adjudged that in Trespass the Plaintiff may traverse the Bar
without making Title in his Replication; and here in as much as it is
acknowledged by the Defendant, that Wright did demise it to the Plaintiff, and
that this is a Lease ta will at the least not defeated by his own showing, but
by the Lease made to Defendant, this being traversed and found against the
Defendant. The Plaintiff by the acknowledgment of the Defendant himself, has a
good Title against him to enter into the Land, and by it the Defendant by his
Re-entry is become Trespass^^ to the Plaintiff; and he said, that in 2 E. 4.
fol. In Trespass, where the Defendant pleads that he let the Land to the
Plaintiff for another man's life, and that he for whose life it was, was dead,
upon which he entered, and it is adjudged that it suffices for the Plaintiff to
maintain that Cestuy and vie was yet living without making any other Title: And
yet these reasons Cleoch and Gaudy held the Replication good, to which Popham
said, that we as Justices ought not to adjudge for the Plaintiff where a good
and formal bar is pleaded as here it is. But whereby the Record it self which
is before us, we cannot see that the Plaintiff has good cause of Action: And
therefore I agree that in Trespass in some cases the Plaintiff may traverse
the Bar, or part of it, without making any other Title then that which is
acknowledged to the Plaintiff by the Bar, but this always ought to be where a
Title is acknowledged to the Plaintiff by the Bar, and by another means destroy
by the same Bar, for there it suffices the Plaintiff to traverse that part of
the Bar which goes to the destruction of the Title of the Plaintiff comprised
in the Bar, without making any other Title, but if he will traverse any other
part of the Bar, he cannot do it without making an especial Title to himself
in his Replication, where by the Bar the first possession appears to be in
the Defendant, because that although the Traverse there be found for the
Plaintiff, yet notwithstanding by the Record in such a Case the first
Possessions will yet appear to be in the Defendant, which suffices to maintain
his Regresse upon the Plaintiff, and therefore the Court has no matter before
them in such a Case to adjudge for the Plaintiff, unless in cases where the
Plaintiff shows a special Title under the Possession of the Defendant; As for
example, In trespass for breaking of his Close, the Defendant pleads that J.
G. was seized of it in his Demesne as of fee, and enfeoffed J. K. by virtue of
which he was seized accordingly, and so being seized, enfeoffed the Defendant
of it, by which he was seized, until the Plaintiff claiming by calour of a
Deed of Feoffment made by the said J. G. long before that he enfeoffed J. K.
(where nothing passed by the said Feoffment) entered, upon which the Defendant
did re-enter, here the Plaintiff may well traverse the Feoffment supposed to be
made by the said J. G. to the said I. K. without making Title, because that
this Feoffment only destroies the Estate at will made by the said I. G. to the
Plaintiff, which being destroyed he cannot enter upon the Defendant, albeit the
Defendant comes to the Land by Disseisin, and not by the Feoffment of the said
I. K. for the first Possession of the Defendant is a good Title in Trespass
against the Plaintiff, if he cannot show or maintain a Title Paramoun^. But the
Feoffment of the said I. G. being traversed and found for him, he has by the
acknowledgment of the Defendant himself a good Title against him, by reason of
the first Estate at will acknowledged by the Defendant to be to the Plaintiff,
and now not defeated: But in the same case he cannot traverse the Feoffment
supposed to be made to the said I. K. to the Defendant, without an especial
Title made to himself; for albeit that I. K. did not enfeoff the Defendant, but
that the Defendant disseised him, or that he comes to the Land by another
means, yet he has a good Title against the Plaintiff by his first Possession,
not destroyed by any Title Paramount, by any matter which appears by the
Record, upon which the Court is to adjudge; and with this accord the opinion of
31 and. 4. 1. That the material matter of the Bar ought always to be
traversed, or other wise that which upon the pleading is become to be
material, and that which the Plaintiff traversed here, to wit, the Lease made
by Wright to the Defendant is the material point of the Bar which destroys
the Title Paramount acknowledged to the Plaintiff by the color given in the
Bar which is good without another Title made: So note well the diversity where
in pleading in Trespass the first Possession is acknowledged in the Plaintiff
by the Bar, and where it appears by the pleading to be in the Defendant, and
where, and by what matter the first Possession acknowledged in the Plaintiff by
the Bar is avoided by the same Bar; And upon this, Judgment was given for the
Plaintiff, as appears in 34. and 35. Eliz. Roll.

Earl of Bedford, versus Eliz. and Anne Russell. Mich. 34. and 35. Eliz.
2. IN tho Court of Wards, the Case was thus, between the now Earl of Bedford,
In the Court of Wards.
and Elizabeth and Anne the Daughters and Heirs of John, late Lord Russell,
which was put ten times to all the Justices to be resolved: Francis late Earl
of Bedford, was seized of the Manor of Baruake Chaldon, etc. in Commitatu
Dorset, in his Demesne as of see, and so seized the fourth year of Queen Eliz.
of it enfeoffed the Lord S. John of Bletsoe, and others in see, to the use of
himself for forty years, from the date of the said Deed, and after to the use
of the said John then his second Son, and the Heirs Males of his body; and for
default of such Issue, then to the use of the right Heirs of the said Earl the
Feoffor for ever: Afterward Edward Lord Russell Son and Heir apparent to the
said Earl dyed without Issue, and after the said John Lord Russell dyed without
Issue Male, having Issue the said two Daughters, afterward to wit 27 Eliz. the
said Francis Earl of Bedford, by Indenture made between him and the Earl of
Cumberland and others in consideration of the advancement of the Heirs Males of
the body of the said Earl, which by course of descent should or might succeed
the said Earl, in the name and dignity of the Earldome of Bedford, and for the
better establishment of his Lordships Manors and Hereditaments, in the name
and blood of the said Earl, covenanted and grantes with the said Covenantees,
that he and his Heirs hereafter shall stand seized of the said Manors (amongst
others) to the use of himself for life, without impeachment of Waste, and after
his decease to the use of Francis the Lord Russell, and the Heirs Males of his
body; and for default of such Issue, to the use of Sir William Russell Knight,
his youngest Son, and the Heirs Males of his body, with diverse Remainders
over: after which the said Francis, Lord Russell tied, having Issue Edward the
now Earl of Bedford, and after this the said Franc^s late Earl of Bedford dyed
also, and after the Daughters of the said John Lord Russell, or the now Earl of
Bedford, shall have these Manors of Barunke, etc. was the question; and upon
this it was argued by Cook, Sollinton and others, for the Daughters, that an
use at Common Law, was but a confidence put in some to the benefit and behoof
of others, and that Conscience was to give remedy, but for those for whose
avail the confidence was, and that was in this Case, for the said Daughters
which were the right Heirs to the said Francis late Earl of Bedford, upon the
first conveyance made 41 Eliz. for the confidence that he put in the Feoffees,
as to the profits that he himself was to have, was but for the forty years, and
how can any other say that he shall have any other Estate, when he himself
says, that he will have it but for forty years; and therefore in this case his
right Heir shall take as a Purchasor, by the intent of the Feoffor which has
power to make a disposition of the use at his pleasure, and his pleasure (as
appears) was to have it so, and it is not as if the use had been limited to
be to himself for life with such a Remainder over, in which Case the use of the
Fee by the operation of Law ought to execuse in himself for the Freehold which
was in him before: As where Land is given to one for life, the Remainder to his
right Heirs, he has a Fee-simple executed, but here he shall have but an
Estate for forty years precedent, and that the Fee-simple cannot be executed by
such a limitation made to the right Heirs; but in case of an Estate for years
only precedent such a limitation to his right Heirs afterward is not good, but
in case of an use it is otherwise, for it may remain to be executed, to be an
use in Esse where the right Heir shall be, and therefore not to be resembled to
an Estate made in Possession. And an Use is always to be guided according to
that which may be collected to be the purpose and intent of the parties: And
therefore if a man make an Estate of his Land without limitation of any Use or
confidence, the Law shall say that it is to his own use, but if it be upon
confidence then it shall be to the Use of the party to whom it is made, or
according to the confidence which shall be absolute, or according to that which
is limited, which may alter that which otherwise shall be taken upon the
general confidence, as 30 H. 6. Fitz. Devise, If a man devise Lands to another
in Fee, he has the use and Title of it, but if it be limited to his use for
his life only, the use of the Fee shall be to the Heir of the Devisor, for by
the limitation his intent shall be taken to be otherwise, then it should be
taken if this limitation had not been; and in as much as in this case the Earl
reserves to himself but the use for years, it is evident that his intent never
was to have the Fee, to surrender this Term, which perhaps he intended to be
for the benefit of his will, which shall be defeated contrary to his purpose,
if the Fee shall be also in him by the death of the said John, without Issue
Male, and therefore the said Daughters ought to have the Land. And on the other
part it was argued by Glanvil: Sergeant, and Egerton the Attorney General,
that this limitation made to the right Heirs, is void in the same manner, as if
a man give Lands to another for life, the Remainder to the right Heirs of the
Feoffor, in this case the Heir shall take by descent as a Reversion remaining
to the Feoffor, and not as a Remainder divested out of him, for the ancient
right privilege the Estate which he may take, and therefore he shall take it by
descent and not by purchase; for the name of right Heir is not a name of
purchase betwixt the Ancestor and his heir, because that does instance that he
happens to be heir, he takes it by descent, and then it comes too late to
take by purchase; And another reason that the Daughters shall not have it is,
because that when Sir John Russell dies without Issue Male, which Estate might
have preserved the Remainder, if it shall be a Remainder, there was not any
right heir of the said Francis Earl of Bedford to take this Remainder, because
that the said Earl survived him: And therefore it is to be resembled to this
Case; Land is given in Tail, the Remainder to the right Heirs of I. G. the
Donee dies without Issue in the life of I. G. in this case, albeit I. G. dies
afterward having an heir, yet this heir shall never have the Loud, because he
was not heir in Esse to take it when the Remainder fell, and for the mean
Estate for years this cannot preserve a Remainder, no more then when Land is
given for years, the Remainder to the right heirs of I. G. this Remainder can
never be good if I. G. be then living, because such a Remainder cannot depend
but upon a Freehold precedent at least, and therefore the Inheritance here
shall go to the now Earl of Bedford by the second assurance. And upon
consideration of the Case and several Confirms had upon this amongst the
Judges and Barens, it was at last resolved by all (but Baron Clarke) that the
Daughters shall not have the Manors in the County of Do^set, but the now Earl
of Bedford, and principally upon this reason, because there was nor right Heir
to take as Purchasor where the mean Estate Tail was determined, which was by
the Lord John, without Issue Male, for they agreed that the Remainder to the
right Heirs if it be a Remainder cannot be preserved by the mean Estate for
years, for it ought to be a Freehold at least which ought to preserve such a
Remainder, until there be one to take it by name of Purchasor as right Heir.
And at this day they did not think there was any diversity between the Case of
a Remainder in Possession limited to the right heir of one, and of a Remainder
in use so limited over to another.

Mich. 34. and 35. Eliz: In the Kings Bench.
3. IN Ejectione firmae upon special verdict the case was thus, A man
possessed of a Term of years in right of his wife, made a Lease for years of
the same Land to begin after his death which was the Lessor, and afterward he
dyed and his wife survived him, and the question was, whether the wife shall
have the Land after the death of the husband, or the Lessee, for if the husband
had devised the same Land to an estranger, yet the Wife shall have it and not
the Devisee, as it happened in the Case of Matthew Smith, who made first such a
Devise of a Term of his Wife, and yet the Wife had it; because that by the
death of the husband (before which the Devise did not take effect) the wife had
it in her first Right not altered in the life of her Husband; but it was agreed
in this case by all the Court, that the Lessee shall have it during his Term,
for as the husband during his life might contract for the Land for the whole
term which the wife had in it, so might he do for any part of the term at his
pleasure, for if he may devise the Land for one and twenty years to begin
presently, he also may make it to begin at any time to come after his Death, if
the term of the Wife be not expired, but for the Remainder of the term of the
husband, made no disposition during his life, the Wife shall have it, which by
Popham this Case happened upon a specialll Verdict in the County of Somerset,
about 20 Eli. Where he and Sergeant Baber were Practisers in the Circuit there,
to wit, the Lands were demised to husband and wife for their lives, the
Remainder to the Survivor of them for years, the Husband granted over this term
of years and dyed, and the question was whether the Wife shall have the term of
years or the Grantee, and adjudged that the Wife shall have it, and it was upon
this reason, because there was nothing in the one or the other to grant over,
until there was a Survivor: And the same Law had been if the Wife bad dyed
after the Grant, and the Husband had survived, yet he shall have the term
against his own Grant; as if a Lease were made for Life, the Remainder for
years to him which first comes to Paul's, if A. grant this Term for years to
another, and afterward A. is the first which comes to Paul's, yet the Grantee
shall not have this Term because it was not in A. by any means neither in
Interest nor otherwise until he came to Paul's: As if a man make a Lease for
life, the Remainder to the Right heirs of J. S. J. S. has Issue a Son which
sells this Remainder, and afterward I. S. dyed, this Son being his Heir
notwithstanding his Sale, he shall have this Remainder and not his Grantee,
because it was not in him at the time of his Grant, but by a matter which
comes, Ex post facto, to wit the death of his Father, and afterward Judgment
was given in the first case, that the Grantee shall have the term granted to him
by the Husband, and that the Wife shall not have the term during this Leese

Hunt Versus Gateler. Mich. 34. and 35 Eliz. in Commun. Banco.
IN a Replevin between Hunt Plaintiff, and Gateler Avowant in the Common Pleas,
which was adjorned for difficulty into the Exchequer Chamber, the Case was
thus, Tenant in tail, Remainder in Fee, he in Remainder in Vide this case Cook
lib. 1. 61. by the name of Cape^s case.
Fee grants a Rentcharge in Fee out of the same Land, to begin after the
Estate tail determined, Tenant in Tail suffer a common Recovery with a Voucher
over, to the use of the said Hunt in Fee, and dyed without Issue inheritable to
the intail, and whether Hunt shall now hold the Land charged with the Rent, was
the question; and after that it had long depended, and was many times argued in
the Common Pleas, and Exchequer Chamber, at Hertford Term it was at last
resolved by all the Justices and Barons unanimously, that the said Rent charge
wss gone by the Recovery, although the Estate tail was expired, because that he
which is in, is in under this Intail: And therefore Popham said, suppose that
the Tenant in tail himself before the Recovery had granted a Rent charge out of
the same Land, or had made a Lease for years, or had acknowledged a Statute,
all those had been good, and to be executed against him which comes in under
the Recovery, notwithstanding that the Estate tail had been determined for want
of an heir inheritable to the intail, for he which recovereth cannot lay that
he against whom he recovered had but an Estate in tail, and if his Lease remain
yet good (as all agreed it did) how can the Lease, a Rent granted by him in the
Remainder, be good also, for the one and the other cannot stand together, and
therefore all the Leases, Charges, or Statutes acknowledged or made by him in
the Remainder, are gone and avoided by the Recovery had against Tenant in tail.
To which opinion all the other agreed, and Popham said further, That he in the
Remainder upon an Estate tail, cannot by any means plead to defend his
Remainder, unless the Tenant will as by vouching of him, and therefore shall be
bound by the Act of Tenant in Tail, where the Estate it self is bound as here
it is by the Voucher, and then they which come in by him in the Remainder by
way of Lease, Charge, or Statute, (which are not so much favored in Law as
Tenant in tail himself) be in better condition then he in the Remainder himself
is; for he in the Remainder upon an Estate tail cannot put more into the Mouth
of the Lessee or Grantee to defend their Estates, then he himself could have to
defend his Remainder, and this is the reason that such a Termer or Grantee
shall never falsify the Recovery had against Tenant in tail, as the Grantee or
Termer shall do which comes in under Tenant in tail against whom the Recovery
was had, for there as the Tenant in tail may plead to defend his Possession and
Estate, so may his Termer or Grantee of a Rentcharge do, for by the Demise or
Grant made, the Tenant in tail has put all the Pleas into their mouths for
their Interests which he himself had to defend his Right and Possession, which
they may plead for the time to defend their Possessions and Rights as well as
the Tenant in tail himself may do, and this is the reason that such may
falsify Recoveries against their Lessors or Grantors, if they be not had upon
the mere right Paramount, which he that comes in by such a Remainder as before
cannot do, for such a one in Remainder cannot be received to defend his Right,
but his mouth is merely foreclosed to do it, and by the same reason are all
those which come in by such men foreclosed to defend their Interests or
Estates, and upon this Audgement was given in the same Term in the common
Pleas.

Gibbons versus Maltyard and Martin.
IN an Ejectione firmae, brought in the Kings Bench by John Gibbons Vide this
case in Cook lib. 8. 130 Thetford Scholies case.
Plaintiff, upon a Demise made by Edward Peacock the Son, of Lands in Croxton,
in the County of Norfolk, against Thomas Maltyard and John Martin, upon a
special verdict, the case appeared to be thus, to wit, that Sir Richard
Fulmerston Knight, was seized of the said Lands (amongst others) holden in
soccage in his Demesne as of Fee, and being so seized by his last Will in
Writing, made 9 Eliz. Ordained that a Devise shall be made by his Executors
that a Preacher shall be found for ever to preach the Word of God in the Church
of Saint Mary's in Thetford, four times in the year, and to have for his Labor
ten shillings for every Sermon. And further he devised to his Executors and
their heirs certain Lands and Tenements in Thetford aforesaid to this intent;
and upon this condition, that they or the Survivor of them within seven years
after his decease, should procure of the Queens Highness to erect a free
Grammar School in Thetford for ever to be had and kept in a house by them to be
erected upon part of the said Land, and that they shall assure three of the said
ienements for the house and Chamber of the Schoolmaster and Usher, and their
Successors for ever, and for the other tonement, that they shall make an
assurance of it for the Habitation of font poor people (two men and two women)
for ever. And for the better maintenance of the said Preacher, Schoolmaster,
Usher, and Poor people, he devised (amongst others) his said tenements in
Croxton to his Executors for ten years for the performance of his Will, and
after this he devised them to Sir Edward Clear, and Frances his Wife (the
Daughter and Heir of the said Sir Richard, and to the Heirs of the said Sir
Edward, upon Condition, that if the said Sir Edward his Heirs or Assigns,
before the end of the said ten years shall assure Lands or Tenements in
possession to the value of five and thirty pounds a year, to the said Executors
or the Survivor of them, their Heirs and Assigns, or to such persons their
heirs or Successors as his said Executors or the Survivor of them shall name or
assign for and toward the maintenance of the said Preacher, Schoolmaster, and
Usher, in the said School house, etc. and for the releif of the said poor
people in the one of the said houses, according to the Ordinance as he himself
in the said Will had declared, or otherwise as by his Executors or the Survivor
of them shall be prescribed. And if the said Sir Edward and his Heirs shall
make default in the assurance of the said Land by him to be assured as
aforesaid, then he will that immediately upon such default, his Estate, and the
Estate of the said Frances shall cease in the said Lands in Croxton, etc. and
then he devise the same Lands to his Executors and their Heirs for ever to the
use of them and their heirs upon trust and confidence that they or the Survivor
of them and their Heirs shall assure the same, or otherwise yearly dispose the
profits of them in finding the said Preacher and other charitable works as
aforesaid and made Edward Peacock Father to the Lessor, (whose Heir the Lessor
is) and others his Executors, and dyed 9. of the Queen, after whose Death all
the Executors refuse to be Executors. The seven years pass without the
establishing of the School, and other things according to the Will for the
first part of it, whereby the Land in Thetford was forfeited to the heir for
the Condition broken, and within the ten years Sir Edward Clear made a
Feoffment of Land to the value of 35. l. a year to the surviving Executor, for
the use of the School, but with acondition contrary to the Will, and no Livery
wa^ made upon the said Feoffment, but it was enrolled of Record in the
Chancery, whereby the said Sir Edward had broken the Condition annexed to his
Estate, and also during all this time neither the Executors nor their Heirs had
done any thing in finding the Preacher or the other works of charity with the
profits of the said Lands in Croxton, or in assuring of it according to the
Will, and yet the said Edward Peacock the Son in September 32. Eliz. being Heir
to the surviving Executor, entered into the Land in Croxton, and demised it to
the Plaintiff for seven years, upon which the Defendant as Servant, and by the
commandment of Sir Edward Clear, and of Edmund the Son and Heir of the said
Frances (who was then dead) entered, upon which entry and Efectment the Action
was brought, and it was moved by Godfrey and others that the entry of the
Defendants was lawful, first in the right of the said Sir Edward, because that
his Estate by the Statute of 23. H. 8. cap. was without condition, or
determined; because that by this Statute all the uses limited in such a manner
are made void, because they are in the nature of a Mortmain, as may appear by a
Proviso at the end of the same Statute for a certain person of Norwich who had
Devised Lands for the case of the poor Inhabitants of the same City, in Taxes
and Tallages, and for cleansing of streets there and for discharge of toll, and
Custom within the City, all which were good uses, and not tending to
Superstition, and yet if it had not been for the Proviso they had been gone by
the body of the Statute: And the Statute ordained also, that every penalty and
thing which shall be devised to defraud this Statute shall be void; and if this
do not help them, yet the Entry made in the right of the said Heir, of Sir
Richard Fulmerston, is good; for the estates of the said Executors are also
bound as with a tacit condition that these things shall be performed which are
not done, and therefore the entry in right of the heir is lawful, for the
words Ad propositum, ea intention, and the like in a Will are good Conditions
which Gaudey agreed, and vouched the case 28. Sess. Pl. but it was after often
argument agreed by all the Court that the first exception was to no purpose,
for they conceived that this Statute was to be taken to extend only to the uses
which tend to Superstition, as might be collected as well by the words of it in
the very body of the Act at the beginning, as by the time in which it was made,
for at this time they began to have respect to the ruin of the authority of
the Pope, and to the dissolution of the Abbeys, Chantries, and the like: And by
Popham, the Proviso was put in the Statute, but for satisfaction of the
Burgesses of the same City at this time, and not for any necessity as
oftentimes it happens. And for the other point, he said, that it appears
fully by the Will that it was not the intent of the said Sir Richard to have
the Land in Croxton bound with any condition in the possession of his
Executors, or with any other matter which determine their Estate, for the
Words, that they shall have it upon trust and confidence, exclude all
constraint which is in every condition, and the Will is, that they shall have
it to the use of themselves and their Heirs for ever, which c^nnot be if it
shall be abridged by any Limitation or Determination: And he said, that the
Lord Anderson demanded of him a Case which was adjudged in the Common Pleas 29.
Eliz. Rot. 639. which was thus, One Michel made a Lease for years rendering
Rent, and for default of payment a re-entry with Covenants on the part of the
Lessee to repair the Messuages, etc. and the term continuing the said Michel,
by his Will in Writing, devised the same Land to the said Lessee for more years
then he had to come in it, rendering yearly the like Rent, and under the same
Covenants which he now holds it, and dyed, and afterward the first term
expired, the Lessee does not repair the Houses, and the question was, whether
by this he has forfeited his term, and adjudged that as to this it was not any
condition, and a Covenant it could not be, for a Covenant ought always to come
on the part of the Lessee himself, which cannot be this case, for he does not
speak any thing in the Will to bind him, but they are all the words of the
Devisor himself which comprised in a Will, and it never was his intent to have
it to be a condition, and therefore void as to the Lessee to bind him either by
way of Covenant or Condition, so here, etc. And for the said Feoffment enrolled
without Livery, it was agreed by all, that it was not of any force to make the
Land to pass to the Executors, but the enrolment conclude him to say not his
Deed* And also that the Executors refuse to be Executors, this shall not hinder
them to take by Devise as to the Inheritance, whereupon it was adjudged that
the Plaintiff shall recover as appears.

Thomson Versus Trafford. Hillary Term 35 of Queen E^izabeth.
IN an Ejectione firmae, between John Thomson Plaintiff* and Thoma^ Trafford
Defendant, the case was thus, The President and Scholars of Magdelen College
in Oxford, 20 December. 8. Eliz Did let a Message u^ the Borough of Southwark,
to which no Land appertained to William Sta^dish for twenty years, from the
Feast of Saint Michael next ensuing, rendering the ancient Rent, and 25. October.
21. Eliz: they did let the same Message to the same Standish for twenty years
from the Feast of Saint Michae^ then next ensuing, rendering also the ancient
Rent, and 31 August 30. Eliz. The President and Scholars made a new Lease of
the same Message to Sir George Carew Knight, for twenty years from making of
the Lease rendering the ancient Rent, which Lease was conveyed by mean
Assignments to the Plaintiff, upon which the Action was brought against the
said Trafford which had the Interest of the said Standish by mean Assignments:
Popham said, that Ipso facto upon the last Lease made, and annexed by Standish,
the first Leass was determined and gone, for this last contract dissolves the
first when the one and the other cannot stand together, as they cannot here,
because the one intermix with the other, and so was the opinion in the Common
Bench about 1 Eliz. in the case of the Abbey of Barking, of which I have seen a
Report.

And here Standish before Michaelmas, next after the second Lease made to him
could not grant over his first term to be good to the Grantee, for if this
should be, the second term shall not be good to Standish; but for the remnant
of the years after, the first term finished, which cannot be because it
stands in the power of the Grantor with the assent and acceptance of the
Grantee to make the second Grant good, for the whole term, to wit, from
Michaelmas, and this cannot be but by a determination in Law of the first term
immediately, which is made by his own acceptance, and therefore a prejudice to
none but himself, and Volenti non fit injuria, and the first Term cannot have
his continuance until Mich. but is gone presently by the acceptance of the
second Lease in the whole, for the first contract which was entyre cannot be so
dissolved in part, but in the whole, as to that which the party has, and
therefore the first Term (as the case is here) is gone in the whole, to which
Clench and Gaudy agreed: And if so then this last Lease to Standish was but as
a Lease made to begin at a time to come, which is made good by the Stat. of 14
Eliz. if it do not exceed the time of 40 years from the making of the Lease;
for the purpose of this Act was, that Colleges and the like shall not make
Grants in Reversion, albeit it be for a year, and the reason was, because that
by such Grants in Reversion they shall be excluded to have their Rent of the
particular Tenants for the time: And therefore in the case of the Countess of
Sussex, who had a Ioynture assured to her for her life by Act of Parliament,
with a Provise, that the Earl her Husband might demise it for one and twenty
years, rendering the usual Rent, where the said Earl had made a Lease for one
and twenty years, according to the Statute, within a year before the end of
the same Lease, the said Earl made a new Lease of the same Land to Wroth his
Servant for one and twenty years, to begin after the end of the former Lease,
rendering the usual Rent, and died, the said Countess avoided this last Lease
by Judgment given in this Court, because it shall be intended to be a Lease in
Possession, which he ought to make by the Proviso, from the time of the making
of it, otherwise by such perverse construction, the true intent of the Statute
shall be utterly defrauded. But here to make a Lease for twenty years to one
in Possession, and to make another Lease to another for twenty years, to
begin after the end of the former Lease, is good, because that the one and the
other do not exceed the forty years comprised in the Statute.

And the Justices of the Common Bench the same day at Sergeants Inn agreed to
the opinion of Popham for the determination of the whole first Term, by the
taking of the second Term by Standish.

Ward versus Downing.
2. IN an Ejectione firmae brought by Miles Word against Robert Downing, the
case was thus; O^e Robert Brown was seized of certain Lands in in the County of
Norfolk, in his Demesne as of Fee (which were of the nature of Gavelkin^) and
had Issue George his eldest Son, William his middlemost Son, and Thomas his
youngest Son, and being so seized 6 December. 1559. made his Testament in writing,
by which he devised the said Tenements in these words.

Item, I give unto Alice my wife the use and occupation of all my Houses and
Lands, as well free, as copyhold, during her natural life.

Item, I will, that George my Son shall have after the decease of his Mother
all those my Houses and Lands, whereof the use was given to his said Mother for
the term of her life, To have and to hold to him and his Heirs for ever, and if
the said George dye without Issue of his body lawfully begotten, then I will my
said Lands shall in like manner remain unto William my Son and his Heirs for
ever. And I will that all such money as shall be paid of any Legacy by the said
George, shall be allowed by the said William, to whom the said George shall
appoint.

Item, I will, that if the said George and William depart the world before they
have Issue of their bodies lawfully: Then I will that all my said Houses and
Lands shall remain unto Thomas my Son and to his Heirs for ever.

Item, That if the said George shall enjoy my said Houses and Lands, then I
will the said George shall pay out of the said Lands to William and Thomas his
Brother 26 l. 13 s. 4 d. that is to say, at his first entry into the said
Lands, to pay unto the said William his Brother 40 s. and so to pay yearly
until the sum of 13 l 6 s. 8 d. be fully answered and paid, and then
immediately to pay unto Thomas his Brother 13 l 6 s. 8 d. to be paid unto the
said Thomas, when the said William shall be fully answered by 40 s. a year, in
like proportion as is aforesaid: And if my said Son George shall refuse to pay
unto William and Thomas his Brother the sums of 26 l 13 s. 4 d in manner and
form as is before limited; Then I will that all my Houses Lands and Tenements
with the Appurtenances remain to Will^am my Son and his Heirs for ever, paying
therefore 26 l. 13 s. 4 d. viz. 13 l. 6 s. 8 d. to George my Son, and 13 l. 6 s.
8 d. to Thomas my Son, in such manner and sort as the said George shall pay if
he should enjoy the said Lands: And if it fortune the said William to enjoy the
said Lands, then the said William shall pay unto Thomas his Brother the whole
sum of 26 l. 13 s. 4 d. as is ^foresayd. After which the said Robert dyed
seized of the s^yd Tenements in question, and his said wife entered into them
for her life by virtue of the said Will, in whose life time the said George
dyed without Issue, after which the said Thomas also, to wit, 9 Dec. 1576. made
his Testament in writing, and of this made Mary his wife his Executrix, and
dyed, having Issue Martha by the s^yd Mary: Afterward the said Alice the wife
of the D^visor, the l^st of March. ^2 Eliz. dyed, and after her death, to wit,
the first of May 32 Eliz. the said William entered into the said Tenements, and
was thereof seized in his Demesne as of Fee-tail, and the said Mary in the
lifetime of the said Alice proved the Testament of the said Thomas Brown, and
the said William did not pay the said 26 l 13 s. 4 d. to the said Mary, nor any
part thereof according to the Will, and the said Martha being Daughter and Heir
of the said Thomas thereupon entered into the said Tenements, and did let the
said Moiety of which the said Action was brought to the said Ward for two
years, upon which the said Downing in the right and by the commandment of the
said William re-entred, and expelled the said Plaintiff bu^ the conclusion of
the Verdict was not upon the expulsion, but only if the entry of the said
Downing shall be adjudged lawful, then they find the Defendant not guilty, and
if it were not lawful, then they find him guilty.

Fennor, the Estate of the said William is conditional by the Will, to wit,
that he shall pay to Thomas the 40 Marks, according to the Will, because the
Will is, that the said money shall be paid as is aforesaid, or before the said
moneys which were to be paid, was expressly limited to be paid upon the
forfeiture of his Estate: And further if it shall not be taken for a Condition,
then Thomas has no remedy for the money to be paid to him; and although it be
limited to be paid but to Thomas, who was dead before the day of payment of
it, yet it shall be taken as a duty limited to him which shall be paid to his
Executors, because that a time certain is limited for the payment of it, to
wit, when the Land is come to the said William, which is, by the death of the
said Alice, but if no time had been limited for the payment of it, and they
had died before the payment of it, it had been otherwise; And it being a
condition in William, albeit it descend upon him, as well upon him as upon the
Heir of the said Thomas, yet it remains a good Condition for the part of the
Heir of the said Thomas, not determined by the descent of the other part upon
the Heir of the said William.

And further he said, that here the Condition shall not be said to be broken,
but upon refusal of payment by the said William, as in the case of George to
whom it refers by the words (as is aforesaid) which refusal is not found, and
therefore the Plaintiff shall be barred.

Clench, The Executors of the said Thomas know not when, nor at what place to
demand it, and therefore he thinks that the said William ought to have tendered
the money to the said Executrix at his peril.

Popham, The payment limited to be made by the said George is at his first
entry after the death of Alice, and then to pay 40 s. and so yearly until 40
Marks are paid to the said William, and thereupon 40 s. yearly to the said
Thomas, until other twenty Marks are paid to him; so that this is the form of
the payment, to wit, at his entry, as well for the place as the time, for it
cannot be made at his entry, unless upon the Land it self, and therefore by the
purport of the Will, the Land shall be taken for the place where the payment
ought to be made, for avoiding the inconvenience which otherwise will ensue; As
if I am bound to pay to you 20 l. upon your first coming to such a place, this
place shall be taken for the place where the payment shall be made. And whereas
it is said further in the Will, and so to pay yearly 40 s. until the twenty
Marks are paid to William, this payment also by the words (and so to pay
yearly, etc.) shall be at the same place at the end of every year, upon the
next day after the end of it, or otherwise there will be no certainty when it
shall be paid, and therefore the first day of every year shall be the very day
of payment, and this also by virtue of the said words (and so yearly) And at
the last day of payment by George to William, or Thomas there ought to be paid
but 26 s. 8 d. because that then there remains no more to be paid of the sums
limited to be paid to them; And when the Will here has finished with George
for that which he is to pay, it goes further, and if he refuses to pay the
said sums to William and Thomas, in manner and form aforesaid, then he wills
that all the said Lands shall remain to the said William and his Heirs for
ever, paying yearly, etc. and so there is an express penalty to George if he
refuse to make payment, to wit, that he shall loose the Land for default of
payment made by George by the word (paying) annexed to the Estate which is a
Condition, but he conceived that this last payment to be made to Thomas, is not
to be made upon any penalty, nor that a Condition is to be employed in it,
although Thomas has no remedy for it, but in conscience, because it is a mere
confidence put in William to pay it: And he said, that he was the rather moved
to be of this opinion, because every one of the precedent Limitations was with
an express Condition annexed to them, as to George, if he refuse, etc. But
when William is to have but an Estate-tail upon the determination of the Estate
made to George, for default of Issue there he says nothing, but that the said
William shall pay to the said Thomas forty Marks, as is aforesaid, which is
but a declaration of his intent, that he put confidence in him for the payment
of it, and did not bind himself upon condition, as in the other cases, which he
might have done by express words of condition, if his intent had been so, as
well as he did in the other cases, if his purpose had been so; and the words,
that he shall pay, as is aforesaid, is to be understood for the place and time
when it shall be paid, according as George ought to pay it: And it does not
seem to stand with reason, to expound it, for a Condition to destroy the
Remainder limited to the said Thomas; but if it shall be a Condition upon a
relation, because of the words, that he shall pay it, as aforesaid mentioned,
that the payment ought to be paid to the Executor of the said Thomas, albeit he
died before the day of payment, because this was a sum in gross limited to be
paid to the said Thomas at a certain time. But if it shall be taken for a
Condition in William, he thinks clearly that the said William ought to have
given notice to the Executrix of the said Thomas before he had made his first
entry into the Land of the Ten. when he intended to make his entry, so that the
Executrix might be there at the same time to have made demand of the money,
which ought to have been done, or otherwise there cannot be a refusal in the
said William, and without his refusal or other default in him, the Condition
cannot be broken, if it had such a relation as to make the payment as George
ought to do it: And so the Executor of Thomas cannot have notice when William
will make his first entry into the Land, if he do not give him notice of it,
and therefore if it shall be a Condition it had been broken on the part of
William, for want of giving notice to the Executor of the time of his first
entry, whereby the Executor might have notice of the time to make his demand,
because without a demand refusal cannot be, and the Executor is excused to
make demand when he had no notice of the time, and therefore the default of
William in not giving notice of it shall be taken against him as strongly as if
he had made a refusal to pay upon demand; for if notice had been given to the
Executor, and he had demanded the money, and William had said nothing to it,
but omitted to pay it, yet this shall be a refusal in Law.

But of this nothing appears in the Verdict, whether the Executor had notice
given to him or not, nor nothing mentioned in the Verdict whether any demand or
refusal was made of the money or not, and therefore the Verdict as to these
points is uncertain to judge upon, whether it shall be taken to be a Condition
in William: But it seems as the Verdict is, that Judgment ought to be given
against the Plaintiff, for the conclusion of the Verdict is upon the entry of
the Defendant, whether this be lawful or not, and not upon the expulsion, or
whether upon the other Moyetie his entry was lawful in right of the said
William, because they were Tenants in Common.

3. IN Trespass of Assault, Battery, and Imprisonment, made such a day at in
the County of Cornwall, brought by against: The Defendant says, that he was
Constable of the same Town, and that the Plaintiff the said day, year, and
place, brought an Infant not above the age of ten days in his arms, and left
him upon the ground to the great disturuance of the people there being, and
that he commanded the Plaintiff to take up the said Infant, and to carry it
from them with him, which the Plaintiff refused to do, for which cause he
quietly laid his hands upon the Plaintiff and committed him to the Stocks in
the same Town, where he continued for such a time, until he agreed to take up
the Infant again, which is the same Assault, Battery, and Imprisonment, of
which the Plaintiff complains, upon which the Plaintiff demurred. Fennor was of
opinion that that, which the Constable did was lawful, and that it is hard
that an Officer shall be so drawn in question for it, for this shall be an
utter discouragement to good Officers to execute their Offices as they ought to
do. Popham, A Constable is one of the most ancient Officers in the Realm for
the conservation of the Peace, and by his Office he is a Conservator of the
Peace; and if he sees any breaking of the Peace, he may take and imprisen him
until he find surety by obligation to keep the Peace: And if a man in fury be
purposed to kill, maime, or beat another; the Constable seeing it, may arrest
and imprison him until his rage be passed, for the conservation of the Peace.
And if a man lays an Infant which cannot help it self upon a Dunghill, or
openly in the field, so that the Beasts or Fouls may destroy it, the Constable
seeing it may commit the party so doing, to Prison, for what greater breach of
the Peace can there be then to put such an Infant by such means in danger of
its life? And what diversity is there between this case and the case in
question, for no body was bound by the Law to take up the Infant but he which
brought it thither, and by such means the Infant might perish, the default
thereof was in the Plaintiff, and therefore the Action will not lie: And thereupon
it was agreed that the Plaintiff take nothing by his Writ.

Hayes versus Allen.
4. TErm. Pasch. 33 Eliz. Rot. 1308. A Cui in vita was brought in the Common
Pleas, by Ralph Hayes against William Allen, of a Message with the
Appurtenances in St. Dunstans in the East, London, in which it was supposed
that the said Will. had no entry, but after the demise which John Bradley, late
husband to Anne Bradley, Aunt of the said Ralph (whose heir the said Ral: was)
made to Tho. Allen and Jo. Allen, and counts accordingly, and shows how Cousin
and Heir, to wit, Son of Will. brother of the said Anne, Will. Allen traverse the
Demise made to the said Tho. and Jo. Allen, and at Nisi prius it was found,
that the said Jo. Bradley and Anne his wife was seized in their demesne as of
fee, in right of the said Ann, of a Message in S. Dunstans aforesaid,
containing from the North to the South 18 foot, and from East to West 12 foot
and a half, and being so seized during their Marriage, by their Deed, sealed
with their Seals, enfeoffed the said Tho. Allen and Jo. Allen thereof, to hold
to them and their heirs, to the use of the said Jo. Bradley and Anne his wife
for their lives, and afterward to the use of the Churchwardens of S.
Dunstans, Land. and of their successors for ever, to the use of the poor of the
same place, and that Livery was made accordingly, and that the said Deed was
enrolled in the Chancery at Westminster. and that afterward the said Anne died, and
that Jo. Bradley survived her and died, and that the right of the said Mess.
descended to the said Ra. as cousin and heir of the said A. And that Sir W.
Allen K. was seized of a piece of land in S. Dunst. aforesaid, containing 6
foot 4 inches contigious and adjacent to the said Mess. late the said Jo.
Bradleys and A. his wife, in his demesne as of fee; And that the said Sir Will.
after the said feoffment, and before this Writ purchased, utterly drew away the
said Message, late the said John Bradleys and Ann his wife, and drected a new
house upon the Land of the said Sir William, and upon part of the Land upon
which the other house stood, containing from the North to the South thirteen
foot, and from the East to the West eighteen foot ten inches, which Message so
newly built, stood the day of the Writ purchased, and yet stands. etc. And if
upon the whole matter the said Demise of the said John Bradley and Anne be, and
in Law ought to be adjudged the Demise of the said Message, newly built upon
the said part of land, where the Message of the said John Bradley and Anne
stood, then, the Jury find that the said John Bradley demised to the said
Thomas and John Allen the said house newly erected as aforesaid, as the
Plaintiff has alleged, and if not, then they find that he did not demise.

And upon this Verdict Judgment was given there, and an especial Writ of
Habere facias seisinam awarded of the said Message, with the Appurtenances;
viz. 18 foot of it from the North to the South, and 12 foot and an half of it
from the East to the West; upon which a Writ of Error being brought in the
Kings Bench, it was alleged for Eror by Coke Solicitor that upon this Verdict
Judgment ought to have been given for the Tenant, and not for the Demandant,
for what was remaining of that which was of the house, is not a house, but only
a piece of a house, and therefore it ought to have been demanded by the name of
a piece of Land, containing so much one way, and so much another; for a house
wasted and utterly drawn away, cannot be demanded by a Message, but by the
name of a Curtilage, or so much Land of such contents; for a Praecipe lies of a
piece of Land containing so many feet in length, and so many in breadth: And
also Land built during the possession of him which has it by Tort, cannot be
demanded by the name of Land by him which has right, but by the name of a
house, nor e contra, for every demand of Land ought to be made according to the
nature of which it is at the time of the Action brought, be it a Message,
Land, Meadow, Pasture, Wood, etc. And if the Walls of a house be made upon the
Land without any covering, yet it shall be demanded but by the name of Land;
for he said, that it cannot be a house without its perfection to be habitable,
which he said is not here, because it stands upon the Land of the said Anne,
which has not the perfection of a house habitable without the remnant. But
this notwithstanding the first Judgment, was affirmed; for it was said by
Popham, and other Justices, that, that which is erected upon the Land of the
said Anne, shall be said a house as to the right of the Heir of the said Anne,
for a house may be such to be demanded by the name of a house, albeit it has
not all the perfection of a house, as if it has no doors, so if it has part
of the side walls not made, drawn away, or fallen, yet the remainder continues
to be demanded by the name of an house; so if part of the covering be decayed,
yet it shall be demanded by the name of an house, and the rather here, because
with that which is upon the other Land it is a perfect house; And I may have a
perfect house although the side Walls belong to another: as in London, where a
man joins his house to the side walls of his Neighbors, he has a perfect
house, and yet the side walls belong to another, and this commonly happens in
London, but it is otherwise if it were never covered, or if the covering be
utterly fallen, or drawn away, for without a covering a house cannot be said to
be a house, for the covering to keep a man from the Storms and Tempests over
head, is the principal thing belonging to a house.

And further, suppose that a man has a Kitchen, or a Hall upon Land, to which
another has right, he which has right ought to demand it by the name of a
house: suppose then that there is adjoining to this upon other land a Parlor, a
Buttery, a Shop, a Closet, and the like, with Chambers over them, this does not
change the form of the Writ that he is to have which has right, although
before it was built by the name of a house, and yet as to the rent both the one
and the other was but a house, but as to the demandant it is otherwise, for
they are several, so here: And the Demise which before was made of the house
drawn away, shall be now upon the matter a Demise, as to this part of it a new
Message; for if a man make a Lease for years of a house, and the Tetmor pull
it down, and erect there a new house, or if land be demised, and the Lessee
build a house upon it, in an Action of Wast, for Wast done in this new house,
the Writ shall suppose that he did wast in the Houses, etc. which were demised
to him, and yet in the one case it is not the Message which was demised to
him, and in the other the house was not demised, but the Land only; But he has
no term in the house but by the Demise before made: And it seems to Popham,
that Allen the Defendant cannot pull down this part of the house erect upon his
own land to the prejudice of the house which Hayes demands, if this which is
erected upon the land of Allen be of such a necessity, that without it the
house of Hayes cannot stand for a house; but if he dies after that Hayes has
built it, then Hayes shall have an Action upon the case against him for the
damages which he sustained by it: As if a man agree with me that I shall set
the outer wall of my house upon his land, and I do it accordingly, and
afterward the party which grants me this license, breaks it down, if the
Grant were by Deed I shall have an Action of Covenant for it, and if but by
Paroll, yet I shall have an Action upon the case against him. And here this
being done by him which was then Owner and Possessor of the one and the other
land, it shall be taken as a license in Law, to the benefit of him which has
right, which he cannot pull down after it is once made, but he shall be subject
to Hayes his Action for it, or otherwise Hayes shall be at great mischief and
prejudice by the Act of him which did the wrong, which the Law will not suffer,
but rather shall turn this to the prejudice of him which did the wrong, then to
the prejudice of the other which shall have wrong by the doing of it; for
Volenti non fit injuria, As if I am to enclose between my Neighbor and my
self, and my Neighbor pull down this enclosure or part of it, whereby my
Cattle escape into the land adjoining, and depasture there, I shall be excused
of this Trespass in the same manner as if he had licenced me to have occupied
it, and whatsoever happens to this Land adjoining by my Neighbors means, shall
be in the same degree as my Neighbors Act, for what he does shall be to his
own prejudice.

And upon the Judgment affirmed, the Attorney of the said Hayes made the like
Writ of Habere facias seisinam, directed to the Sheriffs of London, as was done
in the Common Pleas, whereupon it was affirmed to the Court in Hillary Term next
ensuing, that the Sheriffs had made their execution by the quantity of the feet
comprised in the writ, and that in the doing of it there was pulled down the
part of another house of the said Allen which was erected two feet upon the
land of the said Anne, and prayed remedy for it, and that this Habere facias
seisinam varying from the thing recovered, might not be filed; To which it was
said, that this quantity of feet was but a Surplusage in the Writ, and that the
Writ before this was sufficient and warranted by the Verdict and judgment.

Sherrey versus Richardson.
5. IN Debt upon an Obligation of 50 l. by Lawrence Sherrey against Arnold
Richardson, the case was this; 16 Martii 33 Eliz. the said Richardson was bound
to Sherrey in 50 l. with condition to stand to and observe the Arbitrament,
Award, order, rule, final end and judgment of one Walter Bolton and Edward
Price Arbitrators, indifferently elected to arbitrate, award, and judge of and
for all Actions, Suits, Quarrels, and Demands whatsoever betwixt them, until
the date of the Obligation, so that it be made and done in writing under their
hands and Seals, ready to be delivered to the parties, at, or before the last
day of this instant month of April, and the said Arbitrators the last day of
April, 33 Eliz. made an Arbitrament in writing under their hands and Seals,
that within four days next ensuing the award, either of the said parties shall
release each to other all Actions, Suits, and Demands before the date of the
said Obligation, with this Proviso, that if either of the said parties shall be
discontented with the said Award, or any part of it, within twenty days after
the Award, that then upon the payment of 10 s. by the party which thinks
himself agrieved with the Award, to the other, within the twenty days the
Award shall be void, and either of them to be at liberty against the other as
before the Award; and by the whole Court, if the Award shall be said made
within the time comprised in the O^ligation, where the Proviso had been to be
performed after the four days, it had been good, and a final Award, because
that the Proviso to make the Award void after the time limited for making of
Releases, is repugnant to that which was to be executed before, to wit, that
either of them shall release each to other within four days, for every Avvard
ought to be reasonable and indifferent betwixt the parties in all appearance,
and so that the one part of it ought not to impugn or encounter the other, and
here to what purpose shall it be to make the Award void, and to put out at
liberty against the other, when they have made Releases each to other, and
what indifferenty or reason should there be, that when one has released, the
other may dissolve the Arbitrament by the Proviso, and how may the Obligation
which had been once forfeited by the not making of the Release within the
four days be helped and become not forfeited by dissolving of the Arbitrament
by the Proviso. But by Popham, Gaudy, and Clench. if the Releases had been
limited to have deen made at a day to come, as ten days after, and that the
Proviso had been to have been performed in the mean time before these ten
days, then the Avvard had been void, because they had not pursued the
submission, for it was no final end of the controversy, in as much as it is
not certain by reason of the Condition, whether it shall be an end or not: But
it seems to Popham, that the Award here is not made within the time that it
ought to have been made by the Condition, for the Obligation is alleged to be
made the 16 of March, 33 Eliz. and then no month can be the instant month but
March, and therefore this word April is but a mere negation, and if it should
not be so, to what April shall it refer? for there is no matter to guide it
more to one April then another, but the general intendment which happily shall
guide it to the next April, for avaiding of incertainty, if it had not been for
the words (this instant month) and the words (within this month) shall not be
said to be frivolous and vain, where they may have a good and plain intendment,
but rather the word (April) which is repugnant to it shall be said to be void
and a mere negation; but it seems to him that as the Award is, the case being
that at any time within 20 days after the Award made, the one or the other
disliking the Award, might have been defeated upon the payment of 10 s. if the
10 s. had been paid within four days, as it might have been, and before the
Releases made the party by the intent of the Award had not been bound to have
made the Releases, because that by it within the time before the Releases made,
the Arbitrament shall be defeated by the Condition if it had been a good Award,
and therefore it shall not be said to be a final Award at the time of the Award
made, because that instantly upon it, before the four days are passed, there
was power in the said parties to have defeated the Award upon the payment of
the said 10 s. and therefore it seems to himself also that the Award was void,
and by consequence the Plaintiff shall be barred.

6. KIng Richard the 3. by his Letters Patents granted to the Burgesses of
Gloucester and to their Successors, that the Town of Gloucester, etc. shall be a
County of it self, several and distinct from the County of Gloucester for ever,
and no part of that County, and shall be called the County of the Town of
Gloucester; nevertheless saving and reserving to himself and his Heirs, that
the Justices of Assise in the County of Gloucester, the Justices of
Jail-delivery, and of the Peace, in holding of their Sessions, and also the
Sheriff of the County of Gloucester in holding of his County-Courts, and every
of them may freely enter into the said Town, and keep the said Sessions and
County-Courts, of, and for any thing and matter arising out of the said County
of the Town aforesaid, and within the said County of Gloucester, as before time
they had accustomed to hold them there, the said Grant or any other thing
notwithstanding. And grants further, that they shall have a Major, two
Sheriffs, and one Recorder, within the same County of the Town of Gloucester,
and that the Ministers of the Sheriff of the County shall not afterward enter
to do or execute any thing there which to their Office of Sheriff appertains,
or any ways to intermeddle with it, except only for the Sheriff of the County
of Gloucester, to hold their County-Courts as is aforesaid: And that the Major
and Aldermen of the said Town for the time being, and their Successors, having
power and authority to enquire here and determine all things which Justices of
P. or Justices assigned, to hear and determine Trespasses and Misdemeanors
within the County of Glocest. before this time have made or exercised: And that
the Justices of Peace, of him, his Heirs, or Successors within the said County
of Gloucester, should not intermeddle with the things or causes which belong to
the Justices of Peace within the said Town, etc. And upon this Charter diverse
things were moved by Sir William Periam Knight, now chief Baron of the
Exchequer; before his going into the Circuit.

1. Whether, by the saving of the Charter they have sufficient power reserved
to them to fit within the Town, being now exempted from the said Town of
Gloucester, to enquire there of the Felonies done in the said County of
Gloucester; And so for the Assizes and Nisi prius taken there of things made in
the County of Gloucester. Then if the the Sheriffs may execute their Warrants
made there at the time of the Assizes or Jail-delivery, notwithstanding the
exemption given to them by the Patent.

And it was agreed by all the Justices that the saving in the Patent is
sufficient for the Justices of Assise and Jail-delivery to sit there for the
things which happen within the County of Gloucester, for as the King may by his
Letters Patents make a County, and exempt this from any other County, so may he
in the making of it save and except to him and his Successors such part of the
Jurisdiction or privilege which the other County from which it is exempted,
had in it before; As in diverse places of the Realm, the Goal of a Town which is
a County of it self, or which is a place privileged from the County, is the
Goal of the County, and the place where the Assizes or Jail-delivery is holden,
is within the County of the Town, and yet serve also for the County at large;
as in the Sessions Hall at Newgate, which serves as well for the County of
Middlesex as for London, and yet it stands in London, but by usage it has
always been so, and nothing can be well prescribed unto by usage which cannot
have a lawful beginning by Award or Grant, and this by the division of London
from Middlesex at the beginning might be so. And so the Goal of Bury, etc. And
although that the words are, saving to him and his Heirs, yet by the word
(Heirs) it shall be taken for a perpetual saving, which shall go to his
Successors, which is the Queen, and the rather because it is a saving for
Justice to be done to the Subjects, which shall be taken as largely as it can
be: And albeit the express saving for the Sheriff is but for to hold his turn,
yet in as much as the authority of the Justices of Assise and Jail-delivery in
holding their Sessions as before was accustomed is saved, it is Included in it,
that all which appertain to the execution of this Service, is also saved, or
otherwise the saving shall be to little purpose: And therefore that the Sheriff,
or other Minister made by the authority of these Courts, is well made there and
warranted by the Charter: And we ought the rather to make such exposition of
the Charter, because it has been always after the Charter so put in execution
by all the Justices of Assise: But it seems that by this Commision for the
County a thing which happens in the Town cannot be determined, albeit it be
Felony committed in the Hall during the Sessions, but by a Commission for the
Town it may.

7. SIr Francis Englefield Knight, being seized in his Demesne as of Fee, of
Vide this case reported in Coke, lib. 7. 12, 13.
the Manor of Englefield, in the County of Berks, and of diverse other Lands,
in the first year of Queen Eliz. departed out of the Realm by license of the
Queen for a time, and remained out of the Realm in the parts beyond the Seas
above the time of his license, whereby the Queen by her Warrant under her privy
Seal required him to return, upon which he was warned, but did not come,
whereupon the Queen seized his Land for his contempt; After which the Statute
of Fugatives was made 13. year of the Queen, upon which by Commissions found
upon this Statute, all his Lands were newly seized, and afterward 17 Eliz. by
Indenture made between him and Francis Englefield his Nephew, and sealed by the
said Sir Francis at Rome, the said Sir Francis covenanted with his said Nephew,
upon consideration of advancement of his Nephew, and other good considerations
to raise an use, that he and his Heirs and all others seized of the said
Manor, etc. shall hereafter stand seized of them to the use of himself for
term of his life, without impeachment of Wast, and afterward to the use of his
Nephew, and of the Heirs Males of his body, and for default of such Issue, to
the use of the right Heirs and Assigns of the said Francis the Nephew for ever,
with a Proviso, that if the said Sir Francis shall have any Issue Male of his
body, that then all the said Uses and Limitations shall be void: and with a
Proviso further, that if the said Sir Francis by himself or any other, shall at
any time during his life, deliver or tender to his said Nephew a King of Gold,
to the intent to make the said Uses and Limitations void, that then the said
Uses and Limitations shall be void, and that thereafter the said Manors, etc.
shall be as before. Afterward the said Francis was attainted of Treason
supposed to be committed by him, 18 Eliz. A Le umures in partibus transmarinis,
and le attainder fuit primerment. utlagary and apres. per act de Par. 28 Eliz.
by which the forfeiture of the Condition was given to the Queen, and at the
same Parliament it was also enacted, that all and every person or persons which
had, or claimed to have any Estate of Inheritance, Lease, or Rent then not
entered of Record, or certified into the Court of Exchequer, of, in, to, or out
of any Manors, Lands, etc. by or under any Grant, Assurance, or Conveyance
whatsoever, had or made at any time after the beginning of the Reign of her
Majesty, by any persons attainted of any Treasons mentioned in the said Act
after the 8. day of February, 18 Eliz. within two years next ensuing the last
day of the Session of the said Parliament, shall openly show in the said Court
of Exchequer, or cause to be openly shown there the same, his, or their Grant,
Conveyance, or Assusance, and there in the Term time in open Court, the same
shall offer and exhibit, or upon his or their Oath affirming that they have not
the same, nor can come by it, or that it was never put in writing, then the
effect thereof to be entered and enrolled of Record, or else every such
conveyance and assurance should be void and of none effect, to all intents and
purposes; saving to every person and persons (other then to parties and privies
to such conveyance and such as shall not exhibit the said conveyance according
to the true meaning of this Act) all such Rights, etc. whereupon the said
Francis the Nephew, the 20. day of Novem. 30 Eliz. in his own person affirmed
upon his Oath that he had not the said conveyance, nor knew not how to come by
it, but delivered the effect of the assurance, omitting the time when it was
made, otherwise then that it was made after the beginning of the Queens Reign,
and before the Treason committed by the said Sir Francis, and before the
Statute made 13 Eliz. against Fugatives, and omitting also the last clause of
the Condition for the tender of the said King; and this he offered openly in
the Court of Exchequer the same day: after which the Queen being moved with the
said Condition, made a Warrant per Letters Patens under the great Seal, dated
17. Martii 31 Eliz. to Richard Broughton and Henry Bourchier Esquires, for her
and in her place and stead, to deliver or tender to the said Francis the Nephew
a King of Gold, to the intent to make void the Uses and limitations limited by
the said Indenture, and to return their proceedings upon it into the Court of
Exchequer, whereupon they made a tender of a King of Gold to the said Francis
the Nephew, the 18. day of March, 31 Eliz. which he refused to receive; And the
two years after the said Session of Parliament was the 23. day of March, 31
Eliz. And the said Broughton and Bourchier returned all this that they had done
as before, with the Commissions into the Exchequer, according to the
Commission: And upon this at the Parliament holden 35 Eliz. upon an Act which
then was to pass touching the Land and Attainder of the said Sir Francis,
diverse questions were moved amongst all the Judges and Barons then there;
whereof

1. The first was, whether the effect of the Assurance made by Sir Francis was
delivered into the Exchequer according to the intent of the Act, because it
wanted the time when it was made, and also one of the Proviso's? And upon good
deliberation they all did agree that it was not put in according to the purport
of the said Act, for the time may be material to be known, for the fraud which
by the same Statute might be averred to be in the making of this Conveyance,
and for the better trial of the validity of the assurance and of the cause of
it, therefore the true effect thereof ought to de delivered or shown in writing
to be entered of Record, because the Queens Council may see and understand by
it whether the Queen might have Title to it, or not; and how can this be if it
does not appear when it was done? And for the Condition how can the Queen by
presumption come to the notice of it, if it be not shown to her? And this was
one principal matter of the effect of the said assurance which ought to have
been shown, for this showing ought to be for the benefit and advantage of the
Queen, and not so much for the advantage of the party. And here the effect of
it which shall show for the Queen is omitted, and therefore not shown in writing
according to the purport and intent of the Statute, which was, that by it the
Queen and her Council may see what will make for her in the Grant, Conveyance,
or Assurance.

2. Whether this Condition were given to the Queen, because that the words in
this Indenture precedent to the Condition, are these; viz. Because that the
said Francis the Nephew might happen to be of evil behavior and government;
the said Sir Francis provided as before, which (as was alleged) was founded
upon a particular regard and respect, which was proper to himself, and therefore
cannot be transferred to the Queen; and it does not appear that he yet had been
of ill behavior: But this notwithstanding, all agreed that this Condition is
in the Queen by the attainder of the said Sir Francis, as well by the Act of
his Attainder, as by the Act of 33 H. 8. which give the forfeiture of
Conditions also expressy in the case of Treason.

3. Whether there ought to be an Office for finding the performance of the
Condition according to the Warrant, and all agreed that there need not, because
that when any man is to do a thing by Warrant of Letters Patents for the Queen,
to be returned in any Court, it suffices for him to return it, which he hash
done according to the Letters Patents, with the Warrant it self, and then that
which is so returned, is as well of Record as if it were found by Office and
returned of Record; and so it was agreed in the Exchequer, about 16 Eliz. in
the case of Edward Dacres, who had made an Assignment of his Goods and
Chattells to Sir Alexander Culpdpper and others, who afterward was attainted
of Treason by Outlawry, and the Condition adjudged to be forfeited to the Queen
by the Statute of 33 H. 8. and a Warrant was made by Letters Patents to Sir
Thomas George to perform the Condition, who did it, and returned that he had
done it accordingly, whereby the assurance to the said Sir Alexander and his
Companions was avoided, and all the Goods and Chattels of the said Edward
forfeited to the Queen, and all this was in the Queen without Office found, for
that which the Sheriff or other Minister does by virtue of any Writ or Warrant
which is to be of Record, when it is returned of Record, it is as well of
Record as the Writ or Warrant it self, so here, etc.

4. But the greatest question was (which was not any thing in the case here)
whether the Estate made to Francis the Nephew were void, eo instanti upon
Hillary Term finished 31 Eliz. although the two year after the Session of
Parliament, 28 Eliz. did not end until the 28. day of March, 31 Eliz. in as
much as no Term was or could be within two years after it, in which the
assurance or the effect of it might be shown openly in the Court of Exchequer,
or that it shall tarry to be void until the two years are fully expired; as if
a man make assurance of his Land upon condition, that if he do not go to Rome
within two years next ensuing, that it shall be to the use of I. S. and his
Heirs, and he stay until a week within the end of the two years, in so much as
it is not possible to perform it within the two years, yet the use does not
change until the two years are past; but in this case it ought to be shown a
Term within the two years, which is as much as to say, that if the Terms be all
past, so as it cannot be done after it within the two years, the Assurance eo
instanti upon the finishing of the last Term is become void; as if an Assurance
be upon condition, that if in the Term time, within two years he do not levy a
Fine to I. S. and his Heirs, etc. now if the last Term pass without the Fine,
the Use change, albeit the two years be not expired; si Parolls fort Plea: And
there is great diversity where an Estate is to be defeated, or an Use is to be
raised upon an Act to be done, or not done, within a time certain, within two
years, and where within two years generally, for in the first case the Use
change upon the Act done, or not done immediately, and in the other not until
the two years are finished, because that by presumption always within two
years the Act may be done for any thing of which the Law takes conusance. But
if the Act to be done, or not done, refer to any time certain within the two
years, as if he do not pay 10 l. to one before the Feast of S. Michael the
Archangel within the two years, that then the Use shall change, or the Estate
shall be void, in these cases immediately upon the last Feast of S. Michael the
Archangel, within the two years the Use change, or the Estate shall be void,
as the case is, and shall not tarry until the full end of the two years to do
it, for in the words themselves the diversity appears.

8. AT the same time there was another Indenture shown to the said Judges,
bearing date the 4. day of May, 1 Eliz. made between the said Sir Francis
Englefi^ld of the one part: And Sir Edward Fitton, and Sir Ralph Egerton
Knights, of the other part, and enrolled in the Exchequer, according to the
Statute of the 30. day of October, 30 Eliz by which the said Francis for him
and his Heirs covenanted with them, that as well in consideration of a Marriage
had and solemnised between John Englefield, brother of the said Sir Francis,
and Margaret Fitton, Sister to the said Sir Edward, and for the augmentation
and interest of the Ioynture of the said Margaret, as for other good causes and
reasonable considerations, the said Sir Francis especially moving, the said Sir
Francis before the Feast of S. John Baptist, then next ensuing, would assure
Lands within the County of Warwick, of the value of 60 l. a year to the said
Sir Edward and Sir Ralph, and their Heirs, to the use of the said Margaret for
her life, and for her Ioynture, for part of it, and for the remainder that it
shall also be to the use of the said Margaret for her life, in case that the
Lady Anne then the wife of the said Sir Francis. should recover her Dower of
the said 60 l. a year.

And the said Sir Francis for him and his Heirs, did further covenant with the
said Sir Edward and Sir Ralph, that if it should happen that the said Sir
Francis shall die without Issue Male of his body, the said John or any Issue of
his body upon the body of the said Margaret begotten then living, that then
after the death of the said Sir Francis, as well the Manor of Englefield, as
all his other Lands (making especial mention of them) should be and might
descend, remain, revert, continue or be in possession or rebersion to the said
John Englefield, and to the Heirs Males of his body upon the body of the said
Margaret lawfully begotten, if the said John were then living, or to the Heirs
Males of the body of the said John upon the body of the said Margaret lawfully
begotten, without any Act or Acts, Thing or Things made, or to be made by the
said Sir Francis to the contrary thereof.

And upon this, it was moved, that there was a variance between this Deed now
shown, and this Inrolement, and that therefore it does not appear, whether this
Deed was shown in the Court or delivered there according to the Statute thereof
made, 28 Eliz. for in the Deed it is (for other good causes) and this word
(good) is not comprised within the Inrolement.

But as to it, all the Judges and Barons agreed, that albeit these defeats
happened by the negligence of the Clerk in writing and examining, this
Inrollement remains good, in as much as the omissions are in matters and words
which are of abundance, and not in that which is any substance of the Deed.

But the Lords of Parliament which were Committees of this case in the
Parliament, sent for the Record of the said Inrolement, and would have had this
to have been amended in the Chamber next to the Parliament; but as the Officer
was in doing of it, the Judges advised that it should not be done, as well
because this was not the place where it ought to be amended, but the Court of
Exchequer if it were, or needed to be amended: And also because that the two
years after the Session of Parliament of 28 Eliz. was then past.

Then it was moved whether by the Covenant and considerations aforesaid, the
use shall pass or were raised to John Englefield, or now to his Son Francis,
Nephew to the said Sir Francis, and begotten upon the body of the said
Margaret. And all agreed that it is not for diverse reasons.

1. Because it is, that if it happen that Sir Francis die without Issue Male,
that then it shall be to John as before, if he be then living, or to the Heirs
Males of his body as before, which is in the disjunctive, to wit, that it shall
remain to John, or to his Heirs Male of his body, which cannot raise any use,
but found only in Covenant for the incertainty, and also it is upon a future
contingent, to wit, if the said John be then living.

2. Because the Covenant is, that it shall come or descend, etc. in the
disjunctive, and if he had covenanted that it shall descend to John after his
death without Issue Male, it had been clear that no use had been raised by it,
for it shall be but a mere Covenant, to wit, that he shall leave it to descend
to him; and here it being in the disjunctive it cannot be any other then a bare
Covenant, to wit, that he shall suffer it to descend, or otherwise by
conveyance to come to John, after his death without Issue Male, the one, or the
other at his pleasure.

And yet further, that it shall descend, come, or remain to John in possession
or reversion, so that he may make the one or the other void at his pleasure,
which cannot be, if an Use shall be raised by it, and therefore also it enures
but as a bare Covenant, which he may perform either the one or the other way at
his pleasure.

Also it is, that it shall so descend or come to John without any act or thing
done or to be done by him to the contrary, whereby also it fully appears, that
the assurance of the said John shall stand for all this Land upon the Covenant,
and not upon any use which was to be altered or changed by it.

But if an Use may change by the Manor upon the consideration, yet it shall
not change to the said John or his Issues, until the death of the said Sir
Francis without Issue Male, because that until that happen, if the said John
had been living, he had not had any Use, because it is that he shall have the
Land then if he be then living, and if it shall not be in him until this time,
it shall not be in his Son until Sir Francis be dead without Issue; for it is
if the said John or any Issue Male of his body, etc. be then living, then it
shall descend, come, or remain, etc. so that it does not come to them until it
may appear whether the said John, or any Issue Male of his body upon the body
of the said Margaret, be in rerum natura, when Sir Francis shall be dead
without Issue Male, and therefore it yet remains upon a contingent, whether the
use shall be to the Heirs Males of the body of the said John, if it shall be
said that it is an Use, and therefore in the mean time the entire Fee-simple
remains in Sir Francis, not yet changed, but for the Estate tail it self in
himself, if any change shall be, as appears before that it shall not be, and
therefore by the attainder of the said Sir Francis, the whole Fee-simple is now
all forfeited to the Queen, before that the use may be to the Heirs Males of
the body of the said John: And the Queen shall not come to this Land in any
privity by the said Sir Francis, but in the Post by the Escheat, and therefore
the possession of the Queen now, or of her Patentee shall never be changed with
this Use, which shall never be carried out of any other possession but such
which remains in privity until the use is to come in Esse, no more now then
as it might at common Law before the Statute of Uses, 27 H. 8. And this as to
the future Use was the opinion of Popham, and some other of the Justices. And
nota 21 H. 7. plito. 30. If a man covenant in consideration of the Marriage of
his Son, that immediately after his death his Land shall evert, remain, or
descend to his Son, to him and the Heirs of his body, or to him and his Heirs
for ever, that this is but a bare Covenant, and does not change any Use; And
what diversity then is there in the case of Sir Francis Englefield, who
covenants that it shall descend or remain in possession, or revert. And as it
seems the great difficulty which was in the case of Sir Robert Constable, which
was put by Gerard Attorney-generall, 6 Eliz. and it appears in Dyer 1. Mar.
was because that the Covenant was, that it shall be to the Son in possession or
use, which for the incertainty in as much as it was in them to leave the one or
the other, or perhaps the Estate of their Land was such, that part was in
possession and part in use, and therefore according to the intent taken rather
for a Covenant then for matter sufficient to change the use: But it was so that
it was never helped by any right which he had, but by the grace of the Queen he
enjoyed it.

Easter Term, 35 Eliz. Crocker and York, versus Dormer.
1. UPon a Recovery had by John Crocker and George York, against Geffrey
Dormer, in a Writ of Entry in the Post, of the Manor of Farningho, with the
Appurtenances, and of 6 Messuages, 6 Cottages, etc. in Farningho, and of a
yearly Rent or pension of 4 Marks issuing out of the Church or Rectory of
Farningho, and of the Advowson of the Church of Farningho, in the County of
Northampton, William Dormer Son and Heir of the said Geffrey, brought a Writ of
Error, and assigned diverse Errors.

1. Because that ^uch a form of Writ does not lie of an Advowson, but only a
Right of Advowson, Darrein presentment and Quare impedit.

2. Because he demands the Advowson of the Rectory, and also a Rent issuing out
of the same Rectory.

3. Because the Demand for the Rent is in the Disjunctive, to wit, a Rent or a
Pension.

4. Because it is a pension, whereas a Pension is not suitable in our Law, but in
the Spiritual Court; To which Gaudy said, that there is a great diversity
between a common Recovery, which is an assurance between parties and a Recovery
which is upon Title, for a common Recovery is to an Use, to wit, to the use of
him against whom it is had, if no other use can be averred, and therefore as to
the Use, it is to be guided according to the intent of the parties, and by a
common Recovery had against Tenant for life, he in the Reversion if he be not
party or privy to it, may enter for a forfeiture, as it was adjudged very
lately in the Exchequer, by the advice of all the Justices in the case of a
Recovery had against Sir William Petham Knight, and in all these things it is
otherwise in case of a Recovery upon Title, and therefore in as much as this
common Recovery is but a common Assurance between parties, and is always by
assent between parties, to the end that they may make assurance from one to
another, there shall be and always has been a contrary exposition to a
Recovery which is by pretense of Title, and it has been common to put in such
Recoveries, Advowsons, Commons, Warrens, and the like, and yet always allowed:
And if this shall be now drawn in question, infinite Assurances shall by this
be endangered, which the Law will not suffer, and therefore the demand of an
Advowson and Pension in the Writ of Entry makes not the Writ vicious, as it
shall do in another Writ of Entry founded upon a Title and not upon an
Assurance. And as to that, that the Rent and the Advowson also is demanded,
this is good, because the Advowson is another thing then the Rectory it self,
out of which the Rent is demanded to be issuing: And for the disjunctive demand
of the Rent or Pension, it makes no matter in this case, because it is a common
Recovery in which such a precise form is not necessary to be used as in other
Writs, and also a Pension issuing out of a Rectory is the same with the rent:
To which Clench and Fennor agreed in all; but Popham moved that the greatest
difficulty in this case is the demand made to the disjunctive, to wit, of the
annual Rent or Pension, for if a Pension issuing out of a Rectory shall be
said to be a thing merely spiritual, and not to be demanded by our Law, or
merely of another nature then the Rent it self, with which it is conjoined by
the word (or) then it is erroneous; for albeit a common Recovery, be now a
common assurance of Land past by the assent of parties, and therefore has
another conservation, then that which passes by pretense of Title, yet we are
not to omit gross absurdities in such common Recoveries, as to demand an acre
of Land or Wood in the Manor of Sale, or Dale, or black acre, or white acre,
these are not good in common Recoveries, because there is no certainty in the
demand which of them the party is to recover, which kind of absurdity is not to
be admitted in these Recoveries; for this is but a mere ignorance in the Law
and the Ministers of it. And to this Gaudy and the other Justices agreed, but
they said, that a Pension issuing and a Rent shall be taken for all one; for if
a man grant a Pension of 20 s. a year, issuing out of the Manor of D. or of
the Rectory of S these are Rents issuing out of them: and if the demand had
been of an annual Rent, or Annuity of 20 s. a year issuing out of the Rectory,
this had been good. To which Popham agreed, and yet said, if it had been an
annual Rent of 20 s. etc. or of an Annuity of 20 s. it had nof been good,
because that the word (issuing) is not referred to the Annuity, but to the Rent
only, and therefore are merely general, and not as the same, but if the demand
were of an annuity, rent, or payment of 20 s. issuing out of a Rectory, it is
good, for this is but one and the same. Then it was alleged that
notwithstanding that which appears to the Court, it cannot be taken that this
was a common Recovery, for upon the assignment of the Error, it is not averred
that it was a common Recovery, to which Popham said, that common Recoveries are
such common Assurances to all persons that are well known to all, and
especially to us that they need not be averred, for they are known by certain
Marks, to wit, by the voluntary entry into the Warranty, the common Voucher and
the like: And at last they all agreed that the Judgment shall be affirmed.

2. In Wast, by Thomas Haydock against Richard Warnford, the case was this; One
Michael Dennis was seized in his Demesne as of Fee, of the third part of a
Message, and of certain Lands in Bury Blunsden in the County of Wilts, and
being so seized the last of April, 9 ^liz. demised them to Susan Warnford for
41. years, from the Feast of S. Michael the Archangel then next ensuing, who
assigned this over to Richard Warnford, after which the said Michael Dennis by
bargain and sale enrolled, according to the Statute conveyed the Reversion to
John Simborn Esquire, and his Heirs, the said John being then seized of another
third part thereof in his Demesne as of Fee, after which, to wit, the first day
of June, 17 Eliz. the said John Simborn demised the said third part, which was
his before his said purchase to the said Richard Warnford for 21 years then
next ensuing, and afterward the said John Simborn died seized of the Reversion
of the said two parts, and this descended to Barnaby Simborn his Son and next
Heir, who the 20 of June, 28 Eliz. by bargain and sale enrolled, according to
the Statute conveyed, be Reversion of the said two parts to the said Thomas
Haydock and his Heirs, after which the said Richard Warnford committed Wast in
the said house, whereupon the said Thomas Haydock brought an action of Wast
against him, according to the said two several Leases, and assigned the Wast
in suffering the Hall of the price of 20 l. a Kitchen of the price of 20 l. and
so of other things to be uncovered, whereby the great Timber of them became
rotten, and so became ruinous, to the disinherison of the Plaintiff, and upon a
Nihil dicit, a Writ was awarded to enquire of Damages, in which it was
comprised that the Sheriff shall go to the place wasted, and there enquire of
the said Damages, who returned an inquisition taken thereof at Bury Blunsden,
without making mention that he went to the place wasted, and that it was taken
there, whereupon Judgment was given in the common Bench, that the said Plaintiff
shall recover his Seisin against the Defendant of the said places wasted, with
their Appurtenances Per visum Iurator. Inquisitionis predict. and damna sua
occasion vast^ in eisdem locis in triplo secun^u^ formam statuti, etc. And
upon this a Writ of Error was brought in the Kings Bench, and there by all the
Justices it was agreed that it was but Surplusage to comprehend in the Writ of
enquiry of Damages, that the Sheriff shall go to the place wasted, and there
enquire of the Damages, in as much as by the not denying thereof, the Wast is
acknowledged, and therefore he need not go to the place wasted: But where a Writ
is awarded to enquire of the Wast upon default made at the grand Distress,
there by the Statute of West. 2. cap. 24. the Sheriff ought to go in person to
the place Wasted, and enquire of the Wast done, and therefore in that case it is
needful to have the clause in it, that the Sheriff shall go to the place
wasted, and there enquire of it: for by the view the Wast may be the better
known to them, but where the Wast is acknowledged, as here, that clause need
not, and albeit it be comprehended in the Writ, yet the Sheriff is not thereby
bound to go to the place wasted, and to enquire there, but he may do it at any
place within his Bayliwick where he will, and therefore it is no error in this
point: And they agreed also that the Wast is well assigned in the entire Hall,
etc. although the Action were brought but upon the Demises of two third parts
of it, and it cannot be done in these parts, but that it is done in the whole,
and also it cannot be done in the whole, but that it is also done in the three
parts, but yet the doing thereof is not to the disinheritance of the Plaintiff,
but in these two third parts; and therefore no error in this manner of assigning
of the Wast. And they also agreed that the Action is well brought upon these
several Demises, because neither the interest of the Term, nor of the
Inheritance was severed nor divided to several persons at the time of the
doing of the Wast, but the two Terms in the one, to wit, in Warnford, and the
Inheritance of these immediately in the other, to wit, in Haydock; And by Popham
also, the thing in which the Wast is assigned, is one and the same thing and
not diverse, to wit, a Message, and therefore by Brudnell and Pollard, 14 H. 8.
10. if several Demises are made of one and the same Message by one and the
same person, as one part at one time, and another part at another, an Action of
Wast may well lie: Albeit Fitzherbert and Brook seem therein to be of a contrary
opinion, and that several Actions of Wast ought to be in that case.

And the exception was taken, because the Judgment was entered that he shall
recover the place wasted, Per visum Jurator. praedict. whereas they had not the
view of it in this case, for this should be where it is given upon a Writ
awarded to enquire of the Wast upon default made at the grand Distress;
whereas here the Wast is not denied but acknowledged.

But as to this, several Presidents were shown, the one upon Demurrer for
part, Hill. 1. Mariae. Rot. 301. and another Tr. 31. H. 8. Rot. 142. in an
Information, in both which Cases the Judgment was entered as here, to wit, Per
visum Jur. praedict. and yet in these, the Wast was as acknowledged: Whereupon
it was ordered that the Judgment should be affirmed.

3. In an Ejectione firmae brought by Sir Moyle Finch Knight, Plaintiff against
John Risley Defendant, for a Message and a Mill in Raveston in the County of
Buckinghamshire, the case for the matter in Law appeared shortly to be this.

The King and Queen Philip and Mary by their Letters Patents, dated the eight
of July, 3. and 4. of their Reign, made a Lease of the Reversion of the Manor
of Raveston (of which this was parcel) to Sir Robert Throgmorton for seventy
years, from such a Feast, after the death of the Countess of Ormond, who then
had it for her life, rendering yearly 73 l. 13 s. payable at the Feasts of Saint
Michael the Archangel, and the Annunciation of our Lady, at the receipt of the
Exchequer by equal portions, with a Proviso that the Lease shall cease, if the
said Rent or any part thereof were arrear, and not paid at the said Feast, or a
certain time after, the Reversion descend to the now Queen, and the said
Countess died 7 Eliz. part of the Rent then payable, was not paid at the day,
nor within the time limited by the Proviso, afterward Queen Elizabeth by her
Letters Patents, dated 30. May, 30 Eliz. granted the said Manor to the said
Sir Moyl, and one Awdeley and their Heirs in Fee, with a clause in it, that the
Letters Patents shall be good, notwithstanding there be not any recital of any
Leases or Grants at any time before that made by her, or any of her
Progenitors; after which an Office is found for the Queen, that the Rent was
arrear and not paid as before, after which the said Sir Moyl and Awdeley
assured the said Manors by bargain and sale to Sir Thomas Hennage who demised
the said Message and Mill to the said Sir Moyl, upon whom the said Risley
entered in right of the said Lease made by the said King Phillip and Queen Mary,
under Thomas Throgmorton, who then pretended to have the term of the said Lease
from Sir Robert his Father. The case was well argued at the Bar, and now at the
Bench, where Fennor moved first, Whether it were a Condition. 2. Whether an
Office were requisite. 3. Whether this Office found, comes soon enough for
time: For the first he conceived that it was a conditional Limitation, for a
Limitation is that which limits an Estate certain o^ doubtful, as Quandiu in
manibus nostris fore contigerit, quamdiu amicus sit, or dummodo solverit: And
there (dummodo) was a Condition as appears, 5 Ass plit. 9. and 2. Ass. a
Grant made to J. S. and his Heirs tam di^, as the Grantor and his Heir shall
enjoy such a Manor, this is a Limitation, and a Limitation always determines
the Estate, but a Condition albeit it be broken during the Estate, yet it does
not determine the Estate, and so it is of a conditional Limitation, and
therefore it is not in the King until an Office be thereof found, for the King
submits himself to the Law, for Bracton says, Quod non debet judicare sed
secundum legem, and his Prerogative is so excellent, that he cannot take a part
with any thing, but by matter of Record, neither can he draw the Right or
Possession of any one in question upon a bare surmise, but by Office or other
matter of Record, for a Record always carries credit with it. And there is no
diversity where two matters are limited in Deed, and where one is limited in a
Deed, and the other by the Law: And the contrary objections are easily
answered, for when the Tenant in tail of the King dies without Issue, it is in
the King without Office, because the Law does not help them which contemn it.
But in case of an Office which is forfeited, it is in the King to dispose
without Office, because the King is not to have the Office it self but the
disposition of it, and yet it is to be defeated by Scire facias in the Chancery.

If a Mill be demised for life, upon condition that he shall not let it but to
a Milner, and he breaks the Condition, in case of the King there must be an
Office to avoid it, and there the Office entitles the King to the Condition and
not to the Entry, for after the Office it is not in the King until Entry: And
here the Rent may be paid to the Kings Bailey in the Country, which is matter in
fait, and therefore shall not be defeated without Office; And here the Office
comes too late to give any advantage to the Patentee, for the King cannot grant
a Title of Entry before Office, no more then the Assigns of a common person
can take advantage of a Condition broken in the time of the Grantor, of which
the Grantor did not take advantage in his time; And if the Queen makes a Lease
durante beneplacito, the Patentee shall not avoid it, as it appears in the Lord
Burgleighs case, and therefore the Office her^ shall not help the Patentee, but
the Queen for the mean profits: for although nullum tempus occurrit Regi, yet
the Patentee shall not take advantage of this Prerogative.

Clench agreed clearly, that it was a Limitation, but yet that it is at the
Queens liberty to avoid or make it good, for perhaps the Rent is better then
the value of the Land, and upon this reason a Lease from the King Probi^
hominibus de dale, or to a Monk rendering rent, is good, which otherwise had
been merely void: And by the Office found, the Election of the Queen appears,
without which the Lease is to continue, and therefore the Patentee shall not
defeat that which happened in the Queens time before.

Popham, to say that the Office helps the Queen for the mean Profits, and that
now the Patentee shall not take advantage to avoid the Lease is too absurd; for
the Queen cannot take advantage to have the mean Profits, but in respect of the
avoidance of the Lease: And if the Lease were made void or determined against
the Queen, it shall not remain good and of force against the Patentee, and also
to say, that the Lease might have its continuance, after that it is determined
by the Limitation comprehended in the Writing, by reason of a reservation, is
also too absurd, for so it may be said, that if the Queen make a Lease for
years, if J. S. shall live so long, rendering rent, that this Lease may have
continuance after the death of J. S. which clearly is not Law; And the Patentee
here shall take the advantage to avoid the Lease happened before his Patent made,
because that no Office need to be found of the not payment before it passed
from the Queen to make it void, and the reason is, because this Proviso (as it
is penned) is a mere Limitation of the Estate, and not any manner of Condition;
And therefore if the Queen make a Lease for 100. years, if the Lessee shall so
long lawfully pay the Rent reserved at the day of payment, if he fail of
payment of the Rent reserved at the day limited, the Lease is ipso facto
determined, and it need not be found by Office. And what diversity is there
where the Limitation is conjoined to the estate it self, and where it comes in
by a Proviso afterward, all being in one and the same Deed, and therefore
spoken at one and the same time, for the one and the other case manifests
that the contract and agreement is, that the Lease shall not continue longer
then the default of the payment of the Rent.

And in this case, suppose that the Queen had granted over the Land? shall not
the Patentee have advantage to avoid the Lease, because that no Office was
found before? It is clear that he shall, or otherwise this is now become to be
an absolute Lease for a hundred years, which is not Law, for it is merely
contrary to the Contract, and therefore absurd to be maintained: I agree with
the general rule that nothing shall pass to, or from the Queen but by matter
of Record; but this makes nothing against me in this case, for here the same
Record which passes the Estate to the party, to wit, the Patent of the Lease
contains the time how long it shall endure, longer then which it cannot
continue: And therefore by 9 H. 7. If the King makes a Gift in tail, and the
Donce dies without Issue, the Land is in the King without Office, so in every
other case where the Estate is determined according to the limitation, for he
cannot be put out of possession wrongfully, and now has right to hold it
against him. And I say that no warrant or authority can be found throughout the
whole Law where a Lease or Estate made by the King is determined by an express
limitation comprised in the Patent it self of the Grant, that there need not
any Office or other thing to determine it, for that which is comprised in the
same Patent may determine it, of it self.

And further, whereas the Proviso is, that the re-entry shall be for default of
payment of the Rent, and the like, there the Term continues until the re-entry
be made, notwithstanding the Condition be broken, as appears by all the
Justices, 28 H. 8. because it is expressly limited that it shall be defeated by
the re-entry, and there before re-entry be made, the Action of Wast shall be,
quod tenet: And by 12 H. 7. where a common person is put to his Entry, there
the Queen is put to an Office, with which agrees Stamford in his Book of
Prerogative: But in this case, if it were between common persons, the Lease
shall be determined upon default of payment of the Rent, and before any
re-entry, and therefore in the Queens case it shall be determined without
Office. But if the case had been, that if the Rent had been arrear and not
paid, that then upon re-entry made, it ought to cease, there an Office had been
necessary to countervail the Entry in case of the Queen, or otherwise the Lease
shall not cease, because the Queen cannot make an Entry but by such means, and
therefore it ought to be by matter comprised in the Patent. It has been said,
that this shall be a conditional Limitation, and that therefore an Office is
necessary; but I say, that here is not any matter or quality of a Condition,
but merely of a Limitation, and it is rather a contingent Limitation then any
manner of Condition, and this is well proved by 11 H. 7. which is, that the
Grantee of a Reversion shall take advantage of it at common Law, the which he
cannot do if it savor any way of a Condition, and by 27 H. 8. a Proviso in a
Deed ought always to be expounded according to the purport, because that it is
placed in a Deed, sometimes for a Condition, as where a Proviso is that the
Lessee shall not alien; sometimes for an exception, as where a Proviso is, that
the Lease shall not extend to such an acre, or such a thing, sometimes for a
Limitation, as here and in the like cases. And in this case the release of the
Rent shall make it, that the Lease shall never be determined for the not
payment of it, because tha^ ^^terwards there cannot be any such default of
payment; and therefore in such a case the Limitation remains absolute and
discharged of the contingent, which otherwise had determined it: As if a man
make a Lease for a 100. years, if the Lessee in the mean time do not cut such a
Tree, a release of all Conditions will not serve, yet if the Lessor himself or
any other but the Lessee cut it, the Lease is become absolute for a 100. years:
And so upon this point my conceit appears. But the most colorable thing
which has been alleged on the other side, was by my Brother Drew, which was,
that in counting upon an Ejectione firmae, and pleading in such a Lease as
here, it shall be as an absolute Lease for the years comprised in the Habendum,
without making any mention of the Prouiso, upon which he enforced it that it
shall be taken to be of more efficacy then if it stood merely upon the
Contingent; for he said, that upon a Lease made for years, if the Lessee shall
so long live, and the like, in the count, and also in the pleading mention
ought to be made of the life of the Lessee: I agree it to be true that the
pleading shall be so, for in count counting, and in plea pleading, if the
matter of the Contingent proceed the Limitation, or be anncred to the
Limitation, there a man ought to speak to the Contingent, or otherwise it is
not good, as by 14 H. 8. it shall be of a Condition where it is precedent; But
in case of a Condition it is quite otherwise, for if ^ man make a Lease to
another for years, Si tamdiu vixerit, or Dummodo solverit, etc. or the like,
which are annexed to the limitation of the Estate; in all these cases in
counting and also in pleading, he ought to aver the life of the Lessee, or
otherwise the contents of the thing according to the limitation: But where that
which was the Limitation comes by a Proviso, after the Habendum which
distinguishes the sentence as here, there, because it it is a matter distinct
and subsequent from the Habendum, and not annered to it, he need not to speak
of it, but there it shall always come in to be shown of the other part, and
this is the usual and common case of difference for pleading, but this makes
no difference of the Estate; And therefore if an Obligation be made with a
Condition endorsed, the Plaintiff in debt upon it does not speak of the
Condition in his Count, but if the Condition be precedent, or stands comprised
within the body of the Obligation, then he ought to speak of it in his Count,
as appears by 28 H. 8. where a man was bound in twenty quarters of Malt, to
be paid at such a day, and if he fail, that he shall pay forty quarters at such
a day, if he demand the forty quarters in his count, he ought to show the
default of payment of the twenty quarters at the day limited for it, and yet
the Condition that is out of, and that which is comprehended within the
Obligation are but as one for the substance, but for the form it differs as to
the pleading, which form ought to be observed.

Another reason is in this case, because that the payment of the Rent is
limited to ^^ made at the receipt of the Exchequer, in which case if it had been
(...) had been entered of Record, and not being so, the default appears o^
Record, and where the default appears of Record, there needs no Office, for
^^ shall be in vain to make that to appear upon Record by Office, which (...)
appears of it self by Record, and therefore in 4. and 5. (...) and Mary it
appears, where Sir John Savage was Sheriff of the (...) Fee, and that he was
indicted of two several voluntary (...), and for not keeping of his Turn in
loco consueto upon two (...) removed into the Kings Bench in 8 H. 8. upon the
motion of the (...)-general the Office was seized into the Kings hand without
Scire facias, or any Inquisition found thereof, and as appears 3 Eliz. One
B^ake who by Patent was the Kings Remembrancer in the Exchequer being made one
of the B^rons of the same Exchequer, the other Office was ipso facto ^one and
determined, and there need no inquisition to be made of it, nor Scire facias to
avoid it, because the taking of the Office of a Baron is of Record; And a man
cannot be a Judge and a Minister in one and the same Court, and therefore the
first Office is determined by taking of the second, and there need no Office to
be found of it, the matter it self being apparent upon Record, and therefore as
it appears it was adjudged in 13 H. 8. that a new Patent of the same Office
of Remembrancer making recital of the former Patent (which appeared as before
upon Record to be void) with a clause Quod post mortem sive determinationem,
etc. thereof, the new Grant shall take effect, was void. And Englefields case
was lately adjudged in the Exchequer (and at the Parliament 35 Eliz. allowed to
be good Law by all the Justices there being) where the Queen had a Condition
given to her by forfeiture upon an Attainder of Treason to be performed by the
payment of a sum of money, or the like: If the Queen makes a Warrant by Patent
to one to perform the Condition, and to return his proceedings thereupon into
the Exchequer, who performs it accordingly, and thereupon returns all that he
has done with his Warrant into the Exchequer, no Office need to be found of
the performance of the Condition, because that by the return (which is
warranted by the Patent) the Condition appears sufficiently upon Record to be
performed, and therefore no Office need to be found, no more of the not-payment
in this case. It has been said by some, that it may be that the Patentee has
tendered the Rent at the receipt, and that they would not receive or record the
receipt of it, and that then it should be hard that he should loose his Lease,
no default being in him: to which I say, suppose a man be bound to make his
appearance in any of the Kings Courts, may he say, that he appeared there
according to the Obligation, and excuse himself by such bare averment thereof,
unless his appearance be entered of Record? It is clear that he cannot, as
appears by 18 E. 4. for appearance in a Court of Record, is not unless it be
of Record, yet it may be said, that then the case may be had to the party: as
if the Officer will not record his appearance, which is the same mischief as in
this case, but this will not help him, for first the Law presumes that every
Officer will be indifferent betwixt party and party; and upon this opinion had
of him he is admitted to his Office, whereupon the Law presumes that if the
party would have appeared, that the Officer would have recorded it, and in as
much as he did not do it, it shall be taken that he did not appear. But the
strongest reason in the case is this, to wit, if default be not in the party to
do that which he ought to do, but in the Officer to do that which belongs to
his Office, as to record that which he ought to record, there the Officer shall
be chargable to the party in an Action upon the case, to answer him so much in
Damages as he has sustained by such default of the Officer, and the Law will
put the party rather to such a recovery then to answer it by a bare matter of
averment which ought to be of Record. And further such a voluntary default may
be a forfeiture of his Office, and so a sufficient penalty in case of an
Officer. And to say, that the Office of Receipt is not an Office of Record, is
too absurd, for it is a principal member and part of the Court of Exchequer,
and as well of Record, for the matters belonging to it, as the Offices of the
Pipe and Remembrancers are for those things which belong to them; and the
Records of Receipt as well enrolled in Rolls of Parchment as any other Records
of the Queen in this, or any other Court, and it is commonly used now to convey
Reversions and Remainders to the Queen, with a Proviso to be void upon payment
of a certain sum of money to the Queen at the receipt of the Exchequer, and it is
as usual upon payment made there to have it back again without office found of
this paym. and what is the reason of it? now, but because the paym. there is
always entered upon Record, and therefore no Office needs make this paym. to
appear upon Record. And for the case of Sir Rob. Chester. 4 Eliz. there is
great diversity between that and this case, for it is ordained by the Act that
upon the default of paym. (which is not limited there to be made at the receipt)
the office shall be forfeited, and not that the estate in the office shall
cease: And of a thing forfeited it is at the election of him who is to take
advantage of the forfeiture, whether he will take it or not, and till the
advantage taken thereof the party still remains an Officer.

And therefore if the Queen make a Lease for years, and the Termer makes a
Feoffment in Fee, the Term by this is extinct, as was agreed upon an Evidence
in the Exchequer 28 El. in the case of Drayton Basset, and before that, in the
same case in the Kings Bench, and yet no reversion is drawn thereby out of the
Queen. Suppose then that the Queen before any Office found thereof, grant the
Land over in Fee, shall not the Patentee take advantage thereof by extinguishing
the Term? It is clear that he shall, and albeit a Termer holds over his Term,
yet the Patentee of the Queen, and also the Bargainee of a common person after
the Inrolement of the Bargain shall take advantage of this determination of the
Term.

And for the not reciting of Throgmortons Lease in the Letters Patents made to
Finch and Audeley, it is to no purpose to speak to it, because the Estate was
finished before the Grant; And further, because there was a Non obstante in the
Patent, that it shall be effectual, notwithstanding any not recital of any
Lease being of Record, or not being of Record, mis-recitall, etc. which was by
all at the Bonch admitted to be good, and not contradicted by any.

And for the Office found after the Grant made, I did not speak to it, because
it is of no purpose to help the Patentee, but yet shall serve the Queen for the
mean profits, as has been said: See more of this case, Trin. 36 Eliz. pl. 2.

Trinity Term 35 Eliz. Hughes versus Robotham.
1. MEredith Hughes brought an Action upon the Case against William Robotham
Executor to Ja. Robotham, for that the Plaintiff in the life time of the said
Testator, to wit, the 12th. of Ap^il, 28 Eliz. at London, in such a Parish and
Ward, was possessed of a Message, with the Appurtenances, in the same Parish
and Ward, for diverse years then to come; And whereas also the said Testator was
then possessed of the reversion thereof after diverse years then also to come,
and so possessed the said Testator the said 12th. day of April, at London, in
the Parish and Ward aforesaid, in consideration that the Plaintiff at the
instance and request of the Testator in his life time would surrender all his
Estate and Term of years which he then had to come in the said Message, with
the Appurtenances, and procure one Thomas Thornell to give to the said Testator
a 100. marks for a Lease thereof to be made by the said Testator to the said
Thornell, he assumed and promised to pay to the Plaintiff 30 l. of the said
100. marks, when he should be thereunto required by the Plaintiff.

And the Plaintiff alleged in facto, that he at the instance and request of
the said Testator in his life time afterward, to wit, the 20th. day of April,
28 Eliz. at London, in the Parish and Ward aforesaid, surrendered to the said
Testator all the Estate and term of years which he then had to come in the said
Message, etc. and that he, the same 20th. day of April, in the same Parish and
Ward, procured the said Thornell to give to the said Testator 100. marks for a
Lease of the said Message, etc. by the Testator to the said Thornell, then and
there made for 19 years, from the Feast of the Annunciation of our Lady then
last past, and that yet the said Testator in his life time, nor the said
Defendant after his death, have not paid to him the said 30 l. albeit the said
Testator in his life time, to wit, the 24. day of April aforesaid, at London,
in the Parish and Ward aforesaid, as thereunto required by the said Plaintiff,
and albeit the Defendant after the death of the said Testator, to wit, the
10th. day of April, 32 Eliz. in the Parish and Ward aforesaid, was also
thereunto required by the said Plaintiff: And albeit there were sufficient Goods
and Chattels of the said Testator at the time of his death, to pay as well the
said 30 l. as all other Debts of the said Testator, and also to discharge the
Funerals of the said Testator, which Goods and Chattels came to the said hand
of the said Defendant, etc.

And after Non assumpsit pleaded, and a Verdict for the Plaintiff, exception
was taken in arrest of Judgment, that the Declaration was not good.

1. Because it is, that the Plaintiff the 20th. day of April, 28 Eliz.
surrendered all the Estate and term which he had then to come, and this (for any
thing shown) may be another Term then he had the 12th. day before, for it is
not said, and so being possessed the 20th. day he surrendered, but generally as
before.

And further the consideration was, that he ought to surrender all the Term
which he had the 12th. day of April, which cannot be made the 20th. day, for in
the mean time, part of the Term is incurred, and therefore the purpose was that
the surrender should have been made immediately as soon as might be, so as by
the delay thereof the ^^d Robotham should not loose any part of the Term to come.

And it was further alleged, that a term for years cannot be surrendered to
another Termer for years.

Gaudy, The consideration is, that the Plaintiff at the request of the Testator
in his life time should surrender, so that it is not to be done until he be
required by the Testator, and not instantly at his peril without request
precedent; and here it is alleged that the Plaintiff at the request of the
said Testator, the 20th. day of April surrendered, which is well done, and
according to the agreement, and albeit it had been more formal to have said
that the said Plaintiff so being possessed afterward, to wit, the 20th. day of
April, surrendres, etc. yet it shall not be intended that he had any other term
then that which he had before, if it be not shown on the other side in his Bar,
and especially here, where the Action is not grounded upon the Term, but upon
the Assumpsit, and the consideration is nothing but an inducement to the
Assumption, which is not so formal to be made as if the Action had been
grounded upon the Term it self. And therefore in an Action upon the case upon an
Assumpsit, it suffices to say, that whereas the Defendant was indebted to the
Plaintiff in diverse sums of money amounting in all to a 100 l. the Defendant
assumed to pay him the 100 l. at such a day, without saying, how or in what
manner these Debts accrued, or when, because the Action is nor merely founded
upon the Debt but upon the promise, and the Debts are but inducements to it:
But if it were to recover the Debts themselves in an Action of Debt there ought
to be made a certainty thereof, to wit, when, and how it comes.

And further here, in as much as the Assumpsit is found for the Plaintiff, it
shall be employed that the consideration was duly performed, for without due
proof of the consideration the Plaintiff has failed of his assumption, and
therefore also it shall be now taken that the Testator has such a term of years
in reversion, to which the term for years in possession may be surrendered, for
he said, that he who has ten years in possession may well surrender to him who
has more years, as twenty in reversion; for the lesser may surrender to the
greater term. To all which Popham and Fennor agreed: And Popham said further,
although it shall be taken most strongly against Hughes, to wit, that Robotham
had a lesser term in the reversion then Hughes had in the possession, yet the
surrender shall be good, for in Law it is greater and more beneficial for him
to have a lesser term to be a term in possession, then to have it to be in
reversion: ^^nd by him, if a Lessee for twenty years make a Lease for ten
years, then he which makes the Lease for ten years has a reversion upon these
ten years, so that if Rent be reserved upon it, he may distrain for it and have
Fealty of the Termor: And if he grant the Reversion over for ten years, with
attornment of the Termor in possession, the Grantee has the Reversion and
shall have the Rent for the time, and yet the Remainder for years remains
always to the Grantor, and therefore before the Reversion granted ever, the
Termor for ten years in possession might have surrendered to his Lessor, and
thereby the said Lessor shall have so many of the said years which were then to
come of his former term of twenty years; And after the Reversion granted, he,
which has the ten years may surrender to the Grantee of ten years in
Reversion, and there he shall have so many years in possession which were to
come of his Reversion, Quod nota been: And if he had had a lesser term in the
Reversi^n then the Less^r himself had in the Possession, it shall go to the
benefit of the first Termor for twenty years, who was his Grantor, for the Term
in possession is quite gone and drowned in the Reversion to the benefit of
those who have the R^version thereupon, having regard to their Estate in the
Reversion, and not otherwise; to all which Fennor agreed, whereupon Gaudy gave
the rule that Judgment shall be entered for the Plaintiff: But Popham said, that
if the consideration for the surrender had not been sufficiently alleged, that
the Plaintiff should not be helped by the other consideration of 100. marks
given by Thornel, for if such an Assumption as this is be founded upon two more
considerations, and such which by possibility may be performed, then the party
has failed of his Suit: As if a man in consideration of 5 s. paid, and of
other 5 s. to be paid at a day to come, assume to do a thing, or to pay money,
if the one 5 s. be not paid, or if it be not averred that the other 5 s. was
paid at the day limited for the payment of it, the party has failed in his
assumption in the one case, and the declaration is insufficient in the other
case, for he has made a departure from his consideration: But if one of the
considerations be impossible, or against Law, there the other considerations
which are possible, or stand with the Law suffice if they he well alleged. And
he said, that the Executor shall be charged with the contract of the Testator
by common course of the Court, which stands upon reason, for if an Action of
Debt upon a bare contract be brought against an Executor, if he do not demur
upon it but plead to the Pa^s, that he owes him nothing, and it is found
against him, he shall be the^ by charged of the Goods of the dead; and the
cause why he may be helped by demurring upon the declaration in that case, is,
because the Testator might have waged his Law in that case of debt, which the
Executor could not do of other contracts, and therefore shall not be charged
with it by such an act, if he will help himself by demurrer; but in ^he
assumption of his Testator, he could not have waged his Law: and it is founded
upon the death of the Testator, to wit, his debt, with which the Executor by a
mean may be charged as before, and therefore the assumption in such a c^se
maint^inable against the Executor. But if the Testator upon good consideration
assume to make assurance of Land, or to do any other such collateral thing
which does not sound in a duty of a thing payable, there the Executor shall
never be charged with such an assumption to render recompense for it. And to
this agreed all the Justices ^^ the common Bench, and Barons of the Exchequer;
And such an assu^^^ion has not been allowed in the Kings Bench but of late
time, and th^^ but (...) or two cases. But in the other case it has been
common and of (...), and therefore now too late to be drawn in question; and if
it should ^^, it may be maintained with good reason in this case of a duty of
^^ing payable, in as much as the Testator cannot wage his Law in the Action,
but in the other case there is no reason nor course of the Court to maintai^
it: But the Judges in the Exchequer Chamber reversed all these Iudments in both
cases.

2. Nota, that this Term was adjourned to October. Trin. and because the Writ
was, that Adjournment shall be made in October. Trin. of all cases, until Tres
Trinitat. the Adjournment was made in every of the Courts of Kings Bench,
Common Bench, and the Exchequer, the very first day of October. Trin. then it was
holden by the Justices, that the Adjournment ought not to have been made until
the sitting of the Court the fourth day from Octabis.

And because that the Writs were, that at the said Tres Tr. the Term shall be
holden thereafter, as if no Adjournment had been, the Justices held that they
ought to sit the first day of the said Tres Trin. and so from thence every day
until the end of the Term, and for all causes, as if no adjournment had been;
and so they did accordingly, saving by assent some of the Justices did not come
thither by reason of their far distance from London, at the end of the Term
upon the last Adjournment: But they held, that if it had not been for the
especial words in the Writ, which were, that it shall be then holden as if no
Adjournment had been, the Ess^ines had been the first day of Tres Trin. and the
full Term had not been until the fourth day, which was the last day of the
Term, quod nota, and so it was of the Adjournment which happened first at
Westminster, and afterward at Hertford from Michaelmas Term now last past.

Michaelmas Term 35 and 36 Eliz. Gravenor versus Brook and others.
1. IN an Ejectione firmae by Edward Gravenor Plaintiff, against Richard Brook
and others Defendants, the case appeared to be this; Henry Hall was seized in
his Demesne as of Fee, according to the custom of the Manor of A. in the
County of D. of certain customary Tenements holden of the said Manor called
Fairchildes and Preachers, etc. In the third year of Henry the 8th. (before
which time the customary Tenements of the said Manor had always been used to
be granted by Copy of Court Roll of the said Manor in Fee-simple, or for life
or years, but never in Fee-tail but then) the said Henry Hall surrendered his
said Copyhold Land, to the use of Joane his eldest Daughter for her life, the
remainder to John Gravenor the eldest Son of the said Joane, and to the Heirs
of his body, the Remainder to Henry Gravenor her other Son, and the Heirs of
his body, the Remainder to the right Heirs of the said Henry Hall for ever;
whereupon in 3 H. 8. at the Court then there holden, a grant was made by Copy of
Court Roll accordingly, and Seisin given to the said Joane by the Lord
accordingly.

Henry Hall died, having Issue the said Joane and one Elizabeth, and at the
Court holden within the said Manor, 4 H. 8. the death of the said Henry Hall
was presented by the Homage, and that the said Daughters were his Heirs, and
that the Surrender made as before was void, because it was not used within the
said Manor to make Surrenders of Estates tails, and thereupon the said Homage
made division of the said Land, and limited Fairchilds for the purparty of the
said Joane, and Preachers for the purparty of the said Elizabeth, and Seisin
was granted to them accordingly.

Elizabeth died seized of her said part, after which 33 H. 8. Margaret her
Daughter was found Heir to her, and admitted Tenant to this part; after which
Joane dyed seized of the said Tenements as the Law will.

And after the said Margaret takes to Husband one John Adye, who with his said
wife surrendered his said part to the use of the said John Adye and of his said
wife, and of their Heirs; and afterward the said Margaret died without Issue,
and the said John Adye held the part of his said wife, and surrendered it to the
use of the said Richard Brook, and of one John North, and their Heirs who were
admitted accordingly, after which, the said John Gravenor died without Issue,
and now the said Henry Gravenor was sole Heirs to him, and also to the said
Henry Hall who had Issue Edward Gravenor, and dyed, the said Edward entered into
the said Lands called Preachers, and did let it to the Plaintiff, upon whom the
said Richard Brook and the other Defendants did re-enter and eject him. And all
this appears upon a special Verdict.

And by Clench and Gaudy, an Estate tail cannot be of Copyhold Land, unless it
be in case where it has been used, for the Statute of Donis conditionalibus
shall not enure to such customary Lands, but to Lands which are at common Law,
and therefore an Estate tail cannot be of these customary Lands, but in case
where it has been used time out of mind, and they said, that so it has been
lately taken in the Common Bench; But they said, that the first remainder
limited to the said John Gravenor here upon the death of the said John, was a
good Fee-simple conditional, which is well warrantes by the custom to demise in
Fee, for that which by custom may be demised of an Estate in Fee absolute, may
also be demised of a Fee-simple conditional, or upon any other limitation, as
if I. S. has so long Issue of his body, and the like, but in such a case no
Remainder can be limited over, for one Fee cannot remain over upon another, and
therefore the Remainder to the said Henry was void: But they said, that for all
the life of the said John Gravenor, nothing was in the said Elizabeth which
could descend from her to the said Margaret her Daughter, or that might be
surrendered by the said Margaret and her Husband, and therefore the said Margaret
dying without Issue, in the life time of the said John Gravenor who had the
Fee-simple conditional, nothing was done which might hinder the said Edward,
Son to the said Henry Gravenor of his Entry, and therefore the said Plaintiff
ought to have his Judgment to recover, for they took no regard to that which
the Homage did, 4th. year of Hen. 8.

But Fennor and Popham held, that an Estate tail is wrought out of Copyhold
Land by the equity of the Statute of Donis conditionalibus, for otherwise it
cannot be that there can be any Estate tail of Copyhold Land, for by usage it
cannot be maintained, because that no Estate tail was known in Law before this
Statute, but all were Fee-simple, and after this Statute it cannot be by usage,
because this is within the time of limitation, after which an usage cannot make
a prescription, as appears 22 and 23 Eliz. in Dyer: And by 8 Eliz. a Custom
cannot be made after Westminster. 2. And what Estates are of Copyhold land, appears
expressly by Littleton, in his Chapter of Tenant by Copyhold, etc. And in Brook
Title, Tenant by Copyhold, etc. 15 H. 8. In both which it appears that a
Plaint lies in Copyhold Land in the nature of a Formedon in the Descender at
common Law, and this could not be before the Statute of Donis conditionalibus
for such Land, because that before that Statute there was not any Formedon in
the Descender at common Law, and therefore the Statute helps them for their
remedy for intailed Land which is customary by equity: Add if the Action shall
be given by equity for this Land, why shall not the Statute by the same equity
work to make an Estate intail also of this nature of the Land? We see no reason
to the contrary; and if a man will well mark the words of the Statute of Westminster.
2. cap. 1. he shall well perceive that the Formedon in Descender was not before
this Statute, which wills that in a new case a new remedy may be given, and
thereupon sets the form of a Formedon in Descender: But as to the Formedon in
the Reverter, it is then said, that it is used enough in Chancery, and by
Fitzherbert in his Natura brevium, the Formedon in the Descender is founded
upon this Statute, and was not at Common Law before; And the reason is, because
these Copyholds are now become by usage to be such Estates that the Law allows
them to be good against the Lords themselves, they performing their Customs and
Services, and therefore are more commonly guided by the guides and rules of the
common Law, and therefore as appears in Dyer, Tr. 12. Eliz. Possessio fratris,
of such an Estate, facit sororem esse haeredem. And to say that Estates of
Copyhold Land are not warranted but by custom, and every Custom lies in Usage;
and without Usage a Custom cannot be, is true, but in the Usage of the greater
the lesser is always employed: As by Usage, three lives have been always
granted by Copy of Court Roll, but never within memory, two, or one alone, yet
the grant of one or two lives only is warranted by this Custom, for the use of
the greater number warrants the lesser number of lives, but not e converso: And
so Fee-simples upon a Limitation. or Estates in tail are warranted by the
equity of the Statute, because they are lesser Estates then are warranted by
the Custom, and these lesser are employed as before in the greater, and none
will doubt but that in this case the Lord may make a Demise for life, the
Remainder over in Fee, and it is well warranted by the Custom, and therefore it
seems to them that it is a good Estate tail to John Gravenor, and a good
Remainder over to Henry his Brother, and if so, it follows that the Plaintiff
has a good Title to the Land, and that Judgment ought to be given for him. And
for the dying seized of Elizabeth, they did not regard it, for she cannot dye
seized of it as a Copyholder, for she had no right to be Copyholder of it: And
by the dying seized of a Copyholder at common Law, it shall be no prejudice to
him who has right, for he may enter; But here in as much as she comes in by
admittance of the Lord at the Court, her Occupation cannot be fortious to him,
and therefore no descent at common Law by her dying seized, for it was but as an
Occupation at Will. But if it shall not be an Estate tail in John Gravenor, as
they conceive strongly it is, yet for the other causes alleged by Gaudy and
Clench, Judgment ought to be given for the Plaintiff, and the Remainder which
is not good shall not prejudice the Fee-simple conditional granted to John,
which is no more then if the Surrender had been to the use of John Gravenor and
his Heirs, the Remainder over, because that we as Judges see that this cannot
be good by Law, and therefore not to be compared to the case where the Custom
warrants but one life, and the Lord grants two jointly or successively, there
both the one and the other is void: And this is true, because the custom is the
cause that it was void, and not the Law, and also it is a larger Estate then
the Custom warrants, which is not here, and upon this Judgment was given that
the Plaintiff shall recover.

And by Popham, it has been used, and that upon good advice in some Ma^nors,
to bar such Estates tails by a common Recovery prosecuted in the Lords Court,
upon a Plaint in nature of a Writ of Entry in the Post.

2. JUlius Caesar Judge of the Admiralty Court, brought an Action upon the Case
for a Slander against Philip Curtine a Merchant-stranger, for saying, that the
said Caesar had given a corrupt Sentence; And upon not guilty pleaded, and 200.
marks Damages given, it was alleged in arrest of Judgment, where it was tried,
by Nisi prius at the Guildhall by a partial Inquest, because that upon the
default of strangers, one being challenged and tried out, a Tales was awarded
De circumstantibus by the Justice of Nisi prius; whereas (as was alleged) a
Tale could not have been granted in this case, for the Statute of 35 H. 8 cap.
6. which give the Tales is to be intended but of commontryals of English, for
the Statute speaks at the beginning but of such Iuries, which by the Law eught
to have 40 s. of Freehold, and wills that in such cases the Venire facias
ought to have this clause, Quorum quilibet habeat 40 s. in terris, etc. which
cannot be intended of Aliens which cannot have Freehold: And it goes further
that upon default of Jurors, the Justices have authority at the Prayer of the
Plaintiff or Defendant, to command the Sheriff or other Minister to whom it
appertains to make a return of such other able persons of the said County,
then present at the same Assizes or Nisi prius which shall make a full Jury,
etc. which cannot be intended of Aliens but of Subjects, and therefore shall be
of trials which are only of English, and not of this Inquest which was part of
Aliens.

And further the Tales was awarded only of Aliens, as was alleged on the
Defendants part, but in this point it was a mistake, for the Tales was awarded
generally de circumstantibus, which ought always to be of such as the
principal Pannell was. But Per Curiam the exceptions were disallowed, for
albeit the Statute is, as has been said, yet when the Statute comes to this
clause, which gives that a Tales may be granted by the Justices of Nisi prius,
and is generally referred to the former part of the Act, for it is added;
Furthermore be it enacted, that upon every first Writ of Habeas Corpora, or
Distringas with a Nisi prius, etc. the Sheriff, etc. shall return upon every
Juror 5 s. Issues at the least, etc, which is general of all: And then it goes
further, And wills, that in every such Writ o^ Habeas Corpora, or Distringas
with a Nisi prius where a full Jury does not appear before the Justices of
Assise, or Nisi prius, that they have power to command the Sheriff, or other
Minister to whom it appertains, to nominate such other persons as before, which
is general in all places where a Nisi prius is granted, and therefore this is
not excepted neither by the Letter nor intent of the Law. And where it is said
(such persons) by it, is to be intended such as the first, which shall be of
Aliens, as well as English, where the case requires it, for expedition was as
requisite in cases for, or against them, as if it were between other persons.
And Aliens may well be of the County or place where the Nisi prius is to be
taken, and may be there: for although an Alien cannot purch^se Land of an
Estate of Freehold within the Realm, yet he may have a house for habitation
within it, for the time that he is there, albeit he be no Denison, but be to
remain there for Merchandise, or the like: And by Gaudy, where the default was
only of strangers, the Tales might have been awarded only of Aliens, as where a
thing is to be tried by Inquest within two Counties, and those of the one
County appear, but not those of the other, the Tales might be of the other
County only.

Davies versus Gardener.
3. AN Action upon the case for a Slander was brought by Anne Davies against
John Gardener; That whereas there was a Communication of a Marriage to be had
between the Plaintiff and one Anthony Elcock, the Defendant to the intent to
hinder the said Marriage, said, and published, that there was a Grocer in
London that did get her with Child, and that she had Vide this case reported,
Cook lib. 4. 16. b:
the Child by the said Grocer, whereby she lost her Marriage. To which the
Defendant pleaded not guilty, and was found guilty at the Assizes at Aylesbury
to the Damages of 200. marks: And now it was alleged in Arrest of Judgment,
that this matter appears to be merely spiritual, and therefore not
determinable at common Law, but to be prosecuted in the spiritual Court. But
per Curiam the Action lies here, for a woman not married candot by intendment
have so great advancement as by her Marriage, whereby she is sure of maintenance
for her life, or during her Marriage, and Dower and other benefits which the
temporal Laws gives by reason of her Marriage, and therefore by this slander
she is greatly prejudiced in that which is to be her temporal advancement, for
which it is reason to give her remedy by way of Action at common Law: As if a
woman keep a Victualling house, to which diverse of great credit repair, whereby
she has her livelihood, and one will say to her Guests, that as they respect
their credits, they take care how they they use such a house, for there the
woman is known to be a Bawd, whereby the Guests avoid her house, to the loss of
her husband, shall not she in this case have an Action at common Law for such a
slander? It is clear that she will. So, if one says, that a woman is a common
Strumpet, and that it is a slander to them to come to her house, whereby she
loses the ad^antage which she was wont to have by her Guests, she shall have
her Action ^or this at common Law.

So here upon these collateral circumstances, whereby it may appear that she
has more prejudice then can be by calling of one Harlot, and the like.

And Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

Hillary Term, 36 Eliz. in the Kings Bench.
IN Michaelmas Term, 33, and 34 Eliz. Rot. 181. William and Joane his wife,
Administratrir of Andrew Stock, brought an Action upon the Case upon an
Assumpsit, made to the Intestate for the payment of 5 l. to William Stock, who
imparled until Tuesday next after, Octa. Hillary next, which was the 24th. day
of January, and then the Defend^nt demanded Oyer of the Letters of
Administration which were entered, in haec verba.

Whereby it appears that the Letters of Administration were committed to the
said Joane by Thomas Tailor Bachelor of Law, Commissary to the Bishop of
London, etc. whereby the Defendant pleaded, that after the last continuance, ^he
said Letters Patents of Administ^ation, sealed with the Seal of the Vicar
General of the said Bishop, which he uses in this behalf, and brought here
into Court, bearing date the 27th. day of January 1591. which was three days
after the continuance, committed the Administration to the said Defendant. And
pleaded further the Act of 37 H. 8. which says, that it shall be lawful
hereafter for any person, being a Doctor of the Law, to be Chancellor,
Commissary, or to exercise Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, albeit he were a mere
Lay person, so that such a person be a Doctor as aforesaid, and avers, that at
the time of the committing of the Administration to the said Joane, the said
Thomas Tailor was a mere Lay person, and not Doctor Legis civilis nec minister
allocatus, according to the Laws of the Church of England, whereby he had no
lawful power to commit the Administration.

Upon which it was demurred generally, and by all the Court the Plaintiff had
Judgment to recover; for we are to consider what our Law was in this case
before this Statute of 37 H. 8. And albeit a Doctor then affirmed, that the
Canon Law was, that there was a mere nullity in such Administration, so
although the party that did it, not being a Clark nor Doctor, according to the
Stat. of 37 H. 8. yet all the Justices agreed, that the Administration so
committed will be adjudged in our Law to be of force and effect, being shown
under the Seal of the Officer and committed by him, who is reputed the Officer,
who ought to do it, and is invested in the Office until it be avoided by
sentence, and yet such an avoidance shall not make a man's act to be made void,
no more then if a mere Layman be presented to a benefice, albeit this be a
mere nullity in our Law, and void, yet we adjudge the Church full, according to
the public admission, constitution and induction, and not according to the
capacity of the person, which is a thing secret, until such a one be deprived
for it by sentence in the spiritual Court, and yet the Church shall be in our
Law void but from the time of deprivation, of which notice ought to be given to
the Patron.

So here, he remains as to our Law an Officer until his authority be defeated
by sentence of the spiritual Court, otherwise great mischief will happen; for
an infinite number of Administrations may be drawn in question by Averment,
that he, who granted them was a mere lay person, and so make such Garboils in
the Commonwealth, which is not to be suffered for the inconveniency which will
happen by it; and therefore our Law which is founded upon reason shall judge of
it according to the open appearance of the Officer, to wit, that he has a
grant made to him, and not according to the private capacity of the person, and
this is not altered by the said Statuts which is made in affirmation of it, and
makes the authority of a Doctor of Law absolute, not to be defeated by the
Civil or Canon Law, which is not in the other case: But yet it does not make
this case of worse condition then it was at Common Law. And by all the pleading
of the Administration committed to the Defendant, is not good, because it
appears by the date of it, that it was made after the day of the last
continuance, and therefore could not have been pleaded until a new continuance
after: And by the Doctor the last Administration does not avoid the first, but
in case where there is an especial revecation of the first: But they did not
speak of the doubleness because the Demurrer was general and not special,
and also because the other matters were so clear.

2. IN Trespass for carrying away certain Loads of Hay, the case happened to be
this; The Plaintiff pretending Title to certain Hay which the defend* had
standing in certain Land, to be more sure to have the Action pass for Property.
him, took other Hay of his own (to wit, the Plaintiff) and mixed it with the
Defendants Hay, after which the Defendant took and carried away both the one
and the other that was intermired, upon which the Action was bought, and by all
the Court clearly the Defendant shall not be guilty for any part of the Hay,
for by the intermirture (which was his own act) the Defendant shall not be
prejudiced as the case is, in taking the Hay. And now the Plaintiff cannot say
which part of the Hay is his, because the one cannot be known from the other,
and therefore the whole shall go to him who has the property in it with which
it is intermired, as if a man take my Garment and Embroider it with Silk, or
Gold, or the like, I may take back my Garment, But if I take the Silk from you,
and with this, face or embroider my Garment, you shall not take my Garment for
your Silk which is in it, but are put to she Action for taking of the Silk from
you.

So here, if the Plaintiff had taken the Defendants Hay and carried it to his
house, or otherwise, and there intermired it with the Plaintiffs Hay, there the
Desendant cannot take back his Hay, but is put to his Action against the
Plaintiff for taking his Hay. The difference appears, and at the same day at
Sergeants Inn in Fleetstreet, the difference was agreed by Anderson. Pe^iam,
and other Justices there, and this case was put by Anderson: It a Goldsmith be
melting of Gold in a Pot, and as he is melting it, I will cast Gold of mine
into the Pot, which is melted together with the other Gold, I have no remedy
for my Gold, but have lost it.

Bullock versus Dibler.
3. IN an Ejectione firmae between Edward Bullock Plaintiff, and John Dibler
De^endant, the case appeared to be this; A man was seized of a Copyhold
Ten^^ent, p^rcell of the Manor of Stratfield Mortimer, the County of Berks, in
right of his wife, in his Demesne as of Fee, and surrendered this Copy bold
Tenement by himself without his wife, to the use of a stranger in Fee, who was
(...) by the Lo^^ accordingly, the Husband dies, the wife dies, the Heir of the
wife without any admittance enters upon the stranger, and makes a Lease for a
year to the Plaintiff, upon whom the Defendant in right of him to whom the
Surrender was made, reenters, and adjudged that the Plaintiff ought to
recover, and that the surrender of the Husband was not as a discontinuance
against the wise, to put the Heir to his Plaint in nature of a Sur Cui in vita,
for a Discontinuance shall not be by a Deed of Feement only, but by it with the
Livery ensuing, whereby the entire Fee-simple is given, what Estate so ever the
Feoffor had by reason of the Livery, where by Deed of Grant nothing passed but
that which the party might lawfully grant: And here it shall be taken as if the
Grant had been made by the Husband which passed but his Estate, to wit, that
which he might lawfully grant without prejudice to his wife. But yet there is
this diversity between a surrender of an Estate for life, and a surrender of an
Estate in Fee to the use of a scranger, to wit, that by the one the Estate
drowned in the Lord by the surrender, and by the other it is not drowned in the
Lord, but is transferred to him to whom it was made, upon which he is admitted
to it; otherwise, in the last case it returns to him who surrendered, and then
upon the admittance he is in the Per by him who surrendered, and not by the
Lord, or by the Surrender made by Tenant for life, he to whose use it is made
ought to take it of the Lord, and he is there in by him, and not by him who
surrendered.

And this is the common difference betwixt Customary Estates for lives, and
Customary Estates of Inheritance.

And the Plaint of Cui in vita is given where recovery by default is against
the husband and wife, and not upon the surrender of the husband; for suppose
the husband had surrendered merely to the Lord himself, yet the wife might have
entered after the death of the husband, because the surrender goes but to the
Estate which the husband might lawfully part with, and therefore rather to be
resembled to a Grant then to a Feoffment.

And notwithstanding that he was not admitted, yet he might enter and take the
profits, and make a Lease according to the custom, or bring an Action of
Trespass against him who disturbes him? But if the Lord require his Fine or
his Services, and the Heir refuse to do them, this may be a forfeiture of his
Copyhold; But until lawful Seisin made by the Lord (because it belongs to
him) the Heir may intermeddle with the Possession, albeit he be not admitted by
the Lord where it is an Estate of Iuheritance by the Custom.

And in this Term also in another case, in the same Court it was adjudged. that
an Infant who surrenders his Copyhold Land within age, may enter at his full
age, without being put any Suit for it.

And the first case was very well argued by one Brock, a Puny utter Barister of
the Inner Temple, this Term for the Plaintiff. And it was the first Demur that
he argued in Court.

Forth versus Holborough.
4. IN an Action of Debt upon an Obligation of 200. marks brought by Robert
Forth Doctor of Law, and Mary his Wife, as Executrix to Doctor Drewry, against
Richard Holborough, the Case upon Demurrer appeared to be this; to wit, That
the said Dr. Drewry was seized in his Demesne as of Fee, of the Suit of the
Manor of Goldingham Hall in the County of Essex, and so seized the last day of
November. 27 Eliz. demised it to the said Richard Holborough for 17. years from
the said last day of November. whereby the Defend^nt antred into it the next day,
and was thereof possessed accordingly, and so possessed the last day of November.
28 Eliz. entered into an Obligation to the said Dr. Drewry, with condition, that
if he, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, or any of them should
well and truly pay or cause to be paid to Dorothy Goldingham widow, or her
Assigns, at the Mannor-house of Goldingham Hall in the County of Essex, for the
Term of 17. years, from the Feast of S. Michael the Archangel then last past,
or an Annuity or annual Rent of 20. marks of lawful English money, at the
Feast of the Annunciation of our Lady, and S. Michael the Archangel, by equal
portions, if the said Dororhy shall so long live, and the said Richard
Holborough, or his Assigns, or any other claiming by, or under the said
Richard, or his Assigns, shall or may so long occupy or enjoy the said Site of
the Manor of Goldingham Hall, that then the Obligation shall be void; after
which until the 9th. day of May, 29 Eliz. the Defendant enjoyed the said
Site, and paid duly the said Annuity, and then he surrendered his Estate in the
said Site to the said Dr. Drewry, and after this did not pay the Annuity over,
and yet continued the possession of the said Site.

And by all the Justices the Defendant notwithstanding the Surrender made to
the Obligee himself, ought to have continued the payment of the Annuity to the
said Dorothy, for albeit the Term be drowned, and merged in the Reversion, and
so has no continuance as to him in the Reversion, yet as to any thing
heretofore done by the Defendant who was the Termor in Judgment of Law, it is
to be said to have continuance: As if he had granted a Rentcharge out of it to
have continuance during the said Term, although he surrender his Term to him in
the Reversion, yet the charge continues, and as to it, the Reversion shall be
said to be in the Termor, and albeit the Obligee himself shall not take
advantage of his own, or to have the advantage of the forfeiture of an
Obligation there, where his own act is the cause of his breach.

And if it had been, that the said Dorothy during the said Term shall have the
use of a Chamber within the Site, without the interruption of him, or his
Assigns, there, if after the Surrender, the said Dorothy Drewry had interrupted
him of the use of the said Chamber, the forfeiture of the Obligation shall not
be taken against the Defendant for it.

But here the Condition is of a collateral thing to be done, to wit, the
payment of the Annuity to a stranger, with which the Land is not bound, and
therefore the breach comes merely in default of the Obligor, and of the Obligee
in no part, to wit, and therefore the Obligation here is forfeited.

And by Popham, the case here is more clear upon consideration of the words of
the Condition, for the words are, I the Defendant shall, or may enjoy, etc. and
this word (may enjoy) shall be always intended reasonably, to wit, if it may
without any thing to be done by him to the contrary; and here if he had not
made the Surrender, he might have enjoyed the Site until the end of his Term,
and therefore because it comes of his own act, whereby he, or his Assigns shall
not enjoy it for the Term, if it shall be said, that he in the Reversion shall
not be said in, by the Termor of which he himself shall not take any advantage,
in as much as if this had not been, he might have enjoyed for the whole Term.
To which all the other Justices also agreed, and upon this Judgment was given
for the Plaintiff.

But if any had defeated the said Term by a lawful entry, by a Title
Paramount, the Obligation had not been forfeited for any default of payment
after this Entry, but if Rent had been reserved upon the Lease, and for default
of payment, a Re-entry had been made, yet by Popham the payment ought to be
continued upon the peril of the forfeiture of the Obligation, for the words
(may enjoy) in as much as there it is the mere default of the Defendant
himself, there the Lease does not continue, of which he shall not take
advantage to save his Obligation. But note the form of the Demurrer, and that
it might have been been better joined, which is to be seen in the Record where
it is entered.

Easter Term 36 Eliz. Geilles versus Rigeway.
IN debt for 306. l 6. s. 8 d. by William Geillies, against Thomas Rigeway Esquire
late Sheriff of Devon; For that whereas John Chaunder alias Chaundeler, was in
execution with the said Sheriff for the said sum, the said Sheriff afterward,
to wit, the tenth day of December, 34 Eliz. at London, in such a Parish and
Ward suffered him to escape, the said Rigeway then being Sheriff of Devon, and
having him then in execution, etc. To which the Defendant pleaded, how that he
took him in Execution by the Process at Stockram in the County of Devon, as the
Plaintiff has alleged, and there detained him in safe custody until the 8th.
day of December, 34 Eliz. at which day the said Chaundeler broke the Prison,
and escaped out of it contrary to the will of the said Defendant, and that the
Defendant did freshly pursue him, and in this fresh pursuit did re-take him the
11th. day of December, then next ensuing at Stockram aforesaid, and detained
him in execution for the said 306 l. 6 s. 8 d. during the time of his Office,
and delivered him ever to the new Sheriff, etc. To which the Plaintiff replied
by protestation, that he did not make fresh pursuit; And for plea says, That
after the going away of the said Chaundeler, and before his re-taking by the
said Defendant as aforesaid, the said Chaundeler for a whole day and night, to
wit, at London, in the Parish and Ward aforesaid, was out of the view of the
said Defendant, etc. Upon which it was demurred in Law.

And it was moved by Cook Attorney-generall, that Judgment ought to be given
for the Plaintiff; for, in as much as it was alleged, that he was out of the
view of the Sheriff for a day and a night together, there it shall be intended
to be a default in the Defendant in the making of his pursuit, and therefore
chargable to the Plaintiff, and yet he agreed, that if the Sheriff had made his
pursuit freshly; although that at the turning of a Lane, end of a house, or the
like, the Prisoner had been out of the view of the Sheriff for a small time, as
until the Sheriff comes to this turning, end of the house, or the like, yet
the Sheriff may re-take the Prisoner, and he shall be yet said to be in
execution to the party against his will, yet when he is for so long a time out
of his view, it shall be otherwise, for the default which the Law presumes to
be in him; and therefore in this case the action lies. To which it was answered
by Popham, Gaudy, and Clench, That if he makes fresh pursuit, so that it does
not appear fully that there was a default in the Sheriff in his pursuit,
although he were so long out of his view, yet he shall be said to be in
execution for the party against his will upon the retaking of him: As if be be
pursued to a house where he is kept for a long time, and the Sheriff set a
guard upon the house, and after this re-take him the next, or any other day
without departing from thence, the Sheriff in such a case may re-take him upon
his coming out of the house, and he shall be in execution to the party against
his own will.

And so in all like Cases; As if he pursues him in the night, so as he cannot
see him, and yet by the tract of the horse, or enquiry he makes diligent
pursuit to re-take him, so that it cannot appear that there was any negligence
or default in him in making pursuit.

And it is not the form of the pleading to allege, that he pursued him
freshly, and had him always in his view until he re-took him, but only that
he pursued him freshly and took him in this fresh pursuit, without saying any
thing that he was in his view, and therefore his being out of the view of the
Sheriff is not material in the case, but the fresh pursuit, and the taking of
him in this pursuit.

Then Coke moved, that the Bar was not good, because he does not show where he
made the pursuit, so that he might agres to answer that which is alleged by
the Plaintiff, to wit, his being at large at London, and therefore the Bar not
being good, Judgment shall be given against the Defendant for the insufficiency
of his Bar: for a Repleader shall not be in case of Demurs, as it has been
adjudged here very lately, and also in the Common Bench.

To which it was answered by the said Justices, That if the Bar be insufficient
in matter, so that it may appear by it, that the Plaintiff has sufficient
cause of Action, which in matter is not sufficiently avoided by the Bar,
Judgment shall be given for the Plaintiff upon the Bar, if the Replication be
sufficient, and no Repleader; but if the Bar be sufficient for the matter and
insufficient for the form only, as it is here, there before the Statute of
Eliz. for pleading there shall be a Repleader, but now because no Demurrer was
upon the Bar, but a Replication made to it, therefore by Popham no advantage
shall be taken of the Bar for matter of form, which is admitted by the party,
and no advantage taken thereof according to the Statute.

And they all agreed, that the Sheriff, albeit he did not make fresh pursuit
upon the escape, may yet take, re-take the Prisoner who escaped from him out of
Execution, for the Prisoner shall not take advantage to avoid the Execution;
and therefore in respect of the Plaintiff, who yet may accept the Prisoner to be
in execution, the Sheriff may re-take the Prisoner. But if the Plai. had
recovered against the Sheriff before for the escape, then the Sheriff for his
Indemnity cannot re-take him, but is put to his Action upon the Case against
the Prisoner, for the Sheriff has no color in such a case of escape to retake
him, but in respect, and for the advantage of the Plaintiff, who had Judgment
against the Prisoner, and not in respect of the private wrong done to himself,
of which he has no Judgment, and as it is now, the Replication not being good
(by Popham) Judgment ought to be given against the Plaintiff. But by assent it
was ordered that the Defendant shall put in new Bail, and that upon it, he
shall plead anew; But how shall it be if the Sheriff do notmake fresh Suit and
re-take him? And afterward he, at whose Suit he was in Execution recovered
against the Sheriff; may the Prisoner have an Audita querela upon the matter?

Upon an Assembly of all the Justices at Serjeants-Inn in Fleetstreet, with the
Barens of the Exchequer, it was clearly agreed by them all (but two, who at the
beginning made some doubt of it, but at the end assented also.)

If in the night, the house of any be broken, with an intent to steal any thing
being in the house, although no person be in the house at this time, yet this
is Burglary, for the Law is, that every one shall be in security in the night,
as well for their Goods as their persons which be in the house.

And if a Church be broken in the night for the stealing of any thing in it,
this is Burglary, though no person be in it at this time. And so has the Law
always been put in execution, and in all the Books which speak of Burglary, it
is not mentioned that any person ought to be in the house, but that it is
Burglary, the Message being ^eck^n in the night, to the intent to kill any
person th^^e, or to the intent to steal any thing out of it.

And the case that of late time it has been put in the Inditements of
Burglary, that some person was then there, etc, has been, because that in such
cases of Burglary, Clergy was taken away, but now by the Statute of 18 Eliz.
Clergy is taken away in every case of Burglary.

And the ancient Presidents are, Quod domum of such a one Nectanter Felonice
and burglariter fregit, without making mention that any person was then in it,
or making mention that it was Domus mansionalis of any: And it may be a Mansion
House, albeit no person then inhabit in it. And agreed that hereafter it shall
be so put in execution by all the Justices. See this more fully hereafter,
Trin. 36 Eliz. Pl. 1. in this Book.

AT Tres Paschae this Term there were made for Sergeants at Law; viz. Lewkenor,
Savage and Williams of the Middle Temple, Heal only of the Inner Temple,
Kingsmill, Warburton, Branthwaite, and Flemming of Lincoln's Inn, and Daniel and
Spurling of Grayes-Inn.

And all the Justices were assembled in the Middle Temple Hall, the Wednesday
past M^nsem Paschae, being the second day of May, where the two chief Justices,
and chief Baron sat upon the Vpper-Bench of the same Hall, in their Scarlet
Robes with their Collers of S. S. and every one of the other Justices and
Barens in their Ancienty, one on the one side, and the other on the other side
in their Scarlet Robes also, and then came the new Sergeants in their black
Gowns before the Justices there, the two eldest being put in the midst before
the chief Justice of England, and so every one of them, one on the one side,
and the other on the other side, according to their Ancienty, and every one of
the said Sergeants having one of his Servants behind him at his back, with his
Masters Scarlet Hood and Coife upon his arms: And thereupon the said chief
Justice made his Speech in this manner.

IF men will enter into a due consideration upon what grounds the Laws of this
Realm have their Original Foundation, and what good effects are wrought through
the due execution of the same they might say, and that justly, that the
profession thereof is both an honest, and honorable Profession.

The Laws are derived partly from the law of God and partly from the Law of
Nature. From the Law of God, in that it ordains means how the people may be
truly instructed in the knowledge and fear of God: How they should demean
themselves toward their Sovereign and Prince: How they ought to live one with
the other, and how to be defended from oppressions and injuries. From the Law
of Nature, in that it provideth how each man may defend himself, that he may
live by his own labors, or otherwise according to his profession or calling;
That he may secure his Posterity of that which he has gathered together by his
industry, and that man with man may live together in such secure and
comfortable Society as appertains. And what be the effects which grow by the
due execution of the Laws? They are these.

By it, God is known, the Sovereign Prince obeyed, the people are kept to live
in peace, and that is yielded to each which is his due: And can there be any
better things then these upon the face of the Earth? No, there cannot. The Law
therefore being taken from so good a ground, and working such notable and
honorable effects, who can justly say otherwise, but that the profession of
such a Law in an honorable profession? Are not the Judges of the Law
professors of the Law? See then what God himself in his word has said of
Judges in Psalm. 82. speaking of Judgment and Justices he says thus; I have
said ye are Gods, and can there be any higher name then this in Heaven or
Earth? And why are they so learned? but for that, they in their Offices do
resemble that which is the Office of God, as to discern so far forth as man's
capacity can reach unto between right and wrong, truth and falsehood, the just
and the unjust, which is a most high, weighty and honorable charge, and
therefore 2 Chro: 196. cha. Jehosophat said to the Judges, Take heed what you
do, for you do not execute the Judgments of men, but of the Lord, and He will
be with you in Judgment. By which it is evident, that they are either grossly
ignorant, or otherwi^e very malignant and con^emptuous persons that may not be
induced to be reformed, that do in any wise hold the profession to be either
base or contemptible.

And this I may truly say to the encouragement and comfort of such as being
honest do profess the Law: That in the most parts of England there are more
Gentlemen's houses, and those of continuance raised and advanced by that
profession alone, then by all other the professions that can be spoken of, and
approved,.

Let any man of Experience in the State, of the general part of the Realm
enter into a due consideration of it, and I am well assured he shall find it
so; whereby it may plainly appear, that Gods blessings for worldly benefits have
greatly abounded toward such as have walked evenly and justly in that calling:
yet happily there may be some (I mean such as slip in by extraordinary means)
that sometime do give scandal to the Profession; as where such are called to
the Degrees of Learning, as are either ignorant, or infamous persons, whereby
they either cannot advise as they should, or by giving themselves over to
slights and to shifts, they do not advise as they ought.

A matter abhorred of all good and honest men: But the same being duly weighed,
tends to the touch of the person, and not of the Profession. Nevertheless to
avoid this Scandal, I would advise;

1. Such as have Government in these houses of Court, should be very careful
and respective in their Calls, not only to the bench as Readers, but of those
also whom they call to the Bar, that they may be such as may appear to be both
learned, and honest, and such as may not justly be impeached of Ignorance, or
Ignominy; for such are not only to advise between parties, but many of them are
drawn to Credit and Government also in their Countries, and therefore behoofull
to be free from such Imputations.

And sithence without the knowledge of the Law in some measure, such as govern
in their Countries, may often fall to commit such Errors as were to be wished
might be otherwise.

It were convenient that Gentlemen, yea, those of best worth would bring up
their very heirs in the knowledge of the Laws, as that they might in after
ages, when as they shall be called to Government, be so able to govern under
her Majesty as might best stand with their Reputations, and the good of their
Countries.

And now your selves that are here present, and have been called to this State
and Degree of Sergeants at Law (a State and Degree I may well call it, for that
her Majesty does so term it) Since your gravities and your good conversations
in your callings hither-to, and the good opinion conceived of your Learnings,
Experiences, and Discretions has moved her Majesty to call you to this Dignity.

I am now to advise you so to demean and govern your selves in your Profession
as those good things thus conceived of you may not henceforth any ways be
blemished, but rather increase, to your further Reputations and Credits. In
which you are to have a special regard that you be thankful, first, to God,
who has so guided the course of your lives hither-to, as it has made you to
have been thought to have merited this Advancement. Then to her Majesty, who
upon good report made, has conceived so well of you as to call you to this
Degree, wherein it behooves you so to demean your selves, as in all her Highness
Service, both in your Countries and otherwise, as you shall be called thereunto,
as you may be found to deal therein effectually, diligently, and justly.

And lastly, to the Country and Common wealth who has carried so good a report
of you, as thereby you have been the rather brought to this place: And the most
thankfulness you can show to your Country, is, to Council your Clients
according to your skill honestly, and truly, whereby they may not be encouraged
to spend their time and their substance in vain, frivolous, and unjust Suits;
to be faithful and secret to your Clients, not disclosing their Councels to
their prejudice, that you expedite your Clients Cause so far forth with
convenience, and your Clients safety, that both in your practice and otherwise,
your speech and behavior toward all men be modest and discreet, yea, such as
appertains to men of your Gravities and Callings, that without respect of
persons, yea, be bold to maintain your Clients honest Cause, so far forth as
may stand with knowledge and discretion: And that in all things you respect
more your honesties, then your profits.

And touching these points, you have a continual memory, and that always
about you, in your very Garments: And therefore by the Coif, in respect it is
white many things are signified, as Gravity, Wisdom, and Experience, for that
these Virtues are proper to the gray hairs, and white headed men.

There is also signified thereby, that you should be both honest and of an
unspotted life; And in that it is fashioned like a Helmet, it signifies, that
you should be both bold to utter your knowledge in the Law, in the honest and
just cause of your Client, without respect of persons whomsoever it concerns.
And by the party colored Garments, being both of deep colors, and such as the
Judges themselves in ancient time used (for so we receive it by tradition is
signified soundness and depth of judgment and ability to discern of Causes,
what color soever be cast over it, and under, or with what vail or shadow
soever it be disguised. For the wholness and closness of your Garments, they do
signify integrity to be used in your advices, and secrecy in your councels.
And in that the Garments being single and unlined, it betokens that you
should be sincere and plain in your advises, and not double, carrying your
opinion to your self one way, and you advise it your Client clean another way.

The two Tongues do signify, that as you should have one Tongue for the Rich
for your Fee, as a reward for your long studies and labors, so should you also
have another Tongue as ready without reward to defend the Poor and Oppressed;
And therein to show your seves thankful to God for all that which he has
bestowed upon you.

And for the Rings you give, as Gold is amongst all Metals the purest, so
should you be of all others of your Profession the perfectest both in knowledge
and in the other Virtues before remembered: And in that it is a Ring, and round
without end, it betokens that you have made a perpetual Vow to this your
Profession and Calling, and are as it were wedded unto it: And therefore I
heartily wish you may always walk therein according as appertains to your
Calling.

And this done, the ancienst Sergeant begins to recite his pleading, and so
each after other in order.

And that done, the ancientest kneeleth down before the chief Justice of
England, and so the rest before the Justices and Barons as they are in
ancienty, and had severally by the said chief Justice their Coifs put upon
their heads, and then their red Hoods upon their shoulders, and then the
Sergeants return to their Chambers, and put on their party colored Garments,
and so walk on to Westminster the one after the other, as they be in ancienty,
bare-headed, with all their Coifs on, and so are in their turn presented the
one after the other, by two of the ancientest Sergeants: And after their
pleadings recited, they give their Rings in the Court by some friends, and so
are thereupon set in their place at the Bar according to their ancienty.

And all this done, they return to their Chambers, and there put on their black
Gowns, and red Hoods, and come into the Hall each standing at his Table
according to his ancienty bare-headed, with his Coif on, and after sets
himself upon the Bench, having a whole mess of meat, with two courses of many
Dishes served unto him; And in the afternoon they put on their Purple Gowns,
and then go in order to Paul's, where it has been accustomed that they heard
Service, and had a Sermon.

Edwards versus Halinder.
4. IN an Action upon the Case by Rice Edwards against Edward Halinder; The
Plaintiff declared by his Bill that one Edward Banister was seized in his
Demesne as of Fee, of a Message in such a Parish and Ward in London, and being
so seized did let to him the Cellar of the same house the 23. day of April, 32
Eliz. for a week, from the same day, and so from week to week, so long as the
parties should please, at such a Rent by the week, whereby he was possessed.

And further, that the said Edward Banister being seized of the said house, as
is aforesaid, afterward, to wit, 29. July, in the 32. year aforesaid, gave to
the said Defendant Officium, Anglice, the Warehouse of the said Message being
right over the said Cellar, for a week from thenceforth, and so from week to
week, so long as the parties should please, paying such a Rent, whereby the
Defendant was thereof possessed accordingly: And the Plaintiff being possessed
of the said Cellar, and the Defendant of the Warehouse, as aforesaid, and the
Plaintiff then having in the said Cellar three Butts of Sack to the value of 40
l. etc. The Defendant the 30: day of July in the 32. year aforesaid, put such a
quantity of weight and burden of Merchandise into the said Warehouse, and
thereby did so overburthen the floor of the said Warehouse, so that by the force
and weight of the said burden, the said floor the said 30. day of July was
broken, and by force thereof did fall, and that thereby the Merchandise that were
in the said Warehouse did fall out of the said Warehouse into the said Cellar
upon the said Vessels of Wine, and by force thereof brake the said Vessels of
Wine, whereby the said Wine did fly out of the said Vessels, and became of no
value, to the Plaintiffs damage of a hundred pound, etc. To which the Defendant
says, That within a small time before the Trespass committed, the floor of
the said Warehouse sustained as great a burden of Merchandise as this was: And
that the Warehouse was demised to him as the Plaintiff has alleged to lay in
it 30. Tun weight, whereby he was possessed, and so possessed the said 30. day
of July, did put into the said Warehouse but 14. Tun weight of Merchandise, and
that the damages which the Plaintiff had by the breaking of the floor, was,
because the floor at the time of the laying of the merchandise upon it, and
also before the lease made to him thereof was so rotten, and a great part of the
Wall upon which the said floor lies, so much decayed, that for default of
Reparations and supporting thereof by those to whom the reparations did belong,
before the Lease thereof made, it suddenly brake, which matter he is ready to
aver; Whereupon the Plaintiff demurred, and Judgment was given for the Plaintiff
in the Exchequer, upon which a Writ of Error was brought in the Exchequer
Chamber, and the Error assigned was, that the Judgment ought to have been given
for the Defendant, because that now it appears that there was not any default
in the Defendant, for he was not to repair that which was so ruinous at the
time of his Lease, and therefore if it did bear so much lately before, it cannot
fall by the default of the Defendant in the weight put upon it, but by the
ruinousnes of the thing demised; And yet by the advice of the Justices the
Judgment was this Term affirmed: for the Plaintiff has alleged expressly, that
the floor brake by the weight of the Merchandise put upon it. which ought to be
confessed and avoided, or traversed; whereas here he answers but
argumentatively, to wit, that it did bear more before, therefore that he did not
break it by this weight, or that it was so ruinous that it brake, Ergo not by
the weight: whereas here it is expressly alleged, that it brake by the weight
put upon it, and if lesser weight had been put it would not have broken. And he
who takes such a ruinous house ought to mind well what weight he put into it at
his peril, so that it be not so much that another shall take any damage by it:
But if it had fallen of it self without any weight put upon it, or that it had
fallen by the default only of the posts in the Cellar which support the floor,
with which the Defendant had nothing to do, there the Defendant shall be
excused? But here it is expressly alleged, that it fell by the weight put upon
it, which ought to be answered: As if a man take an Estate for life, or years
in a ruinous house, if he pull it down he shall be charged in Wast, but if it
fall of it self, he shall be excused in Wast; so there is a diversity where
default is in the party, and where not, so here, the Defendant ought to have
taken good care, that he did not put upon such a ruinous floor more then it
might well bear, and if it would not bear any thing, he ought not to put any
thing into it, to the prejudice of a third person, and if he does, he shall
answer to the party his damages.

Collard versus Collard.
5. IN an Ejectione firmae brought by Constantine Collard against Richard
Collard, the case appeared to be this; Thomas Collard was seized in his Demesne
as of Fee, of Lands in Winkle in the County of Devon, called the Barton of
Southcote: And having two Sons, to wit, Eustace the eldest, and Richard (the
now Defendant) the youngest, and the eldest being to be married, the said
Thomas in consideration of this marriage, being upon the said Barton said these
words.

Eustace stand forth, I do here, reserving an Estate for my own life and my
wives life, give unto thee and thy Heirs for ever these my Lands, and Barton of
Southcote; after which the said Thomas enfeoffed his youngest Son of Barton,
with warranty from him and his Heirs, the eldest Son enter, and let it to the
Plaintiff, upon whom the Defendant re-enter, upon which re-entry the Action was
brought, and upon a special Verdict all this matter appeared: But it was not
found by the Verdict, that the said Thomas Collard the Father was dead, and
therefore the Warranty was not any thing in the Case. And it was moved by Heal
that the Plaintiff ought to be barred, because it did not pass by way of
Estate, in as much as a man cannot pass a Freehold of a Land from himself to
begin at a time to come, and by it to create a particular Estate to himself,
and in use it cannot pass, because that by a bare parole and Use cannot be
raised, and by giving my Land to my Son, Cousin, and the like, nothing will
pass without Livery, for there is not consideration to raise an Use.

Fennor, The words shall be taken, as if he had said (here I give you this
Barton reserving an Estate for my life) although the words of reservation have
priority in their time from the speaking of them, because a reservation cannot
be but out of a thing granted, and therefore the reservation shall be utterly
void, or otherwise ought to be taken according to their proper nature, to wit,
to be in their operation subsequent, and so shall not hurt the Grant, and
therefore are not to be compared to the case where a man grant that after the
death of I. S. or after his own death a stranger shall have his Land, which
Popham granted.

And Fennor said further, that these words being spoken upon the Land, as
before amount to a Livery.

Gaudy said, That the words as they are spoken amount to a Livery, if the words
are sufficient to pass the Estate, but he conceived that the words are not
sufficient to make the Estate to pass to the said Eustace, because his intent
appears, that Eustace was not to have the Land until after the death of him
and his wife, and therefore of the same effect, as if he had granted the Land to
the said Eustace after his death; and as an Use it cannot pass, because by a
bare word an Use cannot be raised, as appears in diverse Reports.

Mich. 12, and 13 Eliz. which is a good case to this purpose: But to say
generally that an Use cannot be raised or charged upon a perfect Contract by
words upon good consideration, cannot be Law; and therefore it is to be
considered what the Law was before the Statute of 27 H. 8. And I think that
none will deny, but that by grant of Land for money, before this Statute an Use
was raised out of the same Land, for a bargain and sale of Land for money, and
a grant of Land for money is all one, and no difference between them: And is
not a grant of Land made in consideration of marriage of my Son and Daughter,
as valuable as a grant of it for money? It is clear that it is, and much more
valuable, as my blood is more valuable to me then my money; and therefore it is
absurd to say, that the consideration of money raise or change an Use at Common
Law, and not such a consideration of marriage.

And in such a case at Common Law there was not any diversity, that the party
who so grant or hargain for the one or the other considerations was f^ised of
the Land granted, or bargained in use, or possession, but that the Use by the
Contract was transferred according to the bargain in both cases where there is
a consideration: And where through all the Law shall it be seen that of any
thing which might pass by contract, there need any other thing then the words
which make the contract, as writing or the like testifying it? And that the Law
was so, it appears by the Statute of Inrolements of bargains and sales of
Land made 27 H. 8. which enacts, that no Freehold, nor Use thereof shall pass
by bargain and sale only, unless it be by deed indented and enrolled according
to the Statute; Ergo, if this Statute had not been, it had passed by the
bargain and sale by bare words; and in as much as the Statute enacts this in
case of bargain and sale only, the other cases, as this case here, are as it
was before at Common Law. And by an exception at the end of the same Statute,
London is as it was at Common Law, and therefore now Lands may pass there at
this day by bargain and sale, by word without deed, for it is out of the
Statute: And how can we say, that the Statute of Uses does any thing to alter
the Common Law in this point, by any intent of the makers thereof, whereas at the
same Parliament they made an especial Law in the case of bargain and sale of
Lands. And at this day, for the Lands in London, notwithstanding the Statute of
Uses, the Law has been put in practice, and always holden as to the Lands
there to be good, if sold by bare Parole as it were at Common Law. And I have
heard it reported by Manwood late chief Baron of the Exchequer, that it was in
question in the time of King Edw. the 6th. whether the use of a Freehold of
Land will pass upon a Contract by Parole without Deed in consideration of
marriage; upon which all the then Justices were assembled upon a doubt rising
in a case, happening in the Star Chamber, and then resolved by all the Justices
(as he said) that it shall pass; and he said, that himself was of this opinion
also: And to say, that by grant of Land at Common Law, the use had been raised
out of the possessions of the Land which the Grantor then had, and by it pass
to the Bargainee, and that it shall not be raised and passed to another by
grant of Land in consideration of marriage, which is a more valuable
consideration then money, is absurd and against all reason.

And for the solemnity, Uses in such cases (in respect of marriage) were the
cause that they always were left as they were at Common Law, and not
restrained as the case of bargain and sale is, which by Common intendment may
be made more easily and secretly, then that which is done in consideration of
marriage, which is always a thing public and notorious, but it is not
reasonable that every slight or accidental speech shall make an alteration of
any Use: As if a man ask of any one what he will give or leave to any of his
Sons or Daughters for their advancement in marriage, or otherwise for their
advancement, this shall be but as a bare speech or communication which shall
not alter or change any Use: But where there is upon the Speech a conclusion of
a Marriage between the friends of the parties themselves, and that in
consideration thereof, they shall have such Lands, and for such an Estate, there
the Use shall be raised by it, and shall pass accordingly to the parties,
according to the conclusion which Fennor granted.

But by Popham, If it may be taken upon the words spoken, that the purpose was
to have the Estate pass by way of making of an Estate, as by way of Feoffment,
etc. then notwithstanding the consideration expressed, the use shall not
change, nor no Estate by it but at will, until the Livery made thereupon: And
therefore if a man make a Deed of Feoffment, with express consideration of
marriage, although the Deed has words in it of Dedi and Concessi, with a
Letter of Attorney to make Livery thereupon, there until Livery made nothing
pass but at will, because that by the Warrant of Attorney, it appears the
full intent of the parties was, that it shall pass by way of Feoffment, and
not otherwise, if it be of Land in possession: And if it be of Land in Lease,
not until Attornment of Tenants, which was granted by all the Justices.

But if a man in consideration of money makes a Deed of Gift, Grant, Bargain,
and Sale of his Lands to another, and his Heirs by Deed indented, with a Letter
of Attorney to make Livery, if Livery be thereupon made before Inrolement, there
it has been adjudged to pass by the Livery, and not by the Inrolement.

But by Popham, where Land is to pass in possession by Estate executed, two
things are requisite: The one, the grant of the said Land, the other, the
Livery to be made thereupon, for by the bare Grant without Livery, it does not
pass as by way of making of an Estate: And this is the cause that such
solemnity has been used in Liveries, to wit, if it were of a Message, to have
the people out of it, and then to give Seisin to the party by the Ring of the
door of the House, and of Land by a Turff and a Twig, and the like, which may
be notorious: Yet I agree it shall be a good Livery to say to the party, Here
is the Land, enter into it, and take it to you and your Heirs for ever, or for
life, or in tail, as the case is; And albeit Livery by the View may be made in
such manner, yet by the sealing of the Deed of Grant upon the Land, or by grant
of it upon the Land without Livery, nothing pass but at will. But if thereupon
one party says to the other after the Grant, or upon it, Here is the Land,
enter upon it, and take it according to the Grant, this is a good Livery: But
he ought to say this, or something which amounts to so much, or otherwise it
shall not pass by the bare Grant of the Land, although it be made upon the
Land. Clench said, That when Thomas said to Eustace, Stand forth, here I do
give to thee and thine Heirs these Lands, this amounts to a Grant and a Livery
also; and by the words of the Reservation of the Estate to himself, and his
wife for their lives, in this the Law shall make an use in the said Thomas and
his wife for their lives: so that by such means it shall enure, as if he had
reserved the use thereof to him and his wife, and so it shall enure to them as
it may by the Law according to his intent, without doing prejudice to the
Estate passed to the said Eustace: And afterward Term Mich. 36, and 37 Eliz.
the Case was again disputed amongst the Justices, and then Popham said, That
the Case of Ba^gains and Sales of Lands in Cities, as London, etc. as appears
in Dyer 6. Eliz. are as they were at Common Law; To which all the Justices
agreed, and therefore shall pass by Bargain by parole, without writing. And by
Bayntons Case in 6, and 7 Eliz. it is admitted of every side, that an Use was
raised out of a Possession at Common Law by Bargain and Sale by parole, and
otherwise, to what purpose was the Statute of Inrolements, and by the same case
it is also admitted now to pass by parole upon a full agreement by words in
consideration of Marriage, or the continuance of Name, or Blood.

For it is agreed there, that the consideration of nature is the most forceable
consideration which can be, and agreed also that a bare Covenant by writing
without consideration, will not change an Use, therefore the force thereof is in
the consideration, of which the Law has great respect: And therefore the Son
and Heir apparent ex assensu patris, only may at the door of the Church endow
his wife of his Fathers Land, which he has in Fee, and this is good by
Littleton, although the Son has nothing in it, whereby an Estate pass to the
wife, which is more then an Use. Nature is of so strong consideration in the
Law; And thereupon after advice, Judgment was given for the Plaintiff: the Roll
of this appears in Banco Regis, 1 Hill 35. Eliz. Rot. 355. And upon this
Judgment, a Writ of Error was brought, and the Judgment aforesaid reversed in
the point of Judgment in the Exchequer, by the Statute of 27 Eliz.

Kettle versus Mason, and Esterby.
6. IN a second deliverance between Joh. Kettle Plaintiff, and George Mason
Vide this case Coke lib. 1. 146, etc.
and Francis Esterby, Avowants, the case appeared to be this: Thomas May was
seized of the Manor of Sawters and Hawlin, in the County of Kent, in his
Demesne as of Fee, and being so thereof seized, enfeoffed Thomas Scot and John
Fremling and their Heirs, to the use of Dennis May his Son and Heir apparent
and his Heirs, upon condition, that the said Dennis and his Heirs should pay to
one Petronell Martin for his life, an annual Rent of 10 l. which the said
Thomas had before granted to the said Petronell, to begin upon the death of the
said Thomas; And upon condition also, that the said Thomas upon the payment of
10 s. by him to the said Feoffees, or any of them etc. might re-enter: After
which the said Thomas May and Dennis, by their Deed dated 30. May, 19 Eliz.
granted a Rentcharge out of the said Manor of 20 l. a year to one Anne May
for her life, after which the said Thomas May paid the said 10 s. to the said
Feoffees in performance of the Condition aforesaid, and thereupon re-entred into
the Land and enfeoffed a stranger: And whether by this the Rent were defeated,
was the question: And it was moved by Coke Attorney-generall that it was not,
but that in respect that he joined in the part, it shall enure against the said
Thomas by way of confirmation, which shall bind him as well against this matter
of Condition, as it shall do against any Right which the said Thomas otherwise
had. And therfo^e by Littleton, If a Disseisor make a Lease for years, or grant
a Rentcharge, and the Disseisor confirm them, and afterward reenters; albeit
Lit. there makes a Quaere of it, yet Cook said, That the Disseisor should not
avoid the Charge, or Lease which was granted by the whole Court. And by him the
opinion is in P. 11. H. 7. 21. If Tenant in Tail makes a Feoffment to his own
use upon Condition, and afterward is bound in a Statute, upon which Execution
is sued, and afterward he re-enter for the Condition broken, he shall not
avoid the Execution, no more the Rent here.

Fennor agreed with Cook, and said further, That in as much as every one who
has Title and Interest have joined in the Grant, it remains perpetually good.

And therefore if a Parson at Common Law had granted a Rentcharge out of his
Rectory, being confirmed by the Patron and Ordinary, it shall be good in
perpetuity, and yet the Parson alone could not have charged it, and the Patron
and Ordinary have no Interest to charge it, but in as much as all who have to
intermeddle therein are parties to it, or have given their assent to it, it
suffices.

Gaudy was of the same opinion, and said, That there is no Land but by some
means or other it might be charged, and therefore if Tenant for life grant a
Rentcharge in Fee, and he in the Reversion confirm the Grant, per Littleton,
the Grant is good in property, so here.

To which Clench also assented, but Popham said, That by the entry for the
Condition, the Charge is defeated: And therefore we are to consider upon the
ground of Littleton in his Chapter of Confirmation, to what effect a
Confirmation shall enure, and this is to bind the right of him who makes the
Confirmation, but not to alter the nature of the Estate of him to whom the
Confirmation is made; And therefore in the case of a grant of a Rentcharge by
the Disseisor, which is confirmed by the Demisee: the reason why the
Confirmation shall make this good, is, because that as the Disseisee has right
to defeat the right and the Estate of the Disseisor by his Regresse, in the
same manner has he right thereby to avoid a Charge, or a Lease granted by the
Disseisor, which Right for the time may be bound by his confirmation. But when
a man has an Estate upon condition, although the Feoffor, or his Heirs confirm
this Estate, yet by this the Estate is not altered as to the Condition, but it
always remains, and therefore Nihil operatur by such a confirmation to
prejudice the Condition. And so there is a great diversity, when hewho
confirms, has right to the Land, and where but a Condition in the Land. And
by him, if a Feoffee upon condition make a Feoffment over, or a Lease for life
or years, every one of these have their Estates subject to the Condition; and
therefore by a Confirmation made to them, none can be excluded from the
Condition: And the same reason is in case of a Rent granted by a Feoffor upon
Condition, it is also subject to the Condition, and therefore not excluded from
it by the Confirmation, as it shall be in case of a Right.

And to prove this diversity, suppose there be Grandfather, Father, and Son,
the Father disseise the Grandfather, and makes a Feoffment upon Condition, and
dies, after which the Grandfather dies, now the Son confirms the Estate of the
Feoffee, by this he has excluded himself from the Right which descended to him
by his Grandfather, but not to the Condition which descended to him from his
Father.

And of this opinion were Anderson and other Justices at Serjeants-Inn in
Fleetstreet, for the principal Case upon the Case moved there, by Popham this
Term: And as the case is, it would have made a good question upon the Statute
of Fraudulent Conveyances, if the Avowry had been made as by the grant of
Thomas May, in as much as the Estate made to the use of Dennis, was defeasable
at the pleasure of the said Thomas, in as much as it was made by the Tenant of
the Land, as well as by him who made the Conveyance, which is to be judged
fraudulent upon the Statute. But this as the pleading was, cannot come in
question in this case: And afterward by the opinion of other three Judges,
Judgment was given that the Grant should bind the said Thomas May, and his
Feoffees after him, notwithstanding his regresse made by the Condition, in as
much as the Grant of the said Thomas shall enure to the Grantee by way of
confirmation.

And by Gaudy, If a Feoffee upon Condition make a Feoffment over, and the first
Feoffor confirm the Estate of the last Feoffee, he shall hold the Land
discharged of the Condition, because his Feoffment was made absolutely without
any Condition expressed in his Feoffment.

But Popham denied this, as it appears by Littleton Tit. Descents, because he
has his Estate subject to the same Condition, and in the same manner as his
Feoffor has it, into whomsoever hands it happens to come, and therefore the
Confirmation shall not discharge the Condition, but is only to bind the right
of him who made it in the possession of him to whom it is made but not upon
Condition.

Morgans Case.
7. RObert Morgan Esquire, being seized in his Demesne as of Fee, of certain
Lands called Wanster Tenements in Socage, having Issue John his eldest Son,
Christopher his second Son, and William his youngest Son; by his last Will in
writing, demised to the said Christopher and William thus; viz. Jointly and
severally for their lives, so that neither of them stall alienate the Lands,
and if they do, that they shall remain to his Heirs. Robert the Father dies,
and afterward John his Son and Heir dies without Issue, the reversion by this
descends to the said Christopher who dies, leaving Issue. And upon this Case
made in the Court of Wards, the two chief Justices Popham and Anderson agreed
first, That upon the devise and death of the Father, the said Christopher and
William were Joynt-tenants of the Land, and not Tenants in Common,
notwithstanding the word (severally) because it is coupled with the said word
(jointly.) But yet they agreed also, that by the descent from John to
Christopher, the Fee-simple was executed in the said Christopher, for the
Moiety in the same Manor, as if he had purchased the Reversion of the whole,
or of this Moiety, and that it is not like to the Case where Land is given, and
to the Heirs of one of them; in which case for the benefit of the Survivorship,
it is not executed to divide the Ioynture, because the Estates are made at one
and the same time together, and therefore not like to the case where the
Inheritance comes to the particular Estate by several and divided means: And
a Decree was made accordingly.

Trin. 36. Eliz. In the Kings Bench.
1. IT was agreed by all the Justices and Barons of the Exchequer, upon an
Assembly made at Serjeants-Inn, after search made for the ancient Presidents,
and upon good deliberation taken.

If a man have two houses, and inhabit sometimes in one, and sometimes in the
other, if that House in which he does not then inhabity be broken in the night,
to the intent to steal the Goods then being in his house, that this is
Burglary, although no person be then in the House, and that now by the new
Statute made, such an Offender shall not have his Clergy, for before the
Statutes were made, which take away Clergy in case of Burglary, where any
person was put in fear, no mention was made in the Inditements of Burglary,
that any person was in the House: But it was general that the house of such a
one Noctanter fregit, and such Goods then there Felonice cepit. And the
breaking of a Church in the night to steal the Goods, there is Burglary,
although no person be in it, because this is the place to keep the Goods of the
Parish. And in the same manner the house of every one is the proper place to
preserve his Goods, although no person be there: And that the Law was always,
so it is to be collected by the course of the Statutes thereof made, for first
the Statute of 23 H. 8. does not take Clergy from any in case of Burglary,
unless some of the same Family be in the house, and put in fear. And in 5
Eliz. 6. The Offender shall be ousted of his Clergy, if any of the Family be in
the house, be they sleeping or waking. And these Statutes were the cause that
it was used of late time, to put in the Inditements of Burglary, that some
person of the Family was then in the house, to put them from their Clergy. But
this does not prove that it shall not be Burglary, but where some person was in
the house, and by 18 Eliz. Clergy is taken away in all cases of Burglary
generally, without making mention of any person to be there, which enforce the
resolution aforesaid, and according to it, they all agreed hereafter to put it
in Execution.

Finch versus Riseley.
2. IN this Term the case betweeen Finch and Riseley was in question before all
the Justices and Barons for this, assembled at Serjeants-Inn in Fleetstreet,
where after Arguments heard by the Council of the parties upon this point only.

If the Queen make a Lease for years, rendering Rent, with a Proviso, that the
Rent be not paid at the day limited, that the Lease shall cease, without making
mention that it was to be paid at the receipt, whether the Lease shall cease
upon the default of payment, before Office found thereof?

And by Periam and some of the Justices, the Lease stall not cease until an
Office be found of the default, because it is a matter in Fait which determines
it, to wit, the not-payment.

And by Gaudy, it shall be taken as if it had been for the not-payment, that
the Proviso had been that the Lease shall be forfeited: In which case it is not
detennined until Re-entry made for the forfeiture, which in the Queens case
ought always to be by Office, which countervails the re-entry of a common
person; As where the Queen makes a Lease, rendering Rent, and for default of
payment a Re-entry, albeit the Rent be not paid, yet until Office found
thereof, the Rent continues.

Popham, Anderson, and the greater part of the Justices and Barons resolved
that it was clear in this case, that Ipso facto upon the default of payment,
the Lease was determined, according to the very purport of the contract, beyond
which it cannot have any being, and therefore there needs no Office in the
case. But where it is that it shall be forfeited, or that he shall re-enter,
there until advantage taken of the forfeiture in the one case, or until
re-entry made in the other case, the Term always continues by the contract:
And where in the case of a common person, there is need of a re-entry to undo
the Estate, there in the case of the King there needs an Office to determine
the Estate, for an Office in the Kings case countervails an entry, for the King
in person cannot make the entry: And upon this resolution of the greater part
of the Justices in Mich. Term 31, and 32 Eliz. the same case was in question in
the Office of Pleas in the Exchequer, between the said Moil Finch Plaintiff,
and Thomas Throgmorton, and others, Defendants, and there adjudged by Manwood
late chief Baron, and all the other Barons unanimously after long argument at
the Bar and Bench, that the Lease was void upon default of payment of the Rent
according to the Proviso of the Lease, and this immediately without Office for
the reasens before remembered; upon which Judgment was given, a Writ of Error
was brought before the Lord Keeper of the great Seal, and the Lord Treasurer of
England, where it long depended, and after many arguments, the Judgment given
in the Exchequer by the advice of Popham and Anderson was affirmed, and that
upon this reason, for the Proviso shall be taken to be a limitation to
determine the Estate, and not a Condition to undo the Estate, which cannot be
defeated in case of a Condition, but by entry in case of a common person, and
but by Office (which countervails an entry) in the case of the Queen. And this
Judgment was so affirmed in Mich. Term, 36, and 37 Eliz.

Smiths Case.
3 IT was found by Diem clausit extremum, after the death of Richard Smith,
that in consideration of a marriage to be had between Margaret Smith, and
William Littleton a younger Son to Sir John Littleton Knight, and of 1300.
marks paid by the said Sir John to the said Richard, he made assurance by Fine
of his Lands (being 174 l. a year) viz. Of part thereof of the value of 123 l. a
year, of which part was holden of the Queen by Knights Service in Capite, to
the use of himself for his life, and after his decease to the use of the said
William and Margaret, and the Heirs of the body of the said William, begotten
on the body of the said Margaret, and for default of such Issue, to the use of
the right Heirs of the said William. And of the residue thereof, being also
holden in Capite of the Queen, to the use of himself for his life, and after
his decease to the use of the first Issue Male of the said Richard, and to the
Heirs Males of his body, and then to other Issues of his body, and for default
of such Issue, to the said William and Margaret, and the Heirs of the body of
the said William, on the body of the said Margaret lawfully begotten, and for
default of such Issue, to the right Heirs of the said William, with this
Prouiso, That it shall be lawful for the said Richard, to make a Jointure to
his wife of the Lands limited to his Issue Males, and for making of Leases for
21. years, or three lives, for any part of the said Land, rendering the ancient
Rent, except of certain parcels, and that William died without Issue, and that
Gilbert Littleton was his Brother and Heir, and that the said Margaret married
the said George Littleton youngest brother to the said William, which are yet
living: And that the said Richard married Dorothy, and made her a Jointure
according to the Proviso: And that the said Richard had Issue John Smith, and
died, the said John being his Son and Heir, and within age.

After which, a Melius inquirendum issued, by which it was found, that the said
Margaret was the Daughter of the said Richard, and that the said Land was of
the value of 12000 l. at the time of the assurance: And how much of the Land
shall be in ward, and what Land, and what the Melius inquirendum makes in the
case, was the question put to the two chief Justices, Popham and Anderson, who
agreed, that the Queen now shall have the third part, as well of that which was
assured to William and Margaret, immediately after the death of the said
Richard, as of that which was limited to Dorothy for the life of the said
Margaret, for although money were paid, yet this was not the only consideration
why the Lands were assured, but the advancement of the Daughter, and now by the
surviving of the said Margaret, she shall be said to be in the whole, which
was assured to her by her Father, and for her advancement, and the Land (as it
appears) was of greater value then the money given, and may as well be thought
to be given for the Remainder of the Fee. And agreeable to this was the case of
Coffin of Devonshire, about the beginning of the Reign of the now Queen, which
was that the said Coffin for moneys paid by one Coffin his Cousin (having but
D^ughters himself) conveyed his Land to the use of himself and his wife, and to
the Heirs Males of his body, and for default of such Issue to the use of his
said Cousin and his Heirs, for which, his said Cousin was to give a certain sum
of money to the Daughters for their marriage: Coffin dies, his said Daughters
being his Heirs and within age, and were in ward to the Queen, the Lands being
holden by Knights Service in Capite: And the third part of the Land was taken
from the wife of Coffin for the life of the said wife, if the Heirs continue so
long in Ward.

And it was also agreed by them and the Council of the Court, that the Melius
inquirendum was well awarded, to certify that the said Margaret was the
Daughter of the said Richard, of which the Court could not otherwise well take
Conusance, for they thought that it was not matter to come in by the averment
of the Attorney-generall, as Dyer has reported it: But now by the Statute, it
ought to be found by Inquisition, and being a thing which stands with the
former Inquisition, it ought to be supplied by the Melius inquirendum: for the
same Statute which gives the Wardship in case where Land is conveyed for the
advancement of the Wife, or Infants, or for the satisfaction of Debts and
Legacies of the party by the implication of the same Statute, this may be found
by Inquisitton; and if it be omitted in the Inquisition, it ought to be found
by a Melius inquirendum, but not to come in by a bare surmise. And therefore if
in the Inquisition it be found, that the Ancestor had conveyed his Land by the
Melius inquirendum, it may be found that it was for the payment of his Debts or
Legacies, or that the party to whom, or to whose use it was made, was the Son,
or Wife of the party that made it, and that by the very purport of the Statutes
32. and 34 H. 8. as by Fitzherbert, if it be surmised, that the Land is of
greater value then it is found, a Melius inquirendum shall issue, and so shall
it be if it be found that one is Heir of the part of the Mother, but they know
not who is Heir of the part of the Father; so if it be not found what Estate
the Tenant had, or of whom the Land was holden: so upon surmise made, that he
is seized of some other Estate, or that he held it by other Services, by
Fitzherbert a Melius inquirendum shall Issue, and upon this order given, it was
decreed accordingly this Term.

Morgan versus Tedcastle.
4. IN the same Term upon matter of Arbitrament between Morgan and Tedcastle,
touching certain Lands at Welburn, in the County of L^ncoln, put to Popham,
Walmesley, and Ewens Baron of the Exchequer: Whereas Morgan had granted to
Tedcastle a 100. acres of Land in such a field, and 60, in such a field, and
20. acres of Meadow in such a Meadow in Welburn and Hanstead, in which the
acres are known by estimations or limits, there be shall take the acres as they
are known in the same places, be they more or less then the Statute, for they
pass as they are there known, and not according to the measure by the Statute.
But if I have a great Close, containing 20. acres of Land by estimation, which
is not 18. And I grant 10. acres of the same Close to another, there he shall
have them, according to the measure by the Statute, because the acres of such a
Close are not known by parcels, or by meets and bounds, and so it differs
from the first case: And upon the case then put to Anderson, Brian, and Fennor,
they were of the same opinion: Quod nota.

Humble versus Oliver.
5. IN Debt by Richard Humble against William Oliver, for a Rent reserved upon
a Lease for years, the case was this; Thomas Plain was seized in his Demesne as
of Fee, of a Message in S. and so seized, did let it to the Defendant for
diverse years yet to come, rendering Rent, payable at four usual Feasts of the
year, the Lessee entered accordingly, after which the said Plain by Bargain and
Sale enrolled, conveyed the Reversion thereof to the said Humble and his Heirs,
and before the Feast of the Annunciation of our Lady, 35 Eliz. to wit, the 1.
day of February, in the same year the said Oliver assigned over his whole Term
to one Southmead, who before the same Feast entered accordingly, and for the
Rent due at the Feast the Annunciation of our Lady, the Plaintiff brought this
Action: And it was agreed by the whole Court that the Action would not lie
against him; for although Plain (if he had not aliened the Reversion over)
might have had this Action against the said Oliver, notwithstanding that he had
assigned over his Term before, for the privity of contract which was between
them, in as much as they were parties to it of either part, yet the Grantee of
the Reversion shall not have advantage of the privity, he being a mere stranger
to the Contract, and now was but privy in Law by the Bargain, and therefore now
he has no remedy but against him who had the Estate at the time when the Rent
happened to be due; and this is Southmead, and not Oliver. The Roll of this case
is in the Kings Bench, Hill. 36. Eliz. Rot. 420.

Mich. 36, and 37 Eliz. In the Kings Bench. Button versus Wrightman.
1. IN an Ejectione firmae, between John Bu^ton Plaintiff, and Etheldred
Wrightman Widow, and other Defendants; for a House and certain Lands in Harrow.
The Case upon a special Verdict was this; The Dean and Chapter of Christ's
Church in Oxford, were incorporated by K. H. 8, by his Letters Patents, dated
4. November. 38 H. 8. by the name of the Dean and Chapter of the Cathedral
Church of Christ, etc. Oxford, of the Foundation of King Henry the 8th. and so
to be called for ever; after which the said Dean and Chapter was seized in
their Demesne as of Fee, of the said House and Land, and so being seized by the
name of the Dean and Chapter Ecclesiae Cathedralis Christi in Accademia Oxon.
ex fundatione Reg. H. 8. enfeoffed Edward, late Lord North thereof, by their
Deed, hearing date the 21. day of April, 1. E. 6. who afterward dyed, and the
now Lord North entered, and did let it to the Plaintiff, who was ousted by the
Defendant, claiming the said House by a Lease made by the said Dean and Chapter
in the time of Queen Elizabeth, for diverse years yet to come, and whether his
entry were lawful, or not, was the question, and all depends upon the
mis-naming of the Corporation: But it was found that the City of Oxford, and
the University of Oxford were all one, and that the Town of Oxford was made a
City by the Charter of King H. 8.

And by Fennor, the Feoffment made to Edward Lord North, for the misnaming of
the Corporation, was void, for he said, that Accademia and villa de Oxford, are
diverse in name, and diverse in nature, for the University is to the Scholars
and learned men there, and the Town for the Inhabitants, and the name of a
place is a principal thing in a Corporation, which in a new Corporation ought
to be precise, according to the very Letter of the Charter thereof: And therefore
in the case of Chester it was agreed, that Cestria being omitted, the Charter
for the Dean and Chapter there had been void.

But by Popham, Gaudy, and Clench, this is not such a mis-naming as to the
place which shall make the Feoffment void: for suppose it had been Decanus and
Capitalis Ecclesiae Cathedralis Christi in Civitate Oxon. it had been good, for
Oxon. and Civitas Oxon. are one and the same. So it is if an Hospital be
erected by the name of the Hospital of S. John's in S. Clements; and they make
a Grant by the name of the Hospital of S. John's in the Parish of S. Clements,
it is good, for it appears to be the same: And here if a man will say, that
it shall go to the University of Oxford, this every one conceives to be the
Town of Oxford, and so of Cambridge, and therefore in 8 H. 6. it was agreed to
be a good addition for the place in an Action personal, against such a one
Chancellor of the University of Oxford, and so it is against J. Rector of the
Parish Church of Dale, without any other addition for the place, yet the
Statute is, that it ought to be named of what Town, Hamlet, or place the party
is. And by Popham, the place in a Corporation may well be resembled to the
Sur-name of a man, and as a Grant made by any persons Christian name, as John,
Thomas, etc: is not good, so in a Corporation it is not good to say, Dean, and
Chapter, Mayor, and Comminalty, and the like, without saying, of what place:
And anciently men took most commonly their Surnames from their places of
habitation, especially men of Estate, and Artizans often took their names from
their Arts, but yet the Law is not so precise in the case of Sur-names, and
therefore a Grant made by, or to John, Son and Heir of I. C. or Filio juniori I.
S. is good: But for the Christian name, this always ought to be perfect.

So in the case of a Corporation, it suffices to have a sufficient
demonstration of the place where the Corporation is, albeit it be not by the
precise words comprised in the Charter: as in naming Accademia Oxon. pro Villa
Oxon, and it is common, of which I have seen diverse Charters, where a Town was
incorporated by the name of Mayor, and Comminalty of such a Town, as Bristoll,
Exeter, and others, which afterward have been made Cities, and yet Charters
made to them, and Grants made by them, by the name of Mayor and Comminalty of
the City is good, but more preciseness is used in the body of the name of a
Corporation before the place to which they are annexed, and yet in them, that
which is but an ornament to the name comprehended in the Charter, shall not
hurt the Grant, as of Chapter, of S. George of Windsor, if it be of S. George
the Martyr, and the like, the Grant by such a name is good, because the Martyr
is but an addition of Ornament to the name comprised in the Charter, and it is
no other but the same in re vera. So here, if it had been Domini nostri Jesu
Christi, because it is the same, and is but an ornament to the word Christ
comprised in the Charter, and so should it be also if it had been Christi filii
Dei Salvatoris nostri, because it is but a true addition to the same; whereupon
Judgment was given for the Plaintiff, as appears in the Kings Bench, Pas. 35
E. Rot. 258.

And Popham said further in this case, that to erect an Hospital by the name
of an Hospital, in the County of S. or in the Bishopprick of B. and the like,
is not good, because he is bound to a place too large, and uncertain: But a
College erected in Accademia Cantabrig. or Oxon. is good, and some are so
founded because it tends but to a particular place, as a City, Town, etc.

King versus Bery and Palmer.
2. IN an Ejectione firmae, brought by William King against John Bery and
William Palmer Defendants, for two Messuages and certain Lands in Halstead in
the County of Leicester, upon a Demise alleged to be made by Dorothy Pool, and
Robert Smith* the case upon a special Verdict was this; The said Dorothy was
Tenant for life of the said Tenants, the Remainder over to the said Robert
Smith and his Heirs, and they being so seized made the Lease in the
Declaration, upon which the Action was brought. And per curiam, the Lease found
by the Verdict does not warrant the Lease alleged in the Declaration; for
although they joined in the Demise, yet during the life of the said Dorothy it
is her Demise, and not the Demise of the said Robert Smith; but as his
confirmation for that time: for he has nothing to do to meddle with the Land
during the life of the said Dorothy, but after the death of the said Dorothy
then it shall be said to be the Domise of the said Robert Smith, and not
before, because until this time Smith has nothing to do to meddle with the
Land. And in a more strong case, If Tenant for life, and he in the Reversion in
Fee make a Gift in tail, for the life of Tenant for life, it shall be said to
be his Gift, but after his death it shall be said the Gift of him in the
Reversion, and if the Estate tail had expired during the life of the said
Tenant for life, he shall have the Land again in his former Estate, and there
shall be no forfeiture in the case, because he in the Reversion of the immediate
Estate of Inheritance had joined in it, and therefore has dispensed with that
which otherwise had been a mere forfeiture of the Estate for life, whereby it
was awarded by the Court that the Plaintiff take nothing by his Bill in 33, and
34 Eliz. Rot. And the Judgment is entered, Hill. 34. Eliz. Ret. 72.

3. In this Term I happened to see a Case agreed by the Justices in 3. and 4.
Eliz. which was this:

If a man make a Lease of two Barns, rendering Rent, and for default of payment,
a Re-entry, if the Tenant be at one of the Barns to pay the Rent, and the
Lessor at the other to demand the Rent, and none be there to pay it, that yet
the Lessor cannot enter for the Condition broken, because there was no default
in the Tenant, he being at one, for it was not possible for him to be at both
places together.

And upon this Case now remembered to the Justices, Popham, Walmesley, and
Fennor said, That perhaps also the Tenant had not money sufficient to have been
ready to have paid it, at either of the said places, but it is sufficient for
him to have and provide one Rent, which cannot be at two places together.

And by the Case reported here also; If Lands and Woods are demised together,
the Rent ought to be demanded at the Land, and not the Woood, because the Land
is the more worthy thing, and also more open then the Wood: And therefore by the
three Justices aforesaid, Rent ought not to be demanded in any private place of
a Close, as amongst Bushes, in a Pit, or the like, nor in the open and most
usual passage thereof, as at a Style, Gate, and the like.

4. Upon a Prohibition sued out of the Kings Bench, the Case appeared to be
this.

The late Lord Rich, Father to the now Lord Rich devised, to his Daughter, for
her advancement in marriage 1500. upon condition, that she marry with the
consent of certain friends, and devises further, that if his Goods and
Chattels are not sufficient to pay his Debts and Legacies, that then there
shall be 200 l. a year of his Lands sold to supply it, and dies, making the now
Lord Rich his Executor, his Goods and Chattels not being sufficient to pay the
Debts of the Testator, as was averred, the said Daughter married with a Husband
against the will of those who were put in trust to give their assents; and the
Husband and the Wife sued in the Spiritual Court for the Legacy: And it was
surmised that they would not allow the proofs of the said now Lord Rich,
exhihited to prove the payment of the Debts of his Testator; and further, that
they would charge him for the sale of the Land; upon which matter the
Prohibition was granted to the Delegates, before whom the matter depended, and
now consultation was prayed in the case.

Upon which it was affirmed by a Doctor of the Civil Law, that they will allow
the proofs for the payment of the Debts, according to our Law, and that the
Legacy shall not be paid until the Debs are satisfied. But he said, that by
the Law, if the Executor do not exhibit his Inventory, but neglect it for a
year, or more, that then if any omission or default be in the true value of the
Inventory exhibited, that then such on Executor for this default shall pay all
the Legacies of his Testator, of what value soever they are, not respecting the
Debts, or the value of the Goods or Chattels, how small soever the omission, or
default be in the Inventory; And so he said was the case of the now Sir Richard
S. who did not bring in the Inventory for four years after the death of the
Testator, and that in the Inventory exhibited, the values of every thing were
found to be too small, and therefore to be charged by their Law, albeit he has
not Goods and Chattels sufficient of the Testators. To which it was answered,
that this was quite without reason, for by such means every Subject of the
Realm may be utterly defeated, if he take upon him the charge of an
Executorship: And if this shall be admitted, no man will take upon him the
Execution of the Will of any, and by such a means none will have their Wills
performed, which shall be too inconvenient. And they said further, that in as
much as Debts are to be proved by the Common Law of the Realm, those of the
Ecclesiastical Courts ought to admit in the proof thereof, such proofs as our
Law allows, and not according to the preciseness of their Law: And although by
their Law such a Condition as before being annexed to a Legacy, is void,
because that marriage oughr to be free without Coercion, yet where we are to
judge upon the point (as we are here) if the Execution happen to be charged
because of the sale of Land, and for the money coming thereof, a prohibition
shall be granted to the Ecclesiastical Judge in such a case, whereby the Court
granted a special consultation in the Case, to wit, that they proceed for the
Legacy, provided, that they charge the Executor no further then he has in
Goods and Chattels of the Testator, after his true and due Debts are satisfied:
And that in the case of the proof of these Debts, they allow such proofs as by
the Law of the Land are holden to be sufficient in such a case; Quod nota ben^,
as to the restraining of Ecclesiastical Courts in their proceedings, to bind
any subject touching his private temporal Estate, against all reason: And as
to it, that they do not intermeddle in any thing belonging to the Common Law of
the Realm, as Debts, and the like, against the due course of the Common Law.

Cawdry versus Atton.
5. IN Trespass brought by Robert Cawdry Clerk, against George Atton, Vide
this Case Coke lib. 5. 1. pa.
for breaking his Close at North Luffenham in the County of Rutland, upon not
guilty, and a special Verdict, the Case appeared to be this, to wit, that the
Plaintiff was Rector Ecclesiae de North Luffenham aforesaid, of which the place
was parcel, and being so seized, was deprived of his Rectory by the late
Bishop of London and his Colleagues, by virtue of the high Commission to them
and others diverted, because he had pronounced and uttered slanderous and
contumelious words against, and in depravation of the Book of Common Prayer;
But the form of the sentence was, that the said Bishop by, and with the assent
and consent of five others of the said Commissioners his Companions, and namely
which deprived him.

And further, it was not found, that the Commissioners named were the natural
Subjects born of the Queen, as the Statute enacts that they should be: And if
the deprivation be void, then they find the Defendant guilty, and if it were
good, then they find him not guilty. And it was moved that the deprivation was
void.

First, Because that whereas the Commission is to them, or any three of them, of
which the said Bishop to be one amongst others, it ought to have been the
sentence of them all, according to the authority given to them, which is
equal, and not that it was done by one with assent of the other. Then because
it is not found that the Commissioners are the natural Subjects of the Queen
born, as by the words of the Statute they should be.

Another is, because the punishment which the Statute provides for those of the
Ministry which deprave this Book, is to loose the profits of all their
Spiritual Promotions but for a year, and to be imprisoned by the space of six
months, and not to be deprived until the second Offense, after that he had
been once committed, and therefore to deprive him for the first offense was
wrongful and contrary to the Statute. But by the whole Court for the form of
the deprivation, it is, that which is used in the Ecclesiastical Courts, which
always names the chief in Commission, that are present at the beginning of the
Sentence, and for the other they mention them only as here, but of their assent
and consent to it, and in such cases we ought to give credit to their form, and
therefore it is not to be compared to an authority given at Commen Law by
Commission.

And for the matter that is not found, that the Commissioners were the natural
Subjects of the Queen born, it is to be intended that they were such, unless
the contrary appear: But here at the beginning it is found that the Queen,
secundum tenorem and effectum actus predict. had granted her Commission to them
in causis Ecclesiasticis, and therefore it appears sufficiently that they were
such as the Statute wills them to be.

And for the deprivation, they all agreed that it was good, being done by the
authority of the Commission, for the Statute is to be understood where they
prosecute upon the Statute by way of Indictment, and not to restrain the
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, being also but in the Affirmative.

And further by the Act and their Commission, they may proceed according to
their discretion to punish the offense proved or confessed before them, and so
are the words of their Commission warranted by the clause of the Act.

And further, the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction is saved in the Act.

And further, all the Bishops and Popish Priests were deprived by virtue of a
Commission warranted by this clause in the Act: And now lately it was agreed by
all the Justices, that a Fine of 200. marks set upon one for a vicious liver by
the high commission was warranted by virtue of the Commission and Act: And
therefore if the Act with the Commission, are to be consdered in this case,
whereupon it was agreed that the Plaintiff should take nothing by his Writ:
Which you may see, Hill. 33. Eliz. Rot. 315.

Hall versus Peart.
6. IN an Ejectione firmae brought by William Hall Plaintiff, for Land in D. in
the County of Somerset, upon a Lease made by William Dodington against John
Peart and other Defendants, upon a special Verdict the case appeared to be
this.

That one John Brown was in possession of certain Lands in D. aforesaid, Vide
this case in Cook lib. 2 32, 33. by the name of Doding^ons case.
which before were parcel of the possessions of the Hospital or Priory of S.
John's in Wells, the Inheritance thereof then being in the late King H. 8. by the
Act of dissolutions: And the King being so seized by his Letters Patents, dated
26. of March, 30 H. 8. ex gratia speciali, certa scientia and mero motu suo,
granted to John Ayleworth, and Ralph Duckenfield, omnia illa Messuagia Ter.
Tenemt. and gardina sua and quaecunque tune in separabilibus tenuris diversarum
personarum, which he named particularly, amongst which the said John Brown was
one in Civitate Wellen. ac in suburbiis ejusdem Civitat. and exira eandem
civitat. within the Jurisdictions and Liberties of the said City, late parcel
of the possessions of the said Hospital, and that the said John Brown had not
then any other Lands late parcel of the possessions of the said Hospital, but
this in D. and that this Land was quite out of the said City of Wells, and of
the Suburbs thereof, and also out of the Liberties and Jurisdiction of the said
City, and yet it was found that it was in the particular and parcel of the
value, and valued in it in the Tenure of the said John Brown at 6 s. 8 d. a
year, and the grant was to the said John Ayleworth and Ralph Duckenfield, and
to the Heirs of the said John Ayleworth forever.

And it was moved that the Grant was good to the said Ayleworth and
Duckenfield, because of the Statute of non-recitall and mis-recitall, because
it appears by the particular, and value that it was intended to be passed:
And if this does not pass, nothing can pass which was in the Tenure of the
said Brown, because he had nothing in the places comprised in the Patent.

But it was agreed by all the Court, that it shall not pass by the said Patent
in this case, for the word (illa) is to be restraind by that which follows in
the Patent, where it depends upon a generality, as here, and that it refers but
to that in Wells, as the liberty of that which was parcel of the possessions
of the said Hospital, and in the Tenure of the said John Brown: And if it were
not of these possessions, or not in Wells, etc. or not in the Tenure of the
said John Brown, it shall not pass, for the intent of the King in this case
shall not be wrested according to the particular or the value, which are things
collateral to the Patent, but according to his intent comprised in, or to be
collected by the Patent it self.

And Popham said, that by Grant of omnia, terras Tenementa and Hereditamenta
sua in case of the Queen nothing pass, if it be not restraind to a certainty,
as in such a Town, or late parcel of the Possessions of such a one, or of such
an Abbey, or the like, in which cases it passes, as appears by 32 H. 8. in
case of the King: But if it be Omnia, terras and tenementa sua vocat. D. in the
Tenure of such a one and in such a Town, and late parcel of the possessions of
such a one, there albeit the Town or the Tenant of the Land be utterly
mistaken, or that it be mistaken of what possessions it was, it is good, for it
suffices that the thing be well and fully named, and the other mistakes shall
not hurt the Patent.

And the word of Ex certa scientia, etc. will nof help the Patent in the
principal case. And the case of 29 E. 3. is not to be compared to this case,
for it was thus.

The King granted the Advowson of the Priory of Mountague (the Prior being an
Alien) to the Earl of Salisbury and his Heirs for ever: And also the keeping
and Farm with all the Appurtenances and Profits of the said Priory, which he
himself had curing the War, with the keeping of certain Cell^ belonging to the
said Priory; the said Earl died, William Earl of Salisbury being his Son and
Heir, and within age, whereupon the King reciting that he had seized the Earls
Lands into his hands after his death, for the Nonage of the Heir, he granted to
the said Earl all his Advowsons of all the Churches which were his Fathers, and
all the Advowsons of the Churches which belong to the Prior of Mountague, to
hold until the full age of the said Heir, and quas nuper concessit prefat.
Comiti patri, etc. In which case, although the King had not granted the
Advowsons to the said Earl the Father aforesaid, by the former Patent, because
no mention was of the Advowsons thereof, yet they pass by this Patent,
notwithstanding that which follows after, to wit, and which he granted to the
Father of the Grantee: But there it is by a Sentence distinct, and not fully
depending upon the former words, as here, to wit, Omnia illa Messuagia, etc in
Wells, in the Tenure of the party, parcel of the Possessions of such an
Hospital, or Priory: Quod nota, and the difference.

And because the Defendant claimed under the first Patent, and the Plaintiff by
the latter Patent, it was agreed, that the Plaintiff should recover: Which you
may see in the Kings Bench.

Harrey versus Farcy.
7. IN an Ejectione firmae brought by Richard Harrey Plaintiff, for the Moiety
of certain Tenements in North-petherton, in the County of Somerset, upon a
Lease made by Robert Bret against Humfrey Farcy Defendant, upon not guilty, and
a special Verdict found, the case appeared to be this, to wit, That Robert
Mallet Esquire, was seized of the said Tenements, in his Demesne as of Fee, and
so seized demised* them to John Clark, and Elianor Middleton, for term of their
lives, and of the longer liver of them, after which the said Tenements (amongst
others) were assured by Fine to certain persons and their Heirs, to the use of
the said Robert Mallet for term of his life, and after his decease to the use
of John Mallet his Son and Heir of his body, and for default of such Issue, to
the use of the right Heirs of the aid Robert Mallet.

After which the said Robert Mallet (having Issue the said John Mallet,
Christian, and Elianor Mallet) died, the said John Mallet then being within
age, and upon Office found in the County of Devon, for other Lands holden of
the Queen in Capite by Knights Service was for it in Ward to the Queen:
Afterward the said John Mallet died without Issue during his Nonage, and the
Lands aforesaid thereby descended to his said two Sisters, to whom also
descended other Lands in the County of Devon, holden of the Queen in Capite by
Knights Service, conveyed also by the same Fine in like manner, as the Lands in
North Petherton, the said Christian then being of the age of 22. years, and the
said Elianor of the age of 15. years, upon which the said Christian and
Elianor, 12. November. 31 Eliz. tendered their Livery before the Master of the
Wards, and before the Livery sued, the said Christian took the said Robert Bret
to husband, and the said Elianor took to husband one Arthur Ackland; after
which in the Utas of the Purification of our Lady, 32 Eliz. the said Robert
Bret and Christian his wife, levied a Fine of the said Tenements in
North-petherton, amongst others to George Bret and John Pecksey, Sur conusance
de droit come ceo que ils ont de lour done, by the name of the Moiety of the
Manor of North petherton, etc. with warranty against them and the Heirs of the
said Christian against all men, who tendered it by the same Fine to the said
Robert Bret and Christian, and the Heirs Males of their bodies, the remainder
to the Heirs Males of the body of the said Christian, the remainder over to the
right Heirs of the said Robert Bret, which Fine was engrossed the same Term of
S. Hillary, and the first Proclamation was made the 12th. day of February in
the same Term; the second, the first day of June in Easter Term, 32 Eliz. The
third, the 8th. day of July in Trinity Term next: And the fourth Proclamation
was made the 4th. day of October, in Michaelmas Term next after. And the said
Christian died without Issue of her body. The 9th. day of February, 32 Eliz.
between the hours of 3. and 7. in the afternoon of the same day. And the 22. of
March, 32 Eliz. the said Robert Bret by his writing indented, dated the same
day and year, for a certain sum of money to him paid, by the Queen, bargained
and sold, gave and granted the said Teuements to the said Queen, her Heirs and
Successors for ever, which Deed was acknowledged the 25th. day of March, 32
Eliz. and enrolled in the Chancery the 12th. day of May, in the same year: And
there was a Proviso in the same Deed, that if the said Robert Bret shall pay to
the Queen at the receipt of the Exchequer 5 s. of lawful money, that then the
said Gift, Grant, Bargain, and Sale shall be void, and that from thence-forward
it shall be lawful for the said Robert Bret and his Heirs to re-enter into the
said Tenements, and in the mean time between the Inrolement of this Deed: And
the said 14th. day of October. to wit, the 15th. day of September, 32 Eliz. the
said Arthur upon the said Tenements in North-petherton, entered and claimed the
Reversion thereof in the right of the said Elianor his wife, by reason of the
death of the said Christian: And that afterward, to wit, the 30th. day of
February, 33 Eliz. the said Robert Bret to redeem the said Tenements out of the
Queen, paid the said 5 s. at the receipt of the Exchequer, which payment is
there recorded, and enrolled accordingly; after which in September, 34 Eliz.
the said Arthur and Elianor sued out a special Livery of the said Elianor, out
of the hands of the Queen, of all the Lands seized into the hands of the Queen
by reason of the Nonage of the said John Mallet. And afterward in the same
meneth of September, 34 Eliz. the said Arthur and Elianor sued out another
special Livery, as Heir to the said Christian, of all the Lands which were in
the Queens hands by the death of the said Christian.

And it was further found, that the said John Clark and Elianor Middleton, died
after the 5 s. paid as before, and that the said Robert Bret entered the 8th.
day of October, 34 Eliz. and then made the Lease to the Plaintiff, upon which
the Defendant by commandment of the said Arthur, and with him entered upon the
Plaintiff; and the general question was, Whether the entry of the Defendant
were lawful? But no ouster of the Plaintiff was found.

And by Clench, and Fennor, a Fee-simple pass at Common Law by a Fine levied
by him in Reversion, or Remainder in Tail, because a Fine is said to be a
Feoffment of Record, and by their entry and Feoffment a Fee-simple pass in
such a case at Common Law.

But by Popham, and Gaudy, a Fee-simple does not pass, nor nothing but that
which Tenant in Tail may lawfully grant over, which is for his life, in which
he said, that Littleton was plain in all cases of Grant, although it be by
Fine, and a Fee-simple does not pass at Common Law, but where the Fee may be
drawn out of him who had the Reversion or Remainder in Fee thereupon, if such a
Reversion or Remainder had been in a stranger, which had not been in this case,
if the Reversion or Remainder had been in a stranger; and therefore a
Discontinuance cannot be of an Intail where the Reversion or Remainder is in
the King.

But by them all, however it was at Common Law, it is clear upon the Statute of
Fines, that a Fee-simple determinable pass by such a Fine as soon as the Fine
is levied, because every Fine by presumption of Law shall be taken to be such
whereupon proclamation is made, until the contrary thereof appears to the
Court.

And this is the reason why a Quid juris clamat is at this day maintained upon
such a Fine, which was not at Common Law before this Statute, or otherwise it
will never lie. And so it was holden lately in the Common Bench, in the case of
Justice Wimondham, and yet we may see that the Quid juris clamat ought to be
brought before that the Fine be engrossed, whereby it is manifest that now a
Fee-simple shall pass by the Fine levied, for the possibility of the
Proclamations, to wit, that the Proclamations shall not be made, and to this
Fee-simple the Proclamations shall enure to make a bar to the Estate-tail: But
such a Fine by Popham and Gaudy was not any wrong to him who had the Reversion
or Remainder in Fee being levied by him who had a mean Reversion or Remainder
in Tail, depending upon an Estate for life, or in Tail precedent.

And it is clear, that the Proclamations do not make the Estate, but enure to
the Estate made by the Fine, for if an Estate be granted in Reversion for life,
or in Tail by Fine, with Proclamations by such a Tenant in Tail, in Reversion
or Remainder, the Proclamations work to this Estate, and no further, for
always the Estate pass by the Fine, and the Proclamations make the Bar
according to the Estate, which pass by the Fine before.

But by Clench, Gaudy, and Fennor, the Fee-simple which was in the Queen after
the Fine levied as before, was divested by means of this claim made upon the
possession of the Queen, lo that the Proclamations following are of no force to
hurt the Estate tail, for they said, in diverse cases a possession may be
invested out of the Queen without Office, Petition, or Monstrans de droit, as
the case is, where a man devise that his Land shall be sold, and in the mean
time before the sale, the possession of the Land comes to the Queen, and
afterward the Land is sold according to the Will, the Vendee enter, there the
Land pass from the Queen thereby, and is divested, and so in many other cases.
And in all cases where the Queens Estate is determined, the Subject may enter
into the Land without Office, or Ouster le main, etc. And they said, if it had
been in the possession of a common person, that by such a claim the force of
the Fine had been defeated; and this appears by the case between Smith and
Stapleton in the Commentaries, where it is holden that where a Fine is levied
with Proclamations by Tenant in Tail of an Advowson, Rent, or Tithes, by claim
made by the Issue in Tail, before the Proclamations are passed, where the
Tenant in Tail is dead, the same is defeated, and that the Proclamations
passing afterward, shall not be of force to bar the Intail.

And they said, that the conveyance thereof to the Queen after the Fine levied,
does not make it to be in worse case; And admit it will not serve against the
Queen, yet the claim will serve against Bret, when he had entered by the
performance of the Condition.

And Clench and Gaudy said, that Bret shall not take advantage of this covenous
Deed made by himself, of very purpose to bar the party who had right, and to
put him without remedy, no more then where the Disseisor enfeoff his Father who
dies seized, he shall not take advantage of this descent, or if he who has
cause of Action to recover Lands by Covin, causes another to enter into the
Lands, to the intent to recover against him, and does it accordingly for the
Covin, the Recovery shall be avoided, and in the same manner here.

But Popham took a diversity, where the Possession or the Estate of the Queen
is determined, and where not, for where the Estate is determined, there the
Subject may enter into the Land without Office, or ouster le main: But where
the Possession continues, there the party shall not come to it, unless by
petition, Monstrans de droit officio, or the like, and therefore he said, that
if the Queen had an Estate pur auter vie, or depending upon any other
Limitation, if it be determined according to the Limitation, the party who has
interest may enter; so in the case of the Devise put before.

And if a Lease be made for life, the Remainder in Tail, the Reversion in Fee,
and he in the Remainder in Tail levy a Fine, Sur conusance de droit come ceo
que il ad de son done to a stranger, with proclamations according to the
Statute, and afterward the stranger convey the Remainder to the Queen, her
Heirs and Successors, and after the Tenant for life dies, and after he in the
Remainder in tail dies without Issue, now may he in the Remainder in Fee enter,
because the Estate of the Queen is determined: But here the Queen has a
Fee-simple in her self but determinable upon the Estate-tail which yet
remains, which Fee-simple in Reversion cannot be divested out of the
possession of the Queen but by matter of Record, of so high nature as it is in
her, to wit, by Petition, Monstrans de droit, or the like: As if a Reversson or
Remainder be alienated in Mortmain, the claim of the Lord suffices ther^ to
vest the Reversion in the Lord for the Alienation, but if the Reversion or
Remainder of which such a claim was made be conveyed to the King, his remedy is
now by Office, Monstrans de droit, or Petition, for claim will not now serve
him, for this shall be to divest the possession out of the Queen, which by such
means cannot be done no more then where a Reversion or Remainder is granted to
the Queen upon Condition, but he ought to have an Office to find the
performance of it, if it be to be performed by matter in pais, and without
Monstrans de droit, or otherwise it shall not be divested out of the Queens
possession, yet in the case of a common person, a claim will divest it out of
them, but not so of the Queen.

And these cases Gaudy agreed; but he conceived that in the case in question,
the claim made determines the Estate of the Queen, which is made by means of
the Fine upon the Statute.

And Popham denied the case put in 7 H. 6. to be Law, as it is put upon the
opinion of Strange there, for it is clear, that the claim there does not divest
any possession which was in the King by means of the Wardship, and if this be
not thereby defeated, the claim does not help the Disseisee against the Descent;
and this appears fully by Littleton, who says so of a Claim which avoids a
Descent, to wit, that it ought to be such upon which the Disseisee may upon
every such Claim made have an Action of Trespass or Assise against the
Dissessor, or him who is in possession, if he continue his possession after
such Claim made, which cannot be in this case where the possession is in the
King, which cannot be defeated by such a Claim. And in the Lord Dyer where the
Feoffee, or Mortgagee of Lands holden of the Queen in Capite by Knights
Service, died before the day of Redemption, his Heir being within age, whereby
upon Office found, the Queen had the Wardship of the body and land of the Heir,
after which the Mortgagee at the day of redemption made payment, and of this
also an Office was found, yet he could not enter either before or after Office,
but upon Monstrans de droit thereupon he had his Ouster le main: And the reason
why a Claim shall serve in this case between common persons, is, because that
by such Claim the thing it self is divested out of him who had it before, and
thereby actually vested in him who made the claim: As where a Villain purchase a
Reversion by the Claim of the Lord, the Reversion is actually in him, as it is
of a Possession by Entry: But where he is put to his Claim to divest any thing
out of a common person, he is put to his Suit to divest it out of the Queen.

Aad to say, that Bret should not take advantage of this Conveyance made, to
make it good by the Fine.

I think the Law to be clear otherwise as to this point, for the Statute of
Fines was made tor the security of Purchasors and Possessors of Land, and
therefore taken more strongly against them who pretend Right or Title, and for
the greatest advantage that may be for the Possessors of Lands, and therefore
the Possessor by what ever means he can, may make his Fine to be forceable? And
therefore the Fine upon this Statute differs much from a Fine at Common Law;
for where at Common Law an Infent being a Disseisor was disseised by one who
levies a Fine, and the year and the day pass without claim of the first
Disseisee, now was the first Disseisee barred: yet if afterward the Infant
(who was not bound by the Fine) enter, the first Disseisee may enter upon him,
because that by this entry the Fine at Common Law was utterly defeated.

But now by the Statute, such a Fine being levied with Proclamations, the first
Disseisee not pursuing according to the Statute, is barred for ever.

And although the Infant enter at full age, and undoes the Fine as to himself,
yet this Fine remains always to bar the first Disseissee, and makes that the
Infant has now Right against all the world, and so now takes advantage thereof:
And this is the intent of the Statute for the repose of Controversies and
Suits, and the quiet of the people.

And if I procure a Fine to be levied on purpose to bar another of his Action,
which he may have against me for the Land, yet I shall take advantage of this
Fine, and the other shall have no advantage against me, because of this Covin,
for if this should be admitted, it will countervail the benefit which is
intended to be by means of the Statute of Fines.

And if a Disseisor enfeoffee another upon Condition, to the intent that a Fine
with Proclamations shall be levied to the Feoffee to bar the Disseisee, and
after the Disseisee is barred, the Disseisor enter for the Condition, he shall
yet take advantage of the Fine against the Disseisee.

And Popham put a case which was in this Court, 23 Eliz. upon a special
Verdict which was between Oaks Plaintiff, upon the Demise of John late Lord
Sturton of Cottington which was this.

The Lord Sturton was Tenant for life of certain Lands in Lighe in the County
of Somerset, the remainder in Tail to Charles late Lord Sturton, Father to the
said John Lord Sturton; and the said Charles Lord Sturton, disseised the said
Lady Sturton, and levied a Fine of the said Land to Cottington and his Heirs,
with Proclamations according to the Statute, and warranted it against him, and
his Heirs.

And the said Lord Charles dyed before the Proclamations past, and the Warranty
descended upon the said John Lord Sturton, after which, and before the
Proclamations past, the said Lady Sturton entered upon the said Cottington,
after which the said Lady died, and after her death and all the Proclamations
past, the said John Lord Sturton as Heir in Tail entered, and made the Lease to
the said Oaks, upon whom Cottington the Defendant entered, as under the right of
the said Cottington the Conusee. And I perceiving the Court strongly to incline
upon the matter of Warranty, that it shall bar the entry of the Heir, and make
a discontinuance against him, according to the inference which is taken by
Littleton in his Chapter of Discontinuance, because the truth was, and so
acknowledged to the Court (although it were omitted in the Verdict) that the
said Charles Lord Sturton, was attained of Felony and Murder, and so the blood
corrupted between the said Charles and John Lord Sturton, whereby in a new
Action the Garranty had not hurt the Title of the said Lord John.

I then moved the Court upon the other point of the Fine with Proclamations;
and the Court also agreed in this point, if the Warranty had not been, that yet
the Fine with Proclamations shall bar the said John Lord Sturton,
notwithstanding the entry made by the Lady Sturton were before the
Proclamations past, because that notwithstanding his regresse made, the
Reversion remains in Cottington not defeated by his regresse, in respect of the
Statute whch makes that the Fine remains effectual against the Heir in Tail,
if nothing be done by him to undo it before the Proclamations past as by claim,
regresse, and the like; but the Act of a stranger shall not help him, whereby
Judgment being thereupon given against the said Oaks, the said John Lord Sturton
stood satisfied, and the Cottingtons enjoy the Land to this day; whereas, if
this opinion of the Court had not been on a new Action, the said Sir John might
have been relieved against the Warranty.

And Gaudy said, that this was a very good Case for the point upon the Statute
in this case.

Earl of Shrewsbury versus Sir Thomas Stanhop.
8. GIlbert Earl of Shrewsbury brought a Scandalum Magnatum against Gilbert
Earl of Shrewsbury, against Sir Thomas Stanhop in a Scandalum Magnatum.
Sir Thomas Stanhop Knight, and it was upon the Statute Tam pro Domina Regina
quam pro seipso, etc. For that communication was had between the said Sir
Thomas, and one Francis Fletcher, of diverse things touching the said Earl, the
said Francis at such a day and place, said to the said Thomas,

My Lord (the said Earl meaning) is a Subject (innuendo) that the said Earl was
a Subject of the now Queen) the said Sir Thomas then and there said of the said
Earl these slanderous words, to wit, he (intending the said Earl) is sorry for
that (meaning that the said Earl was sorry that he was then a Subject to our
said Sovereign Lady the Queen) that is his grief (meaning that it was grief to
the said Earl, that the said Earl was Subject to the Queen) to the damage of
the said Earl of 20000 l. To which the said Sir Thomas Stanhop said, that a
question was formerly moved between the said Earl and the Defendant, touching
the subversion and drawing away of certain Wears heretofore erected by the
said Sir Thomas at Shel^ord, in the said County of Not. where the Action was
brought to oust the River of Trent there, and that for the subversion thereof a
Petition was exhibited to the privy Council of the Queen, before the speaking
of the said words, by certain Inhabitants of the County of Lincoln, and diverse
other places not known to the Defendant, with the privity, allowance and
knowledge of the said Earl, which Petition at the time of the speaking of the
said words, depended before the said Council not determined, whereupon at the
day and place comprised in the Declaration, there was Communication between the
said Defendant and the said Francis Fletcher concerning their purpose to have
the said Wears subverted, and touching the said Petition, upon which the said
Francis said to the said Defendant, the matter (meaning the Petition aforesaid,
hanging undetermined before the Council aforesaid) is to be heard before the
privy Council meaning the aforesaid Council of the Queen) and what their
Honors (meaning the Council aforesaid) determine my Lord (the aforesaid Earl
meaning) will willingly obey: To which the said Francis then there answered
saying, My Lord (the aforesaid Earl meaning) is a Subject, upon which the said
Defendant (they then having speech as well of the said Petition, as of the
order thereupon to be taken by the said Council) answered saying, the words
comprised in the Declaration, meaning that he was sorry, and grieved that he
was subject to the order to be made upon the Petition aforesaid by the said
Council, and averred that this was the same speech upon which the Action was
grounded: upon which it was demurred in Law, and for cause shown according to
the Statute it was alleged that the bar was defective, because it is not
alleged at what place, nor by whom, nor against whom the Petition was
exhibited; and also because that by the Bar the matter of the Declaration is
not confessed, avoided, or traversed, and also that the Bar was insufficient:
And it seemed to Fennor, that the matter of the Bar had been sufficient if it
had been well pleaded: but the Plaintiff alleges the words to be spoken in
one sense in the Affirmative, and the Defendant shows matter also in the
Affirmative which proves the words to be spoken in another sense then the
Declaration imporrs, and two Affirmatives can never make a good Issue, and
therefore the Defendant ought to have taken a traverse to that which is
comprised in the Declaration, and for want of this traverse the plea in Bar is
not good.

Gaudy said, that the Bar is not sufficient neither in matter nor form; not in
matter, because that whereas Fletcher said, that the said Earl was a Subject,
this can have no other sense, but that he was a Subject to the Queen in his
Allegiance and her Sovereignty, and so much is drawn out of the course of their
former speech, and therefore the answer which the Defendant made to it refers to
his subjection of alleagiance, and not to the matter of obedience, which he
owed to the order of the said Council, and if it cannot have any other sense
in good understanding, he cannot help himself now by an Innuendo, which is in
it self according to common intendment, contrary to that which the nature of
the words in themselves do purport: And if it had been good for the matter, yet
it is not good for the form, for want of a Traverse, for without the Traverse
the plea is not answered in that case which is laid to the charge of the
Defendant.

But Popham and Clench held strongly to the contrary, and that this Bar is good
in matter, and (as the case is) cannot be otherwise, and that the form also is
good enough, and yet the two Affirmatives cannot make a good Issue: but in case
of two Affirmatives, a Traverse shall not be, but where the Affi^matives do not
agree in one. As if the Defendant in Trespass Intitles himself by the
Feoffment of a stranger, and the Plaintiff reply, and maintain that the same
stranger did enfeoff him, this cannot make a good Issue without a Traverse of
the Feoffment alleged to be made to the Defendant.

But in the same case if the Plaintiff says, that true it is, that the
stranger enfeoffed the Defend ant, but this was to the use of the Plaintiff and
his Heirs, there no Traverse shall be on the Plaintiffs part, because as to the
matter of the Feoffment it agrees with the Defendant, in which case it shall
not take any Traverse, but there the Traverse shall come on the Defendants part
to maintain the Feoffment to his own use, Absque hoc, that the Feoffment was to
the use of the Plaintiff, for now that which the Defendant says, (albeit it be
in the Affirmative) yet it is a Traverse to that which the Plaintiff has
alleged, and therefore he needs not traverse the plea: And so a diversity where
the Affirmative is, to traverse that which is alleged by the other party, and
where not, for in one case the conclusion shall be with a Traverse, and in the
other not: Then in this case when the Plaintiff alleged that the Defendant
spoke these words, which prima facie shall be intended to be spoken in this
sense, as the Plaintiff has alleged, although no Innuendo had been in the
case, for if it shall not be so intended without the Innuendo, the Innuendo
will not help it, yet when the Defendant has declared the circumstance
whereupon these words were spoken, and then the speaking of them thereupon, now
he has confessed the very words themselves to be spoken, but upon the
circumstance discovered to be in another sense then prima facie, they are to be
taken, and therefore he shall not take a Traverse, for he acknowledges the very
words, but not the intendment which the very Law prima facie presumes upon the
words, and therefore shall not take a Traverse: for this intendment of Law being
answered by matter expressly in the plea shall never be traversed, as in the
case put of a Feoffment, prima facie, it shall be intended to be to the use of
the Feoffee, yet when the other party maintains that this Feoffment was to his
use, he shall not take a Traverse to that which the Law intends and presumes.

And if a man upon speech had with a Hunter, says, That he has murdered all
the Hares within 7. miles of his house, and another answer and say, he is a
Murderer indeed, whereupon the Hunter brings an Action upon the Case against
him, for saying, that the Plaintiff was a murderer, the Action will well lie.

Yet when the other shall discover the communication whereupon the words were
spoken, this shall be a good Bar without a Traverse yet if it be true that
there were no such communication between the parties as is mentioned in the
Bar, the Plaintiff then has good cause of Action, and therf^re he may well
say, De injuria sua propria absque tali causa, and this being sound it shall be
against the Defendant.

So upon speech of a Butcher who had killed a 1000. Oxen in a year, and one
hearing it will say, that he is a notable Murderer, this upon the matter
disclosed is not actionable.

And it shall be mischievous by a Traverse or by pleading generally not guilty,
to put such special matter in the mouth of Lay People to give their Verdict
upon, being ignorant, and therefore easy to be miscarried in the^r judgment,
and therefore it shall be the rather admitted by special pleading to be put to
the judgment of the barred Judges, then into the mouths of lay Gents.

And here when Fletcher speaking of the order to be taken by the Council, upon
the Petition said, that the Earl would obey their order, to which the Defendant
answered, that he knew not what the Earl would do, the said Fletcher said
thereupon, that he was a Subject, and what was the intent of Fletcher in saying
so? no other, but that because he was a Subject, therefore he ought to obey; and
if it be so to be understood, as of necessity it ought, (or else they were not
spoken by Fletcher to any purpose, which cannot be intended) then shall the
words following (being spoken thereupon by the Defendant) be taken to be spoken
in answer to the matter of the Speeches spoken by the said Fletcher, and this,
is that he was sorry, and it was his grief that he must be so subject as to be
bound thereby to obey their Order: as if a man says to another, that he was
sorry that he was so subject, that he must obey a Judgment against him in the
Queens Court, this is no cause of Action, for this tends but to his subjection
to the Law, or good order, or the like, which do not give cause of Action: As
if one says of another, that he is of the Temple, who always rebel against
the Governors of the said house, then says another to him, Will you then say
and maintain that he is a Rebel, yes, says one of the other, I will do so; If
an Action be brought for the last words, the Action will lie, but if the other
discover the circumstances of the Speech in the Bar, whereupon it was spoken,
the Action will not lie: And this the Defendant may well do without traversing
that which is alleged, because he acknowledges it, although in another sense,
then the Law Prima Facie imports upon the Declaration.

And if in Speech between two, one of them says of a stranger, that he has
treacherously betrayed his Friend in revealing all his secrets, and council,
whereupon the other then says, that he has done as a Traitor therein, and the
other says to him again, he is a Traitor, and he answering to it, says, true,
he is a Traitor; Now if the stranger brings an Action of the Case against him,
for saying of these last words, Prima Facie, it imports good cause of Action,
without any Innuendo, as that he intended thereby that he was a Traitor to the
Queen, because the words in common intendment have such a sense, yet upon the
matter disclosed by way of Bar, with the circumstances how they were spoken,
the Plaintiff shall be barred, if he cannot maintain that they were spoken
without such a cause, which alter the intendment that the Law has otherwise of
the words.

And Gaudy agreed also, that in such cases the Defendant may plead the general
Issue, and upon the matter also the Jury ought to find him not guilty.

But Popham and Clench said, that this was a dangerous matter to be put in the
mouths of the Lay Gents, as has been said before, and therefore to put it to
the Judgment of the Law by pleading.

And for the exception they ought to have shown here, where, by whom, and
against whom the Petition was delivered, to this they said, that the exception
was to no purpose, for this was but a conveyance to the Speech used, which
Speech was the substance of the Bar; and in this they put the case of the Lord
Cromwell which was in this Court, 22 Eliz. Rot. 752. In an Action upon the
Statute of Scandalum Magnatum, by him brought against Thomas Dye Clark, for
saying to the Lord Cromwell, It is no news though you like not of me, for you
like of those that maintain Sedition against the Queens proceedings; in which
the Defendant said, that he was Vicar of North Linham, in the County of Norf.
and that the Plaintff mentioned one Vincent Goodwyn Clark at such a time, and
one John Trendle at such another time, neither of them being licenced to preach
in the said Church, against the will of the said Defendant, and show how they
severally preached there in their Sermons (and show certainly in what point)
Seditious Doctrine against the Laws of the Church, as against the Cross used
in Baptism, and the wearing of the Surplice, and that afterward in speech
thereupon between the said Plaintiff and him, the Plaintiff said to the
Defendant, That the Defendant was a false Knave, and said in English words,
that he liked not of the Defendant; whereupon the Defendant said the words
comprised in the Declaration Innuendo, That he liked of the said Goodwyn and
Trendle who maintain Sedition (Innuendo) seditious Doctrine against the Queens
proceedings. Innuendo predict Leges and Stat. Eccl^siae hujus regni Angl. etc.
And the Plaintiff was put to answer, Scilicet de injuria sua propria absque
tali causa, etc.

And note in this case, the Defendant would first have justified for the matter
preached by one, and it was not allowed by the Court, but he was put to speak
to both, or otherwise it had not been good because his speeches were in the
plural number, to wit, That he liked of those, which refers to more then to
one. And it was said in this case, that the word (Subject) might have several
significations according to the circumstance whereupon it is spoken: As Subject
generally without more, is to be intended of the Queen, but according to the
circumstance, it may be said, Subject of England, or Subject of Ireland, or
Subject to the Law, or subject to any other authority, or power set over him,
or subject to his Affections.

And if a man says of another, that he is a Subject, and therefore he ought to
serve the Queen in her Wars, and he answers, that he is sorry for that, and is
grieved for it, no Action will lie for this, because the grievance refers to
service, which is to be done, and not to his Subjection as a Subject.

Dillon versus Fraine.
9. IN Trespass brought by William Dillon Esquire, against John Fraine, See
this in Cook lib. 1. 120. b^ the name of Chudleighs case.
for breaking of his Close at Tavestock in the County of Devon, called Seden,
upon not guilty, and a special Verdict, the case appeared to be this, to wit,
that Sir Richard Chudleigh Knight, was seized in his Demesne as of Fee, of the
Manor of Hescot, with the Appurtenances, in the County of Devon, of which the
said Close was parcel, and so seized, 26 April, 3, and 4 Phil. and Mar. by his
Deed of Feoffment, of the same date enfeoffed Sir Tho. Saintleger Knight, and
others, and their Heirs, of the said Manor, to the use of the said Sir Richard
Chudleigh and his Heirs, of the body of the said Elizabeth, then the wife of
Richard Bainfield Esquire, lawfully begotten, and for default of such Issue,
then to the use of the said Sir Richard Chudleigh, and of his Heirs of the
bodies of other wives, of other persons lawfully begotten: And for default of
such Heirs, then to the use of the performance of the Will of the said Sir
Richard Chudleigh for 10. years after his decease, and after the said Term
finished, then to the use of the said Sir John Saintleger and his Co-feoffees
and their Heirs, during the life of Christopher Chudleigh, Son and Heir
apparent of the said Sir Richard, and after the death of the said Christopher,
then to the use of the first Issue Male of the body of the said Christopher,
and to the Heirs Males of the body of this first Issue Male, and for default of
such Issue, to the second Issue Male of the body of the said Christopher, and
to the Heirs Males of the body of this second Issue Male, and so to the tenth
Issue Male: And for default of such Issue, then to the use of Thomas Chudleigh,
another Son of the said Sir Richard, and of the Heirs of his body lawfully
begotten; And for default of such Issue, to the use of Oliver Chudleigh another
Son of the said Sir Richard, and of the Heirs of his body lawfully begotten:
And for default of such Issue, to the use of Nicholas Chudleigh another Son of
the said Sir Richard, and of the Heirs of his body lawfully begotten, and for
default of such Issue, to the right Heirs of the said Sir Richard Chudleigh for
ever; whereby they were seized accordingly, after which the 17th. of November. 5,
and 6. Phil. and Mar. the said Sir Richard died without any Heir of the body of
any of the wives before mentioned: And after that the said Christopher took to
wife one Christian Strecheley, after which, to wit, the 14th. day of August, 1
Eliz. the said Sir John Saintleger and the other Feoffees, by their Deed of the
same date, enfeoffed the said Christopher of the said Manor, to have and to
hold to him and his Heirs for ever, to the use of the said Christopher and his
Heirs, the said Oliver Chudleigh then being living, after which, to wit, the
20th. day of September, 3 Eliz, the said Christopher had Issue of his body
lawfully begotten, one Strechly Chudleigh his first Issue Male: And after this,
to wit, the 30. day of March, 5 Eliz. the said Christopher had Issue of his
body lawfully begotten, one John Chudleigh his second Issue Male, after which,
to wit, the first day of July, 6 Eliz. the said Christopher by his Deed
indented of the same date, and enrolled within six months, according to the
Statute bargained and sold the said Manor to Sir John Chichester Knight, and
to his Heirs, and in the interint also between the date of this Deed, and in
the inrolement thereof, to wit, the 6th. day of July, in the same 6th. year, by
his Deed of the same date, the said Christopher enfeoffed the said Sir John
Chichester and his Heirs of the said Manor, and by the same Deed warranted it
for him and his Heirs, to the said Sir John Chichester and his Heirs, whereupon
the said Sir John Chichester entered into the said Manor, after which, to wit,
the first day of October, 12 Eliz. the said Christopher died, after which the
7th. day of November, 13 Eliz. the said Stretchley Chudleigh died without Issue
of his body: And after the death of the said Sir Richard Chudleigh, to wit, the
6th. day of September, 7 Eliz. the said Sir John Chichester enfeoffed one
Philip Chichester and his Heirs of the said Manor, to the use of the said
Philip and his Heirs.

And the said Close being Copyhold and Customary Land of the said Manor
demisable by the Lord of the same Manor, or his Steward, for the time being,
for life or lives by Copy of Court-roll, according to the custom of the said
Manor.

The said Philip at a Court holden at the said Manor, for the said Manor, the
8th. day of December, 15 Eliz. by Copy of Court-roll granted the said Close to
the said John Frain, for Term of his life, according to the custom of the said
Manor, after which, to wit, the 11th. day of March, 28 Eliz. the said John
Chudleigh being now Heir to the said Christopher, enfeoffed the said William
Dillon of the said Manor, to have and to hold to him and his Heirs, to the use
of the said William and his Heirs for ever, whereby he entered, and was seized,
until the said John Fraine entered into the said Close upon him, the 8th. day
of February, 30 Eliz. upon which entry of the said Fraine this Action is
brought.

And for difficulty of the case it was adjourned into the Exchequer Chamber
before all the Justices and Barons of the Exchequer; And there it was agreed by
all, that a Warranty descending upon an Infant shall not bind him, in case that
the entry of the Infant be lawful into the Land, to which the Warranty is
united: But the Infant ought in such a case to look well that he do not suffer
a descent of the Land after his full age, before he has made his re-entry for
then the Warranty, when he is to have an Action for the Land, shall bind him.

And they agreed also that a Copyhold granted by a Disseisor, or any other who
has the Manor of which it is parcel by wrong, shall be avoided by the
Disseisee, or any other who has right to the Manor by his entry or recovery
of the Manor.

And so by Popham it was agreed by the Justices in the case of the Manner of
Hasselbury Brian, in the County of Dorset, between Henry late Earl of Arundell,
and Henry late Earl of Northumberland: but then he said, that it was agreed,
that admittance upon surrenders of Copyholders in Fee, to the use of another,
or if an Heir in case of a Descent of a Copyhold were good, being made by a
Disseisor of a Manor, or any other who has it by Tort, because these are acts
of necessity, and for the benefit of a stranger, to wit, of him who is to have
the Land by the surrender, or of the Heir: And also Grants made by Copy by the
Feoffee, upon condition of a Manor, before the Condition broken, are good,
because he was lawful Dominus pro tempore.

And for the matter upon the Statute of 27 H. 8. what shall become of this
future use ^imited to the first, second, and other Issues Males not in Esse at
the time of the Feoffment.

Ewens, Owen, Bateman, and Fennor said, That an Use at Common Law is Use, what
it is.
no other then a confidence which one person puts in another, for a confidence
cannot be in Land, or other dead thing, but ought always to be in such a thing
which has understanding of the trust put in him, which cannot be no other then
such a one who h^th reason and understanding to perform what the other has
committed to him, which confidence shall bind but in privity, and yet the
confidence is in respect of the Land, but every one who has the Land is not
bound to the confidence, but in privity shall be said to be in the Heir, and
the Feoffee who has knowledge of the confidence, and in him who comes to the
Land by Feoff^ent without consideration, albeit he has no knowledge thereof,
and yet every Feoffee is not bound although he has knowledge of the
confidence, as an Alien Person, Attaint, and the like, not the King, he shall
not be seized to another use, because he is not compellable to perform the
confidence; nor a Corporation, because it is a dead body, although it consist
of natural persons: and in this dead body a confidence cannot be put, but in
bodies natural.

And this was the Common Law before the Statute of 27 H. 8. Then the Letter of
the Statute is not to execute any Use before that it happens to be an Use in
Esse; for the words are, Where any person is seized to the use of any other
person, that in such a case, he who has the Use shall have the same Estate in
the Land which he had before in the Use; Ergo, by the very letter of the Law he
ought to have an Estate in the Use, and there ought to be a person to have the
Use before the Statute intends to execute any possession to the Use, for the
words are express, that in every such case he shall have it, therefore not
another: And therefore the Statute had purpose to execute the Uses in
possession, Reversion, or Remainder, presently upon the conveyance made to the
Uses: But for the future Uses which were to be raised at a time to come upon
any contingent, as to the Infants here, not being then born, the Statute never
intended to execute such Uses until they happen to have their being, and in
the mean time to leave them as they were at Common Law, without meddling with,
or altering of them in any manner until this time, and if before this time,
the root out of which these contingent Uses ought to spring be defeated, the
Use for this is utterly destroyed, and shall never afterward have his being:
as here by the Feoffment made by the said Sir John Saintleger and his
Co-feoffees, who then were but as Tenements pur auter vie, to wit, for the life
of Christopher, and which was a forfeiture of their Estate, and for which
Oliver Chudleigh might have entered, it being before that the said Strechley or
John Chudleigh were born, the privity of them from Estate. being the root out
of which this future use ought to have risen is gone and destroyed, and
therefore the Contingent Uses utterly thereby overthrown.

As if before the Statute of 27 H. 8. Tenant for life had been, the remainder
over in Fee to an Use: If the Tenant for life had made a Feoffment in Fee, and
he in the Remainder had released to the Feoffee, the Use had been gone for
ever, so in all these cases of contingent Uses at this day, for he who comes
to the possession of Land by Disseisin, or wrong done to the Possessor, who is
seized to another use, shall never be seized to another use.

And the case being so, that it is out of the letter of the Statute to execute
such contingent Uses, it is more strong for them out of the meaning of the
Statute to execute, then before they happen to be in Esse: for this shall be to
make all mischiefs comprehended in the Preamble of this Statute, and against
which the Statute intended to provide sufficient remedy in a worse mischief
then they were before the making of the same Statute, and this shall be but a
perverse instruction of the Statute.

And they said, that the subtleties used from time to time by means of those
Uses, to the great deceit and trouble of the people, were the cause of the
making of this Statute, 27 H. 8. and by all the Statutes formerly made touching
Uses, it appears that they were all taken to be grounded upon fraudulent and
crafty devises, and therefore this Law had no great purpose to favor them, but
a Fortiorari, not to make them in worse case by means of the Statute then they
were before, and therefore it shall not be taken that the Use is executed by the
Statute, which stands upon a contingency, of which a greater mischief will
ensue, then there was in such a case before the Statute, and therefore by the
Feoffment made in the interim, before the birth of the Infants, which otherwise
ought to have preserved the Use, this Use was utterly destroyed; and although
the Feoffee of Christopher had notice of the Use, yet this does not now help in
the case, because the Feoffment did wrong to the Estate first settled, which was
subject to the Use, and extinct in the same possibility which had been
otherwise in the Feoffees to have given livelihood to the said Contingent Use:
And therefore the Judgment by them ought to be, that the Plaintiff shall be
barred.

Walmesley, That the great mischief which was at Common Law upon these
Feoffments to Uses, was, that none could know upon the occupation of the Land,
who was true Owner of the Land, for Cestay que Use was the Pernor of the
Profits, but in whom the Freehold or Inheritance of the Land was, there were
not many which knew, whereby great mischief came to the assurances which men had
of Land which they purchased, and by it men knew not against whom to bring
their Actions to recover their Rights, and by it Wives lost their Dowers,
Husbands their Tenancy by the Courtesy, Lords their Escheats, Wardships, and
the like.

And this mischief happened by reason that one had the profit, and another the
estate of the Land: And the Statute was made to put the Land and the Estate
quite out of the Feoffee, who before did not meddle with the Land to Cestay que
Use, who before had but the occupation and profits of the Land, and to this
intent the letter of the Law serves very well, which says that the Estate of
the Feoffee shall be clearly in Cestuy que Use, and therefore nothing by the
intent and letter of the Law is now to remain in the Feoffee, no more then a
Scintilla juris nemor'd in Brents Case in my Lord Dyer. Eliz. and the whole
Estate in the interim until the contingent happen shall be in them who have
their Uses in Esse, and when the Contingent happen, the Statute gives place to
this Contingent Use, and by the execution thereof comes between the Estates
before executed, and as out of these by the Statute, but nothing is now after
the Statute in the Feoffees, for the purpose of the Statute, was (as I have
said) to take away all from the Feoffee, for all was divested from him, because
that betwixt the Feoffor, and the Feoffee was all the fraud before the Statute,
and the very letter of the Statute is to extinguish and extirpate the
assurances fraudulently made, which was always by reason of assurances made
between the Estate of the Land in one, and the possession thereof in another,
and to cause that now that the Estate shall be to the use, where the occupation
was before: And this Statute was not made to extinguish or discredit Uses, but
to advance them, as by bringing the very Estate in possession to the Use, and
by it the trust now taken from all others who were trusted with it before, so
the Statute does not condemn the uses, but the fraud which was by reason of
them before. And the Statute being, that the Estate, Right, and Title of the
Feoffees shall go to the uses, therefore nothing remains in the Feoffees, but
all by authority of Parliament adjudged to be in Cestay que use, which is the
highest Judgment that can be given in any Court, and the words (Stand and be
seized at any time) refer as well to the future, as present uses, and the
Statute intended as well to help the uses which shall be upon any Contingent,
as those which are at present, for a future or contingent Use is to be said an
Use, according to its nature or quality, and it shall be executed according to
its quality when it happen. And the words are, that the Estate which was in the
Feoffee shall be in Cestay que use and not the Estate which is, and therefore
when the use happens to be in an instant, the Estate which at the first Livery
was in the Feoffee, to this use shall now be executed in possession to this
contingent use, albeit it self was altogether executed (as I said before) in
the Uses which were in Esse, and if so, it follows that nothing which is done
in the mean time by the Feoffee or can be done by any other, can prejudice or
hurt the execution of this Use in contingency when the contingency happen.

And for the case of Brook, 30 H. 8. it is plain in paint, which is this.

A Covenant with B. that if B. enfeoff him of three acres of Land in D. that
then the said A. and his Heirs, and all others seized of such Lands shall stand
thereof seized to the use of the said B. and his Heirs, after which A, enfeoffed
a stranger of this Land, after which B. enfeoffed the said A: of the said three
acres, now the use shall be to the said B. and his Heirs of the said other
Land, for the Statute so binds the Land to this Contingency when it happens,
that by no means it can be defeated, and this is the cause that Leases made by
force of Provisoes comprised in assurances are good, and cannot be avoided, for
the Interests to these Leases is wrought by the first Livery and the Statute,
atd therefore upon the matter, I conceive, that Judgment ought to be given for
the Plaintiff.

Gaudy conceived that it is executed by the intent, but not by the letter of
the Statute, for the purpose was to remove all the Estate from the Feoffee, and
to put it in Cestay que use wholly, to wit, in possessions, to the Uses which
were in Esse, and in aleyance as to the Uses which were to come and contingent;
and now by the same Statute the contingency of the possession shall go in
license of the contingent Use, and now an Use limited to one for life, with
Remainder over to the Heirs of the body of I. S. or to the first Son of I. S.
shall be in the same manner as if Land at this day had been letten to one for
life, with Remainder over to the Heirs of the body of I. S. or to the first Son
of I. S. and not otherwise, for the quality which he had in the Use, the same
(by the very letter of the Statute) he shall now have in the possession and
Estate of the Land, and the Statute is not to undo any Use, but to transfer an
Estate in the Land to the Use.

But he said, That by the Feoffment made to Christopher, the Contingent
remainder which was divested in Stretchly and John Chudleigh depending upon the
Estate which Sir John Saintleger and his Co-feoffees had for the life of
Christopher, is utterly gone and destroyed in the same manner, as where a Lease
is made for life, the remainder to the right Heirs of I. S. or to the Heirs of
the body of I, S. if the Tenant for life dies, or aliens, whereby he makes a
forfeiture, and determines his Estate in the life of the said I. S. his Heir
shall never have the Land by the remainder afterward, because he was not in
Esse, as an Heir at the time when the Estate ended, for there cannot be a
remainder without a particular Estate, neither can it stand or be preserved.

And as in this case without a particular Estate of Freehold, a Remainder
cannot be, no more in the case now in question being now become by means of the
Statute, as if it had been an Estate executed in possession; and for this cause
only he conceived, that Judgment ought to be given against the Plaintiff.

And Clench agreed with this opinion in all, and both of them agreed, if there
be none to take the Use according to the limitation at the time, when it
falls to be in Possessions, that he shall never take it, although it happen
to be in Esse afterward.

Clark said, that Uses were not at Common Law, but grew by sufferance of time,
as appears by the words of the Statute it self, and the mischief and subtlety
which was before this Statute was not in the Fine, Feoffment, or other
Assurances of Land, but by means o^ the Uses limited thereupon, contrary to
that which was used in the ancient course o^ the Common Law,, and the Statute
was made to reduce the Common Law to its ancient force and course, and therefore
ought to conceive such a construction, as may agree with the purpose of the
makers of the Statute, and therefore the best construction of this Statute is,
not to execute other manner of Uses, but in some cases to extinguish them, as
where it is such, as will make the case in as ill, or worse condition then it
was before the making of the Statute.

It has been agreed by all, that the Statute does not execute any Use which
was suspended at the time of the making of the Statute, as by reason of a
Disseisor, or the like happening before; and if it does not execute the Use which
is in suspense for the right which he had in the Use, how can it execute the
Use which has not any being? for in such cases, of Infants not born as here,
until they be in Rerum natura, the Use cannot have any being.

And in the same manner in all cases where the Use is not to rise but upon a
future contingent: And what good shall this Statute do, if these leaping Uses
shall arise without being impeached? Nothing, but always nourish a Viper in
the bosom of the Law, which is quite against the intent of the makers of the
Statute.

The Law was made to preserve peace amongst the Subjects, and to assure their
Possessions, as many other Statutes did, that were made about this time, as the
Statutes of Fines, Wills, and others. But if the exposition of this Statute
shall be as the other side has taken it, it will make the confusion which will
happen thereupon intolerable, and much worse then it was before the Statute was
made and (as Walsh said) if no assurance can be made to be forcible against
such a contingent Use, this will make it worse then it was before.

And hesaid, that it was not to be compared to the interest of Lands to begin
at a time to come, nor to the case where a man devise that his Land shall be
sold, in which case, be shall not be impeached by any manner of assurance, to
be made in the mean time by the Heir, and the reason is, because the Vendee
takes by the Will under the Estate of the Heir, and not by the sale, and
therefore upon the matter, he conceived that the Plaintiff ought to be barred.

Periam said, that Uses were at Common Law, and to prove it, he vouched 24 H.
8. abridged in Brook. And he said, that there have been always trusts, Ergo,
Uses ab initio, but they had not such estimation at the beginning as they have
had by continuance of time, and so it was of Copyholds: And these Uses at
Common Law bind but in privity according to the trust, but do not bind in the
possession of him who comes to the Land in the Post: But now by the Statute
all trusts are gone, and the Estate of the Land it self transferred to the Use,
and now the Use guides the Land, and not the Land the Use.

And the Statute did not intend to destroy any Use, but to bring it back to the
Possession, according to the course of the common Law, and to avoid the fraud.

And as before the Statute the Use it self in such a case of Contingency was in
obeyance for the time, so now the Estate it self is in obeyance by the Statute,
which wills, that he shall now have an Estate in the Land it self, of such a
quality as he had before in the Use; for the Statute puts all clearly out of
the Feoffees, and it is not inconvenient to have a Possession so to a
Contingent Use, and if it had not been in the words of the Statute, yet (as
has been said) it shall be so taken by the intent of the Statute; for it never
was the intent of the makers of the Statute to do wrong to any by means of the
Statute. And therefore he put the case of Cramner, who made a Feoffment to the
use of himself for his life, and after his decease to the use of his Executors
for years, this Estate for years is not now vested in any, because a man cannot
have an Executor during his life, and yet it remains as in the custody of the
Law, until there are Executors to take it.

And he said, that the case of the Lady Bray was as strong to prove the case in
question, to be, at he takes it, which cannot be answered, for if she had
married with the Lord Bray by the assent of the Council assigned for it,
according to the agreement, she had taken an Estate by the Contingency, but in
as much as she did not do it, it was otherwise.

And we are to consider well, what we do in this case, it is a Tree, the
branches whereof over-shadow all the Possessions of the Realm in effect, for the
Estates and Leases in manner of all stand upon those assurances to Uses, and to
pull up such a Tree by the roots, is to put all the Realm in a confusion, and
therefore if there be any mischief therein, it is better to help it by
Parliament, then to alter it by Judgment. And so upon the whole matter, I
conceive that Judgment ought to be given for the Plaintiff.

Anderson, That an Use was not at Common Law, for the Common Law had no respect
to it, but to the Feoffee, and it was the person who by the Law had any thing
to do in the Land, and not Cestay que Use, for he might punish Cestay que Use
for his meddling with the Land, and Cestay que Use had no remedy against him by
no means; But by Suboepna in the Court of Conscience.

And further, an Use being limited to another in Fee, no Use can be limited
further thereupon for any Estate. And it has been well said, that the letter of
the Statute of 27 H. 8. did not tend to execute this Use which was not in Esse,
and for the intent thereof, that it did not tend to execute any contingent Use
until that it happen, which is proved by the case, that an Estate for years
being assigned over, or granted to an Use, the Use of this is not executed by
the Statute of 27 H. 8. as it was agreed about 27 Eliz. and what was the reason
in the case, but because there was not any Seisin in the Use, but only a
possession to the Use? whereby the words of the Statute are much to be regarded.
And here how can there be a Seissin to the Use which is not? it cannot be, and
therefore for the like reason, as in the other case it is never executed, nor
shall be removed by means of such an Use, until it happens to be an Use in
Esse.

And for Brents Case, I have always taken the better opinion to be, that the
Wife cannot take in the case for the mean disturbance, notwithstanding the
Judgment which is entered thereupon, which was by assent of the parties and given
only upon a default made after an Adjournment upon the Demurrer, for he said,
that he had viewed the Roll thereof on purpose; and if it be, that such a
Contingent Use be not executed until it happens to be in Esse, here it
appears, that by the Feoffment Christopher is in, of another Estate which was
not subject to the Use, because he is in by forfeiture and wrong made to this
Estate, and therefore not bound to the Use in Contingency, although he made it
without consideration, and although he had notice of this contingent Use, and
therefore this contingent Use utterly defeated before it had any being.

But in all the Cases put on the other side, it does not appear that there was
any thing done in disturbance of these mediate uses before they happened, and
therefore not to be compared to this case, whereby he conceived that the
Plaintiff ought to be barred.

Popham said, That in as much as the manner of assurance made by Sir Richard
Chudleigh may seem strange, and in some manner to touch the reputation of the
said Sir Richard (who was a grave and honest Gentleman) to those who hear it,
and do not know the reason why he did it, which I remember to be this as I have
heard, to wit, That the said Christopher had killed one Buller a Gentleman of
good reputation, whereupon he fled into France, and the said Sir Richard
doubting what would become of his Estate; if he should dye before he had settled
his Land, and yet having a desire to have power to undo the assurance which he
purposed to make, if he pleased, his Council then thought the best way to make
and devise the assurance, so, that such an Estate of Inheritance might thereby
be in him which could not descend to the said Christopher, and yet such, that
he might thereby undo the assurance made by the Recovery when he pleased, and
yet such also as should never take effect in any of the Issues of his other
Wives, to the prejudice of his right Wives, because he never had a purpose to
marry with any of these Wives.

And to that which has been touched by Periam, That this Limitation first made
is a Fee-simple in Sir Richard, I conceive clearly the contrary, For if it
should be so, then no Use could be limited over upon this Fee-simple, as has
been said before, and therefore all the remainder of the Case had been to no
end; but he said, that it was an Estate-tail special in Sir Richard, and
denied the opinion of Ay scough taken so in 20 H. 6. and this by reason of the
Statute of Donis conditionalibus, which wills Quod voluntas donatoris secundum
formam doni in charta doni manifest expressam de caetero observetur. And here
it is express, that the Heirs of Sir Richard begotten upon any of the said
Wives shall have the Land, and thereby it shall be understood that his Heirs
shall be intended by common intendment the Heirs by him. To which opinion
Anderson agreed.

And for the matter, Popham conceived clearly that there was not any such use
at Common Law as we commonly call an use, and yet he acknowledged there were
always trusts at Common Law; but every trust is not to be said an use: for
none will doubt but that a t^ust may be, and is many times put in others at
this day, as upon pu^chase^ made in other men's names, and assurances also upon
trust, and yet we will not say that this is an use, and without doubt such
trusts were at Common Law, but not the uses aforesaid, and the reason that
moved him to take the Law to be so, was, that he had not seen any ancient
record, Statute, or Book of Law, nor any writing before the time of Ed. 3.
which made any mention of this word use; and if it had been at Common Law,
without doubt (as they said) some mention would have been made thereof. The
reasons which are alleged in 27. H. 8. and in the case vouched 24. H. 8. that
a trust was at Common Law is, by the one of them the Causa Matrimonii
prolocuti, which (as they pretend) ought to prove that there was a trust at
Common Law.

And the other the Statute of Marlbridge, that the Lord in case of Wards
against Feoffments made by Collusion, which Feoffments (they allege) prove
that a trust then was.

To which it was said, that the gift made by a woman to another, to the intent
that he shall marry her, has in it a Condition more properly implied, to wit,
that if he do not marry her, that she shall have her land back again, for
which the Common Law gives her remedy by the Action aforesaid, for if it had
been but a trust, no remedy had been by the Common Law.

And for the Statute of Marlbridge the contrary thereunto is manifestly proved,
for the Statute speaks but of Feoffments made to Heirs apparants or upon
Condition, or to the intent to enffeoff the Heir at his full age, or the like,
in which cases the use always goes with the Possessions, and is not to the
Feffor: And the Statute of 4. H. 7. was made in vain, which gives the Wardship
of Cestuy que use where no Will is declared, which had not been needful if
Feoffments within the Statute of Marlbridge had been said to have been to Uses.

And without doubt if those who made the Statute of Marlbridge had then had
knowledge of these Feoffments to Uses which were so mischievous, and more then
the other Feoffments by Collusion, they then would have provided remedy for
these cases of Uses.

Also the Statute de Religiosis ordains that Nec art, nec ingenio, Lands shall
not be conveyed in Mortmain, and thereby it was conceived that a full provision
had been made against these Mortmains, and yet in 15 Rich. 2. Provision was
made against Uses conveyed in Mortmain to Religious or other Corporations of
which they took the Profits.

And without doubt those who were so precise in the making of the Statute of
Religiosis against Mortmains, would also have made provision for the uses if
they had then been known.

But to clear this point, without all controversy the Statute it self of uses,
27 H. 8. makes it plain, which says expressly that by the Common Law of the
Realm, Lands or Tenements ought not to pass from one to another, without
solemn Livery, matter of Record, or writing, and that these Feoffments to uses
were Errors used and accustomed within the Realm, to the Subversion of the
ancient Laws; therefore it stands not with the ancient Common Law of the Realm,
as all the Parliment took it, which is more to be regarded then any Book
vouched. But see how, and when they began and crept in at Common Law, and it
shall be easily perceived (as it has been well said by some of those who
argued to this point at the beginning) that they began by two means, to wit, by
fraud, and by fear. And he said, that the first Book which he had seen in all
the Books of the Law, which tend to an use, is the case of 8. Assise, which
makes mention that the Counsee of a Fine entered into the Land in the right of
another, which is to be taken to another use. And in the Quadragessim^s of
Edw. 3. mention is made of the Feoffees of the Lord Burglash, who sued to the
King by petition, and by the Statute of 50 Ed. 3. cap. 6. mention is made that
diverse gave their Lands to their Friends to have the profits. and afterward
fled to privileged places, and lived there to the hinderance of their
Creditors; And therefore it was provided that in such a case execution shall be
made, as if no such assurance had been made. And by 2 Rich. 2. these are called
Feoffments to uses, and made by craft to deceive Creditors, and there is the
first mention which is made in any Statute of the word (Use:) So fraud has
been always the chief foundation of these Uses; yet in time they began to have
some credit in the Law. And this was when men saw that the Court of Conscience
gave remedy in these cases against such who had not the conscience themselves
to perform the trust put in them, and to take away the danger which happened to
an infinite number of good Subjects, upon the Garboyls which happened between the
time of E. 3. and that of King H. 7. caused that in effect, all the Possessions
of the Realm were put in Feoffments to uses. And the first case in the Law
which speaks of this word (Use) which he ever saw was (as he said) in 5 H. 4.
And in the like case by Gascoign, 7 H. 4. no remedy is given by the Law for
Cestay que use, and afterward it crept into the Law as appears, yet as an
Error of long time used: And if before the Statute of 27 H 8. a Lease had been
made for life, the remainder in Fee, to the use of B. for life, the remainder
to the use of the first Son of the said B. and so further as here:

If the Tenant for life had made a Feoffment in Fee to a stranger, and had not
given the stranger notice of the Use, and all this were without consideration,
and afterward he in the Remainder in Fee to the Use had released all his Right
to the said stranger, every one of them had been hereby without remedy for
their Uses: Were the Son of B. born before or after this wrong done: So if it
were at Common Law before this Statute as has been we^l said, and the Law
being so before this Statute, then he said it was to be seen what was to be
done in the case after the Statute, which will stand altogether upon this, what
will become of these contingent Uses to the Sons not born at the time of the
said Feoffment made by Sir John Saintleger and his Co-feoffees, by this Statute
of 27 H. 8. and it seems to him clearly that no possession is executed to any
contingent use by this Statute, until it comes in being; and that as the case
is here and in some other special cases it shall never be executed: And one
cause why such a contingent Use shall not be executed, is, because it does not
stand with the letter of the Law, but rather is against the letter.

Another cause is, because it is utterly against the intent of the Law to
execute it, as the case is here. It does not stand with the Letter of the
Statute, for this is, Where any person or persons stand seized to the use of
any other person or persons, etc. And it is clear that none can stand seized to
the use of him who is not, neither can he who is not in rerum natura have any
use; therefore the case here does not stand with the letter of the Statute to be
now executed,

And further, the words following are, that in every such case, every person
who has such an Use in Fee-simples, Fee-tail. for life, for years, etc. or
otherwise in Remainder or Reversion shall stand hereafter seized and adjudged
in lawful Estate and Possessions of the Lands, etc. of such an Estate as he
had in the Use: The words then in the Statute being so precise as they stand,
to wit, that in such case he who has such an Use shall have the possession
executed of such an Estate as he had in the Use, excludes all other who are not
in it, to have it to be executed until that they happen to be in the same case
as of that which the Statute speaks, And if they had intended to have the
Possession to be executed and transferd from the Feoffees to these contingent
Uses, they would have made some mention thereof as well as they did of
Reversions and Remainders, and they did not leave there, but mention this
again, to wit, that the Estate, Right, Title, and Possessions which was in such
person or persons which were seized to the use of any such person or persons,
shall be hereafter clearly adjudged in him, or those who had or have such Use
according to such quality, manner, form, and condition as he had before the use
which was in them, by which it appears plainly, that the Right and Possession
of the Feoffee shall not be vested in or to any, until that he has the use it
self; for it is said, that it shall be in him, therefore they ought to have
something in the Use by the very express letter of the Statute, before any
thing of the Possession shall be executed or transferred by this Statute from
the Feoffee to Cestay que use: And how can this be said to be within the letter
of the Statute, which has so many and so precise words and branches against
it. And therefore it is clear, that if the Feoffee to use were seized at the
time of making of this Statute, that the use shall not be executed by this
Statute, until there be a regresse made by the Feoffee, or in his right to
revive the former use, and it had been out of the letter of the Statute.

But to this I say, that how precise soever the letter is against the execution
of these contingent uses, the intent thereof is yet more strong and precise
against them, which I will prove clearly by the Statute it self, which is of
greater authority then the particular opinion or conceit of any Judge
whomsoever, for it is the Judgment of all the Judges, and all the Realm also
which ought to bind all, and to which all ought to give credit. And to take the
intent, the Statute was full that it was made (as is rehearsed) for the
Disinherison which before was to true Heirs; for the defect which before was in
the assurance of Purchases, for the mischiefs, in regard before men did not
know (by reason of these Uses) against whom to bring their Actions to recover
their Rights. To avoid perjury that it should not be so common as it was, by
reason of the maintenance and support of these secret Uses, for the releif of
the King and other Lords, as to their Escheats, Forfeitures, Wardships,
Releases and the like, for the mischief which before happened to Tenants by the
Courtesy, and in Dower, by reason of these Estates in Use; and finally for the
great Incoveniencies which happened by reason of them, to the great trouble and
unquiet of the People: These were the great mischiefs that were before the
making of the Statute, and these were the things for which the Statute intended
to provide remedy, and if the exposition shall be as has been on the other
side, these mischiefs shall be on every part more mischievous by much, then it
was before the making of the Statute, and that in such a a manner, that it
shall be impossible to help any of them but by Parliament; whereas always the
good and true construction of a Statute is to constrain it, so that it shall
give remedy to the mischief which was before, and not to make it more
mischievous, and therefore examine it by parts.

And as to the disinherison of two Heirs, it appears now that by such
exposition more incoveniences will arise, and that in a more dangerous degree
then before the Statute; for before, for the Use the Heir had his remedy in
conscience according to the trust, and he might have made a disposition of the
Land it self, by the Statute of Rich. 3. as an Owner, for the advancement of
his Wife, and his Children, and for payment of his debts, and the like. But as
the case is now used by means of these perpetuities (as they are called) if the
exposition of the other side shall hold place, the true Heir shall not only be
continually in danger to loose his Inheritance, but by them the very bowels of
nature it self shall come to be divided, and as rent in pieces, for by reason
of these the Inheritants themselves cannot make any competent provision for the
advancement of their Wives, Daughters, or youngest Sons, as every one according
to the course of nature ought to do, nor by reason of this can he redeem
himself if he were taken Prisoner: And this will make disobedience in Children
to their Parents, when they see that they shall have their Patrimony against
their will, whereby such Children oftentimes become unnatural and dissoluts, of
which I in my time have seen many unnatural, dangerous, and fearful
consequences, not convenient to be spoken of. And it stays not there, but it
causes mortal debate (as to blood) between Cousin, and Cousin, Brother, and
Brother, and not so only, but between the Father himself and his Children, of
which every one of us have seen the experience, for the one ought to be as a
watch upon the other, to see when any thing happen to be done, to give him
advantage to disinherit the very true Owner.

And I say, that it is impossible that any can keep his Possessions which has
them tied with these perpetuities, if the exposition of the Statute should hold
place which the other side has made. And I affirm precisely, that there is not
any one in England who has had such Possessions so bound by descent of
Inheritance by five years of any value, but that he has lost all, or part of
his said Land at this time, let him be never so precise in making his
Assurances, and yet he is not sure to have one skillful in the Law always at
his elbow when he is to meddle with his Land. And therefore I put but this Case.

One who has such a perpetuity with power to make Leases, rendering the ancient
Rent, or more, has two Farms, either of them of the ancient Rent of 20 s. a
year but the one is worth 60 l. a year, and the other but 20 l. these are in
hand to be better together, rendering 53 s. 4 d. for both together, therefore he
has lost all, or part of his Land, according to that of which the perpetuity
is; so it is evident that it will happen to be more mischievous in time to
come, and therefore by this exposition much more to the disinherison of the
Heir, then it was before the making of this Statute. And which is more
mischievous if a Feme putein happen to be in such a house who happen to have
Children in Adultery, these Bastards shall have the Land against the will of
the Father, to the utter disinherison of the true Heirs, and against the intent
of him who made the limitation, by which we may see the just Judgment of of God
upon these who attempt by humane policy, to circumvent the divine providence
of God for the time to come; and of this also I have seen an example.

And now to the mischief, that men do not know against whom to bring their
Actions to sue for their Rights, and it is clear, that now by such an
exposition they shall be now in much worse condition then they were before* for
before the Action was given against him who received the Profits, which is now
gone by this Statute in the cases of Freehold, and therefore if the other
exposition shall hold place, it is clear that until the Statute of 13 Eliz.
men might have been by means of this Statute put out of all remedy to recover
their rights by any manner of Action, as some put it in practice, as to make
Feoffments to the use of the Feoffor, and his Heirs, until any intend to bring
an Action against him for this Land, and then over to others upon the like
lim^tation, with a Proviso to make it void at his pleasure, and the like, and
what mischief shall then be for the time upon such an exposition? such; that
Justice thereby cannot be done to the Subject; and what an absurdity shall it be
to say, that such an Exposition can stand with the intent of the Makers of the
Law.

And to that which has been argued on the other side, and first to that which
was said by Walmsley, That the Right, Estate, and Possession is wholly out of
the Feoffee, and vested to the Uses, which have their being by the Statute,
and that upon the Contingents happening, their Estates uncouple and give place to
the contingent Use then executed, and that the execution thereof shall be by a
Possession d^awn to it out of the Possession which was before executed by the
Statute in another: I say, that this Statute can by no means have such an
exposition; for this is as much as to say, that an Use may arise upon an Use,
contrary to what is adjudged, 36 H. 8. That a Bargain and Sale by a Deed
indented, and enrolled, cannot be at this day of Land to one, to the Use of
another.

And if a man enfeoff another to the use of I. S. and his Heirs, and if I. N.
pay such a sum, that then the said I. S. and his Heirs shall be seized of the
same Land to the use of the said I. N. and the Heirs of his body: I. ^. paies
the money, yet the Use does not rise out of the Possession of the said I. S.
But if it had been, that upon the payment the first Feoffee and his Heirs shall
stand seized to the use of the said I. N. and the Heirs of his body, it shall
be otherwise; therefore something remains to the first Feoffee in the Judgment of
the Law.

And I remember, that when I was a Counselor at Law in the time of the Lord
Dyer, where a Feoffment was made to the Use of one for life, with Remainders
over, with restraint to alien, and with power given to Tenant for life to make
Leases for one and twenty years, or three lives, it was much doubted whether
this power so limited to him without words in the Assurance that the Feoffee
and his Heirs shall stand seized to these Uses, shall be good to make such
Leases, or not? And therefore suppose that a man bargains and sells Land to one
for his life by Deed indented and enrolled, and make therein a Proviso, that the
Tenant for life may make such Leases, this is to no purpose as to power to make
a Lease, but the strongest case which he put was, that of 30 H. 8. which I
agreed to be Law, as it is there put, whether it were before or after the
Statute of 27 H 8. for it is not there put that the Feoffment was made upon any
consideration to the stranger, in which case, although he had no notice of the
first Covenant, yet in such a case he shall take the Possession subject to the
Use, to which it was bound by the present Covenant: But if you consider the
case well, you shall see that it was a case before the Statute, for it
follows presently in the same case, that it is there said, that it is not
like the case where the Feoffees in Use fell the Land to one who has no notice
of the first Use, whereby it appears that it was a case before the Statute,
for otherwise there had been no cause to have spoken then of the Feoffees to an
Use, and by the same it appears, if the Covenantor had bargained and sold the
Land to another, the same Use had never risen upon the Covenant, and therefore
it is clear against the Law, that the Possession shall be bound with such an
Use in whosoevers hand it comes.

And to that which Pe^^am said, in the case of these Contingent Uses, they
shall now by the Statute be in the same degree, as if Land it self had been so
conveyed: and that now the Land shall be in Contingency in stead of the Use,
and that by such manner it shall be executed, and that by such means all is
utterly out of the Feoffees, because the Statute was made to determine all
^^^ter of trust to be hereafter reposed in any Feoffee: this is well spoken,
but not well proved; for as I have said before, it is an exposition quite
contrary to the letter and intention of the Law. And I agree, as has been
said, if there be none to take the Use at the time that it falls to be in
possession, according to the limitation that he shall never take it afterward,
no more of an Use upon the Statute then of ^n Use at Common Law: As if an Use
be limited for life, the remainder to the right Heirs of I. S. if the Estate
for life be determined in the life of I: S. the remainder shall never vest
afterward in the right Heirs of I. S. no more then if an Estate had been so
made: But this makes for me, to wit, that the Estate upon the Uses executed by
the Statute, shall be of the same condition as Estates in possession were at
Common Law, and that they being executed ought also to be such, of which the
Common Law makes allowance.

And by way of argument, I agree for the time that it is, as has been said by
them who maintain that an Use may be in suspense, as to that which is an Use in
its proper nature, for it is not properly said an Use, until that it be said
in Esse, to take the Profits themselves: But I am to turn this Argument against
him who made it, for if it be so, the Use can never be in suspense, and i^ so,
it follows that no Possession by means of any such Use can be in suspense, but
stays where it was before to be executed when the Use happens to be in being.

But as to that, that a Reversion or Remainder may be of that which we call an
Use, so also may such a Use be in suspense in the same manner as the Possession
it self, but not otherwise.

And as to Cramners Case formerly put, the Law is so, because nothing appears
in the case to be done, to the disturbance of this contingent Use in the
interim before it happen. But upon the Case put of the Lady Bray, upon which it
has been so strongly relied, it was thus.

The Lord Bray made an assurance of certain Lands, to the use of certain of his
Council, until the Son of the said Lord Bray should come to the age of 21.
years, for the livelihood of the said Son, and of such a Wife as he shall marry
with the assent of the said Council, and then to the use of the said Son and
of the said Wife, and of the Heirs of the body of the said Son: The Father
dies, the Son was become in Ward to the King, after which one of the said
Counselors dies, the King grants over the Wardship of the said Son, after
which the said Lord Bray by the assent of his Guardian, and of the surviving
Counselors marries the Daughter of the then Earl of Shrewsbury, after which
the Husband aliens the same Land to one Butler, and dies, and upon Action
brought by the said Lady against the said Butler for the same land, she was
barred by Judgment, and upon what reason? because she was not a person known
when the Statute was made, which must be in every case of a Freehold in
Demesne, as well in case of an Use, as in case of a Possession.

And therefore a Lease for years, the Remainder to the Heirs of I. S. then
living, is not good, and the same Law of an Use. And so it was agreed by all
the Justices very lately in the case of the Earl of Bedford, but in these Cases
it remains to the Feoffor; and because it does not appear at the time of the
assurance who shall be the Wife of the said Son, so that there was not any to
take the present Freehold by name of the Wife of the Son, she takes nothing by
the assurance, but this reason makes for our side: to wit, That if there were
none to take the Freehold in Demesne from the Use, when it falls, he shall
never take it,

The other reason in this Case was, because she was not married by the consent
of all the Counselors, for that one was dead, nor according to the power given
by the agreement, but by the authority of the Guardian, that the power which
the Father had upon his Son was ceased.

And Nota, That by a Disseisin the contingent Use may be disturbed of his
Execution; but there by the regresse of the Feoffee o^ his Heirs when the
Contingent happen it may be revived to be executed: But by the release of the
Feoffee or his Heirs, the Contingent in such a case by Popham i^ ^^^red o^ all
possibility at any time to be executed,

And to that which has been said, that the general and universal Assurances
of men throughout all the Realm at this ^ay ar^ by means of Uses, and that it
shall be a great deal of danger and inconvenience to draw them now in question
or doubt, and that it now trembles upon all the Possessions of the Realm, and
therefore it shall be too dangerous to pull up such Trees by the roots, the
Branches whereof are such and so long spread, that they overshadow the whole
Realm.

Popham said, That they were not utterly against Uses, but only against those,
and this part of them which will not stand with the public Weal of of the
Realm. and which being executed shall make such an Estate which cannot stand
with Common Law of the Realm, or the true purport of the Statute; and therefore
he said, that it was but to prune and cut off the rotten and corrupt branches
of this Tree, to wit, that those which had not their substance from the true
Sap, nor from the ancient Law of the Realm, nor from the meaning of the
Statute, and so to reduce the Tree to its beauty and perfection.

The same reason he said, might have been made in the time of Edw. 4. against
those Arguments which were made to maintain the common Recoveries to bar
Estates-tail. But if such a reason had been then made, it would have been taken
for a bare conceit and mere trifle, and yet Uses were never more common then
Estates-tail were between the Statute of Donis conditionalibus, and the said
time of Edw, 4. But the grave Judges then saw what great trouble happened amongst
the people by means of Intails, and what insecurity happened by means thereof to
true Purchasors, for whose security nothing was before found (as we may see by
our Books) but collateral Warranty, or infinite delay by Voucher; and thus did
the Judges of this time look most deeply into it, whereupon, upon the very rules
of Law it was found that by common Recovery with Vouchers these Estates-tail
might be barred, which has been great cause of much quiet in the Land until
this day, that now it begins to be so much troubled with the cases of Uses, for
which it is also necessary to provide a lawful remedy.

But he said plainly. That if the Exposition made on the other side shall take
place, it will bring in with it so many mischiefs and inconveniences to the
universal disquiet of the Realm, that it will cast the whole Commonwealth
into a Sea of troubles, and endanger it with utter confusion and drowning.

And to that which was said, That a Remainder to the right Heirs of I. S. or to
the Heirs of the body of I, S. or to the first Son, as here are, so in the
custody of the Law that they cannot be drawn out, and that therefore no
forfeiture can be made by the Feoffment made by him who has the particular
Estate.

To that he said, That a Disseisin made to the particular Estate for life,
draws out such Remainders to the right Heirs, as is proved expressly by 3 H. 6
where it is holden, that a collateral Warranty bars such a Remainder in
obeyance after a disseisin.

And by Gascoigne, 7 H. 4. If such a Tenant for life makes a Feoffment in Fee,
it is a Forfeiture, but he conceived that in the life time of I. S. none can
enter for it, but this is not Law; and when by the Feoffment the particular
Estate is quite gone in possession, and in right also, the remainder shall
never take effect, by the very rules of Littleton.

And by 27 H. 7. which is, That a Remainder cannot be, unless there be an
Estate upon which it may have dependency, which there it cannot; but in the
case of a Disseisin made to a particular Estate, it is otherwise, because there
the Estate remains in right. And to say that it shall not be a Forfeiture,
because the Feoffment was made to Christopher, who then had the Fee-simple
which was limited to the right Heirs of Sir Richard Chudleigh, this is not so,
for by 41 E. 3. The Tenant for life himself, who also had a Remainder in
Fee-simple in himself, depending upon a mean Estate-tail in another made a
Feoffment, and by it committed a Forfeiture to him in the Remainder in tail.

But if Tenant for life, Remainder in tail, Remainder in Fee, enfeoff him in
the Remainder in tail, this is a Surrender of his Estate for the immediate
Estate which was in him; whereupon this Term, Judgment was given in the Kings
Bench for Fraine the Defendant, against Dillon who was Plaintiff. And it is
entered, Hill. 31 Eliz. Rot. 65.

Baynes Case.
10. AT the Sessions holden at Newgate presently after this Term the case was
this; one Baines with another came in the night time to a Tavern in London to
drink, and after they had drunk, the said Baynes stole a cup in which they
drunk in a Chamber of the same House; the Owner of the said House, his Wife,
and servants then being also in the House, and the cup being the Owners of the
said Tavern, whereupon he was indicted and committed, Burglary.
and this matter appeared in the Indictment, and agreed by Popham, Anderson,
and Periam with the Recorder and Serjants at Law then being there, that this
was not Burglary, and yet it was such a Robbery, whereby he was ousted of the
benefit of his Clergy by the Statute of 5. E. 6. Cap. 9. and was ^anged.

11. ANd at the Sessions then next ensuing (...) holden, upon one who had
stolen a silver Basin and Ewer of the then Bishop of Worcester, and the sale
made openly in the day in a Scriveners shop in London to a stranger, the
question was demanded of the Court whether the property were changed by this
Sale, so that the Bishop shall not have his Plate again, because it was
alleged that they prescribed that every one of their shops in London are good
Markets overt through all London every day in the week but Sunday; But agreed
by Popham, Egerton, Anderson, Brian, and others skillful in the Law then being
there, that such a general custom is not good, and that this Sale made there,
albeit it were openly in the shop so that every one passing by In which case
Shops in London are Markets Overt, and what not.
might see, it shall not bind the property as it shall do in Market overt; for
a Scriveners and Cutlers Shop or the like, is not proper for the Sale of I late
nor a place to which men will go to seek for such a thing lost or stole; But a
Goldsmiths Shop is the proper Shop for it, as the Drapers Shop is for Woollen
cloth, or the Mercers Shop for Silk, and the like, and to such men will go to
seek for things of the like nature that are lost or stolen, and not to a
Scriveners Shop or the like.

And they agreed also that a private Sale made in the Shops which are proper to
the nature of the thing sold, so that the Passers by cannot in reason see it in
their passage, cannot bind, for reason, (upon which the Law is founded) will
not admit any such custom.

Hillary Term, 37 Eliz. in the Kings Bench. Westby versus Skinner and Catcher.
1. IN Debt by Titus Westby Plaintiff, against Thomas Skinner and John Chatcher
late Sheriffs of London, Defendants. for 440 l. upon Nihil debet, pleaded, and
a special Verdict found, the Case appeared to be this, See this case in Coke 3.
Report fol 71. 6.
to wit, One Anthony Bustard with others, were bound in a Recognizance in the
nature of a Statute-staple of 440 l. to the Plaintiff whereupon the Plaintiff sued
Execution out of the Chancery against the said Anthony and the other that were
bound with him for the Bodies, Goods, and Lands of the said Obligers which writ
of Execution was delivered to the said Defendants the 8th day of Prisoners in
execution to be delivered over to the new Sheriff by Indenture, and all the
executions to be therein moved
September 30. Eliz. the Defendants then being Sheriffs of London and the said
Anthony being then in Newgate in Execution in the custody of the said
Defendants for 240 l. at the suit of one Robert Deighton, and that afterward,
to wit, the 20th. day of October in the same year the said Defendants were
discharged and removed from their said Offices, and Hugh Offeley, Richard
Saltonstall were then made Sheriffs of London, and that the said Anthony being
in Execution for the one and the other debt, the said Defendant the said 20th.
day of October by Indenture delivered the said Anthony to the said new
Sheriffs in Execution for the said debt of the said Robert Deighton not giving
them any no^ice of the said Execution made for the Plaintiff, and suffered the
said Anthony to go at large; And whether the Defendants shall be charged for
this escape was the question.

And the escape was alleged by the Declaration to be suffered by the said
Defendants the said 20. day of October, 30 Eliz. and it was moved by Tanfield,
that the new Sheriffs ought to take notice of their Prisoners remaining in the
Goal, at their coming into their Office, at their peril, and ought to enquire
and search for the causes that then were in custody, and not to deliver them of
their own head without due course of Law.

And he put the case, That if the old Sheriff had been dead, in the mean time
before the new Sheriffs had been made, shall this be an excuse to the new
Sheriffs that they had no notice for what cause this Anthony had been in
Prison, if they suffer him to escape? And he said that it shall not, no more
here; but per Curiam the new Sheriff shall not be charged with this Escape, as
to the 440 l. of which they had no notice; for if this case which was private
in the knowledge of the ancient Sheriff only upon a Writ directed to them at
the suite of any party, the new Sheriffs cannot by intendment have any
knowledge, unless it be given to them by the old Sheriffs, to whom the Writ of
Execution was directed and delivered.

And the case of one Dabridgecourt, who was Sheriff of Warwick, and had one in
Execution whom he kept in a private Prison by himself, for all his Executions
in the Town of Warwick; and when he was discharged of his Office, and a new
Sheriff made, Dabridgecourt said to the new Sheriff, That he had such a one in
Execution in his custody, and offered to the said Sheriff to put him in the
Indenture amongst his other Prisoners delivered to the new Sheriff, but would
h^ve had the said old Sheriff to have sent for the said new Sheriff to have
taken him into his custody, but the new Sheriff refused to receive him, unless
Dabridgecourt would deliver him into the common Gaol of the County, which was
in the Town of Warwick, whereupon afterward the Prisoner escaped; And
Dabridgecourt was charged with this Escape, and not the new Sheriff, for he is
not compellable to take the Prisoners of the delivery of the old Sheriff, but
in the common Goal of the County, and the old Sheriff remains chargeable with
the Prisoner, until he be lawfully discharged of him, and if the Sheriff dies,
the party shall be rather at a prejudice, then the new Sheriff, without cause
charged with him. And in such a case the party who sued the execution may help
himself, to wit, by the remaining of the body by a Corpus cum causa, whereby he
may be brought to be duly in execution, and this under a due Officer.

And Anderson, Periam, and other Justices were also of opinion, that the said
Skinner and Catcher are to be charged with the escape in the principal case,
whereupon Judgment was given for the Plaintiff, which was entered; Hillar. 34
Eliz. Rot. 169. in the B. R.

Fulwood versus Ward.
2. IN a Writ of Annuity brought in the Common Pleas by George Fulwood
Plaintiff against William Ward Defendant, the Case was thus. The Queen was
seized of a Barn and Tithes of Stretton, in the County of Stafford, for the
life of the Lord Paget, and being so seized, demised it by Letters Patents,
dated 21. June, 29 Eliz. to the said William Ward for 21. years, whereupon the
said Ward by Writing dated, 30. June, 29 Eliz. granted to the said Plaintiff an
Annuity or yearly Rent of 10 l. out of the said Barn and Tithes for 15. years
then next ensuing, payable yearly upon the 8. day of November, with clause of
Distress. The Lord Paget died the first day of March, 32 Eliz. and for the
Arrearages after his death, the Plaintiff brought this Writ of Annuity, and for
the difficulty thereof in the Common Pleas, the Case came this Term to be argued
before all the Justices and Barons at Serjeants-Inn in Fleetstreet, where it
was agreed by Walmsley, Fennor, and Owen, that the Annuity was gone by the
determination ^^ his Estate in the Land who made the Grant, for they said that
presently upon the Grant made as before it was a Rentcharge, for by such a
Rent granted in Fee, the Fee shall be in his Heirs, albeit the Grantee dies
before any Election made; and such a Rent is payable from the beginning at the
Land, as appears by 12 E. 4.

And by grant of Omnia, terras, tenementa, and hereditamenta, such ^ Rent will
pass, ergo, it is a Rentcharge and not an Annuity until the Election made,
and by the determination thereof in the nature of a Rent, the Election is gone,
as by Babington and Martin, 9 H. 6. by the recovery of L^nd charged with such a
Rent by elder Title, the Annuity is gone as it see^s by their opinion, and by
them and by Littleton upon a Rent-charg^ (...) with Proviso, that he shall not
charge the person of the Grantor, (...) exclude the charge of the person, which
proves that the Land is char^^^ Originally, and not the person, for otherwise
the Proviso would be void for the repugnancy; And if so, whenever the Land is
discharged, as by (...), ^^^cent, or the like, the person thereby is also
discharged, and therefore ^he Iu^gment here shall be, that the Plaintiff shall
be barred.

But by the chief Justices, chief Baron, and all the other Justices and Barons,
the Plaintiff ought to have Judgment in this case to recover the Annuity, for
the Law gives him at the beginning an Election to have it as a Rent or an
Annuity, which matter of election shall not be taken from him, but by his own
Deed and folly, as in case where he purchase part of the land charged, in which
case by his own Act he has excluded himself of his Election. But if a Feoffee
upon condition grant a Rentcharge, and presently break the Condition, whereupon
the Feoffor re-enter, shall not the Feoffee be charged by Writ of Annuity,
surely it shall be, against all reason that he by his own act, without any
folly of the Grantee, shall exclude the Grantee of his Election which the Law
gives at the beginning.

And they denied the opinion of 9 H. 6. to be Law; But if the Disseisor grant a
Rentcharge to the Disseisee out of the Land which he had by the Disseisen by
his re-entry, before the Annuity brought, the Annuity is gone; for this was his
own act, yet in effect all of them agreed, that Prima facie, it shall be taken
as a Rentcharge, of which the Wife shall be endowed, as has been said, which
pass by grant of Omnia hereditamenta, and which is payable at the Land; but
the reason is, because it is expressly granted out of the Land, and also for the
presumption of Law, that it is more beneficial for the Grantee to have it in
such a degree, then in the other. But neither the presumption of Law, nor the
express Grant thereof as a Rent, shall not take away from the Grantee the
benefit of his Election, where no default was in him, but that upon his
Election he may make it to be otherwise, as ab initio. And therefore by Popham,
If a Rentcharge be granted in tail, the Grantee may bring a Writ of Annuity,
and thereby prejudice his Issue, because that then it shall not be taken to be
an Intail, but as a Fee-simple conditional, ab initio. And if a Termer for two
years grant a Rentcharge in fee, this as to the Land is but a Rent charge for
two years, and if he avow for it upon the determination of the Term, the Rent
is gone, but by way of Annuity it remains for ever, if it be granted for him
and his Heirs, and assets descend from him who granted it.

And if a Rentcharge be granted in fee, and does not say for him and his
Heirs, if the Grantee brings his Writ of Annuity, the Heir shall never be
charged therewith, yet if he had taken it as a Rentcharge, the Land had been
charged with it in perpetuity.

And by him the cause why the Proviso that he shall not charge the person of
the Grantor upon the grant of a Rentcharge is good, is, because the person is
not expressly charged by such a Grant, but by operation of Law.

But in such a case, a Proviso that he shall not charge his Land is merely void
for the repugnancy, because there the Land is expressly charged by precised
words, and therefore if it be expressly comprised in such a Grant, that the
Grantee may charge the Land, or the person of the Grantor, at his Election;
provided then afterward that he shall charge his person, is not good, Causa
patet.

And all agreed, that upon a Rent granted upon equality of partition, or for
allowance of Dower, or for recompense of a Title, an Annuity does not lie,
because it is in satisfaction of a thing real, and therefore shall not fall to
a matter personal, but always remains of the same nature as the thing for
which it is given. And afterward the same Term Judgment was given in the
Common Bench, that the Plaintiff shall recover, which is entered, etc.

And in the same case, Clark vouched that it was reported by Benloes in his
Book of Reports; where a Rent was granted out of a Rectory by the Parson who
after wards resigned the Parsonage, that it was agreed in the Common Pleas in
his time, that yet a Writ of Annuity lies against the Grantor upon the same
Grant, to which all, who agreed on this part, agreed that it was Law.

Butler versus Baker and Delves.
3. IN Trespass brought by John Butler against Thomas Baker, and Thomas See
this case in Cooks 3. Report, for 25
Delves, for breaking his Close, parcel of the Manor of Thoby, in the County
of Essex, upon a special Verdict, the Case was thus.

William Barners the Father was seized in his Demesne as of fee, of the Manor
of Hinton in the County of Gloucester, holden of the King by Knights-service in
Capite, and being so seized, after the Marriage had between William his Son and
heir apparent, and Elizabeth the Daughter of Thomas Eden Esquire, in
consideration of the same Marriage, and for the Jointure of the said Elizabeth,
assured the said Manor of Hinton, to the use of the said William the Son, and
Elizabeth his Wife, and the Heirs of their two bodies lawfully begotten, and
died, by whose death the Reversion also of the said Manors descended to the
said William the Son, wh^rby he was seized thereof accordingly, and being so
seized, and also seized of the Manor of Thoby, in his Demesne as of Fee holden
also of the Queen by Knights-servivice in chief, and of certain Lands in
Fobbing in the said County of Essex, which Land in Fobbing with the Manor of
Hinton, were the full third part of the value of all the Land of the said
William the Son, and he made his Will in writing, whereby he devised to his said
Wife Elizabeth his said Manor of Thoby for her life, in satisfaction of all
her Jointure and Dower, upon condition, that if she take to any other Jointure,
that then the Devise to her shall be void, and after her decease he devised
that the said Manor shall remain to Thomas his Son, and the Heirs Males of his
body, and for default of such Issue, the remainder to Thomas brother of the
said William for his life, the remainder to her first, second, and third Son,
and to the Heirs Males of their bodies, and so to every other Issue Male of his
body, and for default of such Issue, the remainder to Leonard Barners his
brother, and to the Heirs Males of his body, the remainder to Richard Barners,
and the Heirs Males of his body, the remainder to the right Heirs of the
Devisor: William the Son dies, having Issue Thomas his Son, and Grisell his
Daughter, Wife to the said Thomas Baker; the said Elizabeth by Paroll in pais
moved her Estate in the said Manor of Hinton, and after this entered into the
said Manor of Thoby, after which the said Elizabeth died, and Thomas the Son,
and Thomas the Uncle died also without Issue Male, after which the said Leonard
took one Mary to Wife, and died, having Issue Anthony Barners, after which the
said Mary took the said John Butler to Husband, and after this the said Anthony
assigned to the said Mary the said Manors of Thoby, in allowance for all her
Dower, whereby the said John Butler as in the right of his Wife entered into the
said Manor of Thoby, whereby the said Thomas Delves by the commandment of the
said Baker entered into the said Close, of which the Action is brought as in
right o^ the said Grisell; And whether this entry were lawful or not, was the
question, which was argued in the Court, in the time of the late Lord Wray; and
he, and Gaudy held strongly that the entry of the said Delves was lawful, but
Clench and Fennor held always the contrary, whereupon it was adjourned into the
Exchequer Chamber.

But they all agreed, that the Waiver made by the said Elizabeth by parole in
pais, was a sufficient Waiver of her Estate in Hinton, and the rather, because
of the Statute of 27 H 8. cap. 10. the words of which are; That if the Jointure
be made after the Marriage, that then the Wife surviving her Husband may after
his death refuse to take such Jointure.

And now it was moved by Tanfield, that Judgment ought to be given for the
Plaintiff, for by the Waiver of the Wife, the Inheritance of Hinton is now to
be said wholly in the Husband ab initio, and therefore that with Fobbing being a
whole third part of the whole Land which now is to be said to be left to
descend to the Heir of the Devisor, as to Thoby; is good for the whole, and if
so then no part thereof descends to Grisell, and therefore the entry of the said
Delves in her right is wrongful.

Coke Attorney General to the contrary, for he said, That it is to no purpose
to consider what Estate the Devisor had in the Manor of Hinton, by reason of
this Waiver made by his Wife, Ex post facto after his death. But we are to see
what Estate the Devisor had in it in the view of the Law, at the time of his
death before the Waiver, and according to it the Law shall adjudge that he had
power to make his Devise by means of the Statute; and at this time none can
adjudge another Estate in him but jointly with his wife, of which Estate he had
no power to make any disposition, or to devise it, or to leave it for the third
part to his Heir, for the Statute which is an explanatory Law in this point)
says, that he ought to be sole seized in such a case. And further the Statute
of 34 H. 8. at the end, is, that the Land which descends immediately from the
Devisor shall be taken for the third part, and this Land did not descend
immediately, for it survived to the Wife until she waived it, and therefore this
Land is not to be taken for any third part, which the Statute purposed to have
been left to the Heir, and therefore so much shall be taken from Thoby as with
Fobbin shall be a third part to descend, wherb^ Grisell the Heir has good
right yet to part of Thoby, and therefore the entry of the said Delves in her
right by commandment of her husband not wronfull.

Periam chief Baron, Clench, Clark, Walmsley, and Fennor, That now by reason of
the Waiver in the Devisor shall be sole seized ab initio, for the said
Elizabeth might have had Dower thereof, if she would, as in the like case it is
adjudged in 17 E. 3. 6. and therefore a sole Seisin in the Husband, and the
descent to the Heir in such a case upon the Waiver, shall take away the entry
of him who has right to it. And therefore the case now for the Manor of Hinton
is within the very letter of the Statute, as well for the sole Seisin which was
in the Devisor, as for the immediate descent which was from the Devisor to his
Heir, and therefore remains to the Heir for a good third part of the Inheritance
of the Devisor, by the very letter of the Statute, and if the Letter had not
helped it, yet it shall be helped by the purport and intent of the Statute,
which ought to be liberally and favorably construed for the benefit of the
Subject, who before the Statute of Uses might have disposed of his whole Land
by reason of Uses by his Will, and the Statute of 27 H. 8. excludes him thereof,
and therefore the Statute of 32. and 34 H. 8. are to be liberally expounded as
to the Subject for the two parts, and the rather because it appears by the
preamble of the Statute of 32 H. 8. that it was made of the liberality of the
King, and because that by 34 H. 8. it appears that it was made, to the intent
that the Subject shall take the advantage and benefit purposed by the King in
the former Statute, by all which it appears (as they said) that the said
Statutes shall be liberally expounded for the advantage of the Subject, and for
his benefit, and not so strictly upon the letter of the Law as has been moved;
and so they concluded that Judgment ought to be given for the Plaintiff.

Popham and Anderson the two chief Justices, and all the other Justices and
Barons held the centrary, and that Judgment ought to be given against the
Plaintiff; and that by the very letter and purport of the Statutes of 32 and 34
H. 8. for they said, they are to consider what Estate the Devisor h^d ^^ the
Land at the time of his Devise made, without regard to that which might happen
by matter Ex post facto upon the Deed of another: and if it had be^n demanded
of any apprised in the Law, at the time when the Will was made, what Estate the
Devisor then had in the Manor of Hinton, (...) is so unlearned to say, that he
had other Estate in it, then jointly with his Wife: And if so, it follows that
this Manor was then out of the letter and intent of the Law, for he was not
then sole seized thereof, nor seized in coparcenary, nor in common, and by the
words he should be sole seized in Fee-simple, or seized in Fee-simple in
coparcenary, or in common: It appears that the intent of the Statute was,
that he shall have full power of himself, without the means or aid of another,
to dispose of the Land, of which he is by the Statute to make disposition, or
to leave it to his Heir, and this he has not for the Manor of Hinton here.

And further the words of 32 H. 8. are, That the Devisor has full power at his
Will and pleasure to devise two parts of his Land so holden as here, and this
is to be intended of such Land of which he then had full power to make
disposition, and this he could not then do for the Manor of Hinton.

And further the words of 34 H. 8. are that the devision for the parts shall be
made by the Devisor or Owner of the Land by his last Will in writing, or
otherwise in writing, and in default thereof by commission, etc. And can any say
with reason, that it was the intent of the Statute that he shall make the
Devision of other Lands then of those of which he then had full power to devise
or to leave to his heir without any future accident to help him, or the mean of
Anthony by matter Ex post facto; It is clear that reason cannot maintain it.
And the words following in the Act, which are, That the King shall take for his
third part the Land which descended to the Heir of the ^state tail, or of
Fee-simple immediately after the death of the Devisor; much enforce the opinion
on this side, for it cannot be said upon the death before the Waiver that this
Manor of Hinton was immediately descended, ergo, it ought not to be taken for
the third part.

And further the words are, If the Lands immediately descended upon the death of
the Devisor, etc. do not amount to a full third part, that then the King make
take into his hands so much of the other Lands of the Devisor as may make a
full third part, etc. whereby it is clear, that in this case if the wife had not
waived her Estate for ten years after the death of the Devisor, that for all
this time the Queen could not meddle with the Manor of Hinton, and therefore in
the mean while she might well have so much of the Manor of Thoby, which might
well have made a full third part to her, and for so much which she took the
Will was always void, which shall never be altered nor made good by any Waiver
Ex post facto. And although the Waiver of the Fame put the Inheritance entirely
in the Devisor, and in his Heir, in relation to diverse respects, yet as to
other respects he shall not be said in them with such relation, and especially
upon the Statute in which we now are to respect the power as it was in him at
the time of his death, before this future Contingent.

And by Popham, If the exposition on the other side shall hold place upon the
Statute, perhaps a man shall not see by the space of six years, or more, after
the death of a Devisor, how his Devise shall work: As a Feoffment in Fee is
made to I. S. and a Feme Covert, and their Heirs, of 10 l. Land holden by
Knights-service in Capite, which I. S. has 20 l. Land in fee so holden also;
I. S. makes a Devise of his 20 l. Land, the Husband lives 60. years after; none
will or can deny but that for this time the Devise is not good for two parts,
now the Husband dies, and the Wife waives the Estate made to her, this puts the
Inheritance thereof in the Heir of I. S. with relation to diverse respects, but
not to this respect to make the Will now good for the whole 20 l. Land, which
therefore was void for the third part thereof, for the Will which once was void
by matter Ex post facto, after the death of the Devisor, cannot be made good:
And by him the descent in such a case is not such that it shall take away the
entry of him who has right, because it was not an immediate descent in Deed,
but upon the operation of Law which gave Wardship and the like, but not to
prejudice any third person.

And he said, that although the Queen, or other Lord upon eviction of the Land
descended, or the determination of the Estate thereof, may resort to Lands
devised or assured, and take a third part thereof, yet thereby the Devise or
Assurance remains effectual against the Heir, but this is by a special clause
in the Statute of 34 H. 8. which gives it to them, but no such remedy is given
to the Devisee to help him if his part be abridged, or evicted: And the words
are precise, to wit, If the part left or assigned to the King, or to any Lord,
at any time during their Interest therein be evicted, etc. that they shall have
so much o^ the two parts residue, as shall make a full third part of the
remainder not evicted, etc. Whereby it appears, that this is given only for
the benefit of the Lords, and not of the Heir, nor of the Devisee; f^r if after
the Interest of the Queen, or other Lord be determined, this which was left he
evicted from the Heir, it shall not be helped against the devise, but the
Devise remains good to the Devisee against the Heir for the whole Land devised,
whereby it appears, that it was the very purport and intent of the Statute,
that the Devise remain as it was at the time of the death of the Devisor,
without having regard to that which happens Ex post facto, unless for this
point helped by this special clause of the Statute* and this is for the Lord
and his Interest only, and for no other: And by him also clearly the Statute
which is an explanatory Law shall never be taken by equity in the precise point
explained to impugn the point of explanation, as here the Statute wills that
the Estate of Inheritance comprised in the former Statute, shall be explained
to be Fee-simple, it cannot now by any equity be, as to the power to make a
Devise which is merely given by the authority of the Statute, said to be of any
other Estate then Fee-simple, of which a Devise may be made: And therefore if
Land be given to another and his Heirs for the term of another man's life, a
Devise cannot be made of this, because it is not an Inheritance in Fee-simple,
but only the limitation of a Freehold: And where the Statute says, having a
sole Estate, we cannot by any equity, that it shall be taken of any joint
Estate, as to make any disposition of that which she had in Ioynture, and
thereupon the greater part resolved that Judgment shall be given against the
Plaintiff for the Defendants.

Southwell versus Ward.
4. IN a second deliverance between Richard Southwell Esquire, Plaintiff, and
Miles Ward Avowant, by Demurrer upon the Avowry, the Case appeared to be this.

That John, Prior of the Church of Saint Faiths in Horsham in the County of
Norfolk, was seized in his Demesne as of fee, in the right of his said Priory,
of 8. Messuages. 300. acres of Land, 30. acres of Meadow, 60. acres of Pasture,
and 200. acres of Wood, with their Appurtenances in Horsham aforesaid: And so
seized, the said Prior with the assent of his Covent, by their Deed indented,
shown forth, bearing date the first day of January, 13 E. 4. and by license of
the King aforesaid, granted to William then the Master of the Hospital of St.
Giles in Norwich, and to the Brothers of the same Hospital, and to their
Successors 200. Fagots, and 200. Focalls called Astle-wood, yearly to be taken
of all the Lands and Tenements of the said Prior and Covent in Horsham
aforesaid, by the Servants of the said Prior and Covent, and their Successors*
yearly to be carried to the said Hospital, at the costs and expenses of the
said Prior and Covent, and their Successors, at the Feast of St. Michael. or 20
s. of lawful money for them at the election of the said Master and Brethren,
and their Successors, to take yearly in the same Lands and Tenements in
Horsham, to the use of the poor and infirm persons there being or coming: So
that if it happen the said Fagots and Focalls, or the said 20 ^. for them to
the said Master and Freres in form aforesaid, to be arrear in al^o: part. etc.
then they may distrain in the said Lands and Tenements, and the Distress
detain until they be fully satisfied of the said Fagots and Focals, or of the
said 20 s. for them as is aforesaid, with this Proviso further, That if at any
one or more times, the said Master and Brethren have chosen to have the Fagots
and Focals, yet at any other time they make the 20 s. for them, and although
they have taken the 20 s. for them, once, or oftener, yet at any other time they
may take the Fagots and Focals themselves, and that they may so vary t^ties
qu^ties, and d^strain for them accordingly, reasonable notice being given of
their Election, in form aforesaid.

And the said Master and Brethren granted by the same Deed to the said Prior
and Covent, and their Successors, that they or, others sufficiently warranted
by them, would give sufficient notice of their election yearly, the first
Sunday of April, in the Church of the said Hospital, to some Officer of the
said Prior and Covent, and their Successors, if they send any thither for this
cause.

By force of which Grant, the said Master and Brethren were seized of the said
yearly rent of the said 200. Fagots, and 200. Facals called Astlewood
accordingly, and so being seized, they by their sufficient Writing enrolled of
Record in the Chancery, in the first year of the late King Ed. 6. gave and
granted to the same King the said Hospital, and all the Lands Tenements and
Hereditaments of the said Hospital; To have and to hold to him, and his Heirs
and Successors for ever, whereby the said King was thereof, and of the said
annual Rent seized accordingly, and so seized the 7. day of May, in the same
year, the said King Edw. by his Letters Patents, bearing date the same day and
year, granted the said Hospital and the rent of the said Fagots, and Focals,
and other the Premises, to the Major, Sheriff, Citizens, and Commons of the
City of Norwich, and to their Successors for ever: and for 1600. Fagots, and
1600. Focals of the said annual rent of 200. Fagots, and 200. Focals, being
arrear at the Feast of S. Michael the Archangel, 23 Eliz. the said Ward took
the Distress, and made Conusance as Bailiff to the said Major, Sheriff, etc.
And it was moved that the Avowry was not good, first, because it being matter
of Election which was granted to the Master and Brethren, and their Successors,
to wit, the Fuel, or the 20 s. it does not appear that they ever made any
election of the one, or the other, and until it appears that they have made
their Election to have the one or the other, it is not to be granted over by
general words: But by the dissolution of the Hospital the grant for want of
Election before is gone and determined.

And further, whereas the King made his Grant of the Hospital, and of all the
said rent of Fagots and Focals, without making mention of 20 s. for the same,
it was moved that if it does pass to the King, yet it does not pass from him
to the Major, etc. in as much as he granted it precisely as a Fuel, whereas it
was in him as a Rent of Fuel, or of money at his Election, and therefore the
King deceived in his Grant.

And further, here he has made Conusance for the Fuel, without making mention
of their Election, to have it one way, or another before the taking; but all
the Court agreed that the Conusance was good, and that the return shall be
awarded to him who made the Conusance: first, because that this case is quite
out of the case of Election, because the rent which is granted is only out of
the Fagots and Astlewood, and the 20 s. granted is not as a distinct thing, but
granted as a recompense or satisfaction of that, because the Grant is of the
Fagots, etc. or of 20 s. for the same; so that in such a case the Seisin of the
20 s. is a good Seisin of the Fagots and Focals, and suffices to maintain an
Assise upon this Seisin for the Fuel, but not for the 20 s. as money paid for
Suit of Court is good Seisin of the Suit: And the 20 s. here is not granted in
nature of a Rent of so much, but as an allowance in satisfaction for the Fuel.

And Popham conceived, that he shall have an Action of debt for this 20 s. for
the fuel, after the Election made if he will, as for a Nomine poene, because
it is not the principal thing granted of which the Inheritance is, but a
casual Accident in recompense thereof if he will have it, or otherwise he may
distrain for it, because it is so limited to be done by the Grant it self: But
they shall never have assurance of the 20 s. as a thing of Inheritance, because
it is not the thing of which the Inheritance is granted, but only granted in
allowance and satisfaction of it, and therefore not to be resembled to the cases
where 20. quarters of Corn, or 20 s. Rent is granted to one and his Heirs, or
other such thing which stands merely in the disjunctive, to wit, to have, or
take, the one, or the other.

And therefore suppose the Prior was to carry the Fuel yearly to the Hospital
at the Feast of S. Michael, and yet then the Master and Brethren might have
refused the Fuel, and held themselves to have the 20 s. by force of the Grant,
for then originally the Election ought to have been made there: But upon the
Covenant which comes afterward on the other part, the notice ought to have
been given in April yearly before, but if it be not done, there lies but an
Action of Covenant for the not doing of it, for this will not alter the nature
of the Grant which was full and perfect in Law before. And here he needs not
make this appearance in the Conusance, that any Election was made before the
taking of the Cattle, because the Grant is of the Fuel it self, and if the
other had made Election before to have the 20 s. for the Fuel, this ought to
have been shown on the other side in Bar of the Avowry, to wit, that he brought
to them the Fuel yearly according to the Grant, and that they refused it, and
required the 20 s. every time for it, in which case for every such refusal and
Election to have the 20 s. for it, it had excluded him to have any Fuel for
this year so refused.

And by Popham also, you may see a great diversity between this case, where a
man is to deliver to another 20. Loads of Wood, or 20. Loads of Hay yearly out
of such Land, and he does not tender them for diverse years, and where a man is
to take so much Fuel, or Hay out of the Land of another, and he takes it not
for diverse years, for in the former case the party who is not satisfied shall
have all the arrears, be it never so prejudicial to the Grantor, because it
was through his own default that it was not paid, but in the other case as
appears, 27 H. 6. 10. he shall not have any remedy for the arrears for the
years past, because he took them not yearly as they were due, which shall not
turn the other party to prejudice, that he shall want Fuel, or Hay himself, by
reason of the arrears which happened through the default of him who ought to take
it, and the Judgment was given for him who made the Conusance, and it is entered
in the Kings Bench, Mich. 33. and 34. Eliz. Rot. 229.

Southwells Case.
5. AT the end of this Term, upon the proceeding against Southwell the Jesuit,
it was moved by the Attorney General to Popham chief Justice, the Master of the
Rolls, Periam chief Baron, Walmsley, and Owen Justices, and Ewens one of the
Barons of the Exchecquer upon the form of Indictments, upon the Statute of 27
Eliz. for Jesuits, etc If it need be comprehended in the Indictment of a
Jesuit, who comes into the Realm of England, or any Dominions of the Queen,
or shall be taken therein 40. days after the end of this Session of Parliament,
that if he does not submit himself within three days of his landing, if he
comes in after the 40. days according to the Proviso of the Statute, or that
he was not so infirm of his body) where he came in before the 40. days) that
he was not able to pass out of the Realm by the time prescribed at first,
because that it is comprised in the body of the Act, that it shall not be
lawful for any Jesuit, etc. being born within this Realm, or any other the
Queens Dominions, and made after the Feast of S. John Baptist, in the first
year of her Reign, or after this to be made by any authority derived, etc. from
the Sea of Rome to come, be, or remain in any part of this Realm, etc.
otherwise then in such special cases, and upon such special occasions, and
for such time only which is expressed in this Act, and if he does, that this
offense shall be adjudged high Treason etc.

And after deliberation taken, and consideration and conference amongst
themselves had, they all resolved that the better course was to omit this in
the Indictment, notwithstanding it be comprised in the body of the Act in the
same manner as if it had been only in a Proviso; in which case it is to the
Prisoner to help him by means of such a Proviso, if he can do it: for the words
(other then, etc.) are but as referring to the provision subsequent in the
Statute, in which case this matter shall be used but as the Proviso it self
shall be; and according to this it has been commonly put in practice by all
the Justices in all places after the Statute until now.

And they agreed also, that it need not be shown whether he were made a Jesuit,
or Priest, etc. either beyond Sea, or within the Realm, because whersoever it
was, it is within the Law if he were made by the pretended authority of the Sea
of Rome.

But they agreed that it ought to be comprised in the Indictment that he was
born within this Realm, or other Dominions of the Queen, but need not to show
where, but generally, Et quod I. S. natus infra hoc Regnum Angliae, etc. And
the Indictment ought to comprise that he was a Jesuit, or Priest etc. by
authority challenged or pretended from to the Sea of Rome, because that this is
in the body of the Act, without such reference as in the other point, and
according to this resolution the proceeding was against the said Southwell.

Easter Term, 37 Eliz. Pigots Case.
1. AFter the death of Valentine Pigot Esquire, a Commission was awarded in
nature, of a Mandamus, and after the death of Thomas Pigot Father of the said
Valentine, a Commission was awarded in nature of a Diem clausit extremum, and
the said Commissions were awarded to one and the same Commissioners, who by one
Inquest took but one Inquisition upon these several Commissions in this form.

Inquisitio indentata capt^ apud, etc. virtute Commiss. in natura brevis de
diem clausit extremum eisdem Commiss. direct. etc. ad inquirendum post mortem
Thomae Pigot, Ar. nuper defuncti patris predict. Valentin. per sacramentum,
etc. Qui d^cunt, etc. After which all the points of the C^mmission after the
death of the s^id Valentine are enquired of; but for the Commissions after the
death of the said Thomas Pigot, it is imperfect in some points, as who is his
Heir, etc. is not found.

And by Popham and Anderson, this Inquisition is void as to Valentine as well
as for Thomas, for their authorities which are the Commissions are by several
Warrants which cannot be simul and semel by one and the same Inquisition
executed and satisfied, but ought to be divided and several, as the Warrant is
several, and yet the same Inquest which found one Inquisition by one Warrant,
may also find another Inquisition by the other Warrant, but divided and
several, and not as one, for as it is made it does not appear upon which of
the Commissions the Inquisition as to Valentine is taken, for as it is made it
may be as well upon the one as upon the other, for it is said to be by virtue
of both the Commissions, which cannot be, and therefore is not good in any part,
and several Warrants ought to be severally execused, and therefore although the
Escheator as appears by 9 H. 7. 8. may take ^^ Inquisition Virtue officii,
and at the same day another Inquisition, Virtue brevis by one and the same
Inquest, yet this cannot be drawn into one Inquisition: And that which is found
Virtue officii contrary to that which before the same day Virtute libris, as
that it found more Land, is good for the King. And this their opinion was
certified to the Court of Wards.

Sir Rowland Haywards Case.
2. THis Case was also sent to the same chief Justices out of the Court of See
this case in Coke ^. Report 35.
Wards: Sir Rowland Hayward being seized in his Demesne as of Fee, of the
Manors of D. and A. in the County of Salop, and of other Lands in the same
County, part whereof were in Lease for years by several Indentures, rendering
certain rent, part in the possessions of several Copyholders, and part in
Demesne in possession out of Lease, by Indenture dated 2. September, 34. Eliz.
made mention that this was for, and in consideration of a certain sum of money
to him paid by Richard Warren Esquire, and others, demised, granted bargained
and sold to the said Richard Warren and the others, the said Manors, Lands,
and Tenements, and the Reversion and Remainder of them, and of every part of
them, and the Rents and Profits reserved upon any Demise thereupon for 17.
years, next ensuing the death of the said Sir Rowland, rendering a Rose at the
Feast of S. John Baptist yearly, if it be demanded, which Deed was acknowledged
to be enrolled, and afterward by another Indenture covenanted and granted for
him and his Heirs, hereafter to stand seized of the said Manors, Lands, and
Tenements, to the use of the said Sir Rowland, and of the Heirs Males of his
body, and afterward and before any Attornment to the said Richard Warren and
his Co-lessees, or any of them, the said Sir Rowland died seized of the said
Manors, Lands, and Tenements, leaving a full third part of other Lands to
descend to his Heir.

And it was moved on the Queens part, that for part, to wit, for that which was
in possession it past to the said Richard Warren, and the other by way of
Demise at Common Law, and therefore it does not pass afterward by way of
Bargain and Sale as to the Remainder, and that therefore for the Services of the
Manors, and for the Rents reserved upon the Demise, these remain to the Heir
who was in Ward to the Queen, and within age, and therefore to the Queen by
reason of the Tenure which was in Capite by Knights-service.

But by Popham and Anderson it is at the Election of the said Richard Warren
and his Co-lessees to take it by way of Demise, or by way of Bargain and Sale,
until that by some act done, or other matter, it may appear that their intent
is to take it another way, for the Use in this case may well pass without the
Inrolement of the Deed, because the Statute of 27 H. 8. of Inrolements, extends
but to where a Freehold is to pass, and the Use so passing, this shall be
executed by the Statute of 27 H. 8. of Uses, and therefore if the said Richard
Warren and his Co-lessees after the death of the said Sir Rowland Hayward,
would elect to take it by way of Bargain and Sale, they shall have all the
Reversions, Remainders, Rents, and Services, as well as the Land in possession
executed to them by the Statute of Uses: And of the same opinion were all the
Justices in Trinity Term following, upon their meeting at Serjeants-Inne for
another great cause.

Trinity Term, 37 Eliz.
1. Upon an Assembly of all the Justices and Barons of the Exchecquer at Where
a Just^ce of Peace bails one who is not bailable, he shall be sined, and albeit
he be committed but for suffici^^^ of Felony, and ha^h no notice of his offense.
Serjeants-Inne in Fleetstreet, this Term it was resolved by them, and so
agreed to be hereafter put in execution in all Circuits; That if a man taken
for Felony be examined by a Justice of Peace, it appears that the Felon is
not bailable by the Law, and yet the Justices commit him to Goal but as upon
suspicion of Felony, not making mention for any cause for which he is not
bailable, whereby he is brought before another Justice of Peace, not knowing of
any matter why he ought not to be bailed, whereupon they bail him, these
Justices ought to be fined by the Statute of 1, and 2. Phil. and Mar. for they
offend if they bail him, who by the Statute of Westminster. 1. is not bailable, and
therefore they at their peril ought so to inform themselves before the bail
taken of the matter, that they may be well satisfied that such a one is
bailable by Law,; and therefore observe well the Statute of Westminster. 1. cap. 18.
who is bailable, and who not by the Law. And it seems that no Justice of Peace
could have bailed any one for Felony before the Statute of 1 Rich. 3. cap. 3.
which is made void by 3 H. 7. cap. 3. for before this he ought to have been
bailed by the Sheriff, or other Keeper of the Prison where he was in Ward, or
by the Constable, and by no other Officer, unless Justices of the Kings Bench,
Justices in Air, or Justices of Jail-delivery.

Herbin versus Chard, and others.
2. IN Trespass by William Herbin Plaintiff, against Chard and others
Defendants, for a Trespass made at Pynon Farm in Netherbury and Loder, in the
County of Dorset, the Case upon the Demurrer appeared to be this.

The Lord Mordant was seized of the Farm, in his Demesne as of Fee, and so
seized, demised it to Philip Fernam, Elizabeth his wife, and John Fernam the
eldest Son of the said Philip, for term of their lives, and of the Survivor of
them, and the said Eliz. died, after which the said Philip his Father demised
his part of the Farm by his Deed indented, dated 13. Mart. 32. Eliz. to Philip
his Son, and Toby Fernam his Son, for eighty years, immediately after the death
of the said Philip the Father, if the said John Fernam shall so long live, with
diverse remainders over for years, depending upon the life of the said John,
after which the said Philip the Father died, and John survived him, and demised
the said Farm to the Plaintiff, upon whom the Defendants entered in right of the
said Philip and Toby, and whether their entry were congeable, was the question:
And it was moved by Goodridge of the Middle Temple, that the entry of the
Defendant was not lawful, because the said John was now in by the Lessor, and
not by his joint Companion.

And further, he had no power to dispose thereof beyond his own life; for
suppose that he makes a Lease thereof for years, and afterward grant over his
Estate to a stranger, and dies, the Lease for years is thereby determined,
albeit his joint Companion be yet living, and that his Estate continues.

And yet he agreed, that if had made a Lease for years, to begin at a day to
come, as at Michaelmas following, or the like, that this had been good, for it
is an Interest in the Grantee to be granted over for the presumption, that it
might be executed in his life; but in the other case there is not any
possibility, that he who has not but for his life, can demise it to begin
after the Estate made to him is determined.

But on the other part, it was moved that the Demise remains in force for the
life of the said John, for at the first every one had an interest for the life
of the other also, and therefore if one Ioynt-tenant for life make a Lease for
years in possession, and dies, the Lease yet continues.

And Crook the younger alleged, that it was adjudged at last Hartf. Term, If a
man possessed of a Term for years in right of his Wife, makes a Lease for years
of the same Lands to begin after his death, and dies during the Term, without
other alteration of it, and the Wife survives him, that now the Lease made by
the Husband, is good, and that the like case as this, by the opinion of Clench
and Walmsley was decreed to be good in the Chancery.

Arton versus Hare
3. IN a second deliverance between Francis Arton Plaintiff, and Henry Hare
Avowant, the case appeared to be this.

William Cocksey Esquire, was seized in his Demesne as of Fee, of the Manor of
Wolverton in the County of Worcester, and so seized in Octab. Mich. 7 Eliz.
levied a Fine of the said Manor to certain persons, to the use of the said
William and Alice his Wife, and the Heirs of William, until a marriage had
between Martin Croft, and Anne Wigstone, and after this marriage to the use of
the said William and Alice his Wife, and the Heirs of the body of the said
William, and for defualt of such Issue, to the use of the said Martin Crofts
and Anne, and the Heirs Males of the body of the said Martin upon the body of
the said Anne begotten, until the said Martin should go about to alien, sell,
grant, or give the said Manor, or any parcel thereof, or to suffer any
Recovery, or levy any Fine thereof, or make any discontinuance, etc. And after
the Estate of the said Martin and Anne, and of the Heirs Males of their bodies
to the Premises, by any such attempts determined and finished, then to the use
of the said Anne for her life, and after, to the use of the Heirs Males of the
body of the said Martin upon the body of the said Anne lawfully begotten, and
for default of such Issue, to the use of the Heirs of the body of the said
Martin, and for default of such Issue, to the use of Giles Croft brother of the
said Martin, and the Heirs Males of his body, until, etc. as before, and after
to the use of the Heirs of the body of the said Giles, and for default of such
Issue, to the use of Edmund Crofts, the third brother of the said Martin, and
of the Heirs Males of his body, as is before limited to the said Giles, with
remainders over, afterward the marriage was had between the said Martin and
Alice, after which the said Martin and Giles died without Issue, without any
thing done by the said Martin to determine his Estate, or by the said Giles to
determine his Estate, if any had been.

And it was agreed by all the Court, that as this case is, no remainder can
enure over to the said Giles, without an attempt precedent by the said Martin
to determine his Estate, because the Estate of Giles is not limited to begin
but upon such an attempt precedent.

And in the same manner Edmund shall have nothing until the Estate of Giles
determine by some attempt made by him, if the said Giles had an Estate, because
the Estate of Edmund depends upon the attempt made by Giles precedent to it,
which not being done, the Estate of Edmund never happened to be; and therefore he
who comes in under a Discontinuance made by the said William Cocksey, after
the death of Martin and Giles without Issue, notwithstanding the Remitter of
the said Alice in the case, is to have the Land against those who come in by
the said Edmund, and upon this point only Judgment was given accordingly in the
Kings Bench.

Grenningham versus the Executors of Heydon.
4. IN Debt upon an Obligation of 200. marks by Richard Grenningham Plaintiff,
against the Executors of one Ralph Heydon Defendants, the case appeared to be
this upon Demurrer.

The said Heydon was bound to the Plaintiff in 200. marks, the Condition whereof
recites, that whereas the said Heydon had received of the said Grenningham 76 l.
6 s 8 d. before the date of the said Obligation of 200. marks in payment and
satisfaction of certain Obligations and Bills of debt, remaining in the hands
of the said Heydon, and specified in the Condition what they were in certain,
and the which said Bills and Obligations the said Heydon is to deliver, or
cause to be delivered to the said Grenningham, his heirs or assigns, before the
Feast of S. Michael, next ensuing the date of the said Obligation, or otherwise
the said Heydon, his Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, or some of them
before the same Feast, shall make, or cause to be made and delivered to the
said Plaintiff, his Heirs and Assigns, such good and sufficient Acquittances
for the payment of the said sums of money formerly mentioned, as the said
Plaintiff, his Heirs, Executors, or Assigns, shall devise, or cause to be
devised by the Counsel of the said Plaintiff, his Heirs or Assigns, before the
Feast, without fraud or deceit, that then the said Obligation shall be void,
etc.

And before the Feast the said Plaintiff did not devise any acquittance;
Whether now the Obligation be saved by the Disjunctive, without delivering the
Obligations, and Bills before named, before the Feast of S. Michael: Rot. 36,
and 37.

Eton and Monney versus Laughter.
5. IN Debt upon an Obligation of 400 l. by Thomas Eton, and Roger See this
Case Coke lib. 5. 21. by the name of Laughters case.
Monney Plaintiff, against Thomas Laughter Defendant, who was bound together
with one Richard Rainford to the said Plaintiffs, the Condition of which
Odligation was,

That if the said Richard Rainford after marriage had between him and Jane
Gilman Widow, together with the said Jane, alienate in Fee, or Fee-tail, all
that great Message of the said Jane in London, in the Tenure of William Fitz
Williams Esquire, if then the said Richard Rainford in his life time purchase
to the said Jane, her Heirs and Assigns, Lands and Tenements, of good Right and
Title, and of as good value as the money raised upon the alienanation of the
said Message amounts unto, or leave to the said Jane after his decease, as
Executrix, or by Legacy, or other good assurance, so much money as he shall
receive or have upon the said Sale, that then the Obligation shall be void,
after which the said Richard Rainford married with the said Jane, and the said
Richard and Jane sold the said Message in Fee by Fine, for 320 l. received by
the said Richard Rainford, after which the said Jane died, no Lands being
purchased to the said Jane by the said Richard, and the said Richard yet living.

Michaelmas Term, 37, and 38. Eliz. Sawyer versus Hardy.
1. IN an Ejectione firmae, by Christopher Sawyer Plaintiff, against Edmund
Hardy Defendant, for a Message in S. Martins, upon a Demurrer, the case was
this.

A Lease was made of the said Message to one Margaret Sawyer for 40. years,
upon Condition, that if the said Margaret should so long continue a Widow, she
should dwell and stay in the same Message, the said Margaret continued a
Widow, and dwelt in the same house all her life, and died during the said Term
of 40. years, making the Plaintiff her Executor, and by award the Plaintiff had
Judgment to recover: For by Popham, Gaudy, and Clench, this now was no
Condition nor Limitation, for it has no certain conclusion upon the (that if)
to wit, that then the Term shall continue, or that she shall pay so much, or
otherwise what the conclusion shall be, none can imagine: As if such a Lease be
made upon condition, that if the Lessee does such a thing without other
conclusion, it is a good Lease for 40. years, for none can imagine what the
conclusion shall be in such a case, or that then the Lease shall be void, or
that he shall re-enter, or that the Lessee shall forfeit so much, or what shall
happen upon it, for which incertainty it shall be taken as a void Clause.

But by Popham, if it had been Sub condition si tamdiu vixerit, it had been
good to determine the Lease, but it is otherwise of the word (quod si) for the
incertainty as before.

And they all agreed, that if the Lease had been for 40. years Si tamdiu sols
viveret and inhabitaret in eodem Messuagio, that the Lease had been determined
by her marriage, or death. In the same manner, as if it had been Si tam diu
vixerit. And so in truth had been the case if it had been well pleaded, but by
pleading the advantage thereof was lost, and the truth not disclosed.

But by Popham, If a Lease be made for 40. years, if he shall dwell in the same
for his life, there it is good for 40. years, upon performance of the
Condition, the diversity appears, to wit, where it is, if he shall dwell
there during the Term, and where it is, if he shall inhabit there during his
life.

Goodale versus Wyat.
2. IN an Ejectione firmae by Cuthbert Goodale Plaintiff, against John Wyat See
this Case Coke lib. 5. fol. 95, 96. by the name of Goodales case.
Defendant, for a Meadow in Aylesbury, in the County of Buck. called
Diggelmore, upon a special Verdict the case was this.

Sir John Packington Knight, enfeoffed thereof one Ralph Woodliff, to have and
to hold to him and his Heirs, upon condition, that if the said Sir John within
a year after the death of the said Ralph, pay to the Heirs, Executors, or
Administrators of the said Ralph, the sum of a 100. marks of lawful money,
that then the said Feoffment and Seisin made thereupon shall be void; Ralph
Woodliff made a Feoment over to others thereof, and died intestate, and
Administration was committed to Anne his Wife, and Drew Woodliff his Son and
Heir, who gave a Warrant of Attorney to Thomas Goodale then seized of the said
Meadow by mean conveyances, for the receipt of the said 100. marks, with
Covenant that none of them shall do any act, or thing that shall be
pre^udiciall or hurtful to the said Thomas Goodale, for the receiving and
enjoying of the said sum, after which it was certified to the said Sir John
Packington by the said Goodale that this Warrant was made to him: After which
it was agreed between the said Sir Ioh Packington and Drew Woodale, that the
said Tho. Drew shall have but 32 l. of the said 100. marks, whereupon the said
Sir John Packington within a year after the death of the said Ralph Woodliff
paid to the said Drew Woodliff the 100. marks, and presently the said Drew
delivered to the said Sir John all the 100. marks but 32 l. And the Verdict
stands upon this point, whether the 100. marks were well paid, or not.

And by Popham and Gaudy this was merely a fraud which shall never prejudice a
third person, for if it be agreed between the Disseisee and I. S. that a
stranger shall disseise the Tenant of the Land, and enfeoff the said I. S. to
the intent that the Disseisee shall recover against him, this Recovery shall
bind the said I. S. but not him who was disseised, and yet he who recovered had
a good Title, and paramount the other, but he shall not come to that to which
he had good cause of Action and Title by fraudulent means, to the prejudice of
a third person, not party to this fraud.

And it was said further, that to pay money, and take it away again presently
before that it is pursed up by re-delivery, is not properly a payment, but
rather a color of payment.

And by Fennor and Popham, the force of a Deed of Feoffment once effectual,
cannot become void or of no effect, nor the Livery thereupon by such manner of
words. And it is not like a Bargain of Goods, or an Obligation, or a Lease for
years, which by such words may be dissolved and made to be of no force or
effect, because that as by the sealing a bare Contract, it may be made perfect
and effectual without other circumstances, so may it be defeated by such bare
means without other circumstance: But so it is not in case of an Inheritance or
Freehold, which cannot be effectual by the bare delivery of a Deed, unless
that Livery be made thereupon.

And all agreed, that as this case is, notwithstanding the Feoffment made over
by the Father, the money might have been paid to the Heir to perform the
Condition, if they had been duly paid, and without Covin, and that the words
had been apt to have defeated the Estate.

But by Popham and Clench, If a Feoffment be made to one upon condition In
which case a Condition shall be performed to an Assignee, and not to the Heir.
of payment of money to the Feoffee, his Heirs or Assigns and the Feoffee
makes a Feoffment over, and dies, the money ought to be paid to the Feoffee who
is the Assignee, and not to the Heir, for there (Heir) is not named but in
respect of the Inheritance which might be in him, but here he is named as a
mere stranger to it.

Bartons Case.
3. IN a Writ of Error sued in the Kings Bench by Randall Barton, upon a Fine
levied at Lancaster, 7 Eliz. of Land in Smithall, and else where in the County
of Lancaster, by Robert Barton Esquire, to Leven and Browndo, where this Writ
was brought by the said Randall as Heir in tail to the said Robert, to wit, Son
of Ralph, Brother of the said Robert. The Defendant plead a Recovery in Bar
thereof had after the Fine, in which the said Robert was vouched, who vouched
over the common Vouchee: And by all the Court this common Recovery with such
double Voucher (which is the common assurance of Lands) is a Bar by reason of
the Voucher, to every manner of right which the Vouchee, or his Heir by means
of him is to have to this land, which is paramount the Recovery. And so it is
of every manner of way whereby they are otherwise to come to the Land before the
Recovery. And if the recovery be erroneous, it remains a good Bar until it be
avoided by error. But if the Recovery be void, or the Voucher not warranted to
be, pursuing the appearance of the Tenant, but precedent to it, as was
pretended, and so no Tenant to warrant the Voucher when the Voucher was made,
the Recovery shall be no bar in such a case; and the case here was informed to
be this, for the Writ of Entry bears date 1. Mart. 7 Eliz. returnable Die Lunae
in 4. septimana quadragessimae propter futur. and the Voucher was made in 4.
septimana quadragessimae, 7 Eliz. the said first day of March, being the first
week of this Lent, 7 Eliz. And upon this it was inferred that the Tenant was
not to appear until Monday in the fourth week of Lent, 8 Eliz. which is a long
time after that the Voucher appeared and vouched over.

But by the whole Court the Original Writ shall be taken as it is written, to
be returnable on Monday, in the fourth week of the same Lent, 7 Eliz. for it
shall be taken as it is written shortly, most beneficially that it can be to
make the Recovery good. And if it had been written Prox^me, it should refer to
the week before, and so good. And if the word (Futur.) had been written at
large (Futura) it also shall refer to Septimana, and therefore being written
briefly it shall refer as it may best do to make the Recovery good. But if it
had been in Quarta septimana proximae quadragessimae at large, then the word
Proxime shall refer to Quadragessimae because of the case: But if it had been
Proxima it shall refer to Septimana, because also of the case; But here as the
case is, it shall be a good reference to make the words Tunc proxima futur. to
show what fourth week of Lent, to wit, that next ensuing the first day of
March. As if a man be bound by Obligation, bearing date the first day of March,
to pay the 10. day of March then next ensuing, this shall be taken the 10. day
of this March, because this is next ensuing the first day.

Paramor versus Verrald.
4. IN Trespass of Assault and false Imprisonment, by Robert Paramor against
John Verrold, and others, supposed to be done at such a Parish and Ward in
London, the 20. day of May, 35 Eliz The Defendants justify by reason of an
Erecution upon a Recovery in the Court of Sandwich, within the Cinque Ports,
Debt, and traverse Absque hoc, in that they were guilty in London, etc. The
Plaintiff reply and maintain the Assault and Imprisonment, as it is said, and
traverses Absque hoc quod habetur aliquod tale Recordum loque^ae prout, the
Defendants have alleged, Et hoc paratus est verificare per Recordum illud, and
upon this the Defendants demurred in Judgment: And per Curiam the Defendants
plea Prima f^cie was good, because it was a special manner of Justification,
which cannot be pleaded and alleged to be in any other place then where it was
done, in the same manner as if they had justified by force of a Capias directed
to the Sheriff of another County, then where the occasion brought, or by
Warrant of a Justice of Peace of another County, for matter of the Peace, and
the like, which are not like to the case of Partridge, who was be^ten in the
County of Gloucester by Sir Henry Pole, for which he brought his Action in
London: And Sir Hen. Pole would have justified by Assault of the Plaintiff in
the County of Gloucester, with a tr^verse that he was not guilty in London: But
it was then ruled in this Court, that he could not do it to oust the Plaintiff
to sue in London, but in such a case he might have alleged that the Assault
was done in London, because it was also a thing transitory, of which they shall
take notice there, and so help himself if the matter had been true.

But in the case at the Bar, if the special matter alleged in the foreign
County be false, as here, the Plaintiff may maintain his Action and traverse
the special matter alleged by the Defendant: And so a traverse in such a case
may be upon a Traverse when falsity is used, to oust the Plaintiff of that
benefit which the Law gives him.

Hillary Term, 38 Eliz. Wood versus Matthews.
1. IN a writ of Error brought by Owen Wood, against Griffeth Matthews, upon a
judgment given in the common Pleas, the case was briefly thus. The Issue in the
Common Pleas was, whether one were taken by a Cap. ad satisfaciendum, or not,
and upon the trial thereof at the Nisi prius, the Jury found for the Plaintiff
in this Action, to wit, that the party was not taken by the said Capias, and
upon the back of the Pannell entered dicunt per Quer. but on the back of the
Postea the Clark of the Assizes certified the Pannell thus, to wit, That the
Jury say, that no Capias was awarded, which was otherwise then was put in
Issue, or found by the Jury; and the Roll of the Record was according to the
Postea, and upon this Judgment given for the said Matthew then Plaintiff, upon
which (amongst other Errors) this variance between the Issue and Verdict was
assigned for Error, and after deliberation had upon this point, and this matter
alleged by the Defendant in the Writ of Error, and certified out of the Common
Pleas, the Court awarded as to this point that the Record sent up out of the
Common Pleas by the Writ of Error, shall be amended, according to that which
was endorsed on the back of the Pannell, for the endorsement upon the Pannell
is the Warrant for the certifying of the Postea, and so this Warrant over to
him that makes the Entry in the Roll: And therefore whereas it was alleged that
the Postea was amended in the Common Pleas aft^r the Record removed, it was
holden to be well done there; for although the Record were removed by the Writ
of Error, yet the Nisi prius, the Postea, and the like remain still there, as
it is of the Warrant of Attorney, and the like: And if the Postea had not been
amended there, but sent up with that which was endorsed upon the Panel, all
shall be amended here according to that which was indorsed upon the Panel, and
according to this there was a Presid^nt shown Tr. 35. H. 8. between Whitfeild
and Wright, where the Issue was, whether a quantity of Grain were delivered
between two Feasts, and endorsed upon the Panel (Dicunt pro quaer.) and yet
the Postea certified (and the Rolls also made) that the delivery was made ad
festa, and upon this matter alleged in Banco Regis, and the Error in this
point assigned and certified out of the Common Pleas, the Record removed by the
Writ of Error was by award of the Court amended, and the word (Ad) razed out,
and the word (Inter) written in lieu of it, according as it appears it ought
to have been by the Note upon the back of the Panel. And the like amendment
was made lately in the Checquer Chamber, upon Error brought there upon a
Judgment given in Banco Regis, where the Iudorsment upon the back of the Writ
was (pro Quer.) and the Postea and Roll was, that the Plaintiff was guilty, and
there amended the last Term.

Slanings Case.
2. NIcholas Slaning of Bickley was seized in his Demesne as of Fee, of the
Manor of Bickley, and of a Mill in Walkhampton, in the County of Devon, called
a blowing Mill, and of another Mill there called a knocking Mill, and of an
acre of Land there also, and of diverse other Manors and Lands in the said
County of Devon, the said Mills and acres of Land in Walkhampton, then being in
the possession of one Peterfeild, and Atwill, of an Estate for diverse years
then to come, and being so seized, he with Margaret his Wife levied a Fine of
the said Manor of Bickley, and of other Lands, omitting the said Lands in
Walkhampton, to certain C^nuzees, who rendered the same back again to the said
Margaret Slaning for her life, with the remainder over to the said Nicholas,
and his Heirs: After which the said Nicholas by Indenture daied 30. October. 21
Eliz. gave and enfeoffed all the said Manors and Premises to John Fits and
others, and the Heirs of the said Fits, to the Uses, Provisoes* and Limitations
mentioned in the said Indenture, which was to the use of himself, and the Heirs
Males of his body, by any other Wife, the remainder to Nicholas Slaning of
Newton Ferries, and the Heirs Males of his body, with diverse remainders over,
with this Proviso, to wit, Provided, and it is the intent of these presents,
and of the parties thereunto, that the said John Slaning, and the Heirs Males of
his body, or the said Nicholas Slaning of Newton-ferries, and the Heirs Males
of his body, in whomsoever of them the Inheritance in tail of all the Premises
shall happen to be by force of these presents, shall pay to Agnes the Daughter
of the said Nicholas Slaning of Bickly, 200 l. or so much thereof as shall be
unpaid at the time of the death of her said Father, according to the intent of
his last Will, with a Letter of Attorney to it, by which he ordains John Heart
and Robert Fort, jointly and severally his Attorney to enter into the said
Manor of Bickley, Walkhampton, etc. and all other the Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments, in the said Indenture mentioned, and possession for him to take,
and after such possossion taken for him and in his name, to deliver full
possession and seisin of the Premises to the said John Fits, etc. according to
the form and effect of the said Indenture, whereupon possession and seisin was
given of all but that which was in possession of the said Peterfield and
Atwill: And the said Pererfield and Atwill, nor either of them never attorned
to the said Grant: After which Nicholas Slaning of Bickly made his last Will,
by which devised to the said Agnes his Daughter 200 l. to be paid in form
following, and not otherwise, to wit, 100 l. thereof, in th^se words, On that
day twelvemonth next after the day of his death, and the other 100 l. that day
twelvemonth next after, etc. and made the said John Slaning his Executor, and
afterward, to wit, the 8. day of April, 25 Eliz, died without Issue Male of
his body, the said Agnes took to Husband one Edmund Marley, and upon the 8. day
of April, 26 Eliz. the said John Slaning paid the first 100 l. to Agnes then
being living, and upon the 8. and 9. days of April, 27 Eliz. Nicholas Slaning
of Plumpton, Son and Heir of the said John Slaning, who died (in the mean time)
an hour before the Sun set, and until the S^n was set, came to the House where
the said Edmund and his Wife inhabited in London, and tendered the last 100 l.
and that neither the said Edmund nor Agnes his Wife were there to receive it,
but that the said Edmund voluntarily absented himself, because he would not
receiv^ the 100 l. and that thereupon the Wife of the said Edmund died, having
Issu^ two Daughters, the Lands being holden by Knights-service in Capite, and
the said Daughters being yet within age, and all this being found by Office, by
the opinions and resolutions of Popham and Anderson, and the rest of the
Council of the Court of Wards, the said Heirs now in Ward shall have nothing
but that which does not pass by the conveyance to John Fits and his joint
Feoffees, which was only that which was in the possessions of Peterfield and
Atwill, and that the Livery was good of the rest, albeit the Attorney did
nothing of that which was in Lease, notwithstanding the words of the Warrant,
that they should enter into all, and then shall make the Livery.

And they agreed, that the Condition does not ^ind neither the said John
Slaning nor Nicholas his Son, because they had not all the Land according to
the purport of the Condition, which was, that he who had all thereof should pay
the 200 l. whereas here that which was in the possession of Peterfeild and
Atwill did not pass to them for want of Attornment, for a Condition ought to
be taken strictly.

And further the payment was referred by the Indenture to be according to the
Will, or by the Will, and the 200 l. was devised as a Legacy, which ought to be
paid but upon demand, and not at the peril of the Executor, and therefore the
nature of the payment of it is altered by the intent of the Will, and being not
demanded, there is no default in the said Nicholas Slaning of Plumpton, to
prejudice him of his Land, if it had been a Condition, for then it shall be but
a Condition to be paid according to the nature of a Legacy upon demand, and not
at the peril of the party. And whether the word twelvemonth shall be taken for
a year, or twelve months, according to 28. days to the month, as it shall be
of eight or twelve months, or the like. And they agreed that in this case it
shall be taken for the whole year, according to the common and usual speech
amongst men in such a case, and according to this opinion Wray (who is dead.)

Anderson and Gaudy made their Certificate to the late Chancellor Sir
Christopher Hatton, in the same case then being in the Chancery, and a Decree
was made accordingly.

And many were of opinion, that by his absence, by such fraud he shall not take
advantage of the Condition, being a thing done on purpose, if it had been to be
performed at his peril.

Kellies Case.
WIlliam Kelly and Thomasine his Wife, were seized of certain Lands in S. Eth,
in the County of Cornwall, called Karkian, to them and to the Heirs of their
two bodies between them lawfully begotten, by the Gift of one William Dowmand
Father of the said Thomasine, 11 H. 8. a long time after which Gift, to wit 25
H. 8. A Fine Sur conusance de droit come ceo que il ad per, was levied by Peter
Dowmand, Son and Heir of the said William Dowmand to William Kelley of the
Manor of Dowmand, and of a 100. acres of Land, 300 acres of Meadow, 300. acres
of Pasture, and a 1000. acres of Furzse and Heath in Dowmand, S. Eth. Trevile,
and diverse other Towns named in the Fine, who rendered the same back again to
the said Peter in tail, with diverse Remainders over, and this Fine was with
proclamations according to the Statute, after which the possession of Karkian
continued with Kelly and his Heirs, according to the first Intail; and the
Manor of Dowmand, and the Remainder of the Lands in these Towns, which were to
the said Peter Dowmand to him and his Heirs according to the render, until
nine years past, that by Nisi prius in the Country upon the opinion of Manwood
late chief Baron, the Land called Karkian, was recovered against the Heir of
the said William Kelly, by virtue of the said Fine and Render, because all the
Land which the said Peter Dowmand, and the said William Kelly also had in all
these Towns named in the Fine, were not sufficient to supply the Contents of
acres comprised in the said Fine: And what the Law was in this case, was
referred to the chief Justices, the Master of the Rolls, Egerton, and the now
chief Baron ^ut of the Chancery, who all agreed upon all this matter appearing,
that nothing shall be said to be rendered but that which indeed was given by the
Fine, and Karkian does not pass to the said William Kelly by the Fine, for as
to it the Fine is but as a release of Peter to him, and therefore shall not be
said to be rendered to the said Peter by the Fine, where no matter appears,
whereby it may appear that it was the intent of the parties that this shall be
rendered. And therefore Popham said, that by so many Fines which have been levied
in such a manner, and to such who have Land in the same Towns where the
Conusance has been (considering that always more Land is comprised in Fines
by number of acres, then men have, or is intended to pass) by them at some
time, or in some age, it would have come in question if the Law had been taken
as Manwood took it, but in all such cases the Possession has always gone
otherwise, which shows how the Law has been always taken in such cases.

And therefore if a man be to pass his Manor of D. to another by Fine
Executory, and he levy the Fine to him by the name of the Manor of D. and of
so many acres of Land in D. and S. being the Towns in which the Manor lies,
after which the Conuzor purchases other Lands in these Towns, the Fine before
the Statute of Uses shall not be executed of these Lands purchased after the
Conusance, and the Fine shall work to these which he had power and intent to
pass, and no further.

And it seemed to them, that an Use may be averred without Deed upon a Fine sur
Render. And all agreed that if there had been a Deed to have declared the
purport of the Fine, that the Fine shall not be taken to extend further then is
comprised in the Deed. And what is the cause thereof, the Deed or the intent of
the parties? and none can say but that it is the intent of the parties, and not
the Deed, and the intent may as well appear without the Deed, as with it,
albeit it be not so conclusive by Parole as by Deed.

And therefore suppose I have 100. acres of Land in a Close in D. and I. S. has
another 100. acres in the same Close and Town, and I. S. has a 100. acres of
Land in the same Town out of this Close, and my intent is to levy a Fine to I.
S. of the whole Close by the name of 200. acres of Land, with a Render as
before, and I levy it accordingly, shall the Render enure to the Land, which I.
S. had in the same Town? It is clear that it shall not, although it be without
Deed: why then shall the Fine here be taken to work rather to the Land called
Karkian, then to any other Lands which any other had in the same Towns, when it
appears plainly, that it never was the intent of the parties; that the Fine
should extend to these Lands called Karkian, and it was decreed in Chancery
accordingly.

Hall versus Arrowsmith.
4. IN the case between Hall and Arrowsmith, it was agreed by the whole Court
in the Kings Bench, That if a Copyholder for life has license to make a Lease
for three years, if he shall live so long, and he makes a Lease for three years
without such a Limitation, that yet this is no forfeiture of his Estate,
because the operation of Law makes such a Limitation to the Estate which he
made, to wit, that it shall not continue but for his life, and then such an
express Limitation in the case where the Law it self makes it is but a mere
trifle; and yet if a Lessee for life makes a Lease for years, and he in the
Reversion confirm it, it remains good after the death of the Tenant for life,
but this then shall be as if it had been made by him in the Reversion himself,
and shall be his Lease: But if the Lease there had been made determin^ble upon
the life of Tenant for life, the confirmation thereof by him in the Reversion
will not help him after the death of him who was Tenant for life, Causa patet.

But in the principal case, if the Copyholder had had an Estate in Fee by
Copy, it had been a forfeiture of his Estate to make an absolute Lease, because
in that case he does more then he was licensed to do.

And they agreed that such a license cannot be made to be void by a Condition
subsequent to the execution thereof, to undo that which was once well executed.
But there may be a Condition precedent united to it, because in such a case it
is no license until the Condition performed; but the license before mentioned
is not a condition all License, but a License with a Limitation, and therefore
has not been of force, if the Limitation which the Law makes in this case had
not been, and the Limitation in Law shall be preferred before the Limitation in
Deed, where they work to one and the same effect, and not different.

Arthur Johnsons Case.
5. ARthur Johnson was possessed of a Term for years, and so possessed,
assigned this over to Robert Waterhouse, and John Waterhouse, being Brothers to
the Wife of the said Johnson, to the use of the said Wife; the said Johnson
dies, and makes his Wife his Executrix, after which the said Wife takes Robert
Witham to Husband, who takes the Profits of the Land during the life of his
said Wife, the Wife dies Intestate, her said Brothers being next of kin to the
said Wife, took administration as well of the Goods of the said Wife, as of her
first Husband. And whether the said Waterhouses, or the said Witham shall have
this Lease, or the use thereof, was the question in the Chancery, and thereupon
put to the two chief Justices, upon which they and the chief Baron, and all the
other Justices of Serjeants-Inne in Fleetstreet, and Beamont also were clear in
opinion, that the said Administrators had now as well the Interest as the Use
also of the said Term, as well in Conscience as in Law, and that they had the
use as Administrators to the said Wife, and that the said Witham shall not have
it, because it is as a thing in Action, which the Administrators of the Wife
always shall have and not the Husband. As if an Obligation had been made to
the use of the Wife: And this opinion was certified accordingly to the Lord
Keeper of the great Seal of England, and it was so decreed.

Taunton versus Barrey.
6. IN an Ejectione firmae brought by Giles Taunton Plaintiff, in the King
Bench, against Giles Barrey Defendant, the Case was thus.

John Coals Esquire, made a Lease of the Lands in question to the Father of the
said Barrey, for diverse years, depending upon the life of the Lessee, and of
the said Defendant, and of the Survivor of them, upon condition that the said
Father should not alien without the consent of the said Coals and his heirs,
after which the said Father devised the Term to the said Defendant and died,
making his Executor, who assented; And the question upon this point found upon
a special Verdict, was, whether upon the matter the Condition were broken; and
by the opinion of the whole Court adjudged that it was, for in such a case he
ought to have left it to his Executor, without making any Devise of it, for the
Devise is an Alienation against him, and therefore it was agreed that the
Plaintiff shall recover Term, 37 Eliz. Rot. between Roper and Roper.

Michaelmas Term, 38, and 39. Eliz. Everets Case.
1. THis Case was moved by the chief Justice to the other chief Justices at
Serjeants-Inne in Fleetstreet, concerning one Everet, who before was attaint
for stealing of a Horse, and reprieved after Judgment, and Indicted again for
stealing another Horse before this Attainder: And the Vicar of Pelton, in the
County of Somerset was Indicted as accessory before this Felony, for the
procurement of it; And Everet being again Indicted upon this last Indictment,
did not plead that he was formerly Indicted of another Felony, etc. but
acknowledged the Indictment whereby the Accessory was Arrained, tried, and found
guilty, and had his Judgment also as the principal, but the Execution of the
Accessory was respited: And now moved whether upon this matter it shall be fit
to execute the Accessory, the principal being executed.

And it seemed convenient to all the Justices and Barons that he shall be
executed, and that the matter was clear in this case, because the principal
did not take advantage of his first Attainder by way of Plea, but acknowledged
the Deed, in which case the Accessory may well be Arraigned: But if the
principal had pleaded his former Attainder, whether now he shall be put to
answer for the benefit of the Queen, having regard to this Accessory, who
otherwise shall go quit, because there was not any principal, but he who was
formerly attainted.

And it seemed to Popham and some others, that it shall be in the same manner,
as if the same person so formerly attainted should be tried now for Treason,
made before his Attainder, as appears by 1 H. 6. 5. because it is for the
advantage of the King in his Escheat of the Land: and notwithstanding, that it
is moved by Stamford in his Pleas of the Crown, it seemed to Popham that there
was no diversity where the Treason was made before the Felony of which he is
attainted, and where after and before the Attainder; And by the same reason
that he shall be again tried for the benefit of the King in this case because
of the Escheat, by the same reason in this case here, because of the forfeiture
which accrueth to the Queen by the Attainder of the accessory, and for the
Justice which is to be done to a third person, who otherwise by this means
shall escape unpunished.

But he agreed, that the party Attaint shall not be again Arraigned for any
other Felony done before the Attainder, in case where no Accessory was touched
before the Statute of 8 Eliz. cap. 4. he who is convict of Felony, and has his
Clergy after his purgation made, shall be Arraigned for another Felony done
before the conviction, if it be such for which he cannot have his Clergy, and
was not convicted or acquitted of the same Felony before the Attainder: But
upon this Statute it appears, that he who shall have his Clergy in such
manner, shall not be drawn in question for any other Felony done before his
Attainder, for which he might have his Clergy.

And of this opinion (as Clark and others of the Justices said) were all the
Justices in the time of Wray. And as to the Statute of 18 Eliz. cap 7. It is
not to be understood but that he who has his Clergy, and delivered according
to this Statute, shall be yet arraigned for any other Felony done before his
former Conviction or Attainder, if it be such for which he cannot have his
Clergy; for the words are, That he shall be put now to answer, etc. in the same
manner as if he had been delivered to the Ordinary, and had made his Purgation,
any thing in this act to the contrary notwithstanding.

Pollard versus Luttrell.
2. IN an Ejectione firmae between Pollard and Luttrell for Lands in Hubury and
Listock, upon the Title between the Lord Audeley and Richard Audeley, it was
agreed by the chief Justices, that if the Disseisor levy a Fine with
Proclamations according to the Statute of 4 H. 7. and a stranger within five
years after the Proclamations enter in the right of the Disseisee, without the
privity or consent of the Disseisee, that this shall not avoid the Bar of the
Fine, unless that he assent to it within the five years, for the words of the
Statute are, so that they pursue their Title, Claim, or Interest by way of
Action, or lawful Entry within five years, etc. and that which is done by
another without their assent, is not a pursuing by them according to the intent
of the Statute, for otherwise by such means against the will of the Disseisee,
every stranger may avoid such a Fine, which was not the intent of the Statute.

Mountague versus Jeoffreys and others.
3. IN Trespass by Edward Mountague Plaintiff, against Richard Jeoffreys and
others Defendants, for a Trespass done in certain Lands called Graveland, in
Hailsham in the County of Sussex, the Case upon a special Verdict was thus.

Sir John Jeoffreys late chief Baron, bing seized in his Demesne as of Fee
(amongst others) of the said Land called Graveland having Issue but one only
Daughter, by his Will in writing devised all his Land of which he was seized in
fee (except the said Graveland) to his said Daughter for 21. years, etc. and
the said Land called Graveland (which was then in Lease for diverse years, to
one Nicholas Cobb, which years at the time of the death of the said Sir John
Geoffreys continued) he devised to the said Richard Jeoffreys his Brother, and
his Heirs, and by the same Will he disposed diverse Legacies of his Chattels,
and the Remainder he gave to his said Daughter, and made her Executrix of his
said Will; after which the first Wife of the said Sir John Jeoffreys being
dead, he covenanted with Mr. George Goring to take the Daughter of the said
George to Wife, and covenanted with the said George (amongst other Lands) to
assure the said Land called Graveland to the said George Goring and Richard
Jeoffreys, and their Heirs, to the use of the said Sir John Jeoffreys, and Mary
Goring Daughter of the said George, and the Heirs of the said Sir John
Jeoffreys, by a certain day, before which day the marriage being had, the said
Sir Io: Ieoffreys made a Deed and sealed it, and delivered it, containing a
Feoffment of the said Land called Graveland (amongst others) to the said George
Goring and Richard Ieoffreys, and their Heirs, to the Uses aforesaid, in
performance of the said Covenants, with a Warrant of Attorney to make Livery
accordingly, and the Attorney made Livery in other parts of the Land, and not
in Graveland, and this was in the name of all the Lands compri^^d in the Deed,
and the said Nicholas Cobb never attorned to this Deed; After which Sir John
Ieoffreys interlined in the said Will, that the said Mary then his Wife should
be joint Executrix with his Daughter: And in the Legacy of the rest of his
Goods, etc. he interlin'd the said Mary his Wife to be Joynttenant with his
said Daughter, without other publication thereof; and afterward the sa^d Sir
John died, the said Daughter being his Heir, who took to Husband the said
Edward Mountague.

4. IN Trespass, the Plaintiff supposes the Trespass to be done in the
breaking of his House and Close in such a Town, the Defendant justifies in a
House and Close in the same Town, and shows which, to put the Plaintiff to his
new Assignment, to which the Plaintiff replied that the House and Close of
which he complains is such a House, and gives it a special name, upon which
the Defendant demurs, and adjudged that the Plaintiff take nothing by his Writ:
for albeit a House may have a Curtilage which passes by the name of a Message
with the Appurtenances, yet this shall not be in this case, for by the Bar the
Plaintiff is bound to make a special demonstration in what Message and what
Close he supposes the Trespass to be done, as to say that the House has a
Curtilage, the which he broke, and it shall not be taken by intendment that the
Messuages had such a Curtilage to it, if it be not specially named.

Fennors Case.
5. IN Trespass brought by Fennor in the common Bench, against for breaking
his Close in, etc. the Defendant pleads a Bar at large, to make the Plaintiff
assign the place in certain, where he supposes the Trespass to be done, the
Plaintiff thereupon alleges that the place where he complains is such, etc.
and shows in certain, another then that in which the Defendant justifies, the
Defendant avers that the one and the other are all one, and known by the one
name and the other, and thereupon the Plaintiff demurs, and adjudged there for
the Plaintiff, because that in such a case upon such a special assignment, it
shall be taken merely another then that in which the Defendant justifies, in as
much as the Plaintiff in such a case cannot maintain it upon his evidence
given, if the Defendant had pleaded not guilty to this new Assignment, that the
Trespass was done in the place in which the Defendant justifies, although it
be known by the one and the other name, and that the Plaintiff has good Title
to it, because that by his special Assignment, saying, that it is another then
that in which the Defendant justifies, he shall never after say, that it is the
same in this Plea, for it is mere contrary to his special Assignment: And upon
this a Writ of Error was brought in the Kings Bench, and the Judgment was there
affirmed this Term for the same reason, Quod nota.

Scot versus Sir Anthony Mainy.
6. IN Debt upon an Obligation of 200 l. brought by John Scot Gent. against Sir
Anthony Mainy Knight, the Condition whereof being to perform the Covenant
comprised in an Indenture of Demise made by the said Sir Anthony to the said
Plaintiff, of his Capital Message in Holden with the Lands to it belonging,
etc. amongst which Covenants one was, that whereas by the same Indenture he had
demised it to him for 21. years, that the said Sir Anthony covenanted with the
said John Scot, that the said Sir Anthony from time to time, during the life of
the said Sir Anthony, upon the surrender of this Demise, or any other Demise
hereafter to be made by the said Sir Anthony, of the said Messuages and Lands,
and to be made by the said John Scot, his Executors or Administrators, and upon
a new Lease to be made ready engrossed to be sealed and offered by the said
John Scot his Executors or Administrators, to the said Sir Anthony, for the
like term and number of years in the aforesaid Indenture comprised for the
same Rent, etc. to seal and deliver to the said John Scot, his Executors and
Administrators. And the said Sir Anthony as to this Covenant pleaded, did not
surrender, nor offer to surrender to him the said Demise, nor offer to him any
new Demise of the Premises, ready engrossed for to seal it for the like Term,
etc. as it is in this Covenant.

And for the other Covenants he pleads performance of all; To which the
Plaintiff replies, that the said Sir Anthony after the Obligation, and before
the Action brought, had rendered the said Messuages and Lands by Fine to one
Walter Savage and William Sheldon their Executors and Assigns for eighty years,
from the Feast of Easter next before the Fine which was Pasch. 36 Eliz. whereby
he said, that the said Sir Anthony had disabled himself to renew his Lease
according to the Covenant, upon which it was demurred in the Commen Bench, and
the Judgment given for the Plaintiff, as appears, Trin. 37. Eliz. Rot. 2573.
And upon this Judgment, a Writ of Error was brought in the Kings Bench and
agreed this Term. And it was moved that the Judgment given was erroneous, in as
much as the first act was to be done by John Scot before the new Lease was to
be made, to wit, the surrender of the former Lease, and the drawing of the new
one ought to have been done by the Plaintiff, which not being done on his part,
the said Sir Anthony is not bound to make the new Lease.

And also it was moved, that as the case is here, the said John Scot might
surrender to the Defendant, notwithstanding the intervening of this Lease
between the Lease of the Plaintiff, and the Inheritance of the Defendant, as if
a man make a Lease for years in possession, and afterward make another Lease
to a stranger, to begin after the end of the former Lease, this shall not
hinder but that the first Lease may be surrendered to him who was the Lessor,
notwithstanding the said Term intervening.

To which it was answered by the Court, that the Plaintiff here need not to
make any offer of the surrender of his Term to the said Sir Anthony, in as much
as the said Sir Anthony has disabled himself to take the Surrender, or to take
the Lease according to the purport of the Condition, and by this disabling of
himself the Obligation is forfeited, Come per 44 E. 3. 8. and by Littleton
also, If a man make a Feoffment, upon condition to re-enfeoff him, this is not
to be done until request thereof be made by the Feoffor, yet if in the mean
time the Feoffee suffer a fained recovery of the Land, grant a Rent charge,
acknowledges a Statute, takes a Wife, or the like, the Feoffor may re-enter,
without request made to re-enfeoff him, and the reason is, because that by any
of these the Feoffee has disabled himself to perform the Condition in the same
plight, as he might have done at the time of the Feoffment, in the same manner
here, for by this render by the Fine, the Reversion pass in right, so that the
Termor in possession attorning to it, they shall have the Rent reserved upon
the first Lease, and therefore the Plaintiff cannot now surrender to the said
Sir Anthony, but to the Grantees of the Reversion, and therefore there shall be
no prejudice to the Plaintiff, because the Defendant was the cause of disabling
the Plaintiff to make the Surrender to him. And suppose it be but a Term to
begin at a day to come, yet by this the Obligation is forfeited, because the
Obligor has thereby disabled himself to perform the Condition in such a plight
as he might have done it when the Obligation was made, whereby the Obligation is
presently forfeited, albeit the Plaintiff never surrender nor offer to do it:
And therefore the Judgment there was affirmed.

Mounson versus West.
7. IN an Assise brought in the County of Lincoln, before Gaudy and Owen, by
Thomas Mounson Esquire, Demandant, against Robert West, Tenant for Lands in
Sturton Juxta Stu. The Defendant West pleaded Null Tenant del Frank-tenant named
in the Writ, and if that be not found, then Null tort, null Disseisin: And the
Assise found that the said Defendant was Tenant of the Tenements now in Plaint,
and put in view to the Recognitors of the Assise, in manner and form as the
Writ supposes: And further that the said West thereof disseised the said
Mounson, namely of the Tenements in the will of one Mounson: And did not find
either the words of the Will, nor the Will it self what it was, etc. And the
Justices of Assise upon this Verdict upon advice with the other Justices, gave
Judgment, that the Plaintiff shall recover, etc. upon which a Writ of Error was
brought in the Kings Bench, where it was moved that the Judgment was erroneous:
First, because the Jury have not found that the Defendant was Tenant of the
Freehold, agreeing with the form of the Plea, for the Writ of Assise does not
suppose him to be Tenant of the Freehold, and therefore the Verdict in this
point not fully found.

The second Error is, that the Seisin of the Plaintiff is not required of,
according to the charge given to them, as well as the Disseisen, for the charge
was that they should enquire of the Seisen of the Plaintiff, etc. But to both
these the Court answered that the Verdict is well enough, notwithstanding these
exceptions, for every Assise brought supposes that there is a Disseisor, and a
Tenant named in it, then this Assise being brought against a sole person,
supposes him to be a Disseisor and Tenant also; and therefore the Verdict
saying, that he was Tenant as the Writ supposes, is now as strong in this
case, as if they had found that he was Tenant of the Freehold, for the Tenant
of the Freehold ought to be named in the Writ: But if the Assise had been
brought against two, or more, such a Verdict had not been good, for it
suffices if any of them be Tenant of the Freehold, and then the Writ does not
suppose one to be Tenant more then another, but supposes one Tenant to be
named in the Writ. And therefore in such a case the finding ought to be
special, to wit, that such a one is Tenant of the Freehold, or that there is
a Tenant of the Freehold named in the Writ. But where one only is named in the
Writ to be Disseisor and Tenant, it is sufficient to find as here, for by this
it is certainly found that he is Tenant of the Freehold.

And for the other point, although it be a good direction for the Judges to the
Jury, whereby they may the better perceive that there ought to be a Seisin in
him, or otherwise there cannot be a Disseisen by the other, yet in Deed he
cannot be a Disseised who was not then seized: But the Assise having found the
Disseisen the Seisen in Law, is found included in the Disseisen. But for the
point moved, that the Verdict was not perfect, in as much as they found the
Disseisen with a Nisi, it seemed to Gaudy that the Judgment upon this Verdict
was erroneous, as where a Verdict in another Action is imperfect, a Venire
facias de novo shall be awarded to try the Issue again: And if Judgment be
given upon such a Verdict it is error; so here the Verdict in this point being
uncertain, there ought to have been a Certificate of Assise to have this better
opened: But the three other Justices held (as the case is) that the Verdict in
this point is certain enough, for that which comes before the Nisi (as it is
placed) is merely nugator. as in the case of the Lord Stafford against Sir
Rowland Heyward, the Jury found Non assumpsit, but if such Witnesses say true
(as they believe they did) Assumpsit, etc. it was but a mere nugation.

But it seemed to Popham, that if the Verdict had been, if the words of the
Will do not pass the Land, then that he disseised, and if they pass, then
that he did not disseise; there if the words of the Will be not found, the
Verdict had been all imperfect, but here the Verdict is full and perfect before
the Nisi, etc. and therefore the Judgment was affirmed.

Holme versus Gee.
8. A Formedon in Descender was brought by Ralph Holme Demandant, against Henry
Gee and Elizabeth his Wife Tenants, and the Case was thus.

Ralph Langley and others gave two Messuages and a Garden, with the
Appurtenances in Manchester, to Ralph Holme the great Grandfather of the
Demandant, and to the Heirs of his body begotten, after which the same great
Grandfather by Deed indented, dated 20. September, 14 H. 7. enfeoffed John Gee
of one of the said Messuages, and of the said Garden, rendering yearly to the
said great Grandfather and his Heirs 13 s. 4 d. a year, at the Feasts of S.
Michael, and the Annunciation, by equal portions, after which the said John Gee
died seized of the said Messuages and Garden, and it descended to Henry Gee his
Son and Heir; after which the said great Grandfather by his Indenture, bearing
date 6. Martii, 12 H. 8. enfeoffed the said Henry Gee of the other Messuages,
rendering also to him and his Heirs yearly 13 s. 4 d. at the said Feast
aforesaid by equal portions, after which Holme the great Grandfather died,
Stephen Holme being his Son and next Heir, who was seized of the Rents
aforesaid, and afterward also died seized, Robert Holme being his Son and
Heir, after which the said Henry Gee died seized of the said two Messuages and
Garden, and they descended to Eliz. his Daughter and Heir, who took to Husband
one Richard Shalcroft, and had Issue the said Elizabeth wife of the said Henry
Gee, Tenant in the Formedon, after which the said Richard Shalcroft and his
wife died, after which and before the marriage had between the said Henry Gee
and Elizabeth now Tenants in the Formedon, the said Elizabeth enfeoffed one
Richard Greensearch of the said Messuages and Garden, after which, to wit, at
the Feast of the Annunciation of our Lady, 3 Eliz. the said Henry Gee husband
to the said Elizabeth. paid 13 s. 4 d. for the said Rent reserved as is
aforesaid, to the said Robert Holme, after which, to wit, on Monday next, after
the Assumption of our Lady at Lancaster, before the Justices there, a Fine was
levied with Proclamations according to the Statute, between Thomas Aynsworth,
and Thomas Holden then being seized of the Tenements aforesaid Complainants,
and the said Henry Gee and Eliz. his wife, Deforceants of the Tenements
aforesaid, whereby the Conusance was made to the said Thomas, and Thomas who
rendered them to the said Henry Gee and Eliz. his wife, and to the Heirs of
their bodies, the Remainder to the right Heirs of the said Henry: the five
years past after the Proclamations in the life of the said Robert Holme, after
which the said Robert died, and Ralph his Son and Heir brought the Formedon
upon the Gift first mentioned, and the Tenants plead the said Fine with
Proclamations in Bar, and the Demandant replied, showing the several
discontinuances made by the great Grandfather as aforesaid, and the acceptance
of the said Rent by the said Robert, by the hands of the now Tenant Henry Gee
as is before alleged, and that the said Henry was then seized of the said
Tenements in Fee in right of the said Eliz. then his wife, and although that he
allege the said several Feoffments to be made by Deeds indented, with the
reservation as aforesaid, yet it is not mentioned in the Replication that he
shows forth the Deeds whereby the reservation was made; To which the Tenant by
way of Rejoinder show the Feoffment made by the said Eliz. Shalcroft to the
said William Greenditch, whereby he was seized at the time of the payment of the
said Rent at the said Feast of the Annunciation of our Lady, and traverse
Absque hoc, that the said Henry Gee was thereof then seized in right of his
wife, in manner and form, whereupon it was demurred in Law, and adjudged by the
Justices of Assise at Lancaster, that the Plaintiff should be barred, whereupon
the Tenants have now brought their Writ of Error.

And by Popham and Clench the Judgment is to be affirmed; First, because that
the acceptance of the said Rent had been by the hands of one who was to pay it,
to wit, the Tenant himself, yet this shall not bar the right of Intail in the
said Robert Holme (as a release of his right should do) but this acceptance
shall only foreclose him of his Action, to demand the Land during his life, and
therefore the right which the said Robert had, being barred by the Fine, the Son
is without remedy, for the Son shall never have remedy upon the Fine levied in
time of his Father, the five years after the Proclamations being passed: But in
case where the right begin first to be a right in the Son, and not where there
was right in the Father.

And further, it seemed to them, that the payment of him who had not any thing
in the Land at the time of the payment, as here, shall make no conclusion to
him who accept it, because this payment is as none in Law.

And by them the Rejoinder of the Traverse, Absque hoc, that Henry Gee was
seized at the time of the payment in Fee, in right of his said Wife, in manner
and form, as in the Replication is ailedged, is good enough, for he traverseth
that which the Demandant has specially alleged to destroy the Bar, and
contrary to that which is alleged, it shall not be intended that they had
other particular Estate at the time of the payment, which may make the payment
to be good.

And albeit the Traverse had been, Absque hoc, that the said Henry was seized
in right of his said Wife, Modo and forma prout, the Demandant has alleged
without saying in Fee, as it is pleaded here, yet the Jury shall be put to find
it, if he were seized in Fee, In jure Uxoris, and not of any other particular
Estate, as in 12 E. 4. 4. A Feoffment is pleaded by Deed, the other makes
Title, and traverseth Absque hoc, that he enfeoffed Modo and forma, not showing
forth the Deed, yet he who pleads the Feofment, by Littleton, shall give no
other Feoffment in evidence, then that which is pleaded by the Deed. And by 18
E. 4. 3. In Trespass the Defendant justifies the entry and sowing of Corn,
because that M. was seized in Fee, and sowed the Land, and the Defendant as his
Servant entered and cut it, the Plaintiff says, that it was his Freehold at
the time of the sowing, Absque hoc, that it was the Freehold of the said M.
and per Curiam, it is not good, for such matter was not alleged by the
Defendant, but he ought to traverse the Seisin in Fee, which was alleged, and
good, and so it is good here.

But it seems to Clench, that the Replication is not good, because he does not
say, by the Writing upon which the Reservation was made, which concludes Robert
by his acceptance, Hic in Curia prolat. as by Hill. 15. E. 4. 15. If a man will
bar a woman of her Action for her Land after the death of her Husband, by
Feoffment made by the Baron and Feme, during the Coverture by Deed, rendering
Rent, by reason of acceptance of the said Rent after the death of the husband,
he ought to show the Deed, and say, Hic in Curia prolat. or otherwise the Plea
is not good, because that in such a case albeit it were a Gift in Tail, the
wife shall not be concluded by her acceptance, unless that the Gift were by
Deed.

Popham, True it is, in case the party will demur upon it: but suppose in this
case, the Tenants had expressly acknowledged the said Feoffments, and then
concluded afterward as they have done here, shall they afterward take
advantage of not showing the Deed? I think that not, no more here where they
admit it, and plead the other matter to avoid the conclusion; for if a double
Plea be plea^ed, if the other party demur upon it, he shall take the advantage
of the doubleness: But if he pass it over, and they proceed in pleading upon
another point, the doubleness is gone.

And Fennor said, that the right which is intended to be saved within the first
branch of the Statute of 4 H. 7. is, that upon which the party may pursue his
Action, or enter for his remedy, the which the said Robert could not do in,
when the Fine was levied, because he had accepted the Rent, but the first right
which was in such a case, was that in the Demandant.

Stroud versus Willis.
9. IN Debt upon an Obligation of 40 l. by William Stroud Plaintiff, against
John Willis Defendant, the Condition whereof was, If the said Willis his Heirs,
Executors, or Assigns, should pay or cause to be paid yearly to the said
William Stroud, the Rent, or sum of 37 l. 10 s. of lawful money, at the
Feasts of S. Michael, and the Annuntiation, by equal portions, according to
the Tenor, true intent, and meaning of certain Articles of agreement indented,
made between the said parties of the same date, that the Obligation was, that
then the Obligation shall be void, and the Defendant shows the Articles which
were thus, to wit, that the said William Stroud had demised to the Defendants
all such Tenements in Yeatminster, of, or in which the said William then had an
Estate for life by Copy. Anglice Copy des, except according to the custom of
the Manor of Yeatminster, from the Annunciation of our Lady then last past,
for forty years, if the said William should so long live, rendering yearly to
the said William 37 l. 10 s. of lawful money, at the Feasts of S. Michael, and
our Lady, by equal portions, under the Eastgate of the Castle of Taunton, in
the County of Somerset, etc. with diverse things comprised in the said Articles.
To which points the Defendant pleaded, that at the time of the making of the
said Articles the Plaintiff had not any Estate in the Tenements in Yeatminster
aforesaid, for term of his life, by Copy, Anglice Copy des, except according
to any custom of the said Manor of Yeatminster, and that the Obligation was
made for the payment of the same Rent reserved by the said Articles, and
demands Judgment, etc. whereupon the Plaintiff demurred in the Common Bench, and
there Judgment was given that the Plaintiff should recover his Debt and
Damages, as appears there, Mich. 36, and 37. Eliz. Rot. 312. upon which a
Writ of Error was brought in the Kings Bench, and there moved that the Judgment
was erroneous, in as much as upon the matter he ought to have been barred of
his Action? for if an Action of Debt had been brought upon the Demise, by the
Articles, the Defendant might have pleaded as here, and the Plaintiff should be
clearly barred: As if a man be bound to make an Estate, or to assure to another
all the Lands which he has by descent from his Father, or all the Lands which
he has by purchase from such a one, or the like.

And of this opinion Gaudy was, saying, in as much as the Obligation is, that
he shall be paid according to the true intent of the Articles, the intent of
them is not that the Rent shall be paid if any Land be not passed by them, for
it should be paid, as by 22 H. 6. if a man be bound to pay a Rent which is
reserved upon a Lease made to him, he ought to pay it at his peril: But if it
be to pay it accordingly to the Lease, there he said, it is not payable but
upon the Bond, and is to be paid as a Rent. And if the Land be evicted in the
interim before the day of payment, the Obligor shall help himself by pleading
of it upon such an Obligation to discharge the Bond, so here: But it seemed to
Popham, that the Judgment was well given, and yet he agreed the Cases that were
put; but he said there was a diversity where the Obligation goes in the
generality, and where it tends to a speciality: for as by 2 E. 4. If a man be
bound to be Nonsuit in all Actions which he has against such a one, or to
assure to another all his Lands in Dale, he may say, that he has not any Suit,
or that he has no Land in Dale: But if it be that he shall be Nonsuit in a
Formedon depending, or to enfeoff him of White acre, there it is no plea,
because he refers to a special point. And by 18 E. 4. If a man be bound to
another to pay him 10 l. for which a stranger is bound to the said Obligee, it
is no plea for him to say, that the stranger is not bound to pay him 10 l. for
when the Condition refers to such a special matter, this cannot be denied of
him who is bound.

And therefore in this case the Defendant cannot say, that there were not any
such Articles, contrary to that which is specially comprised in the Condition,
as by 28 H. 6. A man was bound to perform the Covenants comprised in a certain
Indenture of Covenants, he shall not say, that there was not any such
Indenture, because it resorts to a special.

So I think, if a man be bound to pay the Rent of 10 l. a year reserved upon an
Indenture of Demise made of Lands in D. payable at such a Feast, he shall not
say against it, that there was no such Demise made, nor no such Rent reserved
upon the Demise, but is estopped of the one and the other. And in Hill. 3.
Eliz. A man was bound that he shall pay to A. or the Obligee, all such sums of
money as T. S. deceased stands bound to pay by his Obligation to the said A. and
of one R. P. to the behoof of the Children of such a one, according to the Will
of the said party; and in Debt upon this Obligation he says, that the said T.
S. was never bound by any such Writing Obligatory to the said A. and R. P etc.
to pay, etc. Pro usu filiorum, etc. as in the Condition; and per Curiam
adjudged no good Bar, because he is estopped to deny the special matter, which
is matter of Writing, and not a bare matter in Deed.

Kirton versus Hoxton, and others.
10. IN an Appeal of Mayhem brought by Kirton Plaintiff, against Appeal of
Mayhem.
Rob. Hoxton Esquire and diverse other Defen. the one of the Defen. plead Null tiel
in rerum natura, as another of the Appellees, and if it be not found then as to
the Felony and Mayhem not guilty: Agreed by the whole Court that such a manner
of pleading is not to be suffered in an Appeal of Mayhem, because no life is
put in danger by the suit: And yet it was objected that there are presidents,
that such form of pleading has been admitted in Appeals of Mayhem. But the
Court had respect to it, that the reason in all the Books of Law in which it
has been admitted in an Appeal of death, and the like, is, that it stands in
Favorem vitae, and therefore it is admitted to be good, or otherwise by the
Books, it shall not be admitted to be so, for the doubleness of it: But no
life is to be put in ^e^pardy in this case, and therefore such a plea shall not
be admitted, but the Not guilty shall stand, by which the other plea is waived.

Hillary Term, 38 Eliz. Henry Earl of Pembrook, versus Sir Henry Backley.
IN an Action upon the Case, between Henry Earl of Pembrook Plaintiff, See this
Case Coke lib 5. 76. a.
and Sir Henry Backley Knight, Defendant, the case upon the pleading appears
to be thus.

The said Earl was seized in his Demesne as of Fee, of the Manor of Stocktrift,
in the County of Somerset, to which Manor the Office of the custody of the
Forest of Selwood, in the same County belongs, and also that there was before
time of memory, an Office within the same Forest called the Lievtenant-ship, or
Custody of the said Forest belonging to the said Manor, of which also the said
Earl was seized in his Demesne as of Fee: And that there was one part of the
said Forest called the West part of the said Forest, in which there were two
Walks, or Bayliwicks, the one called Staverdale walk, and the other Brewick
walk: And that the said Lieutenant had the charge of the Deer, and the
disposition and appointment of the Keepers of the said Forest. And that the
said Earl being so seized, by his Writing, bearing date 5. November. 12. Eliz.
reciting that his Father had granted the Office of Lievtenant-ship, and
Deputy-ship, of the said West part of the said Forest, Cum vadiis, etc. quando
acciderit, and the Keeper-ship of Brewick-walk aforesaid, to the said Sir
Maurice Barkley Knight, and the Heirs Males of his body, and instituted and
ordained him, and the Heirs Males of his body, Lieutenant and Deputy thereof to
the said Earl and his Heirs, confirmed the Grant aforesaid.

And further by the same Deed granted and confirmed to the said Sir Maurice,
and to the Heirs Males of his body, the said Lievtenant-ship and Deputy-ship of
the said West part of the said Forest, and also the Keeper-ship of the said
Walk called Staverdale Walk, together with the Lodges, etc.

Provided always, and the said Sir Maurice covenanted and granted, for him and
the Heirs Males of his body, with the said now Earl his Heirs and Assigns, that
it shall be lawful for the said Earl his Heirs and Assigns, to have all the
Pre-eminence or commandment of the said Game and Hunting, and pleasure there,
as if this Grant had not been made.

Provided also, and the said Sir Maurice covenanted, granted, and promised for
him, and the Heirs Males of his body, to, and with the said Earl, his Heirs and
Assigns, that the said Sir Maurice and the Heirs Males of his body, and their
Assignee, and Assignees, will preserve the Games as fair as it commonly has
been used, and that neither the said Maurice, nor any of the Heirs Males of his
body, nor any of their Assignees, will cut any manner of Wood growing upon any
part of the Premises, unless for necessary Brouse, and such as they may
lawfully cut of their own, and as was accustomed, etc. after which Sir Maurice
died, and Sir Henry Barkley his Son and Heir Male, cut four Oaks within the
said Walk called Brewicks, growing upon the soil of the Queen there, every one
of them being Timber, and of the value of 13 s. 4 d. and converted them to his
own use. And whether by this act done by the said Sir Henry the now Earl of
Pembrook, may re-enter into the things granted by him, was the question, which
stands upon two points, the first, Whether the last Proviso makes a Condition,
or be but a mere Covenant. 2. Whether this Act makes a Forfeiture of the said
Offices granted as before by the course of the Common Law.

Gaudey, Clench, Walmsley, and Beamont, that the first Proviso is not a
Condition, either because he is not by this to do more then he may do by his
superior custody, in which case he ought to do it by his own authority, as to
take his fee Deer, or to chase and kill Deer by Warrant, and the like; or
otherwise if it shall be taken, that he may by this Proviso kill or chase the
Game at his pleasure, it is void, because as to it, he is to do that which he
ought not to do by his Office, to wit, to destroy the Game, which by his Office
he is to preserve; and therefore for the first, it stands merely upon the
Covenant.

Then when he says further in the second clause; Provided also, and the said
Sir Henry Barkley covenants, this is to be intended that it shall be as the
other for the word also, and this is but a bare Covenant as the first was.

And they said further, that this last Proviso shall be said entirely the words
of the Grantee himself, as the Covenant is, and without words of the Grantor a
Condition cannot be, for it is for him to condition with the Estate given, and
not for him to whom the Grant is made; And therefore suppose that it had been on
the other part, to wit, Provided always, and the Grantor covenant that the
Grantee shall have the refuse of the brouse, and the like; this shall not be
said to be any Condition, but a mere Covenant: In like manner shall it be on
the other part.

And further it is common for Scriveners and ignorant persons to make in effect
every Covenant to begin with a Proviso in this manner, and therefore to expound
such a manner of Proviso as a Condition, it shall be too perilous to the
Estates of men.

And for the case upon the Lease made by Sergeant B^^dloes, which was thus.

Provided always, and it was covenanted, granted and agreed between the
parties, if the Lessee sell, or alien the term that the Lessor shall have the
preferment, This they agreed to be a good Condition, as was adjudged in the
Common Bench, 32 Eliz. but the case there is, because they are the words as
well of the Lessor, who may add a Condition to the Estate, as of the Lessee who
made the Covenant, which is not here. But they said, that the case between
Hamington and Pepull which was 17 Eliz. in the Kings Bench, was more nigh in
resemblance to the case in question, which was that the said Pepull made a
Lease for years to Hamington of a Farm, except the wood, and covenanted with
the Lessee that he shall take all manner of under-wood; provided always, and
the Lessee covenant that he will not cut any manner of Timber-tree, and this
was adjudged no Condition. And as to the other point they said, that the
cutting of Trees by him who had the custody of the Forest, is not a forfeiture
of his Office by the Common Law, as it is of him who has the custody of a
Park, for there is another special Officer who has the charge of wood in a
Forest, to wit, the Verderer and the Woodward, and therefore it is no forfeiture
of him who has the custody of the Forest to cut Trees, for he has another
charge, to wit, the custody of the Game only, and not of the Wood.

And further the cutting of one or two Trees is no cause of forfeiture, for it
may be that there is Covert-shade and brouse sufficient of that which yet
remains, in which case it is no forfeiture if it be not averred that these
things are impaired by it.

But the chief Justices, chief Baron and all the other Justices and Barons were
of a contrary opinion. And for the matter of forfeiture at Common Law, they
said that it was a cause of forfeiture of an Office at common Law to cut the
Trees, as well in the case of a Forester, as in case of a Parkkeeper, for the
Forester has not only the charge of the Game, but of all that is within the
Forest by which the Game is fed, preserved, or succored, and they are fed by
the brouse, and succored by the shade, and have the calmer and better lodging
by reason of the Trees; and therefore by their Office they are to have a care of
these things as well as of the Game, for without these the Game cannot stand:
as to say, that there are others who have special charge of the Wood and
Pasture, as the Woodward, or Agister, etc. this is no proof that the Foresters,
or Keepers are discharged thereby.

And the Foresters and Keepers are by their Offices to present the Misdoers in
the Woods within the Forests of the Wood-wards, and therefore they have to do
with it. And by Carta de foresta, none may cut his wood within his Forest, Nisi
per visum Forestraii, ergo the Foresters have charge thereof: And every
voluntary act done by an Officer contrary to that which belongs to his Office
is a forfeiture of his Office, as by voluntary killing of Bucks, cutting of
Trees, Wood, or the like: but otherwise it is of things done or suffered by his
negligence if it be not common or often. And albeit the Trees here were not
many, or that it was not averred that the Game was to be hurt thereby, yet it
cannot be intended but that it is so much impaired by it, as it should be by
the killing of a Buck in the Forest, by which the Office shall be forfeited,
because the Game is thereby the worse, and yet there may be Game sufficient
without this Buck, but he has voluntarily done a thing contrary to his Office,
and therefore it is a Forfeiture of his Office, and so it shall be in this case.

And for the other point they said, it was a Condition and also a Covenant, and
it was for good purpose to have it to be so: For suppose that the Game had been
destroyed by the said Sir Henry, shall this he a sufficient recompense or
satisfaction to enter for the Condition broken? No, and therefore the Covenant
was made to recompense him for Damages.

And when upon the Habendum a Proviso is added for a thing to be done by When a
Proviso makes a Condition.
him to whom the Deed is made, or to restrain him to do any thing, this is a
Condition, as well as if it had been a Condition which shall make or shall
restrain to do such a thing, for they are in this case the words of the
Grantor, to restrain the Grant in some manner, and to show in what manner he
shall have it, and it is alwais to him who passes the Estate, and to no other.
Then suppose here, that the Proviso had been; Provided always that the Grantee
shall not cut any Tree, And the Grantee covenant also that he will not cut any
Tree, this is plainly a Condition and also a Covenant; then it is as plain in
the case in question, which is; Provided also, and the Grantee covenant, etc.
that he will not cut any manner of Wood: distinguish the sentence by his proper
distinction, and it is clear that it is a Condition as well as a Covenant. And
to say, that there is a diversity between this case and the case upon Sergeant
Bendloes Lease, because there it is, Provided always, and it is covenanted and
agreed between the parties; In which case it is alleged, that the agreement
which is the Plaintiffs, goes to the Proviso to make it a Condition for him, as
well as it shall go to the Grantee to make it to be a Covenant from him: they
understand no difference, because the Proviso as it is placed, is of it self as
spoken by the Plaintiff; and the agreement between the parties that such a
thing shall be done by the Lessee, makes it a Covenant on his part only, all
being to be performed by him, as plainly as in the case in question.

And to say, that the last Proviso shall not be a Condition, because the first
cannot enure as a Condition, because that which is to be done may lawfully be
done with it, or without it, or because that the matter to which the Proviso is
annexed, is repugnant to the nature of the thing granted, yet this is not
because of the nature of the word it self, but by reason of that to which the
Proviso is annexed, and therefore the Proviso following hindered in its operation
by means of the word, also: And therefore if a man makes a Lease for years,
provided always that the lessor may enjoy and hold the Manors of D. (which is
other Land) or that the Lessee shall kill I. S. these are void of Conditions;
But grant then that it is further provided also that he shall not alien his
Term, is not this a good Condition although that which was Precedent was no
Condition? It is clear that is not; And they said for Hamingtons Case that it
was but of the nature of a declaration with what wood the Lessee shall meddle,
because it depends upon the Covenant of the Lessor, and it is general, to wit,
that he may cut any manner of underwood, provided that he do not cut any manner
of Timber; and Popham was of council with Hamington in this case, and the
Court at the beginning insisted much that it was a Condition, and that for the
reason then alleged, that it depended upon the Covenant of the Lessor, which
was general for all manner of under-wood, because that Standels growing between
great Trees, might be taken within the general words of all manner of
underwood, for to make it plain it was well put in, that he shall not cut any
manner of Timber Trees, and therefore in this point it was but a Declaration,
with what wood he should meddle, although in truth it was of another thing then
was comprised in the Covenant before: And then the adding of a Covenant to such
a Proviso shall not make the Proviso of another nature, then it was before the
Covenant made, or if no Covenant had been added to it, and upon this reason the
Court then gave Judgment for Hamington. And by him, if I am seized of the
Manor of D. in D. and of Black acre in D. and so seized, I covenant with I. S.
that he shall enjoy the said Manor for ten years: Provided and the said I. C.
covenant that he shall not enjoy Black acre, this Covenant is not a Condition,
but a Declaration deduced out of my Covenant, to make a plain Declaration, that
it is not my intent that Black acre shall pass, be it parcel or not parcel of
the said Manor; Then the Covenant following will not alter the nature of the
exposition of the Proviso which the Law shall make of it self, if it had stood
of it self without a Covenant following.

And for the Proviso here, he put this case, suppose it had been; Provided, and
the Grantee covenants that he shall not cut any Trees: None will deny but that
this had been a Condition and a Covenant also: And what diversity is there
where the word is at the conclusion, and so couple the Condition and Covenant
together. And we are not to alter the Law for the ignorance of Scriveners, who
do they know not what by their ignorance, shall be corrected by the Law.

And they agreed, that where a principal Officer is by his Office to make
inferior Officers under him, and the inferior Officer commits a forfeiture, the
superior Officer shall take advantage thereof, and shall place a new Officer, as
was done in 39 H. 6. for the Office of the Marshall of the Kings Bench, put in
by the great Marshall of Englang.

Easter Term, 39. Eliz. Overton versus Sydall.
1. IN Debt between Valentine Overton Clark, Prebendary of the Prebend of
Tervin in the County of Chester, founded in the Cathedral Church of Litchfeild
in the County of Stafford, against Thomas Sydall Executor of William Sydall,
the case appeared to be this.

Henry Sydall Clark, Prebendary of the Prebend, 26 Maij 5. E. 6. with the
assent of the Dean and Chapter, and by Writing indented, demised the said
Prebend, to the said William Sydall for 43. years from the Feast of the
Annunciation of our Lady, in the year of our Lord 555. at the yearly rent of
361. William Sydall assigned over his term, and died, making the said Thomas
his Executor, Henry Sydall also died, and afterward the Plaintiff was made
Prebend, and for the rent arrear in his time, and after the assignment this
Action is brought against the Executors in the Debet and Detinet.

And it was alleged that in Hillary Term 36 Eliz. Rot. 420. in the case
between Glover and Humble, it was adjudged in the Kings Bench, that the Grantee
of the Reversion shall not maintain an Action of Debt upon a Lease for years
against the Lessee himself, for any arrears of Rent incurred, after that he had
made an assignment of his Term over to another, and alleged also that in
Hillary, 29 Eliz. in a case between it was adjudged, that an Action of Debt
lies for the Lessor himself against the Lessee, for arrearages of Rent
reserved upon the Lease, and accrued after the Lessee had assigned his Term
over; and both these cases were adjudged accordingly in the Kings Bench, and
the reason in the first case was, because that by the Grant of the Reversion
over, the privity of contract which was between the Lessor and the Lessee is
dissolved, and the Grantee of the Reversion as to it but a stranger.

But in the last case the privity of contract is not dissolved between the
Lessor and the Lessee, notwithstanding the Lessee has passed over his Term,
neither is the contract thereby determined between the parties.

But Fennor said, that in this case the privity in Deed is gone by the death of
the Lessee, and therefore the Executor who is but privy in Law, is not subject
to this Action, unless in case where he has the Term; in which case he shall
be charged as he who has Quid pro quo, which is not in the case here.

And he said further, that a Lease made by a Prebend is good no longer then his
own life, but is merely void by his death, and therefore shall not be said to be
a contract to bind further then his life, and therefore also he said, that the
Action will not lie in the said case for the Successor.

But Gaudy said, that here the Lease is confirmed, and therefore good during the
Term, but it seemed to him that the Executor who is but in privy in Law shall
not be chargable with this action, for the arrearages due after the assignment
over, and yet he agreed that the Heir, the Successor, and the Executor of the
Lessor shall have debt against the Lessee himself, for the arrearages which
accrues to be due after the assignment over of the Lease: But he said, that the
Action of Debt against the Executor upon a Lease made to the Testator, and for
the arrearages due in the time of the Executor, ought to be in the Debet and
Detinet, and that for the occupation of the Term, whereby he has Quid pro quo,
which is not in this case.

Popham said, that for the time that the contract shall bind in nature of a
Contract, there is not any difference between the Heir the Successor, and the
Executor of the Lessor, and the Executor or Administrator of the Lessee, for
the one and the other are equally privy to the Contract, and a Contract or
Covenant especially being by writing, binds as strongly the Executor or
Administrator, as the Testator or the I^testate himself who made it, For these
are privies indeed to the Contract, and as to it represent the person of the
Testator or Intestate himself.

And he agreed, that the Action of Debt against the Executors, for the
arrearages of Rent of a Lease which he occupies as Executor, and accrued in
their own time, shall be in the Debet and Detinet: The reason is, although they
have the Land as Executor, yet nothin^ there of shall be ^mp^^yed to the
Execution of the Will, but such Pr^fits as are above that which was to make the
Rent, and therefore so much of the Profits as is to make, or answer the Rent,
they shall take to their own use to answer the Rent, and therefore they having
Quid pro quo, to wit, so much of the Profits for the Rent, the action ought to
be brought against them in such cases, where they are to be charged in Debt for
Rent upon a Lease made to the Testator, and have not the Profits of the Lease
it self, nor means, nor default in them to come to it, the action of Debt ought
to be against them in the Detinet only and this is the case here, and therefore
the action being in the Debet and Detmet does not lie.

And further he agreed in this case to the opinion of Fennor, that the action
here does not lie for the Successor of the Prevend who made the Lease, for no
more then the Successor in this case shall be bound by the Contract of his
Predecessor, no more shall he take advantage by this Contract, for it is the
consideration which makes him to be bound, and not only the C^ntract, and so
the Successor in such cases is but privy in Law, and not in D^ed t^ the
Contract of his Predecessor. But otherwise it is ^f the Successor of a Bishop
and the like, which Leases are not void against the Successor, but voidable.

Case of Arms.
2. Upon an assembly of all the Justices and Barons at Sergeants-Inne, this
Term, on Monday the 15. day of April, upon this question m^ved by Anderson
chief Justice of the Common Bench: Whether men may arm themselves to suppress
Riots, Rebellions, or to resist Enemies, and to endeavor themselves to
suppress or resist such Disturbers of the Peace, or quiet of the Realm; and
upon good deliberation, it was resolved by them all, that every Justice of
Peace, Sheriff, and other Minister, or other Subject of the King, where such
accident happen may do it: And to fortify this their resolution, they perused
the Statute of 2 E 3. cap. 3. which enacts that none be so hardy as to come
with force, or bring forc^ to any place in affray of the Peace, nor to go or
ride armed, night nor day, unless h^ be Servant to the King in his presence,
and the Ministers of the King in the execution of his Precepts, or of their
Office, and these who are in their company assisting them, or upon cry made for
Weapons to keep the Peace, and this in such places where accident* happen upon
the penalty in the same Statute contained; whereby it appears, that upon cry
made for Weapons to keep the Peace, every man where such accidents happen for
breaking the Peace, may by the Law arm himself against such evil Doers to
keep the Peace.

But they take it to be the more discreet way for every one in such a case to
attend and be assistant to the Justices, Sheriffs, or other Ministers of the
King in the doing of it.

3. AT the same time it was also resolved by them all (except Walmsley, Fennor,
and Owen) in the Case of one Richard Bradshaw and Robert Burton, who with
others lately by word entered themselves into an agreement one with another to
rise and put themselves into Arms, and so to go from one Gentleman's house to
another, and so from house to house to pull down Enclosures generally; that
this so appearing by their own confession, or by two Witnesses according to the
Statute, is high Treason by the Statute of 13 Eliz. cap. 1. The words of which
Statute are, That if any intend to levy War against the Queen, and this
maliciously, advisedly, and expressly declare or utter by any words or sayings,
that this shall be high Treason: For all agreed that Rebellion of Subjects
against the Queen has Rebellion of Subjects high Treason.
been always high Treason at the Common Law, for the Statute of 25 E. 3. cap.
1. is, that levying of War within the Realm against the King is Treason, and
Rebellion is all the War which a Subject can make against the King.

But Walmsley and the others with him said, that the Statute of 1 Mar: cap. 12.
10. That if any to the number of twelve, or more, assemble themselves to the
intent to pull down Enclosures, Pales, and the like with force, and continuing
together after proclamation, according to the Statute, to go away by the space
of an hour, or do any of the Offenses mentioned in the Statute, that this is
Felony: So that if these Actions had been Treason at the Common Law, it had
been to no purpose to have made it Felony.

And it seemed to them that the resistance ought to be with force to the Queen,
before that such Acts shall be said Treason.

But all the other Justices agreed (and so it was put in ure lately in the case
of the Prentices of London) that if any assemble themselves with force to alter
the Laws, or to set a price upon Victuals, or to lay violent hands upon the
Magistrate, as upon the Major of London, and the like, and with force attempt
to put it in action, that this is Rebellion and Treason at Common Law, and yet
this Statute of 1 Mariae, makes it in such a case but Felony.

And they put a diversity between the cases of pulling down Enclosures, Pales,
etc. comprised in the Statute of 1 Mar. for those are to be understood where
diverse to the number of twelve, or more, pretending, any or all of them to be
injured in particular, as by reason of their common, or other Interest in the
Land enclosed, and the like, and assembling to pull it down forcibly, and not
to the cases where they have a general dislike to all manner of Enclosures,
and therefore the assembling in a forcible manner, and with Arms to pull them
down where they have any Interest, whereby they were in any particular to be
annoyed or grieved, is not Treason; but the case here tending to a generality,
makes the act if it had been executed to be high Treason by the c^u^se of the
Common Law.

And therefore the intention appearing as the case is here, it is Treason by the
St^tute of 13. aforesaid.

Periam in some manner doubted of the principal case, but to intend to rise
with force to alter the Laws, to set price upon any Victuals, or to use force
against a Magistrate for executing his Office of Justice, and the like, he said
that they were clearly Treason by the Statute of 13. aforesaid, if it may
appear by express words, or otherwise, as the said Statute mentions, for all
these tend against the Queen, her Crown and Dignity, and therefore shall be as
against the Queen her self: And if it had been put in practice it had been
Treason at the Common Law.

Here ends the LORD POPHAM'S REPORTS.
An addition of certain Select CASES in the time of KING JAMES, and KING
CHARLES.
Trin. 15. Jac. In the Kings Bench, entered, Hill. Jac. Rot. 194. Brooks Case.
IN an Ejectione firmae brough by one Brook against Brook, the Case was thus.

John Wright a Copyholder in Fee, 10 Eliz. surrendered his Land into the hands
of the Lord by the hands of Tenants, according to the Custom, etc. without
saying, to whose use the Surrender should be; And at the next Court the said
John Wright was admitted Habendum to him and his Wife in Tail, the remainder to
the right Heirs of John Wright, and the Wife of John Wright now Defendant was
seized from the time of Where upon surrender of Copyhold land no use is
limited, to whole use i^ shall be.
the admittance until this day: And it was objected by the Counsel of the
Plaintiff, that the surrender was void* because no use was limited, and
therefore by constitution of Law ought to be to the use of the Surrender, as if
a Feoffment be made and no Use limited, it shall be to the Use of the Feoffor,
or as it is in Sir Edward Cleers Case Coke lib. 6. 18. If a Feoffment be made
by one to the use of his last Will, he has the use in the mean time.

2. That the admittance was not available to pass an Estate to the Wife, for
she was not named in the Premises but only in the Habendum, and the Office of
an Habendum is to limit the Estate and not the person, and therefore it is said
in Throgmorten and Tracies Case in Plowd* com. That if one be named to take an
Estate in the Habendum, where he was not named at all in the Premises, this is
not good.

But it was resolved by the whole Court for the first point, that the
subsequent Act shall explain the Surrender, for, Quando abest Provisio partis,
adest provisio legis: And when the Copyholder accepts a new admittance, the Law
intends that the Surrender generally made was to such an Use, as is specified
in the admittance, and the Lord is only as an Instrument to convey the Estate,
and as it were put in trust to make such an admittance, ^s he who surrenders
would h^ve him to make: And Crook Justice said, Fides adhibita fidem obligat.

For the second point it was also agreed by the Court that the Wife shall take
by this admittance, albeit she were not named in the Premises, but only in the
Habendum; and they agreed, that in Feoffments and Grants, the party that is not
named in the Premises shall not take by the Habendum: and therefore Throgmorton
and Tracies Case (as to this point) is good Law; But this case of a Copyhold is
like to the case of a Will, or to the case of Frank-marriage, in which it is
sufficient to pass an Estate, albeit the party be only named in the Habendum,
and if it should be otherwise the Estates of many Copyholders would be
subverted: And so they resolved that Iudg-should be given for the Defendant.

The same Term in the same Court. Laurking and Wilds Case.
THe Rector of the Church of livelled in the spiritual Court, for the Tithes
of a riding Nag, where the case was; That a man let his Land, reserving the
running of a Horse at some time, when he had occasion Tithes for a riding Nag.
to use him there: The Defendant showed this matter in the Court by his
Counsel, and prayed a Prohibition, and avers, that for the same Land in which
the Horse went he paid Tithes. And by the Court, nigh London, a man will take a
100. or 200. Horses to Grass, now he shall pay Tithes for them, or otherwise
the parson shall be defeated. But in this case, if the Defendant allege and
prove that it was a Nag for labor, and not for profit, a Prohibition lies.

The same Term in the same Court. Havergall versus Hare.
IN an Ejectione firmae brought by Havergal against Hare, the Case was thus.
Afterward fol 55.
A Rent of 20 l. per annum was granted out of Green acre to one and his Heirs,
to be paid at Michaelmas, and the Annunciation of our Lady, by equal portions,
and the Grantor covenants, that if the Rent of 20 l. be arrear by the space of
twenty days, that the Grantee may dist^ain, and that if there be not
sufficient distress upon the Land, or i^ there be a Rescous Replevin, or
Pound-breach, that then it shall be lawful for the Grantee and his Heirs to
enter and retain the Land to them and their Heirs, until the 20 l. be paid, 10
l. for one half years Rent was in arrear, and for it an entry was made.

Mountague chief Justice, and Doderidge Justice, there can be no entry made
when 10 l. only is behind, for the words of the Deed are, that if the Rent of
20 l. be behind, that the Grantee and his Heirs may enter, and if he shall
enter now he shall retain the Land for ever, for the 20 l. shall never be paid.

Crook and Haughton Justices, contrary, for if 10 l. be arrear, the Rent of 20
l. is arrear; for Haughton said, In an Assise of Rent of 40 l. where part is
arrear, yet he ought to bring his Assise for the whole Rent of 40 l. for the
Writ ought to agree with the Deed.

Doderidge agreed with him in the case of an Assise, but not in the principal
point.

And for the second point it was agreed by them all, that upon the entry of the
Grantee, he shall have a Fee-simple determinable, admitting the entry for the
10 l. to be good.

The same Term in the same Court, and it is entered, 14 Jac. Rot. 1484. Robinson
versus Walter.
RObinson brought an Action of Trover and Conversion against Walter, and upon
the whole matter the case appeared to be this.

A Stranger took the horse of the Plaintiff, and sent him to a common Inn, and
there he remained for the space of half a year, at which time the Plaintiff had
notice where his Horse was, and thereupon he demanded him of the Innkeeper, who
answered that a person unknown left the Horse with him, and said, that he would
not deliver the Horse to the Plaintiff unless he would pay for his meat* which
came to 3 l. 10 s. for all the time, and also would prove that it was his
Horse, upon which the Plaintiff demurred in An Innkeeper may detain a Horse
until he be satisfied for meat, albeit he be left by a stranger.
Law.

And it was resolved by Mountague chief Justice, Crook, and Doderidge, Justices
(Haughton Justice dissenting) that the Defendants plea was good, for the
Innkeeper was compellable to keep the Horse, and not bound at his peril to
take notice of the Ownder of the Horse. And by the custom of Land. if a horse
be brought to a common Inn, where he has (as it is commonly said) eaten out his
head, it is lawful for the Innkeeper to sell him, which case of the custom
implies this case. And there is a difference where the Law compels a man to do
a thing, and where not; As if the Lieutenant of the Tower brings an Action of
debt for Diet against one who was his Prisoner, in this case the Defendant
cannot wage his Law, because the Law compels the Lieutenant to give Victuals to
his Prisoner, otherwise if another man brings an Action of debt for Diet, and
in the case at the Bar the Innkeeper was compellable. And Doderidge said, that
if the Law were as the Plaintiff would have it, it were a pretty trick for one
who wants a keeping for his Horse. And Mich. 6 ^ac. in the Kings Bench, between
Harlo and Ward, the like was resolved as was cited by Barkesdels of Counsel
with the Defendant.

Mich. 14. Jac. In the Kings Bench. Rawlinson versus Green.
A Copyholder surrendered out of Court, according to the custom of the Manor,
which at the next Court was presented, and entry thereof made by the Steward,
Scilicet Compertum est per homagium, etc. but no admittance; Afterward Cestuy
que use surrenders before admittance, and the first Copyholder surrenders to
the Plaintiff: And in this case there were two questions.

1. Whether he may surrender before admittance?

2. Who shall have the Land? whether the first Copyholder, or the Lord?
Haughton Justice held that he could not surrender before admittance, and the
entry of the surrender does not make an admittance, for this being the A
^ur^ender of Copyhold cannot surrender before admittance.
sole act of the Steward, shall not bind the Lord, and it is not like to the
usual fo^m of an admittance, for that is, Dat Domino de fine fecit fi^elitatem
and admissus est inde tenens. Doderidge Justice agreed and said, that in Hare
and Brickleys case, the admittance of a Copyholder was compared to the
induction to a Benefice which gives the possession.

Hillary 14. Jac. In the Kings Bench. Sir John Pools Case.
Three Executors brought an Action of Debt, and one only declared, and they
were ready for a trial in the Country, and now it was moved that the
Declaration might be amended, and the names of the other Executors incerted:
but per Curiam this cannot be without the assent of the parties.

Pasch. 15. Iac. In the Kings Bench. Cooper versus Smiths.
AN Action upon the Case was brought for these words; viz Waterman, Action for
these words, Thou have killed thy Maste^s Cook.
and thou (Innuende the Plaintiff) have killed thy Masters Cook Innuende, etc.
and I will bring thee in question for thy life: And after Verdict for the
Plaintiff, it was moved in Arrest of Judgment by the Counsel of the Defendant,
that the words were not actionable for the incertainty, inasmuch as it does not
appear who was his Master, nor that his Master had a Cook.

Mountague chief Justice said, that the words were actionable, and albeit
In^uendo cannot ma^e a thing that is uncertain certain.
an Innuendo cannot make a thing that is uncertain certain, but shall serve as
a Predict, yet the words import that he had a Master, and that his Master had a
Cook, to which all the Court agreed, and Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

And another Action was brought for these words, Scil. Thou have sacrificed
Thou have sacrificed thy child to the Devil.
thy Child to the Devil; and adjudged that the words were actionable.

Mich. 15. Iac. In the Kings Bench. Lee versus Brown.
IN an Ejectione firmae brought by Lee against Brown, the Case was this.
Whether copyhold Lands may be intailed.
Tenant in Tail of Copyh^ld Land surrendered the same into the hands of the
Lord, to the use of I. S. whereupon two points did arise. 1. Whether Copyhold
Land be within the Statute of Donis conditionalibus, so that i^ may be
intailed. 2. Whether the Intail may be cu^ off by the surrender.

Doderidge Justice said, as to the first point, that it has been a great
doubt, whether it may be intailed, but the common and better opinion was, that
by the same Statute cooperating with the custom it may be intailed, and with
this agrees Heydons case in my Lord Cokes 3. Report, and so was the opinion An
Intail of copyhold l^nd not to be cut off by ^urrender, unless by special
custom.
of the Court.

And for the second point, their opinion also was, that it could not be cut off
by surrender, unless it were by special custom, and they directed the Jury
accordingly: And it was said to maintain this custom, it ought to be shown that
a Formedon had been brought upon such a Surrender, and Judgment given that it
does not lie; yet it was agreed that it was a strong proof of the custom, that
they to whose use such Surrenders had been made, had enjoyed the Land against
the Issues in Tail: And it was said by the Counsel of the Defendant, that
there was a Verdict for them before in the same case, which they could prove by
witnesses, but the Court would not allow such a proof because it was matter of
Record, which ought to be shown forth.

In the same Term in the Common Pleas. May versus Kett.
AN Action upon the Case was brought for these words; viz. Thou have Words.
Thou have stolen my Corn out of my Earn.
stolen my Corn out of my Barn; And it was moved in Arrest of Iu^gment, because
he had not said how much he had stolen, and perhaps it was of small value: and
yet it was adjudged that the Action would lie, for it is at least petit
Larceny: But if he had said, that he had stolen his Corn generally, it had not
been actionable, for it might have been growing, and then it had been but a
Trespass.

The same Term in the Star Chamber. Riman versus Bickley, and others.
John Riman exhibited a Bill in the Star Chamber, against Thomas Bickley, and
Anne his Wife, Dr. Thorn, Mr Goulding, and others Defendants, the said Anne was
first married to Devenish Riman the Plaintiffs Son, and between them were many
^ars and dis^greem^nts, and the said Devenish was much given to drinking, and
other Vices, and diverse times did beat and abuse his Wife, and was also jealous
of the sai^ Thomas Bickley, and his Wife being at a certain time at Supper with
Dr. Thorn, Goulding, and others, spoke such words as these (having
communication that her Husband did beat and abuse her) to wit, That she heard
that his Father had that quality, and being once whipped for it, was the better
ever after, and that if she thought it would do her Husband any go^d, she would
willingly bestow 40 s. on some body to give him a whipping whereupon G^ulding
said, that he would give him a Med^cine for his M^l^dy, and within two days
after he came in the night in wom^ns apparel, with a Weapon under his Cloak,
and with a Rod, and wen^ into the House and Chamber of the said Devenish, and
would have whipped him, and in striving together, there was some hurt done on
either side, but G^ulding not being able to effect his purpose, fled, and this
was conceived to be by the procurement of Anne his wife: And not long after
Devenish fell sick, and sent to his said wife for certain necessaries, which
she would not send him, and presently after Devenish died, and she refused to
come to his burial.

And although it were much disliked that Devenish should abuse his Wife in such
uncivil manner, as to strike and beat her, and (as Coke late chief Justice
said) it is not lawful by the Act Military for one man to strike another in
the presence of Ladies, yet it was resolved by the whole Court, that it was a
great misde meanor in the Wife, and uncivil and undutifull carriage in her to
do so to her Husband, as they use to do to Children or fools, to wit, to give
them the Whip, and so to disgrace and take away the good name of her Husband,
which, viz. A man's good name and his Childrens, are the two things which make a
man live to Posterity; as was said by Sir Francis Bacon Lord keeper: and the
Court fi^ed the Wife 500 l. and it was said, that Thoma^ Bickley her no^
Husband well deserved to pay this Fine, because he was too familiar with her in
the time of his Predecessor, and as the Bishop of London said, Devenish Rimon
lay upon her hands, and Thomas Bickley upon ^e^ heart: And to aggravate this
matter, a Letter was shown which Devenish Rimon wrote to his Wife, in which he
called her Whoor, and told her somewhat roundly of her faults, and she wrote
back to him in the Marge^t, that he lied, and wished him to get a better Scribe
for his next L^^ter, for he was a Fool that wrote that, wherein she called him
Fool by craft: And Goldings offense was acc^vnted the greater, because he was a
Minister, so that he was fined 500 l. also: And Coke said, that the course of
this Court was that if any were fined who is not able to pay it Respondeat
superior, he that is the principal and chief agent therein must answer it, for
otherwise poor men might be made Instruments of great mischief, who are not
able to answer, and the greater Offenders shall escape, which the Lord Keeper
confirmed. And as to Doctor Thorn he was acquitted by all: And the Bishop of
London said, that they had thought to have troad upon a Thorn, and they gat a
Thorn in their foot: And by Coke, if Devenish Rimon had died upon it, it had
been capital in the Wife who procured it, for it was an unlawful Act.

The same Term in the Kings Bench. Wescot versus Cotton.
THe case was this. An Infant Executor upon an Action brought against Where an
Infant Executor may declare by Attorney, but not defend by Attorney, but by
Guardian.
him appeared by Attorney, where he ought to appear by Guardian, and it was
resolved by the Court that this was Error, for this does much concern the
Infant, in as much as by his false plea he shall be bound to ^nswer of his own
Goods, if he has no Goods of his Testator, and therefore in a 11 E. 4. 1. he
has remedy against his Guardian for pleading a false P^ea.

And by Doderidge, if he has no Guardian, the Court shall appoint him a
Guardian. And if an Infant bring an action as Executor by Attorney, and has
Judgment to recover, this is not erroneous, because it is for his benefit; so
per Curiam, the difference is where he is Plaintiff, and where he is Defendant:
And there is another difference where he is Executor, and where not, for being
Executor, his Plea might have been more prejudicial to him, and Coke lib 5.
Russels case was agreed for good Law, for an Infant may be Executor, and may
take money for a Debt, and make a Release and give an Acquittance, but not
without a true consideration and payment of the money.

The same Term in the same Court. Thomas Middletons Case.
THomas Middleton, alias Strickland was condemned for a Robbery at the Where a
Felon is condemned, and elcapeth and is re-taken, upon confession that he is
the same party, execution may be awarded. The Sheriff of Middlesex fined for
not attending the Court.
Assizes in Oxford, after which he made an escape, and being taken again he was
brought to the Bar, and upon his own confession that he was the same party who
did the Robbery, and that he was condemned for it, the Court awarded execution:
And Mountague chief Justice said, that was no new case, for it had been in
experience in the time of E. 3. and 9 H. 4. and 5. E. 4. that the Court might
so do upon his own confession: And because the Sheriff of Middlesex did not
give his attendance upon the Court in this case, nor came when he was called,
the Court fined him 10 l, And Mountage said, that it shall be levied by process
out of the Court, and also all other Fines there assessed and not estreated
into the Exchequer, for then the party might compound for a matter of 20 s. and
so the King be deceived.

The same Term in the same Court. Gouldwells Case.
John Gouldwell seized of Land in Socage Tenure devised them to his Wife for
life, the Remainder to John Gouldwell his Son and his Heirs, upon Condition
that after the death of his Wife he shall grant a Rentcharge to Steven
Gouldwell and his Heirs, and if John Gouldwell dye without Heirs of his body,
that the Land shall remain to Steven Gouldwell in Tail; the Wife dies, John
Gouldwell grants the Rent accordingly, Stephen Gouldwell grants the Rent over:
John Gouldwell dies without Heir of his body, and the second Grantee distrains
for the Rent arrear, and Stephen Gouldwell brings a Replevin: And it was urged
by the Counsel for the Plaintiff that this Rent shall not have continuance
longer then the particular Estate, and cited 11 H. 7. 21. Edri^ks case, that if
Tenant in Tail acknowledge a Statute this shall continue but during his life:
and Dyer 48. 212. But it was agreed per Curiam that the Grantee was in by the
Devisor, and not by the Tenant in Tail, and therefore the Grant may endure for
ever.

But for the second point, this being to him in Remainder, the intent of the
Demisor is thereby explained that he shall have the Rent only until the
Remainder come in possession, for now the Rent shall be drowned in the Land by
unity of possession.

3. It was agreed and resolved, that by the granting of the Kent over this was
a confirmation. And Mountague said, that it was a confirmation during the
Estate Tail, and shall enure as a new grant afterward: And Haughton and
Doderidge said, that they would not take benefit of the grant over by way of
confirmation, for as Haughton said, this enures only ought of the Devisor, and
he has power to charge the Land in what manner he pleases* and it is like to
an usual case, as if a man makes a Feoffment in Fee to the use of one for
life, the Remainder over, with power to make Leases, and after he makes a
Lease, this is good against Tenant for life, and him in the Remainder also: And
I have considered what the intent of the Devisor should be in granting of this
Rent, and it seems to me, that in as much as the Land is limited in Tail, and
the Rent in Fee, that by this the Grantee shall have power to grant or dispose
of the Rent in what manner he would: but if the Land had been in Fee, I should
have construed his intent to have been, that the Grantee should have the Rent
only until the Remainder fall; to which Doderidge agreed, who said, that we
are in the case of a Will, and this construction stands with the intent of the
Devisor, and stands with the Statute, which says, Quod voluntas Donatoris est
observanda.

The same Term in the same Court. Baskervill versus Brook.
A Man became Bail for another upon a Latitat in the Kings Bench, and before
Judgment, the Bail let his Lands for valuable consideration: Difference between
bail in the Kings Bench and the Common Pleas. And how a bail shall relate.
And afterward Judgment was given for the Plaintiff. And now it was debated,
whether the Land Leased shall be liable to the Bailment: and it was said by
Glanvill of Council with the Lessee, that it ought not to be liable, and he
put a difference between a Bailment in this Court, and a Bailment in the Common
Pleas, for there the Suit comes by original, and the certainty of the debt or
demand appears in the declaration, and therefore then it is certainly known
from the beginning of the Bailement for what the Bail shall be bound: But in
this Court upon the Latitat, there is not any certainty until Judgment given,
before which the Land is not bound, and now it is in another man's hands, and
therefore ^ot liable, and he puts Hoes case, Co. lib. 5. 70. where i^ was
resolved that where the Plaintiff releaseth to the Bail o^ the Defendant upon a
Suit in the Kings Bench before Judgment, all Actions, Duties, and Demands, that
this Release shall not bar the Plaintiff, for there is not any ce^tain duty by
the Bail before Judgment, and therefore it cannot be a Release, and he cite^ the
case of 21 E. 3. 32. upon an account, and said that it was like to a second
Judgment, in that which reduces all to a certainty, and therefore. etc.

But it was said by Mountague and Crook, that the Lessee shall be bound. for
otherwise many Bailments and Judgments shall be defeated, which will bring a
great Inconvenience: And Mountague said, that it was like to the case of a
bargain and sale of Land, which after it is Enrolled, within six months shall
relate to the beginning of the Bargain, so upon the Judgment given, relation is
made from the time of the Bailment. But Haughton being contra, therefore, Curia
advisare vult.

The same Term in the same Court. The Earl of Shrewsburies Case.
Upon a Verdict, a rule was given to have Judgment, and this was upon the
Thursday, and upon S^^u^day after the party that was Plaintiff died, and it was
moved to have a Writ of Error, because it was said, that the party died before
Judgment, in as much as of course after the Verdict, and the ^ule given for
Judgment, there are four days given to speak in Arrest In the di^cretion of
the chief justice to allow a Writ of Error. The entry of a Judgment how it
shall relate.
of Judgment; ^^o so as Yelverton Attorney-generall said, he died before
Judgment absolutely given: and he moved the Court to have a Supersedeas: And it
was agreed that it was in the discretion of the chief Justice, Ex officio, to
allow a Writ of Error, but because it was a cause of great consequence, he took
the advice of the Court, and it was agreed that a Writ of Error was a
Supersedeas in it self, yet it is good to have a Supersedeas also; and if the
Writ of Error had been allowed, the Court could not deny the party a
Supersedeas: But because the Writ of Error was not allowed, and also because no
Error appeared to the Court, for where Judgment is entered, this shall relate to
the time of the rule given: It was resolved that no Writ of Error should be
allowed, nor any Supersedeas granted.

The same Term in the same Court. Rones Case.
IN an Ejectione firmae brought by the Lessee of Rone, Incumbent of the Church
of Dallinghoe in Com. Suff. It was found by special Verdict, that the King was
the true Patron, and that Wingfeild entered a Caveat, in vita Incumbentis, he
then lying in Extremis, scilicet, Caveat Episcopus ne quis admittatur, etc.
Nisi Convocatus, the said Wingfeild; the Incumbent dies, Naunton a stranger
presents one Morgan who is admitted and instituted, afterward the said
Wingfeild presents one Glover who is instituted and inducted, and afterward
the said Rone procure a presentation from the King who was instituted and
inducted, and then it came in question in the Spiritual Court who had the best
right, and there sentence was given that the first institution was Irrita vacua
and inanis, by reason of the Caveat, and then the Church being full of the
second Incumbent, the King was put out of possession, and so his presentment
void: But it was adjudged and resolved by all the Court for Rone, for 1. It was
resolved that this Caveat was void, because it was in the life of the
Incumbent. 2. The Church upon the Institution of Morgan was full against all
but the King, and so agreed many times in the Books, and then the presentation
of Glover was void by reason of the superinstitution, and therefore no obstacle
in the way to hinder the presentation of Rone, and therefore Rone had good
right: And if the second institution be void, the sentence cannot make it good,
for the Spiritual Court ought to take notice of the Common Law, which says,
that Ecclesia est plena and consulta, upon the institution, and the person has
thereby Curam animarum. And as Doderidge Justice said, he has by it Officium,
but Beneficium comes by the Induction: And although by the Spiritual Law the
institution may be disannulled by sentence, yet as Linwood says, Aliter est in
Anglia, who is an Author very well approved of amongst the Civilians: And
Doderidge put a case out of Doctor and Studient, the second Book: If a man
devise a sum of money to be paid to I. S. when he comes to full age, and
afterward he sues for it in the Spiritual Court, they ought to take notice of
the time of full age, as it is used by the Common Law, to wit, 21. and not of
the time of full age as it is used amongst them, to wit, 25. So in this case at
the Bar, for when these two Laws met together, the Common Law ought to be
preferred: And when the Parson has institution, the Archdeacon ought to give
him Induction: And see Dyer 293. Bedingfeilds case cited by Haughton to accord
with this case.

The same Term in the same Court. Tailors Case.
JOhn Tailor a Citizen and Alderman of Gloucester, was put out of his place by
the Common Counsel of the City, for some misdemeanor, and he sued out a Writ of
Restitution, and for that the cause of his displacing was not sufficient Writ
of Restitution for an Aldermans place.
his Writ was allowed, by reason whereof the other Alderman who was elected in
his place was to be removed, for the number of Aldermen was full: But Hazard
another Alderman, to the end that the new elect (who now was Major) should not
be displaced, was contented to surrender his place, in consideration of 10 l. a
year granted to him by the Corporation for term of his life, with which the
Wife of Hazard was not content, and therefore he would have left his agreement:
And thereupon the question was, whether he might surrender, or not: And it was
said by Coventree Solicitor, that he cannot; and he cited Middlecots case an
Alderman of B. where the opinion of the Court was, 13 Eliz. that he cannot
surrender: Doderidge, perhaps they would not except his surrender: Mountague
said, that Alderman Martin of London, gave up his Aldermans place, and without
question any man in such a case may surrender or leave his place, to which the
Court agreed, and therefore it was ordered that Hazard shall have his 10 l. a
year, and that he shall stand to his first agreement.

The same Term in the same Court. May and Samuels Case.
AN action of Debt was brought upon an Obligation, the Condition whereof was to
stand to the Arbitrament of John S. concerning all matters between them to the
time of the submission, who arbitrates that the one shall pay 20 s. and that
the other shall make a general release to him of all matters, from the
beginning of the world to the time of the arbitrament. Arbitrament.


Haughton Justice, this is an arbitrament but of one part, and therefore void,
but if it had been only that the one shall pay 20 s. it may be good, for it
shall be intended that the other by reasonable construction shall be discharged
or acquitted, to which Crook and Doderidge Justices agreed. But by Mountague
chief Justice, it ought to be specified; yet they all agreed, and so it was
adjudged that this was a void arbitrament, for it was of the one part only, to
wit, that he shall pay 20 s. for the other part for the release to the time of
the arbitrament was not within the submission; so if the arbitrament had been,
that the one shall make a release, or shall be discharged or acquitted without
speaking of the other, this being on the one part only is a void arbitrament,
vide Co. lib. 8. Baspoles case, and 7 H. 6. 40. accordingly.

The same Term in the same Court. Vaughans Case.
THomas Dedham had to Apprentice one Holland, who got his Main with Child, and
afterward departed from his Masters Service, and staid a whole night with
Vaughan his Kinsman, and Dedham procured a Warrant from S. Stephen Soame a
Justice of Peace, that the Constable should bring the said Apprentice to order
according to Law, and because that Vaughan persuaded him to withdraw himself,
so that he should not be taken by virtue of the Warrant he was indicted.

And it was agreed that it was lawful for Vaughan to lodge and relieve him,
albeit he knew his misdeeds, they being no Treason or Felony: But Haughton
Justice took exception to the Indictment, because no place appeared where he
persuaded him to withdraw himself from the Warrant, or in truth that he did
hide himself from the Warrant, for if he did not so, the persuasion was nothing.

And Doderidge took another exception to the Warrant, because the Statute
says, that two Justices, of which one of them shall be of the Quorum, shall
proceed in such cases against the Malefactor, and that they shall compel the
party to allow means for the education of the Infant, or otherwise the Offender
shall suffer corporal punishment, and so this Warrant not being special
according.

Pasch. 16. Jac. In the Star Chamber. Wrennums Case.
SIr Henry Yelverton Attorney-generall, exhibited an Information in the Star
Chamber, against one Wrennum, Ore tenus, because he had diverse times petitioned
the King against Sir Francis Bacon Lord Chancellor, pretending that the said
Lord Bacon had done great Injustice to him, in granting an Injunction, and
awarding Possession of Land against him, for which he had two decrees in the
time of the former Chancellor: And also he made a Book of all the proceedings
in the said cause between him and one Fisher, and dedicated and delivered it to
the King, in which he notoriously traduced and scandalized the said Chancellor,
saying, that for this unjust decree, he, his Wife and Children were murdered,
and by the worst kind of death by starving: And that now he having done
unjustly, he must maintain it by speaking untruths, and that he must use his
authority, Wit, Art, and Eloquence, for the better maintenance thereof, with
other such like scandalous words: And the Attorney cited a president, 2 Jac.
Where one Ford for an offense in the like manner against the late Chancellor
was censured in this Court, that he should be perpetnally imprisoned, and pay
the fine of 1000 l. and that he should ride upon a Horse with his face to the
tail, from the Fleet to Westminster, with his fault written upon his head, and
that he should acknowledge his offense in all the Courts at Westminster, and
that he should stand there a reasonable time upon the Pillory, and that one of
his ears shall be cut off, and from thence shall be carried to Prison again,
and in the like manner should go to Cheapside, and should have his other ear
cut off, etc. And because they conceived that the said Wrennum had wronged the
said Lord Chancellor in the said suggestion, they all agreed in his censure
according to the said President: See for such matter, 19. Ass. 5. 9 H. 8. Sir
Rowland Heywards case, and 21 H. 8. Cardinal Wolseys case.

The same Term in the Kings Bench. Mingies Case.
AWrit of Annuity was brought by Mingy, which was granted, Pro Consilio impenso
and impendendo, the Defendant pleaded in Bar that he carried a Bill to the
Plaintiff, to have him set his hand to it, and because he refused Annuity pro
Consil. impenso, etc.
he detained the said Annuity: And per Curiam this is no plea, for he is bound
to give advice, but not to set his hand to every Bill, for this may be
inconventent to him.

The same Term in the same Court.
THe Case was this: A Lessee for years was bound in a Bond to give up the
possession of the Land demised to the Lessor, or his Assigns, at the end of the
Term, the Lessor assigns over his Interest, and the Assignee requires the
Lessee to perform the Condition, who answers, that he knew not Notice where
requisite.
whether he were the Assignee, and thereupon refuses: And the question was,
whether he had broken the Condition, and it was adjudged that he had, for he
has taken upon him so to do, and it is not like a Condition annexed to an
Estate, as Co. lib. 5. Mallories case, or Co. lib. 6. Greens case, where the
Patron presented his Clark to a deprivation, yet the Ordinary ought to give the
Patron notice of the deprivation; for it is a thing Spiritual, of which a
Layman shall not be bound to take notice.

It was moved, that a man riding upon a Horse through the water was Dead and.
drowned, and by the Coroners Inquest it was found that his death was caused,
Per cursum aquae, and the Horse was not found a Deodand, and per Curiam they
did well, for the water, and not the Horse was the cause of his death.

The same Term in the same Court. Wooton versus Bye.
THe case was this: A man made a Lease for years, rendering Rent, and upon
payment of the Rent the Lessor made an Acquittance, by a release of all
Actions, Duties, and Demands, from the beginning of the World to Release of all
Demands bars a future Rent.
the day of the date: And whether the Rent to come were released by it, was the
question: And it was moved by Crook at the Bar, that it was not, for a Covenant
in future shall not be released by such words, yet a release of all Covenants
will be good in such a case, as the Book is in Dyer 57. so Hoes case, Co. lib.
5. 70. b. such a release will not discharge a Bail before Judgment. But it was
answered and resolved by the Court, that such a Release will discharge the
Rent, to come for this word (Demand) is the most large and ample word in a
Release that may be, as Littleton says, and in Co. lib. 8. Althams case, and
in Hoes case, Co. lib. 5. one was Bail for the Defendant, the words whereof are
conditionable, Scil. Si contigerit predict. defendent. debit and damna illa
prefat. Quer. minime solvere, etc. So that before Iudment it is altogether
uncertain, and therefore cannot be released, but in the case at the Bar he has
Jus ad rem, though not in re, as Crook Justice said.

The same Term in the same Court. Bret versus Cumberland.
IN a Writ of Covenant the case was thus: Queen Elizabeth by her Letters
Patents made a Lease of certain Mills, rendering Rent, in which Lease were these
words, to wit, That the said Lessee his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns,
should from time to time repair the Mills, and so leave them at the end of the
Term, the Lessee assigns over his Term, the Queen also grants over the
Reversion, the first Lessee dies, and the Grantee of the Reversion brings a
Writ of Covenant against his Executors; In which case there were two points. 1.
Whether these words. And the said Lessee his Executors, Administrators, and
Assigns, shall from time to time, etc. make a Covenant, or Whether Covenant
lies against the Executor of a Lessee after assignment.
no. 2. Whether (as this case is) it will lie against the Executors of the
Lessee.

As to the first point it was agreed that it is a Covenant, for being by
Indenture it is the words of both parties, and it is more strong being in the
case of the Queen.

Haughton laid, that 25 H. 8. Tit. Covenant. Covenant will lie against a Lessee
after assignment, but Debt lies not for Rent after the Lessee has accepted
the Assignee for his Tenant, and therefore it seems that by the express words
of the Covenant that the Action lies.

Doderidge Justice contra, for between the Queen and the Lessee there is
privity of Contract, and also of Estate, so that the Queen her Heirs and
Successors might have had an action against the Lessee or his Executors, upon
the privity of Contract; and where the Lessee ^ssigns over, the privity of
Contract remains, but the privity of Estate is gone to the Assignee, and now
when the Queen grants over the Reversion, the privity of Contract is utterly
determined, whereby the Action of Covenant cannot be maintained against the
first Lessee, or his Executors, who are more remote: to which Mountague chief
Justice agreed, see 2 H. 4. 6. 6. H. 4. 1. and Co. lib. 3. Walkers case, and
the Judgments there cited, Et adjournator.

The same Term in the same Court. Bennet versus Westbeck.
THe Case was thus: Tenant for life, Remainder for life, Reversion in Fee, he
in Remainder for life gives his Deed of Demise (with the assent of the first
Tenant for life) upon the Land to a stranger in the absence of the Lessor, and
said, that he surrendered to him in Reversion: And it was said, that this
Surrender being without Deed was not good to him who was absent, and to confirm
it, the case was put out of 27 H. 8. Where Mountague chief Justice said, that
if a Feoffment be made to four, and Livery is made to one in the absence of the
other, but in name of all, if it be by Deed this shall enure to all, but if it
be without Deed, then only to him to whom the Livery was made: So here this
Surrender does not enure to him in the Reversion, being absent. Whether Tenant
for life in Remainder may surrender without Deed.


But Non aliocatur, for the sole point now in question, was, whether he in
Remainder for life can surrender without Deed, and as to it this Rule was
taken; viz. That that which cannot commence without Deed, cannot be granted
without Deed, as a Rent, Reversion, common Advowson, etc. as 19 H. 6. 33. 14 H
7. 3. 1, and 2. Ph. and Mar. 110. 22. Ass Pl. 16. But in this case this took
effect by Livery and not by Deed, and therefore might be determined without Deed.

Mountague and Haughton agreed that it might be surrendered without Deed,
because it had its beginning without Deed, but it could not be granted over
without Deed.

Doderidge Justice said, that it could not be surrendered without Deed, but he
said, that Tenant in possession may, or Tenant for life, and he in Remainder
together may surrender to him in the Reversion, but this shall innure as two
several Surrenders, first of him in Remainder to the Tenant for life, and then
by the Tenant for life to him in the Reversion.

Crook Justice agreed with Doderidge, for the Estate of him in Possession is an
Estoppell to the Surrender, so that it could not be surrendered without Deed.

The same Term in the same Court. Thurman versus Cooper.
IN an Ejectione firmae brought by John Thurman against William Cooper, upon
the whole matter the case was thus: Lands were given to a man and woman (who
afterward inter-marry) and to their Heirs and Assigns, Habendum to them and to
the Heirs of their two bodies engendered, the remainder to them and the
Survivor of them, with warranty to them and their Heirs and Assigns for ever.
And the question was what Estate this shall be? whether an Estate-tail or
Fee-simple? or a Fee-tail with a simple Expectant? And it was said that this
shall be an Estate-tail only, for the Habendum qualifies the general words
precedent, and with this agrees Perkins 35. b. and Co. lib. 8. 154. b. Althams
case: But it was answered and resolved by the whole Court, that this is a
Fee-tail with a Fee-simple expectant; and they observed these Rules.

1. That every Deed shall be taken most strong against him that made it.

2. That every Deed shall be construed according to the intent of the maker, so
that all the parts may be effectual if they can stand together with the Rules
of Law, 40 E. 3. 5, Percy says, that it is a Fee-simple, 21 H. 6. 7. that it
is an Estate-tail with a Fee-simple expectant, Dyer 160. and Plow. Paramore,
and Yardleys case, the Law shall make an order of words where there is no order
put by the parties; and the words after the Remainder limited, are Tenendum de
Capitalibus Dominis feodi, etc. and therefore it ought to be a Fee-simple, for
if it were a Fee-tail, he should hold of the Donor, as it is in Co. lib. 6. Sir
John Molins case, and other Books: And although the Warranty cannot enlarge an
Estate, yet this expresses his intent to pass a Fee-simple, and the Law shall
make a construction that the Fee-tail shall precede, upon which the Fee-simple
shall be expectant, according to that which is before said, in Paramore and
Yardleys case.

Doderidge, If the Habendum had been to a stranger, the Premises had been but
a Tail, as 7 H. 4. for otherwise the Habendum shall be void: But if Land be
given to one and his Heirs (viz. In Tail) or if the said Donce dye without
Issue of his body, this had been but an Estate-tail only, because it immediately
checks and confirms the Premises, to which Haughton agreed, Et adjournator.

The same Term in the same Court. Powels Case.
POwel an Vtter-Barister of the Temple, and also Town-Clark of Plimoth, brought
an Action upon the Case against for these Words, That he was a Puritan Knave, a
precise Knave, a bribing Knave, a corrupted Knave, etc.
words; The Defendant supposing that the Plaintiff had wronged him in the Court
of Plimoth, said, that he was a Puritan Knave, a precise Knave, a bribing
Knave, a corrupted Knave, and that he would make him answer for that which he
had done in another place: And after Verdict for the Plaintiff, it was now
moved in Arrest of Judgment that the words were not actionable, because he does
not scandalize him in his Profession by which he acquires his Living.

And Mountague chief Justice said, that this word Bribing does not import that
he took a Bribe, and therefore this word and all the other words, but (corrupted
Knave) are idle, but these words impeacheth him in his Office, for it has
reference to that, and therefore is actionable: And Judgment was given
accordingly.

The same Term in the same Court. Sir Baptist Hickes Case in the Star Chamber.
SIr Baptist Hickes having done diverse Pions and Charitable Acts, to wit, had
founded at Camden in Glocestershire, an Hospital for twelve poor and impotent
men and women, and had made in the same Town a new Bell tunable to others, a
new Pulpit, and adorned it with a Cushion and Cloth, and had bestowed cost on
the Sessions House in Middlesex, etc. one Austin Garret a Copyholder of his
Manor of Camden, out of private malice had framed and writ a malicious and
invective Letter to him, in which in an ironicall and deriding manner, he said,
that the said Sir Baptist had done these charitable works, as the proud
Pharisee for vainglory and oftentation, and to have popular applause, and
further in appro^rtous manner taxed him with diverse other unlawful Acts: And
it was resolved by the Court that for such private Letters an Action upon the
case does not lie at Common Law, for he cannot prove his case, to wit, the
publishing of it, but because Where a private Letter is punishable as a Libell.
it tends to the breach of the Peace it is punishable in this Court, and the
rather in this case, because it tends to a public wrong, for if it should be
unpunished, it would not only deter and discourage Sir Baptist from doing such
good Acts, but other men also who are well disposed in such cases; and therefore
(as the Archbishop observed) this was a wrong, 1. To Piety, in respect of the
cost bestowed on the Church. 2. To charity, in regard of the Hospital. 3. To
Justice in consideration of the Session House; and these things were the more
commendable in Sir Baptist, because he did them in his life time: For as
Mountague chief Justice observed, they who do such acts by their Will, do show
that they have no will to do them, for they cannot keep their Goods any longer.
And he only took a diversity where such a Letter concerns public matter as
they did, or private in which case it is not punishable.

But the Lord Coke said, that it was the opinion of the Judges in the Lord
Treasurers case, when he was Attorney, that such a private Letter was
punishable in this Court, and thereupon he had instructions to exhibit an
Information, but the Lord Treasurer Jacens in extremis was content to pardon
him; and so it was resolved between Wooton and Edwards: And Sir Francis Bacon
Lord Chancellor said, that the reason why such a private Letter shall be
punished, is, because that it in a manner enforces the party to whom the
Letter is directed to publish it to his friends to have their advice, and for
fear that the other party would publish it, so that this compulsary publication
shall be deemed a publication in the Delinquent; and in this case the party was
fined at 500 l.

The same Term in the same Court. Bernard versus Beale.
AN Action upon the case was brought for these words; viz. That the Words, That
the Plaintiff had two Bastards 36. yea^s since
Plaintiff had two Bastards 36. years ago, upon the report whereof he was in
danger to have been divorced: And it was resolved that for Defamation there was
no remedy but in the Spiritual Court, if he had no temporal less thereby, and
therefore it is not sufficient to ground an Action to say, that he was in danger
to be diverced, but that he was De facto, divorced, or that he was to have a
presentment in marriage, as it is in Anne Devies case, Co. lib. 4.

The same Term in the same Court. Brabin and Tradums Case.
THe Case was, That the Churchwardens of D. had used time out of mind to
dispose and order all the Seats of the Church, whereupon they disposed of a Seat
to one, and the Ordinary granted the same Seat to another and his A Prohibition
for a Seat in the Church
Heirs, and excommunicated all others, who afterward should sit in the Seat,
and a Prohibition was prayed and granted, for this grant of a Seat to one and
his Heirs is not good, for the Seat does not belong to the person, but to the
house, for otherwise when the person goes out of the Town to dwell in another
place, yet he shall retain the Seat, which is no reason, and also it is no
reason to excommunicate all others that should sit there, for such great
punishments should not be imposed upon such small Offenders, an Excommunication
being Traditio diabola.

In the same Term in the same Court. Fulcher versus Griffin.
THe Parson of D. covenanted with one of his Parishoners that he should A
Parson covenant that his Parishoners shall pay no Tithes.
pay no Tithes, for which the Parishoner covenanted to pay to the Parson an
annual sum of money, and afterward the Tithes not being paid, the Parson
sued him in the Court Christian, and the other prayed a Prohibition: And it was
agreed, that if no interest of Tithes pass but a bare Covenant, then the party
who is sued for the Tithes has no remedy but a Writ of Covenant: And the
better opinion of the Court in this case was, that this was a bare Covenant,
and that no interest in the Tithes pass.

The custody of a Copyholder that was a Lunatic, was committed to Darcies case
in the Common Pleas.
I. S. and for Trespass done upon his Land, it was demanded of the Court in
whose name J. S. should bring the action, and their opinion was, that it should
be in the name of the Lunatic.

Trinity 16. Jac. In the Kings Bench. The Earl of Northumberlands Case.
THe Earl of Northumberland being seized of the Manor of Thistleworth, in
which he had a Leet to be holden twice a year, to wit, within a month after
Easter, and a month after Michaelmas, and Henry Devell being a Freeholder of
the said Manor erected a new Dove-coat at Heston within the Precinct of the
said Leet, which was presented at the Leet for a common Nuisance, for which
Devell was amerced 40 s. and was commanded to remove it upon pain of 10 l. for
the which a Distress was taken by Henry Sanders and others, as Bailiffs to the
said Earl, whereupon Devell brought a Replevin, and they made Avowry and
justified as Bailiffs, and prescribed that they used to make bylaws to
redress common Nusances, and also prescribed in the Distress. And the point
in question was, whether the new erecting of a Dove-coat by a Freeholder were
a common Nuisance, and punishable Whether the erecting of a Dove-coat be a
common Nuisance.
in the Leet: And; it was resolved by the whole Court upon great deliberation,
viz. Mountague chief Justice, Crook, Doderidge and Haughton Justices, that it
was not a common Nuisance, either punishable or inquirable in a Leet; and by
Haughton a man has Jus proprietatis and privilegii in the Doves. 1. Propriety
in respect of the place, as 22 H. 6. 39. Trespass lies for taking a Goshawk in
respect of the place, as 3 H. 6. 55. For Hares, and Spencers case in Dyer, and
so of other things which are Ferae naturae. And if a Deer goes out of a Park,
albeit it be in the Kings case, yet it is lawful for the Owner of the Sail to
take it, if it be in the place where the Deer bath chase and re-chase: And by
the Register and Fitzherbert it appears that Trespass lies Quaere columbare
fregit, and Columbas cepit: But 16 E. 4. 7. Trespass does not lie for killing
of Doves, but there is a Quaere of an action upon the case, and because the
Doves do no Trespass, neither is there any remedy for the killing of them,
therefore they are no common Nuisance; for by Brook 34 H. 6. Brooks action upon
the case, the common custom is the common Law, and there is no authority
against it, but Co. lib. 5. 104. Boulstons case, which is only on the by^, and
is not agreeing with the reason of the principal, and this confirms my
opinion, Quod fiat concessum per totam Curiam, for there the principal case
was that a man made Cony-burrows, and the Conies strayed into his Neighbors
grounds, and adjudged that it was not actionable; but it was lawful for any
man to kill them upon his own ground; so here, etc.

Doderidge, It may be a hurt to the Commonwealth, but not a public Nuisance,
for that ought to be immediate, or general.

1. Immediate it cannot be, for the erecting of a Dove-coat cannot in it self
be a Nuisance.

2. It is not general but particular to the Neighboring Inhabitants: And it
has been allowed of all sides, that a man may have a Dove-coat by
prescription, which could not be if it were a Nuisance; to which Mountague
agreed: And it is lawful for any man to kill the Doves upon his own Land, but
they must be ware that they do it not against any Statute, for Doves are
preserved by many Statutes, as by the Statute of Wales, made in the time of E.
1. and the Statute of 18 E. 2. gives directions that the killing of Doves shall
be presented at the Leet: And the Statute of 18 Eliz. ordains that Doves shall
not be shot.

3. However the Replevin lies for a fault in the pleading, for the harm and
nuisance which the Doves do is laid to be Per totam patriam, whereas it ought to
be within the Precinct of the Leet; to which Mountague agreed.

Crook, A man has property in the Doves only by the Possession, for being at
large, they are Nullius in bonis, and when they are in his possession, to wit,
in the Dove-coat, they do no harm to any: and it was lately ruled in this
C^u^t, that a man cannot lay Loggs in the Kings high way, although there be
sufficient room for Passengers, because it is a wrong to have the high way
strained; so here a Prescription should not be good if it were a Nuisance, for
it is all one to erect a great Dove-coat, or a little one, for a Nuisance Non
recipit magis aut minus: And Bolstons case rather confirms then increases my
doubt, and so I agree with my Brethren.

Mountague, A man has Jus duplex in Doves. 1. Jus proprietatis. 2. Jus
privilegii, for they fly to and again, and (as Bracton says) have Animum
revertendi, and so have not other things which are Ferox naturae: And it is a
good Argument that this matter was never questioned, for it is without
question. Littleton says in the case of Disparagement, 21 E. 3. 4. They of the
Leet ought to enquire of such things as have been enquirable, yet the excess
thereof is restrainable by the Justices of Assise.

A Precipe lies of a Dove-coat, as appears by the Verse, Mich. Col. and Dower
and Partition lies thereof, which shows it to be lawful, and by the Excess of
Dove-coats restrainable by the Justices of Assise.
Book of 17 E. 4. 7. It seems that it is not lawful to take Doves: And as a
man cannot prescribe to do a Nuisance, so the King cannot license one to do it:
And therefore I agree that Judgment shall be given for the Dove-coat.

The same Term in the same Court. Richardson versus Cabell.
RIchardson, being a Parson, libelled against Cabell in the Spiritual Court
for Tithes, because the said Cabell being an Innkeeper, took all the benefit
of his Pasture by putting in Guest Horses into his Pasture, whereupon Cabell
prayed a Prohibition, and it was not granted, for it is Tithable in this case:
But if Cabell had taken a crop of Hay, and afterward he had put Guest Horses
into the Pasture, in that case it had not been Where tithes shall be paid for
grass of guest Horses:
Tithable, for he had his Tithe before, and thereby it should seem that some
Crop is not Tithable.

The same Term in the same Court. Southern versus How.
RAlph Southern Plaintiff in an Action upon the Case against Robert How, shows
for his case, That the Defendant being a Goldsmith in London, and having
Counterfeit Jewels, knowing them to be counterfeit, sent William Saldock his
Servant with them to the Plaintiff, being a Merchant in Barbary, to use him for
the sale of the Jewels to the King of Barbary, and the Plaintiff thereupon sold
them to the King of Barbary for 800 l. and Saldock having received the said
money, went from thence; And the Jewels being afterward discovered to be
counterfeit, the Plaintiff was taken and enforced by Imprisonment to make
restitution of the money to the said King. But it was said by the Court, that
the Verdict did not prove the case, for it was found that the Defendant did not
command his Servant to make use of the Plaintiff, nor to sell to the King, but
generally to any: And that the Jewels were of some worth, Scil. 80 l. And it
was agreed at the Bar, by Davenport, that in this case the action well lies,
for the Master shall answer for Where a Master shall be answerable for his
Servant, and where not.
his Servant, Dyer 151. the Lord Norths case, 5 E. 4. 1. the Sheriff shall be
amerced for the ill return of his Bailiff: And if I command my Servant to kill
one, who commands another, in this case the Master shall not be punished, but
in Trespass all are principals, and 2 H. 4. 18. If a Servant burns his Masters
house, whereby another house is burnt, there the Master shall answer for it, for
14 H. 8. 31. b. an Action upon the case lies where there is no other action
provided for such a thing, so that an action well lies in this case, and see
Doctor and Student 137. in what case the Master shall answer for his Servant.

Coventry Solicitor, to the contrary, for it was lawful for the Plaintiff to
command his Servant to sell them, for it was found by the Verdict that the
Jewels were of some worth and value, and he did not command him to sell them
for more then they were worth, and 9 H. 6. 53. b. If the Master send his
Servant into a Fair, or Market, to Merchandise for him, the Master shall not be
punished for his fault. And in this case the command was not to deal with the
Plaintiff, or to sell to any one in particular, and for it see 9 H. 6.
aforesaid: And if the Servant will exceed the lawful command of his Master,
the Master shall not be punished therefore, but if the command be unlawful it
is otherwise, 11 E. 4. 6. A man sells cloth of such a length, which proves to
be short of the length, an action lies not without a Warranty, so Fitz. N. B.
64. c. For Wine if it be warranted to be good, an action lies if it be corrupt.
If my Beasts go into another man's Soil, an action lies against me, but if my
Servant drive my Beast into another man's Soil, I shall not be punished, for he
does this of his own wrong, without any such warrant from me, 13 H. 7. b. And
if when a man sell a thing for more then it is worth, an action would lie for
it, we should never have an end of actions. And the action does not lie for
another reason, because it does not appear that the King of Barbary did
lawfully imprison the Plaintiff, 26 H. 8. 3. If a man makes a Lease, and
covenants that he shall not be disturbed, if a stranger disturb him, an action
lies not against the Covenantor, so here, etc. for it seems it was Ex regali
potestate, and not in a lawful manner, and so he concluded that the action
will not lie, and so it was resolved by the whole Court.

Mountague chief Justice, the Plaintiff is no party who shall have the action
but the King of Barbary. 2. The Verdictis contrary to the Declaration, and
Jewels are in value according to the estimation, and therefore 38 Eliz. between
Simson and Sanders in the Star Chamber, it was resolved that a man shall not be
punished for Perjury upon the valuation of Jewels.

Doderidge said, that 22 Eliz. an action upon the case was brought in the
Common Pleas by a Clothier, that whereas he had gained great reputation for his
making of his Cloth, by reason whereof he had great utterance to his great
benefit, and profit, and that he used to set his mark to his Cloth, whereby it
should be known to be his Cloth: And another Clothier perceiving it, used the
same mark to his ill-made Cloth on purpose to deceive him, and it was resolved
that the Action did well lie.

The same Term in the same Court.
Upon an Indictment of Barretry before the Justices of Wales, a Certiorari was
moved for to remove it into this Court: And it was said at the Bar that it had
not been seen from the time of E. I. that such a Writ A Certiorar^ granted into
Wales.
had been granted in the like case, and therefore he collected that it ought not
to be granted: But it was resolved by the Court, that a Certiorari should be
granted, in regard it is in the Kings case; and by Haughton Justice,
notwithstanding the Statute Quod communia placita non sequantur Curiam meam yet
it is plain, that the King may sue in what Court he will: And albeit this Writ
in such a case ought not to be granted in case of a common person, yet that is
no reason but that it may be granted in the case of the King.

The same Term in the same Court. Sir Henry Glemhams Case.
IN a Quo warranto against Sir Henry Glemham for using certain Liberties, to
which Sir Henry pleaded in Bar, and the Kings Attorney replied, and so this
matter rested three years, and then the Kings Attorney put in a new
Replication, and joined Issue upon other points: And it was moved for the
Defendant that he might put in a new Bar, in regard the Replication A Plea not
to be amended in another Term, without assent of parties.
is altered, and nothing was entered, but all remained in paper: And it was
agreed by the Court that the King shall not be concluded but that he might put
in his Replication at any time; And that the King cannot make a double Plea,
for the other party shall answer first to one, and then to the other: And the
Court would not allow Sir Henry to make a new Bar in this case, without the
assent of the Attorney, who would by no means agree to it: And in case of a
common person, this shall not be allowed without the assent of parties.

The same Term in the same Court.
IN an Action of Trover and Conversion between one Nicholas and William Ward,
it was agreed that tithe Lamb and Wool was included within small Tithes: And
Mountague said, that a Vicaridge endowed Lamb and Wool included in small
Tithes.
might be appropriated but not to the parson, to which Haughton and Doderidge
agreed, 31 H. 6. Fitz. tit. Indicavit, is that such a Vicaridge may be
dissolved: An appropriation may be by the King sole where he is Patron, but
there is no Book that it might be by the Patron sole. Grindons case in Plowden,
and 17 E. 3. 39. An Appropriation cannot be without the Kings license.

The same Term in the same Court. Blaxton versus Heath.
IN an Action of Debt by Blaxton against Heath, the case was this. A man
possessed of a term for twenty years, in right of his Wife, made a Lease for
ten years, rendering rent to him, his Executors, and Assigns, and died. And the
question was whether the Wife shall have the rent after his death, or his
Executors, and it was argued, that the wife should not have it, because she was
in by a Title Paramount; as if there be two Joynt-tenants for life, the one
makes a Lease for years rendering rent, and dies, the other shall not have the
Rent, Dyer 167. and so of Joynt-tenants in fee, Co. lib. 1. 96. and Perkins
accordingly: To which Mountague chief Justice agreed, for he said, it was but
an extract of ten out of twenty, the remainder continuing as before: And
Redditus is Reventus, a turning again, but it is otherwise of a Condition,
which is a new Creature, of which the wife shall take no advantage.

Crook Justice, This is a special reservation, and therefore the Executor shall
have it, and not the wife, for she comes in Paramount, as in the case of
Ioyn-tenants: Haughton agreed thereunto, and said, that the Rent shall be
incident to him who has the Reversion under the Lessor, who is the Executor:
And Mountague demanded of Hobert chief Justice of the Common Pleas, his opinion
in this case, who agreed that the wife shall not have it.

The same Term in the same Court. Dennis versus Sir Arthur Mannaring, and
others.
IN the great case between Gabriel Dennis Plaintiff, in Trespass against Sir
Arthur Mannaring and Brimblecomb, and others, the Verdict was found for the
Defendants: And now it was moved in Arrest of Judgment for the Plaintiff,
because no Bail was entered for Brimblecomb one of the Defendants, A Verdict is
given in B: ^: before any bail entered, not good.
for every Defendant is supposed in Custodia Marescalli, and in this case the
Venire facias is awarded to try the Issue between the Plaintiff and Defendants,
where one of the Defendants is no party in Court: And Sergeant More put the
case of the Lord Chandoys and Sculler, and other Defendants, where the Judgment
in such a case was resolved to be erroneous.

Mountague, we ought Discernere per legem quid sit justum, and here Brimblecomb
being no party in Court, no Verdict could be given.

Doderidge, I have seen in this Court, where upon a Writ of Error brought in
such a case, we have compelled him to put in his Bail, because he should not
take advantage of his own wrong and folly: But because that here no fraud
appeared to be in the Plaintiff, he shall not be bound to stand to the Verdict:
Haughton agreed, but Crook seemed to the contrary: But it was agreed, that if
Brimblecomb had appeared at the Suit of any other, the same Term, it had been
sufficient: And these Books were cited to be in the point, 32 H. 6. 2. 8 E. 4.
5. 21 H. 6. 10.

The same Term in the same Court. Hide versus Whistler.
WIlliam Hide made a Lease for years of certain Lands to Whistler, excepting
Exception of all Wood, under-wood, Coppices and Hedgerows.
to the Lessor all his Wood and under-wood, Coppices and Hedgerows; and in a
Replevin the question was, whether the Soil shall pass there by* for the Lessee
put his Beasts into a Coppice, and the Lessor distrained them, whereupon, etc.
And the words of the exception were further, standing, growing, and being in
and upon the Premises: And the Lessee covenanted to make Fences, but if the
Lessor made new Coppices, that the Lessee should net make Fences about them.
And it was said, that a Coppice signifies a parcel of Land fenced for the
safeguard of young Trees. And it was said for A Coppice, what it is.
the Plaintiff, that Premises are Pre dimissa, and by these words, growing,
and being in the Premises, it shall be intended that the Soil did not pass,
for it is pre-demised: But it was resolved that the Soil it self was excepted
by the exception of the Wood and Coppice, 14 H. 8. 1. The Bishop of Londons
case, Co. lib. 5. Ives case, and lib. 11. Lyfords case: And by the reserving of
a Coppice the Soil it self is reserved; for by Mountague, that which is
reserved is not demised, and so the Distress well taken. Crook agreed, and he
said the difference was good between Wood and Trees, for by the excepting of
Wood, the Soil it self is excepted, otherwise of Trees: Haughton agreed that
the Soil it self is excepted in this case, and so it was adjudged.

The same Term in the same Court. Talbot versus Sir Walter Lacen.
IN a Writ of Covenant brought by Margaret Talbot against Sir Walter Lacen.
upon a Lease made by the Plaintiff to the Defendant, of a Park, Covenant to
leave the Premistes in repatations at the end of the Term.
etc. for five years, if she should live so long, in which the Lessee covenants
for him, his Executors and Assigns, to keep the Premises in good Reparations,
and so to leave them at the end of the Term, and also to deliver to the
Plaintiff (upon notice given) four Bucks, and four Does in season, during the
life of the Plaintiff, in every of the said years: And after the expiration of
the aforesaid term of five years she brought a Writ of Covenant, and assigned
the breach, because that in the end of the term he committed Wast, and because
that after the end of the term the Defendant refused to deliver the Deer; And
albeit the words of the delivery of the Deer are, during the life of the
Plaintiff, yet they are also every of the aforesaid years, and therforeit was
resolved that she shall not have them during her life in this case.

And for the other point it was objected, that in Fine termini, was uncertain,
for it may extend after the term, but Ad finem termini had been sufficient, Old
book of Entries, 169. for when he covenants that at the end of the term, he
would leave the Premises in reparations, and Ad finem termini, he did wast,
this ought of necessity to be intended a breach of the Covenant, and therefore
it was adjudged that the action of Covenant well lies.

Mich 16. Jac. In the Kings Bench. Havergall and Hares Case.
IN this Case (which see before, fol. 1. b.) four points were observed.

1. Whether Fisher the Assignee of the Rent were such a person who Before fol.
1. b
shall take benefit of the entry?

2. When 10 l. is only in arrear, whether the Rent of 20 l. shall be said in
arrear?

3. Whether these advantages which were first granted with the Rent may be
granted over?

4. When the Use shall rise, whether upon the first Indenture of the grant of
the Rent, or afterward? For the case was, that the Grantee of the Rent of 20
l. covenanted by the same Indenture, that if the said rent of 20 l. were in
arrear for the space of twenty days after any day of payment, that the Grantee
shall distrain, and if there be not sufficient distress upon the Land, or if
there be a Rescous, Replevin, or Pound-breach, that then it shall be lawful
for the Grantee and his Heirs to enter into the same Land, and to retain it
until he be satisfied: And the said Rent was granted, 9 Jac. it was arrear, 11
Jac. the Fine for the better assurance of the Rent was levied 12 Jac. and 13
Jac. the Distress was taken.

There were four Causes which give an entry, and upon the Distress and
Replevin brought the Assignee enters. As to the three first points, it was
resolved by the whole Court,

1. That Fisher was such an Assignee who shall take benefit of the Entry.

2. When 10 l. is only arrear, the Rent of 20 l. shall be said arrear, whereupon
there shall be a Title of Entry.

3. That these advantages granted with the Rent may be granted over.

And as to the fourth point, it was holden by Mountague and Crook, that the Use
rises upon the first Indenture, and not upon the entry after the Replevin
brought, although the words are, that then it shall be lawful for the Grantee
and his Heirs to enter, whereby the use is only awaked, as it is in the
principal point in Shelleys case, and although a Fine is afterward levied,
yet the Use shall be directed by the original Indenture, and therefore 6 Rich.
2. A Feoffment is made to two and their Heirs, and afterward a Fine is levied
upon it for further assurance, to the use of them and the Heirs of one of them,
yet it shall go to the use of both, for it shall be respected according to the
original agreement, where there are diverse assurances for the perfecting of one
and the same thing, 16 E. 3. tit. Age. A Daughter had a Seigniory by descent, a
Tenancy Escheats, a Son is born, he shall have the Land, see Sharoes case in 4
Mar. Dyer, and in Chadleighs case all looks to the original agreement, and
therefore variance of time shall not hinder the original agreement, as 33. Ass.
the Servant in^ends to kill his Master, and afterward the Master puts him out
of his Service, and then he kills him, this shall be petty Treason in the
Servant, 28 H. 6. Two are bound in a Bond at several times, and yet he shall
declare against both, as upon the first delivery, 11 H. 7. it is adjudged, that
if a Deed be delivered by an Infant, and afterward it is again delivered when
he comes of full age: And see Mallories case, Finches case, and Borastons case,
Nunc and tunc and quando, are a demonstration of the time, and not of the
matter, and so they concluded that the Use shall rise upon the first Indenture,
and not upon the Fine or Replevin brought; but Doderidge and Haughton Justices
contra.

Trin. 17. Jac. In the Kings Bench. Silvesters Case.
JOhn Silvester promised to John B. that if he would marry his Daughter, that
he would give with her a Child's part, and that at the time of his death he
would give to her as much as to any of his Children, excepting his eldest Son,
and afterward he made his Executors and died: I. B. brought an action upon the
case against the Executors upon this Promise, and showed that the Executor had
not given him a Child's part, and that such a younger Son of the Testators had a
100 l. given him: And it was resolved by the Court that the promise of a Child's
part is altogether uncertain, but being so much as any of his Children had, and
then showing that the younger Son had a 100 l. this was certain enough, and
thereupon Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

The same Term in the same Court. Godfrey and Owen.
Cornelius Godfrey was Plaintiff in an action upon the case for Words. He is a
very Varlet, and seeks to sup^res his brothers Will, etc.
words against Owen Defendant, and the words were these, to wit, He is a very
Varlet, and seeks to suppress his Bro^hers Will, he makes show of Religion,
but he is a very Hypocrite: And the words were sp^ken of a Merchant, to one who
gave him much credit in his Trade.

Mountague chief Justice said, that the words which are actionable in such a
case ought to touch the Plaintiff in his Profession, which these do not do, Et
relata ad personam intelligi debent secundum conditionem personae, for in the
suppressing of his Brothers Will the case might be such that he might well do
it, for perhaps there may be an after Will made; And for calling him Hypocrite
lies not in the conusance of the Common Law, for GOD only can judge of the
heart of man, and therefore these words do not touch the Plaintiff as he is a
Merchant.

Doderidge Justice, Words ought to tend some way to the ruin of the party, or
otherwise they are not actionable; and Judgment was given, Quod quere nil
capiat per billam.

Mich. 17. Jac. In the Star Chamber. Sis John Bingleys Case.
IN Sir John Bingleys case in the Star Chamber, it was resolved by the two
chief Justices, Mountague and Hobart, and agreed by the Lord Verulam Lord
Chancellor, and Sir Edward Coke, that if an Information be exhibited there
which begins with diverse particular misdemeanors, and conclude in the general
that, 1. The matter included in the general charge ought to be Ejusdem
generis. 2. They ought to exceed the particulars expressed in number. 3. They
ought not to be greater or more capital; whereupon Mountague cited the Statute
which speaks of Deans and other Spiritual persons, upon which it has been
resolved that Bishops are not within it, for they are of a higher degree, and
the principal reason of these rules was, because that a man cannot possibly
make a defense, because he knews not what will be objected against him; and
upon this Sir John Bingley was discharged at this time for the most
transcendent Offense that was objected against him, to wit, concerning Captain
Baugh, and other Pirates to whom the King of his grace and bounty had given 200
l. to make them Loyal Subjects: But Sir John Bingley, Color officii, had
defrauded them of almost An Officer ^ his own wrong.
all of it, for the want whereof some of them died miserably, and the rest
became Pirates again. But Sir John Bingley made many protestations of his
innocence in this m^tter.

And it was holden also that one might be an Officer of his own wrong, as their
might be an Executor of his own wrong: And this was Sir John Bingleys case for
something in the information, for he committed Extortion, Color officii.

The same Term in the Star Chamber.
THe Attorney-generall put in an Information against diverse Dutch Merchants,
for buying and transporting of many great sums of Gold and Silver Bullion.

And it was said by the Court that diverse Statutes had been made for redress
of this mischief, as the Statute of 5 R. 2. the Offenders whereof ought to
forfeit all they may: and by another Statute in 17 E. 4. this Offense was made
Felony to continue for seven years: But the Court would not now punish them
upon any Statute, for it was an offense at common To carry Gold and Silver out
of the Realm, punishable at Common Law.
Law, and therefore punishable in this Court.

And Sir Edward Coke said, that if any be to be punished upon a penal Statute,
it ought to be within two or three years at least after the offense committed,
for the Informer has but a year to sue, and the King two years for the most
part.

The Statutes of 37 E. 3. and 5 E. 6. Prohibit the buying of Coin, and that it
is so at the Common Law, see 21 E. 3. 60. and Plow. 215. and not only he that
buys but he that sels also offends in it, for it is a Prerogative only
belonging to the King, and it is his Coin, and none can put a value upon it but
himself, which is a Flower of his Crown.

Hobart chief Justice of the Common Pleas, as one shall be punished for
engrossing any Commodity, a Fortiori, one shall be punished for engrossing and
buying of a great quantity of money, all other Commodities being thereby
engrossed, for money is the Mistress of commerce: Pecunia est rerum omnium
vendendarum mensura, Bracton 117. 18 E. 3. Hollinghead 109. 50 E. 3. Rot. Pat.
Memb. 7. And for transportation, 17 E. 3. and 19 E. 3. Rot. Pat. 24. De monetis
non transportandis, 19 R. 2. Rot. Pat. The Duchess of obtained license to melt
Coin to make Plate. And diverse of the Defendants were within the Kings general
pardon, but in as much as they pleaded it in their Rejoinder, and not in their
answer (as it ought to be) the Court overruled their Plea, so that they could
have no advantage thereby. But in as much as they were strangers, and not
co^usant of our Laws, and relied only upon their Counsel, the Court had
consideration thereof in their censure.

Hillary, 17 Jac. In the Kings Bench. Serle versus Mander.
SErle brought an action upon the case against Mahder for these words, to
Words, I arrest you upon Felony.
wit, I arrest you upon Felony, and after Verdict for the Plaintiff, it was
moved in Arrest of Judgment by Richardson that the words were not actionable,
for he does not say, that the Plaintiff had committed Felony; But it was
rescived by the Court, and so adjudged that the action lies.

The same Term in the same Court.
A Judgment was obtained against one of the Servants of the Lord Hay, Judgment
against a Defendant when beyond Sea with an Ambassador reversed.
Viscount Doncaster, when he was Ambassador in Bohemia, and attending upon him
there: And this matter being disclosed to the Court by the Counsel of the
Defendant, they would not suffer the Plaintiff to have execution upon the said
Judgment, but ordered the Plaintiff to declare De novo, to which the Defendant
should presently answer.

Memorand. It was said to be against the course of the Court, to have an
Imparlance.
Imparlance before the Declaration entered.

The same Term in the same Court. The King against Briggs.
A Quo warranto was brought by the King against Briggs, for exercising A
Subject cannot have a Forest.
of certain Privileges, who justified by virtue of a Forest granted to him:
And by Bridgeman, this is the first Quo warranto which he knew that had been
brought against any Subject for a Forest, for a Subject cannot have a Forest,
but he may have a Chase, which peradventure may pass under the name of a
Forest. And there are diverse incidents to a Forest which a Subject cannot use
nor have; there ought to be a Justice of a Forest which a Subject cannot have,
and such a Justice ought to be a man of great Dignity. 2. There ought to be
Verderors who are Judges also, and by 34 E. 1. Ordinatio Forrestae ought to be
by Wait, but a Subject cannot award a Writ. Also there are three Courts
incident to a Forest.

1. A Court of Attachments which may be without Verderors.

2. The Swanimate Court.

3. The Justice seat, and this appears in 1. E. 3. cap. 8. 21 E. 4. cap. 8:
But by the Statute of 27 H. 8. cap. 7. There are some other incidents to a
Forest. 2. Admits that a Subject may have a Forest, yet it fails in this case,
because he has shown the exemplification and not the Letters Patents, and see
Co. lib. 5. Pains case, that neither an exemplification, or constat, are
pleadable at Common Law, and Co. lib. 10. Dr. Leyfeilds case.

The same Term in the same Court. Sir William Webb versus Paternoster.
THe case was this; Sir William Plummer licensed Sir William Webb to lay his
Hay upon the Land of the said Sir William Plummer until he could conveniently
sell it, and then Sir William Plummer did make a Lease of the Land to
Paternoster, who put in his Cattle and they eat up the Hay: And it was two
years between the license and the putting in of the Cattle, and yet Sir
William Webb brought an action of Trespass against Paternester for this.

Mountague chief Justice: 1. This is an Interest which charge the Land into
whosoever hands it comes, and Webb shall have a reasonable and convenient time
to sell his Hay. 2. The Lessee ought to give notice to Notice.
Sir William Webb of the Lease before he ought to put in his Cattle; to which
Haughton Justice agreed in both points: But Doderidge Justice said, that Sir
William Webb had no certain time by this license, yet he conceived that he
ought to have notice: But it was resolved that the Plaintiff had Convenient
time.
a convenient time (to wit, two years) for the removing of his Hay, and
therefore Judgment was given against him. But admit that there had not been a
convenient time, yet the Court was of opinion that the Plaintiff ought to have
enclosed the Land at his peril, for the preservation of his Hay: And it was
agreed that a license is countermandable, although it be concerning A license
whether for profit or pleasure countermandable.
profit or pleasure, unless there be a certain time in the license, as if I
license one to dig Clay in my Land, this is evocable, and may be countermanded
although it be in point of profit, which is a stronger case then a license of
pleasure, see 13 H. 7. The Duchess of Suffolks case for a license.

The same Term in the same Court.
SIbill Westerman brought an action upon the case against Eversall, and had
Error. Sibell for Isabell.
Judgment: and in the entry of the Judgment she was named Isabell, 1 Ass. and
3. Ass. A Fine was levied by Sibill, when her name was Isabell, and it was not
good, for it does not appear to be the same party; so in the case at the Bar:
And for this the Judgment was reversed.

The same Term in the same Court.
JEne as Executor of brought an action upon the case against Chester, An Infant
chargable for necessary Apparel.
because the Defendant made request to the Testator of the Plaintiff to buy for
him certain silk Stuffs for Apparel, and to make him a Cloak; the Defendant
pleaded that he was within age, and George Crook said, that the Defendant
should not be charged, because it is not shown that the Apparel was for the
Infant himself, but he was overruled in this, for it is sufficiently expressed
to be for him. And it was agreed by the Court, that it ought to be shown that
it was Pro necessario vestitu, and it ought to be suitable to his calling, and
(as Doderidge said) that there was a case adjudged in this Court between Stone
and Withipole, that where Withipole had taken of Stone certain Stuffs for
Apparel, being within age, and afterward he promised payment if he would
forbear him some time, and the Assumpsit adjudged not good, because he was not
liable for the Debt at first for the reason aforesaid.

Trin. 17. Jac. In the Common Bench. Gilbert de Hoptons Case.
AN action upon the case was brought for those words, viz. Thou art a Words.
Thou art a Thief and have stolen my Furze.
Thief and have stolen my Furze: And after Verdict for the Plaintiff, it was
moved in Arrest of Judgment, that these words were not actionable: But it was
said on the other side, that to say, thou art a Thief, is actionable, and the
subsequent words are in the Copulative, and enure as a confirmation of the
precedent words: But if it had been for, Thou have stolen my Furze, this had
been ^n explanation of the precedent words, and therefore in that case the
action would not have been: And it was answered and resolved by the Court that
the word (and) in some cases shall be taken as the word (for) and so it shall
be in this case, and therefore adjudged that the action lies.

Mich. 22. Jac. In the Star Chamber.
TWo men came Ore tenus into the Star Chamber, for stealing of the Kings Deer,
and were fined a 100 l. a piece, and three years Imprisonment, unless it would
please he King to release them sooner, and before Fines in the Star Chamber for
killing the Kings Deer.
they should be released of their Imprisonment to be bound to their good
behavior: And it was observed by the Attorney-generall that the offense was
the greater, in regard that the King had but one darling pleasure, and yet they
would offend him in that: And it was said by some of the Court that it was a
great folly and madness in the Defendants to hazard themselves in such a
manner for a thing of so small value as a Deer was. The Lord President said,
that Mr. Attorney was the best Keeper the King had of his Parks, in regard he
brings the Offenders into this Court to be punished: The Lord Keeper said, that
the Defendants in such a case being brought Ore tenus ^re not allowed to speak
by their Counsel, and yet these men have had their Counsel, but it was Peter's
Counselors, meaning, their sorrow and contrition at the Bar, which much moved
him, so that if his vete might prevail he would set but 20 l. fine upon them.

In the same Term in the same Court.
THe Lord Morley and Sir Richard Mollineax being beyond Sea, their Solicitor
in their names exhibited a scandalous Bill in the Star Chamber against the
Bishop of Chichister, and after their return this continued so for three years,
without any disclaiming thereof by them, and now the matter being questioned,
they said, that it was not done with their privity: But because they had not
disclaimed the Fact before, they were fined a 100 l. to the King, and a 100 l.
to the Bishop for Damages, and the Bill was to be taken of the File.

The same Term in the same Court. Jews Plaintiff versus Jeoffreys, and others
Defendants.
THe Plaintiffs Brother had been a Suitor to a woman, which matter proceeded to
a Contract, and afterward the Defendant Jeoffreys happened to be a Suitor to her
also, whereupon (being Rivalls) they fell out, and the Plaintiffs Brother called
the Defendant Jackanapes, which was taken very ill by the Defendant (being a
Justice of Peace in the County of Worcester, and the other being but a mean man
in respect of him) so that he told him that if he would meet him on Horseback
he would fight with him: afterward one of the Sons of the Defendant went to
the said Brother (being upon his own Land, and gave him a mortal wound,
whereupon a friend on the behalf of the party wounded, came to the Defendant
(being a Justice of Peace) and brought him a piece of his Skull, to the end
that his Son should be forth coming at the next Assizes, declaring to him the
danger of death the man was in; whereupon the Defendant took a Recognisance of
10 l. of his Son and of his sureties of 5 l. a piece to answer this at the next
Assise: And in the mean time the party died of the said wound, and the Son did
not appear at the Assizes, and the Judges of Assise fined the Defendant 100 l.
for taking such slender security for the appearance of his Son, which was paid,
and yet notwithstanding the Defendant was fined 200 l. more for this offense
and also 200 l. for his misdemeanor in his challenge, albeit the Defendant A
Challenge fined in the Star Chamber.
was of the age of 63* years, and so it seems that he intended to fight with
him. But he being a Justice of Peace (who is Conservator pacis) he did against
his oath to do any thing which may tend to the breach of the Peace.

And for the other matter it was said by the Court, that the Defendant being
Father to the offender, it had been better for him to have referred this matter
to another Justice of Peace, or at least to have had the assistance of another:
And the party being in such great danger of death, his son was not bailable.

Hillary 1. Car. In the Kings Bench. Bowyer versus Rivet.
THe case was thus; Sir William Bowyer 12. Jac. recovered against Sir Thomas
Rivet in an Action of debt, Sir William made his wife his Exceutrix and died,
the wife made Bowyer her Executor and died; then Sir Thomas Rivet died, Bowyer
brought a Scire facias to have execution upon the Iugment against Sir Thomas
Rivet the younger, as Heir apparent to the Land to him descended from Sir
Thomas Rivet, who pleaded Riens per descent from Sir Thomas Rivet, and it was
found that he had two acres and a half of Land by descent; and it was prayed by
Goldsmith, that Judgment might be given against Sir Thomas Rivet generally, for
he said, that this false Plea shall charge him and his own Lands, and cited
Plowden 440. where in debt against an Heir, upon his false Plea, his own Lands
shall become liable to the debt, and Co. lib. 3. 11. b. Sir William Herberts
case, where the case was upon a Scire facias against the Heir, as it is in this
case.

But on the other part it was argued by Richardson the Kings Sergeant, Banks,
and all the Justices, that Execution shall be awarded in no other manner
against the Heir then it should be against his Ancestor, or other Purchasor, to
wit, of a Moiety of that which he had by descent, for as much as in this case
he cannot be to this purpose charged as Heir, but he ought to be charged as
Ter-tenant and as a Purchasor, and a Purchasor shall never hurt himself but his
false Plea.

And Banks argued, that the Heir in this case is charged as a Purchasor, and
the false Plea of a Purchasor shall never charge himself, 33 E. 3. Fitz.
Execution, 162. and 6 E 3. 15. and that in this case he is charged as
Ter-tenant appears by three reasons.

1. Debt will not lie against an Heir, but where he is bound as Heir, but in
this case Execution is to be sued against him as another Ter-tenant, Dyer 271.
11 E. 3. 15. and in 27 H. 6. Execution 135. and Co. lib. 3. 12. b. That in
Judgment upon Debt or Recognisance the Heir is charged and Execution shall be
sued against him as Ter-tenant.

2. There is not any lien as Heir, for the Judgment does not mention the Heir,
and therefore he cannot be charged unless he be expressly bound, and in the
Record of the Recovery, it does not appear that the first lien shall bind the
Heir, for he declares that he bound himself, and not that he bound himself and
his Heirs.

3. If the Heir were bound in the Obligation so that he were once bound as
Heir, yet the Judgment determines the specialty, so that now he is not bound,
and in the Judgment the Heir is not mentioned, as in 10 H. 4. 21. 24. If an
Abbot contract to the use of the house without consent of the Covent, this
shall bind if he dies, but if he takes an Obligation of the Abbot and then he
dies, this shall not bind the house, for the Contract is determined by the
Obligation, and this is the reason that in the time of E. 3. in a recovery upon
debt the Obligation was cancelled.

4. Here he cannot be charged as Heir, for it appears by the Record Where a
debt is recorded upon bond the Obligation was cancelled.
that his Father is living, for it is brought against him as Heir apparent,
which he cannot be but during the life of his Father.

And as to the objection, that in this case he shall have his age, and therefore
shall be charged as Heir, Non sequitur, for if execution be sued against the
Heir of a Purchasor, he shall have his age, and yet he is not Heir, neither can
charged as Heir to the Conusor: But because it is a rule in Law, that the Heir
which has by descent shall not answer where his Inheritance may be charged
during his Nonage.

Whitlock to the same intent, because the Heir is not charged here as Heir but
as Ter-tenant, whereby his false Plea shall not hurt him, with which Jones also
agreed, and said, that he here considered three things.

1. That the lien of the Ancestor binds the Heir.

2. How the Heir shall behave himself in pleading.

3. Our point in question. For the first there are two things requisite to bind
one as Heir. 1. A lien express, for if one bind himself and not his Heir, this
shall not bind his Heir in any case. 2. A descent of Inheritance, for without
this he shall not be bound by the act of his Ancestor, and he is bound no
longer then Assets descend, for he alien before the Writ purchased the lien is
gone. 2. He ought to behave himself truly and plead truly, and confess the
assets descended to him, when debt is brought against him as heir, otherwise
his own Lands shall be charged with the debt, as it is in Pepys case in Plow.
Com. But where it is said in Pepys case; that upon a Nihil dicit, or Non sum
informatum, etc. If the Judgment pass upon them, that it shall be general; I
am not of that opinion, for the common experience of the Courts is, that such a
general Judgment shall not be given against the Heir; unless it be upon a
false plea pleaded, with which agrees Lawsons case, Dyer 81. and Henninghams
case, Dyer 344. where the Judgment passed by Nihil dicit, so that the saying in
Plow. 440. a. that what way soever the Heir be condemned in debt, if he do not
confess the Assets, etc. that it shall be his proper debt, is not now taken
for Law.

And I also h^ld, that if the Heir plead falsely, and there is found more
Assets, Where upon a false plea by an Heir, the Plaintiff may elect to take the
Assets in execution or an Elegit of all his Land.
that yet it is in the election of the Plaintiff to charge him and to take
execution of the Assets only, or to take an Elegit of all his Land, and he is
not bound to take an Elegit of all his Land in this case, for otherwise this
inconvenience may arise: If the Heir has a 100. acres by descent, and two by
purch^se, if upon the false Plea of the Heir the Plaintiff cannot have any
other execution but an Eligit of the Moiety of his Lands, then he by this is
prejudiced, for otherwise he might have all he Assets in execution, and so the
Heir by this way shall take advantage of his false plea. 3. He held as Whitlock
before, and for the same reason Doderidge Justice: How the Heir shall be b^und
by the act of his Father, is worthy of consideration, upon which Prima facie
the Books seem to disagree, but being well considered, accord with excellent
harmony. I have considered this case, it was moved at Reading Term, and because
my Notes are not here, I will speak more briefly, and will consider.

1. H^w an Heir shall be charged upon the Obligation of his Father? and as to
that in debt against an Heir, he is charged as Heir, so that at this day it is
taken as his proper debt, whereby the Writ is in the Debet and Detinet, How an
Heir shall be charged upon the Obligation of his Father.
but in the Detinet only against Executors: But in former time from the 18. of
Ed. 2. till 7 H. 4. if an Executor had Assets, the Heir was not chargable, but
in 7 H. 4. the Law changed in this point, for now it is accounted his own debt,
and debt will lie against his Executor, as it is said in Plow: Com: and so
against the Heirs of the Heir to many generations, albeit of this Plowden makes
a doubt, and his plea that he had nothing at the day of the Writ purchased, nor
ever after, is good, for if he alien the Assets he is discharged of the debt,
in regard he is not to wait the action of the Obligee.

2. The Heir shall be ch^^ged upon or Recognisance, not as Heir, but as
Ter-tenant, for he is not bound in the Recognisance, but only the Conusor grant
that the debt shall be levied of all his Lands and Tenements, but not against
his Heirs. And here he is not merely as Ter-tenant, for he shall not have
contribution ag^^st ^her Ter-tenants, but only against those who are Heirs as
himself is, but to all other intents he is Ter-tenant, and so charged, Why an
Heir is not chargable for debt. after he has fold the assets.
as 32 E. 3. and 27 H. 6. a^^.

3. That upon a Judgment (as our case is) the Heir shall be charged as
Ter-tenant and not otherwise: The Book which has been cited, viz 33 E. 3.
Execution 162. is express in the point; the broken years of Fitzherbert are
obs^urely reported, but by comparing of cases it will appear to be our case
ex^resly.

4. That albeit an Heir shall be charged upon the Obligation of his Ancestor,
where he is particularly bound, yet upon his false plea no execution shall be
but upon the assets: So it seems to me that in the principal case the Judgment
shall be special, and it seems to be a very plain case.

Crew chief Justice agreed, and in his argument he affirmed what Jones said,
that a general Judgment shall not be given against the Heir, if he do not
plead falsely that he has no Assets, and not upon Nihil dicit: And so Judgment
was given that the Plaintiff shall have Execution of the Moiety of the Lands
descended to the Defendant; and so note the diversity of debt against the Heir,
and Scire facias against the Heir.

Dickenson versus Greenhow, Hill. 1. Car. In the Kings Bench, Intr. Hill. 18.
Jac. Rot. 189.
IN an Attachment upon a Prohibition, the Plaintiff declared that where Robert
the last Abbot of Cokersham in Lancashire, was seized in Fee of three acres of
Land, parcel of his Monastery, and that the Abbot and his Com-monks, and all
the Predecessors of the Abbot were time out of mind of the order and rule of
Praemonstratenses, and that the order of Praemonstratenses, and all Monks
thereof, were time out of mind discharged of payment of tithes for their Lands
and Tenements, Quamdiu manibus propriis aut sumptubus excol^bant. And that the
said Abbot and all his Predecessors time out of mind had holden the said three
acres discharged of payment of Tithes, Quamdiu, etc. and so held them until
the dissolution of the Monastery, and show the surrender to H. 8. and the
Statute of 31 H. 8 by force whereof H. 8. was seized and held them discharged,
and from him derive them to E. 6. and from E. 6. to Queen Mary, and from her to
Queen Elizabeth, and from her in the 42. year of her Reign to Wagstaff, and
from him by mean conveyances to Dickenson the Plaintiff, Quorum pretextu he was
seized, and enjoyed them in Propria manurantia, and show the Statute of 2 E. 6.
cap. 15. whereby it is enacted that Tithes shall be paid as usually they were,
etc. Quorum pretextu, the Plaintiff held the three acres discharged of Tithes,
and that notwithstanding; and against the Prohibition, the Defendant did draw
him into Plea for them in Court Christian, and the Judge thereof held plea, and
the Defendant did there prosecute, him to the disinherison of the Crown: And
upon this the Defendant demurred, and prayed a consultation. And Sir John
Davies the Kings Sergeant argued for the Defendant, that a Consultation should
be granted, because that his matter of discharge is double.

1. His Privilege. 2. The prescription, and if either of them will not help
him, then he ought to be charged: For the Privilege, he took it that the
Praemonstratenses never had such a privilege. It is a Maxim in Law, All Lands
chargable with Tithes.
that all persons ought to pay Tithes, and all Lands shall be charged with them
of common right; but also there are diverse discharges of them and allowed by
our Law (as is manifest by the orders of Templers, Hospitalers, and
Cistertians, which discharges our Law allows) and these are, 1. By
prescription. 2. By real composition. 3. By privilege obtained, and that by
two wais.

1. Either by the Bull of the Pope, for he taking upon himself to be the great
Dispens^r and Steward of the Church, took upon him to discharge them, but this
(as it is holden by the Canon) he could not absolutely do, but might divert
them to a Clergyman, or grant to another to hold them by way of retainer, and
this ought to be to a Clergyman also. Or,

2. By a general Counsel, for some orders were discharged by general
Counsels: So some obtained Privileges by the Popes Bulls, which are his
Patents, some by Counsels which are as his Statutes, and Decrees were as
Judgments, but yet none of them had ever any force in our Law, nor did bind us
in England more then voluntarily retained and approved by usage and custom, for
as it is said in 11 H 4. the Pope cannot alter the Law of England, and this is
evident, for in all cases where the Bulls or Constitutions of the Pope cross
the Law of the Land, they have always been rejected The Popes Bulls of four
sorts.
; as for instance,

1 In the Bulls which are of four sorts.

1. Of Provision.

2. Of Citation.

3. Of Exemption. And 4. Of Excommunication. And as for those of
Excommunication, it appears that it was Treason at Common Law, and that the
Treasurer did kneel to E. 2. for one who brought them in, and in the perpetual
course of the Books afterward, they have always been disallowed in Pleas. So
his Bulls of Citation, before the Statute of Provision was a heinous offense,
and so are Bulls of Provision and Exemption. For his Canons, where they were
against the Law they were neglected. It appears by the Canon, Quod nullus
capiat beneficium a Laico, and yet notwithstanding continued long after for
Benefices, and does yet for Bishoprics, that the Clergy shall take them from
the King and a lay-hand: And also there is a Canon for exemption of Clarks out
of temporal Jurisdiction: but yet as Brain says, 10 H. 7. 18. it was never
observed here. So the Canon says, that the time of the Laps shall be accounted
Per septimanas, but our Law not regarding this, says, that it shall be
accounted Per menses in the Calender, as it is expressly adjudged in 5 E. 3.
Rot. 100. Rot. claus in turri: And there is a great reason for it, as it is in
29 H. 3. memb. 5. in turri. It is not necessary for Bishops of England to go to
general Counsels; so as in Parliament those that do not ^end Knights or
Burgesses shall not be bound by Statutes. And the Counsels of Lions, of
Bigamis, etc. are expounded by Statutes how they shall be taken; so that it they
have a Privilege (as in truth they have) by the Popes Bulls, if it were not
allowed in England, they are not of force to privilege them against the Common
Law of the Land for payment of Tithes; but this was never here allowed.

And now for the Prescription this cannot help them, for Monks are not of
Evangelicall Priesthood, to wit capable of Tithes in the Pernamy, but merely
Laymen, and then as the Bishop of Winchesters case is, they cannot prescribe
in non decimando; And Bid says of them, that they are Mere laici, so that if
their Privilege were allowed, their Prescription will not help them. The
privilege of Praemonstratenses was by the Counsel general of for their
discharge, which denies that all religious persons should be discharged of
Tithes of Lands in their own hands, Quamdiu, etc. But afterward Adrian
restrained it to Templars, Hospitalars, and Cistertians, omitting the
Praemonstratenses; and the decree of Adrian was received also, whereby the Law
took notice of the discharge of the said three Orders. True it is, that the
Praemonstratenses have a Bull of Pope Innocent the third, of discharge, and as
large liberties as the Cistertians, but they never put this in ure: And it
seems, 1. That there were of them 29. Abbots and Abbys, and yet their
privilege is not mentioned in all the Books as the Cistertians is. 2. They
complained to Gregory the nineth, that they were not suffered to put it in ure,
and notwithstanding this complaint and command of the Pope to the Clergy to
allow them this privilege, yet 24 H. 3. Complaint was made against them in
Parliament for claiming this privilege: But the Statute of 2 H. 4. cap. 4. put
this cut of doubt, for this put the Cistertians in a praemunire, for purchasing
and putting in execution Bulls of exemption of their Lands purchased afterward.

Now if the Praemonstratenses had the same privilege they should not have been
omitted ^ut of this Statute; then comes the Statute of 7 H. 4. cap. 6. which
terrifies all from putting in execution Bulls of Exemption of their Lands not
put in execution before, upon which it is not to be presumed that it was put in
execution afterward.

But admit that the Praemonstratenses had this privilege: I say, that the
Plaintiff has not applied this privilege to himself, for he has not averred
in fact that at the time etc. Propriis manibus excolebat, nec ad firman
demit^ebat; And this he ought to have done if he would take advantage of the
privilege, as in Dickensons case, Novel lib. intr. 542. there it is expressly
alleged in the like case, as ours is here, and where the same privilege as
here is claimed, Quod manibus propriis excolebat.

True it is that it is said here, that after the Feoffment to him made, he was
seized Et gavisus fuit in propria manutenor, but he does not say, that at the
time of the Tithes due, gavisus fuit, etc. as he ought expressly to have done,
as appears by other cases.

If one prescribe to have common in arable Land when the Corn is reaped, or in
Meadow where the Hay is carried away, and justify by reason thereof he ought to
aver that the Corn or Hay was carried away when he put in his Cattle,
otherwise he has not applied the prescription to himself.

So if one justify for Common Quandocunque audia sua jerint, he ought to aver
that his Cattle then went in the place where, etc. as 17 Ass. 7. So if the
King pardon all but those who adhere to M. he who plead it ought to aver that
he did not adhere to M. so here the privilege is Quamdiu propriis manibus,
etc. and therefore at the time he ought to aver that he had it propriis manibus,
etc.

Also where upon the surrender to H. 8. and the Statute, they conclude that the
Queen held it discharged, this cannot be, for this ought to be in such manner
as the Abbot held it discharged, but this was quamdiu, etc. and the King cannot
be bound to such an unbeseeming condition, and therefore he shall hold it
disch^rged: Like to the case where the Abbey has the presentation, and another
the nomination, the Abbey surrender, he who has the nomination shall have all,
for the King shall not present for him, it being a thing undecent for his
Majesty, and so he concluded for the Defendant.

Banks contra. 1. That it is a good cause of Prohibition. 2. That it is well
applied to us.

1. That the order of Praemonstratenses is discharged of Tithes, that they had
once this privilege, has been allowed by the other party, by the Bulls of the
Pope, and that it was allowed and taken notice of, he proved by this that this
Bull was confirmed by King John in the 24. year of his Reign, the Charter
whereof he said he had under Seal, and 22 E. 1. membran. 5. there were 26.
Abbeys of this order, and the King took them all into his protection with their
Immunities, and 22 Rich. 2. John de Gant having Jura Regalia in Lancashire
(where the Abbey is) confirmed to them this Bull, and also this has been
diverse times allowed and decreed to them in Court Christian for suit of Tithes,
as in the case of the Abbey of Bigham which was of the same order.

And as to that which was objected, that if the Praemonstratenses had such a
privilege as the Castertians in 2 H. 4. that the like provision would have
been against them.

As to this I answer, that such a provision is not against the Templars nor
Hospitalars, and yet they have such a privilege.

2. It may be that they never enlarged their privileged above their grant. And
for the Statute of 7 H. 4. our Privilege was not then new, and it was
afterward allowed in 22 R. 2. And also I conceive, that if the Abbey were
discharged at the time of the dissolution, although not De jure, yet this is a
sufficient discharge within the Statute of 31 H. 8. as it is taken Co. lib. 11.
14.

2. I hold that they may here prescribe to be discharged of Tithes, because
they are Spiritual persons, and capable of cure of Souls, and capable of tithes
in Pernamy, as if an Appropriation be made to them.

3. It is not now to be argued, whether they have such a privilege, for they
have demurred, which is a confession of all matters in Fait, etc.

4. If there be a matter whereupon the Prohibition may be grounded it will
serve, vide Dyer 170, 171. Co. lib. 11. 10.

And 5. The privilege is well applied, because it is shown that they were once
discharged.

6. He needs not to show how he is discharged, 22 E. 4. 4. 5 E. 4. 8. 20 E. 4.
15. Also the discharges are temps don't, etc. and therefore not pleadable; so he
prayed that the Prohibition might stand.

Pasch. 1. Car. In the Kings Bench. Bowry versus Wallington.
NOte that in this case upon the Statute of 50 E. 3. 4. it was agreed by the
Court, that if there be a Suit in the Ecclestasticall Court, and a Prohibition
awarded, and afterward Consultation granted, that upon the same Libell no
Prohibition shall be granted again, but if there be an Appeal in this case then
a Prohibition may be granted, but with these differences.

1. If he who appeals pray the Prohibition, there he shall not have it; for
then Suits shall be deferred in infinitum, in the Ecclesiastical Courts. Where
several Prohibitions may be granted in the same case, and where not.


2. If the Prohibition and Consultation were upon the body of the matter and
the substance of it, for otherwise he shall be put many times to try the same
matter, which is full of vexation. And the case was moved again, and argued by
Noy, which was thus.

Wallington livelled in the Ecclesiastical Court against Bowry for tithes of
Wool and Lamb, and Bowry upon suggestion of a Modus derimandi obtained a
Prohibition, and had an Attachment, and declared upon it, and are at Issue upon
the Modus, which is found for the Defendant, and Consultation granted, whereupon
Judgment was given in the Ecclesiastical Court against Bowry, upon which Bowry
appealled, and prayed a new Prohibition, and had it, and Noy moved for a
Consultation. 1. Because that a Prohibition and an Attachment upon it are but
one Suit, for the contempt of the party in bringing his Suit in another Court,
and translating this from the Kings Court, and when it is once tried for the
Defendant, the same thing shall not be tried again. And as to the Statute of 50
E 3. 4. upon the mistake whereof the mistake is raised, he confessed that the
Printed Books, and also in the Extract of the Parliament, one Roll remaining in
the Tower is (the same Judge) but the Parliament Roll it self, and the Petition
is, Liceatque Iudici Ecclesiastico sive diocese. eidem an hujusmodi, and the
answer to the Petition is, one Consultation granted suffices in this case: And
the Parliament Roll it self was brought into the Court and viewed, but he said,
that if it were as it is in the printed Book and Extract, the same Judge shall
not be intended the same personal Judge, but the same Judge of Conusance of
the same Jurisdiction or cause, for otherwise, if another Commissary be made,
as the Bishop may when he will, his Successor may be newly prohibited, and also
one thing may be infinitely tried, for in many places the Suit begins in the
Archdeacons Court, and from him an Appeal may be brought to the Bishop.

The same Term in the Kings Bench. Pack versus Methold in a Writ of Error.
IN Mich. Term, 22 Jac. Methold brought an action upon the case in the Common
Pleas against Pack, and declared that in consideration that the Plaintiff would
pay to Playford 52 l. 14 s. to the use of the said Pack, such a day, etc. Pack
promised to deliver to him his Bond (in which he was bound to him in the said
sum) when he should be thereunto requested: And shows that he had paid, etc.
and the Defendant did not deliver to him the Bond, albeit the same to do he was
afterward often times requested, and upon non assumpsit pleaded, it was found
for the Plaintiff, and now it was moved in Arrest of Judgment, because the
request is not laid specially, nor the day nor place thereof expressed. But the
Court, to wit, Hobart chief Justice, Hutton and Harvey gave Judgment for the
Plaintiff, and yet they agreed, that if he had demurred upon the Declaration,
it had not been good, and also that if it had been general, Licet saepius
requisite, it had not been good, in as much as it is parcel of the promise, and
therefore ought to be said substantially; viz. That it was after the promise and
payment of the 52 l. but the time is supplied by these words Postea, and there
is no defect but in the place, and (Postea) implies that it was after the
promise and payment.

And Hobart said, that all the points of the Declaration which have matter and
substance are good, only there wants the place where the request was made,
which by the Issue is moved, and the request is here well notified to the
Court, and the defect of the place is now helped by the Statute.

Hutton said, that if the promise had been to pay so much upon request at
Easter, there the day ought to have been shown, and (Postea) had not been
sufficient, but here the Postea refers only to a thing whereby it is certain;
and he said, that upon this Issue such a request shall be given in evidence.

Harvey said, that the request being here laid as it is, the Court may well
give Judgment: And it seemed to Hobart that such a request cannot be given in
evidence where the Issue is upon an Assumpsit: And Judgment was given for the
Plaintiff; and afterward a Writ of Error, Hill. 1. Car. Where in an action
upon the case, there ought to be a special request, and where not.
was brought in the Kings Bench, and the opinion of the Court was strongly,
that the Plaintiff ought to have alleged the request specially and ceriainly
in time and place, because it is traversable and parcel of the Assumpsit, and
not to be done but upon request.

Jones Justice remembered diverse Presidents in the point, and further day was
given to bring in Presidents of either side, and two Presidents were produced
according to the opinion of this Court, Scil. Pasch. 30 Eliz. Rot. 464. in 1.
Court, Old and Estgreens case, Trin, 16 Jac. Rot. 268. Wales case.

But in Debt Licet saepius requisite is sufficient, for it is not material nor
traversable, for the bringing of the action of Debt (which is a Precipe) is a
sufficient demand in it self, and afterward at another day the Court continued
of the same opinion, and therefore the Plaintiff in the first action brought a
new action, Quod nota, for albeit the Defendant had pleaded non assumpsit, and
Issue was joined upon it, yet this did not amend the evil laying of the
request, according to the Presidents abovesaid.

Pasch. 2 Car. In the Kings Bench, int. Hill, 1 Car. Rot. 135. Constable versus
Clobery.
IN an action of Covenant, the question was upon the Traverse; the Plaintiff
declared upon the Indenture of Covenant, and the Covenant was that a Ship shall
go with the next fair wind, and that the Merchant shall pay so much for
fraught: the Defendant says by way of traverse, that he did not go with the
next wind, and it was objected by Stone of the Temple, of Counsel with the
Plaintiff, that the Traverse was not good, but he ought to have traversed that
the Ship did not go at all, for that which is material shall be traversed, and
that the Ship did not go is the most material thing here, and this appears
by 15 E. 4. 2. where a Gift in tail is traversed, and not the death of the
Tenant in tail, 19 H. 8. 7. 36 H. 6. 16. 2 H. 5. 2. 2 H. 7. 12. and there are
cases to this purpose, Co. lib. 7. 9. Ughtreds case: If a man intitles himself
to Land by an Estate which comes by Condition, he ought to show that the
Condition is performed: A Covenant against a Covenant will not make an
Estoppell, but he shall bring his action, 3 H. 6. 33. Where he ought to show
that he went to Rome, because it is a precedent Condition: The principal case
in Ughtreds case prove other, to wit, that which is material is alledgable:
And the difference upon the case of 48 E. 3. 3. 4. Where A. Covenant with B. to
serve him with three Esquires in France, and B. covenant for it to pay him 42.
marks, he may choose to covenant in general or special, as he will, for there
was Covenant against Covenant, and here there is a Covenant of one part to go
with the Ship, and on the other part to pay so much for the Fraught, and so
Covenant against Covenant.

And it seemed to Doderidge Justice, that the Traverse is not good, for the
Traverse here is by permission of God.

And for another thing where Merchants covenant to pay jointly and severally,
according to the quantity of the Wares, there an action of Covenant may be
brought against one alone, for the Deed is several.

And by Crew chief Justice, it cannot be a good Traverse, for a circumstance
cannot be traversed, for wind is alterable, and a thing material is only
traversable, and here the Covenant is several for their several Fraughts, and
it may be that others have paid him.

Jones Justice, the traverse is not good; and for the other matter he cited
Mattheusens case, Co. lib. 5. 22. Where upon a Charter party if one seal be
broken all is gone. If three are bound jointly, and an action is brought
against one, and it appears that others have sealed, the Writ shall abate:
But in this case an action lies against him alone, although the other be named
in the Indenture.

The same Term in the same Court, intr. Hill. 22. Jac. Rot. 1019. Millen versus
Fandrye.
AN action of trespass was brought for chasing of Sheep, the Defendant pleaded
that they were trespassing upon certain land, and he with a little Dog chased
them out, and as soon as the Sheep were cut of the land he called in his Dog,
and upon this the Plaintiff demurred; The point singly was but thus; J chase
the Sheep of another out of my ground, and the Dog pursues them into another
man's land next adjoining, and J chide my Dog, Justification in tr^spase.
and the Owner of the Sheep brings trespass for chasing of them: And it was
argued by Whistler of Grays-Inne, that the justification was not good, and he
cited Co. lib. 4. 38. b. that a man may hunt Cattle out of his ground with a
Dog, but cannot exceed his authority, and by him an authority in Law which is
abused is void in all, and to hunt them into the next ground is not
justifiable. The Books differ, if Cattle stray out of the high way
involuntarily, whether Trespass lies, 7 H. 7. 2. and H. 7. 20. but all agree,
that they ought to be chased out as hastily as may be.

Littleton argued for the Defendant, that Cattle may be chased out into
another man's ground, and he said that a man cannot have such a power upon his
Dog as to recall him when he pleases, and a Dog is ignorant of the bounds of
Land, and he resembled this case to other cases of the Law; first to 21 E. 4.
64. In Trespass of Cattle taken in A. in D. the Defendant says, that he was
seized of four acres called C. in D. and found the Cattle there Damage
feasant, and chased them toward the Pound, and they escaped from him and went
into A. and he presently retook them, which is the same Trespass, and admitted
for a good plea: and 22 E. 4. 8. In trespass the Defendant justifies by reason
of a custom that they which plow may turn their Plow upon the Land of another,
and that for necessity, and it was allowed for a good justification, and he
has more government of his Oxen, then in our case he can have of his Dog.

If a man be making of a lawful Chase, and cannot do it without damage to
another, this is Damnum absque injuria, 21 H. 7. 28. And he cited a case which
was in Mich. 18 Jac. between Jenning and Maystore, where a man of necessity
chased Sheep for taking one of his own, in trespass he may justify it: And
also if a Dog goes into the Land of another (as in this case) trespass does
not lie, but otherwise it is of Cattle.

Crew chief Justice, it seems to me that he might drive the Sheep out with the
Dog, and he cold not withdraw his Dog when he would in an instant, and therefore
it is not like to the case of 38 E. 3. Where trespass was brought for entering
into a Warren, and there it was pleaded that there was a Pheasant in his Land,
and his Hawk flew and followed it into the Plaintiffs ground, and there it
seems that it is not a good justification, for he may pursue the Hawk, but
cannot take the Pheasant, 6 E. 4. a man cuts Thorns, and they fell into another
man's Land, and in tresgasse he justified for it; and the opinion was, that
notwithstanding this justification trespass lies, because he did not plead
that he did his best endeavor to hinder their falling there, yet this was a
hard case; But this case is not like to these cases, for here it was lawful to
chase them out of his own Land, and he did his best endeavor to recall the
Dog, and therefore trespass does not lie.

Doderidge Justice agreed, for here was no hedge, and when he saw them out of
his own ground, he rated the Dog, 12 H. 8. this difference is taken, if I see
Sheep in my Land, I may chase them out, but if another sees them and chase them
out, I may have trespass against him, because he has taken away For an
involuntary trespass action does not lie.
my advantage; and the nature of a Dog is such that he cannot be ruled
suddenly, and here it appears to be an involuntary Trespass, 8 E. 4.

A man is driving Goods through a Town, and one of them goes into another man's
house, and he follows him, trespass does not lie for this, because it was
involuntary, and a trespass ought to be done voluntarily, and so it is
Injuria, and a hurt to another, and so it is Damnum.

If Deer be out of a Forest, the Owner of the Land where they are may hunt
them, and if the Deer fly to the Forest, and the Hounds pursue him, then he
ought to call in the Dogs, and so I may justify, and trespass lies not.

In the time of chief Justice Popham, this case was adjudged in this Court.

Trespass was brought for hunting and breaking of hedges, and the case was,
that a man started a Fox in his own land, and his Hounds pursued him into
another man's Lands, and it was holden that he may hunt and pursue him into any
man's land, because a Fox is a noysom creature to the Commonwealth.

Bracton says, that when a man is outlawed he has Caput lupinum, and he may
be hunted through all the County: And he agreed the case of 8 E. 4. If a Tree
grow in a hedge, and the Fruit fall into another man's land, the Owner may fetch
it in the other man's land, and he also agreed the case of 22 E. 48. of the
Plew, and so concluded that the trespass does not lie.

Jones Justice, that the trespass does not lie, vide Co. lib. 8. 67. Crogates
case, and lib. 4. Terringhams case, and he cannot recall his Dog in an instant:
And the same day Judgment was given for the Defendant, Quod quaerens nil capiat
per billam.

The same Term in the same Court. Marsh versus Newman.
IN a Replevin the Defendant pleaded that was seized In jure Collegii, and does
not say, that he was in Dominico suo ut de foedo, and the Plaintiff demurred
upon the Avowry. And Andrews argued for the Plaintiff.

1. The Defendant ought to have alleged certainly that they were seized in
Fee; for Littleton says, that in Counts and pleadings a man ought to show how
he is seized, 8 E. 3. 55. 13 Eliz. Dyer. 299. Pl. 31. An Inquisition was found
upon an extent of a Statute-merchant, and does not show how the Conusor was
seized, but only that he was seized, and the Inquisition holden void. But it
may be objected, that if Land be given to a Dean and Chapter that they have
fee, 11 H. 7. 12. I confess it: But the constant use of pleading has alwais
been in case of a Bishop, College, etc. to say, that they were seized in Fee,
as appears in Hill and Granges case, and Co. lib. 6. the Dean and Chapter of
Worcesters case, and Co. lib. 11. 66. Magdalen College case; and it appears
by 20 H. 7. in the Abbey of S. Austins case, that an Abbey may have a Lease
Prae auter vie, and so perhaps here the Dean had a Lease but Prae auter vie,
and therefore ought to have alleged that he was seized in Fee, if the truth
were so. And he moved other exceptions, as 1. That the Defendant entitled
himself to a Lease as Executor, and does not plead Literas testamentarias.

2. That the Defendant entitles himself to a Rent, part of which was due in the
time of the Testator, and part in his own time, and does not show when the
Testator died, and therefore the Avowry not good.

Jermy for the Defendant that the Avowry is good, and it cannot be otherwise
intended but that they are seized in Fee, 11 H. 7. Lands given to a Major and
Comminalty is Fee-simple, but otherwise of an Abbot and Parson, Plow. 103. and
Dyer 103. A Seisin in Fee is implied by Seisin In jure Collegii; and because it
has been objected that he may be seized Prae auter vie, this is but a foreign
intendment, for a Fee is always intended Seisin in Fee-simple.

For the second objection, because Non profert literas testament, true it is if
he entitle himself merely as Executor, he ought to bring in Literas
testamentar. but our case is not so, for here we are Defendants, and we
endeavor only to excuse a Tort, 36 H. 6. 36. Where a man is Plaintiff he ought
to show Literas testamentar. that so the Court may see that he has cause of
action, but here it is only by way of excuse.

For the third, that the death of the Testator does not appear is not
material, for if any part be due to him, it is due as Executor.

Doderidge, they ought to have pleaded that they were seized in Fee; true it
is, that Land given to a Major and Comminalty is Fee-simple, and the reason is
because they are perpetual, and if the Estate be not limited they shall take
according to their continuance, 11 H. 4. 11 H. 7. and 27 H. 8 Dockrayes case,
they may be seized Prae term dauter vie, but if they had pleaded that they
were seized to them and their Successors, this pleading is good, Prima facie,
17 E. 3. 1.

Crew chief Justice, all the authorities are that there were seized in Fee,
Injure Collegii, and it is good to admit a new way of pleading.

Jones Justice, Tenant Prae auter vie makes a Lease for years, and cestui que
use, dies, he cannot have an action of Debt against Lessee for years, for
years, for he is now Tenant at sufferance. But for the first point, it seems to
him that the pleading is not good, for although in point of Creation, they take
a Fee by a Gift to Dean and Chapter, yet in pleading they ought to allege
their Estate specially, for they may have an Estate Prae auter vie: And this is
in an Avowry which shall be taken strickly. And by Crew chief Justice, the
Defendant here ought to show Literas testamentar. for he is an especial Actor
in the Avowry. And by Doderidge, Longissimum vitae tempus est 100. years, Co.
lib. 10 50. Lampets case, and therefore in pleading, if the Defendant had said,
that a Dean and Chapter were seized, and made a Lease for 200. years, this
implies a Seisin in Fee, because a man cannot have so long a life, but here the
Lease is but for 89. years, and it is common to let for 89. years, if A. shall
so long live, yet this is but a slip, and the Title is apparent.

The same Term in the same Court. Hodges versus Moore.
IN Debt for marriage money, the case was this: A man was bound to Hedges to
pay him a 1000 l. after that he had married his Daughter, and afterward he
married her, and brought Debt upon this Obligation, and it was not averred that
he had given notice to him of the marriage, but demanded the money: And this
was moved by Noy in Arrest of Judgment (but quaere if request afterward does
not implynetice.)

And Doderidge Justice put this case, A man is bound to pay a 100 l. two Where
notice is requisite before action, and where not.
months after A. return from Rome, he ought to give notice of his return
before that he can have an action upon this Obligation, for he may land at
Newcastle, or Plymoth, where by common intendment the Obligor cannot know
whether he be returned, or not; and this was agreed by the chief Justice and
Jones.

And Sergeant Davies argued for the Plaintiff, that there need not precise
notice to be given, and he cited 1 H. 7. 18 E. 4. and Co. lib. 8. Where the
Obligor shall take notice at his peril, and so here because he takes upon him
^or to pay it: And it was said, that one Blackamores case was adjudged in the
point, and he conceived also that this request afterward is a sufficient
notice. But Noy for the Defendant said, that he ought to give notice, or
otherwise this mischief would ensue, that if he had not married her, and yet
had demanded the money he ought to pay it: and he said, that where an act is to
be done by a stranger, the Plaintiff or Defendant ought to take notice thereof
at his peril, as the case E. 4. where a man was bound to stand to the Award of
I. C. he ought to take notice of the Award at his peril: but where it lies
properly in the Conusance and notice of the Plaintiff, there he ought to give
notice thereof to the Defendant, Co. lib. 5. Mallories case: If a Reversion be
bargained and sold to J. S. the Bargainee shall have the Rent without
Attornment; but if a penalty be to be forfeited, he ought to give notice to the
particular Tenant of the Grant, or otherwise he shall not take advantage
thereof: and he cited a case which was in 17 Eliz. Stephen Gurneys case; Lessee
for years, the Reversion is granted over for years by way of future Interest,
to begin upon the death, forfeiture, or determination of the first Lease;
provided that if the Rent upon the second Lease be arrear, that the Lessor may
enter; the first Lessee surrender, a Rent-day incur, the second Lessee does not
pay the Rent, the Lessor shall not enter for a Forfeiture, because the first
Lease determined by an act which lies properly in the Conusance of the Lessor,
and because he was to take advantage by it, he ought to have given notice
thereof to the Lessee, and here he might have well given notice to the
Defendant, for it lies properly in the Conusance of the Plaintiff.

The second Objection was, that here was an implied notice, because the
Marriage was at the instance of the Defendant, which implies a notice.

Under favor, this is no notice, for this is before the marriage, but if no
notice be given after the marriage, then there is no notice.

But by Sergeant Davies, there is a sufficient implication, and there is no
need of notice in our case; and see Co. lib. 8. Francis his case, where they
ought to take notice at their peril, and a marriage is an Ecclesiastical
Judgment of which he ought to take notice, and he was interrupted, for all the
Justices went to the Parliament. And diverse Presidents were cited, that there
need no notice to be given in this case: And it was agreed that Judgment should
be given for the Plaintiff: And in Trinity Term next following, Judgment was
accordingly given for the Plaintiff.

The same Term in the same Court. Sir George Reynolls Case.
SIr George Reynoll Marshall of the Marshalsey of the Kings Bench, What Bonds a
Sheriff or Marshall man take.
^rought Debt upon a Bond, the Condition whereof was, that the Defendant shall
be a true Prisoner, and it was doubted whether the Bond were within the Statute
of 23 H. 6 cap. 10.

Doderidge, It is not to be understood by this Statute that a Sheriff, Ga^ler,
or Marshall shall take no Bond, for if the Marshall has a man in execucution,
and fear that he will escape, and he takes Bond of him, this Bond is good.

Jones, The intent of the Statute, that the Sheriff or Marshall shall not
suffer Prisoners to go at large, for that is within the Statute.

And it was ruled in the Kings Bench, that the Marshalsey should be enlarged,
Within the Rules of B^. what it is.
and this shall be called within the Rule, and if the Marshall take a Band to
tarry there it is good, but if he suffer him to go at large, it is not good.

The same Term in the same Court, Sury versus Albon Pigot, and three other
Defendants, Intr. Hill. 1. Car. Rot. 1. 24.
IN an action upon the case for stopping his Watercourse, the Plaintiff
declares that 14. October. 22. Jac. he was possessed of the Rectory of M. in
Barkshire, of which a Curtilage was parcel, and that in this Curtilage is and
has been time out of mind a watering place, for the watering of the Cattle of
the Plaintiff and others, and for other necessary uses, and that a certain
Watercourse had time out of mind flowed from Mildford stream to this Curtilage,
and that this water filled the said Pond; and further that the Defendant well
knowing this, and intending to dam up the said Watering-course, built a stone
Wall thereupon whereby the Watercourse was stopped up, to the Plaintiffs damage of
20 l. and this was laid with a Continuando. The Defendant plead that 3 H. 8.
the said H. 8. was seized of the Manor of etc. and of the said Rectory in his
Demesne as of Fee, and of a certain piece of Land called the Hopyard lying
between the said watering-place and the said stream, and by his Letters Patents
granted this to Wiliam Box and his Heirs, by virtue whereof he was seized:
Francis Searles entered upon him and was seized, and enfeoffed Pigot, 20 Jac. by
virtue whereof of he was seized, etc. and the three others justify as Servants
to Pigot, that they the said day and year filled up the said Watercourse, as
it was lawful for them to do; and Whether unity of possession in several
lands, shall destroy a Water course.
that this is the same Trespass, etc. The Plaintiff demurs. And the question
is, whether the unity of possession of all in H. 8. has extinguished the
Watercourse.

And by Dorrell for the Plaintiff, if it were of a Common, it is clear, that it
is destroyed, because Common ought to be in another man's Land, but not in our
case, for if one prescribe to have Warren, if he purchase the Land yet he shall
have Warren, 11 H. 7. 25. there are two houses, and the one prescribe that the
other shall mend the Gutter, and afterward they come to the hands of one man,
and then he alien one of them, this unity shall destroy the mending of the
Gutter.

Berd for the Defendant, that the unity has destroyed the custom, 21 E. 3. 2.
A way is but an easement, yet by the purchase of the Land the way is
extinguished, and also the watering-course is not only an casement but a
profit, or Prender; and he cited Dyer 295. in case of an Enclosure, that the
Enclosure is extinguished, but there is made a quaere, and he cited 38 Eliz. in
C. B. an opinion, that by purchase of a Close the Enclosure is extinguished; a
fortiori here because it is a profit: And for the case of 11 H. 7. it is by the
custom of London, but there is no custom in our case, and the case of a Warren
is not like to our case, because a man may have Warren in his own Soil; And in
Michaelmas Term next the case was argued again by Barkesdale for the Plaintiff,
that the unity of possession in H. 8. had not extinguished the Watercourse,
and that the Terminus ad quem, and the Medium also being in one, had not
distinguished nor destroyed it. And 1 Col lib. 4. 26. Benedicta est expositio
quando res redimitur a distructione; The Law will not destroy things, but the
Law will sometimes suffer a fiction (which is nothing in rerum natura) ut res
magis valeat. I confess that profit apprender as Common, or Rent is
extinguished by unity of possession, for Common it appears in 4 E. 3. and Co.
lib. 4. Terringhams case: And for Rent it appears in 4 H. 4. 7. and in 21 E.
3. 2. it appears that a way is extinguished by unity of possession, 3 H. 6.
31. Brook Nuisance 11. for it is repugnant for a man to have a way upon his own
Land: But I conceive that our case differs from the case of a way, and that for
this reason; where the thing has a being and existence, notwithstanding the
unity there it is not destroyed by the unity, but the Watercourse has a being
notwithstanding the unity, ergo, etc. I will prove the major proposition by
these cases, 35 H. 6. 55, 56. Where a Warren is not extinct by a Feoffment of
the Land, for I may hawk and hunt in my own land as in another man's, so the
Warren has existence, notwithstanding the unity, Dyer 326. Where the Queen was
seized of Whaddon Chase, and the Lord Gray was Lieutenant there in Fee, and he
and his Ancestors and their Keepers had by prescription used to hunt wandering
Deer in the Demesns of the Manor of S. adjoining as in Purlieues: the Manor
of S. comes into the Queens hands, who grants this to Fortescue in Fee, with
free Warren within the Demesns, etc. it was holden that the unity does not
extinguish the Purlieu, Dyer 295. Two Closes adjoyn, the one by prescription is
bound to a Fence, the Owner of one purchase the other, and suffer the Hedges to
decay, and dies, leaving two Daughters his Heirs, who make partition: Quaere
whether the prescription for the Enclosure be revived; true it is that it is
made a quaere, but he says, see the like case, 11 H. 7. 27. of a Gutter which
proves our case, as I will show afterward.

For the Minor proposition that the watering has being, notwithstanding the
said unity, I will prove it by 12 H. 7. 4. A Precipe quod reddat of Land Aqua
Co-opert, Mich. 6. Jac. Challenor and Moors case. An Ejectione firmae, was
brought of a Watering-course, and there resolved that it does not lie of it,
because it is not firma, sed currit, but of Terra aqua co-operta, it does lie.
Also I will take some exceptions to the Bar, there is no Title in the Bar for
the Defendant Pigot, and so we being in possession, albeit in truth we have no
Title, yet he who has no Title cannot oust us, neither can stop the said
Watercourse, and it is only shown in the Bar that Searles entered and enfeoffed
Pigot, but for any thing as yet appears the true Owner continued in possession,
21 Jac. C. B. Cook against Cook in a Writ of Dower, the Defendant pleads an
Entry after the Darrein continuance, and does not plead that he ousted him, and
upon this the Plaintiff Demurs, and there adjudged that it is no plea in Bar,
because he does not say, that the Defendant entered and ousted the Tenant. 2.
Exception, the action is brought against four, Scil. Pigot, Cole, Branch, and
Elyman; and Pigot has conveyed a Title from Searles, the three other
Defendants justify, but Pigot does not say any thing but that Searles
enfeoffed him, 7 H. 6. an action of Wast is brought against many, one answers,
and the other not, this is a discontinuance: And for the principal matter, I
will conclude with 11 H. 7. 25. Broo. Extinguishment 60. Two have Tenements
adjoining, and the one has a Gutter in the others Land, and afterward one
purchase both, and then he alien one to one, and another to another, the Gutter
is revived notwithstanding the unity, because it is very necessary, and so he
prayed Judgment for the Plaintiff. Bear for the Defendant: I in a manner agree
all the cases which have been put on the other side; and I conceive that the
Watercourse is not Stagnum but Servitium, which is due from the one land to
the other: It is but a liberty, and therefore I agree Challenors case, which is
but a liberty that an Ejectione firmae does not lie of it, but Ejectione firmae
lies De stagno.

For the first exception I answer and confess, that to allege an Entry after
the Darrain continuance, without alleging an Ouster of the Tenant, cannot
abate the Writ, for the Defendant may enter to another intent as appears in
the Commentaries, and with the assent of the Tenant; But here it was alleged
that a Feoffment was made and a Livery which implies another.

For the matter in Law, I conceive that the Watercourse is extinguished, and
it may be compared to 21 E. 3. 2. The case of a way which is extinguished by
unity of possession, Hill. 36. Eliz. Rot. 1332. Hemdon and Crouches case. Two
were seized of two several acres of Land, of which the one ought to enclose
against the other, one purchase them both, and lets them to several men, and
there the opinion was, and adjudged accordingly, that the Enclosure is not
revived, but remains extinguished, 39 Eliz. Harringtons case, the same thing
resolved, and albeit in Dyer 295. is a quaere, yet the better opinion has been
taken according to these resolutions. H. 4. Jac. Jordan and Ayliffes Case, when
one had a way from one acre to another, and afterward he purchased the acre
upon which he had the way, and afterward sold it, and in that Case the opinion
of 3. Justices was that the way was extinguished; also 11 H. 4. 50. and 11 H.
7. 25. prove this case, for the said case is compared to the custom of
Gavelkind and Borough English, and there the quaere is made whether by the
custom it be revived, and if it be a custom which runs with the Land, the
unity of possession does not extinguish it, Co. lib. 4. Terringhams case, and
24 E. 3. 2. common appendant is destroyed by unity of possession, and yet it is
a thing of common right, but a Watercourse being a thing against common right,
a fortiori it shall be extinguished. Now I will take some exceptions to the
Declaration.

1. Because he has laid a prescription for a Watercourse, as to say, that it
was belonging to a Rectory, to which, etc. and this is a good exception, as
appears by 6 E 6 Dyer 70. Ishoms case, where exception was taken, that before
his prescription he does not say, that it was Antiquum parcum, which exception
(as it is there said) was the principal cause that Judgment was given against
him, and also as the case is here, it ought to be a Rectory impropriate, and
this cannot be before the time of H. 8. which is within time of memory, for
before the said time no lay person could have a Rectory impropriate, and
therefore I pray Judgment for the Defendant.

Barksedale said, that the prescription is well laid, and that he would prove
by 39 H 6. 32. and 33 H. 6. 26. and per curiam the prescription is good enough,
and albeit it is not said, that it is Antiquae Rectoria, yet it is well enough,
Mich. 1 Car. at Reading Term in Broek and Harris case, he does not say, that it
was Antiquum Message, and yet resolved good.

Doderidge, the case of 6 E. 6. differs in this point from this case, for a
Rectory shall always be intended ancient, and so is not a Park, for this may
be newly created: and he put this case; suppose I have a Mill, and I have a
Watercourse to this in my own land, and I sell the Land, I cannot stop the
Watercourse.

Crew chief Justice seemed of opinion that the prescription is gone, and that
the better opinion in Dyer 13 Eliz. has always been that the Enclosure is
gone by unity of possession, but yet the Watercourse is matter of necessity.

Doderidge and Whitlock, the way is matter of election, but the course of water
is natural.

Jones Justice, There is great difference between a way and a watercourse as
to this purpose, for admit that this watercourse, after that it had been in
the Curtilage of the Plaintiff, goes further to the Curtilage of another, shall
not that other have the benefit of this watercourse notwithstanding the unity
of possession? I think clearly that he shall.

Doderidge, my opinion is, that the watercourse is not extinguished by the
unity of possession: But some conceived that he had declared his opinion in
terror to the Defendant: And afterward the same Term Barksedale for the
Plaintiff said, that he had agreed the case before, and therefore would now only
endeavor to answer some exceptions which had been taken to the Declaration.

1. Exception has been that no prescription or custom is made for this
watercourse, but only that Currere solebat and consuevit. But I conceive tha^
the Declaration is good notwithstanding this, because the Plaintiff here does
not claim an interest in the Watercourse, but in the Land in which, etc. and
therefore it is good, and this appears by 12 E. 4. 9. the Prior of Lantonies
case in a prescription in a Market overt generally, and the reason there was,
because he was a stranger, as in our case he is, and this pleading appears
also to be good by Cooks Book of Entries, 18. Smiths case, which was entered 9
Jac. Rot. 366. in this Court. 2. Exception was, because it is not said, that it
was Antiqua Rectoria. 3. Exception, because it does not appear that he was a
spiritual man to whom the Demise of the Rectory was made. 4. Because it is not
said, that the Watercourse Ad predict. Rectoriam pertinet. 5. Because the
Watercourse is alleged to be for his customary Tenants of the said Rectory,
and this is not good, as appears by 21 Eliz. Dyer, 363. Prescription, Pro
quolibet customar. Tenente, is not good, but I conceive that this case is not
our case, for here is Customarius tenens Rectoriae, and there it is agreed that
Quilibet customarius tenens Manner. had been good: And the plea in Bar has
salved these objections, and therefore he prayed judgment for the Plaintiff.

Jeremy for the Defendant; And first for the matter in Law, it seemed to him
that by the unity of possession the Watercourse is extinguished, and the
Watercourse may well be compared to the case of the way, for as a way is a
passage for men over the land, so water has passage upon the land, and a way
is extinguished by unity, as appears by 21 E. 3. 2. 11 H. 4, 5. 21 Ass. and
Davies Reports 5. and in 4 Jac. Jordan, and case it was the better opinion that
a way was extinguished by unity of possession; true it is, that there Popham
chief Justice put the difference, where the way is of necessity and where not,
for where the way is of necessity there it shall not be extinguished: This case
has been compared to the case of a Warren in 35 H. 6. but I conceive that the
cases are not a like, because a Warren is a mere liberty, 8 H. 7. 5. A man may
have a Warren in his own Land, and Co. lib. 7. Buts case by a Feoffment of
Land, a Warren does not pass, but this Watercourse has its original out of
the Land, and this case cannot be compared to an ancient Watercourse running
to a Mill, for notwithstanding the unity it shall pass with the Mill, for
otherwise it shall not be Molendinum aquatinum, so that the water there is
parcel of the thing, and so of necessity ought to pass with the thing, but
here it does not appear that it is a Watercourse of necessity, and for any
thing that appears, it may be filled with another Watercourse: Also I
conceive that the Declaration is not good. 1. Because neither prescription nor
custom is laid for the Watercourse, and it appears in Co. Book of Entries,
Holcome and Evans case, and the old Book of Entries, 616, 617. Mich. 1. Car.
Rot. 107. Turner and Dennies case in this Court, in trespass for breaking his
Close, etc. the Defendant justified for a way, etc. and that he was possessed
for years, and for him and his Occupiers had a way over the Land, the Plaintiff
demurred, and resolved that the prescription is not good. 2. The Declaration is
insufficient being an action upno the case for the stopping of a Watercourse,
and it is not Vi and armis, nor Contra pacem, Co. lib. 9. 50. the Earl of
Shrewsburies case, when there are two causes of an action upon the case; the
one Causa causans, the other Causa causata, causa causans may be alleged Vi
and armis, for this is not the immediate cause of the action, but Causa causata
F. N. B. 86. H. and 92. E. in the end of the Writ of action upon the case shall
be Contra pacem. 3. Also he has prescribed for the Tenants of the Rectory,
which is not possible, for no Layman could be Tenant of a Rectory, or of
Tithes before the Statute of H. 8. and therefore I pray Judgment for the
Defendant.

Whitlock chief Justice conceived that the declaration was good, and the bar is
naught, both for the form and matter: the question here is of Aqua profluens,
and I conceive that there needs no prescription or custom in this case, for
water has its natural course, and as is observed by Brudnell in 12 H. 8.
Natura sua descendit, it may be called Usu captio, or Usage, and he conceived
that the action upon the case very well lies in this case, like to the case
where a man bath a house and windows in it, and another erect a new house and
stop the light, then I may have an action upon the case; but true it is, that I
shall not only count for the loss of the air, but also I ought to prescribe
that time out of mind light have entered by these windows, etc. see 7 E. 3. If
there be a Schoolmaster in a Town, and another erect a new School in the same
Town, an action upon the case does not lie against him, because Schools are for
the public benefit, and every private man may have a School in his house. And
for the exception, that a Lay man cannot be possessed of a Rectory, I conceive
that the Declaration is good notwithstanding, for a Layman may have a Rectory
by Demise.

And for the Plea in bar, it is not good for the form, because that Searles
entered and enfeoffed Pigot, and it is not said, that he entered, and Expulit,
and if a man enter and make a Feoffment, the owner being upon the Land the
Feoffment is void, and therefore an actual Ouster ought to be shown: And for
the matter in Law, he conceived that the Bar was not good, for by the unity of
possession the watercourse is not extinguished, and yet I agree the cases of a
way and common upon the differences of Rights which are put in Bracton, lib 4.
221. These are called Servitutes, as jus eundi, fodendi, hauriendi, etc. sunt
servitutes quas praedia ex quibus exunt aliis praediis debent, and are called
Servitutes praediales, and this began by private right, to wit, by grant or
prescription.

A way or common shall be extinguished, because they are part of the profits of
the Land, and the same Law is of Fishings also, but in our case the
watercourse does not begin by the consent of parties, nor by prescription, but
Ex jure naturae, and therefore shall not be extinguished by unity: A Warren is
not extinguished by unity, because a man may have a Warren in his own Land, and
in the case of 11 H. 7. the Gutter was not extinguished only by the unity of
possession, but there also appears in the case that the Pipes were destroyed,
whereby it could not be revived, and although the Book of 13 Eliz. Dyer 295. Two
Closes adjoyn together, the one being by prescription bound to a Fence, the
owner of the one purchase, the other dies, having issue two Daughters, who make
partition, it is a quaere whether the enclosure be revived, yet I conceive
clearly, that by unity of the possession the Enclosure is destroyed, for
fencing is not natural, but comes by industry of men, and therefore by the
unity it shall be gone, and so briefly with this diversity he concluded that
where the thing has its being by prescription, unity will extinguish it; but
where the thing has its being Ex jure naturae, it shall not be extinguished,
and therefore the Plaintiff ought to have Judgment.

Jones Justice agreed, that the Declaration is good, and that the Bar also is
good in manner, but for the matter in Law it is not good.

As to the first exception to the Declaration, I conceive it is good, albeit
there wants a prescription, and this is the ordinary of pleading, as appears in
Co. lib. 4 Luttrels case, and in all the presidents before cited.

2. For the exception Vi and armis, he conceived this difference, where the act
is a Trespass and a Nuisance, there it may be laid to be Vi and armis, but if
it be a Nuisance only and not a Trespass, it is otherwise: as if I have a way
over another man's Land, if a stranger dig in the Land so a^ I cannot have the
way, now because it is a Trespass to the Owner of the Soil, in my action upon
the case against a stranger, I may have Vi and armis, but if the owner stop the
way, there Vi and armis shall not be in my action upon the case.

For the third exception, because he both not say, Ad Rectoriam spectandum, but
I conceive that it shall be intended ad Rectoriam impropriat, and so it
appears.

4. Where it is said, Watering-course for his Tenants, I conceive it is good
enough, being in an action upon the case where damages only are to be
recovered: That the Bar also is good in form, for although the Tenant here be a
Disseisor, yet it is a good Bar, for it matters not whether he has a Title or
no, if the Watercourse be extinct by the unity, for the matter in Law, he
conceived that the unity of possession had not extinguished the Watercourse. A
man has things out of another man's Land, either by grant as a Seigniory, Rent,
Common, etc. and these are distinguished by unity, etc. and the reason is,
because one who has interest as Owner of the Land, cannot have a particular
interest in the same Land also. Or by prescription, and those things are
extinguished by unity of possession also, and not only for the first reason
because he is Owner of the Land, and so cannot have a particular interest in
the same Land also, but also because that by the unity the prescription fail?
And for the case in Dyer, 13 Eliz. I conceive that by the unity the enclosure
is gone, and so it was resolved in 37 Eliz. for every one is not bound to
enclose: For the case of the way, I will suspend my opinion concerning it,
because Clark and Lambs case is now depending touching it in the same point.

But now for our case, it differs from the other cases, for the prescription
here is in another manner then is made for Common, for it shall be pleaded
either as appendant, or appurtenant, but Currere solebat is only in this
pleading, for here no interest is claimed, but in the other cases an interest
is claimed: In this case the Land remains as it was before, and therefore the
unity will not extinguish it; and if such a unity by construction of Law should
extinguish Watercourse, it would be too dangerous: for suppose that a man
has a Watercourse from Thames to his house in Lambeth, if he purchase a
parcel of Land in Hendley; now because that the Thames come by the same Land,
his Watercourse shall be extinguished. Also suppose that the Watercourse
after it has been in the Curtilage of the Plaintiff, goes into another
Curtilage, is it reason that by this unity the second man shall lose his
Watercourse? without doubt it is unreasonable. And the case of 11 H. 7. of the
Gutter, warrants this opinion, and therefore the Plaintiff ought to have
Judgment.

Doderidge Justice, I conceive no great difficulty in the case; for the
exceptions to the Declarations they are not material.

1. That there wants Prescription or Custom, I conceive that it is good enough,
for here are the words of Currere solebat and consuevit, and Consuevit is a
good word for a Custom.

2. That a Layman cannot have a Parsonage; true it is, that a Layman cannot
be a Parson, but he may have a Parsonage, for he may be Lessee of it, which
appears many times in our Books.

3. That it is not alleged to be Vi and armis, this is the most colorable
exception, and the case and rule cited out of Co. lib. 9. the Earl of
Shrewsburies case is good Law, but it is impossible to plead Vi and armis in
this case, for the unity was in H. 8. and the wrong is supposed after the
severance, and it is supposed to be done by the Owner of the Land, and a man
cannot do a thing upon his own Land Vi and armis.

4. Because it is not alleged to be an ancient Rectory: I conceive it need
not, because the Law presumes all Rectories to be ancient, the Patronages
whereof are gained Ratione fundi, fundationis, vel dotationis.

5. Because he does not say, that Pertinet ad Rectoriam: But he has said a
thing which amounts to as much; for it is said, that in the Rectory was a
certain Curtilage in which there is a Watering-pond, and the Curtilage is part
of the house, and therefore he need not say, that it belongs to the house. For
the Bar I conceive that it is good for the Manor: A man makes a Feoffment of
Land, the Owner of the Land being present at the same time, nothing works by
the Livery for the reason before given by Jones. For the matter of Law he
conceived that the unity of possession does not extinguish the Watercourse,
and that for two reasons.

1. For the necessity of the thing. 2. From the nature of the thing being a
Watercourse, which is a thing running.
1 For the necessity, and this is the reason that common appendant by the unity
of possession shall not be extinguished, for it is appendant to ancient
Land-hide, and gain arable Land, which is necessary for the preservation of the
Commonwealth; and as in this case there is a necessity of bread, so in our
case there is a necessity of water: And for the case of a way Distinguendum
est, for if it be a way which is only for easement it is extinguished by unity
of possession, but if it be a way of necessity, as a way to Market or Church,
there it is not extinguished by unity of possession, and accordingly was the
opinion of Popham chief Justice, which I take for good Law, and the case of 11
H. 7. 25. is a notable case, and there a reason is given why a Gutter is not
extinguished by unity of possession, because it is matter of necessity.

2. From the nature of water, which naturally descends, it is alwais current,
Et aut invenit aut facit viam, and shall such a thing be extinguished which
has its being from the Creation. Co. lib. 4. Luttrels case, a Mill is a
necessary thing, and if I purchase the Land upon which the streams goes which
runs to this Mill, and afterward I alien the Mill, the Watercourse remains.
So if a man has a Dye-house, and there is a water running to it, and
afterward he purchase the Land upon which the water is current and sell it,
yet he shall have the Watercourse, Dyer: Dame Browns case, and the principal
case in Luttrels case, a Fulling-mill made a Water-mill, this shall not alter
the nature of the Mill, but yet it remains a Mill, so the water has its course
notwithstanding the unity, and he concluded for the Plaintiff.

Crew chief Justice, I agree that the Declaration is good, and also that the
Bar is good for the manner, but for the matter in Law, I conceive that it is
not good. In our Law every case has its stand or fall from a particular reason
or circumstance: For a Warren, and Tithes they are not extinguished by unity,
because they are things collateral to the Land: And for the case of 13 Eliz.
in Dyer, of an Enclosure; I conceive that by the unity the Enclosure is
destroyed, for the Prescription was interrupted, and in Day and Drakes case, 3
Jac. in this Court it was adjudged that in the same case the Prescription was
gone; It may be resembled to the case of Homage Ancestrell 57 E. 3. Fitzherbert
Nusans: And for our case it is not like to the cases of Common, or a Way,
because the Watercourse is a thing natural and therefore by unity it shall not
be discharged; also there is a linement out of which every man shall have a
benefit, and therefore he concluded that Judgment should be given for the
Plaintiff; And Judgment was commanded to be entered for the Plaintiff.

The same Term in the same Court. Welden versus Vesey.
AN action of Debt was brought by Welden Sheriff of the City of Coventry
against Vesey, upon the Statute of 29 Eliz. cap. 4. and declares, that it is
provided by this Statute that no Sheriff or Minister, etc. shall take for an
execution, if the sum does not exceed 100 l. but 12 d. for every 20 s. and
being above the sum of 100 l. 6 d. for every 20 s. and shows that whereas the
said Vesey had judgment against one in an action of Debt, that the Plaintiff by
virtue of a Capias directed to him, took the body of the said person condemned,
and that it was delivered to the Plaintiff, and that he for levying of the
money had brought this action.

The Defendant by way of Bar says, that it is provided by this act that it
shall not extend to Executions in Towns Corporate, and that this was within
Coventry, and so demurred upon the Declaration.

And Whitwick argued for the Plaintiff; two things are considerable in this
case.

1. Whether where the sum exceeds 100 l. the Sheriff shall have 12 d. for
every 20 s. of the 100 l. and 6 d. for that which is over, or 6 d. only for
every 20 s. for all the sum.

2. Whether this Statute extend to Judgments in Towns Corporate. For the first,
the letter of the Statute is clear that he shall have 12 d. for the first 100
l. and 6 d. for the residue, for the Statute is, that if it be above 100 l.
Whether a Sheriff, or, etc. shall have 12 d. in the pound for the first 100 l.
and 6 d. for the rest upon an Execution.
that he shall have but 6 d. therefore if it be under a 100 l. he shall have 12
d. for every 20 s. And the meaning of the Statute is plain also, for otherwise
the Sheriff shall have a lesser Fee where it is above a 100 l. (as where it is
a 199 l.) then he shall have for 100 l. but this was not the intent of the
Statute, but the greater the Execution, the greater the Fee: It was adjudged in
one Gores case, 10 Jac. that an action of Debt lies upon this Law, Pasch. 14
Jac. Rot. 351. Brole and Tumblerson Sheriffs of the City of London, brought
Dabt against Nathanael Michell for execution of 400 l. for 12 l. 10 s. scil. 5
l. for the first 100 l. and 6 d. for every 20 1. after: But I confess that the
principal question there was, whether an action of Debt lies for the money,
and it was resolved that it did, and Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

2. To the Proviso, that this does not extend to Fees in a Town Corporate,
whether this extend to executions which go out of Judgments in this Court, or
in the Common Pleas into Towns Corporate. The Statute shows that before that
time the Sheriff had taken great Fees, which the Parliament considering,
restrained them to a certainty; The words of the Proviso are general: Provided
that this Act shall not extend to any Fees to be taken for any Execution within
any City or Town Corporate, and although the words be general, yet the
exposition shall be according to reason, as it is said in Fulmerston and
Stewards case in Plow. Expesition, shall be made against the words, if the words
be against reason, 5 H. 7. 7 38 H. 3. Broo. Livery 6. The King shall have
primer Seisen of all Lands of his Tenant which he holds of him in Capite, but
if one holds of the King in Capite, in Socage, he shall pay no primer Seisen to
the King, and this Statute shall have this intendment, that this Proviso shall
extend only to Executions upon Judgments given in Cities and Towns Corporate,
and not where Judgment is given in this Court, or the Common Pleas, and
Executions are only there, and this seems to be a reasonable construction;
Executions in Towns corporate, to wit, Executions upon Judgments given in Towns
corporate. If the Sheriff make execution at the Town side he shall have for his
fees as the Statute limits, and therefore he shall have it if within the Town,
and if this should not be so, this mischief would ensue, that presently when an
Execution issues out against a man, he will shelter himself in a Town corporate,
as in a Sanctuary, and the Sheriff will not do execution there, because he
shall not have so great a Fee for doing it as if it were in another place, and
so execution (which is the life of the Law) shall be undone.

Jermy for the Defendant; and first, if the sum exceed a 100 l. he shall have
but 6 d. for every 20 s. of all. It is considerable that at Common Law the
Sheriff ought to do execution freely without any recompense. In Both and
Sadlers case lately in this place, an action upon the case was brought by a
Bailiff, that whereas a Warrant for taking such a man was directed to him, the
Defendant promised him 40 s. for his pains, he took the man and brought an
action for the 40 s. and it was agreed that he should not have it. The Law
abhors that great Fees shall be given for executions, Co. lib. 3. 7. in Heydons
case: In the exposition of the Statute three things are considerable.

1. What the Common Law was before the making of it. 2. What the mischief was
at the Common Law. 3. The remedy which the Statute gives. 4. The true reason of
the remedy. The Common Law was, that the Sheriff shall not take any Fee for
execution, Ergo now he shall take as small a fee as may be, because this is
nighest to the common Law: And the first words are declarative what Fees he
shall take; and the subsequent words affirmative what Fees they may now take,
to wit, where the sum does not exceed a 100 l. 12 d. for every 20 s. 14 Jac.
It was objected, that the Sheriff is not bound to do execution before he has
his Fee, and then it was resolved that he might have an action of Debt, and so
it seems that the party is not bound to give levying money before that the
execution be done, and otherwise, the party Plaintiff may be at great mischief
if the other be not taken: And it has been agreed lately in the Common Pleas,
that if the sum exceed 100 l. he sh^^l have but 6 d. for every 20 s. And as to
the second point, he endeavored to maintain that the Proviso extends to
executions in Towns corporate, although the Judgments upon which the executions
issue are given in other Courts, and this is the constant practice of the City
of London.
The Judges delivered their opinion, with a protestation, that they might
recall them, if afterward better reason appeared.

Crew chief Justice was of opinion that he shall have but 6 d. for every 20 s.
if the sum exceed 100 l. and the sum shall not be divided, but if the sum be
under a 100 l. then 12 d. for every 20 s. and this is the reason of the Law.

And for the second point, although the Judgment be given in the superior
Court, yet if the Sheriff does execution there, he shall have his levying
money, and this is within the intention of the Proviso.

Doderidge, Justice the first question is upon the exposition of the Statute,
the second upon the Proviso; For the first two expositions may be made as has
been remembered, then we will enquire of the interpretation: This Statute was
made for the benefit of Sheriffs, that as they are in hazard by taking of men,
because many times resistance was made. 2. When the Sheriff had taken a man,
and in the carriage of him to prison he had escaped, an action upon the case
did lie against the Sheriff, and when he had him in prison, he ought to have
great care in keeping of him, for an action lies against him if he escape: and
therefore although on the one side there was a great mischief by reason of great
Fees that the Sheriff took for execution; so on the other side, the Law tendered
Sheriffs in respect of the hazard ^^d care which they had of men in execution,
and therefore the Law in an indifferency provides that the Sheriff shall have a
good Fee for execution, and also it provides against his extortion, and so it
is indifferent between the oppression of the Sheriff and covetousness, and we
are not to judge according to the intent, but according to the equity of the
Law, for equality to prevent the covetousness of Sheriffs and the oppression
of the people; then in this case if he shall have but 6 d. for every 20 s. for
200 l. he shall have no more for execution of 200 l. then if it were a 100 l.
But I think this was not the intent of the Act.

For the second point, I take it that this Statute did not extend to Suits
within Towns corporate, and executions upon them, for they are not at any great
trouble for doing of execution within their Towns, nor hazard: But if a Sheriff
does execution in a Town corporate, then he shall have according to the
Statute, for it may be that the Prison is far distant. And I upon the sudden
conceive that this Proviso extends only to Towns corporate, which are Counties.

Jones Justice, three questions have been made upon this Statute.

1. For the nature of the action which the Sheriff is to have upon this
Statute, and for that it has been many times resolved that he shall have an
action of Debt, for when a remedy is given by a Statute, and no action is given
by the same Statute whereby the penalty shall be recovered, there he shall have
an action of Debt.

2. Who shall have the Fee when the Sheriff makes a Warrant to a Bailiff of a
liberty, the Bailiff of the liberty or the Sheriff.

The second branch of the second question is, tha^ when one Sheriff makes the
extent, and another Sheriff makes the Liberate, who shall have the Fee?

3. The third question has been in debate in the Common Pleas, and there was
some opinion that if the sum be above a 100 l. and under 200 l. that the
Sheriff shall have 12 d. for every 20 s. of the first 100 l. for otherwise the
Sheriff shall have a less for execution of 199 l. then he shall have for 100
l. But if it be above 200 l. he shall have 6 d. ab initio.

My opinion on the sudden is, that for every 20 s. of the first 100 l. he
shall have 12 d. and for the residue he shall have 6 d. for every 20 s. and the
other shall not be altered.

And for the second point, I hold that this Proviso extends only to Judgments
originally commenced in Towns corporate, and not to executions upon Judgments
given in superior Courts, for then the Sheriff does execution as an Officer to
these Courts: And the Sheriff of the County is at as great pains, as if he were
Sheriff of another County, and shall not be bound by the Proviso.

Whitlock Justice was for the Plaintiff in both the points, to wit, that the
Sheriff shall have 1 s. for every 20 s. of the first 100 l. and 6 d. for every
20 s. of the residue. And by him the Sheriff may refuse to do execution until
the levying money be paid to him.

And for the second point, the Sheriff of the County of the City is not within
the Proviso, but shall have the Fees by the Statute provided, as well as the
Sheriff of the County shall have, for the words are general, and the exception
goes to all Towns corporate and Cities, but does not say Cities which are
Counties, and therefore this Sheriff is within the benefit of this Law: And in
Michaelmas Term next following the case was moved again by Whitlock for the
Plaintiff, and he said, that he would not speak to the second point, because
the Court had delivered their opinion, that the Proviso in the Statute, that
this shall not extend to executions in Towns corporate, it is to be intended of
executions in Towns corporate upon Judgments there given: But for executions
there upon Judgments given in this Court, or any other superior Court, the
Sheriff shall have such Fees as are limited by this Statute. And the Court said
to him that were agreed of it.

And as for the first point, he conceived that the Sheriff shall have 12 d. for
levying of every 20 s. of the first 100 l. and 6 d. of every pound more, and
this appears clearly by the Letter of the Statute: And the case in Mich. 19
Jac. in C. B. between Empson and Bathirst does not make against it, for the
resolution of the said case was upon other matters: The case being, a man was
bound in a Statute of 120 l. the Sheriff extends, and before the Liberate takes
double Bond of the party for payment of his Fees, and afterward brought Debt
against the party, who pleads the said matter in Bar, and the Statute of 23 H.
6. cap. 10. And in the case were three points.

1. Whether the Sheriff may take a double Bond for the payment of his Fees, and
it was resolved that the Bond was void, for the Sheriff might have Debt upon
the Statute for his Fees.

2. Whether the Sheriff shall have his Fees before the Liberate, and resolved
that he shall not.

3. Was this very question, and two Justices were against one, that where the
sum exceed 100 l. he shall have but 6 d. for levying of every 20 s, of the
first 100 l. But the Judgment was given upon the other points. All the Court
seemed to be of opinion that he shall have 12 d. for every 20 s. of the first
100 l. and 6 d. for every 20 s. of the residue.

The same Term in the same Court. Awdeley versus Joye.
AWdeley being put out of the Town-Clarkship of Bedford, moved for a Writ of
Restitution to the place, and it seemed to Doderidge Justice that the Justices
of this Court have power to grant restitution in this case, and he cited a case
in 16 Eliz. in this Court, where restitution was granted in such a case, and 43
Eliz. by warrant of Fennor Justice, a Writ of Restitution was granted.

One who was Town Clark of Boston for life, was made Alder-man and put out of
his Clarkship, and was restored. This Court has power not only in judicial
things, but also in some things which are extrajudicial. The A Writ of
Restitution to a Town-Clark being ousted of his Office.
Major and Commonalty of Coventry displaced one of the Alder-men, and he was
restored; And this thing is peculiar to this Court, and is one of the flowers
of it.

Crew chief Justice, doubted whether restitution could be made to Awdeley, or
no, because the Office was granted to him in Reversion, when it was expectant
upon an Estate for life, and when the Officer for life died, Joye was elected,
and he said, that all the said Writs remembered are, where he had once
possession.

Whitlock Justice, in the case of one Constable, 10 Eliz. It was resolved that
this Court has power to grant restitution in such a case, where he was put out
of his Office: And by Jones Justice, this Court has power to grant
Restitution, and he remembered, one Mittlecots case: And Noy being of Counsel
with Awdeley said, that there are Presidents to prove this in the times of E.
2. E. 3. and H. 6. And it was said by the Justices that they are the chief
Conservators of the Peace within the Realm, and therefore have power for the
preservation of the Peace in such factious Towns to grant restitution.

The same Term in the same Court. Dabborne versus Martin.
THomas Dabborne brought an action upon the case against Martin for Words, Thou
art a Knave of Record.
these words, Thou art a Knave of Record, and a forgering Knave: And it was
argued by Jermy for the Defendant, that the words were not actionable, for a
Knave signifies a Male-child, so that it is no more then to say, Thou art a
Male-child of Record: And for forgering Knave, the action will not lie, for
Forger is a general word, and may be applied to diverse Trades, as forgering
Smith, forgering Goldsmith; and when he called him forgering Knave; there was
no communication of his Office, 18 Jac. Sir William Brunskill brought an action
upon the case, and declared that he was well descended, and was a Gentleman of
the Chamber to Prince Henry, and he brought an action for these words, Thou art
a Cosener, and live by cosenage, and adjudged not actionable, Co. lib. 4. 16.
Action upon the case does not lie for these words, Thou art a corrupt man, if
there were no communication touching his Profession; And it was argued for the
Plaintiff that the words were actionable, for it lies for these words, Thou
art an Out-putterer, if they were spoken in Northumberland where they are
understood, but not here, because they have no signification: And the words
here are special and shall have reference to his Office, and shall have such
an interpretation as is now used, and now Knave has no signification of
Male-child.

Jones Justice said, that if one says, that such a one is a corrupt Judge,
action lies, or if one says of a Clark, that he is a forging Clark, action
lies: And in 28 Eliz. the opinion of Justice Fennor was, that for these words
(Thou have forged my Fathers Will) action lies.

Crew said, that he did not understand the word (Forgering) but for calling one
Knave of Record, action lies. And Doderidge Justice said, that he never gave
way to these actions upon the case for words: And no opinion was given this day.

The same Term in the same Court. Goodwin versus Willoughby.
GOodwin brought an action upon the case against Joane Willoughby wife of
Thomas Willoughby, and upon non Assumpsit pleaded, it being found for the
Plaintiff, it was moved in Arrest of Judgment. 1. That the Plaintiff shows that
Thomas Willoughby was indebted upon account, and does not show that Joane
Willoughby is Executrix or Administratrix, and yet that she promised to pay,
whereas in truth she has no cause to pay, for there is no consideration, and so
Nudum pactum.

Jermy for the Plaintiff: for the first, because it does not appear for what
cause he accounted; I answer, that this is but a mere conveyance: And for the
second, that she does not suppose that the Feme is executrix, etc. But here is
a good consideration, which is, that she shall not sue or molest, and that he
gave day for payment, this is a sufficient consideration. But Stone of counsel
with the Defendant said, that the first is the ground of the action, and
therefore he ought to show for what he accounted.

Crew chief Justice, two exceptions have been taken, 1. For the alleging the
manner of the account, which I conceive is good enough, and he need not show
the cause of the account: And as to the second, because it does not appear that
she is Executrix, or Administratrix, and so no consideration, and so no
Assumpsit: But here she assumes to be Debtor and makes a promise to pay, which
is an acknowledgment of the Debt by inference, and therefore he conceived that
the Assumpsit was good.

Doderidge Justice, for the first it is good enough, yet Cum indebitatus
existit is no good Assumpsit, but here he shows a special way of Debt, and it
would be long and tedious to describe his account. For the second there is no
cause of action, because it does not appear that she is Executrix or
Administratrix, or Executrix of her own wrong.

If I say to one do not trouble me, and I will give you so much, this is not
actionable, for there ought to be a lawful ground, and for this cause the
Declaration Where forbearance without cause of action, is no ground of an
Assumpsit.
is void, for it is only to avoid molestation: Give me time, etc. this is no
good Assumpsit, for forbearance is no ground of action where he has no cause
to have Debt.

Jones Justice agreed in the first with them, because a general action upon
the case suffices, and in truth it is but an inducement to the action; but for
the other part he doubted, and he cited one Withypools case, an Infant within
age, promised to pay certain money, he makes an Executor and dies within age;
the Executor says to him to whom the promise is made, forbear and I will pay
you, and there an action upon the case did lie against the Executor upon this
promise, and yet it was a void Contract, but there was color of action,
forbear till such a time, now the other has lost the advantage of his Suit:
But he gave no opinion.

Crew, It is a violent presumption that he is indebted: But by Doderidge here
is no color to charge her, but only by inference that she is Executrix.

If a stranger says, forbear such a Debt of J. S. and I will pay it, it is a
good consideration for the loss to the Plaintiff, and in this case it appears
not that there is any cause, and Broom Secondary said, that Withypools case
before cited was reversed in the Exchequer Chamber.

Jones, If an Infant makes a promise, it is void, and he may plead non
Assumpsit, which Doderidge did not deny: But upon his Obligation he cannot
plead Non est factum, for he said that he shall be bound by his hands, but not
by his mouth.

The same Term in the same Court. Drope versus Theyar.
IN Debt by Drope against Theyar an Inne-keeper upon Issue joined, and a
Verdict for the Plaintiff, Bolstred moved in Arrest of judgment for the
Defendant, and the matter was that one Rowly who was servant to Drope, lodged
in the White Heart at S. Giles, and there had certain Goods of his Masters
which were stolen from him in the night, and Drope the Master brought an action
thereupon, and it was moved by Bolstred that the Plaintiff was without remedy.

1. Because it was in an Inn in London, for the Register 105. is Quando quis
depraedatus euns per patriam, which (as he said) could not be extended to an
Inn in London.

2. It ought to be an Inn, as Inne-keeper.

3. He ought to be as a Guest lodging, and this appears in Culeys case, in 5
Jac. in Celly and Clarks case (which was entered Pasch. 4. Jac. Rot. 254. It was
adjudged that where the Guest give his Goods to his Host to deliver to him
three days after, and the goods are lost, that an action is not maintainable
against the Inne-keeper for them, and this was in an Inn in Uxbridge: And in
one Sands case, where the Guest came in the morning, and his Goods were taken
before night, he shall have an action against the Inne-keeper.

4. The Goods ought to be the Goods of the party who lodges there, for the
words are Ita quod hospitibus damna non eveniunt, and here the Master who
brought the action was not Guest: But admit the Master shall have the action,
yet he ought to allege a custom that the Master shall have the action for the
Goods taken from his Servant, Trin. 17 Jac. Rot. 1535. Bidle, and the Master
brought an action for Goods taken from the Servant, and there it was resolved
that he ought to conclude that Pro defectu, etc. and apply the custom to him
being Master: Sec Co. Book of Entries 345. And that a custom, that for other
men's Goods in the custody of Guests, the Owner shall have an action against the
Inne-keeper if they be stolen.

Ob. This is the Common Law, and therefore ought not to be alleged.

Answ. Where a man takes upon him to show a custom, he ought to show it
precisely, he cited Heydons case, Co. lib. 3. 28 H. 8. Dyer 38. And it was said
for the Plaintiff that Goods are in the possession of the Master which are in
the possession of his Servant, and so here the Master might have had action
well enough, 8 E. 4. my Servant makes a Contract, or ^^ies Goods to my use, I
am liable and it is my act.

By the Court an Inn in London is an Inn, and if a Guest be robbed in such an
Inn, he shall have remedy as if he were Enns per patriam: But the chief point
was, whether the master shall have the action in the case where the Servant
lost the goods, and by Jones Justice in 26 Eliz. in C. B. upon the Statute of
Hue and Cry it was resolved that if the Servant be robbed the Master may have
the Action, and so by him shall it be in the case Doderidge Justice, the
Servant may have the Action also: If the Servant be robbed of wares, the Master
or Servant may have an appeal 8. E. 2. Tit. Robbery; two joint Merchants, one
is Robbed both shall join in the Action and may also join in the appeal. But
it may be objected (as Whitlock Justice did) that the Master is not Hospitans,
I say this is to no purpose; A man put his Horse in the Stable, and before he
goes to bed or lodging, the Horse is gone, he shall have an action although he
did not lodge there. For the word (transeuntes) although he be at the end of
his Journey, yet it is within the custom, and he shall have action. And by
Crew, if I send cloth to a Tailor, and it is stolen from him, the Tailor shall
have an action of trespass, or the Owner.

Jones, the case of Hue and Cry is a more stronger case then this is, for there
the Servant ought to swear that he is robbed, and yet the Master shall have an
action: And for the word (transeuntes) all agreed that although he be at the
end of his journey, or at an Inn in London, yet he is within the remedy of
this Law: And if a man stay in an Inn a month, or a quarter of a year, shall
not he have an action if he lose his Goods?

Doderidge agreed, that if a man be boarded in an Inn, and his Goods are
stolen, he shall not have an action upon this Law. And notwithstanding this
objection, judgment was given for the Plaintiff upon the Verdict.

Trin. Term, 2 Car. In the Kings Bench. Sir William Buttons Case.
SIr William Button a Justice of Peace brought an action for these words; Sir
William Buttons men have stolen Sheep, and he spoke to me that I should not
prosecute them, and it seems that the action did not lie, because Words, Sir
William Buttons men have stolen Sheep, and be spoke to me that I should not
prosecute them.
Sir William did not aver that he is a Justice of Peace, and it does not appear
in what County the said Felony was done, 36 Eliz. One brought an action for
these words; A. is a cosening fellow, and the greatest Pickpurse in
Northamptonshire, and there is not a Purse picked within 40. miles of
Northampton but he has a hand in it, And the action did not lie because he did
not aver that there were Purses cut.

Jones Justice put this case, One says, that A. is as strong a Thief as any is
in Warwick Gaol, he ought to aver that there is a Thief in Warwick Gaol, or
otherwise they are not actionable.

Doderidge put this case, There is a nest of Thieves at Dale, and Sir John
Bridges is the maintainer of them, these are actionable, because it implies
maintenance.

Note that it appeared upon a motion which the Attorney-generall made against
one Lane (who is a Recusant in Northamptonshire) that a Lease for years made by
a Recusant of his own Lands after conviction, if it be Bona fide will bind the
King, but if it be upon fraud and covin, then it will not; and Whitlock said,
that it is a common course for Recusants to make Leases after their Indictment
and before conviction.

The same Term in the same Court. The Case of the Major, Bailiffs, and Jurates
of Maidstone.
IN a Quo warranto depending against the Mayor, Bailiffs, and Iurates of
Maidstone in Kent, Sergeant Finch of Counsel with them of Maidstone, put the
case briefly in effect thus: In the Quo warranto against them, it was ordered
by the Court that they should have day to plead until afornight after Trinity
Term, and the truth was that they had not pleaded accordingly, whereupon
Judgment was entered in the Roll, and the Writ of Seisin awarded, and execution
thereupon; and afterward by a private order in the Vacation by the chief
Justice and Justice Jones, it was ordered that the Judgment should be staid,
and the truth was, that it was never entered amongst the Rules of the Court, and
therefore he prayed that the Judgment might not be filed, but that the last
order might be observed, and that they might amend their Plea.

Hendon Sergeant on the other side said, that it could not be, for by the
Judgment given the King was entitled to have the profits of Franchises which he
shall not lose; and he cited the case which is in F. N. B. 21. Error in B. R.
cannot be reversed the same Term before the same Justices without a Writ of
Error, but otherwise it is in C. B. and he said, that the same course was
observed in Air, there can be no pleading in Air after the Air determined,
and upon this he cited the case of 15 E. 4. 7. before the Justices in Air, if
the Defendant does not come the Franchises shall be seized into the Kings
hands, nomine destinctionis, and if the party who ought the Franchise does not
come during the Air in the same County, he shall forfeit his Franchise for
ever, so here after Judgment entered, there can be no plea per que etc. Finch
we have order from the Court for stay of Judgment, and here no perfect
Judgment was given: and this is not without president, and he cited one
Chamberlains Case, where the Judgment was nigh to perfection etc. but he did
not put the Case Creve ch: Justice: in this case there was the assent of the
Attorney general, who prosecuted the Quo Warranto, and so the cases put by
Hendon to no purpose, Jones upon F. N. B. 21. J. took this difference, true it
is that the Kings Bench cannot reverse a Judgment although it be in the same
term without a Writ of Error, but this is where error lies in Where the Kings
Bench may reverse its own judgment without Writ of Error, and where not.
the same cause in the same Court, as upon outlawry, but if no error lies in
this Court for the same cause, but in Parliament* then the Kings Bench may
reverse the Judgment without Writ of Error being the same term. And the
Judgment here was ever of Record, for the Roll until it be fixed amongst
other Rolls is no Record.

And for the Case of 15. E. 4. 7. it is not like our case in reason, for when
When a Roll ^s become a Record,
the Air is determined the power of the Justices in Air is also determined,
but it is not so here, for the Justices have power from Term to Term; But Noy
argued further for the King, that it is a Judgment of another Term, and
Execution awarded upon it, and said that it is without president that now it
should be avoided, and upon the awarding of execution, the King under his seal
has averred that judgment is given which cannot be falsified, and for
Chamberlains Case he said that there was an assent in it. Doderidge, the
Question which now is moved, is but this, whether a Judgment entered in a
private Roll (as a memorandum), and afterward there is an order that the
Judgment shall not be filed, if the Judgment upon this shall be stayed: and
speaks to it, and by him the Case of 15. E. 4. 7. is nothing to this purpose,
for Justices in Air were Justices by commission, and they had not the custody
of their Records, and so it differs from this case.

And Jones Justice (which was not denied) if a Judgment be pronounced here and
be not entered, the Judges may alter it the next Term. It was said by Noy in
this case that all Franchises in England are against common Right, and
execution of Justice, and for the present purpose, he cited one Sir John Wells
Case, where in a Quo Warranto the Defendant had day to plead, or otherwise that
judgment should be entered to seize, and he failed to plead at the day, and
the Judgment was not filed, and yet he could not be relieved: But it was said
by some of the Justices, that this was a case of great extremity. But by Hendon
it was affirmed in the Exchequer in one Sandersons Case, and in the principal
case the matter was adjourned for a fortnight, and ordered that the plea should
be accorded.

Mich. Term 2. Car. in the Kings Bench. Sharp versus Rust.
IN an Action upon the Case, upon an Assumpsit between Sharp, Plaintiff, and
Walter Rust Defendant, upon non-Assumpsit pleaded, it was found for the
Plaintiff, and it was moved in arrest of judgment upon these words in the
Declaration, the Defendant (being Father to the Plaintiffs Wife, for whom the
Apparel was bought) said to the Plaintiff, deliver the Apparel to my
Daughter, and I will pay for them, and says not to whom the payment shall be
made: And it was argued by Woobrich of Grayes-Inne that this is no sufficient
cause to stay the Judgment, for by necessary implication and reference of the
words precedent, the certainty of the pers on appears to whom the payment
ought to be made. And he observed that in our Law the time, the estate, the
thing, and the person not being sufficiently expressed, Where a thing uncertain
may be made certain both in time, estate, and person.
yet by necessary coherence and relation to matter precedent, they are
sometimes made certain enough: 1. For the time, Perkins. P. 496. puts the Rule,
if a condition has relation to an act precedent, and no time is limited when
it shall be done, yet if ought to be done when the act precedent is done, and
therefore if I. S. be bound to me in 20 l. upon condition that if I enfeoff him
of black acre, that then he will pay me 10 l. etc. in this case presently when I
have enfeoffed the obligor of black acre he ought to pay the 10 l.
notwithstanding there be no time limited when it should be paid. 2. For the
thing being put incertainly, yet the communication precedent makes this
certain, 30. H. 8. Dyer 42. in the Case of the Executors of Greenliffe, where
it is agreed, that albeit it is not shown what thing is granted, yet it shall
be the Land of which the communication was. 3. For the Estate, although it be
uncertain, yet sometimes it is made certain by the matter precedent, as in the
Case Co. lib. 8. A Stewardship was granted for life, and afterward an Annuity
was granted for the exercise of that Office, without declaring what Estate he
should have in that Annuity, and resolved that he should have the Annuity for
life, because he had the Office for life. 4. For the person, the consideration
sometimes ascertains the person, and therefore if land he given to one by Deed,
habendum sibi una cum filia donatoris, in frankmariage, this shall enure to
both, because the Feme is Causa donationis, and by intendment of law the Land
and the feme shall be given together to the man for the advancement of the Feme,
as it is Mich. 2. and 3. Ph. and Mary. Dyer 126. a 4. E. 3. 4. Plow. Com. 158.
enfeoff him and another, and bind him and his heirs to warrant, and does not
say to whom he shall warrant, yet the Feoffee and his heirs shall have
advantage of this warranty, for it cannot have any other intendment: 6. E. 2.
Voucher. 258. 22. E. 4. 16. and Kelleway 108. and Co. lib. 8. Whitlocks Case,
In a Lease for years reserving rent, it is the surest way to make the
reservation to no person in certain, but to leave it to the general intendment
of the Law, 15. H. 7. A man devises that his Land shall be sold for the
payment of his debts, and does not say by whom, they shall be sold by his
Executors, because they are liable for the payment of his debts, but if one
devise that his land shall be sold, and says not for the payment of his debts,
the devise is void, because the Law does not intend in this case to make the
sale 40 E. 3. 5. 4. E. 3. Fitzherbert Obligation 16. Nota, if a man be bound in
debt or Covenant by writing, and puts such a clause in the writing. Et ad
majorem hujus rei securitatem invenit fidei jussores quorum unusquisque in tot.
and in solido se obligavit, that although none speak there but the principal
in the writing, if the others put to their seals, they accept that which the
principal spoke, and so become principal: 2. E 4. 20. and here in our Case it
appears that the Deed was so, and therefore it is reason that the Declaration
should be so, for there cannot be a material difference between the Declaration
and the deed, and especially being upon an agreement which is to be ruled
according to the intention of the parties, as it is in Plow: Com. 140. a. In
our Law if any parties be agreed upon a thing, and words are expressed or
written to make the agreement, although they be not apt words, yet if they have
substance in them tending to the effect intended, the Law shall take Intention
of parties to be observed.
them of the same substance as words usual, for the Law regards the intention
of the parties, and here the intent appears that the assumption shall be m^de
to the Plaintiff, although there want express words, and therefore he prayed
Judgment for the Plaintiff. And afterward the same Term Judgment was given
for the Plaintiff.

The same Term in the same Court. Beven versus Cowling.
IN an Action upon the Case Littleton moved in arrest of Judgment for the
Defendant, wherein the Case was this, the Defendant assumed that if the
Defendant would defer the payment of a bond, in which one A. was bound to him,
and would not implead him upon it, then he promised to pay it, and he does not
say, that he deferred the payment until such a day, and therefore this is no
valuable consideration, so that the action does not lie, for notwithstanding
Action upon the Case, upon a ^romise, that if ^e would not sue such a one, he
would pay it, where good, and where not.
this he may implead him presently, Mich* 12. Jac Kebles Case, A man promises
to pay so much in consideration of a Lease at Will, and it was holden no good
consideration, for by the same breath that he creates it, he may defeat it, and
Pasch. 8. Jac. Austins Case: A man promise that in consideration he would
forbear another, he would pay it, and no time was limited, and therefore it was
holden no good consideration. Trin. 38. Eliz. Rot. 523. A man promise quod non
implacitabit, and avers quod non implacitavit, and because of the uncertainty
it was holden no valuable consideration.

Doderidge Justice: If there be no consideration at the time, or no cause of
Action, the forbearance afterward will not make it actionable, and he said
that it had been adjudged in this Court, that a consideration to forbear for a
little time is not good, but by some to forbear for a reasonable time is good.
But in the principal Case upon the hearing of the Declaration read, it
appeared, that it was, that he should never implead him upon the said
obligation, so that if the Plaintiff brings an Action upon the obligation, the
Defendant here may have an Action upon the Case against him. Also it was non
implacitabit, and this shall be taken indefinitely, quod nunquam implacitabit,
and therefore the Judgment was affirmed, for otherwise the Plaintiff shall
both take advantage of this promise and of the bond also, and here he has in a
manner forsaken the benefit of his bond, and has betaken himself to the
benefit of this Assumpsit.

By Jones and Whitlock Justices, if A. be bound to me, and I enter into bond to
him, that I will not sue this Obligation, I cannot sue him upon the first
Obligation, without forfeiture of my bond: and by Doderidge, if an Obligation
be forfeited, and I say to the Obliger, do not sue the Obligor, or do not
implead him, an Action upon the case lies against me.

The same Term in the same Court. Arnold versus Dichton.
IN an Action upon the Case, and Non-Assumpsit pleaded, it was found for the
Plaintiff, and Noy moved in arrest of Judgment, that there was no
consideration to maintain this Action, the Case being thus: Arnold having
married the Daughter of the Defendents Testator, the Testator promised to give
him 40 l. and meat and drink for a year, and a Featherbed and Bolster, and
afterward the Testator in consideration that the Plaintiff would Assumpsit.
forbear to sue him all his life for it, promised that he should have as good a
portion at his death as any of his children, and the Plaintiff declares, that
he gave to one Tho. P. one of his Sons 200 l. and that he left him at the time
of his death, but 30 l. but when he gave to Tho. P. the 200 l. appears not,
peradventure it might be in his life time, and this promise does not extend to
that which he had given before, as if a man be bound to keep a Goal, and that
no prisoner shall escape, this only extends to a future keeping, and future
escapes, and not to other escapes which were before.

True it is, that sometimes the Law will alter the sense, as in the Case of 32.
H. 6. where a man is bound that his Feoffees etc. And at another day Doderidge
said, that the first promise was but an inducement to the second, and the
Defendant has pleaded Non Assumpsit to the last promise, and then comes the
Plaintiff and shows that he gave to such a one 200 l. and does not show when
this was given, and this may be before the promise, and therefore I conceive
the Declaration is not good: Jones agreed that the Declaration is not good, for
admit that in this case he had given to all his children but one, great
portions before the said promise, and had given a small portion to one after
the promise, the Plaintiff now shall have but according to the said promise,
and it is alleged here, that he gave to such a one 200 l. which may be before
the promise, and therefore the breach not well laid.

Whitlock contra: and that the Plaintiff shall have according to the best gift
in this case, whether it were before or after the promise, and that upon the
intention of the promise; for the intention is, that the Plaintiff should have
as good a marriage or portion with his Daughter, as any other of his children
should have: But by Doderidge this construction cannot be made without offering
violence to the words, for then daret should be for dedisset, and for any thing
which appears he had a portion before, and this was but a superaddition.

Jones put this case: I am bound to enfeoff J. S. of so much Land as I will
enfeoff J. D. this extends not to a Feoffment which I have made to J. D.
before, but only to a Feoffment which I shall make to him afterward, which was
not denied by Whitlock, and it was adjourned.

The same Term, in the same Court. Barker versus Ringrose.
BArker brought an Action upon the Case against Ringrose, and declared, that
whereas he was of good fame, and exercised the Trade of a Wool-winder, the
Defendant spoke these scandalous words of him, that he was a Words. Thou art a
bankrupt Rogue
Bankrupt Rogue: and it was moved in arrest of Judgment, that those words were
not actionable; for the words themselves are not actionable, but as they
concern an Office or Trade etc. and it appears by the Statute of 27. E. 3,
that a Wool-winder is not any Trade, but is but in the nature of a Porter, so
that the Plaintiff is not defamed in his function, because he has not any:
also it is not averred that he was a Wool-winder at the time of the words
speaking.

Jones Justice: If one says of a Wool-winder, that he is a false Wool-winder,
action upon the Case lies; and it was demanded by the Court, A Wool-winder
what he is.
what a Wool-winder was? and it was answered that in the Country he is taken
to be a Wool-winder that makes up the fleece, and takes the dirt out of it: and
a Wool-winder in London opens the fleeces, and makes them more curiously up,
and in London they belong to the Mayn of the staple. Doderidge, If one says of
a Sher-man, that he is a Bankrupt, Action lies, and so it has been adjudged of
a Shoo-maker: and note that if one says of any man (who by his Trade may
become a Bankrupt within the In what case to call a man Bankrupt, is actionable.
Statutes) that he is a Bankrupt, an Action lies, as of a Tailor, Fuller, etc.
And the Court seemed to incline, that in this case (being spoken of a
Wool-winder in London) the Action lies: But Mich. 3. Car. the Case being moved
again, the Court was of opinion, that the Action could not lie, and would not
give Judgment for the Plaintiff.

The same Term in the same Court.
NOta by Doderidge and Jones, Justices, that upon the principal Judgment
reversed, the outlawry is also Ipso facto reversed: Also if an Outlawry
reversed upon revers all of the principal judgment.
outlawry be awarded, if it be not per Judicium Coronator (unless it be in
London) the outlawry is void.

It was demanded by the Justices, when the outlawry and Judgment are affirmed,
how the entry is? And it was answered by Broom Secondary, that the entry is
general, Quod judicium affirmetur in omnibus: and this suffices.

But if the Judgment be affirmed, and the outlawry reversed, then the entry
is. Quod judicium affirmetur and Utlagario cassetur.

The same Term in the same Court. Calfe, and others, versus Nevil and others.
AScire facias was brought by Joseph Calfe and Joshua, Executors of A. against
Nevil Davyes and Bingley, and the Case was this: they became bail to one Hall
(who was condemned in an Action to the Testator of the Plaintiff) that the said
Hall should either render his body to Prison, or that he should satisfy the
Judgment, the Defendents Plead, that after the Scire facias returned, and
presently after the Judgment, the said Hall brought a Writ of Error in the
Exchequor Chamber, hanging which, the said Hall, reddidit se prisonae in
exoneratione manucaptorum suor: and there dyed; and the Plaintiff demurred
upon this Plea, because it was double, and Calthorp argued for the Plaintiff,
that it was double or rather treble.

1. That Reddidit se prisonae. 2. That he was imprisoned. 3. that he dyed in
Prison.
And to prove the Piea double in this Case, he cited 13. H. 8. 15. 16. 4. E. 4.
4. 21. H. 7. 10. The second matter that he moved against the former was, that
pendant the Writ of Error reddidit se prisonae, and does not conclude upon the
Record, and hoc peratus est verificare, as he ought to have done, and for this
he cited 7. H. 8. Kelleway 118.

If J. S. be bound in a Recognizance, that A. shall appear such a day before
the Kings Justices at Westminster, if his appearance be not recorded he shall
not have any averment, by Bricknell, and Conisby, and in 30. Eliz. It was one
Wicks Case, which is ours in effect in case of bail, Dyer 27. 6. E. 4. 1. 2.
For the matter the Plea is naught,

1. Because by the Writ of Error brought, the Scire facias against the bail is
not suspended, because the Bail is a distinct record; and upon this he cited
the Case of the Ambassador of Spain against Captain Gifford, which was, Trin.
14. Jac. That by the Writ of Error brought the bail was not suspended, and he
said that it was so resolved also in Goldsmith and Goodwins Case.

2. For the render of the principal to prison, it is not good, because it does
not appear upon Record: and for this he cited one Austin and Monks Case, which
was in 14. Jac. In Scire facias against the bail, it is pleaded that the
principal had rendered himself to prison, and upon the matter it appeared,
that the render was upon Candlemas day, which is not Dies juridicis; and so the
Court this day had no power to commit him to prison, for which the Plea was
adjudged void.

3. For the death it is no Plea; the bail by it is not discharged, because he
has not rendered himself in due time; and for this he cited Justice Williams
and Vaughans Case, which was Mich. 3. Jac. where in Scire facias against the
bail they pleaded that the principal was dead, and thereupon the Plaintiff
demurred, and in this Case two points were resolved.

1. There was no Capias mentioned to have issued against the principal, and
yet resolved that a Scire facias would lie against the Bail.

2. That the Plea in Bar is not good, because it may be that the principal dyed
after the Capias awarded, or after the return thereof, because it appears
that there was once a default in the principal, and so the bail forfeited, and
no Plea afterward would discharge it, and upon this he put this Case:

A Prisoner escape out of Prison, the Jailer makes fresh suit, and before he
has taken him, the Prisoner dies, this is the act of God, and yet because it
was once an escape, an Action of Escape lies against the Jailer: Jermy for the
Defendent; and he remembered a Case which was Hill: 20. Jac. Cadnor and
Hildersons Case, that by the Writ of Error, the bail is suspended. Nota, that
it was agreed by the Court in this case, that by the Writ of Error brought in,
the bail was not discharged, because it is uncertain whether the Judgment
shall be reversed or not: Also it was agreed, that if the principal dies before
a Capias awarded against him, that the bail is discharged: It was also agreed
by the Court, that the Plea was not double, for the first matters are but an
inducement to the last; and yet by Doderidge, if several matters are pleaded
in Bar, and there be not any dependency on them, the Where a Plea is double,
and where not.
Plea is double, although none of them be material but one.

Jones Justice cited one Hobs and Tadcasters Case; which was 43. Eliz. in B. R.
where after a Writ of Error brought, a Scire facias issued against the Bail,
and upon Nihil returned, the Plaintiff in the Scire facias brought in an Audita
Quaerela, and there the matter came in question, whether upon the Judgment the
Principal ought presently render himself to prison, or that he should stay
until a Capias awarded against him, and there it was resolved by Popham and all
his Companions, that the Principal is not bound to render himself to Prison,
until a Capias be taken out; so that if he dies after the Judgment, and
before the Capias awarded against him, the Bail is discharged.

And in the principal Case here it was resolved, that a Scire facias does not
lie against the Bail, until a Capias be awarded against the Principal: and
because no Capias in this case was awarded against the Principal (which could
not be by reason of the Writ of Error) before his death. And also the Plaintiff
in his Declaration ought to have averred, and shown that the Capias was awarded
against the Principal; for these reasons Judgment was given quod quaerens nil
capiet per Billa.

The same Term in the same Court. Reynor versus Hallet.
IN an Action upon the Case for these words, viz. Reynor is a base Gentleman,
Words. Reynor is a base Gentleman, he has fo^^ child^en by his se^vant Agnes,
and he has killed, or caused them to be killed.
he has four children by his Servant Agnes, and he has killed them all, or
caused them to be killed; and after a verdict for the Plaintiff, it was moved
in arrest of Judgment by Jermy, that the words were not actionable:

For 1. As to the first words, Base Gentleman, they are but words of choler.

2. The next words, He has four Children by his servant Agnes, cannot be
actionable, for although she were once his servant, yet she might be afterward
his Wife.

3. The Plaintiff has averred in his Declaration, that he has lived
continently, and then he cannot have children by his servant Agnes, and then
the words are not actionable.

And 4. For saying he has killed them is not actionable, and upon this he
cited one Snags Case, Co. lib. 4. who brought an Action for these words, Thou
have killed thy Wife; and it appeared by the Declaration, that his Wife was
alive, and therefore it was resolved, that the words were not actionable.

And as to the last exception, it was said by Ashley Sergeant on the other
side, that albeit the Plaintiff has averred in his Declaration, that he lived
continently, and so in a manner confessed that he had no children, this is but
for the aggravation of the offense of the Defendant: as when an Action is
brought for calling one Thief, he avers that he lived honestly, and yet the
Action will lie. But I confess if the Plaintiff had averred that he never had
any child, then it would be like to Snags Case, Co. lib. 4. 16. a. and that the
Action would not lie.

But in Anne Davyes Case, there she averred, that she was a Virgin of good
fame, and free from all suspicion of incontinency; and the Defendant said that
a Grocer had got her with child: Owen Wards Case in Cook, Book of Entries has
the same Declaration as this, and it was the President thereof. But Jermy moved
another exception upon these words, he has killed them, and does not say
Felony, which is not good, for he migt kill them in execution of Justice, which
is justifiable, Trin. 2. Jac. Willers Case in the Court, it was adjudged, that
for these words, Thou have stolen a piece, and I will charge thee with Felony,
an Action lies not, because a piece is a word of doubtful signification.

And Trin. 20. Jac. It was resolved that these words (Agnes Knight is a Witch)
were not Actinable: but it was answered of the other side. that upon the whole
frame of these words, they cannot be intended but to be spoken maliciously, and
there can be no pretenc^ of lawful killing of children: Doderidge, all the
words joined together are actionable; but these words only considered, he has
four children by his servant Agnes, are not Actionable, and albeit he does not
allege it felony, yet this is a scandal, and good cause of Action. Jones
agreed, and yet he conceived, that for saying singly, that one has a Bastard,
an Action lies not, albeit the having of a Bastard be punishable by the Statute
of 18. Eliz. cap. 1. But by him he has killed the King. shall be taken in
pejori sensu; otherwise it is, if the words of themselves be indifferent, as
(Pope) and this word shall not be the rather taken in pejori sensu, having
relation to all the sentence: for the contrariety of the Declaration, it seems
to me, that the Declaration is good enough, but if one says, Thou have killed
J. S. where in truth, there never was such a man, it is not actionable.

But here the Averment of the Plaintiff is more general, Ubi re vera, he is
not guil^y or incontinent, which is a general allegation: but if he had averred
ubi re vera, he never had any child, there peradventure the Action would not
lie, but here it will: Whitlock Justice agreed, and he said that the first
words, has had four children by his Maid Agnes are actionable, and for the
other matters they agreed, whereby Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

The same Term in the same Court.
THis Term in the Commonplace, Sargeant Hendon cited this Case to be adjudged
4. Jac. A Copyholder made a Lease for years by License, and the Lessee dyed,
that this Lease shall not be accounted assets in the hands of the Excecutors,
neither shall it be extended: But the Case was denied by Justice Hutton and
others, and that an Ejectione firmae lies of such a Lease.

But he said, that if a Copyholder makes a Lease for years by License of the
Lord, and dies without Heir, the years not expired, the Lord notwithstanding
this may enter, for the Estate out of which this Lease was derived is
determined: But Yelverton Justice was contra, because this License shall be
taken as a confirmation of the Lord, and therefore the Lease shall be good
against him, and there (as I heard) it was argued by all, that if a Copyholder
makes a Lease for a year, this is a Lease by the Common Law, and not
customary, and shall be counted assets in the hands of the Executors of the
Lessee.

The same Term, in the Kings Bench.
NOta, upon evidence to a Jury between Buffield and Byburo, the Case appeared
to be this, upon a Devise with these words, I will and devise that A. and B. my
Feoffees shall stand seized, and be seized to and of John Callis for life, the
remainder etc. And the truth was that he had no Feoffees: and the opinion of
the whole Court (nullo contradicente) was, that this is a good Devise to John
Callis, by reason of the intention. 38. H. 8. Bro. Devis. 48. and 15. Eliz.
Dyer 323. were urged for the proof of it, and by Doderidge the Case of 15.
Eliz. is more strong then our Case is: Linyen made a Feoffment to his own use,
and afterward devised that his Feoffees should be seized to the use of his
Daughter A. who in truth was a Bastard, and yet this is a good Devise of the
Land by intention, for by no possibility they can be seized to his use.

Mich. 2. Car. Lemasons and Dicksons Case in the Kings Bench. Trin. 2. Car.
Roll. 1365.
THe Case was this, One Parcevall Sherwood was indebted to Susan Clarke, who
brought an Action of debt, by a Bill of Middlesex, which is in nature of a Writ
of Trespass against him, and Sherwood upon a mean Process was arrested by the
Defendant (being Bailiff of the Liberty of White-Chappel) and being in his
custody, he suffered him to escape: Afterward Susan Clarke made the Plaintiff
her Executor, and dyed, and then the Plaintiff brought an Action upon the Case
against the Defendant upon the said escape; and upon issue joined, it was found
for the Plaintiff.

And Calthrop of Council with the Plaintiff, moved, that the Action will well
lie, for the Testator himself might have had either an Action of Debt, or upon
the case upon the said Escape, and therefore the Executor may have the same
remedy, and that by the equity of the Statute of 4. E. 3. cap. 7. which gives
an Action to Executors pro bonis asportatis in vita Testatoris, And by 14. H.
7. 17. this Statute shall be taken by equity, and Administrators, who are in
the same mischief shall have the same remedy, albeit they be not named in the
Statute, old Not. Brevium 103. An Executor shall have a Quare impedit for a
disturbance made in vita Testator, and 7. H. 4. 6. and old Not. Brev. 123. b.
An Executor shall have an Ejectione firmae of an ouster made to the Testator,
17. E. 3. Executors 106. An Executor shall have a Replevin of Goods taken in
vita Testatoris, and it has been oftentimes resolved, that an Executor shall
have a Trover and Conversion of Goods taken and converted in vita Testator.

Doderidge, demanded of him the reason why an Action upon the Case upon an
Escape in the life of the Testator, should not lie against an Executor, to
which he answered, because it was a mere personal wrong. Doderidge, so is the
wrong here; and he said that an Executor cannot have an action Vi and armis,
for a trespass done in vita Testator, and in this case because the escape was in
vita Testator, it is a personal wrong to him, for which the Executor shall not
have an action upon the case.

But it had been otherwise, if the escape had been after the death of the
Testator, and the Statute of 7. E. 3. does not extend to it, because this
Statute is only for Goods, but I agree to the case of Trover and Conversion.
Jones Justice, If this action upon the case will not lie by the Executor, it
would be a mischievous case, for as soon as the Creditor dies, the Goalor will
and may suffer the Prisoner to escape, because none can have an action against
him, but as it appears by the Case of 15. Eliz. Dyer.

The case is as mischievous for the Creditor, if the Goalor suffers an escape,
and dies, for there no action lies against the Executors. And for the case of
Quare impedit, I agree to it, and so it was resolved in Brokesbyes Case, 31.
Eliz. that an Executor shall have a Quare impedit for a disturbance made in
vita Testator, if the avoydance be a Chattel vested, and therefore within the
equity of the Statute, which gives an action de bonis Testator, and he was
commanded to move it another time.

And at another day in Hillary Term, next after, Grigs said for the Defendant,
that the Executor cannot have this action for an escape in vita Testator,
because it is a mere personal action given to the Testator, and moritur cum
persona, and cited 15. Eliz. Dyer, Whitakers Case, and that it is merely
personal appears by 10. Eliz. Dyer 271. Where an Executor shall not be
charged with an ascape in vita testator, generally, where not guilty is a good
Plea, there an Action does not lie for it against Executors. And this Case is
not within the equity of the Statute of 4. E. 7.

But it has been objected that an Ejectione firmae is within the equity of
this Statute for the Executors to have it 7. H. 4. 6. but the reason there, is,
because it is to recover the Term it self; and not d^mages only: and upon the
same reason an Action of Covenant, upon a Covenant broken in the life of the
Testator, is maintainable by an Executor, and that also is the reason of the
Case of the Qua: impedit, because there the presentation is to be recorded: but
in our Case damages only are to be recorded upon the escape, and so they are
not alike.

2. The Arrest here is upon mean Process, and upon a Bill of Middlesex, which is
but in nature of a Trespass before Declaration, and I conceive that if one be
taken by a Cap: ad satisfaciendum at the suit of one, albeit the party at whose
Suit he is taken, dies, yet he shall be detained in execution, but I conceive
the Law to be otherwise upon a Cap: ad respondend: and albeit the Plaintiff
says, that the Arrest was, ea intention, to declare against him in an Action
of Debt, yet an intent is a secret thing, and albeit the Executor represent the
person of the Testator, yet he cannot follow it, and it is impossible to prove
the intent.

Jermy for the Plaintiff said, that there is a difference, where an Action is
brought by, and where against Executors, and this appears by Littletons Case,
that an Action of account does not lie against Executors for want of privity as
to that purpose, but it is clear that account lies by Executors, because this
is a point of interest: And here in this Case, the Testator had interest in the
body by the arrest, and this appears in Hichcocks Case, cited in Hargraves
Case in the Lord Cooks 5. Report, and by the Arrest the body of the party is as
a Chattel in the Testator: and he compared this to the case of 7. H. 4. 2. and
3. Fitzherberts Executors 52. An Executor shall have a ravishment of ward for a
taking in the time of the Testator.

And 7 H. 4. 6. and a Case cited by Hankford, that if one enter upon a Statute
Merchant, who dies, his Executor shall have an assize, and therefore I
conceive, that if a Tenant by Elegit be ousted and bring an Assize, if the
Executors be custed again, he shall have a redisseisen upon the first ^uster,
because the Interest continues in him which was in the first Testator, and it
is to be observed in our law, that the Law inlargeth it self to give to
Executors the same remedy which the Testator had, and thereupon he cited Co.
lib. 6. 80. a. and 3. Eliz. Dyer. 301.

And in our Case the body of the party was in the Testator, as a gage till
appearance, so that it was not only a personal tort. for he had an interest,
and this appears by Co. lib. 5. 27. by a Case put in Russels Case there, and
if the Executors shall not in this Case have an Action, it would be very
mischievous. for so the Goalor shall suffer escapes dispunishable, 20. E. 3.
Fitz. Executors 74.

But as to this reason it was answered by Jones Justice, that the same
mischief is of the other side, if the Jailer suffer an escape and dies, and
Action lies not against his executors.

Calthrop on the same side cited F. N. B. 121. a. that a man condemned in debt,
and imprisoned, if the Goalor suffer him to escape, the Party, or his Executor
may have debt against the Goalor: And he said, that at Common Law, Debt lay
against a Goalor upon an escape, as appears in Fitz. Debt 127. 38. H. C.
placit 36. And if it were a debt in the Testator, then Executors may have an
Action upon it.

But by Doderidge Justice in the said case, debt lies not at Common Law, for to
what purpose was the Statute made? But for the point in Question, his sudden
opinion, was, the Executor shall have this Action, and that it is within the
equity of the Statute of 4. E. 3. for it is a wrong, although it were upon
mean Process, and the tort continues as to the Executor, for every thing which
makes to the hinderance of the Execution of the will, is wrong to him, and the
performance of Wills is much favored, because it is the last desire of the
Party who is dead, and it is for the publick-weale, because by this means
debts shall be paid.

And many cases are within the equity of the Statute, that are not within the
letter, as those Cases which have been put, all which he agreed: Jones Justice
on the sudden was against it, and that this Case is not within the equity of
the Statute of 4. E. 3.

There are diverse Actions which are not helped by this Statute, as Trespass
for cutting of Trees, Battery, and the like; for the Statute is, de bonis and
Catallis asportat in vita testator: An Executor shall have a Replevin of Goods
taken in vita testator, for by this he recovers the thing it self, and shall
have Detinue, but shall not have tre^passe, for he cannot punish the wrong done
in the life of the Testator.

The Statute of 4. E. 3. is much enlarged by equity, as the cases which have
been put, and extend also to usurpation in the life time of the Testator, as
appears in Russels Case Co. lib, 5. and 32. and 33. Eliz. in C. B. in the
Bishop of Chichesters case, that if the Testator dies within 6 months after the
usurpation, the Executor shall have a Quare impedit, And the Case of Trover and
Conversion in vita Testator, was maintained by Executors, and it was so
resolved 41. and 42. Eliz. in the Countess of Rutlands Case in both the
Benches, because this is in nature of a Writ of Detinue.

Now for the Case in question, I conceive that it is not within the Statute of
4. E. 3. because it is neither bona nor catalla. Whitlock Justice contra, and
that this Statute is very much taken by equity, and praeter literam, though not
contra literam.

But Nota, that all agreed, if it were upon an escape after Judgment, that the
Action would lie by the Executors* according to the Case of F. N. B. 121. a.
But the principal Case was adjourned.

And afterward Trin. 3. Car. It was argued again by Jermy for the Plaintiff,
and the sole point was, A man taken by latitat. and being in the custody of the
Sheriff escape, the Party at whose suit he was arrested dies, whether his
Executor shall have an Action upon the Case upon the Escape, and he conceived
that he might.

It has been objected, that it is a personal wrong, and as an Action does not
lie against Executors upon an Escape, in vita Testator, so not by Execucutors:
To which I answer, that it is not merely personal, but mixed with an interest.

At the Common Law, an Executor could not have trespass for Goods taken in vita
Testator, but yet he should have a Replevin, 34. E. 3. Fitz. Avoury 257. and
Executors 106. So at Common Law, a Successor should not have Trespass, for Goods
carried away in the life time of his Predecessor, but he shall have a Replevin,
9. H. 6. 25, but this was remedied by the Statute of Marlebridge cap. 28. and
so upon the Statute of 4. E. 3. de bonis asportat etc. Trover and Conversion
has been adjudged within the said Statute, for the Statute has always been
liberally expounded. 7. H. 4. 2. Fitz, Executor 52. An Executor shall have
ravishment of Guard taken away in vita Testator, and also other Statutes which
do not name Executors, have been e^pounded to extend to them, as the Statute
of 23. H. 8. which gives attaint. 3. Eliz. Dyer 201. Co. lib. 6. 8. Executors
shall take benefit of the pardon of Trin. 14 Jac. P^obe and Maynes Case, if the
party escape being a rested upon mean Process, the Sheriff is not liable for
the Escape, otherwise if upon an Execution.
43. Eliz. and 6. E. 6. Bendloes Reports (which is cited there) Executors shall
have restitution upon the Statute of 21. H. 8. and Co. lib. 5. 31. and 27.
Russels Case, an Executor shall have Trover upon Goods lost in vita Testator,
and this is in manner and nature of a promise to have the party in Court at the
day, and it is clear, that upon an express Assumpsit to the Testator, an
Executor shall have an action upon the Case, and it has been in manner agreed
by the Court, that if it had been an escape of one in execution, that the
action would have lain by the Executor: and I see no difference between that
and our case. And it was adjourned.

The same Term in the same Court.
UPon an Information by Heath the Kings Attorney, against two men of the County
of Huntington in the name of all the County, that they ought, and used to
repair the Bridge of S. Eedes in the County of Huntington, Issue was joined by
the County, whether they ought and used to repair this Bridge; and the
Attorney gave no evidence, but put it upon the other side, for he said by the
Statute of 22. H. 8. cap. if it does not appear that any particular person, or
Town ought to repair a Bridge, by reason of Tenure, or otherwise, that then
the County where this is, ought to repair it.

But Nota, that the issue was, whether they ought to repair the whole Bridge,
and yet upon the evidence it appeared, that only two Arches and a half of the
Bridge was in the County of Huntington, and two A^^hes and a half in the
County of Bedford, and the Jury found generally, that only two Arches and a
half of the Bridge were in the County of Huntington, and say nothing where the
rest was, for they could not find a thing in another County.

And also they found that the County of Huntington ought to repair all, but
not that they used to repair it: And at another day Hedley Sergeant moved for
the County, that the Verdict was not good, because the issue was, whether they
ought to repair, and a tempore cujus contrarium etc. had repaired etc.

And the Jury has found that they ought to repair, which is but the half of
the issue, and also they find that they ought to do it, which is a Question in
Law, and therefore void, 8. H. 6. 3. 4.

Secondly, the issue is, whether they ought to repair the Bridge, and the Jury
has found, that they ought to repair two Arches and a half only, etc. and
the Bridge is an entire thing.

The Attorney answered, that for the first exception the case of 27. Ass. Pl.
8. is against it.

And for the last the very case of 43 Ass. Pl. 37. is against it, and therefore
the Court conceived the Verdict good, notwithstanding these exceptions,
Doderidge Justice, By the common Law before the Statute of 22. H. 8. if no man
by reason of tenure or otherwise, ought to repair a Bridge, the County ought
to do it; like to the case of 8. E. 4. Fishers by the Law of Nations may dry
their Nets upon the Land of any man.

The same Term in the same Court.
DOctor Cleland brought a Writ of error against Baldock, upon a Judgment given
in where the Plaintiff declared that the Intr. Hill. 22. Iac Rot. 59^.
Defendant, in consideration that he would do all his commands, honestly and
truly for the space of a year, assumed to pay him 10 l. and further declared,
that he had done all his honest and lawful commands, and this promise being
found by verdict, Judgment was given against Doctor Cleland, and thereupon he
brought this Writ of error, and Green assigned two errors.

1. The Assumpsit is, that he shall do all his commands honestly and truly,
and he has declared that he has done all his lawful and honest commands, and
he may honest commands, and yet not honestly.

2. It is said that Jurator Assident dampna, and it is not said occasion
transgression. predict. and it is against all Presidents: But Nota, that there
were these words, ex hac part opposita, and therefore the exceptions were
disallowed by the Court, and the first Judgment affirmed.

The same Term in the same Court. Secheverel versus Dale.
THis Case was sent out of Chancery to this Court ^o know the Law therein, and
in Trespass the case was this: Henry Secheverell, the Father seized in Fee,
levied a Fine to A. and B. in Fee, to the use of himself for life, absque
impetitione vasti, with power to cut and carry away the trees, and to make
Leases for 21 years, or three lives, the remainder to the use of John
Secheverell his eldest Son for life, without impeachment of waste, with the
same powers.

Henry the Father made a Lease to one (under whom the Plaintiff claims) for
three lives, rendering the ancient Rent, excepting all the trees (unless those
which shall be for cropping, lopping, and fuel) Henry the Father dies, John
the Son in the next remainder cut certain trees Victorin, Secheverell who
clayms by the lease made by the Father, brings trespass, and two Questions were
moved.

1. Whether Lessee for life without impeachment of waste, may make a Lease
excepting the trees, and it was objected by the Council of the Plaintiff, that
he could not because this second Lease arises out of the first fine, and out
of the estate of the Conusor: But the Court prima facie, was of opinion that he
might well make such a Lease with such an exception, See Co. lib. 11. Lewys
Bowls his Case, and Doctor and Student lib. 1. cap. 1. and by Doderidge
Justice, the Lease arises out of both the estates. Jones Justice, suppose the
Lessee absque impetitione vasti, assign over all his estate, might he cut the
trees? and it was conceived that he might, for by Doderidge he has power to
dispose of the trees, as it was resolved in Lewys Bowls his case. Jones, he
has no propriety in the Trees, until they be cut, Crew: ch: Justice, Admit a
Stranger cut the trees, who shall have them? By all the Court the Lessee
without impeachment of waste shall have them.

2. Point, Tenant for life without impeachment of waste, with power to cut and
carry away the trees, and make Leases for 21. years or three lives, the
remainder for life to J. S. without impeachment of waste, etc. Tenant for life
makes a Lease for three lives, and dies, whether he in remainder for life,
without impeachment of waste, with power to cut the trees, may cut the trees,
and take them during the Lease for three lives, and the Court seemed to be of
opinion that he might: And Leving of Council with the Plaintiff, argued, that
when tenant for life without impeachment of waste with power to cut the trees,
and to make Leases for 21. years or three lives, makes a Lease for three lives,
excepting the trees, that this is a void exception, because he has no
interest, but a bare Authority, 27. H. 6. Fitz. Wast. 8. Statham tit. Wast. 1.
makes this a Quaere (which Statham was once the owner of the Land in question.)
A man makes a Lease for life without impeachment of waste, a Stranger cuts
trees, the Lessee brings trespass, he shall recover no Damages for the value of
the trees, because the propriety belongs to him in the reversion, and he may
dispose of them, Quaere Dyer 284. Daunsley and Southwels Case, Co. lib. 11.
Lewys Bowls case, that such a Lessee may take trees which are blown down, and
3. H. 6. 45. Mich 41. and 42. Eliz. C. B. Leechford against Sanders in an
Action of waste upon a Lease made to Sanders for life, with a proviso that the
Plaintiff might dispose of the trees during the estate, and resolved that the
Action lies not, for notwithstanding this power, the trees are demised to the
Lessee also, so here when the trees are excepted, he has no interest, but only
an authority.

2. The exception is void for another reason, because when such a Lessee, makes
such a Lease, this is not his Lease, but it has its operation out of the
original fine, and he who makes this has but the nomination, and therefore
cannot add a condition or exception to it. And if the second Lease shall have
its being out of the estate of the Lessee for life, then there shall be an use
upon an use, as appears Co. lib. 1. 134. and that the Law will not allow. 15.
H. 7. and Co. Lib. 1. Albanyes Case, If a man devise, that his Executors shall
fell his Land, they cannot add a condition or exception to this sale, as an
attornment upon a condition subsequent is void, Co. lib. 2. Tookers case.

3. This case may be resembled to the case of Copy-holds, which is in Co. lib.
8. 63. b. in Swaynes Case: If a Lord takes a Wife, and afterward grants Lands
by Copy, according to the custom, and dies, his Wife shall not be endowed of
this Land, for albeit her title of Dower was before the Grant, yet the title of
Copi-hold (which is the custom) is elder then the title of Dower; so in our
case, the title of the second Lessee is derived out of the estate of the
Conuzees, and therefore shall not be clogged with the Exceptions of Lessee for
life, without impeachment of waste.

4. This privilege to cut the trees is annexed to the estates, and goes along
with the estate, and therefore shall not begin before the Stranger be in
possession, 3. E. 3. 44. 45. Idles case 28. H. 8. Dyer 10. And it may be
resembled to the cases of 16. E. 4. and 27. H. 8. Tenant in tail sold the
trees, if he dies before the Party takes them, he shall never have them,
because he has stayed out his time. But it may be objected that upon such a
Lease he may reserve a rent, as it is in Whitlocks case Co. lib. 8. to which I
will offer this difference, Lessee for life, with power to make Leases for
three lives, reserving rent makes a Lease for three lives, reserving rent, this
reservation is good, because it is but a Declaration of the Lease, and of the
rent; but if there were no such clause of reserving rent, then I conceive it
were otherwise.

But admitting all this were against me, yet the justification of the Defendant
is not good, for by the exception out of the exception, the Lessor cannot take
the benefit of the bodies of the trees, because he will thereby deprive the
Lessee of the croppings and loppings etc. as in 28. H* 8. Dyer Maleverell and
Spynkes case. Mylward of Lincolnes Inn for the Defendant. And first he
conceived that the Lessee for life without impeachment of waste, might dispose
of the trees in the same manner as Tenant in fee might do, with this
difference, that the disposal thereof ought to be in his life time, and so it
is resolved in Lewys Bowls case Co. lib. 11. 46.

2. The second matter in the case is, whether the Lessee for life, without
impeachment of waste etc. has only an authority, or an interest in the trees,
and I conceive that he has an interest, for his power is to make Leases of it,
or of any part for 21. years or 3. lives, and that the Conuzors shall be seized
to the use of such Lessees, now when he makes a Lease excepting the trees, the
trees are not demised, so that he remains still tenant for life, without
impeachment of waste for the trees.

3. Excepting all Timber Trees, but for fencing, cropping, and lopping; it has
been objected that this exception has no form: It is a general rule. that
if a man makes a Grant, and in the close thereof except all that which was
granted before, the exception is void: and this appears by 34. Ass. Pl. 11. A
Will was granted salvo stagno molendini: so here the last exception takes away
all that which was granted before, 38. H. 6. 38. in a Quare impedit 28. H. 8.
Dyer 19. by Mountague, the cropping and lopping of trees belong to the Lessee,
like to the Duke of Norfolks case in 12. H. 7. 25. and 13. H. 7. 13. and 18. E.
4. 14. and albeit every grant shall be taken most strongly against the Grantor,
yet it shall have a reasonable intendment for the benefit of the Grantor, and
this appears by 7. E. 4. 22. 17. E. 3. 7. 9. E. 4. 2. 21. E. 3. 43. so here
the Exception shall have a reasonable intendment, that he shall only have such
loppings and croppings as shall be bestowed upon the Park, and no other.
Doderidge Justice, I conceive that by the words without impeachment of waste,
he has interest in the trees as long as the estate continues.

2. That when he makes a lease by the second power given to him, this is
derived out of the Fine, and shall be good against him in the remainder.

3. Because he has power to dispose of the trees, I conceive, that when he
makes a Lease, excepting the trees, this is a good exception, 24. Eliz. C. B. A
man made a Lease for years, now he has the wast of the trees, if he assign
over his estate excepting the trees, the exception is void, but in our case the
Lessee has not parted with his whole estate.

4. So the sole question is, whether he in remainder may cut the trees during
the estate of three lives made by Henry Secheverell, and he conceived that he
might, and so concluded for the Defendant: Jones Justice agreed, that the
Lessee for life without impeachment of wast, has interest in the trees, but
this interest is concomitant with his estate and determinable with it.

2. I conceive that the exception is good. Such things which a man has by the
Law he cannot resign to himself upon his assignment, as the cropping and
lopping of trees, as if tenant in tail after possibility etc. (who is
dispunishable of wast by freedom of the Law) assign over his estate, reserving
the trees, he cannot cut the trees, but here the Lessee has a larger liberty
then the Law gives to him, and he by virtue of this may give away the trees;
but I conceive that if he had assigned over all his estate, then he could not
have excepted the trees, but here he has not granted over all his estate, for
he has a remainder, and may have an estate in possession afterward* and upon
this Lease for three lives he may reserve a rent to himself.

3. I conceive, that this Lease is derived partly out of his own estate, and
he has not the mere nomination, and partly out of the first Fine, and
therefore such Lessees shall be subject to all charges made by the Tenant for
life who made the Lease, as Statutes, Recognizances, etc. to wit, during the
life of the first tenant for life.

4. When he dies who made the said Lease for three life's, whether he in
remainder may cut the Trees during the said Lease, and he conceived (yet not
without some doubt) that he had no power during the lives of the said Lessees.
Whitlock Justice agreed with the rest, so that it was agreed by all:

1. That it is a good exception.

2. That the second lease is drawn out of the Fine: And the question now is,
whether he in remainder without impeachment of waste with power to cut the
trees, has power to cut them, during the lives of the said three Lessees, and
the Council was commanded to speak to this point only upon another day.

The same Term in the same Court. Foster and Taylers Case.
ERror was brought upon a Judgment given in C. B. and after the Record was
certified into this Court, the Common Pleas amended a rasure of the Record
which was there, and now Bramston Sergeant mov^^ for the Def. that the Record
might be amended here: Jones Justice, I doubt whether an inferior Court can
amend after the Record is certified here, for then it is but a piece of
Parchment with them: Bramston, It is resolved that it may in Blackamores case,
Co. lib. 8. Doderidge, the doubt is, whether it may be amended after error
assigned in the same Court, for this takes away the benefit of the Law from the
Plaintiff in the Writ of error. Jones, at another day said, that if in nullo
est erratum had been pleaded, it could not have been amended.

And as it is, it cannot be amended, because now it is assigned for error, and
the Plaintiff was once entitled to his Writ of error, which shall not be taken
away from him afterward: and in 11. Jac. there was such a case moved by
Yelverton the Kings Solicitor, and agreed that it could not be amended.

And Pasch. 17. Jac. one Abbingtons case upon a rasure, as our case is, and it
was doubted whether it could be amended: and by Broom Secondary in the said
case, it was amended. Doderidge in this case, it may be amended, albeit it be
after error brought, because it is only the error of the Clerk, and it is
amendable, although the error be assigned in the same point, and so was the
opinion of the whole Court, and therefore it was amended.

The same Term in the same Court.
WEld of the Inner Temple moved for a Prohibition to the Ecclesiastical Court
at Worcester, and showed for cause. 1. That the suit there was for money, which
by the assent of the greater part of the Parishioners of D. was assessed upon
the Plaintiff for the reparations of the Church, to wit, for the recasting of
their Bells, the truth is that the charge was for the making of new Bells, where
there were four before, whereby it appears that it is merely matter of
curiosity, and not of necessity, for which Parishioners shall not he liable to
such taxations, and he relied upon. 44. E. 3. 19. by Finchden. 2 The party
there is overcharged, of which the Common Law shall Judge. 3 The Party has
alleged a Custom that he and all those who has an estate in such a Tenement,
have used to pay but 11 s. for any reparation of the Church. But the
Prohibition was denied, and by Doderidge in the Book of 44 E. 3. there was a
By-law in the case to distrain, which is a thing merely temporal, for which the
Prohibition was granted and per Curiam, in this case the assessment by the
major part of the Parishioners binds the party; albeit he assented not to it:
and the Court seemed to be of Opinion that the Custom was not reasonable,
because i^^aid a burden upon the rest of the Parish. Littleton of Counsel of
the other side, suppose the Church falls shall he pay but 11 s. Whitlock, If
the Church falls, the Parishioners are not bound to build it up again, which
was not denied by Justice Jones,

The same Term in the same Court.
A Prohibition was prayed, because a person had libelled in the Ecclesiastical
Court for the tenth part of a bargain of Sheep, which had depastured in the
Parish from Michaelmas to Lady day: and the party surmised that he would pay
the tenth of the Wool of them, according to the custom of the Parish. But the
Prohibition was denied, for as Doderidge Justice said, by this way the person
shall be defrauded of all, if he shall not have his recompense, for now the
Sheep are gone to another Parish, and he cannot have any Wool at this time,
because it was not the time of sheering. Nota, per Whitlock, de animalibus,
inutilibus, the Person shall have the tenth part of the bargain for
depasturing, as Horses, Oxen, etc. but de Animalibus Utilibus, he shall have
the Tith in specie, as Cowes, Sheep, etc.

The same Term in the same Court.
UPon an Issue joined in an Ejectione firmae, it was found for the Plaintiff,
and Lewkoor moved in arrest, etc. because the Ejectione firmae was de Messuagio
^ive Tenemento, which is not good for the incertainty, and so it was resolved
12. Jac. in this Court, and Ejectione firmae lies not, De Tenemento Co. lib.
11. 54. Savils case, And it was resolved in the Exchequor-chamber, that it lies
not de pecia terrae; and in this Court in Rhetoric and Chapels Case it was
resolved that it lies not De Mess. and Tenemento.

The same Term in the same Court. Sir Robert Brown against Sir Robert Stroud.
IN debt upon an Obligation for performance of certain Covenants contained in
certain Indentures made between the Parties aforesaid, and the Covenant upon
which the question did arise was this: R. B. being seized of the Manor of
Dale, and S. R. S. of the Manor of Sale, they exchanged the one for the other,
and the Manor of R. B. being more worth then the Manor of R. S. R. S.
covenanted to pay for the said Manor 1200 l. and no time was limited when the
money should be paid, and the money not being paid within a year after, R. B.
bargained and sold the said Manor by Deed indented, and enrolled to J. S. and
his Heirs, and afterward brought an Action of Debt against the said R. S. for
the said 1200 l. who pleaded this matter in Bar, and Jermy argued for the
Plaintiff, that this Plea shall not discharge the Defendant of the said
Covenant, for it is a reciprocal covenant, and he ought to sue the other Party
for the breach of the covenant; and it is a perfect bargain Dyer 30. 14. H. 8.
9. and here the Agreement is in writing, and it is good, albeit there be no
limitation when the money shall be paid, 37. H. 6. 9. Calthrop for the
Defendant, that the Action could not ly^, for the contract is Executory, and
therefore is not to pay the money till he has the Manor, for the Covenant is
that pro Manner. etc. he should pay him 1200 l. and the word [pro] implies a
condition and consideration, and being excecutory on the one part, shall be
also executory on the other part, 9. E. 4. 20. 21. Abridg. in Plowden 134. in
Browning and Bestons case 15. E. 4. 4. If A. grant to B. all the ancient Pale,
and for them B. grants, that he will make new Pale for A. if B. cannot have the
old Pale, he shall be excused from making the new Pale, for he cannot have the
one without doing the other, 6. E. 6. Dyer 75. The contract was. pro 20. which
makes a condition, 15. H. 7. 10. by Fineaux, If a man covenant with me to serve
me for a year, and I covenant to give him 10 l. he shall have an Action for
the 10 l. although he do not serve me, otherwise if I covenant to give him 10
l. for his service.

Also there is no time limited when the payment shall be made: true it is, that
in Co. lib. 6. 30. when the act to be done is a transitory act, and no time is
limited there, it ought to be done in convenient time, but the Law shall judge
of the convenience of this time, and the Law will never judge the time of
payment to be before he has the Manor, pro quo. etc.

In many cases when no time is limited, the Law will appoint a time, as
appears in 33. H. 6. 48. and Perkins 799. But now in our case the Law will
never appoint that this money shall be paid, because the other party has
disabled himself to perform his part; like to Sir Anthony Maines case Co. lib.
5. 21. Doderidge, The bargain is not perfect, because no day of payment is
limited, and the other shall have no Action of Debt for the money before he
has the Manor. Jones, If I covenant to make a Feoffment to J. S. and he
covenant in consideration of that Covenant to pay me 10 l. he shall have an
Action of Debt against me, before he has made the Feoffment.

And at another day in Trinity Term. 3. Car. Noy argued for the Plaintiff, and
opened the case thus: Amongst other Covenants in certain Indentures between
them it was agreed, that whereas Sir R. Brown the Father was s^ized of the
Ma^nor of Gadmaston, with the Advowson appendent, and Sir R. Stroud of the
Ma^nor of D. within the same Cou^ty, that there should be an excha^ge between
them of the said Manors, and because the Manor of Gadmaston was the better,
Stroud covenanted with the Father and the Son to pay 1200 l. to the Father for
the Demesnes of the said Manor and Advowson, and that at Michaelmas next
ensuing, there should be a mutual entry into the said Manors, and that in the
mean time either of them should take the profits of their own Ma^nors, and that
they should deliver each to other their evidences, and that Assurances should
be made as Council should advise; the Plaintiff declare, that they had
performed all the Covenants which were to be performed on their part, and that
the Defendant had not paid the 1200 l. and that thereupon this action of
Covenant was brought.

The Defendant protestando that the Plaintiff had performed the Covenants, and
had not produced their edidences, etc. for Plea says, that the Plaintiff after
Michaelmas bargained and sold the Manor of Gadmaston to J. S. and his Heirs,
upon which the Plaintiff demurs, and he conceived that notwithstanding the sale
after Mich. yet an action of Covenant lies for the 1200 l. but otherwise it had
been if he had sold it before Mich. But it has been objected that the money by
the Covenant is to be paid pro the Manor, and therefore because the Defendant
cannot have the Manor, he shall (...) p^y the Money, and for this 9. E. 4. 20.
and 24. E. 3. 21. have been cited, that [pro] implies a condition, as pro
servitio pro maritagio, but these Cases do not resemble this case in reason,
because the fact to be done here, rests upon an indiffinite time, and the
Defendant is to do the first Act, and the Defendant is bound to a certain time
for the doing of this Act. For the first it is agreed, that the Defendant shall
pay 1200 l. and the Plaintiff agrees to make Assurances for this Manor, and
that the Assurances should be made as Council should devise, and I conceive
that the Defendant ought to procure the Council to devise, for mutual
Assurances ought to be made, and either party ought to appoint what Assurances
he would have, and the one ought not to be a Carver to the other, neither can
one know what council the other will have, and upon this reason is the case, 9.
E. 4. 3. 4. and Plow. 15. b. the Case of the Bell, it shall be weighed by him
who is to have the profit, peradventure if it were in case of an Obligation to
perform covenants, there he ought to procure the Counsel, for saving the
penalty of the obligation; but it is otherwise here in case of a Covenant, Co.
lib. 5. 22. b. 18. E. 3. 27. and 4. E. 3. 29. If a man be bound to be ready to
levy a Fine such a day, yet the other ought to bring the Writ of Covenant
against him before that day, for otherwise he cannot levy a fine;

But now the Law is altered, for now fines are levied, and Writs of Covenant
are sued out afterward, 17. E. 4. 2 per Pigot: If I am bound to you in 20 l.
to enfeoff you at such a day of such Land, if you please to take the Feoffment,
you are bound to let me know your pleasure, and here the Assurance is for the
benefit of the Defendant, and he cited Co. lib. 5. 23. and 7. E. 4. 13.

2. For the time, this Assurance ought to be devised by Council before Mich. or
otherwise the Plaintiff shall be enforced to keep his Manor all his life, and
shall be hindered of the sale of it for payment of his debts, or other
necessaries whatsoever. And 17. E. 3. 1. liking ought to be shown in convenient
time. And it appears by the Articles that the time intended was before
Michaelmas, for every thing to be done by the Articles, was to be done before
Michaelmas, Hill. 37. Eliz. Rot. 99. B. R. between Mills and Parsons: A man
covenanted in consideration of 42 l. rent to be granted to him, payable at
Mich. and Lady day, yearly, to levy a fine of a Manor to the use of etc. and
the assurance of the Rent is not made before Michaelmas, and it was resolved
that the Covenant was not performed, for the grant of the Rent ought to be
before Mich. for otherwise he could not have the benefit intended, and cited
also Dyer 347. and 20 Eliz. Dyer 361. and in this case there could be no
execution of other Articles if the Council did not devise them before Mich.

But it has been objected that the Plaintiff have not fully shown the
performance of the Covenants of their part, but only by implication, albeit
they have performed, and they have not averred that the Defendant has not
devised.

Answ. To which I answer, that this is good enough; but where I covenant to do
an act upon a future contingent act to be done by another, there I ougt to show
it particularly, but otherwise in this Case, and this is for the benefit of the
Defendant, and therefore he ought to show it, and to this purpose is 3. E. 3,
Fitz. Det. 157. and 18, E. 3. 4. etc. Jones Justice, Suppose the Defendant had
demanded the assurance after Mich: and before the sale what shall be done: Noy,
nothing can be done after Michaelmas: and it was adjourned.

The same Term in the same Court. Sanders and others, versus Meryton.
IN an Action of Covenant the case was this, Amongst other Covenants in a
certain Indenture made between Sanders and others to the Lessees, and his two
Lessors, the Lessors covenant to discharge them of all Encumbrances done by
them or any other person, and the Plaintiff assign for breach, that one of the
Lessors had made a Lease, and thereupon they brought this Action. And Goldsmith
moved in arrest of Judgment, that the breach was not well laid, because it is
only laid to be done by one of them, and the Covenant is to discharge them of
encumbrances done by them, which shall be intended joint encumbrances.
Doderidge Justice, the Covenant goes as well to Encumbrances done severally as
jointly, for it is of all encumbrances done by them or any other person, and so
was the opinion of the other Justices, and therefore the exception was
overruled.

The same Term in the same Court. Dickar versus Moland.
IN Replevin, the case was thus: A man made a Feoffment to the use of himself
for life, the remainder to his Son in tail, which remainder over to the
Defendant made conusance as Bailiff to the Son for 4 s. Rent due to him before
the said time, in which, etc. to wit, 1. Jan. 18. Jac. which time was before
the death of the Feoffor, whereupon it was moved for the Plaintiff, that the
Avowry could not be good, and Roll argued for the Defendant, that it is good
enough, for the Ante predictum tempus quo etc. is good enough, and the
(scilicet) is void, for by this it appears that the Rent is due to another 20.
H. 6. 15. And a (scilicet) is but an Exposition of that which is once before,
and it shall not destroy the precedent matter, but if it be contrary to it, it
is void, Co. lib. 5. Knights case, A scilicet shall not make an alteration of
that which went before, 15. Jac. B. R. Desmond and Iohnsons Case. In a Trover
and Conversion the Plaintiff declared that he was possessed of the said goods.
1 Jan. 15. Jac. and that Postea, scil. the first day of May he in the year
aforesaid lost them, and that they came to the hands of the Defendant, and upon
issue joined, it was found for the Plaintiff, and this was moved in arrest of
Judgment, and by the Court the (scil.) was agreed to be void, and the Postea
good; and the like case was 17. Jac. in Debt. The second Question is, a man
makes Conusance for Rent for him in remainder in tail, and does not allege
the precise time when the Lessee for life died, but only that he died, and I
conceive that it is well enough.

1. Because an Avowry (which is in lieu of an action) is a real action, and in
real actions no precise day need to be alleged.

2. Because he avows for 4 s. rent due, and the arreare to the remainder, which
implies that the Lessee for life is dead; See 14. Eliz. Dyer. The case of a
person, in one Arundalls case; a man was Lessee for ninty years, if the Lady
Morley should so long live, in an action brought by him as Lessee for years, in
his Declaration he did not aver that the Lady Morley was alive, and yet
awarded good, Trin. 12. Jac. in Hord and Paramores case, the defendant avowed
as Heir of Sir John Arundell, and alleged no time incertaine of the death of
Sir John Arundell, and yet awarded good for the reason aforesaid, and therefore
he prayed Judgment for the Avowant.

The same Term in the same Court. Jenkin versus Vivian.
IN trespass, Jermy for the Plaintiff took some exceptions to the Plea of the
Intr. Hill. 1. Car. Rot. 331.
Defendant: 1. That the Defendant claim common in Trigemore Moore ratione
Vicinagii, and does not say, a tempore cujus contrarium memoria hominum non
existit. 2. The Defendant alleges that he and all his Occupiers of Down-close
had used to have common in the said Tridgemore Moore etc. whereas he ought to
have shown what estate they had in Down-close who have used to have this
common: Roll. there need no prescriptio^in this case, no more then in a common
appendant (which case of a common appenda^t was agreed by the whole Court) for
it is mixed, 6. E. 4. 55. Co. lib. Intr. 625. tit. trespass. For the 2.
exception, I agree that if it be by way of prescription, then it is not good,
as it is alleged here, but if it be by way of custom (as here it is) then it
is good, for a custom goes to Land, and a Prescription to persons, Hill. 11.
Jac. Higgs brought an Action upon the Case for erecting of a new Mill, and
alleged a Custom, that he and all the Inhabitants etc. an exception was taken
to it, and it was there ruled that it was good, because alleged by way of
custom: Co. lib. 6. Gatewards case, and also Mich. 14. Jac. it way be alleged
by way of custom, as our case is, and 15. E. 4. when it is by way of discharge,
it may be alleged in all Occupiers, Jermy for the Plaintiff, It cannot be a
custom here, for as it is in 23. Eliz. Dyer, A custom cannot extend to a
particular place, and this was agreed by the whole Court: But there is another
exception, he clayms common in Tridgemore Moore for cattle levant and couchant
in Down-close, and does not aver, that these beasts were levant and couchant
upon Down-close, and per totam Curiam, this ought to be averred, and it was
also agreed that in this case he ought to have prescribed: But for the
exception of all occupiers it was doubted: but for the other exceptions
Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

The same Term in the same Court. Chambers Case.
IT was said in this case, that in debt upon a Recognizance acknowledged in
Chancery, or in any other Court, the Defendant cannot demand Oyer of the
condition, for the Recognizance is not in Court as an obligation is, when debt
is brought upon it: But if Debt be brought upon a Recognizance acknowledged in
this Court, then the Defendant may demand Oyer of the Recognizance.

The same Term in the same Court, Harison versus Errington.
IN Error to reverse an Indictment of rescous and Riot, taken in the County
Palatine of Durham, Banks assigned the Errors, whereof one was, ther^ was a
Warrant to three conjunctim, and div^sim to arrest the said Harison, and two of
them arrest him, and therefore the Arrest was not well done, for it ought to
have been by one, or all three, and the reason is, because it is a ministerial
act, otherwise if it had been a judicial act, 14. H. 4. 34.

2. The Indictment of Riot was against three, and the Jury found only one of
them guilty of the ^^^ot, this is a void verdict, for one alone cannot make a
riot, like to the case in 11. H. 4. 2. Conspiracy against two, and only one of
them is found guilty, it is void, for one alone cannot conspire. And at another
day in the same Term Noy took other exceptions.

1. Because the Indictment is Jurator, pro Domino Rege presentant. etc. and
does not say, that 12. Jurors presentant, and peradventure but 11. did present.

2. The names of the Jurors ought to have been certified, for peradventure they
are not probe and legales homines, but Villains and Outlawes, 15. H. 4. 41.

3. It is sound that Rolson the Sheriff by virtue of a Writ directed to him,
came, etc. and upon this rescous was made by Harrison etc. and it does not
appear what manner of Writ it was, scilicet, Elegit: Capias ad satisfaciend. on
etc. and if there were no Writ there can be no rescous, and albeit he had a
Writ, yet if execution were done by virtue of another Writ which he had, the
Party may disobey it, as if upon an habere facias seisinam, the Sheriff makes a
Warrant as upon a Capias, the party is not bound to obey the Bayliffe, if he
be not a Bayliffe known; but in case it appears they were only Bailiffs pro
hac Vice. Nota, that an Indictment before Coron^rs, which found that the Earl
of B. was felo de se, was quasht, because it did not appear that it was per
sacramentum probor. and legal. hominum: And in the case of Sarum, this Term an
Indictment was quasht for the same cause.

The same Term in the same Court. Rochester versus Rickhouse.
IN a writ of Error to reverse a Judgment given in Ejectione firmae in
Newcastle, Banks assigned these errors.

1. The Plaintiff declares of a Lease made de Burg. sine Tent. which is not
good, no more then in Ejectione firmae de Mess* sive Tent.

2. Because the Judgment is not quod capitur as it ought to be, because it is
vi and armis.

3. The judgment is Ideo concessum est, where it ought to be consideratus est,
and for these Errors the Judgment was reversed: And the same day another
Judgment between Bell and Margery Strongury was reversed for the same causes.

The same Term in the same Court. Petit versus Robinson.
IN Error to reverse a Judgment given in C. B. in a Replevin, there Jermy for
the Plaintiff assigned two Errors:

1. It appears, that after the Writ and before the trial, it was coram
Justiciar. Dic. Domini Regis, and there was not any speech of any King but of
King James before, and there is no speech of his demise, and therefore this
shall be intended before the Justices of King James, which cannot be.

2. Because the Nisi prius is certified to be tried before Francisco Harvey,
Mill. uno Justiciar. etc. and the Postea returned, is before Francisco Harvey
Arm. argued and so there was no such Judge of Nisi prius as Francis Harvey:
Banks for the Defendant, I conceive the first errors to be because the
adjournment was per br. Dom. Reg. and King James was named before, so that the
objection may be, that it shall be intended the Writ of Adjournment of King
James, which cannot be, but I conceive the Writ is general, and shall not be
intended, that it can be adjourned by the Kings Writ who was dead before, and
the Clerk of the Assizes who certified it, is bound to take notice of the Kings
death, 37. H. 6. 28. and also the Record is not per br. Dic. Dom. Regis, but
per br. Domini Regis, generally. And for the second, I conceive it is no error,
and if it be error, then if the Certificate be not according to the Copy, out
of which the Clerk certifies, it shall be amended, 22. E. 4 22. 35. H. 6. 23.
b. Co. lib. 8. 136. Blackmores case, which is a stronger case then this. But it
has been objected, that the Record is certified by the Justices, and now there
can be no averment to the contrary; but I conceive that this Court may send to
the Clark of the Assizes to amend it, and those objections were overruled in
C. B. in the same case. Doderidge Justice, I conceive that notwithstanding
these exceptions the Judgment ought to be affirmed, for as to the first, the
Court is bound to take notice of the demise of the King, and therefore it shall
be intended the King that now is, and so the Writ of ad^ournment good enough,
in Dyer. King Henry 8. made a Patent, and it was E^ricus Dei gratia, etc. where
it should be Henricus, and yet the Patent good; so in a Writ to the Bishop, the
subscription is, Episcop. Norw. this is good enough, for the Bishop of Norwich
is very well known. And for the other, I conceive it is not well alleged,
because it is not shown whether he were a Knight at the time of the
Certificate or not, and so it may well stand together, that he was a Knight,
for he might be an Esquire at the time of the trial, and before the Record
certified might be made Knight, Jones Justice to the same intent, and that we
ought to take notice of the demise of the King, and therefore it shall be
intended of the Writ of adjournment of the King which now is, and therefore it
is no error, and yet if it were, it were amendable: Whitlock Justice agreed,
and therefore the Judgment was affirmed by the whole Court.

The same Term in the same Court. Crabbe and his Wife versus Tooker.
IN Covenant between Walter Crabbe and Anne his Wife, against Tooker, the
covenant upon which the breach was laid, was this, Tooker the Defendant
covenanted with Tooker his Son, and Anne Slade (one of the Plaintiffs, whom he
intended to marry) to give them their meat and drink in his house, and if any
discontent should happen between the Father and Son, so that he, and his Wife
Anne should disagree to dwell with Tooker the Father, then they should have 6.
Beasts gates, etc. Tooker the Son died, Anne disagree to dwell with Tooker the
Father, and marries with Crabbe, who with h^s Wife Anne brings this Action, and
Tailor argued for the Planitiff that the Action lies, for albeit the Covenant
be in the conjunctive (if they disagree) yet it shall have a disjunctive
interpretation, as where a man covenant to levy a fine to one and his heirs, if
he dies the Covenantor may levy a fine to his Heirs, and Hill and Granges case
in Plow. Two Tenants in common grant a rent, this shall be taken for several
Rents, and Co. lib. 5. Slingesbyes case, also the Wife is party to this
covenant, and she must either have remedy upon this covenant, after the death
of her Husband, or not at all, for she cannot disagree in the life time of her
Husband per que, etc.

And it was agreed on the other side, that there ought to be a dislike between
all jointly, the Father, the Son, and the Wife: and now one of them being dead,
the covenant is discharged, like to the case put in Brudenels case, Co. lib. 5.
If Administration be grant during the minority of 3 if one of them dies, the
administration cease, and 31. Eliz. in C. B. A Lease was made to three, and
the Lessor grants to them to be dispunishable of Wast quamdiu cohabitarent, one
of them dies, and it was resolved, that now they shall be liable to wast. Also
the Bar is not bone, for it is pleaded that Discordia orta fuit, and does not
show what manner of discord this was, and therefore not good; as 3 H 6. In
Annuity brought Pro concilio, etc. he ought to show for what manner of Council
it was: Whitlock Justice was of opinion for the Plaintiff, and that this
Covenant extends to the Wife, and that upon equal construction, because it
comes in place of the first Covenant, and this was intended for the benefit of
the Wife, as well after the death of the Husband as before: Jones Justice was
of the contrary opinion, and that the second covenant was a several covenant
from the first, and that the disagreement is to be made by all three jointly,
and that when one dies the Covenant is gone, 2. Eliz. Dyer, A man will that A.
B. and C. his Feoffees shall sell his Land, B. dies, now the Authority is
determined. The Lord Gray committed the custody of his Son to four, one of them
dies, the authority is gone, and in this case there is no matter of interest,
but an agreement, and in such a case as this is a Feme covert, has a will,
albeit she has no legal will; but in this case there ought to be a
disagreement of both, and there ought to be a dislike of the Father also, and
in the Declaration it is also said, that she dis-agreed. Doderidge agreed with
Jones, that ^he Declaration is not good, and that it is not warranted by the
Covenant, and that the breach is not well assigned. The case is grounded upon
the second covenant which consists upon a contingency which contingency is, if
there happen any discord between the Father and the Son, etc. the words are
joint, and all ought to disagree: True it is, that in some cases a conjunctive
shall be taken for a disjunctive, but this is according to the matter and
circumstances of the fact, but in our case it shall not be taken disjunctively.
If the Father, the Son, and the Wife had disagreed, then it is clear that an
Action of covenant lies, but this is casus omissus, and no provision for it.
Also it is only alleged in the Declaration, that she disagreed, whereas a
mutual disagreement between all ought to be alleged, and therefore Judgment
was given Quod quaerens mil. capiat per bellam. But all agreed, that the Wife
might have boarded with Tooker the Father, if she would, but her new Husband
could not.

AT thowe Sergeant took diverse exceptions to an Indictment of forcible entry
upon the Stat. of 8. H. 6. against Ployden and others for expelling one Syms
from his Copi-hold, and the principal exception was, because (disseisivit) was
not in the Indictment, and in truth it cannot, for albeit the Stat. of 21. Jac.
cap. 15. gives power to Judges and Justices of Peace to give restitution of
possession to Tenants for years, and Copyholders, in which there shall be an
entry, or detainer by force, yet the Stat. does not give an Indictment of
forcible entry of copyhold. Noy, a Copyholder shall now have an Iditement of
forcible entry, but (disseisivit) shall not be in it, for no Jury will find that
because it is not possible, because a Copyholder has no Freehold, and yet a
Copyholder shall have a Plaint in nature of an Assize against a stranger, but
not against the Lord: And at last the opinion of the Court was, that the
Indictment was good.

UPon a Capias directed to the Sheriff of London to take the body of J. S. the
Capias was returnable die Jovis, which was the day of All Souls, and thereupon
the Sheriff took the party, but he returned, that because the return of the
Writ was upon a day that was not Dies Juridicus, he suffered the party to go at
large: And the return was holden insufficient, for by Doderidge the Writ was
good, and the taking and detaining of the party by virtue thereof was lawful,
but yet he could not have the party there at the said day, and therefore the
Sheriff was compelled to bring the party into Court, which the same day he did
accordingly.

The same Term in the same Court.
A Man granted a Rent charge of 12 l. to one of his Sons out of the Manor of
D. by Deed, and died, the Grantee lost his Deed, the Land is extended to I. D.
by virtue of a Recognizance acknowledged by the eldest Son of the Grantor, the
Grantee sue for his Annuity before the Council of York to be relieved in
equity, for that in respect of the loss of the Deed he could not have remedy
at the Common Law, and J. D. the Conuzee obtained a prohibition out of this
Court upon this surmize, that although the Council of York should make a
Decree, that he should pay the said Annuity, yet it should be no discharge for
so much against the Conuzor, because their Decree was no legal eviction. Now
came Smith of the Temple, and prayed a Precedendo for the Grantee to the
Council of York, and the opinion of the whole Court was, that a Decree, there
being no legal eviction, shall not be a discharge for so much against the
Conuzor. Doderidge, the Grantee of the Rentcharge, having now lost his Deed
can have no remedy in equity, for in this case Equitas sequitur legem, and of
the same opinion were Jones and Whitlock: but by Doderidge (which was not
denied) if the Grantee had lost the Deed by a casual loss, as by fir^ etc. in
such a case he shall have remedy in equity: and he said, that in the beginning
of King James, when Egerton was Lord Chancellor, there was such a Case in
Chancery: A Grantee of a rent-seck had seisen of it, so that he might have an
assize, and he devised it to J. S. the Devisee sued in Chancery to have his
Rent and seizen of it, and he could have no remedy for it in Chancery: And this
was one Malleryes case.

The same Term in the same Court.
ONe Hebborne was indicted for stopping a way, etc. and it was moved that the
indictment was insufficient, because it is not laid that it was communis via,
but only that it was a way to the Church, and per Curiam, it was good enough,
and by Jones Justice the Indictment is good enough, although there wants vi and
armis, because he who is supposed to stop the way, is owner of the Land.

The same Term in the same Court.
AN Action upon the Case, upon a promise was brought in the Town of
Northampton, and the Consideration alleged was, that if the Defendant here in
the Writ of Error, would discharge Bagnot of Execution, etc. that then the
Plaintiff here in this Writ of Error promised to pay him eleven pounds, and
there the Defendant pleaded, quod exoneravit illum de Executione relaxavit, And
Bolstred, for the Plaintiff moved this for Errors, that the Plaintiff in the
inferior Court did not show by what manner of release it was, nor that it was
by writing; for this being the Consideration upon which the Action is grounded,
ought to be put in certain, Mich. 15. Iac. Staple and King, Execution of a
consideration ought to be shown* 35 H. 6. 19. a discharge ought to be shown in
certain, 22 E. 4. 43. the Lord Lisles Case, and Mich. 16. Iac. in this Court
Liverel and Rivets Case (which was entered, Trin. 16. Iac. Rot. 32^) in an
Action upon the Case, upon a promise upon issue joined, it was found for the
Plaintiff, and it was moved in arrest of Judgment, because the Consideration
was, that the Plaintiff should discharge one Ogle, and he declares, that he
did discharge him, and thereupon he brought this Action, and because he
declared but generally, quod exoneravit, the Judgment for that very cause was
stayed, and 36 Eliz. one covenanted to make an assurance, and pleaded generally
that he had assured, and resolved that it was not good, and in Rosse and
Harvies Case this Term (which was entered, Trin. 2 Car. Rot. 1408.) In Covenant
the Defendant covenanted to give security, the Defendant pleaded that he
offered security, and resolved that it was not good, per que etc. Jermy for the
Defendant, that the plea is good enough* for a Release by Peroll is sufficient,
I will remember but one book, upon which I will rely, 27. H. 8. 24. Jordons
Case, in an Action upon the Case, the Defendant assumed to the Plaintiff, that
if the Plaintiff would discharge I. T. of such an Execution in which he is
bound at the suit of the Plaintiff, then if I. T. did not satisfy the
Plaintiff by such a day, the Defendant would do it, and they were at Issue
upon an Assumpsit, and there the Count is admitted good, and he need not plead
it was by writing, because the Discharge is good without writing, but it has
been resolved, that if a man be in execution at my suit, and I go to the
Sheriff and command him to discharge the Party, this is a good Discharge,
although it be by Peroll, Jones. If I say to the Sheriff, suffer the party to
go at large, this is a good release both to the party and to the Sheriff, and
by him (relaxavit) implies a sufficient release, and therefore the Plaintiff
in the Writ of Error shall be barred. And if a man be bound to save one
harmless in an Action brought upon this obligation, he pleads that he has
saved him harmless, and shows not how, the Plaintiff demurres generally, he
shall not now take advantage of it, Doderidge. The Cases put by Bolstred are
not to this purpose, for all those cases are of things in certain, and he
agreed that a release by perol was sufficient, and the case of 22. H. 8. is a
stronger case then this is. Whitlock agreed also, and therefore Doderidge
advised the Plaintiff to be satisfied, or otherwise they would affirm the first
Judgment.

Trin 2. Car. in the Kings Bench. Caryes Case.
IN Caryes case of Grayes Inn (where these words were adjudged actionable, You
a Councellor? a Fool, an Ass, a Hangman, a Councellor of Law, a Fool in the
Profession) it was said by Jones Instice, it was not sufficient to say, that he
was eruditus in Lege, but he ought to say that he was Homo Conciliarius: and he
said that in maintenance against Boughton, it came in question upon evidence
to a Jury whether one who is a Barrister may give advice, and it was ruled that
he could not, albeit he had Letters Patents to enable him as fully as if he had
been called to the Bar: and in Fleetwoods case adjudged, that these words (You
the Kings Receiver? you are his Deceiver, are you not?) were actionable.

The same Term in the same Court.
SIr Tho. Savill was indicted for breach of the peace within the Palace, to
wit, for assaulting Sir Fran: Wortley, and he pleaded his pardon, and Doderidge
said, that to strike in the place was the loss of the right hand by the Law,
and in this point our Law agrees with the Laws of France and Spain, and all
other Nations, for as the person of the King, so his Palace and courts of
Justice are so sacred, that such contempts and affronts are judged worthy of
such punishments, and said that the Book of 24. E. 3. 33. Fitzherbert
Forfeiture, 22. (of which he would have Students to take notice) is that where
one came into the Palace armed, and being brought to the Bar in his complete
armor, the cause was demanded, and he said that it was in his own defense,
being in fear of a great man then in Court, and he was committed to Prison by
the Court during the Kings pleasure, and his Lands forfeited during his life.
Vide for the like matter, 41. E. 3. Fitzh. Coron. 280. Dyer 188. 22. E. 3. 13.

Hillar. 2. Car. in the Kings Bench.
ONe Mathias Wheelhorse was indicted at the Sessions of the Peace, holden in the
Town of Northampton. quia Noctivagus, and because he diverse days and nights
did frequent the house of etc. which was within the liberties of Southampton,
and was a suspected Bawdy House: and Crawley Sergeant moved that this
Indictment was insufficient for three reasons.

1. Because it does not appear in the Indictment, that the party knew this to
be a Bawdy House.

2. Because it is not said that it was a Bawdy House, but that it was
susspected to be a Bawdy House.

3. Because the Indictment is before Justices of Peace, Villae de Northampt.
and the house is infra libertates Villae de Northampt. and it shall not be
intended that the power of the Justices of Peace extend thither, and for it see
Co. lib 5. 120. Longs case. 13. H. 7. 33. 34. 22. H. 7. Kelleway 89. Co. lib.
9. Mackaleys case: And the Court gave no opinion concerning the exceptions: But
another thing was moved, to wit, that one could not be indicted before Justices
of peace for being Noctivagus, but this is to be inquired of in the Leet, and
in this the whole Court was against him, for it is a misdemeanor, and it is
contrary to the Statute of Winchester, and every one may arrest him: And at
another day he moved this last exception again, and said that the Justices of
Peace have no power to fine men that are noctivagant, yet true it is, that a
Court Leet has such a power, Rastol. Leet 2. and true it is also, (as it is in
4. H. 7. 1. 2.) that every one may arrest a Night-walker, but there it is said
that if he appears to be a man of good fame, the party who arrests him ought
to let him go at large; and the Indictment here is only that he was Noctivagus,
and it appears not that he is a suspicious Night-walker: and by Doderidge and
Whitlock Justices (only present) by the Common Law every man may arrest him who
is Noctivagus, and the word (Noctivagus) implies that he was a common*
Night-walker, and they said that Justices of peace by their Commission have
power to take such Inditements, for it is of ill behavior, and albeit the
Indictment were naught for the other exceptions, yet being good in this, it
shall not be quasht, and therefore Judgment was given upon it, and the party
fined 40 s.

The same Term in the same Court. Sparrow versus Sherwood.
IN Trover and Conversion of two loads of Fitches of certain Land etc. The
Defendant justify by the command of Hare, to whom part of the Land belongs;
and to one Pots, to whom another part in right of the Lady his Wife belongs,
and shows that part of the Fitches did grow upon the Land of one, and part upon
the Land of the other, and upon this the Plaintiff demurs:

1. Because he justifies by the command of two generally, and he cannot
justify upon the Land of the one by the command of the other, and therefore he
ought to have alleged several commands.

2. Because he does not show particularly upon whose Land the Fitches grew, but
that part grew upon the Land of one, and part upon the Land of the other, which
is uncertain.

3. Because the Wife of Pots is called by the name of Lady, and the Wife of an
Esquire cannot be a Lady: Doderidge and Whitlock only present, for the first
were of opinion, that it was good enough; for although it were a joint command,
yet the parties commanding having several titles, it shall be taken as
several commands, reddendo singula singulis: and for the third it is good
enough, being in a Plea, otherwise, if it had been in a Writ: But for the
second Exception, the bar is not good enough, because uncertain, so that
although upon other Exceptions moved by the Defendant, the Replication of the
Plaintiff was not good, yet the Defendants Bar being ill, the Plaintiff shall
have Judgment upon the Declaration: And the Plaintiff had Judgment
accordingly.

The same Term in the same Court Risley versus Hains.
IN an Action upon the Case, upon an assumpsit, the Plaintiff declared upon
the Sale of several parcells of Tobacco, to wit, for one parcel so much, for
another parcel so much, and so forward, and in the Conclusion he says, quae
quidem separales summae in toto se attingunt, to 55. l. which (being computed)
is less then the pariculars, and upon non assumpsit it was found for the
Plaintiff, and now Andrews moved in arrest of Judgment, for that the
particulars, and the summing up of them differs, and this being in a
Declaration (which ought to contain truth) it is not good, and so there appears
to be no cause of action, 35. H. 8. Dyer 55. And Grices Case, in the very point
Mich. 17. Jac. in this Court, but by Jones and Whitlock Justices only present,
the Declaration is good enough, for there is a particular promise for every
parcel, and the summing up of particulars is only surplusage and officiousness
of the Clark, therefore the Judgment was affirmed: And nota, that Jones said
obiter in this Case, that upon a contract, the Party to whom payment is to be
made, need not make request, and afterward it was agreed by the whole Court,
that it should be amended, otherwise it had been more.

The same Term in the same Court.
A Great multitude of Welsh-men were Indicted for the death of a man, by an
Inquisition taken before the Coroner in the County of Mountgomery in Wales, and
Littleton of Council with the Welsh-men took some Exceptions to the
Inquisition: as, 1. That the Coroner cannot take any Inquest, unless it be
super visum corporis, and to this purpose he cited Britton, 6. Ric. 2. Coron.
107. 21. E. 4. 70. 2. Ric. 3. 2. This also is the reason that, if a man drown
himself, and cannot be found, the Coroner cannot enquire of the death of this
man: but for the King to have a forfeiture of his Goods, an Inquisition ought
to be taken before the Justices of Peace, as it was resolved in this Court,
Trin. 13. Jac. upon which the first exception was, that the Inquisition was
taken at D. in the time of King James, super visum corporis, in D. in the time
of this King, and for this he cited two presidents out of Cooks Book of
E^tryes: Another Exception was, because the Inquisition was per Sacramentum
probor. and legal. hominum Com. predict. whereas by the Stat. of 4. E. 1. this
inquest ought to be by men of the four Towns next adjoining, and this ought to
appear in the Indictment also Hill. 10. Jac. Rot. 3. Co. lib. Intr. 354. And
day was given to the Attorney General, to maintain this Inquisition: But
afterward Pasch. 3. Car. the Indictment was quashed, especially for the first
exception.

The same Term in the same Court, King versus Merrick.
In an Action upon the Case for these words, I charge you King with Felony, and
you Constable (inuendo Thomas Legate) to apprehend him: And a verdict for the
Plaintiff. It was moved in arrest of Judgment by Bacon, that the words are not
actionable: The first words are not, because they are not an express
affirmation, and for this he cited Mich. 11. Jac. in this Court Powel and Bauds
case, where an action was brought for these words, I have arrested Powel of
Felony, for stealing sheep of mine, and adjudged not actionable.

Also the Plaintiff did not show in his Declaration what kind of felony this
was, and it may be such a felony for which an Action will not lie; for there
are diverse kinds of felony, and a Mayhem is one kind, as appears in 40. Ass.
Pl. 4. 6. H. 7. 1 and in this case it shall be taken in mitiori sensu, and it
shall not be intended such a felony for which he may be hanged: If one charge
another with felony, because he has committed a Mayhem, it is clear that an
action will not lie.

And the other words, (I charge you Constable to apprehend him) are not
actionable, and the words are only spoken to the Plaintiff: Also the words are
laid to be spoken in London, and it appears that the Constable was of a Town in
Norfolk, who cannot apprehend any one in London. Earl for the Plaintiff. It
has been argued that the words are not actionable, because felony is a
general word and contains in it self a mayhem also; But I conceive that in
this case felony shall be taken according to the general and common
acceptance, which is such a Felony for which a man may loose his life, and for
this he cited Co. lib. 4. 15. b. Yeomans charged Hext, for my ground in
Allerton Hext seeks my life, and if I could find John Silver, I do not doubt
but within two days to arrest him upon suspicion of Felony: and it was
adjudged that for the last words the Action lies, because he shall be
imprisoned for suspicion of felony, and felony is there taken according to the
common acceptance of the word.

It has been objected that there is no express affirmation of the Felony, but
I conceive that there is, 39. Eliz. Action was brought for these words; I will
call him in question for poisoning my Aunt, and adjudged that it lies, and
Mich. 37. and 38. Eliz. Woodrofe and Vaughans case for these words: I did not
know Mr. Woodrofe was your Brother, I will prove him perjured, or else I will
bear his charges: and adjudged actionable. And Hill. 44. Eliz. Rot. 351. This
man (inuendo John Latham) has cut my Wives purse, and his Father knowing of it
received it of him, and the Money and Rings theein, and therefore I charge him
of flat Felony: and resolved that for these words, (did cut my Wife's purse) no
action lies, for the cutting of ones purse only is not felony, unless it be
taken from the person; and to receive one is not Felony, but resolved that the
last words were actionoble, and then it was agreed, that if one say, that I. S.
did see such a one that had committed felony, and did suffer him to slip away,
I charge him of Felony, these words are not actionable, and Mich. 20. Jac. in
this Court that these words (bear witness, I arrest him of felony) are
actionable, and therefore he praye^ judgment for the Plaintiff. Doderidge
Justice, the words are not actionable: And Hexts case comes not to this case,
for there by the word (Felony) it was manifest what Felony he intended by the
circumstances of the speech; to wit, that he meant such felony, for which he
might lose his life; But the words here being general of Felony, it may be
intended as well of a Mayhem a^ of any other Felony; for in an appeal of
Mayhem, he is arraigned as Felo Domici Regis 40. Ass. and the other case of 44.
Eliz. I do arrest him of flat Felony, is not consonant with the reason of this
case, for there by the arrest, his liberty is taken away, but in this case
there is no restraint, and it is very hard to make these cases agree together,
for words are as variable as the faces of men etc. Jones Justice agreed, and he
took it for a general rule, that where words carry a double sense, and there
is nothing to guide the sense more one way then another, there the words are
not actionable, for finis est legis dirimire lites And therefore if one faith
of another, that he has the Pox, because the sense is ambiguous, it shall be
interpreted in mitiori sensu, and therefore the words are not actionable, to if
one says of another, that he has stolen his Apples, or his Corn, because they
may be Apples from the tree, or Corn in the field, the taking whereof is no
felony: but it was adjudged in the Common Pleas, when I was there, that these
words viz. Thou art a Thief, and have stolen my Corn, are actionable, by reason
of the addition of the word Thief.

So that the speaking of words of a double sense are not actionable, unless ex
antecedentibus, or consequentibus, it can be collected that the words were
spoken in pejori sensu: Then the words in this case (I charge you with Felony)
peradventure intend such a Felony, for which he shall recover damages only,
which is Mayhem, and therefore no action will lie. These words (Thou art
forsworn) are not actionable, because forswearing may be in ordinary
communication, or in a Court of Justice, and it shall be taken in mitiori
sensu: but if he says, Thou art forsworn in a Court of Record, it is
actionable, and if in this case he had charged him with Felony, and said
further that he had stolen, etc. they would have been actionable, but here he
only charges him with Felony, which is an ambiguous word; and also it is no
direct affirmation, and therefore not actionable, and Judgment was given Quod
quaerens nil capiat per Billam.

The same Term in the same Court. Goods Case.
GOod and his Wife brought a Writ of Error upon a Judgment, given in the Court
of the Castle of Windsor, in an Action of Debt there, which was entered Trin.
Mich. 2 Car. Rot. 119. 120. and two Errors were assigned. 1. Because the
Judgment there is given in these words, ideo consideratum ad judicatum, and
assessum est, whereas it ought to be only by the word consideratum, and the
Judgment being the act of the Court, the Law is precise in it, and therefore
it has been resolved, that a Judgment given by the word (concessum) is not
good, but it ought to be by the word (consideratum) 2. The costs ex incremento,
are not said to be given, ad petitionem quaerentis, a^ it ought to be, for
beneficium nemini obt ruditur, and therefore it has been resolved in this
Court, that an alien born shall not have medietatem linguae, if he does not
request it, and as to this it was answered of the other side, that costs ought
always to be ass^ssed ex petitione quaerentis, and albeit here the request of
the Plaintiff was not precisely put to increase of the costs, yet at the
beginning of the Judgment it is said, Ideo ad petitionem quaerentis
cons^^eratum. etc. And that costs shall be given ex in cremento, so that this
request goes to all the Sentence, and by the unanimous opinion of all the
Court, the Judgment was reversed for both the Errourrs, for 1. Ideo
considerat. adjudicat. etc. is not good, the Judgment being the Act of the
Court, and the Law has appointed in what words it shall be given, and if other
words should be suffered, great incertainty and confusion would ensue, and
need^esse verbosity is the mother of difficulty. 2. The increase of costs ought
to be given ad petitionem quaerentis, and the words (ad petitionem quaerentis)
being misplaced* will not supply this defect, and Damages ex incremento is
always given ad petitionem quaerent. for as Bracton says, Omne judicium est
trinus actus trium personarum, judicis, actoris, and rei, and if in this case,
the usual form should not be observed, all would be in a confusion, and in as
much as the words are misplaced, it is as if they had not been put in at all,
and therefore void, like to a case put in Walsinghams case in Plowden, where an
averrement misplaced, is, as if there were none: In this case the Judgment was
reversed, and Trin. 3 Car. in B. B. intr. Hill 2 Car. Rot 849. a judgment was
reversed, because it was Ideo concessum and consideratum est.

FINIS.
THE TABLE OF THE PRINCIPAL MATTERS Contained in this BOOK.
A.
ACceptance 113 Of a second Lease determines the first 9 Action 179 Where the
Master shall be charged in an Action, for the act of the Servant, and e contr.
143 Action upon the case for words 35 36. 139. 140. 128, 129. 148. 150. 177.
180. 184. 187. 207. 210. Action upon the case 116. 144. for pulling down a
house, 15 Against an Officer for his neglect, 27 For laying too much weight,
whereby goods in another man's possession are lost 46 For stopping of a
Watercourse 166 Accessaries 107 Adjournment 33 Administration not avoided by
Averment, 37. granted by a Layman 160 Administrators Of the Wise shall have a
Lease settled on the Wife, not the Husband 106 Admittance 125 What the Heir may
do before admittance, 39 upon a surrender by a Disseisor 71 Addition Of matter
of Ornament, shall not avoid a grant 57 Advowson 23 Agreement 134 construed
according to the intention of the parties 182 Where to be joint, where several
204 Alien Where he may purchase, where not 36 Amendment 21. 128. 203, 204. Of
the Postea, and made according to the Panel, and the Record 102 Of a Record,
after the Record removed, and Error assigned 196 Annuity 87. 86 Pro consilio
135 Appropriation 144, 145 Appeal Of Mayhme 115 Plea in it 115 Assesment by the
major part of Parishoners shall bind the rest 197 Assumpsit 148. 182, 183. 193.
206 against an Executor of an Assumpsit in the life of the Testator 30, 31, 32.
general indebitat. Assumpsit 31 without consideration, is nudum pactum 178
What shall be a good consideration to ground Assumpsit 183, 184. Assise 111.
Assets, where a Lease for years to a Copyholder, in the hand of the Executor of
the Lessee shall be Assets 188 Assault and Battery 13 In what case it lies not
against a Constable 13 Assurance 19 Arbitrament 134 Of one part only not good
134 Avowry 163 Authority 1. 194 to enquire upon several Commissions. A joint
Inquisition cannot be returned 94 Averment 28. 158 Not to avoid a Record 29
Where it must be of Levant and Couchant by the party 201. and error. 201 Award
15, 16 B.
Bail, discharged by death of the Principals 186 How it shall relate, 132 In
the Kings Bench, and the Common Pleas, differ 132 When suspended by a Writ of
Error brought 186 Bar. 1. 112. 167. 114 Not good for want of traverse, and e
contr. 67, 68 Void for incertainty 204. 209 Bargain and Sale By word not good
48 To one and his Heir^ to the use of another, where void 81 Burglary 42. 52.
84 Brief: Of entry of an Advowson 22 C.
CErtiore 202. Of the names of the Jurors. To remove Indictment 144 Chattels 5
Charge 5. 86. 152. 196 Where avoided by entry for a condition broken 50, 51
Charitable uses 7. 139 Charters 17 Clergy Where allowable 52 Claim Where it
determines the Estate 64 and e contr. 64 Common recovery 6 Of Advowson 23 By
Tenant for life, a forfeiture 23 Need not be averred, 24, is a ba^ of all
Rights 10^ Certainty A thing uncertain made certain b^ matter ex post facto 18^
In performance of Covenants wh^ is to do the first act 19^ Where joint and
several 20^ 204 Condition 27. 53. 58. to pay money, payment shall be upon the
Land 11 Repugnant, 16. void for uncertainty 99 Given to the King by Attainder
19 Inseparable, and not to be transferred 19 Words conditional 25. 198. 199
Where payment of money in part by fraud, shall be no performance of it 100 When
to be performed to the Assignee, and not to the Heir, 100 Taken strictly 104.
within convenient time 199 Not to allien, and he devises if broken 106 Where
the word (paying) is a Condition, where a confidence 11 Where discharged by the
disability of the party to perform it 110. 198 Confirmation 105, 131 cannot
enlarge an Estate which is determinable upon a condition 52 Contingency 21
Contribution 155 Constable his Office, and authority 13 Contract 150. 209
Contempts and affronts before Courts of Justice, how punished. 288 Copyhold 125
Intailed, where good, where not, 34. 129 Granted by Disseisin, avoided by the
Disseisee 71 Copyholder Surrender of a Copyhold, cannot surrender before
admittance 128 Covenant 22. 109. 110. 146. 161. 198 200. 204 Lies not against
an Executor of a Lessee after Assignment 137 To pay money pro terris, and no
time limited Where conditional and Executory 196 County; where chargeable
repairing Bridges. 192 Counts 25, 57 Courts Ecclesiastical Court ought to take
notice of the Common Law 133 Costs De incremento must be ad petitionem
quaerentis 209 Cui in vita 39. 13 Custom which lays a burden upon
Parishioners not good 197 D
DAy where a precise day must be alleged, where not 201 Demand 58 In the
Disjunctive 23 Of a Message, or house how it ought to be 14, 15 Of a piece of
Land 13, 14 Of a Rent at what place 58 Of a Pension 23 Demurrer No repleader
after it 42 Demise of the King to be taken notice of 23 Deodand 136 Departure
3^ Deprivation 37 By the high Commissioners for speaking contumelious words
against the Book of Common Prayer 59 Debt 85. 98. 109. 173. 164 Where
maintainable by Granter of the Reversion against the Assign for a Rent arrear
55 Where it lies not for want of privity of contract ibid. Not maintainable by
the Successor of a Prebend, for Rent incurred in the time of the Predecessor
against an Executor 102 Not for an escape upon a mean process in vit. Testator.
189. 190 Devise 91. 52. 188 To charita^ble use 6. 7 Upon Trust 7 Of Gavel kind
Lands 10 Of a Rent 131 Construed according to the intent of the Devisor 131.
188 Of a sum of money 133 Is an ailenation 107 Dove-cotes 142 Descent of a
Copyholder does not take away Entry 35 E
EJectione firmae Upon a Lease of a Copyhold 38 Lies not of a water course 167
Lies for an executor 190. 191 De Messuagio five Tenemento void 203 Election
86. 153. 95 Enfant. Must answer by Guardian, but may bring Action by Attorney
130 Chargeable for necessarik 151 Error 24. 100. 102. 111. 109. 193. 114 130.
151. 203. 211 Where it is in the discretion of the Court to allow a Writ of
Error 132 Is. A supersedeas in it self 132 Escape 41. 85. 131 Estates To two
jointly and severally for their lives, they are Tenants in common 52 Determined
by death 86 Tail with Fee expectant 138 Where they shall pass by Livery, where
by Declaration of use 47. 49 Estoppel 115 Exchange 198 Execution, one in
Execution discharged by word 206 Where the party taken again upon a fresh suit
shall be again in Execution 41 Against Terrtenants 152 Executors shall take
benefit of a geral pardon 142 Infant Executor may take money Release and give
acquittance, 130 What Actions are maintainable by Error 189. 190. 191
Exemplification not pleadable 151 Exception. 1. of Trees 194. 195. Of profits
196 Of Woods, Copices, the soil is is excepted 146 Exposition of Statutes Of
Stat. 23. H. 8. of charitable uses 7 Of Stat. 14. Eliz. of Leases to Colleges
9 Of Stat. 13. Eliz: of 13. Eliz. of Fugitives 18 Of Stat. 32. and 34. H. 8 of
W^lls 89. 90 Of Stat. 27. Eliz. concerning Jesuits 93 Of 8. Eliz. cap 4. 107 Of
29. Eliz. cap. 4. 173 Of 22. H. 8. of reparation of Bridges. 192 Exposition of
words Of the word (Subject) 69 Of the word (Twelvemonth) 104 Scilicet 201
Postea 291 Extinguishment of a Lease 30 Where a Term or other thing shall be
extinguished as to one, and in Esse, to another 40 By unity of possession:
where, and where not 166, 167, 168, 169, 170, 171 F
FAlsifying Recovery 6 Fees For serving Executions 174, 175 Feoffments 103
Enrolled without Livery not good 8 To uses 3 Fine Imposed by the High
Commissioners 60 Fines levied 62, 108. 112 How Proclamations thereupon shall
enure 63 by a Disseison, where a good bar 65 not construed to other Lands, then
are mentioned in the Deed, which lead the uses 105 Forfeiture 84, 105 Of a
Copyholder for not paying his Fine. Of the Office of Leivtenant of a Forest
117 Formedon 112 Forests 117. 150 Fraud added 19 Fugitives 18 Freehold cannot
begin at a day to come 47 Franchises where forfeited by Nonclaim 181 G
GRants 86 Not void by addition of word Of Ornament 57 Where Acres in a Grant
shall be according to Statute Acres, or according to Estimation of the place 55
Of the Office of Keepership 116 Where it shall take effect by Livery, where by
Jurolist 49 Grants of the King. Where void 61 H
Heir Where he shall be charged, where not 152, 153 I
JMparlance Not before a Declaration is entered 150 Imprisonment Where
justifiable 13 Indictments 107, 134, 210 taken before Coroners, Where quashed
202 Upon the Statute of 8. H. 9. of forcible entry of copyhold Lands 205
Innkeepers 128 179 may detain a Horse until he be satisfied for his meat 127
Inquisition by the Coroner, in case of death must be Super visum corporis per
sacramentum proborem and legatum hominum, where not hood 210 Indiciments for
stopping a Church Way, where good 206 For being a Night-walker, where good 208
If good in one part, shall not be quashed Joy^ture where it may be waived 88
Joynt-t^nants ^6 Just^fication 13. 161 Justices of Peace, of Gaol delivery, and
Nisiprius, and their power 17 Judgm^nts 211. 212 by Nihil dicit 153 Where a
Judgment reversed, without Error brought, where no^ 181 Entered in the Book as
a Memorandum stayed by a subsequent order of Court 181 L.
L^ases 99. 106. 57 Void by Acceptance 9 Where in Reversion good 9 By Tenants
for life, or years, to begin after his death 96 By a Copyholder upon a License
105 Where determined without entry 27. 53. 64. Lessce for life without
impeachment ^f Wast may make a Lease, excepting the Trees 193 What interest he
has in them, ib. Lee^. 141 Libels Where a priva^e Letter is punishable a^ a
Libell 139 Legacies, not payable but upon demand 104 Livery of Se^sin 103 Where
words sp^ken upon the (...) do amount to a Livery 47 49 Li^^se (...)
cou^termandable 151 (...) a Cop^holder to make Lea^es 150 (...) (...) by
Bargain and Sale by word 48 Lunatic The Action must be brought in his name 141
M.
MAgis dignum continet in se minus 35 Mayhem 115 Market Overt Where the Sale
shall be good, where not 48 In a Scriviners Shop of Plate void 84 What kind of
Sale alters the property 84 Monstrans of Deeds 113 Melius Inquirendum Where it
shall issue, where not, and what to be found upon it 54 55 Misnosme 151 In
Grains 57 Of a Corporation 58 N.
NOtice 37. 151. Of a condition of payment, where to be given 12 Taken strongly
against the Party 12 Of one Sheriff to another Sheriff of the persons in
Execution 85. 86 Where requisite 136. 164 Nuisance 166 Errecting a Dove-coat by
a Freeholder no Nuisance 141 O.
OBligation 165. discharged by the act of God, 98 not to be avoided by the act
of the Obligor himself 40 To the use of a Feme Covert shall go to her
Administrator, not to the Husband 106 One forfeited, revived, and good 16
Office and Officers Where an Office is void, Ipso facto 28 Forfeited, and by
what act 117 Of his own wrong 149 Office Trove 25, 26 Where Lands shall be in
the King without Office 19 Relates 20 helps the King to the mean profits 30
Countervailes an Entry: And where no entry is requisite in case of a common
person There needs no Office found for the King 53 Where an Estate shall be
divested out of the King, without Office 63 Where not 64. without Return, or
Monstrans de droit 64 Oyer Where of a condition, where not 202 P.
PAtents 16 Where the Patentee shall take advantage of a condition, to avoid a
Lease 27 Void for the generality, in the Grant 61 Void notwithstanding the
words Ex certa sciaentia 61 Perjury, where not punishable 144 Pleadings 28. 42.
101. 109. 152. 150. 160. 163. 206. Void because double Plea. 113. 114 Null tiel
in rerum natura, no Plea in appeal of Mayhem 115 Perpetuities 97. not
tolerable 80 Plenarty, by Induction of a Layman 37. Binds not the King 133
Proviso, How to be construed 27 For a Limitation 53. 117. 118, 119 Where
repugnant and void 87 Possessio fratris 35 Principal and Accessare 107
Prisoners, Must be delivered over at the Gaol 85. 86 Presentation 132 Proofs:
What Proofs are to be allowed in the Ecclesiastical Court 59 Privileges Grant
by the Pope not allowable 157 Prescription 169 For Common for Vicinage, good
101 Difference betwixt it and Custom, and how to be taxed 201 ^roperty 38 What
kind of Sale alters the property 84 ^rohibition 59. 126. 159. 197 For a Seat in
the Church 140 Several Prohibitions in one Cause 156 Prerogative 26 Q.
QVi^ juris clamat 63 (...) warrant^ 150. 180 Quare Impedit, by an Executor for
a disturbance in vite Testator. 189. 190, 191 R.
RAvishment of Ward by an Executor 190. 191 Recovery 6. 5 Relea^es 28. 132
Ex^cuted, where avoided by Proviso 16 Of all demands will discha^ge a rest in
^uturo 136 Relation 12 Of a Ba^l 132 Of Entry of Judgment 132 Return of the
Sheriff of a Capias, upon a day not Dies faci. good 205 Request 160. 211. 212
Upon payment, upon a Contract, is not necessary 211. 212 Remainder 97 in Fee
not good upon a Lease for years 4. 82 Must take effect when the particular
Estate determines for life without impeachment of Wast, whether he may cut
Trees du^ing the life of Tenant for life, 196. 74 Rents Rent and Pension all
one in a Demand in a ^ecovery 23 Where the Executor shall have the rent upon a
Lease of the W^ves land 145 Restitution Of an Alderman to his place 134 Of one
put out of his Office 176 Reservat^on 145, 195. how construed 17 Revivor 167 S.
SAving^ in an Act of Pa^liament how construed 17 Scire (...) L^es ^^t against
the Bail till a Capia^ be awarded of the Principal, 186 Seals 161 Scandalum
Magnatum 66 Sheriffs: O^e Sheriff must deliver over the Prisoners, to the other
by Inde^ture 85. 86 Surplusage shall not abate a Writ 24 Surrender 9. 31. 84.
110. 125 129 Of the Husband of the land of the Wife, no discontinuance 38 39 Of
an Infant Copyholder void 39 Of an Alderman of his place 134 Of Tenant for life
in remainder good without Deed 137 138 T.
TAles where awarded of Aliens 36 Tender where not good to avoid a condition 20
Title where must be made 1, 2 Trusts, not abridged 8 Their difference from Uses
77 Traverse 1. 101. 103. not necessary where there are two Affirmatives, but
where they do not agree 67 Traverse upon a Traverse 101 Circumstances not
traversable 161 Treason 122 Trial Of the same person, upon another Indictment,
after Attainder upon a former Indictment 107 Transporting Corn 149 Trespass
161 Where Vi and armis, e contr. 192 Tithes 140 Where discharged by
Prescription, or Privilege 156 De animalibus inutilibus and animalibus
utrilibus, and the difference 197 Of Sheep and their pasturing wool, etc. 157 V.
VErdict 19 void 202 Found for the De^endants, because no (...) ^^tred for one
of them 145 Volenti non fit injuria 9 Use and Uses What a Use is 71 How to be
construed 3 Not to be abridged 8 Void upon a tender 18 Raised by word upon a
good consideration, where good, where not 47, 49 Rai^ed upon Contracts 48
Considerations to raise Uses 48 49 A bare Covenant writing without
consideration, will not raise an Use 50 What persons cannot stand seized to
Uses 72 Uses contingent not executed by the Statute of 27. H. 8. 72 U^es
contingent destroyed by a Feoffment 72 Uses grounded upon fraud 77 Use cannot
r^^e out of a U^e 81 Uses in contingency barred by a Release of the Feoffees 83
Use upon a Bargain and Sale for years passes without inrolement of the Deed 38
Use amerced upon a Fine upon render without a Deed 105 W.
WAger of Law 127 Words Where the King shall have a third part of the Land of
the Ward, and of other land settled upon a marriage 54 Wast 24. 25 47 Damages in
Wast 24 Warrants When a Warrant is returned upon Record, in case of the King,
it is as strong as an Office found 20. 28, 29 Warranty does bind an Infant, if
his Entry is not lawful 71 cannot enlarge an Estate 138 Wills 152 Words, which
make a condition in Wills 8 Writ of enquiry of damages 24 Where not abated 24
Original shall be taken as they are written 101

FINIS.

