NATURAL MAGIC: in xx Books by JOHN BAPTIST PORTA a Neopolitane:

R. Gaywood fecit Land: 1658

I. BAPT: PORTA

Fire: Air: Art: Nature: Earth:Water:



NATURAL MAGIC BY John Baptista Porta, A NEAPOLITANE: IN TWENTY BOOKS: 1 Of
the Causes of Wonderful things. 2 Of the Generation of Animals. 3 Of the
Production of new Plants. 4 Of increasing Household Stuff. 5 Of changing Metals.
6 Of counterfeiting Gold. 7 Of the Wonders of the Lodestone. 8 Of strange
Cures. 9 Of Beautifying Women. 10 Of Distillation. 11 Of Perfuming. 12 Of
Artificial Fires. 13 Of Tempering Steel. 14 Of Cookery. 15 Of Fishing, Fowling,
Hunting, etc. 16 Of Invisible Writing. 17 Of Strange Glasses. 18 Of Statick
Experiments. 19 Of Pneumatick Experiments. 20 Of the Chaos.
Wherein are set forth All the RICHES and DELIGHTS Of the NATURAL SCIENCES.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Young, and Samuel Speed; and are to be sold at the
three Pigeons, and at the Angel in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1658.

The Preface to the READER.
COURTEOUS READER,
IF this Work made by me in my Youth, when I was hardly fifteen years old, was
so generally received and with so great applause, that it was forthwith
translated into many Languages, as Italian, French, Spanish, Arabic; and
passed through the hands of incomparable men: I hope that now coming forth from
me that an fifty years old, it shall be more dearly entertained. For when I saw
the first fruits of my Labors received with so great Alacrity of mind, I was
moved by these good Omens; And therefore have adventured to send it once more
forth, but with an Equipage more Rich and Noble.

From the first time it appeared, it is now thirty five years, And (without any
derogation from my Modesty be it spoken) if ever any man labored earnestly to
disclose the secrets of Nature, it was I: For with all my Mind and Power, I
have turned over the Monuments of our Ancestors, and if they writ anything that
was secret and concealed, that I enrolled in my Catalogue of Rarities.
Moreover, as I traveled through France, Italy, and Spain, I consulted with all
Libraries, Learned men, and Artificers, that if they knew any thing that was
curious, I might understand such Truths as they had proved by there long
experience. Those places and men, I had not the happiness to see, I writ
Letters too, frequently, earnestly desiring them to furnish me with those
Secrets, which they esteemed Rare; not failing with my Entreaties, Gifts,
Commutations, Art, and Industry. So that whatsoever was Notable, and to be
desired through the whole World, for Curiosities and Excellent Things, I have
abundantly found out, and therewith Beautified and Augmented these, my
Endeavors, in NATURAL MAGIC, wherefore by most earnest Study, and constant
Experience, I did both night and day endeavor to know whether what I heard or
read, was true or false, that I might leave nothing unassayed: for I often
thought of that Sentence of Cicero, It is fit that they who desire for the good
of mankind, to commit to memory things most profitable, well weighed and
approved, should make trial of all things. To do this I have spared no Pain nor
Cost, but have expended my narrow Fortunes in a large magnificence.

Nor were the Labors, Diligence, and Wealth, of most famous Nobles,
Potentates, Great and Learned Men, wanting to assist me; Especially (whom I
name for his Honor) the Illustrious and most Reverend Cardinal of Estings: All
which did afford there Voluntary and Bountiful Help to this Work. I never
wanted also at my House an Academy of curious Men, who for the trying of these
Experiments, cheerfully disbursed their Moneys, and employed their utmost
Endeavors, in assisting me to Compile and Enlarge this Volume, which with so
great Charge, Labor, and Study, I had long before provided.

Having made an end thereof, I was somewhat unwilling to suffer it to appear to
the public View of all Men (I being now old, and trussing up my Fardel) for
there are many most excellent Things fit for the Worthiest Nobles, which should
ignorant men (that were never bred up in the sacred Principles of Philosophy)
come to know, they would grow contemptible, and be undervalued; As Plato says,
to Dionysius, They seem to make Philosophy ridiculous, who endeavor to
prostitute Her Excellence to profane and illiterate Men.

Also here are conceived many hurtful and mischievous things, wherewith wicked
and untoward men may mischief others; What then must I do? let Envy be driven
away, and a desire to benefit Posterity, vanquish all other thoughts: The most
Majestic Wonders of Nature are not to be concealed, that in them we may admire
the Mighty Power of God, his wisdom, his Bounty, and therein Reverence and
Adore him. Whatsoever these are, I set them before you, that you may discern my
Diligence and Benevolence toward you; Had I withheld these Things from the
World, I fear I should have undergone the reproach of a wicked man; for (Cicero
derives this from Plato) we are not born for our selves alone, but our Country
will challenge a part, our Parents and our Friends require their parts also
from us. Wherefore such Things as hitherto lay hid in the Bosom of wondrous
Nature, shall come to light, from the Storehouses of the most ingenious Men,
without fraud, or deceit.

I Discover those Things that have been long hid, either by the Envy or
Ignorance of others, Nor shall you here find empty Trifles, or Riddles, or
bare Authorities of other men.

I did not think fit to omit any thing by erring Honestly, or following the
best Leaders, But such as are Magnificent and most Excellent, I have veiled by
the Artifice of Words, by Transposition and Depression of them; And such Things
as are hurtful and mischievous, I have written obscurely; yet not so, but that
an ingenious Reader may unfold it, and the wit of one that will thoroughly
search may comprehend it.

I have added some things that are Profitable, and rarely Known, because they
are most true. Sometimes from Things most Known, and meanly esteemed, we ascend
to Things most Profitable and High, which the Mind can scarce reach unto:
One's Understanding cannot comprehend High and Sublime Things, unless it stand
firm on most true Principles. The Mathematical Sciences, rise from some trivial
and common Axioms, to most Sublime Demonstrations. Wherefore I thought it
better to Write true Things and Profitable, than false Things that are great.
True Things be they never so small, will give occasions to Discover greater
things by them. The infinite multitude of Things is incomprehensible, and more
than a man may be able to contemplate.

In our Method I shall observe what our Ancestors have said; Then I shall show
by my own Experience, whether they be true or false, and last of all my own
Inventions, That Learned Men may see how exceedingly this later Age has
surpassed Antiquity.

Many men have written what they never saw, nor did they know the Simples that
were the Ingredients, but they set them down from other men's traditions, by an
inbred and importunate desire to add something, so Errors are propagated by
succession, and at last grow infinite, that not so much as the Prints of the
former remain. That not only the Experiment will be difficult, but a man can
hardly read them without laughter.

Moreover, I pass by many men, who have written Wonders to be delivered to
Posterity, promising Golden Mountains, yet Write otherwise then they thought.
Hence most ingenious men, and desirous to learn, are detained for a very long
time (and when they despair of obtaining what they seek for, they find that
they spent their time, pains, and charge in vain) and so driven to desparation,
they are forced to repent by leisure: Others grown wise by other men's harms,
learn to hate those Things before they know them.

I have divided these Secrets into several Classes, that every man may find
what he likes best.

Lastly, I should willingly pass by the offending of your Ears, if I had no
care to refell the Calumnies of detractors and envious men, that most
immo^^esily wound me, calling me a Sorcerer, a Conjurer, which names from my
tender Youth I have abhorred. Indeed I always held myself to be a man subject
to Errors and Infirmities; therefore desired the assistances of many Learned
men, and that if I had not faithfully interpreted, they would reprove me; But
what I always feared came to pass, that I should fall into the hands of some
vile and hateful men, who by doing injury to others, justly or unjustly, labor
to win the popular and base Approbation, and Applause of the Vulgar, by whose
venomed Teeth, those that are wounded do not consume, but by retorting the
venom back upon them, they overthrow their own Honor.

A certain Frenchman in his Book called Daemonomania, Terms me a Magician, a
Conjurer, and thinks this Book of mine, long since Printed, worthy to be burnt,
because I have written the Fairies Ointment, which I set forth only in
detestation of the frauds of Devils and Witches; That which comes by Nature is
abused by their superstition, which I borrowed from the Books of the most
commendable Divines. What have I offended herein, that they should call me a
Conjurer? But when I enquired of many Noble and Learned Frenchmen, that were
pleased to Honor me with their Visits; what that man was, they answered that
he was an Heretic, and that he had escaped from being cast headlong from a
Tower, upon Saint Bartholomew his day, which is the time appointed for the
destruction of such wicked men. In the mean time I shall desire the great and
good God (as it becomes a Noble and Christian man to do) that he may be
converted to the Catholic Faith, and may not be condemned whilst he lives.

Another Frenchman who unworthily reviled all the Learned men of his Age, joins
me amongst them, and holds, that only three Physicians, that are his Friends,
are Praiseworthy, as the most Learned of all men of our Times; and amongst
them he reckons up himself; for the Book is published in his Name, it is a
wonder what Inventions that man has found out to win praise, who having no man
to commend him, nor is he worthy commendations, yet he has undertaken to
commend himself. I pass over other men of the same temper, who affirm that I am
a Witch and a Conjurer, whereas I never Writ here nor elsewhere, what is not
contained within the bounds of Nature.

Wherefore, Studious Readers, accept my long Labors, that cost me much Study,
Travel, Expense, and much Inconvenience, with the same Mind that I publish
them; and remove all Blindness and Malice, which are wont to dazzle the sight of
the Mind, and hinder the Truth; weigh these Things with a right Judgment,
when you try what I have Written, for finding both Truth and Profit, you will
(it may be) think better of my Pains. Yet I am assured there will be many
ignorant people, void of all serious Matters, that will Hate and Envy these
Things, and will Rashly pronounce, That some of these Experiments are not only
false, but impossible to be done; And whilst they strive by Arguments and vain
Disputes, to overthrow the Truth, they betray there own ignnorance: Such men,
as vile, are to be driven from the Limits of our NATURAL MAGIC: For they that
believe not Natures Miracles, do, after a manner, endeavor to abolish
Philosophy. If I have over-passed some Things, or not spoken so Properly of
them, as I might; I know there is nothing so Beautiful, but it may be Adorned;
Nor so Full, but it may be Augmented.

J. B. P.

The FIRST BOOK OF Natural Magic: Wherein are searched out the Causes of
things which produce wonderful Effects.
CHAP. I.
What is meant by the name of Magic.
POrphyry and Apuleius, great Platonicks, in an Oration made in the defense of
Magic, do witness, that Magic took her name and original from Persia. Tully,
in his book of Divination, says, that in the Persian language, a Magician is
nothing else but one that expounds and studies divine things; and it is the
general name of Wisemen in that country. S. Jerome writing to Paulinus, says
that Apollonius Tyanaeus was a Magician, as the people thought; or a
Philosopher, as the Pythagoreans esteemed him. Pliny says, that it is received
for a certainty among most Authors, that Magic was begun in Persia by
Zoroastres the son of Orimasius; or, as more curious Writers hold, by another
Zoroastres, surnamed Proconnesius, who lived a little before. The first Author
that ever wrote of Magic, was Osthanes, who going with Xerxes king of Persia
in the war which he made against Greece, did scatter by the way as it were the
seeds and first beginnings of this wonderful Art, infecting the world with it
wheresoever he came; insomuch that the Grecians did not only greedily desire
this knowledge, but they were even mad after it. So then Magic is taken
amongst all men for Wisdom, and the perfect knowledge of natural things: and
those are called Magicians, whom the Latins call Wisemen, the Greeks call
Philosophers, of Pythagoras only, the first of that name, as Diogenes writes:
the Indians call them Brackmans, in their own tongue; but in Greek they call
them Gymnosophists, as much to say as naked Philosophers: the Babylonians and
Assyrians call them Chaldeans, of Chaldaea a county in Asia: the Celtes in
France call them Druids, Bards, and Semnothites: the Egyptians call them
Priests; and the Cabalists call them Prophets. And so in diverse countries
Magic has diverse names. But we find that the greatest part of those who were
best seen into the nature of things, were excellent Magicians: as, amongst the
Persians, Zoroastres the son of Orimasius, whom we spoke of before; amongst the
Romans, Numa Pompilius; Thespion, amongst the Gymnosophists; Zamolxis, amongst
the Thracians; Abbaris, amongst the Hyperboreans; Hermes, amongst the
Egyptians: and Budda, amongst the Babylonians. Beside these, Apuleius reckons
up Carinondas, Damigeron, Hismoses, Apollonius, and (...) danus, who all
followed Zoroastres and Osthanes.

CHAP. II.
What is the Nature of Magic.
THere are two sorts of Magic: the one is infamous, and unhappie, because it
has to do with foul spirits, and consists of Enchantments and wicked
Curiosity; and this is called Sorcery; an art which all learned and good men
derest; neither is it able to yield any truth of Reason or Nature, but stands
merely upon fancies and imaginations, such as vanish presently away, and leave
nothing behind them; as Jamblichus writes in his book concerning the mysteries
of the Egyptians. The other Magic is natural; which all excellent wise men do
admit and embrace, and worship with great applause; neither is there any thing
more highly esteemed, or better thought of, by men of learning. The most noble
Philosophers that ever were, Pythagoras, Empedocles, Democrites, and Plato,
forsook their own countries, and lived abroad as exiles and banished men,
rather then as strangers; and all to search out and to attain this knowledge;
and when they came home again, this was the Science which they professed, and
this they esteemed a profound mystery. They that have been most skilfu^ in
dark and hidden points of learning, do call this knowledge the very highest
point, and the perfection of natural Science; insomuch that if they could find
out or devise amongst all natural Sciences, any one thing more excellent or
more wonderful then another, that they would still call by the name of Magic.
Others have named it the practical part of natural Philosophy, which produces
her effects by the mutual and fit application of one natural thing unto
another. The Platonicks, as Plotinus imitating Mercurius, writes in his book of
Sacrifice and Magic, makes it to be a Science whereby inferior things are
made subject to superiors, earthly are subdued to heavenly; and by certain
pretty allurements, it fetches forth the properties of the whole frame of the
world. Hence the Egyptians termed Nature her self a Magician, because she has
an alluring power to draw like things by their likes; and this power, say they,
consists in love: and the things that were so drawn and brought together by the
affinity of Nature, those (they said) were drawn by Magic. But I think that
Magic is nothing else but the survey of the whole course of Nature. For,
whilst we consider the Heavens, the Stars, the Elements, how they are moved,
and how they are changed, by this means we find out the hidden secrecies of
living creatures, of plants, of metals, and of their generation and corruption;
so that this whole Science seems merely to depend upon the view of Nature, as
afterward we shall see more at large. This does Plato seem to signify in his
Alcibiades, where he says, That the Magic of Zoroastres, was nothing else, in
his opinion, but the knowledge and study of Divine things, wherewith the Kings
Sons of Persia, amongst other princely qualities, were endued; that by the
example of the Commonwealth of the whole world, they also might learn to
govern their own Commonwealth. And Tully, in his book of Divinations, says,
That amongst the Persians no man might be a King, unless he had first learned
the Art of Magic: for as Nature governs the world by the mutual agreement and
disagreement of the creatures; after the same sort they also might learn to
govern the Commonwealth committed unto them. This Art, I say, is full of much
virtue, of many secret mysteries; it opens unto us the properties and
qualities of hidden things, and the knowledge of the whole course of Nature;
and it reaches us by the agreement and the disagreement of things, either so
to s^nder them, or else to lay them so together by the mutual and fit applying
of one thing to another, as thereby we do strange works, such as the vulgar
sort call miracles, and such as men can neither well conceive, nor sufficiently
admire. For this cause, Magic was wont to flourish in Aethiopia and India,
where was great store of herbs and stones, and such other things as were fit
for these purposes. Wherefore, as many of you as come to behold Magic, must be
persuaded that the works of Magic are nothing else but the works of Nature,
whose dutiful handmaid Magic is. For if she find any want in the affinity of
Nature, that it is not strong enough, she does supply such defects at
convenient seasons, by the help of vapors, and by observing due measures and
proportions; as in Husbandry, it is Nature that brings forth corn and herbs,
but it is Art that prepares and makes way for them. Hence was it that Antipho
the Poet said, That we overcome those things by Art, wherein Nature does
overcome us; and Plotinus calls a Magician such a one as works by the help of
Nature only, and not by the help of Art. Superstitious, profane, and wicked
men have nothing to do with this Science; her gate is shut against them:
neither do we judge them worthy to be driven away from this profession only,
but even out of Cities, and out of the world, to be grievously punished, and
utterly destroyed. But now, what is the (...), and what must be the learning of
this professor, we purpose to (...) in that which flows.

CHAP. III.
The Instruction of a Magician, and what manner of man a Magician ought to be.
NOw it is meet to instruct a Magician, both what he must know, and what he
must observe; that being sufficiently instructed every way, he may bring very
strange and wonderful things to pass. Seeing Magic, as we showed before, is a
practical part of Natural Philosophy, therefore it behooves a Magician, and one
that aspires to the dignity of that profession, to be an exact and a very
perfect Philosopher. For Philosophy teaches, what are the effects of fire,
earth, air, and water, the principal matter of the heavens; and what is the
cause of the flowing of the Sea, and of the divers-coloured Rain-bowe; and of
the loud Thunder, and of Comets, and fiery lights that appear by night, and of
Earthquakes; and what are the beginnings of Gold and of Iron; and what is the
whole witty force of hidden Nature. Then also he must be a skilful Physician:
for both these Sciences are very like and near together; and Physic, by
creeping in under color of Magic, has purchased favor amongst men. And
surely it is a great help unto us in this kind: for it teaches mixtures and
temperatures, and so shows us how to compound and lay things together for such
purposes. Moreover, it is required of him, that he be an Herbalist, not only
able to discern common Simples, but very skilful and sharp-sighted in the
nature of all plants: for the uncertain names of plants, and their near
likeness of one to another, so that they can hardly be discerned, has put us
to much trouble in some of our works and experiments. And as there is no
greater inconvenience to any Artificer, then not to know his tools that he must
work with: so the knowledge of plants is so necessary to this profession, that
indeed it is all in all. He must be as well seen also in the nature of Metals,
Minerals Gems and Stones. Furthermore, what cunning he must have in the art of
Distillation, which follows and resembles the showers and dew of heaven, as the
daughter the mother; I think no man will doubt of it: for it yields daily very
strange inventions, and most witty devices, and shows how to find out many
things profitable for the use of man: As for example, to draw out of things
dewy vapors, unsavory and gross sents or spirits, clots, and gummy or slimy
humors; and that intimate essence which lurks in the inmost bowels of things,
to fetch it forth, and sublimate it, that it may be of the greater strength.
And this he must learn to do, not after a rude and homely manner, but with
knowledge of the causes and reasons thereof. He must also know the Mathematical
Sciences, and especially Astrology; for that shows how the Stars are moved in
the heavens, and what is the cause of the darkning of the Moon; and how the
Sun, that golden planet, measures out the parts of the world, and governs it by
twelve Signs: for by the sundry motions and aspects of the heavens, the
celestial bodies are very beneficial to the earth; and from thence many things
receive both active and passive powers, and their manifold properties: the
difficulty of which point long troubled the Platonicks minds, how these
inferior things should receive influence from heaven. Moreover, he must be
skilful in the Optics, that he may know how the sight may be deceived, and how
the likeness of a vision that is seen in the water, may be seen hanging without
in the air, by the help of certain Glasses of diverse fashions; and how to make
one see that plainly which is a great way off, and how to throw fire very far
from us: upon which sleights, the greatest part of the secrecies of Magic does
depend. These are the Sciences which Magic takes to her self for servants and
helpers; and he that knows not these, is unworthy to be named a Magician. He
must be a skilful workman, both by natural gifts, and also by the practice of
his own hands: for knowledge without practice and workmanship, and practice
without knowledge, are nothing worth; these are so linked together, that the
one without the other is but vain, and to no purpose. Some there are so apt for
these enterprises, even by the gifts of Nature, that God may seem to have made
them hereunto. Neither yet do I speak this, as if Art could not perfect any
thing: for I know that good things may be made better, and there are means to
remedy and help foward that which lacks perfection. First, let a man consider
and prepare things providently and skilfully, and then let him fall to work,
and do nothing unadvisedly. This I thought good to speak of, that if at any
time the ignorant be deceived herein, he may not lay the fault upon us, but
upon his own unskilfulness: for this is the infirmity of the scholar, and not
of the teacher: for if rude and ignorant men shall deal in these matters, this
Science will be much discredited, and those strange effects will be accounted
haphazard, which are most certain, and follow their necessary cause. If you
would have your works appear more wonderful, you must not let the cause be
known: for that is a wonder to us, which we see to be done, and yet know not
the cause of it: for he that knows the causes of a thing done, does not so
admire the doing of it; and nothing is counted unusual and rare, but only so
far forth as the causes thereof are not known. Aristotle in his books of
Handy-trades, says, that master builders frame and make their tools to work
with; but the principles thereof, which move admiration, those they conceal. A
certain man put out a candle; and putting it to a stone or a wall, lighted it
again; and this seemed to be a great wonder: but when once they perceived that
he touched it with brimstone, then, says Galen, it ceased to seem a wonder. A
miracle, says Ephesius, is dissolved by that wherein it seemed to be a
miracle. Lastly, the professor of this Science must also be rich: for if we
lack money, we shall hardly work in these cases: for it is not Philosophy that
can make us rich; we must first be rich, that we may play the Philosophers. He
must spare for no charges, but be prodigal in seeking things out; and while he
is busy and careful in seeking, he must be patient also, and think it not much
to recall many things; neither must he spare for any pains: for the secrets of
Nature are not revealed to lazy and idle persons. Wherefore Epicharmus said
very well, that men purchase all things at Gods hands by the price of their
labor. And if the effect of thy work be not answerable to my description, thou
must know that thy self have failed in some one point or another; for I have
set down these things briefly, as being made for wrtty and skilful workmen, and
not for rude and young beginners.

CHAP. IV.
The opinions of the ancient Philosophers touching the causes of strange
operations; and first, of the Elements.
THose effects of Nature which oft-times we behold, have so employed the
ancient Philosophers minds in the searching forth of their causes, that they
have taken great pains, and yet were much deceived therein; insomuch that
diverse of them have held diverse opinions: which it shall not be amiss to
relate, before we proceed any farther. The first sort held that all things
proceed from the Elements, and that these are the first beginnings of things;
the fire, according to Hippasus Metapontinus, and Heraclides Ponticus; the air,
according to Diogenes Apolloniates, and Anaximenes; and the water, according to
Thales Milesius. These therefore they held to be the very original and first
seeds of Nature; even the Elements, simple and pure bodies (whereas the
Elements that now are, be but counterfeits and bastards to them; for they are
all changed, every one of them being more or less meddled with one another)
those, say they, are the material principles of a natural body, and they are
moved and altered by continual succession of change; and they are so wrapped up
together within the huge cope of heaven, that they fill up this whole space of
the world which is situate beneath the Moon; for the fire being the lightest
and purest Element, has gotten up aloft, and chose it self the highest room,
which they call the element of fire. The next Element to this is the Air, which
is somewhat more weighty then the fire, and it is spread abroad in a large and
huge compass; and passing through all places, does make men's bodies framable to
her temperature, and is gathered together sometimes thick into dark clouds,
sometimes thinner into mists, and so is resolved. The next to these is the
water; and then the last and lowest of all, which is scraped and compacted
together out of the purer Elements, and is called the Earth; a thick and gross
substance, very solid, and by no means to be pierced through: so that there is
no solid and firm body but has earth in it, as also there is no vacant space
but has air in it. This Element of earth is situate in the middle and center
of all, and is round beset with all the rest; and this only stands still and
unmovable, whereas all the rest are carried with a circular motion round about
it. But Hippon and Critias held that the vapors of the Elements were the first
beginnings: Parmenides held that their qualities were the principles; for all
things (says he) consist of cold and heat. The Physicians hold that all things
consist of four qualities, hear, cold, moisture, drouth, and of their
predominancy when they meet together; for every Element does embrace as it were
with certain arms his neighbour-Element which is next situate to him; and yet
they have also contrary and sundry qualities whereby they differ: for the
wisdom of nature has framed this workmanship of the world by due and set
measure, and by a wonderful fitness and convenience of one thing with another;
for whereas every Element had two qualities, wherein it agreed with some, and
disagreed with other Elements, nature has bestowed such a double quality upon
every one, as finds in other two her like, which she cleaves unto: as for
example, the air and the fire; this is hot and dry, that is hot and moist: now
dry and moist are contraries, and thereby fire and air disagree; but because
either of them is hot, thereby they are reconciled. So the Earth is cold and
dry, and the water cold and moist; so that they disagree, in that the one is
moist, the other dry; but yet are reconciled, in as much as they are both cold;
otherwise they could hardly agree. Thus the fire by little and little is
changed into air, because either of them is hot; the air into the water,
because either of them is moist; the water into the earth, because either of
them is cold; and the earth into fire, because either of them is dry: and so
they succeed each other after a most provident order. From thence also they are
turned back again into themselves, the order being inverted, and so they are
made mutually of one another: for the change is easy in those that agree in
any one common quality; as fire and air be easily changed into each other, by
reason of heat: but where either of the qualities are opposite in both, as in
fire and water, there this change is not so easy. So then, heat, cold,
moisture and drouth, are the first and principal qualities, in as much as they
proceed immediately from the Elements, and produce certain secondary effects.
Now two of them, namely heat and cold, are active qualities, fitter to be doing
themselves, then to suffer of others: the other two, namely moisture and
drouth, are passive; not because they are altogether idle, but because they
follow and are preserved by the other. There are certain secondary qualities,
which attend as it were upon the first; and these are said to work in a second
sort; as to soften, to ripen, to resolve, to make less or thinner: as when
heat works into any mixed body, it brings out that which is unpure, and so
whilst it strives to make it fit for his purpose, that it may be more simple,
the body becomes thereby smaller and thinner: so cold does preserve, bind,
and congeal; drouth does thicken or harden, and makes uneven; for when there is
great store of moisture in the utter parts, that which the drouth is not able
to consume, it hardens, and so the utter parts become rugged; for that part
where the moisture is gone, sinking down, and the other where it is hardened,
rising up, there must needs be great roughness and ruggedness: so moisture
does augment, corrupt, and for the most part works one thing by it self, and
another by some accident; as by ripening, binding, expelling, and such like, it
brings forth milk, urine, monthly flowers, and sweat; which the Physicians
call the third qualities, that do so wait upon the second, as the second upon
the first: and sometime they have their operations in some certain parts, as to
strengthen the head, to succor the reins; and these, some call fourth
qualities. So then, these are the foundations, as they call them, of all mixed
bodies, and of all wonderful operations: and whatsoever experiments they
proved, the causes hereof rested (as they supposed) and were to be found in the
Elements and their qualities. But Empedocles Agrigentinus not thinking that the
Elements were sufficient for this purpose, added unto them moreover concord and
discord, as the causes of generation and corruption: There be four principal
seeds or beginnings of all things; Jupiter, that is to say, fire; Pluto, that
is to say, earth; Juno, that is to say, air; and Nestis, that is to say, water:
all these sometimes love and concord knits together in one, and sometimes
discord does sunder them and make them fly apart. This concord and discord,
said he, are found in the Elements by reason of their sundry qualities wherein
they agree and disagree: yea, even in heaven it self, as Jupiter and Venus love
all Planets save Mars and Saturn, Venus agrees with Mars, whereas no Planet
else agrees with him. There is also another disagreement amongst them, which
arises from the oppositions and elevations of their houses: for even the
twelve signs are both at concord and at discord among themselves, as Manilius
the Poet has showed.

CHAP. V.
That diverse operations of Nature proceed from the essential forms of things.
ALl the Peripatericks, and most of the latter Philosophers could not see how
all operations should proceed from those causes which the Ancients have set
down; for they find that many things work quite contrary to their qualities,
and therefore they have imagined that there is some other matter in it, and
that it is the power and properties of essential forms. But now that all
things may be made more plain, we must consider that it will be a great help
unto us, for the making and finding out of strange things, to know what that is
from whence the virtues of any thing do proceed: that so we may be able to
discern and distinguish one thing from another, without confounding all order
of truth. Whereas one and the same compound yields many effects of different
kinds, as we shall find in the process of this Book, yet every man confesses
that there is but one only original cause therein that produces all these
effects. And seeing we are about to open plainly this original cause, we must
begin a little higher. Every natural substance (I mean a compound body) is
composed of matter and form, as of her principles: neither yet do I exclude the
principal qualities of the Elements from doing their part herein; for they also
concur, and make up the number of three principles: for when the Elements meet
together in the framing of any compound, the same compound retains certain
excellent and chief qualities of theirs; whereof though all help together to
bring forth any effects, yet the superior and predominant qualities are held
to do all, because they make the power of their inferior; to become theirs:
for unless some were stronger then other, their virtues could not be
perceived. Neither yet is the matter quite destitute of all force: I speak
here, not of the first and simple matter, but of that which consists of the
substances and properties of the Elements, especially the two passible
elements, the Earth and the Water: and those which Aristotle calls sometimes
secondary qualities, sometimes bodily effects, we may term them the functions
and powers of the matter; as thinness, thickness, roughness, smoothness,
easiness to be cleft, and such like, are altogether in the power of the
matter, howbeit they proceed all from the Elements. Therefore to avoid
confusion, it is better to hold that the effects of the qualities come of the
temperature or mixture of the Elements, but the effects of the matter from the
consistence or substances of them. But the Form has such singular virtue, that
whatsoever effects we see, all of them first proceed from thence; and it has a
divine beginning: and being the chiefest and most excellent part, absolute of
her self, she uses the rest as her instruments, for the more speedy and
convenient dispatch of her actions: and he which is not addicted nor accustomed
to such contemplations, supposes that the temperature and the matter works all
things, whereas indeed they are but as it were instruments whereby the form
works: for a workman that uses a graving Iron in the carving of an Image,
does not use it as though that could work, but for his own furtherance in the
quicker and better performance thereof. Therefore whereas there are three
efficient and working causes in every compound, we must not suppose any of them
to be idle, but all at work, some more and some less; but above all other, the
form is most active and busy strengthening the rest; which surely would be to
no purpose if the form should fail them, in as much as they are not capable of
heavenly influences. And though the form of it self be not able to produce such
effects, but the rest also must do their parts, yet are they neither confounded
together, not yet become diverse things; but they are so knit among themselves,
that one stands in need of another help. He that scans these things well by
the search of reason, shall find no obscurity herein, nor confound the
knowledge of the truth. Wherefore that force which is called the property of a
thing, proceeds not from the temperature, but from the very form it self.

CHAP. VI.
Whence the Form comes; and of the chain that Homer feigned, and the rings
that Plato mentions.
So then, the form, as it is the most excellent part, so it comes from a most
excellent place; even immediately from the highest heavens, they receiving it
from the intelligences, and these from God himself: and the same original which
the Form has, consequently the properties also have. Zeno Citticus holds two
beginnings, God and Matter; the one of them active or efficient, the other the
passive principle. For God, as Plato thinks, when by the Almighty power of his
Deity he had framed in due measure and order the heavens, the stars, and the
very first principles of things the Elements, which wast away by reason of so
many generations and corruptions, did afterward by the power of the Heavens
and Elements, ordain the kinds of living creatures, plants, and things without
life, every one in their degree, that they might not be of the same estate and
condition as the heavens are; and he enjoined inferior things to be ruled of
their superiors, by a set Law, and poured down by heavenly influence upon
every thing his own proper Form, full of much strength and activity: and that
there might be a continual increase amongst them, he commanded all things to
bring forth seed, and to propagate and derive their Form wheresoever should be
fit matter to receive it. So then, seeing that forms come from heaven, they
must needs be counted Divine and heavenly things: for such is the pattern and
the most excellent cause of them, which Plato, that chief Philosopher, calls
the soul of the World, and Aristotle universal Nature, and Avicenna calls it
the Form-giver. This Form-giver does not make it of any thing, as though it
were but some frail and transitory substance, but fercheth it merely out of
himself, and bestows it first upon intelligences and stars, then by certain
aspects informs the Elements, as being fit instruments to dispose the matter.
Seeing therefore this Form comes from the Elements, from heaven, from the
intelligences, yea from God himself; who is so foolish and untoward, as to say
that it does not savor of that heavenly nature, and in some sort of the
Majesty of God himself? and that it does not produce such effects, as nothing
can be found more wonderful, seeing it has such affinity with God? Thus has
the providence of God linked things together in their ranks and order, that
all inferior things might by their due courses be derived originally from God
himself, and from him receive their Operations. For God the first cause and
beginner of things, as Macrobius says, of his own fruitfulness has created
and brought forth a Spirit, the Spirit brought forth a Soul, (but the ^^^th of
Christianity says otherwise) the Soul is furnished partly with reason, which
it bestows up Divine things, as heaven and the stars (for therefore are they
said to have Divine Spirits) and partly with sensitive and vegerative powers,
which it bestows upon frail and transitor^ things. Thus much Virgil well
perceiving, calls this Spirit, The soul of the World; The Spirit, says he,
cherishes it within, and conveying it self through the inmost parts, quickens
and moves the whole lump, and closes with this huge body. Wherefore seeing
Ma^stands as it were in the middle, betwixt eternal and those trans^ory things,
and is not altogether so excellent as heaven, and yet, because of his reason,
more excellent then other living creatures; and he has also the sensitive
power: therefore the other living creatures, as it were degenerating from man,
are endued only with the two powers that remain, the sensitive and vegetative
powers. But the Trees or Plants, because they have neither sense nor reason,
but do only grow are said to live only in this respect, that they have this
vegetative soul. This the same Poet does express a little after. Seeing then
the Spirit comes from God, and from the Spirit comes the soul, and the soul
does animate and quicken all other things in their order, that Plants and bruit
beasts do agree in vegetation or growing, bruit beasts with Man in sense, and
Man with the Divine creatures in understanding, so that the superior power
comes down even from the very first cause to these inferiors, deriving her
force into them, like as it were a cord platted together, and stretched along
from heaven to earth, in such sort as if either end of this cord be touched, it
will wag the whole; therefore we may rightly call this knitting together of
things, a chain, or link and rings, for it agrees fitly with the rings of
Plato, and with Homers golden chain, which he being the first author of all
divine inventions, has signified to the wise under the shadow of a fable,
wherein he feigneth, that all the gods and goddesses have made a golden chain,
which they hanged above in heaven, and it reaches down to the very earth. But
the truth of Christianity holds that the Souls do not proceed from the
Spirit, but even immediately from God himself. These things a Magician being
well acquainted withal, does match heaven and earth together, as the
Husbandman plants Elmes by his Vines; or to speak more plainly, he marries and
couples together these inferior things by their wonderful gifts and powers,
which they have received from their superiors; and by this means he, being as
it were the servant of Nature, does bewray her hidden secrets, and bring them
to light, so far as he has found them true by his own daily experience, that
so all men may love, and praise, and honor the Almighty power of God, who has
thus wonderfully framed and disposed all things.

CHAP. VII.
Of Sympathy and Antipathy; and that by them we may know and find out the
virtues of things.
BY reason of the hidden and secret properties of things, there is in all kinds
of creatures a certain compassion, as I may call it, which the Greeks call
Sympathy and Antipathy; but we term it more familiarly, their consent, and
their disagreement. For some things are joined together as it were in a mutual
league, and some other things are at variance and discord among themselves; or
they have something in them which is a terror and destruction to each other,
whereof there can be rendered no probable reason: neither will any wise man seek
after any other cause hereof but only this, That it is the pleasure of Nature
to see it should be so, that she would have nothing to be without his like, and
that amongst all the secrets of Nature, there is nothing but has some hidden
and special property; and moreover, that by this their Consent and
Disagreement, we might gather many helps for the uses and necessities of men;
for when once we find one thing at variance with another, presently we may
conjecture, and in trial so it will prove, that one of them may be used as a
fit remedy against the harms of the other: and surely many things which former
ages have by this means found out, they have commended to their posterity, as
by their writings may appear. There is deadly hatred, and open enmity betwixt
Coleworts and the Vine; for whereas the Vine winds it self with her tendrels
about every thing else, she shuns Coleworts only: if once she come near them,
she turns her self another way, as if she were told that her enemy were at
hand: and when Coleworts is seething, if you put never so little wine unto it,
it will neither boil nor keep the color. By the example of which experiment,
A^drocides found out a remedy against wine, namely, that Coleworts are good
against drunkenness, as Theophrastus says, in as much as the Vine cannot away
with the savor of Coleworts. And this herb is at enmity with Cyclamine or
Sow-bread; for when they are put together, if either of them be green, it will
dry up the other: now this Sow-bread being put into wine, does increase
drunkenness, whereas Coleworts is a remedy against drunkenness, as we said
before. Ivy, as it is the bane of all Trees, so it is most hurtful, and the
greatest enemy to the Vine; and therefore Ivy also is good against
drunkenness. There is likewise a wonderful enmity betwixt Cane and Fern, so
that one of them destroys the other. Hence it is that a Fern root powned, does
loose and shake out the darts from a wounded body, that were shot or cast out
of Canes: and if you would not have Cane grow in a place, do but plow up the
ground with a little Fern upon the Plough-shear, and Cane will never grow
there, Strangle-tare or Choke-weed desires to grow amongst Pulse, and
especially among Beans and Fetches, but it choaks them all: and thence
Dioscorides gathers, That if it be put amongst Pulse, set to seethe, it will
make them seethe quickly. Hemlock and Rue are at enmity; they strive each
against other; Rue must not be handled or gathered with a bare hand, for then
it will cause Ulcers to arise; but if you do chance to touch it with your bare
hand, and so cause it to swell or itch, anoint it with the juice of Hemlock.
Much Rue being eaten, becomes poison; but the juice of Hemlock expels it; so
that one poison poisoneth another: and likewise Rue is good against Hemlock
being drunken, as Dioscorides says. A wild Bull being tied to a Fig Tree,
waxes tame and gentle, as Zoroaster says, who compiled a book called
Geoponica, out of the choice writings of the Ancients. Hence it was found out,
that the stalks of a wild Fig Tree, if they be put to Beef as it is boiling,
make it boil very quickly, as Pliny writes; and Dioscorides ministers young
figs that are full of milky juice, together with a portion of water and
vinegar, as a remedy against a draught of Bulls blood. The Elephant is afraid
of a Ram, or an engine of war so called: for as soon as ever he sees it, he
waxes meek, and his fury cease: hence the Romans by these engines put to
flight the Elephants of Pyrrhus King of the Epyrotes, and so got a great
victory. Such a contrariety is there betwixt the Elephants members, and that
kind of Lepry which makes the skin of a man like the skin of an Elephant; and
they are a present remedy against that disease. The Ape of all other things
cannot abide a Snail: now the Ape is a drunken beast, for they are wont to take
an Ape by making him drunk; and a Snail well washed is a remedy against
drunkenness. A man is at deadly hatred with a Serpent: for if he do but see a
Serpent, presently he is sore dismayed; and if a woman with child meet a
Serpent, her fruit becomes abortive: hence it is, that when a woman is in very
sore travel, if she do but smell the fume of an Adders hackle, it will
presently either drive out, or destroy her child: but it is better to anoint
the mouth of the womb in such a case, with the fat of an Adder. The sight of a
Wolf is so hurtful to a man, that if he spy a man first, he takes his voice
from him; and though he would fain cry out, yet he cannot speak: but if he
perceive that the man has first espied him, he makes no ado, but his savage
fury cease, and his strength fails him. Hence came that proverb, Lupus in
fabula, the Wolf comes in the nick; which Plato speaks of in his Politics.
The Wolf is afraid of the Urchin; thence, if we wash our mouth and throats with
Urchines blood, it will make our voice shrill, though before it were hoarse and
dull like a Wolves voice. A Dog and a Wolf are at great enmity; and therefore
a Wolves skin put upon any one that is bitten of a mad Dog, asswageth the
swelling of the humor. An Hawk is a deadly enemy to Pigeons, but they are
defended by the Kastrel, which the Hawk cannot abide either to hear or see: and
this the Pigeons know well enough; for wheresoever the Kastrel remains, there
also will the Pigeon remain, thinking themselves safe because of their
protector. Hence Columella says, That there is a kind of Hawks which the
common people call a Kastrel, that builds her nest about houses, that is very
good to keep away hawks from a Pigeon-house: If you take the Kastrels young
ones and put them in diverse earthen pots, and cover the pots close, and
plaster them round about, and hang them up in sundry corners of a
Pigeon-house, the Pigeons will be so far in love with the place, that they will
never forsake it. Hither belongs that notable Disagreement that is betwixt
Garlic and the Lodestone: for being smeared about with Garlike, it will not
draw iron to it; as Plutark has noted, and after him Ptolomaeus: the
Lodestone has in it a poisonous virtue, and Garlic is good against poison:
but if no man had written of the power of Garlic against the Lodestone, yet
we might conjecture it to be so, because it is good against vipers, and mad
dogs, and poisonous waters. So likewise those living creatures that are enemies
to poisonous things, and swallow them up without danger, may show us that such
poisons will cure the bitings and blows of those creatures. The Heart and the
Serpent are at continual enmity: the Serpent as soon as he sees the Heart, gets
him into his hole, but the Heart draws him out again with the breath of his
nostrils, and devours him: hence it is that the fat and the blood of Hearts, and
the stones that grow in their eyes, are ministered as fit remedies against the
stinging and biting of serpents. Likewise the breath of Elephants draws
Serpents out of their dens, and they fight with Dragons; and therefore the
members of Elephants burned, drives away Serpents. The Storks drive out of the
Countries where they are, Lyzards, and sundry kinds of Serpents, and other
noisome things in the fields: and the intrails of them all are good against the
Storks. The same is done also in Egypt by the bird Ibis. That Indian Rat,
called Ichneumon, does harnsse himself with some of the Lote-tree, and so
fights against the Asp. The Lamprey fights with Serpents, and with her biting,
kills the Basilisk, which is the most poisonous serpent that is. So also the
crowing of a Cock affrights the Basilisk, and he fights with Serpents to defend
his hens; and the broth of a Cock is a good remedy against the poison of
serpents. So the Snail and the Eagle. The Stellion, which is a beast like a
Lyzard, is an enemy to the Scorpions; and therefore the oil of him being
putrified is good to anoint the place which is stricken by the Scorpion. The
Barbel eats up the Sea-hare, and is good against the poison thereof. A Swine
eats up a Salamander, without danger, and is good against the poison thereof.
The Hawk is an enemy to the Chamaeleon, and his dung drunken in wine, is good
against the poison of the Chamaeleon. Likewise out of the Sympathies of plants,
we may gather some secret, which is helpful against some kind of hurt. The herb
Corruda, whereof Sperage comes, is most fitly planted where Reed grows, because
they are of much likeness and neernesse; and both of them are inciters to
lust. The Vine and the Olive Tree do joy in each others company, as Africanus
writes: both of them are very commodious for men's uses. In like manner the
Morehenne loves the Heart, which is given to lust; both of their members are
inciters to venery. The Goat and the Partridge love each other; and both these
are goo^ for one and the same remedy. So the fish Sargus and the Goat. A Dog is
most (...) to a man; and if you lay him to any diseased part of your body, he
takes away the disease to himself; as Pliny reports.

CHAP. VIII.
That things receive their force and power from Heaven, and from the Stars; and
that thereby many things are wrought.
I Suppose that no man doubts but that these inferior things serve their
superiors, and that the generation and corruption of mutable things, every one
in his due course and order, is overruled by the power of those heavenly
Natures. The Egyptians, who first proved and found out the effects of the
heavens, because they dwelt in the open Champion-fields, where they had
continually fair weather, and there were no vapors sent up from the earth
which might hinder their contemplation of heaven, so that they might
continually behold the Stars in their brightness, did therefore wholly bestow
themselves in the knowledge of heavenly influences: and whereas others that
were not so diligent as they, stood amazed at the causes of things, these men
referred all to the heavens and the Stars, that all things took their destiny
from them, and that the influence of heaven bare great sway in all generations
and corruptions; and thus observing the motions of the stars to and fro, they
wrought many wonderful things; for this was their resolution, that to certain
hours and set times, there were answerable certain aspects of superior powers,
whereby all things were effected, Ptolomy was of the same mind, who reduced
the heavenly influences to a certain order, and thereby did progno^^icate many
things: and he thought the matter so clear, that it need not much proof: and
moreover, that the increase and decrease of all plants, and all living
creatures, more or less, did proceed from the power and stroke of the stars.
Aristotle, finding that the highest motion was the cause and beginning of all
things, (for if that should cease, these must needs presently decay) says,
that it was necessity for this world to be placed very near and close to the
sup^^^our motions, that all power might be thence derived; and he saw that all
this force of inferior things was caused from the Sun, as he himself fitly
shows: The winding course of the Sun, says he, in the oblique circle of the
Zodiak, causes the generation and corruption of all transitory things; and by
his going to and fro, distinguishes times and seasons. Plato says, that the
circular motions of the heavens are the causes of fruitfulness and
barrenness. The Sun is the Governor of time, and the rule of life. Hence
J^m^lichus following the doctrine of the Egyptians, says, that every good
thing comes certainly from the power of the Sun; and if we receive any good
from any thing else, yet the Sun must perfect and finish it. Heraclitus calls
the Sun, the Fountain of heavenly light; Orpheus calls it the light of life;
Plato calls it a heavenly Fire, an everliving Creature, a star that has a
Soul; the greatest and the daily star: and the natural Philosophers call it the
very heart of heaven. And Plotinus shows, that in ancient times the Sun was
honored in stead of God. Neither yet is the Moon less powerful, but what with
her own force, and what with the force of the Sun which she borrows, she works
much, by reason of her neernesse to these inferiors. Albumasar said, That all
things had their virtue from the Sun and the Moon: and Hermes the learned said,
that the Sun and the Moon are the life of all things living. The Moon is
nighest to the Earth of all Planets; she rules moist bodies, and she has such
affinity with these inferiors, that as well things that have souls, as they
that have none, do feel in themselves her waxing, and her waining. The Seas and
Floods, Rivers and Springs, do rise and fall, do run sometimes swifter,
sometimes flower, as she rules them The surges of the Sea are tossed to and fro,
by continual succession; no other cause whereof the Ancients could find but the
Moon only: neither is there any other apparent reason of the ebbing and flowing
thereof. Living creatures are much at her beck, and receive from her great
increase: for when she is at the full, as Lucilius says, she feeds Oysters,
Crabs, Shelfish, and such like, which her warm light does temper kindly in the
night season; but when she is but the half or the quarter light, then she
withdraws her nourishment, and they wast^* In like manner, Cucumbers, Gourds,
Pompons, and such like, as have store of (...) juice, feel the state of the
Moon: for they wax as she does; and when she (...), they waste, as Athenaeus
writes. Likewise the very stems of plants do follow the state of the heavens;
witness the Husbandman, who finds it by experience in his graffing: and
skilful Husbandmen have found the course and season of the year, and the
monthly race of the Moon so necessary for plants, that they have supposed this
knowledge to be one chief part of Husbandry. So also, when the Moon passes
through those signs of the Zodiak which are most peculiar to the earth, if you
then plant trees, they will be strongly rooted in the earth: if you plant them
when she passes through the signs of the Air, then the tree so planted, will
be plentiful in branches and leaves, and increases more upward then downward.
But of all other, the most pregnant sign hereof is found in the Pome-granate;
which will bring forth fruit just so many years, as many days as the Moon is
old when you plant it. And it is a report also, that Garlic, if it be set when
the Moon is beneath the earth, and be also plucked up at such a time, it will
lose its strong savor. All cut and lopped Woods, as Timber and Fuel, are full
of much moisture at the new of the Moon; and by reason of that moisture, they
wax soft, and so the worm eats them, and they wither away. And therefore
Democritus counsels, and Vitruvius is also of the same mind, to cut or lop
trees in the waining of the Moon, that being cut in season, they may last long
without rottenness. And that which is more, as her age varies, so her effects
vary according to her age; for in her first quarter, she makes hot and moist,
but especially moist; from thence all moist things grow and receive their
humidity in that time: from that time to the full of the Moon, she gives heat
and moisture equally, as may be seen in Trees and Minerals: from that time to
the half Moon decaying, she is hot and moist, but especially hot, because she
is fuller of light; thence the fishes at that time commonly are wont to swim in
the top of the water; and that the Moon is in this age warm, appears by this,
that it does extend and enlarge moist bodies; and thereby the moisture
increasing, it causes rottenness, and makes them wither and w^^te away. But
in her last quarter, when she loses all her light, then she is merely hot; and
the wises of Chaldea hold that this state of heaven is best of all other. So
they report that there is a Moon-herb, having round twirled leaves of a bluish
color, which is well acquainted with the age of the Moon; for when the Moon
waxes, this herb every day of her age brings forth a leaf; and when she
waineth, the same herb loses for every day a leaf. These variable effects of
the Moon, we may see more at large, and more usually in tame creatures and in
plants, where we have daily sight and experience thereof. The Pismire, that
little creature, has a sense of the change of the Plants: for she works by
night about the full of the Moon, but she rests all the space betwixt the old
and the new Moon. The inwards of mice answer the Moons proportion; for they
increase with her, and with her they also shrink away. If we cut our hair, or
pair our nails before the new Moon, they will grow again but slowly; if at or
about the new Moon, they will grow again quickly. The eyes of Cats are also
acquainted with the alterations of the Moon, so that they are sometimes broader
as the light is less, and narrower when the light of the Moon is greater. The
Beetle marketh the ages and seasons of the Planets: for he gathering dung out
of the mixen, rounds it up together, and covers it with earth for eight and
twenty days, hiding it so long as the Moon goes about the Zodiak; and when
the new Moon comes, he opens that round ball of dirt, and thence yields a
young Beetle. Onions alone, of all other herbs, (which is most wonderful) feels
the changeable state of the Planets, but quite contrary to their change frames
it self; for when the Moon waineth, the Onions increase; and when she waxes,
they decay; for which cause the Priests of Egypt would not eat Onions, as
Plutark writes in his fourth Commentary upon Hesiode. That kind of spurge
which is called Helioscopium, because it follows the Sun, disposes of her
leaves as the Sun rules them; for when the Sun rises, she opens them, as
being desirous that the morning should see them rise; and shuts them when
the Sun sets, as desiring to have her flower covered and concealed from the
night. So many other herbs follow the Sun, as the herb Turn-sole (...) when the
Sun rises, she holds down her head all day long, that the Sun may never so
much as writhe any of her (there is such love as it were betwixt them) and she
stoops still the same way which the Sun goes: so do the flowers of Succory and
of Mallows. Likewise the pulse called Lupines, still looks after the Sun, that
it may not writhe his stalk; and this watches the Suns motion so duly, that
like a Dial it shows the Husbandman the time of the day, though it be never so
cloudy; and they know thereby the just time when the Sun sets: and
Theophrastus says, that the flower of the herb Lotum, is not only open and
shut, but also sometimes hides, and sometimes shows her stalk from Sunset to
midnight; and this, says he, is done about the River Euphrates. So the
Olive Tree, the Sallow, the Linden-tree, the Elm, the white Pople-tree, they
declare the times of the Suns standing, when it turns back again from the
Poles; for then they hide their leaves, and show only their hoar-white backs.
In like manner winter-Cresses or Irium, and Penyrial, though they begin to
wither being gathered, yet if you hang them upon a stick about the time of the
Solstice, they will for that time flourish. The stone Selenites, (as much as to
say, the Moon-beam) called by others Aphroselinon, contains in it the Image of
the Moon, and shows the waxing and waining of it every day in the same Image.
Another stone there is, that has in it a little cloud that turns about like
the Sun, sometimes hiding, and sometimes showing it self. The Beast
Cynocephalus rejoiceth at the rising of the Moon, for then he stands up,
lifting his fore-feet toward heaven, and wears a Royal Ensign upon his head:
and he has such a Sympathy with the Moon, that when she meets with the Sun (as
betwixt the old and new Moon) so that she gives no light, the male, or
He-Cynocephalus, never looks up, nor eats any thing, as bewailing the loss of
the Moon; and the female, as malcontent as He, all that while pisseth blood:
for which causes, these beasts are nourished and kept in hallowed places, that
by them the time of the Moons meeting with the Sun may be certainly known, as
Oru^ writes in his Hieroglyphics. The star Arcturus, at his rising causes
rain. Dogs are well acquainted with the rising of the Canicular star; for at
that time they are commonly mad; and so are vipers and serpents; nay, then the
very standing pools are moved, and wines work as they lie in the Cellar, and
other great and strange effects are wrought upon earth: when this star rises,
Basil-gentle waxes whiterish, and Coriander waxes dry, as Theophrastus
writes. The rising of this star was wont to be diligently observed every year;
for thereby they would prognosticate, whether the year following would be
wholesome or contagious, as Heraclides Ponticus says: for if it did rise dark
and gloomy, it was a sign that the Air would be thick and foggy, which would
cause a pestilence: but if it were clear and lightsome, it was a sign that the
Air would be thin and well purged, and consequently healthful. In ancient times
they much feared this Star, so that they ordained a dog to be offered in
sacrifice to it, as Columella says, that this star is pacified with the blood
and entrails of a sucking whelp; and Ovid likewise says, that a dog bred on
the earth, is sacrificed to the Dog Star in Heaven. The Beast or wild Goat,
which in Egypt is called Oryx, has a sense or feeling of this Star before it
rises; for then he looks upon the Sunbeams, and in them does honor the
Canicular star. Hippocrates says, it is good either to purge or let blood,
before or after this star rises; and Galen shows that many very necessary
operations of this Star must be observed in Critical days; and likewise in
sowing and planting. Moreover, the greater stars and constellations must be
known, and at what time they go out of the signs, whereby are caused many
waterish and fiery impressions in the Air. And whosoever is rightly seen in all
these things, he will ascribe all these inferiors to the stars as their
causes; whereas if a man be ignorant hereof, he loses the greatest part of the
knowledge of secret operations and works of nature. But of this argument, we
have spoken in our writings of the knowledge of Plants.

CHAP. IX.
How to attract and draw forth the virtues of superior Bodies.
WE have showed before, the operations of celestial bodies into these
inferiors, as also the Antipathy and Sympathy of things: now will we show, by
the affinity of Nature, whereby all things are linked together as it were in
one common bond, how to draw forth and to fetch out the virtues and forces of
superior bodies. The Platonicks termed Magic to be the attractions or fetching
out of one thing from another, by a certain affinity of Nature. For the parts
of this huge world, like the limbs and members of one living creature, do all
depend upon one Author, and are knit together by the bond of one Nature:
therefore as in us, the brain, the lights, the heart, the liver, and other
parts of us do receive and draw mutual benefit from each other, so that when
one part suffers, the rest also suffer with it; even so the parts and members
of this huge creature the World, I mean all the bodies that are in it, do in
good neighborhood as it were, lend and borrow each others Nature; for by
reason that they are linked in one common bond, therefore they have love in
common; and by force of this common love, there is amongst them a common
attraction, or tilling of one of them to the other. And this indeed is Magic.
The concavity or hollownesse of the Sphere of the Moon, draws up fire to it,
because of the affinity of their Natures; and the Sphere of the fire likewise
draws up Air; and the center of the world draws the earth downward, and the
natural place of the waters draws the waters to it. Hence it is that the
Lodestone draws iron to it, Amber draws chaff or light straws, Brimstone draws
fire, the Sun draws after it many flowers and leaves, and the Moon draws after
it the waters. Plotinus and Synesius say, Great is nature everywhere; she
lays certain baits whereby to catch certain things in all places: as she
draws down heavy things by the center of the earth, as by a bait; so she draws
light things upward by the concavity of the Moon; by heat, leaves; by moisture,
roots; by one bait or another, all things. By which kind of attraction, the
Indian Wisards hold that the whole world is knit and bound within it self: for
(say they) the World is a living creature, everywhere both male and female, and
the parts of it do couple together, within and between themselves, by reason of
their mutual love; and so they hold and stand together, every member of it
being linked to each other by a common bond; which the Spirit of the World,
whereof we spoke before, has inclined them unto. For this cause Orpheus
calls Jupiter, and the Nature of the World, man and wife; because the World
is so desirous to marry and couple her parts together. The very order of the
Signs declares, that the World is everywhere male and female; for the former
is the male, the latter is the female: so also Trees and Herbs have both sexes,
as well as living creatures: so the fire is to the Air, and the water to the
Earth, as a male to the female: so that it is no marvel, that the parts of the
World desire so much to be matched together. The Planets are partly male, and
partly female; and Mercury is of both sexes it self. These things the
Husbandman perceiving, prepares his field and his seed, for heavenly
influences to work upon: the Physician likewise observes the same, and works
accordingly, for the preservation both of our bodies, and of universal Nature.
So the Philosopher who is skilful in the Stars (for such is properly a
Magician) works by certain baits, as it were, fitly matching earthly and
heavenly things together, and platting them as skilfully one within another, as
a cunning Husbandman planteth an old gr^ffe into a young stock: nay, he lays
earthly things under heavenly things, and inferious so fitly for their
superiors everywhere to work upon, as if a man should lay iron before the
Lodestone to be drawn to it, or Crystal before the Sun to be enlightened by
it, or an Egg under a Hen to hatch it. Furthermore, as some can so cherish
eggs, that even without the help of living creatures, they will make them
live; yea and oftentimes they will prepare such matter, so cunningly, that even
without eggs, or any apparent seeds, they will bring forth living creatures,
(as they will bring forth Bees, of an Ox; and a Scorpion, of Basil) working
together by the help of universal Nature upon the vantage of fit matter, and a
seasonable or convenient time: even so the Magician, when once he knows which
and what kinds of matters Nature has partly framed, and partly Art has
perfected, and gathered together, such as are fit to receive influence from
above; these matters especially does he prepare and compound together, at such
a time as such an influence reigns; and by this means does gain to himself
the virtues and forces of heavenly bodies: for wheresoever there is any matter
so directly laid before superior bodies, as a looking-glass before ones face,
or as a wall right before ones voice; so does it presently suffer the work of
the Superiors, the most mighty Agent, and the admirable life and power of all
things showing it self therein. Plotinus in his Book of Sacrifice and Magic,
says, That the Philosophers considering this affinity and bond of Nature,
wherewith all natural things are linked each to other, did thence frame the Art
of Magic, and acknowledged both that the superiors might be seen in these
inferiors, and these inferiors in their superiors; earthly things in
heavenly, though not properly, but in their causes, and after a heavenly sort;
likewise heavenly things in earthly, but yet after an earthly sort. For whence
should we suppose it to be, that the plants called Sun-followers, should still
follow the Suns motion? and likewise the Moon-followers, the Moons motion?
Wherefore surely even in earth we may behold both the Sun and the Moon; but yet
by reason of their quality upon earth; and so in heaven we may behold all
plants, and stones, and living creatures, but yet as following the heavenly
natures: which things the Ancients perceiving, did apply and lay some earthly
things to some heavenly, and thence brought down the celestial forces into
these inferiors, by reason of their likeness one with the other; for the very
likeness of one thing to another, is a sufficient bond to link them together.
If a man do heat a piece of paper, and then lay it a little under the flame of
a candle, though they do not touch each other, yet he shall see the paper
presently burn, and the flame will still descend till it have burned all the
paper. Let us now suppose the paper thus heated, to be that affinity which is
betwixt superiors and inferious; and suppose we also, that this laying of the
paper to the candle, to be the fit applying of things together, both for
matter, and time, and place: let us suppose yet farther, the flame taking hold
of the paper, to be the operation of some heavenly body into a capable matter;
and last of all, we may suppose the burning of the paper, to be the altering of
that matter into the nature of the celestial body that works upon it, and so
purifies it, that in the end it flies upward like burning flax, by reason of
some heavenly seeds and sparks which it has within it self.

CHAP. X.
How the knowledge of secrecies depends upon the survey and viewing of the
whole World.
WE are persuaded that the knowledge of secret things depends upon the
contemplation and view of the face of the whole world, namely, of the motion,
state and fashion thereof, as also of the springing up, the growing and the
decaying of things: for a diligent searcher of Natures works, as he sees how
Nature does generate and corrupt all things, so does he also learn to do.
Likewise he learns of living creatures; which though they have no
understanding, yet their senses are far quicker then ours; and by their actions
they teach us Physic, Husbandry, the art of Building, the disposing of
Household affairs, and almost all Arts and Sciences: the like may be observed in
Metals, Gems, and Stones. The beasts that have no reason, do by their nature
strangely shun the eyes of witches, and hurtful things: the Doves, for a
preservative against enchantments, first gather some little Bay Tree boughs,
and then lay them upon their nests, no preserve their young; so do the Kites
use white brambles, the Turtles sword-grasse, the Crows Withy, the Lapwings
Venus-hair, the Ravens Ivy, the Herns Carrot, the Patridges Reed-leaves, the
Black-birds Myrtle, the Larkes grass, the Swans Park-leaves, the Eagle uses
Maidenhair, or the stone Ae^ites for the same purpose. In like manner they
have showed us preservatives against poisons: the Elephant having by chance
eaten a Chamaeleon, against the poison thereof, eats of the wild Olive; whence
Solinus observes, That the same is a good remedy for men also in the same case.
The Panthers, having swallowed up the poisonous herb Aconitum, wherewith the
Hunters besmear pieces of flesh so to destroy them, against the poison thereof
seek out man's dung. The Tortoise, having eaten a serpent, dispels the poison by
eating the herb Origan. When Bears have tasted the fruit of the Mandrakes, they
eat Pismires against the poison thereof. There is a kind of Spider which
destroys the Hearts, except presently they eat wild Ivy; and whenever they
light upon any poisonous food, they cure themselves with the Artichoke; and
against Serpents they prepare and arm themselves with wild Parsneps; so do the
Ring-doves, Choughs, and Black-birds use Bay Leaves. The little worm Cimex is
good against the biting of Aspes; as Pliny shows by Hens, who, if they eat that
worm, are all day after, free from the hurt of Aspes. Goats care not for
Basil-gentle, because it brings a Lethargy, as Chrysippus writes. The same
Beasts have also showed us what herbs are good to cure wounds. When the Hearts
are wounded by the Cretians, they seek out the herb Dittany, and presently the
darts fall out of their bodies. And so do the Goats. The Elephant being
wounded, seeks out the juice of Aloes, and thereby is cured. The same Beasts
have also found our purgations for themselves, and thereby taught us the same.
An Ass eats the herb Asplenum to purge his melancholy; of whom the Physicians
have learned to Minister the same herb for the same purpose. The Hind purges
her self with large Cummin, before she brings forth, that her birth may come
the more easily from her. Aristotle says, That Boars feed upon the herb Aram,
or Wake-robin, to keep them soluble. Pigeons and Cocks feed upon Pellitory, for
the sharpening of their stomach. Dogs eat grass to purge all their noisome
humors, which otherwise would make them mad. Of all these, men have learned to
use such Medicines against the like diseases. A Lion being sick of a quartane
Ague, eats and devours Apes, and so is healed: hence we know that Apes blood is
good against an Ague. The griping of the belly and guts, is healed by looking
upon Geese and Ducks, and Vegetius writes; and Columella says, that if a Duck
do but look upon a sick horse, she heals him: and Pliny says, that if you lay
a Duck to the griping of ones belly, she takes away the disease, and dies of it
her self; and Marcellus writes, That it is good for one that is so troubled, to
eat the flesh of a Duck. Goats and Does are never purblind, because they eat
certain herbs. Hawks, as soon as they feel their sight dim, they eat
Sow-thistle. Elephants, against the diseases of their eyes, drink milk.
Serpents have caused Fennel to be very famous; for as soon as they taste of it,
they become young again, and with the juice thereof repair their sight; whence
it is observed, that the same is good to repair a man's sight that is dim. Hares
feed upon herbs that have juice like milk, and therefore in their bellies they
have a cream; whence Shepherds have learned to make cream of many such herbs
pressed together. Partridges eat leeks, to make their voices clear, as
Aristotle writes; and according to their example, Nero, to keep his voice
clear, eat nothing but oil of leeks, certain days in every month. These
Beasts have likewise found out many instruments in Physic. The Goats, when
their eyes are blood-shotten, let out the blood; the She-goat by the point of a
bull-rush, the He-goat by the pricking of a thorn, which lets out the evil
humor, and yet never hurts the eye, but restores him his perfect sight: hence,
men learned by such means to cure the eyes. The Egyptians say, they never
learned of men to minister clysters, but of the bird Ibis, which uses it to
her self for the loosnesse of her body. And of the same bird also they learned
their diet, to eat largely at the waxing, and sparingly at the waining of the
Moon. Bears eyes are oft-times dimmed; and for that cause they desire
hony-combs above all things, that the Bees stinging their mouths, may thereby
draw forth, together with the blood, that dull and gross humor: whence
Physicians learned to use letting blood, to cure the dimnesse of the eyes. The
Gullie-gut, when he is full of meat, he pitcheth himself betwixt two trees, so
to force out excrements.

CHAP. XI.
That the likeness of things shows their secret virtues.
WHo so looks into the writings of the Ancients, namely, Hermes, Orpheus,
Zoroastres, Harpocration, and other such like skilful men as have invented and
registered the secrecies of this Art, shall find that they gathered all from
that likeness of seeds, fruits, flowers, leaves and roots, as also of the
stats, metals, gems, and stones; that likeness, I say, which these things have
to the diseases and parts of a man's body, as also of other living creatures:
and out of those Writers, afterward Hippocrates, Dioscorides, Pliny, and the
rest, c^lled out as many such secrecies as they found to be true, and recorded
them in their own books, except some certain things, which they thought were no
secries, but either of folloy or of envy, accounted them to be ordinary and
plain matters. I will relate two or three examples of those former secrecies.
Theophrastus speaking of those herbs that resemble the Scorpion and the
Polypus, says, That some herbs have a peculiar kind of form, as the root of
the herb Scorpius, called by some Walwort, and the root of Polypody: for that
it is like a Scropion, and is good against the sting of him; and this is rough,
and full of hollow partitions like the Polypus, and is of force to kill him.
And in another place he says, That many things are written of the force of
plants, not without just cause; as for example, to make fruitful and barren;
both which, the herb Ragge-wort is forcible unto; for they grow double, a
greater and a smaller; the greater helps generation, the smaller hinders it.
And this herb is called Testiculus. Some herbs are good for procreation of a
male, and some of a female; as the herb which is called Marifica, and
Foeminipara; both are like each other: the fruit of the Foeminipara is like the
moss of an Olive Tree; the fruit of the Maripara is double like a man's stones.
The fruit of white Ivy will make seed barren, but the fruit of Arsemery will
make it fertile; which fruit is a small grain, like to Millet. The leaves of
the herb Harts-tougue will make a man quite barren, if the herb it self be
barren; for there is Hart's-tongue that bears fruit, and this will make a man
fruitful. It is a thing to be noted in a Bur, that a flower grows within the
roughness and prickles of it, which does not show it self, but conceives and
brings forth seed within it self; much like as Weasils and Vipers do: for they
bring forth eggs within themselves, and soon after bring forth young ones; so
the Bur contains, and cherishes, and ripens the flower within it self, and
afterward yields fruit. But these things have both the active and passive parts
of generation. Dioscorides writes, That the herb Scorpius resembles the tail
of the Scorpion, and is good against his bitings. So he says, that the herb
Dragon, both the greater and the less, is full of speckles like a Serpents
hackle, and is a remedy against their hurts: so the herb Arisaron in Egypt, and
Wake-robin, and Garlic, bear seeds like a Snakes head; and so Bugloss and
Orchanet bear seeds like a Vipers head; and these are good to heal their
venomous bitings. Likewise Stone-crop and Saxifrage are good to break the stone
in a man's bladder: and many other such things he there sets down. Galen says,
That the Lark has a crested crown, of the fashion of the herb Fumi^ory, and
that either of them is good against the Cholick, Pliny has gathered into his
books, many things out of the Ancients works that were extant in his time. We
will relate some of them. He says, That an herb which grows in the head of an
Image, being wrapped in a cloth, is good for the Headache. Many men have written
of Holy-wort: it has a flie-beetle in the stalk, that runs up and down in it,
making a noise like a Kid, (whence it receives the name); and this herb is
passing good for the voice. Orpheus found out by his wit, the properties of
Stones. The stone Galactites, in color like milk, if you cast the dust of it
upon the back of a Goat, she will give milk more plentifully to her young; if
you give it a nurse in her drink, it increases her milk. Crystal is like unto
water; if one sick of an Ague keep it, and roll it in his mouth, it quenches
his thirst. The Amethist is in color like wine, and it keeps from drunkenness.
In the stone Achates you may see fruits, trees, fields and medows; the powder
of it cast about the horns or shoulders of Oxen as they are at plough, will
cause great increase of fruits. The stone Ophites resembles the speckles and
spots of Serpents, and it cures their bitings. If you dash the stone
Galcophonos, it sounds like brass: stage players are wont to wear it, because
it makes one have an excellent voice. The stone Hematites being rubbed, is like
blood, and is good for those that bleed, and for blood-shot eyes: and the stone
Sinoper is of the same both color and virtue. The residue I will not here set
down, because I have handled them more at large, in that which I have written
of the knowledge of Plants.

CHAP. XII.
How to compound and lay things together, by this likeness.
WE have showed how that Nature lays open the likeness of virtues and
properties; now let us show how to compound and lay those things together: for
this is a principle of most use in this faculty, and the very root of the
greatest part of secret and strange operations. Wherefore here thou must
imitate the exact diligence of the Ancients, studying to know how to apply and
lay things together with their likes, which indeed is the chief matter wherein
the most secrecies do consist. It is manifest that every kind of things, and
every quality can incline and draw, and allure some things to it, and make them
become like it self: and as they are more active, so they more easily can
perform it: as for example, fire being very active, does more easily convert
things into it self, and so water into water. Avicenna says, That if any thing
stand long in salt, it will become wholly salt; if in an unsavory vessel, it
will become unsavory: he that converses with a bold man, shall be bold; if with
a fearful man, he shall be fearful: and look what living creature converses
among men, the same will be tame and gentle. Such positions are usual in
Physic; as, All parts of the body, are nourished by their like, the brain by
brains, teeth by teeth, lights by lights, and the liver by the liver. A man's
memory and wit is helped by a Hens brain; and her skull, if it be put into our
meat whilst it is new, helps the falling sickness; and her maw, if you eat it
before supper, though you hardly digest it, yet is it good to strengthen the
stomach. The heart of an Ape, takes away the palpitation of a man's heart, and
increases boldness, which is seated in the heart. A wolfs yard broiled and
minced, is good to eat for the procuring of lust, when strength begins to fail.
The skin of a Ravens heel is good against the Gout; the right-heel-skin must be
laid upon the right-foot, if that be gouty; and the left upon the lest: and
finally, every member helps his like. But these things, Physicians write of,
whose sayings it is not our purpose here to rehearse. Furthermore, we must
consider and be well advised, what things such or such a quality is in; and
whether it be there only after a common sort, or else in some great measure;
and whether it be an affection, or perturbation; and whether it come by chance,
by art, or by nature; as for example, heating, cooling, love, boldness,
barrenness, fruitfulness, sadness, babbling, or such like; and whether it can
cause any such matter as we would work thereby: for examples sake: If you would
make a woman fruitful, you must consider with your self the most fertile
living-creatures; and amongst the rest, an Hare, a Cony, or a Mouse; for an
Hare is big even after she has brought forth; she genders every month, and
brings not forth all her young at once, but now and then one upon sundry days,
and presently goes to buck again; and so conceives while she gives suck, and
carries in her womb at once, one young that is ripe, another that has no
hairs, and a third that is but lately conceived. Again, you must consider the
parts and members where that property lies, and minister them to your Patient:
as, to make a woman fruitful, you must give her the womb and curd of an Hare;
and to the man, the stones of an Hare. In like manner, any particular creature
that was never sick, is a help against all diseases. If you would have a man
become bold or impudent, let him carry about him the skin or eyes of a Lion or
a Cock, and he will be fearlesse of his enemies; nay, he will be very terrible
unto them. If you would have a man talkative, give him tongues, and seek out
for him water-frogs, wilde-geese and ducks, and other such creatures, notorious
for their continual noise-making; the tongues whereof, if you lay under the
head or side of a woman as she is sleeping, because they are most clamorous in
the evening, they will make her utter her night-secrecies. Other things we
omit, as being superfluous and unprofitable here, seeing we have largely
handled them in our books of plants.

CHAP. XIII.
That particular creatures have particular gifts; some in their whole body,
others have them in their parts.
PArticular creatures are not destitute of excellent and strange properties,
but are very powerful in operation, more then ordinarily their kind yields: and
this is by reason either of some hidden property, or rather of the heavenly
aspects and influences working diversely in diverse particulars, as Albertus
supposes, and in one particular more then in most other of the same kind.
These sundry effects and inclinations of such particulars, a Magician must also
be well acquainted with; that knowing sundry ways whereby to work, he may make
choice of the fittest, and such as may best serve his present use and need; for
this is our task, to reach the way and method of searching out, and applying of
secrecies; which done, no further thing can be required of us. Therefore to our
purpose. Albertus says, That there were once two twins, one of them would open
doors and gates if he did but touch them with his side; and the other would
shut them as fast when they were open. Some cannot away to look upon a Cat, a
Mouse, and such like, but presently they swoon. So, many have the gift from
heaven to heal the King's Evil, and diverse other sores: and that which has
troubled much, many Surgeons, and they could not heal it, has at length been
healed only with spittle. Again, we must well consider, what kinds of qualities
are incident to what kinds of parties; as, commonly queans are impudent,
ruffians are luxurious, thieves are fearful; and such like passions, as Writers
everywhere mention. Moreover, some natural things have not only such properties
in themselves, but they are apt also to communicate them unto others. A Harlot
is not only impudent in her self, but she also naturally infects therewith, all
that she touches and carries about her; so that if a man do often behold
himself in her glass, or put on her garments, it will make him impudent and
lecherous as she is. The Lodestone does not only draw to it self that iron
which it touches, but also all iron things near it; the same ring which the
Lodestone draws to it self, will draw many rings if they be near, so that it
will be like a chain; the virtue of the Lodestone passing out of one ring into
another. And the like may be observed in other things. We must note also, that
the virtues of some things are seated in their whole substance; of other
things, in some of their parts. The Sea-Lamprey stays a Ship, not principally
with any one part, but with her whole body. And there be many like examples. On
the other side, many things work by some of their parts; as the Cockatrice and
the Basilisk, by their eyes; likewise Pismires shun the wings of a Rere-mouse,
but her head and heart they do not shun; so they shun the heart of an Houpe,
but neither the head, nor yet the wings. The like may be observed in other
things.

CHAP. XIV.
Of those properties and virtues which things have while they live; and of such
as remain in things after death.
WE must consider that almost all those virtues which are found to be excellent
in things while they are alive, do quite perish in death, and seldom are of any
force afterward. If the wolf espy us, his eyes make us dumb; the eyes of the
Cockatrice and Basilisk will kill us forth-right; the Sea-lamprey stays the
course of a Ship; the Struthio-camelus can digest iron: but none of all the
these being dead, works ought; for when they perish, their virtues also
perish with them. Therefore it is a wise rule in natural Magic, that if a man
will work any thing by living creatures, or by any of their parts or
properties, he must take the benefit of them while they be alive; for if they
die, their virtue dies also. For the soul, says Albertus, is a chief help, and
strikes a great stroke in those qualities which are in living creatures; so
that they being alive, are endued with many operative virtues, which their
death, (especially if it be natural, that their humors are quite wasted) takes
from them, as Physicians do much observe. Draw out a frogs tongue, take away
from the Ray or Fork-fish his dart, the eyes or stones out of any creatures
head, or any such operative things, not after they are dead, but while they are
yet alive, and throw them into the water again, that if it be possible they may
live still, lest their virtue should decay, but rather that by their living
they might quicken those their natural properties, and so you may work better
thereby. And thus we must do in all things else, which I spare to speak of any
further. Sometimes yet the properties of things are operative, yea, and that
more forcibly, after death. The Wolf is hurtful and odious to sheep after he is
dead: for if you cover a drum with a wolfs skin, the sound of it will make
sheep afraid, when most other creatures will not be afraid; nay, sheep will
make a heavy noise, whereas it contrariwise causes such clamorous creatures as
hear it, to hold their peace: so if you cover it with a bears skin, the sound
thereof will make horses run away: and if you make harpstrings of all their
guts severally, and put them together upon the instrument, they will always
jar, and never make any consort. The beast Hyaena, and the Panther, are
naturally at variance; hence the skin of a dead Hyaena makes the Panther run
away; nay, if you hang their several skins one against the other, the Panthers
skin will lose the hairs. So a Lions skin wastes and eats out the skins of
other beasts; and so does the wolfes skin eat up the Lambs skin. Likewise, the
feathers of other fowls, being put among Eagles feathers, do rot and consume
of themselves. The beast Florus, (it may be the Ass) and the bird Aegithus are
at such mortal enmity, that when they are dead, their blood cannot be mingled
together. The Pigeon loves the Kastrel so well, that she loves the Dove-house
much the better, where a dead Kastrel is. In like manner, herbs, and other
simples, retain many operative qualities, even after they are dried up. These
things must be well considered by a Magi^ian, lest peradventure he be deceived
in their working.

CHAP. XV.
That all Simples are to be gotten and used in their certain seasons.
SEeing all inferiors, especially plants, receive their virtue from the
heavens, therefore we must have a special care to take them in their due
seasons: for as heaven varies the constitutions of the year, so does it vary
plants, they being much nourished by the temperature of the Air; and the time
of the year, as Theophrastus says, is all in all from them. Whence that
proverb was justly fetched, That it is the year, and not the field, which brings
forth fruit. Which may be understood two ways; either as the vulgar sort mean,
or after a more peculiar manner. Concerning the vulgar understanding thereof,
Dioscorides shows, that we must have a special care both to plant, and to
gather all things in their right seasons; for they are operative only, as
their reason is observed, but otherwise of no force. The time of gathering,
must be a calm and fair time. If we gather them either too soon or too late,
they loose their best virtue. Roots must be plucked up in the fall of the leaf,
for then they are fullest, both of moisture and virtue; their force hiding it
self within them when their leaves fall, which lasts long in them, being at
that season gathered. Flowers must be gathered in the Spring, because then they
have most virtue: and Leaves must be gathered in the Summer. The like we must
observe in other things. Know also, that some things lose their virtue quickly,
others keep it along time, as experience and the rules of Physic teach us;
that some things may be kept many years, others being long kept, are good for
nothing. Whence it comes, that many experiments prove false, because that
which we work by, happily has lost his virtue, being kept too long. But there
are certain peculiar times to gather them in (which the vulgar sort observes
not) wherein the heavenly constellations bestow upon them some singular virtue,
proceeding from the most excellent nature and quality of the stars: in which
times if they be gathered, they are exceedingly operative. But there can be no
set and just time assigned, by reason of the diverse situations of diverse places
in respect of the Sun; for as the Sunbeams come nearer or further off, so the
earth fructifies sooner or later: yet we will give some general observations.
Roots are to be gathered betwixt the old Moon and the new; for then the
moisture is fallen into the lower parts, and that in the Evening; for then the
Sun has driven in the moisture, and by the stalk it is conveyed down into the
root. The time serves well to gather them, when their wrinkles be filled out
with moisture, and they chap because they have so much juice, as if they were
about to break in pieces. Leaves are then to be gathered, as soon as they have
opened themselves out of the sprigs; and that in the morning about Sunrising;
for then they are moister then in the evening, the Suns heat having drunk up
their moisture all day long. Flowers are then to be gathered, when they begin
to seed, while their juice is in them, and before they wax limber. Stalks are
then to be gathered, when the flower is withered; for then especially are they
profitable. And seeds must be then gather^d, when they are so ripe that they
are ready to fall. There are some more peculiar observations. Hot and slender
herbs should be gathered when Mars and the Sun are Lords of the celestial
houses; moist herbs, when the Moon is Lord; but you must take heed that you
gather them not in the falling houses thereof. These things well observed in
gathering plants, will make them very profitable for Physical uses.

CHAP. XVI.
That the Countries and places where Simples grow, are chiefly to be considered.
MAny are deceived in plants, and metals, and such like, because they use them
that come next hand, never heeding the situation of the place where they grow.
But he that will work soundly, must well consider, both the aspect of the
heavens, and the proper nature and situation of the place; for the place works
diversely in the plants, according to his own diverse temperatures; and sometimes
causes such an alteration in the virtues of them, that many, not only young
Magicians, but good Physicians and Philosophers too, have been deceived in
searching them out. Plato makes mention hereof: God (says he) has furnished
the places of the earth with diverse virtues, that they might have diverse
operations into plants and other things according to their kind. And so
Porphyry says, that the place is a principle of a generation, as a father is.
Theophrastus would have Hemlock gathered and fetched from Susa, because
Thrasias was of opinion, that there it might safely be taken, and in other very
cold places: for whereas in Athens the juice of it is poison, odious amongst
the Athenians, because it is given to kill men in common executions; and
Socrates there taking it, died presently; yet here it is taken without danger,
and beasts feed upon it. The herb called Bears-foot, that which grows on the
Hill Oeta and Parnassus, is very excellent; but elsewhere, of small force:
therefore Hippocrates, when he would cure Democritus, he caused it to be
fetched from the Hills. And in Achaia, especially about Cabynia, there is a
kind of Vine, as Theophrastus says, the wine whereof causes untimely births;
and if the dogs eat the grapes, they will bring forth abortives: and yet in the
taste, neither the wine, nor the grape, differ from other wines and grapes. He
says also, that those Physical drugs which grow in Euboea, near unto Aege,
are good; but near to Telethrium, which is a shadowed and waterish place, they
are much worse and drier. In Persia there grows a deadly tree, whose apples are
poison, and present death: therefore there it is used for a punishment: but
being brought over to the Kings into Egypt, they become wholesome apples to
eat, and lose their harmfulnesse, as Columella writes. Dioscorides says, That
the drugs which grow in steep places, cold and dry, and open to the wind, are
most forcible; but they that grow in dark, and waterish, and calm places, are
less operative. Wherefore if we find any difference in such things, by reason
of the places where they grow, that they have not their right force, we must
seek them out there where the place gives them their due virtue.

CHAP. XVII.
Certain properties of Places and Fountains, which are commodious for this work.
DIfference of places, works much in the different effects of things. For the
place of the waters, and also of the earth, has many miraculous virtues, which
a Magician must needs be well acquainted with: for oft-times we see, that some
things are strangely operative, only by reason of the situation of the place,
the disposition of the Air, and the force of the Sun, as it comes nearer or
further off. If one ground did not differ from another, then we should have
odoriferous reeds, rushes, grass, frankincense, peper, and mirth, not only in
Syria and Arabia, but in all other Countries also. Likewise many properties are
derived out of Waters and Fountains; which otherwise could not be made, but
that the waterish humor in the earth, conveys his scent and such like
properties, into the root of that which there grows, and so nourishes up
that matter which springs out, and causes such fruit as savours of the place,
according to his own kind. Zama is a City in Africa, and Ismuc is a Town twenty
miles from it: and whereas all Africa besides, is a great breeder of beasts,
especially of serpents, about that Town there breed none at all; nay, if any be
brought thither, it dies: and the earth of that place also kills beasts,
whithersoever it is carried. In the great Tarquine Lake of Italy, are seen
Trees, some round, some triangle, as the wind moves them; but none apiece.
In the Country beyond the River Po, that part which is called Monsterax, there
is a kind of Corn called Siligo, which being thrice sown, makes good bread-corn
Near to Harpasum a Town of Asia, there is a huge Rock, which if you touch with
one finger, will move; if with your whole body, it will not move. There are
some places of the earth that are full of great fires, as Aetna in Sicily, the
Hill Chimaera in Phaselis; the fire whereof Ctesias writes, will be kindled
with water, and quenched with earth. And in the Country of Megalopolis, and the
fields about Arcia, a coal falling on the earth, sets it on fire. So in Lycia,
the Hills Ephesti being touched with a Torch, flame out, insomuch that the
stones and sands there do burn in the waters; wherein if a man make a gutter
with a staff, he shall see Rivers of fire run therein. The like things are
reported of waters. For seeing they pass under the earth, through veins of
alum, pitch, brimstone, and such like; hence it is that they are sometimes
hurtful, and sometimes wholesome for the body. There are also many kinds of
water, and they have diverse properties. The River Himera in Sicily, is divided
into two parts: that which runs against Aetna, is very sweet, that which
runs through the salt vein, is very salt. In Cappadocia, betwixt the Cities
Mazaca, and Tuava, there is a Lake, whereinto if you put reeds or timber, they
become stones by little and little, and are not changed from stones again,
neither can any thing in that water be ever changed. In Hierapolis, beyond the
River Maeander, there is a water that becomes gravel, so that they which make
watercourses, raise up whole banks thereof. The Rivers Cephises and Melas in
Boeotia, if cattle drink of them, as they do continually to make them conceive,
though the dams be white, yet their young shall be russet, or dun, or
coal-black. So the sheep that drink of the River Peneus in Thessaly, and Astax
in Pontus, are thereby made black. Some kinds of waters also are deadly, which
from the poisonous juice of the earth become poisonous; as the Well of
Terracina called Neptunius, which kills as many as drink of it; and therefore
in old times it was stopped up. And the Lake Cychros in Thracia, kills all that
drink of it, and all that wash themselves with it. In Nonacris, a Country of
Arcady, there flow very cold waters out of a stone, which are called the water
of Styx, which break to pieces all vessels of silver and brass; and nothing
can hold them but a Mules hoof, wherein it was brought from Antipater, into the
Country where Alexander was, and there his Son Jolla killed the King with it.
In the Country about Flascon, the way to Campania, in the field Cornetum, there
is a Lake with a Well in it, wherein seem to lie the bones of Snakes, Lysards,
and other Serpents; but when you would take them out, there is no such thing.
So there are some sharp and sour veins of water, as Lyncesto, and Theano in
Italy; which I sought out very diligently, and found it by the way to Rome, a
mile from Theano; and it is exceeding good against the Stone. There is a Well
in Paphlagonia, whosoever drinks of it, is presently drunken. In Chios is a
Well, that makes all that drink of it, sottish and senseless. In Susa is a
Well, whosoever drinks of it, loses his teeth. The water of Nilus is so fertile,
that it makes the clods of earth to become living creatures. In Aethiopia is a
Well, which is so cold at noon, that you cannot drink it; and so not at
midnight, that you cannot touch it. There are many other like Wells, which Ovid
speaks of: Ammons Well is cold all day, and warm both morning and evening: the
waters of Athamas, set wood on fire, at the small of the Moon: there is a Well
where the Cicones inhabit, that turns into stones all that touches it, or
drinks of it; Crathis and Sybaris make hair show like Amber and Gold; the water
of Salmax, and the Ethiopian Lakes, make them mad or in a trance that drink of
it; he that drinks of the Well Clitorius, never cares for wine after; the River
Lyncestius makes men drunken; the Lake Pheneus in Arcady, is hurtful if you
drink it by night; if by day, it is wholesome. Other properties there are also
of places and fountains, which he that would know, may learn out of
Theophrastus, Timaeus, Possidonius, Hegesias, Herodotus, Aristides, Meirodorus,
and the like, who have very diligently sought out, and registered the properties
of places; and out of them, Pliny, Solinus, and such Writers have gathered
their books.

CHAP. XVIII.
That Compounds work more forcibly; and how to compound and mix those Simples
which we would use in our mixtures.
NOw we will show how to mix and compound many Simples together, that the
mixture may cause them to be more operative. Proclus in his book of Sacrifice
and Magic, says, That the ancient Priests were wont to mix many things
together, because they saw that diverse Simples had some property of a God in
them, but none of them by it self sufficient to resemble him. Wherefore they did
attract the heavenly influences by compounding many things into one, whereby it
might resemble that One which is above many. They made images of sundry
matters, and many odors compounded artificially into one, so to express the
essence of a God, who has in himself very many powers. This I thought good to
allege, that we may know the Ancients were wont to use mixtures, that a
compound might be the more operative. And I my self have often compounded a
preservative against poison, of Dragon-herbs, the Dragon-fish, Vipers, and the
stone Ophites; being led therein by the likeness of things. The herb
Dragon-wort, both the greater and smaller, have a stalk full of sundry-coloured
specks: if any man eat their root, or rub his hands with their leaves, the
Viper cannot hurt him. The Dragon-fish being cut and opened, and laid to the
place which he has stung, is a present remedy against his sting, as Aetius
writes. The Viper it self, if you flay her, and strip off her skin, cut off her
head and tail, cast away all her intrails, boil her like an Eele, and give her
to one that she has bitten, to eat, it will cure him: or if you cut off her
head being alive, and lay the part next the neck, while it is hot, upon the
place which she has bitten, it will strangely draw out the poison. Many such
compound medicines made of creatures living on the earth, in the water, in the
air, together with herbs and stones, you may find most wittily devised, in the
books of Kirannides and Harprocration. But now we will show the way and manner
how to compound Simples, which the Physicians also do much observe. Because we
would not bring forth one effect only, but sometimes have use of two or three,
therefore we must use mixtures, that they may cause sundry effects. Sometime
things will not work forcibly enough, therefore to make the action effectual,
we must take unto us many helps. Again, sometime they work too strongly, and
here we must have help to abate their force. Oft-times we would practice upon
some certain member, as the head, the heart, or the bladder; here we must
mingle some things which are directly operative upon that part, and upon none
else; whereby it falls out, that sometimes we must meddle contraries
together. But to proceed. When you would do any work, first consider what is
the chief thing which your simple or compound should effect; then take the
ground or foundation of your mixture, that which gives the name to your
compound, and let there be so much of it, as may proportionably work your
intent; for there is a just and due quantity required for their working: then
put in the other ingredients, as sauce and seasoning, to help the principal to
work more easily and in due time. So we mingle sweet things with unsavory, and
with bitter, that it may smell and taste well: for if we should mingle only
unsavory and bitter receipts, they that we give it unto would loath it, and
their animal spirits would so abhor it, that though they took it, yet it could
not work in them. So we meddle soft and hard things together, that they may go
down more pleasantly. Sometimes there is so little in a receipt, that the heat
of the body wastes it before it can work; here then is required a greater
quantity: for, this does not hinder the working, but gives the natural heat
somewhat to feed upon, that in the mean space the receipt may have fit time to
work. As for example: If we would catch birds by bringing them to sleep, here
we must take the Nut Methella, which is of that force, as to cause sleep and
heaviness of brain; and let this be the ground of our mixtion: then to make it
more lively in working, put thereto the juice of black Poppie, and the dregs of
wine: If it be too hard, and we would have it more liquid, that so it may fill
out the pulse or other baits which we lay for them; put thereto the juice of
Mandrakes, and Hemlock, and an Ox gall: and that it may not be bitter or
unsavory, put honey, cheese or flower amongst it, that so it may be fitter to
be eaten: and when once the birds have tasted of it, they lie down to sleep on
the ground, and cannot fly, but may be taken with hands. The like must be
observed in other things.

CHAP. XIX.
How to find out the just weight of a mixture.
WE must also have a special care to know the right ministering of a compound,
and how to find out the just proportion of weight therein; for the goodness of
the operation of things, consists chiefly in the due proportion and measure of
them: And unless the mixtion be every way perfect, it avails little in
working. Wherefore the Ancients were wont to observe not only in compounds, but
also in Simples due weight and measure; and their experience has left it unto
us. If then then bestowest thy pains in this faculty, first thou must find out
the weight of a simple Medicine, how much of it would serve such a purpose as
thou intendest; and to that, thou must proportionably frame thy compound,
observing a due proportion, both in the whole and every part thereof. Let thy
chief Simple, the ground of thy mixture, be half the weight, and the other
ingredients altogether must be the other half; but how much of each of these
other ingredients, that thou must gather by thy own conjecture: So then, thy
whole compound must be but as much as if it were only a simple receipt; for we
do not compound things, to make the receipt greater, either in quantity or in
virtue, but only because it should be more speedy in operation: It must also be
considered, that the weights of mixtures and medicines must vary
proportionably, as the Countries and Climates vary: for this alters their
operation, as we showed before. Thou must therefore work advisedly; and as the
operation of the Simples alters, so thou must alter their weight, by putting
to, and taking from, and wittily fitting all things, that they may effect that
which thou would. This is the reason, why in our experiments which we have
set down hereafter, we have described the parts thereof by their several
weights: and lest the diverse names of weights should hinder thy working, we
have used those weights and names which Cornelius Celsus used before us: for so
it is fittest for all men's satisfaction.

CHAP. XX.
How to prepare Simples.
HAving showed the way how to compound and find out the just weight of our
composition, it now remains we teach how to prepare Simples; which is a matter
chiefly necessary for this work; and greatest skill is seen in it. For the
operations of Simples, do not so much corsist in themselves, as in the
preparing of them; without which preparation, they work little or nothing at
all. There be many ways to prepare Simples, to make them fitter for certain
uses. The most usual ways are, Steeping, Boiling, Burning, Powning, Resolving
into ashes, Distilling, Drying, and such like. To macerate or steep any thing,
is to drench and to soak it in liquor, that it may be thoroughly we both within
and without, so that the more subtle and intimate part of it may be drained and
squeezed out, and the grosser and earthly part be left behind, to receive that
humor in the very middle, which we would have in it. Boiling we then use, when
we cannot otherwise well get out the juice of any thing: for by boiling we draw
out of the center into the circumference, when we cannot do it by steeping;
though thereby the slighter vapors may be resolved. So we use to burn, to
roste, to pown things, that we may take away all their moisture from them; for
by this means, they may the more easily be resolved, and the sooner converted
into liquor, and the better mingled with other things to be put to them. So we
roste or broil things when otherwise we cannot break them, that they might
become dust; yet always we must take heed that we do not so burn them, as they
may lose their strength; nor so boil things but only as they may be fitter to
receive that subtle humor and quality, which we would convey into them.
Distillation of things is used, as well to get out water that may be of greater
strength, thereby to work more easily and handsomely; as also because the
slighter and more subtle parts of Medicines are fittest for us, the grosser
parts must be cast away, as being an hindrance to our purpose: and the like we
must conceive of other operations. These things I thought fittest for this
work. He that would be instructed more at large herein, let him look into the
books of Physicians. But let us now proceed to further matters.

THE SECOND BOOK OF Natural Magic: Showing how living Creatures of diverse
kinds, may be mingled and coupled together, that from them, new, and yet
profitable kinds of living Creatures may be generated.
The PROEME.
HAving wandered beyond my bounds, in the consideration of Causes and their
Actions; which I thought fit to make the Subject of my first book: it will be
time to speak of those Operations, which we have often promised, that we may
not too long keep off from them those ingenious men that are very desirous to
know them. Since that we have said, That Natural Magic is the top, and the
complete faculty or Natural Science, in handling it, we will conclude within
the compass of this Volume, whatsoever is High, Noble, Choice, and Notable,
that is discovered in the large field of Natural History. But that we may
perform this, I shall reduce all those Secrets into their proper places; and
that nothing may be thrust out of its own rank, I shall follow the order of
Sciences. And I shall first divide them into Natural and Mathematical Sciences;
and I shall begin with the Natural; for I hold that most convenient, that all
may arise from those things that are simple, and not so laborious, to
Mathematical Sciences. I shall from Animals first proceed to Plants, and so by
steps to Minerals, and other works of Nature. I shall briefly describe
Fountains, also whence flow Springs; and I shall annex thereto the Reasons, and
the Causes; that Industrious men made acquainted with this, may find out more
of themselves. And because there are two generations of Animals and Plants, one
of themselves, the other by copulation: I shall first speak of such as are bred
without copulation; and next, of such as proceed from copulation one with
another, that we may produce new living Creatures, such as the former ages
never saw. I shall begin therefore with Putrefaction, because that is the
principle to produce new Creatures; not only from the variety of Simples, but
of mixed Bodies. I thought fit to leave none out, though they be of small
account, since there is nothing in Nature, appear it never so small, wherein
there is not something to be admired.

CHAP. I.
The first Chapter treats of Putrefaction, and of a strange manner of
producing living Creatures.
BEfore we come to show that new living Creatures are generated of
Putrefaction, it is meet to rehearse the opinions of ancient Philosophers
concerning that matter. Whereof though we have spoken elsewhere, in the
description of Plants, yet for the Readers ease, we will here rehearse some of
them, to show that not only imperfect, but perfect living Creatures too, are
generated of Putrefaction. P^rphyry thought that Living creatures were begotten
of the bowels of the Earth soaked in water, and quickened by the heat of the
Sun. Of the same mind were Archelaus the Athenian, Anaxagoras Clazomenius, and
Euripides his Scolar. Cleodemus, and after him Theophrastus, thought that they
came of putrified water mixed with earth; and the colder and fouler the water
was, the unfitter it was for their generation. Diodorus, and many other good
Philosophers hold, that all living Creatures did arise of putrefaction. For
whereas in the beginning of the world, the Heavens, and Earth, and Elements
were settled in their natural places, the earth being left slimy and soft in
many places, and then dried and stricken with the heat of the Sun, brought
forth certain tumors and swellings in the surface and uppermost parts: in these
tumors were contained and cherished many putrefactions and rotten clods,
covered over with certain small skins; this putrified stuff, being moi^^ened
with dew by night, and the Sun heating it by day, after a certain season became
ripe; and the skins being broken, thence issued all kinds of living Creatures;
whereof, they that had quickest heat, became birds; the earthy ones became
creeping beasts; the waterish ones became fishes in the Sea; and they which
were a mean, as it were, betwixt all these, became walking-creatures. But the
heat of the Sun still working upon the earth, hindered it from begetting and
bringing forth any more such creatures; but then, the creatures before
generated coupled together, and brought forth others like themselves. Avicenna,
in that work of his which he made of deluges and floods; holds, that after the
great floods that drowned the Earth, there was no man's seed; but then, man, and
all living Creatures else, were generated of rotten carcases, only by the
virtue of the Sun: and therefore he supposes, that the womb, and such needful
places framed by nature, for the better fashioning of the infant, are not
needful to the procreation of man. He proves his assertion by this, that mice,
which arise of putrefaction, do couple together, and beget store of young; yea,
and serpents are generated chiefly of woman's hair. And in his book of living
Creatures, he tells of a friend of his, that brought forth Scorpions after a
strange manner, and those did beget other Scorpions, not imperfect, or unlike
to themselves, but such as did also procreate others. Averroes held, that the
stars were sufficient to generate imperfect creatures; as mice, bats, moules,
and such like, but not to generate Men, or Lions. And daily experience teaches
us, that many living creatures come of the putrified matter of the earth. And
the Ancients supposing all things to be produced out of the earth, called it
the mother of all; and the Greeks called it Dimitera. Ovid has very elegantly
set down this generation of putrefaction, under the fable of Pytho; that the
earth brought forth of its own accord, many living creatures of diverse forms,
the heat of the Sun enliving those moistures that lay in the tumors of the
earth, like fertile seeds in the belly of their mother; for heat and moisture
being tempered together, causes generation. So then, after the deluge, the
earth being now moist, the Sun working upon it, diverse kinds of creatures were
brought forth, some like the former, and some of a new shape.

CHAP. II.
Of certain earthly Creatures, which are generated of putrefaction.
PLants and living Creatures agree both in this, that some of them are
generated of seed, and some of them Nature brings forth of her own accord,
without any seed of the same kind; some out of putrified earth and plants, as
those Creatures that are divided between the head and the belly; some out of
the dew that lies upon leaves, as Canker-worms; some out of the mud, as
shel-creatures; and some out of living Creatures themselves, and the excrements
of their parts, as lice. We will only rehearse some which the Ancients have
set down, that so we may also learn how to procreate new creatures. And first,
let us see, how

Mice are generated of putrefaction.
Diodorus says, that near to the City Thebais in Egypt, when Nilus overflowing
is past, the Sun heating the wet ground, the chaps of the earth send forth
great store of mice in many places; which astonisheth men to see, that the
forepart of the mice should live and be moved, whereas their hinder parts are
not yet shapen. Pliny says, that after the swaging of Nilus, there are found
little mice begun to be made of earth and water, their fore-parts living, and
their hinder parts being nothing but earth. Aelianus says, that a little rain
in Egypt, engenders many mice, which being scattered everywhere in their
fields, eat down their corn, and devour it: And so it is in Pontus; but by
their prayers to God, they are consumed. Macrobius and Avicenna say, that the
mice so generated, do increase exceedingly by coupling together. Aristotle
found out, that a kind of field-mice increased wonderfully; so that in some
places they did suddenly eat up whole fields of corn: insomuch that many
Husbandmen appointing to reap their corn on the morrow, when they came with
their reapers, found all their corn wasted. And as these mice are generated
suddenly, so they are suddenly consumed, in a few days; the reason whereof
cannot be so well assigned. Pliny could not find how it should be; for neither
could they be found dead in the fields, neither alive within the earth in the
winter time. Diodorus and Aelianus write, That these field-mice have driven
many people of Italy out of their own Country: they destroyed Cosas, a City of
Hetruria: many came to Troas, and thence drove the inhabitants. Theophrastus
and Varro write, That mice also made the inhabitants of the Island Gyarus to
forsake their Country; and the like is reported of Heraclea in Pontus, and of
other places. Likewise also

Frogs are wonderfully generated of rotten dust and rain;
for a Summer shower lighting upon the putrified sands of the shore, and dust
of highways, engenders frogs. Aelianus, going from Naples in Italy, to
Puteoli, saw certain frogs, that their fore-parts moved and went upon two feet,
while yet their hinder parts were unfashioned, and drawn after like a clot of
dirt: and Ovid says, one part lives, the other is earth still: and again, mud
engenders frogs that sometimes lack feet. The generation of them is so easy,
and sudden, that some write it has rained frogs; as if they were gendred in
the Air. Phylarchus in Athenaeus writes so; and Heraclides Lembus writes, that
it rained frogs about Dardany and Poeonia, so plentifully, that the very ways
and houses were full of them: and therefore the inhabitants, though for a few
days at the first they endured it, killing the frogs, and shutting up their
houses, yet afterward when they saw it was to no purpose, but they could
neither use water, nor boil meat, but frogs would be in it, nor so much as
tread upon the ground for them, they quite forsook their countries, as Diodorus
and Eustathius write. The people Autharidae in Thesprtaia, were driven out of
their Country, by certain imperfect frogs that fell from heaven. But it is a
strange thing that

Red Toads are generated of dirt, and of women's flowers.
In Dariene, a Province of the new world, the air is most unwholesome, the
place being muddy and full of stinking marshes; nay, the village is it self a
marish, where Toads are presently gendred of the drops wherewith they water
their houses, as Peter Martyr writes. A Toad is likewise generated of a duck
that has lain rotting under the mud, as the verse shows which is ascribed to
the duck; When I am rotten in the earth, I bring forth Toads: happily because
they and I both, are moist and foul creatures. Neither is it hard to generate
Toades of women's putrified flowers; for women do breed this kind of cattle,
together with their children, as Celius Aurelianus and Platearius call them,
frogs, toads, lyzards, and such like: and the women of Salerium, in times past,
were wont to use the juice of Parsley and Leeks, at the beginning of their
conception, and especially about the time of their quickening, thereby to
destroy this kind of vermin with them. A certain woman lately married, being in
all men's judgment great with child, brought forth in stead of a child, four
Creatures like to frogs, and after had her perfect health. But this was a kind
of a Moon-calf. Paracelsus said, that if you cut a serpent in pieces, and hide
him in a vessel of glass, under the mud, there will be gendred many worms,
which being nourished by the mud, will grow every one as big as a Serpent; so
that of one serpent may be an hundred generated: and the like he holds of other
creatures. I will not gainsay it, but only thus, that they do not gender the
same serpents. And so, he says, you may make them of a woman's flowers; and so,
he says, you may generate a Basilisk, that all shall die which look upon him:
but this is a stark lie. It is evident also, that

Serpents may be generated of man's marrow, of the hairs of a menstruous woman,
and of a horse-tail, or mane.
We read, that in Hungary, by the River Theisa, Serpents and Lyzards did breed
in men's bodies, so that three thousand men died of it. Pliny writes, that about
the beginning of the wars against the Marsi, a maidservant brought forth a
serpent. Avicenna in his book of deluges, writes, that serpents are gendred of
women's hairs especially, because they are naturally moister and longer then
men's. We have experienced also, that the hairs of a horses mane laid in the
waters, will become serpents: and our friends have tried the same. No man
denies but that serpents are easily gendred of man's flesh, especially of his
marrow. Aelianus says, that a dead man's back-marrow being putrified, becomes a
serpent: and so of the meekest living Creature arises the most savage: and that
evil men's back-bones do breed such monsters after death; Ovid shows, that many
hold it for a truth. Pliny received it of many reports, that Snakes gendred of
the marrow of men's backs. Writers also show,

How a Scorpion may be generated of Basil.
Florentinus the Grecian says, That Basil chewed and laid in the Sun, will
engender serpents. Pliny adds; that if you rub it, and cover it with a stone,
it will become a Scorpion; and if you chew it, and lay it in the Sun, it will
bring forth worms. And some say, that if you stamp a handful of Basil, together
with ten Crabs or Crevises, all the Scorpions thereabouts will come unto it.
Avicenna tells of a strange kind of producing a Scorpion; but Galen denies it
to be true. But the body of a Crab-fish is strangely turned into a Scorpion:
Pliny says, that while the Sun is in the sign Cancer, if the bodies of those
fishes lie dead upon the Land, they will be turned into Scorpions. Ovid says,
if you take of the Crabs arms, and hide the rest in the ground, it will be
Scorpion. There is also a

Creature that lives but one day, bred in vinegar;
as Aelianus writes; and it is called Ephemerus, because it lives but one day:
it is gendred of the dregs of sour wine; and as soon as the vessel is open,
that it comes into the light, presently it dies. The River Hippanis, about the
solstitial days, yields certain little husks, whence issue forth certain
four-footed birds, which live and fly about till noon, but pine away as the
Sun draws downward, and die at the Sunsetting; and because they live but one
day, they are called Hemerobion, a daies-bird. So the

Pyrig^nes be generated in the fire;
Certain little flying beasts, so called, because they live and are nourished
in the fire; and yet they fly up and down in the Air. This is strange; but
that is more strange, that as soon as ever they come out of the fire, into any
cold air, presently they die. Likewise the

Salamander is gendred of the water;
for the Salamander it self genders nothing, neither is there any male or
female amongst them, nor yet amongst Eeels, nor any kind else; which does not
generate of themselves either egg or young, as Pliny notes. But now we will
speak of a most excellent generation, namely, how

Bees are generated of an Ox.
Aelianus writes, That Oxen are commodious many ways; amongst the rest, this
is one excellent commodity, that being dead, there may be generated of them a
very profitable kind of Creatuers, namely Bees. Ovid says it, that as all
putrified bodies are turned into some small living Creatuers, so Oxen putrified
do generate Bees. Florentinus the Grecian says, that Jubas King of Africa,
taught how to make Bees in a wodden Ark. Democritus and Varro show a cruel
manner of making Bees in a house: but it is a very ready way. Choose a house ten
cubits high, and ten cubits broad, square every way: but let there be but one
entrance into it, and four windows, on each side one. Put in this room an Ox,
about two or three years old; let him be fat and fleshy: then set to him a
company of lusty fellows, to beat him so cruelly, that they kill him with their
cudgels, and break his bones withal: but they must take great heed that they
draw no blood of him, neither must they strike him too fiercely at the first:
After this, stop up all the passages of the Ox, his nostrils, eyes, mouth, and
necessary places of evacuation, with fine linen clouts besmeared with pitch:
Then cast a great deal of honey under him, being laid with his face upwards,
and let them all go forth, and daube up the door and the windows with thick
lome, so that no wind, nor Air can get in. Three weeks after, open the room,
and let the light and the Air come in, except there where the wind would blow
in too violently. And when you see that the matter is through cold, and has
taken air enough, then shut up the door and windows as before. About eleven
days after, open it again, and you shall find the room full of Bees clotted
together, and nothing of the Ox remaining, beside the horns, the bones and the
hair. They say that the Kings of the companies are generated of the brain, the
other of the flesh, but the chief Kings of all, of the marrow; yet those that
come of the brain, are most of them greater, handsomer, and better-coloured
then the rest. When you open the room first, you shall find the flesh turned
into small, white, and unperfect creatures, all of the same shape, but as yet
only growing, and not moving. Afterward; at the second opening, you may see
their wings grown, the right color of Bees in them, and how they sit about
their Kings, and flutter about, especially toward the windows, where they would
enjoy their desired light. But it is best to let them light by the windows
every other day. This same experiment, Virgil has very elegantly set down in
the same manner. Now as the best kind of Bees are generated of a young Ox, so a
more base kind of them is brought forth of the dead flesh of baser creatures;
Aelianus says,

That Waspes are generated of an Horse;
when his carcass is putrified, the marrow of him brings forth Waspes; a swift
kind of fowl, from a swift kind of beast. Ovid says, that Hornets are thence
generated; and Isiodore derives crabronem a cabo, id est caballo, a hornet of a
horse, because they are brought forth of horses. Pliny and Virgil say, that
waspes and hornets both, are generated of the flesh of dead horses. In like
manner

Drones come of Mules,
as Isiodore affirms: and the Drone is called Fucus quasi Fagos, because he
eats that which he never labored for. But others hold that Locusts, and not
Drones, are generated of Mules flesh. So also, of the basest beast comes the
basest fowl:

The Beetle is generated of the Ass,
as Pliny writes. Isiodore says, they come of swift dogs: Aelianus says, they
have no female, but lay their seed in a clot of earth for 28 days, and then
bring forth young out of it.

CHAP. III.
Of certain Birds, which are generated of the Putrefaction of Plants.
Olaus Magnus, in the description of the North-countries of Europe, reports,
that about Scotland, there be certain birds generated of the fruit of a Tree.
Munster says, there be certain Trees which bring forth a fruit covered over
with leaves; which, if it fall into the water under it, at the right season, it
lives, and becomes a quick bird, which is called Avis arborea. Neither is this
any new tale; for the ancient Cosmographers, especially Saxo Grammaticus
mentions the same Tree. Late Writers report, That not only in Scotland, but in
the River of Thames also by London, there is a kind of Shel-fish in a
two-leaved shell, that has a foot full of plaits and wrinkles: these fish are
little, round, and outwardly white, smooth and brittle shelled, like an Almond
shell; inwardly they are great bellied, bred as it were of moss and mud: they
commonly stick on the keel of some old Ship, where they hang together like
Mushrome-stalks, as if they were thereby nourished. Some say, they come of
worms, some of the boughs and branches of Trees which fall into the Sea; if any
of these be cast upon shore, they die; but they which are swallowed still into
the Sea, live, and get out of their shell, and grow to be ducks or such like
birds. Gesner says, that in the Islands Hebrides, the same

Birds are generated of putrified wood.
If you cast wood into the Sea, first after a while there will certain worms
breed in it, which by little and little become like ducks, in the head, feet,
wings and feathers; and at length grow to be as big as Geese: and when they are
come to their full growth, they fly about in the Air, as other birds do. As
soon as the wood begins first to be putrified, there appears a great many
worms, some unshapen, others being in some parts perfect, some having
feathers, and some none. Paracelsus says; As the yelk and white of an egg,
becomes a chick by the heat of an Hen; so a bird burnt to ashes, and shut up in
a vessel of glass, and so laid under the mixen, will become a slimy humor; and
then, if it be laid under a Hen, is enlived by her heat, and restored to her
self like a Phoenix. Ficinus reports, and he had it out of Albertus, That
there is a certain bird, much like a Blackbird, which is generated of the
putrefaction of Sage; which receives her life and quickening from the general
life of the whole world.

CHAP. IV.
Of Certain fishes which are generated of putrefaction.
HAving first spoken of earthly Creatures, and then of Fowls; now we will
speak of Fishes so generated. And first how

Eeles are generated.
Amongst them there is neither male or female, nor eggs, nor any copulation;
neither was there ever seen in any of them, any passage fit to be a womb. They
have bred oft-times in certain muddy pools, even after all the water and mud
has been gone; only by rainwater: neither indeed do they ever breed without
rain, though they have never so much water otherwise; for it is the rain, both
that begets and nourishes them, as Aristotle writes. They are also generated of
putrified things. Experience has proved, that a dead horse thrown into a
standing pool, has brought forth great store of Eeles; and the like has been
done by the carcases of other creatures. Aristotle says, they are generated of
the garbage of the earth, which he says, arises in the Sea, in Rivers, and in
pools, by reason chiefly of putrefaction; but it arises in the Sea by reason of
reeds; in Pools and Rivers, it arises by the banksside, for there the heat is
more forcible to cause putrefaction. And a friend of mine filled certain wooden
vessels with water, and Reeds, and some other water-herbs, and set them in the
open Air, having first covered them with a weighty stone, and so in short time
generated Eeles. Such is the generation of

Groundlings out of some and froth,
which fish the Greeks call Aphya, because rain breeds it. Many of them breed
of the foam that rises out of the sandy chanel, that still goes and comes at
all times, till at last it is dissolved; so that this kind of fish breeds all
times of the year, in shadowy and warm places, when the soil is heated; as in
Attica, near to Salamnia, and in Marathon, where Themistocles got his famous
victory. In some places, this fish breeds of foam by the help of the rain; and
swims on the top of the water in the foam, as you see little worms creep on
the top of mud. Athenaeus says, This fish is consecrated to Venus, because she
also comes of the froth of the Sea, whence she is called Aphrodites. Aelianus
says, These fishes neither do beget, nor are begotten, but only come of mud:
for when dirt is clotted together in the Sea, it waxes very black and slimy,
and then receives heat and life after a wonderful manner, and so is changed
into very many living Creatures, and namely into Groundlings. When the waves
are too boistrous for him, he hides himself in the clift of some rock; neither
does he need any food. And Oppianus makes the very same description of them,
and of their generation. There is a kind of these fishes, called a
Mullet-Groundling, which is generated of mud and of sand, as has been tried in
many marish places, amongst the rest in Gindus; where in the Dog-daies, the
Lakes being dried up, so that the mud was hard; as soon as ever they began to
be full of rainwater again, were generated little fishes, a kind of Mullets,
about the bigness of little Cackrels, which had neither seed nor egg in them.
And in some parts of Asia, at the mouth of the Rivers into the Sea, some of a
bigger size are generated. And as the Mullet-groundling comes of mud, or of a
sandy lome, as Aristotle writes; so it is to be thought, that the
Cackrel-groundling comes thereof also. It seems too, that

A Carpe is generated of putrefaction,
Especially of the putrified mud of sweet water: for it is experienced, that in
certain Lakes, compassed about with Hills, where there is no Well, nor River,
to moisten it, but only the rain, after some few showers, there has been great
store of fish, especially Carps: but there are some of this kind generated by
copulation. There are also in certain particular Lakes, particular kinds of
fishes, as in the Lemane, and the Benacian Lakes, there be diverse kind of
Carpes, and other such fishes. Likewise there are certain

Earthly fishes generated of putrefaction.
Pliny reports, that in Paphlagonia, they dig out of deep ditches, certain
earthly fishes very good to be eaten; and it is so in places where there is no
standing water; and he wonders that they should be generated without
copulation: but surely it is by virtue of some moisture, which he ascribes to
the Wells, because in some of them fishes are found. Likewise

Shel-fish are generated of the forthy mud,
or else merely of the salt water; for they have neither seed, nor male, nor
female; the hardness and closeness of their shells, hindering all things from
touching or rubbing their inward parts, which might be fit for generation.
Aristotle says, they breed all of themselves; which appears by this, that
oft-times they breed in Ships, of a forthy mud putrified: and in many places,
where no such thing was before, many shel-fishes have bred, when once the place
waxed muddy, for lack of moisture. And that these fishes emit no seed or
generative matter, it appears, because that when the men of Chios had brought
out of Lesbos many Oysters, and cast them into Lakes near the Sea, there were
found no more then were cast in; only they were somewhat greater. So then
Oysters are generated in the Sea, in Rivers and in Lakes, and therefore are
called Limnostrea, because they breed in muddy places. Oppianus writes also,
that they have neither male nor female, but are generated of themselves and
their own accord, without the help of any copulation. So the fish called
Ortica, and the Purple, and Muscles, and Scallops, and Perwinkles, and Limpins,
and all Shel-fish are generated of mud: for they cannot couple together, but
live only as plants live. And look how the mud differs, so does it bring forth
different kinds of fishes: durty mud genders Oysters, sandy mud Perwinkles, the
mud in the Rocks breeds Holoturia, Lepades, and suchlike. Limpins, as
experience has showed, have bred of rotten hedges made to fish by; and as soon
as the hedges were gone, there have been found no more Limpins.

CHAP. V.
That new kinds of living Creatures may be generated of diverse beasts, by
carnal copulation.
WE have showed that living Creatures are generated of putrefaction: now we
will show, that sundry kinds of beasts coupling together, may bring forth new
kinds of Creatures, and these also may bring forth others; so that infinite
monsters may be daily gendred: for whereas Aristotle says, that Africa always
brings forth some new thing; the reason thereof is this, because the Country
being in most places dry, diverse kinds of beasts come out of sundry quarters
thither, where the Rivers were, and there partly for lust, and partly by
constraint, coupled together, and so gendred diverse monstrous Creatures. The
Ancients have set down many such generations, and some are lately devised, or
found out by chance; and what may be hereafter, let men of learning judge.
Neither let the opinions of some Philosophers stay us, which hold that of two
kinds diverse in nature, a third cannot be made, unlike to either of the
parents; and that some Creatures do not gender at all, as Mules do not: for we
see, that, contrary to the first of these their positions, many Creatures are
generated of kinds diverse in nature, and of these are generated others, to the
perpetual conservation of this new kind; as has been tried in many Villages,
that diverse kinds coupling together, have brought forth other new kinds,
differing from their progenitors every day more and more, as they multiply
their copulations, till at length they are scarce in any thing like the former.
And against their second Position, we must not think that the one example of
Mules not gendring, should prejudice the common course of other creatures. The
commistions or copulations, have diverse uses in Physic, and in Domestical
affairs, and in hunting: for hereby many properties are conveyed into many
Creatures. First, we will rehearse those experiments, which the Ancients have
described, and then those which new Writers have recorded, and our selves have
seen in diverse Countries. And by this, the ingenious Reader may find out
others. But first I will relate certain observations, which Aristotle and
others have prescribed, that this kind of generation may be more easily
wrought. First, the creatures thus coupled, must be of an equal pitch; for if
there be great odds in their bigness, they cannot couple: a dog and a wolf, a
Lion and a Panther, an Ass and a Horse, a Partridge and a Hen, are of one
bigness, and therefore may couple together; but a Horse and a Dog, or a Mare
and an Elephant, or a Hen and a Sparrow cannot. Secondly, they must have one
and the same space to bring forth in: for if one of them bring forth in twelve
months, and the other in six, then the young will be ripe by one side, when it
is but half ripe by the other. A dog must have two months, and a horse must
have twelve: and the Philosopher says, no creature can be born, except he have
his full time. So then a dog cannot be born of a man, nor a Horse of an
Elephant, because they differ in the time of their bearing. Again, the
creatures which we would thus couple, must be one as lustful as the other: for
a chaste creature, that uses coition but once a year, if he have not his
female at that time, he loses his appetite before he can fancy any other mate:
but those which are full of lust, will eagerly couple with another kind as well
as their own. Among four-footed beasts, a dog, a goat, a swine, an ass, be most
lascivious; among birds, partridges, quails, doves, sparrows. Moreover, they
must be coupled at such a time as is fit for generation: for Nature has
prescribed certain times and ages fit for that work. The common time, is the
Spring; for then almost all Creatures are prone to lust. The ages of them must
likewise be fit: for the generative power comes to creatures, at a set age.
Neither of them must be barren, nor weak, nor too young; for then their seed is
unfit for generation: but both of them, if it may be, in the prime of their
best age and strength. If any creatures want appeti^e thereunto, there be many
slights, whereby we may

Make them eager in lust.
And if the female do cast out the seed, there be means to make her hold in it.
Provokements to lust there are many set down by Writers, and some usual with
us. Aelianus writes, that keepers of sheep, and goats, and Mares, do besmear
their hands with salt and nitre, and then rub the generative parts of them in
the time of their coition, for their more lustful and eager performance of that
action. Others besmear them with pepper, others with nettles seed, others with
myrrh and nitre; all of them kindle the appetite of the female, being well
rubbed therewith, and make her stand to her male. The He-goats, if you besmear
their chin, and their nostrels with sweet ointment, are thereby much inclined
to lust; and contrariwise, if you tie a thread about the middle of their tail,
they are nothing so eager of copulation. Absyrtus shows, that if you wipe off
some nature of seed of a mare, and therewith besmear the nostrils of a Stallion
horse, it will make him very lustful. Dydimus says, that if Rams, or any other
beasts, feed upon the herb Milk-wort, they will become both eager to lust, and
stronger for the act of copulation. Pliny shows, that Onions increase desire
of copulation in beasts, as the herb Rotchet does in men. The She-ass, holds
the seed within her the better, if presently after copulation she be well
beaten, and her genitories besprinkled with cold water, to make her run after
it. Many such helps are recorded by those who have written the histories of
living creatures.

CHAP. VI.
How there may be Dogs of great courage, and diverse rare properties, generated
of diverse kinds of Beasts.
WE will first speak of Dogs, as being a most familiar creature with us, and
suiting with many beasts, in bigness, in like time of breeding; and besides,
being always ready for copulation, and very lecherous, oft-times coupling with
beasts of a far diverse kind, and so changes his shape and fashion, leaves the
bad qualities of his own kind, and is made fitter to hunt, to keep any thing
from spoil, to play or make sport, and for diverse other uses. And first, how

A strong Indian-dog may be generated of a Tygre.
This is called by some, a Mastive; by others a Warrior, or a Hircan-Dog.
Aristotle calls them Indian-dogs, and says, they are generated of a Dog and a
Tygre; and elsewhere, of a dog and another wild beast, but he names it not.
Pliny writes, that the Indians intending to generate dogs of Tygres, tie the
She-tygres in the woods about rutting time; and dogs coupling with them
engender young: but the first and second births they care not for, as being too
fierce; but the third they bring up, as being milder and fitter fot their uses.
Aelianus relates the story of this kind of Dogs, out of Indian Writers: that
the stoutest Bitches, and such as are swiftest to run, and best to hunt, are by
the shepherds tied to certain Trees within the Tygres walk: as soon as the
Tygres light upon them, if they have not before met with their prey, they
devour them; but if they be full of meat, and hot in lust, then they couple
with the Bitches; and so generate, not a Tygre, but a dog, their seed
degenerating into the mothers kind. And these dogs thus gendred, scorn to hunt
a Boar, or an Heart; but a Lion they will set gallantly upon. A Noble man of
India made trial of the valor of these dogs, before Alexander the Great, on
this manner: first, he set an Heart before him; but the Dog scorning the Heart,
stirred not at him; next, a Boar, but neither stirred he at the Boar; after
that a Bear, but he scorned the Bear too: last of all, a Lion; then the Dog
seeing that he had an even match in hand, rose up very furiously, and run upon
the Lion, and took him by the throat, and stifled him. Then the Indian that
showed this sport, and knew well this Dogs valor, first cut off his tail; but
the Dog cared not for his tail, in comparison of the Lion which he had in his
mouth: next, he cut off one of his legs; but the Dog held fast his hold still,
as if it had been none of his legs: after that, he caused another of his legs
to be broken; but the Dog still kept his hold: after that, his third leg, and
yet still he kept his hold: after that, his fourth leg, and yet the Dog was
still as fierce upon the Lion, as at the first: Nay, when last of all his head
was cut off from his body, yet still it stuck fast by the teeth in the same
place, where he took his first hold. Alexander seeing this, was much grieved
for the Dogs death, and greatly amazed at his valor, that he would rather
suffer his life, then his courage to be taken from him. The Indian perceiving
that, gave to Alexander four such Dogs; and he received them as a great
Present, and accepted them gladly and thankfully: and moreover, rewarded the
Indian that gave them, with a Princely recompense. This same story Philes also
writes. But Diodorus Siculus and Strabo, say that Sopithes a King, gave
Alexander an hundred and fifty of these Dogs, all very huge and strong, and
usually coupling with Tygres. And Pollux writes the same. And Plutark describes
the Indian-dog, and his fight before Alexander, as it is before related: Pliny
writes, that the King of Albania gave Alexander a great Dog, wherewith he was
much delighted: but when he brought the Dog, first Bears, then Boars, and then
Deer, and saw he would not touch them, being much offended that so great a body
should have so little courage, he caused him to be killed. The King that gave
him, hearing this, sent him another, and withal charged the Messenger, that he
should not be tried in small matches, but either with a Lion or an Elephant. So
then, Alexander caused a Lion to be set before him, and presently the Dog
killed him: afterward he tried him with an Elephant; and the Dog bristled and
barked at him, and assaulted him so artificially every way, till the Elephant
was giddy with turning about, and so fell down and was killed. Gratius writes
of this kind of dogs, thus generated of a Bitch and a Tygre. There is also
another kind of Dogs

Generated of a Lion.
And these are strong Dogs, and good Hunters. Pollux says, that Arcadian Dogs
first came of a Dog and a Lion, and are called Lion-dogs. And Coelius writes
the same: and Oppianus commends the Arcadian Dogs, and those of Tegea, which is
a Town of Acadia. This is also

A strong and swift Dog, gendred of a kind of Wolf called Those,
which, as Aristotle writes, is in all his entrails like a Wolfs; and is a
strong beast, swift, and is wont to encounter the Lion. Pliny says, it is a
kind of Wolf; Hesychius says, it is like a Wolf; Herodotus, that it is gendred
in Africa: Solinus calls them Ethiopian Wolves: Nearchus calls these beasts
Tygres, and says there be diverse kinds of them. Wherefore Gratius says, that
dogs generated of these Thoes, are strong, and fit to hunt; and calls them
half-savage, as coming of a tame Dog, and a savage kind of Wolf. There is also a

Dog called Crocuta, gendred of a Dog and a Wolf.
Pliny says, that these Dogs break all things with their teeth, and presently
devout them. As the Indians join Tygres, so do the Gauls join Wolves and Dogs
together; every herd of Wolves there, has a Dog for their Ringleader. In the
Country of Cyrene in Libya, Wolves do couple with Dogs, as Aristotle and Pollux
write. Galen in his book concerning the use of Parts, writes, that a Bitch may
conceive by a He-wolf, and so the She-wolf by a Dog, and retain each others
seed, and ripen it to the bringing forth of both kinds. Diodorus says, that
the dog which the Ethiopian calls Crocuta, is a compound of the Nature of a
Dog and a Wolf. When Niphus was hunting, one of his dogs eagerly pursued a
she-wolf, and overtaking her, began to line her, changing his fierceness into
lust. Albertus says, that the great Dog called a Mastive, is gendred of a Dog
and a Wolf. I my self saw at Rome, a dog generated of a wolf; and at Naples, a
she-wolf of a dog. Ovid says, that the dog Nape was conceived of a Wolf; and
Ovid and Virgil both, mention the dog Lycisca, which, as Isiodore writes, are
generated of wolves and dogs coupling together. Coelius calls these dogs
Chaonides; being gendred of a kind of wolf called Chaos, as some suppose,
whence they have that name. But if we would generate swift dogs, as
Greyhounds, we must join dogs with some swift beasts. As, couple dogs and
foxes together, and they will

Gender swift Dogs, called Lacedamonian Dogs.
Aristotle, and out of him Galen, report, that beasts may couple together,
though they be of a diverse kind; so that their nature do not much differ, and
they be of a like bigness, and thereby suitable for their times of breeding and
bringing forth, as it is betwixt dogs and wolves; of both which, are gendred
swift dogs, called Lacedaemonian dogs: the first births are of both kinds; but
in time, after sundry interchangeable generations, they take after the dam, and
follow the kind of the female. Pollux says, These are called Alopecidae,
fox-dogs; as Xenoph^^ also writes of them, and makes them to be hunting dogs:
and surely the best and swiftest hunting dogs, as Greyhounds, are long-headed,
and sharp-snou^ed, as foxes are. Hesychius and Varinus call them Dog-foxes. But
now, if we would generate a kind of

Swift Dogs, and strong withal,
we must make a medley of sundry kinds of dogs together; as a Mastive and a
Greyhound gender a swift, and withal a strong dog, as Aristole writes: or else
couple a dog with a wolf, or with a Lion; for both these mixtions have
Hunts-men devised; the former, to amend certain natural defects in one kind;
and the latter, to make their dogs stronger for the game, and craftier to epsy
and take advantages; as commonly, together with the properties of the body, the
qualities of the mind are derived into the young ones. Ovid mentions such
mungrels amongst Actaeons dogs: and Oppianus in his book of Hunting, counsels
to join in the Springtime, diverse dogs together, if we desire to have any
excellent parts in any; as the dogs of Elis, with them of Arcadia; the dogs of
Crete, with them of Pannonia; Thracians, with them of Caria; Lacedaemonians,
with them of Tuscia; and Sarmatian dogs, with Spanish dogs. Thus we see, how to
generate a dog as stomackful as a Lion, as fierce as a Tygre, as crafty as a
fox, as spotted as a Leopard, and as ravenous as a Wolf.

CHAP. VII.
How to generate pretty little dogs to play with.
BEcause a dog is such a familiar creature with man, therefore we will show how
to generate and bring up a little dog, and one that will be play-full. First of
the generation

Of little Dogs.
In times past, women were wont to esteem little dogs in great price,
especially such as came from Malta the Island situate in the Adriatical Sea,
near to Ragusius. Callimachus terms them Melitean dogs. And Aristotle in his
Problems, shows the manner of their generation; where he questioneth, Why
amongst living creatures of the same kind, some have greater, and some have
smaller bodies; and gives thereof a double reason: one, is the straightness of
the place wherein they are kept; the other, is the scarceness of their
nourishment: and some have attempted to lessen the bodies of them, even after
their birth; as they which nourish up little whelps in small cages: for thereby
they shorten and lessen their bodies; but their parts are prettily well knit
together, as appears in Melitaean dogs: for nature performs her work,
notwithstanding the place. Athenaeus writes, that the Sybarites were much
delighted with Melitaean dogs, which are such in the kind of dogs, as Dwarfes
are among men. They are much made of, and daintily kept, rather for pleasure
then for any use. Those that are chosen for such a purpose, are of the smallest
pitch, no bigger at their best growth then a mouse, in body well set, having a
little head, a small s^out, the nose turning upward, bended so for the purpose
when they were young; long ears, short legs, narrow feet, tail somewhat long, a
shagged neck, with long hair to the shoulders, the other parts being as it were
shorn, in color white; and some of them are shagged all over. These being shut
up in a cage, you must feed very sparingly, that they never have their fill;
and let them couple with the least you can find, that so less may be
generated; for so Hippocrates writes, that Northern people, by handling the
heads of dogs while they be young, make them less then, and so they remain
even after they are come to their full growth: and in this shape they gender
others, so that they make, as it were, another kind. But if you would know the
generation of a

Dog that will do tricks and feats,
one that will make sport of himself, and leap up and down, and bark softly,
and (...) without biting, and stand upon his hindermost legs, holding forth his
other legs like hands, and will fetch and carry; you must first let them
converse and company with an Ape, of whom they will learn many sportful tricks;
then let them line the Ape; and the young one which is born of them two, will
be exceeding practiced to do feats, such as Juglets and Players are wont to
show by their dogs. Albertus says, that these kind of dogs may very well be
generated of a dog and a fox.

CHAP. VIII.
How to amend the defects and lacks that are in dogs, by other means.
WE may also supply the lacks that are in dogs, by other means, and teach them
new qualities, even by their food and nourishment: for we have showed
oft-times, that qualities are drawn in together with the milk and nourishment
whereby we live. Columella shows how

to make Dogs strong and swift:
If you would have them full of stout spirits, you must suffer them to suck the
breasts of some other beasts; for always the milk, and the spirits of the
nurse, are much available, both for the quality of the body, and the qualities
of the soul. Oppianus bids us to keep hunting dogs from sucking any ordinary
Bitches, or Goats, or Sheep; for this, says he, will make them too lazy and
weak; but they must suck a tame Lioness, or Heart, or Do, or Wolf; for so they
will become swift and strong, like to their nurses that give them suck. And
Aelianus gives the very same precept, in the very same words: for, says he,
when they shall remember that they had such strong and swift nurses, nature
will make them ashamed not to resemble their qualities. Pollux says, that for
a while, the Dams milk is fittest meat for whelps; but after, let them lap the
blood of those beasts which dogs have caught, that by little and little they
may be acquainted with the sweetness of hunting. Ctesias in his book of Indian
matters, writes, that the people called Cynamolgi, do nourish and feed many
dogs with Bulls blood, which afterward being let loose at the Bulls of India,
overcome them and kill them, though they be never so fierce: and the people
themselves milk their Bitches, and drink it, as we drink Goats or Sheeps milk,
as Aelianus reports: and Solinus writes, that this is supposed to make that
people flap-mouthed, and to grin like dogs. We may also make

an Ass become courageous,
if we take him as soon as he is brought forth into the world, and put him to a
Mare in the dark, that she may not discern him; for her own Colt being privily
taken from her, she will give suck to the Ass as to her own foale: and when
she has done thus for the space of ten days, she will give him suck always
after willingly, though she know him to be none of hers. Thus shall he be
larger, and better every way.

CHAP. IX.
How to bring forth diverse kinds of Mules.
WE will speak of the commixtion of Asses, Horses, and such like: though it be
a known matter, yet it may be we shall add something which may delight the
Reader. Aelianus writes out of Democritus, that Mules are not Natures work, but
a kind of theft and adultery devised by man: first committed by an Ass of
Media, that by force covered a Mare, and by chance got her with foal; which
violence men learned of him, and after that made a custom of it. Homers
Scholiast says, that Mules were first devised by the Venetians, a City of
Paphlagonia. It is writ^^^ Genesis, chap. 36. v. 24. that Anah, Esau's kinsman,
feeding his fathers Asses in the wilderness, found out Mules. Now

A Mule comes of a Mare and an Ass.
They have no root in their own kind, but are graffed as it were, and double
kinded, as Varro says. If you would have a strong and a big Mule, you must
choose a Mare of the largest affize, and well-knit joints, not regarding her
swiftness, but her strength. But there is another kind of mule called Hinnus,
that comes

of a Horse and a She-ass.
But here special choice must be made of the Ass, that she be of the largest
affize, strongly jointed, and able to endure any labor, and of good qualities
also; for howsoever it is the Sire that gives the name to the young one, and it
is called Hinnus, of the Horse; yet it grows altogether like the Dam, having
the main and the tail of an Ass, but Horses ears; and it is not so great of
body as the Mule is, but much slower, and much wilder. But the best She-mules
of all, are generated

of a wild Ass, and of a She-ass,
and these are the swiftest too; for though the Mule that is begotten by the
He-asse, be both in shape and qualities very excellent in his kind, yet that
which is begotten of the wild Ass, comes nothing behind the other, but only
that it is unruly and stubborn, and somewhat scammel, like the Sire. These
Mules thus gendred of a wild Ass, and a She-asse, if they be males, and put
to cover a Mare, beget excellent young ones, which by little and little wax
tame, resembling the shape and mildness of their Sire, but the stomach and
swiftness of their Grand-sire; and they have exceeding hard feet, as Columella
writes. These happily are the Mules which Aristotle writes, are only in Syria,
swift, and fertile, called by the common name of Mules, because of their shape,
though their kind be of a wild Ass. But there is a more common kind of

Strong Mules gendred of a Bull and an Ass,
which is a fourth sort of Mules, found in Gratianopolis, and called by a
French name, Jumar. Gesner reports, that at the foot of the Hill Spelungus in
Rhetia, was seen a Horse gendred of a Mare and a Bull. And I my self saw at
Ferraria, certain beasts in the shape of a Mule, but they had a Bulls head, and
two great knobs in stead of horns; they had also a Bulls eyes, and were
exceeding stomackful, and their color was black: a spectacle, wherewith we
were much delighted. I have heard, that in France, they be common; but I could
see none there, though I passed through the whole Country.

CHAP. X.
How to mingle the Sheep and Goats together, by generation.
IF we would better any qualities in a Ram, we must effect it by coupling them
with wild beasts, such as are not much unlike, either in quantity or in kind.
There is a beast called

Musinus, gendred of a Goat and a Ram.
Pliny says, that in Spain, but especially in Corsica, there are beasts called
Musimones not much unlike to Sheep, which have Goats hair, but in other parts,
Sheep: the young ones which are gendred of them, coupling with Sheep, are
called by the Ancients, Umbri: Strabo calls them Musimones. But Albertus calls
them Musini or Musimones, which are gendred of a Goat and a Ram. I have heard
that in Rhetia, in the Helvetian confines, there are generated certain beasts,
which are Goats in the hinder parts, but in the former parts, Sheep or Rams;
but they cannot live long, but commonly they die, as soon as they are born: and
that there the Rams being grown in years, are very strong and lustful, and so
oft-times meeting with goats, do run over them: and that the young ones which
wild Rams beget of tame Sheep, are in color like the Sire, and so is their
breed after them; and the wool of the first breed is shaggy, but in their
after-breed soft and tender. On the other side, there is a beast called

Cinirus, generated of a He-goat, and an Ewe,
as the same Albertus writes. But the best devised adultery is, to couple in
generation, and thereby to procreate young ones, of

A wild and a tame Goat.
Writers affirm, that whatsoever kind has some wild, and some tame, the
wildenesse of them, if they couple with the tame of the same kind, is altered
in the succeeding generations; for they become tame. Columella writes, that
many wild Rams were brought out of Africa into Cales, by some that set out
games before the people; and Columella, the Uncle of this Writer, bought some
of them, and put them into his grounds; and when they were somewhat tame, he
let them cover his Ewes: and these brought lambs that were rough, and had the
color of their Sire: but these then afterward coupling with the Ewes of
Tarentum, begot lambs that had a thinner and a softer fleece. And afterward,
all their succeeding generations resembled the color of their Sires, and
Grand-sires, but the gentleness and softness of their Dams. The like is
experienced in Swine: for we may bring forth

Of a wild and a tame Swine, the beast called Hybrides:
for a Boar is exceeding hot in lust, and wonderfully desires coition;
insomuch, that if the female refuse to couple with him, either he will force
her, or kill her. And surely howsoever, some wild beasts being made tame, are
thereby unfit for generation, as a Goose, a Heart brought up by hand from his
birth; and a Boar is hardly fruitful in such a case: yet there is no kind so
apt for generation, the one being wild, and the other tame, as the kind of
Swine is. And those which are thus gendred, these half-wilds, are called
Hybrides, happily because they are generated in reproachful adultery: for
Hybris signifies reproach.

CHAP. XI.
Of some other commixtions, whereby other beasts of diverse kinds are generated.
WE will speak yet farther of the commixtion of diverse beasts differing in
kind; as also of other mixtions derived from these, so to find out all such
kinds: and moreover we will show, that of their young, some take after the Sire
most, and some after the Dam. And first, that

A Leopard is gendred of a Libard and a Lioness.
The Lioness is reported to burn in lust; and because the Lion is not so fit
for copulation, by reason of his superfluity of heat, therefore she entertains
the Libard into the Lions bed: but when her time of bringing forth draws near,
she gets away into the Mountains, and such places where the Libards haunt: for
they bring forth spotted whelps, and therefore nurse them in thick woods very
covertly, making show to the Lions, that they go abroad only to seek some prey;
for if the Lions at any time light upon the whelps, they tear them in pieces,
as being a bastard brood, as Philostratus writes. In the wild of Hircania,
there are Leopards, as it were, another kind of Panthers, which are known well
enough, which couple with the Lioness, and beget Lions; but they are but base
Lions, as Solinus writes. Isiodore says, that the Libard and the Lioness
coupling together, procreate a Leopard, and so make a third kind. Pliny says,
That those Lions which are generated of Libards, do want the mones of Lions.
And Solinus says, that the Lion can find out by his smell, when the Lioness
has played the Harlot; and seeks to revenge it upon her with all his might:
and therefore the Lioness washes her self in some River, or else keeps aloof
from him, till the scent be wasted. Now as there are two sorts of Mules, one of
a Horse and an Ass, the other of an Ass and a Mare; so there are two sorts of
Leopards, one of a Libard and a Lioness, the other of a Lion and a Panther, or
She-libard: that is in body like a Lion, but not in courage; this is in body
and color like a Libard, but not in stomach: for all double-kinded creatures,
take most after their mother, especially for shape and quantity of their
bodies. Claudianus says, that there is a kind of Libard, which he calls a
Water-libard, that is generated of a mingled seed, when a strong and vigorous
Libard meets with a Lioness, and happily coupleth with her: and this kind
of Libard is like the Sire for his spots, but his back and the portraiture of
his body is like his Dam. Now there is another copulation of the Lioness, when
the

Hyaena and the Lioness gender the beast Crocuta;
for the Lioness is very furious in lust, (as we showed before) and couples
with diverse kinds of beasts: For Pliny writes, and Solinus writes the same,
That the Hyaena and the Lioness of Aethiopia, gender the beast Crocuta.
Likewise the Panther is a most lustful beast, and she also couples with beasts
of diverse kinds; with a Wolf especially: of both which, the

Hycopanther, or beast called Thoes, is gendred;
for the Panther, when her sacoting is come, goes up and down, and makes a
great noise, and thereby assembles many, both of her own kind, and of other
kinds also. And amongst the rest, the Wolf oft-times meets and couples with
her, and from them is generated the beast Thoes, which resembles the Dam in the
spots of his skin, but in his looks he resembles the Sire. Oppianus says, That
the Panther and the Wolf do gender this Thoes, and yet he is of neither kind:
for, says he, oft-times the Wolf comes to the Panthers Den, and couples with
her; and thence is generated the Thoes: whose skin is very hard, and is meddled
with both their shapes; skinned like a Panther, and headed like a Wolf. There
is also a

Thoes gendred of a Wolf and a female Hyaena.
This medley, Hesychius and Varinus have described; That of them comes this
Thoes, as the Greeks call it. The Scholiast upon Homer says, That it is like
to the Hyaena: and some call it Chaos. Pliny says, That this Chaos, which by
the French is called Raphium, was first set forth for a show, in the games of
Pompey the Great: and that it has spots like a Leopard, but is fashioned like
a Wolf. But the Greeks make mention of a very strange adultery, that

The Bactrian Camel is gendred of a Camel and a Swine;
for Didymus, in his works called Geoponica, reports, that in certain
Mountains of India, Boares and Camels feed together, and so fall to
copulation, and gender a Camel: and this Camel so gendred, has a double
rising, or two bunches upon his back. But as the Mule which is generated of a
Horse and an Ass, is in many qualities like the Sire, so the Camel which is
begotten of a Boar, is strong and full of stiff bristles like a Boar; and is
not so soon down in the mud as other Camels are, but helps himself out lustily
by his own force; and will carry twice so great a burden as others. But the
reason of their name, why they are called Bactrian Camels, is this; Because the
first that ever was so generated, was bred in the Country of Bactria.

CHAP. XII.
Of sundry copulations, whereby a man genders with sundry kinds of Beasts.
I Am much ashamed to speak of it, that Man being the chief of all living
Creatures, should so foully disparage himself, as to couple with bruit beasts,
and procreate so many half-savage Monsters as are often seen: wherein Man shows
himself to be worse then a beast. I will relate some few examples hereof,
thereby to make such wicked wretches an obloquie to the World, and their names
odious to others. Plutark says, That bruit beasts fall not in love with any,
but of their own kind; but man is so incensed with lust, that he is not
ashamed most villanously to couple himself with Mares and Goats, and other
Beasts; for Man is of all other Creatures most lecherous, at all seasons fit
and ready for copulation; and besides, agrees with many living Creatures in his
time of breeding: all which circumstances make much for the producing of
monstrous, and half-savage broods. And howsoever the matter we speak of is
abominable, yet it is not fruitless, but helps much to the knowledge of some
other things in the searching out of the secrecies of nature. Plutark in his
Tract, which he calls the Banquet of the wise men, shows, that a shepherd
brought into the house of Periander,

A Babe gendred of a Man and a Mare,
which had the hands, and neck, and head of a Man, but otherwise it was like a
Horse; and it cried like a young child. Thales, as soon as he saw it, told
Periander, that he did not esteem it as a strange and monstrous thing, which
the gods had sent to portend and betoken the seditions and commotions likely to
ensure, as Diocles thought of it; but rather as a natural thing: and therefore
his advice was, that either they should have no Horse-keepers; or if they had,
they should have wives of their own. The same Author in his Parallels,
reports out of Agesilaus his third book of Italian matters, that Fulvius
Stella loathing the company of a woman, coupled himself with a Mare, of whom he
begat a very beautiful maiden-child; and she was called by a fit name, Ep^na.
And the same Plutark reporeth also of

A maiden that was generated of a Man and an Ass;
for Aristonymus Ephesius, the Son of Demonstratus, could not away with a
woman's company, but made choice of an Ass to lie with; and she brought him
forth after a certain time, a very comely maiden, and in show exceeding
beautiful: she was called Onoscelis, that is to say, one having Asses thighs:
and this story he gathered out of Aristotle, in the second of his Paradoxes.
But Galen cannot think this possible; nay, it is scarce possible in nature,
seeing a Man and an Ass differ so much as they do: for if a man should have to
do with an Ass, her womb cannot receive his seed, because his genitories are
not long enough to convey it into her place of conception: or if it were, yet
she would presently, or at least not long after, mart his seed. Or, if she
could so conceive, and bring her birth to perfection, how, or by what food
should it be nourished after the birth? But, though this can hardly be, yet I
do not think it altogether impossible, seeing all men are not of a like
complexion, but some may be found, whose complexion does not much differ from a
horses; and some men also have longer and larger genitories then others; as
also some Mares and Asses have less and shorter genitories then others have:
and it may be too, that some celestial influence has a stroke in it, by
enliving the seed, and causing the Dam to conceive it, and bring it forth in
due time. And because all these things do very seldom concur together,
therefore such births are very seldom seen. Aelianus writes another story,
That there was once generated

A half-beast of a Man and a Goat.
There was a certain young man in Sybaris, who was called Crachis, a luster
after Goats; and being overruled by his lust, coupled himself with a fair
Goat, the fairest he could light upon, and lived with her as his Love and
Concubine, bestowing many gifts upon her, as Ivy and Rushes to eat; and kept
her mouth very sweet, that he might kiss her; and laid under her soft grass,
that she might lie easy, and sleep the better. The He-goat, the Ringleader of
the Herd, espying this, watched his time when the young man was on sleep, and
fell upon him and spoiled him. But the She-goat, when her time was come,
brought forth an infant that had the face of a man, but the thighs of a Goat.
The same Author writes, That

Women lie with He-goats, and with the Cynocephali;
for the He-goats are so lecherous, that in the madness of their lust, they
will set upon Virgins, and by force ravish them. Herodotus in his second book,
writes of a He-goat, that had to do with a woman openly, and in the sight of
many men standing by. Strabo says, that in the Mediterranean Sea, a little
without the mouth of a River near to Sebenis and Pharnix, there is an Island
called Xoas, and a City within the Province of Sebenis, and the Cities
Hermopolis and Mendes, where Pan is honored for a God, and with him is
likewise honored a He-goat; and there, as Pindarus reports, He-goats have to
do with women: In the utmost corner of the winding of the River Nilus, says
he, are fed certain Herds of Goats; and there the lecherous He-goats are
mingled with women. Aelianus also writes of the Indians, that they will not
admit into their Cities any red Apes, because they are oft-times mad in lust
toward women; and if at any time they find such Apes, they hunt and destroy
them, as being adulterous beasts. Pliny writes also, That

Man couples with diverse kinds of beasts:
for some of the Indians have usual company with bruit beasts; and that which
is so generated, is half a beast, and half a man.

CHAP. XIII.
That diverse kinds of birds may be generated of diverse birds coupling together.
BEfore we come to speak of the commixtion of birds, it is meet to prescribe
certain observations for the more easy effecting thereof; that if we have need
to supply any defects in any birds, we may be the better instructed how to
perform it readily, to make them fitter for our uses. Se showed before out of
Aristotle, that if we would mingle Creatures of diverse kinds, we must see that
they be of like bigness, of a like proportion of time for their breeding, of a
like color; but especially, that they be very lecherous; for otherwise they
will hardly insert themselves into a strange stock. If a Falconer be desirous
to produce fighting Hawks, or Cocks, or other birds, he must first seek our
good lusty males, such as be strong and stomackful, that they may derive the:
same qualities into their young ones. Next, they must procure strong and
courageous females: for if but one of them be stomackful, the young ones will
rather take after the dullness and faint-heart of the one, then after the
quickness and courage of the other. When you have thus made choice of the best
breeders, before their copulation, you must keep them together within doors,
and bring them by little and little acquainted with each other; which you may
best do, by causing them to feed and to live together. Therefore you must
prepare a pretty little cottage, about ten foot long, and ten foot broad; and
let all the windows be made out toward the South, so that there may good store
of light come in at the top of the house. In the middle you must make a
partition with lattises or grates, made of Osiers: and let the rods stand so
far asunder, as that the birds head and neck may go in between them: and in one
side of the room, let that bird be alone by her self, which you would make
tame; in the other side, put the other birds which you purpose to join in
copulation with the strange bird. So then, in the prime of the Spring, (for
that is the time wherein all Creatures are most eager in lust) you must get you
fruitful birds, and let them be of the same color, as is the bird which you
desire to become tame. These you must keep certain days at the same board as
it were, and give them their meat together, so that the strange bird may come
at it through the grate: for by this means she will learn to be acquainted with
them, as with her fellows, and will live quietly by them, being as it were kept
in prison from doing them any wrong: whereas otherwise she would be so fierce
upon them, that she would spare none, but it she could, destroy them all. But
when once by tract of time, and continual acquaintance with his fellows, this
male-bird is become somewhat gentle, look which of the females he is most
familiar with, let her be put in the same room where he is; and give them both
meat enough. And because commonly he either kills, or does not care for the
first female that is put unto him, therefore, lest the keeper should lose all
his hope, he must keep diverse females for supply. When you perceive that he
has gotten the female with young, presently you must divorce one of them from
the other, and let him in a new mate, that he may fill her also: and you must
feed her well till she begin to sit upon her eggs, or put the eggs under some
other that sits. And thus shall you have a young one, in all respects like the
Cock: but as soon as the young ones are out of the shell, let them be brought
up by themselves, not of their mother, but of some other Hen-bird. Last of all,
the females of this brood, when they be come to ripeness, that they stand to
their Cock, their first or their second brood will be a very exact and absolute
kind.

CHAP. XIV.
Diverse commixtions of Hens with other Birds.
WE will begin with Hens, because they are in great request with us, and are
houshold-birds, always before our eyes; and besides, they may be very
profitable and gainful, if we can tell how to procreate and bring up diverse
kinds of them. Cocks are of all other most lecherous; and they spend their
seed, not only at the sight of their Hens, but even when they hear them crake
or cackle; and to repress their lust, they are oftentimes carved. They tread
and fall to their sport, almost all the year long. Some Hens are very lusty,
and withal very fruitful; insomuch that they lay threescore eggs before they
sit to hatch them: yea, some that are kept in a pen, do lay twice in one day;
and some bring forth such store of eggs, that they consume themselves thereby,
and die upon it. We will first show

How to couple a Partridge with a Hen.
Partridges are much given to lust, and very eager of coition, and are mingled
with other birds of diverse kinds, and they couple betwixt themselves, and so
have young ones; as first with Hens, of whom they procreate certain birds,
which partake of both kinds in common, for the first brood; but in process of
time, when diverse generations have successively passed, they take merely after
the mother in all respects, as Aristotle writes. The field-cocks are usually
more lustful then houshold-cocks are, and they tread their Hens as soon as ever
they are off the roust; but the Hens are more inclinable to coition, about the
middle of the day, as Athenaeus writes, out of Aelianus and Theophrastus: of
which circumstances we may take our best advantage in coupling them with
Partridges. After the same manner

A Hen and a Pheasant may gender together;
for, as Florentius writes, the Pheasant and the Hen agree both in their time
of laying, either of them bringing forth eggs one and twenty days after
conception. And though she be not so wanton as other birds are, yet in their
treading time they are glad of coition, and not very wild, especially those
that are of the smaller sort: for these may easily be made tame, and suffered
to go amongst Hens; but at their first taking they are very fierce, insomuch
that they will not only kill Hens, but even Peacocks too. Some men bring up
Pheasants to make a game of them: but some breed them for delight and pleasure,
as I saw at Ferraria in the Princes Court, where was brought up very great
store, both of Hens and Pheasants too. And this has been an old practice: for
in Athenaeus we find a saying of Ptolomy, that not only Pheasants were sent for
out of Media, but the Country Hens, they also afforded good store of them, the
eggs being conceived in them by the treading of a Cockpheasant. First then,
you must take a Cock-pheasant, and be very careful in keeping of him tame
amongst your Hens: after that, you must seek our Country-hens of diverse
colors, as like the color of the Hen-Pheasant as you can, and let them live
with the Cock-Pheasant, that in the Springtime he may tread the Hens; and they
will bring forth speckled eggs, everywhere full of black spots, far greater
and goodlier then other eggs are. When these are hatched, you must bring up
the chicken with barly-flour, and some leaves of smallage shred in amongst it;
for this is the most delightful and nourishing food that they that they can
have. There is also

A Chick gendred of a Pigeon and a Hen:
the Pigeon must be young, for then he has more heat and desire of copulation,
and much abundance of seed; for if he be old, he cannot tread: but young
Pigeons do couple at all times, and they bring forth both Summer and Winter. I
had my self at home a single Pigeon, and a Hen that had lost her Cock: the
Pigeon was of a large size, and wanton withal; the Hen was but a very small
one: these lived together, and in the Springtime the Pigeon trod the Hen,
whereby she conceived, and in her due season laid eggs, and afterward hatched
them, and brought forth chicken that were mixed of either kind, and resembled
the shape of them both. In greatness of body, in fashion of head and bill,
they were like a Pigeon; their feathers very white and curled, their feet like
a Hens feet, but they were overgrown with feathers; and they made a noise like
a Pigeon: and I took great pleasure in them; the rather, because they were so
familiar, that they would still sit upon the bed, or nuzzle into some woman's
bosom. But there is, yet another mixture, when

A Cock, and a Pea, gender the Gallo-Pavus;
which is otherwise called the Indian-hen, being mixed of a Cock and Pea, though
the shape be liker to a Pea then to Cock. In body and greatness it resembles
the Pea, but it has a comb and chackels under the chin like a Cock: it has
the voice of a Pea, and spreads forth her tail, and has such variety of
colors as she has. The taste of her flesh relishes like a compound of them
both; whereby it appears, that both kinds are not unfitly matched together. But
afterward, when the she Gallo-pavus and the Pea-cock were brought up tame
together, we had of them very fruitful eggs, which being hatched, yielded very
goodly chickens, whose feathers were of a most orient and glistering color:
and these young ones afterward growing bigger, were mingled in copulation with
Pea-cocks and Pea-hens, and the brood which was so generated of them, were in a
manner all of the kind and fashion of the Pea. The like a man may conjecture of
other kinds of birds.

CHAP. XV.
How to generate Hawks of diverse properties.
WE will show some commixtions of Hawks, by the example whereof, you may
imagine of your self the like in other birds: and hereby it shall appear how we
may amend diverse faults and defects in Hawks, and engraffe in them some new
qualities to be derived from their sundry progenitets. And first, how

The bird Theocronus is gendred of a Hawk and an Eagle.
Hawks are exceeding hot in lust; and though there be diverse kinds of them, yet
they all couple together among themselves without any difference, as Aristotle
writes: they couple with Eagles, and thereby engender bastard Eagles. Eagles
are most lecherous: and whereas among other creatures, the famale is not
always ready and willing to yield to the male for coition; yet the Eagles
never refuse it: for though they have been trod never so often, yet still, if the
male desire copulation, the female presently yields unto him. Aelianus accounts
ordinary and common Hawks in the kind of Eagles. Oppianus in his Ixeutica
says, that there is a bird known well enough, called Theocronus, which is
generated of a male Hawk, and a female Eagle. There is a kind of Hawks so
wholly given over to lust, that in the Springtime they lose all their
strength, and every little bird snaps at them; but in the Summer, having
recovered her strength, she is so lusty, that she flies up and down to revenge
her self upon those little birds; and as many of them as she catches, she
devours. If the male of this kind do but hear the voice of the female Eagle,
presently he flies to her, and they couple together: but the eggs which she
conceives by this base copulation, she scorns to hatch and sit upon* and that
she may not be known of it to the male Eagle, she flies far away from him: for
the male Eagle, if once he perceive that she has played the harlot, divorces
her from him, and is thoroughly revenged upon her. These birds are now commonly
called Sea-eagles. There is also a commixtion, whereby the Hawk mingles himself

with a Faulcon, and with a Buzzard, and the Eagle Nisus;
for Hawks do not only couple with their own kind, but with Faulcons, Buzzards,
and Eagles of diverse kinds, as also with most of those fowls that live upon
the prey and spoil of other birds; and according to the diversity of those
kinds, diverse kinds of Hawks are generated. Besides, they couple with strange
Faulcons of other Countries, and other kinds: for as soon as they be hatched and
Pen-feathered, if their parents see that they are not right Faulcons, presently
they beat them away; and so partly because they cannot endure their parents
rage, and partly to get their living, they fly away into strange places; and
there finding no mates of their own kind, they seek out a mate of another kind,
the likest to her own kind that the can meet with, and couples with them. So
then, if you have Hawks that descend from the right and best kind, art may more
easily work upon them, then upon such as come of the baser sort. In like manner
there may be generated of diverse kinds of Eagles diverse fowls, as

The Osprey, the fowl called Ossifragus, and Ravens also.
Pliny discoursing of the Osprey, says, That they have no proper kind of
their own, but are descended from diverse sorts of Eagles mingled together: and
that which comes of the Osprey, is of the kind of Ossifragi: and that which
comes of the Ossifragi, is a kind of little Ravens, and of these afterward is
generated a kind of great Ravens, which have no issue at all: the Author of
which assertions before Pliny, was Aristotle in his book of Wonders. Oppianus
says, that Land-eagles are a bastard brood, which their parents beat out of
their nests, and so they are for a while nourished by some other fowls, till
at length they forsake the Land, and seek their living in the Sea.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the commixtion of diverse kinds of fishes.
IT is a very hard thing for a man to know, whether diverse kinds of fishes be
mingled together or no; because they live altogether under the waters, so that
we cannot observe their doings; especially such as they practice against the
ordinary course of nature. But if we rightly consider that which has been
spoken, before, we may easily effect their commixtion, namely, if we take such
fishes as are much given to venery, and match those together which are alike in
bigness; in time of breeding, and in other such conditions as were before
required. Aristotle in his book of living Creatures, says, that diverse fishes
in kind never mingle their seeds together: neither did ever any man see two
fishes of diverse kinds couple in generation, excepting only these two,

The Skate and the Ray, which engender the Rhinobatos;
which is so called of both his parents names compounded together. And out of
Aristotle, Pliny reports, that no fishes of diverse kinds mingle their seeds,
save only the Skate and the Ray; of both which is gendred the fish Rhinobatos,
which is like the Ray in all his former parts, and has his name in Greek
answerable to his nature; for it is compounded of the names of both his
parents. And of this kind of fish I never read nor heard any thing besides
this. Theodorus Gaza translates the word Rhinobatos into Squatin^-raia in
Latin, that is, a Skate-ray: and though some deny that there is any such fish,
yet surely it is found in the Sea about Naples; and Simon Portus, a very
learned Philosopher of Naples, did help me to the sight of one of them; and the
picture thereof is yet reserved, and it is to be seen.

CHAP. XVII.
How we may produce new and strange Monsters.
STrange and wonderful monsters, and aborsements, or untimely births, may be
gendred of living Creatures, as by those ways of which we spoke before,
namely, the commixtion of diverse kinds; so also by other means, as by the
mixture of diverse seeds in one womb, by imagination, or such like causes.
Concerning Imagination, we will speak hereafter. Now at this time let us see
the ways of engendring such monsters, which the Ancients have set down, that
the ingenious Reader may learn by the consideration of these ways, to invent
of himself other ways how to generate wonderful monsters. Democritus, as
Aristotle says, held that the mixture of many seeds, when one is received into
the womb before, and another not long after, so that they are meddled and
confounded together, is the cause of the generation of many Monsters, that
sometimes they have two heads, and more parts then the nature of their kind
requires. Hence it is that those birds which use often coitions, do oftentimes
bring forth such births. But Empedocles, having forecast all scruples and
doubts within himself, seems to have attained the truth in this case: for he
says, that the causes of the generation of monstrous Creatures, are these;
either if the seed be too much, or if it be too little, or if it light not in
the right place, or if it be scattered into many parts, or if the congredients
be not rightly affected to procreate according to the ordinary course of
nature. And Straton assigns many reasons, why such monsters are generated; as,
because some new seed is cast upon the former, or some of the former seed is
diminished, or some parts transposed, or the womb puffed up with wind. And
some Physicians ascribe it principally to the place of conception, which is
oft-times misplaced, by reason of inflations. Aristotle says, that such
Creatures as are wont to bring forth many young ones at one burden, especially
such as have many cells or receipts for seed in their womb, do most commonly
produce monsters: for in that they bring forth some that are not so fully
perfect, thereby they degenerate more easily into monsters: especially of all
other, the Pigs that are not farrowed at their due time, but some certain days
after the rest of the litter; for these cannot choose but be monsters in one
part or other; because whatsoever is either more or less then that which the
kind requires, is monstrous, and besides Nature. And in his book of Problems he
says, that small four-footed Creatures bring forth monsters: but Man, and the
greater sorts of four-footed beasts, as Horses and Asses, do not produce them
so often. His reason is, because the smaller kinds, as Bitches, Sows, Goats,
and Ewes, are far more fruitful then the greater kinds are; for, of those,
every one brings forth at least one, and some bring forth for the most part,
many at once. Now Monsters are wont to be produced then, when there is a
commixtion or confusion of many seeds together, either by reason of sundry
copulations, or because of some indisposition in the place of conception. Hence
it is, that birds also may bring forth monsters; for they lay eggs sometimes
that have a double yelk: and if there be no small skin that keeps both the
yelks asunder, then the confusion of them causes the breed to become
monstrous. Nature is earnest in the fashioning of a living Creature; and first
shapes out the principal parts of the body: afterward she works sometimes
more, sometimes less, as the matter can afford which she works upon, still
framing her self thereunto: whereby it comes to pass, that if the matter be
defective, then she cannot have her forth; if it be overmuch, then is nature
overcome, and so both ways hindered of her purpose, and thereby brings forth
monstrous broods, as in artificial births has been often seen; some being
defective, as having but one leg, or but one eye; some exceeding the ordinary
course, as having four eyes, or four arms, or four feet, and sometimes having
both sexes in them, which are called Hermaphrodites: and so, look how your art
disposes and lays things together, and after the same manner, Nature must
needs accomplish her work, and finish your beginnings. But whosoever would
bring forth any monsters by art, thou must learn by examples, and by such
principles be directed, as here thou may find. First, thou must consider
with thy self, what thing are likely and possible to be brought to pass: for
if you attempt likely matters, Nature will assist you, and make good your
endeavors, and the work will much delight you: for you shall see such things
effected, as you would not think of; whereby also you may find the means to
procure more admirable effects. There be many reasons and ways, whereby may be
generated

Monsters in Man.
First, this may come by reason of inordinate or unkindly copulations, when the
seed is not conveyed into the due and right places: again, it may come by the
narrowness of the womb, when there are two young ones in it, and for want of
room, are pressed and grow together: again, it may come by the marring of those
thin skins of partition, which nature has framed in a woman's womb, to
distinguish and keep asunder the young ones. Pliny writes, that in the year of
Caius Laelius and Lucius Domitius Consulship, there was born a maid-child that
had two heads, four hands, and was of double nature in all respects: and a
little before that, a woman-servant brought forth a child, that had sour feet,
and four hands, and four eyes, and as many ears, and double natured every way.
Philostratus in the life of Apollonius writes, that there was born in Sicily, a
boy having two heads. I my self saw at Naples, a boy alive, out of whose breast
came forth another boy, having all his parts, but that his head only stuck
behind in the other boys breast; and thus they had sticken together in their
mothers womb, and their navils also did cling each to other. I have also seen
diverse children having four hands and four feet, with six fingers upon one
hand, and six toes upon one foot, and monstrous diverse other ways, which here
were too long to rehearse. By the like causes may

Monsters be generated in Beasts.
We showed before, that such beasts as bring forth many young ones at one
burden, especially such as have many cells or receipts in their womb for seed,
do oftenest produce Monsters. Nicocreon the Tyrant of Cyprus, had a Heart with
four horns. Aelianus saw an Ox that had five feet; one of them in his
shoulder, so absolutely made, and so conveniently placed, as it was a great
help to him in his going. Livy says, that at Sessa-Arunca a City in Italy,
there was eaned a Lamb that had two heads; and at Apolis, another Lamb having
five feet; and there was a kitling with but three feet. Rhases reports, that he
saw a Dog having three heads. And there be many other like matters which I have
no pleasure to speak of. But it may seem that

Monsters in Birds may be more easily produced;
both in respect that they are more given to lust, and because also they bear
in their bodies many eggs at once, whereby they may stick together, and easily
cleave each to other: and besides this, those birds that are by nature very
fruitful, are wont to lay eggs that have two yelkes. For these causes,
Columella and Leontinus the Greek, give counsel to air and purge the houses
where Hens are, and their nests, yea and the very Hens themselves, with
Brimstone, and pitch, and torches; and many do lay a plate of iron, or some
nails heads, and some Bay Tree boughs upon their nests; for all these are
supposed to be very good preservatives against monstrous and prodigious births.
And Columella reports farther, that many do strew grass, and Bay Tree boughs,
and heads of Garlic, and iron nails, in the Hens nests; all which are supposed
to be good remedies against thunder, that it may not mar their eggs; and
these also do spoil all the imperfect chickens, if there be any, before ever
they grow to any ripeness. Aelianus reports out of Apion, that in the time
of Oeneus King of the South, there was seen a Crane that had two heads; and in
another Kings days, another bird was seen that had four heads. We will show
also how to hatch

A chicken with four wings and four feet,
which we learn out Aristotle. Amongst eggs, some there are oft-times that
have two yelkes, if the Hens be fruitful: for two conceptions cling and grow
together, as being very near each to other; the like whereof we may see in the
fruits of Trees, many of them being twins, and growing into each other. Now, if
the two yelks be distinguished by a small skin, then they yield two perfect
chickens without any blemish: but if the yelks be meddled one with another,
without any skin to part them, then that which is produced thereof, is a
Monster. Seek out therefore some fruitful Hens, and procure some of the
perfectest eggs that they lay: you may know which are for your purpose, by the
bigness of them; if not, then hold them against the Sun, and you shall
discern, both whether there be in them two yelks, and also whether they be
distinguished or no: and if you find in them such plenty of matter, that you
see they are for your turn, let them be sitten upon, their due time, and the
chickens will have four wings and four legs: but you must have a special care
in bringing them up. And as some eggs have two yelkes, so there are some that
have three: but these are not so common; and if they could be gotten, they
would yield chickens with six wings and sixs legs, which be more wonderful.
There has been seen a small Duck with four feet, having a broad thin bill, her
fore-parts black, her hinder-parts yellow, a black head, whitish eyes, black
wings, and a black circle about her neck, and her back and tail black, yellow
feet, and not standing far asunder; and she is at this day kept to be seen at
Torga. No question but she was generated after the same manner as we spoke even
now of chickens. So they report of a Pigeon that was seen which had four feet.
And many such monsters we have oft-times hatched at home for pleasure sake. So
also are Serpents generated, having many heads and many tails. Aristotle
writes of certain Serpents, that they may be generated after the same manner,
to have many heads. The Poets, and the ancient devisers of Fables, do speak
much of that Hydra L^rnaea, which was one of Hercules labors to overcome:
which Fiction was without all question occasioned by these kinds of Monsters.
And whilst I was employed about the writing of this present work, there was in
Naples a Viper seen alive, which had two heads, and three cloven tongues, and
moved every one of them up and down. I my self have seen many Lizards that had
two or three tails, which the common people most foolishly esteem to be a jest;
and it cannot be but these were generated of such eggs as had two yelks.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of certain other ways how to produce monstrous births.
WE may also produce Monsters by another way then that which we spoke of
before; for even after they are brought forth, we may fashion them into a
monstrous shape, even as we list: for as we may shape young fruits as they
grow, into the fashion of any vessel or case that we make for them to grow
into; as we may make a Quince like a man's head, a Cucumber like a Snake, by
making a case of that fashion for them to grow in; so also we may do by the
births of living Creatures. Hippocrates in his book of Air, and Water, and
Places, does precisely set down the manner hereof; and shows how they do it,
that dwell by the River Phasis, all of them being very long-headed, whereas no
other Nation is so besides. And surely Custom was the first cause that they had
such heads; but afterward Nature framed her self to that Custom; insomuch that
they esteemed it an honorable thing to have a very long head. The beginning of
that Custom was thus. As soon as the child was new born, whiles his head was
yet soft and tender, they would presently crush it in their hands, and so cause
it to grow out in length; yea they would bind it up with swathing bands, that
it might not grow round, but all in length: and by this custom it came to
pass, that their heads afterward grew such by nature. And in process of time,
they were born with such heads, so that they needed not to be so framed by
handling; for whereas the generative seed is derived from all the parts of the
body, sound bodies yielding good seed, but crazie bodies unsound seed; and
oftentimes bald fathers beget bald children; and blear-eyed fathers, blear-eyed
children; and a deformed father, for the most part a deformed child; and the
like also comes to pass concerning other shapes: why should not also
long-headed fathers generate long-headed children? But now they are not born
with such heads, because that practice is quite out of use; and so nature,
which was upheld by that custom, cease together with the custom. So if we
would produce a two-legged Dog, such as some are carried about to be seen; we
must take very young whelps, and cut off their feet, but heal them up very
carefully: and when they be grow to strength, join them in copulation with
other dogs that have but two legs left; and if their whelps be not two-legged,
cut off their legs still by succession, and at the last, nature will be
overcome to yield their two-legged dogs by generation. By some such practice as
you heard before, namely by handling, and often framing the members of young
children, Mid-wives are wont to amend imperfections in them; as the
crookedness or sharpness of their noses, or such like.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the wonderful force of imagination; and how to produce party-colored
births.
PLutark in his rehearsal of the opinions of Philosophers, writes, that
Empedocles held that an infant is formed according to that which the mother
looks upon at the time of conception: for, says he, women were wont to have
commonly pictures and images in great request, and to bring forth children
resembling the same. Hippocrates, to clear a certain woman's honesty that had
brought forth children very unlike their parents, ascribed the cause of it to a
certain picture which she had in her chamber. And the same defense Quintilian
uses on the behalf of a woman, who being her self fair, had brought forth a
Black-moor, which was supposed by all men to be her slaves son. Damascen
reports, that a certain young woman brought forth a child that was all hairy;
and searching out the reason thereof, he found the hiary image of John Baptist
in her chamber, which she was wont to look upon. Heliodorus begins that
excellent history which he wrote, with the Queen of Aethiopia, who brought
forth Chariclea a fair daughter; the cause whereof was, the fable of Andromeda
pictured in that chamber, wherein she lay with the King. We read of some
others, that they brought forth horned children, because in the time of their
coition they looked upon the fable of Actaeon painted before them. Many
children have hare-lips; and all because their mothers being with child, did
look upon a Hare. The conceit of the mind, and the force of Imagination is
great; but it is then most operative, when it is excessively bent upon any such
thing as it cannot attain unto. Women with child, when they long most
vehemently, and have their minds earnestly set upon any thing, do thereby alter
their inward spirits; the spirits move the blood, and so imprint the likeness
of the thing mused upon, in the tender substance of the child. And surely all
children would have some such marks or other, by reason of their mothers
longing, if this longing were not in some sort satisfied. Wherefore the
searchers out of secrets have justly ascribed the marks and signs in the young
ones, to the imagination of the mother; especially that imagination which
prevails with her in the chiefest actions, as in coition, in letting go her
seed, and such like: and as man of all other living creatures, is most swift
and fleeting in his thoughts, and fullest of conceits; so the variety of his
wit affords much variety of such effects; and therefore they are more in
mankind, then in other living creatures: for other creatures are not so diverse
minded, so that they may the better bring forth every one his like in his own
kind. Jacob was well acquainted with this force of imagination, as the
Scriptures witness: for endeavoring

To bring forth party-colored Sheep,
he took that course which I would wish every man to take, that attempts any
such enterprise. He took certain Rods and Poles of Popler, and Almond-tree, and
such as might be easily barked; and cut off half the rine, pilling them by
white strakes, so that the Rods were white and black in several circles, like a
Snakes color. Then he put the Rods which he had pilled, into the gutters and
watering-troughs, when the Sheep came to drink, and were in heat of conception,
that they might look upon the Rods. And the Sheep conceived before the Rods,
and brought forth young of party-colours, and with small and great spots. A
delightful sight it was. Now afterward, Jacob parted these Lambs by
themselves, and turned the faces of the other Sheep toward these
party-colored ones, about the time of conception: whereby it came to pass,
that the other Sheep in their heat, beholding those that were party-colored,
brought forth Lambs of the like color. And such experiments might be practiced
upon all living Creatures that bear wool; and would take place in all kinds of
beasts; for this course will prevail even in

Generating party-colored Horses;
A matter which Horse-keepers, and Horse-breeders do practice much; for they
are wont to hang and adorn with tapestry and painted clothes of sundry colors,
the houses and rooms where they put their Mares to take Horse; whereby they
procure Colts of a bright Bay color, or of a dapple Gray, or of any one
color, or of sundry colors together. And Absyrtus teaches the same in
effect; counselling us to cover the Mares body with some stuff of that color,
which we would have the Colt to be of: for look what color she is set forth
in, the same will be derived into the Colt; for the horse that covers her, will
be much affected with the sight of such colors, as in the heat of his lust he
looks on; and will beget a Colt of the same hue as the example then before
his eyes does present unto him. Oppianus in his first book of Hunting, writes
the same argument. Such is, says he, the industry and practisednesse of man's
wit, that they can alter the color of the young ones from the mother, and even
in the womb of their Dam procure them to be of diverse colors: for the
Horse-breeder does paint the Mares back with sundry colors, (even such as they
would procure to be in the Colt,) against the time that both she desires horse,
and the Stallion is admitted to cover her. So the Stallion, when he comes and
sees such goodly preparation as it were for his wedding, presently begins to
some at the mouth, and to neigh after her, and is possessed with the fire of
raging lust throughout his whole body, raving and taking on, that he cannot
forthwith satisfy himself upon his bride. At length the Horse-breeder takes
off their fetters, and lets them loose together; and the Mare admits him, and
afterward brings forth a Colt of as many colors as she beheld in the time of
her copulation; for as she conceives the Colt, so withal she conceives those
colors which she then looks upon.

How to procure white Pea-cocks.
Informer times, white Pea-cocks were such a rare sight in Colen, that every
one admired them as a most strange thing: but afterward they became more
common, by reason that merchants brought many of them out of Norway: for
whereas black or else party-colored Peacocks were carried into that Country to
be seen, presently as they came thither, they waxed white; for there the old
ones sit upon their eggs in the air, upon the tops of very high mountains,
full of snow; and by continual sitting there, it causes some alteration in
their own color; but the young which they hatch, are white all over. And no
doubt but some such courses will take good effect in all kinds of birds; for if
we take their Cages or Coops wherein they are kept, and their nests wherein
they sit, and white them on the inside with some plastering work, or else cover
them all over with white clothes or curtains, and so keep them in with grates,
that they may not get out, but there couple and sit, and hatch their eggs,
they will yield unto us white broods. So if you would*

Procure Pigeons of party colors,
you must take that course which Oppianus has set down. At such time, as they
fall to kissing their mate, and are desirous of copulation, let him that keeps
them lay before their eyes sundry clothes of the bravest colors they can get,
but especially purple: for the pigeons will in their heat of lust be much
affected and delighted with the sight thereof, and the young ones which they
bring forth, shall resemble the same colors. The subtle Fowler, says he, that
gives himself to take and to bring up birds, is well acquainted with, and is
wont to practice such experiments, and very artificially procures fine colors
in young Pigeons: he casts before their sparkling eyes fine wrought tapestry,
and red coverlets, and purple garments; and so whiles he feeds their eyes with
pleasing sights, he steals away their imagination to the colors which they
look upon, and thereby derives the very same colors into the young ones.

How to procure a shag-hair'd Dog.
In ^a^ting time you must strew their kennels, and the places where they lie
and couple, and usually haunt, with the fleeces and hides of beasts; and so,
while they continually look upon those sights, they will beget shag whelps like
Lions. This we heard came to pass by chance, and without any such intended
purpose, that a little Bitch lying continually in a Rams fleece, when she came
to be with whelp, she brought forth puppies of the like hair as the fleece was.

How to procure Swine, and other beasts to be white.
Swine-herds, and Keepers of beasts, when they would have white litters, are
wont to beautify, and to build the stables and places whither the beasts
resort to lie, with white roofs and white eaves; and the Swine which were
brought forth in such white sties, and the other beasts likewise that were
brought forth in such whited places, became thereby white all over.

CHAP. XX.
How it may be wrought, that Women should bring forth fair and beautiful
children.
BY this which has been spoken, it is easy for any man to work the like
effects in mankind, and to know how to procure fair and beautiful children.
Nay, Writers make mention, that these things which we speak of, have oftentimes
fallen out by chance. Wherefore it was not here to be omitted. The best means
to produce this effect, is to place in the bed-chambers of great men, the
images of Cupid, Adonis, and Ganymedes; or else to set them there in carved and
graven works, in some solid matter, that they may always have them in their
eyes: whereby it may to pass, that whenever their wives lie with them, still
they may think upon those pictures, and have their imagination strongly and
earnestly bent thereupon: and not only while they are in the act, but after
they have conceived and quickened also: so shall the child when it is born,
imitate and express the same form which his mother conceived in her mind, when
she conceived him, and bare in her mind, while she bare him in her womb. And I
know by experience, that this course will take good effect; for after I had
counseled many to use it, there was a woman, who had a great desire to be the
mother of a fair Son, that heard of it, and put it in practice; for she
procured a white boy carved of marble, well proportioned every way; and him she
had always before her eyes: for such a Son it was that she much desired. And
when she lay with her Husband, and likewise afterward, when she was with child,
still she would look upon that image, and her eyes and heart were continually
fixed upon it: whereby it came to pass, that when her breeding time was
expired, she brought forth a Son very like in all points, to that marble image,
but especially in color, being as pale and as white, as if he had been very
marble indeed. And thus the truth of this experiment was manifestly proved.
Many other women have put the like course in practice, and their skill has not
failed them. Oppianus mentions this kind of practice, that it is usual amongst
the Lacedaemonians: for they, says he, when they perceive that their wives are
breeding young bones, hang up fine pictures, and place goodly images in their
sight; some, of the most beautiful and handsome young men that ever mankind
afforded, as of Nireus, Narcissus, and valiant Hyacinthus, and of other young
lusty gallants that were most comely and beautiful in face, and very sightly
for all the parts of their body; and some, of such excellent gods as was Apollo
crowned with a garland of fresh colored Bay, and Evan that had a Diadem of
Vine-leaves about his head, and goodly hair hanging down under it: and this
they did, that while their Wives stood gazing continually upon such brave
pictures, and comely portraitures, they might breed and bring forth children of
the same comeliness and beauty.

CHAP. XXI.
How we may procure either males or females to be generated.
EMpedocles was of opinion, That males or females were generated according to
the heat or cold that was in them; and thence it is, says he, that the first
males are reported to have been generated in the Eastern and Southern parts of
the earth, but the first females in the Northern parts. But Parmenides quite
contrary affirmed, That males were especially generated toward the North, as
having in them more solidity and thickness; and females especially toward the
South, as being more loose and open, according to the disposition of the place.
Hipponax held, That males and females are generated, according as the seed is
either strong and solid, or fluid, weak and feeble. Anaxagoras writes, that the
seed which issues out of the right parts of the body, is derived into the
right parts of the womb; and likewise that which issues out of the left parts
of the body, falls into the left parts of the womb: but if they change
courses, and the right seed fall into the left cell or receipt in the womb, or
the left seed into the right cell, then it generates a female. Leucippus held,
That there was no cause either in the seed or heat, or solidity, or place, that
they should be different sexes, but only as it pleases nature to mark the young
ones with different genitories, that the male has a yard, and the female a
womb. Democritus affirms, that either sex in every part proceeds indifferently
from either parent; but the young one takes in sex after that parent which was
most prevalent in that generation. Hipponax says, if the seed whereof the
young is begotten, prevail most, then it is a male; but if the nourishment
which it receives in the breeding, prevail more then the seed, then it is a
female. But all Physicians with one consent affirm, that the right side has
most heat in it; wherefore if the woman receive and retain the generative seed
in the right side of her womb, then that which she conceives, is a male; but
if in the left side, it is a female. The experience whereof may be evidently
seen in such living Creatures as bring forth many at one burden: for if you
cut open a Sow that is great with Pig, you shall find the Boar-pigs lying in
the right side, and the Sow-pigs in the left side of her womb. And hence it
is, that Physicians counsel women, as soon as they have taken in man's seed, to
turn them presently on their right side. And hence it is, that if you knit up a
Rams right stone, he begets Ewe-lambs only, as Pliny writes. A Bull, as soon
as he has rid a Cow, gives evident signs to any man to conjecture whether he
has begotten a Cow-calf or a Bulchin; for if he leap off by the right side, it
is certain that he has begotten a Bulchin; if by the left side, then a
Cow-calf. Wherefore the Egyptians in their Hieroglyphics, when they would
signify a woman that has brought forth a daughter, they make the character
and likeness of a Bull looking toward the left side; but to signify the birth
of a son, they make his character as looking toward the right side. But if you
desire to have a male generated, Africanus, Columella, and Didymus counsel you
to knit up the left stone of the Sire; if a female, then to knit up his right
stone; at such times as he is to be coupled for generation. But because this
would be too muchto do, where there is great store of cattle, we may assay it
by another means. Northern blasts help much to the conception of a male, and
Southern blasts to the conception of a female, as Pliny reports: the force of
the Northern air is such, that those beasts which are wont to procreate females
only, this will cause to bring forth males also. The Dams at the time of their
copulation, must be set with their noses into the North: and if they have been
used to coition still in the morning, you must not put them to it in the
afternoon, for then they will not stand to their mate. Aristotle, a man most
subtle, and exquisitely seen in the works of nature, wills us, that about
the time of gendering, we should wait for some Northern blasts in a dry day,
and then let the flock feed against the wind, and so let them fall to
copulation: if we would procure females to be generated, then we must so wait
for Southern blasts, and let them stand with their heads toward the South as
they are in copulation; for so not only Aristotle counsels, but Columella
and Aelianus also: for it is a rule that Aelianus, Pliny, Africanus and Didymus
do all give, that if the cattle, as soon as they have been covered, do turn
themselves toward the Southern wind, then certainly they have conceived
females. There is also some cause of the procreation of a male, or of a female,
in the begetters themselves; nay further, some cause thereof may be the force
and operation of some waters: for sometimes the waters cause that a male or
female be generated. There is, not far from the City Pana, a certain River
called Milichus; and not far from that, another River called Charadius; whereof
if the beasts drink in the Springtime, they commonly bring forth all males:
for which cause the Shepherds there drive away their flocks at that time, and
feed them in that part of the Country which lies farthest off from that River;
as Pausanias writes in his Achaica.

CHAP. XXII.
Of diverse experiences that may be, and have been practiced upon diverse living
Creatures.
THere remain now certain experiments of living Creatures, both pleasant, and
of some use, which we have thought good here to set down, to save a labor of
seeking them any further. And first,

How to make Horses have white spots on them.
It is a thing required in the art of trimming of Horses, to be able to cause
white spots to grow in some parts of them; for crafty Horse-coursers are wont
to counterfeit white spots in the forehead, or left thigh, or right shoulder of
an Horse, thereby to deceive such men, as are wont to guess at the goodness
and qualities of a horse, by the conjecture of such marks. And this their
counterfeit practice has been derected by this chance; that the hair of a
horses skin being galled off in any place, after a while hoary hairs have grown
up there of themselves; and it is not unlikely but that this chance taught them
that practice. The manner of the doing it, is, first to shave off the hair in
that place where you would have a white spot; and then rub off, or cut the
upper skin, and so you shall there have a white patch. But Oppianus speaking of
the same experiment, shows that it is to be done by fire. There be some Horses,
says he, that are full of white round spots intermingled with their black
color: it comes by the industry of the Horse-breeder, who when they are yet
tender and young, cunningly burns off their hair with an hot iron. But on the
contrary, if you would have

The hairs of a wounded or galled place, to grow up of the same color, as the
other hair is of,
Tiberius has taught the way how to do it. You must knead three pints of
bruised or ground barley, and put to it the froth of nitre and a little salt,
and make it into loaves; then you must put them into an Oven till they are
burned to coals; afterward crush them, and beat them to powder, and then mix
them with oil, and anoint the sore or the scar therewith; and this you must do
for twenty days. But what should be the reason that this barley ashes should
cause, not white hairs, but the like in color to the rest, to grow upon the
scars or sores of horses whereupon it is cast, that, Alexander Aphrodisaeus
ascribes to this, because barley has in it a purgative and cleansing force,
and so wastes and expels the humors, and all the naughty stuff, that was
gathered by the sore into that part, because it was maimed, and consequently
not so well able to relieve it self. Neither yet will I here omit that toyish
experiment whereby we may

Procure in Oxen a counterfeit show of fatness.
If you take an Ox well grown in years, and make a hole into his thigh, and
blow wind thereby into him, and afterward give him meat, he will show fat,
though indeed he be very lean. We may also, by giving them some kind of water
to drink

Cause the fleeces and hides of cattle to be of diverse colors,
as Aelianus shows. The River Crathis affords one channel that makes beasts
white: for Oxen and Sheep, and all four-footed beasts, as Theophrastus says,
as soon as they drink of it, become white, though before they were red or
black. In Euboea, all for the most part, are white Oxen by nature. Sheep, by
reason of the diversity of matter which they drink, do diversely change their
color; the force and nature of the Rivers working this change in them,
especially at every ramming time. Some are turned from black to white, and
contrariwise, some are turned from white to black: these alterations are
commonly seen near to the River Antandrus, and near also to a certain River in
Thracia. The River Scamander, which is near unto Troy, makes as many Sheep as
drink of the water thereof, to become yellow. We may also conjecture and
foresee by certain outward bodily signs in the Dam or Sire,

What color their young ones will be of.
To foreknow the color of young Mules, we must take special example of the
hairs of their Dams ears and eyelids: for howsoever the rest of their body is
of one and the same color, yet in those two parts we may discern so many and
such colors as the foal shall have, as Columella writes. So if you look under
the Rams tongue, you shall there find certain veins; which if they be black,
then will the Lambs be black also; but if they be white, then he has begotten
white Lambs: for look what color these veins are of, with the same color will
the fleece of the Lamb be overspread; insomuch that if there be sundry colors
in them, there will be also sundry like colors upon the Lambs, as Aristotle,
Democritus and Didymus do witness. Now, how we may

Know by the egg, whether the chick when it is hatched, will be a Cock or a Hen,
Aristotle teaches us: for, says he, if the egg be exactly round, then it
will yield a Cock-chicken; but if it be somewhat long, then it yields an
Hen-bird: the reason is, because in things that are round, the natural heat is
more kindly and strongly compacted together.

How to make a bird sociable and familiar with thee.
Now we will speak of the sociablenesse and familiarity which a certain Pie had
with a friend of mine: who by this pretty device did make the Pie so well
acquainted with him, and so serviceable to him, that she would fly unto him,
not only for the supplying of her daily wants, but as it were for love, never
forsaking him night or day. The device was this. While she was yet unfeathered
in the nest, he broke off her lower beak, even to her very jaws, that the poor
wretch could not eat any meat but that which was put into her mouth with hands;
and he himself gave her with his own hands all the meat she did eat. After
that, she would fly to his trencher at dinner and supper, and would prate and
chat unto him very flippant; insomuch that nothing could be spoken in the
house, but she would imitate it, and speak it again; and not only frame her
tongue to their words, but her body also to the imitating and resembling of
their actions. And he was wont still to leave her loose at home, and she would
fly about everywhere; but still at dinner and supper times she would return
home. It fell out that the man had occasion to go from home fifteen or sixteen
days journey: she would always bear him company, now and then flying a great
way before him, and would sit still upon a bough till he came at her; and then
she would leap upon his cap and his shoulders, frisking about him for very joy;
and sometimes staying behind him; and then when he was gone a great way before,
she would in all haste fly away after to overtake him: and she was also his
continual bedfellow; and yet to this day he has her, and enjoys her
familiar company. But, concerning the general transmutation and change of
living creatures, let these things be sufficient which we have already spoken.

THE THIRD BOOK OF Natural Magic: Which delivers certain precepts of
Husbandry; and shows how to intermingle sundry kinds of Plants, and how to
produce new kinds.
The PROEME.
WE have rehearsed concerning diverse kinds of new living Creatures; now shall I
speak of Plants, which ravish with admiration the eyes and minds of those that
contemplate on them, with their abundant pleasantness, and wonderful Elegancy.
These bring more profit, and by these a natural Philosopher may seem more
admirable. For use made with the earth, is more honest and honorable then with
other things* and the ground never grows old or barren, but is everywhere
naturally rank to receive new seed, and to produce new; and is ever unsatisfied
in fruitfulness, and brings perpetual increase: and if nature be always
admirable, she will seem more wonderful in Plants. Copulation was but of one
kind, here it is almost infinite; and not only every Tree can be ingrafted
into every Tree, but one Tree may be adulterated with them all. Living
Creatures of diverse kinds were not easily produced, and those that come from
other Countries were hard to get: here is no difficulty at all; grafts are
fetched and sent, if need be, to any part of the world. And if diversity of
Creatures are made in Africa, by their copulating when they meet at the Rivers,
that so new creatures are always produced; here in Italy, where the Air is
always calm, and the Climate very indulgent, strange and wild plants find a
good harbor, and ground to grow in, which is the mother and nourisher of all,
and so fruitful to produce new and diversity of plants, that it can hardly be
exhausted. And we can better write of them, and know the truth more then
others, because we have them still before our eyes, and an opportunity to
consider of their effects. And if our Ancestors found many new things, we by
adding to theirs, have found many more, and shall produce more excellent things
overpassing them, because daily by our art, or by chance; by nature, or new
experience, new plants are made. Diodorus writes, that the Vine at first was
but one, and that was wild; but now by the help of Bacchus alone, from the
quality of the ground, the nature of the climate, and the art of planting, it
is varied into many kinds, that it were madness to number them up, and not
worth our time. Nature brought forth but one kind of Pear Tree: now so many
men's names are honored by it, that one is called Decumana, another
Dolabelliana, and another is named from Decumius and Dolabella. The same thing
is observed in Figs, of Livy and Pompey. Quinces are of many kinds; some
called Mariana from Marius, Manliana from Manlius, Appiana Claudiana from
Appius Claudius, Cestiana from Cestius: their varieties have made the Authers
names immortal. What shall I say of Laurel cherries, found in Pliny his time?
what of Citrons? which as Athenaeus says, were too sharp to eat in the days of
Theophrastus, and the ancestors of Plutark and Pliny; but Palladius made them
to become sweet. What of the Peach, and Almond-peach Nuts, fruits our
forefathers knew not, yet now are they eaten, being pleasant and admirable?
what of Clove-gilliflowers, that the Gardrers Art has made so dainty and sweet
scented? and so of other plants I have everywhere set down in this work? Our
Naples abounds so with them, that we would not go forth to see the Orchards of
the Hesperides, Alcinus, Semiramis, and at Memphis, that were made to hang
above ground. But I shall briefly and plainly relate the History.

CHAP. I.
How new kinds of Plants may be generated of putrefaction.
AS we have showed before, that new kinds of Living Creatures may be generated
of putrefaction; so, to proceed in the same order as we have begun, we will now
show that new kinds of Plants may grow up of their own accord, without any help
of seed or such like. The Ancients questionless were of opinion, that diverse
plants were generated of the earth and water mixed together; and that particular
places did yield certain particular plants. We rehearsed the opinion of
Diogenes before, who held that plants are generated of water putrified in it
self, and a little earth tempered therewith. Theophrastus held, that the rain
causes much putrefaction and alteration in the earth, and thereby plants may
be nourished, the Sun working upon it with his heating, and with his drying
operation. They write also, that the ground when it is stirred, brings forth
such kinds of Plants always, as are usual in the same place. In the Isle
Creta, the ground is of that nature, that if it be stirred anywhere, and no
other thing sown or planted in it, it will of it self bring forth a
Cypresse-tree: and their tilled lands, those that are somewhat moist, when they
lie fallow, bring forth thistles. So the herb Laser in Africa, is generated of
a kind of pitchy or clammy rain and thick dirt; and the herb will show it self
out of the earth presently after the rain is fallen. Pliny said, that the
waters which fall from above, are the cause of every thing that grows upon the
earth, nature showing therein her admirable work and power: and many such
things they report, which we have spoken of in the books of the knowledge of
Plants. And I my self have oft-times by experience proved, that ground dug
out from under the lowest foundations of certain houses, and the bottom of some
pits, and laid open in some small vessel to the force of the Sun, has brought
forth diverse kinds of Plants. And whereas I had oftentimes, partly for my own
pleasure, and partly to search into the works of Nature, sought out and
gathered together earths of diverse kinds, I laid them abroad in the Sun, and
watered them often with a little sprinkling, and found thereby, that a fine
light earth would bring forth herbs that had slight stalks like a rush, and
leaves full of fine little rags; and likewise that a rough and stiff earth
full of holes, would bring forth a slight herb, hard as wood, and full of
crevises. In like manner, if I took of the earth that had been dug out of
the thick woods, or out of moist places, or out of the holes that are in hollow
stones, it would bring forth herbs that had smooth bluish stalks, and leaves
full of juice and substance, such as Peny-wort, Purslane, Senegreek, and
Stone-croppe. We made trial also of some kinds of earth that had been far
fetched, such as they had used for the ballast of their Ships; and we found
such herbs generated thereof, as we knew not what they were. Nay further also,
even out of very roots and barks of Trees, and rotten seeds, powned and buried,
and there macecrated with water, we have brought forth in a manner the very
same herbs; as out of an Oken root, the herb Polypody, and Oak-fern, and
Splenewort, or at least such herbs as did resemble those, both in making and in
properties. What should I here rehearse, how many kinds of toad-stools and
puffs we have produced? yea, of every several mixture of putrified things, so
many several kinds have been generated. All which I would here have set down,
if I could have reduced them into any method; or else if such plants had been
produced, as I intended: but those came that were never sought for. But happily
I shall hereafter, if God will, write of these things, for the delight, and
speculation, and profit of the more curious fort: which I have neither time nor
leisure now to mention, seeing this work is ruffled up in haste. But let us see

How Toad-stools may be generated.
Dioscorides, and others have written, That the bark of a white Poplar-Tree,
and of a black, being cut into small pieces, and sowed in dunged lands or
furrows, will at all times of the year bring forth mushromes or toad-stools
that are good to be eaten. And in another place he says, that they are more
particularly generated in those places, where there lies some old rusty iron,
or some rotten cloth: but such as grow near to a Serpents hole, or any noisome
Plants, are very hurtful. But Tarentinus speaks of this matter more precisely.
If, says he, you cut the stock of a black Poplar peece-meal into the earth,
and pour upon it some leaven that has been steeped in water, there will soon
grow up some Poplar toad-stools. He adds further; If an up-land or hilly
field that has in it much stubble and many stalks of corn, be set on fire at
such time as there is rain brewing in the clouds, then the rain falling, will
cause many toad-stools there to spring up of their own accord: but if, after
the field is thus set on fire, happily the rain which the clouds before
threatened does not fall; then, if you take a thin linen cloth, and let the
water drop through by little and little like rain, upon some part of the field
where the fire has been, there will grow up toad-stools, but not so good as
otherwise they would be, if they had been nourished with a shower of rain. Next
we will show

How Sperage may be generated.
Dydimus writes, That if any man would have good store of Sperage to grow, he
must take the horns of wild Rams, and beat them into very small powder, and
sow them in eared ground, and water it, and he shall have his intent. There is
one that reports a more strange matter; that if you take whole Rams horns not
powned into small pieces, but only cut a little, and make a hole in them, and
so set them, they will bring forth Sperage. Pliny is of Didymus opinion, that
if the horns be powned and ^igged into the earth, they will yield Sperage;
though Dioscorides thinks it to be impossible. And though I have made often
trial hereof, but could not find it so to be, yet my friends have told me of
their own experience, that the same tender seed that is contained within the
Rams horn, has produced Sperage. The same my friends also have reported

That Ivy does grow out of the Hearts horn;
and Aristotle writes of an Husbandman that found such an experiment; though
for my own part I never tried it. But Theophrastus writes, that there was Ivy
found growing in the Hearts horn; whereas it is impossible to think how any Ivy
seed could get in there: and whereas some allege, that the Heart might have
rubbed his horn against some Ivy roots, and so some part of the horn being soft
and ready to putrify, did receive into it some part of the root, and by this
means it might there grow; this supposal carries no show of probability or
credit with it. But if these things be true, as I can say or see nothing to the
contrary, then surely no man will deny but that diverse kinds of plants may be
generated of diverse kinds of living Creatures horns. In like manner, may plants
be generated of the putrified barks and boughs of old Trees: for so is

Polypody, and the herb Hyphear generated;
for both these, and diverse other plants also, do grow up in Firre-trees, and
Pine-trees, and such other: for in many Trees, near to the bark, there is a
certain phlegmatic or moist humor, that is wont to putrify; which, when it
abounds too much within, breaks forth into the outward show of the boughs and
the stock of the Tree; and there it meets with the putrified humor of the
bark; and the heat of the Sun working upon it there, quickly turns it into such
kinds of herbs.

CHAP. II.
How Plants are changed, one of them degenerating into the form of the other.
TO work Miracles, is nothing else (as I suppose) but to turn one thing into
another, or to effect those things which are contrary to the ordinary course of
Nature. It may be done by negligence, or by cunning handling and dressing them,
that plants may forsake their own natural kind, and be quite turned into
another kind; wholly degenerating, both in taste, and color, and bigness, and
fashion: and this I say may easily be done, either if you neglect to dress or
handle them according to their kind, or else dress them more carefully and
artificially then their own kind requires. Furthermore, every plant has his
proper manner, and peculiar kind of sowing or planting* for some must be sowed
by seed, others planted by the whole stem, others set by some root, others
graffed by some sprig or branch: so that if that which should be sowed by seed,
be planted by the root, or set by the whole stock, or graffed by some branch;
or if any that should be thus planted be sowed by seed; that which comes up
will be of a diverse kind from that which grows usually, if it be planted
according to its own nature, as Theophrastus writes. Likewise if you shall
change their place, their air, their ground, and such like, you pervert their
kind; and you shall find that the young growing plant will resemble another
kind, both in color and fashion; all which are clear cases by the books of
Husbandry. Some examples we will here rehearse. If you would change

A white Vine into a black, or a black into a white;
sow the seed of a white Garden-Vine, and that which comes of it, will be a
black Wilde-vine; and so the seed of a black Garden-vine will bring forth a
white Wilde-vine, as Theophrastus teaches. The reason is, because a Vine is
not sowed by seed, but the natural planting of it is by sprigs and roots.
Wherefore if you deal with it otherwise then the kind requires, that which
comes of it must needs be unkindly. By the like means

A white Fig Tree may degenerate into a black.
for the stone of a Fig, if it be set, never brings forth any other but a wild
or a wood Fig Tree, and such as most commonly is of a quite contrary color; so
that of a white figtree it degenerates into a black, and contrariwise a black
fig tree degenerates into a white. Sometimes also, of a right and noble Vine is
generated a bastard Vine, and that so different in kind oftentimes, that it
has nothing of the right garden-vine, but all merely wild. In like manner
also are changed

The red Myrtle and the red Bay Tree into black,
and cannot choose but lose their color: for these likewise degenerate, as the
same Theophrastus reports to have been seen in Antandrus; for the Myrtle is not
sowed by seed, but planted by graffing; and the Bay Tree is planted by setting
a little sprig thereof that has in it some part of the root, as we have showed
in our discourse of Husbandry. So also are

Sweet Almonds and sweet Pomegranates changed into sour ones.
for the stones or kernels of the Pomegranates are changed from their right
blue, into a baser color; and the Pomegranate it self, though it be never so
good, degenerates into a hard, and commonly a sharp fruit. The Almond
degenerates likewise both in taste, and also in feeling; for of a soft one
comes a harder: therefore we are counseled to graffe him when he is prettily
well grown, or else to change him, and shift him often. An Oak likewise will
become worse: and therefore whereas the best grows in Epyrus, and many have
planted the same elsewhere, yet they could never produce the like of that. In
like manner, of the kernel of the natural Olive comes a wild Olive; (and they
that say that the male Cypresse-tree for the most part degenerates into a
female;) and in process of time there is such a change, that it agrees in
nothing with the natural Olive, but is so stark wild, that sometimes it cannot
bring forth fruit to any perfection. Varro says that

Coleworts are changed into Rape, and Rape into Coleworts.
Old seed is of so great force in some things, that it quite changes the
nature; for the old seed of Coleworts being sowed, brings forth Rape; and
contrariwise, old Rape-seed degenerates into Coleworts. By labor also and
dressing

The Corn Typha, and Spelt, are changed into Wheat, and Wheat into them;
for this may be done, if you take them being of a thorough ripeness, and
knead them, and then plant them; but this will not so prove the first nor the
second year; but you must expect the proof of it in the third year, as
Theophrastus shows. Pliny writes, that the Corn Siligo is changed into Wheat
the second year. So all seeds, either by reason that they are neglected, or
because there is some indisposition either in the earth, or the air where they
are, do oft-times degenerate from the excellency and goodness of their kind,
and become worse. Virgil has observed it: I have seen, says he, the best and
choicest things that were most made of, at length yet to degenerate, unless
man's industry did yearly supply them with his help: so fatal it is for all
things to wax worse and worse, and still to have need to be renewed. Galens
father, a man very studious of Husbandry, especially in his old age, bestowed
great pains and diligence to find out, whether the annoyances of fruits, that
which mars their pure goodness, did spring up of it self, or arise out of any
seeds of the fruits themselves, which did degenerate into other kinds.
Wherefore he took the purest, and the cleanest Wheat and Barley that he could
get, and having picked out all other seed whatsoever, sowed them in the ground:
and when he found much Tares growing in the Wheat, but very little in the
Barley, he put the same experiment in other grain in practice; and at last
found in Pulse a hard and round Fetch; and moreover, that the herb Axesceed did
grow among Pulse, by a kind of degeneration of the Pulse into Axesceed. So,
unless it be prevented by skill and pains,

The herb Ballamint will turn into a Mint.
Wherefore it must be often shifted and translated from place to place, lest it
so degenerate, as Theophrastus counsels; for when a man does not look to it
and dress it, the roots thereof will grow very large, and thereby the upper
part being weakened, loses the rankness of his savor; and that being lost,
there remains in it but a weak smell, the very same in a manner that is in a
common Mint. I my self have sowed Mint seed, and it has been changed into
wild Peny-roial; I mean, in savor only: for the fashion of the Mint remained
still in it. Martial writes, That

Basil-royal degenerates into-wilde Betony,
if it be laid open to the Suns hotest and greatest force: for then it will
bring forth sometimes purple flowers, sometimes white, and sometimes of a Rosy
color. And it will not only degenerate into Betony, but into Ballamint also.
Likewise the boughs of the shrub Casia, as Galen reports, will degenerate
into Cinnamon. Likewise

Cloves, Roses, Violets, and Gilli-flowers, of purple, will become white,
either by reason that they are old, or else if they be not well looked unto.
For Theophrastus records, that Violets, Roses, and Gilli-flowers, if they be
not well heeded, in three years will wax white; and the experience thereof I my
self have plainly seen. Neither yet will Plants degenerate one into another,
only in such case as where there is a kind of vicinity and likeness of nature,
but also where there is no such vicinity, one plant may be changed into another
of a quite different kind: for

An Oak may be changed into a Vine.
Albertus reports, (if the thing be as true as it is strange; but let the
truth thereof lie upon his credit) he reports, I say, that Oaken or Beechen
boughs being ingraffed into the Tree Myrica, is quite changed into it; and so
into the Tree called Tremisca, which is a baser kind of wood: and likewise if
Oaken boughs be set in the ground of Alummum, a place so called, they will be
quite altered into right Vines, such as their grapes yield good wine; and
sometimes the old Oaks, if they be pared, degenerate into Vines. But we must
not think that this change is made while those Trees or boughs last; but when
once they are putrified, then the nature of the ground works into them, and
changes them into Vines.

CHAP. III.
How to make one fruit compounded of many.
AS we heard before of diverse living Creatures, that they might be mingled into
one, by copulation; so now we will show also how to contrive diverse kinds of
fruits, by graffing into one fruit: for graffing is in plants the same that
copulation is in living creatures: yet I deny not, but there are other means
whereby this may be effected, as well as by graffing. But above all other,
graffing is most praiseworthy, as being the best and fittest means to
incorporate one fruit into another, and so of many to make one, after a
wonderful manner. And whereas it may be thought a very toilsome, and indeed
impossible matter, here the excellent effect of the work must sweeten all thy
labor, and thy painful diligence will take away the supposed impossibility of
the thing, and perform that which a man would think were not possible to be
done. Neither must thou suffer thy self to be discouraged herein by the sayings
of rude Husbandmen which have attempted this thing, but for want of skill
could not perform it, seeing experience teaches thee that it has been done.
Wherefore against such discouragements, thou must arm thy self with a due
consideration of such experiments as the Ancients have recorded: as for
example, that the Fig Tree may be incorporated into the Plane-tree, and the
Mulberry-tree; and likewise the Mulberry-tree into the Chestnut-tree, the
Turpentine-tree, and the white Poplar, whereby you may procure white
Mulberries; and likewise the Chestnut-tree into a Hasel, and an Oak; and
likewise the Pomegranate-tree into all Trees, for that it is like to a common
whore, ready and willing for all Comers; and likewise the Cherry-tree into a
Turpentine-tree: and to conclude, that every Tree may be mutually incorporated
into each other, as Columella supposes. And this is the cause of every
composition of many fruits into one, of every adopted fruit which is not the
natural child, as it were, of the Tree that bare it; and this is the cause of
all strange and new kinds of fruits that grow. Virgil makes mention of such a
matter, when he says, that Dido admired certain Trees which she saw, that bare
new kinds of leaves, and apples that naturally were not their own. And
Palladius says, that Trees are joined together as it were, by carnal
copulation, to the end that the fruit thereof might contain in it, all the
excellencies of both the parents: and the same Trees were garnished with two
sorts of leaves, and nourished with two sorts of juices, and the fruit had a
double relish, according to both the kinds whence it was compounded. But now,
as we did in our tract of the commixtion of diverse kinds of living Creatures;
so here also it is meet to prescribe certain rules, whereby we may cause those
diverse plants which we would intermingle, to join more easily, and to agree
better together, for the producing of new and compounded fruits. First
therefore, we must see that either of the Trees have their bark of one and the
same nature: and both of them must have the same time of growing and shooting
out of their sprigs; as was required in living creatures, that both of them
should have the same time of breeding their young ones: for if the graffe have
a dry or a hard bark, and the stock have a moist or soft bark, or that they be
any way contrary each to other, we shall labor in vain. Then we must see that
the ingraffing be made in the purest and soundest place of the stock, so that
it neither have any tumors or knobs, or any scars, neither yet has been
blasted. Again, it is very material, that the young graffes or shoots be fetched
from the most convenient place or part of the Trees; namely, from those boughs
that grow toward the East, where the Sun is wont to rise in the Summertime.
Again, they must be of a fruitful kind, and be taken off from young plants,
such as never bare fruit before. They must also be taken in their prime, when
they are beginning first to bud, and such as are of two years growth, and
likely to bear fruit in their second year. And the stocks into which they are
to be engraffed, must likewise be as young as may be graffed into; for if they
be old, their hardness will scarce give any entertainment to strange shoots to
be planted upon them. And many such observations must be diligently looked
into, as we have showed in our book of Husbandry. But we must not here omit to
speak of the lome, or that clammy mortar, which makes

The Graffe and the stock to close more easily together;
for it is very helpful to glue or fasten the skins of both the barks one into
the other: and if the barks be of a diverse nature, yet by this lome they may be
so bound into one, that they will easily grow together. And surely it is
commodious in many respects. First, because, as in man's body, the flesh being
wounded or pierced into, is soon closed up again with stiff and clammy
plasters applied thereunto; so the bark or the boughs of Trees being cut or
rent, will close together again very speedily, by the applying of this mortar.
For if you pill the bark off from a Tree, or slip off a little sprig from a
bough, unless you close it up so cunningly, that it may stick as fitly every
way in the graffing as whilst it grew, it will soon wither, and fade, and lose
the natural juice and moisture; which inconvenience this lome will prevent, and
fit them one into another. Moreover, if there be any open chink betwixt the
bark and the Tree, presently the air gets in, and will not suffer them to
close; therefore to make it sure that they may close without fail, this lome is
needful. And whereas there are some Trees which cannot away to be harbored in
any of another kind, this lome knit them so strongly into the stock, that they
cannot but bud and blossom. But here we must observe, that this glue or mortar
must be as near of the nature of the thing engraffed as may be; for then it
will perform this duty more kindly. If you be diligent herein, you may do many
matters. We will give you a taste of some, that by these you may learn to do
the like. Pill off the bark of Holly, and make a pit in some moist ground, and
there bury your Holly rines, and let them there putrify, which will be done in
twelve days: then take them forth, and stamp them till you see they are become
a clammy slime. This is also made of the fruit Sebesten in Syria; and likewise
it may be made of ordinary birdlime: but the best of all is made of the rines
of Elm-roots stamped together; for this has a special quality, both to fasten,
and also to cherish. But let us return to graffing, which is of such great
force, that it has caused a new kind of a bastard fruit that was never heard
of before, namely

An Apple compounded of a Peach-apple, and a Nut-peach;
which kind of compound generation, was never seen, nor heard of, nor yet
thought upon by the Ancient. This is to be done by a kind of graffing which
they call emplastering. Take off two young fruitful sprigges, one from a
Peach-apple Tree, and the other from the Nut-peach Tree; but they must be well
grown, and such as are ready to budde forth. Then pare off the bark of them
about two fingers breadth in compass, so that the budde to be graffed may
stand fitly in the midst betwixt them both; but you must do it charily, lest
you perish the wood. Then cleave them thorough the middle a little way, that
they may be let one into another, and yet the cleft not seen, but covered with
the bud. Then take off a bud from one of those Trees, with the bark round about
the bud, and set it into the midst of the boughs which we spoke of before; and
so engraffe them together into the other Tree, having first cut out a round fit
place for them therein. They must be engraffed in that part of the Tree, which
is most neat and fresh-coloured; the sprigs that grow about that place must be
cut off, lest they withdraw the nourishment from the graffe, which requires it
all for it self. And when you have so done, bind it about gently, that you
hurt it not; and cover it with somewhat, lest the rain fall down upon it; but
especially take heed to the cleft, and the place where you pilled off the bark,
that you plaster it up well with mortar. Thus if you do, the graffe will very
kindly prosper, and the bud grow forth into a fruit that is compounded of both
kinds, and it shall carry the hue both of the Peach-apple and the Nut-peach by
equal proportion, such as was never seen before. By this means also we may
procure the bringing forth

Of a Fig half white and half black;
for if we take the buds of each of them, paring them off together with the
bark round about them, and then cut them in the middle, and put the half of
one, and the half of the other together, and so emplaister them into the Tree,
as we spoke before, the fruit thereof will be a Fig half white and half
black. So also

Pomegranates may be brought forth, which will be sweet on the one side, and
sour on the other;
If you take either the shoots or the buds of each of them, and after you have
divided them in the midst, put the half of each together, as before was spoken.
But this may be done best upon the shoots or sprigs; for the bud can hardly be
pared off, nor well divided, because the bark is so weak, and so thin, and
slender, that it will not endure to be much or long handled. Likewise

Orenges compounded of diverse kinds, and such as are half Limons; as also
Limons half sweet, and half sour, may be produced,
if we mix them after the same manner as we spoke before; for these are very
fit to be graffed by emplastering; and these kinds of compound Orenges and
Limons are very commonly to be seen in many Orchards in Naples* In like manner
we may mingle and compound

A Peach of the white and the red Peach,
if we put those two kinds together, by such emplastering: for there are of
this compound fruit to be sold in Naples at this day. Likewise we may procure

A grape that has a kernel or stone half black, and diversely colored.
We must deal by the shoots of Vines, as we showed before was to be done by the
buds of other Trees; cleave them in the middle, and bind two shoots or more of
diverse sorts of Vines handsomely together, that they may grow up in one, and
graff them into a fruitful Vine of some other kind. And the same which we have
showed concerning fruits, may be as well practiced also upon flowers. As for
example; If we would produce

Roses that are half white and half red;
we must take the sprigs of white Rose, and of a red, and pare off the buds of
each of them; and having cut them asunder in the middle, put the halfs of each
together, as we spoke before, and engraffe them artificially into the bark, and
then have a diligent care still to cherish them, the compound bud will in due
season bring forth Roses which will be white of the one side, and red of the
other. But if you would make trial hereof in Clove-gilli-flowers, and desire

To produce some that are half red,
seeing they have no buds at all, you must practice this experiment upon their
root; you must take two roots of them, and cleave them in the middle, and match
them fitly together, that they may grow each to other; and bind them up well,
and then will they yield compound Clove-gilli-flowers: of which kind we have
great store, and they are common amongst us everywhere; and they do not only
bring forth party-colored flowers, but the very same bough, and one and the
same sprig, will bear white ones and red ones, and such as are wrought and as
it were embroidred with diverse goodly colors, most pleasant to be seen.

CHAP. IV.
Of a second means whereby fruits may be mingled and compounded together.
THere is also a second way of compounding diverse kinds of fruits together;
namely, by another manner of graffing. As for example; If we would produce

Pomegranates compounded of diverse kinds,
Theophrastus shows us how to do it. We must take the young slips or branches
of diverse kinds, and bruise them with a Beetle, so that they may stick and hang
together; and then bind them up very hard each to other, and set them in the
ground: and if they be well laid together, all those slips will grow up jointly
into one Tree; but so, that every one of them retains his own kind, and
receives his several nourishment by it self, and severally digests it: and the
chief community which they have all together, is their mutual embracing each of
other. The same Theophrastus teaches us in the same place,

How one and the same Vine-branch may bring forth a black and a white grape
both together; and how in the same grape may be found a white and black stone
hanging together.
Take the branch of a white Vine, and another of the black, and the uppermost
half of either of them must be bruised together; then you must match them
equally, and bind them up together, and plant them: for by this means they
will grow up both into one joint; for every living thing may be matched with
another, especially where one is of the same or the like kind with the other:
for then if they be dissolved, as these are in some sort when they are bruised,
their natures will easily close together, and be compact into one nature: but
yet either of these branches has his several nourishment by it self, without
confusion of both together; whereby it comes to pass, that the fruit arising
from them is of a diverse nature, according as either of the sprigs requires.
Neither ought this to seem strange, that both of them concurring into one,
should yet retain each of them their several kind, seeing the like hereof may
be found in certain Rivers which meet together by confluence into one and the
same channel, and yet either of them keeps his own several course and passage;
as do the Rivers Cephisus and Melas in Boeotia. Columella teaches us to do
this thing on this manner. There is, says he, a kind of engraffing, whereby
such kind of grapes are produced, as have stones of diverse kinds, and sundry
colors; which is to be done by this means. Take four or five, or more (if you
will) Vine-branches of diverse kinds, and mingle them together by equal
proportion, and so bind them up. Afterward put them into an earthen pipe or a
horn fast together; but so, that there may be some parts of them seen standing
out at both ends; and those parts so standing forth, must be dissolved or
bruised: and when you have so done, put them into a trench in the ground,
covering them with muck, and watering them till they begin to bud. And when the
buds are grown fast together, after two or three years, when they are all knit
and closed into one, then break the pipe, and near about the middle of the
stalk beneath the sprouts, there where they seem to have most grown together,
cut off the Vine, and heal that part where it is so cut, and then lay it under
the ground again about three fingers deep: and when that stalk shall shoot up
into sprigs, take two of the best of them, and cherish them, and plant them in
the ground, casting away all the other branches; and by this means you shall
have such kinds of grapes as you desire. This very same experiment does Pliny
set down, borrowing it of Columella. But Didymus prescribes it on this manner.
Take two Vine-branches of diverse kinds, and cleave them in the middle; but with
such heedful regard, that the cleft go as far as the bud is, and none of the
pith or juice be lost; then put them each to other, and close them together, so
that the bud of either of them meet right one with the other: and as much as
possibly may be, let them touch together, whereby both those buds may become as
one: then bind up the branches with paper as hard together as you can, and
cover them over with the Sea-onion, or else with some very stiff clammy earth;
and so plant them, and water them after four or five days, so long till they
shoot forth into a perfect bud. If you would produce

A Fig, that is half white, and half red;
Leontinus teaches you to do it after this manner. Take two shoots of diverse
kinds of Fig Trees; but you must see that both the shoots be of the same age,
and the same growth as near as you can: then lay them in a trench, and dung
them, and water them. And after they begin to bud, you must take the buds of
each, and bind them up together, so that they may grow up into one stalk: and
about two years after, take them up, and plant them into another stock, and
thereby you shall have Figs of two colors. So then by this means

All fruits may be made to be party-colored;
and that not only of two, but of many colors, accordingly as many kinds of
fruits may be compounded together. And surely these experiments are very true,
though they be somewhat hard to be done, and require a long times practice, as
I my self have had experience. The like experiment to these is recorded by
Palladius, and by other Greek Writers, who show the way

How a Vine may bring forth clusters of grapes that are white, but the stones
of the grapes black.
If white and black Vines grow near together, you must shred the branches of
each, and presently clap them together so, that the bud of either may meet
right together, and so become one: then bind them up hard in paper, and cover
them with soft and moist earth; and so let them lie three days or thereabouts:
after that, see that they be well and fitly matched together, and then let them
lie till a new bud come forth of a fresh head: and by this means you shall
procure in time, diverse kinds of grapes, according to the diverse branches you
put together. I my self have made choice of two shoots of two diverse Vines
growing one by another; I have cleft or cut them off in that place where the
buds were shooting forth, leaving the third part of the bud upon the branch; I
fastened them together, and bound them up into one very fast, lest when the
buds should wax greater, one of them might fly off from the other: I fitted
them so well, branch with branch, and bud with bud, that they made but one
stalk; and the very same year they brought forth grapes that had cloven kernels
or stones. This shoot so springing up, I put to another; and when that was so
sprung up, I put that also to another; and by this continual fitting of diverse
sprigs one to another, I produced clusters of divers-coloured and
divers-natured grapes: for one and the same grape was sweet and unsavory; and
the stones were some long, some round, some crooked; but all of them were of
diverse colors. Pontanus has elegantly showed

How Citron-trees may bear diverse kinds;
namely, by joining two sundry boughs together, after the bark has been pared
aaway, and fastening each to other with a kind of glue, that they may grow up
one as fast as the other; and when they are engraffed into one stock, they must
be very carefully covered and looked unto, and so one and the same branch will
bring forth fruit of diverse kinds. So you may procure

An Orenge-tree to bring forth an Apple half sweet and half sour.
And this kind of commixtion was invented by chance; for there were graffed two
boughs of Orenge-trees, one brought forth a sweet, and the other a sharp fruit.
When occasion served to transplant and remove the Tree, it was cut off in the
middle, according as Husbandmen are wont to do when they plant such Trees
after they are grown old; and by great chance, it was cut off there where the
two boughs had been before engraffed: and so when the stock budded afresh,
there arose one bud out of the sharp and sweet branches both together as they
were left in the stock; and this one bud brought forth Apples or fruit of both
relishes. Wherefore no question but such a thing may be effected by art, as
well as it was by chance, if any man have a mind to produce such kind of
fruits.

CHAP. V.
Of a third way, whereby diverse kinds of fruits may be compounded together.
WE will also set down a third way, whereby we may mingle and compound diverse
kinds of fruits together. A way which has been delivered unto us by the
Ancients, though for my own part I think it to be not only a very hard, but
even an impossible matter. Notwithstanding, because grave Ancient Writers have
set it down, I cannot scorn here to rehearse it: and though I have put it in
practice, but to no purpose, for it has not so fallen out as they write, yet I
will not discourage any man that has a mind to make trial hereof; for it may
be that fortune will second their endeavors better then she did mine. The way
is this; to gather many seeds of sundry Trees and fruits, and wrapping them up
together, so to sow them: and when they are grown up into stalks, to bind all
the stalks together, that they may not fly asunder, but rather grow up all
into one Tree; and this Tree will bring forth diverse kinds of fruits, yea and
one and the same fruit will be mingled and compounded of many. It should seem
that the Authors of this experiment, learned it first out of Theophrastus, who
writes, that, If you sow two diverse seeds near together within a hands breadth,
and then sow two other diverse seeds a little above them, the roots which will
come of all these seeds will lovingly embrace and wind about each other, and
so grow up into one stalk or stock, and be incorporated one into another. But
special care must be had how the seeds be placed; for they must be set with the
little end upward, because the bud comes not out of the low and hollow parts,
but out of the highest. And there are four seeds required, because so many will
easily and fitly close together. A matter, which if it were true, it might be a
very ready means which would produce exceeding many and wonderful experiments.
By such a means

Berries that are party-colored may be produced.
If you take a great many berries, white, and black, and red, one amongst
another, and sow them in the earth together; and when they are shot up, bind
all their stalks into one, they will grow together, and yield party colored
berries. Pliny writes, that this way was devised from the birds; Nature, says
he, has taught how to graffe with a seed: for hungry birds have devoured
seeds, and having moistened and warmed them in their bellies, a little after
have dunged in the forky twistes of Trees, and together with their dung
excluded the seed whole which erst they had swallowed: and sometimes it brings
forth there where they dung it, and sometimes the wind carries it away into
some chinks of the barks of Trees, and there it brings forth. This is the
reason why many times we see a Cherry-tree growing in a Wilow, a Plane-tree in
a Bay Tree, and a Bay in a Cherry-tree; and withal, that the berries of them
have been party-colored. They write also, that the Jack-daw hiding certain
seeds in some secret chinks or holes, did give occasion of this Invention. By
this self-same means we may produce

A Fig that is partly white and partly red.
Leontius attempts the doing of this, by taking the kernels or stones that are
in a Fig somewhat inclinable to this variety, and wrapping them up together in
a linen cloth, and then sowing them, and when need requires, removing them
into another place. If we would have

An Orange or Citron-tree bear diverse Apples of diverse relishes;
Pontanus our Countryman, in his work of Gardening, has elegantly taught us
how to do it. We must take sundry seeds of them, and put them into a pitcher,
and there let them grow up: and when they come forth, bind the sprigs together,
and by this means they will grow up into one stock, and shroud themselves all
under one bark: but you must take heed that the wind come not at them to blow
them asunder, but cover them over with some wax, that they may stick fast
together; and let them be well plaistered with mortar about the bark: and so
shall you gather from them in time very strange Apples of sundry relishes.
Likewise we may procure

A Damosin, and an Orange or Limon to be mixed together.
In our books of Husbandry, we showed at large, by many reasons alleged to and
fro, that sundry seeds could not possibly grow into one; but all that is
written in favor of this practice, is utterly false, and altogether
unpossible. But this experiment we our selves have proved, whereby diverse kinds
of Damosins are mixed together. While the Damosin-trees were very tender and
dainty, we fastened two of them together, which were planted near to each
other, as Sailers plat and tie their Cables: but first we pared off the bark to
the inmost skin, in that place where they should touch together, that so one
living thing might the more easily grow to the other: then we bound them up
gently with thin lists, made of the inner bark of Elm, or such like stuff that
is soft and pliable for such a purpose, lest they should be parted and grow
asunder; and if any part of them were so limber that it would not stick fast,
we wedged it in with splents; yet not too hard, for fear of spoiling it. Then
we rid away the earth from the upper roots, and covered them with muck, and
watered them often, that by this cherishing and tilling on, they might grow up
the better: and thus after a few years that they were grown together into one
tree, we cut off the tops of them about that place where they most seemed to be
knit together; and about those tops there sprung up many buds; whereof, those
which we perceived had grown out of both Trees, we suffered to grow still, and
the rest we cut away; and by this means we produced such kind of fruit as we
speak of, very goodly, and much commended. And concerning Limons, I have seen
some in the Noble-mens Gardens of Naples, which, partly by continual watering
at seasonable times, and partly by reason of the tenderness and the rankness
of the boughs, did so cling and grow together, that they became one tree; and
this one Tree brought forth fruit compounded of either kind. We may also effect
this featly by earthen vessels; for the plants that are set therein, we may
very conveniently cherish up with continual watering, and perform other
services toward them which are necessary for their growth. And as it may be
done by Limons, so we have seen the same experiment practiced upon
Mulberry-trees, which growing in moist and shadowed places, as soon as their
boughs closed one with another, presently they grew into one, and brought forth
berries of sundry colors. If we would procure that

A Lettice should grow, having in it Parsley, and Rotchet, and Basil-gentle,
or any such like commixtion, we must take the dung of a Sheep or a Goat; and
though it be but a small substance, yet you must make a shift to bore the
Truttle through the middle, and as well as you can, get out the inmost pith,
and in stead thereof put into it those seeds which you desire to have mingled
together, packing them in as hard as the Truttle will bear it: and when you
have so done, lay it in the ground about two handful deep, with dung and hollow
geer, both under it, and round about it; then cover it with a little thin
earth, and water it a little and a little; and when the seeds also are sprung
forth, you must still apply them with water and dung; and after they are grown
up into a stalk, you must be more diligent about them; and by this means at
length there will arise a Lettice, mixed and compounded with all those seeds.
Palladius prescribes the same more precisely. If you take, says he, a Truttle
of Goats dung, and bore it through, and make it hollow cunningly with a bodkin,
and then fill it up with the seed of Lettice, Cresses, Basil, Rotchet, and
Radish, and when you have so done, lap them up in more of the same dung, and
bury them in a little trench of such ground as is fruitful and well manured for
such a purpose, the Radish will grow downward into a Root, the other seeds will
grow upward into a stalk, and the Lettice will contain them all, yielding the
several relish of every one of them. Others effect this experiment on this
manner. They pluck off the Lettice leaves that grow next to the root, and make
holes in the thickest substance and veins thereof, one hole being a reasonable
distance from the other; wherein they put the forenamed seeds, all but the
Radish seed, and cover them about with dung, and then lay them under the
ground, whereby the Lettice grows up, guarded with the stalks of so many herbs
as there were seeds put into the leaves. If you would procure

Party-colored flowers to grow;
you may effect it by the same ground and principle. You must take the seeds of
diverse kinds of flowers; and when you have bound them up in a Linen cloth, set
them in the ground, and by the commixtion of those seeds together, you shall
have flowers that are party-colored. By this means, it is thought that Daisies
of diverse kinds were first brought forth, such as are to be seen with golden
leaves, reddish about the edge; nay some of them are so meddled with diverse
colors, that they resemble little shreds of silk patcht together.

CHAP. VI.
How a double fruit may be made, whereof the one is contained within the other.
THere is also another way of Composition, whereby fruits may be so meddled
together, not as we showed before, that one part of it should be of one fruit,
and the other part of another kind; nor yet that one and the same bough shall
at once bear two or three several kinds of fruits; but that one and the same
fruit shall be double, containing in it self two several kinds, as if they were
but one; whereof I my self have first made trial. But let us see how the
Ancients have effected this: and first

How to make an Olive-grape.
Diophanes shows that the Olive being engraffed into the Vine, brings forth a
fruit called Elaeo-staphylon, that is to say, an Olive-grape. But Florentinus
in the eleventh book of his Georgicks, has showed the manner how to engraffe
the Olive into a Vine, that so it shall bring forth not only bunches or
clusters of grapes, but an Olive fruit also. We must bore a hole through the
Vine near to the ground, and put into it the branch of an Olive Tree, that so
it may draw and receive both from the Vine, sweetness; and also from the
ground, natural juice and moisture, whereby it may be nourished: for so will
the fruit taste pleasantly. And moreover, if, while the Vine has not yet born
fruit, you take the fruitful sprigs thereof, and plant them elsewhere, these
sprigs will retain the mixture and composition of the Vine and the Olive Tree
together, and bring forth one fruit that shall have in it both kinds, which
therefore is called by a name compounded of both their names, Eleo-staphylus,
an Olive-grape. He reports that he saw such a tree in the Orchard of Marius
Maximus; and tasting the fruit thereof, he thought with himself that he felt
the relish of an Olive-berrie and a grape kernel both together. He writes also
that such plants grow in Africa, and are there called by a proper name in their
Country language Ubolima. But we must set props under them, to bear up the
weight and burden of the boughs: though if we engraffe them any other way but
this, we shall need no polls at all. I suppose also that by this self-same
means it may be effected,

That a Grape should have Myrtle in it.
Tarentinus writes, that the Vine may be engraffed into the Myrtle-tree, and
the Vine-branches thereon engraffed, will bring forth grapes that have
Myrtle-berries growing underneath them. But the manner of this engraffing he
has not set down. If you engraffe the Vine-branches in the higher boughs or
arms of the Mrytle, then they will bring forth grapes after their ordinary
manner, not having any Myrtle in them: but if you engraffe them as she showed
before, near to the ground, as the Olive Tree must be into the Vine, then you
may produce Myrtle-grapes, though not without some difficulty. We may likewise
produce

Damosins that shall be of the color of Nuts;
for such kind of fruit were produced by the Ancients, and called Nucipruna,
that is, Nut-Damosins, as Pliny reports. It is a peculiar property of these
fruits that are engraffed into Nut-trees, that they are in color like to their
own kind, but in taste like unto Nuts; being therefore called by a mixed name,
Nuci-pruna. So there may be produced, as the same Pliny writes,

Damosins that have sweet Almonds within them.
There is, says he, in this kind of fruit an Almond-kernel, neither can there
be any prettier double fruit devised. The same Pliny reports also, that there
is a kind of

Damosin that has in it the substance of an Apple,
which of late was called by the Spaniards Malina, which comes of a Damosin
engraffed into an Apple Tree. There is also a kind of fruit called by the
Apothecaries Sebesten, or

Mixa, which has in it a sweet Almond.
This same Mixa is a kind of Damosin, which differs from all others; for
whereas others have a bitter Almond or kernel within their stone, this only
has a sweet kernel. It is a plant peculiar to Syria and Egypt, though in
Plinies time it was common in Italy, and was engraffed in the Service-tree,
whereby the kernel was the pleasanter. They engraffed it into the Service-tree,
likely for this cause, that whereas the fruit of it self would make a man
laxative, the sharp taste of the Service being mixed with it, might cause it to
be more binding. But now we will show

How to produce an Almond peach, which outwardly is a Peach, but within has an
Almond-kernel.
The former means producing double fruits, which the Ancients have recorded,
are but vain fables; not only false matters, but indeed impossible to be so
done: for, we showed in the book of Husbandry, if you engraffe the Vine into
the Myrtle, there will be no such fruit brought forth after that manner.
Besides, it is impossible to engraffe the Olive Tree into the Vine; or if it
were engraffed, yet would it not bring forth any such grapes. Pliny speaks of
Apple-damosins, and Nut-damosins; but he shows not the manner how they may be
produced; happily, because it was never seen nor known. But we will demonstrate
the manner of it to the whole world, by this example: this fruit is called an
Almond-Peach by the late Writers, because it bears in it self the nature, both
of the Almond and the Peach compounded together. And it is a new kind of
Adultery or commixtion, wrought by skill and diligence used in graffing; such a
fruit as was never heard of in former ages, partaking both of the shape, and
also of the qualities of either parent: outwardly it resembles the Peach both
in shape and color; but inwardly it has a sweet Almond within the kernel,
that both looks and tastes like an Almond; and so is the Tree also a middle
betwixt the Almond-tree and the Peach-tree, outwardly like the Peach-tree, and
inwardly like the Almond-tree. The manner of engraffing is, by clapping the bud
of one upon the bud of another; either upon one of the trees that bare one of
the buds, or else setting them both into a third tree, as we have done when the
Trees have been old. We may also go farther, and upon that branch wherein those
two buds grow up together, we may set a third bud, and so the fruit will be
threefold. These trees we had growing in our own Orchards many years together.
By this self-same means we may produce a very strange Apple; the wonderfulnesse
whereof will ravish our senses and our thoughts; namely

A Citron that has a Limon in the inner parts:
and this, I say, we may produce by laying the bud of a Citron upon the bud of
a Limon. And the most of those kinds are to be found among the Brutii, a people
dwelling near Naples, and the Surrentines in Campania; and these fruits proceed
from the tart juice that is within the branch. In like manner

A double Orange may be produced;
which kind of fruit is common with us, wherein are double ranks of kernels in
such rare proportion, that you would wonder and be amazed to see.

CHAP. VII.
Of another device, whereby strange fruits may be generated, and made either
better or worse.
COncerning the praises and excellency of engraffing, we have spoken elsewhere
more at large: Here it shall suffice only to show, that by engraffing, new
fruits may be produced, some better, and some worse then their ordinary kinds.
We will relate some experiments of our own, and some which the Ancients have
found out. And first

How to produce a Chest-nut of the best.
There is one rare example hereof not to be omitted. Corellius, a Nobleman of
Rome, born at the City Ateste, engraffed a Chest-nut upon a Chest-nut branch,
in the Country of Naples, and so produced a Chest-nut called Corelliana, after
his name. After that, his Heir, whom he made a Freeman, graffed the same
Corelliana upon another Tree: the difference betwixt them both is this, that
the former is a larger Chest-nut, but this latter is a better fruit. These
things have been done by the Ancients: and the good that comes by engraffing
is such, as that if any thing be engraffed into a stock or branch of its own
kind, the fruit will thereby be made better. The Cherry-tree is very kindly to
be engraffed: and you shall scarce ever have a good and a sweet Cherry, unless
it be by engraffing upon some other Tree, as Pamphilus reports. By the
president of this example, we have endeavored to change

The Barbery-Tree into the Tree called Tuber:
for I take it, that the Oxyacantha, or the Barbery-tree, is nothing else but a
bastard, or a wild Tuber: and therefore if a man follow that example of
Corellius, and engraffe the Oxyacantha oftentimes into the own branch or stock,
it will be much bettered, and become the Tuber-tree: as also on the other side,
the Tuber-tree, if it be not dressed and looked unto, does degenerate into the
Barbery-tree. I my self have engraffed it three or four times into the branches
of its own kind, in my own Orchard; and if I live so long, I will still
engraffe it so, till it do bring forth Tubers; for I find that it brings forth
already, both greater and sweeter berries. Now we will speak of such fruits, as
are engraffed not into their own branches, but into branches of another kind,
which contain in them both the fashion and the properties of either kind: and
we will teach the manner how to compound a new kind of fruit lately devised,
namely

A Peach-nut, mixed of a Nut and a Peach.
There is a kind of Peach called a Peach-nut, which the Ancients never knew of,
but has lately been produced by pains taken in graffing, as I my self have
seen. It bears the name and the form also of both the parents whereof it is
generated, having a green color like a Nut, and has no mossie down on the
outside, but very smooth all over; the taste of it is sharp and somewhat
bitter; it is long ere it be ripe, and is of a hard substance like a Peach.
That part of it which lies against the Sun is reddish; it smells very well; it
has within, a rough stone, and hard like a Peach-stone; it has a pleasant
relish; but the apple will not last so long as the Nut, or kernel within. Which
kind of fruit cannot be supposed to have been otherwise brought forth then by
diverse engraffings of the Peach into the Nut-tree, one year after another. We
may also better the fruits by engraffing them into better Trees. Diophanes
produced

Citron-apples compounded of an Apple and a Citron.
for he engraffed an Apple into the Citron-tree, and that oftentimes; but it
withered as soon as ever it did shoot forth: howbeit, at length it took fast
hold, and became a Citron-apple-tree. Anatolius and Diophanes made a compound
fruit called

Melimela, of an Apple and a Quince mixed together;
for if we engraffe an Apple into a Quince-tree, the Tree will yield a very
goodly apple, which the Athenians call Melimelum, but we call it a St. John's
Apple. Pliny writes, that an ordinary Quince, and a Quince-pear being
compounded,

Produce a fruit called Milviana.
The Quince, says he, being engraffed into a Quince-pear, yields a kind of
fruit called Milvianum, which alone of all other Quinces is to be eaten raw.
Now as we have showed how to make fruits better by engraffing, both for show
and for properties, we will declare also, how by engraffing

Fruits may be made worse.
We will show it first by a Pear. Marcus Varro says, that if you engraffe a
very good Pear into a wild Pear Tree, it will not taste so well as that which
is engraffed into an Orchard Pear Tree. If you engraffe a Peach into a
Damosin-tree, the fruit of it will be much less: if into a bitter Almond-tree,
the fruit will have a bitter relish. Likewise if you graffe a Chest-nut into a
Willow, and be somewhat a latter fruit, the taste of it will be more bitter.
And so if you graffe an apple into a Damosin-tree, the fruit which it yields,
will neither be so great, nor yet so good, as it is in the own kind.

CHAP. VIII.
How to procure ripe fruits and flowers before their ordinary season.
ARt being as it were Natures Ape, even in her imitation of Nature, effects
greater matters then Nature does. Hence it is that a Magician being furnished
with Art, as it were another Nature, searching thoroughly into those works which
Nature does accomplish by many secret means and close operations, does work
upon Nature, and partly by that which he sees, and partly by that which he
conjects and gathers from thence, takes his sundry advantages of Natures
instruments, and thereby either hastens or hinders her work, making things ripe
before or after their natural season, and so indeed makes Nature to be his
instrument. He knows that fruits, and flowers, and all other growing things
that the world affords, are produced by the circuit and motion of celestial
bodies; and therefore when he is disposed to hinder the ripening of any thing,
or else to help it forward, that it may be more rare and of better worth, he
effects it by counterfeiting the times and seasons of the year, making the
Winter to be as the Summer, and the Springtime as the Winter. Amongst other
means, engraffing is not a little helpful hereunto. Wherefore let us see, how
we may by engraffing

Produce Grapes in the Springtime.
If we see a Cherry-tree bring forth her fruit in the Springtime, and we
desire to have Grapes about that time, there is fit opportunity of attaining our
desire, as Tarentinus writes. If you engraffe a black Vine into the
Cherry-tree, you shall have Grapes growing in the Springtime: for the Tree
will bring forth Grapes the very same season, wherein it would bring forth her
own fruit. But this engraffing cannot be without boring a hole into the stock,
as Didymus shows. You must bore the Cherry-tree stock through with a wimble,
and, your Vine growing by it, you must take one of the next and goodliest
branches thereof, and put it into the a^ger-hole; but you must not cut it off
from the Vine, but place it in as it grows: for so the branch will live the
better, both as being nourished by his own mother the Vine, and also as being
made partaker of the juice of that Tree into which it is engraffed. This sprig
within the compass of two years, will grow and be incorporated into the
Cherry-tree: about which time, after the skar is grown over again, you must cut
off the branch from the Vine, and saw off the stock of the Cherry-tree wherein
it is engraffed, all above the boring place, and let the Vine-branch grow up in
the rest: for so shall neither the Vine be idle, but still bring forth her own
fruit, and that branch also which was engraffed does grow up together with it,
being nothing hurt by that engraffing. We may also by the help of engraffing
procure

A Rose to show forth her buds before her time.
If we pluck off a Rose-bud from the mother, and engraff by such an
emplastering as we spoke of before, the same into the open bark of an
Almond-tree, at such time, as the Almond-tree does bud, the Rose so engraffed,
will bring forth her own flowers out of the Almond bark. But because it is a
very hard matter to engraffe into an Herb, and therefore we can hardly produce
flowers sooner then their time by that means, we will show another means
hereof; And namely,

How Cucumbers may hasten their fruits.
Columella found in Dolus Mendesius an Egyptian, an easy way whereby this may
be done. You must set in your Garden in some shadowy place well dunged, a rank
of Fenel, and a rank of Brambles one within another; and after the aequinoctial
day, cut them off a little within the ground; and having first loosed the pith
of either of them with a wooden puncheon, to convey dung into them, and withal
to engraffe in them Cucumber-seeds, which may grow up together with the Fenel
and the Brambles: for by this means the seeds will receive nourishment from the
root of the stalk into which they are engraffed, and so you shall have
Cucumbers very soon. But now let us show how we may accomplish this thing by
counterfeiting as it were the seasons of the year: and first, how we may
procure that

Cucumbers shall be ripe very timely.
The Quintiles say you must take panniers or earthen pots, and put into them
some fine ^^^ed earth mixed with dung, that it may be somewhat liquid, and
preventing the ordinary season, you must plant therein Cucumber-seeds about the
beginning of the Spring, and when the Sun shines, or that there is any heat or
rain, they bring the panniers forth into the Air, and about Sunsetting they
bring them into a close house; and this they do daily, still watering them as
occasion serves. But after that the cold and the frost is ceased, and the Air
is more temperate, they take their panniers and dig a place for them in some
well-tilled ground, and there set them, so that the brims thereof may be even
with the earth; and then look well to them, and you shall have your desire. The
like may be done by Gourds. Theophrastus shows, that if a man sow Cucumber
seeds in the Wintertime, and water them with warm water, and lay them in the
Sun, or else by the fire, and when seed-time comes, put whole panniers of
them into the ground, they will yield very timely Cucumbers, long before their
ordinary season is to grow. Columella says, that Tiberius the Emperor took
great delight in the Cucumbers that were thus ripened, which he had at all
times of the year; for his Gardners every day drew forth their hanging Gardens
into the Sun upon wheels, and when any great cold or rain came, they
straightwayes carried them in again into their close hovels made for the same
purpose. Didymus shows

Roses may bud forth, even before Winter be past,
if they be used after the like manner; namely, if you set them in hampers or
earthen vessels, and carefully look unto them, and use them as you would use
Gourds and Cucumbers, to make them ripe before their ordinary season. Pliny
shows

How to make Figs that were of last years growth, to be ripe very soon the next
year after;
and this is by keeping them from the cold too, but yet the device and practice
is not all one with the former. There are, says he, in certain Countries, as
in Maesia, Winter Fig Trees, (a small tree it is, and such as is more beholding
to Art then to Nature) which they use on this manner. After the Autumn or Fall,
they lay them in the earth, and cover them all over with muck, and the green
Figs that grew upon them in the beginning of Winter are also buried upon the
Tree with them. Now when the Winter is past, and the Air is somewhat calmer the
year following, they dig up the Trees again with the fruit upon them; which
presently do embrace the heat of a new Sun as it were, and grow up by the
temperature of another year, as kindly as if they had then new sprung up:
whereby it comes to pass, that though the Country be very cold, yet there
they have ripe Figs of two years growth as it were, even before other Fig Trees
can so much as blossom. But because we cannot so well practice these
experiments in the broad and open fields, either by hindering, or by helping
the temperature of the Air, therefore we will assay to ripen fruit and flowers
before their time, by laying warm cherishers, as lime, or chalk, and nitre, and
warm water, to the roots of Trees and herbs. If you would have

A Cherry ripe before his time,
Pliny says, that you must lay chalk or lime to the root of the Tree before it
begin to blossom; or else you must oftentimes pour hot water upon the root; and
by either of these means you may procure the ripening of Cherries before their
time: howbeit afterward the Trees will be dry and wither away. If you would
procure the ripening

Of a Rose before his time;
Dydimus says you may effect it by covering the Rose-bush with earth, a foot
above the root of it, and there pour in wam water upon it, whilst the slip
begins to shoot up, and before any blossom appears. Likewise if you would
have

A Vine to bring forth before her time,
you must take nitre, and pown it, and mix it with water, so that it be made of
the thickness of honey; and as soon as you have pruned the Vine, lay good store
of your nitre upon the Vine-buds, and so shall your buds shoot forth within
nine days after. But to procure the Grapes to be timely ripe, you must take the
mother of the wine before it is become sour, and lay the same upon the root of
the plants when you set them; for at that time it is best so to use them, as
Tarentinus and Florentinus both affirm. Moreover, if you would have any thing
to bud forth very timely, Theophrastus says you may procure it by setting the
same

Into the Sea-onion:
for if a Fig Tree be set but near it, it will cause the speedy ripening of
Figs. And to be brief, there is nothing set in the Sea-onion, but will more
easily and speedily shoot forth, by reason of the strong inward heat which that
herb is endued withal. Democritus shows another means, whereby you may cause

The Fig Tree to bring forth hasty Figs,
namely, by applying the same with pepper, and oil, and Pigeons dung.
Florentinus would have the du^g and the oil to be laid upon the Figs when they
be raw and green. Palladius counsels, that when the Figs begin to wax
somewhat red, you should then besmear them with the juice of a long Onion mixed
with pepper and oil; and so the Figs will be the sooner ripened. Our practice
is this; when the Figs begin to wax ripe, we take a wooden needle, and anoint
it over with oil, and so thrust it through both ends of the Figs; whereby in
few days the fruit is ripened. Others effect this, by heaping up a great many
Rams horns about the root of the Tree. Pliny shows

How to make Coleworts branch before their time;
and this is by laying good store of Sea-grasse about it, held up with little
props; or else by laying upon it black nitre, as much as you can take up with
three fingers, or thereabouts; for this will hasten the ripening thereof. We
may also cause

Parsley to come up before his time.
Pliny says, that if you sprinkle hot water upon it, as it begins to grow, it
will shoot up very swiftly. And Palladius says, that if you pour vinegar upon
it by little and little, it will grow up; or else if you cherish it with warm
water as soon as ever it is sown. But the mind of man is so bold to enter into
the very secret bowels of Nature, by the diligent search of experience, that it
has devised to bring forth

Parsley exceeding timely.
It grows up easily of it self; for within fifty or forty days it is wont to
appear out of the earth, as Theophrastus and others affirm, as by their
writings may be seen. Our Countrymen call it Petroselinum. In the practicing
of this experiment, you must show your self a painful workman; for if you fail,
or commit never so small an error herein, you will miss of your purpose. You
must take Parsley seeds that are not fully one year old, and in the beginning
of Summer you must dip them in the vinegar, suffering them to lie a while in
some warm place: then wrap up the seeds in some small loose earth, which for
this purpose you have before meddled with the ashes of burned bean-straw: there
you must bedew them oftentimes with a little warm water, and cover them with
some cloth, that the heat get not from them* so will they in short time appear
out of the earth: then remove the cloth away, and water them still, and thereby
the stalk will grow up in length, to the great admiration of the beholders. But
in any case, you must be painful and very diligent; for I have assayed it; and
by reason of some error and negligence, I obtained not my desire: howbeit, many
of my friends having made diligent trial hereof, found it to be a very true
experiment. Likewise may

Lentiles be hastened in their growth,
if they be smeared over with dry Ox-dung, a little before they are sown; but
they had need lie in that dung four or five days before they be cast into the
ground. So

Melons may be hastened in their fruit;
for if in the Wintertime you lay a parcel of earth in mixens that are made of
hot dung, and in the same earth sow Melon-seeds, the heat of the dung will
cause them soon to sprout forth: you must keep them warm with some covering,
from the snow, and the cold of the night; and afterward when the Air is more
calm, you must plant them in some other place: for by this means we have
hastened the fruit hereof. And by this same device of preventing their
seed-time, we may cause

Cucumbers to hasten their fruit.
But Theophrastus sets down another practice. Cucumber-roots, if they be
carefully looked into, will live long. Therefore if a man cut off a Cucumber
close by the ground, after it has brought forth fruit, and then cover the
roots over with earth, the very same roots the year following will bring forth
very timely fruit, even before others that were most seasonably sown.
Theophrastus also sets down another way

Of hastening Cucumbers,
and that is by macerating the seed before it be sown; or else by supplying it
with continual moisture after it is sown. So also we may procure

Pease or Vitches to be timely ripe;
If we sow them before their ordinary season in Barley time, as Florentinus
shows. But Theophrastus says this may be done by macerating them in the
water before seed-time, but especially if you macerate them shales and all: for
there is but a little of it will turn to putrefaction; and the shale feeds the
kernel well at the first, howsoever afterward it turn to nothing. The same
Theophrastus shows also

How the Rape-root may be hastened in growth.
If the Gardner, says he, do hide the same in an heap of earth, it will cause
it to bring forth very timely fruit the year following. There may other fruits
also be timely ripened; as

A Quince may be hastened in ripening,
if you daily bedew them with continual moisture, as Palladius shows. And
Democritus says, you may have

Roses growing in the month of January,
if you water the slip twice a day in the Summertime. We may likewise procure
that

Gourds shall bring forth very timely,
by underpropping and holding up their young tender sprigs. In like manner we
may cause

The forward Fig Tree to hasten her fruit,
by renting or scarifying the body of the Tree, that the milky juice may there
swell and find issue out of it, that when the superfluous humor is gone forth,
that which is left behind, may be the more easily concocted, and so the fruit
will be sooner ripened. To be short, we may procure

The timely ripening of all kind of fruit.
If we sow or plant them in some place where they may lie still opposite
against the Sun, or if we put them into certain vessels made for the same
purpose, and still water them with warm water, and let them lie continually in
the Sun. And if we would have them to hasten their fruit very speedily, we
should have an Oven made under those vessels, that so by reason of a double
warmth, one from above, and the other from beneath the fruit may more speedily
be produced. And surely this is the only cause, why fruits and flowers are more
forward and sooner ripe in the Country Puteoli, and the Island Inatime, then in
all other places of Campania, because there they hasten the concoction and
ripening of them, by cherishing the roots thereof with fire and heat within the
earth.

CHAP. IX.
How we may have fruits and flowers at all times of the year.
BY these ways of procuring fruit to be timely ripe, it may be effected, that
we shall have fruits and flowers at all times of the year, some very forward
that come before their ordinary season, and some late-ward that come after: as
for their own time, then, Nature of her self affords them unto us. Aristotle in
his Problems shows

How we may have Cucumbers all the year long,
both in season and out of season. When they are ripe, says he, you must put
them into a waterish ditch, near the place where they grew, and cover it over:
for by this means the heat of the Sun cannot come at them to dry them, and the
waterishnesse of the place will keep them supple and moist, so that they will
still be fresh and green. And Theophrastus after him says the like; that
Gourds and Cucumbers must be taken when they are small, and in their tender
growth, and must be hidden in some ditch, where the Sun cannot come to waste
and consume their moisture, nor the wind to dry them, which two things would
man and hinder their growth, as we see it falls out in Trees, that are so
situate, as both the wind and the Sun have their full scope upon them. If you
would have

Citron trees bear fruit all the year;
to have Citrons still growing fresh upon the Tree, you must observe that
manner and custom which was first peculiar in Assyria, but is now usual in many
places. When their season is to be gathered, you must cut off some of the fruit
from the Tree, and prune those parts well where you have left no fruit; but you
must leave some behind, upon some other parts of the Tree: so shall you find a
new supply of fresh fruit there where you cut off the former; and when these be
ripe, then cut off those which you left upon the Tree before, and so fresh
fruit also will come up in their stead. Pontanus has set down the same
experiment in verse; that part of the fruit is to be gathered, and the rest
left hanging upon the Tree; for so it will come to pass, that the Tree will
bud forth a fresh in those parts where it finds it self destitute of fruit,
grieving as it were that one bough should be beautified with fruit, and the
other should have none at all. We may also effect this by the help of
engraffing: for if we desire

To have Apples all the year,
Dydimus in his Georgicks says, that if we engraffe an Apple into a
Citron-tree, it will bring forth for the most part continual fruit. And if we
would have

Artichockes grow continually,
we may learn to do it out of Cassianus, who following the Authority of Varro,
says, that Artichocks always bring forth fruit about the same season that they
are set in, and therefore it is easy to have them all the year long. The
ordinary season of planting Artichocks is in November and September, and
commonly they bear fruit in July and August: but they will bring forth also in
March and April, if they be planted accordingly; for by that time they will
have as perfect a soul, as at any time else. If you practice it three years
together, to plant them in the months of November, December, January,
February, and March, you shall have Artichockes of that kind, as will bring
forth fresh fruit almost all the year long. Likewise, if you desire to have

Sperage always growing fresh,
and fit to be eaten, you must take this course: as soon as you have gathered
the fruit, you must dig round about the roots as they lie in their own place
under the earth, and by this means they will shoot up into new stalks. In like
manner, if you desire to have

Roses growing all the year long,
you must plant them in every month some, and by dunging them, and taking good
heed unto them, you shall have fresh Roses continually. By the like practice,
you may also have

Lillies all the year long;
for if you take the roots or cloves of Lillies, and set them in the ground,
some fourteen, some twelve, some eight fingers deep, you shall by this means
have Lillies all the year long, and so many several flowers of them as you have
planted several roots. And as this may be done by Lillies, so Anatolius thinks
the same practice will take like effect in all other flowers. Theophrastus
says, that we may have

Violets always growing,
if we set them in well-fenced places, and such as lie open to the force of the
Sun: for commonly fruits and flowers will grow there, when they will grow no
where else: but they must be very carefully looked unto, and then they will come
on the better. The best way is, to set them in earthen vessels, and keep them
from vehement cold and heat, bringing them forth still when the Air is calm and
temperate, and applying them with moisture, and muck, and careful dressing. So
we may procure also that

The Herb Oenanthe shall flourish all the year;
for Theophrastus writes, that if we deal thereby, as in the procuring of
Violets, we shall have flowers upon it continually.

CHAP. X.
How to produce fruits that shall be later and backward.
WE have already showed how to produce forward fruits that will be very timely
ripe; now it remains that we set down such cunning sleights and devices, as
whereby we may procure fruit to grow very later, not to be ripe before the
lowest of Winter. And this we may learn to effect by contrary causes to the
former; and whereas we were to heat that which we would have to be timely ripe,
we must here use coolers to make things ripen slowly; and whereas before we
were to engraffe later fruits into forward Trees, here we must engraffe forward
fruits into later Trees. Likewise we must sow or plant late, that we may
receive later fruit: for as beasts that are long ere they be perfectly bred,
are long before they have their hair, and do not change their hair before the
same time of the year come again, in which they were brought forth; so also in
plants it comes to pass, that if they be set late, they will grow late, and
bring forth backward fruits. To begin with engraffing, we will show how thereby

To produce later Cherries.
There is a kind of Tree that brings forth a very bitter fruit, so bitter that
it is called Amarendula, that is to say, a bitterling; a branch of this Tree
being engraffed into a Cherry-tree, after three or four several engraffings
will bring forth at length Cherries that will be very later: and howsoever the
fruit of its own kind be very bitter, yet in time it will forget the former
relish, and yield a more pleasant taste. We may effect this also by that kind
of engraffing which we spoke of in the eighth Chapter; but that will be longer
in working. Likewise we may procure that

A Pear shall grow exceeding later,
if we engraffe the same into a Willow; for we have declared before, that such
an engraffing there may be; and certain it is, that thereby a very latter fruit
may be produced. But we must see that the Willow grow in such a place, as where
it may be nourished with continual moisture; and this engraffing must be done
about the last days of the Moons last quarter; and it must be graffed betwixt
the Tree and the bark. If any man would have

Roses grow later;
Florentinus shows how it may effected. When you have engraffed the Vine-branch
into a Cherry-tree, as soon as ever the fruit comes forth, you must set the
bud of a Rose into the bark or pill thereof: for growing in another body, look
what time the Tree wherein it is set, will fructify, and at the same time will
the Rose open it self, yielding a very excellent savor, and besides will be
very pleasant to behold. To be short, all kinds of fruits may be made to grow
later, by this kind of engraffing. Now there is another way whereby we may
procure the backward growth of fruits: and this is by shaking or plucking off
the buds or blossoms that grow first upon the Tree; for while new buds are
growing up in the room of the first, time wears away, and yet if the Air be
seasonable, these latter buds will be good fruit, and well ripened, though they
be slow. Thus we may produce

Figs that are very backward,
as Columella shows. When the green Figs are very small, shake them off, and
the Tree will bring forth others that will not be ripe before the latter end of
Winter. And Pliny following his authority, says, that Figs will grow latter,
if the first Green ones be shaken off when they are about the bigness of a
bean; for then others will come up in their stead, which will be long a
ripening. And by this means it is, that Tarentinus shows how to produce

Latter Grapes,
We must take away the bunches that grow first, and then others will grow up in
their stead: but we must have an especial care still to look to the Vine, that
other clusters may grow, and at length be ripened. By this means likewise we
may cause

Roses to open or blow very latter,
If we tuck off the buds that grow first, at such time as the flower begins to
appear and show forth it self. This practice will take best effect, if it be
used upon musk-roses, especially such as are wont to be fullest of leaves; for
thus we have in the Country store of Roses growing all the Winter long, as they
stand in earthen vessels, and are set up in Windows. So if you would have

Clove-gilliflowers blow later;
you must tuck off the first stalks and slips about that time as they are ready
to bud, and set them in the heat of the Sun all the Summer long; but you must
water them continually, that they lose not all their moisture: for by this
practice we have procured other stalks, and other slips which have yielded
flowers all the Winter long even to the Spring, so that we have continual
Winter-gilliflowers, both at home and in the Country abroad. There is also
another device whereby we may cause fruit to ripen very late; not by shaking or
cutting off the buds, but by planting them late, and keeping away the cold from
them. As for example, If we would

Produce later Cucumbers,
because we know that this kind of fruit cannot endure any frost, or showers,
or cold storms, therefore we must sow the seeds in the Summertime; and when
the Winter draws on, we must lay heaps of muck round about them, whereby no
cold may come at them to destroy them, and they may be ripened through the heat
and fatness thereof. But the best way to have later Cucumbers, is, as we showed
before, either to set thereof into great Fennel stalks, or else to cast the
Cucumbers into a pit for a certain season. If we would have

A Rose blow in the Winter;
we must watch the time when the tops of the sets begin to shoot up, as they
grow on their beds; and then take away the sets, and plant them in another
place, where the root afterward will take, and so yield us a winter-rose.
Likewise if we desire to have

Straw berries in the Winter or Spring,
as we have in the Summer, we must take them whiles they are white, before they
are grown to their reddish hiew, and put them leaves and all into reeds or
canes, stopping up the mouth thereof with some fat soil, and burying them in
the earth till Winter come; and then if we would have them to be red of their
own natural color, let them lie a while in the Sun, and we shall obtain our
purpose. By the like device as this is, we may reserve

Lettice for a Winter sallet.
When she has brought forth her leaves, that they grow up round together, you
must bind the tops of them about with a little string, and keep them growing in
an earthen vessel, in such a place as they may always receive fit nourishment;
and by this means you shall have them still white and tender. In like manner

Endive may be kept till Winter,
to have it still fresh for any use. Others take other courses that are less
chargeable; as to cover them only with earth, or with straw and leaves.
Gardeners with us cover them in their Gardens with sand or such like earth,
whereby they keep them very white and tender, and yet enjoy them all the Winter
long.

CHAP. XI.
How we may cause fruit to grow bigger then their ordinary kind.
IT remains now that we set down certain rules and ways whereby fruit may be
made greater, and far exceed the ordinary bigness of their own kind: and this
may be effected diverse ways; for it may be done either by engraffing only (for
indeed this is the chief privilege that engraffing has, to procure bigger
fruit); or else by planting upon those Trees which bring forth greater fruit of
their own kind; or else by gathering of the fruit here and there some, if the
Tree be overladen, that so the juice may more plentifully bestow it self upon
the fruit that is left behind; or else by dressing and trimming them; or by
other devices, as hereafter shall be showed. We will first begin with
engraffing, and show how we may procure thereby

That Apples or other like fruit shall grow bigger then they are wont.
A tree that is planted with a graffe of her own kind, will always bring
forth greater fruit, then if it were not so planted. We brought an example
hereof out of Pliny, that Corellius took a Scion of a Chestnut-tree, and
engraffed the same into the tree again, and thereby produced a greater and a
better Chestnut. And for my own part; I have oft-times made the like proof in
many other fruits, and by experience have found that all fruits may be made
greater by engraffing, and caref^^ looking unto, but especially Citrons.
Secondly, we may procure fruits to be greater then ordinary, by graffing upon
another Tree, whose kind is to bear bigger fruit. As for example, if we would
produce

Pears that should be greater then ordinary,
especially the least sort of Pears called Myrapia, or Musk-pears, we may
effect it by engraffing them into a Quince-tree; because the Quince tree, of
all other, bears the greatest fruit: and thereby the least Pears that are may
be so augmented, that they will become a very goodly fruit; experience whereof,
we have in many places in our Country. So we may cause

The Medlar-tree to bear huge Medlars,
greater then any man would imagine, if we engraff it into the Quince-tree: the
proof whereof both I have made my self, and seen it tried by many others; and
the oftener we so engraff it, the greater Medlars we shall procure. Likewise

The small Apricock may be made greater,
whereas they are the smallest kind of Peaches that are. I have oftentimes
engraffed it upon that kind of Damosin-tree which bears a Plum like a Goats
stone both in shape and greatness, (it may be it is our Scag-tree) and by this
means I procured great Apricocks: but if you ingraff it into any other
Damosin-tree, it will yield but a bastard fruit: for the Apricock does not
endure kindly, to be engraffed into any other trees besides. In our Naples and
Surrentine orchards, there is excellent fruit of this kind; and I never saw
any elsewhere. We may also

augment the fruit of the Myrtle-tree.
The Pomegranate-tree and the Myrtle-tree are each delighted with others
company, as Didy^^us writes in his Georgicks; where he says plainly, that the
Pomegranate-tree being engraffed into the Myrtle-tree, and likewise the
Myrtle-tree into the Pomegranate-tree, do each of them bring forth a greater
fruit. But I am persuaded that the Myrtle-tree brings forth greater fruit in
proportion to her body when it is engraffed upon the Pomegranate-tree, because
the kind of this is greater then the kind of that, then the Pomegranate-tree
does when it is engraffed upon the Myrtle-tree. By such a kind of means we may
also procure

Mulberries greater then ordinary,
if we engraff a Mulberry into a Fig Tree: for so Palladius has written, That
if the Mulberry be engraffed into a Fig Tree, the Fig Tree will cause it to
change his color, and will fill up the fruit thereof with a fat juice, so that
they shall be greater Mulberries then ordinarily their kind is wont to yield.
A third means whereby Apples or suchlike fruit may be augmented, is, by
plucking off some of the fruit here and there, and leaving some few upon the
trees: for so shall the juice of the tree bestow it self more liberally upon
the fruit that is left, and make it greater: as a mother does more bountifully
feed one child with her milk, then she can feed twain. Wherefore if we would
procure

Citrons greater then their kind,
Florentinus counsels us, that when the fruit begins to weigh down the
boughs, we should pluck off here and there some, and leave but a few behind;
so shall they that are left be thicker and bigger every way. P^ntanus also
says the same. If, says he, you would have great Citrons, big enough to fill
your hand, you must shake off a great many from all the boughs, only leaving
some few, (but you must leave both the greatest, and those also that grow in
the chiefest and likeliest parts of the tree^) for, says he, the heir which is
left, will make himself merry and fat with his brothers milk, and thrive much
the better. Palladius shows

How to make Apples greater then ordinary,
and it is by this same means. For when they hang thick upon the bough^, you
must gather away the worst, that so the nourishing juice may be converted to
the best, and the fairest may thereby be the better augmented. There is yet
another means whereby we may cause fruit to be the greater; and this by
dressing and trimming, when we dig about them, and water them, and lay muck
about them. And first, by this means

Citrons may be made greater:
for, as Palladius says, they are much helped and delighted with continual
digging about them. And

Quince-pears may be augmented,
as the same Author shows, by watering them continually. And

Peaches may be augmented much,
if we plant them in moist places, and supply them with continual watering. But
if you would have the Peach-trees

Bring forth very great ones,
you must watch the time when they blossom, and suckle them three days together
with three pintes of Goats milk, as Palladius shows. We have practiced to
cause

The Pomegranate-tree to bear a mighty fruit;
and that by this means. We took a good portion of fat muck, whereunto we put
an equal portion of Swines dung, and the lees of Wine and Barley-bran; and we
kept all this in a dry place for a year together, every month manging them
again one with another; and at last we put Vinegar to it, and made it like an
Ointment. Afterward in October and November, we dug away the earth from
about some parts of the Pomegranate-tree-roots, and there wrapped in this
Ointment round about them, and at length covered them again with earth; and by
this Device I had greater Pomegranates then ever the tree bare before. But now
if you would go forward, and practice the same upon it the two next years
following, questionless you might produce very huge Pomegranates, wonderful to
be seen, as big as Gourds. Likewise we have caused

Beans to bring forth great cods,
by anointing them with this same ointment, and afterward sowing them in the
earth: whereby we had great increase, both for the bigness of the Bean, and
also of the cod. Also

Leeks and roots of Radish may be made greater;
if we translate them out of one place, and set them in another, as
Theophrastus shows. If you would have

A Rape grow bigger and rounder,
you must sow it as soon as ever it is ready to be taken out of the husk: for by
the advantage and benefit of the season wherein it is sowed, it will be the
more augmented; because the root will thereby be the better filled, and the
larger grown. Likewise Florentinus shows, how to make

Pease of a bigger growth.
If, says he, you take Pease, and steep them in warm water the day before you
sow them, they will grow the greater. Some men take more pains then needs;
who, because they would have a greater Pease growing, they steep them shells
and all, and put Nitre into the water wherein they are steeped, and sow them in
their shells.

Vitches may be made bigger,
if they be set with a little pole, to grow up thereby: for this will cause
them to thicken, as Theophrastus says. So also

Onions may be thickened,
as Sotion shows. About some twenty days before you translate them from the
place where they first grew, you must dig away the earth about them, and let
them lie a drying, that all moisture may be kept from them; and then plant them
again, and they will grow much bigger. But if withal you pill of the top-skin,
and so plant them, they will be far greater. Likewise we may cause

Artichocks to bear a fuller fruit,
as Varro shows. If you plant them in a well-soiled place, and cover them
with old dung, and water them often in the summertime, you shall by this means
have a fuller and a more tender Artichock. We may also practice another Device
whereby to make greater fruit, which Theophrastus has set down; and he brings
an Example, how to make

Pomegranates to grow greater then ordinary:
for Art may cause the greatness of Fruit. When the first buds be formed upon
the boughs, they must be put into an earthen vessel that is made with a hole
quite through; and the bough whereon they grow, must be swayed downward without
hurting it: then cover the pot with earth, and so you shall have exceeding
great Pomegranates. The reason whereof is this: The pot preserves the fruit
from the vapors that would otherwise annoy it: and besides, the earth
ministers some moisture unto it; so that the bigness thereof is increased by
the store of nourishment. It receives no more help from the tree, then if it
were out of the earth; and therefore the kernels are no greater then ordinary;
but the pill is much thicker: the proper juice of it is somewhat wasted and
consumed; for which cause the taste of this fruit so handled, is waterish and
worse then others: but the rine receives outward nourishment, and spends none;
for which cause that is much thicker. The like practice Palladius and Martial
use, thereby to procure

A great Citron.
They take a Citron when it is young, and shut it up fast in an earthen vessel:
for the Citron will increase continually, till it come to be of the bigness and
fashion of the vessel wherein it is put: but there must be a hole made through
the vessel, whereby the air may get in unto it. By the like device,
Theophrastus assays to produce

Cucumbers and Gourds greater then ordinary,
by hiding them while they are young, both from Sun and from Wind, that
nothing may come at them to hinder their growth. Like to this Device, is the
setting of them in Fennel-stalks, or in earthen Pipes; whereby the natural
Juice and Nourishment is kept in, to the increasing of their growth. We will
also show, out of Theophrastus, a like Device, whereby the Herb

Alisander or Parsley may be made greater.
You must dig the Alisander round about the root, and cover it with Cachryl,
and then heap earth upon it. For the roots spend all the moisture themselves,
and suffer no nourishment to ascend into the buds. This Cachryl is hot and
thick: and as by the thickness it draws nourishment to it, so by virtue of the
heat it does concoct and digest that which it has attracted: and therefore
seeing this does both draw more nourishment to the Alisander, and also concoct
it, there must needs be a greater augmentation of that herb. This practice he
borrowed of Aristotle. This herb may also be made bigger by another means,
namely, if when you plant it, you make a hole for it in the ground with a great
stake: for the root will at length fill up the hole. So there is a means to make

A Radish-root grow bigger,
if it be planted in a cold ground, as Pliny shows. For Radishes are much
cherished and delighted with cold; as in some cold places of Germany there be
Radishes growing as big as a little child. Some have reported, that if you
drive a stake into the ground six inches deep, and put chaff into the pit which
the stake has made, and then put in the Radish-seed, covering it over with
earth and muck, the Radish will grow up to the bigness of the pit. By a Device
not much unlike to this, Florentinus shows how to

Make great Lettise.
You must remove them, and water them well; and when they are grown half a
handful high, you must dig round about them, that the roots may be seen: then
wrap them in Ox-dung, and cover them over again, and water them still; and when
they are waxen bigger, cut the leaves cross with a sharp knife, and lay upon
them a little barrel or tub that never was pitc^ed, (for Pitch will hurt the
herb) that so it may grow not in height, but only spread forth in breadth. So
the herb

Beet may be made greater,
as Sotion shows. To make Beet grow in bigness, says he, thou must cover the
roots over with some fresh Ox-dung, and divide the leaves or buds, and lay a
broad stone or a tyle upon it, to cause it to spread forth in breadth. You may
also make

Leeks greater,
by removing them, and laying a great stone or a broad tyle upon them: but in
no case must they be watered. By the very same Device, Anatolius shows how to
make

Garlic greater,
by laying tyles upon the roots thereof, as upon Leeks. Theophrastus shows
another kind of Device, whereby to make

Radishes greater;
and he says that the Gardeners of his time were wont to practice it. They
took away the leaves in the Wintertime, when they flourish most, and cast the
Radishes into the ground, covering them over with earth; and so they lasted and
grew till Summer came again, never shooting forth either into buds or leaves,
except it were where the earth was gone, that they lay uncovered. The like
Experiment does Palladius teach, concerning the Rape-root, whereby to make

Rape-roots greater.
As Soon as you have plucked them up, you must strip off all the leaves, and cut
off the stalk about half an inch above the root: then make certain furrows for
them in the ground, for every one of them a several furrow; and there bury them
asunder, about eight inches deep: and when you have cast earth upon them, tread
it in; and by that means you shall have great Rape-roots. By the like means,
Theophrastus thinks, we may procure

The herb Wake-robbin to grow greater.
When it is most full of leaves, and when the leaves be at the broadest, we
must bow them downward, winding them round about the root within the earth,
that so the herb may not bud forth, but all the nourishment may be converted to
the head of the herb. So may we make

Onions to grow bigger,
as Theophrastus supposes, if we take away all the stalk, that the whole force
of the nourishment may descend downwards; lest if it should be diffused, the
chief virtue thereof should spend it self upon the seeding. Sotion says, that
if a man plant Onions, he must cut off both the tops and the tails thereof,
that so they may grow to a greater bigness then ordinary. Palladius says, that
if we desire to have great-headed Onions, we must cut off all the blade, that
so the juice may be forced down to the lower parts. In like manner, if we would
have

Garlick-heads greater then common,
we must take all the greenish substance thereof, before it be bladed, and turn
it downward, that so it may grow into the earth. There is yet another Device,
whereby to make herbs and roots grow bigger then ordinary; but yet I like not
so well of it, howsoever many ancient Writers have set it down: and first,

How to make Leeks grow greater.
Columella has prescribed this course: you must take a great many Leek-seeds,
and bind them together in thin linen clouts, and so cast them into the ground,
and they will yield large and great leeks. Which thing Palladius also confirms
by his authority, in the very same words. But both of them had it out of
Theophrastus, who puts it for a general Rule, That if a man sow many seeds
bound up together in a linen cloth, it will cause both the root to be larger,
and the buds to be larger also; and therefore in his time they were wont to sow
Leeks, Parsley, and other herbs after the same manner: for they are of more
force when there be many seeds together, all of them concurring into one
nature. Moreover, it makes not a little to the enlarging of fruits, to take the
seeds which we would sow, out of some certain part of the former fruit. As for
example: we shall procure

A Gourd of a greater or larger growth,
if we take the seed out of the middle of a Gourd, and set it with the top
downward. This course Columella prescribes, in his Hortulus: Look, says he,
where the Gourd swells most, and is of the largest compass, thence, even out of
the middle thereof, you must take your seed, and that will yield you the
largest fruit. And this is experienced not in Gourds only, but also in all
other fruits: for the seeds which grow in the bowels or belly, as it were, of
any fruit, are commonly most perfect, and yield most perfect fruit; whereas the
seeds that grow in the outward parts, produce for the most part weak and
unperfect fruit. Likewise the grains that are in the middle of the ear, yield
the best corn; whereas both the highest and the lowest are not so perfect: but
because Gourds yield great increase, therefore the experience hereof is more
evidently in them then in any other. Cucumbers will be of a great growth, as
the Quintiles say, if the seeds be set with their heads downward; or else if
you set a vessel full of water under them in the ground, that so the roots may
be drenched therein: for we have known them grow both sweeter and greater by
this Device.

CHAP. XII.
How to produce fruit that shall not have any stone or kernel in it.
IT is a received thing in Philosophy, especially amongst those that have set
forth unto us the choicest and nicest points of Husbandry, that if you take
Quicksets, or any branches that you would plant, and get out the pith of them
with some earpicker, or any like instrument made of bone, they will yield fruit
without any stone, and without any kernel: for it is the pith that both
breeds and nourishes the substance of the kernel. But the Arcadians are of a
quite contrary opinion: for, say they, every tree that has any pith in it at
all, will live; but if all the pith be taken out of it, it will be so far from
yielding any stoneless fruit, that it cannot choose but die, and be quite dried
up. The reason is, because the pith is the moistest and most lively part of any
tree or plant: for the nourishment which the ground sends up into any plant, is
conveyed especially by the pith into all the other parts: for Nature has so
ordained it, that all the parts draw their nourishment, as it were their soul
and their breath, through the marrow or pith of the stock, as it were through a
Squirt or Conduit-pipe. Which may appear by experience, seeing any bough or
stalk, so soon as the marrow is gone, returns and crooks backward, till it be
quite dried up, as the Ancients have showed. But I for my part must needs hold
both against Theophrastus, and against others also that have written of
Husbandry, both that trees may live after their marrow is taken from them, and
also that they will bring forth fruit having stones or kernels in them, though
there be no pith in the trees themselves, as I have showed more at large in my
books of Husbandry. Notwithstanding, lest I should omit any thing belonging to
this argument, I have thought good here to set down the examples which those
Ancients have delivered in writing, that every man that lists may make trial
hereof; and happily some amongst the rest using greater diligence in the proof
hereof then I did, may find better success herein then I have found. There be
many means, whereby Plants may be deprived of kernels; as namely, by
engraffing, by taking out their pith, by soiling with dung, or by watering, and
by other Devices. We will first begin, as our wonted manner is, with
engraffing; and will show how to produce

A Peach-apple without a stone.
Palladius says he learned this new kind of engraffing of a certain Spaniard,
which he says also he had experienced in a Peach-tree. Take a Willow-bough
about the thickness of a man's arm; but it must be very sound, and two yards
long at the least: bore it through the middle, and carry it where a young
Peach-tree grows: then strip off all the Peach-tree-sprigs all but the very
top, and draw it through the hole of the Willow-bough: then stick both ends of
the Willow into the ground, that it may stand bending like a bow; and fill up
the hole that you bored, with dirt and moss, and bind them in with thongs.
About a year after, when the Peach-tree and the Willow are incorporated into
each other, cut the plant beneath the joining place, and remove it, and cover
both the Willow-bough and the top of the plant also with earth; and by this
means you shall procure Peaches without stones. But this must be done in moist
and waterish places; and besides, the Willow must be relieved with continual
watering, that so the nature of the wood may be cherished, (as it delights in
moisture) and it may also minister abundant juice to the plant that is
engraffed in it. By the like experiment we may procure, as Avicenna shows, that

A Citron shall grow without any seed in it:
for, says he, if we engraff it into a Quince-tree, it will yield such a
fruit. Albertus promises to produce

A Medlar without any stones,
by engraffing it into an Apple Tree, or a Service-tree. But experience proves
this to be false; yet surely, if it be so engraffed, it will have a softer
kernel a great deal. The reason which brought the Ancients to think and write
thus, was this: They saw that such fruits as have in them the hardest stones,
do grow upon such trees as have in them the hardest pith; as the Dog-tree, the
Olive Tree, the Damosin-tree, the Myrtle-tree, and the like: they saw also,
that such trees as have a soft and a spungie kind of pith in them, as the
Fig Tree, the Alder-tree, and suchlike, bring forth fruit without any stones
in them at all: and from hence they gathered and concluded, that it is the pith
which nourishes the kernel. Which thing howsoever it has some little shadow of
truth in it, yet they should not have extended it generally to all plants,
seeing experience proves it to fail very often. Now let us come to the second
means whereby fruit may be prevented of their kernels; and this is by taking
forth the pith or marrow. As for example: if you would procure the growing of

A Grape without any stone in it,
Democritus counsels you to take a branch or twig of a Vine, and cleave it
just in the middle, and either with a stone, or some instrument made of bone,
fetch out all the pith, in that part which you will plant within the earth, or
at least as far as you can hollow it without spoil: then presently bind up the
parts together again with paper stiffly and tightly wrapped about them, and
make a trench for them in some moist and very fertile soil, where you must
plant them in one, and fasten it to some sure prop, that it may not be wreathed
nor bowed; so will they soon grow up together into one, as they were before:
but it would be much better, if you would put the clove or head of a Sea-onion
into that part which you have robbed of the pith: for this is as good as glue
to fasten them together; and the moisture hereof will keep them supple, as also
the heat hereof will cherish them much. Theophrastus says, that you may
procure Grapes without any stones in them, if you rob the Vine-branch of the
pith that is in it, whereof the stones are wont to be gendred. And Columella
says, that if you would have Grapes without stones, you must cleave the
Vine-branch, and take out all the pith; but so, that the buds be not hurt
thereby: then join it together, and bind it up again, so that you crush not
the buds; and so plant it in a well-soiled ground, and there water it often:
and when it begins to shoot up into slips, you must dig deep about it
oftentimes; and when it comes to bear, it will yield you Grapes with our any
stones. Palladius says, there is a goodly kind of Grape which has no kernels
in it, so that it may be swallowed down easily, and that with no small
pleasantness, as if it were many Grapes stoned and supped up together. The
manner of the procuring it is, as the Greeks record, by Art assisted with
Nature, on this wise: The set which we would plant, must be cleft in the midst,
so far as we mean to set it within the ground; and when we have picked and
clean scraped out all the pith of those parts, we must close them togethe^
again; and when we have bound them hard up, set them in the earth: but the bond
wherewith they are tied up, must be made of Paper or Parchment; and the ground
where they are set, must be a moist place. Some go to work more precisely, and
put the plant so (...) and made up again, into a Sea-onion, so far as the plant
was cloven: for by the help thereof, all plants do sooner and easier take root.
Pliny likewise says, there is (...) new^invented kind of Grapes, when the
Vine-branch that is to he planted, is cloven in the middle, and all the pith
scraped out, and the pieces knit up together again, with a special care that
the buds receive no harm any way: then they set the Vine-branch in a
well-soiled ground; and when it begins to shoot forth, they pru^e it, and
dig often about it: the Grapes which it afterward bears, will have no hard
kernels in them, as Columella writes; howbeit, it is great marvel that there
can be in them any kernels at all, though never so soft, seeing all the pith,
which is the mother of the kernel, is quite taken away. But surely I for my
part marvel at those who think it strange that a tree should live when this
pith is gone, and are persuaded that a Vine-branch can bear fruit without
kernels when the pith is taken out of it; seeing many men in the Country are
eyewitnesses that there do many plants live without any pith in them; and
seeing also it is impossible almost that any tree should bear fruit without
kernels, because the kernel carries it self the very seed whereby one fruit may
be generated of another. Likewise you may procure, as Democritus also shows,

Pomegranates and Cherries without any stones;
if in like manner you pick out the pith of the young plants that you set. And
Africanus says, If you deal with these as with Vine-branches, plucking out the
pith after you have cleft them, and then plant them; and after a while cut off
the upper parts of the plants when they have budded forth, then the Pomegranate
set, will yield fruit without any kernels. Palladius borrows this same
experiment of Africanus, and sets it down word by word as he does. Likewise that

A Cherry-tree may bring forth fruit without any stone within;
Martial shows more distinctly. Cut off a young plant about two foot long,
and cleave it as it stands in the ground, down to the root, and then fetch out
the pith on both sides, and presently tie them up again fast, and cover the
whole cleft both on the top, and on both sides, with muck; so shall they grow
fast together again in one year: then engraffe some young sprigs of a
Cherry-tree, such as never bare any fruit before into this stock, and by this
means you shall procure Cherries without any stones at all. Others, that they
might accomplish their purpose more speedily, did not cleave such tender young
Cherry-trees, but bored a great hole thorough Trees of good growth, so that it
might pierce the whole pith, and cross it in the middle of the Tree; then they
put a stake or a wedge into it, which might stop the passage of the pith, that
none might be ministered into the upper parts. In like manner Africanus teaches
how to procure

A Peach without any stone.
You must, says he, bore a hole beneath through the body of the Tree, and
having so cut off the pith from passing upward, you must fill up the hole with
a stake of Willow or Prick-wood; so shall you intercept the pith from ascending
out of the root into the branches. Some Writers there are, which show how to
procure stoneless fruit by diligence in dressing and trimming of plants. It is
held for a rule in Husbandry, that soft, fat, and moist nourishment does alter
all wild and unkindly fruit into that which is milder and more natural: It is
a kind of mildeness in fruits, to have a little, soft and sweet kernel; as on
the contrary, it is wildenesse to have a great and a hard kernel, for it comes
by reason of a kind of harsh and dry nourishment that the earth sends up into
them. Wherefore no doubt but we may procure the kernel of a fruit to be smaller
and more tender, by diligence and skill in dressing them. To begin with a Vine:

How a Vine may bring forth grapes without a harsh and stony kernel.
At such time as Vines are pruned, you must take a fruitful sprig, somewhat
near the top as you can, and there, as it grows, you must pick out the pith at
the highest end, never cleaving it, but hollowing it with some fit instrument
as well as you can, and there uphold it with a prop that it bow not down: then
take some Cyrenian juice, as the Greeks call it, and pour it into the place
that is hollow; but first you must steep this juice in water, to the thickness
of sodden wine: and this you must do for eight days together every day once,
till the vine-branch sprout forth again. Columella says the very same; that
the vine-branch as it grows upon the Vine must be cut, and the pith of it
fetched out with some fit instrument, as well as you may, out of the top
without the cleaving of the branch, but the branch being whole, and still
growing on the Vine, you must put into it some Benjamin or Cyrenian juice
steeped in water, as was showed before, and set it upright with a prop, that
the juice may not run forth; and this is to be done for eight days together.
So if we would procure

A Myrtle without a kernel,
Theophrastus teaches us how to do it. If you water the Myrtle-tree with hot
water, then, says he, the fruit will be the better, and without any kernel.
Some affirm, that this experiment was found out by chance: for whereas there
stood near to a Bath, a Myrtle-tree which no man regarded, the Comers by took
off some of the fruit by chance, and found them without any kernels; then they
carried some home, and set them, and so this kind of fruit began first in
Athens. Didymus also says, that if the Myrtle-tree be often watered with warm
liquor, it will yield berries without any stones or kernels within.
Theophrastus shows yet another way whereby this may be effected; take, says
he, the filth or shavings of skins, and put them in Urine, and so lay them
about the root of the Myrtle-tree at such time as the buds begin to show
themselves, and so shall you have berries that have either none at all, or else
very small kernels in them. Likewise the Pomegranate may be produced without
any kernels within it, if you lay good store of Swines-dung about the root of
the Pomegranate-tree.

CHAP. XIII.
How fruit may be produced without any outward rines or shells.
THe very same helps and devices which we prescribed for the producing of
fruits without their inner kernel, we may likewise use in the practice of
producing Nuts, and such like fruits as are wont to grow in shells and rines,
that they may grow naked as it were without any shel at all. And first this may
be effected by taking away the pith out of the plants that bear them so.

A Nut without a shell,
may be produced, as Damageron teaches. If you bore a hole quite thorough the
Nut-tree, and put into it a stake of Elm to fill it up, you shall thereby stop
the pith from ascending into the upper parts* and so no shells can grow because
it is the pith only that causes them. Palladius counsels you to bore the
hole through the root, and stop it up with a stake of box, or some wedge made
of iron, or of copper. But Theophrastus shows, how to procure

Almonds and Chest-nuts with a soft shell,
and this is by skill in dressing the Trees. If you would soften and alter the
fruit, we must apply the root with Swins-dung: for this is a very forcible
worker; likewise often digging will cause both the plants to prosper better,
and the fruit to become better also: for the kernels will be smaller, in such
fruit as have any stones in them; and such fruit as grow in shells or rines, as
Almonds, and Chest-nuts, will have the softer shell without, and the larger
kernel within: for the greater store of nourishment there is applied to the
Tree, the moister it is, and the substance of the fruit is so much the more
increased. But Palladius would persuade us, that if we rid away the earth from
the roots of the Almond-tree some certain days before it begin to blossom,
and all that while apply them with warm water, we shall hereby procure the
Almond-shels to be very tender. If we would procure

That kind of Nut which is called Nux Tarentina,
the same author Damageron has showed us how to do it. Every Nut and Almond
will yield a mild fruit with a tender shell, if we continually apply the body
and root of the tree with pouring ashes upon them; and likewise all other kind
of fruits that grow in any shell or rine, may be so wrought upon, and will
suffer the like alteration by the like means practiced upon them. If you would
procure a Tarentine Nut, Palladius says, you must water the Tree with Lie
thrice a month throughout a whole year, and so you may obtain your purpose.
Others effect such alterations by correcting the plants; as, by cutting off the
tops of the roots. If the Nut be too hard shelled, you may also remedy it by
cutting and paring off the bark of the Tree, as Damageron shows; for by this
means you draw down that harsh and wild humor: The reason whereof is, because
the bark of the Tree answers to the shell of the fruit, as the pith of the
Tree answers to the kernel of the fruit: and therefore, as to amend the inner
kernel we abated the pith, so to soften or amend the utter shell or rine of the
fruit, we must abate the utter bark of the Tree. A thing which we have observed
by another like example: for a Peach being engraffed upon a bitter Almond-tree,
the pill of the fruit thence growing was so bitter, that it could not be eaten
till the pill were pared off. This secret may stead you in many other
experiments of the like kind. But this kind of Nut which we now speak of, I
have growing in my own Orchard, and it has such a tender shell, and so thin,
that as soon as ever it is but touched, the shell falls off, and the fruit is
bare and naked. Florentinus assayed to produce

An Almond without a shell,
on this manner: He break the shell very charily, so that the kernel was kept
whole; then he took wool, and sometimes green leaves of the Vine or of the
Plane-tree, and wrapped about the kernel, lest if he should have set it without
my covering about it, the Emots or such like vermin should have gnawn it.
Columella shows another device whereby we may procure

A Filberd to become a Tarentine Nut.
When you have made your pit wherein you purpose to set your Nut, put into it a
little earth, about half a foot deep, and there plant the feed of Fennel-gyant;
and when the Fennel is come up, cleave it, and within the pith of it put your
Filberd without any shell upon it, and so cover it all over with earth: this if
you practice before the Calends of March, or betwixt the Nones and the Ides of
March, you shall have your purpose. They prescribe likewise another device,
whereby

Gourds may bring forth fruit without any seeds within them:
The Gourd, say they, will grow seedless, if you take the first branch or sprig
of a Gourd when it is a little grown up, and bury it in the earth as they use
to deal by Vines, so that only the head thereof may appear; and so soon as it
is grown up again, to bury it so again: but we must have a special care that
the slips which grow up out of the stalk be cut away, and none but the stalk
left behind; so shall the fruit that grows upon it, whether it be Gourds or
Cucumbers, be destitute of all seed within. Likewise they will grow without
seeds in them, if the seeds which are planted, be macerated or steeped in
Sea-famine oil, for the space of three days before they be sowed.

CHAP. XIIII.
How to procure fruits, to be of diverse colors, such as are not naturally
incident to their kind.
NOw we will show how to color fruits: to the effecting whereof there have
been diverse means devised; as waterings, and engraffings which can never be
sufficiently commended or spoken of, and other like practices. To begin with
engraffing; If we would color any fruit, we must engraffe it upon a plant that
flourishes with the same color which we would borrow. As for example, If we
would produce

Red Apples,
we must engraffe them upon a Plane-tree, and the fruit will be red, as
Diophanes, Didymus, and Palladius affirm. So we may procure that the fruit

Rhodacen shall grow red,
if we engraffe it upon a Plane-tree, as Africanus witnesses. Of whom
Palladius learned that the way to make Rhodacens look red, is to engraff them
into a Plane-tree. If you would have

Citrons of a red scarlet-colour,
Avicenna shows you may effect it by engraffing them into a Pomegranate-tree;
for we showed before that such an engraffing may well be made. But if you would
have

Citrons to be blood-red,
Florentinus shows that you may effect this by engraffing them into a
Mulberry-tree; which experiment Deophanes approves. Likewise he that desires
to have

Red Pears,
must engraffe them into a Mulberry-tree; for by this means the Pears will grow
red, as Tarentinus and Diophanes do witness. So also you may procure

A white Fig to become red,
by engraffing it upon a Mulberry-tree, as the same Diophanes witnesses. By
the same means

Apples may be of a blood-red color,
if they be engraffed into a Mulberry-tree, as Avicenna shows. But Beritius
and Diophanes write, that the Mulberry-tree it self, which makes all other
Apple-fruit to become red, may be caused to bring forth

White Mulberries,
if it be engraffed into a white Poplar tree; for this will alter the color of
the fruit. But Palladius procures this effect by another means; not by
engraffing the Mulberry into a white Poplar, but into the Fig Tree; for this
also will alter their color, and cause

White Mulberries,
as he shows in his verses; wherein he says, that the Fig Tree does persuade
Mulberries to change their own color and to take hers; whereof I my self have
seen the experience. Likewise, of

A white Vine may be made red Wine,
if we engraffe a white Vine into a black: for the stock into which it is
engraffed, will alter the color much, as I have seen by experience in
hony-grapes, those which we call Greek-grapes; for the Vines which have been
engraffed upon those Greek-Vines, have yielded a blackish juice or wine; and
the oftener such engraffing has been made, the blacker juice was yielded. In
the places about the Hill Vesuvius the white wind grape, which grows upon her
own stalk that is engraffed into the Greek-vine yields a more high-colored
wine then others do. Another way to make

Apples grow red,
is by diligent and cunning dressing, even by applying them with hot and fat
receipts; for there are two chief Elements or principles of colors; white, and
black, or dark colored; now by dressing them, and applying fat things unto
them* we may procure every flower or fruit that is blackish, to become brighter
and fresher colored; whereas on the other side, if they be neglected, that we
do not bestow pains and care in trimming them, their color will not be so
lively, but degenerate into a whiterish hew; for all colors that begin to
fade, wax somewhat whitish. Beritius therefore, endeavoring to make Apples
grow red, watered them with Urine, and so obtained his purpose. But Didymus

To procure red Pomegranates,
watered the Tree with Bath-waters sodden into Lie, and some other water mixed
therewith. But there is yet another device, whereby we may procure

Apples to grow red,
by opposing them directly to the greatest force of the Sunbeams; for this
will make them red. Beritius, that ^e might cause the reflex of the Sunbeams
to be more forcible upon the fruit, used this slight. He fastened certain
stakes into the ground, and weighing down the boughs that had fruit upon them,
he bound them charily without hurting the fruit to those stakes; and near
thereunto he dug certain ditches filling them with water, or else would
place some other vessels full of water near the boughs; casting this in his
conjecture, that surely the heat of the Sun lighting upon the water, would
cause hot vapors, which being reflected together with the heat of the Sun into
the places near adjoining where the fruit hangs, and so reflected upon the
fruit, would procure them to be of a reddish and a goodly color. Beritius
assayed to procure

Red Apples,
by another devise, by a secret kind of operation. Under the Tree he was wont
to set Roses, which did lend their goodly hew to the Apples that grow upon the
Tree above them. Democritus practiced the like device not upon Apples, but upon
Rhodacens, and made

Red Rhodacens,
by planting Roses underneath the Tree, round about the roots. Likewise we may
color fruit by coloring the seeds of them; for look what color we procure in
the seed, either by steeping it in some colored liquor, or by any other means,
the fruit will grow to be of the same color which the seed is, when it is set
or sown. As for example, we may color

Peaches,
with Sanguinary or Vermillion; If we bury a Peach-stone in the ground, and
take it up again seven days after (for in that time the stone will open of it
self) and then put into it some Vermillion, and bury it in the earth again, and
afterward look carefully unto it, we shall thereby procure Vermillion-peaches.
And Dsmocritus is persuaded, that if we should put into it any other color
after the same manner, the Peach would be of that other color. It is a thing
commonly reported among us, and it is not unlike to be true, that

Peaches may be of a sanguine-colour,
by another means. You must take a Peach-stone, and put it into a Carrot that
is then growing, and the stalk which grows of that stone in the Carrot, if it
be carefully nourished and preserved, will bring forth Peaches of a sanguine
color. In like manner, If you would have

White kernels growing in a Pomegranate,
Palladius shows how to do it, by the authority of Martial. If you take chalk
and white clay, and with them mingle a quarter so much plastering, and apply
the Pomegranate-tree roots with this kind of soilage or dunging, for the space
of three whole years together, you shall obtain your purpose. Likewise, if you
desire

Mellons of a Sanguine color,
you must take Mellon-seeds, and steep them in sanguine liquor for three or
four days together before you set them, you may easily have your desire. Or
else, if you open a little the skin of the seed, and put within it the juice of
red Roses, Clovegilliflowers, and Black-berries that grow upon Brambles, or of
any other like thing, so that it be not hurtful to the seed, you may effect
your purpose. And I suppose that the sanguine-coloured Mellons which are seen
in these Countries, are thus used, that they may be of this color. Consequent
upon these devices is that slight whereby

A Peach may grow with any writing upon it.
The Greeks affirm, that a Peach may be made to grow with a writing upon it, if
you take out the stone and bury it in the earth for seven days; and then when
it begins to open, pluck out the kernel, and write in it what you will, with
Vermillion-juice: then bind up the kernel into the stone again, and set it so
into the ground, and you shall have growing a written fruit. Now as the Sun
does color the herbs that it may well come at, as we have showed; so by
keeping the force of the Sun away from them, we may whiten them; for so

A Lettice may be made white,
as Florentinus shows. If you would, says he, procure goodly white Lettice,
then must you bind together the tops of the leaves, two days before they be
gathered; for so they will be fair and white. Likewise you may whiten them by
casting sand upon them. And with us

Artichocks are made white,
by the very same means which we speak of. And if you would cause

Beets to become whiter then ordinary,
you must cover the roots over with Cow Dung, and as we spoke before concerning
Leeks, so here you must cleave the bud, and lay a broad stone or a tile upon
it, as Sotion shows. So Columella teaches how to make

Endive to grow white,
when the leaves are shot forth, you must tie them about the tops with a small
string, and cover them over with an earthen vessel set fast into the ground,
and the herb will be white. Others are at less charges, and cover them over
with some earth our Gardeners lay them in sand, and so make them very white. If
you would procure

White Sperage,
you must put the slips as soon as ever they appear out of the earth, into a
broken reed; and there let them grow for a while, and afterward when you take
away the cane or reed, the Sperage will be whiter then ordinary.

CHAP. XV.
How the color of Flowers may also be changed.
IN transforming and meddling the colors of flowers together, we may procure
such strange medleys, as nothing can be more delightful to be seen. Those which
are of a ^eep purple color may be meddled with azure blue; those which are as
white as milk, may be meddled either with a duskish hew, or with a green, or
crimson, or some other compound colors; in the beholding whereof, the mind
cannot choose but be affected with great delight, and be ravished with
admiration, and as it were quite overcome with the excellent beauty of them.
Wherefore we will set down certain Rules, whereby we may be able to alter the
color of flowers, as we prescribed certain rules before, whereby we showed how
to alter the color of fruits. And first we will show, how by engraffing

Gilliflowers that are of themselves purple, or else white, may become azure
blue,
You must cut off (somewhat near the root) a stalk of Endive or Blue-bottle, or
Bugloss, but the old wild Endive is best for this purpose, and let it be grown
to an inch in thickness; then cleave that in the middle which is left growing
in the ground, and plant into it a Gilliflower new plucked up out of the earth,
root and all; then bind up the stalks or slips with some sl^ght bond, and lay
good store of earth and dung round about it: so shall it yield you a flower,
that is somewhat bluish, of a most delightful color to behold. This, many of
my friends will needs persuade me, though for my own part, I have often made
trial of it, and yet never could see it effected. But this I have seen, that a
white Gilliflower slip being engraffed into a red Carrot made hollow for the
same purpose, and so buried in the earth, has yielded a Sea-coloured flower.
Likewise you may procure the white Gilliflower to be of a skarlet-colour, if
after the same manner you engraffe it into the root of Orchanet: by which means
also you may turn a purple Gilliflower into a skarlet. If you would have

A Rose, as also the flower Jasmine to be of a yellow-colour,
you may procure it by engraffing either of them into a broom-stalk: for of all
other, the broom-flower is most yellow: and though we cannot do it so well, by
clapping the leaf or the bud of the one upon the leaf or bud of the other, yet
it may be effected by boring into the stalk after this manner. You must set a
Rose or a Jasmine near to the broom, and when they are somewhat grown, take
them up together with the earth that is about them; (for they will prove better
when they are set again, with their own earth which is about them, being as it
were their mother, then with any other earth that shall be as it were their
step mother,) then bore a passage into the broom-stalk, and when you have
cleansed the passage, prune the rose-stalk and plant it into the broom: and
there cover them with ^oam where the engraffing was made, and so bind it up.
Afterward when the set is grown into the stock, you must cut off all the head
somewhat above the engraffing place; so shall you have a Rose or a Jasmine
there growing, of a lovely yellowish color. Which kind of flowers are very
usual with us, and this their borrowed color is so orient and bright, that the
eye is scarce able to endure the brightness thereof. There is another means
also whereby we may color flowers, and that is by pouring some coloring into
the roots. If you would have

Lillies to be red,
we will show how to do it, as Florentinus has showed us. Take a Lillie-clove
or head, and when you have opened it well, pour into it some Sinoper, or any
other coloring, and the Lillie-flower that grows out of the clove so dressed,
will be of the same color. But you must be very careful that you hurt not the
clove or head, when you so open it; and besides, you must be sure to cover it
with fat and well-soiled earth. By the like means you may procure

Lilly-flowers of a purple color.
The manner whereof, Anatolius shows to be this. You must take ten or twelve
Lilly-stalks, about such time as they be ready to yield flowers, bind them all
together and hang them up in the smoke: then will there spring out of them some
small roots, like unto a Scallion. Therefore when the time of the year serves
to set them, you must steep the stalks in the Lees of red Wine, till you see
they be thoroughly stained with that color: then you must take them asunder,
and set every one of them by it self, watering them still with the same Lees;
and so you shall have Lillies that bear a purple flower. Cassianus attempted by
the very like means

To produce white Ivy:
He steeped it in white Marle, and covered the roots of it with the same mortar
for eight days together, and it brought forth white berries. We may effect the
like matters by careful manuring and dressing of fruits; for if we apply them
with fat and fertile muck, the flowers will be a great deal the better
colored, and may be made blackish; as we have often proved in
Clove-gilliflowers, which we have procured to be so deep colored, that they
have been even black. And on the contrary

Roses, Clove-gilliflowers, and Violets will wax of a whiterish color,
if they be not carefully looked unto, that either you do not water them well,
nor transplant them, nor dig about them, nor feed them with muck; for by this
means Theophrastus writes, not only these kinds of flowers, but almost all
other, that grow in Woods and Forests unregarded, do become whiterish. But
Didymus has devised another kind of slight diverse from these, whereby to make
Roses and Clove-gilliflowers to become white very suddenly; and this is, by
smoking and perfuming them with brimstone about the time that they begin to
open.

CHAP. XVI.
How fruits and Flowers may be made to yield a better savor then ordinary.
AS it is pretty and delightsome to see fruits and flowers wear a counterfeit
color; so it is worth our labor to procure in them a more fragrant smell,
then their ordinary kind is wont to afford: which thing we may effect by diverse
ways, by planting, by watering, and by other devices. And for example sake, we
will first show, how to make

Limons to become very odoriferous.
If we take that least kind of Limons which is called Limoncellum picciolu^,
and engraff into a Citron-tree, the stock will inspire the fruit with a very
goodly smell; and the oftener that you so engraffe it, the sweeter smell it will
afford, as by daily experience we have tried in our Naples Gardens. So also we
may procure

Very odoriferous Pears,
by engraffing them upon a Quince-tree, for the ^tock thereof will lend the
fruit a grateful savor. Diophanes avoucheth, that

Apples may be made more odoriferous,
if they be engraffed into a Quince-tree; and that hereby are procured those
goodly Apples which the Athenians call Melimela. And I suppose that the Apple
called Appium malum, was produced by the often engraffing of an Apple into a
Quince-tree: for the smell of it is somewhat like a Quince; and it is not
unlike that Appius Claudius found it out, and first procured it by the same
means. Likewise we have with us great red Apples, and some of them of a m^rry
color, which yield the same smell; and questionless could never be produced
but by the same means. So we have procured

The Centifole Rose to be more odoriferous.
If you would do so too, you must engraffe it into that kind of Rose, which, by
reason of the sweet smell of Musk that it carries with it, is called
Moschatula; but you must oftentimes reiterate the engraffing of it again and
again: so shall it be more beautiful, and fuller of leaves, and smell sweeter.
But it is best to engraffe it by Inoculation, by clapping the bud of the one
upon the bud of the other; for so it will take soonest, and prove best. By a
slight not much unlike to this we may procure

Vines to smell of sweet ointments,
as Paxamus shows. If you would have the Vine to smell sweetly, and the place
where it grows, you must take the branches and cleave them, and pour in sweet
ointments into them when you are about to plant them. But your labor will take
the better effect, if you first steep the branches in sweet oil, and then
plant or engraffe them. I have practiced an easier and slighter way, besmearing
the branches that are to be engraffed, with Musk, or else steeping them in
Rose Water, if the Musk did not stay upon them. So also we could make

Limons to be as odoriferous as Cinnamon,
by taking the sprigs that are to be planted, and besmearing them with oil or
the water of Cinnamon, and dressing them with much industry and diligence: And
this kind of Limons is usual amongst us; and is termed by the common people
Limoncellum incancellatum. There is also another device whereby fruits may be
made odoriferous, and to smell of Spices; and this is, by taking the seeds of
them, and steeping them in sweet water before they be sowed. As for example: If
we would procure

Odoriferous Artichocks,
Cassianus has declared out of Varro, the manner how to effect it. You must
take Artichock-seeds, and steep them for the space of three days in the juice
of Roses, or Lillies, or Bays, or some other like, and so to set them in the
ground. Also you may make Artichocks smell like Bays, if you take a Bay-berry,
and make a hole in it, and put therein your Artichock-seed, and so plant it.
Palladius records out of the same Author, that if you steep Artichock-seeds for
three days together in the oil of Bays, or Spikenard, or Balme-gum, or the
juice of Roses, or of Mastick, and afterward set them when they are dry, that
then the Artichocks that grow out of those seeds, will yield the smell and
savor of that which the seeds were before steeped in. Florentinus makes

Mellons of the fragrant smell of Roses,
after this manner* by taking Mellon-seeds, and laying them up amongst dry
Roses, and so planting them one amongst another. I have procured Mellons to
smell like Musk, by opening that part whereby the seed sprouts out, and
steeping them in Rose Water wherein some Musk was distilled also, and so
planting them after two days steeping. So we have procured

Odoriferous Lettice,
by taking the seed of Lettice, and putting it into the seed of a Citron, and
so planting it. After the same manner, you may learn to make

Flowers grow that shall smell of Cloves;
if you take the seeds of those flowers, and lay them in Clove-powder, or the
oil of Cloves, or Clove-water distilled, and so set them: for by this means,
the flowers will entertain the smell and savor of the Cloves. And this I take
it, was the cun-ning the cunning slight whereby our ordinary
Clove-gilliflowers were first produced; for questionless Gilliflowers do grow
everywhere of themselves without any such pleasant smell; and besides, they are
of a smaller assize, and of their own kind somewhat wild. But it should seem,
that Gardeners did by their industry and trimming, bestow the smell of Cloves
upon them, by steeping their seeds in Clove-water, or by suppling them with the
oil of Cloves, or else by sticking Cloves in the roots of them, and so
planting them. We may add to these sleights another device,

How to make Garlic grow that shall not smell rankly and unsavourily.
Sotion has taught us the way. If, says he, you do set Garlic, and pluck it
up again, both, when the Moon is underneath the earth, it will not have any bad
savor. And Theophrastus has taught us a means

How we may procure Roses to yield a more odoriferous smell,
namely, if you take Garlic, and plant it near your Roses.

CHAP. XVII.
How to procure fruits to be sweeter and pleasanter for taste.
THere are some trees, which cannot away with any scar, but if you cut their
stock never so little, or make any other scar in them, presently the Air and
the extrinsecal heat get in, and so the Trees perish; for the corruption will
fall downward to the root, and so make the Trees presently to wither and fade
away. Now there are other Trees, which will abide not only a scar, but also to
have their stock cleft, and to be bored into; yea, and by this means too, they
will bear fruit more plentifully; as does the Pomegranate-tree, the
Almond-tree, and the Apple Tree; of all which there is very great use. The
reason hereof is this: Their nature and kind is, to receive so much
nourishment as is sufficient for them, and to void away hurtful and superfluous
humors: for as those living creatures which sweat most, or have some other
issue in their bodies, are most healthful and wont to live longest; so when
these Trees have a cut or a scar in them whereby they sweat out, as it were,
their hurtful and superfluous moisture, they do more easily digest that
moisture which is left behind within them; and the better that the moisture is
digested, the sweeter and pleasanter is their juice. And besides, they will
live, if the parts have any continuation at all, though it be never so little,
only if they may but hang together: and therefore they will easily defend
themselves from any harm that may happen unto them by the cutting or mangling
of any of their parts. We will show how to procure fruits that shall be sweter
in taste then ordinarily their kind is wont to afford, first by engraffing,
secondly by boring or cutting, and last of all by other means. And first, by
engraffing we may procure

Cherries that shall have in them the relish of Bays,
For as we have showed before, engraffing may amend those defects that are in
plants and endue them with better qualities: so that if you have any fruit that
is loathsome, because it is too sweet, do but engraffe it into a bitter Tree,
and there will be such a medley, that your fruit shall have a very savoury
relish. Pliny says, that if you engraffe a Cherry upon a Bay Tree, you shall
have Cherries thence growing, that will have the smatch of the Bay. Palladius
says the same, engraffe a Cherry upon a Bay Tree, and the fruit that grows
thence, will have the relish of the Bay. In my time, there have been seen
certain Cherries in Naples, which they called Bay-cherries, somewhat bitter,
but yet pleasant withal; a most excellent kind of fruit, far better then any
other cherries, of a very large assize, full of juice, of a very sanguine
color, that have a bitter-sweet taste, so that they are neither loathsome for
their overmuch sweetness, nor yet to be refused for their overmuch bitterness.
So likewise may be procured

Sweeter Apples by engraffing them into a Quince
For if you do engraffe an Apple into a Quince, the Apple will have a relish
like honey: which kind of fruit the Athenians do therefore call Melimela,
because they taste like honey, as Diophanes shows. Now we will show also, how
by husbandry and skilful dressing, fruits may be made sweeter in taste; namely,
by piercing or boring the stock, or scarrifying it round about, or by some
other chastisements, as the Husbandmen are wont to call them; for by these
means, the trees may purge themselves of their superfluous moisture, and so
they will bear the sweeter fruit. As for example: If you would learn,

How to procure the Almond-tree to yield fruit without any bitterness.
Aristotle has taught you the way. You must knock a great nail into the body
of the Almond-tree, that the gum of the Tree, which causes the bitterness of
the fruit, may drop out by that passage. And this is such a slight that hereby
you may tame, as it were, wild Trees, and alter their nature into a milder
kind. Theophrastus says, that if you dig round about the stock of the
Almond-tree, and bore thorough it about nine inches above the ground, the gum
will thereby drop out, and so the fruit will become the sweeter by that
chastisement. If you cut off a bough, or an arm of it, so that the gum may have
egresse that way, and if you wipe away the gum still as it comes forth, and
observe this for two or three years together, you may by this means alter a
bitter Almond-tree into a sweet one. For the bitterness proceeds from no other
cause, but only from the superfluity of nourishment and moisture, which is
abated by boring into the stock: and when once that which is superfluous is
evacuated, then that which is left, is more easily concocted, and so the tree
becomes fertile in bringing forth a sweeter and a better fruit. Africanus
likewise affirms, that if you dig about the stock of a bitter Almond-tree,
and make a hole into it some four inches above the root, whereby it may sweat
out the hurtful moisture, it will become sweet. Pliny says the same; If you
dig round about the stock, says he, and bore thorough the lower part of it,
and wipe away the humor which there issues forth, a bitter Almond-tree will
become sweet. Some there are, who after they have made that hole, do presently
put honey into it, that it may not be quite empty; for they are of opinion,
that the relish of the honey is conveyed up into the fruit, through the pith,
as thorough a Conduit-pipe. As for example sake; If we would procure

Sweet Citrons;
(for that kind of fruit was not wont to be eaten in Theophrastus time, nor in
Athenaeus time, as himself reports, nor yet in Plinies time:) Palladius has
showed, how to alter the bitter pith of a Citron-tree into sweet. His words are
these. It is reported that the bitter pithes of Citrons may be made sweet, if
you take the Citron-seeds, and steep them in honey-water, or else in Ewes milk,
(for this is better) for the space of three days before you set them. Some do
bore a hole sloaping into the body of a Tree, but not quite thorough it; by
which passage the bitter humor drops away: This hole they make in it the about
February, and leave it so, till the fruit is fashioned; but after the fruit is
fashioned, then they fill up the hole with mortar; and by this device the pith
is made sweet. This has Pontanu^ set down in his book called, The Gardens of
Hesperides. What is it, says he, that Art will not search into? Cut a thick
Vine, and make it hollow on the the top, about thy hand breadth; but so, that
the brims of the hole be brought round and something close together, so that
the sides be about an inch thick and no more. Pour into it and fill it up with
liquefied honey, and cover it with a broad stone that the Sun may not come at
it. And when the Vine has drunk in all that, then fill it up again with the
like: and when that is soaked in too, then open the concavity wider, and let
the Vine grow: but you must continually water the tender roots thereof with
man's water: and you must be sure that you leave no buds or leaves upon the
stock, that so there may be no other moisture let into it, but the whole Vine
may grow up as it were in a spring of honey. Palladius shows also

How to make sweet Almonds of bitter ones,
even by boring a hole in the middle of the stock, and putting into it a
wooden wedge besmeared over with honey.

Sweet Cucumbers
may be procured, by steeping Cucumber seeds in sweet waters, till they have
drunk them up: for they being planted, will produce sweet Cucumbers.
Theophrastus shows how to make sweet Cucumbers, even by the same slight; by
steeping their seed in milk, or else in water and honey sodden together, and so
planting them. Columella says, that a Cucumber will eat very tender and sweet,
if you steep the seed thereof in milk before you set it. Others, because they
would have the Cucumber to be the sweeter, do steep the seed thereof in
honey-water. Pliny and Palladius do write the same things of the same fruit,
out of the same Authors. Cassianus has declared out of Varro, how to procure

Sweet Artichocks growing.
You must take the Artichock-seeds, and steep them in milk and honey, and after
you have dried them again, then set them, and the fruit will relish of honey.
So you may procure

Sweet Fennel growing,
For if you steep Fennel-seeds in sweet wine and milk, then will the fruit that
grows of those seeds, be much sweeter. Or else if you put the seeds thereof in
dry figs, and so plant them, the like effect will follow. So you may procure

Sweet Melons,
as Palladius shows; even by steeping the seeds thereof in milk and sweet wine
for three days together: for then if you dry them, and set them being so
dried, there will grow up a very sweet fruit. Likewise you may procure

Sweet Lettice;
for if you water them in the evening with new sweet wine, and let them drink
for three evenings together as much of that liquor as they will soak up, it
will cause sweet Lettice, as Aristoxenus the Cyrenian has taught out of
Athenaeus. So

A sweet Radish may be procured,
by steeping the Radish-seeds for a day and a night in honey, or in sodden
wine, as both Palladius and Florentinus have recorded. So you may procure the
same, by steeping the seeds in new sweet wine, or else in the juice of Raisons.
There is also another device, whereby to make sharp or bitter fruits to become
sweet; and this is by art and cunning in dressing them; as, by pouring hot
water, or the Lees of oil, or casting soil and such like about their roots. As
for example: when we would make

A bitter Almond to become sweet,
we cast some sharp piercing matter upon the root, that by virtue of their
heat, the Tree may the more easily concoct her moisture, and so yield a sweeter
fruit. Theophrastus says, that if we apply hot and strong soil, as
Swines-dung, or such like, to the root of the bitter Almond-tree, it will
become sweet: but it will be three years before the Tree be so changed, and for
all that time you must use the same husbanding of it. Africanus says; If you
uncover the roots, and apply them still with Urine, or with Swines dung, then
will the fruit be the sweeter. The Quintils report of Aristotle, that, by
covering the Almond-tree root with Swines-dung, in March, of a bitter one it
becomes sweet. And Palladius uses the very same practice. By the same device

Sharp and sour Pomgranate-trees may be made to bring forth a sweet
Pomegranate:
for these also may be changed from sharp and sour into sweet. Aristotle shows
in his book of plants, that Pomegranate-trees, if their roots be applied with
Swins-dung, and watered with soom cool sweet liquor, the fruit will be the
better and the sweeter. Theophrastus says, that the roots of a
Pomegranate-tree must be applied with Urine, or with the offals and refuse of
hides, yet not in too great a quantity: for the roots of this kind of Tree have
need of some sharp matter to know upon them, and most of all, every third year,
as we said before of the Almond-tree; but indeed the Pomegranate-roots are more
durable. The reason is, because of a kind of softness in the roots, which is
peculiar unto them alone. Now Swines-dung, says he, or somewhat that is of the
like operation, being cast upon the roots, does sweeten the juice of the Tree:
as also if you pour on good store of cold water, it will work some kind of
change thereof. Paxamus prescribes this course, to dig round about the root of
the Tree, and to lay Swins-dung upon it, and then when you have cast earth upon
that, water it with man's Urine. Columella says; If you have a Pomegranate-tree
that bears a sharp and a sour fruit, this is your way to amend it: You must
cover the roots with Swins-dung and man's ordure, and water them with man's Urine
that has stood long in some vessel; and so it will yield you for the first
years a fruit that tastes somewhat like wine, and afterward a sweet and
pleasant Pomegranate. Pliny reports the very same thing out of the very same
Authors. Anatolius shows

How to make an Apple Tree become sweeter;
and that is, by watering it continually with Urine, which is a thing very
comfortable to an Apple Tree. Some do use Goats-dung and the Lees or dregs of
old wine, applying them to the roots of the Apple Tree, and thereby cause it to
bear a sweeter fruit. Theophrastus says; If you water an Apple Tree with warm
water in the Spring time, i^ will become better. The like applications being
used to Herbs, will make them sweeter also. As for example sake; we may procure

Sweet Endive.
There be many things, which being watered with salt liquors, do forsake their
bitterness, and become sweet. Of which sort Endive is one: and therefore if we
would have sweet Endive, Theophrastus wills us, to water it with some salt
liquor, or else to set it in some salt places. The like practice will procure

Sweet Coleworts.
And therefore the Egyptians do mix water and Nitre together, and sprinkle it
upon Coleworts, that they may be sweet: And hence it is that the best Coleworts
are they which are planted in salt grounds: for the saltness, either of the
ground where it is set, or of the liquor wherewith it is watered, does abate
and take away the tartness and natural saltness of the Coleworts. In like
manner, if you would procure

Sweet Betony,
Theoph^astus counsels you to water them with salt liquor, and so they will
be better. Which very same things Pliny reports out of the same Author.
Likewise you may procure

Sweet Rochet,
such as will yield leaves that shall be more toothsome, if you water it with
salt liquor. There is another slight in husbanding of Pot Herbs, whereby they
may be produced fitter to be eaten; and this is by cropping the stalks of them,

Basil will grow the sweeter,
if you crop the stalk of it: for at the second springing, the stalk will be
sweeter and pleasanter; a most evident reason whereof is assigned by
Theophrastus. So

Lettice will be the sweeter
at the second springing. Theophrastus says, that the sweetest Lettice springs
up after the cropping of the first tops; for the first tops of their first
springing, are full of a milky kind of juice, which is not so pleasant, because
that it is not thoroughly concocted; but they which grow at the second
springing, if you take them when they are young and tender, will be far
sweeter. He shows also, how

Leeks may be made sweeter;
by cropping them once or twice, and afterward let them grow: the cause whereof
he has assigned in his book of causes, namely, that their first shooting up is
the weakest and the most unperfect. The like is to be thought and practiced in
other Pot Herbs: for the cropping or cutting off, does make the second sprouts
to be the sweeter, almost in all herbs. There are also diverse other sleights in
husbanding and dressing of such Pot Herbs, whereby they may be made sweeter to
be eaten. As for example,

Garlic may be made sweeter,
for Sotion is persuaded, that, if you break the Cloves of Garlic before you
set them, or else supple them with the Lees of oil, when you do set them, they
will gather and yield a far sweeter relish. By another slight far differing
from this,

Onions may be made sweeter;
for we must consider, that diverse things do exercise a mutual discord or
agreement and concord of natures toward each other; whereby they either help
one another, if their natures agree; or, if their natures dissent, they hurt
and destroy one another. Nuts and Onions have a sympathy or agreement of
nature; and therefore if you lay up Nuts amongst Onions, the Onions will cause
the Nuts to last the longer: in liew of which kindness, Nuts do gratify Onions
with another good turn, for they ease the Onions of their sharpness, as
Palladius has observed.

CHAP. XVIII.
How fruits that are in their growing, may be made to receive and resemble all
figures and impressions whatsoever.
MAny things do fall out by chance, and hap-hazard, as they say, which an
ingenious man lighting upon, does by his great industry, and often experiments
that he makes of them, turn and apply to very good use. Whence it is that the
Poet says, manifold experience, and much labor and practice, sets a broach to
the world many new arts and rare devices. And because the most part are not
acquainted with the cause of such things, thence it is, that they are esteemed
to be miraculous, and to come to pass besides Natures rule. We have oftentimes
seen in Citrons, diverse kinds of stamps and impressions, which were made there
by chance; as by the hitting of some carved matter, or any stick, or such like,
which has caused the same impressions: whence, the wit of man has devised to
cause diverse kinds of fruits, to grow up with diverse kinds of figures on them.
If you take an earthen vessel, and put-into it an apple that is very young, as
it hangs upon the Tree growing, the Apple will grow to fill up his earthen
case, and will be of any form whatsoever you would desire, if you make the case
accordingly. Also if you pown any colors and bray them together, and dispose
of them in places convenient on the fruit, on the inside of the case, the
fruits will wear and express the same colors, as if they were natural unto
them. Whence it comes to pass, that oftentimes the yellow Quince is made to
grow like a man's head, having in it the lively resemblance of white teeth,
purple cheeks, black eyes, and in all points expressing the form and color of
a man's head, without any greenesse at all, which is the natural color of that
fruit whiles it is in growing. And this is the slight that Africanus
prescribes, whereby

A Citron may be made to grow in the likeness of a man's head, or the head of
an horse, or any other living Creature.
You must take some Potters clay, or soft mortar, and fashion it to the
bigness of a Citron that is at his full growth: but you must cleave it round
about with a sharp instrument, so that the fruit may be taken out of it
handsomely; and yet in the mean space the sides of the case must be so closely
and firmly joined together, that the fruit growing on, may not break it open.
If the counterfeit or case which you make, be of wood, then you must first make
it hollow within; if it be of clay, you may clap it on, as it is, so that it be
somewhat dry. But then when the fruit comes to be of a greater and stronger
growth, you must prepare earthen vessels made for the purpose, with a hole in
them at the lower end, that the stalk of the fruit may there be let in: Into
these earthen vessels you must enclose the fruit, and bind them about with a
strong band, for otherwise the growth of the fruit will break them open: And
when you have procured the fruit to grow up into his counterfeit, or sheath as
it were, that it is come to the just bigness of a fruit of that kind, it will
bear the same shape and figure which you would have in it. The like we have
showed before out of Florentinus. Pontanus also speaks of the same device. If,
says he, you would have a Citron to grow in diverse shapes, you must cover it
being young, with some counterfeit of clay, or wood, or earth, wherein it may
be swadled; as a tender infant in his Nurses bosom: and that counterfeit will
fashion the fruit into any form; and when it is taken out, it will resemble any
image that you have carved within the counterfeit. So also you may deal by

Pomegranates, Pears, or any kind of Apples, making them to receive any kind
of form,
for the same Author writes, that if you bestow the same pains and diligent
care upon any other sort of Apples, you may frame them to every fashion; for so
it is in brief, says he, that all Apple-fruits may be made to grow up to the
shape of any living creature, if you first carve the same shape into a
counterfeit of wood or earth, and let the fruit be shut up into that
counterfeit, that it may grow up within it. So may you make

A Quince grow in the shape of living Creatures,
as Democritus affirms, by putting them into some counterfeit that is carved
within to the same proportion, and so let the Quince grow in it. But it is
easiest to make

Cucumbers grow to any form;
for if you take earthen vessels of any fashion, and therewith cloth the
Cucumbers when they are very young, and bind them very fast about, they will
receive any shape or impression very easily, If you take a Cane, and make it
hollow all along, and bind it fast about, and then put into it a young Cucumber
or a young Gourd, it will grow so pliable within it, that it will fill up the
whole length of the Cane. Pliny says, Cucumbers grow to any fashion that you
would frame them unto; insomuch that you may, if you will, make a Cucumber grow
in the shape of a Dragon, winding himself many ways. Likewise, a Gourd will be
made to grow picked and sharp by many means, especially if it be put into a
case that is made of such pliant twigs as Vines are bound withal; so that this
be done as soon as it has cast the blossom. But if you lay a Gourd betwixt two
platters, or dishes, it will grow to the same plainness and roundnesse; and of
all other fruit, this is the easiest and fittest to be formed to any fashion.
You may make them to grow like a Flagon, or like a Pear, great at the one end,
and small at the other, if you tie it hard in that part which you would have to
be the less: afterward when it is come to full growth, dry it, and take out
all that is in it, and when you go abroad, carry it about you, it will serve
for a cup to drink in. Hence we learn how it may be effected, that

An Almond should grow with an inscription in it.
Take an Almond, and steep it for two or three days; and then break the shell
of it very charily, that the kernel receive no harm: then you must write in the
kernel what you will, but write it as deep in as you safely may: then wind it
up in some paper, or some linen cloth, and overlay it with mortar, and soil it
with dung; and by that device, when the fruit comes to be of full growth, it
will show you your handy work, as Africanus records. So may you make

A Peach to grow with an inscription in it,
as Democritus shows. After you have eaten the fruit, you must steep the
stone of it for two or three days, and then open it charily, and when you have
opened it, take the kernel that is within the stone, and write upon it what you
will, with a brazen pen, but you must not print it too deep, then wrap it up in
paper, and so plant it; and the fruit which that will afterward bear, will show
you what was written in the kernel. But

A Fig will grow with an inscription in it,
if you carve any shape upon the bud, the fig will express it when it is
grown: or else if you carve it into the fig when it is first fashioned: but you
must do it either with a wooden pen, or a bone pen, and so your labor shall be
sure to take effect. I have printed certain characters upon the rine of a
Pomegranate, and of a Quincepear, having first dipped my pensil in mortar; and
when the fruit came up to the just magnitude, I found in it the same
impressions. Now it remains that we show how we may

Fashion Mandrakes,
those counterfeit kind of Mandrakes, which couzeners and cony-chatchers carry
about, and sell to many instead of true Mandrakes. You must get a great root of
Brionie, or wild Nep, and with a sharp instrument engrave in it a man or a
woman, giving either of them their genitories: and then make holes with a
puncheon into those places where the hairs are wont to grow, and put into those
holes Millet, or some other such thing which may shoot out his roots like the
hairs of ones head. And when you have dug a little pit for it in the ground,
you must let it lie there, until such time as it shall be covered with a bark,
and the roots also be shot forth.

CHAP. XIX.
How fruits may be made to be more tender, and beautiful, and goodly to the eye.
NOw at length, that nothing may pass us, we will set down diverse kinds of of
sleights in husbanding and trimming of herbs and fruits, whereby they may be
made not only tenderer, sweeter, larger, and better relished, but also fresher
colored, and more sightly to the eye. And first

How an Apple Tree and a Myrtle-tree may be bettered,
we may learn out of Theophrastus, who counsels to water their roots with
warm water, and promises the bettering of the fruit by that means; nay it will
cause the Myrtle fruit to be without any kernel at all. And this, says he, was
found out by chance, in certain of these Trees growing near unto a hot Bath. If
you would procure

Goodlier Figs then ordinary,
Columella shows, how you make them to grow more plentifully, and to be a
sounder fruit. When the tops of the Fig Tree begin to be green with leaves, you
mu^^ cut off the tops of the boughs with an iron tool; and still as the leaves
begin to bu^ forth, you must take red chalk, and blend it with Lees of oil and
man's dung^ and therewithal cover the roots of the Tree: and by this means, the
Tree will bear more store of fruit, and besides the fruit will be a fuller and
better fruit. Pliny and Palladius record the same experiment out of the same
Author. When the Fig Tree begins to show her leaves; if you would have it yield
you more and better fruit, you must cut off the very tops of them when the bud
begins to show it self; or, if not so, yet you must besure at the least to
cutoff that top which grows out of the midst of the Tree. Palladius writes,
that some have reported, that the

Mulberry-tree will bear more and better fruit,
if you bore thorough the stock of the Tree in diverse places, and into every
hole beat in a wedge; into some of the holes, wedges made of the
Turpentine-tree, and into some of them, wedges made of the Mastick-tree.
Didymus says that

The Palm, or Date-tree, and the Damosin tree will grow to be of a larger and
good-lier assize,
if you take the Lees of old Wine, and after you have strained them, water the
roots therewith. And he says, that it will take the better effect, if you cast
upon it a little salt ever now and then. So

The Myrtle-tree will have a goodlier leaf,
and also yield a better fruit, if you plant it among Roses: for the
Myrtle-tree delights to be consorted with the Rose, and thereby becomes more
fruitful, as Didymus reports. So

Rue will grow tenderer, and more flourishing,
if it be engraffed into a Fig Tree: you must only set it into the bark
somewhat near the root, that you may cover it with the earth, and so you shall
have excellent good Rue. Plutark in his Sympo^iakes, commends no Rue but that
only which grows very near the Fig Tree. Aristotle in his Problems, demanding
the cause of this, at length concludes, that there is such a sympathy and
agreement betwixt the Fig Tree and the herb Rue, that Rue never grows so fast,
nor flourishes so well, as when it grows under the Fig Tree. If you would have

Artichocks grow without sharp prickles,
Varro says, that you must take the Artichock-seed, and rub it upon a stone,
till you have worn it blunt at the top. You may cause also

Lettice to grow tenderer and more spreading,
as Palladius shows, and Columella. Palladius says, that if your Lettice be
somewhat hard, by reason of some fault either in the seed, or place, or season,
you must pluck it out of the earth and set it again, and thereby it will wax
more tender. Columella shows, how you may make it spread broader. Take a little
tile-sheard, and lay it upon the middle of the Lettice when it is a little
grown up; and the burden or weight of the tile-sheard will make it spread very
broad. Pliny says, that it is meet also to besmear the roots with dung when
they set them, and as they grow up, to rid away their earth from them, and to
fill up the place with muck. Florentinus says, when you have a Lettice growing
that has been transplanted, you must rid away the earth from the root after it
is grown to be a handful long, and then besmear it with some fresh Oxe-dung,
and then having cast in earth upon it again, water it; and still as the bud or
leaf appears out of the earth, cut it off till it grow up stronger, and then
lay upon it a tile-sheard that has never been seasoned with any pitch, and so
you shall have your purpose. By the like device you may procure

Endive to be tenderer and broader.
When it is grown up to a pretty bigness, then lay a small tile-sheard on the
middle of it, and the weight of that will cause the Endive to spread broader.
So also you procure

Coleworts to be more tender,
if you bedew them with salt water, as Theophrastus writes. The Egyptians, to
make their Coleworts tender, do water them with Nitre and Water mixed together.
So

Cucumbers will be tenderer,
if you steep the seeds in milk before you set them, as Columella reports. If
you would have

Leeks to grow Cloven,
the Ancients have taught you, that first you must sow them very thick, and so
let them alone for a while; but afterward when they are grown, then cut them,
and they will grow cloven. Or else, you must cut it about some two months
after it was set, and never remove it from the own bed, but help it still with
water and muck, and you shall have your purpose, as Palladius says. Now we
will speak of some monstrous generations; as of the generation of the herb
Dragon, and of a cloven Onion. And first

How to produce the herb Dragon.
It is a received opinion amongst Gardeners, that if you take Hemp Seed or
Line-seed, and engraffe it into an ordinary Onion, or else into a Sea-onion as
it grows near the Sea, or else into the Radish root, thence will grow the herb
Dragon, which is a notable and famous Sallet-herb. But surely, howsoever they
boast of it that this has been of entimes done, yet I have made sundry trials
hereof, and still failed of my purpose. By the like setting of seeds, they show

How to produce cloven Onions,
by making a hole into an Onion, and putting into it a clove of Garlic, and so
planting it; for that will grow to be an Ascalonian, or a cloven Onion. Now let
us see, how to make

Parsley to grow frizled or curled.
Theophrastus writes that Parsley will grow frizled, if you pave the ground
where you have sowed it, and ram it in with a roller; for then the ground will
keep it in so hard, that it it must needs grow double. Columella says; If you
would have Parsley to bear curled leaves, you must put your Parsley-seed into a
mortar, and pown it with a Willow pestle, and when you have so bruised it, wrap
it up in linen clouts, and so plant it. You may effect the same also without
any such labor; even by rolling a cylinder or roller over it after it is a
little grown up, wheresoever or howsoever it is sowed. Palladius and Pliny
record the same experiment out of the same Author. I have oftentimes seen

Basil growing with a kind of brush like hairs upon it.
The seed of withy-winde being planted near to Basil, as soon as it shoots up,
will presently wind it self round about the stalks of the Basil, and by often
winding about them, will wrap them all into one. The like will be effected
also, if the withy-winde grow elsewhere, and a twig of it be brought and
planted near to Basil: for by either of these means, the Basil will grow so
bushy and so thick of hair, and that in a very short time, that it will be most
pleasant to be looked upon. So you may make the

Ivy to bear very sightly berries,
if you burn three shellfish, especially of that kind which is called Murex,
and when you have powned them together, cast the ashes thereof upon the
Ivy-berries; or else, if you cast upon them beaten Alome, as Cassianus
teaches. Theophrastus mentions an experiment that is very strange, whereby to
make

Cumin grow flourishingly,
and that is by cursing and banning of the seeds when you sow them; and Pliny
reports the same out of Theophrastus: and he reports it likewise of Basile,
that it will grow more plentifully and better, if it be ^owed with cursing and
banning. If you desire to produce long

Cucumbers, and such as are not waterish,
you may effect it by this means. If you take a mortar or any other like vessel
filled with water, and place it near the Cucumbers, about five or six inches
distant from them, the Cucumbers will reach the vessel within a day or two, and
extend themselves to that length; The reason is, because Cucumbers have such a
great delight in moisture: so that, if there be no water in the vessel, the
Cucumbers will grow backward and crooked. To make them that they shall not be
waterish; when you have dug a ditch to plant them in, you must fill it up
half full with chafe, or the twigs of a Vine, and then cover them, and fill up
the pit with earth; but you must take heed you do not water them when they are
planted. By all these things which have been spoken, we may learn to procure

A Tree, which of it self may yield you the fruit of all Trees.
A thing which I have seen, and in merriment have oft-times called it, the Tree
of Garden-dainties. It was a goodly height and thickness, being planted within
a vessel fit for such a purpose, the mould which was about it, being very fa^,
and moist, and fruitful, that so every way, as well by the liveliness and
strength of the plant it self, as also by the moistness and thriftiness of the
ground, all things that were engraffed into it, received convenient
nourishment. It was three-forked; upon one bough or arm, it bare a goodly
grape, without any kernels in it, party colored, very medicinable; for some of
the grapes were good to procure sleep, and other some would make the belly
loose. The second bough or arm, carries a Peach, a middle kind of fruit
differing both from the ordinary Peach, and the Peach-nut, without any stone in
it; and the smaller branches thereof bearing here a Peach, and there a
Peach-nut. If at any time there were any stone in the fruit, it was commonly as
sweet as an Almond; and it did resemble sometimes the face of a man, sometimes
of other living creatures, and sundry other shapes. The third arm carries
Cherries, without any stone, sharp, and yet sweet withal, and Orenges also of
the same relish. The bark of this Tree was every where beset with flowers and
Roses: and the other fruits, all of them greater then ordinary, and sweeter
both in taste and in smell, flourishing chiefly in the Springtime; and they
hung upon the Tree, growing even after their own natural season was past: but
there was a continual succession of one fruit after another, even all the year
long, by certain degrees, so that when one was ripe, there was another budding
forth, the branches being never empty, but still clogged with some fruits or
other; and the temperateness of the air served every turn so well, that I never
beheld a more pleasant and delightful fight.

CHAP. XX.
How diverse kinds of fruits, and likewise Wines may be made medicinable.
THe Ancients have been very careful and painful in seeking out, how to mix
Wine with diverse kinds of Antidotes or preservatives against poison, and how to
use it best in such receipts, if need should be. A thing that might very well
be practiced; for indeed there is nothing more convenient for that purpose. And
therefore they have tried and set down more curiously then need required, many
things concerning this argument, strange to be reported, and yet easy to be
effected; which Theophrastus has copiously set down. About Heraclia in Arcady,
there is a kind of wine, which makes the men that drink of it to become mad,
and the women to become barren. And the like Athenaeus records of that wine
which they have in Troas, a place in Greece. And in Thrasus there is a kind of
wine which if it be drunk, will procure sleep; and there is another kind of
wine made in that sort, that it will cause a man to be watchful: and there are
diverse confections of wines which you may read of in the most exact Writers of
Physic, and of matters of Husbandry, which are easy both to be learned, and
also practiced by those that are well acquainted with the operations of
Simples; and they are such as a man's own conjecture may well lead him unto; and
indeed they are nothing else almost, but such qualities operative as the
property of the place where their Simples grow, does endue them withal. And
surely I would counsel that these kinds of confections should be ministered to
those that are timorous and queazie in the taking of any medicinal receipts,
that so they may be swallowed down pleasantly, before they should seem
loathsome. And first,

How a Vine may be made to bring forth grapes that shall be medicinal against
the biting of venomous beasts.
Florentinus bids you in the first and second book of his Georgicks, to set a
Vine-branch, and to cleave it in the lower part about the root, that the cleft
may be some four inches long; there you must pluck out the pith, and istead of
the pith put Hellebore into it, and bind it fast about with some pliant twig,
and so cover it with earth; and by this means it will yield you grapes that
being eaten, will make your body soluble. Or, if you would have the grapes to
be more operative in this kind, you must supple the Vine-branches in some
Antidote or counter-poyson, and then set them in the head of a Sea-onion, and
so cover them with earth; but you must still pour upon it the juice of that
counter-poyson, that the sets may drink their fill of it, and so the strength
and virtue of the grape will last a great deal longer. If you would have a Vine
to yield the grapes whereof the confections called Propomata are made,
Palladius shows you. You must take the Vine-branches and put them in a vessel
that is half full of Hippocras, or else of Conserves of Roses, or Violets, or
wormwood; and the earth that grows about the root, you must resolve into a
kind of Lie as it were made of Ashes; then when the branch that grows up out of
the bud begins to bear a leaf, you must take it away, and set it as you set
other Vines, in any other place, and the fruit will be such a grape as you
desire. Pliny says, that if you plant Hellebore about the roots of the Vine,
it will yield a grape fit for such a purpose. Cato says, that the herb
Scammony has a wonderful quality in drawing into it self the juice of the
Vine. Pliny shows

How to make that kind of wine which is called Phthorium, and kills children in
their mothers wombes.
That Hellebore which grows in Thassus, as also the wild Cucumber, as also
Scammony, are good to make Phthorian wine, which causes abortives. But the
Scammony or black Hellebore must be engraffed into the Vine. You must pierce
the Vine with a wimble, and put in certain withie-boughes, whereby you may
bind up unto the Vine the other plants that are engraffed into it: so shall
you have a grape full of sundry virtues. So you may procure

Figs that shall be purgative,
if you pown Hellebore and Sea-Lettice together, and cast them upon the
Fig Tree roots: or else if you engraffe them into the same roots, for so you
shall have Figs that will make the belly loose. Florentinus says, that you may
make a Fig to grow which shall be good against the biting of venomous beasts,
if you set it after it has been laid in triacle. So we may procure

Purgative Cucumbers.
You must take the roots of the wild Cucumber, and pown them, and steep them
in fair water two or three days; and then water your Cucumbers with that
liquor for five days together; and do all this five several times. Again, you
may make them purgative, if, after they are blossomed, you dig round about
their roots, and cast some Hellebore upon them and their branches, and cover
them over with earth again. So you may procure

Purgative Gourds,
if you steep the seeds of them in Scammony-water nine days before you set
them, as the Quinti^es report. Now if you would procure a man to be loose
bellied and sleepy withal, you may cause

Purgative Damosins that be good also to cause sleep.
You must bore thorough a bough, or through the whole stock of a Damosin-tree,
and fill it up with Scammony or the juice of black Poppy wrapped up handsomely in
paper, or some such covering: and when the fruit is ripe, it will be operative
both for sleep and purgation. Cato shows also, how you may cause

A Vine to be purgative.
After the Vintage, at such time as the earth is used to be rid away from the
roots of Vines, you must uncover the roots of so many Vines as in your opinion
will make wine enough to serve your turn: mark them, and lop them round about,
and prune them well. Then pown some Hellebore roots in a mortar, and cast them
about your Vines, and put unto them some old rotten dung and old ashes, and
twice of much earth amongst them, and then cover the Vine-roots with mould, and
gather the grapes by themselves. If you would keep the juice of the grape long
that it may last you a great while for that purpose, you must take heed, that
the juice of no other grapes do come near it. When you would use it, take a cup
full of it, and blend it with water, and drink it before supper, and it will
work with you very mildely without any danger at all. Late Writers have taken
another course: they rid and cleanse the Vine-roots, and then pour upon the
juice of some purgative medicine to water them withal; and this they do for
many days together, but especially at such time as the bud begins to fill
out: when they have so done, they cast earth upon the roots again, and they
take special regard, that the roots never lie naked and open when the Northern
wind blows; for that would draw forth and consume the juice of the medicine
that is poured upon the roots. This if you diligently perform, you shall have
grapes growing upon your Vines, that are very operative for loosing of the
belly. I have effected

The same by another means;
I pierced the Vine with a wimble, even unto the very marrow, and put into it
certain ointments fit for such an effect; (it will suffice, if you put them
within the rine;) and this I did in diverse parts of the Vine, here and there
about the whole body of the Vine, and that about graffing time by Inoculation;
for then the Vine is full of moisture; whereby it comes to pass, that the
moisture it self ascending at that time into the superior parts, does carry up
with it the virtue of the ointments, and conveys it into the fruit, so that the
fruit will be operative either for purgation or for childe-bearing, either to
hurt or help, either to kill or preserve, according as the nature and quality
of the ointment is, which was poured upon the roots of the Vine.

CHAP. XXI.
How to plant Fruits and Vines, that they may yield greatest increase.
THat we may conclude this whole book, with a notable and much desired
experiment, we will now show in the last place, how we may receive a large
increase from the fruits, and pulse, and Vines which we have planted. A matter
surely that must needs be exceeding profitable, for a man to receive an hundred
bushels in usury as it were, for one bushel that he has sowed. Which yet I
would not have to be so understood, as if a man should still expect to receive
an hundredth for one, precisely or exactly so much; for sometimes the year, or
the air and weather, or else the ground, or else the plants may not perform
their parts kindly; and in this case, the increase cannot be so great; (but yet
it shall never be so little, but that it shall be five times more then
ordinary;) but if those things do perform their parts kindly together, you
shall receive sometimes for one bushel, an hundred and fifty by increase. This
may seem a paradox to some, and they will think that we promise
impossibilities; but surely if they would consider all things rightly, they
should rather think it a paradox, why half a bushel well sown or planted,
should not yield two hundred bushels increase, seeing that one grain or kernel
that is planted and takes kindly, does oft-times spread his root, as we see,
and fructify into sundry and many stems, sometimes into fifteen, and in the
ear of every one of those stalks, are contained sometimes threescore grains? I
spare to mention here the ground that lies in Byzatium in Africa, whereof Pliny
speaks, which, for one grain that was planted in it, did yield very near four
hundred stalks, and the Governor of that Country sent unto Nero three hundred
and forty stems growing out of one grain. But let us search out the cause
whereby this comes to pass. Some think that the increase commonly falls out to
be so little, because the greater part of the fruit which is cast into the
ground, is eaten up of worms, or birds, or moles, and of other creatures that
live in the earth. But this appears to be false, because one bushel of Pulse
being planted, never yields above fifteen. Now the Pulse or Lupines, is of it
self so bitter, that none of those devouring creatures will taste of it, but
let it lie safe and untouched: and when they are grown up, you shall commonly
find about an hundred grains in the cods of every stalk. Others refer the
cause hereof unto the weather, as if the fruit were annoyed with over much
cold, or heat, or rain, so that the fields are sometimes frozen with cold, and
sometimes parched with heat, whereby they are sometimes more fruitful, and
sometimes more barren. But this cannot be the true reason, because that though
the weather be never so kindly, ye that cannot make one increase into thirty.
But not to wander or range any further about, we must know that all grains that
grow within the ear or the husk, are not prolifical, that is, they are not all
fit to yield increase; for God has appointed some of them for the food and
sustenance of living creatures, and others for seed. There are some grains in
an ear, which are as it were abortives, such as degenerate from their natural
kind, and will not fructify at all, but rot and waste away into putrefaction.
There are other grains in an ear, such as are easier to be stripped out of their
husk, which are fitter for propagation, and are better enabled by nature
thereunto. Besides that, sometimes it falls out, that seeds or grains are not
planted in due season; or if they be, yet sometimes the Husbandman does not
bestow that due labor and industry in looking unto them, which the kind of the
fruit requires. Wherefore if we can meet with all these impediments, we may
procure increase according to our hearts desire. For the seeds will be larger
in the roots, and when they have spread their roots under the earth of a good
length, then will they send up a greater number of stems, and bring forth good
store of ears. Therefore you must make choice of your seeds or grains, not of
the forwardest, nor yet of the backwardest, because they commonly are weakest,
but of the middle sort: then wash them and cleanse them from all other seeds;
and besmear them with fat ointments, and with the grease of old Goats; and let
them be continually supplied with sufficient heat, and sufficient moisture;
then lay them in soft and warm mould carefully manured; for the livelier that
the heat of the mould is, the better will the seeds close with it, and become
more eager to propagation, and emorace it more sweetly, as the male would do by
this female. So shall your your seeds be more enlived, and bring forth a more
legitimate and a larger increase. Let them be planted in the full of the Moon
or thereabout; for the larger the Moon is, the more bountiful increase she will
procure. Concerning the Vine, you must see that her leaves be not wanting, if
you would have good store of Wine; for, if the leaves be away, the Vine has
little heart to bear; and besides, she should be without an issue for her
superfluities, which commonly the leaves do receive into themselves: only you
must pare off those twisted curles that are wont to grow upon it; for so, her
pride being taken away from her, the juice will be more delightful, and more
pleasant.

THE FOURTH BOOK OF Natural Magic: Which teaches things belonging to
Housekeeping; how to prepare domestical necessaries with a small cost; and how
to keep them when they are procured.
The PROEME.
FRom Animals and Plants, we are come to Houshold-affairs; there we provided
diverstty of new fruits fit for our use: now we shall seem to have sowed
nothing, and produced nothing, unless we show how, and what we sowed and
produced at great charge and pains, may be preserved against the cold, and
injuries of the outward air, that they may come forth in their seasons. It were
the part of a wicked and slothful man carelessly to let that dye and come to
nothing, which he had provided with so much care and pains: wherefore as you
were witty to produce them, you must be as diligent to preserve them. And the
Husbandman that stores up fruit, shall have good provision for the Winter. For
says Marcus Varro, they serve for several meats, and no man stores them up but
to produce them when he has need of them, to defend, or use, or sell them. I
shall first set down the inventions of our Ancestors, who were very diligent
herein, for they found sundry things by diverse means, and faithfully delivered
the knowledge of them to posterity. Then I shall relate what I know to be true,
intermixing some of my own inventions, and such as I think to be of greatest
concernment, and that I have often tried. I shall besides add some
considerations of bread, wine, and oil, and such as are of great profit for
the Husbandman to provide for his family with the lesser cost, always setting
down the natural causes; that they being perfectly known, a man may easily
invent and make them. But to proceed to the work.

CHAP. I.
How Fruits may be long preserved upon their Trees.
WE will begin with Fruits: And whereas fruits and flowers both may be
preserved either upon their own mother Tree which bear them, or else being
plucked off from it, we will first show, how fruits may be preserved upon their
own Tree, and first rehearse those things which the Ancients have set down
concerning this matter, and next, what we our selves have found out by our own
experience. Our Ancestors, when they would have fruit to last long upon the
Tree, were wont first of all to bind them to the stock or to the boughs, lest
any tempest should strike them off, or toss them up and down. Besides, they did
intercept that juice from them, which should ripen them: for there are some
kinds of fruits, which, as soon as ever they be ripe, will stay no longer upon
the Tree, but fall down of themselves, though they are not so much as shaken:
other fruits there are that will stick longer and faster to their hold.
Besides, they were wont to cover them with certain cases or shells as it were;
thereby guarding them from the injuries of the weather, both hot and cold, and
also from the mouths of devouring birds. Wherefore to make

Pomegranates hang long upon their Trees;
Some have wreathed and platted about the fruit the smaller boughs that grow
hard by, that the rain may not come forcibly upon it to break it or chop it,
for if it be once bruised, or that it do but gape and have any chops in it, it
will soon perish: and when they have so done, they tie them fast to the
stronger boughs, that they may not be shaken; and then they bind the Tree about
with a kind of broom withes, that the Daws, or Crows, or other birds may not
come at the fruit to gnaw it. Some do frame earthen cases fit for the fruit,
and cover the same with strawie mortar, and let the fruit hang still upon the
Tree in them. Others do wrap up every one of the Pomegranates in hay or holm,
and then daube it thick over with mortar which has chopped straw in it, and so
fasten them to the stronger boughs, that the wind may not shake them. But all
these practices must be used when the weather is fair, and there is neither
rain nor dew stirring, as Columella teaches. But Beritius uses this means to
make them stay long on their Tree. He takes the blossoms of the Tree when they
begin to wither, and wraps in them every Pomegranate by it self, and then binds
them about with bonds; thereby preventing their putrefaction, and their chawns
and chops which otherwise would be in them. Others put them in earthen pots
every one by it self, and cover them well, and settle them fast, that they may
not be broken by knocking against the stock or arms of the Tree, not by hitting
one against the other: for by this means you shall have them always better
grown then by any other. Varro says, that if you take Pomegranates before they
be ripe, as they stick upon their stalks, and put them into a bottomless pot,
and cover them, boughs and all, in the ground, so that no wind may come at
them, you shall not only find them whole when you take them out, but they will
be greater also then if they had hung still upon the Tree. Palladius shows,

Citrons may be preserved upon the Tree;
even by shutting them up in certain earthen vessels fit for such a purpose*
for so you may keep them upon their Tree almost all the year long. If you would
have

Grapes hang upon the Vine, fresh and good, even till the Spring of the year,
Beritius prescribes you this course. You must dig a pit in a very shadowy
place near to the Vines, about a yard deep, and fill it up with sand, and set
up some props in it: then you must loosen the joints of the Vine-branches, and
wind them in together with the clusters of grapes to be tied to the props, and
then cover them, that no water may come at them. You must take heed also that
the grapes do not touch the ground. A thing which I have oft-times put in
practice, but it fell not out to my expectation: for still the grapes were half
rotten, and their color quite faded. Columella says, There is no surer way
then to prepare certain earthen vessels which may hold each of them a cluster
of grapes, so that they may have scope enough; and they must have every one
four handles, whereby they may be tied to the Vine, and their lids or coverings
must be so framed that the middle may be the place of closing, where both sides
of the cover may fall close together when the clusters are in, and so meeting
may hide the grapes. But you must see that both the vessels themselves, and
also their coverings be well pitched both within and without; for the pitch
will do good service herein. When you have thus covered and shut up your
grapes, then you must lay good store ^f mortar with straw chopped in it upon the
vessels. But in any case, look that the grapes be so placed in the vessels,
that they touch no part thereof. Tarentinus gives this counsel. The clusters
that first grow, you must pluck off, and then others will come up in their
steads, if you look carefully to the Vine: now these later clusters will be
very backward and long ere they be ripe: take some earthen vessels, and let
them be somewhat open below* put into them your later clusters, and let the
upper part of them be very close covered, and then bind your vessels fast unto
the Vine, that so the wind may not shake them. Palladius says; If you be
desirous to keep grapes upon the Vine till the Springtime, you must take this
course. Near unto a Vine that is laden with grapes, you must make a ditch about
three foot deep and two foot broad in a very shadowy place; and when you have
cast sand into it, stick up certain props, and wind the bunches daily toward
them, and when you have wrought them to stand that way, bind them to your props
without hurting the grapes, and then cover them to keep them from the rain. The
Graecians likewise counsel you to shut up your grapes into certain earthen
vessels which are somewhat open beneath, but very close and fast shut above,
and so you may preserve them long upon the Tree. If you would preserve

Grapes upon the Vine till new come again, so that upon one and the same
Vine-branch, may be seen old and new grapes both together,
you may effect it by this device, which I my self have used: for, all the
former experiments are the inventions of Antiquity, and, because there is great
difficulty in working them, and small profit when they are wrought, therefore I
esteem them as toys and matters of little worth. But this I have experienced
my self, and preserved good grapes upon a Vine until May and June, and so have
seen both new grapes, and grapes also of the former year together upon one and
the same branch. When Vintage time is past, you must take the tops and pliant
twigs of such Vines as grow by the house side, and wind them in at the window
into the house, and bind them fast to the summers or beams with the sprigs of
Broom, as with strings or thongs, that they may be surely stayed from wagging
up and down: but you must let them in handsomely that the windows may be opened
and shut conveniently. By this means you shall keep them safe from the injury
both of the cold weather, and also of the devouting birds. When there is any
frosts or winds abroad, keep the windows close shut, and open them again when
the air is waxed any thing calm and warm; and so deal by them till the Spring
come. And when the Vine begins to bear new buds and new leaves, then let your
twigs out of prison, and bring them back again into the open air, and there let
them take the comfort of the warm Sun. So shall there grow new grapes upon the
same twigs where the old grapes are. I have also effected the same

By another means.
Because it was a great trouble, and a very irksome piece of work, to take that
course every year, I have thought of another device whereby the same effect may
be attained both more prettily and miraculously. About the time wherein they
are wont to prune Vines, make choice of two special branches upon the Vine,
such as are most likely to bear fruit. Cut off the tops of either of them, but
leave the branches still growing upon the Vine, and leave two or three buds
upon either branch. Then take a vessel made of chalk or white clay, and let
there be a hole bored quite thorough the bottom of it, and so place it, that it
may stand fit for the branches to be drawn thorough it, so that they may stand
a little out above the brims thereof. When your branches are so seated, then
fill up the vessel with earth; and, that you may work more surely and speedily
too, you must set over your earthen vessel another vessel full of water, all
the Summer long, which must be stopped toward the bottom with a clout somewhat
loosely, that the clouts end hanging down into the earthen vessel, may bedew
the earth that is in it continually by little and little; so shall your sprigs
or branches bring forth both fruit and leaves, and moreover shall take root
within the vessel that will shoot out into new twigs. After Vintage-time, cut
off the branches from the Vine a little beneath the earthen vessel, and so
carry them into a close house that is situate in a dry place where no tempests
can come at it, as in Wine-cellars, or such like: Let the windows be netted
over, that the birds may not come at them: In the Wintertime, if there come
any fair days, bring them forth into the Sun: and, when the weather is extreme
cold, keep them in so much the closer and warmer rooms. If you preserve them
thus until August, you shall have old and new grapes both together upon o^e
branch, and each of them will be quick and well-colored.

CHAP. II.
How Flowers may be preserved upon their own stalk.
By the like devices as those were, we may also preserve flowers upon their own
stalk; yet not so easily as fruits may be preserved upon their own Trees:
Neither yet can they be made to last so long as fruits, because fruits are of
an harder substance, but flowers are soft and tender. First therefore we will
show

How Roses may be preserved upon their own stalks.
If you take a Reed or Cane, and cleave it when it is green as it grows by the
Roses, and put in the Rose-bud as it is upon the stalk, within the Reed, and
then bind some paper about the Reed somewhat loosely, that it may have as it
were a breathing place; your Roses will thereby be well preserved upon their
stalk, as Dydimus reports. Palladius says; If you shut up your Rose-buds as
they grow upon their stalk, into a growing Reed which you have cleft for that
purpose, and close up the Reed again, that the cleft do not gape, you shall
have fresh Roses when you will, if you open your Reed again. I have tried this
device, and found it in some sort to be true, and answerable to my intendment:
I took the Rose-buds before they were blown, and shut them up into a Reed (for
the Roses and the Reeds must be planted near together) and the cleft which I
had made in the Reed, being but slender, I bound it up again that it might not
stand gaping, (only I left a fit passage for the Rose stalk to stand in) and
so I preserved them a great while. The like device I used

To preserve Lillies upon their stalks for a long time.
I cleft the Cane betwixt the joints, and put the Lillies into it as they grow
upon their stalk before they were blown, and so the joint of the Cane closing
upon them beneath, and the cleft above being stopped with wax, the Lillies were
thereby long preserved upon their stalk. The very same experiment I practiced
upon Clove-gilliflowers, and so I had them growing upon their stalk a great
while: And whenever I would use them, I brake up their cases wherein they
were preserved, and so by the comfort and force of the Sun, they were blown and
opened themselves.

CHAP. III.
How to make Fruit safes, or places wherein fruits may conveniently be
preserved.
NOw we will show how you may preserve fruits when they are taken off from the
Trees whereon they grow. Wherein because our chiefest care and labor is, to
keep them from putrefaction, therefore, that we may so do, we must first know
the causes of their putrefaction. The Philosophers hold, that the temperature
of the air being of it self exceeding variable by reason of the variety of
celestial influences which work upon it, is also of that force, that it causes
every thing which it comes at, even whatsoever is contained under the cope of
the Moon, to hasten toward an end, and by little and little to decay
continually. For the air which is apt to search every thing when it lights upon
any fruit, finds in it a certain natural heat somewhat like to its own heat;
and presently closes with it, and entices as it were the heat of the fruit to
come into the air: and the fruit it self, having a natural coldness as well as
heat, is very well content to entertain the heat of the circumstant air, which
exhausteth the own heat of the fruit, and devoureth the moisture of it, and so
the fruit shrinks, and withers, and consumes away. But man is not of such a
dull sense, and of such a blockish wit, but that he can tell how to prevent
these inconveniences, and to devise sundry kinds of means, whereby the
soundness of Fruits may be maintained against the harms and dangers both of
cold, and of heat. And first we will speak of Fruit-safes, or artificial
places, whereby the danger of heat may be avoided. Then we will show that there
is especial choice to be made of times, wherein heat shall be of small force.
And then we will prescribe the manner of gathering fruits, lest happily they
might be bruised with handling or falling, which if they should, it would be
their bane, and the beginning of their putrefaction. And last of all, we will
teach you how to lay them up in diverse and sundry places, whereby you may
prevent the heat and moisture of the air, from doing them any harm. First
therefore, that we may prepare cold and dry places, wherein we may lay up such
fruits as we would have to last long, and so to keep away the extrinsecal heat
and moisture, we must understand that there are places, some general, and some
particular. We will speak of some peculiar places of the world, which are
excellent good to preserve fruits in. Theophrastus says, that some fruits will
last the longer, because they are laid up in some certain places. Wherefore, in
a certain place of Cappadocia, which is called Petra, fruits may be preserved
forty years, and yet they are all that time fertile, and very fit to be sown:
nay, says he, if they be kept threescore years, or threescore and ten, they
will still be very good for meat to be eaten, though not so good for seed to be
sown. The place he reports to be a high place, and open for the winds, and to
stand lower toward the North then to the other three quarters of the world. It
is reported likewise, that fruits are preserved in Media, and other high
Countries, longer and better then in other places. But these are the properties
of some peculiar places only. But generally for all Fruit-safes, it is the
judgment and counsel of all the best and learnest Husbandmen, that they must
be so situate, that they may have windows toward the North, which must lie
open in the Springtime, and every fair day, that the Northern wind may blow
into them. But in any case there must no windows be made toward the South,
because the Southern wind will make your fruit full of wrinkles. Let us see
therefore

What places are fittest to lay up Quinces in.
Marcus Varro says, that they will be preserved well if they be laid up in
some place that is cold and dry. Columella also lays them up in a cold floor
or loft where there comes no moisture. Palladius likewise would have them laid
up in some cold and dry place, where there comes no wind. So if you would

preserve Apples well,
Columella teaches you to lay them up in a very cold and a very dry loft, where
neither smoke, nor any noisome savor can come at them. Palladius would have
them laid up in some close and dark places, where the wind cannot come at
them. And Pliny would have them laid very thin one by another, that so the air
may come equally at every side of them. So

Pomegranates may be preserved,
as Columella reports out of Mag^ the Carthaginian, if first you warm them in
Seawater, and then besmear them with some chalk, and when they be dry, hang
them up in some cold place. And Palladius out of Columella, prescribes the very
same course. In like manner you may

Preserve the fruit called Ziziphum,
if you hang them up in a dry place, as the same Author is of opinion. If you
would have

Figs to last a great whole,
Columella teaches you, that as soon as they be thoroughly dry, you must lay
them up in a very dry room, and thereby you shall preserve them for a long
time. So

Damosins may be long preserved,
If you lay them upon hurdles or grates in some dry place, where the Sun may
come at them. Palladius shows, that

Chest-nuts may be long preserved,
if they be raked up in the earth, where they may lie dry. And I my self have
seen in Barry;

Almonds preserved sound a great while,
three years or four years together, shells and all, being laid up in a dry
place. If you would have

Wheat long preserved;
Varro says, that you must lay it up in high Garners which have a thorough air
on the East Side and on the North-side: But in any case there must no moist air
come at them from any waterish places thereabouts. Some have their Garners
under the ground, as Caves, as it is in Cappadocia and Thracia; others have
their Garners in pits and ditches, as it is in the nearer part of Spain: only
they lay the chafe under it, and take special care that no moisture nor air
may come at it, except it be when they take it out to use some of it: for if
the air be kept from it, the worm cannot breed in it to devour it. By this
means they keep their wheat good and sweet, fifty years; and they preserve
their Millet above an hundred years, as Theophrastus records. If you lay up
your wheat with any dust in it, it will putrify: for the extrinsecal heat of
the dust, does as it were lay siege to the natural heat of the grain, and so
choaks it up, because it has not as it were a breathing place; and by this
means it is overheated, and so putrifies. Florentinus reports out of Varro,
that Corn may be very well preserved above ground, if it be laid up in such
places, as have the Eastern light shining into them: they must also be so
situate that the Northern and the Western winds may come at them moderately;
but they must be safe from all Southerly winds: and you must make in them a
great many of channels, whereby both the warm vapors may have issue forth, and
also the cooling air may have access in. The best way whereby you may

Preserve Beans.
is, to parch them reasonably well; for so there will be less store of moisture
in them, which will cause them to last the longer. Theophrastus writes, that in
Apollonia and (...), they preserve Beans long without any parching at all.
Pliny makes mention of certain Beans that were laid up in a certain Cave in
Ambracia, which lasted from the time of King Pyrrhus, until the war which
P^^pey the great wage^ against the Pirates. The same Theophrastus writes also,
that

Pease may be long preserved,
if you lay them up in high places where the wind has his full force, as in
Media and the like Countries: but the Bean will be kept there much longer, So
also the

Pulse called Lupines, may be long preserved,
if you lay them up in a loft where the smoke may come at them, as Columella
writes: for if any moisture do settle upon them, presently the worm breeds in
them; and if once the worm have eaten ^ut the navel as it were of the Pulse,
that which is in them like a little mouth, then cannot the other part which is
left, be over fit for seed. Palladius likewise says, that this kind of Pulse
will last very long, if it be laid up in dry Garners, where no moisture can
come at it; especially if it may be continually perfumed as it were with smoke.
But now let us show how to do that which is the most difficult thing of all in
this kind, namely,

How to preserve flesh and fish,
I have seen flesh and fish preserved from putrefaction, for a whole month
together in very cold place, without any other art at all besides the coldness
of the place. In rooms that are made under the ground, and very cold, where
there comes neither heat nor any Southerly wind, but that they are
continually cold and dry, almost every thing may be preserved without
putrefaction. In a certain monastery that is upon the Hill Parthenius, near
unto Naples, I saw the carcases of men kept whole and sound for many years
together. The Hill is covered over with snow almost continually: and in the
tops of the Mountains, where the snow lies in ditches and pits, conveyed
thither of purpose to keep it, look what Pears, and Cervices, and Apples, and
wild Chest-nuts have been gathered up by chance together with the snow, and
put into the same pits; after the space of a year that the snow was consumed
away, we have there found the same fruits, so moist, and fresh, and goodly to
the eye, as if they had been but then plucked off from their Trees. To conclude,
there is nothing better and more available for the preservation of any thing,
then is the dryness and the coldness of such places as they are laid up in, to
be kept.

CHAP. IV.
What special time there must be chosen for the gathering of such fruits, as
you mean to lay up in store for a great while after.
THe principal matter which I would have to be observed in this case, is the
choosing of your time wherein to gather all such fruits as you would lay up in
store, that they might last long. For if we desire to defeat that heat and
moisture which will mar our fruit, and cause it to putrify, we cannot take any
better course against them, then by making choice of such a time to gather our
fruits in, as when those planets and stars, which are the principal Authors of
that heat and moisture, are themselves become cold and dry, or at the least not
hot and moist in any high degree. The Moon when she is in the waining, is cold
and dry: If there be any fruits gathered when the Moon abounds with heat and
moisture, the very same qualities will also the fruit abound withal, and so
they will very soon be putrified, as every man of any wit will easily judge:
and therefore all those that have written of Husbandry, with one consent do
give it for a precept, that fruits are to be gathered in the decaying of the
Moon. Moreover, the night and the day, the morning and the evening, do bestow
their moisture and their dryness upon fruits, accordingly as they themselves
are either moist or dry. The day, by reason of the presence of the Sun, is hot
and dry. The night, by reason of the absence of the Sun, is cold and moist: The
evening, by reason that it has a little of the Sun, is partly warm; and yet
withal by reason of the approaching night, is partly moist: The morning, is
partly cold, by reason of the tail of the night; and partly warm, by reason of
the Sun approaching: So then, let two or three hours of the day be spent, and
then the time will be somewhat dry, because it has begun to be a little
acquainted with the Sun; and withal somewhat cold, because it has not yet
quite forgotten and shaked off the night; and this is in all men's judgment the
best and the fittest time wherein to gather fruits. But least we should make
the matter too hard and difficult, by giving such Astrological precepts, we
will frame our selves to the plainest, and yet a very exact rule; namely, that
the situation and aspect of the Planets is to be regarded, whereby the air
becomes colder and dryer then at other times, and so consequently the fruit
may last the longer. And, because we will not be too tedious, we will spare to
allege authorities and experiments which might be brought for the proof
hereof, seeing all living creatures that are gendred in the full of the Moon,
or somewhat before, do grow much more then they that are gendred when she is in
the waining. But let us come to examples. If you would know

The time, wherein Citrons are to be gathered,
Palladius teaches you in his book of the preserving of Citrons. If you would
gather Citrons to keep, says he, you must pluck them with their boughs and
leaves from the Tree in the night time, when there is no Moonlight stirring.
Pontanus a Countryman of ours has elegantly set down this matter. If you
desire, says he, to keep Citrons long without any harm or loss of their vigor,
you must take this course: Pluck off the fruit together with the branches and
leaves as they were upon the Tree, in the night time when the Moon shines not
at all: Then hang them up upon some hook or tack in some dark and close place;
see that you touch them but very softly, and let not any wind come at them; or
else lay them up amongst chafe and cry straw; So shall you keep the fruit
sound and good, and the leaves also green for a great while together. There is
also

An appointed time wherein Quince-pears are to be gathered.
I have found no better or surer way to preserve Quince-pears, says Columella,
then by gathering them that were very ripe and sound, and without any blemish,
at such time as the air was temperate, and the Moon in the waining. Likewise
the same Author prescrbing unto us

A time wherein Apples are to be gathered that they may last the longer,
bids us to do thus. About August, choose, says he, the sweetest Apples,
such as be not over ripe, and they will be kept long. Pliny counsels us to
gather them after the Aequinoctial in Autumn, but never before the Moon be
fifteen days old, nor yet before one of the clock. And Palladius shows,

What time Pears are to be gathered in, that they may last long.
In a calm day, when the Moon is in the waining, and that also toward the
latter end, betwixt the two and twenty and eight and twenty day of the Moon,
you must take them off the Tree with your hand, at such time of the day as the
Sun is in some strength of heat, that is, either betwixt seven and ten in the
morning, or else betwixt two and five of the clock in the afternoon: and the
Pears which you so gather, must be somewhat hard and green. Pamphilus an
Husbandman prescribes

A certain time wherein to gather Cherries, that they may last long,
Cherries are a kind of fruit that will soon wither; and yet if you gather
them before the rising of the Sun, and so lay them up, they will be fresh and
good a great while. Palladius prescribes

A certain time wherein to gather Medlars, that they may last long.
They are to be gathered, says he, in a fair day about Noontide; and they
must not be thorough ripe. Columella says, that

The time wherein you gather Pomegranates to be laid up and preserved,
must be a fair day when the air is temperate. Pliny would have you to let them
be well dried in the Sun, that there be none of the nights dew left upon them.
Didymus chooses

A certain time wherein Grapes are to be gathered, that they may last long.
If you would lay up Grapes that they may last all the Winter long, you must,
says he, gather them after the full of the Moon, when the air is clear and
calm, about four of the clock afternoon, when all the dew is quite dried off
from them: you must gather them when they be at the best, even in their full
strength, so that they be neither raw, nor yet past their ripest strength.
Authors likewise do prescribe

A certain time wherein Corn is to be gathered and laid up.
When you have reaped your Wheat or Barley, you must let it lie abroad in the
field one or two days, or at the least one wh^le night, and carry it away
before the rising of the Sun, that so it may be thoroughly cold when it is laid
into the bar^^ for it is that which will cause the Corn to last much the
longer. Columella shows, and he teaches it of his own experience

What time Beans are to be gathered, and laid up to be long preserved,
You must fell your Beans, says he, when the Moon is in the very last of her
last quarter, and you must fell them before Daylight; then, when they are
waxed dry upon the floor, presently you must thresh them out before the Moon is
renewed; and when you have laid them on cooling, then carry them into your
Garner to be laid up: for if you deal thus with them, you shall be sure to
preserve them from the worms, which otherwise will breed in them. The very same
experiment does Palladius record out of the very same Author. Likewise

Garden Pease may be preserved for a whole year;
if you lay them on drying in the Sun, and when you have fetched out all their
moisture, take them out of their shells, and lay them up: for by this means
shall you preserve them from putrefaction.

CHAP. V.
Of the manner how to gather fruits; as also how to help and dress the stalk
that grows into them, whereby we may prevent the first original, and the
occasion of their putrefaction.
WHereas our Ancestors did perceive that the first beginning of putrefaction in
fruits did arise from the little stalk that grows into them, or from that part
of the fruit where the stalk is entertained into it; (for it is requisite, that
the beginning of the spoil, and destruction of them should arise in the very
same part, wherein they began first to live and receive their nourishment) they
have therefore devised sundry means whereby to prevent all such mischief and
harm, as the stalk might bring upon the fruit, Moreover, fruits are very
carefully to be gathered, especially those which we would lay up for store,
that they be not knocked and hit one against the other; for the hitting of them
together will cause their putrefaction. Besides, we must see that they be in
their best estate when we gather them, that they be not perfectly ripe; for as
they must not be altogether sharp and green when they are gathered, so neither
must they be come to their full ripeness. Furthermore, the fruits that you
would lay up, you must take a diligent view of them, and see that they be
sound, without any bruise, or speckednesse, or worm in them. But let come to
examples. And first

How we must gather Apples, and how we must dress their stalks.
Columella would have such Apples to be preserved, which have a good relish,
and are gathered when they are reasonable ripe: and he would have them to be so
disposed and placed when they are laid up, that the blossome-end should stand
upward, and the stalk-end downward, even so as they grow upon the Tree: but
they must not be laid to touch one another: neither must they be thoroughly
ripe when they are gathered, but somewhat sharp and sour. Besides, you must
see that every several kind of Apples must be laid up in a several room or cell
by themselves: for when sundry kinds are laid together in one cell, there will
be a disagreement amongst them, and so they will the sooner putrify.
Experience whereof we have in wine; which if it be made of sundry kinds of
grapes, it will not be so durable, as when it is made only of one kind.
Palladius says, If you keep Apples in store, you must gather them very
charily, that they be taken off from the Tree without any blemish; and you must
drench their stalks in scalding pitch, and so place them upon a boarded loft,
with the stalk-end downward; and you must take heed that you do not touch them,
nor meddle with them till we take them out as being fit for our use. Pliny
likewise shows, that Apples must be placed upon their stalk-ends. Apuleius
the Greek counsels us to gather our Apples when they are in their full
strength; and we must take special regard, that they be gathered by hand
without any bruise; and then laid up in such sort that they may not touch one
another: but in any case they must be sound, and not thoroughly ripe. He says
moreover, that if you besmear the tops of the Apples with the juice of green
Rag-wort, it will preserve them from putrefaction. If you would have

Citrons to last long,
Palladius counsels you to gather them with their boughs which they grow
upon, and lay them up in several, as we showed before out of Pontanus.
Columella shows

How Pears must be gathered that they may endure long;
namely, if you gather them before they be thoroughly ripe: and Palladius
says, that they must be gathered charily by hand, that they may not be
bruised; and you must diligently cull out from them, all such as have fallen
from the Tree, and lay up none but those that are very sound, and somewhat hard
and green, and such as are gathered with their stalks upon them. Democritus
says that those Pears will keep best, which are besmeared with pitch about the
stalk, and so hung up. We will also show the manner how to gather*

Cervices, that they may last.
Marcus Varro says that Cervises are to be gathered even while they are very
sour, and so to be hung up, that they may ripen but slowly, and that also
within doors: for if you lay them up when they are grown to some ripeness,
they will not last so long. Theophrastus by this means procured Cervices to
defer their ripening even until Winter. Columella says, they must be charily
gathered with your hand. Pliny says, they must be hanged up as they are upon
their boughs. Palladius says, they must be gathered when they are hard, and so
hanged up together with their stalks in some close and dark place. So

Figs are to be laid up as they are upon their boughs,
as Africanus teaches; but, says he, they must be gathered before they be
ripe: for when once they are come to be ripe, they will hang no longer upon
their Tree, as other fruits do, but fall off presently. They are also to be
gathered and laid up with their stalk or their navel upon them, that is, the
part which they hold by, and depend upon their mother: for if they be so
gathered, they will last the longer sound and good. Palladius also would have
them to be gathered while they be green and unripe, and that with their stalks
upon them, and so to be laid up. Cato says, that the boughs of the Fig Tree
whereon the figs grow, are to be preserved together with their fruit; and those
figs that you would keep, must be gathered somewhat green and sour. Columella
says, that Figs, if we would keep them long, must be gathered, neither when
they are very ripe, nor yet when they are too green. Palladius says, that if
you would have

Peaches well kept,
you must fill up the navel of the Peach, that is, that part of the Peach
whereby it closes with the stalk, with one drop of scalding pitch. I for my
part have preserved

Damosins a great while together,
by hanging them up with their stalks, upon the rafters of an house; but there
is none so good to be kept, as those that are of a purple color. Palladius
would have them to be gathered while they are unripe, yet he would not have
them too raw; but in any case they must be very sound, and without any worm, or
bruise, or any other blemish. So also the fruit called

Ziziphum may be preserved,
if it be gathered with the boughs that it grows upon, and folded or wrapped up
in his own leaves, and so hung upon the beams of an house, as Palladius
shows. So

Medlars may be kept long,
if you gather them when they are but half-ripe, and hang them up with their
boughs in some house. Beritius shows,

How Pomegranates are to be gathered and laid up to last.
You must gather them, says he, with a very chary hand, lest if you touch them
somewhat roughly, they should be hurt or bruised; and that would be an occasion
of their putrefaction. Columella says, that Pomegranates are to be gathered
with their stalks, and the stalks to be put into an Elder-tree; because the
Elder-tree is so full of pith, that it may easily entertain the Pomegranate
stalks. The same Author reports out of Mago the Carthaginian, that all fruits,
which you would lay up in store, must be gathered with their stalks upon them;
yea, and if it may be without the spoil or hurt of the Tree, they must be
gathered with their boughs too; for this will be very helpful to cause the
fruit to last the longer. Palladius says, that Pomegranates may be preserved
best, if you gather them sound, and lay pitch upon their stalks, and hang them
up in due order: nay, they will keep so much the better, the longer the boughs
are, which are plucked off from the Tree with them. Pliny says, that they are
to be gathered with their boughs, and the boughs to be stuck into the Elder
pith, and so to be preserved. Cato shows, how we may preserve

Myrtle twigs with their berries upon them.
They must be taken from the Tree when the berries are somewhat sour, and so
bound up with their leaves about them. Didymus has taught us, how we must
gather

Grapes that they may last long.
We must take special heed that every grape be perfect and sound; and for this
cause we must have a very sharp knife or hook, to cut of those grapes that are
unsound easily and without any stroke, even with one touch as it were. When you
gather your grapes, they must be in their full strength, neither too raw, nor
yet past their best liveliness. Some cut off the branches together with the
clusters; and when they have so done, they espy out all the grapes that are
either putrified, or dried away, or unripe, and pluck them off with a pair of
nippers, lest they should infect their fellows; and after this, they take the
branches whereon the cluters grow, and that end which was cut, they dip into
scalding pitch, every one by it self. Others hold, that grapes must be hanged
up in some high roof, where the air may have full scope at them; but the grapes
must be none of those which grow toward the tops of the branches, but they must
be the lower clusters. Palladius says; If we would have grapes to last, we
must see that we gather such as are without blemish; they must not be too harsh
and sour, neither must they be over-ripe, but it must be a very clear grape to
the eye, and somewhat soft to be felt, and yet it must have a reasonable tough
skin. If there be any amongst them that is bruised, or has any other blemish,
we must cut it way; neither must we suffer amongst them any one that is over
hard, which the Sun has not in some sort overcome with his heat: After all
this, we must drench the cut ends of the stalks in scalding pitch, and so hang
them up.

CHAP. VI.
In what grounds those fruits should grow and be gathered, which we would lay
up.
WE must not omit to speak of another necessary observation in this matter;
namely, in what ground, in what air, under what Climate, it is best that those
fruits, which we should lay up, should grow and be gathered. Whatsoever fruits
do grow i^ moist and waterish, in hollow and low grounds; as also those which
grow in such grounds as are much soiled and manured with fat muck; they are
much subject to putrefaction; for, in as much as they grow with great store of
moisture and heat in them, they have the occasion and original of their own
bane within their own bosom. But in wild fruits, and such as grow upon the
tops of mountains, in dry grounds, and such as are not manured at all, and such
as the Southern heat does continually beat upon, it falls out clean
otherwise: for the fruits that grow in such places, are for the most part, dry,
and very solid, not abounding either with heat or moisture. Hesiodus in his
book of Husbandry, never makes any mention of muck or soiling, and
questionless, he would never have omitted such a necessary part of Husbandry as
this is, but that he saw the inconvenience of it in this respect, that it makes
the fruit more subject to putrefaction, and many infirmities. Fruits that grow
in wild and stony grounds, where the wind has his full force, will preserve
themselves without any skill and device practiced upon them: wherefore, if
other sleights be added, which are helpful to their preservation, they will
surely last much the longer. But let us see whether Antiquity has made any
mention of this matter; and first let us hearken to Theophrastus, who shows

In what ground there grow the best Dates or Palms to be preserved for store.
If you preserve and lay up any Dates or Palms, says he, you must make choice
of those which grow in sandy grounds, as in that Country which is called Syria
cava: and there are in all that Country but three sandy places where they do
grow, and these are excellent good to be preserved; those which grow in other
places, are not durable, but presently wax rotten. Of all those Palms which
Syria yields, it is held by some, that none are good to last, but those only
which grow in the Palme-valley, a place so called there. But those which grow
in Egypt, and Cyprus, and elsewhere, they are all very soon putrified. And
Pliny reports out of the same Author, that those Palms which grow in salt and
sandy grounds, as in Judaea, and Cyreni^n Africa, may be preserved: but not
those which grow in Cyprus, Egypt, Syria, and Seleucia of Assyria. The same
Theophrastus speaking of Beans, shows

In what ground there grow the best Beans to be preserved for store.
One Country, says he, differs from another, and one Climate differs also from
another, in respect of the fruits that grow in them, either to be good to lay
up, or to be subject to putrefaction. And therefore the Beans that grow in
Apollonia which is near to the Ionian Sea, are not subject at all to any worms
or rottenness, so that they are best of all other to be preserved. Likewise
the Beans that grow about Cizicum are very durable.

CHAP. VII.
How fruits must be shut up and kept close that the air come not at them.
WE have showed before, that, if we would preserve fruit long, we must keep
away both heat and moisture from them; both which qualities are found in the
air. Wherefore we will first set down the devices of Antiquity in this behalf;
and then our own devices and experiments. And first

How to keep Apples close without putrefying.
We will begin with Aristotle, who says, that fruits are to be kept in bottles
full of air, that so the extrinsecal air may be excluded; for thus he speaks in
his Problems. Whence comes it, that the fruits of Trees, and flesh, and such
like, do last without putrefaction, when they are shut up in bottles full of
air, or in other vessels that are well covered, and closed up on every side? It
is because all things are wont to be corrupted when they are stirred or
removed, but when things are filled, they stand unmovable? for it cannot be,
that any thing should be moved, unless there be some vacant space to be moved
in: now those things which are so shut up, are every way full, and therefore
are preserved without corruption. As if he should say; the air which is so
enclosed, cannot so soon procure putrefaction, by reason that it is not so
subject to the daily alterations of the circumstant air. Or, if the fruit could
send forth their heat and moisture which is in them, yet it should be kept in
upon them by the fullness of the bottles. But let us see what the Masters of
Husbandry do teach concerning this matter. As for example

How to preserve Citrons close without putrefying.
Palladius does thus preserve them from the air. He shuts up every Citron in a
several vessel by it self, and plasters them up, and sets them orderly in a
fit place prepared for that purpose. Sotion says, that the Pome-Citron must be
very well plaistered over with stamped mortar, that so it may keep one whole
year together, without any harm or blemish. So have others taught us the way

How to keep Apples shut up close.
Columella says, that every several kind of Apples is to be placed in a
several cell by themselves; for when diverse kinds are shut up in one and the
same cell, they will not agree so well together, but will soon putrify: But
when you have disposed of your Apples that they are set in good order, then
shut up the lids of the coffer or cell upon them; and plaster the lids over
with lome, that has straw chopped in it, lest the air get in. Palladius would
have every apple placed by it self in a several earthen vessel, which must be
pitched within, and plaistered over with mortar, or else they may be lapt up in
clay, and so preserved. Pliny says, that the custom in his time was, to make
choice of the goodliest apples, and to plaster them over with mortar or wax,
that it may be like a crust upon them: but, says he, they must be fully ripe
first; for otherwise they will grow and wax bigger, and so break out of their
houses. Others put every several Apple or Pear into a several earthen vessel,
and besmear the vessels all over with pitch, and then put the vessels with the
fruit in them, into a barrel or tub, and so preserve them. Apuleius was wont to
preserve them in an earthen pot laid all about on the inside with wax. Some
preserve them by lapping them up in Reits or Sea-weed, and so shutting them up
into earthen pitchers: but they must be every one wrapped up severally by it
self, and so laid, that they may not touch each other; and besides, the
pitchers must be very well and close covered. Columella prescribes this course
whereby

Quinces are to be shut up, that they may last.
They must be wrapped up in Fig Leaves; and you must take some Potters white
earth and put in Wine-lees to it, to make mortar of them, and with that mortar
besmear the Quinces: then you must put them into some new vessels, and cover
them all over with some dry plaistering that they may not touch one another.
Palladius puts them between two tile-sheards, and closes them up with Lome
round about; and then covers them over with dry plaistering, and so lays them
up in a New pot or basen, that they may be kept asunder. Democritus does first
cover them over with leaves, and then he makes mortar of clay or of some
Potters chalk with hair chopped into it, wherewith he besmears the Quinces; and
when he has dried them in the Sun, he lays them up: and whenever he would
use any of them, he breaks up their case, and there finds his Quinces in the
same taking as they were, when he put them in. But Pliny teaches us very
briefly, that if we would keep Quinces long, we must shut them up so close,
that no air may come at them. By the like means, you may preserve

All things close exceeding well,
Mago, when he would preserve any fruit close, he covers them all over very
carefully with Potters chalk, and then dries it in the Sun; and if there happen
to be any chap in the mould, he stops it up with lome, and so when it is
dry, lays it up. Others take a new earthen pitcher, and strew it with the
dust or shavings of Poplar, or else of the Holm-tree; and then they place the
fruit in it, in such sort that there lies some of the dust betwixt every fruit:
then they board that space, and make a floor over that stoary; and having so
done, they strew the second stoary with the like dust, and there also dispose
of their fruit as in the other stoary: then they board that space too, and make
a third stoary, and so a fourth, and so forward till the pitcher be filled up:
and when it is full, they lay a covering upon it, and plaster it over very
carefully with thick lome. Others put their fruit into a barrel, but they place
them in such order, that the one may not touch the other; and then they close
up the barrel again, as Palladius reports. Africanus teaches a way whereby

Figs may be shut up to be preserved long,
You must take a green Gourd, and make in it certain cells or hollow places of
receipt, for every several fig a several cell; Into these cells you must put
your figs, and wrap the gourd about with a swathe of cloth or leather, and
then hang up the gourd in a dark place where neither fire nor smoke may come at
them: But you must see that the figs which you would thus preserve, have their
tails ar stalks upon them. Others take a cup of glass, or some other cup that
you may see thorough, and set it upon the figs with the mouth downward, and
stop up with wax every place round about, that no air may come within the cups
mouth; and so the figs are preserved without any corruption. Palladius
rehearses the very same experiment out of the same Author, Likewise

Cervises may be shut up in barrels,
and thereby be preserved a great while. You must take Cervices presently as
they are gathered, and make choice of those that are not bruised nor blemished
any way: These you must put into a barrel, and shut up the mouth of the barrel
very close, and plaster it over with mortar. Or else you may take clay mortar,
that is well made, and beaten together, that it may be about the thickness of
honey, and drench your Cervises in it, and then hang them up: so you may
preserve them sound a while; and afterward you must wash them, that the mortar
which sticks upon them, may fall off. So, the fruit

Ziziphum may be shut up in earthen vessels
to be long preserved, as Palladius shows. But they must be gathered by hand,
and that not before they be ripe; and you must shut them up in long earthen
vessels, and plaster them over, and so lay them up. He shows also that

Medlars, and the fruit Tuber may be shut up in pitchers, so to be preserved.
You must put your Medlars into pitchers, that are besmeared with pitch on the
inside; but the pitchers wherein you put your Tubers, must not only be pitched
on the inside, but also daubed over on the outside. So Didymus shows, that

Myrtle-berries may be very well kept
to last long, if you gather them when they are green, and put them into a
vessel, that is not pitched, and so cover it close, and lay them up. Others lay
them up with tails or stalks upon them. Palladius shows, that

Nuts may be long preserved,
if you shut them up close in coffers; but the coffers must be made of
Nut-tree. The same Palladius shows, that

Chest-nuts may be long preserved,
if you put them in wicker baskets, and plaster up the baskets round about:
but the rods which the baskets be made of must be Beechen-rods; and they must
be made up so close, that no air may come at that fruit which is in them.
Likewise

Roses may be shut up to be preserved,
if you take green Barley being plucked up by the roots, and put them into a
barrel that is not pitched, and lay Roses in amongst it before they be blown:
for by this means you may keep them long. So also you may shut up

Lillies, to make them last a whole year.
You must gather them with their boughs, as they grow, before they be blown,
and put them into new earthen vessels that were never pitched, and when you
have covered the vessels, lay them up; and so shall you have Lillies of a year
old. But if you have use for any of them in the mean time, bring them forth
into the Sun, and by the heat thereof they will be opened and blown. We will
show also out of Didymus, how

Grapes may be shut up to last long,
Some take certain cases that are pitched all within, and when they have
strewed them with the dust or dry powder of the Pitch-tree, or the Firre-tree,
or the black Poplar-tree, or else with the dry flower of Millet, then they put
in their grapes, and so they last long: but they take their grapes presently
after the time of Vintage, and make special choice of those grapes that are
without any bruise or blemish, and they shut up the mouth of the vessels very
close, and overlay them with mortar. Or else they may be drenched in
clay-morter, that is well beaten, and somewhat liquid, and then be hanged up,
and so kept for a while, and afterward when you would use them, wash them over,
that the mortar may fall off. Columella says; you must take the great
Teat-grape, or else the hard-skinned grape, or else the fair purple-grape, from
the Vine, and presently pitch their stalks with hard pitch: then take a new
earthen Vatt, and fill it with dry chafe well sifted, that it be without dust,
and so hang up your grapes upon it: then take another Vat, and cover therewith
the former, grapes and all: and when you have laid the brims of both vatts
together, then daube them up with more that is made with chopped straw; and
when you have so done, place them in a very dry loft, and cover them all over
with dry chaffe^

Wheat may be laid up close to be preserved,
by putting it into caves or pits of the earth, as we have showed out of Varro;
for the Cappadocians and Thracians put their Corn into Caves and Dens; the
Spaniards put it into certain pits, and make special provision that the
moisture and air may not come at them; except it be when they take cut any for
their use; for if the air do not breath upon it, it will be free from the mice
and such like vermin: and it is known, that Corn being thus laid up, has been
kept clean and sweet fifty years together. Marcus Varro says, that

Beans and Pulse have been laid up in vessels, and so preserved for a long time:
but they must be oyle-vessels, and they must be covered over with ashes. Pliny
writes the very same experiment out of Varro; that Beans and Pulse being laid
up in oylebuts, and covered over with ashes, have lasted a great while; and
being laid up in some hole of the earth, they have lasted an hundred and twenty
years. So the Pulse called

Lintels, have been preserved long,
as Columella shows: for if you put them into oyle-vessels, or else into
salting-tubs, that they may be full, and so plaster them over with mortar,
whenever you take them forth again for your use, you shall find your Lintels
sweet and good.

CHAP. VIII.
How the Ancients, when they had put their fruit into certain vessels, and so
shut them up close, did put them also into some other vessels full of liquor.
HOwsoever the Ancients, by making up their vessels close, did shut out and
keep away the air as being the Author of all putrefaction, so that it could not
come in to the fruit: yet they did not by this means keep away the air out of
those places where the vessels were laid, but that as the circumstant air was
changed, either being disposed to heat, or cold, or drouth, or moisture, to the
air also that is within, mustneeds be changed, and consequently, the fruit also
must be affected with the same change. Wherefore, for the avoiding of all
inconveniences which this way might ensue, after they had plaistered their
fruit-vessels, and so made them up fast, they did drown these vessels in diverse
and sundry kinds of liquors. And surely not without great reason, as experience
shows. For I have oft-times observed it, being seriously employed in these
affairs, that if the air be uniform, and without alteration, the fruits and
flowers that have been shut up in vessels of glass, have lasted long without
any putrefaction: but when once they felt any alteration in the air, presently
they began to putrify. For this cause are those vessels to be drowned in
Cisterns, or ditches, o^ some places underneath the ground, that so the
variable alterations of the air may not be felt by the fruit. And, to descend
to experiments, we will first show,

How Quince-pears being shut up close, may be drowned for their better
preservation.
An experiment which Democritus has set down. You must put your Quince-pears
into a new earthen-vessel, and then cover it, and pitch it all over, and so put
it into a but of wine; but so, that they may have scope to swim upon the top of
the Wine: for by this means shall you keep your fruit fresh and good for a long
time; and besides, the wine wherein they float, will have a very fragrant
savor. Likewise

Apples being shut up close, and then put into Cisterns, will last long,
As Palladius shows. You must put your apples, says he, into earthen
vessels, well pitched and made up close: and when you have so done, drown those
vessels in a Cistern, or else in a pit. Pliny puts apples in earthen Basins,
and so lets them swim in wine; for, says he, the wine by this means will yield
a more odoriferous smell. Apuleius says, that Apples are to be put into a new
pot, and the pot to be put into a Hogs-head of wine that there it may swim, and
play on the top of the wine; for so, the Apples will be preserved by the wine,
and the wine will be the better for the Apples. So

Figs being shut up close, may be drowned for their better preservation,
As Africanus affirms. They take figs, says he, that are not very ripe, and
put them into a new earthen vessel; but they gather them with their tails or
stalks upon them, and lay them up every one in a several cell by it self: and
when they have so done, they put the vessel into an Hogs-head of wine, and so
preserve their figs. I have also proved it by experience, that

Peaches being shut up in wooden Cisterns, have been well preserved by drowning.
And I have proved (...) also in other kinds of Apples, that if they be shut up
in a small vessel that is very well pitched on the utter side, and so drowned
in the bottom of a Cistern of water, and kept down by some weights within the
water, that it may not float, they may be preserved many months without any
putrefaction. By a slight not much unlike to this,

Pomegranates may be preserved in a Pipe or But that is half full of water,
as Palladius shows. You must hang up your Pomegranates within the But; yet
so, that they must not touch the water; and the But must be shut up close, that
the wind may not come in. And as fruit may be thus preserved, if the vessels be
drowned in water or other liquor; so there are some of opinion, that, if you
hide those vessels underneath the ground, you may by this means also eschew the
danger of the alterations that are in the air. Columella shows, that

Cervises being shut up close, and so laid under ground, will thereby last the
longer.
When you have gathered your Cervises charily by hand, you must put them into
vessels that are well pitched, and lay also pitched coverings upon them, and
plaster them over with mortar: then make certain ditches or trenches about two
foot deep in some dry place within doors; and in them so place your pitchers,
that the mouth may be downward: then throw in the earth upon them, and tread it
in somewhat hard. It is best to make many trenches, that the vessels may stand
asunder, not above one or two in a trench; for when you have use of them, if
you would take up any one of the vessels, none of the rest must be stirred; for
if they be, the Cervises will soon putrify. Pliny reports the like out of
Cato: that Cervises are put into earthen vessels well pitched, the covering
being plaistered over with mortar, and then put in certain ditches or pits
about two foot deep; the place being somewhat open, and the vessels set with
the mouth downward. And Palladius writes out of those two Authors, that
Cervises must be gathered while they be somewhat hard, and laid up even when
they begin to be ripe; they must be put in earthen pitchers, so that the
vessels be filled up to the top, and covered over with mortar, and laid in a
ditch two foot deep, in a dry place where the Sun comes; and the mouths of the
vessels must stand downward, and the earth must be trodden in upon them. The
same Author writes that

Pears being shut up in vessels, and so laid under the ground, will last the
longer.
You must take those pears which are hard both in skin, and in skin and
substance: These you must lay upon an heap; and when they begin to wax soft,
put them into an earthen vessel which is well pitched, and lay a covering on
it, and plaster it over with mortar. Then the vessel must be buried in a small
ditch, in such a place as the sun does daily shine upon. Others as soon as the
pears are gathered, lay them up with their stalks upon them in pitched vessels,
and close up the vessels with mortar or else with pitch; and then lay them
abroad upon the ground, covering them all over with sand. Others make special
choice of such pears as are very sound, somewhat hard and green; and these they
shut up into a pitched vessel, and then cover it and set the mouth of it
downward, and bury it in a little ditch in such a place as the water runs round
about it continually. In like manner also

Apples being shut up close, may be hidden within the ground for their better
preservation,
As Pliny shows. You must dig a trench in the ground about two foot deep, and
lay sand in the bottom of it, and there put in your apples; then cover the pit
first with an earthen lid, and then with earth thrown upon it. Some put their
apples in earthen basins, and then bury them. Others put them into a ditch that
has sand cast into the bottom of it, and cover it only with dry earth. The
like device it is whereby

Pomegranates are preserved in small Buts which have sand in them.
You must fill a small But up to the middle with sand, and then take your
pomegranates, and put the stalk of them every one into a several cane, or into
the bough of an Elder-tree; and let them be so placed asunder in the sand, that
the fruit may stand some four fingers above the sand: but the vessel must be
set within the ground in some open place. This also may be done within doors,
in a ditch two foot deep. Others fill up the But half full of water, and hang
the pomegranates within the But, that they may not touch the water; and shut up
the But close that no air may come in. Cato shows how

Filberds may be preserved within the ground,
You must take them while they be new, and put them into a pitcher, and so lay
them in the ground; and they will be as fresh when you take them forth, as when
you put them in. In like manner Palladius shows that

Chestnuts may be preserved,
if you put them in new earthen vessels, and bury them in some dry place within
the ground. He says also that

Roses being shut up, may be buried in the ground for their better preservation,
if they be laid up in a pot, and well closed, and so buried in some open
place. But now we will show

How all things that are shut up, may be preserved for many years.
Fruits are to be laid up in vials of glass, as we showed before: and when the
pipe or neck of the glass is stopped close up, then they are to be drowned in
cisterns, and they will last good for certain whole years. Likewise, flowers
are to be closed up in a vessel that is somewhat long, and the neck of it must
be stopped up, as we showed before, and then they must be cast into the water:
for by this means they may be kept fresh for a long time. I have also put new
wine into an earthen vessel that has been glazed within, and have laid it in
the water with a weight upon it to keep it down; and a year after, I found it
in the same taste and goodness, as when I put it into the vessel. By the like
device as this is, we may preserve

Things that are shut up, even for ever,
if we wrap them up in some commixtion with other things, so that the air may
not pierce them through; but especially, if the commixtion it self be such, as
is not subject to putrefaction. I have made trial hereof in Amber; first
reducing it to a convenient softness, and then wrapping up in it that which I
desired to preserve: For whereas the Amber may be seen through, it does
therefore represent unto the eye the perfect semblance of that which is within
it, as if it were living, and so shows it to be sound, and without
corruption. After this manner I have lapped up Bees and Lyzards in Amber, which
I have showed to many, and they have been persuaded that they were the Bees and
the Lyzards that Martial speaks of. We see every where that the hairs of
beasts, and leaves, and fruits, being lapped up in this juice, are kept for
ever; the Amber does eternize them. Martial speaks thus of the Be, A Be does
lie hidden within the Amber, and yet she shines in it too; as though she were
even closed up within her own honey: A worthy reward she has there for all her
labors; and, if she might make choice of her own death, it is likely she would
have desired to die in Amber. And the same Author speaks thus of the Viper,
being caught as it were in the same juice: The Viper comes gliding to the
dropping Pine Tree, and presently the Amber juice does overflow her: and while
she marvails at it, how she should be so entangled with that liqour, upon the
sudden it closes upon her, and waxes stiff with cold. Then let not Cleopatra
boast her self in her Princely Tomb, seeing the Viper is interred in a Nobler
Tomb then she. But if you desire to know how to make Amber soft, though there
be diverse ways whereby this may be effected, yet let this way alone content
you, to cast it into hot boiling wax that is scummed and clarified: for, by
this means it will become so soft and pliant, that you may easily fashion it
with your fingers, and make it framable to any use. Only you must be sure
that it be very new.

CHAP. IX.
How Fruits may be drenched in Honey, to make them last for a long time.
THe Ancients finding by experience, that the shutting up of fruits in vessels,
and the drenching of those vessels in water, was a notable preservative against
corruption, did thence proceed farther, and began to drench the fruits
themselves in diverse kinds of liqours; supposing that they might be the longer
preserved, if they were sowsed in honey, wine, vinegar, brine, and such like,
in as much as these liquors have an especial virtue against putrefaction: For
honey has an excellent force to preserve, not fruits only, but also even the
bodies of living creatures from being putrefied, as we have elsewhere showed
that Alexanders body, and the carcass of the Hippocentaur were preserved in
honey. Mere water they did not use in this case; because, that being moist in
it self, might seem rather to cause putrefaction. But of all other liquors,
honey was most in request for this purpose, they supposing it to be a principal
preserver against corruption. Columella says

That Quinces may be preserved in honey without putrefaction;
We have nothing more certain by experience, says he, then that Quinces are
well preserved in honey. You must take a new flagon that is very broad brimmed,
and put your Quuinces into it, so that they may have scope within, that one may
not bruise another; then when your pot is full to the neck, take some withy
twigs, and plat them over the pots mouth, that they may keep down the Quinces
somewhat close, least when they should swell with liquor, they should float too
high: then fill up your vessel to the very brimme with excellent good liquefi'd
honey, so that the Quinces may be quite drowned in it. By this means, you shall
not only preserve the fruit very well, but also you shall procure such a well
relished liquor, that it will be good to drink of. But in any case take heed,
that your Quinces be through ripe which you would thus preserve: for if they
were gathered before they were ripe, they will be so hard, that they cannot be
eaten. And this is such an excellent way, that though the worm have seized upon
the Quinces before they were gathered, yet this will preserve them from being
corrupted any farther: for such is the nature of honey, that it will suppress
any corruption, and not suffer it to spread abroad: for which cause it will
preserve the dead carcass of a man, for many years together, without
putrefaction. Palladius says, that Quinces must be gathered when they are
ripe, and so put into honey, whole as they are, and thereby they will be long
preserved. Pliny would have them first to be smeared over with wax, and then to
be sowsed in honey. Apitius says, Quinces must be gathered with their boughs
and leaves, and they must be without any blemish, and so put into a vessel full
of honey and new wine. The Quinces that were thus dressed, were called
Melimela, that is to say, Apples preserved in honey: as Martial witnesses,
saying, Quinces sowsed in pure honey, that they have drunk themselves full, are
called Melimela. Likewise Columella shows that

Other kind of Apples may be so preserved,
Not only the Melimela, but also the Pome-paradise, and the Sestian Apples,
and other such dai^ties may be preserved in honey: but because they are made
sweeter by the honey, and so lose their own proper relish which their nature
and kind does afford, therefore he was wont to preserve them by another kind of
practice. Palladius says, That

Pears may be preserved in Honey,
if a hey be so laid up therein, that one of them may not touch another. So
Africanus reports, That

Figgs may be long preserved in Honey,
if they be so disposed and placed in it, that they neither touch each other,
nor yet the vessel wherein they be put; and when you have so placed them, you
must make fast the lid of the vessel upon them, and there let them lie without
troubling them. And Palladius reports the same: Green Figs, says he, may be
preserved in Honey, if you place them so that they may not touch each other.
Florentinus also shows, That

Cherries may be preserved in Honey,
if you put them into a vessel that is strawed in the bottom with Savory, and
so cast some honey upon them; but your honey must be somewhat sharp. So
likewise

Medlars may be preserved in Honey,
to last a great while without rotting, as Palladius shows: but then they
must be gathered before they be thoroughly ripe. Martial shows also, That

Nuts may be preserved in Honey,
to be green all the year long; and he speaks it of his own trial and
experience. You must take green Nuts, and pluck them out of their shells, and
so let them be sowsed in honey: and the honey wherein they are sowsed, will
become very medicinable, insomuch that if you make a potion of it, it will be
very helpful to cure the Arteries, and the Jaws. Palladius says, That

Peaches may be preserved in Honey,
if you take out the stone before you sowse them; and besides that they will
last long, this will also make them to be very well relished. He says also
that they may be well preserved in the liquor Oxymel. To be brief, Columella
says plainly that there is no kind of fruit but may be well preserved in
honey. But he prescribes it for a general rule in this case, that every kind of
fruit should be preserved in several by it self: for if you lay up diverse kinds
of fruits together, one of them will corrupt and mar the other. So also

Grapes may be preserved in Honey,
and they will last long without any blemish in them, if they be so preserved,
as Didymus writes. But we will show now,

What kinds of fruits are best preserved in Honey.
For, I have endeavored my self in this Practice, how to keep fruits without
putrefaction, and for this cause, I laid up all kinds of fruits in vessels of
glass filled with honey, that so I might prove, which might be preserved
longest: and I found great difference among them, some kinds lasting long and
some but a little while. For, the fruits that were by their own kind, full of
moisture, did attaint the honey; so that the honey being it self attainted, was
not possibly able to preserve the fruit from putrefaction. Grapes, Figgs, and
Peaches are soon putrified by reason of their moistness; Quinces, Apples, and
Pears do last longer uncorrupted; but Nuts will will last green and sound a
whole year together.

CHAP. X.
How fruits may be long preserved in ordinary wine, or sodden wine, or new
wine, or else in wine-lees.
THe Ancients likewise perceiving, that wine would keep all things, and that
grapes-stones lighting into the wine as it was barrelled up, did continue whole
in the barrels for the space of a whole year; thence they gathered, that those
fruits which were laid up in wine, would be well preserved from putrefaction.
Neither did they stay there, but also proceeded to use sodden wine, new wine,
vinegar, and wine-lees, for that purpose, because all these have a smatch of
the substance of wine it self. But we considering that there may be a very pure
and durable liquour extracted out of the substance of wine (for wine, as it is
of it self, will sooner be corrupted) have therefore used the help of that
extraction, whereby to preserve things sound and good time out of mind. But to
return to them, and set down their examples. Palladius shows, That

Quinces may be preserved in wine.
For, if we lay them up in vessels filled with very good wine, half with
ordinary wine, and half with new wine, we shall by this means preserve Quinces
a great while. Others sowse them in barrels of new wine only, and so close
them up; whereby they cause the wine to yield a very fragrant smell. So
Democritus makes choice of the fairest and soundest quinces, and puts them
into barrels of new wine, and thereby does preserve his quinces and better his
wine. So

Apples may be preserved floating in wine,
as the same Author shows. You must put some few apples into a barrel of wine
that they may float up and down, and so shall you also better the wine.
Democritus would have them to be put into earthen pots; but Apuleius would have
them put into barrels, and so closed up; and thus, says he, shall you procure
an admirable sweetness and pleasantness in the wine. Others would have them put
into a new pot, and the pot to be drenched into a barrel of wine, so that they
may there swim, and then the barrel to be made up close; for this will be best
both for the wine and also for the apples. Likewise

Figgs may be long preserved in wine,
as Africanus shows. You must make a new earthen pot, not altogether round,
but rather somewhat square, having a good sound bottom; then you must gather
your figs with their sprigs and stalks, and that before they be through ripe;
then put them fresh into your vessel, and place them so that they may lie from
each other a pretty distance; and so put them in a barrel full of wine, and
there let them swim; but the barrel must be very well closed up, that the air
get not in: and until the wine change and become sowrish, the figs will never
change, but continue in the same estate as when they were put in. Palladius
does report the very same experiment out of the very same Author. Beritius
shows, That

Mulberries may be preserved in wine:
But it must be such wine as is made of Mulberries; and the vessels wherein
they are put, must be made up very close. Likewise Pamphilius shows, That

Damosins may be preserved in wine,
if they be put into Hogsheads either of sweet wine, or else new wine, there to
swim up and down, and the Hogsheads well covered. Palladius also teaches, That
the fruit*

Ziziphum may be preserved in wine.
so that it shall not have any screwls or wrinkles: for, if it be fresh
gathered, and suppled with drops of new wine, it will continue plumpe and full
without any wrinkles. Didymus shows

How Grapes may be preserved in wine,
You must take a barrel that is half full of new wine, and therein hang up your
grapes in such sort, as the clusters may not touch each other, nor any of them
touch the wine: for by this means they will continue as sound as they were upon
the Vine. Some do preserve them in wine that is alayed with water. Grapes thus
preserved in wine, have been in great request among the Ancients. Athenaeus
makes mention of them out of Eubulus in Agglutinat^: you must, says he,
minister unto him good store of grapes preserved in wine: And Pherecrates,
among other things that are to be eaten, makes mention of grapes that were
taken out of wine. Cato shows, That

Pears may be long preserved in sodden wine,
especially the Tarentine-pears, and the Must-pears, and the Gourd-pears. Varro
says, That the pears called Anciana, and Sementina are to be preserved in
sodden wine. Pliny says, That the Tarentine-pears, and the Anciana are so
preserved. Palladius says, That they may be preserved either in sodden wine or
else in new wine; but, says he, The vessels which they are put into, must be
filled up with that liquor wherein they are to be preserved; which very same
precept he learned out of Democritus. Columella shows how to make this kind
of sodden wine of that sweet wine which is called Mustum. Palladius shows
also, how that kind of

Peaches, which has the hardest stone, may be preserved long in sodden wine,
You must fill up the Navel of the Peach (or that place wherein the stalk was
fastened) with a drop or two of scalding pitch, so that the wine may not get
into the peach by that passage; and then shut up the vessel very close, that
the air may not get in. Columella says, That

Cervises may be long preserved in new wine,
if you plat some dry fennel above them, to keep them under, that still the
liquor may overflow them: but the coverings or lids of the vessels must be well
pitched, and plaistered over with mortar, that the air may have no access unto
them. Pliny says, That Cervises are to be preserved in sodden wine, by the
judgment of Cato. Palladius also says, That Cervises may be preserved long in
sodden wine. Columella shows

That Grapes may be preserved in new wine,
You must take a barrel that is well pitched, and put into it a certain
quantity of new wine; then make a hurdle as it were, of good stiff rods platted
together, a little above the liquor: then place upon those hurdles, certain new
earthen vessels, and therein so dispose your grapes that they may not touch
each other; then cover your vessels and stop them up, after that, make another
such a loft of hurdles, and then another, and so forward, as far as the
greatness of the barrel will give you leave; and in every one of those rooms
place your grapes, as in the first: then take the pitched cover of your barrel,
and smear it all over with good store of new wine, and when you have laid it
upon the barrel, make it up close, and lay ashes upon it. Others make no more
ado, but only put their new wine into the barrel, and make certain hurdles
over the wine, and there hang their grapes out of the reach of the wine, and so
cover the barrel and stop it up. The same Author likewise reports, That

Damosins may be long kept in new Wine.
About harvest time, you must gather Damosins not being thoroughly ripe, nor yet
too green, (but they must be wild Damosins, such as are in color like to the
Onix^^one) and you must dry them in some shadowy place, the third day after
they were gathered: then you must mingle vinegar with new Wine, or else with
sodden wine, in equal portions, and so put your Damosins into it. But they will
be preserved the better, if you make your medley of a certain quantity of
vinegar, blended with twice so much water. Or else you may take the
purple-coloured Damosins, and lay them up in an earthen vessel well pitched,
and then fill it either with new, or else with sodden wine, so that the whole
fruit may lie under the liquor; and then lay the covering upon the vessel, and
plaster it up. We may also preserve

Cucumbers in the Lees of Wine,
as the Quintiles are of opinion. You must, say they, put your Cucumbers into
the Lees of White Wind, before it be sour, and see that your vessel be
top-full; for by this means your Cucumbers will last fresh and good a great
while. Didymus writes, that

Olives and Grapes may be kept together.
You must take Grapes while they be fresh, and new, and whole, and lay them up
in a vessel amongst Olives, so placed, that every Olive may stand betwixt two
Grapes, and so every Grape betwixt two Olives; and thus, the vessel being well
closed up, they will preserve each other. Columella says, that

Corneile, or Hamberry may be kept in Lees;
and if it be well preserved so, it will serve to be used in the stead of
Olives. Ovid declares this in the eighth book of his Metamorphosis. Columella
shows that

Grapes may be preserved fresh and green in the Lees of wine.
You must gather your grapes when they are of a reasonable ripeness, and then
lay them upon certain hurdles, so that one cluster may not touch the other:
then bring them within doors, and tuck away the dry, and withered, and rotten
grapes with a pair of tuckers: and when they have lain a while cooling out of
the Sun, take three or four clusters according as the bigness of your pot is,
and put them into it amongst the Lees; and let the lid be made up fast with
pitch, that the liquor may not break forth. Then you must take a great many of
Vine-stalks, and squeeze or press them well, with their grapes upon them: then
lay the stalks and husks in the bottom of a barrel, and therein place your pots
that you have filled with Lees and Grapes, and let their mouths stand downward,
and let them stand in distance each from other, so that you may ram in good
store of Grape-kernels betwixt them: and when you have filled the room with
Grape-stones stuff^ in hard about the pots; you must make a second room like
the first, and fill it up in the same manner: likewise you must make a third
room and so forward, till the barrel be thoroughly filled even to the very
brim, with pots, and Grape-stones crammed in fast and thick about them; then
straightway cover the barrel and make it up close, and lay ashes upon it. But
you must look to it, when you take forth any of the pots, that you take out a
whole row together: for the Grape-stones being stamped in thick together must
not be stirred; if they be, they will become sowrish very soon, and so they
will mar the grapes. The Quintiles say, that

Cucumbers may be preserved in vinegar;
and that very fresh and in their natural strength, if you hang them up in a
vessel that has some vinegar in it, that they may not touch the vinegar, and
then close up the vessel fast, that the air may not pass into it; for by this
means you may have green and new Cucumbers in the Wintertime. So all other
fruits may be preserved in vinegar: but because vinegar does mar the taste of
them, therefore we will not speak of such preservings. But hereby we have
learned to preserve, time out of mind,

All things with distilled wine:
for wine is of it self subject to putrefaction many ways: but when it is
often distilled, that the quintessence be extracted from it, this extraction is
free from all putrefaction whatsoever: wherefore all things that are drenched
in this kind of liquor, if the vessel be carefully closed up, must needs last
unputrified even for a whole age, nay for all eternity. At Rome, I saw a fish
that was drenched in the water that had been distilled out of the Vine, and she
was preserved five and twenty years, as fresh as while she was alive: and at
Florence, I saw the like of forty years continuance: the vessel was made of
glass, and made up with the seal of Hermes. And I make no question, but that
all things that are sowced in this kind of liquor, will last sound and good for
many ages. How many sorts of things I have preserved by this one means, it were
too long here to rehearse.

CHAP. XI.
That fruits may be very well preserved in salt-waters.
NExt after wine, salt water is of special use for preserving from
putrefaction: for such things as have been drenched therein, have lasted long
very sound and good. The Ancients saw that whatsoever was preserved in salt,
was kept thereby from putrefying: wherefore, that they might preserve fruits
from corruption, they have used to drench them in salt-waters. Homer calls salt
a divine thing, because it has a special virtue against putrefaction, and by
it, bodies are preserved to all eternity. Plato calls it the friend of God,
because no sacrifices were welcome to him, without salt. Plutark says that the
Ancients were wont to call it a divine influence, because the bodies of
creatures that were seasoned with salt from above, were thereby acquitted from
corruption. Salt binds, and dries, and knits together, and does privilege
bodies from putrefaction, that in their own nature must needs putrify: as the
Egyptians custom manifestly shows, who were wont to season their dead
bodies with salt, as Herodotus writes. But let us come to examples. Beritius
says, that

Pomegranates are preserved in salt-waters.
You must take seawater, or else brine, and make it boil, and so put your
Pomegranates into it; and afterward when they are thorough cold, dry them, and
hang them up in the Sun; and whenever you would use them, you must steep them
in fresh water two days before. Columella rehearses the opinion of a certain
Carthaginian touching this matter. Mago would have, says he, that Seawater
should be made very hot, and Pomegranates being tied together with thread or
broom-twigs, to be drenched in it till they change their color, and then to be
taken forth and dried in the Sun for three days, and afterward to be hanged
up: and when you would use them, you must steep them in fresh and sweet water
for the space of four and twenty hours before, and so they will be fit for your
use. Pliny also reports out of the same Author, that Pomegranates are first to
be hardened in hot Seawater, and then to be dried in the Sun three days, and
so to be hung up, that the evening dew come not at them; and when you would use
them, to steep them first in fresh water. Palladius writes the same out of
Pliny; and he shows also, that

Damosins may be preserved in salt-waters.
They must be fresh gathered, and then drenched either in brine, or else in
seawater scalding hot, and then taken forth, and dried either in the Sun, or
else in a warm Oven. Columella would have them drenched in new wine, sodden
wine, and vinegar; but he gives a special charge also to cast some salt amongst
them, lest the worm or any other hurtful vermin do grow in them. Palladius
likewise shows, that

Pears will last long in salt water:
first the water is to be boiled, and when it begins to rise in surges, you
must skim it; and after it is cold, put into it your Pears which you would
preserve: then after a while take them forth and put them up in a pitcher, and
so make up the mouth of it close, and by this means they will be well
preserved. Others let them lie one whole day and night in cold salt water, and
afterward steep them two days in fresh water, and then drench them in new wine
or in sodden wine, or in sweet wine to be preserved. Others put them in a new
earthen pitcher, filled with new wine, having a little salt in it, and so cover
the vessel close to preserve them. Likewise

Modlars may be preserved in salt water:
They must be gathered when they are but half ripe, with their stalks upon
them, and steeped in salt water for five days, and afterward more salt water
poured in upon them, that they may swim in it. Didymus shows also, that

Grapes may be preserved long in salt water.
You must take some seawater, and make it hot; or, if you cannot come at that,
take some brine, and put wine amongst it, and therein drench your clusters of
grapes, and then lay them amongst Barley straw. Some do boil the ashes of a
Fig Tree, or of a Vine, in water, and drench their clusters therein; and then
take them out to be cooled, and so lay them in Barley straw. The grape will
last a whole year together, if you gather them before they be thorough ripe,
and drench them in hot water that has Allome boiled in it, and then draw them
forth again. The Ancients were wont

To put salt to Wine, to make it last the longer,
as Columella shows. They took new wine, and boiled it till the third part
was wasted away; then they put it into vessels, there to preserve it for their
use the year following: they put a pint and a half of this liquor thus boiled,
into nine gallons of new wine unboiled; and after two days, when these liquors
are incorporated together, they wax hot, and begin to spurge; then they cast
into them half an ounce of salt beaten small, and that made the wine last till
the next year. Theophrastus and Pliny write, that

The fruits of those Palm Trees which grow in salt places, are fittest to be
preserved;
as those which grow in Judaea, and Cyrenian Africa, because those Countries
especially do afford salt and sandy grounds: for salt is a great nourisher of
these kinds of fruits, and they are preserved long, even by their own
saltness; so that the salter the places are where they grow, the better will
the fruit be preserved. So likewise that kind of Pulse which is called

Cicer, is preserved by its own saltness,
without any other dressing; for the nature thereof is, to have a saltish juice
within it; whereby it comes to pass that whereas all other Pulse are subject
to corruption, and have some vermin or other breeding in them, only this kind
does not engender any at all, because of the bitter and sharp saltish juice
that is in it, as Theophrastus writes. Didymus likewise writes, that

Beans will last long in salt water:
for, if they be sowced in seawater, they will continue long without any
blemish. Pliny also shows, that

Garlic may be preserved in salt water;
for if you would have Garlic or Onions to last long, you must dip the heads
thereof in warm salt water; so will they be of longer continuance, and of a
better taste. So

Cucumbers are preserved in brine,
as the Quintiles affirm; for if you preserve either Gourds or Cucumbers in
brine, they will last long. So

Apples and Myrtles may be preserved,
by lapping them up in Sea-weed one by one, so that they may be covered all
over with it, and not touch one another, as Apuleius shows. If you have no
Sea-weed, then you must lay them up close in Coffers. Aristotle is of opinion,
that the fruits of the Myrtle-tree need not to be lapped up in Sea-weed,
thereby to keep them from falling off from the Tree, because they will stick on
of themselves till they be thoroughly ripe; but the blades of them are
preserved by wrapping Sea-weed about them: and the vapor of the Sea-weed thus
wrapped about the blades, will keep the juice of the fruit from being changed
to any further maturity, and cause it to continue long at one stay; and this is
by reason of the saltness of the Sea-weed, whereby it does intercept and dry up
that moisture which should be derived into the fruit, to ripen it. We may learn
also to preserve

Olives in brine, to have them good a year after*
Marcus Cato says, that those kinds of Olives which are called Orchites, may
be well preserved, if they be laid up in brine while they are green; or else,
if they be powned with M^stick. Columella says, that the Olives which are
called Orchites, and those which are called Pansiae, and the little round Olive
called Radiolus, are to be knocked and beaten, and so cast into brine, and then
to be taken out of the brine and squeezed, and so cast into a vessel together
with the blanched seeds of Mastick and Fennel; then take a good quantity of new
wine, and half so much strong brine or pickle, and put it into the vessel, and
so the fruit will be preserved. Or else, you may cast your Olives whole into a
vessel, and put in strong brine amongst them till the vessel be brim-full, and
so take them out for your uses when occasion serves. There are a certain kind
of black Olives, called also Orchites, which Cato says, are thus to be
preserved. When they be dry, cast them into salt, and there let them lie for
the space of two days; afterward take them forth and shake off the salt, and
set them in the Sun two days together, and so they will be preserved. Marcus
Varro reports the very same experiment out of Cato. Columella says; while
Olives be yet black and unripe, you must tuck them off the Tree with your hand
in a fair Sun-shining day; and cull out the sound ones from those that have any
blemish; and into every peck and and an half of Olives, put a quart and
somewhat more of whole salt; then put them into wicker baskets, and there let
them lie in salt thirty days together, that the Lees or dregs may be still
dropping forth: afterward put them into some trey or such like vessel that you
may wipe away the salt with a sponge; and when you have done so, barrel them up
into a Hogs-head full of new wine or else of sodden wine, and by this means
they will be long preserved. Didymus teaches to make condite or preserved
Olives on this manner. When Olives are almost ripe, you must gather them with
their stalks and all: then wash or steep them a whole day in cold water, and
afterward lay them a drying upon wicker Lattises, handling them very gently;
then put them in the bottom of a vessel, and cast good store of salt amongst
them: and into five pecks of Olives, you must put in four gallons and two
quarts of brine, and two pints and a half of vinegar: And when you have filled
up the vessel, shake them together, that the liquor may swim on the pot.
Columella, Palladius and diverse others do cast the Olives into Seawater, and
there steep them seven days together, and when they have taken them forth,
they condite them with brine, and so put them up into some other vessel.

CHAP. XII.
That things may be specially well preserved in Oil and Lees of Oil.
Oil, and especially Lees of Oil, do excellently conserve things, defending
them both from the injuries of the Air and of Animals. Cato does in short
enumerate the faculties of Lees of Oil, he subacts the Barn-flores with Lees of
Oil, that Mice may not eat his Corn. That also

He may preserve his Grain in his Garner,
he dawbes the Pavement and Walls thereof with clay, confected with Lees of
Oil. That also

Moths may not eat his clothes,
he be sprinkles them with Lees of Oil: as also that

Seed, Corn, lying in the fields may be kept from erosion by Animals,
if it be steeped in Oil lees, as also Whetstones, Shoes, Brazen-vessels from
rust, all Woodden-houshold-stuff, Potters-vessels and the like. The same Cato
also says,

That Myrtle branches may be preserved with their Berries on, in Lees of Oil.
Bind these or any of the like Nature into bundles, put them into a vessel of
Oyl-lees, so that the Oil cover them, then cover the vessel. Didymus says,

That roses may be kept in Oyl-lees
fresh and vigorous, if they be covered over with this liquor.

If you would preserve Figtree-branches with their fruits in Oyl-lees,
bundle them up with their leaves and all, and put them in a vessel of
Oyl-lees, as we said of Myrtle; but if you would keep dry Figs from corruption,
lay them up in a Potters vessel wet with Lees of Oil decocted.

Olives may be preserved in Oil,
for when they have lost their color they may be gathered with their stalks
preserved in Oil, and a year after they will represent their green color; and
if you besprinkle them with common salt they will pass for new ones.

CHAP. XIII.
How Apples may belong conserved in Sawdust with leafs and Chaff or straw.
THe Ancients have invented many Trees, whose fruits may be long preserved in
their own saw dust because of its dryness. Now every fruit is best kept in its
own leaves dust, and the like, as we have said of Olives which are best kept in
Oil, Grapes in wine, etc.

Orenges may be kept in Cedar-dust.
As Palladius asserts, who avers that many have experienced it, in the like
manner*

Quinces may be long kept in dust,
because as Democritus avers the dryness of the dust preserves them from
putrefaction, they may be also kept long in Wool, fine Tow, or the like in
Chests.

The fruits of the Fir Tree may be long kept in dust.
Many diffuse the saw-dust of the Poplar, or Fir Tree, amongst their fruits for
their preservation. Apuleius says, You may lay them involved in fine Tow into
a vimineous basket, and they will keep.

Pomegranates may be kept from putrefaction in Oak-dust.
Columella would have the dust first steeped in vinegar, and then they laid in
it. Mago would have us first strew a new potters vessel with the dust, then lay
in the apples, then strew another layer of dust, and another of apples, till
the vessel be full, which we must shut and dawb close up. Beritius would have
the dust first infused in vinegar.

Grapes may be kept in dust.
Some keep green Grapes in dry poplar, or firre-dust. Didymus would have them
reposed in boxes overlaid with pitch, in the dry dust of the pitch or black
poplar-tree. some preserve fruits in chaff, which by its innate frigidity,
either keeps the frosty rigor unmelted, or by its genuine dryness keeps all
things from putritude; or by being void of all qualities keeps fruits in their
proper quality. And first

Orenges may be kept in Chaff,
As Palladius avers, or in small straw. And the same says, That

Quinces may be preserved in Chaff.
As also in small straw, as Pliny attests, who asserts also, That

Apples may be kept in Chaff,
or straw, they being laid upon and in it. Palladius says, That

Pears will keep long in Chaff, and Medlars also,
if they be gathered on a clear day, half covered with chaff, and not again
touched Palladius says, That

Pomegranates may be kept in Chaff,
if they be not moved, or touched after their reposure.

Grapes may be kept in Chaff.
The clusters should be severally laid along the pavement, so that they touch
not each other, with lupin-straw under them if possible, for it is dryer and
hardest, and an enemy to Mice; but if not then Bean-straw, or such pulse: but
if none of these, then dry hay cut small. Palladius says, That

Nuts will keep in straw,
if Almonds cannot be easily excoriated, cover them with chaff and straw, and
you may effect it. Sotion avers, That

Onyons may be kept from putrefaction in Barley-straw.
First put them into hot-water, dry them in the Sun, that done, lay them so in
straw that they touch not each other. Palladius says, That

Chestnuts may be preserved
in small Barley-straw, or in their own leafs: As also

Quinces in Fig Leaves.
Democritus would have them involved in leaves, and dawbed up with clay.
Palladius says, Apples may be kept from putretude in fig leaves, who also
avers,

That Orenges may be preserved,
in their own leaves, if they be laid severally. He also says,

That Apples may be kept long in nut-leaves,
And Apuleius says, Their color, odor, and grace; will be hereby preserved,
and that best if they be laid in fresh, not falling leaves: As also

That pears may be kept well in wallnut-leaves.
Democritus says, The leaves must be dry, and the pears will be green at a
years end. Pliny says,

Figs may be kept in the leaves of Vervine without putretude.
Palladius would have them put in an Oven, and whilst hot imposed in their own
leaves and reconded in a pot. Columella would have dry Figs cast into a pitched
vessel with dry hay in it and upon them. We may also

Preserve Cherries in the leaves of Winter-savory,
if we first cast the leaves, then the Cherries into a vessel, and so by
course, or if we after the same manner lay Cherries in Reeds-leaves: thus also

May Jujubees be kept in their own leaves,
or else they may be cut of with their boughs and suspended. Thus also

May the Myrtle and its Berries be preserved,
either in a close vessel, or in Lees of Oil. Thus also may

Quince-pears be long kept in their own leaves, and Nuts in their leaves, but
the leaves must be dry, Wheat may be kept in herbs.
Tarentinus would have it imposed upon dry Wormwood and Semper-vive; but dry
Quince leaves and small sand are better, which must be laid in layers among
the Grain. It is best to cover the flore with Coniza, add after ten measures of
Grain, to lay another layer of Coniza till all be deposed; for thus the whole
will not be only free from putretude for many years, but keep its due weight.

Barley may be kept safe in dry Bay Leaves,
Dry Grass with Mint mixed with Bran, preserve Barley special well. Some bray
cummin and salt together, and make them into dry Masses for the preservation of
Barley.

CHAP. XIV.
How fruits may be mixed with many things for their better preservation.
ANd now that we may not further protract our speech, we shall from ancient
Examples show how fruits by immersion into several things, may be long kept
from putretude: and first

Orenges in Barley putrefie not,
But if you lay them on hot Barley-bread, they putrefie quickly. Palladius
says,

That Quinces laid in Millet-seed, endure long,
for he thinks that Millet-seed corrupts not in many years, and so what is
reposed in it cannot speedily putrefie. Democritus says, Barley is better,
being dry; but always provided that they be not laid near tender and fugacious
fruits, for they will vitiate them by their acid sapour, and putrefie grapes if
they be near them.

Apples may be also kept in the same seed,
As Pliny is of mind. But Apuleius says a heap of Barley is better. But you
must always mind to repose each kind in its proper continent and place, because
if diverse kinds be occluded together, they vitiate sooner: wherefore the wine
that is expressed out of several kinds of grapes, is not so firm as the simple
and sincere.

Pears will keep amongst corn,
For as Palladius says, The Siccity thereof is notably preservative.

Mushrooms may be kept in Millet-seed.
The Vesuvians also keep them in dry sand, till new ones come.

Pomegranates may be kept lay in Wheat,
if they be first dipped into hot waters, then reconded in Wheat, till they
become rugous. Varro and Cat^ would have them put in a heap of sand for
preservation. Dydimus says,

That Grapes may be kept well and long,
if they be suspended in a Garner, for the dust that rises up of the corn when
moved, causes long duration in grapes.

How Corn may be long preserved,
Tarentinus says, The ashes of Oaks; others dry Beasts dung, strewed on corn
preserve it; but small sand sub^cted with Lees of Oil is better, for this
corrupts all vermin and keeps the corn more dense and solid. Perfrigerated
Argil is best of all, for it will keep corn thirty or forty years from
corruption, you may let it through a strait seive when you use it.

Pulse will keep long,
if they be sprinkled with vinegar mixed with the juice of Laser.

CHAP. XV.
How other things may be preserved from putrefaction.
WE shall here recite what other things, though vile, may be preserved, and so
make way for further inquisitions.

Quicksilver will preserve all things from putretude.
As fruits and the like, for we have often put fruits into a fit vessel, and
cast quicksilver upon them, and so preserved them long and well.

Flesh hanged on a Brasen-nail will keep long,
For Brass is so styptical and exiccative, that the flesh it passes throw
putrefies not.

How a dead Carcass may be preserved.
First let ^he side of the Body be opened, and the Carcass exenterated; let the
Skull be opened and the brains taken out, let the papills be subtracted, as
also the privities with the pith of the Backbone, then hang up the Body by the
feet for three or four hours, then wash it with a spung dipped in vinegar and
aqua vitae, then let it dry, which done; strew it with unquenched Lime, Alome
and Salt; let it hang so two days in the smoke of Myrrh, Bay, Rosemary, and
Cypress in a dry and open place. Then make a mixture of unquenched Lime five
pound, of burnt Alome one pound, good Salt two pound, of Aloes and Myrrh half
a pound, of Aloes-wood half a pound, of the Oil of Spicknard three onces, of
the powder of Rosemary-flowers five, of burnt Green-brass and Calcanthum two,
of the best Theriack four, of the dust of Cypress half a pound, of dried
Saffron one once, of the seeds of Coloquintida three and a half, of Antimony
beaten to powder one and an half, of the ashes of Wine-lees five and a half, of
Musk half a dragm, of Amber two. Let all be diligently brayed and mixed
together, and strewed upon the Body which must be for three days together
strongly rubbed, in an open and dry place. This also we admonish, that in fat
Bodies the fat of the Abdomen, Buttocks, Hips, Muscles of the Legs, thighs;
and all other places must be first abstracted.

Things may be also preserved by Balsom.
But seeing we can compass no true Balsom; or if there be any, it is exceeding
dear we are glad to make artificial Balsoms, as we shall show in due place.

CHAP. XVI.
How diverse sorts of Bread may be made.
WE have spoken of preserving fruits and other things: It remains to show how
we may use those we have kept. Amongst the rest, we shall teach you concerning
those things that are most necessary for daily use, as for many kinds of Bread,
Wine, Vinegar, and Oils; that not only the Householder may provide for his
family with small cost: but when provision is dear, he may provide for himself
with small pains in Mountains and Deserts, of all those things almost we have
spoken of. But we will begin with Bread, and see what our forefathers used in
case of necessity. I shall let pass those common things, as Spilt, and
Bean-corn, Amel-corn, Typh-wheat, Panick, Sesamum; being all well known. But
first

To make Bread of Wall-nuts,
Dioscorides says there is a kind of Thistle commonly found in the waters,
that only in Rivers brings forth a certain seed as big as a Ches-nut, with
three points, membranous, full of white pith, that tastes like Ches-nuts; they
call them water ches-nuts vulgarly, and the Inhabitants use them in meats, as
they do Ches-nuts. Pilgrims make Chapelets of them. The Thracians that dwell by
the River Strimon, fat their horses with this Thistle when it is green, and of
the same seed they make Bread to eat. Moreover, in places where they grow
amongst us, the Inhabitants when provision is dear make Bread of them; as at
Ferrara they do of Ches-^uts, and the Brutii roast them in the embers and eat
them for juncates. Almost in the same manner.

To make Bread of the Lote tree.
Theophrastus teaches it. The Lote-tree grows in plain ground, where the
Countries are overflowed with water. The fruit is like a Bean naturally, but
less and more slender. That which grows on the head comes forth promiscuously,
as Beans do many and very thick together: When the Sun sets, it closes, and
opens when he rises, and springs up above the water. The head is as great as a
Poppy-head, where it grows in Euphrates. The Egyptians lay those heads on heaps
to putrefie; and when the shells are putrefied, they wash them in a River, and
part the fruit from them, and dry it, and break it and make bread of it, and
eat it. Pliny, There is also bread made of the seed of it, like to Millet seed,
in Egypt by the Shepherds, and they knead it with water especially, or with
milk. They say that nothing is more wholesome then that bread, or lighter
whilst it is hot, but cold it is harder to digest and becomes heavy. It is
certain, that those who live upon that are never troubled with Dysenteries,
Tenasmus, or any diseases of the belly. And therefore it is one of their
remedies. For it was of old a custom;

To make bread of Dates,
which Pliny writes of, Dates that are very dry of Thebes and Arabia, that are
slender and very lean, with a continual vapor they are terrified, and are
covered rather with a Shel then a Skin. In Ethiopia it is crumbled (so great is
the draught) and like meal it is made into bread.

Bread of the Mulberry-figtree.
In Caria and Rhodes there is a great Fig of Egypt, or increase of the
Sycamore-tree, and in the neighboring places where there is little wheat, the
people for want of corn use it for bread, and for all bread corn. So great and
continual plenty is there of that Apple, and abundance of bread is made of it
pleasing to the stomach; but it affords but little nutriment, and we might make
the same if we would. We find it in Writers of husbandry,

How we may make bread without leaven,
Out of Didymus some add Nitre, for Nitre makes bread more crumbly, as it does
flesh also. Some the day before they make their bread, cast Grapes into the
water, and the next day when they will make their bread they take them away,
for they swim above the water, and they press them out, and use the moisture
pressed forth for leaven, and so they make their bread more pleasing. If you
would have leaven last you all the year, when the new wine has boiled in the
vessels, Skim off the froth that boils on the top, and mingle with it
Millet-meal, and work it well together, and make morsels of it, which dry in
the Sun, and lay up in a moist place; and you may take a sufficient quantity
and use it for leaven.

CHAP. XVII.
Diverse sorts of Bread made of Roots and fruits.
NOw we shall proceed to other kinds of bread, found out in our days, that are
no small profit to us when corn is dear.

How to make bread of the Roots of Cuckow-pint,
the root of Wake-Robin, when it is not too acrimonious is eaten and desired in
meats. Dioscorides says, The decoction was drank, as not being over sharp.
Galen, That it was eaten as Rape-roots, and in some Countries it grows more
corroding. To prepare it rightly, pour out the water of the first boiling, and
presently cast it into other hot water. In Cyrene those Roots are otherwise
then amongst us, for there it is no Physical root, and is not acrimonious at
all, so that it is more profitable then a Rape-root. Also our forefathers, when
Corn was dear used this Root in meats with great profit. Caesar de bello
civili, Also there is a kind of Root, found by them that were with Valerius,
which is called Chara, which mingled with milk releived a Soldier that was
hungry, and it was made up like to bread. There was great plenty of this Root,
and of it bread was made, when those of Pompey his side objected to our
Soldiers that they wanted food, they would commonly throw these at them, that
they might deceive their expectation. And a little after the Army used this and
were very healthful. And in Dioscorides in the false names of simples,
Cuckow-pint was of old called Chara, with us it is so acrimonious that we
scarce can endure to touch it with our tongues. But I shall open the reason how
excellent bread may be made of it, and if I may say so, better then
Wheat-bread. The great Roots are made clean, and they are cut into small thin
plates, for the thinner they are cut, the sooner will they become pleasant, and
they must boil in vessels of hot water, until you perceive the water grow sharp
and the Roots somewhat sweet; pour out the former water, and pour in fresh,
then boil them again, till the water become sweet, and the root when it is
cheweded has no acrimony left. Then take them out of the water, and put them
upon linen cloths, extended and hanging up until they be dry, then grind them
in handmils and the meal will be exceeding white, which by it self a with a
third part of wheat-meal added to it, will make most pure bread and well
rasted: There are other ways to make it sooner; when you have obtained this
art, you will be exceeding glad I am very certain of it. For with great pleasure

Bread of Asphodils is eaten.
This is so fruitful of roundheads with us, that no Plant has more, for
oftimes 80 heads will be heaped together. Moreover, Mountains and Sea-shores
are full of them, that it may be truly thought to be made for man's meat. Pliny,
The Daffodil is eaten with the seed and head terrified. But this roasted in the
embers as Hesiod affirms, is eaten with oil also braied with figs, it is eaten
with great pleasure. These Roundheads are like to Navews of moderate bigness.
So says Galen also. But with us they are so unpleasant, and acrimonious in
taste, that a man cannot eat them; and Sowes digging them up with their snowts,
will hardly feed on them, no not when we want corn can we eat this in our
greatest hunger, it was the poor fair of frugal antiquity. But by boiling, the
sharpness of it becomes more mild, and the heat of it more tolerable, as we
said of Cuckow-pint. It will be sufficient to satisfy a man's hunger, as of old
it was used: As Pliny says, We have made most wholesome bread of these mingled
with meal, especially for men wasted and in consumptions, also

Bread is made of Rape-roots, Turnips, and Skirworts.
For of those boiled and cooked, first cleansed from all excrements, a most
commendable bread may be made, as I have tried: But meal must be mingled with
them to a third part, or else half as much of one, and the other as we shall
show a little after. And not to be tedious, the same way-bread to eat, may be
made of all Navews, Roots, or Bulbous-heads. Also there is made

Excellent bread of Gourds,
For Gourds may be had very cheap, and they make savoury bread with meal, and
so the bread is greater, for this is the greatest of all fruits; for with a
very little meal in time of Famine we may feed many men, and not only use it
for need, but for dainties also: for seasoned with Sugar, and prepared for men's
pallats, and to quench feverish heats, they are carried about every where to
be sold. The way to make them up is this, Take great round Gourds, and fully
ripe, and cut into many pieces the dry skin, and the pith must be taken from
them with a knife; put them into a kettle of boiling water, and boil them, for
by long boiling the grassy greenness, and the rank smell and loathsome taste are
taken away, and they will smell better and taste, and nourish better, and will
last as long as bread. Being now brought to the form of an ointment, press it
through a linen strainer with your hands, that if any parts of it be not well
boiled or any woddy pieces be there, they may be kept back by the narrowness of
the strainer. To this Mass, add a third part of meal, and make them into bread
together, which will be pleasant to eat daily, I will not have you to eat your
fill of it, but if you eat it moderately it will profit much. When it is new it
is excellent, but stale, it is not so sightly nor dainty. I have showed you the
way how you must use such things of superfluous moisture, now do you learn
wisely to do it.

CHAP. XVIII.
Diverse ways to make bread of all sorts of Corn and Pulse.
Anciently they made Bread of diverse kinds of Corn and Pulse, it would be
needless to repeat them, for you may find them in the Books of the Ancients,
and there can be no error in making them. In Campania very sweet bread is made
of Millet: Also the people of Sarmatia are chiefly fed with this bread, and
with the raw meal tempered with Mares-milk, or blood drawn out of the veins of
their legs. The Ethiopians know no other Corn then Millet and Barley. Some
parts of France use Panick, but chiefly Aquitane: But Italy about Po, add
Beans to it, without which they make nothing. The people of Pontus prefer no
meat before Panick. Panick meal now adays is neglected by us and out of use,
for it is dry and of small nourishment; of Millet bread and cakes are made, but
they are heavy and hard of digestion and clammy to eat. Unless they be eaten
presently when they are newly baked, or not, else they become heavy and compact
together. Of the Indian Mais, heavy bread is made and not pleasant at all, very
dry and earthly next to Millet: like to this is bread called Exsergo, that is
also void of nutrimental juice. There was also of old bread called Ornidos,
made of a certain seed of Ethiopia, so like Sesamum that it is hard to know
them asunder. Also

Bread is made of Lupins,
The best kind was known also to the Ancients; For Didymus teaches how Lupins
will grow sweet, being three days infused in River or Seawater, and when they
grow mild they must be dried and laid aside, and then the meal of them mingled
with Barley-meal or Wheat-meal is fit to make bread. But we make it thus, First
the Lupins are ground in mills, and are made into flower: fifty pound of these
are put into a wooden vessel, and fair water is cast upon them, that it may
swim four fingers breadth above them; and it must be often stirred with a
wooden stick, then let it settle till the water grow clear, and the meal sink
down, then strain the water well, that no meal be lost; and pour on water the
second time, and stir it as before; do so the third time till the meal and
water be come sweet, which will be done in one day if the water be often
changed. As that is done, put the meal into a linen cloth laid abroad, that
the meal may be separated with a wooden slice, and the water may run away
through the cloth, and the meal may dry the better upon the cloth. In the mean
time boil two pound of Rice, and being boiled mingle them with the Lupins,
divide the whole into two parts, and mingle one with the leaven and a hundred
pound of wheat-meal, and make bread of it; let the other be set by with the
leven till the next day, which being mingled again with wheat-meal, will make
excellent bread, and will not taste of Lupins. But you must use all diligence
in the making of it, for if you make it not of the best meal, the bread will be
naught, wherefore the work lies in the right preparation of it: For the worse
Corn or Pulse you make it of, the more Corn must be taken to prepare it. After
this manner it may be made of Tares and Vetches, and the favor of them is
dulcified with water and mingling meal with them. Bread is made also of Peason,
Chiches, Tarses, Lentils, Beans, and chiefly of Acorns. But it is not
unprofitable to make

Bread of Herbs,
If a man cut the Herb Clot-bur small and grind it in a mill to very fine
powder, and add as much or a third part of wheat-meal to it, it will make good
bread, that may be eaten when there is a famine; and I have heard that the poor
eat it in some places, and it hurts them not, and that some in a siege have
lived a month with such bread.

CHAP. XIX.
How bread may be increased in weight.
NOw I shall show how bread may be augmented; a thing very strange and
profitable, not only to help in time of need, but it is good for the
Householder, for with little meal he may nourish many, and fill their bellies;
and that three ways: For there be things that added to Corn, will increase the
substance of the bread; other things are dry, and of a clammy nature, that will
thicken the Element by refraction into the substance of bread. The last way is
the life of the heat of it, whereby it waxes and grows as if it were alive. As
much as is lost by the bran taken from it, is added to it, by casting water on
it when it is ground, and in the other workmanship. Moreover, the baking of
bread takes away a tenth part and a half of the weight. Let us see how our
Ancestors did by some Earth or

Chalk make their bread more weighty and white.
Pliny teaches that Spelt will grow white by a kind of chalk, thus. Let this
Spelt be of Beer-corn, which he called a seed; the corns of it are bruised in a
wooden mortar, for it will be spoiled and consumed by the hardness of a stone:
the best as it is well known, is made by those that are condemned to bray in
morters for their punishment. For the best there is an iron box, the hulls
being then beaten off; again, with the same instruments the marrow of it being
made bare, is broken; so are there made three kinds of this Spelt-meal, the
finest, the second sort, and the third that is the coursest. But yet they are
not white, which makes them excellent, yet now are these preserved at
Alexandria; after this, (it is very strange) chalk is mingled with them, that
passes both into the body and the color of them, and makes them tender. You
shall find this between Puteoli and Naples, on the Hill called Leucogaeum. And
there is extant a decree of Divus Augustus, wherein he commanded to pay them at
Naples yearly 20000 Sestertia out of his Treasury, drawing his Colony to Capua,
and he assigns the cause, by reason that they of Campania affirmed that
Spelt-meal could not be made without that stone.

Rice makes bread weigh.
It neither corrupts the taste or goodness of the bread, but increases both,
and it brings it closer by one eighth part, for by a continual turning it, it
will retains volatile meal; and from hence you shall see it coagulate, and
when it is coagulated put leaven to it; but it must first grow cold, lest the
force of the coagulation should be hindered. To bind this fugitive servant
fast, add so much Wheat-meal as may fasten it well together, till you see
there is enough, and you shall find it increased to the weight desired. By this
example

You may increase the weight of bread with Millet.
This is easily done, for it is dry, ctumbles, and will not hang together, and
is weak; let it be bruised with a wooden pestle, and sifted through a sieve
till the hulls be parted, as we see it done at Rome and at Florence; by this we
hold it, that it fly not, away by its hungry dryness; then we mingle it with
Wheat, and the air reflects back, and it will be converted into the substance
of Alica, that you will think nothing taken from the taste, color or goodness,
nor yet added to it. Nor will it be unpleasant to see

Bread weigh more by adding milk to it.
This is an experiment of great profit and praiseworthy; for it adds weight
and whiteness to bread, and makes it short, being put in instead of water
whilst it is hot. I never tasted any thing more pleasant or tender. I thought
fit to add this for the singular virtue of it, adding also such things as we
knew to be necessary for this art. But truly that is admirable; by the same

Wheat to increase the weight of Wheat.
This is done without any addition, for if we would, we could do this with many
and almost infinite things, with any small addition; but in this a leaven is
drawn forth of the very substance of the Wheat, which being strained, cleansed
and added to the same again, either by increasing the substance of it, or by
retracting the air into its substance, it will be much augmented: giving you
this warning beforehand, that the augmenting heat must not be diminished, but
preserved and increased, that all may depend on this. But an admirable work of
Nature, and full of wonder it is, how it may be that

Wheat may increase out of it self.
I cannot discover this, how it came into my mind, lest it should be made
public to every common fellow, and ignorant Animal. Yet not to conceal it from
ingenious men, I shall hide it from these, and open it to those. That our
forefathers knew it not is clear, because there is no such thing mentioned in
all their works of making bread. The whole business consists in this, that the
Wheatmeal may be managed with the life of its heat, which is the offspring of
celestial fire. By nature it is of such renuity, that being raised with its
heat, it will make the lump swell so much, that it will come up to the top of
the vessel; the next day cast it into a Hutch, and add more meal to it, which
again being raised by its heat, and coming back again by the same, and meeting
with the lump, as flowing back again, it joins into the refracted Elements, and
so into clotters of meal. Do this thrice or four times, and so you may increase
it continually, and this must be done in a stove, that the dewy spirit may be
fostered. I thought good to tell you also before, that you must not prick the
lump, lest the generative blast should breath forth, and fly into the air, for
so you will lose your labor; and there must not want presently a dewy vapor,
which being carried into the air, and made to drop, may moisten the lump, so
you will rejoice at the wonderful increase: but you must be cunning in the
manual application. Pray do not destroy by your negligence, what was invented
by the careful ingenuity of those that tried it.

CHAP. XX.
How we may long endure hunger and thirst.
THe Ancients had some compositions to drive away hunger and thirst, and they
were very necessary both in times of Famine, and in wars. Pliny says, some
things being but tasted, will abate hunger and thirst, and preserve our forces,
as Butter, Licoris, Hippace; and elsewhere, Scythia first produced that root
which is called Scythia, and about Baeotia it grows very sweet. And another,
that is excellent against Convulsions, also it is a high commendation of it,
that such as have it in their mouths fell nor hunger nor thirst; Hippace
amongst them does the same, which effects the same in horses also. And they
report that with these two herbs the Scythians will fast twelve days, and live
without drink also; all which he translated out of Theophrastus first book. The
Scythian Hippace is sweet also, and some call it Dulcis; it grows by Maeotis.
Amongst other properties, it quenches thirst also, if it be held in the mouth.
For which cause both with both with that, and with the other called equestris,
men say, the Scythians will endure hunger and thirst twelve days. Hence it
appears that Pliny translated all this out of Theophrastus. But I think he
erred, for Hippace signifies Cheese made of Mares milk, and is no herb.
Theodorus translated it Equestrem, as it were a root like Licoris, fit to drive
away hunger and thirst. For Hippocrates says, the Scythian shepherds eat
Hippace, but that is Mares Cheese: and elsewhere, The Scythians pour Mares milk
into hollow vessels of wood and shake it, and that froths with churming, and
the fat of it they call butter, which swims on the top, that which is heavy
sinks to the bottom, they separate this and dry it, when it is dry, they call
it Hippace: the reason is, because Mares milk nourishes exceedingly, and is as
good as Cows milk. Dioscorides, The west Indians use another composition also

To endure hunger and thirst.
Of the herb called Tobacco, namely of the juice thereof, and the ashes of
Cockle shells they make little balls and dry them in the shade, and as they
travel for three or four days they will hold one of them between their under
lip and their teeth, and this they suck continually, and swallow down what they
suck, and so all the day they feel neither hunger, thirst, nor weariness; but
we will teach another composition, which Heron mentions, and it was called

The Epimenidian composition, to endure hunger and thirst.
For it was a medicament that nourished much, and abated thirst, and this was
the food the besiegers of Cities and the besieged also lived on. It was called
the Epimenidian composition, from the Sea-onion called Epimendium, that is one
of the ingredients of that composition; it was made thus, The squil was boiled
and washed with water, and dried, and then cut into very small pieces, then
mingle sesamum a fifth part, poppy a fifteenth part, make all these up with
honey, as the best to make up the mass, to mitigate it: divide the whole, as
into great Olives, and take one of these about two of the clock, another about
ten; and they felt no hurt by hunger, that used it. There is another
composition of the same, that has of Athenian sesamum half a Sextarius, of
honey a half part, of oil a Cotyle, and a Chaenice of sweet Almonds mundified:
the sesamum and Almonds must be dried, and ground, and winowed, then the squil
must have the outsides taken off, and the roots and leaves must be cut into
small pieces, and put into a mortar and bruised, till they be well mollified,
then you must make up the squils with the like quantity of honey and of oil,
and put all into a pot, and set them in cold, and stir them well with a wooden
ladle, till they be well mingled, when the lump is firm, it is good to cut it
into little morsels, and he that eats one in the morning, another at night,
has meat enough. This medicament is good for an Army, for it is sweet, and so
fills a man and quenches thirst: we had this in an old Scholiast, a Manuscript
upon the book of Heron, in the Vatican Library. I saw the same composition in
Philo, in his fifth book of wars, where he describes such like other things.

CHAP. XXI.
Of what fruits wines may be made.
NOw we shall speak of fruits, of which wines may be made. And first our
Ancestors did do thus, but they had two ways; for some were for Physics,
which are found plentifully in Physic books: others again were for ordinary
use, and they were diverse, and almost infinite, according as the differences of
places and Nations are: for what is granted to one is denied to another. First

Wine of Dates.
Pliny says that in the East they make wine of Dates, and he reckons up fifty
kinds of Dates, and as many different wines from them; Cariotae are the chief,
full of juice, of which are made the principal wines in the East, they are
naught for the head, and thence they have their name. The best are found in
Judaea, chiefly about Jericho, yet those of Archelaiis are well esteemed, and
of Phaselis, and of Libias, valleys of the same Country. The chiefest property
they have is this, they are full of a white fat juice, and very sweet, tasting
like wine with honey. The wine will make one drunk, and the fruit also eaten
largely. Dioscorides teaches thus; Put ripe Dates called Chydeae, into a
pitcher with a hole at bottom, and stopped with a pitched reed; shut the hole
with linen, and to forty Sextarii pour on three gallons of water. If you
would not have it so sweet, five gallons will be sufficient to pour on; after
ten days take away the reed with the linen, take the thick sweet wine and set
it up. Also wine is made

Of Figs.
Sotion relates it thus. Some make wine of green figs, filling half the vessel
with them, and the other half to the brim they fill with fair water, and they
try still by tasting; for when it tastes like wine, they strain it and use it.
It is made, faith Dioscorides, of ripe figs, and it is called Catorchites or
Sycites, Chelidonian or Phaenician figs called Caricae, are steeped in a pot
with a hole in the bottom with a pitched reed, and the hole stopped with flax: to
forty Sextarii you must pour on three gallons of water, and if you will not
have the wine so sweet, pour on five gallons and it will do. After ten days
the liquor is taken, and again the third time also the same measure of water
wherein the figs were infused, is poured on; and in the like manner, after four
or five days it is drawn off. Some to six Amphorae thereof add ten Sextarii
of salt, that it may not early corrupt: others put Fennel and Thyme in the
bottom, and the Caricae on the top, and so in order, till the vessel be full:
also men make

Wine of Pears,
which from the Greek word for Pears is called Apyres, and from the Latin Piery
Palladius says it was thus. They are bruised and put in a very course bag of
Canvas, and pressed with weights, or in a Press. It lasts in the Winter, but in
Summer comes it sowrer. Dioscorides will not have the Pears too ripe; the same
way is made

Wine of Pomegranates.
Sotion makes wine of the grains of the Pomegranate, taking away what is in the
middle of the grains. Palladius put the ripe grains well purged into a Date
pail, and press them out with a scrue press, then boil them gently to half;
when it is cold, put it into vessels that are pitched or plaistered with
Gipsum. Some do not boil the juice, but to every Sextarius they mingle one
pound of honey, and put all in the said vessels and keep it. There is made

Wine of the Lote-tree fruit.
There is a kind of Lote without any inward kernel, which is as hard as a bone
in the other kind: wine is pressed also out of it like Mead, that will not last
above ten days; Nepos says the same from Pliny, Athenaus from Polybius. Wine
is made of the Lote steeped in water and bruised, very pleasant to the taste as
the best Mead is; it is drunk pure without water also, but it will not last
above ten days, wherefore they make but little for use to last only so long.
Vinegar is made also of it. And yet not much or good enough, yet there is made

Wine of Myrtles berries and Cornels,
Out of Sotion, who of the berries of Myrtles and Cornels when they are fresh,
pounded and pressed our, made wine. Now I shall show how we may make

Wine of Corn.
Drink is made of Corn. Dioscorides teaches to make Beer of Barley, also a
drink is made of Barley called Curmi, they use that drink oft-times for wine;
the like drinks are wont to be made of Wheat. In Hiberia toward the west and in
Britany; whence Pliny, of Corn drink is made: Beer in Egypt, called Zythum, in
Spain Caelia and Ceria, Beer in France and other Provinces. In Aristotle's book
of drunkenness, those that drink wine made of Barley till they be drunk fall
upon their backs, they call that wine (...), but those that are drunk with any
other kind of drinks fall any way, on the right, or left hand, forward or
backward, but those that drink Pinum, fall only upon their backs. Wine made of
Barley they call Brytum. Sophocles in Triptolemo, and Aeschylus in Lycurgo. But
Hellanicus says, that Brytum is made in Farms out of roots. Hecateus says,
that the Egyptians grind Barley to make drink, and that the Macedonians drink
Brytum made of Barley, and Parabia made of Millet, and Rice, says Athenaeus.
Also wine is made of Rice; for says Aelianus, when an Elephant fights in war,
they give him not only wine of grapes, but of Rice also. Now the same drink is
made in the Northern Climates of Corn, and they call it Biera, but they put
hops to it, for it cannot be made without; Barley and Wheat are infused in the
decoction of it. We see that of Barley and Wheat steeped in water a drink is
made that tastes like wine, and of them I have made the best aqua vitae. But
these drinks of old were Physical, rather then to use as wine. But I shall show
how some drinks that are so like wine in taste, that you would think they were
wine indeed. And first

Wine of Honey.
To nine vessels of water put eighteen pounds of Honey, into brass Caldrons
covered with Tin, and let them boil a long time, stirring all with wooden
ladles, and wiping away the froth that rises with little brushes, pour it out,
and put it into a wine vessel, then take two pounds of red wine Tartar, and
boil them in water till they be dissolved, to which add an eighth part of a
vessel of vinegar, that the loathsome and unpleasing taste of the sweetness of
Honey may be lost, let these be mingled; then pour on two vessels of the best
wine, then let it settle; after some days strain it through a hair-cloth
strainer, or one of cloth to cleanse it from the filth and excrements. A liquor
will run from this that will serve for sparing, and to abate charge in a
family, and it is good to drink in health and sickness: cover it close, and
drink it. I shall show you another way to make

Wine of Raisins.
Pour into a brass Caldron seven vessels of water, put in two pounds of
Raisins, let them boil till they be wasted in the water, and the water be sweet
as Mead; if your kettle be too small, do it at several times: then take your
kettle from the fire, and when the liquor grows cold, strain it gently forth;
put up the strained liquor in a wine vessel, and pour into it a measure of the
sharpest red wine vinegar to abate the sweetness of the Raisins, then add nine
pound of Tartar finely powdered unto it, and pouring on a fourth part of the
best wine, stop the vessel close when it is full, after one week use it. Another

Wine of Quinces.
Put into brass Caldrons glazed with Tin a vessel of new wine, and put thereto
about fifty wild Quinces, namely such as are full of streeks and wrinkled, take
out their kernels, cut the Quinces in pieces like as you do Rape Roots, boil
all at a gentle fire; when they have boild a while, take them off, and let them
cool, pound the Quinces in a mortar with a wooden pestle, press them out with a
press, put the juice pressed forth of them the new wine, and set it up in a
glazed earthen vessel for a whole year. When wine is scarce and you have
occasion to use this, put unto a vessel four parts of water, two of new wine,
and one fourth part of the aforesaid mixture, cover the vessel and let it boil,
and when it is clear; use it. Of all these an amphora of vinegar, a pound of
honey, as much Tartar in powder, let them boil a while in a pot glazed with
Nitre, and mingle them, and for every vessel of water pour on an Amphora of
wine, and cover all, and after twenty days use it: or take honey one pound, as
much red wine Tartar, half a pound of Raisins, two Amphoras of Vinegar, let
them boil in a pot, add wine also to them, and it will be for drink. I shall
add the Northern drink

Wine called Metheglin.
The drink in Pannonia, Poland and England is more pleasant and wholesome then
many wines are; it is made of twenty pound of good honey, and of water one
hundred and twenty pound, skimming it till all comes to eighty pound, which
being cold and tunned up into a wine vessel, put in leaven of bread six ounces,
or as much as will serve to make it work, and purify it self, and withal put
into a bag, that hangs and may be put into the liquor, and not touch the
bottom, of Cinnamon, granes of Paradise, Pepper, Ginger, Cloves two drams, one
hand full of Elder flowers: let them stand in a wine Cellar all the Winter, in
Summer set them forty days in the Sun, till they taste like wine, and the
unpleasant taste of the honey be gone. But it will be more pleasant if you add
a third part of wine.

CHAP. XXII.
How vinegar may be made diverse ways, and of what.
AFter wine it follows to speak of vinegar: First, how our forefathers made it;
then how of late years, that it may be made extreme sour, which is not only
good for a family, but is necessary for many Arts. Also there are some
Countries where wine, and so vinegar is scarce. Therefore in those places
diverse men have used their wits to make it: wherefore to begin, we say that

Vinegar may be made of the Fig Tree.
Out of Columella; A green fig must be taken very betimes, and also if it have
rained, and the figs fall to the earth beaten down with showers, gather those
figs and put them up in Hogs-heads or Amphora, and let them ferment there; then
when it grows sharp, and has sent out some liquor, what vinegar there is
strain it out diligently, and pour it into a sweet pitched vessel. This yields
the best sharp vinegar, and it will never grow musty or hoary, if it be not set
in too moist a place. Some to make more quantity, mingle water with the figs,
and then they add to them the ripest new figs, and they ^et them consume in
that liquor, until it taste sharp enough like vinegar, then they strain all
through rushy baskets, or withie bags; and they boil this vinegar till they
have taken off all the froth, and filth from it. Then they add some terrefied
salt, and that hinders worms and other vermin to breed in it. Cassianus makes
it thus: Put into a vessel old figs, terresied Barley, and the internal parts
of Citrons. Stir it often and diligently, and when they are putrified and
soaked, strain them out, and use them. Apuleius, They make vinegar of figs, wet
upon the Trees, and cast into water to putrify, Dioscorides, The liquor of
figs steeped grows sharp as vinegar, and is used for it. There is made also

Vinegar of Dates.
To Date wine we speak of, some add water, and receive it again; and they do
this three, four, five or six times, and at last it grows sour. From the same,
Pliny teaches to make

Vinegar of honey.
You must wash your honey vessels, or hives in water, with this decoction is
made the most wholesome vinegar. Palladius teaches the way to make

Vinegar of Pears.
wild Pears are such as are sharp and ripe, are kept three days in a heap,
then they are put into a vessel, and fountain or river water is put to them,
the vessel is left covered thirty days, then as much vinegar as is taken out
for use, so much water is put in to repair it. Cassianus makes

Vinegar of Peaches.
Put soft delicate Peaches into a vessel, and add parched Barley to them, let
them putrify for one day, then strain them out, and use it. We may from
Cassianus make

Vinegar without wine.
If you boil Gypsum and seawater, and then mingle it with River water, and use
it being strained. But if you will

Turn wine into vinegar, and contrarily vinegar into wine,
Cassianus has it. He puts Beet roots bruised into wine, it will be vinegar
when three hours are over. But if he would restore it again as it was, he puts
in Cabbage roots. So also

To make the same.
We may do it another way and quickly: Cast into wine, Salt, Pepper and sour
leaven, mingle them and they will soon make it vinegar. But to do it more
quickly, quench in it often a red hot brick or piece of steel; also provide for
that unripe Medlars, Cornels, Mulberries and Plums. But Sotion shows to make

Sharp vinegar of new wine.
Dry the mother of wine of grapes at the Sun, and put them into new wine,
adding a few sour grapes thereto and it will make sharp vinegar that will be
for use after seven days; or put in pellitory of Spain and it will be sharp.
Moreover, if you boil a fourth or fifth part of vinegar at the fire, and put
that to the rest, and set all eight days in the Sun, you shall have most sharp
and pleasant wine. The roots of old grass, and Raisins, and the leaves of a
wild Pear Tree bruised, and the root of the bramble, and whey of milk, burnt
Acorns, Prunes roasted, and the decoctions of Chiches, and pot-sheards red hot,
all of these put severally into vinegar, will make it tart. Apuleius teaches

To double the quantity of vinegar.
Take a good measure of Vinegar, about a Metreta, and to that add one Metreta
of Seawater boiled to half, mingle them and set them aside in a vessel. Some
steep Barley, and strain it, and of that juice they mingle one Metreta, and
they stir them together, and they cast in torrefied salt when it is yet hot, a
good quantity, then they cover the vessel, and let it stand eight days. But I
use to make it thus,

Vinegar of clusters of grapes pressed forth.
After the Vintage, we cast in the clusters when the wine is pressed forth into
a wooden vessel, and we pour upon them a quantity of water, and it will be
vinegar when a week is over. Moreover, we cut the tendrels from Vines, and
bruise them, and put water to them, and it will be vinegar. Also thus,

Ill wine is turned to vinegar.
When the bunches of grapes are pressed forth, lay them between two wooden
bowls, not very thick together, let them grow hot for four days; then pour on
them so much naughty wine as may cover them, let them alone 24 hours, then
strain them into another wooden bowl, and after so many hours, put them into
another bowl, and do so til it be turned into most sharp white vinegar; and if
you would make more of the same clusters, pour on upon them some sharp vinegar,
and let them alone till they be extreme sharp and sour, then take that out and
pour on ill wine, and do as you did. Lastly press those clusters out in a
press, and you shall recover as great quantity as of the wine that was spent.

CHAP. XXIII.
How the defects of wine may be managed and restored.
OUr forefathers found out many remedies to preserve wine, and in our days we
have taken no less pains. For wine is easily corrupted, and takes to it self
many strange qualities. Paxamus says, wine either grows sour or dead about
the Solstices, and when the seven stars set, or when the dog star causes heat,
and when it is extreme cold, or hot, or rainy, or windy, or when it thunders.
We shall show remedies for all these; First, we shall lay down out of
Africanus, the signs to know wines that will last, or will corrupt. When you
have put your wine into a vessel, after some time change the vessel, and look
well on the Lees, for thence shall you know what the wine is, proving it by
smelling to it, whether it corrupt, or weevils breed in it, these are signs it
putrifies. Others take wine out of the middle of the vessel, they heat it, and
when it is cold they taste of it, and they judge of the wine by the favor,
some by the smell of the cover; a strong taste is the best sign, a watery the
worst, sharpness of duration, weakness of corrupting. The signs must be taken
at the times to be feared, we mentioned. But to come to the remedies, we shall
show how

To mend weak wine.
The wine will be weak, when it begins to breath forth that force of heat; fot
when the soul of it is breathed forth, the wine grows immediately sour:
vinegar is the carcass of wine. Then we may presently prevent it by adding
aqua vitae to it, for by that it may put on a new soul: the measure will be the
fourth part of a pound for a vessel. Another remedy will be

That wine may not grow hot.
In the Summer Solstice wine grows hot by the hot weather, and is spoiled: then
put quicksilver into a glass-viol well stopped, and hang it in the middle of the
vessel, and the coldness of it will keep the wine from heating. The quantity is
two pound for great vessels; for when the air is hot, the external heat draws
forth the inward heat, and when that is gone, it is spoiled. We

That wine may not exhale
use this remedy. The vessel being full, we pour oil upon it, and cover it,
for oil keeps the spirits from evaporating, which I see is now used for all
liquors that they may not be perverted. Wines sometimes are troubled: But

To clear wines,
Fronto bids us do thus. Cast three whites of eggs into a large earthen dish
and beat them, that they may froth; put some white salt to them, that they may
be exceeding white, and pour them into a vessel full of wine, for salt and the
white of an egg will make all thick liquors clear, but as many Dolia or such
measures as there are in the vessel, so many whites of eggs must you have, to
be mingled again with so many ounces of salt, but you must stir the mixture
with a stick, and in four days it will grow clear. Also it is done

That wines may not corrupt.
I said that salt keeps all things from corrupting: wherefore for every Dolium,
powder one ounce of Allome, and put it into the wine vessel with the wine, for
it will keep it from corrupting. The same is done if you put in one ounce of
common salt, or half one, half the other: Also brimstone hinders putrefaction.
Wherefore if you shall add to eight ounces of Allome or of Salt, four ounces
of brimstone, you shall do well. The Ancients were wont to peserve wine, by
adding Salt or seawater to it, and it would continue along time. Columella
teaches thus, when the winds are quiet you must take water out of the deep
sea: when it is very calm, and boil it to thirds, adding to it, if you please,
some spices. There are many ordinary things, but we let them pass.

CHAP. XXIV.
How Oil may be made of diverse things.
IT is an excellent thing to show the diversity of ways to make Oil. That if
Olives should ever be scarce, yet we might know how to draw Oil from many kinds
of fruits and seeds. And some of these ways that came from the Ancients, yet
only the best and such as are our inventions. Wherefore to begin, We say that

Oil may be made of Ricinus, called Cicinum.
Dioscorides makes it thus. Let ripe Ricini as many as you please, wither in
the hot Sun, and be laid upon hurdles: let them be so long in the Sun, till the
outward shell break and fall off. Take the flesh of them and bruise it in a
mortar diligently, then put it into a Caldron glazed with Tin that is full of
water: put fire under and boil them, and when they have yielded their inbred
juice, take the vessel from the fire, and with a shell skim off the Oil on the
top, and keep it. But in Egypt where the custom of it is more common: for they
cleanse the Ricini and put them into a Mill, and being well grownd, they press
them in a press through a basket. Pliny says, They must be boiled in water,
and the Oil that swims on the top must be taken off. But in Egypt where there
is plenty of it, without fire, and water sprinkled with Salt, it is ill for to
eat, but good for Candles. But we collected them in September, for then is the
time to gather them, with it parts from a prickly cover and a coat that holds
the seed in it; it is easily cleansed in a hot Caldron: The weight of Oil is
half as much as the seed, but it must be twice knocked, and twice pressed.
Palladius shows how

Oil of Mastick is made,
gather many Grains of the Mastick-tree, and let them lie in a heap for a day
and a night: Then put a basket full of those Berries into any vessel, and
pouring hot water thereto, tread them and press them forth. Then from that
humor that runs forth of them, the Oil of Mastick that swims on the top is
poured off. But remember lest the cold might hold it there, to pour hot water
often on. For thus we see it made with us, and all the Country of Surrentum:
also, so is made

Oil of Turpentine,
as Damageron teaches. The fruit of Turpentine is grownd in a Mill, as the
Olives are, and is pressed out, and so it sends forth Oil. The kernels serve to
feed hogs and to burn. Likewise

Oil of Bays,
Boil Bay Berries in water, the shells yield a certain fat, it is forced out by
crushing them in the hands, then gather the Oil into horns. Palladius almost as
Dioscorides, in January boil many Bay Berries, that are ripe and full, in hot
water, and when they have boy'ld long, the watery oil that swims on the top that
comes from them, you shall gently pour off into vessels, driving it easily with
feathers. The Indians make as it is said

Oil of Sesamon.
It is made as we said before, it sends forth excellent Oil abundantly. There
is made

Oil of the Plane-Tree.
Pliny, For want sometimes they are forced to make Oil for candles, of the
Plane-tree berries soaked in water and salt, but it is very little as I proved.
Pliny says the Indians make

Oil of Ches-nuts,
which I think very difficult, for but a little will come from them, as you
shall find if you try. He said also, That Gallia Cisalpina made

Oil of Acorns of the Oak
to serve for lights; but we can make very little. Also the Ancients used to
make

Oil of Wallnuts,
that they pressed from the Wallnuts, unsavory and of a heavy taste: for if
there be any rottenness in the kernel, the whole manner is spoiled. Now Gallia
Cisalpina makes it for to eat, and for lights also. For lights, by parting the
naughty Nuts from the sound; but the best serves for to eat at second courses.
These therefore are to eat, and those for lights, they burn clear, and there is
nothing that yields more Oil. For it turns almost all to Oil, for one pound of
cleansed Nuts will yield almost ten ounces of Oil. Now follows

Oil of sweet Almonds.
Oil of sweet Almonds is best for food, and of bitter, for Physic, and of old
it was made with great diligence. Dioscorides shows the way how half a bushel
of bitter Nuts cleansed and dried, are pounded in a mortar with a wooden pestle
into lump^, then a sextarius of seething water is poured on, and when for half
an hour the moisture is drunk in, they are beaten more violently then before;
then is it pressed between boards, and what sticks to the fingers is collected
with shells. The Nuts being pressed again, a Hemina of water is sprinkled on
them, and when they have drank that up, they do as before; every bushel yields
an Hemina. With us it is commonly drawn out the same way. These are the Oils of
the Ancients. Now we shall proceed with our Oils: Next follows

Oil of small Nuts.
They yield abundance of sweet sented excellent Oil, which all may use also for
meats: one pound of the cleansed Nuts will yield eight ounces of Oil, which
former times were ignorant of.

Oil of Pistaches
serve for Meat and Physics. Out of

Pine kirnels Oil is made
They are culled, and the naughty ones serve for lights; but the Oil that comes
from the best, is for to eat, and for Physic; very much is extracted. I saw it
at Ravenna. But

Oil of Beech,
The best of all is pressed out in abundance, for meats and for lights. It
burns very clear, and tastes as sweet Almonds, and the whole Nut almost goes
into Oil, as the Wallnut does. The elder the Mast is, the more Oil it yields
and the Lees of the Oil is excellent to far Oxen and Hogs. They are soon
gathered, cleansed, bruised and pressed: We pressed also

Oil from the bastard Sycomore,
as they call it; for it is abundant in seed, and in winter the boughs of it
are seen loaded with seed only. In February we collected it and crumbled it,
the shell is broken into six or seven parts, the kernels are like a Pear, they
are bruised and heated in a pan, then put into a press, and they yield their
Oil: They make clear light in lamps, and the seed yields a fourth part of Oil.
There is drawn

Oil out of the Sanguine-Tree
for lights. About the middle of September the ripe berries are taken forth of
the clusters, let them dry a few days, bruise them, and let them boil in water
in a brass kettle for one hour, then put them into the press, you shall have
green colored Oil, about a seventh part of the seed. The Mountainous people
use it. There is pressed

Oil out of the Grapes or Raisins,
The Greeks called these Gigarta: Cisalpina Gallia makes oil of them, bruised,
heat, and pressed in a press, but it is very little fit for lights, because it
burns exceeding clear. There is much in Egypt

Oil of Radish-seed
made: they use it to season their meats, and boil it with them. But Cisalpina
Gallia presses Oil out of Radish-seed, and Rape-seed: Rapes are pulled up
only in Novemb^r, but they are covered with sand together with their leaves.
They are planten in March, that they may seed in May. For unless they be pulled
up, they freeze with winter cold. But there is another kind of Rape that is
sowed in July; it is weeded, it comes forth in the spring, in May it yields
seed: out of a quarter of a bushel of it, eighteen pounds of Oil are drawn; it
is good for lights, and for common people to eat. If you sow a whole Acre with
this seed, you shall have five load of seed, and of every load you may make two
hundred pounds of Oil: it is only plowed and weeded. Also

Oil is made of the seed of Cameline.
It is made for lights, but those of Lombardy make great plenty of a
golden-coloured Oil of a seed like to this, called Dradella. It has plaited
leaves as wild Rochet, which they sow amongst Pulse. The same may be said of
the seeds of Nettles, Mustard, Flax, Rice.

CHAP. XXV.
How a Householder may provide himself with many sorts of Thread.
NOw shall I speak of many sorts of Yarn, because this may much help the
Household, for the Houswife has always need thereof. Our Ancestors used Hemp
and Flax; for thus they made

Yarn of Flax:
yet there needs no example, the Thread is so common. I will speak of those
that follow, and of other inventions. Pliny. Flax is known to be ripe two ways,
when the seed smells, or looks yellow; then it is pulled up and bound in
handfuls, and dried in the Sun, letting it hang with the roots upwards for one
day: Then five of these bundles standing with their tops one against another,
that the seed may fall in the middle. Then after Wheat-harvest, the branches
are laid in the water that is warm with the Sun, they are kept down by some
weight and soaked there, and again, as before, turned up-side down they are
dried in the Sun. Then being dried, they are bruised on with a flax-hammer;
that which was next the rind is called hard, or the worst flax, and it is fit
for to make weiks for Candles, yet that is kemmed with hackes, till all the
membrans be pilled clean. The art of kembing and making of it, is, out of fifty
pound of Flax-bundles, to make fifteen pound of Flax. Then again it is polished
in Thread, it is often beat upon a hard stone with water, and when it is woven
it is bruised again with Beetles, and the more you beat it, the better it is.
Also there is made

Thread of Hemp,
Hemp is excellent for ropes. Hemp is plucked up after the Vintage, but it is
cleansed and pill'd with great labor. There are three sorts of it, that next
the rind is the worst, and that next the pith, the middlemost is the best,
which is called Mesa: Another

To make Thread of Broom,
It is broken and pulled from the Ides of May, until the Ides in June, this is
the time when it is ripe. When it is pulled, the bundles are set in heaps for
two days to take the wind; on the third day it is opened and spread in the Sun,
and is dried, and then again it is brought into the house in bundles.
Afterward it is well steeped in seawater, or other water where that is
wanting. Then being dried in the Sun again, it is watered* if we have presently
need of it, if it be wet with hot water in a vessel, it will be the shorter
way. But it must be heat to make it good, for the fresh nor seawater cannot
soften it enough. Ropes of Hemp are preferred when they are dry, but Broom is
preserved wet, to make good the dryness of the ground it grows on. The upper
part of Egypt toward Arabia, makes linen of Cotton. Asia makes Flax of Spanish
Broom, especially for Fishers nets to last long; the Shrub must be soaked for
ten days. And so every Country has its Thread made of diverse Plants and
Shrubs. We know that there is made

Thread of Nettles,
amongst the Northern people, and it is very fine and white: also there is made

Thread of Aloes in America,
it is hard, white, and most perfect. I shall describe it by their relation,
because the extreme parts are full of prickles, we strike them off that they
may not hinder us, and we cut the branches into long pieces long ways, that the
substance under the rind may be the better taken away; then two Poles of wood
are fastened in the earth, crossing one the other in the middle like a cross;
these are held fast with the left hand, to make them hold fast together, and
with the right the foresaid pieces or fillets are taken by one end and drawn
over the cross, that the inward part may part from the woody part, and the
Flax from the substance, and then they are kembed so often, till they become
white, pure, nervous, as Fiddle or Harp-strings, then are they washed, dried,
and laid up. In thirteen years after that it is planted, the leaves grow very
long even twenty foot, the stalk rises in the middle forty foot long. Then the
top is adorned with flowers and bears fruit: I saw this at Rome, and I never
remember that I saw any thing more beautiful. I shall now speak of Flax called
Asbestinum. Pliny says there is Flax also found, That fire will not consume;
they call it live-Flax, and I have seen Napkins and Table-clothes burning in
the fire, at Feasts, and they were better cleansed of filth with the fire, then
they could be by water: Wherefore of this they made Coats for Kings funerals,
to keep the ashes of the Body from other ashes. It grows in India in the
deserts and scorched places with the Sun, where no rain falls; but there are
terrible creatures and serpents, and this is preserved by burning; it is hard
to be found, and difficult to wear, because it is so short: when it is found it
is as dear as the most precious Pearls. The Greeks call it Asbestinum from the
nature of it, So says Pliny, out of which words it is plain that he knew not
the Stone Asbestinum, when he said that it was hard to find; and difficult to
wear for the shortness of it, for it is kembed and spun by every w^man almost,
if she be not ignorant of it, as I saw at Venice, a woman of Cypr^ and another
of Valentia, that showed me it in great abundance in the Arsenel or Hospital.
It is an excellent secret, very rare and profitable, thou^h few knew it of our
times: but I have freely communicated it, though it cannot be had, but at great
^ates.

CHAP. XXVI.
To hatch Eggs with out a Hen.
NOw shall I show how without a Hen, Eggs of Hens and other Birds may be hatched
in summer or winter, so that if any sick people desire to eat Chickens then,
they may have them. Birds Eggs are hatched with heat, either of the same Birds
or of others, as the heat of man, of the Sun, or fire; for I have seen Hens sit
on Geese, Ducks, and Peacocks Eggs, and Pigeons sit on Hen Eggs, and a Cuckoo
to sit upon any of them. And I have seen women to foster and hatch Eggs between
their breasts in their bosoms, and under their armpits. Livia Augusta when she
was young and great with child of Nero, by Caesar Tiberius, because she
earnestly desired to bring first a boy, she made use of this Omen to try it by,
for she fostered an Egg in her bosom, and when she must lay it aside, she put
it into her nurses bosom, that the heat might not abate, Pliny. But Aristotle
says that Birds Eggs, and Eggs of forefooted Beasts are ripened by the
incubation of the dam; for all these lay in the earth, and their Eggs are
hatched by the warmth of the earth. For if forefooted Beasts that lay Eggs came
often where they are, that is more to preserve and keep them then otherwise.
And again, Eggs are hatched by sitting. It is Natures way, but Eggs are not
only so hatched, but of their own accord in the earth, as in Egypt covered
with dung they will bring Chickens. Diodorus Siculus de Egyptiis. Some are
found out by man's industry, by those that keep Birds and Geese; besides, the
ways that others have to produce them, that they may have Birds that are
strange, and great numbers of them: for Birds do not sit upon their Eggs, but
they by their skill hatch the Eggs themselves. At Syracuse a certain drunken
companion put Eggs under the earth in mats, and he would not leave off drinking
till the Eggs were hatched. In Egypt about grand Cayro, Eggs are artificially
hatched; they make an Oven with many holes, into which they put Eggs of diverse
kinds, as Goose eggs, Hen Eggs, and of other Birds; they cover the Oven with
hot dung, and if need be they make a fire round about it, so are the Eggs
hatched at their due times. Paulus Jovius in his Book of his Histories. In Egypt
there is abundance of Hen Chickens: For Hens do not there sit on their Eggs,
but they are hatched in Ovens by a gentle heat, that by a an admirable and
compendious art, Chickens are hatched in very few days and bred up, which they
sell not by tale, but by measure. They make the measure without a bottom, and
when it is full they take it away. And in the Island of Malta in Sicily, they
make an Oven, where into they put Eggs of diverse Fowls* as of Hens, Geese, then
they make a fire round about, and the Eggs grew ripe at times. But let us see
how our Ancestors hatched their Eggs, Democritus teaches

If a Hen do not sit, how she may have many Chickens,
The day you set your Hen upon Eggs, take Hens dung, pound it and sist it, and
put it into a hollow vessel with a great belly, lay Hens feathers round about.
Then lay your Eggs upright in it, so that the sharp end may be uppermost; and
then of the same dung, sprinkle so much on them till the Eggs be covered. But
when your Eggs have lain so covered for two or three days, turn them afterward
every day, let not one touch the other, that they may heat alike. But after the
twenty day when the Chickens begin to be hatched, you shall find those that are
in the bottom to be cracked round, for this reason you must write down the day
they were set, lest you mistake the time: Wherefore on the twentieth day,
taking of the shell, put the Chickens into a pen and be tender of them. Bring a
Hen to them which is best to order it: yet I tried this most diligently, and it
took no effect, nor can I tell how it should be done. They that commend the
Oven, do not teach the manner how it should be done. But what I have done my
self, and I have seen others do, I shall briefly relate, that with little
labor and without Hens, any one may

Hatch Eggs in a hot Oven.
Make a vessel of Wood like a Hogshead, let it be round, and the Diameter so
long as your arm is, that you thrust in, that you may lay and turn the Eggs,
let it be four foot in Altitude. This we divide by three boards within into
four parts: Let the first be a foot and half, the second little above a foot,
the third a foot, and the fourth least of all. Let every concavity divided with
boards have a little door thereto, so large as you may thrust in your arm, and
its shut to open and shut at pleasure. Let the first and second loft be made of
thin boards, or wrought with twigs, let the third be of brass arched, and the
fourth of solid wood. Let the first and second stage have a hole in the center
three fingers broad, through which must pass a brazen or iron pipe tinned over,
that must come half a foot above the second story, and so in the lower most,
but in the bottom the orifice must be wider, like a Pyramid or funnel, that it
can fitly receive the heat of the flame of a candle put under it; in the second
story let the pipe be perforated about the top, that the heat breathing forth
thence, the place may be kept warm, and the Eggs may be hot in the upper part,
as they are under the Hen. Above these three rooms strew saw-dust, which I
thinks is best to cover them: Let the saw-dust be highest about the sides of
the Hogshead, but less in the middle; in the bottom where the pipe is lower,
that the Eggs that lie upon it may receive the heat that comes from the pipe
every way: In the third story where the pipe ends, let it be pressed down about
the sides, and higher in the middle about the pipe, let a linen cloth cover
the saw-dust, a fine cloth, that if it be foul'd it may be washed again, and the
Chicken hatched may go upon it. Lay upon every story a hundred Eggs, more or
less, let the great end of the Eggs lie downwards, the sharp end upwards. The
walls of the Hogshead that are above the saw-dust within the concavities, and
the upper part of the story must be covered with sheep skins, that their warmth
may keep in the heat: In the lower concavity under the Tunnel, must a light
lamp be placed, at first with two weiks, in the end with three, in summer; but
at beginning of winter, first with three, and last with four or five: Let the
light fall upon the middle of the Tunnel, that the heat ascending by the pipe,
the rooms may heat all alike. The place where this vessel stands must be warm
and stand in a by place; in the lower part where the lamp is lighted, you must
lay no Eggs, for that heat there will not hatch them. But where the Chickens
are wet when they are first hatched, shut them in here to dry them by the warm
heat of the lamp, marking twice or thrice every day whether the heat abate, be
warm or very hot. We shall know it thus, take an Egg out of the place, and lay
it on your Eye, for that will try it well: if it be too hot for you, the heat
is great, if you feel it not, it is weak; a strong heat will hatch them, but a
weak will make them addle. So you must add or take away from your lamp, to
make the light adequate and proportionable: after the fourth day that the Eggs
begin to be warmed, take them out of the cells, and not shaking them hard, hold
them gently against the Sun beams or light of a candle, and see whether they be
not addle, for if you discern any fibers or bloody matter run about the Egg, it
is good; but if it be clear and transparent, it is naught, put another Egg in
the place of it: All that are good must be daily turned at the lamp heat, and
turn them round as the Hen is wont to do. We need not fear spoiling the Eggs,
or if any man do handle them gently; in summer after nineteen or twenty days,
or in winter after twenty five or twenty eight days, you shall take the Eggs in
your hand, and hold them against the Sun, and see how the Chickens beak stands,
there break the shell, and by the hole of the Egg take the Chicken by the beak
and pull out its head; then lay it in its place again, for the Chicken will
come forth it self, and when it is come out, put it in the lower cell as I
said: But let the lamp stand something from the parement, lest the Chickens
allured by the light, should pick at it and be burnt by it: And if you do work
diligently as I have showed you, in three hundred Eggs you shall hardly lose
ten or twenty at most. But because they are hatched without the dam, I must show
how to make

A Cock foster Chickens as the Hen does,
For they would die, if none did keep them. But a Cock or Capon will perform
what the Hen should; do but show him the Chicken, and stroke him gently on the
back, and give him meat out of your hands often, that he may become tame. Then
pull the feathers off of his breast, and rub him with Nettles, for in a few
hours, not to say days, he will take care of the Chickens so well and give them
their meat, that no Hen did ever do it, as he will.

THE FIFTH BOOK OF Natural Magic: Which treats of Alchymy; showing how
Metals may be altered and transformed, one into another.
THE PROEME.
WE are now come (according to that order which we proposed unto our selves in
the beginning) to those experiments which are commonly called by the name of
Alchymy matters, wherein not only a great part of the world is much
conversant, but also every one is very desirous to be a practitioner in them,
and does thirst after them with an unquenchable lust. Wherefore we are
constrained to speak something concerning this Subject the rather, because many
rude and unskilful men, being drawn on, partly by the hope of gain, which they
looked for by it, and partly by the pleasure and delight which they did take in
it, have bestowed themselves in these experiments to the great slander both of
the Art it self, and also of the professors thereof; so that now adays, a man
cannot handle it without the scorn and obloquy of the world, because of the
disgrace and contempt, which those idiots have brought upon it. For whilst
they, being altogether ignorant of the Principles of these things, have labored
to make sophistical and counterseit gold, they have utterly miscarried in their
endeavors, and wasted all their substance, and quite undone themselves, and so
were deluded by that vain hope of Gold, which set them on work. Demetrius
Phalereus said very well of these men, That which they should have gotten,
says he, they did not get, and that which they had in their own possession,
they lost; and so, whereas they hoped to work a metamorphosis or alteration in
the Metals, the alteration and change has lighted heavily upon themselves, in
respect of their own estate: and when they have thus overthrown themselves,
they have no other comfort left them but only this, to broach many lies and
counterfeit devices, whereby they may likewise deceive others, and draw them
into the very same lurches which themselves have before fallen into. And surely
the desire partly of the Art it self, and partly of the great gain which many
men hoped after by the same, has filled the world with so many Books, and such
an infinite number of lies, that there is scarce any other matter in the like
request; so that it was very well done of Dioclesian the Emperor, and it was
high time for him so to do, to establish a Decree, that all such lying Books
that were written concerning that matter, should be cast into the fire and
burnt to ashes. Thus was an excellent good Art discredited and disgraced by
reason that they abused it; which falls out also in many other better things
then this is. The Art of it self is not to be fet at naught, but rather to be
embraced and much to be sought after; especially by such as apply their minds
to Philosophy, and to the searching out of the secrecies of Nature: for they
shall find in it many things which they will wonder at, and such as are
exceeding necessary for the use of men: and when they shall behold the
experience of many kinds of transmutations and sundry effects, it will be no
small delight unto them; and besides, it will show them the way to profounder
and worthier matters, such as the best and soundest Philosophers have not been
ashamed to search into, and to handle in their writings. I do not here promise
any golden mountains, as they say, nor yet that Philosophers stone, which the
world has so great an opinion of, and has been bragged of in many ages, and
happily attained unto by some; neither yet do I promise here that golden
liquor, whereof if any man do drink, it is supposed that it will make him to be
immortal; but it is a mere dream, for seeing that the world it self is variable
and subject to alteration, therefore it cannot be but that whatsoever the world
yields, should likewise be subject to destruction; so that to promise or to
undertake any such matters as these are, it were but rashness and mere
foolis^ness. Put the things which we purpose to discourse of and to deliver,
are these which here^fter follow; and I would request the Readers to take them
in good part, and to content themselves ^ith these; lest if they attempt to
proceed to further experiments herein, they prove themselves as foolish and as
mad as those which we have spoken of before. These things which here you shall
find, I my self have seen, and proved by experience, and therefore I am the
bolder to set them abroach to the view of the whole world.

CHAP. I.
Of Tin, and how it may be converted into a more excellent Metal.
Tin does counterfeit and resemble Silver; and there is great amity and
agreement betwixt these two Metals in respect of their color. The Nature and
the color of Tin is such, that it will whiten all other Metals; but it
makes them brickle and easy to be knapt in sunder: only Lead is free from
this power of Tin: but he that can skilfully make a medley of this Metal
with others, may thereby attain to many pretty secrecies. Wherefore, we will
endeavor to counterfeit Silver as ne^r as we can: A matter which may be easily
effected, if we can tell how to abolish and utterly destroy those imperfections
which are found in Tin, whereby it is to be discerned from Siver. The
imperfections are these: First, it is wont to make a creaking noise, and
crasheth more then Silver does: Secondly, it does not ring so pleasantly as
Silver, but has a duller sound: Thirdly, it is of a more pale and wanne
color: And lastly, it is more soft and tender; for if it be put into the fire,
it is not first red hot before it be melted, as Silver will be; but it clings
fast to the fire, and is soon overcome and molten by the heat thereof. These
are the qualities that are observed to be in Tin; not the essential
properties of the Nature thereof, but only accidental qualities, and therefore
they may be more easily expelled out of their subject. Let us see therefore how
we may rid away these extrinsecal accidents: and first,

How to remedy the softness of Tin, and the creaking noise that it makes.
You must first beat it into small powder, as you shall hereafter be instructed
in the manner how to do it; and when you have so done, you must reduce it into
one whole body again. And if it do not lose its softness at the first time as
you deal so by it, use the same course the second time, and so likewise the
third time rather then fail, and by this means you shall at length obtain your
purpose: for, by so doing, the Tin will wax so hard, that it will endure the
fire till it be red hot, before ever it will melt. By the like practice we may
also harden all other soft bodies, to make them red hot before they shall be
melted: but the experience hereof is more clear in Tin then in any other
Metals whatsoever. We may also take away the creaking noise of Tin, if we
melt it seven several times, and quench it every time in the urine of children;
or else in the Oil of Wall-nuts: for this is the only means to expel that
quality and imperfection out of it. Thus then we have declared the manner how
to extract these accidents from it: but all this while we have not showed how
it may be transformed into Silver: which now we are to speak of, as soon as
ever we have showed the manner

How to bring Tin into Powder,
which we promised to teach. Let your Tin boil in the fire; and when it is
very liquid, pour it forth into a great mortar; and when it begins to wax
cold, and to be congealed together again, you must stir it and turn it round
about with a wooden pestle, and let it not stand still in any case; thus shall
you cause it be congealed into very small crumbs as little as dust: and when you
have so done, put it into a very fine ranging sieve, and sift out the smallest
of it; and that which is left behind in your sieve, because it is too great
and not broken well enough, you must put it into the fire again, and use the
very same course with it to break it into smaller dust, as you used before; for
unless it be thoroughly broken into powder, it is not serviceable, nor fit for
your purpose. Having therefore showed you how to break your Tin into small
crumbs, as also how to expel out of it those imperfections whereby it is most
manifestly discerned from Silver; both which things are very necessary
preparatives as it were to the main matter which we have in hand, let us now
come to the principal experiment it self, namely

How to alter and transform Tin, that it may become Silver,
You must take an earthen vessel somewhat wide-mouthed; but it must be very
strongly and firmly made, that it be thoroughly able to endure the vehemence of
the fire, even to be red hot: Into this vessel put your Tin broken into such
small crumbs as have been spoken of, and therein you must with an iron ladle
stir it up and down continually without ceasing, till it be all on a light
fire, and yet none of the Metal to be melted: when you have so done, that you
have given it over, and it gathers together into one body or lump again, you
must bestow the very same labor upon it the second time, so long as it may
stand in small crumbs all on a fire for the space of six hours together, without
melting. But if some part of the Metal be melted by the vehement heat of the
fire, and some other part of it remain not melted, then you must take away that
which is melted, and when it is congealed, you must break it into small powder
once again, and you must run over your whole labor again with it, even in the
same vessel and with the same instrument as before. After this, when you have
brought all your Metal to that perfection that it will endure the fire without
melting, then you must put it into a glass-fornace where glass is wont to be
made, or else into some Oven that is made of purpose to reflex the heat of the
fire to the best advantage, and there let it be tormented and applied with a
very great fire for the space of three or four days together, until such time
as it is made perfectly white as snow: for the smaller that it is broken and
beaten into powder, the more perfectly it will take white, and be the fitter
for your purpose, and more exactly satisfy your expectation. After all this,
you must put it into a vessel that shall be almost full of vinegar, and the
vinegar must cover all the Tin, and swim about three inches above it. There
you must distill it, and let the vinegar boil with it so long, till the Tin
has colored it, and made it of his own hue, and thickened it into a more
gross substance. Then let it stand a while; and when it is thoroughly settled,
pour out that vinegar and put in new, and temper it well with those ashes or
crumbs of Tin: and this you must do again and again, till all your Tin be
dissolved into the vinegar. If by this often repetition of this labor, you
cannot effect such a dissolution, then you must put it once again to the fire
in such a furnace, or else into such an Oven as we spoke of before, that so it
may be reduced into white ashes more exactly and perfectly, whereby it may be
the more easily dissolved into vinegar. After this, you must let the vapor of
the vinegar be exhaled, and strained out, and the Tin that is left behind
must be put into a certain vessel where ashes have been wont to be put, and
then melt some fine Lead and put amongst it: and because the Lead that is put
in will bear up the Tin aloft, therefore you must make certain little balls
or pills compounded of Soap and Lime, or else of Saltpeter and Brimstone, or
some other like fat earthy stuff, and cast them in amongst the Lead and Tin,
and they will cause the Tin to drench it self within the Lead: and by this
means, all your Tin that does take the Lead, and is incorporated into it by a
just proportion and equal temperature, does become very excellent good Silver.
But this is a mavelous hard labor, and not to be achieved without very
great difficulty. You may like wise alter and transform

Tin into Lead,
An easy matter for any man to effect, by reducing Tin into ashes or powder
often times: for the often burning of it will cause the creaking noise which it
is wont to make, to be voided from it, and so to become Lead without any more
ado; especially, if you use a convenient fire, when you go about to reduce it
into powder.

CHAP. II.
Of Lead, and how it may be converted into another Metal.
THe Ancient Writers that have been conversant in the Natures of Metals, are
wont to call Tin by the name of white Lead; and Lead, by the name of black
Tin: insinuating thereby the affinity of the Natures of these two Metals,
that they are very like each to another, and therefore may very easily be one
of them transformed into the other. It is no hard matter therefore, as to
change Tin into Lead, which we have spoken of in the former Chapter, So also

To change Lead into Tin.
It may be effected only by bare washing of it: for if you bath or wash Lead
often times, that is, if you often melt it, so that the dull and earthy
substance of it be abolished, it will become Tin very easily: for the same
quicksilver, whereby the Lead was first made a subtle and pure substance,
before it contracted that soil and earthiness which makes it so heavy, does
still remain in the Lead, as Gebrus has observed; and this is it which causes
that creaking and gnashing sound, which Tin is wont to yield, and whereby it
is especially dicerned from Lead: so that when the Lead has lost its own
earthy lumpishness, which is expelled by often melting; and when it is endued
with the sound of Tin, which the quicksilver does easily work into it, there
can be no difference put betwixt them, but that the Lead is become Tin. It is
also possible to transform

Antimony into Lead:
For, that kind of Antimony which the Alchymists are wont to call by the name
of Regulus, if it be oftentimes burned in the fire, and be first thoroughly
boiled, it turns into Lead. This experiment is observed by Dioscorides, who
says, That if you take Antimony and burn it exceedingly in the fire, it is
converted into Lead. Galen shows another experiment concerning Lead, namely,

How to procure Lead to become heavier, then of it self it is:
For, whereas he had found by his experience, that Lead has in it self an
ethereal or airy substance, he brings this experiment. Of all the Metals,
says he, that I have been acquainted with, only Lead is increased both in
bigness and also in weight for, if you lay it up in sellars or such other
places of receipt that are under the ground, wherein there is a turbulent and
gross foggy air, so that whatsoever is laid up in such rooms shall straightways
gather filth and soil, it will be greater and weightier then before it was.
Yea, even the very clamps of Lead which have been fastened into carved Images
to knit their parts more strongly together, especially those that have been
fastened about their feet, have been diverse times found to have waxed bigger;
and some of those clamps have been seen to swell so much, that whereas in the
making of such Images the leaden plates and pins were made level with the
Images themselves, yet afterward they have been so swollen, as that they have
stood forth like hillocks and knobs very unevenly, out of the Crystal stones
whereof the Images were made. This Lead, is a Metal that has in it great
store of quicksilver, as may appear by this, because it is a very easy
mastery,

To extract Quicksilver out of Lead.
Let your Lead be filed into very small dust, and to every two pounds of L^ad
thus beaten into powder, you must put one ounce of Saltpeter, and one ounce of
ordinary common Salt, and one ounce of Antimony. Let all these be well beaten
and powned together, and put into a sieve; and when they are well sifted, put
them into a vessel made of glass, and you must fence and plaster the glass
round about on the outward side with thick loam tempered with chopped straw, and
it must be laid on very fast; and that it may stick upon the vessel the better,
your glass must not be smooth, but full of rigoles, as if it were wrested or
writhen. When your vessel is thus prepared, you must settle and apply it to a
reflexed fire, that is, to a fire made in such a place, as will reflect and
beat back the heat of it with great vehemence to the best advantage: and
underneath your vessels neck, you must place a large pan, or some other such
vessel of great capacity and receipt, which must be half full of cold water:
then close up all very fast and sure, and let your fire burn but a little, and
give but a small heat for the space of two hours; afterward make it greater, so
that the vessel may be thoroughly heated by it, even to be red hot; then set a
blower on work, and let him not leave off to blow for the space of four whole
hours together, and you shall see the quicksilver drop down into the vessel
that is half full of water, being flighted, as it were, out of the Metal by
the vehement force of the fire. Commonly the quicksilver will stick to the
sides of the vessels neck, and therefore you must give the neck of the vessel a
little jolt or blow with your hand, that so the quicksilver may fall downward
into the water-vessel. By this practice I have extracted oftentimes out of
every pound of Metal almost an whole ounce of quicksilver; yea, sometimes
more then an ounce, when I have been very diligent and laborious in performing
the work. Another experiment I have seen, which drew me into great admiration,

Lead converted into quicksilver:
A counterfeiting practice, which is the chief cause that all the quicksilver
almost which is usually to be had, is but bastard stuff, and merely
counterfeit; yet it is bought and sold for current, by reason of the near
likeness that it has with the best. Let there be one pound of Lead melted in
an earthen vessel, and then put unto it also one pound of that Tinny metal
which is usually called by the name of Marchasite: and when they are both
melted together, you must stir them up and down, and temper them to a perfect
medley with a wooden ladle: In the mean space you must have four pounds of
quicksilver warmed in another vessel standing by, to cast in upon that
compounded Metal; for unless your quicksilver be warm, it will not close nor
agree well with your Metals: then temper your quicksilver and your Metal
together for a while, and presently after cast it into cold water; so shall it
not congeal into any hard lump, but flote on the top of the water, and be very
quick and lively. The only blemish it has, and that which only may be
excepted against it, is this, that it is somewhat pale and wan, and not all
things so nimble and lively as the true quicksilver is, but is more slow and
slimy, drawing as it were a tail after it, as other viscous and slimy things
are wont to do. But put it into a vessel of glass, and lay it up for a while;
for the longer you keep it, the quicker and nimbler it will be.

CHAP. III.
Of Brass; and how to transform it into a worthier Metal.
WE will now allege certain experiments concerning Brass; which though they
are but slight and trivial, yet we will not omit to speak of them, because we
would fain satisfy the humor of those, who have a great desire to read of and
be acquainted with such matters. And here we are to speak of such things as are
good to stain the bodies of Metals with some other color then naturally they
are endued withal. Yet I must needs confess that these are but fained and
counterfeit colorings, such as will not last and stick by their bodies for
ever; neither yet are they able to abide any trial, but as soon as ever they
come to the touchstone, they may easily be discerned to be but counterfeits.
Howbeit, as they are not greatly to be desired, because they are but
deceivable, yet notwithstanding they are not utterly to be rejected as things
of no value. And because there are very few Books extant which Treat of any
Argument of like kind as this is, but they are full of such experiments and
sleights as here offer themselves to be handled by us (for they are very common
things, and in every man's mouth) therefore we will in this place speak only of
those things which are easily to be gotten, and yet carry with them a very
goodly show, insomuch that the best and sharpest censure may be deluded and
mistaken by the beautiful gloss that is cast upon them; and it may gravel the
quickest and skilfullest judgment, to define upon the sudden whether they are
true or counterfeit. Yet let them be esteemed no better then they deserve. But
this you must know, that as slight and trivial as they are, yet they require
the handling of a very skilful Artificer: and whosoever thou art that go
about to practice these experiments, if thou be not a skilful and well
experienced workman thy self, be sure to take the advice and counsel of those
that are very good Artists in this kind; for otherwise thou wi^t certainly
miscarry in them, and be defeated of thy purpose. The chief and especial things
which are of force to endue Brass with a whiter color, are these: Arsenick or
Oker; that kind of quicksilver which is sublimated, as the Alchymists call it;
the scum or froth of silver, which is called by the Greeks Lithargvron; the
Marchasi^e or fire-stone; the Lees of wine; that kind of Salt which is found in
Africa under the sand, when the Moon is at the full; which is commonly called
Salt Ammoniack; the common and ordinary Salt which the Arabians call by the
name of Al-hali; Saltpeter, and lastly Alome. If you extract the liquor out of
any of these, or out of all these, and when it is dissolved, put your Brass,
being red hot, into it to be quenched, your Brass will become white: Or else,
if you melt your Brass, and as soon as it is molten, put it into such liquor,
your Brass will become white: Or else, if you draw forth into very small and
thin plates, and pown those bodies we now speak of, into small powder, and then
cast both the brass that is to be colored, and the bodies that must color it,
into a melting or casting vessel, and there temper them together to a good
med^ev, and keep them a great while in the fire, that it may be thoroughly
me^ted, the brass will become white. Or else, if you melt your brass, and then
cast upon it some of that coloring in small lumps, (for if you cast it in
powder and dust, it is a doubt that the force and rage of the fire will utterly
consume it, so that it shall not be able to infect or Pain the metal) but if
you cast good store of such coloring upon the molten brass, it will endue your
brass with a strange and wonderful whiteness, insomuch that it will seem to be
very silver indeed. But that you may learn the better, how to work such
experiments, and beside, that you may by occasion of those things which are
here set down, learn how to compound and work other matters, we will now set
forth unto you certain examples, how we may make

Brass to counterfeit Silver;
for when once you are trained up a little in the practice of these matters,
then they will sink more easily into your understanding, then by all your
reading they can do: therefore as we have spoken of such things as will do this
seat, so also we will reach you how to work artificially. Take an earthen pot,
and set it upon the fire with very hot coals heaped round about it; put lead
into it, and when you see that your lead is molten by the force of the fire,
take the third part of so much silver as there was lead, and pown it into small
powder, and pu^ it to the lead into the pot; but you must sprinkle it in only
by little and little, that it may be scorched, and even burned as it were by
the heat of the fire, and may float like as it were oil on the top and surface
of the lead; and some of it may be so wasted by the vehemence of the heat, that
it vanish away into the smoke. Then let them rest a while, so long as there be
any remainders of the coa^s left. After you have so done, break the vessel into
pieces, and take away the scum and dross of the metal; and whereas there will
stand on the top of the metal a certain oil as it were, or a kind of gelly,
you must take that, and bray it in a mortar, and cast it into a vessel by
little and little where there is brass melted; and though the brass be three
times so much in weight as that gelly is, yet the gelly will endue all that
brass with a white silver color; Nay, if there be more then three times so
much melted brass put into that metal, it will make it all like unto silver.
But if you would have your brass endued with a perfect white color, and not
discernable from silver, you must melt some silver and some brass together, and
then throw them into the fire, and so take them out again after some short
time; for the longer you suffer them in the fire, the worse will your
experiment succeed. Which is a matter most worthy to be observed in these
cases: for if your work continue any longer in the fire then need requires, it
will fade in color, and the violence of the fire will countermand the
operation and effect of your skill and labor in tempering the metals together,
and so the brass will recover his former color in his first estate. Wherefore
let your metals be kept in the fire as little while as you can, that you may
make your brass the whiter, and in color most like unto silver: howbeit,
though you have made it never so white, yet in time it will wax blackish and
dim again; for the Arsnick that is naturally incorporated into the brass, will
always strive to restore it to the former du^kish and dim color which it is
by nature endued withal. We will now also teach you another way how to make

Brass to counterfeit Silver;
and this is a more excellent and notable experiment then the former. Take six
ounces of the Lees of wine, eight ounces of Cristal Arsnick, half an ounce of
quicksilver that has been sublimated, two ounces of Salt-peeter, one ounce
and an half of glass; beat all these together in a mortar, and see that they be
broken into the smallest powder and dust that may be. After this, take three
pounds of Copper, that which is commonly called Banda Mediolanensis; this you
must have to be drawn out into small thin and slender plates; and when you have
thu^ prepared your metals and ingredients, you must take of that powder, and
sprinkle it into an earthen pot by little and little, and withal put into the
same pot your slender plates of Copper; and these things you must do by course,
first putting in some of your powder, and then some of your Copper, and
afterward some powder again, and afterward some of your little plates again,
and so by turns one after another, till the pot be brim-full: then set a cover
upon your pot, and plaster it all over singularly well with good stiff mortar
that is tempered with chopped straw; then bind it round about with bands and
clamps of iron; and truss it up very hard and stiff together, and then cover
it over again with such mortar as before. Afterward let the pot be made hot
with a great fire round about it. The manner of the heating of your pot must be
this; set the pot in a Center as it were, that the fire may lie as it were in
the circumference round about it, to the distance of one foot from the Center;
a little after this, move you fire nearer to the pot, that there may not be
above the distance of half a foot betwixt them; then within a while lay the
fire a little nearer, and so by little and little let the fire be brought close
to the pot, yea and let the pot be covered all over with hot burning coals,
within the space of one hour, and so let it stand hidden in the fire for the
space of six whole hours together. And after the six hours, you must not take
away the coals, but let them go out and die of themselves, and let the pot so
stand under them until it be stark cold: and when it is thoroughly cold, break
it into pieces, and there you shall find your little thin plates so brittle,
that if you do but touch them somewhat hard with your fingers, they will soon
be crumbled into dust. When you have taken them out of the pot, you must
afterward put them into some casting vessel that is very hard, and durable; and
there within half an hour it will be melted: then put into it some of your
powder by little and little, till all of it be molten together; then cast it
all forth into some hollow place, into some form or mould, that it may run
along into rods; and the metal will be as brittle and as easy to be broken
into small crumbs, as any Ice can be. After all this, you must melt two pounds
of brass; but you must first purify it and cleanse it a little, by casting
upon it some broken glass, and Lees of wine, and Salt-ammoniack, and
Salt-peeter, every one of them by turns, and by little and little. When you
have thus cleansed it, you must put unto it one pound of that metal which you
made of the Copper and powder before spoken of; and you must still sprinkle
upon the^ some of that powder; and after all this, you must take half so much
of the best silver that may be gotten, and melt it amongst the metals before
spoken of and cast them all together into some hollow place like a mould, and
so you shall obtain your purpose. But that the surface and the utmost outsides
of the metal may appear while, you must throw it into the fire, that it may be
burning hot, and then take it forth, and cast it into that water wherein the
Lees of wine and ordinary salt have been liquefied and dissolved; and there let
it boil for a certain time, and so shall you make it very white, and moreover
so pliant and so easy to be framed and wrought to any fashion, that you may
draw it thorough any little hole, yea even thorough the eye of a needle.
Furthermore, this is not to be omitted nor buried in silence, for it is a
matter of great use, and special force in the coloring of metals, that they be
inwardly cleansed and purged of their dross, that they may be thoroughly washed
and rid of all such scum and ^ffals, as are incident unto them; for being thus
handled, they will be more serviceable and operative for all experiments. As
for example; let brass be molten, and then quenched in vinegar, and then
reduced into powder with salt, so that the more gross and infectious parts
thereof be extracted from it; and let it be so handled oftentimes, till there
be nothing of its natural uncleanness remaining within it, and so shall it
receive a deeper dye, and be changed into a more lively color. Let the vessel
wherein you melt your metals to prepare and make them fit for your turn, be
bored thorough in the bottom with sundry holes, that the metal being melted may
strain thorough, but the dross, and scum, and offals of it may be left behind,
that there may be nothing but pure metal to be used in your experiments: for
the less dross and offals that your metal have, they are so much the more
serviceable for your use in working. Let this therefore be a general rule
always to be remembered and observed, that your metals be thoroughly purged and
rid from their dross as much as may possibly be, before ever you entertain any
of them into your service for these intendments. There is yet also another way
whereby we may bring to pass that

Brass should resemble silver,
and this by Arsnick Orpine, which is an effectual means to accomplish this
matter: and whereas in tract of time the metal will somewhat recover it self to
its own former paleness and dim color, we will seek to remedy it and prevent
it. Take the best Arsnick Orpine that may be gotten, such as yawns and gapes as
though it had scales upon it; it must be of a very orient golden color; you
must meddle this Orpine with the dust of brass that has been filed from it,
and put into them some Lees of wine; but they must be each of them of an equal
weight and quantity when you drench them together within the liquor, and so
shall it bear a continual orient color, and glister very brightly without ever
any fading at all. After this, take you some silver, and dissolve with that
kind of water which is called Aquafortis* but it must be such as has in it
very little store of moisture; for the most waterish humor that is in it, must
be evaporated in some scalding pot or other such vessel, which you must fill up
to the brim six or seven several times, with the same water, after the vapors
of it have been extracted by the heat of the fire that is under the vessel:
when you have thus done, you must mingle your silver that is so dissolved, with
the brass filings, and the Arsnick Orpine which we spoke of before; and then
you must plain it and smooth it all over with the red marble-stone, that the
clefts or scales before spoken of, may be closed up; and withal, you must water
it by little and little, as it were drop after drop, with the oil that has
been expressed or extracted out of the Lees of wine, or else out of the firmest
Salt-ammoniack that may be had. And when the Sun is gotten up to any strength,
that it shows forth it self in very hot gleams, you must bring forth this
confection, and let the force of the heat work upon it, even till it be
thorough dry: afterward you must supple it with more of the same oil again,
and then let it be dried up again so long, till that which is remaining do
weigh just so much as the silver weighed before it was dissolved Then clos^ it
up in a vessel of glass, and lay it under some dunghill till it be dissolved
again, and after the dissolution be gathered together into a Gelly; then cast
into it ten or eight pieces of brass, and it will color them all, that they
shall most lively counterfeit silver. But if you desire

To make brass show it self of a silver color, by rubbing it betwixt your
hands,
as boys and cozening companions are oftentimes wont to do, that if they do
but handle any vessels of brass, they will make them straightways to glitter
like Silver, you may use this devise. Take Ammoniack-salt, and Alome, and
Salt-peeter, of each of them an equal weight, and mingle them together, and put
unto them a small quantity of Silver-dust, that has been filed off; then set
them all to the fire, that they may be thoroughly hot; and when the fume or
vapor is exhaled from them, that they have left reaking, make a powder of
them; and whatsoever brass you cast that powder upon, if you do withal, either
wet it with your own spittle, or else by little and little rub it over with
your fingers, you shall find that they will seem to be of a silver color. But
if you would whiten such brass more handsomely and neatly, you must take
another course: You must dissolve a little silver with Aqua fortis, and put
unto it so much Lees of wine, and as much Ammoniack-salt; let them so lie
together till they be about the thickness of the filth that is rubbed off from
a man's body after his sweating: then roll it up in some small round balls, and
so let them wax dry: when they are dry, if you rub them with your fingers upon
any brass or other like metal, and still as you rub them moisten them with a
little spittle, you shall make that which you rub upon to be very like unto
silver. The very like experiment may be wrought by Quicksilver; for this has
a wonderful force in making any metal to become white. Now, whereas we promised
before, to teach you, not only how to endue brase or such other metal with a
silver color, but also how to preserve and keep the bodies so colored from
returning to their former hiew again, you must beware that these bodies which
are endued with such a silver color, do not take hurt by any sharp or sour
liquor; for either the urine, or vinegar, or the juice of limons, or any such
tart and sour liquor, w^ll cause this color soon to fade away, and so
discredit your work, and declare the color of those metals to be false and
counterfeit.

CHAP. IV.
Of Iron, and how to transform it into a more worthy metal.
NOw the order of my proceedings requires, that I should speak somewhat also
concerning Iron; for this is a metal which the Wizards of India did highly
esteem, as having in it self much goodness, and being of such a temperature,
that it may easily be transformed into a more worthy and excellent metal then
it self is. Notwithstanding, some there are, which reject this metal as
altogether unprofitable, because it is so full of gross earthly substance, and
can hardly be melted in the fire, by reason of that firm and settled brimstone
which is found in it. But if any man would

Change Iron into Brass,
so that no part of the gross and earthly substance shall remain in it, he may
easily obtain his purpose by Coppresse or Vitriol. It is reported that in the
mountain Carpatus an Hill of Pannonia, at a certain Town called Smolinitium,
there is a Lake, in which there are three channels full of water: and
whatsoever Iron is put into those channels, it is converted into brass: and if
the Iron which you cast into them be in small pieces or little clamps,
presently they are converted into mud or dirt; but if that mud be baked and
hardened in the fire, it will be turned into perfect good brass. But there is
an artificial means whereby this also may be affected* and it is to be done on
this wise. Take Iron, and put into a casting vessel; and when it is red hot
with the vehement heat of the fire, and that it begins to melt, you must
cast upon it by little and little some sprinkling of quick brimstone: then you
must pour it forth, and cast into small rods, and beat it with hammers: it is
very brittle, and will easily be broken: then dissolve it with Aquafortis,
such as is compounded of vitriol and Alome tempered together: set it upon hot
cinders till it boil, and be dissolved into vapors, and so quite vanish away;
and the subsidence thereof, or the rubbish that remains behind, if it be
reduced into one solid body again, will become good brass. If you would

Make Iron to become white,
you may effect it by diverse and sundry sleights; yet let this only device
content you in this matter. First, you must cleanse and purge your Iron of that
dross and refuse that is in it, and of that poisoned corruption of rust that it
is generally infected withal: for it has more earthly substance and parts in
it then any other metal has, insomuch that if you boil it and purge it never
so often, it will still of it self yield some new excrements. To cleanse and
purge it this is the best way: Take some small thin plates of Iron, and make
them red hot, and then quench them in strong lie and vinegar which have been
boiled with ordinary Salt and Alome; and this you must use to do with them
oftentimes, till they be somewhat whitened: the fragments or scrapings also of
Iron, you must pown in a mor^er, after they have been steeped in salt; and you
must bray them together till the salt be quite changed, so that there be no
blackness left in the liquor of it, and till the Iron be cleansed and purged
from the dross that is in it. When you have thus prepared your Iron, you must
whiten it on this manner: Make a plaster as it were, of quicksilver and lead
tempered together; then pown them into powder, and put that powder into an
earthen vessel amongst your plates of Iron that you have prepared to be
whitened: close up the vessel fast, and plaster it all over with mortar, so
that there may be no breathing place for any air either to get in or out: then
put it into the fire, and there let it stay for one whole day together, and at
length increase your fire, that it may be so vehement hot as to melt the Iron;
for the plaster or confection which was made of lead and Quicksilver, will
work in the Iron two effects; for first, it will dispose it to melting, that it
shall soon be dissolved; and secondly, it will dispose it to whitening, that it
shall the sooner receive a glittering color. After all this, draw forth your
Iron into small thin plates again, and proceed the second time in the same
course as before, till you find that it has taken so much whiteness as your
purpose was to endue it withal. In like manner, if you melt it in a vessel that
has holes in the bottom of it, and melt with it lead, and the Marchasi^e or
fire-stone, and Arsnick, and such other things as we spoke of before in our
experiments of brass, you may make Iron to become white. If you put amongst it
some silver, though it be not much, it will soon resemble the color of silver:
for Iron does easily suffer it self to be meddled with gold or silver; and they
may be so thoroughly incorporated into each other, that by all the rules of
separation that can be used, you cannot without great labor, and very much ado
separate the one of them from the other.

CHAP. V.
Of Quicksilver, and of the effects and operations thereof.
IN the next place it is meet that we speak something concerning Quicksilver,
and the manifold operations thereof: wherein we will first set down certain
vulgar and common congelations that it makes with other things, because many
men do desire to know them; and secondly, we will show, how it may be dissolved
into water, that they which are desirous of such experiments, may be satisfied
herein. First therefore we will show

How Quicksilver may be congealed and curdled as it were with Iron.
Put the quicksilver into a casting vessel, and put together with it that
water, which the Blacksmith has used to quench his hot Iron in; and put in
also among them Ammoniack Salt, and Vitriol, and Verdegrease, twice so much of
every one of these, as there was quicksilver: let all these boil together in
an exceeding great fire, and still turn them up and down with an Iron slice or
ladle; and if at any time the water boil away, you must be sure that you have
in a readiness some of the same water through hot to cast into it, that it may
supply the waste which the fire has made, and yet not hinder the boiling; thus
will they be congealed all together within the space of six hours. After this,
you must take the congealed stuff when it is cold, and bind it up hard with
your hands in leather thongs, or linen cloth, or osiers, that all the juice
and moisture that is in it, may be squeesed out of it; then let that which is
squeesed and drained out, settle it self, and be congealed once again, till the
whole confection be made: then put it into an earthen vessel well washed, and
amongst it some spring water, and take off as near as you can, all the filth
and scum that is upon it and is gone to waste; and in that vessel you must
temper and diligently mix together your congealed matter with spring water,
till the whole matter be pure and clear: then lay it abroad in the open air
three days and three nights, and the subject which you have wrought upon will
wax thick and hard like a shell or a tile-sheard. There is also another
congelation to be made with quicksilver,

Congeailng of Quicksilver with balls of Brass,
thus: make two Brass half circles, that that may fasten one within the other,
that nothing may exhale: put into them quicksilver, with an equal part of
white Arsenick and Tartar well powdered and searced; lute the joints well
without, that nothing may breathe forth, so let them dry, and cover them with
coals all over for six hours: then make all red hot, then take it out and open
it, and you shall see it all coagulated and to stick in the hollow of the Brass
ball; strike it with a hammer, and it will fall off; melt it, and project it,
and it will give an excellent color like to Silver* and it is hard to discern
it from Silver. If you will, you may mingle it with three parts of melted
Brass, and without Silver; it will be exceeding white, soft and malleable. It
is also made another way: Make a great Cup of Silver, red Arsenick and Latin,
with a cover that sits close, that nothing may exhale: fill this with
quicksilver, and lute the joints with the white of an Egg, or some
Pine-tree-rosin, as it is commonly done: hang this into a pot full of Linseed
Oil, and let it boil twelve hours; take it out, and strain it through a skin or
straw; and if any part be not coagulated, do the work again, and make it
coagulate. If the vessel do coagulate it slowly, so much as you find it has
lost of its weight of the silver, Arsenick and Alchymy make that good again,
for we cannot know by the weight: use it, it is wonderful that the quicksilver
will draw to it self out of the vessel, and quicksilver will enter in. Now I
shall show what may be sometimes useful,

To draw water out of Quicksilver.
Make a vessel of potters earth, that will endure the fire, of which crucibles
are made six foot long, and of a foot Diameter, glassed within with glass,
about a foot broad at the bottom, a finger thick, narrower at the top, bigger
at bottom. About the neck let there be a hole as big as ones finger, and a
little pipe coming forth, by which you may fitly put in the quicksilver; on
the top of the mouth let there be a glass cap, fitted with the pipe, and let it
be smeered with clammy clay, and bind it above that it breathe not forth. For
this work make a furnace, let it be so large at the top, that it may be fit to
receive the bottom of the vessel, a foot broad and deep. You must make the
grate the fire is made upon, with that art, that when need is you may draw it
back on one side, and the fire may fall beneath. Set therefore the empty vessel
into the furnace, and by degrees kindle the fire: Lastly, make the bottom red
hot; when you see it to be so, which you may know by the top, you must look
through the glass cap; presently by the hole prepared pour in ten or fifteen
pounds of quicksilver, and presently with clay cast upon it stop that hole,
and take away the grate that the fire may fall to the lower parts, and
forthwith quench it with water. Then you shall see that the water of
quicksilver will run forth at the nose of the cap, into the receiver under it,
about an ounce in quantity: take the vessel from the fire, and pour forth the
quicksilver, and do as before, and always one ounce of water will distill
forth: keep this for Chemical operation. I found this the best for to smug up
women with. This artifice was found to purify quicksilver. I shall not pass
over another art, no less wonderful than profitable for use,

To make quicksilver grow to be a Tree.
Dissolve silver in aqua fortis, what is dissolved evaporate into thin air at
the fire, that there may remain at the bottom a thick unctious substance; Then
distill fountain water twice or thrice, and pour it on that thick matter,
shaking it well* then let it stand a little, and pour into another glass vessel
the most pure water, in which the silver is: add to the water a pound of
quicksilver, in a most transparent crystalline glass that will attract to it
that silver, and in the space of a day will there spring up a most beautiful
tree from the bottom, and hairy, as made of most fine beards of corn, and it
will fill the whole vessel, that the eye can behold nothing more pleasant. The
same is made of gold with aqua regia.

CHAP. VI.
Of Silver.
I Shall teach how to give silver a tincture that it may show like to pure
gold; and after that, how it may be turned to true gold.

To give Silver a Gold-colour,
Burn burnt brass with stibium, and melted with half silver, it will have the
perfect color of gold; and mingle it with gold, it will be the better color.
We boil brass thus: I know not any one that has taught it: you shall do it
after this manner: melt brass in a crucible, with as much stibium: when they
are both melted, put in as much stibium as before, and pour it out on a plain
Marble-stone, that it may cool there, and be fit to beat into plates. Then
shall you make two bricks hollow, that the plates may be fitly laid in there:
when you have fitted them, let them be closed fast together, and bound with
iron bands, and well luted: when they are dried put them in a glass furnace,
and let them stand therein a week, to burn exactly, take them out and use them.
And

To tincture Silver into gold,
you must do thus: Make first such a tart lie, put quick lime into a pot, whose
bottom is full of many small holes, put a piece of wood or tilesheard upon it,
then by degrees pour in the powder and hot water, and by the narrow holes at
the bottom, let it drain into a clean earthen vessel under it: do this again,
to make it exceeding tart. Powder stibium and put into this, that it may
evaporate into the thin air; let it boil at an easy fire: for when it boils,
the water will be of a purple color: then strain it into a clean vessel
through a linen cloth; again, pour on the lie on the powders that remain, and
let it boil so long at the fire, till the water seems of a bloody color no
more: Then boil the lie that is colored, putting fire under, till the water be
all exhaled; but the powder that remains being dry, with the oil of Tartar
dried and dissolved, must be cast again upon plates made of equal parts of gold
and silver, within an earthen crucible; cover it so long with coals, and renew
your work, till it be perfectly like to gold. Also I can make the same

Otherwise.
If I mingle the congealed quicksilver that I speak of with a cap, with a
third part of silver, you shall find the silver to be of a golden color: you
shall melt this with the same quantity of gold, and put it into a pot: pour on
it very sharp vinegar, and let it boil a quarter of a day, and the color will
be augmented. Put this to the utmost trial of gold, that is, with common salt,
and powder of bricks, yet adding Vitriol, and so shall you have refined gold.
We can also extract

Gold out of Silver,
And not so little but it will pay your cost, and afford you much gain. The way
is thi^: Put the fine filings of Iron into a Crucible that will endure fire,
till it grow red hot, and melt: then take artificial Chrysocolla, such as
Goldsmiths use to soder with, and red Arsenick, and by degrees strew them in:
when you have done this, cast in an equal part of Silver, and let it be
exquisitely purged by a strong vessel made of Ashes: all the dregs of the Gold
being now removed, cast it into water of separation, and the Gold will fall to
the bottom of the vessel, take it: there is nothing of many things that I have
found more true, more gainful or, more hard: spare no labor, and do it as you
should, lest you lose your labor: or otherwise, let the thin filings of Iron
oak for a day in seawater, let it dry, and let it be red hot in the fire so
long in a ^rucible, till it run, then cast in an equal quantity of silver, with
half brass, let it be projected into a hollow place: then purge it exactly in
an ash vessel: for the Iron being excluded and its dregs, put it into water of
separation, and gather what falls to the bottom, and it will be excellent Gold.
May be it will be profitable to

Fix Cinnaber.
He that desires it, I think he must do thus, break the Cinnaber into pieces as
big as Wall-nuts, and put them into a glass vessel that is of the same bigness,
and the pieces must be mingled with thrice the weight of silver, and laid by
courses, and the vessel must be luted, and suffer it to dry, or set it in the
Sun; then cover it with ashes, and let it boil so long on a gentle fire, till
it become of a lead color and break not, which will not be unless you tend it
constantly till you come so far. Then purge it with a double quantity of lead;
and when it is purged, if it be put to all trials, it will stand the stronger,
and be more heavy and of more virtue: the more easy fire you use, the better
will the business be effected: but so shall we try to repair silver, and revive
it when it is spoiled. Let sublimate quicksilver boil in distilled vinegar,
then mingle quicksilver, and in a glass retort, let the quicksilver evaporate
in a hot fire, and fall into the receiver: keep it: If you be skilful, you
shall find but little of the weight lost. Others do it with the Regulus of
Antimony. But otherwise you shall do it sooner and more gainfully thus: Put the
broken pieces of Cinnaber as big as dice, into a long linen bag, hanging
equally from the pot sides; then pour on the sharpest venegar, with alom and
tartar, double as much, quick lime four parts, and as much of oaken ashes, as
it is usual to be made; or you must make some. Let it boil a whole day, take it
out and boil it in oil, be diligent about it, and let it stay there twenty four
hours: take the pieces of Cinnaber out of the oil, and mere them with the white
of an egg beaten, and role it with a third part of the filings of silver: put
it into the bottom of a convenient vessel, and lute it well with the best
earth, as I said: set it to the fire three days, and at last increase the fire,
that it may almost melt and run: take it off, and wash it from its faeces that
are left, at the last proof of silver, and bring it to be true and natural.
Also it will be pleasant

From fixed Cinnaber to draw out a silver beard.
If you put it into the same vessel, and make a gentle fire under, silver that
is pure, not mixed with lead, will become hairy like a wood, that there is
nothing more pleasant to behold.

CHAP. VII.
Of Operations necessary for use.
I Thought fit to set down some Operations which are generally thought fit for
our works: and if you know them not, you will not easily obtain your de^^re. I
have set them down here, that you might not be put to seek them elsewhere: First,

To draw forth the life of Tin.
The filings of Tin must be put into a pot of earth, with equal part of
saltpeter, you shall set on the top of this seven, as many other earthen pots
with holes bored in them, and stop these holes well with clay: set above this a
glass vessel with the mouth downwards, or with an open pipe, with a vessel
under it: put fire to it, and you shall hear it make a noise when it is hot:
the life flies away in the f^me, and you shall find it in the hollow pots, and
in the bottom of the glased vessel compacted together. If you bore an earthen
vessel on the side, you may do it something more easily by degrees, and you
shall stop it. So also

From Stibium
we may extract it. Stibium that Druggists call Antimony, is grownd small in
handmills, then let a new crucible of earth be made red hot in a cole fire;
cast into it presently by degrees, Stibium, twice as much Tartar, four parts of
saltpeter, finely powdered: when the fume rises, cover it with a cover, lest
the fume rising evaporate: then take it off, and cast in more, till all the
powder be burnt: then let it stand a little at the fire, take it off and let it
cool, and skim off the dregs on the top, and you shall find at the bottom what
the Chemists call the Regulus; it is like Lead, and easily changed into it. For
says Dioscorides, should it burn a little more, it turns to Lead. Now I will
show how one may draw a more noble Metal

To the outside,
As foolish Chemists say, for they think that by their impostures they do draw
forth the parts lying in the middle, and that the internal parts are the basest
of all; but they err exceedingly: For they eat only the outward parts in the
superficies, that are the weakest, and a little quicksilver is drawn forth,
which I approve not. For they corrode all things that their Medicament enters,
the harder parts are left, and are polished and whitened: may be they are
persuaded of this by the medals of the Ancients, that were within all brass,
but outwardly seemed like pure silver; but those were sodered together, and
beaten with hammers, and then stamped. Yet it is very must to do it as they
did, and I think it cannot be done. But the things that polish are these,
common Salt, Alom, Vitriol, quick Brimstone, Tartar; and for Gold, only
Verdigrease, and Salt Ammoniack. When you would go about it, you must powder
part of them, and put them into a vessel with the metal. The crucible must be
luted with clay, and covered: there must be left but a very small hole for
perspiration: then set it in a gentle fire, and let it burn* and blow not, lest
the metal melt: when the powders are burnt they will sink down, which you shall
know by the smoke, then take off the cover and look into them. But men make the
Metal red hot, and then when it is hot they drench it in: or otherwise; they
put it in vinegar till it become well cleansed, and when you have wrapped the
work in linnenrags, that was well luted, cast it into an earthen vessel of
vinegar, and boil it long, take it out and cast it into urine, let it boil in
salt and vinegar, till no filth almost rise, and the foul spots of the
ingredients be gone; and if you find it not exceeding white, do the same again
till you come to perfection: Or else proceed otherwise by order: Let your work
boil in an earthen pot of water, with salt, alom, and tartar: when the whole
superficies is grown white, let it alone a while; then let them boil three
hours with equal parts of brimstone, saltpeter, and salt, that it may hang in
the middle of them, and not touch the sides of the vessel; take it out, and rub
it with sand, till the fume of the sulphur be removed again: let it boil again
as at first, and so it will wax white, that it will endure the fire, and not be
rejected for counterfeit; you shall find it profitable if you do it well; and
you will rejoice, if you do not abuse it to your own ruin.

CHAP. VIII.
How to make a Metal more weighty.
IT is a question amongst Chemists, and such as are addicted to those studies,
how it might be that silver might equal gold in weight, and every metal might
exceed its own weight. That may be also made gold, without any detriment to the
stamp or engraving, and silver may increase and decreas^ in its weight, if so
be it be made into some vessel. I have undertaken here to teach how to do that
easily, that others do with great difficulty. Take this rule to do it by, that

The weight of a Golden vessel may increase,
without hurting the mark, if the magnitude do not equal the weight. You shall
rub gold with thin silver, with your hands or fingers, until it may d^ink it
in, and make up the weight you would have it, sticking on the superficies. Then
prepare a strong lixivium of brimstone and quick lime, and cast it with the
gold into an earthen pot with a wide mouth: put a small fire under, and let
them boil so long, till you see that they have gained their color; then take
it out, and you shall have it: Or else draw forth of the velks of eggs and the
litharge of gold, water with a strong fire, and quench red hot gold in it, and
you have it.

Another that is excellent.
You shall bring silver to powder, either with aqua fortis, or calx; the calx
is afterward washed with water, to wash away the salt, wet a golden vessel or
plate with water or spittle, that the quantity of the powder you need may stick
on the outward superficies: yet put it not on the edges, for the fraud will be
easily discovered by rubbing it on the touch stone. Then powder finely salt one
third part, brick as much, vitriol made red two parts: take a brick and make a
hole in it as big as the vessel is, in the bottom whereof strew al^m de plume:
then again pour on the powder with your work till you have filled the hole,
then cover the hole with another brick, and fasten it with an Iron pin, and
lute the joints well with clay: let this dry, and let it stand in a
reverberating fire about a quarter of a day; and when it is cold, open it, and
you shall find the gold all of a silver color, and more weighty, without any
hurt to the stamp. Now to bring it to its former color, do thus: Take Verdi
rease four parts, Salammoniack two parts, saltpeter a half part, as much
brick, alom a fourth part; mingle these with the waters, and wash the vessel
with it: then with iron tongs put it upon burning coals, that it may be red
hot: take it off, and plunge it in urine, and it will regain the color. If it
shine too much, and you would have it of a lower color, the remedy is to wet
it in urine, and let it stand on a plate red hot to cool. But thus you shall
make vitriol very red; put it into a vessel covered with coals, and boil it
till it change to a most bright red: take it out and lay it aside, and do not
use it for an ill purpose. We may with the fragments of brass

Do this business otherwise:
That shall supply the place of silver, and it shall become too weighty: Or
otherwise, melt two parts of brass with silver, then make it into small thin
plates; in the mean while make a powder of the dregs of aqua fortis, namely of
saltpeter and vitriol, and in a strong melting vessel, put the plate and the
powder to augment gold, fill the vessel in a preposterous order. Then lure the
mouth of it, and set it in a gentle fire half a day: take it off, always
renewing the same till it come to the desired weight. We have taught how to
increase the weight, and not hurt the fashion or stamp. Now I shall show how
without loss in weight, nor yet the stamp being hur^,

Gold and Silver may be diminished:
Some use to do it with aqua fortis, but it makes the work rough with knots and
holes; you shall do it therefore thus: Strew powder of brimstone upon the work,
and put a candle to it round about, or burn it under your work, by degrees it
will consume by burning; strike it with a hammer on the contrary side, and the
superficies will fall off, as much in quantity as you please, as you use the
brimstone. Now shall I show how

To separate gold from silver Cups that are gilded:
For it is oft-times a custom for Goldsmiths, to melt the vessels and cast
them away, and to make new ones again; not knowing how without great trouble,
to part the gold from the silver, and therefore melt both together. To part
them, do thus: Take salt Ammoniack, brimstone half a part: powder them ^ne, and
anoint the gilded part of the vessel with oil: then strew on the powder, and
take the vessel in a pair of tongs, and put it into the fire: when it is very
hot, strike it with an iron, and the powder shaken will fall into the water, in
a platter under it, and the vessel will remain unaltered. Also it is done

Another way
with quicksilver: Put quicksilver into an earthen vessel with a very wide
mouth, and let it heat so long at the fire, that you can endure the heat of it
with your finger, put into it: put the gilt plate of silver into it, and when
the quicksilver sticks to the gold, take it out and put it into a Charger,
into which the gold, when it is cold, will fall with the quicksilver. Going
over this work again, until no more gold appears in the vessel. Then put the
gold with the quicksilver that was shaken into the Charger, into a linen
clout, and press it out with your hands, and let the quicksilver fall into
some other receiver, the gold will stay behind in the rag; take it and put it
into a cole made with a hole in it, blow till it melt, make it into a lump, and
boil it in an earthen vessel with a little Stibium, and pour it forth into
another vessel, that the gold may fall to the bottom, and the Stibium stay
atop. But if you will

Part Gold from a vessel of Brass,
wet the vessel in cold water, and set it in the fire: when it is red hot,
quench it in cold water; then scrape off the gold with latin wire bound
together.

CHAP. IX.
To part Metals without aqua fortis.
BEcause waters are drawn from salts with difficulty, with loss of time and
great charges; I shall show you how to part gold from silver and brass, and
silver from brass, without aqua fortis; but by some easy operations, with
little cost or loss of time: And first I shall show how

To part Gold from Silver.
Cast a lump of gold mixed with silver into an earthen vessel, that will hold
fire, with the same weight of Antimony, thus: when the vessel is red hot, and
the lump is melted, and turned about with the force of the fire; cast a little
Stibium in, and in a little time it will melt also; and when you see it, cast
in the rest of the Stibium, and cover the vessel with a cover: let the mixture
boil, as long as one may repeat the Lords-prayer: take away the vessel with a
pair of tongs, and cast it into another iron Pyramidal vessel red hot, called a
Crucible, that has in the bottom of it rams fat; shaking it gently, that the
heavier part of gold separated from the silver, may fall to the bottom: when
the vessel is cold it is shaken off, and the part next the bottom will be gold,
the upper part silver; and if it be not well parted, refuse not to go over the
same work again, but take a less quantity of Stibium. Let therefore the gold be
purged again, and let the Stibium be boiled, and there will be always at the
bottom a little piece of gold. And as the dregs remain, after the same manner
purge them again in the copple, and you shall have your silver, without any
loss of the weight, because they are both perfect bodies; but the silver only
will lose a little. But would you have your silver to lose less, do thus: add
to two pound and half of Stibium, wine-lees two pounds, and boil them together
in an earthen vessel, and the mass will remain in the bottom, which must be
also boiled in a copple; then adding pieces of lead to it, purge it in a
copple, wherein the other things being consumed by the fire, the silver only
will remain: but if you do not boil your Stibium in wine-lees, as I said, part
of the silver will be lost, and the copple will draw the silver to it. The same
may be done

Another way.
Take three ounces of brimstone, powder them, and mingle them with one ounce of
common oil, and set them to the fire in a glazed dish of earth: let the fire be
first gentle, then augment it, till it run, and seem to run over: take it from
the fire, and let it cool, then cast it into sharp vinegar, so the oil will
swim above the vinegar, the brimstone will fall down to the bottom; cast away
the vinegar, and let the brimstone boil in strong vinegar, and you shall see
the vinegar colored: you shall strain the vinegar through a wisp into a glased
vessel, to which add more brimstone, boil it again, and again strain out the
lie into the vessel: doing this so often, till the Lixivium comes forth muddy, or
of a black color. Let the Lixivium settle one night: again strain it through a
wisp, and you shall find the brimstone almost white at the bottom of the
vessel: add that to what you had before, and set it again to boil with three
parts as much distilled vinegar, till the vinegar all evaporate and dry the
brimstone: take heed it burn not: when it is dry, put it again into distilled
vinegar, working the same way so often, until putting a little of it upon a red
hot plate of iron, it will melt without flame or smoke. Then cast it on a lump
of gold and silver, and the gold will sink to the bottom presently, but the
silver will remain on the top. For if brimstone be boiled in a Lixivium so
strong, that it will bear an egg, until it will not smoke, and will melt on a
fire-cole: if it be projected on a mass of gold and silver mingled, when they
are melted, it will part the gold from the silver. Also there is an ingenious
and admirable way

To part silver from brass
with certain powders. The best are those are made of powdered lead, half so
much quick brimstone, and arsenick, and common salt double as much, saltpeter
one half; powder those fine each by themselves, then mingle them. Take the mixed
metal, with half so much more of the powder, and in a vessel that will endure
fire, strew it in by turns, and set the vessel filled at a strong fire, till all
melt; take it out and cast it into another vessel, that is broad atop, narrow
at bottom, and hot, as we said, and smeered with ram or sowes grease clarified:
let it cool, for you shall find the silver at the bottom, and the brass on the
top: part one from the other with an iron rasp, or file: if you will, you may
purge your silver again in a copple. But the silver must be made into thin
plates, that when it is strewed interchangeably with the powders, they may come
at it on all sides: then cover the vessel with its cover, and lute it well. But
the salt must be decrepitated that it leap not out, and the brimstone prepared
and fixed. But we may thus

Part gold from brass:
Make salt of these things that follow, namely, Vitriol, Alom, Saltpeter,
quick Brimstone, of each a pound, Salt-ammoniack half a pound. Powder them all,
and boil them in a lie made of ashes, one part, as much quick lime, four parts
of beech-ashes: melt them at the fire, and decant them, and boil them till the
Lixivium be gone; then dry it, and keep it in a place not moist, lest it melt;
and mingle with it one pound of powder of lead, and strew on of this powder six
ounces for every pound of brass made not in a melting vessel, and let them be
shaken, and stirred vehemently with an iron thing to stir it with: when the
vessel is cold, break it, you shall find a lump of gold in the bottom. Do the
rest as I said.

CHAP. X.
A compendious way to part gold or silver from other Metals with aqua fortis.
WE shall teach thus compendiously to part gold from silver, and silver from
other metals; and it is no small gain to be got by it, if a man well understood
what I write: for I have known some by this art that have got great wealth. For
example, take a mixture of brass and silver, dissolve it in common aqua fortis:
when it is consumed, cast fountain water into it, to remove the sharpness of
the water, and that it can no more corrode the metal. Put the water into a
great mouthed earthen vessel, and plunge plates of brass therein; for the
silver will stick to them like a cloud, the brass is best in the water: put the
water into a glass retort with a large belly, and make a soft fire under, and
the fountain water will distill forth by degrees. When you know that the whole
quantity of fountain water is distilled out, or the belly of the retort looks
of a yellow color, and the sent of the salts pierces your nostrils: take away
the receiver, and put another that is empty to it, and lure it well that
nothing break forth. Augment the fire, and you shall draw off your aqua fortis
as strong as before, and the brass will be at the bottom of the retort: The
aqua fortis will be as good as it was, and you may use it oft-times.

THE SIXTH BOOK OF Natural Magic: Of counterfeiting Precious Sons.
THE PROEME.
FRom the adulterating of Metals, we shall pass to the counterfeiting of
Jewels. They are by the same reason, both Arts are of kin, and done by the
fire. And it is no fraud, says Pliny, to get gain to live by: and the desire
of money has so kindled the firebrand of luxury, that the most cunning artists
are sometimes cheated. They are counterfeited by diverse ways, either by cutting
Jewels in the middle, and putting in the colors, and joining them together; or
else by giving a tincture to Crystal that is all one piece, or counterfeiting
Crystal by many ingredients; or we shall attempt to make true Jewels to depart
from their proper color, and all of them to be so handsomely colored, that
they may show like natural Jewels. Lastly, I shall show how to make Smalt of
diverse colors.

CHAP. I.
Of certain Salts used in the composition of Gems.
WE will first set down certain operations, which are very necessary in the
making of Gems, lest we be forced to repeat the same thing over again: And
first,

How to make Sal Soda.
The herb Kali or Saltwort is commonly called Soda: grind this Soda very
small, and sift it into powder: put it into a brass Cauldron and boil it,
pouring in for every pound of Soda, a firkin of water. Let it boil for four
hours, till the water be consumed to a third part. Then take it from the fire,
and let it stand twelve hours, while the dregs settle to the bottom, and the
water becomes clear: then drain out the water with a linen cloth, into another
vessel, and pour fresh water into the Cauldron: Boil it again, and when it is
cold, as before, and all the dross settled, filtrate the clear water out again:
Do as much the third time, still having a care to try with your tongue, whether
it be still salt. At last, strain the water, and set it in an earthen vessel
over the fire, keeping a constant fire under it, until the moisture being
almost consumed, the water grow more thick, and be condensed into salt; which
must presently be taken out with an iron ladle; and of five pound of Soda, you
will have one pound of salt.

How to make Salt of Tartar.
Take the lees of old wine, and dry it carefully; it is commonly called Tartar:
put it into an Alimbeck, made in such sort, that the flame may be retorted from
the top, and so augment the heat. There let it burn, you will see it grow
white; then turn it with your iron tongs, so that the upper part which is white
may be at bottom, and turn the back up to the flame: when it has ceased
smoking, take it out, and break part of it, to see whether it be white quite
through, for that is an argument of the sufficient burning; because it
oftentimes happens, that the outside only is burned, and the rest of it
remains crude. Therefore, when it has gained the color of chalk, it must be
taken out; and when it is cold, grind it, and lay it in water in some
wide-mouthed vessel a quarter of a day. When the water is grown clear, filtrate
it, and strain it into another vessel, and then pour water again unto the
settlement, observing the same things we spoke before, until the water have
taken out all the salt, which will come to pass in the third or forth time.
Pour your waters which you saved, into a vessel of glass; and all things being
ready, put live coals under it, and attend the work until the water be consumed
by the force of the fire, which being done, the salt will stick to the bottom:
it being thus made, preserve it in a dry place, lest it turn to oil.

CHAP. II.
How Flint, or Crystal is to be prepared, and how Pastils are boiled.
THe matter of which Gems are made, is either Crystal or Flint, from whence we
strike fire, or round pebbles found by river sides: those are the best which
are taken up by the river Thames, white, clear, and of the bigness of an egg;
for of those are made best counterfeit Gemms, though all will serve in some
sort. Some think that Crystal is the best for this purpose, because of the
brightness and transparency of it; but they are deceived. The way of making
Gems, is this: Take riverpebbles and put them into a furnace, in that place
where the retorted flame is most intense; when they are red hot, take them out
and fling them into water: then dry them, and powder them in a mortar, or a
hand-mill, until they are very fine; put them into a wide-mouthed vessel, full
of rain water, and shake it well in your hands, for so the finest part will
rise to the top, and the grossest will settle to the bottom: to that which
swims at top pour fresh water, and stir the dust again: and do this oftentimes,
until the gross part be quite separated and sunk down. Then take out the water,
and let it settle, and in the bottom there will lie a certain slimy matter;
gather together, and reserve the refined powder. But whilst the stone is
ground, both the mortar and the mill will lose somewhat of themselves, which
being mixed with the powder will foul the Gem: wherefore it will be worth the
lab^r to wash that away: to which end, let water be often poured into the
lavel, and stirred about; the dust of the mortar will rise to the top, by
reason of its levity, and the powder of the pebbles will retire to the bottom
by reason of its weight; skim the lavel, and separate them with a spoon, till
all that sandy and black dust be taken off; then strain out the water, and
reserve the powder dry. These being done, we must teach

How Pastils are boiled.
Artificers call those pellets which are made of the salts, and the forenamed
powder and water, Pastils. Take five parts of salt of Tartar, as many of salt
of Soda* double the quantity of these of the forespoken powder of pebbles, and
mix them very well in a stone mortar: sprinkle them with water and wet them, so
that they may grow into a past, and make Pastils of them in bigness of your
fist; set them in the sun, and dry them well. Then put them into a furnace of
reverbaration, the space of six hours, increasing the fire by degrees, that at
last they may become red hot, but not melt; wherefore use no bellows: when they
are baked enough, let them cool, and they will become so hard, that they will
endure almost the hammer.

CHAP. III.
Of the Furnace, and the Parts thereof.
NOw the Furnace is to be built, which is like to that of glass-makers, but
less according to the proportion of the work. Let your furnace be eight foot
high, and consist of two vaults; the roof of the lower must be a handful and a
half thick: the vault it self must have a little door, by which you may cast in
wood to feed the fire there. Let it also have on the top, and in the middle of
its roof, a hole about a foot in breadth, by which the flame may penetrate into
the second vault, and reach to the upper roof; whence the flame being
reverberated, does cause a vehement heat. In this upper vault there must be cut
out in the wall small holes of a handful in breadth, which must open and shut,
to set the pots and pans in on the floor, and to take them out again.
Artificers call these pots Crucibles; they are made of clay, which is brought
from Valencia, and does very strongly endure fire: They must be a finger thick,
and a foot and a half deep, their bottom somewhat thicker, lest they should
break with the force of the fire. All things being thus provided, cast in your
wood and fire, and let the furnace heat by degrees, so that it may be perfectly
hot in a quarter of a day. Your workmen must be diligent to perform their duty;
then let the Pastils, being broken into pieces about the bigness of a wall-nut,
be put into crucibles, and set in the holes of the furnace built for that
purpose, with a pair of iron tongs to every pot. When they melt, they will rise
up in bubbles, and growing greater and greater, must be pricked with sharp
wires; that the vapor passing out, the bubbles may sink down again, and not run
over the mouth of the crucibles. Then let other pieces be put in, and do as
before, until the pots be filled to the top: and continue the fire for a whole
day, until the matter be concocted. Then put an iron hook into the pots, and
try whether the matter have obtained a perfect transparency: which if it have,
take it out of the pots with iron instruments for that purpose, and cast it
into clear water, to wash off the filth and stains, and to purge out the salt:
for when the Gems are made; on a sudden the salt breaks forth, as it were
spued out, and overcast them like a cloud. Yet there must be a great deal of
diligence used, whil^st you draw out this vitrified matter, lest it touch the
sides of the furnace; for it will cleave thereto like bird^ime, hardly to be
pulled off without part of the wall: as also lest it fall into the vessels: for
it is very difficult to separate it, and it prejudices the clearness of the
glas^. When it is cold, put it again into the crucibles, and let it glow for
two days, until it be concocted into perfect glass. When this vitrified matter
has stood so for two days, some, to make it more fine and bright, lest it
should be specked with certain little bubbles (to which glass is very subject)
put into the crucible some white lead, which presently grows red, then melts
with the glass and becomes clear and perspicuous. Make your trial then with an
iron hook; for if it be clear of those bubbles, it is perfected, and so will be
a perfect mass of Gems. Now we will teach the several Colors, Yellow, Green,
or Blue, wherein we will cast our Gems.

CHAP. IV.
To make Colors.
WHile the Crystal is preparing in the furnace, by the same fire the Colors
may be also made: And first,

How to make Crocus of Iron:
Take three or four pounds of the limature of Iron, wash it well in a broad
vessel; for by putting it into water, the weight of the iron will carry that to
the bottom; but the straws and chips, and such kind of filth, will swim on the
top; so you will have your filings clean and washed. Then dry it well, and put
it into an earthen glazed pot with a large mouth, and pour into it three or
four gallons of the best and sharpest vinegar: there let it macerate three or
four weeks, stirring it every day seven or eight times with an iron rod: then
giving it time to settle, pour out the vinegar into another pot, and put fresh
vinegar into the iron; and do this, till the vinegar have consumed all the
filings. Then put all the vinegar into an earthen vessel, and set it on the
fire, and let it boil quite away: In the bottom there will remain a slimy durty
mattter, mixed with a kind of fatness of the iron, which the fire by continuance
will catch hold of: let it burn, and the remaining dust will be Crocus. Others
file your rusty nails, and heating them red hot, quench them in vinegar; then
strain them, and dry the rust, and set it again to the fire, till it be red
hot, then quench it again with vinegar; this they do three or four times: at
length they boil the vinegar away, and take the remaining Crocus from the
bottom. Next remains to show

How to reduce Zaphara into Powder.
A little window is to be made out of the side of the furnace, nigh to which
must be built a little cell or oven, so joined to the mouth of the oven, that
the flame may be brought in through a little hole. Let this cell have a little
door without, to admit the workmans hand upon occasion. Let this cell be a foot
in length and breadth. Set the Saffron upon a Potters tile, into the cell and
shut the door: let it be red hot, and after six hours take it out and put it
into water, so will it cleave into pieces; let it be dried, stamped, and so
finely seirced, that it may scarce be felt. But if it cannot be effected with a
pestle and mortar; pour water upon the powder, and stir it with your hands, and
let it settle for a while; then strain it into another vessel, and pour fresh
water into the powder; and reiterate this so often, till that which setleth,
being beat and brayed, do pass through with water: then dry it, and it will
become very fine powder.

How to burn Copper.
Set the filings of Copper, with an equal quantity of salt mixed in an earthen
pot, over the fire, and turn it about three or four hours with an iron book,
that it may be burned on all sides: There let it burn a whole natural day: then
take it out, and divide it into two parts; lay the one part aside, and set the
other with salt on the fire again, for an artificial day: do the same three or
four times, that it may be more perfectly calci^ed, always having a care that
it be as hot as may be, but that it melt not. Waen it is burnt, it is black.

CHAP. V.
How Gems are colored.
ALl things being thus prepared; there is nothing more, I think, remains to
make an end of this work, but to know how to color them. And we will begin
with the way

How to dye a Sapphire.
Artificers begin with a Sapphire: for when it is colored, unless it be
presently removed from the fire, it loses the tincture; and the longer it
remains in the fire, the brighter it grows. Put a little Zaphara, as they
call it, into a pot of glass, two drachms to a pound of glass; then stir it
continually from top to bottom with an iron hook: when it is very well mixed,
make trial whether the color please you or no, by taking a little out of the
pot. If it be too faint, add some more Zaphara; if too deep, put in more
glass, and let it boil six hours. Thus you may

Color Cyanus,
or seawater, another kind of Sapphire. Beat your calcined brass into very fine
powder, that you may scarce feel it; for otherwise it will mix with the
Crystal, and make it courser: the quantity cannot be defined* for there are
lighter and deeper of that kind: for the most part, for one pound one dram
will be sufficient.

How to counterfeit the color of the Amethist:
To a pound of Crystal, put a dram of that they call Manganess, and so the
color is made. If the Gem be great, make it the paler; if small, make it
deeper: for they use such for rings, and other uses.

To counterfeit the Topaze.
To every pound of glass, add a quarter of an ounce of crocus of Iron, and
three ounces of red-lead, to make it of a brighter red. First put in the lead,
then the crocus.

The Chrysolite.
When you have made a Topaze, and would have a Chrysolite, add a little more
Copper, that it may have a little verdure: for the Chrysolite differs from
the Topaze in nothing, but that it has a greater luster. So we are wont

To counterfeit an Emerald.
This shall be the last: for we must let our work be as quick as possible,
because the copper being heavy, when it is mixed with the Crystal, does
presently sink down to the bottom of the pots, and so the Gems well be of too
pale a color. Therefore thus you must do: when you give the tincture to a
Cianus, you may easily turn it into Smaragde, by adding crocus of iron, in half
the quantity of the copper or brass, viz. if at first you put in a fourth part
of copper: Now you must add an eighth part of crocus, and as much copper.
After the colors are cast in, let it boil six hours, that the material may
grow clear again: for the casting in the colors will make them contract a
cloudiness. Afterward let the fire decrease by degrees, until the furnace be
cold: then take out the pots and break them, wherein you shall find your
counterfeit precious Stones.

CHAP. VI.
How Gems may otherwise be made.
THe manner which I have set down, is peculiar and usual to our Artificers, and
by them is also accounted a secret. But I will set down another way, which I
had determined always to keep secret to my self; for by it are made with less
charge, less time, and less labor, much more refulgent, bright, and livelier
Gems, whose superficies and luster, the salt shall not deface in a much longer
time. Although those old counterfeits which are found at Puteoli, in the mortar
of ruined houses, and on the shores, are yet very bright, and of a perfect
clearness, so that they seem beyond the imitation of our age: Yet I will
endeavor by this way, not only to equal them, but to make much better.
Wherefore give ear, and believe: the materials are thus made: Take the comb of
a Cock, and cutting his gullet in two, keep the head and the neck. Put it into
a pot, and set it in a hard fire; stop i^ close that no coals or ashes arising
with the smoke, or soote, fall in, and spoil the luster of it. When the fire is
kindled, you will hear it hiss: when it is red hot, take it up with an iron
tongs, and quench it in clear water, and dry it: Do this three times, changing
the water* lest there should be any filth; then grind it on a marble till it
be so fine that you may blow it about, and reserve it for use. Thence have you
the Philosophers Stone, most fragrant in fire, and chief in the triplicity. If
thou art ignorant of the Philosophers Stone, learn it from these verses, which
I found in an old Manuscript.

Arctus est hominis, qui constat sex elementis.
Cui p si addideris, s. in. m. mutare si been scis.
Hoc erit os nostrum constans lapis Philosophorum.
Now we have advertised you of the materials: let us advise also about the
color. And first of all, I will show you

How to counterfeit a Topaze.
Put your material into a pot, and cover it with a lid, full of holes; over
which there must be laid another, that it may exhale, and yet receive no hurt
from the smoke: let it stand in its furnace to the middle the space of a whole
day, and it will be a Topaze. Now

To counterfeit a Chrysolite,
cram the Cock, and for every ounce give him to eat two grains of the beloved
flower of Venus: stroke him, and in due time thou shall see.

To make an Emarald.
Feed the Cock again, and for every ounce, give him four grains of wheat, and
he will shine with a most bright luster. But

To make a Jacinth,
give the Cock grains of the bloody Stone, instead of wheat, and he will
easily lay hold of them.

CHAP. VII.
Of Several Tinctures of Crystal.
I Have declared diverse tinctures of glass, and those no vulgar and common
ones, but such as are rarely known, and gained, and tried with a great deal of
labor. Now I will relate some ways of staining Crystal, and especially those
that are choice, and known to very few; if not only to my self.

To stain Crystal with the color of a Jacinth, or a Ruby, without breaking, or
wearing it.
Take six parts of Stibium, four of Orpin, three of Arsenick, as much of
Sulphur, two of Tutty; beat them all asunder, and sift them through a fine
seirce: put them into a pot: hang your Crystal by wires, or cover it over with
the powders, and so set it on the fire, that it may be hot, four or five hours;
but use no bellows, lest it break in pieces, or melt. It is a certain sign of
being perfectly colored, if you take out a piece, and that be of a bright and
shining color* otherwise deliver it to the fire again, and after some time try
it again. But you must have a great care, lest it cool too suddenly when you
take it off the fire, for it will crumble and fall to pieces. If a
violet-colour pleases you, take it soon from the fire: if you would have a
deep purple, let it stand longer: we can make a violet with Orpin only.

To turn a Sapphire into a Diamond.
This stone, as all others, being put in the fire, loses his color: For the
force of the fire makes the color fade. Many do it several ways: for some
melt gold, and put the Sapphire in the middle of it; others put it on a plate of
iron, and set it in the middle of the furnace of reverberation; others burn it
in the middle of a heap of iron dust. I am w^nt to do it a safer way, thus: I
fill an earthen pot with unkill'd lime, in the middle of which I place my
Sapphire, and cover it over with coals; which being kindled, I stop the bellows
from blowing, for they will make it fly in pieces. When I think it changed, I
take a care that the fire may go out it self: and then taking out the stone, I
see whether it has contracted a sufficient whiteness; if it have, I put it
again in its former place, and let it cool with the fire; if not, I cover it
again, often looking on it, until the force of the fire have consumed all the
color, which it will do in five or six hours; if you find that the color be
not quite vanished, do again as before, until it be perfect white. You must be
very diligent, that the fire do heat by degrees, and also cool; for it often
happens, that sudden cold does either make it congeal, or fly in pieces. All
other stones lose their color, like the Sapphire; some sooner, some later,
according to their hardness. For the Amethist you must use but a soft and
gentle fire; for a vehement one will over-harden it, and turn it to dust. This
is the art we use, to turn other precious stones into Diamonds, which being cut
in the middle, and colored, makes another kind of adulterating Gems; which by
this experiment we will make known: And it is

How to make a stone white on one side, and red or blew on the other.
I have seen precious stones thus made, and in great esteem with great persons,
being of two colors: on one side a Sapphire, and on the other a Diamond, and so
of diverse colors. Which may be done after this manner: For example, we would
have a Sapphire should be white on one side, and below on the other; or should
be white on one side, and red on the other: thus it may be done. Plaster up
that side which you would have red or blew, with chalk, and let it be dried;
then commit it to the fire, those ways we spoke of before, and the naked side
will lose the color and turn w^ite, that it will seem a miracle of Nature, to
those that know not by how slight an art it may be done.

How to stain glass of diverse colors.
I will not pass by a thing worth the relation, which happened by chance, while
we were making these experiments. The flower of Tin takes away the
perspicuity of Crystal glass, and makes it of diverse colors: for being
sprinkled upon Crystal glasses that are polished with a wheel, and set to the
fire, it does variously color them, and makes them cloudy; so that one part
will look like a stone, and another like an Opale of diverse colors. But you
must often take it out from the fire, and order it rightly, till it be
according to your desire. I have before told you how to make flour of Tin for
the purpose. I will add somewhat more, indeed no secret, nor very necessary,
but that nothing may be omitted by us in this work, viz.

How to make a Jacinth
beautiful enough, and not much unlike a true one. Put lead into a hard earthen
pot, and set it on the fire in a glass-makers furnace, there let it remain for
some days, till the lead be vitrified, and it will be of the color of a
Jacinth.

To counterfeit an Emerald.
You may do this almost in the same manner; and it will resemble the color of
a pleasant green corn. Dissolve silver with strong water, then casting into the
water some plates of Copper, as I told you, it will cleave to them. Gather it
together, and dry it, and set it into a glass-makers furnace in an earthen pot,
within a few days it will become an Emerald. To do the same with other metals,
I will leave to the trial of others; it is enough for me to have found out and
discovered the way.

To counterfeit Carbuncles.
This we do with Orpin, and use it in some ornaments, for they are brittle, and
of a most flagrant color, have much of the scarlet blush, and cast forth red
sparkles. Take four ounces of Orpin, and grind it small: then put it into a
glass vessel, whose bottom you must fortify against the force of the fire with
mortar made with straw, and stop the mouth of it gently. The fire being
kindled, the smoke flies up, and the thinnest part of the material will rise
to the top: and you will see it stick to the sides of the glass, and the neck:
it will grow bigger by degrees, and new parts still flying up, will make it
grow thicker; and like boiling water gather into bubbles, which at last will
increase so big, that they will fall down: Some will stick in the neck of the
glass, all of a most flagrant color, but brittle and small. Break the glass,
and take off with a sharp point of a knife, those red congealed bubbles which
stick to the glass, and use them. If you would make one great one of those
little bubbles; lay a great many little ones upon a piece of glass, and melt
them, and they will run into one: a most pleasant sight to see.

CHAP. VIII.
Of making smalt or Ennamel.
AFter Gems we will endeavor to make Smalt or Ennamel. It is a work almost of
the same nature, and of the same mixture and colors; this only difference is
between them, that in Gems the glass is transparent, in this it is more dense
and solid. In ancient times they made their Checker or Mosaique work of it: and
Goldsmiths do use it in coloring and enammeling gold. It is Tin that gives
it a body and solidity.

To make white Enammel,
Take two ounces of Lead ashes, four of Tin; and make it into a body, with
double the quantity of glass: role it into round balls, and set it on a gentle
fire all night: take heed it stick not to the sides of the pot, but stir it
about with an iron spattle, and when it is melted, increase the fire, and the
business is done.

To make black Smalt.
To a pound of glass, you must add a dram of Manganess, for so it will be of
the color of a Lion: then add a dram of Zaphara, and the mixture will turn
black: make often trial, if it be of a dark purple or violet-colour: for the
Tin that gives it the body, will make it blacker.

To make Smalt of a deep yellow.
You may put to every pound of Crystal a little Crocus Martis, and three ounces
of Jalloline, as they call it, which engravers use: at last, Lead and Tin. But
if you desire

To make Smalt of a paler yellow,
Instead of Jalloline, add Jaletto, and you will have your desire.

To make green Smalt,
Add burned Copper, and so it will be of a deeper color: but if you desire it
a paler, add the flakes of Copper, which fly off, while the smith hammereth
it, being red hot.

To make red Smalt,
Add the rust of iron, very finely beaten: but when you would make

Smalt dark on one side, and transparent on the other,
Make your Pastils of earth, and double as much glass; set it a whole night in
the fire of reverberation, and let it melt in a convenient vessel, stirring it
with an iron rod: so you shall perceive both transparent and opacous parts in
the same little Orb. So

To make Smalt of the color of an Amethist.
It is done with nothing but Manganess: and if you would have it of a deeper
color, add more of the body, that is, of the flower of Lead and Tin.

To make Smalt of skie-colour.
It may be effected with Zaphara, by adding somewhat more of the body.

To make speckled Smalt,
which being full of small specks, shall seem to be compounded of a great many
lice, very pleasant to behold. The opacous Smalt being made, pour it upon
marble, and then presently sprinkle some Crocus upon it, or drop some pale
color in specks, all over it, and you shall have your desire.

To make Smalt of two colors,
cast Smalt first of one color upon a marble, as before; and presently after,
some of another color upon that: then with an iron rod press them close, and
join them together.

To make the best kind of Smalt,
such as Goldsmiths use; to every pot allow two roles of Sal Soda, and some
sand, of which glass is made, and it will be much more perfect.

CHAP. IX.
To make Smalt of a clear rose-colour.
THe most skilful glass-makers do labor very much, in coloring Smalt of a
rose-colour; which is commonly called Rossiclere: seeing that in former times
they did it most beautifully and artificially. I will set down what both I my
self have door in it, and what I have received from other friends: I have
performed the best I could, to show others an opportune way of making better.
The manner is this: cast ten pounds of Crystal in a pot, and when you know it
to be well melted, add a pound of the best red lead, by half at a time,
stirring it with an iron rod as fast as you can, for the weight of it will make
it sink to the bottom: when it is well mixed, take it out of the pot with iron
instruments fit for the purpose, and cast it into water: do this thrice: then
mix with it five ounces of Tin calcined, and Cinnabaris of a most bright
color; and so stirring them about for three hours, let them stand a while.
When this is done, add moreover three ounces of vitrified Tin, and beat them
together without any intermission, and you will see a most lively rose-colour
in the glass, which you may use in enamelling Gold.

To make Glass of Tin.
Set a pound of Tin in a strong earthen pot, into the fire: let it heat and
melt; then remove it with iron tongs into the hottest flames of the
glass-makers furnace, for three or four days. Afterward, the pot being taken
out, and cold; break it, and in the top you will find glass of a saffron
color, not clear: but the longer it stands in the fire, the perfecter it
will grow; neither have I known better in this kind, of those many that I have
tried. It must be reduced into fine powder: for the which not only a mortar
and mills will be requite, but also a Porphyrian stone. If it be too florid,
you may make it of a more faint color, by adding glass to it.

Another way to make it.
This is only for friends: Take nine parts of burnt Tin, seven of Lead, two
of Cinnabaris; of Spanish-soder and Tartar, one part and a half; of the
Boodstone one part, of Painters red a fourth part. And do with it, as in the
former.

CHAP. X.
Of leaves of Metal to be put under Gems.
THere are certain leaves of Metal laid under Gems, which being perspicuous,
are thereby made paler or deeper, as you will: for if you would have them of a
fainter color, you must put under them leaves of a more clear brightness: if
of a deeper, leaves of a darker hue. Moreover, Gems being transparent, are seen
quite through, and discover the bottom of the ring; which takes much of their
beauty off. This is an invention of later times, who by terminating the
transparency of stones, with leaves of a most bright and pleasant color, do
fit and make up, and mend the color of the stones. I have been very much
delighted in this kind of work, and therefore will deliver it particularly. The
leaves are to be made either of Copper alone, or of Copper, Gold, and Silver,
mixed together. I will speak of those which are made of Copper alone: You must
buy at the Brasiers-shops some thin plates of Copper, of the thickness of
strong paper, that they may be the easier made thinner, which you must cut into
pieces of three fingers in length, and two in breadth; so that a sheet of two
pound, will be divided into a hundred and thirty parts: these we must divide
again into two parts, that they may be hammered more easily: Take forty and
heat them, as Artificers do gold, when they beat it out into thin rays. Let
the anvile and hammer be smooth and polished, lest the heavy strokes should
make dents in the Copper, and break it. Discontinue your work by turns, so that
you may hammer the Copper while it is hot, and prepared by the fire; and put it
into the fire, when it is cold: for if you do otherwise, it will break in
pieces; which you must presently remove from the rest; for those that are
broken, will break others. But that they may be the more easier prepared, when
they begin to be ex^eruated, I make use of this invention. There must be
prepared two plates of iron, of a hand square, and the thickness of paper.
Double one of them, that it may receive the other within the folds of it: so
that they may receive the plates of Copper in the middle, and enclose them on
all sides, that they can neither slip out* nor any dust or ashes fall in, so
stick to them. When you have thus enclosed the Copper plates, put them into the
fire, and heat them; then take them out with iron tongs, and shaking off the
ashes, beat them with your hammer till they are cold, and so they will become
thin and fine rays. But while you are beating one, set others to heat: and do
this eight times over, until you have hammered them very thin, and made them
fit for your purpose. It will be worth your labor to look often upon them, to
see if any be broken in the working, for they will break their fellows. But
because they are wont to grow black in the working, and foul, so that they
oftentimes deceive the eye; therefore it is fit, that you have a pot of water
ready, with an equal quantity of Tartar, and salt in it, and let it boil over
the fire: Put into it your rays, and stir them about continually, till they
be boiled white. Then take them out, and wash them in a pot of clear water,
till they be very clean: then dry them with a linen cloth, and then heat them,
and beat them on the anvile again, as before, until they spread into rays, as
thin as leaf-gold* When this work is to be done, the hammer and anvile must be
as smooth, and polished, and bright, as a looking-glass; which you may effect
in this manner. First of all, hold them to the grinde-stone, wherewith they
grind knives, until they be smoothed and planed* then rub them with fine sand,
and Pumice-stone; afterward glaze them with a wheel, and polish them with a
plate of lead, and powder of emerald: if you use any other art, you will but
lose your labor. Thus in two days your work will be finished, that is, by
heating your plates, eight or ten times, and preparing them, and by whiting
them four times at least: Finally, examine them all, whether they be whole, and
of a sufficient thinness: so that if any remain too thick, they may again be
brought to the hammer and perfected. But I must advertise you, that the thinner
they grow, the less time they must lie in the fire, because they will presently
melt: and so also in the water, because the salt will eat into them. At last,
cut them with sheares into square pieces, that they may be more convenient for
use.

CHAP. XI.
How leaves of Metals are to be polished.
THe plates being thus thinned and finished, we will fall to polishing of them.
But first we must provide tools, wherewith to perform it. Take a plate of
Copper of a foot in length, and a hand in breadth, most exquisitely burnished,
that it may be as smooth as a looking-glass: bow it either with your hand, or a
hammer, by little and little, into the form of a semicylinder. Then turn a
piece of wood, so that it may be equal, and fit for it in every part, and be
received into the convexity of it, where being fastened with four nails at the
corners of the plate, it may remain steadfast. Fix this wood upon a little
frame, with two bars of a foot height, fastened to the ends of it. Now we will
begin to burnish the plates; which must be thus done: provide chalk made into
fine powder, after this sort; take some beaten clay, wrap it in a clean and
indifferently fine cloth, and put it into a washing-bowl full of water; stir
it about here and there, in the water, that the finest part may be washed
through, and the courser remain in the cloth: then put the new chalk into the
cloth again; stir it and strain it till it all pass through the cloth, and
then suffer the water to settle, and seirce it through a strainer; only
changing the water, until no gross settlement remain: Then lay the cloth over
the mouth of the vessel, which must receive it, and tie it slack on: so strain
it, that you may be the more sure, that nothing but what is very fine can pass
through: then press cut the water, and reserve the chalk. Lay this clay, thus
prepared, upon the Copper, and rub it with a poplar stick, till it shine like
gold: then wash it with water, over a wide-mouthed pan, that may receive the
water. After this, have a boodstone ready, very well polished, upon a plate
of lead, with the dust of Emerald, it will become most exquisitely smooth:
therefore, lay your rays of copper upon the copper, and spread it abroad with
the thumb of your left hand; then cast on the clay, and pour water on to wash
it, and then wipe it off, and let only the water remain to fasten them upon
the copper. Then take into your hands the stone, being fastened to a stick; and
polish the plates with it, having a great care that they do not run into
wrinkles; for then they are quite spoiled: but when they begin to move, pour on
some of the water, and that will fix them again: Continue this, till you have
made it all over as bright and smooth as a looking-glass. A token of their
perfect polishing is, when no marks of the running of the stone, is seen upon
them. Then taking them off from the wood, cast them into a pot of water, until
the rest are all finished; and then wrap them in a clean linen cloth: dry
them, and lay them up in boxes, free from all dust, and filth: but bend them
like a half-pillar, so that the polished side may be inward; and tie them so
with a string.

CHAP. XII.
Of building a furnace for the coloring Plates.
NOw we will show how to color them: but first, let us describe the furnace,
wherewith it must be done. Therefore let a Furnace be made of iron plates of a
convenient thickness: let it be a foot in height, and as much in the diameter
of the length; let it be covered on the top, with a circular plate: In the
center of the roof of it, cut a round hole, a handful in breadth; and set
another furnace upon it, of the same length and breadth, and make a hole in
that also, which must be set against the other, and join them close together.
Make a little door in the lower furnace, close to the ground; let it be made
with an arch, four fingers wide, and jet out half a foot, like the mouth of an
oven, and be joined in the same manner to the great furnace. Then kindle your
coals in another place, until they cease moking, and with iron tongs cast them
into the foresaid furnace: Heat it very well, and let the outward furnace or
mouth of the oven be fill half way with live coals. These being thus disposed,
fall to coloring the plates. And first, I will teach you

How to color plates with a purple color.
Take the plates tied about with thread, as I told you, and fit them upon a
pair of iron tongs, which you must fasten at the fore-end with an iron ring,
that they may not open: hold them upon the hole of the upper furnace, that they
may receive the ascending smoke; and turn them about, until by degrees you
shall perceive them gather a purple color, without any other smoke then what
arises from the heat of the coals: when you think them colored enough, remove
them from the smoke, and lay them aside.

How to make them of a Sapphire color.
It is done much after the same way: for taking the rays in an iron tongs, and
holding them over the hole of the furnace, cast upon the coals through the low
arched door, the feathers of a goose, which grow upon her breast, and then lay
upon them a red hot iron rod. For the smoke of the feathers, arising through
the tunnell of the furnace, will beat upon the rays, and make them of a
sky-colour: when the iron rod grows cold, take another and put in. It is very
admirable, how on a sudden these copper rays will change into several colors:
wherefore, when they have obtained the color which you desire, take them off
the furnace presently, for otherwise they will alter into another.

How to make them of a silver color.
Take a little silver, and dissolve it with aqua fortis: then pour some
fountain water into it, and your copper rays: presently the water will be
troubled, and will stick upon the copper like silver fleeces: cast away the
water, and wash the silver, and dry it in the Sun; and when it is dry, lay it
upon a marble, and mix with it an ounce of Tartar, and as much ordinary salt;
grind them together, till they be well mixed. This being made into powder, lay
it on copper, and rub it with your fingers, and it will make it shine like
silver: then spread the rays upon the round wood, and the copper; wet them with
the water, lay the powder on them, and rub them with your thumbs, that they may
become of a silver color; steep them in water, and levigate them with the
boodstone upon the foresaid copper; then set them in the smoke, and they will
shine with a sky-colour.

How to make them of the color of an Emerald.
It is very difficult, and there scarce is one of very many that will prove
right. First, make your rays of a sky-colour, as before; then take those which
have not took that color rightly, and lay two of them upon the hole of the
furnace; and through the vault of the little door, fling some leaves of Box
upon red hot plates of iron, where they will crackle like day-leaves, and send
up a smoke through the hole, which will color the rays. But before they come
to be of a green color, they must pass through many other colors, as yellow,
red, and sky-colour; but they must continue some time before they obtain a
perfect green.

How to make them red, like a Ruby.
Fling some flocks of Scarlet upon the live coals, and lay the thin plates over
the hole, and the arising smoke will color them red.

How to make them of the color of the Amethist.
When it is made of a sky-colour, it passes through the color of the
Amethist; take it therefore off in time, and you have your wish.

CHAP. XIII.
How rays are to be colored by a mixture of Metals.
I will now show how rays may be colored by mixture with other metals; which
is of more difficulty, but of longer continuance. The former cost but little
labor, but they easily lose their color: these are harder to be made; but
keep their color longer. Take half a pound of copper, and melt it in a melting
pot, put thereunto half a crown of gold; and when it is well melted, and mixed,
add some tartar, that when it cools, the top of it may be plain and smooth;
after it is cold, set it aside. Then take another half pound of copper, and
melt it in the same manner; mix a dram of silver with it, and let it cool:
take it out of the pot, and file the outside of it smooth; for the least
crack, or chap, would spoil the work. You may know whether there be any crack
within side or without, by this sign; place it in an even poise upon a piece of
iron, and strike it with another piece; if it sound equally, and ring clearly,
it is whole; if it do jar, it is cracked somewhere. Let your pieces of metal be
about a finger in bigness; beat them gently upon the anvile, lest they break
somewhere: set them in the fire and season them, and when they are cold, beat
them with the hammer into thin rays, as I have said before: if they chance to
crack, file off the flaws; and when they have been seasoned twice or thrice, in
the fire, have your pot of water ready, prepared with salt and tartar, to
whiten them, that you may more exactly find out the craks.

To make them of the color of a Ruby.
The plates being finished, if you would make them of a ruby color, do it with
flocks of scarlet, as before; but then the rags must be of the mixture of
copper and gold.

To make them of the color of a Sapphire or Emerald.
Let the plates be of copper and silver: the Sapphire color is made with goose
feathers, but the Emerald with box-leaves, holding them somewhat longer over
the fire. And these are the experiments which I have made concerning Gems.

THE SEVENTH BOOK OF Natural Magic: Of the wonders of the Lodestone.
THE PROEME.
WE pass from Jewels to Stones: the chief whereof, and the most admirable is
the Lodestone, and in it the Majesty of Nature does most appear: and I
undertake this work the more willingly, because the Ancients left little or
nothing of this in writing to posterity. In a few days, not to say hours, when
I sought one experiment, others offered themselves, that I collected almost two
hundred of principal note; so wonderful is God in all his works. But what wiser
and learneder men might find out, let all men judge. I knew at Venice R. M.
Paulus the Venetian, that was busied in the same study: he was Provincial of
the Order of servants, but now a most worthy Advocate, from whom I not only
confess, that ^ gained something, but I glory^^ it, because of all the men I
ever saw, I never knew any man more learned, or more ingenious, having obtained
the whole body of learning; and is not only the Splendour and Ornament of
Venice or Italy, but of the whole world. I shall begin from the most known
experiments, and pass to higher matters, that it may not repent any man of his
great study and accurate diligence therein. By these, the longitude of the
world may be found out, that is of no small moment for Saylors, and wherein the
greatest wits have been employed. And to a friend that is at a far distance
from us, and fast shut up in prison, we may relate our minds; which I doubt not
may be done by two Mariners Compasses, having the Alphabet writ about them.
Upon this depends the principles of perpetual motion, and more admirable
things, which I shall here let pass. If the Ancients left any thing of it, I
shall put that in by the way: I shall mark some false reports of some men, not
to detest their pains and industry, but lest any man should follow them in an
error, and so errors should be perpetual thereby. I shall begin with the Name.

CHAP. I.
What is the Name of this Stone, the kind of it, and the Country where it
grows.
PLato in Ione writes, that Empedecles called this stone (...), but Lucretius
from the country Magnesia.

The Greeks do call it Magnes from the place,
For that the Magnets Land it does embrace.
And the same Plato says, some call it Heraclius. Theophrastus in his book of
Stones calls it (...), that is Herculeum, because he found it about the city
Heraclea. Others think it denominated from Hercules: for as he conquered and
subdued all beasts, and men; so this stone conquers iron, which conquers all
things. Nicander thinks the stone so called, and so does Pliny from him, from
one Magnes a shepherd; for it is reported that he found it by his hobnail'd
shoes, and his shepherds-crook that it stuck to, when he fed his flocks in
Ida, where he was a shepherd. But I think it is called Magnes, as you should
say Magnus, only one letter changed. Others call it Siderites from (...), that
in Greek signifies iron, and the Latin call it Magnes, Heraclius, and
Siderites. Hes^hius makes the stone Siderites to be different from Herculeus;
for he says, one has an iron color, and the other a silver color. Also
Pliny from Sotacus makes five kinds of it. The Ethiopian, the Magnesian from
Magnesia near Macedonia, as the way lies to the Lake Boebis, on the right hand;
the third in Echium of Boeo^ia, the fourth about Alexandria at Troaderum; the
fifth in Magnesia of Asia. The first difference is, whether it be male or
female, the next in the color: for those that are found in Macedonia and
Magnesia, are red and black; but the Boeotian is more red then black: That
which is found in Troas is black, and of the female kind, and has no force
therefore. But the worst sort is found in Magnesia, of Asia; it is white, and
attracts not iron, and is like a Pumice stone. It is certain, that the bluer
they are, the better they are. The Ethiopian is highly commended, and it costs
the weight in silver. It is found in Ethiopia at Zimirum; for so is the sandy
country called. It is a token of an Ethiopick stone, if it will draw another
Loadstone to it. There is also a mountain in Ethiopia, not far off, that
produces a stone called Theamedes, that drives away all iron from it.
Dioscorides describes it thus. The best Loadstone is that which easily draws
iron, of a bluish color, thick, and not very weighty. P^saurensis makes three
sorts of them; one that draws iron, another flesh, another that draws and
repels iron; very ignorantly: for the fleshy Loadstone is different from this,
and one and the same stone draws and drives iron from it. Marbodeus says, it
grows amongst the Proglodites and Indians. Olaus Magnus reports, that there are
mountains of it in the North, and they draw so forcibly, that they have ships
made fast to them by great spikers of wood, lest they should draw out the iron
nails out of the ships that pass between these rocks of Loadstone. There is an
Island between Corsica and Italy, called Ilva, commonly Elba, where a Loadstone
may be cut forth: but it has no virtue. It is found in Cantabria in Spain,
Bohemia, and manyother places.

CHAP. II.
The natural reason of the Loadstones attraction.
BEcause some have written whole Books, of the reason of the Loadstones
attracting of iron: lest I should be tedious, which I purpose not to be, I
think fit to pass over other men's opinions, especially, because they depend
only upon words and vain cavils, that Philosophers cannot receive them; and I
shall set down my own, founded upon some experiments: yet I shall not pass by
the opinion of Anaxagoras, set down by Aristotle in his Book De Anima, who by a
similitude calls it a living stone, and that therefore it draws iron; and for
some other peculiar forces, which might be properly said to proceed from the
soul, as you shall see. Epicurus would fain give a reason for it, as Galen and
Lucretius report. For, say they, the Atoms that flew out of the iron, and meet
in the Loadstone in one figure, so that they easily embrace one the other;
these therefore, when they light upon both the concretes of the stone and iron,
and then fly back into the middle, by the way they are turned between
themselves, and do withal draw the iron with them. Galen inveighs against
this; for he cannot believe, as he says, that the small atoms that fly from
the stone, can be complicated with the like atoms that come from the iron, and
that their embracing can draw such a heavy weight. Moreover, if you put another
iron to that which hangs, that will fasten also, and another to that, and so a
third and fourth: and the atoms that result from the stone, when they meet with
the iron, they fly back, and are the cause that the iron hangs: and it is not
possible that those atoms should penetrate the iron, and through the empty
pores should rebound unto the former atoms, and embrace others, whereas he saw
five iron instruments hang one by the other. And if the atoms be diffused
straight forward through the iron, why then do other iron nails stick, fastened
but on the sides? for the virtue of it is spread every way: Wherefore if a very
little Loadstone should touch many small bodies of iron, and these others, and
those others again, and the Loadstone must fill them all; that small stone
would even be consumed into atoms. But I think the Loadstone, is a mixture of
stone and iron, as an iron stone, or a stone of iron. Yet do not think the
stone is so changed into iron, as to lose its own Nature, nor that the iron is
so drowned in the stone, but it preserves it self; and whilst one labors to
get the victory of the other, the attraction is made by the combat between
them. In that body, there is more of the stone, then of iron; and therefore the
iron, that it may not be subdued by the stone, desires the force and company of
iron; that being not able to resist alone, it may be able by more help to
defend it self. For all creatures defend their being: Wherefore, that it may
enjoy friendly help, and not lose its own perfection, it willingly draws iron
to it, or iron comes willingly to that. The Loadstone draws not stones, because
it wants them not, for there is stone enough in the body of it; and if one
Loadstone draw another, it is not for the stone, but for the iron that is in
it. What I said, depends on these Arguments. The pits of Loadstone are where
the veins of iron are: these are described by Galen, and such as deal in
Minerals, and in the confines of them both; of the stone and the iron they
grow, and the Loadstones are seen, wherein there is more stone, and others in
which there is more iron. In Germany a Loadstone is dug forth, out of which
they draw the best iron; and the Loadstone, whilst it lies in the filings of
iron, will get more strength; and if it be smeered or neglected, it will lose
its forces. I often saw with great delight a Loadstone wrapped up in burning coals,
that sent forth a blue flame, that smelt of brimstone and iron; and that being
dissipated, it lost its quality of its soul that was gone, namely, its
attractive virtue. It is the stink of iron and brimstone, as such who destroy
iron by reducing it to a Calx, or use other Chemical operations, can easily
try. And I thought that the same soul, put into another body, must necessarily
obtain the same faculty.

CHAP. III.
That the Loadstone has two opposite Poles, the North and South, and how they
may be known.
BEcause the effects of the Loadstone are many and diverse, I shall begin to
distinguish from the effects of it, that the Readers may receive more benefit
and direction. The effects of the Loadstone, are of the stone only, or of the
iron touched with the stone, or of them both, the iron and the stone. The
simple effects of the stone, are to draw the stone, to respect the Poles of the
world, and such like: also they are mixed and compounded. We say therefore
first, that the stone has two points, that stand opposite one to the other, be
it in a great or small stone, which we call the Poles: one of them is directed
to the North, the other to the South: For if the stone be at liberty, and hangs
that it may play, without any impediments from its weight, one part turns
freely to the North, and the contrary part to the South. The way to try it is
thus: Take a little piece of Cork, or Fennel gigant, or some other light wood,
and make it like a Boat, that it may serve to bear up the weight of the stone.
Put the stone into this vessel, that it may be equi-distant from the bottom.
Put the Boat into a vessel full of water, that it may move here and there, and
find no impediment; let it so alone, and the Boat will never rest, until the
point of the stone stand full North, and the opposite point full South. When
the Boat stands still, turn it about twice or thrice with your finger, and so
it will come again to rest, and return to the same posture; and this shall make
you more certain of the North and South Poles of it. There are many more ways
to prove it, for letting it hang equally, as in the Mariners Compass; for where
it can move of it self freely, it still directs to the same points: and you may
do the same if you hang it by a small thread. Hence we may easily learn,

To know which Loadstone is the more perfect.
Which a man may easily do by the former trial, and find out what Loadstone is
void of virtue, or most forcible. For that Loadstone that does soonest bring
about the Boat to the points, and having found the north Pole, stands still, is
certainly the most forcible stone. But that which slowly works, and comes
softly about to its place, and stops often, is more weak and feeble. Also we may
be certified another way: for that which can turn about the greater piece of
wood, or boat, not slowly, but quickly, is the best stone. And though there be
more ways to try it, yet let these suffice at present: we shall speak of the
rest in other places.

CHAP. IV.
The force of the stone is sent by a right line from North to South, through
the length of it.
BUt the two points we speak of, are the end of the right line, running through
the middle of the stone from North to South; if any man break the stone, and
break this line, those ends of the division will presently be of another
property and virtue, and will be enemies one to the other: which is a great
wonder: for these two points, when they were joined together, had the same
force of turning to the pole; but now being parted asunder, one will turn to
the North, the other to the South, keeping the same posture and position they
had in the Mine where they were bred: and the same happens in the least bits
that are seen in the greatest lodestone.

For example: let the rock of Lodestone be ABCD, and let the line from North
to South be AB: if we shall cut the stone AB out of the rock, the very line AB
in the stone will represent the polar line from North to South. But if we break
the stone broad-wayes, every little piece will keep its line. Cut the stone AB
broad-ways, as CF, there will be two stones; ACD, and EFB: I say, the stones
cut through the line CD, each of them will have its poles of the world. In the
stone AGD, the North Pole will be A, the South G. In the stone EFB, the North
will be H, the South B; and that is beyond all admiration, that the points GH
whilst the stone was but one, were but one: as being agreed together, they had
the same forces; but when the stone is divided, each part will hold its virtue,
and be quite contrary and at enmity: for G always turns to the South, and H to
the North, and every bit will have its poles: and if you fit the divided stones
with boats, A and H will turn to the North, G and B to the South: and the same
will fall out, if you divide AG and HB into many small pieces; and if you
afterward join all these pieces together as they were, their mutual discord of
nature will be presently reconciled. Wherefore Cardanus said false, that the
Lodestone draws where it has but a thin cover, and more in one part then
another: for it attracts only from one certain point, as it had its position
before in the mines.

CHAP. V.
That the polar line in the Loadstone is not stable, but moveable.
BUt the like wonder of nature cannot but be admired amongst many that God has
made, and therefore I would have no man ignorant thereof. This polar line
spoken of, is not always certain in the same place, nor does it stand always
firm; but changes, and takes the contrary positions: but this is constant in
it, that it always runs through the middle of the stone, like a King that has
always his Court or fort in the midst of his Country: for consisting in the
center from whence the extreme parts are as it were the circumference, it can
easily send its forces to all parts, and defend it self. But an example shall
clear this.

Let the stone be AECF, and let the line AC running through the length of it,
be the polar line we speak of, wherein the force of it resides, which runs from
the North to the South-pole; I say, if you divide the stone in two pieces by
the line AC, that one piece may be AED, the other BCF, if they be taken
asunder, that the force of it does not reside in the extreme part of the line
AD or BC; but being divided in the middle, the force is received in the middle
of each stone, and in the stone AED, it will be GH, and in BCF, it will be IL:
which cannot be spoken without admiration, that in a dead stone there should be
a living virtue to move it self: who is there, unless he try it, that will
believe these things? For as the line that stretches from North to South was
in the prime, so if you divide the stone into a thousand parts, that force is
sent into all those parts, each of them holding its own line in the middle of
it; so if we shall divide the part AED into other parts, and shall part the
smallest of them, what part soever is parted from its confines, it will have
that same lively force running long-ways through the middle of it: and so it
will be, if you divide the stone into the smallest sand: but the greater wonder
is, that if you joit all the parts together again as they were at first, they
will all have the same force united, and that will retire into the middle of
the stone.

CHAP. VI.
That the force of North and South is vigorous in the points.
BUt what is more wonderful? Though the force retreats to the middle of the
stone, yet it does not send it self forth by the middle, but by the extreme
parts of the stone, and lies still in the middle, as if it were asleep; but it
is awake in the end, and there it comes forth: But if a man break the stone, he
shall see it more perfectly. I shall give an example for such that are curious,
to search out the virtue of the Lodestone.

Let the Lodestone be AB, and A the North pole, B the South; I say that in AB
the end of the stone, the force is greater, and in the middle of the line ILN,
it is more weak and drowsy, unless there be any virtue unknown in the right
and left side CD: but the nearer it is to the North or South, the more it
augments; but the farther off it is, the more it faints. Break the stone in C
and G, wherein there lay hid a virtue unperceived, but it will appear when the
stone is broken, and show its properties, and one point will show forth the
North, the other the South. And if these things seem superfluous, yet are they
necessary, as the grounds of what I must say.

CHAP. VII.
That by the touching of other stones, those points will not change their
forces.
ANd because I said that the Lodestone does not always hold its forces equal,
but that one stone is more powerful in operation then another, for some are
faint and weak; I shall put the first question, whether by rubbing and touching
the weaker stones with the stronger, those forces will be changed, or stay as
they were; as, if a Lodestone is sluggish in pointing out the pole, whether in
a stronger stone rubbed with the North point upon the North point of the
weaker, can help it at all; or if we shall rub the South point of the other on
the North point of this, whether the North point rubbed on will be gone and
become the South point, or continue in its former virtue? Where we have not
reason to direct us, experience shall prove it. For let a Loadstone be of what
forces and properties it may be, by rubbing it against a Loadstone of less
virtue, it will never lose any thing, but continues immutable; and being left
at liberty in its boat, it will turn voluntarily to its own pole, and decline
the contrary part. And though we cannot find the cause of it, yet it seems not
against reason; I say, that in stones of the same kind, the greater stones have
the greatest forces; and when one Loadstone i^ rubbed against another, it will
leave certain hairs, which are but the bruised small parts of the stone, that
stick like hairs, and these are they that lend force to iron and other things
to attract, and to turn to the pole; but if the stone that is rubbed and
receives it be greater then those hairs, it can never be that the gre^ter
virtue should be conquered by the less, always the stones being of the same
kind, since the hairs have as it were no proportion to the magnitude of it. And
as the hairs to the stones magnitude are insensible, so it is impossible that
they can wrest the force of it to the contrary pole.

CHAP. VIII.
That a Loadstone will draw a Loadstone, and drive it from it.
I Shall speak of the other operation of it, which is of its attracting and
repelling. This is both admirable, and delightsome to behold with our eyes, and
to consider in our mind, that the part of one Loadstone should so carefully
search out another, allure and attract it, to enjoy its company, and to foster
it in its bosom and again, another should be such an enemy to it, that they are
at mutual discord, so that putting their contrary ends together, the one will
be so contrary to the other, and hate as it were the force of it, that it will
turn the contrary way: namely, the North part of the one does not indifferently
draw any part of every other stone, but a distinct and certain part, nor does
it drive every part from it, but that part it naturally abhors, and cannot
endure, as being contrary unto it. The North part of the one will draw the
South part o^ the other, and drive away from it the North part of the same; and
the South part of this is not an enemy to the North part of the other, but to
the South part of it. The same will appear better by an example.

Let there be two stones ACD, and EBF: in the first stone let A be the North
pole, and the point G the South; in the stone EFB let the North part be H, the
South B: I say, if you put the South part G. of the stone CAD, to the South
part B, of the stone EFB, it will presently drive it from it; and the same will
happen if you put the North pole A to the North pole G Again, if you show the
North point A to the South point H, or the South point B to the North point A,
as being mutually agreed, it will draw the part to it that is not against it.
The reason of it I know; for since that the South part G, had formerly been
fast to the North part H, when the parts are divided they always seek to unite
again, to preserve the same body, as Philosophers say. But if the South point G
had been fast with the South point B of another stone, B^flies off presently,
and departs from it; or if you show the North point A, to the North point H,
the same will come to pass: for they refuse one the other, because they did not
so stand in their Mine. Here I shall confute the error of Pliny, and of his
followers, who think that no other Loadstone has this virtue but the stone of
Ethiopia; but it is common to all Loadstones. Also, it is a sign, says he, of
the Ethiopian stone, because that will draw another whole Loadstone to it. Also
Cardanus falsely affirms that one Loadstone will not draw another; but it will
draw it, because the iron is concealed in it that it had first drank in. In
brief, the poles that are unlike, will join together, by reason of the
similitude of their substance, and likeness of inclination; but the poles that
are the same, by a contrary inclination are at enmity: that is, the North point
seeks the South point, and the South the North point; so shall the South and
North points reject South and North points. Yet we must tell you by the way,
that when we try the stones, let them not be both great and vast stones, that
being hindered by their weights cannot perform their office: but let one be
great, and the other small; or both small, that they may be mutually repulsed
or drawn on. The trial is easy, if they be hanged by a thread, or put into
their boats, or if they play equally balanced upon the needle.

CHAP. IX.
A sport of the Loadstone.
I Will not pass by a merry conceit of the Loadstone, that I have oft-times
made my friends sport with, for the good of those that are curious in the
search of the reasons of things. How in a short time two kinds of sands
mingled, and said on a heap, may be parted one from the other very suddenly:
for the standers by, that cannot sound the reason of it will, think it
impossible. The trick is this: Pown a Loadstone into very fine sand, and put
some white sand, or some other sand together with it, and mingle them, and make
a heap of them: for if you put a Loadstone to it, either uncovered, or covered
with linen (that the standers by may not know it) presently the sand of the
Loadstone, as in league with it, will run like small hairs joined together, and
will stick fast to the stone; which you may brush off and lay aside, then come
again, and what is behind will run to the stone, till you have drawn it all
out; and it will cause no little wonder, that when the Loadstone comes to the
heap, the sands that were mingled should be parted asunder. But the more easily
to powder the Loadstone, do thus. Put the Loadstone into an iron mortar, lay a
blanket or some other soft thing upon it, for it will thus yield to
hand-strokes, and presently crumble; if not, you must beat hard on the bottom
of the mortar, and batter the pestle. Also the same thing befalls us in a
certain sand that is brought to us out of an iron Mine from Porchys, for it
has the color and shining that iron has; and by the proximation of the
Loadstone, it is soon parted from the other, to the admiration of those that
are present. It may be this experiment was made, because the ancients report
that the Loadstone will draw iron, sand, oil, and all things.

CHAP. X.
The greater the Loadstone is, the greater is the force of it.
ANd you must know, that the bigger Loadstone will cast forth its force at a
farther distance, and brandish it, and attract the opposite Loadstone with more
violence, and draw it to it, and that in the same sort of stone; as if a
Loadstone be a pound weight, and another Loadstone be a good distance from it,
it will presently leap, and meet the other that draws it. If we cut off half
that stone, the force of it will decay, and be dull as if it were dead, and the
vigor of it is taken away by the proportion of the part taken from it. If any
man will not believe it, let a stone be fetched for trial; for a part being
taken away, part of the virtue is lost also: join the part taken away as it
was, and the force will be restored, and become more lively, and will be as
powerful as formerly, that it will leap at a Loadstone that meets it at a great
distance, and presently embrace it. This argument confirms it, that the greater
the stone is, the greater force it has, even in the same sort of stones: for I
have seen diverse Loadstones, brought from diverse parts of the world, to have
diverse properties. I saw at Rome, a Loadstone weighed an Ounce, that drew two
Ounces of Iron, and held it so fast as it drew, that it could scarce be pulled
from it. I have seen others of forty Pound weight, that were so feeble, that
they would scarce stir an Ounce. But that I may the more oblige the curiosity
of Students in this matter, I shall teach in the following Chapters, how the
Virtue of the Stone may be tried and equally balanced.

CHAP. XI.
That the force of this Stone will pass into other Stones, that sometimes you
may see as it were a rope of Stones.
THe Stone with us is commended for another property; for when it has taken
hold of another Stone, it not only holds that fast, but it sends into the Body
of it an effluxion of its forces; and that having got more forces, draws
another, and gives it the like faculty: the third made to partake of the same
virtue, draws others that are near or far off, and cast forth and brandisheth
the same virtue; and this draws another: and so, by a reciprocal ejaculation,
by the same force it is held, by the same it holds others; and from each of
them to the other, are their darts flying, as it were endowed with the virtue
of them: and if you lift them up on high, they seem to hang in links like a
Chain, that they will not easily be drawn one from the other; that we must
needs wonder exceedingly, how that internal and invisible force can run from
one to the other, and pass through them: and the more virtue it has, to the
more it does communicate it. Yet I thought fit to forewarn you that you fail
not in your trial, that the Stones must stick the one to the other by the parts
that agree, and not by contrary parts; for so would not one impart his virtues
to another, but by the meeting with an opposite part, would be held back, and
cease from doing its Office; namely, that the North point of the one, must
stick to the South point of the other, as I said; and not contrarily: for the
South point applied to the South, and the North point to the North point, is
contrary and the faculty will faint and decay at the presence of its Adversary.
Nor yet will we omit to remember those that are curious to try this, that the
Stones must successively be proportionable, that the great one must draw a
less, and a little one must draw one less then it self: for so they will hang
the faster, and not be so easily pulled asunder.

CHAP. XII.
That in the Loadstone that hairyness is contused.
HEnce comes that hairiness of little Hairs, that we mentioned before, that
sticks so fast to the Stone, that it can hardly be pulled off: for when one is
rubbed against the other, or is beaten off with a light blow of the Hammer,
those small pieces being rubbed one against another, do not fall to the Earth
by their own weight, but are held up by the force of the Stone: and that one
may stick fast to the other, turning its friendly countenauce to it, it can by
no other means commodiously fasten to its sympathizing part, nor be joined with
it, but like a Hair or small Thread; and if you rub one Stone long against
another, that heap of Sand will so augment, that it will appear all hairy, or
like the down on a man's chin, or as it were beset round with a heap of pricks.
Nor is this to be passed without admiration, That if any man puts another
Loadstone to it, or near it, that is greater then i^, and more powerful; they
will appear presently to turn about, and to direct their friendly parts to the
like parts in the Stone that is put near them, and to strive to come to it; and
if they cannot do it, for want of strength, they will fall to the ground.

CHAP. XIII.
The attractive part is more violent then the part that drives off.
WE must tell the Reader of another thing beforehand, that having laid the
foundation of what we shall say, we may proceed to greater matters. The part
that attracts, draws more vehemently; and that which drives away, does it more
faintly; namely, the part opposite to it: for if the South part of the Stone,
stick to the North part of the other, it will draw at greater distance and more
force: but contrarily, if you turn the disagreeing parts together, namely, the
South parts to the South, and the North parts to the North parts, the natural
force is made dull, and as though it were feeble and weak, it loses its force,
that it cannot so well perform its Office; and if they be not very near, the
force is stopped, and can do very little. If any man desires to try, let him
hang them up with threads, or balance them on a pin, or put them in Boats, and
he shall find their readiness to draw, and their feebleness and sluggishness
to drive off from them.

CHAP. XIV.
The contrary parts of the Stones are contrary one to another.
THe parts we speak of, if they be joined friendly together, they will as it
were, enter a league, and help one the other, and will gain more force and
virtue. But if they be contrary, they are at such opposition by their Nature,
and such secret hatred there is between them, that being put together by their
disagreeing points, as if their Adversary were present, they will cease from
all their attraction, and lose all their force. As, if you have Loadstones in
your hands, that have the opposite parts united, the North and South together;
if another stone be put to them, neither of these stones will move or get the
Victory; for they neither draw to, nor drive from; especially, if both their
forces be equal. But if one be stronger then another, the stone that is put to
it, will move and stir, and will either come forward or go backward. But if you
take up his contrary Companion, he will either be drawn after, or will fly
from it willingly; for it will either go along with the part it agrees with, or
will go from that part it is contrary to: by which Reason you may know, that
one hinders the other. We may also by another Experiment, be made more certain
of the same thing: If you draw one Loadstone with another, and let it hang in
the Air; if to the place where they join, you apply the contrary force of
another Loadstone; by this meeting with their Enemy, both their forces will
fail and faint: and if the same be of a great force, the stone that drew will
let the other go, and falls from it. And also, not without mirth and
admiration, you shall see a Chain of many pieces of Loadstones hanging
together; and if you apply the contrary side to the third or fourth stone, the
Chain is presently broken, and the part falls off, and will not hang fast: but
the other parts, whither the force of it comes not, will yet stick fast
together in a Link, unless you put the end of the contrary part to them.

CHAP. XV.
How to know the Polar points in the Loadstone.
WE may know by another and more certain way then that I set down before,
which are the vertical points in the Loadstone, which turn to the North, which
to the South; and especially, that point that sends forth the attractive
virtue, will be discovered. Thus: That point that most vehemently draws unto it
the South point of another stone, and sticks fast to it, that is the North
point; and that point the North part of another stone willingly joins with, is
the South point. The same also may be known by the driving off: That point that
drives off from it, and refuses the North part of the stone put against it, is
the North point; and the (...) point, that drives from it the South point. And
he that would have the true pole more exactly demonstrated, let him do thus:
Put a little bit of a Loadstone, not much greater or lesser then a Millet-Seed,
to the Loadstone; and if it presently draw it at a distance, and when it is
drawn, it sticks fast and is hardly taken from it, it is an Argument of the
true end whence that force proceeds. You may also draw about a little bit about
that point, to see if it will draw weakly or strongly, and whether it will part
from that place of it self, or unwillingly. Briefly, That point that draws with
most force, and will hardly let loose what it has attracted, is the true point
of attraction; giving you to understand,

That the Pole sends its force to the Circumference.
I have known it so, as from the Center to the Circumference. And as the light
of a Candle is spread every way, and enlightens the Chamber; and the farther it
is off from it, the weaker it shines, and at too great a distance is lost; and
the nearer it is, the more clearly it illuminates: so the force flies forth at
that point; and the nearer it is, the more forcibly it attracts; and the
further off, the more faintly: and if it be set too far off, it vanishes
quite, and does nothing. Wherefore for that we shall say of it, and mark it
for, we shall call the length of its forces the compass of its virtues.

CHAP. XVI.
That the force of drawing and driving off, can be hindered by no hindrance.
BUt this is above all wonder, that you can never wonder so much as you should,
That the force of the stone for attraction and repelling, can be included in no
bounds, can be hindered by nothing, or held back; but it will penetrate
invisibly, and will move and stir those stones that are sympathizing with it,
if they be put to it, and will exercise its forces, as if there were nothing
between: but this must be within the compass of its virtue: for if you hang
some Loadstone fitly upon a Table of wood, stone, or metal, or lying equally
balanced, and you shall put your Loadstone under the Table, and stir it there,
the virtue of it will pass from this body like a Spirit penetrating the solid
Table, and move the stone above it, and stir it as it self is moved; as this
moves, so moves that; and when this rests, that does the same. But if the Table
be made of Loadstone or Iron, the virtue is hindered, and can do nothing: we
shall show the reasons of it in their proper places. Of so many strange
miracles in Nature, there is none more wonderful then this.

CHAP. XVII.
How to make an Army of Sand to fight before you.
ANd it is as pleasant as wonderful, that I showed to my Friends, who beheld on
a plain Table an Army of Sand divided into the Right and Left Wings, fighting,
to the wonder of the Spectators: and many that were ignorant of the business,
thought it was done by the help of the Devil. I pouned a Loadstone into powder,
some very small, some something gross: and I made some of little bits, that they
might better represent Troops of Horse, or Companies of Foot: and so I set my
Army here and there. The Wings were on the Right and Left, and the main Body
was in the middle, accompanied with Troops of Horse: under a smooth Table I put
a very principal Loadstone with my Hand. When this was put there, the Left Wing
marched; and on the Right Hand, with another stone, the Right Wing marched:
when they drew near together, and were more near the Loadstone, the Sands
trembled; and by degrees, they seemed like those that take up their Spears; and
when the Loadstone was laid down, they laid down their Spears, as if they were
ready to fight, and did threaten to kill and slay: and the better the Loadstone
was, the higher would these hairs stretch forth themselves: and as I moved my
Hands by little and little, so the Army marched on: and when the stones came
near to one the other, they seemed to fight, and run one within the other; so
the other Wings and Troops came on, and showed the form of a Battle; and you
might see them sometimes retreat, sometimes march forward; sometimes to
conquer, and sometimes to be conquered; sometimes to lift up their Spears, and
lay them down again, as the Loadstone was put near to them, or farther off; and
the more force there was to send forth every way. But this is the greater
wonder, because what is done on a plain Board, may be done hanging in the Air,
that you may see them like the Antipodes in Battle: for stretching out a Paper,
or setting a Table aloft, the Loadstones moved above the Table, will do the
same thing we speak of, and show it to the Spectator. But if one that is
ingenious do the business, he will do more and greater Feats then we can write
of.

CHAP. XVIII.
The Situation makes the Virtues of the Stone contrary.
IT cannot want wonder, as it does reason, That the position should show the
Virtues contrary to all that we have said: for the stone put above the Table
will do one thing, and another thing if it be put under the Table: for if you
fit the stone by equally poising it to make it move freely, or put it into a
Boat, and put a stone above it, it will attract it, or reject it, as we said
before: but if you put it under the stone, it will work contrarily; for that
part that drew above, will drive off beneath; and that will draw beneath, that
drove off above: that is, if you place the stone above and beneath in a
perpendicular. By which Experiments, one may see clearly, That the situation
will work contrary operations, and change the forces of it by turns. Wherefore
in the operations of it, you must chiefly mark the position, if you put the
Loastone above or beneath.

CHAP. XIX.
How the attractive force of the Loadstone may be weighed.
WE can also measure that attracting or expelling virtue of the Loadstone, or
poise it in a balance: which will be of no small consequence in the following
considerations; and especially, for a perpetual motion, and to make Iron hang
pendulous in the Air, when the true and certain attractive Virtue is found our
from the Circumference to the Center. The Art is this: Put a piece of a
Loadstone into a balance, and in the other scale as much weight of some other
matter, that the scale may hang equal: then we apply a piece of Iron lying on a
Table, that it may stick to the Loadstone that is in the scale: and that they
may stick fast by their friendly points, you shall by degrees cast some sand
into the other scale, and that so long, till the scale and iron part; so by
weighing the weight of the sand, we have the Virtue of the Loadstone we sought
to find. We may also put the iron into the scale, and lay the Loadstone on the
Table.

CHAP. XX.
Of the mutual attraction, and driving off of the Loadstone, and of Iron.
NOw are we come to the other part of our Treaty, wherein we discourse of the
mutual union of Loadstones, and of their differences one with the other: the
effects whereof are so known, that they are in the mouths of all men, nor will
any man almost say that he knows them not. The operation is this: Because there
is such a Natural concord and sympathy between the iron and the Loadstone, as
if they had made a League; that when the Loadstone comes near the iron, the
iron presently stirs, and runs to meet it, to be embraced by the Loadstone. And
that embraces it so fast, that with tossing of it up and down, you can scarce
part them. And the Loadstone runs as fast to the iron, and is as much in love
with that, and unity with it; for neither of them will refuse to be drawn. But
the weaker still runs willingly to meet the other. That you may believe this,
you shall try it thus: Either hang them both by a thread, or put them in boats,
or balance them on the needle. Pliny speaking of this, says, For what is more
wonderful? or wherein is Nature more wanton? what is more sluggish than a cold
stone? yet Nature has given this both sense and hands. What is more powerful
than hard iron? yet it yields and submits: for the Loadstone draws it; and that
matter that conquers all things, runs after I know not what; and as it comes
near, it stops, and lays fast hold, and stays constantly to be embraced.
Lucretius, seeking the cause of this effect,

How it should be that Loadstone Iron draws:
And Orpheus in his Verses relates, that iron is drawn by the Loadstone, as a
Bride after the Bridegroom, to be embraced; and the iron is so desirous to join
with it as her husband, and is so sollicitous to meet the Loadstone: when it is
hindered by its weight, yet it will stand an end, as if it held up its hands to
beg of the stone, and flattering of it, as if it were impatient that it cannot
come at it by reason of its ponderosity; and shows that it is not content with
its condition: but if it once kissed the Loadstone, as if the desire were
satisfied, it then is at rest; and they are so mutually in love, that if one
cannot come at the other, it will hang pendulous in the air. Wherefore Albertus
very ignorantly told Frederick the Emperor, that a friend of his showed a
Loadstone that did not attract iron, but was attracted by it: since the lighter
of these two will stir, when the heavier approaches near it.

CHAP. XXI.
The Iron and Loadstone are in greater amity, then the Loadstone is with the
Loadstone
THe exceeding love of the Iron with the Loadstone, is greater and more
effectual and far stronger, then that of the Loadstone with the Loadstone; and
this is easily proved: For lay on a Table, pieces of iron, and Loadstone of the
same weight; and let another Loadstone be brought near; when it comes to a fit
distance, the iron will presently stir, and runs toward the Loadstone and
embraces it. And it is proved better thus: Let a Loadstone embrace a
Loadstone, and be set softly near the iron; when the force of its circumference
comes to the iron, the Loadstone will presently let fall the Loadstone, and lay
hold on the iron: but let iron and that be joined, no Loadstone can ever take
them asunder to stick there.

CHAP. XXII.
The Loadstone does not draw on all parts, but at certain points.
YEt we must not think that the Loadstone draws the iron with every part, but
at a set and certain point; which is to be searched out, with great reason,
care, and diligence. You shall find it thus: either hang up the iron, or
balance it on a Table, that it may presently leap to be embraced from them:
then carry your Loadstone round about it; and when you see the iron tremble,
and run toward the Loadstone, touching it, that is the very point of
attraction, and the beams of its virtue are sent round about from that point:
wherefore, the farther from that point the iron is, the more faintly and weakly
will it move; for the more forcible virtue nests in the Center, as in its
Throne.

CHAP. XXIII.
That the same Loadstone that draws, does on the contrary point drive off the
iron.
THat no man might be deceived, thinking the Loadstone that draws iron, to be
different from that stone that drives it off; I tell him of it beforehand, and
I shall by experiments dissipate this cloud. Pliny says, the Loadstone that
draws iron to it, is not the same with that which drives iron from it. And
again, In the same Ethiopia, there is a mountain that produces the stone
Theamedes, that drives off iron, and rejects it. Pliny not knowing this,
erred exceedingly, thinking that they were two stones that had these contrary
operations; whereas it is but one and the same stone, that by sympathy and
similitude, draws the willing iron to it; but with the opposite part, by
antipathy of Natures, it drives it off. And you may be easily assured of this:
for let iron be balanced equally, and let one end of the Loadstone draw it, if
you turn the other end to it, it will fly back, and turn to the contrary part:
these points run in a right line through the middle of the stone. Yet observe
this, that the iron which is drawn by one point of the Loadstone, or is within
the compass of its virtue for a while, obtains presently this virtue: that what
is drawn by the one end of it, will be driven off by the other. You shall know
these differences of attraction more clearly by the following experiment.

CHAP. XXIV.
How iron will be made leap upon a Table, no Loadstone being seen.
BY reason of this consent and discord of the Loadstone, I use to make pretty
sport to make my friends merry. For casting the iron on the Table, and not
putting any Loadstone near it, that the spectators can see, the iron will seem
to move it self: which is very pleasant to behold. I do it thus: divide a
needle in the middle, cast one half of it upon the Table, but first rub the
head of it with one end of the Loadstone. Put your hand with the Loadstone
privately under the Table, and there where the head of the needle lies, the
Loadstone will stick, and the needle will presently stand upright: and standing
so, to the wonder of the beholders, will walk over the Table, and follow the
motion of the hand that guides it: when it has gone thus a while, presently
turn the stone upside down, and put the contrary part of the Loadstone to the
needle; and (which is strange) the needle will turn about: and if it went on
the head before, it will now go on the point; and draw your hand which way you
will, the needle will follow it: and if you turn the stone three or four times,
putting sometimes the south point, sometimes the north point of the stone to
it, the needle will turn as often, and sometimes stand on the head, sometimes
on the point upright, or walk so as you please; and sometime it will go with
that part it stood upon, sometimes it will stand on the part it went. I can
present my friends with the same sight, in a more strange manner: for if you
put the two pieces of a needle upon a paper or Table, whereof one has touched
the north point, the other the south point of the stone, I can so place two
stones, that one of the needles shall go upon the head, the other upon the
point; and sometimes one shall turn, then both at once, or they shall dance
orderly, and move when any music is played on. And this is a pretty sight to
show your friends, that cannot but admire it.

CHAP. XXV.
That the virtue of the Loadstone, is sent through the pieces of Iron.
THat virtue that is imparted to the iron, by the Loadstone, does not stay in
the iron, but is sent from one to another. For if you draw a ^eel needle by the
touch of the Loadstone, and put another needle to the end of that needle, that
part will draw the needle, and hold it hanging in the air; and if you apply
another needle to that, it will do the same.

You may do this with as many needles, as the force of the Loadstone can reach
unto; but when it grows faint, the needle will let the other needle fall, as
not having strength enough to bear its weight. And thus you may hang a great
many needles in a chain in the air. Plato knew this virtue, for he speaks of it
in Ione: which stone, not only draws iron rings, but infuseth virtue into the
rings themselves, that they can do the same, and attract rings as the one does:
whence sometimes you shall see a long concatenation of iron rings, and all the
virtue of them is attracted from that stone. Lucretius knew it also.

A Stone there is that men admire much,
That makes rings hang in chains by touch.
Sometimes five or six links will be
Fast joined together, and agree.
All this virtue from the Stone arises,
Such force it has --
Pliny speaking of the same virtue, says, Only this matter receives strength
from another stone, and holds it a long time; laying hold of another iron, that
sometimes you shall see a chain of rings, which the ignorant vulgar call Live
iron. Galen. You may see in the Loadstone, that when it touches iron, it will
^^ick to it, without any bands: and if that was first touched, touch another,
that will ^^ick as the first does; and likewise a third to the second.
Augustine de civitate Dei, speaking of this wonder, said, We know that the
Loadstone will wonderfully draw iron; which when I first saw, I trembled at it
exceedingly. For I saw an iron-ring drawn by the stone, that hung in the air by
it, that communicated the same force to others: for another ring put to the
first, made that hang also; and as the first ring hung by the stone, so the
second ring hung by the first ring. In the same manner was there a third and
fourth ring applied, and fastened; and so their rings hung together by the
outsides, not fastened inwardly, like to a chain of rings. Who would not admire
at the virtue of this stone? that was not only within it, but ran through so
many rings, that hung by it, and held them fast with invisible bands. But the
greater the virtue of the Loadstone is, the more rings it will hang up: I have
hanged ten needles with a stone of a pound weight. But he that would draw many
needles, let him rub the heads only against the Loadstone, and they will all
hold the heads by their points.

CHAP. XXVI.
The Loadstone within the sphere of its virtue, sends it forth without touching.
ANd the Loadstone does not only impart its virtue to the iron, by touching
it, but, which is wonderful, within the compass of its virtue, it will impart
virtue to the iron, if it be but present, to draw another iron. For if you put
your Loadstone so near to the iron, that it may have it only within the
circumference of its virtue, and you put another iron near to that iron, it
will draw it to it; and if another touch that which is drawn, it will draw that
also: that you shall see a long chain of rings or needles, hanging in the air.
But when they hang thus together, if you ^emove the Loadstone a little farther
off, the last ring will fall; and if yet you remove ^ farther, the next will
fall, until they all fall off: whence it is clear, that without touching, it
can impart its virtue to the iron.

CHAP. XXVII.
How the Loadstone can hang up iron in the air.
I Have a long time endeavored much to make iron hang in the air, and not
touch the Loadstone, nor yet tied beneath: and now I think it almost impossible
to be done. Pliny says it: Dinocrates the Architect began to vault the Temple
of Arsinoe with Loadstone, that therein her Image of iron might seem to hang in
the air: both he and Ptolomy died, who commanded this to be made for his
sister; so that what he began, he did not finish. The Greeks say, that in the
Temple of Serapis, that is vaulted at Alexandria, there was a Lodestone set,
that held a statue of brass in the air; for it had a piece of iron in the head
of it. But that is false, that Mahomets chest hangs by the roof of the Temple.
Petrus Pellegrinus says, he showed in another work how that might be done: but
that work is not to be found. Why I think it extreme hard, I shall say
afterward. But I say it may be done, because I have now done it, to hold it
fast by an invisible band, to hang in the air; only so, that it be bound with
a small thread beneath, that it may not rise higher: and then striving to catch
hold of the stone above, it will hang in the air, and tremble and wag it self.

CHAP. XXVIII.
The forces of the Loadstone cannot be hindered, by a wall or table coming
between.
AS I said before of the Loadstone, the virtue of that and iron, can be hindered
by no body coming between; but it will do its office. For whilst the Loadstone
is moved under a Table of wood, stone, or any metal, except iron; the needle in
the Mariners Compass will move above, as if there were no body between them.
St. Augustine Lib. de civitate Dei, knew this experiment. But that is much more
wonderful that I have heard: that if one hold a Loadstone under a piece of
silver, and put a piece of iron above the silver, as he moves his hand
underneath that holds the stone, so will the iron move above; and the silver
being in the middle, and suffering nothing, running so swiftly up and down,
that the stone was pulled from the hand of the man, and took hold of the iron.

CHAP. XXIX.
How a man of wood may row a little Boat; and some other merry conceits.
THe fraud here is notable; for women shall see a man of wood rowing a little
boat well waxed, in a large vessel full of water, and they can counterfeit
hereby, as impostors do divination by water. The fraud is thus began: the
vessel is filled with water, a little ship of Wax is put into it, or else of
wood; in the middle sits a little man of wood, fastened through the middle with
a hogs-bristle, so equal balanced, that with every light motion he may easily
stir himself: let him have oars in his hands, and under his feet a piece of
iron. Let the Alphabet be made on the brim of the vessel, round about:
wherefore a woman coming to enquire of some doubtful matter, the little man of
wood, as if he would give a true answer, will row to those letters that may
signify the answer: for he that holds the Loadstone in his hand, under the
Table, can draw the boat which way he will, and so will answer by joining these
letters together. Or put a boy of cork into a glass viol, with a broad mouth,
that turns himself about the needle equally balanced; and about the glass
vessel, make the Alphabet, that the man turning round about may give answers.
But I made my friends wonder exceedingly to see

A paper go up a wall, and come down of it self.
For I glew'd a piece of iron on the backside of the paper, and I gave it my
friends to hold to the wall; but behind stood a boy with a Loadstone, and the
paper that was left there, stood still: my friend commanded it to go up two
foot: the boy that heard what was commanded, moved the Loadstone against it, to
that place: and the paper moved thither also, and so downwards, or side-ways:
they that knew not the reason were astonished at it. But, which exceeds all,
when he moved the Loadstone over his head by an arch of wood, it drew the paper
after it whereupon the paper hung over our heads and moved: but all that saw
it, believed the Devil was the cause of it.

CHAP. XXX.
A Loadstone on a plate of iron, will not stir iron.
WE said that there is nothing coming between, can hinder the force of iron,
but iron only: so that if you lay a needle on a plate of iron, and shall bring
your Loadstone to it, above or beneath, it has no virtue to attract it, or do
its office: and the reason is easy. For it stands by reason, that if iron lie
upon iron, they are the same body, as a part is of the whole: and when the
plate of iron, or piece, is bigger, and too heavy for the Loadstone to draw, it
moves not. So that if you put the filings of iron upon a plate of iron, and
with your hand underneath, you carry the Loadstone, the filings will not stir,
but stand still upon the plate. Nor if iron or a Loadstone be upon a Table of
iron, will they come to the stone that is put to them, but will lie as if they
were asleep, and void of all virtue, or changed in their Natures. Also, if you
put flat iron to a Load stone, if on the other side iron be equally balanced,
it will not stir, nor move to meet it; as if all the force of the Loadstone
were hindered by it. Lucretius says, that it will happen so, not when iron, but
brass is between them: but I rather think he writ so by hearsay, then by his
sight, if we understand his meaning.

Pieces of iron I have seen,
When only brass was put between
Them and the Loadstone, to recoil:
Brass in the middle made this broil.
CHAP. XXXI.
The position of the Iron, will change the forces.
What the Loadstone can do, the iron touched by the Loadstone, will do the
same. I said, that the Loadstone equally balanced, by putting the south part of
the Loadstone above, it will draw the north part, and the north part will drive
off the north part; but on the lower part, the Nature being changed, that which
drew before, drives off now; and that which drove off, draws to it. The same I
judge of iron touched with the Loadstone. For iron in the Mariners Compass
touched with the Loadstone, that part of the Loadstone that draws and drives
off in the upper part, being put under, expels what it drew before, and draws
what it expelled. I would not omit, that amongst its admirable properties, the
position should cause such alteration. Whence we may conjecture, that as the
stone has a pole-arctick and antarctick; so it has an east and west part, and
its upper and nether part, as the heavens have: and therefore it is reasonable,
that whereas the north and inferior part from above, drew the south and
inferior part of the iron; now the position being changed, the upper part of
the stone will draw the nether part of the iron.

CHAP. XXXII.
That the iron rubbed with the northern point of the Loadstone, will turn to
the south, and with the south point to the north.
I Come to the third part, that is, to the iron touched with the Loadstone, and
they are all wonderful, I say then, that when we know the north point of the
stone, and we have rubbed one end of the iron with it, if it be equally
balanced, or hung by a thread, or lie freely in a boat, it will turn of it self
to the south. And that stands with reason: for the Loadstone imparts its force
to the iron. For it is the natural force of the Loadstone, that being balanced
equally, it should turn its north point to the north, and his south point to
the south. But when it is rubbed on the iron, the upper part of the Loadstone
is fastened to the iron; but the lower part that is near to it, is freed:
wherefore, if you rub the iron with the north part, which fastneth to the iron,
and touches its external superficies, it will be northern that seems to to be
southern, and this south part will turn freely to the north. But contrarily, if
you rub the south point against the iron, the south point is fastened to the
iron, and the north point is let loose that turns to the north. Wherefore
Cardanus speaks false, that the iron touched by the north point, will turn to
the north, and that which was touched by the south point, will turn south; for
we see the contrary. Yet the iron must be touched with one point, either the
north or south point: for if one part bend northward, the other will tend
southward; by the use whereof, so large seas are sailed over, that being the
conductor. Our Ancestors sailed, by seeing the sun by day, and the stars by
night. For in the middle of the sea, as they wandered, they could no otherwise
see the coasts of the world. But we cannot only discover what coast we are in,
but we can avoid the rocks under the waters; and in cloudy days and dark
nights, we can at all times know the poles of the world. Flav^us says, an
Italian found it out first, whose name was Amalphus, born in our Campania. But
he knew not the Mariners Card, but stuck the needle in a reed, or a piece of
wood, cross over; and he put the needles into a vessel full of water, that they
might flote freely: then carrying about the Loadstone, the needles would follow
it; which being taken away, as by a certain natural motion, the points of the
needles would turn to the north pole; and having found that, stand still.
Wherefore, knowing the place before they steered their course thither. Now the
Mariners Compass is made, and a needle touched with the Loadstone, is so fitted
to it, that by discovering the pole by it, all other parts of the heavens are
known. There is made a rundle, with a Latin-navel upon a point of the same
metal, that it may run roundly freely. Whereupon, by the touching only of one
end, the needle not alone partakes of the virtues of it, but of the other end
also, whether it will or not: For if you rub the needle with the north point of
the stone presently that part will turn to the south, and the opposite part to
the north; and one virtue cannot be imparted without the other. So the needle
touched by the south point of the stone, will turn to the north, and the other
part to the south; so that the part of the needle that is touched, receives a
contrary force, from that the stone has.

CHAP. XXXIII.
That iron touched by the Loadstone, will impart that force to other iron.
IRon touched by the Loadstone, by that touch receives the virtue of the
Loadstone, that it will do almost as much by attracting, and effecting, and
turning it self to the pole. So the iron hanging freely, touched with the south
point of the Loadstone, will turn freely to the north: if you apply the south
part of the stone to the same, it will turn to the south presently. But if you
touch another iron with the iron that was touched, that will turn to the south;
and do but point at it with the said point of the iron, it will turn to the
north. And this force is not only sent into the second iron, but to a third
and fourth, as the force of the Loadstone is. For if it be a strong stone, it
will send its virtue through eight or ten needles.

CHAP. XXXIV.
The virtue received in the iron, is weakened by one that is stronger.
YEt this I must tell you, that the virtue received by the iron, is not fixed
and certain, but is taken off by a stronger that takes it from it. As an iron
touched by a weak northern point of the Loadstone; if you rub the same part of
the iron with a south point of a stronger Loadstone, it will vanish, and that
former force of turning it self to the south, is taken away, and it takes a
southern virtue, and will turn to the north without resistance. But if the
Loadstones be of equal force, they are so astonished and blunted, that they
will neither receive both, nor either.

CHAP. XXXV.
How in a stone the south or north point is discerned.
AMongst those ways I showed before, I shall set down this also; and perchance
this is the best, how to know the true northern and southern points. Let the
Loadstone be turned round, by the wheel of the Jewellers, and polished. Then
make a slender iron, as long as the axeltre of that round ball, and lay that
upon the stone: for it will turn it self upon that line, that points just north
and south. Mark the line upon the stone, with some delible paint: do the same
on the otherside of the stone; and where it rests upon the ball, draw the same
line: do the same the third and fourth time, upon the middle of it: and where
those lines cross one the other and meet, those are the polar points. We may
also find it out thus: Break a small needle, and put the smallest piece upon
the same ball, and stir it; for when it comes to the just northern point, the
needle will stand upright, that will make standers by admire, and will stand
perpendicularly upon it: and till it do rise thus, be not weary of moving it up
and down; for when you have found it, you will be glad of it.

CHAP. XXXVI.
How to rub the iron needle of the Mariners Compass.
I Know that some are troubled how to rub the needle in the Compass with the
Loadstone, that it may get force to turn it self to the north Pole. It must be
done thus: When you have found the points in the stone, as I said before;
strike the points lightly with a hammer, and the plates will be full of stiff
hairs: upon which if you rub an iron needle, it will presently get virtue to
turn it self to the Poles. Yet observe this, that if you would have your needle
turn to the north, you must rub it on the south point; but if to the south, rub
it with the north part: For when it is equally balanced, it will turn to these
points in the heavens. But that it may do it more forcibly, and do its office
more exactly, I shall lay down some rules fit to instruct you. If you strike
both ends of the stone with the hammer, that hairs may appear on both parts,
that you touch the needle at both ends, for so the needle will sooner do its
office. Moreover, you must observe very carefully, that when the iron rubbed
against the Loadstone, has received these hairs, that you touch it with no
other iron or Loadstone, but keep it far distant from them, and lock it up in a
box; for by touching of others the iron will grow dull, and lose its virtue,
that it will never point out the parts of heaven perfectly. For the iron coming
within the Compass of the virtue of another Loadstone, will receive that, as we
said. So the needle must be proportionable to the stone. For from a little
Loadstone, a great iron will not receive much virtue, nor show the pole: also,
a little piece of iron cannot receive much virtue; for it consumes by the great
force of the Loadstone. Moreover, the point that shows the pole, must not be
sharp, but f^at a little, that it may receive those virtues of the Loadstone
exactly, and hold them; for in a very sharp point, scarce any virtue will
abide. Iron, the purer it is, the better will it hold the virtue. For it will
hardly take upon foul and rusty iron: wherefore Mariners make it of pure steel;
for steel is made of the best iron. If you observe this, iron once rubbed, will
hold the virtue a hundred years; and will certainly, without failing, point
exactly at the poles in the heavens, for so long time.

CHAP. XXXVII.
Of the diverse uses of Mariners Compasses.
ANd the needle touched, does not only show the poles for the Mariners use,
but almost it serves for infinite uses; as all men know that it is daily spoken
of every where. I shall speak of some of the chief. The use of the Loadstone
upon the needle, is well known in Sun-dials: for when the needle stands still
over the line that is made from north to south, we are so directed by it, to
know the hours by the shadow falling from the Gnomon. Also, those that work in
Mines use the needle, to find the veins of the metals, which way they run: for
in caves under ground, in that posture the needle stands that is touched with
the Loadstone, they know the veins of the metals run on that side of the
heavens. Also, it does serve very much for those that describe platforms of
buildings, cities, countries, whilst the situation of the corners are taken and
described upon the paper. We use it also in making passages, for to bring water
under ground, in digging pits, in making Mines and Trenches, wherewith they
use, with great skill, to blow up Forts, Castles, Rocks and Walls, by putting
Gunpowder into them, and stopping all places of vent: the Compass guides them
how to go on. Lastly, how to level the discharging of Canon, both by night and
day, it is of singular virtue, and for many other uses, too tedicus to relate
here.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
How the Longitude of the world, may be found out by help of the Loadstone.
I Will not omit, that amongst the principal uses of the Loadstone, by the help
of it the Longitude of the world may be found out. Which notable work has
employed the wits of the most knowing men. It has been observed a long time by
our men, that the needle touched with the Loadstone, will not always rest upon
the Meridian line, but sometimes will decline nine degrees from it to the east;
nor will it hold the same posture in all places; but in diverse places, it has
diverse declinations. But this error seems to follow this order, that the
nearer it is to the east, the more it will decline from the Meridian line,
toward the east; and the nearer it comes to the west, the point of the needle
will decline the more to the west. For finding the Meridian line, as Ptolomy
and other Geometricians teach how, and setting up a point thereon, that the
steel needle may turn freely upon the top of it, in Italy it declines toward
the east nine degrees, of which there is ninety in a quadrant of a circle, as
it is observed in Sun-dials that are brought out of Germany, and it is so
described. Moreover, many famous travelers report, that amongst the Fortunate
Islands, one is called the Azores, where the needle set in the Compass, will
rest directly upon the Meridian line, without any variation at all. Also, they
that sail to the West Indies observe, that the point of the needle will decline
to the west. Therefore, laying down these for true Maxims, we may easily know
the longitude of the world: for if we make a very great Compass, about five
foot diameter, and divide the degrees and minutes, into seconds and thirds,
etc. and sailing under the Equator, we do observe the chief motions of the
Needle, and the declinations of it, and shall accommodate the same to the
proportion of our Voyages; we shall easily know the Longitude of the World,
beginning from the Fortunate Islands. Whence both Longitude and Latitude in
dark nights, and the greatest Tempests may be certainly discovered Wherefore it
is false that Cardanus says, That the Needle in the Compass declines from the
Meridian Line, because it inclines to the Pole Star in the little Bears Tail:
whereas, the Needle declines nine Degrees, and the Polar Inclination is not so
much.

CHAP. XXXIX.
If the Mariners Needle stand still, and the Loadstone move, or contralily,
they will move contrary ways.
IF the Loadstone lie on the Table, and you put the North point of the Mariners
Needle to the South point of the stone, and shall carry it round about by the
right hand, the Needle will draw to the left: but moving the Box to the left
hand, the Needle will run to the right; and it will go so far, until it stand
in the middle between those two opposite points. The same will be seen in a
Sun-Dial, if that stand, and the Loadstone be carried about: for if you decline
to the right hand, the Needle will follow the same part; and likewise, if you
turn to the left. Hence it is apparent, That the Needle in the Compass is drawn
by the North Pole: for those that sail toward the East, have it turned toward
the East; and so contrarily to the West, it will move to the same point of the
Heaven: and if the Loadstone be turned about, the Iron will turn about also, as
a pair of Compasses about the Center.

CHAP. XL.
The Loadstone imparts a contrary force to the Needle.
NOw I will speak of the Needle touched with the Loadstone, and of the
wonderful operations of it. The first is; That when the Iron is touched by the
Northern point of the Loadstone, and equally balanced; if you put that part to
it from which it received its force, it will not endure it, but drives it from
it, and draws to it the contrary and opposite part; namely, the Southern part:
the reason whereof, I set down before. The same falls out if you touch the
Needle with the South part of the Loadstone: for if you presently put the same
to it, it will resist it, and draw to it the North point. Hence the parts that
are alike, are at enmity, and rejected as Adversaries; and the parts that are
unlike do agree as Friends. Whence it is apparent, That the Loadstone imparts
to the Iron a contrary force from what the end it self is, and the Steel
receives the force of that point of the Loadstone which it touches not. And I
prove it thus: Take two Needles, and put them in Boats, or hang them by
Threeds; that being touched with the Loadstone, they may move freely: they are
contrary one to the other, and they will join in the parts that were touched
with contrary ends of the Loadstone, and will not endure the ends that are
alike.

CHAP. XLI.
Two Needles touched by the Loadstone, obtain contrary Forces.
I Will relate a strange thing, yet not far from Reason. If you touch two
Needles with a Loadstone together, and set them on the same point of it; the
other parts that hang on the Loadstone, will abhor and fly one from the other:
and if you force them together with your hands, so soon as you let them alone,
they will presently return to their postures, and depart as far as they can
from one another. The reason is this: That if two Needles stick fast to one
Northern point of the Loadstone, with their points: you must imagine, that they
did receive a Southern virtue; and because they are of the same similitude,
they will not endure one the other; and because they are fastened to the
Loadstone, they cannot get off being compelled by a greater force: but the
opposite points of the Needle, because they are both alike Northerly, they must
needs abhor one the other: and when they are free, one will part from the
other. And when they are so hanging on, if you put to them the Southern part of
another Loadstone, they will presently let go their hold, and go as far off as
they can, that sometimes they are pulled off from the Loadstone, being forced
by an invisible vapor.

CHAP. XLII.
That the force of the Iron that draws, will drive off Iron by diversity of
Situation,
THat, as I said of the Loadstone alone, is true of the Iron that is touched
with it: for if you put a Needle touched with a Loadstone by a Boat, swimming
in the Water, or hanged by a Thread, or turning on a point equally balanced: if
you put upon this a Needle touched with a Loadstone, it will draw it: and that
part that attracted the Iron above, will put underneath, drive it away; and the
part that drives off above, will draw to it, put underneath: where you may
observe, that the position will work contrary operations.

CHAP. XLIII.
The Needle touched by the Loadstone on one part, does not always receive
Virtue on both parts.
IF the Needle be touched at one end by the Loadstone, it receives Virtue at
that end; and at the other end, the contrary virtue: But that must not be
understood absolutely, but of that Needle that is of a proportionable length:
for if it be too long, the virtue will not come to the other end. But would we
know how far the virtue is come, we must know how far reached the Circumference
of the Virtue, as I said. Therefore if the Circumference of it be a foot, the
force will go a foot-long into the Needle. If we would try this: Touch a long
Needle three foot long with a Loadstone at one end, if it touch the Iron at the
other end, the Iron touched will not move from its place; but if you touch it a
foot or two long, namely, as far as the Circumference of the Loadstones Virtue
will reach, and then touch the Needle, it will presently move and be drawn by
it.

CHAP. XLIV.
The Needle touched in the middle by the Loadstone, sends forth its Force at
both ends.
IF the Needle be somewhat too long, and we rub it with the stone in the middle
of it, the forces of the stones part are diffused to both ends of it; but very
obscurely; for you shall not know which is the end: but if you touch it
something farther from the middle, the nearer part will receive the forces of
the part that touched it, be it the Northerly or Southerly part.

CHAP. XLV.
An Iron Ring touched by a Loadstone, will receive both Virtues.
BUt if we rub an Iron Ring on the one side with a Loadstone, then the part
that is touched, will receive the virtue of the part of the Loadstone that
touched it* and the opposite part will receive the contrary: and therefore the
middle of the Iron Ring will be capable but of half the force of it, as if it
were straight. But if we make a Pin round as a Ring; and the part joynted
together with a joint, be rubbed with a Loadstone; and being rubbed, be
stretched straight again, the ends shall receive the same virtue, be it
Northern or Southern. But by degrees that force will grow feeble; and in a
short time become Northerly, and the other Southerly, or will receive more
virtue then it first had, may be when it was touched farther from the end. But
if you would, that of these a Chain of Iron should hang in the Air, so soon as
one ring touched on one side with the Loadstone, has received force on the
other side by it, we may hang a Chain of Rings in the Air, as we may of
Loadstones: so then, if the Rings be laid in order upon a Table, that they may
one touch the other, though they do not fasten, put the Loadstone to them, and
not only the first will be drawn, but the next, and the third, that they will
hang like links of Rings: and not only will it be so, if the Loadstone touch
the first, that the rest will follow; but if the stone be but near, it will do
the same without touching them.

CHAP. XLVI.
An Iron Plate touched in the middle, will diffuse its forces to both ends.
WHat I said of a long Needle, I say also of an Iron Bar: for if you touch it
in the middle, the Beams of it are spread like the Beams of the Sun, or light
of a Candle, from the Center to the Circumference, and extreme parts. But if we
touch an Iron Mortar, being the force is feeble, where it is touched about the
superficies, some virtue may be be perceived; but it is very weak in the
extreme parts.

CHAP. XLVII.
How filings of Iron may receive force.
IF you wrap up filings of Iron in a paper, as Druggists do, like a Pyramid;
and put a Loadstone near it, all the filings together will receive the same
force, as a long piece of Iron does: but if you stir the filings, and put them
into an open paper, that force is lost, and confounded, and can do nothing, as
if it had never been touched, by reason of so many different pieces.

CHAP. XLVIII.
Whether Garlic can hinder the virtues of the Loadstone.
NOw I shall pass on to other properties of the Loadstone: and first, whether
the Loadstones attraction can be any ways hindered. Plutarch says, That Garlic
is at great enmity with the Loadstone; and such antipathy and hatred there is
between these insensible Creatures, that if the Loadstone be smeered with
Garlic, it will drive away Iron from it. Ptolomy confirms the same, That the
Loadstone will not draw Iron, if it be anointed with Garlic; as Amber will no
more draw straws, and other light things to it, if they be first steeped in
Oil. It is a common Opinion amongst Seamen, That Onyons and Garlic are at
odds with the Loadstone: and Steers-men, and such as tend the Mariners Card are
forbid to eat Onyons or Garlic, lest they make the Index of the Poles drunk.
But when I tried all these things, I found them to be false: for not only
breathing and belching upon the Loadstone after eating of Garlic, did not stop
its virtues: but when it was all anointed over with the juice of Garlic, it
did perform its office as well as if it had never been touched with it: and I
could observe almost not the least difference, left I should seem to make void
the endeavors of the Ancients. And again, When I enquired of Mariners, whether
it were so, that they were forbid to eat Onyons and Garlic for that reason;
they said, They were old Wives fables, and things ridiculous; and that Seamen
would sooner lose their lives, then abstain from eating Onyons and Garlic.

CHAP. XLIX.
How a Loadstone astonished may be brought to it self again.
IF a Loadstone be drunk, and do not its office, not as we said, by being
breathed on by Garlic, but rather by reason of some other parts of the
Loadstone that had touched it, so that the virtue of it is decayed and gone; we
shall restore it to its former virtue, by covering it over with the filings of
Iron many days, until, by the vapors or company of the Iron, it can perform
its office as it should.

CHAP. L.
How to augment the Loadstones virtue.
THere are many learned men that have attempted to augment the Loadstones
virtue, and that diverse ways, that having got more forces, it might serve for
very great uses. Alexander Aphrodiseus in the beginning of his Problems,
enquires wherefore the Loadstone only draws Iron, and is fed or helped by the
filings of Iron; and the more it is fed, the better it will be: and therefore
it is confirmed by Iron. But when I would try that, I took a Loadstone of a
certain weight, and I buried it in a heap of Iron-filings, that I knew what
they weighed; and when I had left it there many months, I found my stone to be
heavier, and the Iron-filings lighter: but the difference was so small, that in
one pound I could find no sensible declination; the stone being great, and the
filings many: so that I am doubtful of the truth. Paracelsus, being skilled in
distillation, tried to do it another way: For (says he) if any man shall
quench often in Oil of Iron, a Loadstone red hot, it will by degrees recover
force, and augment so much, that it will easily pull a Nail forth that is fast
in a Wall: which conceit pleased me well; and thereupon I made the stone red
hot, and quenched it often in Oil of Iron: but it was so far from getting more
strength, that it lost what it had: and fearing I had not done it right, I
tried if often; so I found the falsity of it, and I warn others of it also. For
a Loadstone made red hot in the fire, will lose all its virtue, as I shall show
afterward.

CHAP. LI.
That the Loadstone may lose its virtue.
I Found out, That this is the only true way, amongst many that are set down
by Writers, by heaping Fire-coals upon the Loadstone: for once made red-hot, it
presently loses all its virtue, and a vapor flies from it that is bluish
black, or Brimstone-like, smelling strong, as Coals do; and when that flame and
vapor cease to exhale, if you take it out of the fire, all the force of it is
breathed forth: and I always thought, that that was the Soul of it, and the
cause of its attraction of iron; whenas iron is made of Brimstone not perfect:
as I read in ^ebar and other Writers that treat of Metals: which is the cause
that it runs so swiftly to the Loadstone, and desires so much to be embraced by
it: and when that vapor is gone from the stone, it loses all its virtue; and
then it is but a dead carcass, and it is in vain to endeavor to revive it.

CHAP. LII.
How the Iron touched with the Loadstone loses its force.
THe same way the Loadstone does, the iron loses its force also: for though it
have been excellently well touched by the Loadstone, if you heart it red-hot in
the fire, it will lose its forces: and the reason is; because that part of the
Loadstone that cleaves to the iron, loses its forces in the fire; and
therefore the iron deprived of that, loses the force also. Wherefore in the
Mariners Compass, or in other uses, when the iron is stupefied by the touch of
other things, and has not its due forces to free it from this imperfection, we
put it into the fire. Hence we find the error of many men, who when they put
the Needle into the Compass, they first make it red-hot, and then they rub it
with the Loadstone, supposing it will by that means, take in the Loadstones
virtue the more: but they do not only by contraries, but they so make void the
Loadstones virtues, that it cannot do its office, but that force is driven out
of the iron by the fire; and it is just as it was before it was touched with
the Loadstone. Wherefore, as often as that force is driven away with the fire,
we may touch it again, and give it the same force.

CHAP. LIII.
It is false, That the Diamond does hinder the Loadstones virtue.
WE showed that it was a false report, that the Loadstone anointed with
Garlic, loses its virtues. But it is more false, that it loses its virtue by
the presence of the Diamond. For, say some, there is so much discord between
the qualities of the Loadstone and the Diamond, and they are so hateful one
against the other, and secret enemies, that if the Diamond be put to the
Loadstone, it presently faints and loses all its forces. Pliny. The Loadstone
so disagreeth with the Diamond, that if Iron be laid by it, it will not let the
Loadstone draw it; and if the Loadstone do attract it, it will snatch it away
again from it. St. Augustine. I will say what I have read of the Loadstone: How
that if the Diamond be by it, it will not draw iron; and if it do, when it
comes near the Diamond, it will let it fall. Marbodeus of the Loadstone: All
Loadstones by their virtue Iron draw;
But of the Diamond it stands in awe:
Taking the Iron from't by Natures Law.
I tried this often, and found it false; and that there is no Truth in it. But
there are many Smatteres and ignorant Fellows, that would fain reconcile the
ancient Writers, and excuse these lies; not seeing what damage they bring to
the Commonwealth of Learning. For the new Writers, building on their ground,
thinking them true, add to them, and invent, and draw other Experiments from
them, that are falser then the Principles they insisted on. The blind leads
the blind, and both fall into the pit. Truth must be searched, loved and
professed by all men; nor must any men's authority, old or new, hold us from it.
But to return from whence those Reconcilers idleness drew me: I took a piece of
a Loadstone to try by; it was hardly four Grains in weight: I fastened the
filings of iron very fast to it; then I put the Diamond that was three or four
times bigger then them both; but that would not make the Loadstone forsake the
iron: then I took off the filings of iron from the Loadstone, and set them at a
just distance, and it drew the filings to it, though the Diamond were by. I say
this, lest they should think I failed in the trial, and to have taken a
Loadstone of twenty or thirty pound weight, and fastened an ounce of iron to
it, and then to have taken a very small Diamond, and put it to them to make
trial with.

CHAP. LIVE.
Goats blood does not free the Loadstone from the enchantment of the Diamond.
I Said, That from false Principles, are drawn most false Conclusions. Also I
said, That it is related that the juice of Garlic smeered on the Loadstone,
will take away its attraction of iron; and, That when the Diamond is by, it
will not draw iron, or will let it fall. But because (say some) Goats blood
will break the Diamond, if the Loadstone be anointed with Goats blood, it will
recover. Castianus in Geoponic. Graec. The Loadstone draws iron to it, and
again drives it away from it, if it be anointed with Garlic: but that the
force almost lost may be restored, it must be washed in Goats blood. Rhennius
the Interpreter of Dionysius. Against which, nor fire, nor steel ever won;
Goats blood if warm, can break the Diamond:
Nor strokes of the Hammer can consume this Stone,
Which from the Loadstone does the Iron take,
That it would still embrace it, let alone:
Diamonds, Loadstones virtues empty make.
Marbodeus of the same. A Diamond is mighty hard: a Stone
That on the Anvil never can be broke;
Nor steel, nor fire hurt it, yet it is known,
It crumbles in Goats blood, if laid to soak.
Since therefore there is an Antipathy between the Diamond and the Loadstone;
and there is as great Antipathy between the Diamond and Goats blood, as there
is sympathy between Goats blood and the Loadstone; We are from this Argument
proceeded thus far, that when the virtue of the Loadstone is grown dull, either
by the presence of the Diamond, or stink of Garlic, if it be washed in Goats
blood it will then recover its former force, and be made more strong: but I
have tried that all the reports are false. For the Diamond is not so hard as
men say it is: for it will yield to steel, and to a moderate fire: nor does it
grow soft in Goats blood, or Camels blood, or Asses blood: and our Jewellers
count all these Relations false and ridiculous. Nor is the virtue of the
Loadstone, being lost, recovered by Goats blood. I have said so much, to let
men see what false Conclusions are drawn from false Principles.

CHAP. LV.
The Iron touched with a Diamond will turn to the North.
BUt this is most true, that I found out by chance when I made trial, whether
the Diamond had any forces to weaken the Loadstones virtue, as I said: for if
you rub a steel-Needle on a Diamond, and then put it into a Boat, or thrust it
through a reed, or hang it up by a Thread, it will presently turn to the North,
almost as well as if it had been touched with the Loadstone; but something more
faintly. And, what is worth noting, the contrary part will turn the iron to the
South: and when I had tried this in many steel-Needles, and put them all into
the Water, I found, that they all stood equi-distant, pointing to the North.
And if they that write, That the Loadstone is weakened by the presence of the
Diamond, had written thus* ^^ey had said more Truth: for a Needle rubbed on a
Diamond, and stuck in a (...) and put into the water, that it may turn freely;
being turned with your finger, when it stands still, it will turn North, and
point at it exactly.

CHAP. LVI.
The forces and remedies of the Loadstone.
OUr Ancestors invented many things, by reason of this admirable attractive
operation of the Loadstone, and found out many remedies that are worth
observing. From this drawing quality that it allures iron to it, and that they
mutually attract the one the other; they did attribute unto it an understanding
of venerious actions, and that they are one in love with the other; nor will
their mad love abate, till they embrace each one the other: and when they turn
their backs, they hate one the other, and drive one the other off; and that
they contain in them also the Principles of hatred. Marbodeus. This Stone does
reconcile the man and wife,
And her recall that from her husband goes:
If one would know her leads a whorish life,
Under her head, when that she sleeps, it shows:
For she that is chaste, will presently embrace
Her husband whilst she sleeps; but a whore
Falls out of the bed, as thrown out with disgrace,
With stink of the Stone, which shows this, and much more.
And for this cause, our Ancestors to signify as much, did oft-times engrave
the picture of Venus upon the Loadstone. Hence Claudian writes,

The Loadstone Venus oft-times represents.
I remember also, that many of the Ancients reported, That if a Loadstone were
beat into powder, and were strewed into burning Coals, about the corners of the
house, that the smoke might fly up; those that are in the house, will
presently run out for fear the house will fall; and frighted with these
phantasmes, would run, forsaking all their houses: and thus Thieves may steal
all their Goods. Marbodeus.

If that a Thief can creep into a House
That Is full of wealth, and Treasure has good store;
Let him on burning Coals, before he rowse
The people, strew the Loadstone dust all ore,
That so the Smoke may at each corner rise,
And that will make the people wake, and think
The house will fall, and run out with great cries,
Then may he take away their Gold and chink.
The reason is, Because the Loadstone is melancholic, as you may conjecture by
the color of it; the fumes whereof, rising into the brain, will cause those
that are a sleep to have melancholic phantasms presented unto them: and Coals
will do the like. The weight Davic, with Serpents fat, and juice of Metals,
given to one to drink, will make him mad, and make him run out of his House,
Country and Nation: and this is does by exaggeration of black Melancholy: or it
will make people lunatic and melancholic if they do but hold it in their
mouths: and by its drawing out of iron, Physicians think it will help well to
draw an Arrow-head out of ones body.

But we use the Loadstone in making Glass. Pliny. After Glass was found out, as
it is a very cunning invention, men were not content to mingle Nitre; but they
began to add the Loadstone thereunto, because it is supposed, that it will
attract the liquor of the Glass into it self, and into iron also. Hence it is,
that in making Glass, we add a little piece of Loadstone to it, for that
singular virtue is confirmed by our times, as well as former times: it is
thought so to attract into it self the liquor of the Glass, as it draws iron to
it; and being attracted, it purges it; and from green or yellowish Glass, it
makes it white: but the fire afterward consumes the Loadstone. Out of
Agricola. We read also, That a Loadstone laid to ones head, will take away all
the pains. Galen says, It has purging faculties; and therefore it is given to
drink for the Dropsy: and it will draw forth all the water in the Belly.
Lastly, I shall not pass by the error of Hadrian, concerning the Loadstone: for
he says, That the iron by its weight makes the Loadstone never the heavier.
For the Naturalists report, That if a great Loadstone were weighed in a Scale*
and after that, should draw iron to it, it would be no heavier then it was when
it was alone, though they be both together; so the weight of the iron is as it
were consumed by the Loadstone, and hindered by it from any effect or motion:
which I find to be false. It is like that jear in Aristophanes, of a Clown
that rid upon an Ass, and carried his Coulter at his back, that he might not
load the Ass too much.

THE EIGHTH BOOK OF Natural Magic: Of Physical Experiments.
THE PROEME.
I Intended to pass by these following Experiments in Physic, because I have
everywhere mentioned them in my History of Plants; and we have not omitted any
thing, that was certain and secret in them that we knew, unless i^ be such
things as could not be brought into that rank. And though other things shall be
described in my Book of Distillations, yet that this place of Physic be not
left empty, I changed my opinion, and have set down some of them here.

CHAP. I.
Of Medicines which cause sleep.
THat we may in order set down those Experiments, of which we intend to speak,
we will begin with those Diseases which happen in the Head; and first, with
Sleep: for Soporiferous Receipts are very requisite to be placed amongst these
Arcana, and are of very great esteem amongst Physicians, who by Sleep are wont
to cheat their Patients of pain: and not of less, amongst Captains and
Generals, when they practice Stratagemes upon their Enemies. Soporiferous
Medicines do consist for the most part of cold and moist things. Plutarch in
Simpos. says, That Sleep is caused by cold; and therefore Dormitives have a
cooling quality. We will teach, first, how

To cause Sleep with Mandrake.
Dioscorides says, That men will presently fall asleep in the very same
posture wherein they drink Mandrake, losing all their senses for three or four
hours after; and that Physicians do use it, when they would burn or cut off a
member. And skilful men affirm, That Mandrake growing by a Vine, will transmit
its Soporiferous quality into it* so that those who drink the Wine that is made
thereof, shall more easily and readily fall asleep. Here we will relate the
pleasant stories of the Mandrake out of Authors of Stratagems. Junius Frontinus
reports, That Hannibal being sent by the Charthagenians, against some Rebels in
Africa; and knowing they were a Nation greedy of Wine, mixed a great quantity
of Mandrake with his Wines; the quality of which, is between poisonous and
sleepy: then beginning a light Skirmish, he retired on purpose; and in the
middle of the Night, counterfeited a flight, leaving some Baggage in his Camp,
and all the infected Wine. Now when those Barbarians had took his Camp, and for
joy, had liberally tasted of that treacherous Wine; he returned, took and slew
them all, as they lay dead as it were before. Polinaeus the same. And Caesar
sailing toward Nicomedia, was taken about Malea by some Cilician Pirates: and
when they demanded a great Ransom for his Liberty, he promised them double
what they asked. They arrived at Miletum: the people came out of the Town to
see them. Caesar sent his Servant, being a Milesian, named Epicrates, to those
of the Town; desiring them to lend him some money; which they presently sent to
him: Epicrates, according to Caesar's command, brought the money; and with it,
a sump^uous, Banquet, a Water-pot full of Swords, and Wine mixed with Mandrake.
Caesar paid to the Pirates the promised sum, and set the Banquet before them;
who, being exalted with their great Riches, fell freely to it; and drinking the
infected Wine, fell into a sleep: Caesar commanded them to be killed sleeping,
and presently repaid the Milesians their own money. Demosthenes, intending to
express those who are bitten as it were by a sleepy Dragon, and are slothful,
and so deprived of sense that they cannot be awakened; says: They seem like
men who have drunk Mandrake. Pliny affirms, That smelling to the Leaves of
it, provokes sleep.

For the same, with Nightshade.
We may make the same of Nightshade, which is also called, Hypnoticon, from the
effect of it: a Dram of the Rind, drank in Wine, causes sleep, but gently
and kindly. This later Age, seems to have lost the knowledge of Solanum
Manicon: for in the very description of it, Dioscorides seems to be mad. But in
my judgment, (as I have elsewhere said) he describes two several Plants in
that place: Fuschius his Stramonium, and the Herb commonly called Bell a Donna
whose qualities are wonderfully dormitive: for they infect Water, without
giving it either taste or sent; so that the deceit cannot be discovered,
especially, considering it must be given but in a very small quantity. I
prepared a Water of it, and gave it to a Friend for certain uses; who, instead
of a Dram, drank an Ounce; and thereupon lay four days without meat or
motion; so that he was thought dead by all; neither could he be awakened by any
means, till at last, when the vapors were digested, he arose: although
Dioscorides threatens nothing but death from the immoderate use of it. The
same may be made also

Of Poppy
In a Lohoch. Take the Heads of Poppy, and cut them cross-ways, with a tender
hand, lest the knife enter too deep: let your nail direct the issuing juice
into a Glass; where let it stand a while, and it will congeal. The Thebane
Poppy is best. You may do the same with Nightshade, Henbane. Of all these
together, you may make

A Sleeping Apple.
For it is made of Opium, Mandrake, juice of Hemlock, the Seeds of Henbane; and
adding a little Musk, to gain an easier reception of the Smeller: these being
made up into a ball, as big as a man's hand can hold, and often smelt to, gently
close the eyes, and bind them with a deep sleep. Now shall be shown

A wonderful way to make one take a sleeping Medicine in his sleep.
Those things which we have already spoken of, are easily discovered after
sleep, and bring a suspicion along with them. But ou^ of many of the aforenamed
dormitive menstrues, there may be extracted a Quintessence, which must be kept
in Leaden Vessels, very closely stopped, that it may not have the least vent,
lest it should fly out. When you would use it, uncover it, and hold it to a
sleeping man's Nostrils, whose breath will suck up this subtle essence, which
will so besiege the Castle of his senses, that he will be overwhelmed with a
most profound sleep, not to be shook of without much labor. After sleep, no
heaviness will remain in his Head, nor any suspicion of Art. These things are
manifest to a wise Physician; to a wicked One, obscure.

CHAP. II.
To make a Man out of his senses for a day.
AFter these Medicines to cause sleep, we will speak of those which make me^
mad: the business is almost the same: for the same Plants that induce sleep, if
they be taken in a larger proportion, do cause madness. But we will not tell
those things which breed it for ever, only which may make us sport for a day,
and afterward leave no harm. We will begin with,

How to make men mad with Mandrake.
We have told you, That a small dose brings sleep; a little more, madness; a
larger, death. Dioscorides says, That a Dram of Morion will make one
foolish: we will easilier do it with Wine, which is thus made: Take the Roots
of Mandrake, and but put them into new Wine, boiling and bubling up: cover it
close; and let them infuse in a warm place for two months. When you would use
it, give it to somebody to drink; and whosoever shall taste it after a deep
sleep, will be distracted, and for a day shall rave: but after some sleep, will
return to his senses again, without any harm: and it is very pleasant to
behold. Pray make trial. We may do the same

With Stramonium, or Solanum Manicum:
The Seeds of which, being dried and macerated in Wine, the space of a night,
and a Dram of it drank in a Glass of Wine, (but rightly given, lest it hurt
the m^n) after a few hours will make one made, and present strange visions,
both pleasant and horrible; and of all other sorts: as the power of the potion,
so does the madness also cease, after some sleep, without any harm, as we said,
if it were rightly administered. We may also infect any kind of meat with it,
by strowing thereon: three fingers full of the Root reduced into powder, it
causes a pleasant kind of madness for a day; but the poisonous quality is
allayed by sleep, or by washing the Temples and Pulses with Vinegar, or juice
of Lemmon. We may also do the same with another kind of Solanum, called

Bella Donna.
A Dram of the Root of which, amongst other properties, has this; that it
will make men mad without any hurt: so that it is a most pleasant spectacle to
behold such mad whimsies and visions; which also is cured by sleep: but
sometimes they refuse to eat. Nevertheless, we give this praecaution, That all
those Roots or Seeds which cause the Takers of them to see delightful visions,
if their Dose be increased, will continue this alienation of mind for three
days: but if it be quadrupled, it brings death. Wherefore we must proceed
cautiously with them. I had a Friend, who, as often as he pleased, knew how

To make a man believe he was changed
into a Bird or Beast; and cause madness at his pleasure. For by drinking a
certain Potion, the man would seem sometimes to be changed into a Fish; and
flinging out his arms, would swim on the Ground: sometimes he would seem to
skip up, and then to dive down again. Another would believe himself turned into
a Goose, and would eat Grass, and beat the Ground with his Teeth, like a Goose:
now and then sing, and endeavor to clap his Wings. And this he did with the
aforenamed Plants: neither did he exclude Henbane from among his Ingredients;
extracting the essences by their Menstruum, and mixed some of their Brain,
Heart, Limbs, and other parts with them. I remember when I was a young man, I
tried these things on my Chamber-Fellows: and their madness still fixed upon
something they had eaten, and their fancy worked according to the quality of
their meat. One, who had fed lustily upon Beef, saw nothing but the forms of
Bulls in his imagination, and them running at him with their horns; and
suchlike things. Another man also by drinking a Po^ion, flung himself upon the
earth, and like one ready to be drowned, struck forth his legs and arms,
endeavoring as it were to swim for life: but when the strength of the
Medicament began to decay, like a Shipwrack'd person, who had escaped out of
the Sea, he wrung his Hair and his Clothes to strain the Water out of them; and
drew his breath, as though he took such pains to escape the danger. These, and
many other most pleasant things, the curious Enquirer may find out: it is
enough for me only to have hinted at the manner of doing them.

CHAP. III.
To cause several kinds of dreams.
NOw we will endeavor to show how to cause pleasant, sad, or true dreams. But
that we may more certainly effect it, it will be good first to know the causes.
The meat in concoction must be corrupted, (this must be taken for granted) and
turned into vapors; which, being hot and light, will naturally ascend, and
creep through the Veins into the Brain; which being always cold, condenseth
them into moisture, as we see Clouds generated in the greater World: so by an
inward reciprocation, they fall down again upon the Heart, the principal seat
of the senses. In the mean while, the Head grows full and heavy, and is
overwhelmed in a deep sleep. Whence it comes to pass, that the species
descending, meet and mix with other vapors, which make them appear preposterous
and monstrous; especially, in the quiet of the night. But in the morning, when
the excrementitious and foul Blood is separated from the pure and good, and
become cool and allayed; then pure, and unmixed, and pleasant visions appear.
Wherefore I thought it not irrational, when a man is overwhelmed with drink,
that vapors should arise participating, as well of the Nature of what he has
drank or eat, as of the humors which abound in his body, that in his sleep he
should rejoice or be much troubled: that fires and darkness, hail and
putrefactions, should proceed from Choler, Melancholy, co^d and pu^rid humors.
So to dream of killing any one, or being besmeared with Blood, shows an
abundance of Blood: and Hippocrates and Galen say, We may judge a man to be of
a sanguine Complexion by it. Hence those who eat windy meats, by reason
thereof, have rough and monstrous dreams: meats of thin and small vapors,
exhilarate the mind with pleasant phantasms. So also the outward application
of simples, does infect the species while they are a going to the Heart. For
the Arteries of the body, says Galen, while they are dilated, do attract into
themselves any thing that is next them. It will much help too, to anoint the
Liver: for the Blood passes upward out of the Stomach by evaporation, and
runs to the Liver; from the Liver to the Heart. Thus the circulating vapors
are infected, and represent species of the same color. That we may not please
the Sleepers only, but also the Waking, behold

A way to cause merry dreams.
When you go to bed, to eat Balm, and you cannot desire more pleasant sights
then will appear to you; Fields, Gardens, Trees, Flowers, Meadows, and all the
Ground of a pleasant Green, and covered with shady Bowers: wheresoever you cast
your eyes, the whole World will appear pleasant and Green. Bugloss will do the
same, and Bows of Poplar; so also Oil of Poplar. But

To make dark and troublesome dreams,
we eat Beans; and therefore they are abhorred by the Pythagoreans, because
they cause such dream. Phaseoli, or French Beans, cause the same: Lentiles,
Onyons, Garlic, Leeks, VVeedbine, Dorycnium, Picnocomum, new red Wine; these
infuse dreams, wherein the phantasms are broken, crooked, angry, troubled: the
person dreaming will seem to be carried in the Air, and to see the Rivers and
Sea flow under him: he shall dream of misfortunes, falling, death, cruel
tempests, showers of Rain, and cloudy days; the Sun darkened, and the Heavens
frowning, and nothing but fearful apparitions. So by anointing the aforesaid
places with Soo^, or any adust matter, and Oil, (which I add only to make the
other enter the easier into the parts) fires, lightnings, flashings, and all
things will appear in darkness. These are sufficient: for I have already showed
in my Book Phytognom, how to procure true dreams.

CHAP. IV.
Excellent Remedies for the Eyes.
HEretofore, being much troubled with sore Eyes, and become almost blind; when
I was given over by Physicians of best account, a certain Empyrick undertook
me; who, putting this Water into my Eye, cured me the very same day: I might
almost say, The same hour. By Gifts, Entreaties, Cunning and Money, I gained
the Secret, which I will not think much to set down, that every one may use it
at their pleasure. It is good for Inflammations, Blearness, Mists, Fistula's,
and suchlike; and cures them certainly the second day; if not the first. If I
should set down all those whom I have cured by it, I should be too tedious.
Take two Bottles of Greek-VVine, half a Pint of White-Rose-Water; of Celendine,
two Ounces; of Fennel, Rue, Eyebright, as much; of Tutty, half an Ounce; of
Cloves as much; Sugar Candy of Roses, one Dram; Camphire, half a Dram; and
as much Aloes. Tutty is prepared after this manner: Let it be heat and
extinguished six times in Rose Water, mixed with Greek-Wine; but let the water
at last be left out: powder what are to be powdered finely; and mix them with
the waters. Aloes is incorporated with waters thus: because it will not be
powered, let it be put into a Mor^ar with a little of the forementioned waters,
and beat together until it turn to water, and swim about in ropings, and mix
with the waters: then put it to the rest. Set them all in a Glass-Bottle, close
covered, and waxed up that it do not exhale abroad in the Sun and Dew for forty
days, still shaking them four times in a day: at last, when it is well sunned,
set it up and reserve it for your use. It must be applied thus

In Inflammations, Blood-shots and Fistula's,
let the Patient lie flat on his back; and when a drop of this water is put
upon his Eye, let him open and shut his Eyelids, that the water may run
through all the cavities of his Eve. Do this twice or thrice in a day, and he
shall be cured. But thus it must be used for

A Pearl in the Eye.
If the Pearl be above or beneath the Cornea, make a Powder of Sugar Candy of
Roses, burnt Allome, and the Bone of a Cuttle-Fish, very finely beat and
searched exactly; and when the Patient goes to Bed, sprinkle a little of this
Powder upon his eye, and by and by drop some of this water into it, and let him
shut his Eyes and sleep: for he will quickly be cured.

CHAP. V.
To fasten the Teeth.
I Could find not any thing in all this Physical Tract of greater value then
this Remedy for the Teeth: for the water gets in through the Gumms, even to the
very Nerves of the Teeth, and strengthens and fasteneth them: yea, if they are
eaten away, it fills them with Flesh, and new clothes them. Moreover, it
makes them clean, and white, and shining like Pearls. I know a man, who by
this only Receipt, gained great Riches. Take therefore three handfuls of Sage,
Ne^tles, Rosemary, Mallows, and the rind of the Roots of Wall-nut; wash them
well, and beat them: also, as much of the Flowers of Sage, Rosemary, Olive and
Plantaine Leaves; two handfuls of Hypocistis, Horehound, and the tops of
Bramble; one pound of the Flower of Myrtle; half a pound of the Seed; two
handfuls of Rose-Buds, with their Stalks; two drachms of Saunders, Coriander
prepared, and Citron-Pill: three drachms of Cinnamon in powder; ten of Cypress
Nuts; five green Pine-Apples; two drachms of Bole-Armenick and Mastick. Powder
them all, and infuse them in sharp black Wine, and let them macerate three
days: then, slightly pressing the Wine out, put them into an Alembick, and
still them with a gentle fire: then boil the distilled water, with two ounces
of Allome till it be dissolved, in a V^ssel close stopped. When you would use it,
suck up some of the water, and stir it up and down your mouth until it turn to
Forth: then spit it out, and rub your Teeth with a Linen-cloth. It will perform
what I have promised: for it fasteneth the Teeth, and restores the Gums that
are eroded. Now we will deliver other Experiments

To fasten the Teeth.
Macerate the Leaves of Mastick, Rosemary, Sage, and Bramble; in Greek-Wine:
then distill it with a gentle fire through a Retort: take a mouthful of this,
and stir about, till it turn to Spittle; it fasteneth the Teeth, makes them
white, and restores the Gums. The Root of Pellitory bruised, and put into the
Teeth, takes away the pain: so does the Root of Henbane. For the bleeding of
the Teeth, I have often made trial of Purslaine, so much commended.

For the swelling of the Gums,
beat the Roots and Leaves of Plantaine, and lay them to the swelling when you
go to bed; and in the morning you shall find your Gums well.

CHAP. VI.
For other infirmities of Man's Body.
I Will heap together in this Chapter, some Remedies not to be passed over,
which I know to be certain, by continual Experience made; and although some of
them are common, yet are they true. And first,

For the Headache,
There is a certain Essence, of the color of Blood, extracted out of Roses, of
a wonderful sweetness and great strength. Wet a cloth in this Liquor, and lay
it to your Forehead and Temples; and if sometimes it does not quite take away
a pain of long continuance, yet it will mollify it. If the cloth be dried
before your pain cease, wet it again. I have often known the Ophites, or
Serpentine Marble applied to the Head, both to take away, and mollify the
pain. The Vertigo, I have seen it cured also, by applying the Hoof of an Elk,
and by a Ring of it worn on the Finger.

Against the chopping of the Lips
the Seeds of Henbane are good: for being cast upon live Coals, if you receive
the rising vapor through a Paper-Tunnel, upon the chopping of your Lips, as hot
as you can endure, it appeaseth the swelling presently, and heals the Clefts,
that they will never more trouble you.

Against the clefts of the Fingers.
It is a most admirable Experiment, which I learned of Paracelsus; but have
often practiced it my self: for it takes away the swelling and pain, and
cures the Nail. Take a Worm, which creeps out of the Earth; especially, in
moist Grounds: for if you search and dig there, you may easily (...) them*
wind him, being alive, about your Finger, and there hold him (...) be dead,
which will be within an hour. The pain will presently cease, the matter dry
away, and in a short time be cured: Indeed I do not know a more admirable
Remedy.

For a Pleurisy.
I found ou^ a most powerful Remedy made of the Flowers of wild Poppy. Gather
them in the Month of May, before the rising of the Sun, and their opening: for,
being thin Leaves, they are easily dried with a little heat, and shed: dry them
in the shade, and lay them up for your use. Or else, still the Flowers, and
keep the water. If any one takes a dram of the powder in Wine, and some of
the water; or in the water alone: or shall apply a Plaster of the Powder to
the place, the pain will presently cease, to the admiration of the Beholders.
Missleto of the Oak infused in Wine, and drunk, does the same. There is a Stone
also brought out of the West Indies, called in Spanish, Della Hijada; much like
an Emerald: which being worn in Silver, upon the Arm, is accounted a
preservative against this Disease.

Against the Colic
Civet is most excellent in this Disease: for the quantity of a Pease, applied
to the Navil, and a hot Loaf out of the Oven clapped over it, presently eases
the pain: the Patient must ly on his Belly upon the Bread before it be cold.

Against Crab lice.
The Dust which falls from the Curry-Combs, while the Ostler dresseth Horses,
or such kind of Beasts, cures them without any pain. Or the Powder of
Lithargy, Aloes, Frankincense, Verdegreese, and Alome, beaten and mixed
together with Oil of Mastick, and anoint the place. The Powder of Mercury
praecipitate, is best by far, being applied.

To bring away the Stone,
Take Saxifrage, Maidenhair, Pellitory of the wall, Parsely, Pimpernel and
Ceterach; distill them in Balneo Mariae, and let the Patient drink of it every
other day: for it corrodes and eats away the Stone, though never so great; and
by daily experience, you will see in his Urine, Gravel and Fragments of the
Stone voided out. Moreover, the Fruit and Leaves of the Mulberry gathered
before Sunrising, and distilled or dried in the shade, if it be drank in Wine,
or a proper water, early in the morning, does wonderfully remove the Stone.
Mushromes growing on a Rock, reduced into Powder, or dried in the shade, or a
warm Oven, and drank with Wine in a morning, is very Sovereign against the
Stone. If the Kernels of a Peach-Stone be bruised, and macerated two days in
the distilled water of Bean-Cods, and then distilled again, and drunk, bring
down the Stone. The Hedge-Sparrow, which Aetius mentions, I know to be good
against the Stone in the Kidney or Bladder. It is the least of all Birds,
lives in Hedges, carries his Tail upright; on the top of his Wings, there are
some streaks of Ash Color; of a short flight; and lastly, much like a Wren. He
has a virtue against the Stone beyond all the rest, eaten either raw or
boiled, or dried or salted, or taken any way; also reduced into Powder, being
made up close in a Pot covered and clayed up, that the virtue may not expire;
and so set over the fire. I have also tried a water against this Disease,
running out of a certain Vein, described by Vitruvius: which when I had
diligently sought after, and found out, made me exceedingly rejoice. The words
of Vitruvius are these: There are also some Veins of acide Springs, as at
Lyncestum; and in Italy, at Theano in fertile Campania; and many other places:
which being drunk, have a virtue to dissolve Stones which breed in the Bladders
of men. And this seems to be naturally done, because there lies a sharp and
acide juice under the Earth, through which, these Veins passing, receive a
tincture of sharpness; and so, when they come into the Bodies of Men, they
dissolve whatever they find there congealed or settled. But wherefore acide
things should dissolve them, we may thus guess the Reason: An Egg laid in any
Vinegar some time, will wax soft, and his shell will dissolve. Also Lead, which
is the toughest and heaviest, if it be laid in a Vessel of Vinegar, and closed
up, will dissolve, and become Ceruss. By the same means, Copper, which is of a
more solid Nature, if it be ordered as the former, will melt, and become
Verdegreese. Likewise Pearl, as hard as Flint, which neither iron or fire can
dissolve of themselves, when they are heat by the fire, and then sprinkled with
Vinegar, break and dissolve. Therefore, when we see these things done before
our eyes, we may infer by the same Reasons, that the Stone may naturally be
dissolved by acide things, through the sharpness of their juice. Thus far
Vitruvius. The place where the Vein is now to be found, is called commonly
Francolise, about a mile from Theano, and runs along the way toward Rome.

To strengthen the Stomach.
We will not omit a wonderful Oil, which helps concoction, and takes away
the inclinations to vomit: it is thus made: Pour half a Pint of the best Oil
into a brass Pot, tinned within, and of a wide mouth: then take fifteen pound
of Romane-Mint, and beat it in a Marble-Morter, with a VVooden-Pestle, until it
come to the form of an Ointment; add as much more Mint and Wormwood, and put
them into the O^l: mingle them, and stir them well: but cover the Pot lest any
dirt should fall in; and let them stand three days, and infuse: then set them
on a gentle fire, and boil them five hours for fifteen days together, until
the Oil have extracted all the virtue of the infused Herbs: then strain them
through a Linen-cloth in a press, or with your hands, till the Oil be run clear
out: then take new Herbs, beat them, and put them into the strained Oil; boil
it again, and strain it again: do the same the third time; and as often as you
renew it, observe the same course until the Oil have contracted a green color:
but you must separate the juice from the Oil very carefully; for if the least
drop do remain in it, the Oil will have but small operation, and the whole
intent is lost. A certain sign of perfect decoction, and of the juice being
consumed, will be, if a drop of it, being cast upon a plate of iron red-hot, do
not hiss. At last, Take a pound of Cinnamon, half a pound of Nutmegs, as much
Mastick and Spikenard, and a third part of Cloves: poun them severally* and
being well seirced, put them into the Oil, and mix them with a VVooden-stick.
Then pour it all into an Earthen Vessel glazed within, with a long Neck, that
it may easily be shut, and stoot close; but let it be of so great a capacity,
that the third part of it may remain empty. Let it stand fifteen days in the
Sun, always moving, and shaking it three or four times in a day. So set it up
for your use.

CHAP. VII.
That a Woman may conceive.
THere are many Medicines to cause Conception spread abroad, because they are
much desired by Great Persons. The Ancients did applaud Sage very much for this
purpose: And in Coptus after great Plagues, the Egyptians that survived, forced
the Women to drink the juice of it, to make them conceive, and bring forth
often. Salt also helps Generation: for it does not only heighten the
Pleasures of Venus, but also causes Fruitfulness. The Egyptians, when their
Dogs are backward in Copulation, make them more eager by giving them
Salt-meats. It is an Argument also of it, That Ships in the Sea, as Plutarch
witnesses, are always full of an innumerable company of Mice. And some
affirm, That Female-Mice will conceive without a Male, only by licking Salt.
And Fish-wives are insatiably leacherous, and always full of Children. Hence
the Poets feigned venus to be born of Salt or the Sea. The Egyptian Priests
(says the same Author) did most Religiously abstain from Salt and Salt-meats,
because they did excite to lust, and cause erection.

A remedy to procure conception.
This I have tried and found the best; when a woman's courses are just past, let
her take a new-laid egg, boil it, and mix a grain of musk with it, and sup it
up when she goes to bed. Next morning take some old beans, at least five years
old, and boil them for a good space in a new pipkin, and let the woman when she
arises out of her bed, receive the fume into her privities, as it were through
a tunnel, for the space of an hour: then let her sup up two eggs, and go to bed
again, and wipe off the moisture with warm clothes: then let her enjoy her
husband, and rest a while; afterward, take the whites of two eggs, and mix
them with Bole-armenick and Sanguis^draconis, and dip some flax into it, and
apply it to the reins; but because it will hardly stick on, swathe it on from
falling: a while after, let her arise, and at night renew the plaster. But
when she goes to sleep, let her hold ginger in her mouth. This she must do
nine days.

CHAP. VIII.
Remedies against the Pox.
SInce this disease has raged so cruelly amongst men, there have been invented
a multitude of most excellent remedies to oppose it. And although many have set
out several of them, yet I will be contented with this one only, which we may
use, not only in this disease, but almost in all other: and I have seen many
experiences of it. It is easily made, and as easily taken. Take a pound of
lingnum Guaiacum, half a pound of Sarsaperilla beaten small, five ounces of the
stalks and leaves of Sena, one handful of Agrimony and Horse-tail, a dram of
Cinnamon, and as much cloves, and one nutmeg: Poun them all, and put them into
a vessel which contains twenty gallons of Greek wine; let it stand a day, and
then let the patient drink it at meals, and at his pleasure: for it purges
away by degrees all maladies, beside the French Pox. If the patient grows
weak with purging, let him intermit some days. In the summer time leave out the
cinnamon, and the nutmeg. I have used it against continual headaches,
deafness, hoarsness, and many other diseases.

A preservation against the Pox,
which a man may use after unclean women. Take a dram of hartwort and
gentian, two scruples of sanders and lignum-aloes, half a dram of powder of
coral, spodium, and hearts horn burnt, a handful of sowthistle, scordium,
betony, scabious, and tormentil; as much of roses, two pieces of Guaiacum, two
scales of copper, a dram and a half of Mercury precipitate; a pint of
malmesey, a quart of the waters of sowthistle, and scabious: mix the wine and
waters, and lay the Guaiacum in it a day, and then the rest; then boil them,
till half be consumed; strain them, and lay a linen cloth soaking in the
expression a whole night; then dry it in the shade: do this thrice, and after
copulation, wash your yard in it, and lay some of the linen on, and keep it
close.

CHAP. IX.
Antidotes against Poison.
IT is the common opinion of all Physicians, that those herbs, stones, or any
other thing, which being put into a Serpents mouth, does kill him, is an
Antidote against his poison. We read in Dioscorides of the herb Alkanet, which
is very efficacious against the poison of Serpents; and being chewed and spit
out upon a Serpent, kills him. Upon this, I thrust half a dram of treacle
or mithridate, mixed with Aqua vitae, into a vipers mouth, and she died within
half an hour. I made a water-serpent swallow the same, but she received no hurt
by it, only lay a small time ^^upified: wherefore I pressed some oil out of
the seeds of citron, and orange or lemons, and dropped it into the serpents
mouth, and she died presently. Moreover, a dram of the juice of
Angelica-roots will kill a serpent. The Balsame, as they call it, which is
brought from the West Indies, is excellent against them; for when I anointed
their mouth and jaws with it, they died in half an hour. Balsame of the east,
is a present remedy against poison by ointments, or the biting of a serpent,
says Aetius. In Arabia, where it grows, there is no fear of poison, neither
does any one dye of their bitings; for the fury of this deadly poison, is
allayed by the feeding of the serpents upon this precious Balsame. But I have
found nothing more excellent than the earth which is brought from the Isle of
Malta: for the least dust of it put into their mouths, kills them presently. I
have tried the same virtue in Lithoxylon, which Physicians use for the worms in
children. There is a stone called Chelonites, the French name it Crapodina,
which they report to be found in the head of a great old Toad; and if it can be
gotten from him, while he is alive, it is sovereign against poison: they say it
is taken from living Toads, in a red cloth, in which color they are much
delighted; for whilst they sport and open themselves upon the scarlet, the
stone droppeth out of their head, and falls through a hole made in the
middle, into a box set under for the purpose, else they will suck it up again.
But I never met with a faithful person, who said that he found it: nor could I
ever find one, though I have cut up many. Nevertheless, I will affirm this for
truth, that those stones which are pretended to be taken out of Toads are
minerals; for I remember at Rome I saw a broken piece of stone, which was
compacted of many of those stones, some bigger, some less, which stuck on the
back of it like limps on a rock. But the virtue is certain: if any swallow it
down with poison, it will preserve him from the malignity of it; for it runs
about with the poison, and assawageth the power of it, that it becomes vain
and of no force.

A most perfect oil against poison,
often tried in repressing the violence of it. Take three pound of old oil, put
into it two handfulls of the flower of St John's wort, and let them macerate in
it for two months in the sun. Then strain out the flowers, and put into the oil
two ounces of the flowers of the same herb, and set it to boil in Balneo Mariae
a quarter of a day. Stop the bottle close, that it may have no vent, and set it
a sunning for fifteen days. In the month of July, take three ounces of the
seed, stamp it gently, and steep it in two glasses of the best white wind, with
gentian, tormentil, white dittany, zedoary, and carline gathered in August; red
sanders, long aristolochie, of each two drams: Let all these mecerate in the
wine for three days; then take them out, and put them in the oil, and boil them
gently in Balneo for six hours; then strain them in a press. Add to the
expression an ounce of saffron, myrrh, aloes, spikenard, and rubarb, all
bruised, and let them boil in it for a day in B. M. at last treacle and
mithridate, of each two ounces, and let them also boil in it six hours as
before: then set it forty days in the sun. It must be used thus: In the
plague-time, or upon suspicion of poison, anoint the stomach and wrists, and
the place about the heart, and drink three drops of it in wine. It will work
wonders.

CHAP. X.
Antidotes and preservatives against the Plague.
I Have spoken of poisons, now I will of the plague, being of the same nature,
and cured almost by the same Medicines. I will set down only them, which in
our time have been experimented by the Neapolitanes, Sicilians, and Venetians
(whilst the plague was spread amongst them) to resist the contagion of that
epidemical plague, and preserve their bodies from infection.

A confection of Gillyflowers against the plague, of wonderful operation.
Gather some clove-gilliflowers in the month of May, of a red and lively
color, because they are of the greater virtue; pull them out of their husks,
and clip off the green and, then beat them in a marble mortar with a wooden
pestle, until they become so fine as they may hardly be felt. In the mean
while, take three pound of sugar for one of the flowers; melt it in a brass
skillet, and boil it with a little orange-flower water, that may quickly be
consumed. When it is boiled sufficiently, put in some whites of eggs beaten,
enough to froth and clarify it, still stirring it, and skimming off the froth
with a spoon, until all the dregs be taken out. Then put in the due weight of
flowers, and stir it with a wooden slice, till i^ turn red: when it is almost
boiled, add thereunto two drachms of cloves beaten with a little musk, the
mixture of which will both add and excite a sweet sent and pl^asantness in the
flowers. Then put it into earthen pots, and set it up: if you add a little
juice of lemon, it will make it of a more lively blood-colour. We may also make
Lozenges and round Cakes of it, by pouring it on a cold marble. If any would do
i^ after the best manner, they must extract the color of the flowers, and boil
their sugar in that infusion, for so it will smell sweeter. Some never bruise
the flowers, but cut them very small with sizers, and candy them with sugar;
but they are not very pleasant to eat. This confection is most grateful to the
taste, and by reason of the sent of the cloves, very pleasant. The virtues of
it are these, as I have found by experience: it i^ good for all diseases of the
heart, as fainting, and trembling thereof; for the megrum and poison, and the
bitings of venomous creatures, and especially against the infection of the
plague. There may be made a vinegar, or infusion of it, which being rubbed about
the nostrils, is good against contagious air, and night-dews, and all effects
of melancholy.

Against the Plague.
Gather Ivy-berries in May, and wild Poppies before the sun rise, lest they
open; In April gather goats rue: dry them in the shade, and make them into
powder. One dram of it being drank in wine, is excellent against infectious
diseases. The Bezoar stone, brought from the West Indies, being hung about the
neck nigh to the heart; or four grains of it in powder* being taken in wine, is
good against the plague, and the infection of all pestilential feavors, as I
can testify: And takes away soundings, and exhilarateth the heart. The water
or oil, extracted from the seeds of Citron, is a very strong Antidote against
the plague. Apparitius Hispanus, his oil is also approved against the same.

CHAP. XI.
Remedies for wounds and blows.
THere are some remedies for wounds and blows, which shall not be omitted, for
I have found some of them to be of wonderful virtue.

The oil of Hispanus for wounds and other things.
Take two pound of new wax, four ounces of wax, as many of linseed, two ounces
of rosemary-flowers, and bay berries, as many of betony; of chamomil-flowers,
or the oil of it, three ounces; of cinnamon an ounce and a half, as much of St
John's wort, or the oil of it, two ounces of old oil. Dry the flowers and herbs
in the shade; and when they are withered, beat them, and seirce them through a
sieve. Melt the wax on the fire, then pour in the oils, next the powders, still
stirring them with a stick. At length, pour it on a marble, and cut it into
small slices, and put it into a glass retort; stop it close with straw-mortar,
and set it on the fire with his receiver; stop the joints, and give the
enclosed no vent, lest the virtue fly out and vanish away. First, by a gentle
fire draw out a water; then increasing it, and changing the glass, draw a red
oil; stop them close, and keep them for use: the qualities of it are heating;
by anointing the neck, it cures all creeks that are bred by cold; it heals
wounds, helps the contraction of the nerves caused by cold; it mo^lifieth
cold gouts, and takes away the trembling of the hands; It may be drank for the
Sciatica, taken in wine; it helps the quinsie: by anointing the reins of the
back, and the belly, or by drinking the water or oil in wine, it will break the
stone and bring it down, and asswageth poison. For deafness, you must steep
some wool in it, and stop the ears with it: anoint the belly and back in any
pain there. Being drunk in vinegar, it cures the falling sickness, and
restores lost memory; it provokes the menstrues in women, by anointing their
privities with it, or by drinking some drops of it in wine; taken in the same
manner, it provokes appetite, being taken early in the morning; and is good
against the bitings of Scorpions: Drink it going to bed, or when you arise in
the morning, and it will cure a ^^inking breath.

For cold aches.
Oil of Herns is excellent to allay and remove all cold aches, the gout,
sciatica, griefs of the sinews, convulsions, pain in the joints, cold
defluctions, and other diseases of moisture and cold. In the Diomedian Isles,
now called Tremi^y, in the Adriatique Sea, there are birds, commonly called
Hearns, who breed there, and continue there, and are to be found nowhere else:
they are a kind of Duck, feeding on fish, which they catch in the night: they
are not to be eaten, though they be very fat, because they savor of the
rankness of fish. Kill these birds, and pluck off their feathers; draw them,
and hang them up by the feet, there will drop from them a certain black
yellowish oil, very offensive to the nose, being of a noisome fishy smell. This
oil being applied to any place, as much as you can endure, will do the effects
before mentioned, and more: but it is very hurtful for any hot maladies. There
is a water also

For old Sores.
Take lime unkilled, and dissolve it in water; stir it three or four times in a
day; then when it is settled and cleared, strain it and keep it; wet a linen
cloth in it, and apply it to a wound or sore, and it cures them. I will not
omit

The virtues of Tobacco.
Out of the seeds of it is expressed an oil, three ounces out of a pound, which
allays the cruel tortures of the gout: the juice clarified and boiled into a
syrup, and taken in the morning, makes the voice tunable, clear and loud; very
convenient for singing Masters. If you bruise the leaves, and extract the
juice, it kills lice in childrens heads, being rubbed thereon. The leaves
cure rotten Sores and Ulcers, running on the legs, being applied unto them. The
juice of this herb does also presently take away and assuage the pain in the
codds, which happens to them who swimming do chance to touch their codds.

CHAP. XII.
Of a secret Medicine for wounds.
THere are certain Potions called Vulnerary Potions, because, being drunk, they
cure wounds: and it seems an admirable thing, how those Potions should
penetrate to the wounds. These are

Vulnerary Potions.
Take Pirole, Comfrey, Aristolochy, Featherfew of each a handful; of Agrimony
two: boil them in the best new Wine: digest them in horse-dung. Or take two
handfuls of Pirole, of Sanicle, and Sowe-bread one, of Ladies Mantel half one.
Boil them in two measures of Wine, and drink it morning and evening. Bind the
herbs, which you have boiled, upon the wound, having mixed a little salt with
them: and in the mean while use no other Medicine.

The Weapon-Salve
Given heretofore to Maximilian the Emperor, by Paracelsus, experimented by
him, and always very much accounted of by him while he lived: It was given to
me by a noble man of his Court. If the Weapon that wounded him, or any stick
dipped in his blood be brought, it will cure the wound, though the Patient be
never so far off. Take of the moss growing upon a dead man his scull, which
has laid unburied, two ounces, as much of the fat of a man, half an ounce of
Mummy, and man his blood: of linseed oil, turpentine, and bole-armenick, an
ounce; bray them all together in a mortar, and keep them in a long straight
glass. Dip the Weapon into the ointment, and so leave it: Let the Patient in
the morning, wash the wound with his own water; and without adding any thing
else, tie it up close, and he shall be cured without any pain.

CHAP. XIII.
How to counterfeit infirmities.
IT has been no small advantage to some, to have counterfeited sicknesses,
that they might escape the hands of their enemies, or redeem themselves for a
small ransom, or avoid tortures; invented by former ages, and used by these
latter. I will first teach you

How to counterfeit a bloody Flux.
Amphiretus Acantius, being taken by Pirates, and carried to Lemnos, was kept
in chains, in hope that his ransom would bring them a great sum of money. He
abstained from meat, and drank Minium mixed with salt water. Therefore, when he
went to stool, the Pirates thought he was fallen into a bloody Flux, and took
off his irons, lest he should dye, and with him their hopes of his ransom. He
being loose, escaped in the night, got into a Fisher-boat, and arrived safe at
Acantum: so says Poliaenus. Indian Figs, which stain the hands like ripe
Mulberries, if they be eaten, cause the urine to be like blood: which has put
many into a fright, fearing they should dye presently. The fruit of the
Mulberry, or Hoggs blood boiled and eaten, makes the excrements seem bloody.
Red Madder makes the urine red, says Dioscorides. We may read also, that if
you hold it long in your hand, it will color your urine. I will teach you also

To make any one look pale.
Cumine taken in drink causes paleness: so it is reported, That the Followers
of Portius Latro, that famous Master of Rhetoric, endeavored to imitate that
color which he had contracted by study. And Julius Vindex, that assertor of
liberty from Nero, made this the only bawd to procure him an executorship.
They smoke themselves with Cumine, who disfigure their faces, to counterfeit
holiness and mortification of their body. There is an experiment also, whereby
any one may know how

To cause Sores to arise.
Take Perwinckle, an herb of an intolerable sharpness, that is worthily named
Flammula; bruise it, and make it into a plaster, and it will in a short space
ulcerate, and make blisters arise. Cantharides beaten with strong water, do
also raise watery blisters, and cause ruptures.

CHAP. XIV.
Of Fascination, and Preservatives against enchantments.
NOw I will discourse of enchantment; neither will I pass over in silence, who
they are whom we call Inchanters: For if we please to look over the Monuments
of Antiquity, we shall find a great many things of that kind delivered down to
posterity. And the trial of later ages does not altogether explode the fame of
them: neither do I think that it derogateth from the truth of the stories, that
we cannot draw the true causes of the things, into the straight bonds of our
reasons, because there are many things that altogether impede the enquiry: but
what I my self judge of others opinions, I thought fit here to explicate. You
may find many things in Theocritus and Virgil, of this kind: whence that verse
arose:

There Is same, I know not whose unlucky eye
Bewitcheth my young Lambs, and makes them die.
Isigonus and Memphodorus say, There are some families in Africa, that bewitch
with their tongue the very Woods: which if they do but admire somewhat
earnestly, or if they praise fair trees, growing corn, lusty children, good
horses, or fat sheep, they presently wither, and die of a sudden, from no
other cause or harm: which thing also Solinus affirms. The same Isigonus
says, there are amongst the ^riballians and Illyrians, certain men, who have
two pupils in each eye, and do bewitch most deadly with them, and kill whatever
they look earnestly on, especially with angry eyes; so pernicious are they: and
young children are most subject to their mischief. There are such women in
Scythia, called Bichiae, says Apollonides. Philarchus reports of another
kind, called Thibians in Pontus, who had two pupils in one eye, and in the
other the picture of a horse; of which Didymus also makes mention. Damon
relates of a poison in Ethiopia, whose sweat would bring a consumption in all
bodies it touched: and it is manifest, that all women which have two pupils in
one eye, can bewitch with it. Cicero writes of them; so Plutarch and
Philarchus mention the Paletheobri, a Nation inhabiting in part of the Pontick
Sea, where are Inchanters who are hurtful, not only to children that are
tender and weak, but to men of full growth, who are of a strong and firm body;
and that they kill with their looks, making the persons languish and consume
away as in a consumption. Neither do they infect those only who live among
them, but strangers, and those who have the least commerce with them; so great
is the power and witchcraft of their eyes: for though the mischief be often
caught in copulation with them, yet it is the eyes that work; for they send
forth spirits, which are presently conveyed to the heart of the bewitched, and
so infect him. Thus it comes to pass, That a young man, being full of thin,
clear, hot, and sweet blood, sends forth spirits of the same nature; for they
are made of the purest blood, by the heat of the heart: and being light, get
into the uppermost parts of the body, and fly out by the eyes, and wound those
who are most porous, which are fair persons, and the most soft bodies. With the
spirits there is sent out also a certain fiery quality, as red and blear-eyes
do, who make those that look on them, fall into the same disease: I suffered by
such an accident my self: for the eye infecteth the air; which being infected,
infecteth another: carrying along with it self the vapors of the corrupted
blood, by the contagion of which, the eyes of the beholders are overcast with
the like redness. So the Wolf makes a man dumb; so the Cockatrice kills, who
poysoneth with looking on, and gives venomous wounds with the beams of his
eyes: which being reflexed upon himself, by a looking-glass, kill the Author of
them. So a bright Mirror dreadeth the eyes of an unclean women, says
Aristotle, and grows cloudy and dull, when she looks on it: by reason that
the sanguine vapor is contracted by the smoothness of the glass into one
place; so that it is spotted with a kind of little mist, which is plainly seen;
and if it be newly gathered there, will be hardly wiped off. Which thing never
happens on a cloth or stone, because it penetrateth and sinketh into the one,
and is dispersed by the inequality of parts in the other. But a Mirror being
hard and smooth, collecteth them entire; and being cold, condenseth them into a
dew. In like manner almost, if you breath upon a clear glass, it will wax moist
as it were with a sprinkling of spettle, which condensing will drop down: so
this efflux of beams out of the eyes, being the conveyers of spirits, strike
through the eyes of those they meet, and fly to the heart, their proper
region, from whence they rise; and there being condensed into blood, infect all
his inward parts. This stranger blood, being quite repugnant to the nature of
the man, infects the rest of him, and makes him sick: and there this contagion
will continue, as long as he has any warm blood in his body. For being a
distemper in the blood, it will cast him into a continual fever; whereas, if
it had been a distemper of choler or phlegm, it would have afflicted him by
intervalls. But that all things may be more distinctly explained, you must know
first, that there are two kind of Fascinations mentioned by Authors: One of
Love, the other of Envy or Malice. If a person be ensnared with the desire of a
fair and beautiful woman, although he be caught at a distance, yet he takes
the poison in at his eyes, and the Image of her beauty settleth in the heart of
this Lover, kindles a flame there, which will never cease to torment him: For
the soft blood of the beloved being strayed thither, makes continual
representations of her: she is present there in her own blood; but it cannot
settle or rest there, for it continually endeavors to fly homeward, as the
blood of a wounded person spirts out on him that gives the blow. Lucretius
describes this excellenty:

He seeks that body, whence his grief he found;
For humors always flow unto a wound.
As bruised blood still runs unto the part
That Is struck, and gathers where it feels the smart:
So when the murtheress of his heart's in place,
Blushes arise, and red orespreads his facee.
But if it be a Fascination of Envy or Malice, that has infected any person,
it is very dangerous, and is found most often in old women. Neither can any one
deny, but that the diseases of the mind do distemper the body; and that the
good disposition of it, does strengthen and corroborate the same: and it does
not work this alteration only in its own body, but on others also, by how much
it stirs up in the heart inward desires of love and revenge. Does not
covetousness, grief, or love, change the color and disposition? Does not envy
cause paleness and meagerness in the body? Does not the longing of the mother,
imprint the mark of what she desired upon the tender Embryo? So when Envy bends
her fierce and flaming eyes, and the desire of mischief bursts thereout, a
vehement heat proceeds from them, which infecteth those that stand nigh,
especially the beautiful; they strike them through as with a sword, set their
entrails on fire, and make them wast into a leannness, especially if they be of
a choleric or sanguine complexion; for the disease is easily fed, where the
pores are open, and the humors thin. Nor is it the passions of the mind only,
that affects the body thus: but the body it self, as Avicenna proves, may be
endued with venomous qualities: many are so by Nature; so that it cannot seem a
wonder, if sometimes some are made so by Art. The Queen of India sent to
Alexander a very beautiful maid, anointed and fed with the poison of Serpents,
as Aristotle says, and Avicenna from the Testimony of Rufus, Galen Writes of
another, who eat Henbane without any harm; and another, Woolf-bane; so that a
Hen would not come near her. And Mithridates (as old Histories deliver it to
us) King of Pontus, had so strengthened himself against poison, that when he
would have poisoned himself, lest he should fall into the hands of the Romans,
nothing would do him any hurt. If you give a Hawk a Hen fed with snakes or
lizards flesh, or with barley boiled in the broth of them, it will make him mew
his feathers betimes: and many other such things are done, which are too long
to be recounted. So many men are of such a nature, that they will cure some
diseases only with their stroaking. Many eat Spiders and wild Olives, and
care not for the biting of Serpents, nor suffer any wasting or consumption, if
they be of such a nature, that their looks or breath will not only blast men,
but plants and herbs, and any other thing, and make them wither away: and
oftentimes, where such kind of creatures are, you may find blasted corn,
poisoned and withered, merely by the contagion of their eyes, the breath that
comes from them. Do not women in the time of their courses, infect cucumbers
and melons, by touching or looking on them, so that they wither? Are not
children handled with less prejudice by men then women? And you will find more
women then men witches, by reason of their complexion; for they are farther
distant from a right temper, and eat more unwholesome food; so that every
month they are filled with superfluities, and purge forth melancholy blood:
from whence vapors arise, and fly out through their eyes, poisoning those that
stand nigh them, and filling them with the same kind of blood. Hence sanguine
complexioned men, and somewhat choleric, who have large, shining, gray eyes,
and live chastely (for too often copulation exhausteth the moisture) who by
frequent glances, and continual imagination, encounter point to point, beams to
beams, eyes to eyes, do generally stir up love. But why a man is taken by this
Fascination with one, and not another, appears by the former, and this
reason: for it happens from the intention of the Inchantor, who by those
spirits or vapors, is transmitted into the bewitched person, and he receiving
them, is made like unto him: For the infection seizing on his mind, and fixing
in his imagination, becomes a permanent habit, and makes the spirits and blood
obedient to it; and so binds the imagination, and inflameth them with the
thing beloved. Although the mind (which opinion is fathered upon Avicen,
neither does it want his authority) can of its own will and power, produce such
passions. Musaeus will have the eyes to lay the foundation of Love, and to be
the chief allurements of it. And Diogenianus says, That Love is begotten by
looks, affirming that it is impossible for a man to fall in love unawares. So
Juvenal places that Lover among prodigies,

Who burnt with Love of her he never saw:
For the bright glances of the eyes, drives the Object into a kind of madness,
and teach the rudiments of Love. The other parts are scarce any cause of Love,
but provoke and entice the beholder to stay, and gaze a while upon their
beauty, whilst the eyes wound him; for there they say, Cupid lies in ambush
with his bow, ready to shoot his arrows into the beholders eyes, and set his
heart on fire. For thy eyes slide in through my eyes (says Apuleius) and raise
a cruel fire within my heart. Now I have discovered the original of it unto
you; unless you are quite mad, you may many ways fortify your self against it.
But many one may well wonder, considering those diseases which come by
infection, as the itch, scabbiness, blear-eyes, the plague, do infect by sight,
touching or speaking, and presently cause putrefaction, why Love's contagion,
which is the greatest plague of all, does not presently seize upon men, and
quite consume them: Neither does it infect others only, but sometimes it
returns upon it self, and the persons will be ensnared in their own charms:
It is reported by the Ancients of Eutelides, that he bewitched himself by
reflection in water, looking-glasses, or fountains, which returned his own
shadow upon him. So that he seemed so beautiful unto himself, that falling in
love with that wherewith he used to entrap others, he lost his former
complexion, and died a Sacrifice unto his own Beauty. So children oftentimes
effascinate themselves, when their parents attribute it to haggards and
witches. Now take

Some Preservatives against Love.
There are many prescribed by wise antiquity. If you would endeavor to remove
the ^charms of love, thus you may expel them. Turn your face away, that she may
not asten her eyes on yours, nor couple rays with you; for you must remove the
cause from the place, where it uses to make its impression: forsake her
company, avoid idleness, employ your mind in business of concernment; evacuate
blood, sweat, and other excrements in a large quantity, that the infection may
also be voided with them.

A Preservative against Envy.
If it be the witchcraft of Envy, you may know it thus. The infected loses his
color, hardly opens his eyes, always hangs his head down, sighs often, his
heart is ready to break, and sheddeth salt and bitter tears, without any
occasion or sign of evil. To disencharm him, because the air is corrupted and
infected, burn sweet persume to purify the air again, and sprinkle him with
waters sweetened with cinnamon, cloves, cypress, lignum aloes, musk, and amber.
Therefore the old custom is continued until this day, and observed by our
women, to smoke their children, and roll them about in frankincense. Keep him
in an open air, and hang Carbuncles, Jacinthes, or Saphires about his neck.
Dioscorides accounts Christ's Thorn, wild Hemp, and Valerian, hung up in the
house, an amulet against witchcraft. Smell to Hyssope, and the sweet Lilly;
wear a ring made of the hoof of a tame or wild Ass; also Sa^v^ion, the male
and female, are thought the like. Aristotle commends Rue, being smelt to. All
these do abate the power of witchcraft.

THE NINTH BOOK OF Natural Magic: How to adorn Women, and make them Beautiful.
THE PROEME.
SInce next to the Art of Physic, follows the Art of Adorning our selves, we
shall set down the Art of Painting; and how to beautify Women from Head to
Foot* in many Experiments: yet lest any man should think it superfluous, to
interpose those things that belong to the Ornaments of Women, I would have them
consider, that I did not write these things for to give occasion to augment
Luxury, and for to make people voluptuous. But when God, the Author of all
things, would have the Natures of all things to continue, he created Male and
Female, that by fruitful Procreation, they might never want Children: and to
make Man in love with his Wife, he made her soft, delicate and fair, to entice
man to embrace her. We therefore, that Women might be pleasing to their
Husbands, and that their Husbands might not be offended at their deformities,
and turn into other womens-chambers, have taught Women, how, by the Art of
Decking themselves and Painting, if they be ashamed of their foul and swart
Complexions, they may make themselves Fair and Beautiful. Somethings that
seemed best to me in the Writings of the ancients, I have tried, and set down
here: but those that are the best, which I and others have of late invented,
and were never before in Print, I shall set down last. And first I shall begin
with the Hairs.

CHAP. I.
How the Hair may be dyed Yellow, or Gold-colour.
SInce it is the singular care of Women to adorn their Hair, and next their
Faces; First, I will show you to adorn the Hair, and next the Countenance. For
Women hold the Hair to be the greatest Ornament of the Body; that if that be
taken away, all the Beauty is gone: and they think it the more beautiful, the
more yellow, shining and radiant it is. We shall consider what things are fit
for that purpose; what are the most yellow things, and will not hurt the Head,
as there are many that will: but we shall choose such things as will do it good.
But before you dye them,

Preparing of the Hair
must be used, to make them fit to receive a tincture. Add to the Lees of
White Wind as much Honey that they may be soft, and like some thin matter:
smeer your Hair with this, let it be wet all night: then bruise the Roots of
Celandine, and of the greater Clivers Madder, of each a like quality: mingle
them, being bruised, very well with Oil, wherein Cummin-Seed, Shavings of Box,
and a little Saffron, are mingled; anoint your Head, and let it abide so twenty
four hours: then wash it with Lie made of Cabbage-Stalks, Ashes, and
Barley-Straw: but Rye-Straw is the best: for this, as Women have often proved,
will make the Hair a bright yellow. But you shall make

A Lie to dye the Hair
thus: Put Barley-Straw into an Earthen-pot with a great mouth, Feny-Graec, and
wild Cummin; mingle between them, Quicklime and Tobacco, made into Powder:
then put them upon the Straw beforementioned, and pour on the Powders again; I
mean by course, one under, the other over, till the whole Vessel be full: and
when they are thrust close, pour on cold water, and let them so stand a whole
day: then open a hole at the bottom, and let the Lie run forth, and with Soap
use it for your Hair. I shall teach you

Another.
To five Glasses of Fountain Water, add Alume-Foeces, one Ounce; Soap, three
Ounces; Barley-Straw, one Handful: let them boil in Earthen-pots, till two
thirds be boiled away: then let it settle: strain the Water with the Ashes;
adding to every Glass of Water, pure Honey one Ounce. Set it up for your use.
You shall prepare for your Hair

An Ointment
thus: Burn the Foeces of Wine, heaped up in a Pit, as the manner is; so that
the fire may go round the Pit: when it is burnt, pown it, and seirce it: mingle
it well with Oil: let the Woman anoint her Head with it when she goes to Bed;
and in the morning, let her wash it off with a Lie, wherein the most bitter
Lupines were boiled. Other Women endeavor

To make their Hair yellow
thus: They put into a common Lie, the Pills of Citrons, Oranges, Quinces,
Barley-Straw, dried Lupines, Foeny-Graec* Broom-Flowers, and Tartat colored, a
good quantity: and they let them there lie and steep, to wash their Hair with.
Others mingle two parts Soap, to one part Honey; adding Ox-Gall one half part:
to which they mingle a twelfth part of Garden-Cummin, and wild Saffron: and
setting them in the Sun for six weeks, they stir it daily with a wooden-staff:
and this they use. Also of Vinegar and Gold Litharge, there is made a decoction
very good to dye the Hair yellow as Gold. Some there are, that draw out a
strong Water with fire, out of Saltpeter, Vitriol, Salt-Ammoniac, and
Cinaber; wherewith the Hairs dyed, will be presently yellow: but this as wont
to burn the Hair: those that know how to mingle it, will have good effects of
it. But these are but ordinary; the most famous way is

To make the Hairs yellow:
draw Oil from Honey by the Art of Distillation, as we shall show: First, there
will come forth a clear Water, then a Saffron-colour, then a Gold-colour: use
this to anoint the Hair with a Sponge; but let it touch the Skin: for it will
dye it Saffron-colour, and it is not easily washed off. This is the principal
above others, because the Tincture will last many days: and it will dye
Gray-Hairs, which few others will. Or make a Lie of Oak-Ashes, put in the
quantity of a Bean of Rheubarb, as much Tobacco, a handful of Barley-Straw and
Foeny-Graec. Shells of Oranges, the Raspings of Guaiacum, a good deal of wild
Saffron and Liquorish: put all these in an Earthen-pot, and boil them, till the
water sink three fingers: the Hairs will be washed excellently with this. Hold
them in the Sun, then cast Brimstone on the Coals, and fume the Hairs; and
whilst it burns, receive the smoke with a little Tunnel at the bottom, and
cover your Head all over with a cloth, that the smoke fly not away.

CHAP. II.
How to dye the Hair bed.
BEcause there are many men and women that are ruddy Complexions, and have the
Hair of their Heads and Bearbs Red; which, should they make yellow-coloured,
they would not agree with their Complexions: To help those also, I set down
these Remedies: The Ancients used the decoction of the Lote-Tree raspt, which
we call Melo Fiocco: and so they made their Hair Red. Or else, by burning me
Foeces of the old Wine, as I said, they added Oil of mastick thereto, which
they provided thus to the purpose. They heaped up the ripe Berries of the
Mastick-Tree for some days, till they might wither: the they poured on water,
and boiled them so long in Brazen Kettles until they brake: they put them in
Bags, and pressed out the Oil with a press. With this Ointment, they kept their
Head anointed all the night, and so made them Red. But how we may

Dye the Hair Red
I shall teach you. There is a Powder brought to us from Africa, they commonly
call Alchena: if we boil it in a Lie till it be colored, and anoint our Hair
with it, it will dye them red for many days, that is indelible: but whilst you
handle it, take heed you wet no your Nails therewith: for they will be so died,
you cannot easily make them clean. So also we dye the Tails and Mains of white
Horses red. But I can easily do it with Oil of Honey; for when the clear and
Saffron-coloured waters are drawn off, increase the fire, and the Oil will come
forth, the red. This is exellent to make the Hairs red, and it will dye white
Hairs red for many days; and when that tincture is worn off, the Hairs will
shine of a golden color. But when we anoint our Heads with a Lie, we take a
wet sponge with nippers, that we may not stain our Hands or skin of our Heads.

With Herbs a woman died her hoary Head:
Arts Colors bettered Natures, as it is said.
CHAP. III.
How the Hairs are dyed Black.
IT is worth the while, to show such as are ashamed to seem old, how to dye
their hoary Hairs black, as if they might grow young again by it. And if we
provide for young women, we must do as much for aged Matrons; especially, if it
fall out that they grow hoary too soon. Of old, they made a decoction of
Sage-Leaves, the green Husks of Walnuts, Sumacts, Myrtle-berries,
Black-berries, Cypress-nuts, Rindes of the Roots of Halm-Tree, and suchlike:
for the Rind of the Root of Halm-Tree, boiled till it be sort, and consumed,
and then smeered on all night, blacks the Hair, first made clean with Fullers
Earth. Learn therefore

How Gray Hairs and dyed Black.
Anoint your Hair in the Sun with Leeches that have lain to corrupt in the
blackest Wine sixty days, and they will become very black. Or else, Let a
sextary of Leeches stand in two sextaries of Vinegar in a Leaden Vessel to
corrupt, for sixty days: and as I said, anoint your Hair. Pliny says, It will
dye so strongly that unless they hold Ovl in their mouths, when they dye the
Hair, it will make their Teeth black also. But if you would have

Long and Black Hair,
Take a green Lizard, and cutting off the Head and Tail, boil it in common Oil,
and anoint your Head with it. You shall have also

Another.
Yet you may thus dye your Hair and Beard handsomely, if they be grown Gray:
Froth of Silver, burnt Brass, must be mingled with four times the quantity of
strong Lie: and when it bubbles on an easy fire, wash your Hair with it; and
when they are dry, wash them with hot water. I used this as the Ancients taught
it: and I made a Lie of Quicklime and Oak-Ashes, that they commonly call the
Capitel; in that I boiled Litharge of Silver: then I tried it on white Wool;
for if it be dyed black, as I would have it, then I took it from the fire; or
else, I boiled it longer. If it burnt the Wool, I put water to it; or else,
dyed with it. Add Lytharge. Wash your Hair or Beard with this, and it will dye
them with a shining black color, and it will not be discerned: for the more
you wash it, the better it will shine.

CHAP. IV.
To make Hairs part smooth.
BEcause sometimes a part is deformed with abundance of Hair, or for lack of
Hair, I shall show how to make a smooth part thick with Hair, and a hairy part
smooth, by depilatories.

A common Depilatory,
which men use commonly in Baths. It consists of Quicklime, four parts made
into Powder, Orpiment one part: boil them. Try with a Hens Feather; when that
is made bare with it, it is boiled: take heed you boil it not too much, or that
it stay not too long upon your skin, for it will burn: but if it chance to burn
your skin, take Populeum and Oil of Roses or Violets, and anoint the place, and
the pain will be gone. This must be done in a Bath; but if you cannot have one,
let the Woman be covered with cloths very well, and let it be cast on burning
Stones or Tiles, that she may receive the fume of it, and swear. After she has
sweat, let her wash her self with her water, and wipe it off: then let her
anoint her self all over; for the parts anointed thus, will presently grow
smooth. And thus may all parts be kept free from Hair. The Ancients used these,
as Saserna, as Varro reports, teaches in his Book of Husbandry. If (says he)
you would make any one smooth from Hair, cast a pale Frog into water, and boil
it to a third part; and with that anoint the Body. But by pale Frog we must
understand a Toad: for a Frog has no such faculty. A Salamander soaked in Oil,
will pull out the Hair. Dioscorides. But it will be stronger, if you steep it
long in Oil, and dissolve it. The filthy matter that is white as Milk, and is
vomited up at the mouth by the Salamander, if it touch any part of the Body,
all the Hair will fall off. Dioscorides says, That the Sea-Scolopendra boiled
in Oil, and smeered on the part, will pluck off the Hair by the Roots. But

To make Hair grow slowly,
If you press Oil out of Henbane-Seed with a Press, or do often anoint the
places with the juice of it, they will grow again very slowly. The same is done
with the juice of Hemlock. Or to take off the Hairs, men added to Ants Eggs,
red Orpiment, and Ivy-Gum, with Vinegar; and they rubbed the place where the
Hair was taken away. In former times, they rubbed the down-parts of children
with the Roots of Hyacinthus, and the Hair would never grow there. And
therefore it is well known in trimming Medicaments sold here and there, that
being smeered on with sweet Wine, keeps back the Bread, and will not let it
break forth. But if you would

That Hair should never grow again,
In which business I have taken great pains; and tried many things that I found
to be false; First, foment the part with hot water, and pull out the Hairs one
by one with women's nippers: then dissolve Saltpeter in water, and anonynt the
holes where the Hairs grew. It will be better done with Oil of Brimstone, or of
Vitriol: and so they will never grow again; or if they do, after one year, they
will be very soft: do then the same again, and the parts will be bare always.
So I have made women's Foreheads longer, and have taken off Hair from parts
hotter then the rest.

CHAP. V.
How Hair may grow again.
BUt for those that would have Hair grow where it should, these Remedies will
do it: sometimes women's temples use to be deformed for want of Hair, I shall
teach you how

Hair falling off before old age, may be held fast.
And if any Hair has fallen off, to make it grow again, torrifie Gith upon the
Coals; when it is torrified, powder it, sift it, and mingle it with water; and
anoint your Head. The Ancients made their Hair grow again with these Remedies:
with the Ashes of a Land Hedgehog, or of burnt Bees or Flies, or the Powder of
them deied; also with Man's Dung burnt, and anointed on with Honey, to which
they added well the Ashes of Small-nuts, Wall-nuts, Ches-nuts, and other
Bean-like substances: for by all these mingled together, or by them single,
Hair will be made to grow. But if you will

That Hair shall grow quickly,
I know that by often washing the place with that water that first distills from
Honey by the fire, much Hair will soon grow; or if you do but moysten the place
with wet cloths, and not wipe it, but let it always continue wet. Also Noble
Matrons may use this

To make the Hairs grow softer.
Augustus was wont to burn his Legs with a burning Nut, that the Hair might
grow softer. But

That Hair may grow longer and quickly,
Bruise Marsh-Mallow Roots with Hog's Grease, and let them boil long in Wine:
then add Cummin-Seed well bruised, Mastick, and yelks of Eggs well boiled:
first, mingle them a little, and then boil them: strain all through a
Linen-clout, and let it stand and settle; then take the fat that swims on the
top and anoint the Head, first wash. But to make them grow quickly, take
Barley-Bread with Salt and Bears Grease: burn the Bread; and with such a
mixture anoint the place. Some besmeer a glazed Pot with the fat of a Horse
Neck, and they boil a River-Eel that is fat, and cut into pieces in it, till it
dissolve into Oil, and they anoint the part with it.

CHAP. VI.
To take away Sores and Worms that spoil the Hair.
THere is a certain plague of the Hair that befalls them, and breaks, cuts, and
takes the Hair quite off from the Head. I will add the Remedies presently,
whereby to take them away. It is healthful, in these Diseases, to apply bitter
things to kill these Worms called Tiners or Sirens: take the Flowers of
Myrtle-Trees, Broom-clary; boil them in Vinegar, till the Vinegar be consumed,
and then rub the ends of the Hair continually with it. Also grind bitter
Lupines into fine Meal; boil them in Vinegar, and then rub the Hairs between
your hands: for this will kill these Sirens, and drive them away. But I used
very hot Bread, newly taken forth of the Oven, cut in the middle, and putting
the Hair between them till they grow ^old.

CHAP. VII.
How to make Hair Curl.
Curled Hair seems to be no small Grace and Ornament to the Head: and women
that use painting do all they can to curl the Hair. If you will know how

To Curl the Hair,
Boil Maidenhair with Smallage-Seed in Wine, adding a good quantity of Oil: for
this will make the Hair curled and thick. Pliny. Moreover, if you put the Roots
of Daffidils into Wine, and pour this often on the Head, being shaved, it will
make the Hair curl the more, as the same Author says: or else, bruise the Root
of Dwraf-elder, with Oil, and anoint the Head therewith, and bind the Leaves
of the same upon the Head. Some say that Camels Dung will curl the Hair: or
else, poun the Ashes of a Rams Horn, with Oil; and with that anoint the Head
often, being first shaved. So also, will the Ashes of Chef-nuts or Hedge-hogs
do, if you with Honey smeer the Head with it.

CHAP. VIII.
Remedies to make the Eye brows black.
BEfore we leave off to speak of Hair, I shall show how to make the Eyebrows
black, because women are as desirous of this as of the rest. The Greeks call
them Calliblephara, that is, Fair Eyebrows: wherefore the Ancients used

To dye the Eyebrows
with black Earth like Bitume or Sea-Cole: being burnt, it is a very fine
black: and it is added to those Remedies that serve to dye the Eyebrows and
the Hair black: or else the Marrow of an Ox bone taken out of the Right-Leg
before, and beaten with Soot, is good to dye the Hair, and faulty Eyebrows,
and the corners of the Eyes. Also, Soot is tempered for this purpose, with the
smoke of Paper, and Oil of Sesama, the smoot being wiped off of a new Vessel
with a Feather. The Kernels of Dates burnt in a new earthen Pot, and the Ashes
washed, serve instead of Spodium; and they are mingled with Eye-salves, and
they make Calliblephara; adding Spikenard thereunto. And if they be not well
burnt, burn them again. Also Rose-Leaves are fit burn for the same use. Also,
you may amend your Eyebrows thus; Take Labdanum, and beat it with Wine, and
mingle Oil of Myrtles with it, and make a very thick Ointment: or infuse in Oil
the black Leaves of the Myrtle-Tree, with a double quantity of Galls bruised,
and use that. I use this. Galls are fried in Oil, and they are ground with a
little Salt-Ammoniac; and then mingled with Vinegar, wherein the Pills of the
Mulberry and Bramble have been boiled: with these anoint the Eyebrows, and let
it abide on all night; then wash it off with water. But if you would

Change the color of childrens Eyes,
you shall do it thus: anoint the fore part of their Heads with the Ashes of
the shells of Hazel-nuts and Oil, it will make the white eyes of children
black, if you do it twice. There are many Experiments to make white and gray
Eyes black, and to alter the colors. But I shall let them pass, because those
that want them will not so lightly endanger their Eyes; nor do they answer the
expectation, as some have tried them.

CHAP. IX.
How to make the Face white.
I Taught formerly in my Book of Plants, That with white clear Silver-coloured
Herbs, Shel-Fish, and Stones, the Face might be made white, polished and
Silver-coloured. I shall now set down some examples, by which you may invent
many more. I shall first speak of Simples, then of Compounds: Simples that are
white, make the face white. The Lilly is a complete white color: the bulbous
tops of it, like Onyons boiled in water, or the distilled water of them, will
make the Faces of Maids white, if they wash them therewith, morning and
evening. Withwind bears a Flower like to the Lilly, without any smell; but
within like Saffron: it is only white, and is as it were the Rudiments of
Nature, when she goes about to frame a Lilly. The distilled water from the
flowers will wonderfully make the Face whole. Also with the decoction of Ivory,
one may make the Face like Ivory. Melanthinm makes the Face beautiful.
Dioscorides. But it shows its excellency when it is thus prepared: Pown it, and
sift out the finest of it, take the juice of Lemmons, and let the Meal of Gith
lie wet in it twenty four hours; take it out, and let it dry: then break an Egg
with the Shell, and mingle it with it: then dry it in the shade, and sift it
once more. In the morning, when the woman rises out of her bed, let her put
this into a white Linen-clour, that is not too fine, and wet it with water or
spittle; and let her rub her Face with the clour, that the moisture alone, and
not the Meal, may come on the Face. If you will have

Your Face white,
it may be made as white as Milk many ways, and chiefly with these that follow:
Let Litharge of Silver, half an ounce, boil in a Glazed Earthen Pot, with
strong Vinegar, until the thinner part be evaporated: set it up for use. Then,
in another Pot, let half a pound of clear water boil: then mingle both these
waters together, and shake them; and it will become like Milk, and sink to the
bottom: when it is settled, pour it off; water being plentifully poured in: and
leaving it a while to settle, pour it off again, and pour on fresh; shake it,
and leave it to settle a short time, and so forbear. That which is settled, set
in the Sun and when it is grown stiff, as thick pap, make small balls of it,
and lay them up. You may use these with water to make the Face white. Or else
powder Lytharge of Silver, eight ounces, very fine: pour on the Powder, of the
strongest Vinegar five pints: distill them, and keep them for your use. Then
take Allome de Plume, Salt Gemma, one dram; Frankincense, one ounce and a
half; Camphire, two drachms; Oil of Tartar, six ounces; Rose Water, one pound:
powder what must be powdered, and pour it in: distill the water in Chemical
Vessel, and set it up. When you would use them, mingle a little of both waters
in the palm of your hand, and it will be like Milk: rub your Face with it, and
it will be white. Or else take off the Pills of about twenty Cirton Lemmons;
infuse the Pills in one pound of the best Wine, and one pint and an half of
Rose Water, for six days: then add one ounce of white Lilly and Mallow-Roots,
and let them stay as many days: then add Rosin of Turpentine, four ounces;
white Mercury sublimate, two ounces; Boxan, half an ounce; ten whites of Eggs
made hard at the fire: and mingle all these together: let them stay one night.
The next day, put a cap upon the Vessel, and luting the joints well, that
nothing may breath forth, let the water drop into a Vessel to receive it: set
it aside for use. I me this, that is easy to make, and does the business
completely: Take the white of an Egg, and stir it so long with an Iron, that it
froth well: let it stand to turn to water: then take half an ounce of the best
Honey, and beat with that water, and ^ingle them until they unite: add to them
the quantity of two Corns of Wheat, Mercury sublimate, finely powdered; when
you go to bed, take some of the water in the palm of your hand, and wash your
Face; and so let it dry in, that it may not slick to the Linen: in the morning,
wash it off with Fountain Water, and you shall have your Face clear and white.

CHAP. X.
How women shall make their Faces very clean to receive the Color.
BEfore any thing be used to make the Face beautiful, it must be made very
clean and fit to receive it: for oft-times women have excellent Waters and
Remedies brought them, but they have no operation: wherefore the matter is,
that they must first prepare their Face. This is the best

Preparation of the Face.
Bind Barley-Meal-Bran in a Linen-cloth, and let it down into a Pot full of
water, and let it boil till a third part be remaining, and press out the juice:
with this decoction wash your face, and let it dry: then bruise Myrrh, and
mingle it with the white of an Egg, and burn it on hot Fire-sticks, or red hot
Tiles, and receive the fume by a tunnel: let the narrow part of it be toward
the Face, and the broad to the fire: cover the head with a Napkin that the
smoke fly not away; and when you have received sufficient of the smoke, rub
your Face with a Linen-cloth: then use your Remedy to anoint your Face. I shall
show you

One that is stronger.
When the skin must be cleansed or made white, you must cleanse some parts of
your Face from skins that will not let your painting Ointment stick. Powder an
ounce of Sublimate very finely: put it into a Pot that is glazed, and cast into
it fix whites of Eggs, so beaten, that they are turned into water: then boil
them on hot Embers, till they grow thick: put them into a Linen Cloth that is
loosly weaved, and press the water out of them with your hands, and wash your
Face with it: then mingle Honey, whites of Eggs, and the aforesaid water
together, equal parts: put some in your palm, and rub the place you would make
white, with the palms of your hands: then boil spelt; and when it is boiled,
take the fume of it by a tunnel: then rub your Face with a course Linen Cloth.
Others wash their Face with water, wherein fine flour is boiled.

CHAP. XI.
How the Face may be made very soft.
THe next Beauty of the Face and Hands, is Tenderness, which is procured by fat
things; and chiefly by Milk, and principally of Asses: for it takes off
wrinkle* and makes the skin white and soft. And therefore, it was not for
nothing, that Poppaea Sabina, Nero's wife, had always five hundred Asses with
her: and in a Bath with a ^ear, she soaked all her body with that Milk.
Wherefore if you would have

Tour Face made soft and white,
Steep crumbs of Bread in Whey or in Milk; then press it out, and with that
water wash your Face; for it will wonderfully white your Face, and make the
skin fair. Or, take six Glasses of Milk, steep crumbs of Bread in it five
hours: take ten Lemmons, make clean the Pills, and cut the Body of them into
thin slices: then shake ten whites of Eggs; bruise an ounce of Camphire, Allom
Sauharinum, two ounces; mingle them all, and distill them, and set it in a
glazed Vessel close covered, in the Sun; and then set it up for your use. Here
is one stronger

For the same purpose.
Boil two Calves Feet in water; first make them clean: then boil the water till
half be consumed; put it in Rice one pound, and boil it well: let crumbs of
Bread steep in Asses Milk or Goats Milk, with ten whites of Eggs bruised with
their Shells: distill all at a gentle fire; add to the water a little Camphire
and Borax: put into a glazed vessel, two young naked Pigeons, with their guts
taken forth, and put in as much Milk as will cover them; and add one ounce of
Borax; Turpentine, three ounces; Ca^phire, one ounce; five whites of Eggs: put
on the cover, and distill them; for it is fat things that make the Face soft. I
shall say more, when I come to speak of making the hands white and soft: the
reason is the same for both.

CHAP. XII.
How to make the face clear and shining like silver.
THe face is not only made clear, but white as silver, by those things that I
said were white as silver; yet not exactly as silver, but they shine as clear
as silver. There is an herb commonly called Argentaria, or Argentina, or wild
Tansey, whose leaves are green above, but on the backside they shine of a
silver color: the distilled water of it is drank by women against spots in
their faces, and to make them white as silver. The snails that are found in
moist places, and leave behind them, as they creep, a silver cord (Dioscorides
says, will cure the spots in the face) women much desire them: for they put
them in a still and draw out water from them, that polisheth the skin
exceedingly, and makes it contract a silver gloss. And the seashell-fish, like
an ear, whose shell is of a silver color within, or pearl color, and many
kinds of shells; that being steeped in vinegar, will grow pure, casting off the
outward crust; as the Oystershel does that brings forth pearl. There are also
shells, we call the Mothers of pearl, that inwardly are shining, and of a
silver color, like pearls: all which women use for their art of beautifying
themselves; for they make the face smooth, and to shine as white as silver. But
pearls do it best of all things, when they are dissolved in sharp juyces, and
soaked in rotten dung, till they send forth a clear oil, that is the best thing
to beautify the face, as I shall show elsewhere. For the same use, is a
glass-stone used, that shines like silver. But no better water is prepared,
then from Talk, or Quicksilver, as I shall show in that which follows.

CHAP. XIII.
How to dissolve Talk for to beautify women.
THough I shall speak in a work, on purpose, more at large, how Talk may be
dissolved into water or oil; We shall here only set down, how it may be fitted
for women's use. Of all such ways as are used, I shall set forth such as I have
tried to be good. Beat Talk in a mortar of metal; then put it into a pot of the
strongest clay, and cover it, and bind it in with strong iron wire; lute it
well all cover, and stop the joints that nothing breathe out; and set it in the
Sun to dry. Then put this stone in an oven, that flames strongly, or in some
other place, where the fire is most vehement. When the fire of the oven is out,
take it forth and break the vessel; and if it be well calcined, it is enough:
Otherwise do the same again, until the calx of it be as white as it ought to
be. When the calcined body of it, is white, as it must be* grind it on a
porphyry-stone, and put it into a little bag, or upon a marble in a very moist
place, or deep well, or cistern; and let it lie there long, and with much
moisture it will drop forth at last: It will more easily and perfectly dissolve
into water, if it were burnt long enough, and turned into a calx. For the parts
being turned to lime, and made exceeding dry by force of fire, they attract
moisture. It is also done

Another way
that is good. Calcine the Talk, and put it in an earthen pot, and set it in
the hottest part of a potters oven, to stay there six days. When the Talk is
thus turned to a calx, put it into a gourd-glass, which you shall first make
clean, and make a hole at the bottom of it: and setting a vessel under it, you
shall have the moisture of it drop forth, and the calx will resolve into water:
put this into a glass vial, and let the water evaporate in Bal^eo: take the
sediment out for your use. I use also

Another way:
Put snails in an earthen vessel, in the open air, that they may be kept hungry
three days, and pine for want of meat, and be purged; then take a silver
Loadstone, or Talk, most finely powdered, mingle it with the white of an egg,
and make an ointment; anoint the earthen vessel with it, and put the snails
into it, for they will eat up all the Talk: When they have eaten all, and
voided their excrements, bruise the snails with their shells; and putting them
into a retott, draw out their moisture with a gentle fire; the humor that
drops forth, will exceedingly adorn the face.

CHAP. XIV.
The preparation of Sublimate.
I Said, that there was nothing better than quicksilver for women's paints, and
to cleanse their faces, and make them shine. Wherefore* I shall set down many
ways to Prepare it, that you may have the use of it to your desire. Take one
ounce and half of pure quicksilver, not falsified with lead: for if there be
lead mingled with it, all your labor is lost. How it must be purged and known,
I taught elsewhere. Mingle this with half a pound of Mercury sublimate, and put
it into a marble mortar, and with a new wooden pestle, stir it well, turning it
round about. First, it will be black, in six hours it will grow white, if you
cease not to beat it. Then add one ounce and half of white salt, always
turning it about with the p^stle; for the more you grind it, the perfecter it
will be. When it is very well ground, it must be washed. Sprinkle boiling clear
water into the mortar, and stir it; and then stay a while, until the muddy part
may sink down, and the filth that was lighter, and swims on the top: laying the
vessel on one side, pour out the water gently, and pour in fresh; do this five
or six times in the same manner, until the pure and only powder remain without
dregs: make little cakes of it, and dry it in the sun. Some whilst they bruise
it, sprinkle water on, lest the powder by grinding should be made so small,
that it should fly away into the air. The chief business is to purge it, and
grind it well, that it be not troubled when it is strained forth: that which is
gone to the bottom, and so part of it be lost; some open a hole in the belly of
a pot, that when it is settled, the hole being opened, the water with the dregs
may run forth. Others to sublimate, add a third part of quicksilver, and
grind it in a wooden mortar; and in the ^^an while they chew four grains of
mastick in their mouths, and they spit the clammy spittle out of their mouths
into the mortar, until it be white, as I said: then they boil it in one pound
of the distilled water, of Bryony-root, till it be consumed: then they put a
linen cloth, to receive it at the mouth of the vessel, and so they strain it
forth, and set it in the sun: they make ^roches of it with gum Traganth; others
to sublimate, add a sixth part of quicksilver, bruising it round about: then
they add camphir, borax, and ceruss, half as much, and mingle all together.
The principal matter is, it is the best way to sprinkle it with water whilst
you grind it, lest by grinding it, the powder become so light, that it fly
away: also, when the water is poured on, all the filth will come on the top,
and more easily be poured off: then when the sublimate is washed, it is left to
settle down: then again pouring off the former water, they pour on fresh, and
they wash it often, till they see it is enough, and no black swims on the top.
But there is no better, as we said, than

Water of quicksilver.
But some will not away with quicksilver, by reason of the hurt it commonly
does to the teeth: but they use other water. Yet there is no better water, then
that which is extracted from quicksilver; it is so clear and transparent, and
the face anointed with it, shines like silver: it draws the skin handsome, and
makes it soft by and by; and I never saw a better: the manner was showed before.

CHAP. XV.
How white-lead is prepared for the face.
BEcause sublimate is so dangerous, there is a private way to do it with
ceruss, but not the usual way, that women may have their desire, without
hurting their skin or their teeth. I am now come to the business of ceruss.
Take of swines grease well washed and cleansed in common water, at least ten
times: put it in to a lie of sweet water, and after fifteen days, into a pot,
or earthen vessel, with a broad mouth; pouring in the sharpest vinegar, put in
your swines grease, that the vinegar may swim three fingers above it: then
fasten a plate of lead on the mouth of the pot, well luting the joints with
linen cloths, that the vinegar may not evaporate. Every fifteen days take off
the cover, and see how it is, if the lead be dissolved, and scrape the cover of
all that hangs upon it, and put in the cover; anoint it all about, and let it
stand so long, till all the rest be performed, as I said before, and the whole
lead be turned to ceruss. Ceruss must be washed thus: Pour water into a vessel,
put the ceruss into it; stir it up and down, that what dregs there is may swim
on the top: the ceruss is heavy, and will sink to the bottom: Pour forth what
swims above in the vessel, and pour on fresh water; and do this so often, until
the pure ceruss be found without dregs: dry it, and lay it up. If you will do it

Another way,
Take two handfuls of cleansed barley, let it steep all night in fair water;
then dry it on a linen cloth, spread abroad in the sun. When it is dried, poun
it in a marble mortar; when it is bruised, put it into a glazed vessel, which
is full of vinegar, and cast upon this four whole eggs, with their shells: then
stop the vessel with a plate of lead, that is arched, or not very even, and let
there be no place that gives vent. Set it half in the sand, and let it stand in
the open sun; after ten days, take off the covering of the vessel, that you
stopped it with; strike down the ceruss that is in it with a feather, and scrape
it off: then take the eggs out, and put in new, and do as you did; and after so
many days scrape it off, until the whole plate be consumed. Let down the ceruss
you have stricken off, into a vessel full of water, bound up in a linen cloth
that is clean, and moderately fine; and stir it in the water, carrying it about
here and there, until the muddy part of it run forth, and the sediment remain
in the cloth: let the water settle, and strain it, and pour it forth, changing
the water so long, until no dregs remain. Lastly, strain forth the water, and
lay up the powder when it is dry. This alone with fountain water, will make the
face white, mingled with the white of an egg, and will make it shine. Some

Another way
wash ceruss, and make it pure. Mingle hards of hemp, with whites of eggs well
stirred: role up the ceruss in the middle of it: and wrapping a cloth about it,
boil it one hour in a new earthen pot, putting water to it: as it boils, take
off the skum: then take it from the fire; and if any Lead be sunk down, cast it
forth: afterward make Troches of it with Gum-Traganth, that it may keep the
better. Some bid boil in water of white Lillies, Ceruss very finely powdered,
tied up in a skin, and fastened in a Linen-cloth over it to the handle of the
Vessel. The manner of boiling is the same as I first showed. Then pour it forth
into an earthen dish, and strain it gently from all its moisture: dry it
fifteen days in the Sun, and keep it.

CHAP. XVI.
The best Sopes for women.
I Showed in particulars how you might procure whiteness, luster, and softness
to the Face: now shall I speak of waters made of these, that will at the same
time make, if it be first rubbed clean,

The Face white, clear, ruddy and soft.
These I speak of can do it, being composed together, and distilled. Take
Ceruss ready washed, one ounce; half as much Mercury sublimate; Gum-Traganth as
much; Tartar, one ounce: powder all these, and put them into a young Pigeon
washed and unbowelled, and sow them in: put it into a new Earthen Pot full of
water, distilled by a Retort: boil it till the flesh part from the bones; then
distill it: when you go to bed, wash you Face; and in the morning wash it with
Fountain Water: so you shall have it white, clear, soft, and well-colored.
Also you may do it

Another way.
Bruise three pound of Bean-Cods, the shells; add two pounds of Honey, and one
of Rosin of Turpentine: put them into a Vessel, and close it that nothing vent
forth; and let it ferment eight days in dung: then add four pound of Asses
milk: and in the Vessel draw forth Oil at the fire; use this water morning and
evening. If you will have

Another way,
do it thus. Distill all these severally; Elder-flowers, and Flowers of wild
Roses, Broom, Honey-sn^kles, Solomons-seal, and Briony-Roots, sour Grapes, and
Sarcocolla: mingle equal parts of each, or distill them again, and set them in
the Sun. This will be the best. I shall show

Another for the same.
Pull of a Hens Feathers without water, take out her Entrals, cut her in
pieces, let infuse one night in White Wind: in the morning wash her in it, and
press her between your hands that no Wine remain; and then adding two Cups of
White Wind, distill her in a Chemical Vessel: then distill the Flowers of
Bindeweed, Citrons, Oranges together; and keep this water by it self. Then open
Lemmons, and press out the juice. And, also take water of Bean-flowers; then
distill six cups of Asse^ milk, and as many of Cows-milk. You shall do the same
with water of Gourds, and of Milk well boiled, and of water of Bean-flowers,
and of Rosin of Turpentine. Then provide a glazed Vessel, put into it, Camphire
two drachms, four ounces of Ceruss finely powdered: mingle them with the
aforesaid waters, and set it in a soft Vessel in the open Air fifteen days and
nights. When you would use it, wet a Linen-rag in it, and wash your Face.

CHAP. XVII.
How to make the Face Rose-coloured.
I Have made the Face white, now I will make it red, that the wise may be made
wholly Beautiful for her husband. And first,

To make a pale Face purple-coloured.
And to adorn one that wants color, use this Remedy. Take Vinegar twice
distilled, and cast into it the raspings of red Sanders, as much as you please:
boil it at a gentle fire, adding a little Allom, and you shall have a red
color most perfect to dye the Face. If you would have it sweet smelling, add a
little Musk, Civet, Cloves, or any Spices. Now

Another,
Take Flowers of Clove-Gilliflowers, bruise the ends of the sprigs, and draw
forth the juice; if they be so ripe that they are black, add juice of Lemmons,
that they may shine with a more clear red. With this paint your Face, and you
shall have a pleasant red color without any stinking smell; or wet the sprigs
of Clove-gilliflowers in juice of Lemmons, and set them in the Sun. Take away
the old, and put in fresh, until it be as red as you would have it: let the
juice dry, and the color will be most glorious. But I draw a quintessence from
Clovegill flowers, Roses, Flower-gentle, with Spirit of Wine; then I add Allom,
and the juice of a Citron, and I made an excellent color to beautify the
Face. Take

Another.
If you add to the best Wine one tenth part of Honey, and one ounce of
Frankinsence^ and then distill it, and steep in it the raspings of red Saunders
until it is colored to your mind; and then wash your Face with it: it will
make your Face white and well-colored. Also,

A Fucus that cannot be detected:
And it is so cunningly made, that it will delude all men; for a clear water
makes the Cheeks purple-coloured, and it will last long; and the cleerer the
part will be, the more your wash it with it, and rub it with a cloth of Woolen.
You shall draw out a water from the Seeds of Cardamom, (which the Apothecaries
call Grains of Paradise) Cubebs, Indian Cloves, raspings of Brasil and Spirit
of Wine distilled: when they have been infused some time, draw forth the water
with a gentle fire, or corrupt Dung, and wet your Face often with this. There
are also Experiments

To color the Body.
If you boil Nettles in water, and wash your Body with it, it will make it
red-colored, if you continue it long. If you distill Straw-berries, and wash
your self with the water, you shall make your Face red as a Rose. But the
Ancients dyed their bodies of diverse colors; partly, for ornament; partly, for
terror: as Caesar writes of the Britans going to war; for they painted
themselves with wood. Theophrastus calls it Isatis, and we call it Guado. The
Grecian-women painted themselves with wood, as Zenophon writes. And in our days
the West-Indians crush out in Harvest-time a blood-red juice from the Roots of
wild Bugloss: which the women know well enough, whereby they cover their pale
color with a pleasant red: and so change their over-white color with this
Experiment.

CHAP. XVIII.
To wash away the overmuch redness of the Face.
I Have showed you how to color the Face, now I shall show how to uncolour it:
when the Face is too red, and women that are very red desire this. The way is:

To wash away the too-much redness of the Face,
Take four ounces of Peach-Kernels, and Gourd-Seed two ounces; pown them, and
crush them out strongly, that you may draw forth an oily Liquor: with this,
morning and evening, anoint the red Carbuncles of your face, and by degrees
they will vanish and be gone.

Another.
Take Purple-Violets, Egg-shells, Saunders Camphire mingled with water: set the
water in the open Air, and wash the redness therewith. Also, I know that the
distilled water of white Lillies will take away the redness.

CHAP. XIX.
How to make a Sunburned Face white.
WHen women travel in the open Air, and take journeys in Summer, the Sun in one
day will burn them so black, that it is hard to take it off. I found out this

Experiment.
Beat about ten whites of Eggs till they come to water: put them in a glazed
Vessel, adding one ounce of Sugar Candy to them: and when you go to bed, anoint
your Face, and in the morning wash it off with Foutain-water. Pliny also says
thus.

Another.
If the Face be smeered with the white of an Egg, it will not be Sunburned.
With us, women that have to do in the Sun, to defend their Faces from the heat
of it, that they may not be black, they defend it with the white of an Egg
beaten with a little Starch, and mingled; and when the Voyage is done, they
wash off this covering with Barley-water. Some do it

Another way:
rubbing their foul Skin with Melon-Rindes; and so they easily rub off
Sun-burnings, and all other spots outwardly on the Skin. The Seed also bruised
and rubbed on, will do it better. Also, a Liquor found in little bladders of
the Elm-Tree, when the Buds first come forth, makes the Face clear and shining,
and takes away Sun-burnings.

CHAP. XX.
How Spots may be taken from the Face.
OFt-times fair women are disgraced by spots in their Faces; but the Remedy for
it, is this: to use Abstergents and Detergents in whiting of their Faces.
Therefore,

To take off spots from the Face,
anoint the Face with Oil of Tartar, and let it dry on, and wash it not at all:
do this for ten days: then wash it with a Lixivium, and you shall see the spots
no more. If the part be not yet clean enough, do it once more. If this please
you not, take

Another.
Put Quicklime into hot water; mingle them, and stir them for ten days. After
two days, pour forth the clear water into a Brazen Vessel: then take
Salt-Ammoniac between your Finger-tops, and rub it so long at the bottom of the
Vessel, until you see the water become of a blew-colour; and the more you rub
it, the better color it will have, and it will turn into a Skie-colour or
Purple-colour, very pleasant to behold. Wet Linen-cloths in this water, and lay
them on the spots, till they be dry; and wet them again, till the spots be
gone. See

Another.
Take two ounces of Turpentine-Rosin, Ceruss as much; mingle them with the
white of an Egg; and stirring them well, besmeer Linen-cloths with them. And
when you go to bed, let them stick to the spots: in the morning wash the place;
and do the same again, till all the spots be gone. If you please, here is

Another.
The distilled water of Pimpernel, mingled with Camphire and laid to the Face,
will make women that desire to be beautiful have a clear Skin, very sightly to
behold; and will take off the spots. Distill the Mulberry-Leaves; let the water
stand ten days in the Sun: add to this, Mercury sublimate, Verdigrease,
artificial Chrysocolla, called Borax, and a good quantity of the Powder of
Sea-Cockle-shells finely beaten. Set it so many days in the Sun, and then use
it. If you will

rub off the wan color of your cheeks,
do thus; especially, for women when they are in their courses: Anoint the
place with Ceruss, and Bean-flower mingled with Vinegar; or yelks of Eggs,
mingled with Honey. The same may be done with Bean-meal and Feny-Greek, smeered
on with Honey. But we wipe away

Black and blew marks
thus: If you wash the black and blew places with the juice of the Leaves and
Roots of Thapsia made into Cakes in the Sun, but one night, they will be taken
away. Nero Caesar made his Face white from the strokes he had received in his
Nightwalks, with Wax and Frankincense; and the next day his Face was clear
against all reports. Or Oil pressed from the Seeds of Flowers, when it is
thick, will do it rarely. Or the Root mingled with equal quantities of
Frankincense and Wax, (but let it ^ay on but two hours at most) then foment the
place with Seawater hot. Also, Wal-nuts bruised or smeered on, will take away
black and blew spots. Vinegar or Honey anointed will take away the same. So
does Garlic rubbed on: and brings black and blew to the right color. Or the
Ashes of it burnt, smeered on with Honey. The juice of Mustard Seed, anointed
on but one night, is good for the same: or it is anointed on with Honey, or
Suet, or a Cerate. If a Briony-root be made hollow, and Oil put into it, and it
be boiled in hot Embers; if that be anointed on, it will blot out black and
blew spots. Marks that are noted upon Children by Women great with-child, when
they long exceedingly, are taken away thus: Let her first eat of that Flesh or
Fruit her belly full: then let her bind on that Flesh alive, or the green
Fruit to the part, till it die or corrupt; and they will be gone. Or else, let
her wash the place with Aqua Fortis, or Regia, and the Skin grows very black:
so it will take the marks away. Do it again

For spots and beauty.
I will not omit Aelian's Experiment of a Lion, which is a kind of Locust. For
in some Membranes, where the Testes are bound together, under which there are
some soft Carbuncles, and tender, that are called the Lions fat; This will help
people to make ill Faces look comely, mingled with Oil of Roses; and made into
an Ointment, it will make the Face look fair and shining.

CHAP. XXI.
How we may take off red Pimples.
BEcause red Pimples use to deform the Face; and specially, the whitest:
therefore, to take them off, use these Remedies. I often, to take off

Pimples,
used Oil of Paper; namely, extracting it from burnt Paper. I shall show the
way elsewhere, because I will not disturb the Order: where I shall speak of the
Extraction of Oils and Waters. Wherefore anointing that on the red spots, will
soon blot them out.

For the same.
Rear Eggs are good, twenty of them boiled hard cut in the middle, and the
yelks taken forth: fill up the hollow places in the whites, with Oil of sweet
Almonds and Turpentine-Rosin: extract the Liquor in a Glass Vessel: use it.

Another.
Beat two Eggs well together, add as much juice of Lemmons, and as much Mercury
sublimate: set it in the Sun, and use it.

Another to polish the Face.
Take Sow-bread-Roots, three parts; cleansed Barley, six parts; Tartar
calcined, one part; Roots of wild Cucumers powdered, two parts; Wheat-Bran,
two handfuls: let them all boil in Water, till a third part be consumed: then
wash your Face with it.

CHAP. XXII.
How Tetters may be taken from the Face, or any other part of the Body.
RIng-worms will so deform the Face, that nothing can do it more: sometimes,
they run upon other parts of the Body, as the Armpits and Thighs: there drops
forth of them, a stinking water that will foul the cloths. I found these
Remedies

Against Tetters.
Distill water from the Roots of Sowredock, and add to every pound of these, of
Pompions and Saltpeter, half an ounce; Tartar of White Wind, two ounces: let
them soak for some days: then distill them, and wash your Face in the morning
therewith; and at night, smeer it with Oil of Tartar and of Almonds, mingled.
Oil of Eggs is good also to anoint them with. Yet sometimes these Tetters are
so fierce, that no Remedies can cure them. I shall set down

Another,
that I have used with admirable success, when they were inveterate. In a Glass
of sharp red-Wine, boil a dram of Mercury sublimate; then wash the place with
it morning and evening: let it dry of it self. Do this three or four times, and
the Tetters will away, and never come again.

Another.
Take Saltpeter, three ounces; Oil of bitter Almonds, two pound; of Squils,
half a pound; one Lemmon without the Pills: mingle them, and let them ferment
three days: then, with Chemical Instruments, extract the Oil, and anoint your
Tetters therewith, and they will be gone, though they seem to turn to a
Leprosy.

CHAP. XXIII.
How Warts may be taken away.
WArts use to possess the Forehead, Nose, Hands, and other open places: so
does hard Flesh, and other foulness of the skin: women cannot endure them. I
found out Remedies against these deformities of the skin.

Against Warts.
The Ancients used the greater Spurge, whose juice, anointed on with Salt,
takes them away: and therefore they called it Warts-Herb. There is also a kind
of Succory, called Verrucaria from the effect: for if one eat it but once in
Sallets, all the Warts will be gone from any part of the Body: or, if you
swallow one dram of the Seeds.

Another.
This one, and so no more. There is a kind of Beetle that is Oily, in Summer
you shall find it in Dust and Sand in the way; if you rub that on the Warts,
they will be presently gone, and not be seen. You may find these, and keep
them for your use.

CHAP. XXIV.
To take away wrinkles from the Body.
MAny parts of the Body use to be wrinckled, as the Hands, Face, Belly after
Childbearing; and the like. To contract the Skin therefore do thus:

For a wrinckled Forehead,
the Dregs of Linseed-Oyl is good: or Lees of Oil of Olives; putting unto it a
little Gum-Arabick, Traganth, Mastick and Champhire: it is good also for
flagging Breasts.

For a wrinkled Face.
When Eggs are boiled hard in water, cut them in the middle, fill the holes
where the yelks were, with Powder of Myrrh: then cover one with the other half,
and bind them with a Thread, that they come not asunder: then take a glazed
earthen Vessel, with a broad mouth, and lay sticks across it, that the Eggs may
lie upon them hanging near the bottom: let the cleft of the Eggs hang toward
the bottom: put the earthen Vessel into a chest of Osiers, and set it in a
Well; let it hang one foot from the water; by the moisture whereof, the Myrrh
will dissolve into Oil of water: anoint your Face with it. The juice of the
green Canes of the Pine Tree, but it is weaker then the distilled water, being
applied to the Face, with a Linen Cloth wet therein, will take away all
wrinkles from the Face excellently well. You have

Another.
Steep Kidney-Beans in Malmsey, one day; then take away the black whence they
sprout, and distill them with Lemmons and Honey. Take a quantity of old
Cow-Beef, and distill that also; mingle the waters, and set them in the open
Air, in a Glass-Vessel in the Sun for fifteen days, and wash your Face morning
and evening therewith.

Another.
Crop in the morning the Flowers of Mullens, and steep them in Greek-Wine, with
the Roots of Solomons-Seal: then receive the water distilled in Glass-stills:
and if a woman, when she rises out of her bed, wash her face with this, she
will be very fair; and if you would take off the wrinkles with the same water,
add distilled water of Lemmons thereunto, and it will make you glad to see the
effect. But this is the best

Water to whiten, plain, and beautify the Face.
Take equal parts of the Root of Solomon's Seal, greater Dragons and lesser,
Sparagrass, Bryony, and white Lillies, as much as you please: bruise them a
little, and cast them into an earthen pot with a large mouth; let it be glazed:
pour on Greek Wine that may cover all: add to these juice of Lemmons a fourth
part, ten new Eggs bruised with their shells, and Land-Snails without shells;
let them infuse a while: then distill them at a gentle fire, and keep the first
water a part: then augment the fire, and keep the second: that will be
stronger: for this wipes all spots and red pimples from the Face. Some mingle
with this, water of Bean-Flowers, Elder, Poppy, Honey-Suckles, and the like; so
do they take away all wrinkles and spots coming from the Sun, and all the rest.
But you may thus take off

The wrinkles of the Belly after childbirth.
Untipe Services are long boiled in water: with these mingle whites of Eggs,
and water wherein Gum-Arabick is dissolved: wet a Linen-cloth in such water,
and lay on the Belly; or mingle the Powders of Hearts Horn burnt, the Stone
Amiantus, Salt-Ammoniac, Myrrh, Frankincense, Mastick, with Honey; and it takes
away all wrinkles.

CHAP. XXV.
Of Dentifrices.
DEntifrices are used amongst things to beautify women: for there is nothing
held more ugly then for a woman to laugh or speak, and thereby to show their
rugged, rusty, and spotted Teeth: for they all almost, by using Mercury
sublimate, have their Teeth black or yellow: and because they stand in the Sun
when they would make their Hair yellow, their Teeth are hurt thereby, and grow
loose, ready to fall out; and do oft-times. I shall show first how to make
black Teeth white as Pearls; then how to make flesh grow about such as are weak
and bare of Gums, and to make them strong. But of old were made

Dentifrices
of the shells of Purples, and others like trumpets burnt. The Arabian-stone it
is like the spotted Ivory; burned, it is good for Dentifrices. Also, of
Pumex-Stone very profitable Dentifrices were made. Pliny. So with the Powder of
Ivory rubbed on, the Teeth were made as white as Ivory. Ovid.

That Teeth may not grow black forborne,
With Fountain Water wash them every morn.
I shall add

Another
that I use. The Crumbs of Barley-Bread burnt with Salt sprinkled on, and Honey,
will not only make the Teeth white, but makes the Breath sweet. Also, with red
Coral, Cuttle bone, Hearts Horn, and suchlike, whereof every one will well
polish and wipe the Teeth clean: so does also the Grains of Cochinele. Also,
there is made a water of Allom and Salt distilled, that whiteneth the Teeth
exceedingly, and confirms them; but the Oil of Sulphur does it best: for it
smooths them and wipes away all spots: and if any one think it is too strong,
it may be qualified with the water of Myrtle flowers. Make a Tooth-scraper
after the fashion of a Tooth, and pour on Oil, and rub the spots therewith: but
he careful it touch not the Gums, for it will whiten and burn them: rub so long
till the spots be gone, and they be very white. I have now described the most
perfect Remedy.

CHAP. XXVI.
To hinder the breasts from augmenting.
AMongst the Ornaments of women, this is the chief, to have after
Childbearing, round, small, solid, and not flagging or wrinkled Breasts. So we
may

Hinder the augmenting of the Breasts,
if we will. Bruise Hemlock, and lay a Cataplasm thereof with Vinegar to women's
Breasts, and it will stay them that they shall not increase; especially, in
Virgins: yet this will hinder milk, when it should be seasonable. But if you
will

Curb soft and loose Breasts,
Powder white Earth, the white of an Egg, sour Galls, Mastick, Frankincense;
and mingle them in hot Vinegar, and smeer the Breasts therewith: let it stay on
all night. If it do not effect it, do the same again. The Stones of Medlars are
good for this also; unripe Services, Sloes, Acacia, Pomegranate Pills,
Balanstia, unripe Pine-nuts, Wild Pears, and Plantain; if they all boil in
Vinegar, and be laid to the Breasts, or some of them. The Ancients commended for
this purpose a Whetstone of Cypress, that we sharpen Iron upon, to restrain
Virgins Breasts, and not let them grow big. Dioscorides. But Galen says, That
it not only stops the increase of the Breasts, but will hinder childrens
Testicles from growing: but I use the juice of Ladies Mantle from the Leaves of
it, and I wet Linen in it, and lay it on the Breasts, and renew it; for it will
not only hinder Virgins Breasts from increasing, but will fallen the loose
Breasts of Matrons, and make them firm. It is more effectual to use the
decoction of the Herb; and if you join any of the forementioned things
therewith, as Hypocistis, Pills of Pomegranates, and the like. So water
distilled from green Pine-Apples, will draw in loose Breasts, and make them like
the round, hard, solid Breasts of Virgins.

CHAP. XXVII.
How the Hand may be made white.
THe Hands must not be forgotten, but we must make them white also, smooth, and
soft, that are Ornaments of the Hands to be desired. But how whiteness and
smoothness may be obtained, I have showed already; softness remains, which is
only given to fat Hands.

To make the Hands as white as Milk.
Take things that are Milk-White, as Almonds, Pine-Kernels, Melon and
Gourd-Seeds, and the like. Therefore bruise bitter Almonds, Pine-Kernels, and
Crumbs of Bread: then make Cakes of them with Barley-water, wherein Gum Traganth
has been soaked. You may use this for Soap, when you wash your Hands; for they
scowre them, and make them white. I

For the same,
use oft-times bitter Almonds, half a pound: put them in hot water to blanch
them: then beat them in a Marble-Morter. Afterward, take the lesser Dragons,
two ounces; Deers Suet and Honey, of each as much: mingle them all in an
earthen Pot with a large mouth: set them at the fire, and let them be stirred
gently with a wooden-stick that they mingle well: put it up in Boxes for your
use. If you will have

Your hands white,
wash fresh Butter nine times in sweet water, and last of all, in sweet-sented
Rose Water, to take off the ill smell; and that it may look as white as Snow,
then mingle white wax with it, and a good quantity of Oil of sweet Almonds.
Then wash your gloves in Greek-Wine as the manner is, and smeer on the foresaid
mixture: put on these when you go to bed, that all night they may grow soft by
the help of fat things. Then take Peach-Kernels, with the skins picked off,
Seeds of Gourds, Melons, white Poppy, Barley-meal, of each one ounce and half;
the juice of two Lemmons, roasted in the Embers: mingle these with as much Honey
as will make them thick as an Ointment: and to make them smell well, you may
add a little Musk or Civet, when you go to bed; but in the morning wash them
with Fountain Water; and for Soap, use the Lees of Oil of Nuts well pressed
forth, or Lees of Oyl-Olive. Others use this Liniment only. Press the Cream
out of Lemmon-Seeds; with two ounces of it, mingle one ounce of Oil of Tartar,
and as much Oil of Almonds. When at night you go to bed, wash your Hands in
Fountain Water; dry them, and anoint them with this Liniment, and put on your
Gloves. Take

Another.
For one weeks-time, infuse the Marrow of Ox-bones in cold water; but change
the water four or five times a day; and for every pound of Marrow, take six
excellent Apples, and cut them in the middle, and cast forth the Seeds and
Core: then beat them small in a Marble-Morter, and put them into a new Mortar,
that they may smell the sweeter: adding a few Cloves, Cinnamon, Spikenard; let
them boil in Rose Water. When they are all very soft, take them forth and
strain them, and again add a sharp Lixivium, and let them boil at a gentle
fire, until all the water be washed. Then set them up in a Glass-Vessel for
your use, or make them into morsels. That which follows is good

For the same.
Make a hole in a Lemmon, and put into it Sugar Candy and Butter, and cover it
with the Cover: wet Hards of Hemp, and wrap it up in, and boil it in hot
Embers, and that it grow soft by rosting: when you go to Bed, anoint your hands
with it, and put on your Gloves.

CHAP. XXVIII.
How to correct the ill sent of the Armpits.
THe stink of the Arm-holes makes some women very hateful; especially, those
that are sat and fleshy. To cure this, we may use such kind of Experiments.
The Ancients against the stink of the Armpits, used liquid Allome with Myrrh
to anoint them: or the Secrets and Arm-holes were strewed with the dry Leaves
of Myttles in powder. The Roots of Artichoaks smeered on, does not only cure
the ill sent of the Armpits, but of the whole Body also. But Zenocrates
promises by Experiment, That the faultiness of the Armpits will pass forth by
urine; if you take one ounce of the pith of the Root boiled in three Lemina's
of Muskadel to thirds; and after bathing, fasting, or after meat, drink a cup
thereof. But I am content with this. I dissolve Allome in waters, and I wash
the Feet and Armpits with it, and let them dry: so in some days we shall
correct the strong smell of those parts. But it will be done more effectually
thus. Pown Lytharge of Gold or Silver, and boil it in Vinegar; and if you wash
those parts well with it, you shall keep them a long time sweet: and it is a
Remedy, that there is none better.

CHAP. XXIX.
How the Matrix ovar-widened in Childbirth, may be made narrower.
TRotula says, we may honestly speak of this, because Conception is sometimes
hindered by it, if the Matrix be too open; and therefore it is fit to lend help
for such an impedient. For some women have it stand wide-open by reason of
their hard labor in Childbirth; and if their Husbands be not content with it,
that the men may not abhor the women, it is thus remedied* Take Dragons-Blood,
Bole-Armeniac, Pomegranate-shells, white of an Egg, Mastick, Galls, of each one
ounce: powder them, and make them all up with hot water. Put some of this
Confection into the hole that goes into the Matrix. Or, Galls, Sumach,
Plantain, great Comfrey, Allome, Chamaelaea: take equal parts of them all, and
boil them in Rainwater, and foment the Privities. Or, beat sour Galls very
finely: mingle a little of the Powder of Cloves with them. Let them boil in
sharp red Wine: wet a woollen cloth in it, and apply to the part. Or thus may
you restrain that part of common whores, with Galls, Gums, whites of Eggs,
Dragons Blood, Acacia, Plantain, Hypocistis, Balanstia, Mastick, Cypress-nuts,
Grape-skins, Akorn-cups. Or, in that hollow part where the Glans breaks forth;
and gaping, shows the Nucleus, with Mastick and Terra Lemnia. If all these be
boiled in red Wine or Vinegar, and the Matrix be often wet therewith, it will
come very close, and be much straighter. Or else powder all these, and cast
them in through a Reed, or make a fume under them Great Comfrey will be
excellent for this purpose: for flesh boiled with it, will grow together. And
the other also, if it be boiled, will very well glue together fresh Wounds. The
Decoction of Ladies Mantle, or the juice, or distilled water of it, cast into
the Matrix, will so contract it, that Whores can scarce be known from Maids:
or, if they sit in the Decoction of it; especially, if we mingle other
astringent things with it, and wet the Secrets therewith. The distilled water
of Starwort, being often injected into the Matrix, will make one scarce know
which is corrupted, and which is not. But if you will have.

A woman deflowred made a virgin again,
Make little Pills thus: Of burnt Allome, Mastick, with a little Vitriol and
Orpiment: make them into very fine Powder, that you can scarce feel them: when
you have made them Pills with Rainwater, press them close with your fingers;
and let them dry, being pressed thin, and lay them on the Mouth of the Matrix,
where it was first broken open: change it every six hours, always fomenting the
place with Rain or Cistern-water, and that for twenty four hours, and it will
here and there make little Bladders; which being touched, will bleed much
blood, that she can hardly be known from a Maid. Midwives that take care of
this, do it another way. They contract the place with the Decoction of the
forementioned things, then they set a Leech fast on upon the place, and so they
make a crusty matter or scab; which being rubbed will bleed. Others when they
have straightned the part, inject the dried Blood of a Hare or Pigeon; which
being moistened by the moisture of the Matrix, shows like live fresh Blood. I
found out this noble way: I powder Litharge very finely, and boil it in
Vinegar, till the Vinegar be thick; I strain out that, and put in more, till
that be colored also: then I exhale the Vinegar at an easy fire, and resolve
it into smoke.

CHAP. XXX.
Some sports against women.
THus far I have showed how to beautify women, now I shall attempt some things
against their decking of themselves, and make some merriment after those things
that I seriously discovered to adorn them.

To make a painted Face look pale.
If you would know a painted Face, do thus: Chew Saffron between you Teeth, and
stand near to a woman with your mouth: when you talk with her, your breath will
foul her Face, and make it yellowish; but if she be not painted, the natural
color will continue. Or burn Brimstone in the room where she is: for if there
be Ceruss or Mercury sublimate on her Face, the smoke will make her brown, or
black. The painted Women that walk at Puteoli, in the Mountains of Phlegra, are
made so black, as Silver-money is, shut up in bags. We may also know thus,

Whether she be painted with red.
Chew Grains of Cummin, or a Clove of Garlic, and speak close by her; if it be
natural, it will remain; but counterfeit with Ceruss or Quicksilver, it
presently decays.

To make a woman full of red pimples.
Of a Stellio is made an ill Medicament: for when he is dead in Wine, all the
Faces of those that drink of it, will be red-spotted Wherefore, they that would
disfigure Whores, kill him in an Ointment. The Remedy is, the yelk of an Egg,
Honey and Glass. Pliny.

To make the Face green.
Avicenna says, That the Decoction of Chamaeleon, put into a bath, will make
him green-coloured that stays long in that bath; and then by degrees he will
recover his former color.

To make the Hair fall off the Head and Beard.
Touch any part of man's body with a matter white as milk, that the Salamander
vomits up out of its mouth, and the Hairs will fall off; and what is touched is
changed into the Leprosy. Pliny.

THE TENTH BOOK OF Natural Magic: Of Distillation.
THE PROEME.
NOw I am come to the Arts, and I shall begin from Distillation, an Invention
of later times, a wonderful thing, to be praised beyond the power of man; not
that which the vulgar and unskilful men use: for they do but corrupt and
destroy what is good: but that which is done by skilful Artists. This admirable
Art, teaches how to make Spirits, and sublime gross Bodies; and how to
condense, and make Spirits become gross Bodies: and to draw forth of Plants,
Minerals, Stones and Jewels, the Strength of them, that are involved and
overwhelmed with great bulk, lying hid, as it were, in their Chests: and to
make them more pure, and thin, and more noble, as not being content with their
common condition, and to lift them up as high as Heaven. We can by Chemical
Instruments, search out the Virtues of Plants, and better then the Ancients
could do by tasting them. What therefore could be thought on that is greater?
It is Natures part to produce things, and give them faculties; but Art may
ennoble them when they are produced, and give them many several qualities. Let
one that loves Learning, and to search Natures Secrets, enter upon this: for a
dull Fellow will never attain to this Art of Distilling. First, we shall
extract Waters and Oils: then, the Essences, Tinctures, Elixirs, Salts, and
suchlike: then we shall show how to resolve mixed Bodies into the Elements,
and make them all more pure, to separate their diverse and contrary qualities,
and draw them forth, that we may use them at pleasure: and other things, that
will never repent us to know and do.

CHAP. I.
What Distillation is, and of how many sorts.
WHether the Art of Distillation were known to the Learned Ancients, or no, I
will not undertake to dispute; yet there is another kind of Art to be read in
Dioscorides, then what we use. He says thus: There is an Oil extracted out of
Pitch, by separating the watery part, which swimmeth on the top, like Whey in
Milk? and hanging clean flocks of Wool, in the vapor arising from it while the
Pitch boyls; and when they are moist, squeezing them into some Vessel. This
must be done as long as it boyleth. Geber defines it thus: Distillation is the
Elevation of moist vapors in a proper Vessel: but we will declare the true
definition of it elsewhere. He makes three sorts of it; by Ascent, by Descent,
and by Filtration. But I cannot but confess, that Filtration is not properly a
species of Distillation. But I say, by Ascent, by Descent, and by Inclination,
which is a middle between both, and is very necessary: for when a thing is
unwilling to ascend, we teach it by this to rise by degrees, by inclining the
Vessel; and raise it by little and little, until it become thinner, and know
how to ascend. The Instructions for Distillation shall be these: First, Provide
a Glass or Brazen Vessel, with a Belly swelling out like a Cupping-Glass, and
sharpened upward like a Top or a Pear: fit it to the under-Vessel like a Cap;
so that the neck of that lower Vessel may come into the belly of the upper. A
Pipe must run about the Bottom of the Cap, which must send forth a Beak; under
which, there must stand another Vessel, called the Receiver, from receiving the
distilling water. Stop all the vents close with Stawmortar, or rags of Linen,
that the spirituous Aerie matter may not pass out. The fire being put under this
Stillatory, the enclosed matter will be dissolved by the heat of the fire into
a dewy vapor, and ascends to the top; where, meeting with the cold sides of
the Head, it sticks there; being condensed by the cold, swells into little
bubbles, bedeweth the roof and sides, then gathers into moist pearls, runs
down in drops, turns into water, and by the Pipe and Nose is conveyed into
the Receiver. But both the Vessels and the Receiver must be considered,
according to the Nature of the things to be distilled. For if they be of a
flatulent vaporous Nature, they will require large and low Vessels, and a more
capacious Receiver: for when the Heat shall have raised up the flatulent
matter, and that find it self straightened in the narrow cavities, it will seek
some other vent, and so tear the Vessels in pieces, (which will fly about with
a great bounce and crack, not without endamaging the standers by) and being at
liberty, will save it self from further harm. But if the things be hot and
thin, you must have Vessels with a long and small neck. Things of a middle
temper, require Vessels of a middle size: All which the industrious Artificer
may easily learn by the imitation of Nature, who has given angry and furious
Creatures, as the Lion and Bear, thick bodies, but short necks; to show, that
flatulent humors would pass out of Vessels of a larger bulk, and the thicker
part settle to the bottom: but then, the Stag, the Estrich, the Camil-Panther,
gentle Creatures, and of thin Spirits, have slender bodies and long necks; to
show that thin, subtle Spirits, must be drawn through a much longer and
narrower passage, and be elevated higher to purify them. There is one thing
which I must especially inform you of, which is, that there may be a threefold
moisture extracted out of Plants: The Nutritive, whereby they live, and all
dried Herbs want; it differs little from Fountain or Ditch-water: The
Substantial, whereby the parts are joined together; and this is of a more solid
Nature: And the third is the Radical humor, fat and oily, wherein the strength
and virtue lies. There is another thing, which I cannot pass over in silence,
it being one of the Principles of the Art, which I have observed in diverse
Experiments; which is, that some mixed bodies do exhale thin and hot vapors
first, and afterward moist and thick: on the contrary, others exhale earthy
and phlegmatic parts first, and then the hot and fiery; which being fixed in
the inmost parts, are expelled at last by the force of the fire. But because
there can be no constant and certain Rule given for them, some I will mark unto
you; others, your own more quick ingenuity must take the pains to observe.

CHAP. II.
Of the Extraction of Waters.
THe Extraction of Waters, because it is common, I will dispatch in a few
words. If you would extract sweet Waters out of hot Plants, and such as are
earthy, and retain a sweet savor in their very substance; these being cast
into a Stillatory, without any Art, and a fire made under them, yield their
odors: as you may draw sweet Waters out of

Roses, Orange-flowers, Myrtle and Lavender, and suchlike,
either with Cinders, or in Balneo Mariae; but only, observe to kindle the
fire by degrees, lest they burn. There are also in some Plants, sweet Leaves,
as in Myrtle, Lavender, Citron, and suchlike; which, if you mix with the
Flowers, will no way hinder the savor of them, but add a pleasantness to the
Waters: and in places where Flowers cannot be gotten, I have seen very sweet
Waters extracted out of the Tendrils of them: especially, when they have been
set abroad a sunning in a close Vessel for some days before. There is a Water,
of no contemptible sent, drawn out of the Leaves of Basil gentle, (especially,
being aromatized with Citron or Cloves) by the heat of a gentle Bath,
heightened by degrees, and then exposing it to the Sun for some time. There is
an odoriserous Water extracted out of the Flowers of Azadaret, or bastard
Sicamore, very thin and full of savor. The way to find out whether the odor be
settled in the substance of a Plant, or else in the superficies or outward
parts, is this: Rub the Leaves of Flowers with your fingers; if they retain the
same sent, or cast a more fragrant breath, then the odor lies in the whole
substance. But on the contrary, if after your rubbing, they do not only lose
their natural sent, but begin to stink, it shows that their odor resideth
only in their superficies, which being mixed with other ill savoured parts,
are not only abated, but become imperceptible. In distilling of these, we must
use another Art. As for example,

To extract sweet Water out of Gill^flowers, Musk, Roses, Violets, and Jasmine,
and Lillies.
First draw the juice out of some wild Musk Roses, with a gentle heat in
Balneo; then remove them, and add others: for if you let them stand too long,
the sent which resid^th in the superficies is not only consumed, but the dull
stinking vapor which lies in the inward parts is drawn forth. In this water,
let other Roses be infused for some hours, and then taken out and fresh put in,
which the oftener you do, the sweeter it will smell: but stop the Vessel close,
lest the thin sent fly out and be dispersed in the Air; and so you will have a
most odoriferous Water of Musk-Roses. The same I advise to be done with
Jasmine, Gilliflowers, Lillies, and Violets, and Crows-toes, and the like. But
if you are not willing to macerate them in their own waters, the same may be
done in Rose Water. By this Art, I have made Waters out of Flowers of a most
fragrant smell, to the admiration of Artists of no small account. But because
it happens sometimes by the negligence of the Operator, that it is infected
with a stink of burning, I will teach you

How to correct the stink of burning.
Because that part which lies at the bottom f^eleth more heat then the top,
whence it comes to pass, that before the one be warm, the other is burnt, and
oftentimes stinketh of the fire, and offends the nose; Therefore distill your
Waters in Balneo with a gentle fire, that the pure clear Water may ascend, and
the dregs settle in the bottom with the Oil, a great cause of the ill savor.

How to draw a great quantity of Water by Distillation.
Fasten some Plates of Iron or Tin round the top of the Stillatory; set them
upright, and let them be of the same height with it, and in the bottom fasten a
Spigget. When the Stillatory waxes hot, and the elevated vapors are gathered
into the Cap, if that be hot, they fall down again into the bottom, and are
hardly condensed into drops: but if it be cold, it presently turns them into
Water. Therefore pour cold Water between those plates, which by condensing the
vapors, may drive down larger currents into the Receiver. When the Cap, and
the Water upon it begin to be hot, pull out the Spigget, that the hot Water may
run out, and fresh cold Water be put in. Thus the Water being often changed,
that it may always be cold, and the warm drawn out by the Spigget, you will
much augment the quantity of your Water.

CHAP. III.
Of extracting Aqua Vitae.
IT is thus done: Take strong rich Wine growing in dry places, as on Viseuvius,
commonly called Greek-wine, or the tears or first running of the Grape. Distill
this in a Glass-Retort with Cinders, or in Balneo, or else in a long necked
Still. Draw out the third part of it, and reserve the rest; for it is turned
into a perfect sharp Vinegar; there remaining only the carcass of the Wine:
for the life and tenuous part is taken out. Then distill the same again, an the
third time; always drawing off but a third part. Then prepare a Vessel with a
longer and straighter neck, of three cubits, and distill it again in this: at
last, put it into the mouth of the Vessel, cover it with Parchment, and set on
the Cap of the Stillatory, and kindle the fire: the thin spirits of the Wine,
will pass through all, and fall down into the Receiver; and the phlegm, which
cannot get passage, will settle to the bottom. The note of perfect deputation
from phlegm, will be, if a rag being dipped in it, and set on fire, do burn quite
away: or, if some of it, being dropped on a plain boa^^, be kindled into flame,
does leave no moisture or mark of it. But all the work depends on this, that
the mouth of the Vessel be exactly stopped and closed* so that the least Spirit
may not find vent and fly into Air. The fittest thing to stop them with, is
an Ox's Bladder, or some other Beasts; for being cut into broad fi^^ets, and
while they be wet, rolled and tied about where the mouths of the Vessels meet;
it will alone keep in the expiring vapors. You may observe this in the
Distillation of it. The Coals being hot, the Vessel boyleth, and a most burning
Spirit of the Wine, ascends through the neck of the Vessel: it is hot below,
and cold on the top, till it gets up into the Cap, then, encountering with
cold, it turns into water, and runs down by the nose into the Receiver:
and what was a long time ascending, then, in a small interval of time, flows
down again to the under-placed Glass. Then, the Cap being cold, sends down
that quality through the neck into the very belly of the Stillatory, until the
Spirit, being separated from the phlegm, works the same effect again. I use
to suffer the Wine to ascend, so long as the Spirit runs invisible into the
Receiver: for when the phlegm ascends, there will appear bubbles in the Cap,
and streams, which will run into the water through the nose. Then I take away
that dead carcass of the Wine, and pour in fresh Wine, and extract the Spirit
out of the same way.

To do the same a more compendious way.
Those who desire to do this in a shorter time, must make a Brass Vessel, of
the bigness of an ordinary Barrel, in the form of a Gourd; but the nose of the
Cap must be made of Glass, or Brass of fifteen or twenty foot, winding about
with circling Revolutions, or mutual crossings, or as it were with the circling
of Snakes, which they must set in wooden Vessels, full of cold water, that
passing through, it may be received into the Receiver. For when it has
distilled the third part of the Wine in three hours, they must cast out the
residue, and put that which is distilled into the Stillatory again; and the
second time di^^ill out a third part: so also the third time in the same day.
At length, they put it into a Stillatory with a longer neck, and separate the
phlegm from it, Some make the Cap with three or four heads, setting one upon
another, all being pervious but the uppermost: and every one having his nose,
and his particular Receiver. They fit them to the Vessel with a long neck, set
them on, bind them and lute them, that they have no vent: the water which
distilleth out of the uppermost head, is cleerest and most perfect: that out of
the lowest, more imperfect, and must be reserved asunder; for they will be of
different estimation: the highest will be clear from all phlegm, the lower
full of it, the middle in a mean between both.

How to make Aqua Vitae of new Wine.
It may be done without the charge of Coals and VVood: for it may worthily be
called (...) neither does it require the attendance of a learned Artist, but of
an ignorant Clown, or a woman: for this Spirit is drawn out merely by the
vehement working of Nature, to free her self without any other help whatever.
When the Wine is run out of the press into the Ho, shead, and other Vessels,
and begins to purge, place an earthen neck, or one of wood, being two cubits
in length, upon the bung-hole of the Vessel: set the Cap upon the neck, and
lute the joints very close, that there may be no vent: set the Receiver under
the nose to take the Water which flows down. Thus thine exhaltations being
elevated by the working Spirits of the Wine, are converted into Water, merely
for the work of Nature, without the help of fire, which therefore has his
particular virtues, which we will pass over now, and mention them in another
place.

CHAP IV.
How to distill with the heat of the Sun.
WE may distill not only with fire, but with the Sun and Dung. But the last
tainteth the distilled Waters with a scurvy sent. The Sun extracteth the best
Water, and very useful for many Medicines. The heat of the fire changes the
Nature of things, and causes hot and fiery qualities in them. Wherefore in all
Medicines for the eyes, we must use Waters extracted from the Sun: for others
do fret and corrode the eye, these are more gentle and soft. The Sun extracteth
more Water then the fire, because the vapors do presently condense and drop
down; which they do not over the fire, because they are driven up with a force,
and stick to the sides of the Stillatory, and fall down again into the bottom.
There are other advantages which shall be explicated in their proper places.
Besides, it is good Husbandry: for the work is done without wood, or coals, or
labor. It is but filling the Vessels with the Ingredients, and setting them in
the Sun, and all the pains is past. Therefore to explain the manner in a few
words: Prepare a Form of three foot in height, two in breadth, and of a length
proportionable to the number of the Vessels you intend to set to Work: if many,
make it longer; if a few, let it be shorter. Board up that side of the Form
next the Sun, lest the heat do warm the Receivers, and make the Water ascend
again. In the middle of the upper plank of the Form, make several holes for the
necks of the Glasses to pass down through. When the Sun has passed Gemini,
(for this must be performed in the heat of Summer only) set your form abroad in
the Sun. Gather your Herbs before Sunrise, pick them and cleanse them from
dust and dirt of men's feet, from the urine and ordure of Worms and other
Creatures, and such kind of fi^th and pollutions. Then, lest they should foul
and soil the Water, shake them, and wipe them with clothes; and lastly, wash
your hands, and then, them, and dry them in the shade: when they are dried, put
them into the Glasses, take some wire-Cittern strings, and wind them into
round clues; so that being let go, they may untwine themselves again: put one
of these, into the mouth of each Glass, to binder the Herbs from falling out,
when the Glasses are turned downwards. Then thurst the necks through the holes
of the Form into the Receivers, which are placed underneath, and admit them
into their bellies: fasten them together with linen bands, that there may be
no^vent: and place the Receivers in dishes of water, that the vapor may the
sooner be condensed. All things being thus provided, expose them to most
violent heat of Sunbeams; they will presently dissolve them into vapors, and
slide down into the Receivers. In the evening, after Sunset, remove them, and
fill them with fresh Herbs. The Herb Polygonum, or Sparrows-tongue, bruised,
and thus distilled, is excellent for the inflammation of the eyes, and other
diseases. Out of S. John's Wort, is drawn a water good against cramps, if you
wash the part affected with it: and others also there are, too long to
rehearse. The manner of Distilling, this Figure expresses.

CHAP. V.
How to draw Oil by Expression.
WE have treated of Waters, now we will speak of Oils, and next of Essences.
These require the industry of a most ingenious Artificer: for many the most
excellent Essences of things, do remain in the Oil, as in the radical moisture,
so close, that without the greatest Art, wit, cunning, and pains, they cannot
be brought to light: so that the whole Art of Distillation depends on this.
The chiefest means is by Expression; which, though it be different from the Art
of Distillation, yet because it is very necessary to it, it will not be
unnecessary to mention here. The general way of it, is this: Take the Seeds out
of which you would draw Oil, blanch them, and strip them of their upper Coats,
either by rubbing them with your hands, or picking them off with your nails.
When they are cleansed, cast them into a Marble-Morter, and beat them with a
wodden Pestle: then sprinkle them with Wine, and change them into a
Leaden-Morter: set them on the fire, and stir them with a wooden-Spoon. When
they begin to yield forth a little Oyliness, take them from the fire, and
prepare in readiness two plates of Iron of a fingers thickness, and a
foot-square: let them be smooth and plain on one side, and heated so, that you
can scarce lay your finger on them; or, if you had rather, that they may hiss a
little when water is cast upon them, wrap the Almonds in a linen-cloth being
wetted, squeeze them between these plates in a press: save the Expression, and
then sprinkle more Wine on the pressed Almonds or Seeds: allow them some time
to inbibe it: then set them on the fire, stir them, and squeeze them again, as
before, until all their Oil be drawn out. Others put the Seeds when they are
bruised and warmed, into a bag that will not let the Oil strain through; and by
twining two sticks about, press them very hard and close: then they draw the
Oil out of them, when they are a little settled.

To draw Oil out of Nutmegs.
Beat the Nutmegs very carefully in a Mortar, put them into a Skillet, and warm
them, and then press out the Oil which will presently congeal. Wherefore, to
make it fluide and apter to penetrate, distill it five or six times in a Retort,
and it will be as you desire: or else, cast some burning Sand into it, and mix
it, and make it into Rolls; which, being put into the neck of a Retort, and a
fire kindled, will the first time remain liquid.

To extract Oil out of Citron-seed
we must use the same means. Blanch and cleanse them: an Oil of a Gold-colour
will flow out: they yield a fourth part; and it is powerful Antidote against
Poison and Witchcraft; and it is the best Menstruum to extract the sent out of
Musk, Civet and Amber, and to make sweet Ointments of, because it not quickly
grow rank.

Oil of Poppy-Seed
is extracted the same way, and yields a third part of a Golden-colour, and
useful in dormitive Medicines. Also, thus is made

Oil of Coloquintida-Seeds.
The fairest yield a sixth part of a Golden-colour: it kills Worms, and
expels them from Children, being rubbed on the mouth of their Stomach. Also,

Oil of Nattle-Seed.
An ounce and a half may be extracted out of a pound and a half of Seeds, being
picked and blanched: it is very good to dye women's Hair of a Gold-colour.

Oil of Eggs
is made by another Art. Take fifty or sixty Eggs; boil them till they be hard:
then peal them, and take out the yelk, and set them over warm Coals in a tinned
Posnet, till all their moisture be consumod; still stirring them with a
wooden-spattle: then increase the fire, but stir them uncessantly lest they
burn. You will see the Oil swet out, when it is all come forth, take away the
fire, and skim off the Oil. Or, when the Oil begins to swet out, as I said,
put the Eggs into a press, and squeeze then very hard: they will yield more
Oil, but not so good.

CHAP. VI.
How to extract Oil with Water.
NOw I will declare how to extract Oil without Expression: and first, out of
Spices, Seeds, Leaves, Sticks, or any thing else. Oil being to be drawn out
only by the violence of fire, and very unapt to ascend, because it is dense:
considering also, That Aromatic Seeds are very subtle and delicate: so that
if they be used too roughly in the fire, they will stink of smoke, and burning:
therefore, that they may endure a stronger fire, and be secure from burning, we
must take the assistance of water. Those kind of Seeds, as I said, are endued
with an Airy, thin, volatile Essence; and by the propriety of their Nature,
elevated on high; so, that in Distillation, they are easily carried upward,
accompanied with water; and being condensed in the Cap of the Stillatory, the
oily and the waterish vapors, run down together into the Receiver. Choose your
Seeds of a full ripeness; neither too new, not too old; but of a mature age:
beat them and macerate them in four times their weight of water; or so, that
the water may arise the breadth of four fingers above them: then put them into
a Brass-pot, that they may endure the greater fire; and kindle your Coals unto
a vehement heat, that the Water and Oil may promiscuously ascend and flow down:
separate the Oil from the Water, as you may easily do. As for example,

How to draw Oil out of Cinnamon.
If you first distill Fountain Water twice or thrice, you may extract a greater
quantity of Oil with it: for being made more subtle, and apt to penetrate, it
pierces the Cinnamon, and draws the Oil more forcibly out of its
Retirements. Therefore take CXXXV pound of Fountain Water, distill it in a
Glass-Alembick: when forty pound is drawn, distill that until fifteen flow out:
then cast away the rest, and draw five out of those fiftteen. This being done,
macerate one pound of Cinnamon in five of Water, and distill them in a Retort or
Alembick. First, a Milky water will flow out with Oil, next clear Water: cast
the Water in over the Oil, and separate them as we shall teach you. Of a pound
of Cinnamon, you will scarce receive a dram of Oil.

How to draw a greater quantity of Oil out of Cinnamon.
I do use to do it in this manner, to the wonder of the best and subtillest
Artists: Provide a Descendatory out of the Bath, (the making of which, I will
show hereafter) and put your Cinnamon, being grossly beaten into a
Glass-Retort: set it in its proper place, and put water into the Bath; the heat
of the fire by degrees, will draw a little water in many days: receive it
careful, and pour it again into the Cinnamon that it may re-imbibe its own
water; so let it remain a while: afterward, kindle the fire, and you shall
receive a little Water and Oil. Do this third and fourth time, and you will
gain an incredible quanity. You may try the same in other things.

Oil of Cloves
may be extracted in the same manner: To every pound of Cloves, you must add
ten of Water; distill them as before: so shall you have both Water and Oil. It
will yield a twelfth part, The Oil is good for Medicines, and the Water for
Sawces. So also is made

Liquid Oil of Nutmegs.
If you bruise them, and put them with the Water into a Vessel, and distill
them as before, they will yield a sixth part.

Oil of Mace and Pepper
is drawn in the same manner, much stronger, but in less quantity.

Oil of Aniseed
may be thus extracted; an ounce out of a pound. It congealeth in VVinter like
Camphire or Snow: in the Summer it dissolveth. Let the Seeds be macerated in
the Water for ten days at least: for the longer they lie there, the more Oil
they will yield.

Oil of Fennel
is extracted in the same quantity: when the Seeds are ripe and fresh, they
have most Oil; for they yield as much more.

Oil of Coriander
yields but a small quantity, and is of very hard extraction: there is scarce
one dram drawn out of a pound: new Seeds yield most. And to be short; in the
same manner are extracted the Oils out of the Seeds of Carrot, Angelica,
Marjoram, Rue, Rosemary, Parsely, Smallage and Dill, and suchlike.

Oil of Rosemary and Lavender-flowers, and
such-others, which being dried, afford no Oil, may be thus extracted: Put the
Flowers into a Receiver, and set it close stopped in the hot Sun for a month:
there will they dissolve into Liquor, and fly up to the sides of the Glass:
then being condensed again, fall down and macerate in themselves: at a fit
time, add Water to them and distill them, as the former: so shall you draw
forth with the Water a most excellent sweet Oil.

Oil of Juniper and Cypress-Wood
may de drawn out by the same Art, if you macerate the dust of them in their
own or in Fountain Water for a month, and distill them in the same manner: the
Oil will come out by drops with the water, of a strong sent, and excellent
virtue. These I have tried, the rest I leave to thee.

CHAP. VII.
How to separate Oil from Water.
When we extract Oils, they run down into the Receiver together with the
Water: wherefore they must be separated, left the phlegm, being mixed with the
Oil do weaken the virtue of it: that it may obtain its full vigor, it must be
purified by Distillation and Separation: for being put into a Retort or broad
Still, over a gentle fire, the Water will run out, and the remaining Liquor
will be clear Oil. This work of Separation is very laborious: yet there are
very artificial Vessels invented, by the help of which, all the Water may be
drawn off, and the phlegm; only pure Oil will remain. Prepare a Glass-Vessel:
let it be broad and grow narrower by degrees downwards, until it come to a
point, like unto a Tunnel. Put the distilled Water, which consists of the
phlegmatic Water and Oil into this Vessel; let it stand a while: the Oil will
swim on the top, and the Water will sink down to the bottom. But stop the
mouth of it with your finger; so that removing it away, the Water may first
run out, and the Oil sink down by degrees. When it is descended into the
narrow part, so that the Oil becomes next to your finger; stop the hole, and
let the Orifice be but half open for the Water to pass out: when it is all run
out, empty the Oil into another small Vessel. There is another very ingenious
Instrument found out for to separate Oil, with a great belly and a narrow neck,
which a little nose in the middle. Pour the Oil mixed with Water into the
Vessel, the Water will possess the bottom, the Oil the neck. Drop Water gently
into it, until the Oil ascend up unto the nose: then incline the Vessel
downward, and the Oil will run out pure and unmixed. When you have emptied out
some, drop in more Water, until the Oil be raised again unto the nose: then
stop it down, and pour out the rest of the Oil. But if the Oil settle to the
bottom, and the Water swim on the top, as it often happens, filtrate it into a
broad dish, or any other Vessel with a cotten-cloth: the Water will run out,
and the Oil will remain in the bottom very pure.

CHAP. VIII.
How to make an Instrument to extract Oil in a greater quantity and without
danger of burning.
WE may with several sorts of Instruments, use several kinds of Extractions:
among the rest, I found out one, whereby you may draw Oil with any the most
vehement fire, without any danger of burning; and a greater quantity, then by
any other: and it is fit for many other uses also. Prepare a Vessel in the form
of an Egg, of the capacity of half an ordinary Barrel: let the mouth of it, be
of a convenient bigness to receive in your arm, when there shall occasion to
wash it, or to fill it with several sorts and degrees of things to be
distilled. Let it be tinned within; then set a brass head upon it of a foot
high, with a hole in the bottom fit to receive the neck of the lower Vessel,
and stop the mouth of it exactly. Out of the top of the head, there must arise
a pipe of Brass, fifteen or twenty foot long, bended into several angles, that
it may take up less room, and be more convenient to be carried. The other end
of this Pipe, must be fastened into the belly of another Vessel, which must be
of less capacity then the former, but of the same figure. Fix a head upon this
also, with a Pipe of the same length, and bended like the former; whose lower
end shall be received into another straight Pipe, which passing through the
middle of a Barrel, at last falls into the Receiver. The manner of using it is
this: Put your Leaves, Stalks, or Seeds, being beaten small, into the
Brass-pot, and pour as much Fountain Water on as will cover them a handful or
five large fingers over; then set on the head, and stop the joints very close.
Put the other end of the Pipe into the other Pot, and joint them exactly: then
set on the other head, and fasten the lower end of its crooked Pipe into that
straight one; which passing through the Barrel, runs into the Receiver. If
the joints be anywhere faulty, stop them with Flax, and paste them with
Wheat-flour, and the white of an Egg; then roll them about and tie them close
with Fillets, cut out of a Bladder: for when the vapors are forced by the heat
of the fire, they are so attenuated, that they will break forth through the
least rhyme or chink, in spite of all your endeavors. Fill the Barrel with cold
water, and when it begins to grow hot, draw it out through a Cock at bottom,
and supply fresh water, that the Pipe may always be kept cool. At length, make
the Pot boil, at first with a gentle fire; then increase it by degrees, until
the vehemence of the heat, does make the vapors hiss, as it were ready to break
the Pipes, as they run through them; so they will be elevated through the
retorted Pipes, and leave the phlegmatic water in the lower Vessel; till
passing through the cold Pipe, they be condensed into Liquor, and fall down
into the Receiver. If the water do consume away in the boiling, pour in more
being first warmed, through a little Pipe which the Pot must have on one side
with a Spigget to it, for this purpose: but be sure to stop the Spigger in very
close, that there may be no vent. Afterward, separate the Oil from the Water,
sublime and purify it in another Vessel. Of all the Instruments that ever I
saw, not any one extracteth a greater quantity of Oil, and with less labor and
industry then this. Thus you may without any fear of burning, draw Oil out of
Flowers, Leaves, Spices, Gums, and VVood with the vehementest fires; as also
out of Juniper and Laurel-Berries.

CHAP. IX.
The Description of a Descendatory, whereby Oil is extracted by Descent.
I Cannot refrain from discovering here an Instrument found out by my own
private experience, which I hope will be of no small profit to the Ingenious,
by which they may draw Oil out of any the least things without any fear of
burning. For there are many tenuous, oily Flowers, as of Rosemary and Juniper,
and other things, as Musk, Amber, Civet, Gum, and suchlike: out of which may
be drawn Oils very sweet and medicinable: but they are of so thin a substance,
that there is a great hazard of burning them, when they are forced by the heat
of the fire, without which, neither fat things will be elevated, nor Oil
extracted. Therefore to remedy these inconveniences, I have invented an
Instrument, by which Oil shall descend without any labor or danger of burning.
Let a Vessel be made of Brass, in the form of an Egg, two foot high, and of the
same breadth: let it be divided toward the top, of which the upper part must
serve for a cover, and be so fitted to be received into the lower part, that
the joints may closely fall in one another, and be exactly stopped. In the lower
part, toward the middle, about half a foot from the mouth; let there be a
Copper-plate fitted, as it were the midriff; so that it may easily be put and
taken out: in which must be made three hollow places to receive the bottom of
three retorted Vessels, the rest of the plate must be pervious, that the
boiling Water and hot Spirits may have passage to rise upwards. Out of the
sides of the Vessel there must be three holes, through the which the necks of
the Retorts may pass, being glued and fastened to their Pipes with Flax, and
tied with Fillets of Bladders: so that not the least Air, much less any Water
may fly out. When you prepare to work, fill the Glass-Retorts with the things
you intend to still, thrust the necks through the holes outward, and lay their
bodies in the prepared hollowness of the cross-plate, somewhat elevated. If
there remain any void space between the necks, and the sides of the holes they
pass through, stop it with Flax, and tie it about with Fillets of Bladder, and
fill the Vessel with with water, within three fingers up to the cross-plate.
The Vessel, being covered, and the joints well stopped and glued, and bound
about; so that the force of the vapors arising, may not burst it open, and
scald the Faces of the bystanders, kindle the fire by degrees, until it become
very vehement: then will the vapors make a great nose, almost sufficient to
terrify one, and first Water, then Water and Oil will distill out. I cannot
contain my self from relating also another Instrument invented for the same
purpose. Make an oval Brass-Vessel, as I advised before, with a hole bored
through the bottom; to which fasten a pipe that may arise up to the mouth of the
Vessel, let the mouth of it be wide, like a trumpet or tunnel; so that the long
neck of a Gourd-Glass may pass through the Pipe of it, and the wide mouth of
the Vessel under, may by degrees receive the swelling parts of the neck. Adapt
a cover to this Vessel that it may be close stopped and luted as we said before.
You must make a Furnace on purpose for this use: for the fire must not be made
in the bottom, but about the Vessel.

The use is this: Fill the Glass with Flowers or other things; put in some wire
Lute-strings after them, that they may not fall out again when the Glass is
inversed. Thrust the neck through the Brass-Pipe: set the Vessel on the Furnace,
and fill it with Water round about the arising Pipe: put on the Cover, and
plaster it about: set the Receiver under the Furnace that it may catch the
dropping Water and Oil: then kindle the fire about the sides of the Pot, the
violence of which, will elevate vapors of burning water; which, beating against
the concave part of the Cover, will be reverberate upon the bottom of the
Gourd-Glass, whose fervent heat, will turn the Water and Oil into vapor, and
drive it down into the Receiver. I will set down some examples of those things
which I made trial of my self. As,

How to extract Oil out of Rosemary Flowers.
Fill the Retorts with the Leaves and Flowers of Rosmary, and set them in the
Brass-Furnace: the fire being kindled will force out first a Water, and
afterward a yellow Oil, of a very strong and fervent odor; a few drops of
which, I have made use of in great sicknesses, and driving away cruel pains.
You may extract it easier, if you macerate the Flowers or Leaves in their own,
or Fountain Water, for a week. In the same manner

Oil of Citron-Pill
is extracted. When Citrons are come to perfect ripeness, shave off the peal
with a gross Steal-File: put the Filings into a Pot, and set them to macerate
ten days in dung, being close stopped up: then accomodate them to the Furnace,
and kindle fire; an Oil mixed with water distills out, of a most pleasant sent.
The same may be done with Orange and Lemmon-peal. In places where Flowers and
Fruits are not to be had, they cut off the tops of the Branches and Tindrils,
and slice them into four-inch-pieces, and so distill them.

Oil of Roses, and Citron-Flowers
is drawn after the same sort; a most excellent Oil, and of an admirable
savor. But because the Oil is very hardly distinguished from the Water, pour
the Water into a long Glass with a narrow neck, and expose it to the Sun being
close stopped: the Oil will by little and little, ascend to the top, which you
must gather off with a Feather or pour out by inclining the Glass.

Sweet Oil of Berjamin
is to be made, by putting Benjamin into a Glass-Retort, and fitting it to the
Furnace: then increase the fire without any fear of combustion, and you will
obtain a fragrant Oil, to be used in precious Ointments. So Oil of Storax,
Calamite, and Labdanum, and other Gums. So also,

Oil of Musk, Amber, and Civet
cannot be extracted more comodiously by any Instrument, Art, or Labor, then
by the aforesaid; for they are of so thin a substance, that they can hardly
endure any the least heat, without contracting a scurvy base stink of burning;
yet by this Artifice, it may be drawn out very safely. I see nothing to the
contrary, but that we may extract Oil out of Spices also, very securely by the
same Artifice.

CHAP. X.
How to extract Oil out of Gums.
THere is a peculiar Extraction of Oil out of Gums; which, although they
require the same means almost as the former, that is, the mixing them with
Water^, and macerating them for many days, then putting them into a Brass pot,
and by a vehement fire, forcing out the Oil with the Water; yet does it come
out but in a small quantity of an excellent odor, and free from the stink of
the fire; as thus they usually deal with Opoponax, Ga^^anum, Storax, and
others. But they are distilled also another way, by Ashes; which does require
the diligent attendance of the Workman, and a singular judgment and provident
dexterity in him: for it is rather an ingenious then painful Operation. I will
set down an example,

How to extract Oil out of Benjamin.
Macerate the Benjamin in Rose Water: or omitting that, put it into a Retort:
set the Retort into a Pot full of Sand, so that it may fill up the space
between the side of the Pot, and bottom of the Retort: put the neck of it into
a Recei^er with a wide belly: kindle the fire by little and little; and without
any haste or violence of heat, let the Water distill: by and by increase the
fire, that the Oil may flow out; yet not too intensely for fear of burning; but
moderately between both: the oily vapors will straight fill all the Receiver;
then will they be condensed and turn into flakes, like Wool; and sticking to
the sides and middle of the Glass, present you with a pleasant spectacle: by
and by they are turned into little bubbles, so into Oil, and fall down to the
bottom: keep the fire in the same temper, until all the Feces are dried; then
remove it, or fear of ustion.

Oil of Storax
is drawn in the same manner; but if the Storax be liquified, it will run with
a gentle fire: it is of a strong and quick od^r. Calamites requires a more
lively fire, such as was used in Benjamin, and a diligent attendance: for too
much fire will cause adustion in it.

Oil of Ladanum.
Beat the Ladanum, and macerate it fifteen days in Aqua Vitae, or Greek-Wine;
at least ten: for the lon^er it infuseth, the sooner it will run into Oil: draw
it with a gentle fire, it will distill out by drops after the Water.

Oil of Turpentine
is extracted easily; for it flows with a gentle fire: but beware in the
operation, that no smoke do evaporate out of it; for it presently will take
fire, and with a magnetic virtue attract the flame, and carry it into the
Retort, where it will hardly be extinguished again: which will happen in the
extraction of

Oil of Olives, and Linseed Oil.
If you distill common Oil, it will hardly run; yet en reasing the fire, it will
come out in six hours: you must be very careful, that the Ashes and Pot do not
wax too hot: for if the Oil within take fire, it will break the Vessels, and
fly up, that it can hardly be quenched, and reach the very cieling; so that it
is best to operate upon Oils in arched Rooms. From herce Artificers of
Fireworks, learned to put Oil in their Compositions, because it quickly takes
fire, and is hardly extinguished.

CHAP. XI.
Several Arts how to draw Oil out of other things.
THe Nature of things being diverse, do require diverse ways of distilling Oil
out of them: for some being urged by fire, are sublimed, and will not dissolve
into Liquor; others cannot endure the fire, but are presently burned. From
which variety of tempers, there must arise also a variety in the manner of
Extraction. I will set down some examples of these, that ingenious Artists may
not despair to draw Oils out of any thing whatever.

Oil out of Honey
is hard enough to be extracted: for it swells up with the least heat, and
rises in bubbles; so that it will climb up through the neck of the Retort,
though it be never so long, into the Head, and fall down into the Receiver
before it can be dissolved into Liquor or Oil. There are diverse remedies found
out to help this: Take a Glass with a short wide neck, put your Honey into it,
and stop it in with Flax quite over-laid two fingers thick. This will repress
the Honey when it swells and froaths, and make it sink down again. Clear
Water will drop out at first: but when it begins to be colored, take away
the Receiver, and set another in the place; so keep the Waters severally. Or
put Honey into any Vessel, so that it may fill it up four large fingers above
the bottom, and cover it close, as the manner is: then dig a hole in the
ground, and set the Vessel in, as far as the Honey arises: then lute it, and
plaster it about four fingers above the Ground, and dry it well; kindle your
Coals round about it; then will the Honey grow hot, and by degrees stick to the
Pot: but because the heat is above it, it cannot swell up, but very easily
distilleth Water and Oil; first, yellow, next reddish, until the Honey be
turned into a very Coal. There is another way, which may be performed by any
Woman: Pour the Honey into a new Pipkin, and cover it; dig a hole, and bury it
abroad about a cubit under Ground; there let it putrify for ten days: then
take it up, and there will swim on the top of the Honey a Crystal Liquor,
which you must strain out, and stop the Pipkin again, and bury it as before.
About a week after, view it again, and strain out the overflowing water; so
the third and fourth time, until all the Honey be converted into water, which
you may see by uncovering the Pipkin: distill the Water according to Art, and it
will yield Water and Oil easily enough.

Oil of Camphire.
Beat Champhire very small, and put it into common Aqua Fortis, made of
Saltpeter, and Coppress distilled and clarified: set the Pot in a Bath or
Stove for half a day, and you will see a clear bright Oil swim on the top of
the Water: incline the Pot gently, and pour it off, and clarify it in a
Retort; so shall you have a beautiful, thin and sweet Oil.

Oil of Paper and Rags.
Roll up your Paper like a Pyramide, as Grocers do, when they lap up any thing
to lay by, or send abroad: clip the edges even; and taking hold of the top of
it with a pair of Pincers; set it on fire with a Candle; and while it flameth,
hold it downward over a broad dish half a finger distant from the bottom, so
that the smoke may hardly fly out: and still as the fire consumes the Paper,
let your hand sink, that may always keep the same distance from the Dish. When
it is quite burnt, you will find^ a yellow Oil, stinking of burning, upon the
bottom of the dish. Gather it up, and reserve it: it is excellent to drive away
freckles and pimples in women's faces, being applied. Almost in the same manner

Oil of Wheat.
Lay your Wheat plain upon a Marble-Morter, being turned with the bottom
upwards, and cover it with a plate of Iron, almost red hot, and press it hard:
out of the sides there will be expressed an Oil of a yellow color, and
stinking of burning, which is good for the same purposes; that which is good to
refresh decayed Spirits, is prepared another way.

CHAP. XII.
How to extract Oil by Descent.
THe way is common and vulgar to all; for it is done by Ustulation: but the
Oils are of a most offensive savor, and can be used only in outward Medicines;
for they are not to be taken inwardly. Prepare a Pipkin made of tough Clay, and
able to endure fire, well vernished within, that there may be no suspicion of
running out: let the bottom be full of holes, set upon another earthen Pipkin,
whose mouth is large enough to receive the bottom of the upper Pipkin; lute
them close together. Fill the Pipkin with slices of your VVood: cover it, and
lute it. Then dig a hole, and set the Pipkins into it, and fling in the Earth
about it, and tread it down close, and throw Sand over it two inches thick:
make a gentle fire just over the Pipkin; which you must increase by degrees,
until the Pipkin have stood there a whole day. After this, remove the fire: and
when the heat is spent, dig up the Pipkins, and you will find the Oil strained
down into the lower; which you must distill again in a Retort, to purify it
from filth. To add something to the former invention, I always do thus: I make
a Tressel with Legs of two foot in length. There must a hole be bored in the
Plank of it, to receive the neck of the Limbeck. Upon the Tressel fasten an
Iron-plate to keep the VVod from burning. Underneath, about the middle of the
Feet, fasten a Board, upon which the Receiver may stand, and meet with the neck
of the inversed Vessel; which being filled with the materials to be stilled,
kindle a fire about it. Therefore if you would extract

Oil out of Lignum Guaiacum,
fill it with the Dust of Lignum Guaiacum, and lute it close with Straw-Mortar,
twice or thrice double: when it is dried in the Sun, put into the neck, wire
Strings, and thrust it through the hole of the Tresse into the mouth of the
Receiver, and mortar them together. Then kindle the fire on the Plate about the
body of the Limbeck, at some distance at first, and by degrees nigher and
hotter: but let it not be red hot, until you think it be all burned: then
remove the fire, and let it rest a while, until it be cold, and you shall find
in the lower Vessel a black stinking burnt Oil. In this manner is Oil drawn out
of Juniper, Cypress, and Lignum Aloes: but in this last, you must use more Art
and diligence, and a gentle fire, because it is mixed in Ointments.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Extraction of Essences.
WE have delivered the several kinds of Extraction of Oils, now we are come
to Quintessences, the Extraction of which, we will here declare. The
Paracelsians define a Quintessence to be the Form, or Spirit, or Virtue, or
Life, separated from the dross and elementary impurities of the Body. I call it
the Life, because it cannot be extracted out of the Bones, Flesh, Marrow,
Blood, and other Members: for wanting Life, they want also the Quintessence. I
say, Separated from elementary impurities, because when the Quintessence is
extracted, there remains only a mass of Elements void of all power: for the
Power, Virtue, and Medicinable qualities, are not the Elements, but in their
Essences, which yet are Elements, and contain the virtue of the Elements in
them, in the highest degree: for being separated from the grosness of their
bodies, they become spiritual, and put forth their power more effectually and
strongly when they are freed from them, then they could while they were clogged
with the Elements. They are small in bulk, but great in operation. The strength
of Quintessences, is not to be judged by the degrees of their qualities, but of
their operation: for those which soonest and clearliest root out a disease, are
reckoned in the first degree. So the essence of Juniper, is reckoned the first
degree of operation, because it cures the Leprosy by purging the Blood only.
The essence of Ambar in the second, because it expels poison, by purging the
Heart, Lungs and Members. Antimony in the third, because (beside the former
virtues) it also purges the Body. But Gold of it self alone, has all those
virtues, and renews the Body. Wherefore the fourth degree and greatest power,
is attributed to it. Bet how to extract these Essences is a very difficult
work; for they may be either Oil, or Salt, or Water, or of Extraction: some, by
Sublimation; others, by Calcination; others, by Vinegar, Wine, Corrosive
Waters, and such like. So that several kind of menstruums are to be provided
according to the nature and temper of things. I will set down some Rules for
the choosing of proper menstruums. Let the menstrum be made of those things
which are most agreeable to the things to be extracted, and as simple as may
but: for Essences ought not to be compounded, mixed, or polluted with any
thing; be pure, simple and immaculate. But if there be a necessity of adding
some thing let them be separated after extraction. If the Essence of any Metal
be to be extracted by Corrosives, separate the Salt from the Waters, after the
work is done, and use those Salts only, which will easily be taken out again:
Vitriol and Allom are very difficult to be separated, by reason of their earthy
substance. Moreover, use not a watery menstruum, for a watery Essence; nor an
oily menstruum, for an oily Essence because being of like natures, they are not
easily separated: but watery Menstruums for oily Essences: and so on the
contrary. I will set before you some examples in Herb, fat of Flesh, and other
things; by which you may learn of your self how to perform it in the rest.
There are an infinite number of Essences, and almost many ways of Extraction:
of them, some I shall show unto you, whereof the first shall be

How to extract the Essence out of Civet, Musk, Ambar, and other Spices.
Take Oil of Ben, or of Almonds, mix Musk, Ambar, Cinnamon, and Zedoary, well
beaten in it: put it in a Glass-bottle, and set it in the Sun, or in Balneo,
ten days: then strain from it the Dregs, and the Essence will be imbibed into
the Oil; from which you may separate it in this manner: Take Aqua Vitae, and if
it be an odoriferous Body, Fountain Water, three or four times distilled, mix
with the aforesaid Oil, and stir it about, and so let it digest for six days:
then distill it over Cinders: the hot Water and the Essence will ascend, and the
Oil remain in the bottom without any sent. Afterward, distill the Aqua Vitae,
and the Essence in Balneo, until the Water be evaporated, and the Essence
settle to the bottom in the form of an Oil. If you will do it with Aqua Vitae
alone, slice the Roots of Zedoary, beat them and infuse them in so much Aqua
Vitae as will cover them three fingers over in a Glass Bottle: let them ferment
for ten days according to Art; then distill them over Cinders, or in Sand,
until nothing but Water run out; yet have a care of burning it. Take the
distilled Liquor, set it in Balneo; and with a gentle fire, let the Aqua Vitae
evaporate, and the Quintessence of Zedoaay will settle in the bottom, in a
liquid form Next

To extract Essence out of Flesh.
Out of three Capons, I have oftentimes extracted an Essence in a small
quantity, but of great strength and nutriment, wherewith I have recovered life
and strength to sick persons, whose Stomachs were quite decayed, and they
almost dead for want of nourishment, having not been able to eat any things in
three days. Take Chickens, or Hens, or Capons; pluck them, and draw their Guts
out; beat them very well, and let them boil a whole day in a Glass-Vessel,
close stopped, over warm Embers, until the bones, and flesh, and all the
substance be dissolved into Liquor: then strain it into another Vessel, through
a Linen-cloth, and fling away the Dregs: for the remaining Bones are so herest
of Flesh, sent, or any other quality, that a Dog will not so much as smell to
them; which is an assured Argument that their goodness is boiled out. Pour the
strained Liquor into a Glass-bottle, and dissolve it into vapor in a gentle
Bath; the Essence will remain in the bottom, either hard, or soft, like an
Ointment, as you please, of a most admirable virtue, and never sufficiently to
be commended.

To extract Essences out of Salts.
Take Salt and calcine it according to Art: if it be volatile, burn it, and
grind it very small: lay the Powder upon a Marble in a moist Cellar, and set a
Pan under it to receive it as it dissolveth: let it ferment in that pan for a
month; then set it in Balneo, and with a gentle fire let it distill: cast away
the sweet Water, that comes from it, and set that which remains in the bottom,
to ferment another month, then distill out the sweet Water, as before: and do
this, while any sweet Water will run from it: keep it over the fire until the
moisture be all consumed; and then what remains settled in the bottom, is the
Quintessence of Salt; which will scarcely arise to two ounces out of a pound.

To extract Essences out of Herbs.
Beat the Herbs, and set them to ferment in dung for a month, in a convenient
Glass-Bottle: then distill them in Balneo. Again, set them in dung for a week,
and distill them in Balneo again; and thus macerate them so long as they will
yield any Liquor: then pour the distilled Water upon the Herbs again, and
distill them in this Circulation for six days, which will make it of a more
lively color: draw of the Water by Balneum and the Essence must then be
expressed out in a press: ferment it in dung for five days, and it will yield
you the sent, color and virtues of the Herbs in perfection. A way to extract

The Essence of Aqua Vitae.
It is a thing bragged of by thousands; but not effected by any. I will not
omit the description of it, which I have found out, together with a Friend of
mine very knowing in Experiments, by the assistance of Lulius. Provide some
rich, generous, old Wine, bury it in dung for two months, in large Bottles
close stopped and luted, that they may not have the least vent. The whole
business depends on this: for if this be not carefully look to, you will lose
both your cost, and your labor: the month being past, distill it in an ordinary
Stillatory, reserve the Spirits by themselves. The Dregs and Faeces of the Wine
must be buried again, and the Spirits be distilled out as before, and reserved
by themselves. Distill the Faeces until they settle like Honey or Pitch: then
pour on the phlegm upon them, wash them, and lay them to dry: then put them
into a Porters, or Glass-makers, Furnace, and with a vehement fire burn them
into white Ashes: wet them with a little Water, and set them in the mouth of
the Furnace, that they may be converted into Salt. There is no better mark to
know the perfection of your work, then by casting some of it on a red hot Plate
of Iron: if it melt and evaporate, it is well done; otherwise, you must
rectify it. Mix the Salt with water, and put it into a Glass bottle with a
long neck; stop it with Cork and Parchment: then set on the Head, and kindle
the fire; the force of which, will carry it up through all the stoppage into the
Head, and there it sticks to the sides like dirt; the Water will remain quiet
in the bottom, in which you must again mingle the Salt; and so by a continual
Circulation, draw it out of it self, until it be divested of all its Grosness,
and obtain a more thin and subtle Essence.

CHAP. XIV.
What Magisteries are, and the Extraction of them.
I Said, That Quintessences do participate of the Nature of mixed Bodies; on the
contrary, a Magistery takes the temper of the Elements: so, that it neither
extracteth the Spirits nor the Tincture, but a certain mean between both. A
Magistery therefore, is what can be extracted out of things without separation
of the Elements. Essences do oftentimes keep the color of the Bodies out of
which they are extracted: Tinctures always do it, Magisteries never. The means
of extracting Magisteries, is various, according to the diversity of Natures in
things. I will set down for an example and pattern

How to extract a Magistery of Gems, Coral and Pearl.
Beat the Gems, and set them in igne reverberationis, till they be calcined;
mix them with an equal quantity of Saltpeter, and dissolve them in Aqua Vitae:
pour out that which is liquified, and let the remainder of the Powder be
calcined better; then lay it in Aqua Vitae again, and do this till it be all
dissolved. Set this water in a hot Furnace, until the moisture be all
evaporated; and what shall remain in the bottom, is the Magistery of Gems.
Pearls must be dissolved in Vinegar; and if possible, in juice of Lemmons. You
may augment the strength of the Vinegar by those things, which, as I showed you
in Aqua Vitae, do quicken the Virtue of it, that is, its own Salt, being
dissolved and macerated in Balneo, or in Fimo, for a month: then distill the
Menstruum, and in the bottom will remain the Magistery of Pearls.

Of Charabes.
I will deliver to you the way that I use; for the Paracelsians do either
conceal it, or not know it. Beat your Gum very small, and dissolve it in Aqua
Vitae: when it is liquified, pour that out, and put in fresh: let them macerate
for a month; and when all is dissolved, mix the waters all together, and let it
evaporate over a fire; so in the bottom will remain the Magistery of Charabe.
It will take away scars in the Face, and cure the Vertigo.

The Magistery of Guaiacum
is an excellent Remedy against the Pox, and is thus extracted. Take the
shavings of Lignum Guaiacum, or the dust of it, which Turners work off: for the
File, by continual Frication, heats it, and exhausteth the best Spirits. Lay it
in clarified Aqua Vitae a whole day: when the water has contracted a red
color, which will be when it has sucked out the oyliness and substance of it,
strain it out, and pour in fresh. Then stir it about, until the water become
colored again; strain that out also, and put in as much more, until the water
do not alter its color any more. Then strain it in a press, and distill the
juice through Linen-cloth; and then boil it till the moisture be consumed: the
Oil, or Gum, or Magistery will remain of a bright color, and most sweet sent,
which you would think impossible to reside in such Wood. You may extract the
same in a shorter time; but it will not be of the same value: for if you lay
the dust of Guaiacum in distilled Fountain Water, boil it for half a day,
strain it, distill it through a cloth, and let the moisture evaporate over a
fire; the same Gum will settle in the bottom. You must choose the most Gummy
Wood, which being held near a Candle, will sweat out a kind of Oil.

The Magistery of Lignum Aloes.
Take the shavings of the Wood worked off, as the former, with a Turners wheel;
lay it in Aqua Vitae till it color it; then strain it out, and let the
moisture evaporate over a fire: and in the bottom of the Glass, you will find
a most odori^erous Oil, excellent to be used in sweet Ointments.

The Magistery of Wine, commonly called the Spirit of Wine.
I will first set down the Paracelsian way of extracting it, and afterward my
own; because we cannot use that in our Countries. Pour some strong generous
good Wine into a Glass-Bottle: so that it may fill two parts of it; stop the
mouth of it very exactly, either with Hermitis Sigillum, or a strong Glue,
which I shall hereafter describe unto you; and so set it in Fimo three or four
months, with an uninterm^tted fire. In the Winter set it out in the Frost for a
month, and let it freeze: the Spirit or Magistery will retire into the Center,
because its fiery Essence makes it incapable of conglaciation. Break the
Vessel, cast away the congealed part, and reserve the liquid; which being
circulated in a Pelican for a month, will yield you what you seek for. My way
is, to put the aforesaid Wine into a round Glass-Vessel: let it ferment in
Fimo, conglaciate it, as I shall show you; and then breaking the Vessel to
reserve the unfrozen liquor, in which you will find a great deal of virtue:
but if you desire to have it better, you may perfect it by Circulation.

CHAP. XV.
How to extract Tinctures.
A Tincture is the purest and most active part of a colored body extracted;
the noblest Essence in a Compound. It is extracted out of Gems, Flowers, Roots,
Seed, and suchlike. It differs from a Quint essence in this, that it
especially draws the color of the Body from whence it is extracted; and
requires Ar^, and Cunning, and diligent Attendance, more then labor. It is
separated by Distillation, clear from any oyliness or matter; free from the
commi^^ion of other Elements, or any impure substance; it imitateth the
clearness and perspicuity of the Air: and in that brightness represents the
color of the Gem or Flower, from whence it was drawn; of so pure a substance,
that in many years it will not have any dregs in it, but will continue in a
perpetual cleerness, subtilty, and strength. After the ex^racti^n, the matter
remains discolored, and useless for any thing. I will present some examples
to you how to extract the Tincture out of Metals and Flowers, etc.

How to draw out the Tincture of Gold.
If the Virtues of this never-sufficiently-praised Metal, were known, as well
for the health of the Body, as the convenience of men's living, it would be
adored with a greater devotion then it is already. The Apes of wise Nature,
cunning Inquirers in Experiments, perceiving a certain Glory and Brightness in
Gold, and an attractive or magnetic Virtue, (if I may so say) which at first
sight draws every man's eye to look upon its Majesty and Beauty, and tempts our
hands to touch and handle it, and even our minds to desire it, so that even
Infants do rejoice, and laugh at the sight of it, and reach their arms out
after it, and catch it, and will by no means part from it; presently
conjectured, that there was some extraordinary Virtue in it for the health of
man. Astrologers, seeing it contend with the Sun in Beams, Brightness and
Glory, and to have a Praerogative of Majesty among Metals, like the Sun among
the Stars, do therefore set it down for a Cordial, and a Destroyer of
Melancholy, and all the ill Companions of it. Refiners say, That the Elements
are so proportionably mixed in the Composition of it, so pure and compacted,
that they account it a most exactly tempered body, and free from corruption: in
which there is nothing deficient nor superfluous; so compact and close, that it
will not only endure the fire without consumption, but will become more bright
and refined by it. It will also lie under Ground thousands of years without
contracting any rust: neither will it foul the hands like other Metals, or has
any ill sent or raste in it. Wherefore, say they, being taken into our Bodies,
it must needs reduce the Elements and humors into a right temper, allay the
excessive, and supply the defective, take away all putrefaction, refresh the
natural heat, purge the blood, and increase it: and not only cure all
sicknesses, but make us healthy, long-lived, and almost immortal. Rainoldus,
Raimundus, and other Physicians of the best esteem, do attri^ute to Gold, a
power to corroborate and strengthen the Heart, to dry up superfluities and ill
humors, to exhilarate and enliven the Spirits with its Splendour and Beauty, to
strengthen them with its Solidiry, temper them with its Equality, and preserve
them from all diseases, and expel Excrements by its Weight: by which it
confirms Youth, res^oreth Strength, retardeth old Age, corroborateth the
principal Parts, opens the Urinary Vessels, and all other passages, being
stopped: cures the Falling Sickness, Madness, and Leprosy, (for which cause,
Osiander the Divine, wore a Chain of Gold about his neck) and also Melancholy,
and is most excellent against Poison and Infections of the Plague. We will now
examine whether the old or new Physicians knew the way to prepare it aright, to
perform these admirable Effects. Nicander does mightily cry up for an Antidote
against Poison, Fountain Water in which Gold has been quenched; supposing,
that it imparteth some of its Virtue to the Water in the extinction.
Dioscorides, Paulus Aegineta, and Aetius, affirm the same. Avicenna says, That
the filings of it helps Melancholy, and is used also in Medicines for the
shedding of the Hair, in liquid Medicines, or reduced into very fine Powder; it
is used in Collyriums, or Medicines for the Eyes, for the pain and trembling of
the Heart, and other passions of the Mind. Pliny uses it burnt in an earthen
Pipkin, with a treble quantity of Salt; whereby it will communicate its Virtue,
but remain entire and untouched it self. He also makes a Decoction of it with
Honey. Marsilius Ficinus says, It is of a solid substance, and therefore must
be attenuated, that it may penetrate the Body. But he is ignorant of the way of
it, only he advises to give it in Cordial-waters, being beaten out into thin
Leaves; for so the Water will suck out the Virtue of it: or else by
extinguishing it in Wine. There are some of Pliny's Scholars, who would have
the parts of a Hen laid in melted Gold, until it consume it self; for the parts
of a Hen are Poison to Gold. Wherefore Ficinus mixeth Leaf-Gold in
Capon-broath. Thus far the Grecians, Latins, and Arabians, have discoursed
concerning the Extraction of the Tincture of Gold; but they have erred far from
the Truth: for what a vanity is it to imagine, that quenching it in Water, can
extract the Virtue of it? or, that the heat of Man's Body, though it be
liquified and be made potable, can draw any thing from it, when the force of
the most vehement fire is ineffectual, and cannot work upon it? I have made
trial of it in a most violent fire for the space of three months, and at last I
found it nothing abared in weight, but much meliorated in color and goodness;
so that the fire, which consumes other things, does make this more perfect.
How then can it be concocted by the heat of Man's Body, which is scarce able to
concoct Bread? And how can it impart its Virtue by Extinction, when neither
Aqua Vitae, nor any strong Waters can alter the color or taste of it? I will
set down what I have seen. The later learned Men, and curious Inquirers into
Nature, affirm, That the Magistery, Secret and Quintessence of Gold, consists
in the Tincture: so that the Virtue, Power, Life and Efficacy of it, resideth
in the Color. Wherefore it will be no small Secret to know how to extract the
Tincture; no small labor and pains: for those who pretend to speak of it, do it
so intricately and obscurely, that they rather seem to obscure it, or not to
understand it, then to discover or teach it. Know therefore, that the Tincture
cannot be extracted, but by perfectly dissolving it in Strong Waters; and that
it cannot be dissolved, as the work requires, in common Aqua Fortis, or Royal
Waters, because the corrosive Salts in them, are not perfectly and absolutely
dissolved into Water. Wherefore you must learn by continual solution and
immistion, so to distill them, that the whole substance of the Salt may be
melted; which must be done by reiterating the Operation. I have informed you,
what Salts are easy to be separated, the which must only be used in this
Work. After perfect solution, cast in that Menstruum or Water, which I have
often mentioned for the Extraction of Essences or Colors. I have with great joy
beheld it attract to it self the Golden, Yellow, or Red-colour, and a white
dust settle down to the bottom. We must then separate the Salt from the
Menstruum: dissolve it, and let the liquor evaporate away, and there will
remain true potable Gold, the right Tincture, and that great Arcanum of
Philosophers, disguised with so many Riddles; so thin, that it will easily
penetrate the Body, and perform those wonders, which Antiquity could only
promise.

Tincture of Roses.
Cut Red Rose-Leaves with a pair of Shears into small pieces; lay them in Aqua
Vitae, and they will presently dye it with a sanguine color. After three hours,
change those Leaves, and put in fresh ones, until the water become very much
colored: then strain it out, and let the Liquor evaporate quite away, and in
the bottom will remain the Tincture of Roses. The same may be done with
Clove-Gilliflowers. We may also do it another more perfect way, without Aqua
Vitae. Fill a wide-mouthed Glass, with Red-Rose Leaves: set i^ into a
Leaden-Limbeck, and fill it with other Roses: then set on the Head, and kindle
the fire; whereupon the vapors will arise, and fall into the Glass, of a
sanguine-colour. This is a new way of extracting Tinctures, which may be used
in any colored Flowers. So the

Tinctures of Marigolds, Violets, Bugloss, and Succory-Flowers.
If you extract them the former way, the Tincture of Marygolds will be yellow;
of Bugloss, Violets, and Succory-Flowers, Red; because the colors of those
Flowers, is but thin and superficiary: so that it expireth with a little heat,
and is red underneath.

Tincture of Orange-Flowers of an excellent sent.
Cut the Orange-Flowers into small pieces, macerate them in Aqua Vitae; and
when the Water is turned yellow, and Flowers have lost their sent, change them,
and put in fresh, until the Water become very sweet, and well-colored, and
somewhat thick: then strain it, and let it evaporate: it will leave behind it
a Tincture, enriched with the sent and virtues of the Flowers.

Tincture of Coral.
Beat the Coral to Powder, and with a vehement fire turn it into Salt; add an
equal quantity of Saltpeter to it: then extract the Salt with Aqua Vitae, and
it will bring out with it, the Tincture of a wonderful virtue.

CHAP. XVI.
How to extract Salts.
SAlts do retain the greatest part of the Virtue of those things, from whence
they are extracted; and therefore are used to season the sick persons meat: and
otherways, because they have a penetrative quality. It was a great Question
among the Ancients, Whether Salts retained the virtue of the things; or,
whether they lost some in the fire, and acquired others: but it is row
manifested by a thousand Experiments, that the virtues do not only remain in
them, but are made quicker and more efficacious.

Salt of Lemmons.
Distill the Lemmons with their Peels and Juice: reserve the Water, and dry the
rest in the Sun, if the season permit it; or in an Oven. Put them in a Pot
close luted, and calcine it in igne reverberationis. Then dissolve the Powder
in the Water, and boil them in a perfect Lie: cleanse it with a Feather, that
the Dregs may settle to the bottom: purify it, and let the Liquor evaporate:
so the Salt will remain in the bottom; which is most excellent to break the
Stone in the Bladder.

Salt of Pellitory of Spain.
Dry the Roots, and burn it in a close luted pot, for three days, until it be
reduced into white Ashes: pour on its own Menstruum: distill it, and calcine i^
again; so the third time: then cleanse it with a Feather, boil it in an earthen
vernished Pipkin, with the white of an Egg to clarify the Salt: at length, a
white grained Salt will appear.

Salt of Cumine.
Put the Roots, Leave, and Flowers in a close luted Vessel, and dry them, and
put them into a Potters Furnace, till they be burned to Ashes. In the mean
while, distill the Roots, Leaves and Flowers; or, if you please, make a
decoction of them; and of that decoction, a sharp Lie: which, being strained
very clean through a Linen-cloth three or four times, must be boiled to a Salt
in a Glass-Vessel. If you desire it very fine and white, strew the Salt upon a
Marble, and set it in a moist place with a pan underneath to receive it as it
dissolveth: cleanse the filth still away; and do this three times, until it
become of a Crystal color; so reserve. In this manner Sal Alchali is made.

Of Saxifrage.
It is made like the former: if you season your meat with it, it protecteth
from all danger of poisoned bread or meat; conserveth from the contagion of
pestilential and infections Air. The same may be extracted out of other
Alexiphatmacal Bodies, which Princes may use at meals, instead of ordinary
Salt; for they scarce differ in taste. A Salt may be made of Thapsia, very good
to remove the Stone in the Bladder or Kidneys, and to dissolve the Tartar, or
viscous Concrescency; to kill the Worms, and purge the Blood; to provoke sweat
by being often taken, and is admirable in Venereal Diseases. The Salt of
Pimpernel, being taken three days, and the third month, for a man's whole
lifetime, secureth him from the Dropsy, P^hisick, and Apoplexy. It also
preserves from infection and pestiferous Air, and helps digestion in a weak
Stomach. But it is to be observed, That these Salts must not be eaten every
day, left they become too familiar to the Stomach, and be taken for food. There
may be a Salt also extracted out of the filings of Lignum Guaiacum, which is
excellent in the French Pox, being taken as the former. By these you may learn
to make other Salts.

CHAP. XVII.
Of Elixirs.
ELixirs are the Conservators of Bodies in the same condition wherein they
find them: for their Virtue is to preserve from corruption, not by meliorating
their state, but by continuing it; and if by accident, they cure any Diseases,
it is by reason of their tenuity. They have a double Virtue to preserve from
sickness, and continue health, not only in Men, but to preserve Plants also.
They imitate the qualities of Balsam, and resort chiefly to the Heart, Brain,
and principal Parts, where the Spirits reside. There are three kinds of
Elixirs; of Metals, of Gems, and of Plants; as of Roots, Herbs, Flowers, Seeds,
Woods, Gums, and suchlike. An Elixir differs from Essences, Tinctures, and
the rest; because it is compounded of many things void of fatness: therefore it
cannot be an Oil, because it wants perspicuity and clearness; not an Essence,
because it is a Compound; not a Tincture, but a mean between all, and of a
consistence most like to Water; whence it had its name ab eliquesco, to be
dissolved or liquified.

To make Elixir of Pimpernel.
Dig up the Roots in a convenient time, and macerate them in their Water,
putting some weight on them to depress them under Water: when the Flowers are
blown, gather them, and macerate them in the same manner, in a peculiar Vessel:
the same must be done with the Seeds: Then put them in an Alimbeck, and draw
out the Water and Oil, until the Foeces remain dry: then separate the Oil from
the Water, and circulate it in a Pelican for two months: then take it out, and
reserve it for your use.

An Elixir of many things.
Many Compositions of Elixir, are carried about, which are erroneous and false
to my knowledge, and of so hard a work to extract the Oil and Water, that you
will more probably lose your time and cost, then gain any good by them: for
they are made for pomp and magnificence, rather then for the benefit of man.
Besides, I have found them often fail in the performance of what was promised
from them, and cannot be made according to those descriptions: But here I will
deliver one to you which will perform far more then is promised. Take the
Flowers of Sage, Origanum, Mugwort, Savory, Elder, Sage-Leaves, white Mint,
Rosemary, Basil, Marjoram, Peniroyal, Rose-buds, the Roots of Betony,
Pellitory, Snake-weed, white Thistle, Aristolochy, Elder, Cretan-Ditany,
Currants, Pine-Apples, Dates, Citron-Pill, of each an ounce and a half; Ginger,
Cloves, Nutmegs, Zedoary, Galangal, white and long Pepper, Juniper Berries,
Spikenard, Mace, Cubebs, Parsley-seed, Cardomoms, Cinnamon, Staechados,
Germander, Granes, Rose of Jerusalem, Doronicum, Ammoniac, Opoponax, Spodium,
Schaeinanthus, Bdellium, Mummy, Sagapenum, Champhire, Mastick, Frankincense,
Aloes, Powder of Ebony, Bole-Armenick, Treacle, Musk, Galls, Mithridate, Lignum
Aloes and Saffron, of each three drachms; of clarified Sugar, thirteen pounds;
of Honey two. I exclude Pearl, Rubies, Jacinths, Saphires, Emeraulds and
Leaf-Gold, from the Composition; because, as I have proved before, they have no
operation; especially, thus exhibited: and therefore are used in Medicines by
none but ignorant Physicians. Reduce all these into Powder, and put them into a
Pelican or blind Alimbeck, with twelve pound of Aqua Vitae, very well
clarified, as though the whole work depended on it: let it circulate in Balneo
a whole month: take off the yellow Oil or Quintessence of all, with a
Silver-Spoon, and add to it a dram of Musk and Amber, and set it by for your
use in a Glass-bottle close stopped. Distill the remainder, and it will afford a
yellow clear water: but you cannot extract the Oil without a stink of burning.
I have very exactly extracted Oil of Gums, Roots and Seeds of the
forementioned: and mixing them together have effected strange things with them.
Most of their operations are against Poisons, and Pestilential Contagions;
especially, those that are apt to seize on the Spirits; for a drop of it, being
anointed on the Lips or Nostrils, reviveth the Soul, and keeps it in perfect
Senses at least six hours.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of a Clyssus, and how it is made.
THat there may nothing be omitted, I will now show what a Clyssus is, and how
it may be made. A Clyssus is the Extraction of the Spirits of every part of a
Plant, united in one common entity. There are in a Plant, the Root, Leaf,
Flower, Fruit and Seed, and in every one of these parts, there is a peculiar
Nature. The Operation is thus: Dig the Roots when they are full of juice, the
Leaves when they are fresh and green, the Flowers when they are blown, the
Fruit and Seeds in their due time. Extract the Spirits or Essences out of all
these by Distillation, Maceration or Calcination, or any other of the former
ways. But when they are all extracted severally, one in the form of Oil,
another of Salt or Liquor; then mix them all together, so that the may be
conjoined and united in one body, which is called a Clyssus. Some mix them in
Distillation in Vessels made for the purpose in this manner: They put the
Water, Salt and Oil in three several Curbicles of equal height and bigness; and
tying their three necks together, and put them into one common Head, which may
be fit to receive them all, close them, lute them, and kindle the fire under.
The heat will elevate the thinnest substance in all of them, which will meet
and mix in the Head, and run down by the Nose, or Spout, into the Receiver: so
set them by for use. This Congregation of Essences, does penetrate and search
all the remote passages of the Body, and is very useful in Physic.

CHAP. XIX.
How to get Oil out of Salts.
I Have declared many ways of extracting Oil, now I will show how to draw it
out of Salts, that they may be more penetrative, and work more powerfully,
which can be done no other way. They seem to have some kind of fat in them,
yet will not burn; so that it cannot be called a perfect Oil.

How to extract Oil of Tartar.
Burn the Tartar, and reduce it into a Salt, as I showed before: then lay it on
a Marble in a moist place, and in a few days it will turn to Oil, and run down
into a dish, which you must set underneath to receive it. Thus you may easily
make it into Salt: Beat the Tartar into Powder, and mix an equal quantity of
Saltpeter with it: when they are mixed in Iron Mortar, set them in the fire,
until they be quite burned: grind the remaining Foeces, and dissolve them in a
Lie, strain it, and let the Lie evaporate away, and the Salt will settle to the
bottom: then boil some Eggs hard, take ou^ the yelks, and fill up their place
with Salt, and in a little time it will dissolve into Oil.

Oil of Sal Sodae.
Dissolve the Salt in Water, and strain it through a cloth, then dry it, lay it
on a Marble, and set it in a moist place, and it will run down in an Oil. So

The famous Oil of Talk
is extracted only by the vehement heat of fire: yet I knew not at first what
it was useful for. But I perceive it is much accounted of by women in their
F^cus. Beat it into fine Powder in an Iron-Morter, and put it into a very
strong thick Pot, fasten the cover on with wire, plai^^er it with Potters Clay,
and set it in the Sun for three days: then thrust it into a Potters Furnace
where the flames are most violent. After three or four days, take it out, break
open the Pot; and if you find it not sufficiently calcined, make it up, and
set it in again. When it is burned perfectly white, lay it on a Marble, and
place it in a moist room, or in a hole dug in the earth: and there let it stand
for a good while, until it dissolve into Oil; then reserve it in a
Glass-bottle. So also is made

Red Oil of Sulphur.
Grind live Sulphur into a small Powder, and mix it with an equal quantity of
the former Oil of Tartar: boil it three hours in a Glass-bottle; and when it is
dissolved, strain it through a Linen Cloth into another Glass, and set it over
a Gentle fire, till it thicken like clotted blood, and so dry. Then powder it,
and lay it on a Marble in a moist Cellar; there it will dissolve, and run down
into the under-placed dish. Set this Liquor, being first strained through a
cloth in a Glass-bottle over warm Ashes, until the moisture be consumed, and
there will remain a red Oil of Sulphur.

Oil of Myrrh.
Boil some Eggs hard, cut them in the middle, take out the yelks, and fill
their places with Myrrh, powdered and seirced: lay them in an earthen Pan upon
long cross-sticks, that the Eggs may not imbibe the Oil again, and shut them in
a moist Cellar; so the Oil will drop down into the Pan.

CHAP. XX.
Of Aqua Fortis.
NOw I will recite those Distillations, which draw out neither Water nor Oil,
but a middle between both: for the terrene parts are forced up, turned into
Water by the vehemence of the fire: from whence they do acquire so great a
heat, that corrode and burn most violently. They are extracted only in igne
reverberationis, and with great care and labor.

How to draw Aqua Fortis, or Oil, out of Salt.
It is a piece of Art discovered to very few. Take Pit-Salt, put into a
Glass-Retort, treble luted over, and dried: set it in igne reverberationis,
where the flames do struggle most violently: the first time you will get but
little moisture. Break the Retort, and remove the Foeces into another, and pour
the extracted Water into them, and distill them again: the second time thou will get more. Do the same a third time, and so to the tenth, until the Salt be
all turned into Liquor, which is a most precious Jewel and worth thy labor.
Some quench hot Bricks in the liquified Salt, and then distill them with a most
intense fire, as in Oil of Bricks.

A Water for the Separation of Silver.
Take Saltpeter and Alom in equal quantity, beat them in a Mortar, and put
them into a Glass-Retort luted over three double: when it is well dried, set it
in the circulating-fire, that is, which is reverberated on the top and below
too. Stop it close, and set a large Receiver under it: for if it be too narrow,
the strong Spirits will break out with a great bounce, crack the Vessel, and
frustrate your labor. Distill it six hours: if you calcine the Alome-fire, the
Water will be stronger.

A Water for Separation of Gold.
Mix with the equal parts of Saltpeter and Alom, as much Vitriol, and distill
it, as before: there will proceed a Water so strong, that it will even corrode
the ^i^cture of Gold. Wherefore, if this seem too violent, take nine pounds of
the former Salts, being dissolved in Water, and two ounces of Sal Ammoniacum:
when they are melted, set them two days in Fimo, and with hot Ashes you may
distill a Water that will corrode Gold. If you refund the Water upon the
Foeces, let them macerate and distill it again, the Water will be much stronger.

How to purge the phlegm from these Waters,
without which they are of no force: cast a little Silver into a little of this
Water; which, being overcharged with phlegm, will not corrode it. But set it
to heat over the fire, and it will presently do it: pour all this Water into
another Pot, and leave the Foeces behind in the former: so the Water will be
clarified.

Oil of Vitriol.
Dissolve Vitriol in an earthen Pan with a wide mouth; let the phlegm
evaporate, then increase the fire and burn it, till it be all red, and the
fourth part be consumed. Put it into a Glass-Retort, luted all over thrice
double, and well dried, and set in igne reverberationis, continually augmenting
the fire, and continning it for three days, until the Vessel melt, and an Oil
drop out without any Water. Every three pounds will ^ield one ounce of Oil.
Put it into a Glass-bottle, and set it in hot Embe^s that the Water, if any be
in the Oil, may evaporate; for so it will be of greater strengh. The sign of a
perfect extraction, is, if it make a piece of VVood, being cast into it, smoke,
as if it burned it.

Oil of Sulphur.
This is the proper way to extract Oil of Sulphur: Take a Glass with a large
mouth in the form of a Bell, and hang it up by a wire: place a large Receiver
under it, that it may catch the Oil, as it droppeth out of the Bell. In the
middle between these, hang an earthen Vessel full of Sulphur: kindle the fire,
and make the Sulphur burn; the smoke of which, ascends up into the Bell,
condenseth it self, and falls down in an oily substance. When the Sulphur is
consumed, put in more, until you have the quantity of Oil which you desire.
There is also another way to extract it in a greater quantity: Prepare a great
Glass-Receiver, such as I described in the Extraction of Oil of Tartar, and
Aqua Fortis: cut a hole through it with an Emerauld, and indent the edges of it,
that the smoke may pass out: set this upon an earthen Pan, in which you burn
the Sulphur. Above this, set another Vessel of a larger size, so that it may be
about a handful distant from the first: cut the edges of the hole in deeper
notches, that the vapor ascending through the first, and circulating about the
second, may distill out of both; so you may add a third and fourth. Pour this
Oil into another Glass, and let the phlegm evaporate over hot Embers; it will
become of that strength, that it will dissolve Silver: and I may say, Gold
also, if it be rightly made. The fume of Sulphur is congealed in Sal
Ammoniacum: for I have gathered it in the Mountains of Campania, and condensed
it into Salt, nothing at all differing from that which is brought out of the
Eastern Countries. Thus Sal Ammoniacus, which has so long lain unknown, is
discovered in our own Country, and is nothing but Salt of Sulphur; and this Oil
is the Water of Sal Ammoniac, or Salt of Sulphur. I would fain know how Learned
Men do approve this my Invention. I take the Earth, through which the smoke of
Sulphur has arisen, and dissole it in warm Waters, and purge it through a
hanging Receptacle described before: then I make the Water evaporate; and so
find a Salt nothing different, as I hope, from Ammoniacum.

CHAP. XXI.
Of the Separation of the Elements.
IN every Compound, there are four Elements; but for the most part, one is
predominant, the rest are dull and unprofitable. Hence, when we speak of
separating the Elements of a Compound, we mean the separating that predominant
one. In the Water-Lilly, the Element of Water is chief; Air, Earth and Fire are
in it, but in a small proportion. Hence there is but a small quantity of heat
and dryness in it, because Water overwhelms them all. The same must be
understood in other things also. But do not think, that we intend by the
separation of the Elements, to divide them absolutely, the Air from the Water,
and the Water from the Fire and Earth; but only by a certain similitude, as
what is hotter then the rest, we call Fire; the moister, Water. Stones
participate more of Earth: VVoods, of Fire; Herbs, of Water. We account those
Airy, which fill the Vessels and Receivers, and easily burst them, and so fly
out. When the Elements are thus separated, they may afterward be purified and
attenuated. The manner of extracting them, is various according to the
diversity of natural things; for some must be calcined: some sublimated, others
distilled. I will set down some examples.

How to separate the Elements of Metals.
Lay your Metal in Aqua Fortis, as I showed before, till it be dissolved: then
draw out the Aqua Fortis by a Bath, and pour it on again, and so again, until
it be turned into an Oil of a light Red, or Ruby-colour. Pour two parts of Aqua
Fortis unto the Oil, and macerate them in a Glass in Fimo for a month: then
distill them on Embers till the Water be all drawn out, which you must take and
still again in Balneo, until it ascend; so will you have two Elements. By the
Bath the Air is elevated, the Water and Earth remain in the bottom: the Fire
continues in the bottom of the former Vessel: for it is of a fiery substance:
this, Nature, and the Affusion of Water, and the Distillation in Balneo will
reduce into an Oil again: in which you must correct the Fire, and it will be
perfect. You may lay Metal in Embers, then by degrees increase the fire: the
Water will first gently ascend, next the Earth. In Silver, the first Oil is
bluish, and in perfect separation, settleth to the bottom, and the Water
ascends; but in Balneo, the Elements of Fire and Earth: for the substance of
it is cold and moist: in Balneo the Elements of Fire and Earth remain; first
the Earth will come out, afterward the Fire. So of Tin, the first Oil is
yellow; in Balneo, the Air will remain in the bottom, the Fire, Earth and
Water will ascend: which is proper only to Tin; for in no other Metal, the
Air remains last; but in Tin, the Water is first elevated; next the Fire;
last of all, the Earth. Of Iron is made a dark ruddish Oil; Of Quicksilver, a
white Oil: the Fire settleth to the bottom: the Earth and Water are elevated:
and so of the rest.

How to separate the Elements in Herbs.
In Herbs there is always one Element which reigns in chief. Take the Leaves
of Sage, bruise them, macerate them in Fimo, and then distill them: the Fire
will first ascend, until the colors be changed; next the Water; then a part
of the Earth: the other part will remain in the bottom, not being volatile, but
fixed. Set the Water in the Sun six days, then put it in Balneo: the Water
will ascend first, then the color will alter; and the Fire ascends next,
till the taste be changed: at length, a part of the Earth, the rest being mixed
with the Air, tarrieth behind in the Bottom. In VVater-Plants, the Air arises
first; next the Water and Fire.

How to find out the Virtues of Plants.
There are no surer Searchers out of the Virtues of the Plants, then our Hands
and Eyes: the Taste is more fallible: for, if in Distillation, the hottest
parts evaporate first, we may conclude, that it consists of hot and thin
parts: and so of the rest. You may easily know by the separation of the
Elements, whether a Plant have more of ^ire, or Water, or Earth, by weighing
the Plant first: then afterward, when the Water and Oil are extracted,
weighing the Foeces, and by their proportion you may judge of the degrees of
each Element in the Composition of it, and from thence of their Qualities. But
the narrow limits of this Book will not give me leave to expatiate farther on
this Subject. Wherefore I will leave the Discourse of it to a particular
Treatise, which I intend to set out at large on this matter.

How to extract Gum out of Plants.
There are some Plants out of which we may extract Gum: some Plants, I say,
because many have none in them, and nothing can give more then it has. Fennel,
and all other kinds of it, Opoponax, and suchlike Herbs are full of it.
Nature is the best Director in extracting them: for when the Sun shines very
hot, and the Stalks of these Plants are swelled with sap, by reason of the
continual increase of their juice; they open themselves in little clefts, like
a Woman when her labor approaches; and thence does the Plant bring forth, as
it were in travel, that Noble Liquor, which partly by the heat of the Sun,
partly by a natural Inclination grows clammy, and is condensed into a hard
Body. Hence we may learn.

How to extract Gum out of Opoponax.
In the Summer Solstice gather the Roots in the nightime, that the heat of
the Sun may not exhaust the moisture; slice it long ways, and put it into a
well vernished earthen Pipkin: then set it upside down in a descending Furnace
with a Receiver underneath, to catch the falling-Liquor: make a Fire about the
upper part of the Vessel, which will drive down a Noble Gum, which must be
purged in other Vessels, and may be meliorated by Di^^illation. The same may be
effected on Sagapene, w^ose Roots must be gathered at the same time, and
sliced; and being put into a Vessel with a gentle fire, will drop out a
glutinous Liquor into the Receiver; which, being clarified, will harden like
Gum, and is kept for Medicinal uses.

How to extract Gum out of Fennel.
Gather the stalks of Fennel, when it is in its vigor, and the Flowers begin to
blow, about the full of the Moon; for then they are more succulent: slice them
into pieces of a hand-long, and put them into a Glass-Tub of a hand in
wideress, and a handful and a half in length: fill it full, and set the bottom
of it, being full of little holes, into a Tunnel fit to receive it, and the
lower part of the Tunnel into a Receiver. Then make a gentle fire about the Tub
at a handful distance, which may beat upon the stalks on every side with its
heat, like the Sunbeams. The Tub thus growing hot, will exclude some drops;
which, flying from the violence of the heat, slide down through the ho^es of the
bottom into the Tunnel, and from thence into the Receiver, where they will
condense into Gum, participating of the Nature of Fennel, of no contemptible
virtues.

THE ELEVENTH BOOK OF Natural Magic: Of Perfuming.
THE PROEME.
AFter Distillation, we proceed to Unguents and sweet smells: it is an Art next
of kin to the other; for it provides odors of the same things, compounds and
mingles Unguents, that they may send forth pleasant sents every way, very far.
This Art is Noble, and much set by, by Kings and great Men. For it teaches to
make Waters, Oils, Powders, March-panes, Fumes; and to make sweet Skins that
shall hold their sent a long time; and may be bought for little money: not the
common and ordinary way, but such as are rare, and known to very few.

CHAP. I.
Of perfuming Waters.
I Have in the former Book showed how sweet Waters may be distilled out of
Flowers and other things, as the place dedicated to Distillation did require:
here now I will teach how to compound sweet Waters and Flowers, that may cast
forth odoriferous sents: as first,

To make a most sweet perfumed Water.
Take three pound of Damask-Roses, as much of Musk and Red-Roses, two of the
Flowers of Orange, as many of Myrtle, half a pound of Garden-Claver, an ounce
and a half of Cloves, three Nutmegs, ten Lillies: put all these in an Alimbeck,
in the nose of which you must fasten of Musk three parts, of Amber one, of
Civet half a one, tied up together in a clout: and put the Nose into the
Receiver, and tie them close with a cloth dipped in Bran and the white of an Egg
mixed: set a gentle fire under it, until it be all distilled.

Another.
Take two pound of Rose Water, of Lavender half one, of Certan-Wine thirteen
drachms; of the Flowers of Gilliflowers, Roses, Rosemary, Jasmine, the Leaves
of Marjoram, wild Betony, Savory, Fennel, and Basil gentle, half a pound; an
ounce of Lemmon-peel, a dram of Cinnamon, Benjamin, Storax and Nutmegs: mix
them, and put them in a Glass, and set them out in the Sun for four days; then
distill them with a gentle fire: and unless you put Musk in the Nose of the
Alimbeck, tie it up in a rag, hang it by a thread in the Water, whilst it
stands sunning for a month. Set it in the Sun, to take away the scurvy savor
of the distilling, if by chance it conceive any.

Aqua Nanfa.
Take four pound of Rose Water, two of Orange-Flowers, one of Myrtle, three
ounces of sweet Trifoil, one of Lavender: add to these, two ounces of Benjamin,
one of Storax, the quantity of a Bean of Labdanum, as much Mace and Cloves, a
dram of Cinnamon, Sanders, and Lignum Aloes, an ounce of Spikenard: let these
all be grossly beaten, and boiled in a vernished earthen Pipkin over a gentle
fire, for the space of an hour; then let them cool. Strain them through a
Linen-cloth, and set it up in a Glass close stopped. But tie up the Cinnamon,
Cloves, Lignum Aloes and Sanders in a thin Linen-cloth; and so put them into
the pot, and boil them, as I said before, and afterward take out the bundle:
for after the boiling of the water, the remaining dust may be formed into
Pills, and made into Cakes, which may be used in perfuming, as I shall teach
hereafter. This Water is made diverse ways, but I have set down the best: yet in
the boiling, it will turn colored, and become red, so that Hankerchiefs or
white Linen, if they be wetted in it, are stained, although they are made
wonderfully sweet: which makes many forbear the use of it. Wherefore, if we
would have

Aqua Nansa clarified,
Take the former Water, and put it into a Glass-Retort, and set it in Balneo,
over a gentle fire: the Water will become clear, and almost of the same sent:
only a little weaker: keep the Water, and lay aside the rest of the Foeces for
sweet Cakes.

CHAP. II.
To make sweet Water by Infusion.
NOw I will teach how to make perfumed Liquors, and what Liquors they are,
which will receive odors best; for Water is unapt to keep sent, Oil is better,
and Wine, (we may assign the reason out of Theophrastus: for Water is thin,
^oid of taste or sent, and so fine, that it can gather no sent) and those
Liquors which are thick, savory, and have a strong sent. Wine, although it be
not sweet of it self, yet being placed nigh any odor, it will draw it, because
it is full of heat, which does attract. Water, being cold by Nature, can
neither attract, nor receive, nor keep any sent: for it is so fine, slender and
thin, that the odor flies out again, and vanishes away, as if there were no
foundation whereon it could fix and settle, as there is in Wine and Oil, who
are more tenacious of sent, because they are of a denser and callous Body. Oil
is the best preserver and keeper of sent, because it is not changeable:
wherefore Perfumers steep their perfumes in Oil, that it may suck out their
sweetness. We use Wine to extract the sent of Flowers, and especially, Aqua
Vitae; for Wine, unless distilled, infecteth the Water too much with his own
sen^.

Musk Water.
This Water sets off all others, and makes them richer; wherefore it is
first to be made. Take the best Aqua Vitae, and put into it some Grains of
Musk, Amber and Civet, and set them in the hot Sun for some days: but stop the
Vessel very close, and lute it; for that will very much add to the frangrancy
of it. A drop of this put into any other water, will presently make it smell
most pleasantly of Musk. You may do the same with Rose Water and Fountain Water
often distilled, that it may obtain a thinness and heat, which is very
necessary for the extraction of Essences.

Water of Jasmine, Musk-Roses, Gilliflowers, Violets and Lillies,
is extracted the same way: for these Flowers send forth but a thin odor,
which dwells not in the substance of them, but only lies scattered on the
superficies; so that if they remain too long on the fire, or in their
Menstruum, their sweetness degenerateth from its former pleasantness, and is
washed off by the mixture of the stinking ill-savoured part of their substance.
Wherefore we must lay their Leaves only in the best Aqua Vitae, that is, the
Leaves of Lillies, Jasmine, Musk-Roses; and the rest; hanging them on a thread,
that when the Water has sucked out their odor, we may pluck them out,
because their odor lies only on their superficies; so that if they should
remain long in the Aqua Vitae, it would penetrate too deep into them, and draw
out a sent, which would not only destroy their former sweetness, but taint
them with an ill savor, which accompanies those inward parts. After these
Leaves are taken out, supply them with fresh, until you perceive their sent is
also extracted. But take out the Violets and the Gilliflowers sooner then the
rest, lest they color the Water. This Water, being mixed with others, takes
away the scurvy sent of the Wine.

A sweet compounded Water.
Take a great Glass-Receiver, and fill the third part almost of it with Aqua
Vitae: put into it Lavender-Flowers, Jasmine, Roses, Orange and Lemmon-Flowers.
Then add Roots of Iris, Cypress Sanders, Cinnamon, Storax, Labdanum, Cloves,
Nutmegs, Calamus Aromaticus, with a little Musk, Amber, and Civet. Fill the
Glass, and stop it well. But after you have filled the Glass with the Flowers,
they will wither and sink down: wherefore fill it up with more. Set it in a
very hot Sun or in Balneo, until their sweetness be all extracted. Then strain
out the Water; and one drop of it in Rose Water, or of Myrtle-Flowers, will
perfume it all with a most fragrant smell.

CHAP. III.
How to make sweet Oils.
HOw to extract Oil out of Spices and sweet things, is declared before: now I
will show how to draw sents out of other things with Oil: or, as I said before,
to make Oil the ground in which odours may be kept and preserved a long time;
which is done either by imbibing the Oil with odors, or the Almonds out of
which we afterward express the Oil.

How to make Oil of Ben,
which is the sweetest Oil of all, used by the Genois: take an ounce of Ben, a
dram of Amber, as much Musk, half a dram of Civet: put them in a
Glass-bottle well stopped, and set it in the Sun for twenty days; then you may
use it. But be sure that it be close stopped: for the Nature of odors being
volatile and fugitive, it quickly decays, loses his fragrancy, and smells
dully.

A way to make odoriferous Oil of Flowers:
it is a common thing, but very commodious for Perfumers, and may be used for
other things: he that knows how to use it rightly and properly, will find it
an Oil very profitable to him. Blanch your Almonds, and bruise them, and lay
them between two rows of Flowers. When the Flowers have lost their sent, and
fade, remove them, and add fresh ones. Do this so long as the Flowers are in
season: when they are past, squeeze out the Oil with a press, and it will be
most odoriferous. You may draw a sent with this way, out of those Flowers, from
whom you cannot draw sweet Water. Oil of Jasmine, Violets, Musk-Roses, Lillies,
Crows-foot, Gilliflowers, Roses, and Orange-Flowers, and of others, being made
this way, smells most fragrantly. Oil of Amber, Musk, and Civet, may be thus
made also: Cut the Almonds, being blanched from the top to the bottom, into
seven or eight slices, and enclose them in a Leaden Box with these perfumes for
six days, until they have imbibed the sent: then press them, and they will
yield a most sweet Oil; and yet perhaps not make the Musk much worse.

CHAP. IV.
How to extract Water and Oil out of sweet Gums by Infusion.
WE may extract sweet Waters by another Art that we spoke of before, out of
Gums, by Infusion and Expression: as for example.

A sweet Water of Storax, Benjamin, and Labdanum,
which affords a most sweet savor, and is thus extracted. Infuse Storax or
Benjamin being bruised, in as much Rose Water as will cover them two fingers
over: set them in Balneo, or a warm place for a week: then distill them in
Balneo, and you will have a very pleasant Water from them, which you must
expose to the hot Sun, that if there should remain any stink of the smoke in
it, it may be taken away. We may also put Gums into Glass-Vessels, and make a
slow fire under it: there will sweet out a very little water, but of sweet
savor, and the Gum will settle to the bottom, which will be useful for other
things.

To extract Oil of Benjamin, Storax, and other things.
We may do this, by beating and mixing these Gums with Oil of Almonds or of
Ben, and macerating them in Balneo for a month: then draw out the Oil either by
a Retort or by Expression, which is better; it will yield a most fragrant
odor, that you can hardly perceive whether it were drawn out of the Gums
themselves by a Retort. Ben, called in Latin Glans Unguentaria, is used in
precious Ointments in stead of Oil. Pliny calls it Morobolane. So also
Martial,

What not in Virgil nor in Homer's found,
Is of sweet Oil and Acorn the compound.
It is without any sent, and therefore fitter to receive them; and when it does
receive them, to reserve them, for it never grows rank.

CHAP. V.
How to perfume Skins.
NOw we will discourse of the perfuming of Skins, which is performed several
ways, either by sweet Waters, or rubbing them with Oils, or laying them in
Flowers, so that they may attract their odor. And first,

How to wash Skins,
that they may lose the sent of the Beasts and of Flesh. The manner is this:
First wash them in Greek-Wine, and let them lie wet for some hours: then dry
them, and if the sent continues in them still, wash them again: that being
taken away, wash them in sweet Waters. Take four parts of Rose Water, three of
Myrtle, or Orange-Flowers two, of sweet Trifoli one, of Lavender half one: mix
them, and put them into a wide mouthed earthen Vessel, and steep the Skins in
them for a day. Then take them out, and hang them up in the shade to dry: but
when they are almost dry, stretch and smooth them with your hands, that they
may not be wrinkled. Do this thrice over, till they savor of the sweet Waters,
and lose their own stink. Next

How to perfume Skins with Flowers.
They must first be rubbed over with Oil; for, as I have told you, that is the
foundation of all sents, both to attract them, and retain them in a greasy
body. It may be done with common Oil, but better with Oil of Ben, because it is
without any sent of his own: best of all with the Oil of Eggs, which I have
taught before how to make. The manner is thus: Anoint your Gloves or Skins with
a Sponge on the inward side, and especially, in the Seams: when that is done,
you may thus make them attract the sent of any Flowers. Violets and
Gilliflowers blow first in the Spring; gather them in the morning, and lay them
on both sides of your Skins for a day. When they grow dry sooner or later,
fling them away, and lay on new; stirring or moving them thrice or four times
in a day, lest they make the Skins damp, and grow musty. When these Flowers are
past, lay on Orange-flowers and Roses in the same manner: and last of all,
Jasmine, which will continue until Winter: I mean, Garden-Jasmine, for it
flourishes two or three months. Thus your Skins or Gloves will become very
sweet in a years space. The odor will quickly fade and die: but if you do the
same the second time, it will continue much longer, and preserve their
pleasantness. It very much preserves their fragrancy, to keep them in a close
place, in either a Wooden or Leaden Box: but if you lay them among Linen, it
will suck out their odor, and dull their sent.

How to perfume Skins.
If you add Musk, Amber, and Civet to the aforesaid Skins, they will smell much
more sweet and gratefully. Or take four parts of Western Balsam, one of Musk,
as much Amber, and rub it on your Gloves with a Sponge, and they will smell
very sweet. I will add one more excellent Composition: Take eight parts of
Iris, one of Sander, two of Benjamin, four of Rose-Powder, one and a half of
Lignum Aloes, half a one of Cinnamon, or rather less; soften them all with
Rose Water and Gum-Tragacanth, and grind them on a Porphyretick Marble: then
anoint your Gloves with it in a Sponge, and take three Grains of Musk, two of
Amber, one of Civet: mingle them, and rub them also on.

How to take the sent out of Gloves.
If you repent your self of perfuming them, or would make sport with any one,
boil a little Rose Water or ^qua Vitae; and while they be hot, put the Gloves
in, and let them remain there awhile. This will take away their sent: and if
you steep other Gloves in it, and dry them, they will imbibe it.

CHAP. VI.
How to make sweet Powders.
NOw we come to making sweet Powders, which are either Simple or Compound: they
are used in stuffing sweet Bags, in perfuming Skins and Compositions. Learn
therefore

How to make Cyprian Powder.
Take Moss of the Oak, which smells like Musk; gather it clean, in December,
January, or February: wash it five or six times in sweet Water, that it may be
very clean: then lay it in the Sun, and dry it. Afterward, Steep it in
Rose Water for two days, and dry it in the Sun again. This you must iterate
oftentimes; for the more you wash it, the sweeter it will smell. When it is
dried, grind it into Powder in a Brass-Morter, and seirce it: then put it into
the ceive, and cover it: make a fire, and set some sweet waters to boil over
it; or cast on some perfumed Cakes, and let the fume arise up into the ceive.
The more often you do this, the stronger and more lasting sent will be imbibed
by the Powder. When you perceive it to have attained a sufficient odor, take
one pound of the Powder, a little Musk and Civet powdered, and a sufficient
quantity of Sanders and Roses: beat them in a Brass-Morter; first putting in
the Musk, and then by degrees casting in the Powder; so mingle them well. At
last, put the Powders into a Glass close stopped, that the sent may not transpire
and grow dull. There are several Compositions of this Powder, which would be
too tedio^ to recount. It may be made, either white, or black* or brown. The
white is made of Crude Par^er washed in Rose Water, or other sweet Water; and
adding Musk, Amber, Civet, and suchlike, it will smell at a good distance.

CHAP. VII.
How to make sweet Compounds.
THere may be made diverse kinds of sweet Compounds; of which are made Beads,
which some use to reckon their Prayers by, and others to trim their clothes
with: also wash-Balls to cleanse and sweeten the hands. And first,

How to make sweet Balls
with small charge, which yet shall seem to be very costly and sweet. Take one
ounce of Cyprian Powder, and Benjamin of the best mixture, which is brought out
of Turkey; half an ounce of Cloves, a sufficient quantity of Illyrian Iris.
First, melt some Gum Tragacantha in Rose Water: then with the former powder
make it into a Mass, and roll it up in little Balls: bore them through, and fix
every one on a several tent upon the Table: then take four Grains of Musk,
dissolve it in Rose Water, and wash the outside of the Balls with it: then let
them dry: afterward wet them again, for three or four times* so will they cast
forth a most pleasant sent round about, which they will not quickly lose. But
if you would bestow more cost, and have a greater sent, I will show

How to make them another way.
Take one ounce of Storax, of Amber half one, a fourth part of Labdanum
cleansed, one dram of Lignum aloes and Cinnamon, an eighth part of Musk. Beat
the Gum, Storax and Amber in a Brass Mortar with an Iron Pestle, being both
hot: when these are well mixed, cast in the other powders, and mix them all
together: at last add the Musk; and before they grow cold, from what you please
of them. I will add also

Another Compound,
very necessary in a time of Plague, which will not only refresh the Brains
with its sweet odor, but will preserve it against infection: Take three ounces
of Labdanum, as much Storax, one of Bejamin, an ounce and a half of Cloves, an
ounce of Sanders, three of Champhire, one of Lignum Aloes, Calamus Aromaticus,
and juice of Valerian, a dram of Amber: mix all these in the juice of Balm,
Rose Water, and Storax dissolved. But to wash the Face and Hands, I will set
down a most Noble Composition

Of washing Balls or Musk-Balls.
Take the fat of a Goat, and purify it in this manner: Boil a Lie with the
Pills of Citron in a Brass Kettle; let the fat remain in it for an hour: then
strain it through a Linen-cloth into cold water, and it will be purified. Make
the Lie of two parts of the Ashes of the Ceruss-Tree, one of Lime, and half a
Porringer of Alom; mingle them, and put them in a wooden Bowl, with two holes
in the bottom, stopped with Straw: then pour in water, that it may cover them
three fingers over, and strain it out through the holes: when the first is run
out, add another quantity of water, and so the third time, whilst the water
does receive any saltness. Keep these several runnings asunder, and add some of
the second and third unto the first, while a new Egg will swim in it: for if it
sink and go to the bottom, it will be too weak; therefore add some of the first
running. If it swim on the top, and lie upon the surface of the Water, put in
some of the second and third running, until it descend, so that scarce any part
of it be seen above the Water. Heat twenty pound of this Water in a Brass
Kettle, and put into it two of the fat: then strain it out into broad Platters,
and expose it to the hot Sun, mixing it often every day. When it is grown hard,
make Pomanders of it, and reserve them. You may thus perfume them: Put two
pound of the Pomanders into a Bowl, and with a Wooden Spoon, mix it with
Rose Water, till it be very soft: when it has stood still a while, and is
grown hard, add more water, and set it in the Sun: do this for ten days. Then
take half a dram of Musk, somewhat less Civet, and as much of Cinnamon well
beaten: mix them, and if you add a little Rose-powder, it will smell much
sweeter: then judge of it by your nose. If the sent be too weak, add more of
the Perfumes; if too strong, more of the Soap.

How to make Soap, and multiply it.
Since we are fallen upon the discourse of Soap, we will not pass it over this:
Take Soap Geta, and reduce it into a small Powder: set it on the fire in a
Brass Kettle full of Lie of a moderate strength; so that in three hundred pound
of Lie, you may put fourscore of Soap. When the Water begins to boil up in
bubbles, stir it with a wooden Ladle; and if the Lie do fail in the boiling,
add new. When the Water is evaporated, take the Kettle from the fire, and cast
in six pound of ordinary Salt well beaten; and with an Iron Ladle empty it out,
and let it cool all night. In the mean time, prepare a brine, so sharp that it
will bear an Egg. In the morning, cut the Soap into slices, and put it into a
broad Vessel, and pour the brine on it: there let it stand one quarter of a
day, and it will become very hard. If you put some Sal Alchali into the brine,
it will make it much harder.

CHAP. VIII.
How to make sweet Perfumes.
IT remains, that we speak of Perfumes; for they are very necessary for the
senting of Skins, Clothes, and Powders, and to enrich Noble men's Chambers, with
sweet odors in Winter: they are made either of Waters or Powders.

How to make Perfumes of Waters.
Take four parts of Storax, three of Benjamin; of Labdanum, Lignum Aloes, and
Cinnamon, one; an eighth part of Cloves, a little Musk and Amber. Beat them all
grossly, and put them in a Brass Pot with an ounce and a half of Rose Water.
Set the Pot over the fire, or hot Ashes, that it may be hot, but not boil; it
will cast forth a pleasant odor: when the Water is consumed, put in more. You
may also add what you have reserved in the making Aqua Nanfa: for it will send
out a very sweet fume.

Another way.
Take three parts of Cloves, two of Benjamin, one of Lignum Aloes, as much
Cinnamon, Orange-Pill and Sanders, an eight part of Nutmeg. Beat them, and put
them into a pot, and pour into them some Orange-flower-water, Lavender, and
Myrtle-water, and so heat it.

Another way.
Express and strain the juice of Lemmon, into which put Storax, Camphire Lignum
Aloes, and empty Musk-Cods: macerate them all in Balneo for a week in a
Glass-Bottle close stopped. When you would perfume your Chamber, cast a drop of
this Liquor into a Brass Pot full of Rose Water; and let it heat over warm
Ashes, it will smell most pleasantly.

Excellent Pomanders for perfuming.
Take out of the Decoction for Aqua Nanfa, Lignum Aloes, Sanders, Cinnamon and
Cloves; and of the remaining Powders make a mass, which you may form into
cakes, which being burnt on hot Ashes, smell very sweetly. I take out the
Cinnamon and the Woods, because in burning they cast forth a stink of smoke.

Another way.
Take one pound and a half of the Coals of Willow, ground into dust, and
seirced; four ounces of Labdanum, three drachms of Storax, two of Benjamin, one
of Lignum Aloes: mix the Storax, Benjamin, and Labdanum in a Brass Mortar with
an Iron Pestle heated, and put to them the Coal and Lignum Aloes powdered. Add
to these half an ounce of liquid Storax: then dissolve Gum Tragacantha in
Rose Water, and drop it by degrees into the Mortar. When the powders are mixed
into the form of an Unguent, you may make it up into the shape of Birds, or any
other things, and dry them in the shade. You may wash them over with a little
Musk and Amber upon a Pencil; and when you burn them, you will receive a most
sweet fume from them.

Another Perfume.
Anoint the Pill of Citron or Lemmon with a little Civet; stick it with Cloves
and Races of Cinnamon: boil it in Rose Water, and it will fill your chamber
with an odorifeous fume.

CHAP. IX.
How to adulterate Musk.
THese Perfumes are often counterfeited by Impostors; wherefore I will declare
how you may discern and beware of these Cheats: for you must not trust whole
Musk-Cods of it, there being cunning Impostors, who fill them with other
things, and only mix Musk enough to give its sent to them. Black Musk
inclining to a dark red, is counterfeited with Goats blood a little roasted, or
toasted bread; so that three or four parts of them beaten with one of Musk,
will hardly be discovered. The Imposture may be discerned only thus: The Bread
is easy to be crumb'd, and the Goats blood looks clear and bright within
when it is broken. It is counterfeited by others in this manner: Beat Nutmegs,
Mace, Cinnamon, Cloves, Spikenard, of each one handful, and seirce them
carefully: then mix them with the warm blood of Pigeons, and dry them in the
Sun. Afterward beat them again, and wet them with Musk-water and Rose Water:
dry them, beat them, and moysten them very many times; at length, add a fourth
part of pure Musk, and mix them well, and wet them again with Rose Water and
Musk-water: divide the Mass into several parts, and roll them in the hair of a
Goat which grows under his Tail. Others do it

Another way, and
mingle Storax, Labdanum, and Powder of Lignum Aloes: add to the Composition,
Musk and Civet, and mingle all together with Rose Water. The Imposture is
discovered by the easy dissolving of it in water; and it differs in color
and sent. Others augment Musk by adding Roots of Angelica, which does in some
sort imitate the sent of Musk. So also they endeavor

To adulterate Civet
with the Gall of an Ox and Storax liquified and washed, or Cretan Honey. But
if your Musk or Amber have lost their sent, thus you must do,

To make Musk recover its sent,
hang it in a Jakes and among stinks: for by striving against those ill
savours, it exciteth its own virtue, reviveth, and recovereth its lost sent.

THE TWELFTH BOOK OF Natural Magic: Of Artificial Fires.
THE PROEME.
BEfore I leave off to write of Fire, I shall treat of that dangerous Fire that
works wonderful things, which the vulgar call Artificial Fire, which the
Commanders of Armies and Generals, use lamentably in diverse Artifices and
monstrous Designs, to break open Walls and Cities, and totally to subvert them;
and in Sea Fights, to the infinite ruin of m^rtal men; and whereby they
oft-times frustrate the malicious enterprises of their Enemies. The matter is
very useful and wonderful, and there is nothing in the world that more frights
and terrifies the minds of men. God is coming to judge the world by Fire. I
shall describe the mighty hot Fires of our Ancestors, which they used to
besiege places with; and I shall add those that are of later Invention, that
far exceed them: and lastly, I shall speak of those of our days. You have here
the Compositions of terrible Gunpowder that makes a noise, and then of that
which makes no noise: of Pipes that vomit forth deadly Fires, and of Fires that
cannot be quenched, and that will rage under Water at the very bottom of it,
Whereby the Seas rend asunder; as if they were undermined by the great violence
of the flames striving against them, and are lifted up into the Air, that Ships
are drawn by the monstrous Gulphs. Of Fire^Balls that fly with glittering
Fire, and terrify Troops of Horsemen, and overthrow them. So that we are come
almost to eternal Fires.

CHAP. I.
How diverse ways to procure Fire may be prepared.
VItruvius says, That it fell out by accident, that sundry Trees, frequently
moved with Winds and Tempests, the Bows of them rubbing one against another,
and the parts smiting each other, and so being ratified, caused heat, and took
fire, and flamed exceedingly. Wild people that saw this, ran away. When the
Fire was out, and they durst come nearer, and found it to be a great commodity
for the Body of man, they preserved the Fire; and so they perceived that it
afforded causes of civility, of conversing and talking together. Pliny says,
It was found out by Soldiers and Shepherds. In the Camp, those that keep
watch, found this out for necessity; and so did Shepherds, because there is not
always a Flint ready. Theophrastus teaches what kinds of Wood are good for
this purpose: and though the Anger and the handle are sometimes both made of
one sort of Wood, yet it is so that one part acts and the other suffers; so
that he thinks the one part should be of hard Wood, and the other of soft.
Example:

Wood that by rubbing together will take Fire.
They are such as are very hot, as the Bay Tree, the Buck-thorn, the Holm, the
Piel-Tree: But M^estor adds the Mulberry-Tree; and men conjecture so, because
they will presently blunt the Ax. O^ all these they make the Auger, that by
rubbing they may resist the more, and do the business more firmly; but the
handle to receive them, is to be made of soft Wood, as the Ivy, the wild Vine,
and the like, being dried, and all moisture taken from them. The Olive is not
fit, because it is full of fat matter, and too much moisture. But those are
worst of all to make Fires, that grow in shady places. Pliny from him. One Wood
is rubbed against another, and by rubbing takes Fire; some dry fuel, as
Mushroomes or Leaves, easily receiving the Fire from them. But there is nothing
better then the Ivy, that may be rubbed with the Bay Tree, or this with that.
Also the wild Vine is good, which is another kind of wild Vine, and runs
upon Trees as the Ivy does. But I do it more conveniently thus: Rub one
Bay Tree against another, and rub lustily, for it will presently smoke, adding
a little Brimstone: put your fuel nearer, or dry matter made of dry
Toad-stools, or Leaves that are very fine, found about the Roots of Coltsfoot;
for they will soon take fire, and retain it. I have done the same with Ivy-wood
cleansed from the Bark, and dried; and by rubbing one Reed against another; or,
which is better, drawing a cord swiftly upon it. The West-Indians bind two dry
sticks together, and they put a stick between them, which they turn about with
their hands moved from them, and so they kindle fire. But since the mind of
Man seldom rests in the thing once invented, but seeks for new Inventions, by
man's industry there is found out

A stone that will raise Fire with any moisture.
The way to make it is thus: Take quick Brimstone, Saltpeter refined, of each
a like weight; Camphire the double weight to quick Lime; and beat them all in a
Mortar, till they be so fine that they will fly into the Air: bind them all
fast together, wrapped in a Linen-clout, and put them into an earthen pot; let it
be well stopped: lute it well with clay and straw, and let it dry in the Sun:
then put them into a Potters Oven; and when the earthen Vessel is perfectly
baked, they will grow together, and be hard as a Stone: take them out, and lay
them up in a dry place for use. I went to try this in haste, and my experience
failed me. I know certainly, that some of my Friends have done it: but the pot
must not have any vent, for it will all burn away. Yet I have seen water cast
upon quick Lime, and by putting Brimstone to it, it took Fire, and fired
Gunpowder. This I can maintain.

CHAP. II.
Of the Compositions for Fire, that our Ancestors used.
BEfore I come to our Compositions for Fireworks, I shall set down those that
our Forefathers used in Sea Fights, and in taking or defending of Cities.
Thucidides says, That those that besieged Plataenenses, when Engines would do
no good, they fell to Fireworks: for casting about the Walls bundles of stuff,
and throwing in Fire, Brimstone and Pitch, they burnt the wall: whence arose
such a flame, that until that time no man ever saw the like. Heron teaches,
That in burning of Walls, after you have made a hole through, you must put wood
of the Pine Tree under, and anoint them with dry pitch, and powdered Brimstone
together, with Tar or Oil, and set this on fire. And elsewhere he teaches to
burn with a pot: Take an earthen Pitcher, and bind it about with plates of
Iron on the outside, and let it be full of small coal: let there be a hole
about the bottom to put in the Bellows: for when the coals take fire, by
sprinkling on of vinegar, piss, or any other sharp matter, the Walls are
broken. Vegetius teaches what combustible matter must be used: and he uses
burning Oil, Hards, Brimstone, Bitumen. Burning Arrows are shot in Cross-bows
into the Enemies Ships; and these, being smeered over with Wax, Pitch and
Rosin, they quickly fire the Decks, with so many things that afford fuel to
the Fire. I shall add

The Fire-Darts the Ancients used.
A^^ianus Marcellinus described Fire-Darts, a kind of Weapon made after such a
fashion: It is an Arrow of Cane, joined with many Irons between the Shaft and
the Head, and they are made hollow after the fashion of a woman's Distaff,
wherewith Linen-threed is spun; in the midst of it, it has many small holes,
and in the very hollow of it, is put fire with some combustible matter, and so
is it easily shot forth of a weak Bow: for a Bow that is strong, puts out the
Fire; and there is no means to put it out, but by casting on Dust or Lees of
Oil. Livy. Some came with burning Torches, others carrying Tow, Pitch, and
Fire-Darts; and the whole Army shined as if it were all in flames: but in the
concave part of this Dart there was Glue and Fuel, for Fire not to be
extinguished, of Colophonia, Brimstone, Saltpeter, all mingled with Oil of
Bays. Others say, with Oil of Peter, Ducks-grease, the Pith of the Reed of
Ferula, Brimstone; and, as others think, with Oil, Tallow, Colophonia,
Camphire, Rosin, Tow. The old Warriors called this an incendiary composition.
Lucan speaks of burning of Ships:

This plague to water is not consonant,
For burning Torches, Oil and Brimstone joined,
Are cast abroad, and fuel was not scant:
The Ships do burn with Pitch or Wax combined.
And elsewhere,

He bids them shoot their Shafts into the Sails,
Besmeer'd with Pitch, and so he soon prevails:
The Fire straight does burn what is made of Flax,
And so their Decks were fired by melting Wax;
And tops of Masts were bur^^, and Sea-mens packs.
But in compositions for Arrows and Darts, that they might burn the more
vehemently, they put melted Vernish, Printers Oil, Petroleum, Turpentine, made
up with the sharpest Vinegar, pressed close, and dried at the Sun, and wrapped
over with Tow, and with sharp Irons to defend it, wrought together like to a
bottom of yarn: all which at last, only passing over one hole, are smeered over
with Colophonia and Brimstone, after the manner that follows. But by the
subtilty of the Greeks, there was invented

A Fire, called the Greek Fire.
To overcome the Ship presently, they boiled Willow-coals, Salt, Spirit of
Wine, Brimstone, Pitch, with the yarn of the soft Wool of Ethiopia, and
Camphire; which, it is wonderful to speak, will burn alone in the water,
consuming all matter. Callimachus the Architect, flying from Heliopolis, taught
the Romans that thing first, and many of their Emperors did use that against
their Enemies afterward. Leo the Emperor, burnt with this kind of Fire those
of the East, that sailed against Constantinople with 1800 Carvels. The same
Emperor, shortly after, burnt with the same Fire 4000 Ships of the Enemy, and
350 in like manner. Prometheus found out, that Fire would keep a year in the
Cane Ferula: wherefore Martial speaks of them thus:

Canes that the Masters love, but Boys do hate,
Are by Pr^metheus gift held at great rate.
CHAP. III.
Of the diverse Compositions of Gunpowder.
WE should be ill spoken of, if, that treating of fiery Compositions, we should
not first say something of that wonderful Gunpowder, that is the Author of so
many wonderful things; for it is an ingredient in all mixtures, and all depends
upon it: not that I have any mind to speak of it, because it is so common; but
of such things that have some new or hidden secret in them. It is made of four
parts of Saltpeter, Brimstone and VVillow-coals, of each one part. But the
Saltpeter must be refined from common Salt, the fat and earthly parts: for
that is the Foundation and Basis of the rest. All of these must be well
powdered and finely seirced, and perfectly mingled together. Therefore if you
would have

Gunpowder that shall make a great noise, and do much service,
Put in more parts of Saltpeter; namely, to one part of Brimstone, and one of
Willow-coal, put in six or eight parts of Saltpeter, but excellent well
refined and mingled. For four parts of Saltpeter well refined and mingled,
will do more then ten parts of that which is faeculent, and ill mingled. From
the Saltpeter comes the force, the noise of the flame; for Brimstone it takes
fire, and the sooner for the coal. But if one would have

Gunpowder that will shoot a Bullet without noise,
he must make weak the Saltpeter, but with some fat substance; which is done
by the Glue and Butter of Gold, by mingling them according to a certain and due
proportion; and so it will shoot a Ball with very little or no noise; for you
shall scarce hear it: and though the force be not so strong, yet it is but
little less. I will not teach the way, lest wicked men should take occasion to
do mischief by it.

CHAP. IV.
How Pipes may be made to cast out Fire.
THe same Heron bids the Soldiers when they scale the VValls, that they should
set against the faces of their enemies that defend the Cities, such hand-Guns
that they can turn, and that will throw fire a great way: for so they shall so
terrify those that defend the VValls, by these monstrous Engines that cast
Fireballs at such great distance, and with such furious flames, that they will
never endure to behold them, nor yet the Soldiers that mount up the VValls;
but will quickly run away. Moreover, in fights at Sea, and amongst Horsemen,
men of this later age make great use of them: for Horses are terrified with
Fire, as Elephants were; and will easily run away, and break the ranks. When
Antipater besieged the Megarenses, and the Macedonians did fiercely lie upon
them, the Megarenses first anointed their Hogs with pitch, and set them on
Fire, and so sent them out amongst their Enemies. The Hogs were mad at it, and
ran furiously among the Troops of Elephants, and cried as they burned with the
Fire; and, as so many Furies, they extremely disordered the Elephants. But I
shall describe

Rockets that cast Fire a great way.
Make a stick of three foot long, round on the outside, and with a Turners
Instrument make it hollow within: let the hole in the middle be four fingers
diameter, and the VVood a finger thick; but within let it be fenced with a thin
Iron plate, and without with Iron hoops, at the mouth, in the middle, and on
the end; and let the Spaces between be fastened and joined together with
Iron-wires, lest by the violence of the flames, striving within, the Engine
should break in pieces, and hurt our Friends. Fill the hollow hole with this
composition: Gunpowder three parts, Colophonia, Tutia, Brimstone, half a part:
but you must bruise your Brimstone and Colophonia very well, and sprinkle them
with Linseed Oil, and work them in your hands. Then try if your mixture will
burn gently or fiercely: fill the space between the joints in a Reed with
powder; put Fire to it: if it burn vehemently, that it break the Cane, add to
it Colophonia and Brimstone; but if mildly, then put more Powder into your
Rocket, pressing it again with a sharp stick: then stop the mouth of it, being
full, with a Linen-clout, wax and pitch, and cover it, that the Powder fall not
out: and making a hole in the clout, fasten a Cotton-match to the mixture, that
when necessity is, it may take fire. You shall learn shortly after to make the
Match. This is called a simple Rocket.

How to make a Rocket armed.
This by a continual sending forth of Fireballs and Leaden Bullets, and by the
shooting off of Iron-guns, will strike through the faces of those that stand by.
It is made of Turpentine-Rosin, liquid Pitch, Vernish, Frankincense and
Camphire, equal parts; quick Brimstone a third part and half; two parts of
Saltpeter refined, three parts of Aqua Fortis, as much of Oil of Peter and
Gunpowder: pown them together, and make Fireballs: put them into the hollow
of the Pipe, that is broad enough to receive them. Put into the hollow part the
first mixture, three fingers deep, and press it down: then put in the little
Ball of Gunpowder only, weighing one ounce, ready made: then put in again the
first Powder: and do this by course one after another, till it be full; and
stop the mouth, as I said. Some do not thrust down a Ball, but Hards wrapped up
in square pieces of Iron; and that is so pliable, that the first mixture can
kindle the Gunpowder. Some put in with the Tow, Glass grossly powdered. Others,
Salt and powder of Lead: for if the Lumps stick to Armor or Garments, you
cannot put them out with water or any thing else till they be consumed. Some
there are also that compass in the Rocket with Brass or Iron-Guns, and at the
open passage of the Rocket, they put in Gunpowder; when fire comes at it, with
terrible and frequent noises, they cast Leaden Bullets forth upon the standers
by. I saw a Rocket of extraordinary largeness; it was ten foot long, and as
wide as a man's head might go in: it was full of Fireballs, Stones, and other
matters, and put into a Gun, and bound to the lower part of the Cross-yard of a
Ship, which was transported every way with cords, as the Soldiers would have
it; and in Sea Fights was levelled against the Enemies Galleys, and destroyed
them all almost. Yet I will not omit to relate how

A Brass-Gun once fired, may discharge ten times.
It is a new Invention, that a great Brass-Gun, or a hand-Gun, may discharge
ten or more Bullets one after another without intermission. Make a dark Powder,
such as I used in the precedent part, and fill it thus: First, put in a certain
measure of Gunpowder, that being put in, may discharge the Ball: then put in
the Ball, but a small one, that it may go in loosely, and that the powder put
in upon it, may come to touch the Gunpowder: then pour in this dark powder two
or three fingers depth: then put in your Gunpowder, and your Bullet: and thus
in order, one after the other, until the Gun seems to be full to the very
mouth. Lastly, pour in some of your dark clammy powder: and when you have
levelled your Gun to the place appointed, put Fire to the mouth of it; for it
will cast out the Bullets, and then Fire for so long time as a man may
discharge a hand-Gun at diverse shoots. And thus with one Brass-Gun you may
discharge many times.

CHAP. V.
How Fireballs are made that are shot off in Brass-Guns.
NOw I will show how to make some Pot-compositions of Fireballs that are shot
out of Brass-Guns; for diverse uses: either to burn ships, or to give light to
some men in the night, or at Solemnities to cast up into the Air, that they may
seem to stream along like falling Stars.

Fireballs flying in the Air,
that are made at Festival times. Grind one pound of Gunpowder, one third part
of Saltpeter, two ounces of Brimstone, and as much Colophonia: mingle all
these* sow them up in Coffins made of thick Cloth in fashion of Balls, and put
them into hollow half circles made in Wood, and strike them with a wooden
Hammer that they may be hard as stones; then bind them about with cords, and
dip them in Tar three or four times, they that may be well fenced about, lest
being discharged by the violence of a Brass-Gun; they should break in pieces.
Lastly, pierce them thrice through with a sharp stick in the center, and fill
them with Gunpowder, and dry them to be sent aloft. When you would use them,
raise your Brass-Guns, or more conveniently the but end of your Guns, and take
the Ball in a pair of Iron Pinchers, and give Fire to the holes, that it may
take: when your are certain that it is lighted, with your right hand cast it
into the hollow of the Gun; and with your left, give fire to the lowest
touchhole of the Gun: when it is fired, it rebounds; and being carried up by
force of the Fire, it seems to run up and down in the Air, as I often saw it at
Rome, and prepared it. They are made also

Another way.
Take Sea-pitch three parts, Turpentine-Rosin two parts, as much Brimstone, one
part Goats suet: powder what must be powdered; and melt in a Brass Vessel what
will melt: put them together, and stir them with a wooden stick. Then cast in
Hards of Hemp or Flax, so much as will drink up all the mixture: then take the
Brass Kettle from the fire, and with your hands make Balls as big as you will,
that they may be shot forth of Brass-guns; and before they grow hard, thrust
them through with wooden sticks, making small holes: then put in Gunpowder
broken with Brimstone, and roll them about upon a Table strewed with
Gunpowder, and through the holes fasten cotton Matches rolled in the Powder,
as I shall show: let these dry and grow hard in the Sun. The way to discharge
them from a Brass Gun is this: Choose such as are commonly called Petrils, that
are fittest for this use. The weight of the Gunpowder to be put into the
Vessel, must be one fifth part of the Ball, or a little more or less: for if
you put in much, they are either cast down by the too great violence of the
Fire, or else they are put out as they fly, and do not answer our expectation.
The Powder being put into the Vessel, lay neither Hards nor Hemp upon it; but
fit the Ball upon the Powder, that as that fires, it may fire the Ball, and
send it forth. Here is a more noble Composition

Another way.
Take five parts of Gunpowder, three of Saltpeter refined, Brimstone two,
Colophonia one half part, beaten Glass, common Salt, of Oil of Peter, and of
Linseed Oil, and refined Aqua Vitae as much: powder what must be powdered, and
pass it through a fine Cieve: then melt it in a new earthen pot with burning
coals, without flame: let them not sparkle; for so the Composition may take
fire. Then cast in the Powders, that they may incorporate well together: then
make round Coffins of Linen cloth as I said, and fill them with the Gunpowder
alone, and bind them with cords about: then wrap your Tow in the Composition,
and make a Ball of the bigness you would have it; and if you will shoot it out
of a Brass Gun, bind it the thicker with little cords: then pierce your Ball
through in many places with wooden pricks, that they may come at the powder
that lies in the middle: then put cotton Match through, that when it flies in
the Air so violently, they may preserve the fire. In another earthen Pot, melt
Pine-Tree-Gum, Gunpowder and Brimstone, and dip in your Ball into that liquor,
that it may be all over-cast with it. When you take it out, lift up your cotton
Matches with a stick, and strew them with Gunpowder. This Ball will sorely
punish the Enemies with a great noise, cracking and breaking asunder: the Fire
cannot be put out: it will burn all kind of Furniture, Garments and what else,
till it be all consumed; for it will burn Armor so mightily, that unless they
be taken off, they will burn the man.

CHAP. VI.
Of Compositions with burning Waters.
PHilosophers seeking the Reason of Waters that lie hid above and under the
earth, and are always hot, they say, Bitumen is the cause thereof, which being
once on fire, has this property, that it will not only not be put out, but if
you cast on water it will burn the more. The Mountain Chimaera burns always in
Phaselis, both night and day. Gnidius Ctesias says, The fire of it is kindled
by water, and is put out with Earth or Hay. In the same Lycia, Vulcan's
Mountains, touched with a burning Torch, will so burn, that the very stones and
sand in Rivers are consumed by them, and will burn in the midst of the waters;
and that fire is maintained by water. The hollow Cave in Nymphaeum foreshews
terrible things to the men Apollonia: as Theopompus writes; it increases by
showers, and it casts forth Bitumen, that must be tempered with that Fountain
that cannot be tasted, otherwise it is more weak then any Bitumen is. Now I
shall search out the kinds of Bitumen. The first kind is liquid, called
Naphtha, we call it Oil of Peter, which remains in stones and Ki^ram. This has
great affinity with Fire, and the fire will take hold of it every way at a
great distance. So some say, That Medea burnt a whore, who, when she came to
sacrifice at the Altar, the fire laid hold on her Garland. Another kind is,
that men call Maltha; for in the City of Comagenes Samosata, there is a Lake
sends forth burning mud: when any solid thing touches it, it will stick to it;
and being touched, it will follow him that runs from it. So they defended the
Walls, when Lucullus besieged them, and the Soldier burned in his Armor. Waters
do kindle it, and only Earth can quench it, as experience shows. Camphire is a
kind of it: as Bitumen, it draws fire to it and burns. Pissaphaltum is harder
then Bitumen: both Amber and Jet are of this sort; but these burn more gently,
and not so much in the waters. Moreover, in regard it burns in the Water, it is
Brimstone; for no fatter thing is dug forth of the Earth. To maintain this
fire, it self is sufficient: it neither burns in the waters, nor is it put out
with water, nor does it last long; but, joined with Bitumen, the fire will last
always, as we see in the Phlegrean Mountains at Puteoli: and as fire, if Oil be
cast in, burns the more; so when Bitumen is kindled, water cast on, makes the
flame the greater. Wherefore I shall make use of those fires that burn in and
above the waters. But I shall bring some examples how is made

A Ball that will burn under Water.
First prepare your Gunpowder; for this must be one Ingredient in all
Compositions, and gives force to the rest to burn vehemently. If it be in great
corns, pown it well, and seirce it fine: to seven parts of this, add two parts
of Colophonia, three of Saltpeter, one of Brimstone: pown them all together,
and mingle them; sprinkling on of Naphtha, or of liquid pitch Kitram; moystning
them so long, until the powder pressed in your hand will stay together. When
these are well mingled, make trial by them: if it burn too vehemently, add more
Colophonia, Saltpeter and Brimstone; but if but weakly, more Gunpowder. This
mixture must be wrapped in straw or linen-rags, or put into coffins made of the
same things; and bind it as close as you can with straw, or little cords round
about: then dip it into scalding pitch, and so let it dry: then wrap it again
with straw, and smeer it over with pitch, to keep it safe from water, and that
it may not break asunder by the violence of the fire. When it is well dried,
and a little hole made in it, put in Gunpowder, and put fire to it: and when
it begins to burn, stay but very little, and cast it into the water. It will by
its weight fall to the bottom, and the flames will strive with the water, and
drive them far from it: so it will appear to burn above, and is obscured with a
black smoke, that you will think you see the sulphurous waters at Puteoli
burning there. Being then made lighter by many turnings and windings, it will
seem to ascend to the superficies of the water; which is a most pleasant sight:
for you will think that the water burns; and you shall see two contrary Element
fighting together, yet to unite friendly until the matter be spent. Others wrap
in cloth nothing but Gunpowder a whole handful; and this they bind in with
cords: then they dip it in melted scalding pitch, and bound very fast, and
wrapped in many linen rags; they make a small hole through it, and they place
this in the Center of the Ball we even now spoke of, that when it comes to the
superficies of the water, the fire taking hold on the Powder within, breaks the
Ball in pieces; and with a mighty noise, wounds all those that stand near it.
Some make it

Otherwise.
They make a Composition of Brimstone, Colophonia, Saltpeter, Vernish; and to
this they add a fourth part of Gunpowder; and they add
Venice-Turpentine-Rofin, Oil of liquid Vernish, Petroleum, Linseed Oil, and the
best refined Aqua Vitae: with these they wet and sprinkle the dry Powders. I
have seen this take fire more vehemently, and to cast the flames farther. To do

The same,
Take Mastick one part, Frankincense two, Grains of Vernish, Brimstone,
Camphire, Gunpowder, of each three parts; of Colophonia six, Saltpeter
refined nine: pown them all together, and fifth them; only pown the Camphire
mingled with the Salt; for that only will not be powdered: strew them all
about upon an earthen dish with a large mouth, and sprinkle them with Naphtha,
or Vernish, or Linseed Oil, and mingle them with your hands. Take out part of
the Powder, and put it into a hollow Cane, and try it, whether it will burn to
your mind; and if it burn too weak, put in more Gunpowder; if too vehemently,
more Colophonia: always trying if it be as it should be. For to these
Compositions, we add the same things to blunt the vehement burning of the
Saltpeter and the Gunpowder. Then make Coffins of Canvas, like Balls, and
fill them with your Composition, and stuff it in well, and bind them well with
cords round about. Then melt Brimstone, and let there be in it one fourth part
of Gunpowder: stir them together with a wooden stick, and lute the Ball over
with that liquor, that it may be well fenced and crusted. Then with a wooden
prick make a hole in it in the middle to the Center, and fill that with powder;
and so put in fire, and it will burn under water: it may also be shot forth of
brass Engines. I will show you how to make

Balls and Pots to be cast forth of Ships.
The Ancients write, That Alexander the Great found out this Composition of
Fires, to burn Bridges, Gates, Ships, and the like: but it will work now more
vehemently, by reason of the Gunpowder added. Take Gunpowder, Saltpeter,
Brimstone, Pitch, Pine-Tree-Gum, Vernish in Grains, Frankincense, of each
alike; Camphire one half: beat all these, and mingle them. Then take Oil of
Peter, liquid Vernish, Rosinous Turpentine, equal parts; and with these, being
liquid, mingle all together, and fill Pots with them, to be cast among Ships
and enemies: or, if you make a Ball of these, bind it hard about the head of a
hammer, whose sharp-tooth'd end must be a foot long, and the handle three foot.
If at a Sea Fight, any one with a light Boat strike this into a Ship of the
enemies with one blow, he shall raise a mighty fire, that neither water nor any
other thing will put out.

CHAP. VII.
How Balls are made of Metals that will cast forth fire and Iron wedges.
I Shall show you how to make brittle Balls of Metal, that being filled with
Gunpowder, and all the places of vent stopped, with the violence of the flame
will fly into many pieces, and strike through those they meet with, and on all
sides they will pierce through those who are not only unarmed but armed men;
and these are to be used in besieging of Cities: for cast amongst multitudes,
they will wound abundance. The danger is seen among Herds of Cattle. Make then

Balls that will cast pieces of Iron a great way off.
Let a Ball of Metal be made a hand-breadth diameter, half a finger thick: the
Metal is made of Brass three parts, Tin one part, to make it so brittle, that
by force of fire it may fly in small pieces. To make the Ball more easily,
make it of two half circles, for the charge is the less, and let them join
together like a box, or let them screw one within another: let it be equally
thick, that it may break in all parts alike. Then with a Nail drove through the
middle, let it be fastened the better together, a finger thick, that it may
break in all parts before it do in the joints. Then make a little Pipe as big
as a finger, and as long as ones hand, that it may come to the Center of the
Ball, and so stick forth beyond the Superficies, like a Pyramid, the Basis
outward, the Point inward: sodder it fast to the Ball. The nail, as I said,
must come forth on both sides; and to this fasten wires, that runs through iron
piles, that have a large hole through them, that every wire may have thirty of
them; that when the ball is broken by force of the fire, the wires of iron may
break also, and the piles of iron may be thrown about, a great way, with such
force, that they may seem to be shot forth Guns and Ordnance. Lastly, let the
Ball be filled with the best Gunpowder only, but the pipe with that mixture
that burns more gently, that when fire is put to it, you may hold it so long in
your hand, until that slow composition may come to the center; and then throw
it amongst the enemies, for it will break in a thousand pieces; and the iron
wires and pieces of iron, and parts of the Ball will fly far, and strike so
violently, that they will go into planks or a wall a hand depth: These are cast
in by Soldiers, when Cities are besiged, for one may wound two hundred men:
and then it is worse to wound then to kill them, as experience in wars shows.
But when you will fill the pipes, hold one in your hand without a Ball, full of
the composition, and try it how long it will burn, that you may learn to know
the time to cast them, lest you kill your self and your friends. I shall teach
you how with the same Balls

Troops of Horsemen may be put into confusion.
There are made some of these sorts of Balls, that are greater, about a foot in
bigness, bound with the same wire, but fuller of iron piles, namely with a
thousand of them. These are cast amongst Troops of Horsemen, or into Cities
besieged, or into ships with slings, or iron guns, which they call Petrels; and
diverse ways: for if they be armed with iron pieces, when they break they are
cast forth so with the violence of the fire, that they will strike through
armed men and horses, and so fright the horses with a huge noise, that they
cannot be ruled by bridle nor spurs, but will break their ranks. They have four
holes made through them, and they are filled with this said mixture, that being
fired they may be cast amongst Troops of Horsemen; and they will cast their
flames so far with a noise and cracking, that the flames will seem like to
thunder and lightning.

CHAP. VIII.
How in plain ground, and under waters, mines may be presently dug.
TO dig Mines to overthrow Cities and Forts, there is required great cost,
time, and pains, and they can hardly be made but the enemy will discover it: I
shall show how to make them in that champion ground, where both armies are to
meet, with little labor, and in short time.

To make Mines in plain grounds where the Armies are to meet.
If you would do this in sight of the enemy (for they know not what you do) I
shall first teach how. A little before night, or in the twilight, where the
meeting shall be, or passage, or standing, there may pits be made of three foot
depth, and the one pit may be distant from the other about ten foot: There fit
your Balls about a foot in bigness, that you may fill the whole plain with
them; then dig trenches from one to the other, that through them cotton matches
may pass well through earthen pipes, or hollow ca^es; but fire the Balls at
three or four places: then bury them, and make the ground even, leaving a space
to give fire to them all at once. Then at the time of war, when the enemy
stands upon the ground, then remove at your pleasure, or counterfeit that you
fly from them; and cast in fire at the open place, and the whole ground will
presently burn with fire, and make a cruel and terrible slaughter amongst them;
for you shall see their limbs fly into the air, and others fall dead pierced
through, burnt with the horrible flames thereof, that scarce one man shall
escape. You shall make your Match thus: In a new Test let the best Aqua vitae
boil with gunpowder, till it grow thick, and be like pap; put your matches into
it, and role them in the mixture: take the Test from the fire, and strew on as
much gunpowder as they will receive, and set them to dry in the Sun: put this
into a hollow cane, and fill it full of gunpowder: or take one part refined
saltpeter, brimstone half as much, and let it boil in a new earthen pot, with
oil of linseed: put in your Match, and wet them well all over with that liquor,
take them away and dry them in the Sun. But if you will make

Mines under the Water,
use this rare invention: You shall make your Mines where the enemies Galleys
or Ships come to ride; you shall upon a plain place fit many beams, or pieces
of timber, fastened cross-wise, and thrust through, or like nets; according to
the quantity in the divisions, you shall make fit circles of wood, and fasten
them, and fill them with gunpowder; the beams must be made hollow, and be
filled with match and powder, that you may set fire to the round circles: with
great diligence and cunning, smeer over the circles and the beams with pitch,
and cover them well with it, that the water may not enter, and the powder take
wet (for so your labor will be lost) and you must leave a place to put fire
in; then sink your engine with weights to the bottom of the water, and cover it
with stones, mud and weeds, a little before the enemy come. Let a Scout keep
watch, that when their Ships or Galleys ride over the place, that the snare is
laid; for fire being put to it, the sea will part, and be cast up into the air,
and drowned the Ships, or will tear them in a thousand pieces, that there is
nothing more wonderful to be seen or done. I have tried this in waters and
ponds, and it performed more then I imagined it would.

CHAP. IX.
What things are good to extinguish the fire.
I Have spoken of kindling fires, but now I shall show how to quench them; and
by the way, what things obnoxious to the fire, will endure it and remain. But
first I will relate what our Ancestors have left concerning this business.
Vitruvious says, That the Larch-tree-wood will not burn, or kindle by it self,
but like a stone in the furnace, will make no coals, but burn very slowly. He
says the reason is, That there is in it very little air or fire, but much
water and earth, and that it is very solid, and has no pores that the fire can
enter at. He relates how this is known, When Caesar commanded the Citizens
about the Alps, to bring him in provision, those that were secure in a Castle
of wood, refused to obey his commands: Caesar bade make bundles of wood, and to
light torches, and lay these to the Castle: when the matter took fire, the
flame flew exceeding high, and he supposed the Castle would have fallen down;
but when all was burnt, the Castle was not touched. Whence Pliny writes, The
Larch-tree will neither burn to coals, nor is otherwise consumed by fire, then
stones are. But this is most false: For seeing it is rosiny and oily, it
presently takes fire and burns; and being one fired, is hard to put out.
Wherefore I admire, that this error should spread so far, and that the Town
Larignum, so called from the abundance of Larch-wood, compassed about with
fire, should suffer no hurt. Moreover, I read that liquid Alom, as the Ancients
report, will stand out against fire: For wood smeered with Alom, and
Verdignease, whether they be posts or beams, so they have a crust made about
them, will not burn with fire. A^^^^laus the General, for Mithridates made
trial of it in a wooden Tower against (...), which he attempted in vain to set
on fire: which I find observed by (...), in his Annals. But this liquid Alom is
yet unknown to many learned men: our Alum wants this property. But many say,
that vinegar prevails against fire. Plutarch says, That nothing will sooner
quench fire them vinegar: for of all things, it most puts out the flame, by its
extremity of cold. Poli^^^^ reports, (...), when he was besieged by his
enemies, poured out of brazen vessels, melted lead upon the engines, that were
set to scale the place, and by this were the engines dissolved; but the enemies
poured vinegar upon it, and by that they quenched the lead, and all things else
that fell from the walls: and so they found vinegar to be the fittest to quench
fire, and an excellent experiment, if things be wet with it. Pliny prayseth the
white of an egg to quench it, saying, that the white of an egg is so strong,
that if wood be wet with it, it will not burn, nor yet any garment. Hieron, to
cover scaling engines, used the raw hides of beasts new killed, as having force
to resist fire; and the joints of wood they fenced with chalk, or with ashes
tempered with blood, or clay molded with hair or straw, and with sea-weeds wet
in vinegar; for so they were safe from fire. Carchedonius was the first that
taught men to cover engines and rams, with green hides. I have heard by men of
credit, that when houses were on fire, by a peculiar property, the menstruons
clothes of a woman that had her courses the first time, cast over the planks,
would presently put out the fire. Thick and muscilaginous juyces are good
against fire, as of Marshmallows. Therefore Albertus writ not very absurdly,
that if a man anoint his hands with juice of Marshmallows, the white of an
egg and vinegar, with alom,

He may handle fire without hurt.
And it is a thing that has much truth in it. But I think that quicksilver
killed in vinegar, and the white of an egg, and smeered on, can preserve any
thing from fire.

CHAP. X.
Of diverse compositions for fire.
I Shall speak of diverse compositions for fire to be used for diverse uses. But
men say M. Gracchus was Author of this invention.

To make a fiery composition, that the Sun may kindle.
It consists of these things: Oil of Rosinous Turpentine, of Quicksilver
(otherwise then I showed in distilling) of Juniper, of Naphtha, Linseed,
Colophonia, Camphire; let there be Pitch Saltpeter, and Ducks-grease, double
to them all; Aqua vitae refined from all phlegm. Pound them all, and mingle
them; put them up in a glazed vessel, and let them ferment two months in
horse-dung, always renewing the dung, and mingling them together. After the set
time, put it into a retort, and distill it: thicken the liquor either with
Pigeons-dung, finely sifted, or with gunpowder, that it may be like pap: Wood
that is smeered over with this mixture, and set in the summer Sun, will fire of
it self. Pigeons-dung easily takes fire by the Sun beams. Galen reports, That
in Mysia, a part of Asia, a house was so set on fire. Pigeons-dung was cast
forth, and touched a window that was near; as it came to touch the wood that
was newly smeered with rosin, when it was corrupted, and grew hot, and vapoured
at Midsummer, by heat of the Sun, it fired the rosin, and the window; then
other places smeered with Rosin, took fire, and by degrees part of the house
began to take hold; and when once the covering of the house began to flame, it
soon laid hold of the whole house, because it has a mighty force to inflame
all. Ducks-grease is very prevalent in fireworks, and Physicians praise it
extremely, that it is most subtle, penetrating and hot, it makes other things
penetrate; and as it is most subtle and hot, so it takes fire vehemently, and
burns. I shall show how to distill

A most scalding Oil.
When I would prepare the most excellent compositions of burning oil, I
distilled common oil in a retort, but with great labor; yet what was distilled
was thin, combustible, and ready to fire; that once kindled, it was not to be
put out; and it would draw the flame at a great distance, and hardly let it go.
But oil of Linseed is stronger than it; for if you distill it often, it will
have such a wonderful force to take fire, that it can hardly be shut up in a
vessel, but it will draw the fire to it; and the glass being opened, it is so
thin, that it will fly into the Air; and if the light of a candle, or of fire
touch it, the Air takes fire, and the oil fired by it, will cast the flame afar
off, so vehemently, that it is almost impossible to quench it. It must be
distilled with great cunning, lest the vessel over-heat, it should take fire
within. Moreover,

Fire that is quenched with oil, is kindled with water.
It is thus made: I said that Naphtha will burn in water, and that Camphire is
a kind of it. Wherefore, if you mingle brimstone with it, or other things, that
will retain fire; if you cast in oil or mud, it will quench it; but it revives
and flames more, if you cast in water. Livy relates, That some old women in
their plays, lighting Torches made of these things, passed over Tyber, that it
seemed a miracle to the beholders. I said it was the property of Bitumen to
take fire from water, and to be quenched with oil. Dioscorides says, That the
Thracian stone is bred in a certain River of Scythia; the name of it is Pontus:
it has the Force of Jet, they say it is enflamed by water, and quenched with
oil, like as Bitumen. Nicander speaks of this stone thus:

If that the Thracian stone be burnt in fire,
And wet with water, the flame will aspire;
But oil will quench it. Thracian shepherds bring
This stone from the River Pontus, Poets sing.
Torches that will not be put out by the winds.
They are made with brimstone, for that is hardly put out, if once kindled.
Wherefore Torches made with wax and brimstone, may be carried safely through
winds and tempests. These are good for Armies to march by, or for other
necessary things. Others use such: They boil the wick of the Torches in
Saltpeter and water; when it is dried, they wet them with brimstone and Aqua
vitae: of this mixture then they make their Candles, with brimstone, and then
with half Camphire, and Turpentine, two parts Colophonia, three of Wax; of this
they make four Candles, and put them together: in the middle that is empty,
they cast in quick-brimstone, and they will forcibly resist all things. Or
thus: Boil wicks of Hemp or Cotton in water, with Saltpeter; take them out and
dry them: then melt in a brass pot equal parts of brimstone, gunpowder, and
wax; when they are melted, put in your wicks to drink up part of the mixture;
take them out, and to what is left in the kettle, add Gunpowder, Brimstone, and
Turpentine, of each a like quantity, of which mixture make your Torches, and
join them together. Also there is made

A cord that set on fire, shall neither smoke nor smell.
When Soldiers or Hunters go secretly by day or night, they use sometimes to
make a Match, that being lighted, will neither smell near hand, nor far off,
nor make any smoke; for wild Beasts, if the Match smell, will sent it, and run
to the tops of the Mountains. Take a new earthen pot, and put into it a new
cord so handsomely, that the whole pot may be filled; so laid in rounds, that
no more can go in; cover it, and lute it well three or four times, that it may
have no vent; for the whole business depends on this. Then make a fire round
about it, by degrees, that first it may grow hot, then very hot, and lastly red
hot; and if sometimes the smoke come forth, stop the chinks with clay still;
then heaped up under the coals, let it grew cold of it self; and opening the
Pot, you shall find the Cord black, like a cole. Light this Cord, and it will
neither smoke nor smell.

CHAP. XI.
Fire-compositions for Festival days.
I Have showed you Terrible and Monstrous fireworks, it is fit to show you
some to use at Solemn Times: not so much for use, as to give you occasion to
find out higher matters. I shall show then how to make one,

That when a man comes into his Chamber, the whole Air way take fire.
Take a great quantity of the best refined Aqua vitae, and put Camphire into
it, cut small, for it will soon dissolve in it: when it is dissolved, shut the
Windows and Chamber-doors, that the vapor that exhales, may not get forth:
when the vessel is full with water, let it boil with coals, put under, without
any flame, that all the water may resolve into smoke, and fill the Chamber, and
it will be so thin, that you can scarce perceive it. Let some man enter into
the Chamber with a lighted Candle in his hand, and the Air by the Candle light,
will take fire all about, and the whole Chamber will be in a flame, like an
Oven, and will much terrify one that goes in. If you dissolve in the water a
little Musk, or Amber-greese, after the flame you shall smell a curious sent.
Also there is made

Exceeding burning water:
Thus: Take old strong black Wine, put into it quick Lime, Tartar, Salt, and
quick-Brimstone; draw out the water of them with a glass retort. This will burn
exceedingly, and never cease till it be all consumed. If you put it into a
vessel with a very large mouth, and put flame near it, it will presently take
fire: if when it is on fire you cast it against a wall, or by night out at the
window, you shall see the Air full of sparks, and kindled with fires. It will
burn, held in your hands, and yet will not scald you. Distill it once again, and
it will burn the less. But if you take equal parts of quick Lime, and Salt, and
shall mingle them with common Oil, and make little Balls, and cast them into
the belly of the retort at the neck, and then shall draw forth the Oil by a
vehement fire; and mingling this Oil again with Salt and quick Lime, shall
distill them again, and shall do the same four times, an Oil will come forth
that will burn wonderfully, that some deservedly call it infernal Oil. A Solemn
Pleasant fire, is made for the Theater. If Camphire be dissolved in Aqua vitae,
and with that Fillets, Papers, or Parchments, be smeered; and being dried
again, be lighted, and shall fall from a loft: as they fall lighted through the
Air, you shall see Serpents with great delight. But if you dessire

To cast flame a great way,
Do thus: Beat Colophonia, Frankincense, or Amber finely, and hold them in the
palm of your hand, and put a lighted Candle between your fingers; and as you
throw the Powder into the Air, let it pass through the flame of the Candle; for
the flame will fly up high. If you will have that

Many Candles shall be lighted presently,
on Festival Days, as I hear they are wont to do amongst the Turks: You shall
boil Brimstone and Orpiment with Oil, and in them let thread boil; when it is
dry, bind it to the wicks of Candles, and let them pass through; for when one
head is lighted, the flame will run to them all, and set them on fire. Some
call it Hermes his Ointment. Any man may

Eating in the dark, cast sparkles out of his mouth.
It is pleasant for the Spectators; and it is thus: Let a man eat Sugar Candy,
for as he breaks it with his teeth, sparkles will seem to fly out of his mouth;
as if one should rub a firebrand.

CHAP. XII.
Of some Experiments of Fires.
I Will set down some Experiments, that are without the ranks of the rest. I
held it better to conceal them: but they may give you occasion to think on
greater matters by them. If you will

That Bullets from Brass Guns, may enter deeper,
you may easily try this against a wall, or plank set up. Let the Ball rather
go into the hollow of it, straight then wide: but wet it in Oil, before you put
it in, and so cast it in: this Bullet shot off by force of fire, will go in
twice as far as otherwise. The reason is easy: for the Oil takes away the
occasion of the Airs breathing forth; for all vents being stopped, the flames
striving within, cast forth the Bullet with more violence, as we shall show
more at large. So also will the Bullets of Brass Guns penetrate with more
force: and if you lard the Bullets, they will penetrate through Arms of proof.
I can also by a cunning Artifice

Shoot a man through with a Bullet, and no place shall be seen where it went
in, or came forth.
The mind of man is so cunning, that it has invented a way to shoot a man
quite through with a Bullet, and yet no mark of the Bullet shall appear, though
all the inward parts be bruised and beaten through. Consider, that what things
are heavy, are solid, and so subtle, that they will penetrate and leave no
marks, where they entered or came out; and they will do the same, though they be
united, as if they were disjoynted; and every part will act by it self alone,
as it would do being united. I have said thus, to take away all occasions from
ignorant and wicked people, to do mischief. I saw

A Gun discharge often, and yet no more powder was put in.
Famous Soldiers use this, not only for Brass Cannon, but for small
hand-Guns. It is thus: wrap a paper three or four times about the rammer that
is put into the hollow mouth of the Gun, and drawing out the Gun-stick, fill
that hollow place with Powder and Bullet; here and there let the Bullets be
stopped in, and glewed fast, that no scissure or vent may appear in the paper.
First, let it be put into the Gun, but loosly, that the Powder put in above,
may come to the vent-hole beneath: then put your measure of Powder in atop, and
stamp in your Bullet, putting Gunpowder to the touchhole; and putting fire to
it, the upper Ball shall be shot off with its Powder: presently thrust in a
sharp instrument at the vent-hole, and make a hole in the Carteridge, and feed
it with Powder, and put fire to it again; and in short time it will discharge
twice. I can

Blind your eyes with the smoke.
This may much profit, when enemies come to storm a City. But first we must
consider the wind, that it may be on the backs of our men, and may carry the
smoke into the faces of our enemies. Let there be measures made like lanthorns,
so wide that they may go in at the mouths of the Brass Guns: fill them with
Powder of Euphorbium, Pepper, quick Lime, Vine-ashes, and Arsnick sublimate;
and put them into the hollow of it, after the Gunpowder: for by force of the
fire, will these paper-frames break; and the smoke of the Powder, if it come at
the eyes of the enemies, will so trouble them, that casting away their weapons,
they can hardly save their eyes.

CHAP. XIII.
How it may be, that a Candle shall burn continually.
BEfore we end this Book, I shall discover, whether it may be that a Candle
once lighted, should never be put our; which seems very contrary to the reason
of the corruptible things of this world, and to be past belief. But let us see
first whether the Ancients ever attempted it, or did it. We read in the Roman
Histories, that there was at Rome, in the Temple of the goddess Vesta; and of
Minerva, at Athens; and of Apollo, at Delphi, a perpetual fire kindled. But
this seems to be false; for I remember that I have read in many Authors, that
this perpetual fire was always kept so by the Vestal Nuns, that it should never
go out: as we find it in Plutarch, in the Life of Numa; and then in the time of
the Civil War, and of Mithridates, it went out. At Delphi it was watched by
widows, who took care, by always pouring in of Oil, that it should never go
forth: but this failed, when the Medes burnt that Temple. Of the same sort was
that fire, God appointed by Moses in the Scriptures. The fire shall always burn
upon mine Altar, which the Priest shall always keep lighted, putting under wood
day by day. Wherefore, the fire was not perpetual in the Temples of the gods of
the Gentiles. Yet I read that about the Town Ateste near Padus, there was found
an earthen Pitcher, in which there was another little Pitcher, and in that
there was found a little light still burning, which by the hands of some
ignorant fellows, pouring it rudely forth, was broken, and so the falme was put
out. And in our time, about the year 600. in the stand Nesis that stands in
Naples, there was a Marble Sepulcher of some Roman found, and that being
opened, a Vial was found within it, in which there was a Candle: when this was
broken, and it came to the light, it went out: it was shut in before the coming
of our Savior. Some others I have heard of, by report of my friends, that were
found and seen with their eyes. Whence I collect this may be done, and was done
by our Ancestors. Let us see if we can do the same. Some say that Oil of Metals
may last long, and almost perpetually. But this is false: for Oil of Metals
will not burn. Others say, Oil of Juniper from the wood will last long, because
the coals of that wood may be kept a whole year alive under ashes. But this is
most false, because I kept a cole under ashes, and it would not last two, nor
yet one day; and the Oil of the wood burns most vehemently, and is sooner
wasted then common Oil. Some boast they have drawn Oil from the incombustible
stone, thinking that flame cannot consume that: for a wick made thereof, will
never be burnt; and yet burns always, if you put Oil always to it: But if that
be true, that the wick is not consumed by fire, yet that follows not (...) And
no man yet was ever seen to draw Oil from the stone (...) that would burn.
Others think that Oil drawn from common Salt, will last always; for if you cast
Salt into Oil, it makes the Oil in the Lamp last twice as long, and not be
consumed, which I affirm to be true; therefore if Oil be distilled from it, it
will burn always and never waste. Yet this follows not that Oil drawn from Salt
will burn continually; and Oil distilled from it will burn no more than a stone
of Aqua fortis, that parts Gold and Silver, of which kind it is. But it is an
ignorant thing to imagine, that an Oil may be made that shall burn always, and
never consume. Wherefore some other thing must be thought on. Some say (and
they do not think foolishly) that fire in a Vial does not always burn; but in
the Vial there is some composition laid up, that so soon as it comes to the
Air, presently takes fire, and seems to burn only at that time, yet it never
burned before. This may be true: for as I often have labored in Chemical
matters, a glass well stopped, and forgot by me after the things were burnt in
it; and being so left for many months, I may say, many years: at last, being
opened, has been seen to flame, and burn, and smoke. What I had burnt I had
forgot, but they might be the same things, that I heard of by my friend, that
had the same chance: for when he had boiled Litharge, Tartar, quick Lime, and
Cinnaber in Vinegar, until it was all evaporated; and then covering and luting
the Vessel well, he set it into a vehement fire, and when it was enough, he set
it by till it was cold: after some months, when he went to open it to see his
work, a flame suddenly flew out of the Vessel, and set fire on some things,
when as he thought of no such matter: and the same has happened to many more.
Moreover, when I boiled Linseed Oil for the Press, when the flames took within,
I covered the pot with clothes to put it out: after some time I opened the
Vessel, the Oil at the Air coming to it flamed again, and took fire. But
experience is against this opinion: For who saw a Candle shut up close in a
glass Vial, and to keep its flaming quality, and to give light? For the
Ancients thought that the souls of the dead did always rest in the grave, as
the ashes do; and that they might not lie in the dark, they endeavovred all
they could to send out this light, that their souls might enjoy light
continually. Therefore we must think on another experiment, and make trial of
it. But this must be held for a rare and firm principle in Natures shop, that
the cause of wonders is because there can be no vacuum; and the frame of the
work will sooner break asunder, and all things run to nothing, then there can
be any such thing: Wherefore if a flame were shut up in a glass, and all
vent-holes stopped close, if it could last one moment, it would last continually,
and it were not possible for it to be put out. There are many wonders declared
in this Book, and many more shall be set down, that have no other cause. But
how the flame should be lighted within side, this is worth the while to know;
It must be a liquor or some subtle substance, and that will evaporate but
little; and if then it can be shut up in the glass, when the glass is shut it
will last always: which may easily be performed by burning-glasses, fire,
industry, and cunning. It cannot be extinguished, because the Air can come in
nowhere to fill up the emptiness of the Vial: The Oil is always turned into
smoke, and this, being it cannot be dissolved into Air, it turns to Oil, and
kindles again, and so it will always by course afford fuel for the light. You
have heard the beginnings; now search, labor, and make trial.

THE THIRTEENTH BOOK OF Natural Magic: Of tempering Steel.
THE PROEME.
I Have taught you concering monstrous Fires; and before I part from them, I
shall treat of Iron Mines; for Iron is wrought by Fire: not that I intend to
handle the Art of it; but only to set down some of the choicest Secrets that
are no less necessary for the use of men, in those things I have spoken of
already, besides the things I spoke of in my Chemical works. Of Iron there are
made the best and the worst Instruments for the life of man, says Pliny. For
we use it for works of Husbandry and building of Houses; and we use it for Wars
and Slaughters: not only hard by; but to shoot with Arrows, and Darts, and
Bullets, far off. For, that man might die the sooner, he has made it swift,
and has put wings to Iron. I shall teach you the diverse tempers of Iron, and
how to make it soft and hard, that it shall not only cut Iron and other the
hardest substances, but shall engrave the hardest Porphyr and Marble Stones. In
brief, the force of Iron conquers all things.

CHAP. I.
That Iron by mixture may be made harder.
IT is apparent by most famous and well-known Experience; that Iron will grow
more hard by being tempered, and be made soft also. And when I had sought a
long time whether it would grow soft or hard by hot, cold, moist or dry things;
I found that hot things would make it hard and soft, and so would cold and all
the other qualities: wherefore something else must be thought on to hunt out the
causes. I found that it will grow hard by its contraries, and soft by things
that are friendly to it; and so I came to Sympathy and Antipathy. The Ancients
thought it was done by some Superstitious Worship, and that there was a Chain
of Iron by the River Euphrates, that was called Zeugma, wherewith Alexander the
Great had there bound the Bridge; and that the links of it that were new made,
were grown rusty, the other links not being so. Pliny and others think, That
this proceeded from some different qualities; it may be some juices or Minerals
might run underneath, that left some qualities, whereby Iron might be made hard
or soft. He says. But the chief difference is in the water that it is often
plunged into when it is red hot. The pre-eminence of Iron that is so
profitable, has made some places famous here and there; as Bilbilis and
Turassio in Spain, Comum in Italy: yet are there no Iron Mines there. But of
all the kinds, the Seric Iron bears the Garland; in the next place, the
Parthian: nor are there any other kinds of Iron tempered of pure Steel: for
the rest are mingled. Justine the Historian reports, That in Gallicia of Spain,
the chiefest matter for Iron is found; but the water there is more fortible
then the Iron: for the tempering with that, makes the Iron more sharp; and
there is no weapon approved amongst them, that is not made of the River
Bilbilis, or tempered with the water of Chalybes. And hence are those people
that live near this River called Chalybes; and they are held to have the best
Iron. Yet Strabo says, That the Chalybes were people in Pontus near the River
Thermodon. Virgil speaks,

And the naked Calybes Iron.
Then, as Pliny says, It is commonly made soft with Oil, and hardened by
Water. It is a custom to quench thin Bars of Iron in Oil, that they may not
grow brittle by being quenched in Water. Nothing has put me forward more to
seek higher matters, then this certain Experiment, That Iron may be made so
weak and soft by Oil, that it may be wrested and broken with ones hands: and by
Water it may be made so hard and stubborn, that it will cut Iron like Lead.

CHAP. II.
How Iron will wax soft.
I Shall first say how Iron may grow soft, and become tractable; so that one
may make Steel like Iron, and Iron soft as Lead. That which is hard, grows soft
by fat things, as I said; and without fat matter, by the fire only, as Pliny
affirm. Iron made red hot in the fire, unless you beat it hard, it corrupts: as
if he should say, Steel grows soft of it self, if it be often made red hot, and
left to cool of it self in the fire: and so will Iron grow softer. I can do the
same diverse ways.

That Iron may grow soft,
Anoint Iron with Oil, Wax, Asafoetida; and lure it over with straw and dung,
and dry it: then let it for one night be made red hot in burning coals. When it
grows cold of it self, you shall find it soft and tractable. Or, take
Brimstone three parts, four parts of Potters Earth powdered: mingle these with
Oil to make it soft. Then cover the Iron in this well, and dry it, and bury it
in burning coals; and, as I said, you may use Tallow and Butter the same way.
Iron wire red hot, if it cool alone, it will be so soft and ductible, that you
may use them like Flax. There are also soft juices of Herbs, and fat, as
Mallons, Bean-Pods, and suchlike, that can soften Iron; but they must be hot
when the Iron is quenched, and Juices, not distilled Waters: for Iron will grow
hard in all cold waters, and in liquid Oil.

CHAP. III.
The temper of Iron must be used upon soft Irons.
I Have said how Iron may be made softer, now I will show the tempering of it,
how it may be made to cut sharper. For the temper of it is diverse for diverse
uses. For Iron requires several tempers, if it be to cut Bread, or Wood, or
Stone, or Iron, that is of diverse liquors; and diverse ways of firing it, and
the time of quenching it in these Liquors: for on these does the business
depend. When the Iron is sparkling red hot, that it can be no hotter, that it
twinkles, they call it Silver; and then it must not be quenched, for it would
be consumed. But if it be of a yellow or red color, they call it Gold or
Rose-colour: and then quenched in Liquors, it grows the harder; this color
requires them to quench it. But observe, That if all the Iron be tempered, the
color must be blew or Violet color, as the edge of a Sword, Rasor or Lancet:
for in these the temper will be lost if they are made hot again. Then you must
observe the second colors; namely, when the Iron is quenched, and so plunged
in, grows hard. The last is Ash color: and after this if it be quenched, it
will be the least of all made hard. For example:

The temper of a Knife to cut Bread.
I have seen many ingenious men that labored for this temper, who, having
Knives fit to cut all hard substances, yet they could scarce fall upon a temper
to cut Bread for the Table. I fulfilled their desire with such a temper.
Wherefore to cut Bread, let the Steel be softly tempered thus: Heat gently
Steel, that when its broken seems to be made of very small grains; and let it
be excellent well purged from Iron: then strike it with a Hammer to make a
Knife of it: then work it with the File, and frame it like a Knife, and polish
it with the Wheel: then put it into the Fire, till it appear Violet-colour. Rub
it over with Soap, that it may have a better color from the Fire: then take it
from the Fire, and anoint the edge of it with a Linen-cloth dipped in Oil of
O^ives, until it grow cold; so you shall soften the hardness of the Steel by
the gentleness of the Oil, and a moderate heat. Not much differs from this,

The temper of Iron for Wood.
Something harder temper is fit to cut wood; but it must be gentle also:
therefore let your Iron come to the same Violet-colour, and then plunge it into
waters: take it out; and when it appears Ash Color, cast it into cold water.
Nor is there much difference in

The temper for Instruments to let blood.
It is quenched in Oil, and grows hard; because it is tender and subtle: for
should it be quenched in water, it would be wrested and broken.

The temper of Iron for a Sithe.
After that the Iron is made into a Sithe, let it grow hot to the color of
Gold, and then quench it in Oil, or smeer it with Tallow, because it is subtle
Iron; and should it be quenched in waters, it would either crumble or be
wrested.

CHAP. IV.
How for all mixtures, Iron may be tempered most hard.
NOw I will show some ways whereby Iron may be made extreme hard: for that Iron
that must be used for an Instrument to hammer, and polish, and fit other Iron,
must be much harder then that.

The temper of Iron for Files.
It must be made of the best Steel, and excellently tempered, that it may
polish, and fit other Iron as it should be: Take Ox hoofs, and put them into an
Oven to dry, that they may be powdered fine: mingle well one part of this with
as much common Salt, bearen Glass, and ^himney-foot, and beat them together,
and lay them up for your use in a wooden Vessel hanging in the smoke; for the
Salt will melt with any moisture of the place or Air. The powder being
prepared, make your Iron like to a file: then cut it chequerwise, and
crosswayes, with a sharp edged tool: having made the Iron tender and soft, as I
said, then make an Iron chest fit to lay up your files in, and put them into it
strewing on the powders by course, that they may be covered all over: then put
on the cover, and lute well the chinks with clay and raw, that the smoke of the
powder may not breath out; and then lay a heap of burning coals all over it,
that it may be red-hot about an hour: when you think the powder to be burnt and
consumed, take the chest out from the coals with Iron pinchers, and plunge the
files into very cold water, and so they will become extreme hard. This is the
usual temper for files: for we fear not if the files should be wrested by cold
waters. But I shall teach you to temper them excellently

Another way.
Take the pith out of Goats horns, and dry it, and powder it: then lay your
files in a little Chest strewed over with this Powder, and do as you did
before. Yet observe this, That two files supernumerary must be laid in, so that
you may take them forth at pleasure: and when you think the Chest, covered with
burning coals, has taken in the force of the Powder, take out one of the
supernumerary Files, and temper it, and break it; and if you find it to be
very finely grained within, and to be pure Steel, according to your desire,
take the Chest from the fire, and temper them all the same way: or else, if it
be not to your mind, let them stay in longer; and resting a little while, take
out the out the other supernumerary File, and try it, till you have found it
perfect. So we may

Temper Knives to be most hard.
Take a new Ox hoof, heat it, and strike it with a Hammer on the side; for the
pith will come forth: dry it in an Oven; and, as I said, put it into a pot,
always putting in two supernumeraries, that may be taken forth, to try if they
be come to be pure Steel; and doing the same as before, they will be most hard.
I will show

How an Habergeon or Coat of Arms is to be tempered.
Take soft Iron Armor of small price, and put it into a pot, strewing upon it
the Powders abovesaid; cover it, and lute it over, that it have no vent, and
make a good Fire about it: then at the time fit, take the Pot with iron
pinchers; and striking the Pot with a Hammer, quench the whole Herness, red
hot, in the foresaid water: for so it becomes most hard, that it will easily
resist the strokes of Poniards. The quantity of the Powder is, that if the
Harness be ten or twelve pounds weight, lay on two pounds and a half of Powder,
that the Powder may stick all over: wet the Armor in water, and roll it in the
Powder, and lay it in the pot by courses. But, because it is most hard, lest
the rings of a Coat of Male should be broken, and fly in pieces, there must be
strength added to the hardness. Workmen call it a Return. Taking it out of the
Water, shake it up and down in Vinegar, that it may be polished, and the color
be made perspicuous: then make red hot a plate of Iron, and lay part of the
Coat of Male, or all of it upon the same: when it shows an Ash Color, workmen
call it Berotinum: cast it again into the water, and that hardness abated; and
will it yield to the stroke more easily: so of a base Coat of Male, you shall
have one that will resist all blows. By the mixture of Sharp things, iron is
made hard and brittle; but unless strengh be added, it will fly in pieces with
every blow: therefore it is needful to learn perfectly how to add strength to
it.

CHAP. V.
Liquors that will temper Iron to be exceeding hard.
I Said that by Antipathy Iron is hardened, and softened by Sympathy: it
delights in fat things, and the pores are opened by it, and it grows soft: but
on the contrary, astringent things, and cold, that shut up the pores, by a
contrary quality, make it extreme hard; they seem therefore to do it: yet we
must not omit such things as do it by their property. If you would have

A Saw tempered to saw Iron,
Make your Saw of the best Steel, and arm it well that it be not wrested by
extinguishing it. Then make a wooden Pipe as long as the Iron of the Saw, that
may contain a liquor made of Water, Alon, and Piss; Plunge in the red hot Iron,
and take it out, and observe the colors: when it comes to be violet, put all
into the liquor, till it grow cold. Yet I will not conceal, that it may be done
by a Brass wire bent like a bow, and with Powder of Emril and Oil: for you
shall cut Iron like Wood. Also, there are tempered

Fish-hooks to become extreme hard.
The Hook serves for a part to catch Fish; for it must be small and strong: if
it be great, the Fish will see it, and will not swallow it; if it be too small,
it will break with great weight and motion; if it be soft, it will be made
straight, and the Fish will get off. Wherefore, that they may be str^ng, small
and not to be bended in the mouth; you shall thus temper them: Of Mowers Sythes
make wire, or of the best Steel, and make Hooks thereof, small and fine: heat
them not red-hot in the Fire; for that will devour them: but lay them on a
plate of red hot Iron. When they grow red, cast them into the water: when they
are cold, take them out and dry them. Then make the plate of Iron hot again,
and lay on the Hooks the second time; and when an Ash color, or that they
commonly call Berotinus, appears, plunge them into the water again, that they
may be strong: for else they would be brittle. So you may make

Culters extreme hard.
Albertus, from whom others have it, says, That Iron is made more strong, if
it be tempered with juice of Radish, and Water of Earthworms, three or four
times. But I, when I had often tempered it with juice of Radish, and
Horseradish, and Worms, I found it always softer, till it became like Lead:
and it was false, as the rest of his Receipts are. But thus shall you make Steel
extreme hard, that with that only, and no other mixture, you may make Culters
very hard: Divide the Steel into very small pieces like Dice, and let them
touch one the other, binding Iron wires over them, fastening all with an Iron
wire: put them into the Fire till they grow red hot, and sparkle, at least
fifteen times, and wrap them in these powders that are made of black Borax one
part, Oyster-shells, Cuttle-bones, of each two parts: then strike them with a
Hammer, that they may all unite together, and make Culters, or Knives, or what
you will: for they will be extreme hard. For this is the most excellent sort of
Steel, that only tempered with waters, is made most hard. There is another,
but not so good; and unless it be well tempered, it always grows worse. It is
this:

To temper a Graver to cut Marble.
Make your Graver of the best Steel, let it be red hot in the Fire, till it be
red or Rose colored; dip it into water, then take it away, and observe the
second color. When it is yellow as Gold, cast it into the water. So almost is

A Tool made to cut Iron.
When the same red Rose color appears, plunge it into the water, or some sharp
liquor that we shall show; and you must observe the second yellow color, or
wheat color, and then cast it into the water. These are the best

Tempers for Swords.
Swords must be tough, lest whilst we should make a thrust, they should break;
also, they must have a sharp edge, that when we cut, they may cut off what we
cut. The way is thus: Temper the body of it with Oil and Butter, to make it
tough; and temper the edge with sharp things, that they may be strong to cut:
and this is done, either with wooden Pipes, or woollen Cloths, wet with Liquor:
use it wittily and cunningly.

CHAP. VI.
Of the temper of a Tool shall cut a Porphyr Marble Stone.
OUr Ancestors knew well to temper their Tools, wherewith they could easily cut
a Porphyr Stone, as infinite Works testify that were left to us: but the way
was showed by none, and is wholly concealed; which is a mighty disgrace to our
times, when we neglect such rare and useful Inventions, and make no account of
them. That we might be freed from this dishonor, with great care, and pains,
and cost, I made trial of all things came to my hand, or I could think of, by
diverse ways and experiments, that I might attain unto it: at last, by Gods
great blessing, I found a far greater passage for to come to these things, and
what exceeds this. And I will not be grieved to relate what I found out by
chance, whilst I made trial of these things. The business consi^ed in these
difficulties. If the temper of the Graver was too strong and stubborn, with the
vehement blow of the Hammer it flew in piece: but if it was soft, it bowed, and
would not touch the stone: wherefore it was to be most strong and tough, that
it might neither yield to the stroke, nor fly asunder. Moreover, the juice or
water the Iron must be tempered in, mu^ be clear and pure: for if it be
troubled, the colors coming from heat could not be discerned: and so the time
to plunge the Tools in would not be known, on which the whole Art depends. So
then, clear and purified juices will show the time of the temper. The colors
must be chiefly regarded: for they show the time to plunge it in and take it
out; and because that the Iron must be made most hard and tough, therefore the
color must be a middle color between silver and gold: and when this color is
come, plunge the whole edge of the Tool into the liquor, and after a little
time, take it out; and when it appears a Violet-colour, dip it into the liquor
again, lest the heat, yet remaining in the Tool, may again spoil the temper:
yet this we must chiefly regard, that the liquors into which the Iron is
plunged, be extreme cold; for if they be hot, they will work the less: and you
must never dip an Iron into water, that other Iron has been dipped in before;
for when it is grown hot, it will do nothing: but dip it into some other that
is fresh and cold; and let this in the mean time, swim in some glazed Vessel of
cold water, that it may soon grow cold, and you shall have it most cold for
your work. Yet these are

The hardest tempers of Iron.
If you quench red-hot Iron in distilled Vinegar, it will grow hard. The same
will happen, if you do it into distilled Urine, by reason of the Salt it
contains in it. If you temper it with dew, that in the month of May is found on
Verches Leaves, it will grow most hard. For what is collected above them, is
salt; as I taught elsewhere out of Theophrastus. Vinegar, in which Salt
Ammoniac is dissolved, will make a most strong temper: but if you temper Iron
with Salt of Urine and Saltpeter dissolved in water, it will be very hard; or
if you powder Saltpeter and Salt Ammoniac, and shut them up in a Glass Vessel
with a long neck, in dung, or moist places, till they resolve into water, and
quench the red-hot Iron in the water, you shall do better. Also, Iron dipped
into a liquor of quick Lime, and the Salt of Soda purified with a Sponge, will
become extreme hard. All these are excellent things, and will do the work: yet
I shall show you some that are far better.

To temper Iron to cut Porphyr Marble.
Take the fugitive servant, once received, and then exalted again, and shut it
in a glazed Vessel, till it consume in Fire or water; so the Iron Tool will
grow hard, that you may easily have your desire: but if it be too hard, that it
be too brittle, add more liquor, or else more Metal: yet take care of this
alone, whilst you have found the measure of your work: for the Iron will grow
strong and tough. The same also will be happily performed by the foul moisture
of the Serpent Python, and by the wasting thereof: for the salt gives force,
and the fat roughness. And these are the best and choicest that I have tried in
this kind.

CHAP. VII.
How to grave a Porphyr Marble without an Iron tool.
SOme have attempted to do this without any Graver, but with strong and
forcible water; and this Argument moved them to it: When they saw Vinegar and
sharp juices to swell into bubbles, being cast upon Marble, and to corrode it,
they supposed that if they should draw very strong sharp liquor from sharp and
corroding things, they might do the same work without labor. At last, thus
they did it: Take a little Mercury sublimate, and a little Salt Ammoniac,
distill these as I showed in Glass Stills: then take a little Verdigrease, Tin
calcined, and of the fire-stone, powder all these with Sal Gemmae, and common
Salt, and Salt Ammoniac, and distill them, and pour the distilled liquor again
upon the Foeces, and distill it again, and do it again the third time: then keep
the liquor in a Vessel well stopped. When you go about your work, smeer the
Porphyr Marble with Goats suet, only touch not those parts you mean to have
engraved: you must make a ledge about it, that when you pour on your water, it
may not run off here and there; and the liquor poured on will eat most
strongly: when it cease to eat, cast it away, and pour on fresh; and do this
so often, till you have graved it so much as you please, and you have done.

CHAP. VIII.
How Iron may be made hot in the fire to be made tractable for works.
MAny seek most diligently, how by a secret Art Iron may be so tempered, that
it may neither break, not be shot through with Guns. But these men do not take
care of what they have before them, and seek for what they have not; for would
they consider whilst the Iron heats, the thing they seek for so eargerly, is
before their eyes. I say therefore, That the reason why Swords break and fly
in pieces, and breasts of Iron are shot through with Guns, is, because there are
flaws in the Iron, and it cleaves in diverse places, and the parts are ill
united; and because these clefts are scarce visible: this is the cause that
when they are bended or stricken they break: for if you mark well, whenever
Knives or Swords break in pieces, you shall always find these craks and
flames, and the solid parts are not broken; and being bended, resist. But when
I sought for the cause of these flaws, I found at last, that in Smiths Shops,
where Iron is made hot, they heap up coals over the Iron, and the refuse of
coals; saying, The Iron will not heat so easily, if some rubbish of the coals
and dust be not heaped over it: and with this trumpery-cust, there are always
mingled small stones, chalk, and other things gathered together in pieces;
which, when they meet in the fire, they cause many knots outwardly, or cavities
in wardly, and cracks, that the parts cannot well fasten together. Whence,
though the business be trivial and of small regard, yet this is the cause of so
great inconveniences that follow. Wherefore, to avoid this impediment, I
thought on this course to be taken: I cast my coals into a wooden bowl full of
water: for they will swim on the top, (but the filth and bricks will fall to
the bottom) those that swim, I take out and dry them; and those I use for my
works. What a blessing of God this profitable Invention is! for thus men make
Swords, Knives, Bucklers, Coats of Male, and all sorts of Armor so perfect,
that it were long and tedious to relate: for I have seen Iron breasts, that
scarce weighed above twelve pound, to be Musket-proof. And if we should add the
temper to them, they would come to far greater effects.

CHAP. IX.
How Damask Knives may be made.
NOw whilst I set down these Operations very pleasant, namely, how Damask
Knives may be made to recover their marks that are worn out, and how the same
marks may be made upon other Knives. If then we would

Renew the waved marks of Damask Knives that are worn out,
polish a Poniard, Sword or Knite, very well with Powder of Emril and Oil, and
then cleanse it with Chalk, that no part may be dark, but that it may glister
all over: then wet it all with juice of Lemmons mingled with Tanners water,
that is made with Vitriol: for when it is dry, the marks will all be seen in
their places, and wave as they did before. And if you will

Make marks with Damask Knives,
And that so acurately, that you can scarce know them from Damask Knives:
Polish a Knife very well, as I said, and scowre it with Chalk: then stir with
your hands, Chalk mingled with water; and touching it with your fingers, rub
the edge of the Sword that was polished, and you shall make marks as you
please: when you have done, dry them at the fire or Sun: then you must have a
water ready wherein Vitriol is dissolved, and smeer that upon it: for when the
Chalk is gone, it will dye it with a black color. After a little stay, wet it
in water, and wash it off: where the Chalk was, there will be no stain; and you
will be glad to see the success. You may with Chalk make the waving Lines
running up and down. If any one desires

To draw forth Damask Steel for work,
You may do it thus: for without Art it is not to be done. Too much heat makes
it crumble, and cold is stubborn: but by Art, of broken Swords Knives may be
made very handsomely; and Wheels and Tables, that Silver and Gold wire are
drawn through, and made even by, to be used for weaving: Put it gently to the
fire, that it may grow hot to a Golden color; but put under the fire for
ashes, Gip calcined, and wet with water: for without Glp, when you hammer it,
it will swell into bubbles, and will fly and come to be dross and refuse.

CHAP. X.
How polished Iron may be preserved from rust.
IT is so profitable to preserve Iron from rust, that many have labored how to
do it with ease. Pliny says, That Iron is preserved from rust, by Ceruss, Gip,
and liquid Pitch. But he shows not how Ceruss may be made: Yet those that know
how to make Oil of Ceruss without Vinegar, Iron being smeered therewith, is
easily preserved from rust. Some anoint the Iron with Deers suet, and so keep
it free from rust; but I use the fat substance in the Hoofs of Oxen.

THE FOURTEENTH BOOK OF Natural Magic: I shall show some choice things in the
Art of Cookery.
THE PROEME.
THe Cooks Art has some choice Secrets, that may make Banquets more dainty and
full of admiration: These I purpose to reveal, not that so I might invite
Gluttons and Parasites to Luxury, but that with small cost and expense, I might
set forth the curiosities of Art, and may give occasion to others thereby to
invent greater matters by these. The Art consists about eating and drinking. I
shall first speak of Meats, then of Drinks; and by the way I shall not omit
some merry pass-times, that I may recreate the Guests, not only with Banquets,
but also with Mirth and Delights.

CHAP. I.
How Flesh may be made tender.
I Shall begin with Flesh, and show hot it may be made tender, that Gluttons
much desire. I shall do it diverse ways; Some that proceed from the kind of
their death; others from the secret properties of things: and they will grow so
tender, that they will almost resolve into broth. Then how whilst the
creatures are yet alive, they may be made tender. For example:

How to make Sheeps flesh tender.
The Flesh of creatures killed by their enemies, especially such as they hate
and fear, will be very tender. Zoroaster in his Geoponicks says, that Sheep
killed by Wolves, and bitten, their flesh will be more tender, and so the
sweeter. Plutarch in Symposiacis gives the cause of it. Sheeps Flesh, he says,
bitten by a Wolf becomes the sweeter, because the Wolf by biting, makes the
Flesh more flaggy and tender. For the breath of the Wolf is so hot, that the
hardest bones will consume in his stomach, and melt; and for this cause, those
things will the sooner corrupt, that the Wolf bites. And both Hunters and
Cooks can testify, that creatures killed diverse ways, are diversely affected.
Some of these are killed at one blow, that with one stroke they lie for dead:
yet others are hardly killed at many blows. And which is more wonderful, some
by a wound given with the Iron weapon, have imprinted such a quality upon the
creature, that it presently corrupted, and would not keep sweet one day; and
others have killed them as suddenly, yet no such quality remained in the flesh
that was killed, and it would last some time. Moreover, that a certain virtue,
when creatures are slain or dye, comes forth to their skins, and hair, and
nails, Homer was not ignorant of, who writing of skins and thongs; A thong
says he of an ox slain by force, for the skins of those creatures are tougher
and stronger, when they die not by old age or of diseases, but are slain. On the
contrary, such as dye by the bitings of Beasts, their hoofs will grow black,
and their hairs fall off, and their skins will wither and flag. Thus far
Plutarch. But I think these things are false; for how should Sheeps flesh grow
tender by the Wolfes breath, I understand it not: For other creatures that are
killed by their enemies, and flesh of a contrary nature does also grow tender,
where there are no hot vapors. But I think that the absence of blood, makes
the flesh tender, for these reasons. Quails and Pheasants killed by Hawks, are
very tender, but their hearts are found full of blood, and hard within them.
Deer and Bores, killed by Dogs, are more tender; but harder if by Guns: and
about, the heart the parts are so hard, that they can scarce be boiled. Fear of
death drives the blood to the heart; the other parts are bloodless, as shall
appear by the following experiments. As

How Geese, Ducks, Pheasants, Quails, and other Birds become most tender.
This is easily done, if we hunt them and fly Hawks, and other birds of prey,
at them; for whilst they fight, they strive to be gone, and they are sometime
held in the Falcons Tallents, and are wounded with diverse strokes; and this
makes them so tender that it is wonderful: Wherefore, when we would eat crammed
Birds, we should purposely fly a Hawk at them, and being killed by them, should
grow more tender to be desired. So

That Ox-flesh may grow tender,
especially of old Oxen; for they are dry and hard, and will not easily boil.
The Butchers set hounds at them, and let them prey upon them, and they will for
some hours defend themselves with their horns: at last, being overcome by
multitudes of Dogs, they fall with their ears torn, and bit in their skin;
these brought into the shambles, and cut out, are more tender than ordinary.
Some of them fighting openly with Bears, and sometimes killed by them, if any
of the body be left, it will be so tender that it will melt in a man's mouth. We
may do the same, if we keep creatures sometime in fear of death, and the longer
you keep them so, the tender they will be. For

To make Hens tender,
we fright them off from high Towers; so we do Turkies, Peacocks: and when they
cannot fly away by the weight of their bodies, for fear of death, with great
pains and shaking of their wings, they fall down, that they may take no hurt by
falling. Those that are so killed with fear of death, grow very tender. So old
Pigeons that by chance had fallen into deep pits, when they had long labored,
struggling with their fluttering wings above the waters to save themselves from
drowning, with struggling and fear of death they grew very tender; and by this
accident we have learned, that when we would have them very tender, we
purposely drive them in. Horace in Sermon, says almost the same.

How a Cock may grow tender,
if you must suddenly set him before your friends, and cannot help it. If that
a guest do come by chance at night, and if the cock be tough, not fit to eat,
drowned him alive in Muscadel out right, and he will soon come to be tender
meat. We use to hang up Turkies alives by the bills, at the sadle-bow, when we
ride; and these being thus racked and tossed with great pains, at the journeys
end you shall find them dead, and very tender.

CHAP. II.
How flesh may grow tender by secret propriety.
SOme things there are, that by secret propriety make flesh tender. I shall
record two prodigious miracles of Nature. One, that hung on a fig tree,

Cocks flesh grows tender,
and so short, that it is wonderful: Another, that wild Cocks bound to a
fig tree, will grow tame, and stand immovable. Plutarch in his Symposiacks,
gives the reason, why the Sacrifices of Cooks hung to a Fig Tree did presently
grow tender and short, when the Cook of Aristian, amongst other meats, offered
to Hercules a tender dunghil-Cock, newly slain, that was extreme short: Aristio
gives the reason of this tenderness to be the Fig Tree; and he maintaned, that
these killed, though they be hard, will grow tender, if they be hanged up on a
Fig Tree. It is certain, as we may judge by sight, that the Fig Tree sends
forth a vehement and strong vapor. This also confirms that which is commonly
spoken of Bulls, that the fiercest of them bound to a Fig Tree, will grow tame
presently, and will endure to be touched with your hand, and to bear the yoke;
and they puff out all their anger, and lay aside their courage that thus fails
them: for so forcible is the acrimony of the vapor of that Tree, that though
the Bull rage never so much, yet this will tame him. For the Fig Tree is more
full of Milky juice, then other Trees are; so that the Wood, Boughs, Figs, are
almost all full of it: wherefore, when it is burnt, the smoke it sends forth,
does bite and tear one very much; and a lixivium made of them burnt, is very
detergent, and cleansing: also Cheese is curdled with Fig Tree milk, that comes
forth of the Tree, if you cut the green bark. Some would have the heat to be
the cause, that the Milk curds, by the juice of the Fig Tree cast in, which
melts the watery substance of the humor; wherefore the Fig Tree sends forth a
hot and sharp vapor, and that is digesting, and dries and concocts the flesh
of Birds, so that they grow tender. So

Ox flesh may be made tender,
If you put the stalks of wild Fig Trees into the pot, wherein Ox flesh is
boiled, they will be boiled much the sooner, by reason of the wood. Pliny. I
gave you the reason of it before from Antipathy. The Egyptians alluding to
this, when they would describe a man that was punished to the height, they
painted a Bull tied to a wild Fig Tree: For when he rores, if he be bound to a
wild Fig Tree, he will presently grow tame. If we will have

Pulse grow tender,
because I see that there is great antipathy between Pulse and Choke fitch,
that destroys and strangles them. Some call this Lions Herb: for as a Lion
does with great rage and furiously kill Cattle and Sheep, so does choke fitch
all Pulse: wherefore this Herb put to Pulse, when they boil, will make them
boil the sooner. But

To make meats boil the sooner,
All kinds of Docks, though they be dry and juiceless, will do it, that all
flesh will grow tender, and become fit to eat. Wherefore the Ancients always
fed on it, that it might digest the meat in their stomachs, and loose their
bellies. Also the root of wild Nettles boiled with flesh, will make them
tender. Pliny.

CHAP. III.
How Flesh may be made tender otherwise.
THere be other ways to make flesh tender: First, if flesh killed be hung in
the open Air, for they will grow tender, as beginning to corrupt, but they must
not stay there so long till they corrupt indeed. Wherefore you must know their
quality, which will keep longest, and which not. For example

Peacocks, Partridge, Pheasants to be made tender.
Isaac says, That a Peacock killed will be kept two days, and three in winter,
that the hard flesh of it may grow soft. Haliabas hangs them up three days,
hanging stones to their feet. Savanrola hangs them up ten days without weights.
Simeon Sethi says, That Patridge newly killed are not to be eat, but after a
day or two, that they may lose their hardness. Pheasants in Summer hung up two
days, and three days in winter, after they are killed, will be fit meat.
Arnoleus. And to avoid tediousness, the same must be done with other flesh. The
like

That Birds may grow tender.
If you hang those in Moonlight, that were killed in the night, they will grow
more tender by boiling: For the Moon has great virtue to make flesh tender,
for it is but a kind of corruption. Therefore wood, cut by Moonlight, will
sooner grow rotten, and fruit sooner grow ripe. Daphnis the Physician in
Athenaus.

CHAP. IV.
How Shell-creatures may grow more tender.
BEfore I end to speak of ways to make flesh more tender; It will not be amiss
to make Crabs tender, and by another way then I showed before. How we may make

Crab-fish tender shel'd.
At Rome they do so, and it becomes pleasant and excellent meat for Noble men's
Tables. I speak of those Crabs bred in fresh waters: For at Venice I have eaten
them that bred naturally tender in salt-waters; they call them commonly
Mollecas: but they are not so sweet, as they are made at Rome; and they ask a
Julius apiece. The way is, in the Months of June, July, August, and September,
the Crabs use to cast their shells, and put off their old coat; at that time
fishermen search about the banks of Rivers, where they find their holes and
caves half stopped, and by that they know the time is come to cast their shells;
for the more their shells grow tender, the more they shut up their holes. They
grow tender first about the feet, and by degrees it ascends over their whole
bodies. When they have taken them, they bring them home, and put them every one
in several earthen pots; and they put in water, that it may cover half their
bodies, and so they let them remain eight or ten days, changing the water every
day, and their shells will grow more tender every day. When it is all soft,
that it is transparent as Crystal, they fry them with butter and milk, and
bring them to the Table. So

Squils grow tender.
We must do as we did to Crabs, for they cast their shells as Crabs do: and
Nature did this for some end; for when their shells are grown too thick and
weighty, they can scarce crawl; wherefore by the excrements that go into it,
that are consumed to make a new shell within, the former that was made is
broken, and falls off.

CHAP. V.
That living Creatures may be made more fat and well tasted.
I Shall endeavor to show how living Creatures may be made more fat and well
tasted, that we may set more favory meats before our guests. The Ancients were
not negligent in this matter: Wherefore you shall find many ways, not only
amongst Cooks, but such as write concerning Husbandry. Liccorish Gluttons found
out the ways to fat Cattle, that they might feed on them more plentifully and
daintily. Hence they called them crammed, because they were full fed, and had
gross bellies. Those were called Bird pens, where they fatted all sorts of
Birds. M. Lelius Strabo, was the first that appointed this; and he appointed
Crammers to take care of them, and ordered how much every crammed bird should
eat. They will fat better in winter than in summer, because Birds at that time
of the year are best, being not so much wasted with young; and Cocks will fat
better then Hens, and such as never trod nor made eggs. In summer, when it is
at an end, and the sour Grapes hang yet upon the Vines, they are at the best.
I shall therefore teach

How Hens and other Birds must be crammed.
Choose a place that is hot and obscure; shut them all up apart, and so close
in their pens, that they cannot come together, nor turn; and make two holes;
one for their heads to put forth, and the other for their tails, that they may
both at their meat and shite it out again when it is digested. Lay soft hay
under them; for if they lie hard, they will never fat. Pull off all the
feathers from their heads, thighs, and (...) under their wings, there, that it
may breed no lice; here, that the dung corrupt it not. For meat, give them
gobbets of Barley-Meal, made up with water; at the first for some time, more
sparingly, then after give them as much as they can digest; and you must give
them no new meat, till you feel their c^ops that all the old is digested. When
the Bird is full, let him go a while, not to wander abroad; but if there be any
thing that urges him, he may pick it off with his bill. Let him not be set to
fatting before five, or after twenty Months old. Young Pigeons or Chickens,
will fat better with their dams, if you pull off a few of their feathers, and
bruise their legs, that they may stay in their places; and if you give meat
plentifully to their dams, that they may feed themselves, and their young ones
sufficiently. Turtles are best fatted in summer: give them nothing but meat,
especially Millet-seed, for they much delight to eat that; but Geese in winter:
They must be put up to fat four Months, you need give them nothing else but
Barley-Meal, and Wheat-meal three times a day; so that you give them water
enough to drink, and no liberty to walk about; thus they will fat in two
Months. But tender Pullers will not be made fat in forty days. Ducks will grow
fat with all nutriment, if it be abundance; especially with Wheat, Millet-seed,
Barley, and with Water-squils, Locusts, and Creatures found in Lakes.
Columella. Pheasants, Partidges, Heath-cocks, and Turky-hens, will fat being
shut up; and the first day they eat meat, the next set them water or good
strong wine to drink: Let their meat be raw Barley-Meal, made up with water,
giving them it by degrees; or else broken and ground Beans and Barley sod with
water, and whole Millet-seed, Linseed boiled and dry, mingled with Barley-meal:
to these you may add Oil, and make gobbets of them, and give them to eat to the
full, and they will grow fat at longest in sixty days. Now I shall show how

Four-footed Beasts are fatted.
The Sow will soonest fat, for in sixty days she will be far. First kept hungry
three days, as all the rest must be. She grows fat with Barley, Millet, Acorns,
Figs, Pears, Cucumbers; rest, and not wandering. But Sows will grow fatter by
wallowing in the mire. Figs and Chick-peason, will fat them soonest; and they
desire change of meats. Varro. The Sow is fed with Beans, Barley, and other
Grain; for these will not only fat them, but give them a good relish. The
Olive, wild Olive, Tares, Corn in straw, Grass: and they are all the better
sprinkled with brine; but the more effectual will they be, if she fast three
days before. Aristotle. Beanhusks, and Coleworts are pleasant meat for them;
Salt put to them, will make them have a stomach, which in summer put into their
troughs will season their meat, and make them eat it up; and by that seasoning
of it, they will drink and eat the more. Colunmella. Oxen will grow fa^ with
Corn and Grass, Tares, ground Beans, and Beanflalks: Also with Barley, whole or
broken, and parted from the hulls: also by sweet things, as pressed Figs, Wine,
Elm-boughs, and with a Lotion of hot water. Aristotle. We feed them at home
with Wine of Surrentum, or else we put Calves to two Cows, and thus being fed
with abundance of Milk, they can scarce go for fat. Also in their cra^ches we
strew Salt stones, that they may lick them, and so drink, and they will grow
exceeding fat and tender.

CHAP. VI.
How the flesh of Animals is made sweeter.
NOw shall I show with some Meats, and Arts, How not only the parts of
Animals, but their whole bodies are made fat, tender, and more delicate* And
first,

How to fat the Livers of Geese.
Out wise Ancestors, says Pliny, who knew the goodness of a Goose liver,
taught how by cramming to make it grow great; also taken forth, it is augmented
by sweet Milk. And it is not without cause demanded, who was the first man that
found out so profitable a thing: Whether it were Scipio Metellus, that was
Consul, or Mar, Sejus, that in the same age was a Gentleman of Rome. Palladius
taught the way how; when Geese have been fatting thirty days, if you desire to
have their livers tender, you shall bruise old Figs, and steep them in water,
and make gobbets of them, and feed the Geese with them twenty days together.
But Quintilius way is, when they grow fat, you shall break dry wild Radish in
small pieces, and tempering them with water, give them this to drink for twenty
days. Some, that the liver may be made great, and the Geese fat, feed them
thus. They shut up the Goose, and cast to him Wheat sleeped in water, or Barley
the same way. Wheat makes him fat quickly, but Barley makes the flesh white.
Let her be sed with the said grain, but severally with them both, for twenty
days, giving to her twice a day a moist Medicament made thereof; so that seven
of those meats, may be given her for the first five days, and by degrees the
days following, increase the number of these meats, until twenty five days be
past; that the days in the whole may be thirty: and when they are over, heat
Mallows, and in the decoction thereof, being yet hot, give her leaven moystned
therewith; do so for four days, and in the same days give her water and honey;
changing it thrice every day, not using the same again: and do this the days
following, till sixty days: mingle dry Figs, bruised all this time with the
said leaven, and after sixty days you may eat the Goose, and its liver, that
will be white and tender. Which being taken forth, must be put into a large
vessel, wherein there is hot water, that must be changed again and again. But
the Bodies and Livers of the females are best, but let them be Geese not of one
year, but from two years old to four. Horace in Sermon. speaks of this,

Fat Figs do make the Goose white, Liver great.
And Juvenal, Satyr 5.

A Goose's Liver fed before him stood,
As big as a Goose, and to eat as good.
And Martial,

The Liver's greater then the Goose, that is true,
But now you l wonder where this Liver grew.
Athenaus writes, That this was of great account at Rome. When you kill the
Goose, take out the Liver quickly and cast it into cold water, that it may be
solid; then fry it in Goose-grease, in a frying pan, and season it with spices.
It is a dish for a Prince, and highly commended by many. So is

A Sows Liver fatted.
Pliny. There is art used for Sows Livers, as well as for Geese. It was the
invention of Marcus Apicius, when they are fat with dry Figs, give them sweet
wine to drink, and kill them presently. Apicius. Add to the Liver of a Sow
fatted with Figs, Wine-pickle, Pepper, Time, Lovage, Suet, and a little Wine
and Oil. Aetius. If, says he, any man feed that creature with dry Figs, the
Sows Liver is preferred before all meat. I said out of Aristotle, that Figs and
Chick peason will fat a Sow best. Galen. As whilst Sows are living, their
Livers are fed for delight with dry Figs; so for Geese, I see their meats are
moystned with milk, that their Livers may be not only most pleasant meat, but
may be fed exceedingly, and be most delicate. If you will

That Cattle may be more excellent to eat.
Cattle that use to feed on Masterwort, and to be first cleansed, will grow
very fat, and their flesh will be exceeding sweet. Pliny. Whence it is that
this Benjamin is not for many years to be found in Cyrene, because the Farmers,
that hire the grounds, finding more gain by it, devour them by their Cattle.
Moreover in India, and chiefly in the Country of the Prasil, it rains liquid
honey; which falling down on the grass, and the tops of Reeds in the Lakes, is
admirable food for Sheep and Oxen; and the Shepherds drive them thither, where
most of this sweet dew falls from the Air, and there they are feasted with it,
as with pleasant bankets: and they recompense their Shepherds with a pleasant
reward; for they milk very sweet milk from them, and they have no need, as the
Grecians do, to temper honey with it. Aelian. But

How Pullets are made most white, tender, and delicate,
Such as I use to set before my friends: The way is. I shut them up five days
in chambers or cellars, and I give them a dish full of chippins of bread, wet
with milk, and sometimes with honey: fed thus, they will grow as fat as great
Sappers in Fig time, and so tender, that they will melt in your mouth, and they
taste better by far then Pheasants, Heath-cocks, or Thrushes. And it seems the
Ancients knew this: For says Pliny, when a crammed Hen was forbid to eat at
supper, by the Laws of the Ancients, they found out this evasion, to feed Hens
with meats wet in milk; and so they were far more delicate to set on the Table.
And Columella. They that will make Birds not only fat, but tender, they
sprinkle the foresaid Meal with water and honey new made; and so they fat them.
Some to three parts of water, put one of good wine, and wet Wheat-bread, and
fat the Bird; which beginning to be fatted the first day of the Month, will be
very fat on the twentieth day.

CHAP. VII.
How the Flesh of Animals may be made bitter, and not to be eaten.
AGain, if we will that Flesh shall be rejected for the bitterness, and ill
taste of it, we must do contrary to what has been said: Or if we will not take
the pains, we must wait the times that these creatures feed on such meats, as
will do it, whereby sometimes they become venomous also. As if we would have

Deers flesh become venomous,
Simeon Sethi says, That Deers flesh, that is caught in summer, is poison;
because then they feed on Adders and Serpents; these are venomous creatures,
and by eating of them they grow thirsty: and this they know naturally; for if
they drink before they have digested them, they are killed by them: wherefore
they will abstain from water, though they burn with thirst. Wherefore
Stags-flesh, eaten at that time, is venomous, and very dangerous. Sometimes also

Partridge are naught,
Namely, when they eat Garlic. The Chyrrhaei will eat no Partridge, by reason
of their food; for when they have eaten Garlic they stink, and their flesh is
stinking meat, that the Fowler will not eat them. So also

Quails, and Stares, are rejected,
at that time of the year, that black Hellebour is the meat they like only.
Wherefore, when Quails feed on Hellebour, they put those that feed on them into
so great danger of their lives, that they swell and suffer convulsions, and are
subject to vertigo's: Wherefore Millet-feed must be boiled with them. Also

Birds are not to be eaten,
when the Goose-berries are ripe; for their Feathers will grow black thereby,
and men that eat them, fall into scowrings. Dioscorides.

The Eggs of the Barbel, or Spawn, not to be eaten
in May, because they are dangerous; but the Eggs are not dangerous of
themselves, nor do they breed such mischiefs. For they do not do it always; for
often you may eat them without danger: but they are only then hurtful, when
they feed on Willow-flowers, that fall into the waters. So are

Snails to be rejected,
when they stick fast to briars and shrubs, for they trouble the belly and the
stomach, and cause vomiting. Dioscorides. And not only these Animals
themselves cause this mischief, but their excrements, as milk, honey, and the
like. For

Milk must not be eaten,
when Goats and Sheep feed on green food, because it will loosen the belly the
more: but Goats-milk does not try the belly so much, because these Cattle feed
on binding meats, as on the Oak, Mastick, Olive-boughs, and Turpentine-tree.
But in such places where Cattle eat Scammony, black Hellebore, Perwincle, or
Mercury, all their milk subverts the belly and stomach; such as is reported to
be in the mountains of Justin^^: for Goats that eat black Hellebore, that is
given them when the young leaves come first out, their milk drank will make one
vomit, and causes loathing and nauseating of the stomach. Dioscorides. Also
there is found

Honey that is venomous,
That which is made in Sardinia, for there the Bees feed on Wormwood. At
Heraclia in Pontus, some times of the year, by a property of the flowers there,
Honey is made, that they which eat it grow mad, and sweat exceedingly.
Dioscorides. There are

Eggs laid that stink.
When there are no fruits nor herbs to be seen, then Hens feed on dung, and so
do other Birds that lay Eggs. But then those raste best that feed on fat
things, and eat Wheat, Millet, and Panick: but such as eat Wormwood, their Eggs
are bitter.

CHAP. VIII.
How Animals may be boiled, roasted, and baked, all at once.
I Have thus far spoken to please the palate. Now I shall represent some merry
conceits to delight the guests, Namely,

How a Hog may be roasted, and boiled, all at once.
Athenaeus in his ninth Book of Dipnosophistae (Dalachampius translates it more
elegantly) saying; There was a Hog brought to us, that was half of it well
roasted, and half of it was soft boiled in water; and the Cook had used great
industry to provide it, that it should not be seen in what part he was stuck:
for he was killed with a small wound under his shoulder, and the blood was so
let out; all his intestines were well washed with wine; and hanging him by the
heels, he again poured wine on him, and roasted him with much Pepper. He filled
half the Hog with much Barley-flouer, kneaded together with Wine and Barley;
and he put him into an Oven, setting a brass platter under him: and he took
care to roast him so leasurely, that he should neither burn, nor be taken up
raw; for when his skin seemed somewhat dry, he conjectured the rest was roasted.
He took away the Barley-meal, and set him on the Table. So

A Capon may be boiled, and roasted.
Put a Capon well pulled, and his guts taken out, into a silver dish, and fill
the one half of him with broth, and put him into an Oven; for the upper part
will be roasted by the heat of the Oven, and the under part will be boiled. Nor
will it be less pleasant to behold

A Lamprey fried, boil^d, and roasted all at once.
Before you boil your Lamprey, take out his bones, to make it more graceful,
for his flesh is full of bones; which you shall do with two little sticks held
in both hands; and fastening the Lamprey in the middle, you shall cut his
backbone in the middle: then his head and end of his tail, about which the
bones are heaped, by reason of the bones pulled out; being cut off, and his
entrails taken forth, put him on a spit, and wrap about three or four times
with fillets, all the parts that are to be roasted and fried, strewing upon the
one Pepper; and the fillets must be made wet in Parsley, Saffron, Mint, Fennel,
and sweet wine; or with water and salt, or broth, for the roasted parts; for the
fried parts with Oil: and so let him be turned, always moystning the fillets
with strewing on the decoction of Origanum: When part of it is roasted, take it
from the fire, and it will be gallant meat; set it before your guests.

CHAP. IX.
Of diverse ways to dress Pullets.
I Shall here set down diverse ways to dress Chickens, that will be very
pleasant for the guests. So that

A boiled Peacock may seem to be alive.
Kill a Peacock, either by thrusting a quill into his brain from above, or else
cut his throat, as you do for young kids, that the blood may come forth: then
cut his skin gently from his throat unto his tail; and being cut, pull it off
with his feathers from his whole body to his head: cut off that with the skin,
and legs, and keep it: Roast the Peacock on a spit: his body being strffed with
spices and sweet herbs, sticking first on his breast cloves, and wrapping his
neck in a white linen cloth; wet it always with water, that it may never dry:
when the Peacock is roasted, and taken from the spit, put him into his own skin
again; and that he may seem to stand upon his feet, you shall thrust small iron
wires, made on purpose, through his legs, and set fast on a board, that they
may rot be discerned, and through his body to his head and tail. Some put
Camphire in his mouth: and when he is set on the table, they cast in fire.
Platira shows that the same may be done with Pheasants, Geese, Capons, and
other Birds; and we observe these things amongst our Guests. But it will be a
more rare sight, to see

A Goose roasted alive.
A little before our times, a Goose was wont to be brought to the Table of the
King of Arragon, that was roasted alive, as I have heard by old men of credit.
And when I went to try it, my company were so hasty, that we eat him up before
he was quite roasted. He was alive, and the upper part of him, on the outside,
was excellent well roasted. The rule to do it is thus: Take a Duck, or a Goose,
or some such lu^^y creature, but the Goose is best for this purpose; pull all
the feathers from his body, leaving his head and his neck: Then make a fire
round about him, not too narrow, left the smoke choke him, or the fire should
roast him too soon; not too wide, lest he escape unrosted. Within-side set
everywhere little pots full of water, and put Salt and Meum to them. Let the
goose be smeered all over with Suet, and well larded, that he may be the better
meat, and roast the better: put fire about, but make no too much have: when he
begins to roast, he will walk about, and cannot get forth, for the fire stops
him: when he is weary, he quenches his thirst by drinking the water, by
cooling his heart, and the rest of his internal parts. The force of the
Medicament loosneth and cleanses his belly, so that he grows empty; and when
he is very hot, it rosts his inward parts. Continually moysten his head and
heart with a sponge. But when you see him run mad up and down, and to stumble
(his heart then wants moisture) wherefore take him away, and set him on the
Table to your Guests, who will cry as you pull off his parts; and you shall
almost eat him up before he is dead. If you would set on the Table.

A young Pigeon, with his bones pulled out,
you shall take out his bones thus: Put a young Pigeon, his entrails taken forth
and well washed, for to lie a night and a day in strong Vinegar: then wash him
well, and fill him with Spices and Herbs, and roast him or boil him, as you
please; either way you shall find him without bones. Of old, they brought to
the Table

The Trojan Hog.
The Ancient Gluttons invented, how a whole Ox or Camel should be set on the
Table, and diverse other creatures. Hence the people had a Tale concerning the
Trojan Hog; so called, because he covered in his belly, many kinds of living
creatures, as the Trojan Horse concealed many armed men. Macrobius reports, 3.
Lib. Satur. That Cincius in his Oration, where he persuades to put in practice
Fannius his Law concerning Moderation of Expense, did Object to the men of his
age, that they brought the Trojan Hog to their Tables. Collers of Brawn, and
the Trojan Hog, were forbidden by the Law of regulating expense. The Hog was
killed, as Dalachampas translates it, with a small wound under his shoulder:
When much blood was run forth, all his entrails were taken out, and cut off
where they began; and after that he was often and well washed with wine, and
hanged up by the heels, and again washed with wine, he is roasted with Musk,
Pepper: then the foresaid dainties, namely, Thrushes, Udders, G^at-snappers,
and many Eggs poured unto them, Oysters, Scallops, were thrust into his belly
at his mouth: he is washed with plenty of excellent liquor, and half the Hog is
filled with Polenta, that is, with Barley, and Barley-Meal, Wine, and Oil,
kneaded together; and so is he put into the Oven, with a brass pan set under:
and care must be had to roast him so leasurely, that he neither burn, nor
continue raw: for when the skin seems crup, it is a sign all is roasted, and the
Polenta is taken away. Then a silver platter is brought in, only gilded, but
not very thick, big enough to contain the roasted Hog, that must lie on his back
in it, and his belly sticking forth, that is stuffed with diversity of goods; and
so is he set on the Table. Athenaeus Lib. 9. Dipnosophist. But

That an Egg may grow bigger than a man's head.
If you would have an Egg so big, there is an Art, how it may cover other Eggs
in it, and not be known from a natural Egg. You shall part fifty or more yelks
of Eggs, and whites, one from the other: mingle the yelks gently, and put them
into a bladder, and bind it as round as you can; put it into a pot full of
water: and when you see it bubble, or when they are grown hard; take them out,
and add the whites to them; so fitting the velks, that they may stand in the
middle, and boil them again; so shall you have an Egg made without a shell,
which you shall frame thus. Powder the white Egge-shells, clean washed, that
they may fly into fine dust; steep this in strong or distilled Vinegar, till
they grow soft; for if an Egg ly long in Vinegar, the shell will dislove, and
grow tender, that it may easily be thrust through the small mouth of a glass:
when it is thrust in, with fair water it will come to its former hardness, that
you will wonder at it: when the shells dissolved are like to an unguent, with a
Pencil make a shell about your Egg that is boiled, and let it harden in clear
water: so shall you have a true natural Egg.

CHAP. X.
How Meats may be prepared in places where there is nothing to roast them with.
SOmetimes it falls out that Men are in places where there want many things fit
to provide supper; but where convenience wants, wit may do it: if you want a
frying pan, you shall know

How to fry fish on a paper.
Make a frying pan with plain paper, put in oil and fishes: then set this on
burning coals, without flame, and it will be done the sooner and better. But if
you will

Roast a Chickin without a fire;
That Chickins may roast whilst we are in our Voyage: Put a piece of steel into
the fire, put this into a Chicken that is pulled and his guts taken forth, and
cover him well with clothes, that the heat breathe not out* and if he do smell
ill, yet the meat is good. If you want Servants to turn the spit, and you would
have

A Bird to roast himself,
do thus: For the Bird will turn himself. Albertus writes, That a Bird called a
Ren, that is the smallest of all Birds, if you put him on a spit, made of
Hazel-wood, and put fire under, he will turn as if he turned himself. Which
comes from the property of the wood, not from the Bird: and that is false the
Philosopher said; for if you put fire under a Hazel-rod, it will twist, and
seem to turn it self; and what flesh you put on it, if it be not too weighty,
will turn about with it. So

Eggs are roasted without fire.
Eggs laid in quick Lime, and sprinkled with water, are roasted; for the Lime
will grow as hot as fire. The Babylonians have their invention, when they are
in the Wilderness, and cannot have an opportunity to boil Eggs; they put raw
Eggs into a sling, and turn them about till they be roasted. But if you

Want Salt
for your meats, the seed of Sumach strewed in with Benjamin, will season any
thing. Pliny. If you want Salt, and would

Keep flesh without Salt,
Cover what flesh you will with honey, when they are fresh; but hang up the
vessel you put it into, longer in winter, a less time in summer. If you would
have

That Salt-flesh should be made fresh.
First, boil your Salted flesh in milk, and then in water, and it will be
fresh. Apicius* You shall learn thus

To wash spots from linen clothes,
If you want Soap, for red wine will so stain them, that you can hardly wash
them out without it: But when it does fall down and stain them, cast Salt upon
them, and it will take out the spots. If there want

Groundlings, how to make them.
Suidas says, That when Nicomedes, King of Bithynia, longed for some of these
Fish, and living far from the Sea, could get none; Apicius the glutton, made
the Pictures of these Fish, and set them on the Table, so like, as if they had
been the same. They were prepared thus: He cut the female Rape-root into long
thin pieces, like to these Fish, which he boiled in Oil, and strewed with Salt
and Pepper, and so he freed him from his longing. As Aethenaeus says, in
Cuphron. Comic. If there want fire, I have showed already how to make diverse
sorts of Artificial fires.

CHAP. XI.
Of diverse Confections of Wines.
NOw I come to drink, for I have spoken of meat sufficiently. And I will teach
you to make many sorts of wines, and that they may be pleasant and odorifetous;
for I have said already what ways it may be made without pains. If you will

That you Wine shall smell of Musk,
Take a glass Vial, and wash it, and fill it with Aqua vita, and put into it a
little musk; stop the mouth close, that it vent not, set it in the summer-Sun
two weeks, always stirring the water. The use is, if you put a drop of this
into a gallon of wine, all the wine will smell of Musk; and so for Cinnamon or
other Spices. So you may make

Hippocras Wine,
Take the sweetest wine, we call it commonly Mangiagu^rra, and into four Vials
full of that, pour in two pounds of beaten Sugar, four ounces of Cinnamon,
Pepper, and grains of Paradise, one ounce and half: let them infuse one day;
then strain them: add in the end in a knot a little Musk, and it will be
excellent Wine; or to powdered Sugar we put a little Aqua vitae, wherein
Cinnamon, Pepper, Grains of Paradise, and musk have been infused, as I said,
and it is presently provided, for it draws forth the quintessence. I shall show
how

Wine may freeze in Glasses.
Because the chief thing desired at Feasts, is that Wine cold as ice may be
drunk, especially in summer; I will teach you how Wine shall presently, not
only grow cold, but freeze, that you cannot drink it but by sucking, and
drawing in of your breath. Put Wine into a Vial, and put a little water to it,
that it may turn to ice the sooner; then cast snow into a wooden vessel, and
strew into it Saltpeter, powdered, or the cleansing of Saltpeter, called
vulgarly Salazzo. Turn the Vial in the snow, and it will congeal by degrees.
Some keep snow all the summer. Let water boil in brass kettles, then pour it
into great bowls, and set them in the frosty cold Air, it will freeze, and grow
harder than snow, and last longer.

CHAP. XII.
To make men drunk, and to make them loath Wine.
NOw we are come to speak of Wine; before we pass from it, I will show you how
to make your guests drunk; for drunkenness at Feasts, increases mirth: and
then how to keep them safe from drunkenness, when they are often provoked to
drink healths, and to strive who shall drink most. You may with these fruits

Make men drunk.
The fruits of the Arbute, and the Lote-tree, being eaten, will make men as
though they were drunk: also Dates eat in too great a quantity, cause
drunkenness, and the pain of the head; Sow-bread with Wine, makes a man drunk.
Amber-greese, or Musk, put in Wine, exasperate drunkenness: The filth of a Dogs
ear mingled with Wine, makes one drunk, as Albertus says. But Rhases, out of
whom he took it, says, That Wine, wherein the seeds of Ricinus are infused, if
any one drink it, it will inebriate them. Camels froth, drunk with water by a
drunken man, will make him mad, as possessed with a Devil. Let these suffice,
for I said more in my description of Plants. But on the contrary, these things
will

Take away drunkenness.
Because Hemlock, with Wine, is the cause of death by its venom, it has been
invented and found true, that Hemlock is the cause of life to others. Pliny
seems to intimate as much. Also, venoms are prepared to drink, some taking
Hemlock before, that they may drink, and die. If a man has drunk too much
Wine, that does him hurt, he shall discuss it thus: Cato bids, that at the
beginning and middle of Supper, a man should eat four or five tops of raw
Coleworts, and it will take off his drunkenness, and remove the hurt comes by
Wine, and will make a man as though he had neither eat nor drank. The
Egyptians, before all meat, did eat boiled Coleworts, and so provided
themselves for drink. Many to keep themselves sober, take Colewort-seeds first.
The Tibaritae, says Simaeus, before they drank, fenced themselves by feeding
on Coleworts. Alexis.

Yesterday thou drank'st too much,
And now thy head does ache: but such
Distemper fasting cures; then
Eat boiled Coleworts, drink again.
And Amphis.

There is no means can half so well
As sudden trouble drink dispel.
For that will wonderfully cure:
Eat else Radish, that is as sure.
They were wont in a vessel of Amethyst, to make another remedy for
drunkenness, that they might drink Wine without danger. Athenaeus. If you would
otherwise hinder the vapors of the Wine, drink it well tempered with water;
for they are soonest drunk, that drink strongest Wines. Africa^^^ says, If
thou have drunk too much, eat before meat three or four bitter Almonds: they
are drying, and will drink up the moisture, and drive away drunkenness.
Plutarch relates, That there was a Physician with Dr^s^s, who when he had first
eaten five or six bitter Almonds, he always conquered at the duel of
drunkenness. The powder of Pumex-stone will do as much, if the drinker take
that first. Theophrastus says it is dangerous, unless he drink abundantly. So
E^de^^^ drank two and twenty Cups, at last he went into a Bath, and did not
vomit; and supped, so as if he had drank nothing: for by its drying quality, it
consumes all the moisture; and being cast into a vessel of new Wine that works,
the heat of the Wine is strait allayed. There are other things prepated by the
Ancients, to extinguish drunkenness, as to eat Lettice at the end of Supper,
for they are very cold: we eat it now first, to procure appetite: whence
Martial writes,

Why do we first our Lettice eat?
Our Fathers made it their last meat.
Dioscorides seems to call it Acrepula, because it hinders drunkenness. Leeks
discuss drunkenness: and he that takes Saffron before, shall feel no
drunkenness. There are also Herbs and Flowers, that if you make Garlands of
them, they will hinder drunkenness; as Violets, Roses, and Ivy-berries. The
ashes of the Bill of a Swallow, powdered with Myrrh, and strewed into the Wine
you drink, will keep you secure from being drunk. H^rus the King of Assyria
found out this invention. Pliny. I have said how drunkenness may be disposed:
now I shall show how men shall abstain,

That love Wine, to refrain it,
There are many who when they have drank much Wine, that is the worst thing in
the world for them, fall sick, and die of it. Now if you would refrain, and
abhor Wine and strong drink, because the Fountain Clitorins is too far off; let
three or four live eels, put into the Wine, stay there till they die. Let one
drink of this Wine, who is given to drunkenness, and he will loath Wine, and
always hate it, and will never drink it again: or if he do, he will drink but
little, and with much sobriety. Another way: wash a Tortois with Wine a good
while, and give one of that wine to drink privately, half a cup full every
morning for three days, and you shall see a wonderful virtue. Myrepsus. When
one complained before the King of the Indians, that he had Sons born to him,
but when once they began to drink a little wine, they all died; Jarchus
answered him thus: It is better for them that they died; for had they lived,
they would have all run mad, because they were begot of seed that was too cold.
Therefore your children must abstain from wine, so that they may not so much as
desire it. Wherefore if you have any mote Sons born, observe this rule: see
where an Owl lays her eggs; and boil her eggs rere, and give them your child
to eat; for if the child eat them before he drinks wine, he will always hate
it, and live sober, because his natural heat is made more temperate.
Philostratus, in the life of Apollonius. Democritus says, the desire of wine
is abolished, with the watery juice that runs from Vines pruned, if you give it
a drunkard to drink, who knows not of it.

CHAP. XIII.
How to drive Parasites and Flatterers from great men's Tables.
IT is an easy matter to drive away from our Tables, and great men's Tables,
all smell-feasts, and cogging foisting fellows, and this will make our guests
very cheerful and glad, to see such Cormorants and Parasites driven away, and
derided by all men. When therefore he sits down at Table,

That his hands may grow black when he wipes of the Napkin,
Beat Vitriol and Galls in a Mortar, put them in a narrow close sieve, that the
powder may come forth very fine; with this wipe the Napkin, and shake it; that
what sticks not, may fall off: then rub it with your hands, till you find that
it sticks very fast; then wiping and shaking off what stays not within, when
the Parasite has new washed his hands and face, cast to him the Towel to wipe
himself; and when it is wet, it will make his hands and face as black as a
cole, that will very hardly be washed out with many washings. Being now washed
and wiped,

That he may not swallow the meat the chews.
And we shall make him feel the more pain, if he be any thing dainty. I find in
writing, that if you stick under the Table a needle, that has often sowed the
winding sheet of the dead; and do this privately before supper, the guests
cannot eat, that they will rather loath the meat, than eat it. But experience
proves this to be false and superstitious. Florentinus says, That Basel is an
enemy to women, and that so much, that if it be put under the dish, and the
woman knows not of it, she will never put her hand to the dish, before it be
taken away: but this is a most fearful lie. For a woman and Basel agree so
well, that they not only sow and plant them with great diligence in their
Gardens, hanging in the Air; but they frequently feed on them in meats and
sallets. I have done it oft-times: I infused in a glass of wine one dram of
the root of an herb we call Belladonna, Fair Lady, not bruising it too much;
and after twelve hours, or a little more, po^r out this wine into another cup,
and give him that must eat with you, in the morning a cup of it to drink: then
derain him with you three hours; then call him to your Table, for the morsel he
takes in his mouth, he can by no means swallow down, but he must hurt his
chaps, and be in great pain, so that he can hardly drink. If you would have him
eat or drink, let him gargle a good quantity of milk or vinegar in his mouth,
and he will be as if he had suffered nothing at all. If we will

Drive Parasites from great men's Tables,
we can easily do it thus: If we strew some of the dry roots of Wake-robbin on
the daintiest meats, like Cinnamon or Pepper, in powder; when he takes a bit of
it, it will so burn his chaps, and bite his mouth and tongue, and so fetch off
the skin of his tongue, that he will so mump; and draw his chaps in and out,
and gape, and make such sport, that will make people laugh: and the pain will
not abate, until he has anointed his chaps with butter and milk. Moreover, if
you cut the leaves of Cuckoo pint small, and mingle them with ^allets; those
that eat of them, will have their mouths and tongues to drivel so much, with
thick spittle, that they cannot eat till they have washed it off. And it will
be as good sport, if you like not your guest.

That all thing the smell-feast eats, may taste bitter,
If you rub the edge of the Knife, and the Napkin he wipes his mouth with, with
the juice of Coloquincida, or flesh of it, and lay it before him: For when he
cuts bread with the Knife, or any things else, and shall touch his lips with
the Napkin, it will give him such a filthy and abominable taste, that whatever
he touches, tastes, or licks, will have a most horrible smack with it; and
the oftener he wipes his mouth, that he may wipe away this bitter taste, the
more will his mouth, palate, and jaws, be tormented, that he will be forced to
forsake the Table. We can also delude him so,

That when he drinks, the cup shall stick to his mouth, that he can hardly pull
it off.
Besmeer the cups mouth with the milk of Figs, and Gum-traganth dissolved in
it; for when they are dry, they will be clear: but when he drinks, the cup will
stick so fast to his lips, that when he has done drinking, he can hardly pull
it off. We shall do thus,

That flesh may look bloody and full of worms, and so be rejected
by smell-feasts. Boil Hares blood, and dry it, and powder it; and cast the
powder upon the meats that are boiled, which will melt by the heat and moisture
of the meat, that they will seem all bloody, and he will loath and refuse them.
Any man may eat them without any rising of his stomach. If you cut Harp-strings
small, and strew them on hot flesh, the heat will twist them, and they will
move like worms.

THE FIFTEENTH BOOK OF Natural Magic: Shows to catch living Creatures with
your hands, and to destroy them.
THE PROEME.
WE shall speak of Fawkning, that most men, and especially great men, delight
in. If you will catch living creatures, they are taken by force, or by craft.
They are taken by craft, and killed. But how that may be done, shall be taught
in Philosophy, that shows the Nature and manners of living Creatures: For it is
easy, when you know their Natures and their Manners, cunning may find ways to
allure and take them. First, I shall teach how to allure and take them, by
meat, whistle, light, smell, love, and other frauds; or else to make them
drunk, and take them, or to kill them with venom. I shall set down examples.

CHAP. I.
With what meats diverse sorts of Animals are allured.
THere is nothing that more allures and draws on Animals, then meat and
pleasure, and love. Wherefore from these shall I begin. They follow meat for
necessity; unless they would dye for hunger, they mu^ search for that: But
diverse Creatures feed on diverse meats, and some of them feed on particular
diet; and you may guess at the rest thereby by your own reason.

The bait for a Sturgeon, or Whale-fish.
Sturgeons or Whales are allured with the Lungs of a Bull roasted, hung upon a
line with a hook, cast into the sea; the Sturgeon presently smells it, and being
greedy of it, presently swallows it down, and is caught with the hook: Oxen
draw him to the shore. Aelian.

A bait for a Sargus.
The Sargus loves Goats exceedingly, as we shall show, and hunts after the
smell of them. Wherefore the Fisherman wets his paste in Goats blood, and
casts it into that part of the sea where they haunt; and they are drawn thither
by the sent of it, as by a charm, and are catched with the hook. Moreover, if
men fasten to the hook the bait that is made of a Mo^se-fish salted, and move
this gently in the sea, the Sargi will come to it exceedingly, and gather about
the hook for the love of it, and are easily caught by their greediness after
the meat.

A bait for Thymalus.
Tici^us a River in Italy produces a fish called Thymalus, that is not taken
with the dainty baits that other fish are, but only with the Gnat, an enemy to
man; and she delights in no other bait.

The bait for an Aulopius.
Coracini, blackfish, whose heads shine like Gold, allure the Aulopii; when
they observe some such dainty food, and they come to it rejoicing.

A Bait for Summer-whitings.
The Bait is made of the Purple fish; for this is bound fast to the line, and
this makes them swim to the Bait, because they love it; and when any one of
them by greediness lays hold of the Bait, the rest will run after, and catch
hold of the hooks, that for number you shall hardly draw them to you, so many
will be hanged together by several hooks.

Bait for an Eel.
Eels lie in their holes; and the mouths of their holes being smeered in the
ponds with some odoriferous thing, they are called forth as other Fish are.
Aristotle. Yet Pliny says false, that they are not allured, but driven away by
the sent of dead Eels. Opianus wittily says, they are allured with garbage.
Would you know

A Bait for Mullets.
Because the Julides are a Bait almost for all Fish, or your groundlings or
little Seasquils; therefore they are a part of all Baits. Or, take of the Liver
of the T^nny Fish, four drachms; Sea-squils, eight drachms; Sesamum-seed, four
drachms; Beans ground, eight drachms; of raw Dog-fish, two drachms: pown all
these, and make them up with new Wine distilled into balls, for good Baits.
This is

A Bait for all Fish.
Tarentinus teaches us this for all Fish: Take of the strong Whale, eight
drachms; yellow Butterflies, Anniseed, Cheese of Goats Milk, of each four
drachms; of Opoponax, two drachms; Hogs blood, four; as much Galbanum: pown
them all, and pour on sour Wine: make cakes, and dry them in the Sun.

CHAP. II.
How living Creatures are drawn on with the baits of love.
THere are two Tyrants that rule over brute Beasts, meat, and pleasure or love;
not smell, nor sound, nor fumes; nor do other things allure their minds besides
love: that we may say of wild Beasts as well as of man, Want on love can do
any thing with mortal Creatures. If we will

Take Cuttles with the bait of love;
To take Cuttles there needs neither wheels nor nets; but you may catch them
thu^, with baits of love, to trail the Female Cuttle; and the Male seeing it
never so far off, swims presently after, and fasteneth close about her; and
whilst they thus embrace, the Fishers cunningly take them up.

To catch a Pollard or Cupito.
Aelian says, that in the Grecian Gulf, the sharp-sighted Cupito is; but I
have seen them taken in the Adriatic Sea by the fury of love. The Fisher
binds the Female either to a long fish-pole, or to a long rope; but she must
be fair and fat: for the Male cares not for one that is lean: so is he drawn to
the shore: or, he follows the net; and you must observe how to lay hold of him:
for when the Female is drawn, the Males swim after her, being furiously in
love; the Fisherman casts in his net, and takes them.

To catch a Scarus or Gilthead.
The Scarus of all Fish is the most lascivious; his unsatiable desire of the
Female, is the cause that he is taken; cunning Fishermen that know this, lay
snares for him thus: They catch the Female, and tie the top of her mouth to a
rope, and they draw her alive through the Sea in such places as they haunt: the
Males are mad with lust when they see her, and strive to come at her, and use
all such means as lovers do: but when they come near the net, the Fisher draws
in the Female, and the Males swimming in after her, are caught. Opianns.

To catch Elephants.
There is a Pit made to catch Elephants, and four Females are put in to allure
the Males; the Males come, and enter into the Pit: but those that lie in wait,
pull away the Bridge, and so they have the Elephants fast. Aelian.

To catch a Nightingale.
The Female Nightingale is shut in a Cage, the Fowler counterfeits their note;
the Males come when they hear it; and seeing the Female, the Male flies about
till he fall into the net.

CHAP. III.
Also other Animals are called together by things they like.
ALso, some Animals by Sympathy, are drawn by the love of some things, or of
some other Creatures, which he that lays snares observing, uses such meats for
them, that whilst they follow what they love, they may fall into the snares. If
you would know how

To catch a Sargus;
It is a mad way to catch them. The Sargi love Goats unmeasurably; and they are
so mad after them, that when so much as the shadow of a Goat, that feeds near
the shore, shall appear near unto them, they presently leap for joy, and swim
to it in haste; and they imitate the Goats, though they are not fit to leap:
and thus they delight to come unto them. They are therefore caught by those
things they so much desire. Where upon, the Fisher putting on a Goats skin with
the horns, lies in wait for them, having the Sun behind his back, and paste
made wet with the decoction of Goats flesh: this he casts into the Sea where
the Sargi use to come; and they, as if they were charmed, run to it, and are
much delighted with the sight of the Goats skin, and feed on the paste. Thus
the Fisherman catches abundance of them. Aelian. Opian does elegantly describe
it thus:

The Sargi does run mad for love of G^^ts.
And a little after,

The cunning Fisher hid in a Goats skin,
Makes two Goats horns unto his temples fast;
His bait mixed with Goats blood, ^e does within
The Sea let loose. The Sargus comes in haste:
For of the bait he deerly loves the smell,
And the Goats skin does tole him on as well.
How to catch Partridge.
Partridge love Deer exceedingly, and are cosened by their skin. Thus: If a man
put on a Deer's skin, and the horns upon his head, and come closely to them;
they supposing it is a Deer indeed, will entertain him, and draw near to him;
and will not fly away; and embrace him as much as one would do a Friend, come
from a long journey: but by this great friendliness, they get nothing but nets
and snares.

Catching of Bustards.
Bustards of all Birds are thought to be most in love with Horses; and it
appears, because they cannot endure other living creatures, but when they see a
Horse, they will presently fly to him, with great joy, and come near to him.
If a man put on a horse skin, he may catch as many as he please; for they will
come near for love of the horse. So almost are

The Polypi or Pourcontrels taken.
The Polypi take delight in the Olive tree, and they are oft-times found
fastened with their claws about the body of it: sometimes also, they are found
clapping about the Fig Tree that grows near the Sea, and eating the Figs, says
Clearchus. Wherefore Fishers let down an Olive-bough into the Sea, where the
Polypi use to be. In short space, without any labor, they draw up as many
Polypi as they will. Opian handsomely describes it thus:

The Polypus does love the Olive tree,
And by the speckled leaves (it is wonder) he
Is caught. --
Again,

He is enraged for the Olive-bough,
The wary Fisher does by this know how
To catch this Fish: for he does bind about
A piece of Lead, an Olive Branch throughout:
The Fish lays hold, and will not let it go;
He loves it, and it proves his overthrow.
CHAP. IV.
What noises will allure Birds.
NOt only love, but noises and Music will draw them: and each creature
delights in some special noise. First,

The Dolphin loves the Harp.
And with this Music is he most delighted, as also with the sound of the
Organs. Hence Herodotus first, and others from him, report, that Arion was
carried to Tenarus on a Dolphins back: for when the men of Corinth cast him
into the Sea, he begged that he might have his Harp with him, and might sing
one song as he was thrown in. But a Dolphin took him, and brought him to
Tenarus. Opian.

A Wolf is charmed by a Minstrel or Flute.
A Minstrel at Pythiocara, when he sang and played very pleasantly, he made the
Wolves tame. Aelian.

Horses delight in the Music of the Flute.
The Horses of Lybia are so taken with the noise of the Flute, that they will
grow tractable for man's use thereby, and not be obstinate. Shepherds make a
Shepherds Pipe of Rhododaphne; and by piping on this, they will so delight
Horses, that they will run after them: and when the Shepherds play on, the
Horses will ^^and still, and weep for joy. Euripides says, that Shepherds
provoke Mares to take Horse, by playing on a Pipe; and the Horses are so
provoked to back the Mares.

Stags and Bores are taken with a Pipe.
It is a common saying among the Tyrtheni, that Bores and Stags are taken most
with them by Music: which so comes to pass. Nets being pitch^d, and all things
made ready for to ensnare them, a man that can play well on the Flute, goes
through dales and hills, and woods, and plays as he goes, near their haunts:
they listen exceedingly after it, and are easily taken by it: for they are so
ravished, that they forget where they are. And thus by delight they fall into
the snare, and are taken. Aelian.

The Pastinaca is taken by dancing and Music.
When the Fisherman sees the Pastinaca, or Ray, swimming, he leaps ridiculously
in his Boat, and begins to play on the Pipe: the Pastinaca is much taken with
it, and so comes to the top of the water, and another lays hold of him with his
Engine.

Grampels by Music are enticed on land.
Fishermen catch Grampels by Music: some lie hid, others begin to play with
the Pipe: when the Grampels hear the Music, they presently come forth of their
holes, as if they had been charmed; and they are so ravished, that they will
come out of the waters. These go back and play on the Pipe, the others run and
catch them on dry Land.

CHAP. V.
Fishes are allured by light in the night.
AMongst the many Arts to deceive Animals, Light is one: for at night, when
some Fish rest, Fishermen carrying Light in their Boats, draw these Fish to
them, and so strike them with a three-forked Spear, or catch them alive. Which
Opian knew. Either at noon, or when the Sun does set,
Are Fishes caught, or else in the dark night,
By burning torches taken in the Net;
For whilst they take such pleasure in the Light,
The Fisherman does strike them with his dart,
Or else does catch them then by some such Art.
Many men have been much troubled how to make a Fire or Light under Water, that
Fishes seeing it afar off, might swim to it. I have done it thus: I made a
Pillar of Brass or Lead, three or four foot diameter: it was sharp or pyramidal
below, that it might sink the better into the deep; and it was bound about with
iron hoops, that being sunk by its weight, it might be drawn under the water: I
set on the top a Pipe that was fifteen or twenty foot long, and one foot broad.
The middle of this Pillar had many open windows, five or six, and these were
Glass-windows, well polished and fitted to them, and the joints were well glued
wiht Pitch, that no water could come in. I sunk the Pillar by its weight in a
place fit for it; but the mouth of the Pipe stood at least two foot above
water: then I let down a lighted Candle into the belly of the Pillar by the
Pipe, with a cord; and it was so provided, that what motion soever it had, it
should always stand upright. The Light passed through the windows into the
waters, and by reflection made a Light that might be seen under water very far:
to this Light, abundance of Fish came, and I catched them with Nets.

CHAP. VI.
That by Looking-Glasses many Creatures are brought together.
IF Females be wanting, Looking-Glasses may serve to make reflection of
themselves; so these Creatures, deluded by their own pictures, are drawn
thither. Also Liquors may serve in stead of Glasses.

The Cuttle is taken with a Glass.
Glasses put into wood are let down by a cord by the Fishermen into the waters;
and as they flote, they are drawn by degrees: the Cuttle seeing himself in it,
casts himself at his own image; and laying fast hold of the wood with his
claws, whilst he looks upon his own picture as enamored by it, he is
circumvented by the Net, and taken.

A Jackdaw is taken with a Looking-Glass.
Jackdaws love themselves: the Fowler following to take them, invents such
ways; for where he sees they flock, there he sets a Basin full of Oil; the
curious Bird coming thither, sits on the brim of the Vessel, looking down to
see her own Picture; and because she thinks that she sees another Jackdaw, she
hastens to flee down, and so falls into the Oil, and the thick Oil sticks to
her, and so she is catched without snares or nets.

How Quails are taken with a Locking-Glass.
Clearchus says, that Quails spend their seed not only when they see the
Females, but when they hear their cry also. The cause is the impression in
their minds, which you shall know when they couple, if you set a Looking Glass
against them, and before that a Gin: for running foolishly to their picture in
the Glass, they see they are caught. Athenaeus and Eustathius.

CHAP. VII.
How Animals are congregated by sweet smells.
THere are many odours, or other hidden qualities, that gather Animals
together, from the particular Nature of things, or of living Creatures. I shall
speak of the smelling odours and other aliments that they much desire. As,

The Unicorn is allured by sent.
Tretres writes, that the Unicorn so hunts after young Virgins, that he will
grow tame with them; and sometimes he will fall asleep by them, and be taken
and bound. The Hunters clothe some young lusty Fellow in Maids clothes; and
strewing sweet odours on him, they set him right against the place where the
Unicorn is, that the wind may carry away the smell to the wild Beast: the
Hunters lie hid in the mean time. The Beast, enticed with the sweet smell,
comes to the young man: he wraps the Beast's Head in long and large sleeves:
the Hunters come running, and cut off his Horn.

To make Wheezles come together.
The Gall of a Stellio beaten with water, will make Wheezles come together,
says Pliny. Also, the wise Plinianists write, that with the Gall of a
Chamaelion cast into water, Wheezles will be called together.

To make Mice come together.
If you pour thick lees of Oil into a Dish, and set it right in the house, they
will stick to it. Palladius. But Anatolins says, if you pour Oyl-Lees into a
Brazen Basin, and set it in the middle of the house, all the Mice at night will
meet together.

To make Fleas come together.
The fat of a Hedgehog boiled in water, and taken off as it swims on the top;
if you anoint a staff with it, and set it in the house, or under your bed, all
the Fleas will come to it. Rhasis.

To bring Frogs together.
The Gall of a Goat set into the earth in some Vessel, is said to bring all the
Frogs together, if they can find any delight therein.

CHAP. VIII.
How Creatures, made drunk, may be caught with the hand.
I Have said what draws them, now I shall say what will make them drunk. There
are many simples that will do it, that you may take them with your hands,
whilst they sleep: and because there are diverse Animals that are made drunk
with diverse things, I shall speak of them in order. And first,

How Dogs are made drunk.
Athenaeus says, that Dogs and Crows are made drunk with an Herb called
Aenutra: but Theophrastus, from whom he had it, says, that the Root Aenothera,
given with Wine, will make them more tame and gentle. Whence Aenutra comes, by
corruption of the word. Theophrastus his Aenothera is Rhododaphni, as I said. So

Asses are made drunk.
And when they sleep, they are not only taken; but, if you pull off their
skins, they will scarce feel you, nor awake; which comes by Hemlock: for when
they have eaten that, they fall so fast asleep, that they seem stupid and
senseless. So

Horses are made stupid
by Henbane seed, if you give it them with Barley; and they will be so fast
asleep, that they will be half dead, half a day. A certain Cheat, who wanted
money on his way, cast this seed to some of his company; and when they lay
almost dead asleep, and they were all much troubled for them, for a reward he
promised to help them; which received, he put Vinegar to their Nostrils, and so
revived them. Whereupon they went on their journey. So

Libards are made drunk.
Opian teaches the way, and how they are taken when they are drunk. In Africa,
so soon as they come to a Fountain where the Libards use to drink every
morning, there the Hunters in the night bring many vessels of Wine; and not far
from thence, they sit covered in blankets. The Libards, very thirsty, come to
the Fountain, and so soon as they have drunk Wine, that they delight in, first
they leap, then they fall fast asleep on the ground; and so they are easily
taken. If you desire to know how

Apes are taken, being drunk;
Athenaeus writes, that Apes will drink Wine also; and being drunk, are
caught. And Pliny says, that four-footed Beasts, with Toes, will not
increase, if they use to drink Wine. So

Sows run mad,
eating Henbane-seed. Aelian says, that Boars eating this Herb, fall sick of a
lingering disease, and are troubled: it is of the Nature of Wine that disquiets
the mind and head. So

Elephants are made drunk.
Athenaeus reports out of Aristotle's Book de Ebrietate, that Elephants will be
drunk with Wine. Aelian writes, that they give the Elephant that must go to
war, Wine of the Grapes, and made Wine of Rice, to make them bold. Now I will
show bow Birds laid asleep, may be caught with your hands. If then you would
know how

Birds may be caught with hands;
Pliny writes, A certain Garlic grows in the Fields, they call it Alum, which
being boiled, and cast to them, is a remedy against the villainy of Birds that
eat up the Corn that it cannot grow again: the Birds that eat it are presently
stupid, and are caught with ones hand, if they have staid a little, as if they
were asleep. But if you will

Hunt Partridge that are drunk,
Boethius teaches you thus: You shall easily hunt such Partridge, if you cast
unto them meal wet in wine: for every Bird is soon taken with it. If you make
it with water and wine mingled, and put that which is stronger into the
vessels, so soon as they have but sipt a little, they grow drowsy and stupid.
He shows,

How to take Ducks with your hand.
If any one observe the place where Ducks use to drink; and putting away the
water, place black wine in the place: when they have drunk, they fall down, and
may be easily taken. Also, wine-lees is best.

Ducks and other Birds being drunk are soon taken
With some meats, as are the Bur Dock seed, strewed here and there in places
where Birds frequent: they are so lightheaded when they have eaten them, that
you may take them with your hands. Another bait. Tormentil boy'ld in good wine,
and boil Wheat or Barley in the same, cast to Birds, is good to catch them: for
they will eat pieces of Tormentil with the seeds, and be drunk that they cannot
fly; and so are they catc'd with your hands. This is best when the weather is
cold, and the Snow deep. Or else strew Barley-corns in places where many Birds
come, then make a composition like a pultis of Barley-meal, Ox-gall, and
Henbane-seed; set this on a plank for them: when they have tasted it, the Birds
will be so stupid, that they cannot fly, but are caught with ones hand. Or
mingle Barley, and mushrooms, that are so called from flies, with the seeds of
Henbane, and make the pap of it, and lay on a board, as before.

To catch Rooks with your hands.
Powder Nux vomica, and mingle it with flesh. So also you may make Fish drunk.
Opian teaches some ways. If you will

Make Fish drunk,
Sow-bread will do it: for I said, that Sow-bread will make men more drunk. His
words are:

Of Sow-bread-Root, they make a paste that is white
And fat, with which the rocks and holes they smeer;
The water's poisoned by it, and the might
And force thereof does spread both far and near.
The Fishes fall, the Fishes are made blind,
And tremble at it: for the stinking smell
This Root thus ordered, always leaves behind,
Does make them drunk, as Fishers know full well.
CHAP. IX.
The peculiar poisons of Animals are declared.
DO not think I mean, that one poison can kill all living Creatures, but every
one has his several poison: for what is venom to one, may serve to preserve
another; which comes not by reason of the quality, but of the distinct nature.
Would we mention

The venoms that kill Dogs.
Diosc^rides says, that white Chamaeleon made up with Barley-Flour, will kill
Dogs, Sows, and Mice, being wet with water or Oil. Theophrastus says, Dogs and
Sows kneaded with water and Oil: but with Coleworts Sows. Nux vomica, which
from the effect is called Dogs Nut, if it be filed, and the thin filings
thereof be given with Butter or some fat thing to a Dog to swallow, it will
kill him in three hours space; he will be astonished, and fall suddenly, and
dies without any noise: but it must be fresh, that Nature seems to have
produced this Nut alone to kill Dogs. They will not eat the Fruit of the Ash,
because it makes pain in their backbone and hips: yet Sows are fatted by it.
So there is one Plant, called Dogs bane. Chrysippus says, that Dogs are killed
with it, if the shoots of it are given to them with water. Dogs cole, or wild
cole, if it be given with Flesh; so the fumes of Lead. Aristotle in his
wonders, concerning the Country of the Scythians and Medes, says, that there
is Barley that men feed on; but Dogs and Sows will not endure the Excrements of
those that eat it, as being poison to them. I say nothing of Aconitum, called
by Dioscorides, Dogs bane. I shall say the same

Of Wolfs bane.
Wolfs bane kills Wolfs and many other wild Beasts; and it is so called from the
effect. Mountebanks make venom thus: Take black Hellebore, two ounces;
Yew-leaves, one ounce; Beech-rinde, Glass, quick Lime, yellow Arsenick, of each
one ounce and half: of sweet Almonds three ounces; Honey what may suffice. Make
pellets, as big as a small Nut. Others take Wolfs bane, yellow Arsenick, and
Yewleaves, of each alike, and mingle them. There are other Herbs that kill
Wolfs: but I pass them, to avoid tediousness. Aelian says, By Nilus grows an
Herb called Wolfs bane; if a Wolf tread on it, he dies of convulsions.
Wherefore the Egyptians forbid any such Herb to be imported into their Country,
because they adore this Creature. There are also

Herbs that kill Mice.
That Aconitum, which is called Myoctonon, kills Mice a great way off.
Dioscorides and Nicandor. Staves-acre has almost the same forces, whose Root
or Seed in powder, mingled with Meal, and fried with Butter, kills Mice if they
eat it. They are driven away with the Root of Daffodils; and if their holes be
stopped with it, they die. The wild Cucumber, and Coloquintida, kill Mice. If
Mice eat Tithymal, cut into small slices, and mingled with Flour and Metheglin,
they will be blind. So Chamaeleon, Myacanthus, Realgar, namely, of live
Brimstone, quick Lime and Orpiment will do the same. But amongst

Wolfs banes,
is reckoned Libards bane, by whose Root, powdered, and given with flesh, they
are killed. Flesh is strewed with Aconite, and Panthers are killed if they
taste thereof. Their jaws and throat are presently in pain: therefore it is
called Pardalianches. They are killed also by Dogs bane, which also they call
Pardalianches.

Lious bane
is called Leontophonon: it is a little Creature that breeds nowhere but where
the Lion is. Being taken, it is burnt: and with the Ashes thereof, flesh is
strewed; and, being cast in the highways where they meet, Lions are killed: so
Pardalianches kills Lions as well as Panthers.

Ox bane.
The juice of black Chamaeleon kills Heifers by a Quinsey: wherefore some call
it Ulophonon. Oxen fear black Hellebore, yet they will eat the white.

Goats bane.
There is an Herb, that from killing Beasts, but especially, Goats, is called
Aegolethros. The Flowers of it, in a watery Springtime, are venom when they
wither; so that this mischief is not found every year.

Hearts bane.
Some (...) First are found in Armenia; with the powder of them, they scatter
Figs strewed with it, in the places where wild Beasts come: Beasts no sooner
taste of them, but they di^^* And by this Art are Hearts and Bores killed.
Aelian.

Horse banes,
are Aconite, Hellebore, and red Arsenick.

Wheezles bane, are
Sal Ammoniac^* and Corn moystened with some Liquor: scatter this about such
places as Whee^les haunt: when they eat it, they die, or fly away.

Sheeps bane.
Nardum kills Sheep. Dioscorides. Cattle and Goats, if they drink the water
where Rhododendron is steeped, will die. Pliny and Onony^^ius, an Author
nameless. Flea-bane kills Goats and Sheep: so does Savin.

Pigeons bane.
S^r apio writes* that Pigeons are killed when they eat Corn or Beans steept in
water, wherein white Hellebore has been infused.

Hens bane.
Hens die by eating the Seeds of Broom, called Spartum.

Bats bane.
(...) in Geopon* says they die by the fume of Ivy.

Vultures.
Some Animals are killed by ^ings that smell very sweet to us: Vultures by
Unguents, and black Beet^^^ by Roses* The same happens if a man do but anoint
them, or give them meat that is smeered with sweet Ointment. Aristotle lib.
Mirabil.

Scor^ions bane.
Aconite called Theliphonum, from killing Scorpions. Scorpions are stupefied by
touching it, and they wax pale, showing th^^ they are conquered. The Eagle is
killed with Comfrey: the (...) with the Gall of the Hiaena^ the Stare with
Garlick-seed: the (...) with Brimstone: the Urc^in with Pondweed: the Faulcon,
the Sea-gill, the Turtl^, the Blackbird, the Vulture, the night-Bird, called
Scopes, perish with Pomegranate K^rne^. The ^^^ling by the Flower of Willows:
the Grow with Rocket-seed the B^^tle with swe^t Ointment: the Rook with the
relics of flesh the Wolf has fed on: the ^ark by Mustard Seed: the Crane by
the Vine-juice.

CHAP. X.
Of the venomes for Fishes.
THe Sea and Rivers use to be infected with some Herbs, and other simples
whereby the Fishes (...) those waters, are (...) and die. But, because they are
several for several Fish, (...) the Particulars and the Gen^^als, that the
Fisherman taught by these, may inv^^^ others himself.

Fishes (...)
says Pliny, by the Root the (...) of (...), called, round Birth-wort, called
also the venom of the Earth. This Root they bruise, and mingle it with Lime,
and cast itin to the Sea: the Fishes come to it with great delight, and are
presently killed, and float on the waters. Dioscorides says, that broad leaved
Ti^hymal, bruised and strewed in the waters, kills Fish. We use now (...) Roots
of it, and with a weight let them down to the bottom of the waters, that will
be infected by them, and kill the Fish presently. But in the Sea (...) shall
sooner kill them thus: Mingle Oriental Galls, two dr^chms (...) Cheese one
ounce; Bean-meal three ounces, with Aqua Vitae; make pelle^s of these as big as
Chick-peason. Cast them into the Sea, in the morning before Sun rise: after
three hours, come to the place again, and you shall find all those that tasted
of it (...) drunk or dead, and to appear either on the top or bottom of the
Sea; which you shall take up with a pole and a hook fastened to it, or Fish
speer. The Aqua Vitae is added, because it soon flies to the head. The Oriental
Galls are poison that astonisheth them: the Bean-meal is not of great
concernment. This bait invites them; and the Cheese smells so, that they sent
it at a distance.

CHAP. XI.
Of other Experiments for hunting.
NOw I will add some Experiments that seem to be requisite, that you may use
for necessity when you please.

To change a Dogs color.
Since white Dogs are seldom fit for hunting, because they are seen afar off; a
way is found to change his color that will be done if you boil quick I^me with
Litharge, and paint (...) Dog with it, (...) him black.

That a Dog may not go from you.
Democrites says, a Dog will never (...) from you; if you smeer him with
Butter from head to tail, and give him Butter to ^ick. Also, (...) you if, you
have the secondine of a Bitch close in a (...) ^mell to it. If you ^ould not
have

Your Dog to bark.
If you have a Bitches second Membrane, or Hares hairs, or Dung, or Vervain,
about you. In Nilus there is a black stone found that a Dog will not bark (...)
he see it: you must also carry a Dogs Tongue und^^ your great (...) within your
shoe, or the dry heart of a dog about you Sextus. Or, the hair of (...), or
the Dung. Pliny. Or cut off the tail of a young (...) and put it under (...) or
(...) the Dog a Frog to eat in a piece of meat. All these things are to ^^ep
Dogs from barking. Nigidius says, that Dogs will all day (...) from him who
pulls off a t^^k from a Sow, and carries it a while about him. Op^an.

If of (...) you takes*
And w^^r it, (...) dogs will (...) for sake;
As frighted they will fly, and (...)
Bark at you, though they barked much before.
That a Dog may not run.
If you anoint him with Oil under the shoulders he cannot run.

To make a Hawke (...)
You shall animate your Hawk against (...) prey, tha^ he may assail and flee at
great Birds. When you hawk, wet the Hawks meat with Wine. If it be a Buzzard,
add a little Vinegar to it when you would have him (...) a give him three bits
of flesh wet in wine: or, pour Wine in at his mouth, with a young Pidgeon: so
let him fly.

To make Partridge more bold to fight.
Give then (...) with their meat. Pliny.

That dunghill (...) fight the better.
Give them Garlic to eat soon before the^ fight: whence, in the old Comedy, a
Cock ready and earnest to fight is wittily called (...), fed with Garlic.

(...) a Bird may not the high.
Take out the Feathers of (...), that make him fly upwards* so he will whirl
about, and fly downward. If you will have

That a Bird shall not fly,
cut the upper and lower nerves of his Wings, and it will not hurt him; yet he
cannot fly out of your Bird-cages, or places you keep them in.

THE SIXTEENTH BOOK OF Natural Magic: Wherein are handled secret and
undiscovered Notes.
THE PROEME.
I Make two sorts of secret marks, which they vulgarly call Syfers, one of
visible marks, and is worthy of a treatise by it self: another of secret marks,
whereof (...) tempted to say something in this present Volume, (...) what are
the consequ^^^ thereof, for the use of great Men, and Princes, that (...) than
(...) man that knows the invention. I shall set down plainly some examples:
(...) consequences of them must (...) faithfully concealed, lest by growing
(...) amongst ordinary people, they be disrespecte^^. This is that I shall
publish.

CHAP. I.
How (...) in diver^ (...) be re^^.
THere are many, an^ almost infinite (...) write things of necessity, that the
Charact^^ shall not (...) ^ou dip them into waters, or put them near the (...)
them over. (...) are read by dipping them into waters. Therefore

If you desire that letters not (...) are (...) may be hi^^,
Let Vitriol soak in boiling water* when (...) strain it (...) till the water
grow clear; with that liquor write (...) are dry, they (...) not (...).
Moreover, grind^ burnt straw (...); ^^egar and (...) will, write (...) the
spaces between the fo^^er li^^s, describ^^ large. Then (...) Galls in white
Wine, wet a sponge in the liquor; (...) when you have need (...), and we^ the
letters so long until the native black (...) disappear, but the former color,
that was not seen, may (...) I will (...) in what liquors paper must be soaked
to make letters (...) be see (...) said, Dissolve Vitriol (...) then powder
Galls finely, and soak them in^^ter; let them stay there twenty four hours:
filtre them through (...) cloth (...), that may make the water clear, and make
letters upon (...) to have concealed; send it to your Friend absent: when you
would have (...) appear, dip them in the first liquor, and the letters ^ill
presen^^y be seen.

That di^^^ng (...) line^^^ water (...) may appear.
Dissolve Alom in water, and (...) linen, (...), napkins, and the like; for
when they are dry they will (...). When you will have them visible, (...) linen
(...) to be darkened: but only where the Alom (...) that you may read them:
(...) are dissolved, those parts will admit water (...)

White (...)
Litharge is first powdered and cast into an earthen pot that has water and
vinegar mixed; boil it, and strain it, and keep it: then write letters with
Citron Lemons juce: these are added to them when they begin to dry. If you dip
them in the liquor kept, they will appear clearly and very white. If women's
breasts or hands be wet in it, and you sprinkle the said water upon them, they
will grow white as Milk. Use it. If at any time you want (...) if you please,

A stone dipped in vinegar will show the letters.
Make letters with Goats far upon a stone; when they are dry; they will not be
seen. If the stone be dip^ into (...) they presently come forth, and seem above
the stone. But if you would have (...) writ with water only, appear black, that
you may the better be provided (...) more speedily for a voyage; beat Galls and
Vitriol finely, and strew this (...) on your paper: rub it with a cloth, and
polish it well, that so it may stick fast to the (...), and be like it. Powder
J^niper-gum, which Scriveners call Vernish, and (...) to the rest: when you
would use it, write with water o^^pittle, and they will be black letters. There
are many such Arts, too tedious to relate.

CHAP. II.
(...) in the fire.
(...) letters are not made visible (...) by fire, or not, unless (...) light
interpose or may be read when they are burnt.

To make letters visible by fire.
So we may bring (...) between the verses, and in the close setting together,
or larger (...) ^^ables. Let (...) contain so^e void space, that the letters
may not (...); and if this (...) ^ed, it (...) be read. If you write with the
juice of Citrons, Oranges, Onyons, or almost (...) things, if you make it (...)
presently discovered: (...) they are undigested juic^ (...) detected by the
(...) of the fire* and (...) they (...) forth (...) would (...) ^f they were
(...) a (...) that (...) to the fire, they are concocted: and will give the
(...) color they would in due time g^ve upon the tree; when they were (...).
Juice of (...), added to Cala^us, will make a green; to (...) will show diverse
colors by the fire. By these means, (...) Love Letters escape from those that
have (...) of Salt called Ammoniac; this powder^^ and mingled with (...) will
(...) letters; and can hardly be distinguished from the paper (...) hold them
to (...) will show black. Also,

Letters th^^ cannot be read unless the paper be burnt.
For the mixture will be white, (...); but when it is burnt, the paper will be
black and (...) will be (...) ^^rpest vinegar and the white of an Eg^^ in these
(...) Quick-(...) stir it well; and with that mixture make Letters (...) and
the letters (...) unburnt; or make letters (...) or any and or Salt or Lime;
these, bring they cannot be see^ (...) when the (...) is burnt and made black,
they will appear white. If you will, you may

Write letters (...) of fire.
Do it th^^^, Mingle (...) with G^m Traganth, soaked, and of this mixture
(...), that (...) the (...) letters (...): for that (...) of (...) matter
opposed against outward (...) it, that the ^ays cannot come to out ^ight; and
(...) a shadow.

CHAP. III.
How Letters rub d with dust may be seen.
NOw I will use another artifice, that Letters rubbed with dust may be read,
that were before invisible, which I read was used by the Ancients: wherefore do
thus:

That Letters rubbed with mill-dust may be read.
That as in paper, so on some unseen parts of the Body, Letters written may lie
hid, and be opened when need is; write secretly on your Back or Arms o^ other
Limbs, with Vinegar or Urine, and dry it that nothing may appear: now, to have
it read, rub it over with foot or burnt paper; for so the Letters will
shineforth. Or,

Otherwise,
If you make Letters with Fat, Tallow or any other fatty with Gum, or Milk of a
Fig Tree, and strew them with the dust of (...) or (...), they will appear. It
may be by this craft, as (...) the Greek says, (...) used the inprinted
inscription in a Beast for a sacrifice. He, (...) Soldiers, to make them fight
valiantly with their Enemies, (...) number; supposing it would be no little
advantage to put them (...) before hand of the assurance of the victory,
invented a trivial business; but otherwise profitable, with the Priest that was
to (...) the sacrifice, (...) Before the day they were to fight, he prepares
for the victory^ for (...) to offer sacrifice, prayed unto the gods, and (...)
the Sacrifice in (...) King used powdered Gum, (...) from the right to the left
side, he dre^^ (...) words: Reg^ Victoria, The Victory is the King's: and when
the Entrails were drawn forth, he thrust his hand into the hottest and most
spun^^ (...) and (...) the inscription. But the (...), changing the outer
parts, and doing his (...) the part where this inscription was contained, Reg^
Victoria. (...) sooner published, but the Soldiers generally (...), to show how
ready they were to fight; so (...) with certain (...) of the Victory, and
depending on this promise from (...), they fight to ^^agiously, and subdued the
French. But to the matter (...) the (...) will do the same, if it be written on
white paper, and afterward (...) be (...) with cole dust strewed upon it, and
made clea^ (...) presently appear black. Pliny says, the Milk of T^hynal^ will
do the like, to make the Letters, and dust strewed on them to (...) them: (...)
had rather speak with Adulterers, then by Letters. (...) confirms this, (...)
Amandi, how they may safely write to their Sweet-hearts.

(...) Milk, it is (...) but (...)
The writing with cole-dust (...) full-right
(...) as if (...),
(...)
Also there is an Art that one would not imagine, to write upon Crystal: for,
being all transparent, no (...) will dream of it, and the letters may lie hid
within. Do it thus:

That letter^ (...) of fine dus^*
Dissolve Gum (...) may be cl^er; and when it is well dissolved, it (...) or
(...) a Cup or Glass; for when the (...). No man will imagine the fraud, if a
Cup besent to one in (...) Glass (...): when he would see the letters, rub
(...) straw (...) paper upon it, (...) will presently be seen. Here is another
secret,

That letters on the paper may be read, not by fire, nor water, or any other
thing, but in the dust only.
This is a secret worth knowing: dissolve Goats suet with a little Turpentine:
rub the paper with this liquor, and keep it: when you would send some news to
your friend, lay on the paper (...) with the ^at upon a letter you would send
to your friend; write upon that with an iron point, and the suet will make the
characters on the letter: send this away; and if it be intercepted, no water
will make the words visible, or any other Art, but only strewing dust upon it.
Also you may make

That upon black paper, white letters may appear.
The reason is this: mingle the white and yelk of an Egg together, that it may
be liquid as ink: with this liquer, writes the paper what words you please,
and dry them: when the paper is dry, shake a black color over it, and dry it
again, and send it, but that the letters may be visible, scrape the superficies
of the paper with a broad iron for so it will be, that the ink being scraped
off, where the letters were, they will appear white.

CHAP. IV.
How you may write in an Egg.
(...) by the P^pal Inquisition, and no (...), I will show you how Letters may
be writ on the upper shell (...) of an Egg also: for example,

That letters may be written the Egg-she^^^*
Wrap the Egg in wax and with an iron point make letters on it, as far as to
the shell; but break it not: for (...) shell with you iron, or point, or knife,
it may be detected. So a^^^our Egg one ^ight in strong (...) depart, which
separates gold from (...) in the morning take away the wax; and take off the
Egg-shell^ cover, and hold the shell between your eye and the light* and the
letters will be seen very clear quite through the (...). The same is done with
the juice of Lemons: for it softeneth the (...) not, and you shall (...) your
desire. Will you

(...) the white*
yellow, and better when the Egg is boiled. (...) Egg hard and roll it in wax,
and engrave the letters on the wax with an iron (...) that the marks may lie
open: put this Egg into liquor with A^om and Galls (...) then put it into sharp
Vinegar, and they will (...) and taking off the (...) you shall see them in the
white of the Egg. (...) and alom with vinegar, till they be as thick (...):
with this (...) what you will (...) in Egg; and when the writing is dried in
the Sun, put it (...): dry it (...) it* and (...) off the shell, and you shall
read the writin^^ (...) put it into vinegar, and (...) nothing of it. Perhaps,
he means by pickle, (...). The cause is this: the Egg-shell is porous, and has
large holes, which is (...); for being set up the fire it will sweat, and water
will come forth; and looking at it against (...) will (...) clear; so then,
(...) being subtle, pe^^rates by the p^res, and (...) the shell (...) and when
it is mingled with the Alom and Galls, it (...) them appear on the white; and
when it is put into (...) to be hard as it was. But observe, it must not (...)
long in vinegar; for that will eat off all the shell, and will leave the Egg
bare, having nothing (...) to cover it: and if you put that into cold water,
the shell will not come again. If (...) will know

How letters writ with water, maybe seen in an Egg,
Dissolve (...) in the (...) and writ (...) dry it, and nothing will be seen.
If you will read (...) dissolve Galls (...) steep the Egg therein: or, (...)
with Limewater (...) Egg, and (...) Brasil is infused; and so the letters will
seem to be (...) upon the shell, and steep it in water (...) vitriol: (...) is
dry, (...), and nothing will be seen: when you afterward steep it in the (...)
wine, white letters will appear in a black shell. I will show,

How letters may become visible upon an Egg by the fire.
Write on the Egg with juice of Lemmons, or Onyons, or Fig-milk^ when you put
this to the fire, the Letters will appear yellow: and that must be done on a
raw Egg: for if you boil it, the letters will be seen.

That letters may be seen on the Egg shell by dust.
Make letters on the shell with vinegar, suet, fig tree milk, or of Tithymal,
or with gums: when you would have them seen, rub them with cole-dust, or burnt
straw, or paper, and they will seem black. There is a way

How to put a letter into an Egg.
Make your letter that you send, narrow and long, searce broader then your
middle-finger: write your mind in short characters, and with the edge of a
knife, make a cut in the Egg, and break the inward skin, and put in your letter
at one end by degrees: for it will easily take it in, were it ten hands
breadth: then stop the cut, with lime and gum mingled, that it may not be seen,
and with Ceruss and (...); for then it is impossible to discern it. But if you
will have this done more neatly, put the egg in sharp vinegar three or four
hours: and when you find it soft* (...) the shell with the edge of your knife,
put in your roll of paper* then soak it in (...) and the shell will grow as
hard as it was.

CHAP. V.
How you may write in diverse places, and (...)
I Have showed you di^^^s ways of writing invisible; now I come to those ways
that will teach you to write letters on diverse things, which though they be
visible, and intercepted, yet the Reader will be deceived by their secret
device. First,

How to write (...)
Let us see how they did this in elder times (...), That when the Lacedemon^^^
writ to their (...), that their (...) being intercepted by the enemies might
not be read, invented this kind of writing; yet it is referred to Archimedes
to be the (...) of it. Tw^ sticks must be (...), and polished with the Turners
in (...); they must be equal for (...) and thickness. One of these was given to
the (...) when he (...) and the (...) was kept at home (...) Senate: (...) a
page (...) about the stick, as large as (...) the matter (...) might make a
round volume, and the sides of it were (...), that they were like a collar that
exactly fitted the wood, and no (...) that thus was rolled about the stick,
they writ letters (...) collar thus written on, being long and narrow, (...)
and (...) the General; for they thought, if it was ^^^^^scepted by the (...)
when they (...) bits of letters, and (...) of words, (...) at divided, they
(...) discern the thing: and they were not deceived (...) fell among (...) the
enemy, did not imagine any thing was (...) let them (...) as with a thing done
as all adventures, and insignificant: but he to whom it was writ, applied this
band, and rolled it about, as it was (...) upon and (...) words lay joined as
they should be, and so be knew the message. The Greeks call this khird of
writing, (...). Plutarch says, (...) was brought to Lysander by Hellespont.
But I inven^^^ (...) make two small sticks alike great and round: one we give
to our friend that (...) far from us, and hold the other by us: let us make
them stick so (...) together, that they may join, and seem to be as on^ and the
wood not (...) the (...) should be, and write long-ways on the stick what you
please; the (...) more lines will they receive. If you first steep (...) is
dissolved, the Ink will not spread; but the letter^ will (...) ^ake your Thread
that is about the ^^ick* and (...) to keep (...) secret, (...) the edges of
napkins or (...) your (...) for the curious watch shall discern nothing (...)
our friend winding the Thread about the (...) to make the points (...) the tops
and agree well, shall easily read them. I will show.

How to write on Parchment, that the Letters may not be seen.
When you have writ on Parchment, put it to the light of a candle, or to the
fire, and it will all crumple and run together, and be nothing like what it
was; if a man look on it, he will hardly suspect any fraud. If he desires to
read what is in it, let him lay it on moist places, or sprinkle it gently with
water, and it will be dilated again, and all the wrinkles will be gone, and it
will appear as it did at frst, that you may read the Letters upon it, without
any hindrance. Now I will show the way

How in the Sections of Books the Characters shall be hid.
When the Book is well bound, and cut, and colored black; if we open it, and
turn back the leaves, that they may be turned in, we may write at the corners
of the leaves what we will: but when the Book is set back again, and the leaves
put into their own places, nothing is seen or can be imagined to be writ in
them; but he that would read those Letters, must set the Book that way as it
was, and the Letters will be read. So may we write on fly-traps, that are made
with wrinkles, and then draw them forth. If need be, we may do

The same with Cards to play with.
You may excellent well write on Cards, if you put them in some order, that one
may follow the other; and some shall be upright, others turned downwards. When
you have set them right together, you may write all things where they divide:
mingle the Cards together again, and turn them, and nothing will be seen but
some disorderly marks, if any man look curiously upon them. But he that would
read them, must set them in order, and they will join and be read exactly.
Also, we may write in white Pigeons, and other white Birds, feathers of their
wings, turning them upwards; for when they return to their own places, they
will show nothing. But if they be brought to their former posture, you will
read the Letters; and this is no small benefit for those that shall use them
for messengers. There is a way

To hide Letters upon wood.
Any one may make Letters upon wood, and not be suspected; for they shall not
be seen, but when we please. Let the wood be fleshy and soft, of Poplar, or
Tile-tree, or such like: and with those iron Markers Printers use, when they
make stamps upon Brass, commonly called Ponzones, make Letters in the wood,
half a finger thick: then hew the wood with a Carpenters hatchet, as deep as
the Letters go; when all is made plain, and equal, send the stick to your
friend, or board, to him that knows the matter; he putting the wood into the
water, the wood will swell out, that was beaten in with the marks, and the
Letters will come forth. That we may do in wooden vessels, polished by the
turner, if when they are turned, we mark the Letters on them; and then turn
them again: when this is done, send it to your friend, and let him soke it in
water, etc.

CHAP. VI.
In what places Letters may be enclosed.
I Shall speak in what places Letters may be enclosed, and not be suspected;
and I shall speak last of Carriers. I shall bring such examples as I have read
in Ancient Histories, and what good a man may learn by them. First,

How to hide Letters in wood.
Theophrastus's opinion was, that if we cut the green bark of a Tree, and make
it hollow within, as much as will contain the Letters, and then bind it about,
in a short time it will grow together again, with the Letters shut up within
it. Thus he says, That by including some religious precepts in wood, people
may be allured; for they will admire at it. But I mention this out of
Theophrastus, rather for a similitude, then for to do the thing I would have,
for that would require a long time. But this may be done well in dry wood, as
in Fir: thus; the chinks fastening together with common white glue. Also the
Ancients used

To conceal Letters in Junkets.
I will relate the cunning of the Wife of Polycretes; for she, whilst in the
Milesian camps they solemnized a Solemn Feast of their Country; when they were
all fast asleep, and drunk, took this opportunity to tell her brothers of it,
and did thus. She desired Diognetus, General of the Erythrei, that she might
send some Junkets to her brothers: and when she had leave, she put a leaden
scrole into a cake, and she bad the bearer tell her brothers from her, that no
man should eat of it but themselves. When they heard this, they opened the
cake, and found the Letter, and performed the contents of it. They came upon
the enemy by night, that was dead drunk at the Feast, and conquered him. Also
the Ancients were wont

To shut up Letters in living creatures.
Herodotus says, That Harpagus sent Letters to Cyrus, put into the belly of a
Hare whose entrails were taken out, by one that counterfeited a shepherd
hunting. So

Letters may be hid in Garments.
The secret places of clothes are best, to avoid suspicion; as in your bosom,
or under the soles of your feet. Ovid in his Art Amandi, writes to this
purpose:

Letters may be concealed in your breast,
Wrapped in a clowt, which way is held the best;
Or else you may under your feet provide
A place full closely Letters for to hide.
To hide Letters in your belt.
Those of Campania were wont, when they would discover any thing to the
Carthaginians, and the Romans besieged them round; they sent a man that seemed
to run from them, with a Letter concealed in his girdle; and he taking occasion
to escape, brought it to the Carthaginians. Others carried Letters in their
scabbards, and sent them away by messengers, and were not found out. But we use
now adays

To hide letters in the Bowels of living creatures.
For we wrap them in some meat, and give them to a Dog, or some other creature
to swallow; that when he is killed, the letters may be found in his belly: and
there is nothing neglected to make this way certain. The like was done by
Harpagus. He, as Herodotus says, being to discover to Cyrus some secrets, when
the ways were stopped, that he could do it by no other means, he delivered the
letters to a faithful servant, who went like a Hunter, that had caught a Hare;
and in her belly were the letters put, when the guts were taken forth, and so
they were brought to Persis. We use also

To shut up letters in stones.
Flints are beaten very fine in brazen Mortars, and sifted; then are they
melted in a brass Cauldron, by putting two ounces of Colophonia to one pound of
the powder of the stone; and mingling them, put your letters into leaden
plates, and hide them in the middle of the composition, and put the lump into a
linen bag, and tie it fast, that it may be round; then sink it into cold
water, and it will grow hard, and appear like a flint.

CHAP. VII.
What secret Messengers may be used.
THe Ancients used the same craft for Messengers; for they used men that should
be disguised by their habits, and some living creatures besides. For

To counterfeit the shape of a Dog,
It was the crafty counsel of Josippus, that the Messengers should be clad with
skins, and so they past the enemies guards, and were not regarded; for if they
were seen, they were in the likeness of Dogs; and this was done until the enemy
found out the trick, and compassed the Rampart round about. And man's curiosity
was not satisfied here, till they found means for ways to pass, where the
Sentinels and Scouts might not discover them; wherefore they left the land, and
sent by water: But that the writing might not be spoiled in the water, as
Frontinus says, The Soldiers that past over the River Saltella, had leaden
plates writ upon, fastened to their arms. But Lucullus, as the same Frontinus
reports, that he might declare to the Cyziceni, that were besieged by
Mithridates, that he was coming to relieve them, all narrow passages being
stopped by the enemies guards, that were joined to the continent by a small
bridge, he sought a way by sea. For a private Soldier appointed for it,
sitting on two bladders blown, wherein the Letters were put in two covers; and
so like some Sea Monster, he swam seven miles at sea, and told of the coming of
the General. So they often used

Arrows for Messengers:
But that seemed not sufficient, for they feared men's cunning, lest some chance
or fraud might intercept the messenger, and the secret should be discovered, or
they should be racked to make them confess. Sometimes therefore they sought a
way in the Air, and used Arrows for messengers, that none might intercept them.
Herodotus says, That Artabazus and Timoxenus did this, when one would declare
any thing to the other; for the paper was folded about the foot of the Arrow,
and the feathers were put upon it, and it was so shot into the place appointed.
To this appertains the example of Cleonymus King of the Lacedaemonians. He
besieging the city Troezene, commanded many of his best Archers to shoot Arrows
into several places; and he writ upon them: I come to relieve your City; and by
this means he set ladders, and his Army scaled the walls and went in, and
plundered the place, and destroyed it. But when Caesar heard that Cicero
besieged by the French, could hold out no longer, he sent a Soldier by night,
who should shoot a Letter, fastened to an Arrow, over the well: when he had done
this, the watch found the Arrow and the Letter, and brought it to Cicero. In it
were these words written: Caesar bids Cicero be confident, and to expect
relief. So Caesar came suddenly, and slaying the enemies, relieved him. We can
do it safer* and better now adays with Guns: if the matter to be sent be
contained in few words, we may shoot them forth with Muskets; namely, by
folding up the paper, and putting it into a case of lead, where they cast
bullets, pouring upon it melted lead, but not burning hot; the paper wrapped up
in the lead, we shoot away with the Powder to the place. But because the
Letters are but small, we may shoot many of them in a day. The way to melt the
Ball is, by putting it to a gentle fire, or into quicksilver, and it will soon
melt, and the paper not be touched. I shall show now

How to make Pigeons your Messengers.
We may use Birds for Messengers: as Pigeons, Swallows, Quails, and others: For
these Birds carried to other places, when need is, if you bind Letters to their
necks or feet, they will return with them: and when any thing was suddenly to
be related, the Ancients sometimes used these Messengers. Hircius being Consul,
as Frontinus testifies, sent forth Pigeons from the nearest place he could from
the walls, which had been long shut up in the dark, and half fa^ished, to
Decimus Brutus, who was besieged at Mutina by Anthony. They being glad of
light, and defiring meat, flew and sat upon the highest parts of the houses;
Brutus caught them, and so was confirmed how things were: wherefore, always
laying meat in those places, he called them back again. Hence Pliny. Nor
Ramparts, nor Scouts, nor Nets pitched before Rivers, did profit Anthony; for
the Messenger went through the Air. By the same way, in the very same day, from
Olympia to Aegina, was the victory of Taurosthen^s declared to his Father;
though others say it was to reseen: others say, That Taurosthenes, when he went
forth, took a Pigeon from her young ones, yet weak and not able to fly, and as
soon as he had conquered, he sent her back again, purple-coloured; and she
making great have to her young ones, flew that very day from Pisa to Aegina.
Aelian writes this. Some have sought to do this by Swallows, taken out of their
nests from their young, and sent back again. Some also attest, that beyond set
Eastward, there are Pigeons that when the way is stopped, will fly through the
midst of the enemies, and carry Letters under their wings, a very long way. It
may be Juvenal meant this, when he said,

As if from diverse parts a letter were
Brought with a doufful wing quite through the Air.
Also in old Monuments and Histories it is declared, that there was a King of
Egypt, whose name was Marrhes, who bred up a tame Rook, and this he made use of
for a winged messenger, so often as he had need: for, as if she had reason, she
would carry the Letter where she was directed; for she was so crafty, as to be
instructed whit ^ee to fly, and where to stay, or rest at any time. Man's wit
has invented these shifts to avoid danger; but by the same craft is he wounded
sometimes, as it were with his own weapons. When the Christians with an Army
besieged Ptolemais, when Saladine had appointed a Pigeon to be sent thus with
Letters to the besieged, to wish them to be constant, and expect his coming
suddenly; the Christians caught her, and tied a contrary letter to her, and
sent her away: whence it fell out, that they despairing of relief, yielded
themselves: so there can be no certain security in humane affairs, but there
may be fraud in all things. Themistius says, That amongst Animals, Pigeons
have the best memory, as having a clear and refined mind. Wherefore, though all
other Animals make have to their young ones, when they are taken from them, yet
none of them carried far, can come back, because their memory fails. I have
seen the trial with Pigeons. When my servant came from my Farm, he brought home
some young Pigeons taken from their dams, and he wrapped them up in a cloak as we
went; and when we came home at night, they were shut up in the house; but when
the morning came, they flew out of the windows; and discovering the country
afar off, they took upon the wing, and flew all home again. Wherefore in
Genesis, Noah sent forth a Pigeon, which returned; but the Raven returned not.
For the Raven wants memory. I remember in Plutarchs works, what is worth
relating that I read there, That by the Pigeon sent forth of the Ark, in
Deucalio^s flood, was showed, that the waters were sunk down, and the storms
past. Animals that have newly brought forth young ones, will do the same.

CHAP. VIII.
How Messengers may be sent, who shall neither know that they carry letters,
nor can they be found about them.
OUr Ancestors had another Art* that could not be discovered, invented by
strange craft. Herodotus mentions it from Hestiaeus, who was the Author of it.
He being born in Asia, when of noble place, when Darius ruled, when he was with
the King in Persia, and would privately write to Aristagorus to fall from him,
fearing lest if he should not do it cunningly, he should be discovered, and be
in great danger, he invented this way. He shaved off his servants hair of his
head, as though he meant to cure him, who for a long time had been troubled
with (...) eyes: and on his head, with good ink, he writ letters, that
contained what he meant to have done* he kept this fellow at home with him,
until his hair was grown again; when that was done, he sent him away to
Aristagoras, bidding him say, when he came to him, that he should do unto him,
in shaving off his hair, as he did before: When the servant came to
Aristagoras, to Mile^um, he said what his Master bad him say to Aristagoras: he
supposing the bu^^ne^s not to be idle, did what he was ordered, and so read the
message. The Ancients found out these inventions, to send messengers with. Yet
that can be no safe way, to shave off the hair, and to write letters upon the
head, for the head will easily sweat, and put them out. And if the skin be
pricked with a needle, this will not avoid the suspicion, if he that wears the
writing, be laid bold on by the way: for then is there most diligent search:
for fear and necessity will make men watchful, and they are never satisfied,
till they have searched every place. Sometimes they try men by fair promises,
sometimes they fright them with threats; and if these will not do, they torment
and torture them, to make them confess: and if this will not do, that letters
may not be secretly conveyed, not only their hose and shoes use to be
searched, their clothes plucked off, and the seams riot, but they will search
their very guts; so far is it from keeping any secret upon the head, that shall
not be looked for. But I can send Letters, and write so, that it can be
understood by none, but those that the letters are designed for. And he that
carries them never so far off, if he should be taken by the way, and examined
by torments, he can confess nothing, because he knows nothing of it, and the
Letter shall always remain secret. Nor will length of time, or sweat in travel,
blot out the Letters; nor is it any matter if the messenger pass through
Rivers, Seas, or Rain; for wet will not hurt them. What good Princes may get by
this, I leave to your cogitations; for they have most need of this, when they
would declare any thing to their friends, that are besieged: and oft-times upon
one message, may the victory of a City or Army depend. The invention of the
Ancients, was partly good, and partly bad. They writ Letters on his head, which
he could not read; nor would water or sweat, wash them off, because they were
printed into the head: and when the hair grew out, they could not be seen. And
that the messenger might be ignorant what was writ upon his head, they took
occasion for it, saying, he had a pain in his eyes, that they would cure: and
thus he knew not the craft they used. But this fraud seems not very secure, for
one that should suspect it might shave off the hair, and find out the secret.
Moreover, if the messenger were to be sent suddenly, how could he stay a
month, till his hair were grown again? and when his skin was pricked for to
make the Letters, he must needs suspect something. But let us see

How Hestiaus could make the Letters on his head indelible.
He wounded the skin with the point of a needle, or opened it with a rasor, and
cast in the powder of Colophonia burnt; for so we use to make the names of
Masters, upon the faces of bondslaves, that they shall never come forth, and
in time they will look green. Also

Letters may be made between the skin, that are indelible, upon any part.
You may soon do it thus: Let Cantharides steep a whole day in strong water,
but sooner is it done in water of separation; then make the letters with a
Penknife, or fit instrument, upon the upper skin of the Arm, or any other
part; the flesh hurt with the moisture, will rise in blisters, and be
exulcerated; so by the force of this corroding water, will there always remain
the prints of white letters, and they will never be blotted out. And this is
best done by Hestiaus secret, because the letters could not be read under the
hair, whereas white letters, like milk, would be seen. But would we have them
stay only for sometime, and not always, we may do it many ways. If you make
letters with Aqua fortis, that has eaten silver or brass, they will appear
many days. So it may be done with oil of Honey. Now I will show

How a man may carry letters that are indelible and invisible, and unknown to
him; and how to make them visible when need is.
You may do it thus: by writing letters on the messengers back, that he may not
know of, having first given him an Opiat to make him sleep soundly, then write,
and let them dry in; when he awakes, send him away, the letters dried on will
not be seen: The Ancients knew this. Ovid says it:

Write on his back for paper, so you shall
Better conceal your purpose from them all.
But let us see whether we can write on the flesh with any liquour, that
passing through Rivers and Rain, the letters may not be blotted out with any
moisture, and then by strewing on of dust, may be made visible again. Write on
a man's back, which shall be visible only, by being wet with some humor, and
no man can find out, unless he know the secret. If you write with water,
wherein Vitriol is dissolved, with a decoction of Galls, it will be seen. If it
be made very sharp, it will pierce the skin, and the letters will be delible:
we may do the same with the oil of it. Salt Ammoniac with quick Lime, or Soap,
will make a blew color. If they be rubbed with oil of Litharge, they will
appear white, with Aqua vitae, or its equal, distilled vinegar, and water and
Salt.

CHAP. IX.
How Characters may be made, that at set days shall vanish from the paper.
I Shall attempt to show how letters may be written on paper, or in other
matter, that shall disappear at set times: and other letters shall be made
invisible, that at a time certain shall appear, not only useful for secret
marks, but for other purposes necessary for our lives. Letters that decay and
vanish, may be made two ways, either with Aqua fortis, that eats the paper, or
some decaying liquors, that will vanish with any light touch, and leave the
place where they were, without any spot. I shall teach

How letters are made, that eat the paper.
If you mingle oil of Vitriol with common ink or any other black color, in few
days by corroding the paper, or the ink it self, the letters will vanish, or in
a month, as you put in more or less of the oil; and this you may try before
you send away your letter: If you would have it work more slowly, add but a
little oil; if faster, put in more: you may, when it is too strong, put some
water to it. The same is performed, if you mix a strong lie, they call it the
Capital, with your ink; for first they will be yellow, and then they will
vanish. The same is done by oil of Tartar, or Salt Alkali, or Soda, and strong
water of separation of Gold; for these corrode the letters, and the paper, that
nothing of the letters will appear. If you desire to know

How letters may be made, that will soon vanish;
Make them with the strongest Aqua vitae, or use Camphir and burnt straws: for
the letters in time, will decay and vanish; the tincture will fall off, when
the glutinous matter is gone. Make a powder of a very fine touchstone; for the
Sandy-stone will sooner decay, that no letter shall be seen. Also it is done

Another way:
Infuse the small filings of steel in water of separation; take a treble
quantity of this, and add thereto liquid Pitch, or Soot of Turpentine, to make
it the blacker, and cover the vessel: grind this on a Porphyre-stone, write,
and they will vanish and fall away. This secret I thought not fit to overpass,
because it is the principal thing to be considered, to make trial oft-times;
for if it stay long on the paper, add more strong water to it; and if you be
careful, no mark of the writing will remain. You shall do it like to this,
another way. If it be good so to counterfeit: Take Chrysocolla, Salt Ammoniac,
and Alom, all alike; powder them all, and put them into a Crucible, and make a
strong lie of quicklime, and laying a linen cloth over the mouth of the
vessel, that must receive it, strain it; boil it a little, mingle this with
your ink, they will remain a while, but in short time the letters will vanish
away. Set it up for you use. But contrarily, if you will

That invisible letters after some time, shall become visible
and show themselves; I will give you some examples, that you may invent more
thereby your self. If you write with juice of Citrons or Oranges, on Copper or
Brass, and leave this so for twenty days, the letters will appear green upon
the place: the same may be done many other ways, namely, by dissolving salt
Ammoniac in water, and writing with it upon Brass, the place will sooner appear
of verdigreese-colour.

CHAP. X.
How we may take off letters that are written upon the paper.
IF we would take letters from off the paper, or that such as are blotted out
might appear again, we must use this art. As, if we would

Take letters off the paper,
or from parchment: Take Aqua fortis, that is it that parts gold from silver:
with a pensil wipe some of this upon the letters, it will presently wipe off
letters, written with Gall and Copras. If you use Aqua fortis, wherein salt
Ammoniac is dissolved, it will be sooner done. But printed letters are harder
taken out, because that ink has neither Galls nor Copras: Or rub it with salt
Alkali and Sulphur, making little balls of them, and that will eat them out,
that nothing shall be seen. But if you desire to write any thing in the place
you have made clean; first, wet the place with water, wherein Alom is
dissolved, for the ink will not run about. If you desire

To renew letters decayed,
or to read such as are vanished: Boil Galls in wine, and with a sponge wipe
over the letters, the letters will presently be seen, when they are once wet
thus, and be well colored as they were at first.

CHAP. XI.
How to counterfeit a seal and writing.
IT may be of great use when places are besieged, and in Armies, and affairs of
great men, to know how to open letters, that are sealed with the Generals Seal,
and signed with his Name, to know what is contained within, and to seal them
again, writing others that are contrary to them, and the like. I will show how

To counterfeit the Seal.
Melt Sulphur, and cast it into powder of Ceruss, while it is melted; put this
mixture upon the Seal, but sense it about with paper or wax, or chalk, and
press it down; when it is cold, take it off, and in that shall you have the
print of the Seal. I will do it another way. Fill an earthen pot with Vinegar,
cast Vitriol into it, and a good deal of Verdigreese; let it bubble on the
fire, put plates of iron into it; after a short time take them out, and from
the outside with your knife, scrape off a kind of rust it has contracted,
that is durty as it were, and put this into a dish under it: again, put them
into the earthen pot, and scrape more off when you take them out; do this so
often, till you have some quantity of this durty substance: cast quicksilver
into this, and make a mixture; and while it is soft and tender, lay it on the
Seal, and press it down, and let it remain in the open Air, for it will grow so
hard, that you may almost seal with it; for it will become even like to a
Metal. It may be also done another way: Take the filings of steel, and put them
in an earthen Crucible at a strong fire; put such things to it, as will hasten
the melting of it: when it is melted, cast it into some hollow place, pownd it
in a brass Mortar, for it will be easily done: do it so three or four times;
then powder it, and mingle quicksilver with it, and let it boil in a glazed
vessel six hours, till it be well mingled; then press the seal upon it, and let
it cool, and it will become exceeding hard. It is possible

To make a great Seal less,
if it should happen that we want a lesser seal, we must do thus: Take
Isinglass, and dissolve it in water: anoint the figure with oil, that it may
not stick to the glue; compass the seal about with wax, that the matter run not
about; put the Isinglass to the fire, and melt it, pour it upon the seal; after
three hours, when it is cold, take it away, and let it dry, for the seal when
it is dry, will be drawn less equally. If you will

Imitate the form of a writing,
do thus: Open the letter upon a looking-glass, that wants the foyl: upon the
letter lay white paper, and a light under the glass; temper your ink as the
writing is, and draw your lines upon the lines of the letters you see through.
We may

Open letters, and shut them without suspicion.
We use to seal letters, putting paper upon them, which goes through the letter
on one side, and wax is put on the other side, where it comes forth, and there
it is sealed. You shall open the letter thus: Break away that part of the
paper, that is put upon the place, where it passes through the letter, and the
hole is, the letter opens presently: read it, and shut it again, and put the
paper torn off, in its proper place: first, anointing the crack with
gum-traganth, dissolved in water; for the paper will be so glewed, that it will
be stronger there then elsewhere; press it with a small weight, till it grow
dry; the fraud cannot be discovered, because the glue is white, and is not
known from the color of the paper.

CHAP. XII.
How you may sp^ak at a great distance.
THere are many way how we may speak at a very great distance, with our friends
that are absent, or when they are in prison, or shut up in Cities; and this is
done with safety, and without any suspicion, as I shall show. Two things are
declared here, either to do it by open voice re^uplicated, or else by a Trunk.
We may

With open voice show some things to those that are confederate with us.
It is wonderful, that as the Light, so the Voice is reverberated with equal
Angles. I shall show how this may be done by a glass. It is almost grown
common, how to speak through right or circular walls. The voice passing from
the mouth goes through the Air: if it goes about a wall that is uniform, it
passes uncorrupted; but if it be at liberty, it is beaten back by the wall it
meets with in the way, and is heard, as we see in an Echo. I through a
circular building, that was very long and smooth, spoke words to my friend,
that heard them round the wall, and the words came entire to his ears; but one
standing in the middle heard not any noise, and yet I heard again what my
friend answered to me. In the morning whenas I walked by the sea shore, I heard
above a mile, what my friends talked in a Boat: the sea was very calm, and
scarce moved, and the words came clearly to me, carried on the plain
superficies of the water. I hear that at Mantua, and other places, a great
Gallery is built, wherein one speaking in the corner, is heard by another that
knows the business, standing in another corner; but those that stand in the
middle, perceive nothing of it. But more exactly and clearly

To signify to friends all things by a Trunk,
Let the pipe be of Earth (but lead is better) or of any matter well closed,
that the voice may not get forth in the long passage; for whatever you speak at
one end, the voice without any difference, as it came forth of the speakers
mouth, comes so to the ears of him that hearkneth; and I doubt not but this may
be done some miles off. The voice not divided or scattered, goes whole a long
way I have tried it for above two hundred paces, when I had no other
convenience, and the words were heard so clear, and open, as the speaker
uttered them: Upon this it came into my mind, to intercept words spoken by the
way, with leaden pipes, and to hold them so long as I pleased close in; that
when I opened the hole, the words should break forth, I perceive that the sound
goes by degrees, and that being carried through a pipe, it may be shut up in
the middle; and if a very long Trunk should take away the convenience of it,
that many winding pipes might shut it up in a close place. I read that Albertus
made an Artificial head, that spoke at a set time: I might hope to do the same
by this invention; yet I never tried this farther then I have said: yet I have
heard by my friends, that lovers have spoke a long time through a leaden pipe,
from their Houses that stood far asunder.

CHAP. XIII.
By night we may make signs by fire, and with dust by day.
IT remains to show whether we can make signs in the night by fire, and in the
day by dust, to declare our business. That may fall out two ways: For by fire
of a sudden, we show to our confederate friends, or when we please, by certain
numbers of Torches, we represent letters fit to demonstrate what our purpose
is, that those that are far off, seeing and observing the motions may perceive
our intent. The first way, we read that Medea promised to the Argonauts, that
if she killed Pelias, she would signify so much unto them by night with fire
from a Watchtower, and by day with smoke. When therefore the business was
effected, as she would have it, she counterfeited, that she must pay her vows
to the Moon, by making a fire, by lighting Torches in the open Air, from the
top of the place, as she had promised, and when the Argonauts understood it
this way, they invaded the Kings palace, and killing the guard, they made her
to enjoy her wishes. We read also that Maga, having possession of Paretonium,
agreed with the watch, that at night in the evening, and again in the morning
be^imes, they should set up the light that was for confederacy; and by that
means signs were made, that the messenger came as far as Clius. Also to friends
that live out of the City, by fire we may signify our revenew, and the quality
of provision. It is apparent, that Annibal, as Polybius writes, when the people
of Agrigentum were besieged by the Romans, by many and frequent fires by night,
did show forth the intolerable famine of his Army, and for that cause many of
his Soldiers, for want of victuals, fell off to the enemy. Also the Grecians
compacted with Sinon, that by night, when the Trojans were asleep, those that
came to Troy should have a token, when he should open the Trojan Horse, to let
forth the Soldiers that were within. Whence Virgil,

When the Kings fleet lift up the flames, just then
Did Sinon let forth all the Grecian men.
Also by Torches letters may be signified, as we find it in the Manuscript of
Polybius. Tops of buildings or Towers, are very fit to set up the Torches on.
Let the letters be divided into two or three parts, if there may be eleven, or
seven parts of each. If they be seven, the first letters are showed by single
Torches, the second by double ones, the third by three Torches. The number may
be also divided into four parts: but in representing them, we must observe the
variety of motion. For one Torch once lifted up, shall signify A, the same
lifted up twice B, thrice C; so seven times: the last of the first order G,
after that two once H, so many twice I, thrice signifies L, and so of the rest
of the same order. Then Q by the third order, once, R by the same, twice, and
thrice as many of the same, signifies S, and so it holds for four. Thus a woman
from a Watchtower, with three lights showed five times, then with double ones
twice, then with treble lights twice, then again with one at once, and with the
same four times, then five times with three lights, then thrice, and with as
many four times, shall signify, vir adest, the man is come. Also the lights
may be of diverse colors, if they would show that friends are near. Also by
smoke, we may show that our enemies are near, or some other thing. Hence it
was, that by the policy of Amilcar, the men of Agrigentum, being drawn off far
from the City, amongst their enemies that they pursued, unto an ambuscado,
where the enemies lay hid, and a by wood set on fire, suffered a great
overthrow: for when they thought they were called back by their friends, by
reason of a smoke they supposed to come from the walls; when they turned their
course to go to the City, Amilcar commanding, the Carthaginians followed them,
who fled before, and so slew them.

THE SEVENTEENTH BOOK OF Natural Magic: Wherein are propounded Burning-glass,
and the wonderful sights to be seen by them.
THE PROEME.
NOw I am come to Mathematical Sciences, and this place requires that I show
some experiments concerning Catoptrick-glasses. For these shine amongst
Geometrical instruments, for Ingen^ity, Wonder, and Profit: For what could be
invented more ingeniously, then that certain experiments should follow the
imaginary conceits of the mind, and the truth of Mathematical Demonstrations
should be made good by Ocular experiments? what could seem more wonderful, then
that by reciprocal strokes of reflection, Images should appear outwardly,
hanging in the Air, and yet neither the visible Object nor the Glass seen? that
they may seem not to be the repercussion of the Glasses, but Spirits of vain
Phantasms? to see burning Glasses, not to burn alone where the beams unite, but
at a great distance to cast forth terrible fires, and flames, that are most
profitable in warlike expeditions, as in many other things. We read that
Archimedes at Syracuse with burning Glasses defeated the forces of the Romans:
and that King Ptolomey built a Tower in Pharos, where he set a Glass, that he
could for six hundred miles, see by it the enemies Ships, that invaded his
Country, and plundered it. I shall add also those Spectacles, whereby poor
blind people can at great distance, perfectly see all things. And though
venerable Antiquity seem to have invented many and great things, yet I shall
set down greater, more Noble, and more Famous things, and that will not a
little help to the Optic Science, that more sublime wits may increase it
infinitely. Lastly, I shall show how to make Crystal and Metal Glasses, and how
to polish them.

CHAP. I.
Diverse representations made by plain Glasses.
I Shall begin with plain Glasses, for they are more simple, and the
speculations thereof, are not so laborious, though the apparitions of them be
almost common, yet they will be useful for what follows: and we shall add some
secret apparitions unto them. The variety of the Images that appear, proceed
either from the matter or form of the Glass. Crystal must be clear,
transparent, and exactly made plain on both sides: and if one or both of these
be wanting, they will represent diverse and deformed apparitions to our sight. I
shall therefore begin from the matter, and show

How apparitions may seem to him that looks upon them, to be pale, yellow, or
of diverse colors.
When the Glass is melted with heat in the furnace, with any little color it
will be tainted; if you cast in yellow, the face of him that looks into it,
will seem to have they yellow Jaundies; if black, he will appear wan and
deformed; if you add much of it, like to a blackmoore; if red, like a drunkard
or furious fellow; and so will it represent Images of any color. How to mingle
the colors, I taught when I spoke of Jewels. I have often made sport with the
most fair women, with these Glasses; when they looked, and saw not themselves
as they were: but there are many varieities arise from the form.

That the face of him that looks on the Glass may seem to be divided in the
middle,
Let the superficies of the looking-glass that you look on, be plain, and
exactly polished by rule; but the backside must have a blunt angle in the
middle, that the highest part of it may be in the middle; in the outward parts
it must be sharp and pressed down; then lay on the foil: wherefore the Image
that falls on your sight, where the lines meet in the angle, will seem divided
into two. If you will

That he that looks in the Glass, shall seem like an Ass, Dog, or Sow;
By variation of the place, the Angles, and the representation of the Form
beheld, will seem various. If that part of the Glass, that is set against your
mouth, shall stick forth before like a wreathed band or a Boss-buckler, your
mouth will appear to come forth like an Asses or Sows snout; but if it swell
forth against your eyes, your eyes will seem to be put forth like shrimps eyes;
if the Angle be stretched forth by the length of the Glass, your Forehead,
Nose, and Chin, will seem to be sharp, as the mouth of a Dog.

That the whole face may seem various and deformed.
Let a plain Glass not be exactly plain and even: which that it may be done,
when the Glass is once made plain, put it into the furnace again, and let it be
turned by the skilful hand of an Artist, till it lose its right position, then
foil it. Then the Image on the hollow part of the Glass, will represent the
opposite part hollow; so it will hold forth one lying along on his face, or
crooked, and swelling outwardly and inwardly. Then if when the Glass is
polished, one side be rubbed, the face will seem long and broad: wherefore it
must be rubbed, and fashioned on all sides, that it may every way represent a
perfect face. I shall show you also

How to make a Glass to represent many Images.
That it may show diverse Images one after another, and of diverse colors, make
the solid body of the Looking-glass, or Glass that is half a finger thick, and
let it be so plained, that upon one side, the thickness may not be touched, but
on the other side, the lines of the two superficies may meet, as the sharp edge
of a Knife. M^ke also another table of a Glass the same way: or else more; lay
a foil of Tin upon the last, and place one of them upon the other, so that the
thinner part of the one, may lie upon the thick part of the other: so will the
face of one that looks into it, appear to be two, one behind the other, and the
nethermost will always appear darkest. So if by the same Artifice, you fit
three tables of Glass, the Image will appear to be three, and the farther he
that looks, stands with his face from the Glass, the farther will those Images
or faces stand asunder; but as you come very near, they seem to join all in
one: If you hold a Candle lighted against it, there will be many seen together,
which comes by the mutual reciprocation of the sight and the Glass* and if the
polishers of Glasses be not neer-hand, we may make the same with common
Looking-glasses, putting one aptly above another, but let one be distant from
the other by certain courses; then shut them in a frame, that the Art may not
be discovered. Nor will I omit

How letters may be cast out and read, on a wall that is far distant;
which we shall do with the same plain Glass; and lovers that are far asunder,
may so hold commerce one with another. On the superficies of a plain Glass,
make Letters with black ink, or with wax, that they may be solid to hinder the
light of the Glass, and shadow it; then hold the Glass against the Sunbeams,
so that the beams reflecting on the Glass, may be cast upon the opposite wall
of a Chamber, it is no doubt but the light and letters will be seen in the
Chamber, the Suns light will be clearest, and the letters not so bright; so
that they will be clearly discovered, as they are sent in.

CHAP. II.
Other merry sports with plain Looking-glasses.
NOw I shall annex some other operations of a plain Glass, described by our
Ancestors, that I may seem to leave out nothing: and I will so augment them,
and bring them to a rule, that they may be easily made. I shall begin with this,

How by plain Looking-glasses, the head may appear to be downwards, and the
heels upwards.
If any man by plain Glasses, desires to see his head downward, and his feet
upward (though it is proper for Concave-Glasses to represent that) yet I will
endeavor to do it by plain Glasses. Place two Glasses long-ways, that they may
stick together, and cannot easily come asunder, or move here and there, and
that they make a right Angle; when this is so done, according to coherence the
long way, set this against your face, that in one, half the face, in the other
the other half may be seen; then incline the Looking-glass to the right or
left hand, looking right into it, and your head will seem to be turned, for
according to their latitude, they will cut the face into two, and the Image
will appear so, as if the head were under, and the heels upwards; and if the
Glass be large, the whole body will seem to be inverted. But this happens from
the mutual and manifold reflection, for it flies from one to the other, that it
seems to be turned. We may

Make a plain Glass that shall represent the Image manifold.
A Glass is made that will make many representations, that is, that many things
may be seen at once; for by opening and shutting it, you shall see twenty
fingers for one, and more. You shall make it thus: Raise two brass
Looking-glasses, or of Crystal, at right Angles upon the same basis, and let
them be in a proportion called sesquialtera, that is, one and half, or some
other proportion, and let them be joined together longways, that they may be
shut and opened, like to a Book; and the Angles be diverse, such as are made at
Venice: For one face being objected, you shall see many in them both, and this
by so much the straighter, as you put them together, and the Angles are less:
but they will be diminished by opening them, and the Angles being more obtuse,
you shall see the fewer: so showing one figure, there will be more seen: and
farther, the right parts will show right, and the left to be the left, which is
contrary to Looking-glasses; and this is done by mutual reflection and
pulsation, whence arises the variety of Images interchangably. We may

Make a Glass of plain Glasses, wherein one Image coming, is seen going back in
another.
Take two plain Glasses, the length whereof shall be double, or one and half to
the latitude, and that for greater convenience: for the proportion is not
material; but let them be of the same length, and equal, and laid on the top of
a Pillar, inclining one to the other, and so joined together; and let them be
set upright upon some plain place perpendicularly, so the Glasses fastened, may
be moved on the moveable side. It is no doubt but you shall see the Image to
come in one, and go back in the other Glass; and the more this comes near, the
farther will the other go; and in one will it be seen coming, and in the other
going. Also you may see

In plain Glasses those things that are done afar off, and in other places.
So may a man secretly see, and without suspicion, what is done afar off, and
in other places, which otherwise cannot be done: but you must be careful in
setting your Glasses. Let there be a place appointed in a house or elsewhere,
where you may see any thing, and set a Glass right over against your window, or
hole, that may be toward your face, and let it be set straight up if need were,
or fastened to the wall, moving it here and there, and inclining it till it
reflect right against the place; which you shall attain by looking on it, and
coming toward it: and if it be difficult, you cannot mistake, if you use a
quadrant or some such instrument; and let it be set perpendicular upon a line,
that cuts the Angle of reflection, and incidence of the lines, and you shall
clearly see what is done in that place. So it will happen also in diverse
places. Hence it is, that if one Glass will not do it well, you may do the same
by more Glasses; or if the visible Object be lost by too great a distance, or
taken away by walls or mountains coming between; moreover, you shall fit
another Glass just against the former, upon a right line, which may divide the
right Angle, or else it will not be done, and you shall see the place you
desire. For one Glass sending the Image to the other tenfold, and the Image
being broken by many things, flies from the eye, and you shall see what you
first light upon, until such time as the Image is brought to you by right
lines, and the visible Object is not stopped by the windings of places or walls:
and the placing of it is easy. So oft-times I use to convey Images of things.
But if otherwise you desire to see any high place, or that stands upright, and
your eye cannot discern it; fit two Looking-glasses together long-ways, as I
said, and fasten one upon the top of a post or wall, that it may stand above
it, and the Object may stand right against it; the other to a cord, that you
may move it handsomely when you please, and that it may make with the first
sometimes a blunt, sometimes a sharp Angle, as need requires, until the line of
the thing seen, may be refracted by the middle of the second Glass to your
sight, and the Angles of reflection and incidence be equal; and if you seek to
see high things, raise it; if low things, pull it down, till it beat back upon
your sight, then shall you behold it. If you hold one of them in your hand, and
look upon that, it will be more easily done. I show you also

How to make a Glass that shall show nothing but what you will.
Also a Glass is so framed, that when you look into it, you shall not see your
own picture, but some otherface, that is not seen any where round about. Fasten
a plain Glass on a wall upon a plain, set upright perpendicularly, and bow the
top of it to the known proportion of the Angle: right against it cut the wall,
according as the proportion of some Picture or Image may require, and set it by
it, according to a fit distance, and cover it, that the beholder may not see it
(and the matter will be the more wonderful) nor can come at it: The Glass at a
set place will beat back the Image, that there will be a mutual glance of the
visible Object and the sight, by the Looking-glasses: there place your eye; you
shall find that place, as I taught you before. Wherefore the spectator going
thither, shall neither see his own face, nor any thing else besides: when he is
opposed to it, and comes to the set place, he shall see the Image or the
Picture, or some such thing, which he can behold nowhere else. You shall now
know

How a Glass may be made of plain Glasses, whereby you may see an Image flying
in the Air.
Nor is that Glass of less importance, or pleasure, that will represent men
flying in the Air. If any man would do it, it is easily done thus: Fit two
pieces of wood together like a square or gnomon of a Dial, and being well
fastened, they may make an Angle as of a right angled triangle, or Isosceles.
Fasten then at each foot one great Looking-glass, equally distant, right one
against the other, and equidistant from the Angle: let one of them lie flat,
and let the spectator place himself about the middle of it, being somewhat
raised above the ground, that he may the more easily see the form of the heel
going and coming: for presently you shall perceive, if you set your self in a
right line, that cuts that Angle, and it be equidistant to the horizon. So the
representing Glass will send that Image to the other, which the spectator looks
into, and it will shake and move the hands and feet, as Birds do when they fly.
So shall he see his own Image flying in the other, that it will always move, so
he depart not from the place of reflection, for that would spoil it.

CHAP. III.
A Looking-glass called a Theatrical Glass.
PRudent Antiquity found out a Looking-glass made of plain Glasses, wherein if
one Object might be seen, it would represent more Images of the same thing; as
we may perceive by some writings, that go in Ptolomies name. Lastly, I shall
add to this what our age has invented, that is far more admirable and
pleasant. Wherefore

To make an Ancient fashioned Looking-glass of plain Glasses, wherein more
Pictures will be represented of the something.
The way is this; make a half circle on a plain Table, or place where you
desire such a Glass to be set up; and divide this equally with points according
to the number of the Images you would see. Make subtendent lines to them, and
cut away the arches; then erect plain Looking-glasses, that may be of the same
latitude, and of the same parallel lines, and the same longitude; glue them
fast together, and fit them so, that they may not be pulled asunder, as they
are joined long-ways, and erected upon a plain superficies. Lastly, let the
spectator place his eye in the center of the circle, that he may have his sight
uniform, in respect of them all; in each of them you shall see a several face,
and so quite round, as we see it often when people dance round, or in a
Theater, and therefore it is called a Theatrical Glass: For from the center all
the perpendicular lines fall upon the superficies, and they are reflected into
themselves; so they reflect the Images upon the eye, each of them drawing forth
its own. This is the Ancients way of making a Theatrical Glass; but it is
childish: I will show you one that is far more pleasant, and wonderful; for in
the former, the Images were seen no more than the Glasses were in number; but
in our Glass, by the manifold and reciprocal da^tings of the Object and the
Glass, you may see far more, and almost infinite Images. The way is this.

How to make an Amphitheatrical-Glass.
Make a circle on a Table what largeness you desire, and divide it into unequal
parts; and in the place where the Object or Face to be seen must be opposed,
leave two void spaces: over against the parts, let a right line be made upon
the lines that determine the parts, let Looking-glasses be raised
perpendicularly; for the face that shall be against the Looking-glass, placed
in the middle, will fly back to the beholder of it, and so rebounding to
another, and from that to another, and by many reflections you shall see almost
infinite faces, and the more the Glasses are, the more will be the faces: If
you set a Candle against it, you shall see innumerable Candles. But if the
Glasses you erect, shall be of those already described, from so many diverse
faces of Asses, Sows, Horses, Dogs; and of colors, yellow, Brown, red, the
spectators shall see a far more wonderful and pleasant sight, for by reason of
the manifold reflection, and diversity of the forms of the Glasses, and
colors, an excellent mixture will arise.

But I will now make one that is far more wonderful and beautiful. For in that
the beholder shall not see his own face, but a most wonderful, and pleasant,
and orderly form of pillars, and the basis of them, and variety of
Architecture. Make therefore a circle as you would have it for magnitude, but I
hold the best to be where the diameter is two foot and a half: divide the
circumference into equal parts; as for example, into fourteen; the points of
the divisions shall be the places, where the pillars must be erected. Let the
place where the spectator must look, contain two parts; and take one pillar
away, so there will be thirteen pillars: Let one pillar be right against the
sight; then raise Looking-glasses upon the lines of space between, not exactly,
but inclined: place then two Lookingglasses at opposition in a right line, but
the rest about the beginning, where they join, and that for no other reason,
but that the beholders face, being not rightly placed, may not be reflected, as
I said before: for thus the Glasses will not represent faces, but pillars, and
spaces between, and all ornaments. Hence by the reciprocal reflection of the
Glasses, you shall see so many pillars, basis, and varieties, keeping the right
order of Architecture, that nothing can be more pleasant, or more wonderful to
behold. Let the perspective be the Dorick and Corinthian, adorned with Gold,
Silver, Pearls, Jewels, Images, Pictures, and such like, that it may seem the
more Magnificent: the form of it shall be thus. Let H G. be the place for the
beholder to look: the pillar against him shall be A, in the Glass AB, or AC, the
face of the beholder shall not be seen, but AB is reflected into IH, and IH
into BD, so by mutual reflections they are so multiplied, that they seem to go
very far inwardly, so clearly and apparently, that no spectator that looks into
it, unless he know it, but he will thrust his hands in to touch the orders. If
you set a Candle in the middle, it will seem so to multiply by the Images
rebounding, that you shall not see so many Stars in the skies, that you can
never wonder enough at the Order, Symmetry, and the Prospect. I have raised and
made this Amphitheatre diverse ways, and to show other orders, namely two ranks
of pillars, so that the one stuck to the Glasses, the other stood alone in the
middle, bound with the chief Arches, and with diverse Ornaments, that it may
seem to be a most beautiful Perspective or Architecture. Almost the same way is
there made a little chest of many plain Glasses, covered round: this they call
the Treasury: on the ground, arches and walls, were there Pearls, Jewels,
Birds, and Moneys hanging, and these were so multiplied by the reflections of
the Glasses, that it reprsented a most rich Treasury indeed. Make therefore a
Chest of wood, let the bottom be two foot long, and one and half broad; let it
be open in the middle, that you may well thrust in your head; on the right and
left hand, erect the side-boards a foot long, semicircular above, that it may
be arched, but not exactly circular, namely, divided into five parts, each a
hand-breadth. Cover this all about with Glasses; where the Glasses join, there
put Pearls, Precious-stones, specious Flowers, diverse colored Birds: above the
bottom set heaps of Gold, and Silver Meddals; from the Arches, let there hang
Pearls, fleeces of Gold; for when the C^ffer is moved gently, they will move
also, and the Images will move in the Glasses, that it will be a pleasant
sight.

CHAP. IV.
Diverse operations of Concave-Glasses.
BUt the operations of Concave-glasses are far more curious and admirable, and
will afford us more commodities. But you can do nothing perfectly with it,
until you know first the point of inversion. Therefore that you may do it the
better, and more easily

Know the point of Inversion of Images in a Concave-glass,
Do thus: Hold your Glass against the Sun, and where you see the beams unite,
know that to be the point of Inversion. If you cannot well perceive that,
breathe a thick vapor from your mouth upon it, and you shall apparently see
where the coincidence is of the reflected beams; or set under it a vessel of
boiling water. When you have found the point of Inversion, if you will

That all things shall seem greater.
Set your head below that point, and you shall behold a huge Face like a
monstrous Bacchus, and your finger as great as your arm: So women pull hairs
off their eyebrows, for they will show as great as fingers. Seneca reports that
Hostius made such Concave-Glasses, that they might make things show greater: He
was a great provoker to lust; so ordering his Glasses, that when he was abused
by Sodomy, he might see all the motions of the Sodomite behind him, and delight
himself with a false representation of his privy parts that showed so great.

To kindle fire with a Concave-Glass.
This Glass is excellent above others, for this, that it unites the beams so
strongly, that it will show forth a light Pyramid of its beams, as you hold it
to the Sun; and if you put any combustible matter in the center of it, it will
presently kindle and flame, that with a little stay will melt Lead or Tin, and
will make Gold or Iron red hot: and I have heard by some, that Gold and Silver
have been melted by it; more slowly in winter, but sooner in summer, because
the medium is hotter; at noon rather than in the morning, or evening for the
same reason.

To make an Image seem to hang in the Air, by a Concave-Glass.
This will be more wonderful with the segment of a circle, for it will appear
farther from the Glass. If you be without the point of Inversion, you shall see
your head downwards. That with fixed eyes, and not winking at all, you may
behold the point, until it comes to your very sight: For where the Cathe^us
shall cut the line of reflection, there the species reflected will seem almost
parted from the Glass: the nearer you are to the Center, the greater will it
be, that you will think to touch it with your hands: and if it be a great
Glass, you cannot but wonder; for if any man run at the Glass with a drawn
sword, another man will seem to meet him, and to run through his hand. If you
show a Candle, you will think a Candle is pendulous lighted in the Air. But if
you will

That the Image of a Concave-Glass should go out far from the Center;
when you have obtained the Image of the thing in its point, if you will have
it farther distant from the Center, and that the Picture of a thing shall be
farther stretched forth, then you shall decline from the point a little toward
the right or left hand, about the superficies of the Glass, and the Image will
come forth the farther, and will come to your sight: There, namely where the
Catherus does the farthest off that is possible touch the line of reflection,
which few have observed: from which principle many strange wonders may be done.
When you have this, you may easily

Reflect heat, cold, and the voice too, by a Concave-Glass.
If a man put a Candle in a place, where the visible Object is to be set, the
Candle will come to your very eyes, and will offend them with its heat and
light. But this is more wonderful, that as heat, so cold, should be reflected:
if you put snow in that place, if it come to the eye, because it is sensible,
it will presently feel the cold. But there is a greater wonder yet in it; for
it will not only reverberate heat and cold, but the voice too, and make an
Echo; for the voice is more rightly reflected by a polite and smooth
superficies of the Glass, and more completely than by any wall. I prove this,
because, if a man turn his face to the Glass, and his friend stand far behind
his back, when he beholds his face, he shall decline his face from the point of
Inversion; but on the right hand, about the superficies of the Glass, and his
face will come forth far from the Glass, and will seem very great about the
face of his friend: Whatsoever he shall speak with a low voice against the
Glass, he shall hear the same words and motions of his mouth, and all motion
from the mouth of the reflected Image; and they that stand in the middle
between them, shall perceive nothing at all. But he that would send his own
Image to his friend, must observe till his head shall come to the Glass. It is
profitable also

By a Concave-Glass to see in the night what is done afar off.
By this very Glass, we may in a tempestuous night, in the middle of the
streets, cast the light a great way, even into other men's Chambers. Take the
Glass in your hand, and set a Candle to the point of Inversion, for the
parallel beams will be reflected to the place desired, and the place will be
enlightened above sixty paces, and whatsoever falls between the parallels, will
be clearly seen: the reason is, because the beams from the Center to the
circumference, are reflected parallel, when the parallels come to a point; and
in the place thus illuminared, letters may be read, and all things done
conveniently, that require great light. By the same Art we may

With a few small lights give light to a great Hall.
In Temples, Watches, and nightly Feasts, any man may thus with a few lights
make a great light. At two or more places of the Chamber set Concave-glasses
above, and let them be so ordered, that the place of concurrent parallels may
be coincident in the place required; and in the point of Inversion of them, the
light will be so multiplied, that it will be as light as noonday. Lamps are
best for this purpose, because the light varies not from the place. Candles are
naught, because they alter the places of reflection. More commodiously then by
a plain Glass, to signify by a Concave-glass, secretly some notes to your
friend: Thus, do as I said, make the marks upon your Glass superficies with wax
or some dark substance, and setting it against the light, it will cast the
light upon the walls of the Chamber, and there it will be dark where the
letters are made: one that knows the craft, may easily read them. But this is
more admirable for one that knows not the cause,

To read letters in a dark night.
A Concave-Glass is of great use for this, and it may be this may be good in
time of necessity. Set your Concave-Glass against the Stars of the first
magnitude, or against Venus or Mercury, or against a fire or light that is afar
off; for the light reflected will meet in the point of burning, and reflects a
most bright light, whereby you may easily read the smallest letters; for
putting the point of reflection to every word, you shall see all clearly. But
this is more necessary and profitable,

At any hour of the day with a Concave-Glass, to set a House or Fort on fire.
You may so burn the enemies Ships, Gates, Bridges, and the like, without
danger or suspicion, at a set hour of the day, appointed the day before. Set
your Glass against the Sun, and order it so, that the coincidence of the beams
may fall upon the point: lay fuel there, and things that will take fire, as I
showed you: and if you would blow up Towers, make heaps of Gunpowder: at night
set your Glass, and hide it, that it be not seen, for the next day the Sun will
fall upon the same point, where you set fuel for the fire.

CHAP. V.
Of the mixed operations of the plain Concave-Glasses.
I Shall set down the mixed operations and benefits of both these Glasses, that
what one cannot do alone, it may do by the help of another. If we would

Kindle fire afar off with a plain and a Concave-Glass.
It falls out sometimes that one shut up in prison needs fire, and the Sun
beams shine not in: or else I will show how we may kindle Gunpowder without
fire, or make mines and fill them with Gunpowder, to blow up Castles or Rocks
afar off without danger, setting them on fire by a plain Glass. A plain Glass
as it receives the parallel beams of the Sun, it so reflects them, and
therefore will cast the beams that are equidistant, a great way: but if a
Concave-Glass receive them, it so unites them, that it sets things on fire.
Wherefore, first proving where the Concave-Glass must be placed, that it may
fire the fuel cast in: the next day, at the hour appointed, let the plain Glass
cast in the beams upon the Concave-glass, that will unite them: so without
danger, or any suspicion of the enemy, we may kindle fire for our use. Nor is
it useless,

That by a plain and Concave-Glass the smallest letter shall appear very great,
when letters are so small that they can only be seen: For I have seen St.
John's Gospel, In the beginning, etc. writ so small, in so little place, that it
was no bigger than a small pimple, or the sight in a Cocks eye. By this
Artifice we may make them seem greater, and read them with ease. Put a
Concave-glass, with the back of it to your breast; over against it in the point
of burning, set the writing: behind set a plain Glass, that you may see it:
Then in the plain Glass will the Images of the Characters be reflected, that
are in the Concave-glass, which the Concave-Glass has made greater, that you
may read them without difficulty. You may

With a plain and Concave-Glass, make an Image be seen hanging altogether in
the Air.
Do thus. I said that by help of a Concave-Glass, an Image may be sent forth:
and this is seen by none but those that stand over against it; Set the
Concave-Glass to your breast, without the Center place a Poniard against it, and
going farther off, set a plain Glass against it; and looking in that, you shall
see the Image reflected from the Concave-glass, hanging in the Air, and that
exactly. But if an ingenious man observe it, he may wonderfully see an Image
hanging in the Air, that is received in a plain Glass, and sent far out as I
showed, without the help of a Concave-glass, and a visible spectacle, by the
means of a plain Glass only. You may also

By a plain Glass see your face turned the wrong way.
When you have set the Glass to your breast, as I said; set a plain Glass
against it, and look upon it, will cast it upon the Concave-glass, and that
will beat it backwards on the plain Glass: so have you your purpose.

CHAP. VI.
Other operations of a Concave-Glass.
BEfore I part from the operations of this Glass, I will tell you some use of
it, that is very pleasant and admirable, whence great secrets of Nature may
appear unto us. As,

To see all things in the dark, that are outwardly done in the Sun, with the
colors of them.
You must shut all the Chamber windows, and it will do well to shut up all
holes besides, lest any light breaking in should spoil all. Only make one
hole, that shall be a hands breadth and length; above this fit a little leaden
or brass Table, and glue it, so thick as a paper; open a round hole in the
middle of it, as great as your little finger: over against this, let there be
white walls of paper, or white clothes, so shall you see all that is done
without in the Sun, and those that walk in the streets, like to Antipodes, and
what is right will be the left, and all things changed; and the farther they
are off from the hole, the greater they will appear. If you bring your paper,
or white Table nearer, they will show less and clearer; but you must stay a
while, for the Images will not be seen presently: because a strong similitude
does sometimes make a great sensation with the sense, and brings in such an
affection, that not only when the senses do act, are they in the organs, and
do trouble them, but when they have done acting, they will stay long in them:
which may easily be perceived. For when men walk in the Sun, if they come into
the dark, that affection continues, that we can see nothing, or very scantly;
because the affection made by the light, is still in our eyes; and when that is
gone by degrees, we see clearly in dark places. Now will I declare what I ever
concealed till now, and thought to conceal continually. If you put a small
centicular Crystal glass to the hole, you shall presently see all things
clearer, the countenances of men walking, the colors, Garments, and all things
as if you stood hard by; you shall see them with so much pleasure, that those
that see it can never enough admire it. But if you will

See all things greater and clearer,
Over against it set the Glass, not that which dissipates by dispersing, but
which congregates by uniting, both by coming to it, and going from it, till you
know the true quantity of the Image, by a due appropinquation of the Center;
and so shall the beholder see more fitly Birds flying, the cloudy skies, or
clear and blew, Mountains that are afar off; and in a small circle of paper
(that is put over the hole) you shall see as it were an Epitomy of the whole
world, and you will much rejoice to see it: all things backwards, because they
are near to the Center of the Glass, if you set them farther from the Center,
they will show greater and upright, as they are, but not so clear. Hence you
may,

If you cannot draw a Picture of a man or any things else, draw it by this
means;
If you can but only make the colors. This is an Art worth learning. Let the
Sun beat upon the window, and there about the hole, let there be Pictures of
men, that it may light upon them, but not upon the hole. Put a white paper
against the hole, and you shall so long fit the men by the light, bringing them
near, or setting them further, until the Sun cast a perfect representation upon
the Table against it: one that is skilled in painting, must lay on colors
where they are in the Table, and shall describe the manner of the countenance;
so the Image being removed, the Picture will remain on the Table, and in the
superficies it will be seen as an Image in Glass. If you will

That all shall appear right,
This is a great secret: many have tried it, but none could obtain it: For some
setting Plain Glasses obliquely against the hole, by reverberation against the
Table, they could see some things somewhat direct, but dark and not
discernable. I oft-times by putting a white paper obliquely against the hole,
and looking just against the hole, could see some things direct: but a Pyramid
cut obliquely, did show men without proportion, and very darkly. But thus you
may obtain your desire: Put against the hole a unequal Glass; from thence let
the Image reflect on a Concaveglass: let the Concave-glass be distant from the
Center, for it will make those Images right, that it receives turned, by reason
of the distance of the Center. So upon the hole and the white paper, it will
cast the Images of the Objects so clearly and plainly, that you will not wonder
a little. But this I thought fit to let you understand, lest you fail in the
work, that the Unequal and Concave-glasses be proportionable circles: how you
shall do this, will be here declared often. I shall show also,

How in a Chamber you may see Hunting, Battles of Enemies, and other delusions.
Now for a conclusion I will add that, then which nothing can be more pleasant
for great men, and Scholars, and ingenious persons to behold; That in a dark
Chamber by white sheets objected, one may see as clearly and perspicuously, as
if they were before his eyes, Huntings, Banquets, Armies of Enemies, Plays, and
all things else that one desires. Let there be over against that Chamber,
where you desire to represent these things, some spacious Plain, where the Sun
can freely shine: Upon that you shall set Trees in Order, also Woods,
Mountains, Rivers, and Animals, that are really so, or made by Art, of Wood, or
some other matter. You must frame little children in them, as we use to bring
them in when Comedies are Acted: and you must counterfeit Stags, Bores,
Rhinocerets, Elephants, Lions, and what other creatures you please: Then by
degrees they must appear, as coming out of their dens, upon the Plain: The
Hunter he must come with his hunting Pole, Nets, Arrows, and other necessaries,
that may represent hunting: Let there be Horns, Cornets, Trumpets sounded:
those that are in the Chamber shall see Trees, Animals, Hunters Faces, and all
the rest so plainly, that they cannot tell whether they be true or delusions:
Swords drawn will glister in at the hole, that they will make people almost
afraid. I have often showed this kind of Spectacle to my friends, who much
admired it, and took pleasure to see such a deceit; and I could hardly by
natural reasons, and reasons from the Optics remove them from their opinion,
when I had discovered the secret. Hence it may appear to Philosophers, and
those that study Optics, how vision is made; and the question of intromission
is taken away, that was anciently so discussed; nor can there be any better way
to demonstrate both, than this. The Image is let in by the pupil, as by the
hole of a window; and that part of the Sphere, that is set in the middle of the
eye, stands in stead of a Crystal Table. I know ingenious people will be much
delighted in this. It is declared more at large in our Optics. From hence may
one take his principles of declaring any thing to one that is confederate with
him, that is secret, though the party be far off, shut up in prison. And no
small Arts may be found out. You shall amend the distance by the magnitude of
the Glass. You have sufficient. Others that under took to teach this, have
uttered nothing but toys, and I think none before knew it. If you desire to
know

How you may see the Sun Eclipsed,
Now I have determined to show how the Suns Eclipse may be seen. When the Sun
is Eclipsed, shut your Chamber-windows, and put a paper before a hole, and you
shall see the Sun: let it fall upon the paper opposite from a Concave-glass,
and make a circle of the same magnitude: do so at the beginning, middle, and
end of it. Thus may you without any hurt to your eyes, observe the points of
the diameter of the Suns Eclipse.

CHAP. VII.
How you may see in the dark* what is light without by reason of Torches.
WE may demonstrate the same without the light of the Sun, not without wonder.
Torches, or lights lighted on purpose in Chambers, we may see in another dark
Chamber what is done, by fitting things as I said: but the light must not
strike upon the hole, for it will hinder the operation; for it is a second
light that carries the Images. I will not conceal at last a thing that is full
of wonder and mirth, because I am fallen upon this discourse,

That by night an Image may seem to hang in a Chamber.
In a tempestuous night the Image of any thing may be represented hanging in
the middle of the Chamber, that will terrify the beholders. Fit the Image
before the hole, that you desire to make to seem hanging in the Air in another
Chamber that is dark; let there be many Torches lighted round about. In the
middle of the dark Chamber, place a white sheet, or some solid thing, that may
receive the Image sent in: for the spectators that see not the sheet, will see
the Image hanging in the middle of the Air, very clear, not without fear and
terror, especially if the Artificer be ingenious.

CHAP. VIII.
How without a Glass or representation of any other thing, an Image may seem to
hang in the Air.
BEfore I part from this Image hanging in the Air, I will show how you may make
the Images of all things seem to hang in the Air, which will be a wonder of
wonders; chiefly being done without the apparition of a Glass, or a visible
Object. But first we will examine what the Ancients writ of this matter. One
Vitellio describes the business after his fashion, thus: Fasten the segment of
a Cylinder in the middle of the house, set upon a Table, or Stool, that it may
glance perpendicularly upon the ground; then place your eye at some hole or
chink that is somewhat distant from the Glass, and let it be fixed, that it may
not move here and there: over against the Glass break the wall, and make it
like to a window: let it be Pyramidal in shape, and let the sharp point be
within, and the basis without, as men use to do, when a Picture or any Image is
placed for the eye to look upon; but let it be reflected on by the superficies
of the Pyramidal Glass, that the Picture placed without, which your eye cannot
see through the hole, may seem to hang pendulous in the Air; which will cause
admiration to behold. A Pyramidal Convex-glass will do the same, if you fit it
so that it may represent the same Image. It may be done also by a Sphaerical
Unequal and Concave. But the matter promises more in the Frontispiece written
upon it, then it will perform in the conclusion. Wherefore the Image will be
seen without the Glass, but by the means of the Glass; so that the thing beheld
in the Glass, will seem to be without it. But he is foully mistaken here, as in
other places. He had said better, by a Cylinder of Crystal: For as a pillar it
would make an irradiation outwardly, yet it would be worse seen than in the
pillar, as I shall show. But I shall discover what I purposed always to conceal;

That neither the Object nor Glass may be seen, yet the Image shall seem to
hang alone, pendulous in the middle of the Chamber;
And walking about, you shall behold the Image every where. But is such a thing
fit to be discovered to the people? shall I do such an unworthy Act? Ah! my pen
falls out of my hand. Yet my desire to help posterity, overcomes; for perhaps
from this gleaning as it were, greater and more admirable inventions may be
produced. Let it be so: get not a Sphaerical Cylinder, or Unequal diflection of
a Pyramidal Concave, the portion of which segment is not known; but let it be
that which may descend upon his right Angle by a half Cylinder and a square,
and is parted by an oblique Angle. Of two parts it must be received pendulous,
and beneath in the half of its diameter it is conveyed from the middle. Let all
the windows of the house be shut: stop all the chinks, that the light may not
come in beneath. In that place where the spectacle is prepared, if the Sun or
Moon beams fall in, the whole show is spoiled. So place the beams of the Image
that are beaten back, that the head of it may by repercussion fall right upon
the earth. So will the visible Object that comes by reper^ussion, be reflected
above and beneath; It will follow the fashion of the first Glass: let a Brass
or Marble Table be so placed upon it, as we said; and lest the light falling
from the window should light upon the plain Cylinder, and the crooked Glass, it
mu^ be stopped by a shutter of a hands-breath, that is three times as broad as
the hole; for it will break forth every way: You shall cover the apparition,
that the Image may be fitted very deep, that there may seem to be a pit: as the
beams meet, let the spectator come, who cannot be in any great mistake. But
cover your sight round, that the Glass offend not your eye. Then is the Image
seen, and it shall not appear above the Table, where the falling of the
Cathetus will cut the line of sight through the Center of the Glass. I could
open the matter no plainer, I have done what I could: I know he that can
understand it, will rejoice very much.

CHAP. IX.
Mixtures of Glasses, and diverse apparitions of Images.
NOw will I try to make a Glass, wherein many diversities of Images shall
appear: and though such a one be hard to make, yet it will recompense all by
the diversity of Images, and the benefit of it. If then you would

Make a Glass that shall represent much diversity of Images.
Take a great or small circle, as you would have your Glass, and here and there
cut off two parts of the circumference, one to the quantity of a Pentagon, the
other of a Hexagon, as is clear in the Mathematics: let the arch of the
Pentagon be made hollow with some table, or Iron, that it may exactly receive
it into it, and may seem to be cut out of it; but the side of the Hexagon shall
be contrary to this, for the quantity of that must be received by a Unequal
Table, that the arch of it may so stick forth: Then take a foil of Wax or Lead,
of a convenient thickness, that exceeds the breadth of the arch of the Hexagon,
and in length exceeds them both: Then crook this plate so, that it may exactly
stand in the hollow of the wood, that there be no space or chink left between
them; then let the Unequal superficies that is preserved prominent, be applied
inwardly, according to the breadth of it; that the form of the Concavity may
not be against the Convexity, but that the same plate may receive both portions
without impediment: Having thus made your model, make your Glass of steel, or
of some other mixture, as I shall show you; and when it is polished, it will
show you many diversites of Images. First, the right parts will show right, and
the left the left, whereas the nature of plain Glasses, is to show the right
side as left, and the left side as right: and if you go backwards, the Image
will seem proportionable, and will come forward: if you come more toward the
Unequal superficies, the Image will show ugly; and the nearer you come, the
uglier will it show, and be more like a hories head. If you incline the Glass,
that will incline too; and by varying the Glass, and the situation of it, you
shall perceive diverse variations; sometimes the head down, and the heels up;
and you shall see many other things that I think not needful to relate now: for
being placed on a voluble set, that it may show both parts before and behind,
the spectator of himself may see all things. We may

Make a Glass out of all,
that in that alone all Images may be seen, that are seen in all: many mouths;
sometimes greater, sometimes less, sometimes right, sometimes left, some
nearer, some farther off, some equidistant. If a crooked be set in one place,
in another a Concave, and a plain one in the middle, you shall see great
diversity of Images. These are

The operations of a Unequal Cylindrical Glass.
When your face is against it, the more deformed it appears in length, the more
ugly it is for slenderness: if the length of it cut the face overthwart, it
shows a low pressed down face like a Frogs, that you shall see nothing but the
teeth: almost the same way, as you shall see it in a Sword, or any other long
and polished steel: if you incline it forward, the forehead will appear very
great, the chin small and slender like a horse. But contrary to these are

The operations of Cylindrical Concave-glasses.
If you look into the Concave, you shall see more Images of the same thing,
imitating the said Glass. If you set your eye to the Center, you shall see it
all the breadth of the Glass; so your forehead, mouth, and the rest. If you
turn such a Glass, that it may cut your face broad-ways, you shall presently
see your head inverted, and the rest that I related in the Concave-glass.

The operations of a Pyramidal Glass turned,
are these: You shall see a sharp forehead, and a large chin. But the contrary
way, a long forehead, with a very long nose. In a Concave you shall behold many
faces, if according to the concavity you fit many portions of plain Glasses:
for one looking into it, shall find them as many as there are Glasses, and all
moving a like; and again, what Glass soever it be, if it be not plain, it shall
show always different from the Image.

CHAP. X.
Of the effects of a Lenticular Crystal.
MAny are the operations of a Lenticular Crystal, and I think not fit to pass
them over in silence. For they are Concaves and Convexes. The same effects are
in spectacles, which are most necessary for the use of man's life; whereof no
man yet has assi^n'd the effects, nor yet the reasons of them. But of these
more at large in our Optics. That no space may be empty, I shall touch some
things here; I call Lenticulars, portions of circles compacted together, of
Concaves and Convexes. I will first show

How with a Unequal Crystal Lenticular to kindle fire.
A Unequal Lenticular kindles fire most violently, and sooner, and more
forcibly then a Concave-glass: I gave the reasons in my Optics. For being held
against the Sun, when the beams meet in the opposite part, it will kindle fire
it is opposite to, melt Lead, and fire Metals. Moreover, if you will

By night give light afar off with a Lenticular Crystal,
Set a Candle a little behind the point of burning, so it will cast parallels a
very great way to the opposite part, that you may see men pass the streets, and
all things done in Chambers that are far from you. The same way as I said of a
Concave-glass, we may

In a dark night read a letter by a Lenticular Crystal:
Put the letter behind the Glass, against the Stars or Candles a great way from
you; where the beams meet, the words that are opposite will be clearly seen in
a dark night, and the Chamber shut. But that which follows, will afford you a
principle far better for your consideration: Namely,

By a Lenticular Crystal to see things that are far off, as if they were close
by.
For setting your eye in the Center of it behind the Lenticular, you are to
look upon a thing afar off, and it will show so near, that you will think you
touch it with your hand: You shall see the clothes colors, men's faces, and
know your friends a great way from you. It is the same

To read an Epistle a great way off with a Lenticular Crystal.
For if you set your eye in the same place, and the Epistle be at a just
distance, the letters will seem so great, that you may read them perfectly. But
if you incline the Lenticular to behold the Epistle obliquely, the letters will
seem so great, that you may read them above twenty paces off. And if you know
how to multiply Lenticulers, I fear not but for a hundred paces you may see the
smallest letters, that from one to another the Characters will be made greater:
a weak sight must use spectacles fit for it. He that can fit this well, has
gained no small secret. We may

Do the same more perfectly with a Lenticular Crystal.
Concave Lenticulars will make one see most clearly things that are afar off;
but Convexes, things near hand; so you may use them as your sight requires.
With a Concave you shall see small things afar off, very clearly; with a
Unequal, things nearer to be greater, but more obscurely: if you know how to fit
them both together, you shall see both things afar off, and things near hand,
both greater and clearly. I have much helpe^ some of my friends, who saw things
afar off, weakly; and what was near, confusedly, that they might see all things
clearly. If you will, you may

By a Unequal Lenticular Crystal see an Image hanging in the Air.
If you put the thing to be seen behind the Lenticular, that it may pass through
the Center, and set your eyes in the opposite part, you shall see the Image
between the Glass and your eyes; and if you set a paper against it, you shall
see it clearly: so that a lighted Candle will seem to burn upon the Paper. But

By a Concave Lenticular to describe compendiously how long and broad things
are.
A Painter may do it with great commodity, and proportion: for by opposition to
a Concave Lenticular, those things that are in a great Plain are contracted
into a small compass by it; so that a Painter that beholds it, may with little
labor and skill, draw them all proportionably and exactly: but to leave
nothing concerning spectacles, I will show

How a thing may appear multiplied.
Amongst sports that are carried about, a spectacle is of no small account:
that Glass Instrument we put to our eyes, to see the better with. For of those
things that delude the sight, there can be no better way invented, then by the
medium; for that being changed, all things are changed. Wherefore prepare that
of very solid thick Glass, that it may be the better worked by a wheel into
proportions: wherefore fit it into many Forms and Angles, whereby we desire to
multiply any thing: but in the middle of them, let the Angles be Pyramidal, and
let it agree with the sight; that from diverse Forms, Images may be retracted to
the eyes, that they cannot discern the truth. Being now made of diverse
superficies, set them to your eyes; and if you look upon any man's face hard-by,
you will think you see Argus, one that is all Eyes. If his nose, you shall see
nothing but nose; so his hands, fingers, arms, that you shall see no man, but
Briareus the Poet, feigned to have have an hundred hands. If you look upon
Money, you shall see many for one, that you cannot touch it with your hands,
but it will often deceive you; and it is better to pay with it then to receive.
If you see a Galley afar off, you will think it is a fleet of war: If a
Soldier walks, that it is an Army marching. And thus are things doubled, and
men seem to have two faces, and two bodies, Thus are there diverse ways to see,
that one thing may seem to be another: and all these things will be evident to
those that seek and enquire after them by trial.

CHAP. XI.
Of Spectacles whereby one may see very far, beyond imagination.
I Will not omit a thing admirable and exceeding useful; how bleare-ey'd people
may see very far, and beyond that one would believe. I spoke of Plotomies
Glass, or rather spectacle, whereby for six hundred miles he saw the enemies
ships coming; and I shall attempt to show how that might be done, that we may
know our friends some miles off, and read the smallest letters at a great
distance, which can hardly be seen. A thing needful for man's use, and grounded
upon the Optics. And this may be done very easily; but the matter is not so to
be published too easily; yet perspective will make it clear. Let the strongest
sight be in the Center of the Glass, where it shall be made, and all the Sun
beams are most powerfully dispersed, and unite not, but in the Center of the
foresaid Glass: in the middle of it, where diameters cross one the other, there
is the concourse of them all. Thus is a Concave pillar-Glass made with sides
equidistant: but let it be fitted by those Sections to the side with one
oblique Angle: but obtuse Angled Triangles, or right Angled Triangles must be
cut here and there with cross lines, drawn from the Center, and so will the
spectacle be made that is profitable for that use I speak of.

CHAP. XII.
How we may see in a Chamber things that are not.
I Thought this an Artifice not to be despised: for we may in any Chamber, if a
man look in, see those things which were never there; and there is no man so
witty that will think he is mistaken: Wherefore to describe the matter, Let
there be a Chamber whereinto no other light comes, unless by the door or window
where the spectator looks in: let the whole window or part of it be of Glass,
as we use to do to keep out the cold; but let one part be polished, that there
may be a Lookingglass on both sides, whence the spectator must look in; for the
rest do nothing. Let Pictures be set over against this window, Marble statues,
and suchlike; for what is without will seem to be within, and what is behind
the spectators back, he will think to be in the middle of the House, as far
from the Glass inward, as they stand from it outwardly, and so clearly and
certainly, that he will think he sees nothing but truth. But lest the skill
should be known, let the part be made so where the Ornament is, that the
spectator may not see it, as above his head, that a pavement may come between
above his head: and if an ingenious man do this, it is impossible that he
should suppose that he is deceived.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the operations of a Crystal Pillar.
NOr shall the operations of a Crystal Pillar go unspoken of, for in it there
are some speculations not to be despised. First,

To kindle fire with a Crystal Pillar,
by opposing it to the Sun, it will kindle fire behind it about the
circumference: ofttimes left above the Chamber, when the Sun shined, it burnt
the Blankets. They that will at set hours and places burn the enemies camps, if
it be laid upon fuel for fire, it will certainly kindle it. We may also

With a Crystal Pillar, make an Image hang in the Air.
It will show the Image hanging in the Air, both before and behind. Let the
Object be behind the Pillar, let the Pillar be between that and the eye, the
Image will appear outwardly hanging in the Air, above the Pillar, parted every
where from the Pillar, clearly and perspicuously; and if the visible Object be
between the eye and the Pillar, the Image will appear behind the Pillar, as I
said. If it be a very visible Object, as fire or a candle, the matter is seen
more clearly without any difficulty: I gave the reasons in my Optics. We may
also

In a Crystal Pillar see many Rain-bows.
Make a solid-Pillar in a Glass furnace, so great as a Walnut, and let it be
made round only by the fire, as the manner is, as Glass-makers use to do, that
without any help of the wheel, the outward superficies may be most polite:
where the Iron touched it, there leave a Pedestall. It is no matter for pure
Glass, for impure is best: place this upon your eye, and a burning candle over
against it; the light refracted by bladders will show infinite Rain-bows, and
all the light will seem Golden-colour'd, that nothing can be more pleasant to
behold.

CHAP. XIV.
Of Burning-Glasses.
I Proceed to Burning-Glasses, which being opposed against the Sun beams, will
kindle fire upon matter laid under them; In these also are the greatest secrets
of Nature known. I shall describe what is found out by E^clide, Ptolomy, and
Archimedes; and I shall add our own inventions, that the Readers may judge how
far new inventions exceed the old. Fire is kindled by reflection, retraction,
and by a simple and a compound Glass. I shall begin from a simple reflection,
and from

A Concave-Glass that shall kindle fire behind it:
which few have observed. Know, that a Concave-glass will burn from its middle
point, unto the hexagonal-side above the Glass, as far as a fourth part of its
diameter; from the hexagonal-side, as far as the tetragonal without the Glass,
on the lower part of it: Wherefore cut off that part of the semicircle, which
is situate from a pentagon as far as a tetragon, as it were the band of the
circle; and this being polished, and opposed against the Sun, will cast fire
far from it, behind it. I will say no more, because I said more at large in my
Optics concerning this. So also we may

With a Concave Pillar or Pyramidal, kindle fire:
but very slowly, with delay only, and in the Summer-Sun; it kindles in the
whole line, and not in a point, but being extended by the point of accension of
its circle. The same will fall out by a Pyramidal Concave.

CHAP. XV.
Of a Parabolical Section, that is of all Glasses the most burning.
THat is called a Parabolical Section, that more forcibly farther off, and in
shorter time, will set matter on fire, that is opposite to it: it will melt
Lead and Tin: My friends related to me, that Gold and Silver also; but I have
made them red hot. By which invention of Archimedes, as appears by the
testimony of Galen, and many more, We read that he set the Roman Navy on fire,
when Marcellus besieged Syracuse, his Country. Plutarch in the life of
Pompilius says, The fire that burnt in Diana's Temple, was lighted by this
Glass, that is, by instruments that are made of the side of right triangle,
whose feet are equal: These made hollow, do from the circumference respect one
Center. When therefore they are held against the Sun, so that the beams kindled
may be gathered from all parts, and be united in the Center, and that they do
fever the Air rarefied, it soon sets on fire all fuel that is combustible
opposed against it, by kindling first the lightest and driest parts; the beams
being as so many fiery darts falling upon the Object. In a Concave spherical
Glass the beams meeting together, kindle fire in a fourth part of the diameter
under the Center, which are directed within the side of a Hexagon from the
superficies of the circle. But a Parabolical Section, is, wherein all the beams
meet in one point from all the parts of its superficies. Cardanus teaches how
such a Glass should be made. If we would kindle fire at a mile distance, we
must describe a circle, whose diameter must be two miles long; and of this we
must take such a part, that the roundness of it may not lie hid, namely, a
sixtieth part, to which we must add a dimetient, according to the altitude in
one point, and upon the fixed diameter must we bring about part of the circle,
which shall describe the portion of a Sphere; which when we have polished, if
we hold it against the Sun, it will kindle a most violent fire a mile off. It Is
strange how many follies he betrays himself guilty of, in these words. First,
he promises a Glass should burn a mile off; which I think is impossible to
burn thirty foot off, for it would be of a wonderful vastness; for the
superficies of the Cane is so plain, and to receive any crookedness, it can
hardly be made so great. Moreover, to describe a circle, whose diameter should
be two miles long, what compasses must we use, and what plate shall we make it
on, or who shall draw it about? And if it be true, that Archimedes by a
Parabolical Glass did burn ships from the wall, the distance could not be above
ten paces, as appears by the words of the Authors themselves; for in the same
place he raised ships, and threw them against the Rocks: and his engines were
Iron bars, the greatest part whereof lay backward; and by reason of those iron
crows, it is manifest it could be done no other ways. There are other
fooleries, but I pass them for brevity sake, that I might not seem tedious: the
cause of his error was, that he never had made any such Glasses; for had he
tried it, he would have spoke otherwise. But I will now show how

To make a Glass out of a Parabolical Section.
The way to describe it is this: Let the distance be known how far we would
have the Glass to burn, namely, AB ten foot; for were it more, it could hardly
be done: double the line AB, and make ABC, the whole line will be AC: from the
point A, draw a right line DA, and let DA and AE be equal one to the other, and
cut at right Angles by AC, but both of them must be joined to the quantity AC,
as DCE, which in C make a right Angle, DCE. Therefore the Triangle DCE is a
right angled Triangle, and equal sides: and were this turned about the Axis CD,
until it come to its own place whence it parted, there would be made a right
angled Cane, EDNC, whose Parabolical Section will be ABC: the right line DC
will be the Axis of the Cane, and CE shall be the semidiameter of the basis of
the Cane: Through the point C you must draw a line parallel to DE, and that is
HI of the length of CE and CD; and by the point B draw another parallel to the
said line ED, which is FBG; and let BG and BF be both of them equal to AC: so
FG shall be the upright side, and HI the basis of the Parabolical Section: If
therefore a line be drawn through the points HEAGI, that shall be a Parabolical
Section, the Diagram whereof is this that follows. But if you will burn any
thing, you must not make your Parabolical Glass to the bigness of the whole
line HFAGI, but only take a part thereof, as if we would take the top part of
it LAM, that the line LM may cut AC in K, or greater or lesser: if you will
make one greater, cut off AK beneath it; for the bigger it is, the more quickly
and vehemently will it burn; if you will have it less, take it above AK. But
thus you must do, that the crooked line LAM may be more exactly described, that
you may not commit the least error. Wherefore on a plain Table I protract the
line ABC, and let AB be double the distance, that we intend to burn any thing,
that is, the length of the line ABC: from the point B, I raise a perpendicular
line BD, the altitude whereof must be of the same semidiameter of the Section
to be made, that is the line LM, the half whereof is LK; from thence describe a
semicircle, whose beginning A must pass through the point D. But you shall find
the Center thus: Let the points AD be joined by a line, and let the Angle BAD
be made equal to ADE, and the line DE drawn forth, shall cut AC in F, that
shall be the Center: so draw the semicircle ADC. If therefore we shall cut the
line BC into smaller parts, so much the lesser Parabolical line must be
described. Divide it into four parts, and let the points of the divisions be
HGF: then describe three circles, that shall be termined by A from the three
points HGF: the first is AF, the second AG, the third AH: and they shall cut
line BD; the first in F, the second in G, the thir^ in H; thence I take my
Section to be perfected LKM, and I cut the line KA into four parts, and through
those points I draw parallel lines to LM. Let BH be the nearest to the top of
the Parabolical Section, the second BG that follows next, and the third BF next
to that, and after shall be LM. Thence by the lines LFGHA, draw a crooked line,
and do the same on the other part so far as M, and that shall be the line
sought for, to make the Parabolical Section, and from that must be made the
Glass, as I shall show.

CHAP. XVI.
How a Parabolical Section may be described, that may burn obliquely, and at a
very great distance.
I Have described a Parabolical Section, which might be made by rule and
compass, because we may use it at a short distance; but in greater distance we
must proceed by numbers: as for forty or for sixty foot, and not much more,
lest the Glass should be made of an unusual magnitude. The foresaid Glass burns
between it and the Sun; and if the Sun be not as you desire it, the operation
is lost: so also by an oblique Glass, that is between the Sun and the
combustible matter, or over against it. Whence according to the situation you
may use them all, namely, wherein they answer your expectation; and especially
when the Sun is in the Meridian, they burn with more vehemence. This I must
tell you, that you may not be deceived; for when you err, you commonly draw
others into error with you. A Parabolical Glass made from the top, if the
Section shall be from the top, if we would burn far, the Glass will be plain;
and that it may have some crookedness, it will be wonderful great. And if the
Section be about the basis, that will be worst of all; for from the least
distance, it will be almost flat: wherefore that we may have it with some
crookedness, we must take a line about the neck of the Section, not the head,
nor the feet. Wherefore being to make a Glass of a Parabolical Section, about
the neck of the Section, where the greatest crookedness of the Parabolical
Section is made, and that may burn far from its superficies, to twenty foot
distance; Let the line AB be the sinus versus eighteen foot long: from the
point A, I raise a line to right Angles with AB, which shall be the line by
which, the fourth part whereof is AB: cut AB in C, and let it be two foot, and
CB sixteen foot: I multiply twice seventy two, and that makes one hundred forty
and four; the square root of this is twelve; wherefore the line erected
perpendicularly from the point C, unto the circumference of the Parabolical
Section, will be DI of twelve foot, wherefore CI will be the line appointed:
join IB, and the Radius that must burn, will be in the point B that was sought
for: Wherefore the ray of the Sun, that is equidistant to the sinus versus HI,
is reflected by IB in B; the Latitude whereof will be about twenty foot: for
the line IC of twelve foot, multiplied into it self, will make one hundred
forty and four; and CB is sixteen foot, which multiplied into it self, makes
two hundred fifty and six; add these together, and they make four hundred: the
square root of it is twenty foot, thus. Wherefore I am resolved to take the
part of the Glass, intercepted between the points I and F, and I seek two
thirds of one foot, from C toward B, and I divide one foot into thirty parts,
that the crookedness may be taken more precisely; and let CG be twenty parts of
a foot, from A to C sixty parts, because they are two foot: wherefore from A to
G, where we shall make our Glass, will be eighty parts. Wherefore let us begin
from AC sixty parts, to which I always add four cyfers 0000. for this purpose,
that when numbers come forth, whose roots cannot be extracted, those that are
taken may be to the least loss: wherefore we shall make the Table under
written. In the first line are the points of the sinus versus: in the second,
the sqares, the lines to which; from the multiplication of the sinus versus,
namely, the length AE, is seventy two foot: if we shall reduce these to parts,
by multiplying by thirty, there comes forth 2160: multiply by the parts of the
sinus versus AC, there will arise 129600: in the third line are roots of the
foresaid number, namely, the lines appointed: adding therefore to 129600, four
cyfers, they make 1296000000: the square root of this is 36000, of which last
cyfers, one signifies the tenth part of a foot, another the tenth of a tenth
part: thus, 360. 0. 0. 0. so will be the foresaid Table made.

The points of sinus versus. Multiplication of sinus versus with the line to
which. The square root. Tenth parts. Tenths of tenth parts. 60 129600 360 0 0
61 131760 362 9 8 62 133920 365 9 3 63 136080 368 8 9 64 138240 371 8 1 65
140400 374 7 6 66 142560 377 5 67 144720 380 4 2 68 146880 383 2 4 69 149040
386 0 5 The points of sinus versus. Multiplication of sinus versus with the
line to which. The square root. Decimal parts. Decimals of decimals. 70 151200
388 8 4 71 153360 391 6 1 72 155520 394 3 6 73 157680 397 0 8 74 159840 399 7 9
75 162600 402 4 8 76 164160 405 1 6 77 166320 407 8 2 78 168480 410 4 6 79
170640 413 0 8 80 172800 415 6 9

These things being done, I take the differences of the roots, of the greatest
to the smallest, for they are from 160. 0. 0. to 415. 6. 9. Make choice of the
measure of a foot, according to which distances we would make our Glass: let it
be AB, which we divide into thirty parts; and take twenty parts, namely, two
thirds: I add a line to it at right Angles, namely B, and let it be BC, which
I divide into fifty five parts. I divide one part into ten, and that one into
ten parts more, and those are tens of tens. Let A be null, that is a cyfer, and
there place sixty; the second part sixty one: the line joined to right Angles,
will be two; the third part sixty two; the line joined to it will be five: so
the twentieth part will be eighty, and the line joined to the Angle fifty six:
to the extremities of these lines I fasten a pin, and I put a brass
Cithern-wire upon them, and upon it I draw a line, and the Parabolical line is
exactly described by it; for should we draw it without the help of this cord,
it will be wavering, and not perfect. Then take a brass Table of convenient
thickness, and draw the line now found upon it, filing away all that that shall
be above the line CA. These things being done, take an iron rod of an exact
length, namely, twelve foot, as the line DC, and at the end fasten a plate,
which shall be for the circumvolution of the axis; at the other end fasten a
spike, that it may be fastened somewhere, and be handsomely turned about. So
being well fixed, we turn it about, by adding clay mingled with straw, that it
may excellent well make a hollow place, like to the form of a Parabolical
Section; which being dried, we must make another solid one, that it may contain
the liquid Metal, as the manner is.

CHAP. XVII.
A Parabolical Section that may burn to infinite distance.
ZOnaras the Greek, writes in the third Tome of his Histories, That Anastasius
moved sedition against Vitalianus a Thracian, and he got those of Mysia, and
the Scythians to stand with him; and in the Country by Constantinople, he
plundered the people, and besieged the City with a Fleet. Marianus the Deputy
opposed him; and there being a fight at sea, by an engine made by Proclus a
most excellent man, for he then was famous for Philosophy and Mathematics; for
he not only knew all the secrets of the most eminent Artificer, Archimedes,
but he found out some new inventions himself; the enemies Navy was vanquished.
For Proclus is reported to have made Burning-Glasses of brass, and to have
hanged them on the wall against the enemies Ships; and when the Sun beams fell
upon them, that fire brake forth of them like to lightning, and so burnt their
Ships and men at sea, as Dion reports that Archimedes did formerly to the
Romans besieging Syracuse. But I will show you a far more excellent way than
the rest, and that no man as ever I knew writ of, and it exceeds the invention
of all the Ancients, and of our Age also; and I think the wit of man cannot go
beyond it. This Glass does not burn for ten, twenty, a hundred, or a thousand
paces, or to a set distance, but at infinite distance: nor does it kindle in
the Cane where the rays meet, but the burning line proceeds from the Center of
the Glass of any Longitude, and it burns all it meets with in the way.
Moreover, it burns behind, before, and of all sides. Yet I think it an unworthy
act to divulge it to the ignorant common people: yet let it go into the light,
that the immense goodness of our great God may be praised, and adored. Because
a proportional Radius does proceed from the greater Section, from the less is
made the greater: to avoid this, make it of a Cylindrical Section, for it is
the mean, and let it be set for the axis of the small and of the greater
dissection, which may pass through the middle parallels: this held against the
Sun, does make refraction of the beams sent into it, very far, and
perpendicularly from the Center of a Cylindrical Section; and in this Art the
reason cannot be found, that the beams uniting should part again: Wherefore it
receives them directly, which it sends back again obliquely into beams far from
the superficies of it. For the beams passing through the narrow hole of a
window, are forthwith dilated; nor is their proportion kept, by being far
removed, therefore it may reverberate and burn where the Cane seems clearest,
which will be near the Center, nor is it far distant from the point where the
rays meet; but near the ray coming forth from that point, from the superficies
of the Glass, called Parabolicall, which must remain firm in that place which I
said before. Let experiment be made of its virtue, by threads passing from its
Center, or iron wire, or hair; and it is no matter whether it be Parabolical or
Sphaerical, or any Section of the same order: then let it be excellent well
fitted upon the Center of the said Section: If the rays go forth above, or a
little beneath, it is no matter, if not much money, or much money be laid out
to make it. The making of it depends merely on the Artificers hand; the
quantity is nothing, be it small or great. The Latitude of the hollow is not
necessary, only let it be sent forth from the middle, that the rays may meet
excellent well in the Center. Let the window be made open aslaunt, that it may
receive a Parabolical Glass; and thus shall you have a Glass, if that be well
done I spoke of. He that has ears to hear, let him hear; I have not spoken
barbarously, nor could I speak more briefly, or more plainly. But if a small
one do not answer a great one in proportion, know that you will operate
nothing: let it be large about the basis, small at the top, equidistant to the
first. Let it not be a steel Glass, because it cannot sustain the heat of the
burning, and by burning it loses its brightness. Let it be therefore of Glass
a finger thick: Let the Tin foil be of purged Antimony, and Lead, such as they
make in Germany: let the form be of clay: put the Glass upon it, and melt it in
a Glass furnace, that it may take its form. This is a wonder, that that which
causes so much burning in the work, is cold, or at most but lukewarm. If you
would have it burn before, of the Section which is about the basis, make a
circle, in the middle point whereof fit the Artifice, that the ray returning,
may come forth to the fore part. This I have said; and I have observed, that we
may use this Artifice in great and wonderful things, and chiefly by inscribing
letters in a full Moon. For whatsoever we have written by this Glass, as I said
of a plain Glass, we may send letters of it to a very great distance: and
because I said it sends forth to infinite distance, it is sent as far as the
Moon, especially being helped by its light.

CHAP. XVIII.
To make a Burning-Glass of many Sphaerical Sections.
VItellio describes a certain composition of a Burning-glass, made of diverse
Sphaeral Sections: but what he writes he proves not, nor does he understand
what he says: whilst I was searching for that, I found this. Propound the
distance of combustion, let it be CB, let it be doubled, CA shall be the
semidiamiter of the Sphaere, whose Center B must be extended to D, and the
Diameter will be AD. Divide CA into four points, but the more the parts are,
the more precise will be the description of the line, and set the numbers to
the divisions: so setting the foot of the compass fast in I, and the moveable
foot in B, make the semicircle OF, and mark it BY: and setting it in the 2.
Center at the same wideness, and the other moveable foot in the line BD,
describe another semicircle and mark it 3. and so to the fourth and mark it 4.
Then setting the foot firm in B, at the distance of BC, or B4, make a circle,
and the immovable foot standing on the Center B, upon the distance B3,
describe another: so there is the third B, and the fourth BA, as BY. Then from
the point, A, draw a line, and another from the point B; and let them meet in a
point where the circled meets, with the semicircle 1. for let them be cut in G;
then draw the second line from circle 2. and another from the same A the
Center, and let them meet, where the second circle cuts with the second
semicircle in H; then from the third circle, and from B the Center, and where
they meet in, I, by the meeting of the semicircle: so from the fourth, where
the fourth begins in K, and from KIHG draw a line, which shall be the Section
to be described. The same may be done on the other part of the circle, the
reason is this: The beam of the Sun LI falling upon the point I, of the Glass,
is reflected to B, because B3. and BY are equal from the same circle: therefore
the Angle B3I, is equal to BY3. But B3^ is equal to 3IL, because it is
subalternate, for the ray of the Sun LI is equidistant to the diameter of the
circle, wherefore the Angles LI3 and 3IB, are equal, therefore it is reflected
upon B. The same is to be said of the beam MH and NG, and this Glass is
contrary to a Sphaeral Glass: From diverse points of the circumference, the rays
are reflected upon different parts of the diameter, and all the diameters are
from the Center: but in this the reflected beams unite, not in one point, and
the diameter are various from the fourth of the diameter. But of this more
largely in my Optics. Lastly, I will not omit that the Cane does kindle fire
circularly, when that as far as this circle it kindles in a point. Divide the
Parabolical line by sinus versus, and let them meet upon contrary parts. For
example, let the Parabolical Section be CEF, the sinus versus DE: cut this
circumference in E, and let CF meet together in the manner they stood before,
that it may be EGFE, and about the axis GH turn it round, there will be made a
round Cane, make it of Steel, or other Metal; and polish it, and it will kindle
fire round about,

CHAP. XIX.
Fire is kindled more forcible by refraction.
I Have spoken of Burning-glasses by reflection: Now I shall speak of those
which burn by refraction; for these kindle fire more violently, I shall show my
reason in the Optics. Wherefore

By a Cylindre of Crystal to kindle fire.
We may do it by setting it against the Sun, but very slowly and by leisure;
for all the beams do not meet in one point, but in a line. The same way almost
are we wont

To burn with a Pyramidal Crystal Glass.
But this burns about a line, yet both burn more strongly than a pillar Glass
of a Pyramidal, in the place of this we may use a Vial full of water. But the
most violent of them all, is with

A Crystal Sphaere, or portion of it.
And if a Sphaere be wanting, we may supply it with a Vial full of water, that
is round and of Glass, set against the Sun: if you set behind it any
combustible matter, that is friendly to the fire, so soon as the rays unite
about the superficies, it forthwith kindles fire, to the wonder of the
Spectators: when they see fire raised from water, that is extreme cold, so will
the portions of Sphaeres, as spectacles, lenticulars, and such like, which we
speak of already.

A Crystal parabolick-Glass will kindle fire most vehemently of all,
we shall see it, because the beams all meeting, it kindles more than a Glass.
We may also, as I said of a Glass

By refraction, kindle fire afar off,
And almost to infinite distance, as is demonstrated by Obtick reasons; and the
more by how much as refractions work more forcibly than reflections: and I
shall perform this many ways, as I said before, not only by reason, but by
experience. Almeon said, That he made the same way parallel lines cut a cross.
I have said also, that if they be opposed in place, Crystal Sphaeres are so
perfectly opposite by coition, as are Sphaeral and Cylindrical portions. Nor do
they cast forth fire so far, that it is hard to believe it, and more than
imagination can comprehend. Behold, I shall show you a more forcible way to
kindle fire. It sends forth also unequal, and combust parallels. Let a uniform
Section fall in, and it will carry forth oblique beams, you shall see the fire
by a hidden and open beam, falling upon a right superficies, and it will come
forcibly and uniformly into that place, where the beams unite most in a fit
combustible matter: for if that combustible matter that is opposite, be not
dry, it is in vain to set a Glass against it, either a Unequal Cylindrical, or
Concave Sphaerical; for the matter will be found almost pierced through with
strong fire, and if it be not truly opposite it will burn, whether it be small
or great. But it is considerable, the portion of which it is. It will do also
the same thing, if the thing be opposite, and be small or great, if need be.

CHAP. XX.
In a hollowed Glass how the Image may hang without.
BEfore I depart from a plain Glass, it is performed by the later Artists
industry, that in the same Glass many faces may be seen, or likenesses of the
same Image, without any hindrance to the first: for behind it they make the
Glass hollow, and make a little Concave, whence a foil being laid on, as I
shall show, and fitted well, it will hold another forth without. Hence comes it
to pass by this excellent invention, that a man looking in a Glass, may see the
upright Image of some other thing, and wonders at it, for catching at it, he
can catch nothing but Air. I remember that I have often seen it, and the matter
is thus. A Glass being made of Crystal, they make a hollow place on the
backside like an Image, as curiously as they can; then they foil it over, and
set it in its place, now as deep as the hollow is with in, so much will it show
it self without the superficies; and you cannot satisfy your self, unless you
touch it with your hands, whether it truly stick without the Glass or not. So
Letters are truly read, that they will seem to be made in Silver upon the
Crystal; nor is the eye so quick, but it may be deceived when it looks on. Nor
will I omit the Artifice,

To see in a plain Glass that which appears no where.
I have often much delighted my friends, and made them admire with this Glass.
Provide thirty or forty little Tables ready, of a foot and half long, and two
fingers broad, and a third part of a finger thick; so artificially hewed, that
the thickness may be upon the one side, and the thinness on the other side,
like the edge of a knife. Place all these boards together, that the solid parts
may stand altogether, as to make a perfect plain: Then paint your own Picture,
or of some other thing upon it: yet by this artifice and great observation,
that if the Image be near the Glass, it must be drawn as it were afar off. If
you would have it far distant, let the forehead be unmeasurably long, the nose
somewhat longer, and the mouth, and the chin, likewise. The manner how to draw
this Form exactly in Tables, I said in my Optics. When the Image is now
described, fasten the little boards upon a plain Table, that the head may be
set downwards, and the chin upwards; and place the first Table after the
second, and the second after the third, till they be all fastened. Hang the
Table above a man's height, that no man may see into it, above the degrees of
the Tables: and place a Glass over this, distant two foot from the Table, so
long lifting it up, and putting it down till you see the perfect Image. Now
when any man comes near the Glass to see his own Image, he shall see the Image
of some other thing that appears no where. In the breadth of the Tables you may
draw some Picture, lest they should give some occasion to suspect.

CHAP. XXI.
How Spectacles are made.
WE see that Spectacles were very necessary for the operations already spoken
of, or else lenticular Crystals, and without these no wonders can be done. It
remains now to teach you how Spectacles and Looking-glasses are made, that
every man may provide them for his use. In Germany there are made Glass-balls,
whose diameter is a foot long, or there abouts. The Ball is marked with the
Emrilstone round, and is so cut into many small circles, and they are brought
to Venice. Here with a handle of Wood are they glewed on, by Colophonia melted:
And if you will make Unequal Spectacles, you must have a hollow irondish, that
is a portion of a great Sphaere, as you will have your Spectacles more or less
Unequal; and the dish must be perfectly polished. But if we seek for Concave
Spectacles; let there be an Iron-ball, like to those we shoot with Gunpowder
from the great Brass Canon: the superficies whereof is two, or three foot
about: Upon the Dish, or Ball there is strewed white-sand, that comes from
Vincentia, commonly called Saldame, and with water it is forcibly rubbed
between our hands, and that so long until the superficies of that circle shall
receive the Form of the Dish, namely, a Unequal supreficies, or else a Concave
superficies upon the superficies of the Ball, that it may fit the superficies
of it exactly. When that is done, heat the handle at a soft fire, and take off
the Spectacle from it, and join the other side of it to the same handle with
Colophonia, and work as you did before, that on both sides it may receive a
Concave or Unequal superficies: then rubbing it over again with the powder of
Tripolis, that it may be exactly polished; when it is perfectly polished, you
shall make it perspicuous thus. They fasten a woollen-cloth upon wood; and upon
this they sprinkle water of Depart, and powder of Tripolis; and by rubbing it
diligently, you shall see it take a perfect Glass. Thus are your great
Lenticulars, and Spectacles made at Venice.

CHAP. XXII.
How upon plain Concave and Unequal Glasses, the foils are laid on and they are
b^^^ed.
NOw it remains that I speak of some few things, not to be overpassed of the
banding of Unequal Glasses, and of foiling plain Glasses, and Unequal Glasses,
that so I may set down the perfect Science of Looking-glasses. First, for the
terminating of Looking glasses, that are made of Crystal and Glass, then of
other mixtures, and polishings, that a knowing Artificer may know, and know how
to make them: For though amongst many things, that show the Images of things,
as water, some Jewels, and polished Metal do it; yet nothing does so plainly
represent Images, as Lead foiled upon Glass. Plain Looking-glasses are prepared
of Crystal, and of Glass: those of Crystal are polished by wheels, and require
another Artifice. But at Venice

How Glass Looking-glasses are made,
I have seen it. They take the melted Glass out with an Iron; with their blast
they frame an empty Pillar; they open it on one side with their tongs, and
whilst it is red hot they lay it upon a plain plate of Iron, that is equally
made; and they put it into the furnace again, to make it softer; and that it
may get the perfect plainness of the iron plate, they leave it over the furnace
to cool by degrees: When it is cool, they do thus

Polish plain Glasses.
They fasten it upon a plain Table with Gyp; underneath lies a most polite
plain plate of iron; they cast upon it the foresaid sand; they rub it with
water by a stick, leaning thereon, until it be perfectly plain; they take it
from the Table, and glue it on the other side, to polish them both: then they
make them perspicuous, as I said they did. Now will I show

To terminate plain Glass Looking-glasses.
Glass or Crystal Looking-glasses, when they are made plain and equal, the
Artist makes a foil of the same bigness of Tin, that is level and thin, as
perfectly as he can. For if Crystal or Glass had no foil of Lead behind it, by
its strength and thickness it could never terminate our sight, nor stay the
Image Printed upon it, but it would let it slip away; for Glass is pure and
transparent, and so would not contain it, by reason of its brightness; and so
the Image would vanish in it, as light in the Sun. Wherefore upon this foil you
shall wipe over with Quicksilver, by the means of a Hares foot, that it may
appear all as Silver: and when you see it fast on the superficies, you shall
put it upon a fair white paper, and so upon the Glass; but first made clean
with a linen clout, and polished: for if you handle it with your hands, the
foil will not stick to it: with your left hand press down the Glass, and with
the right take away the Paper, that the foil may cleave every where, and they
bind fast together; laying a weight upon it for some hours, and so let it stand
and stir it not. Now I will show

How a foil is put upon a Concave Glass.
But it is more laborious to lay a foil on a Concave-Glass: Prepare then a foil
of the bigness of your Glass, that you shall lay upon the Unequal superficies;
and holding it fast with a finger of your left hand upon the Center, with your
right hand you shall fit the foil round about, and shall extend it on the said
superficies, until it become of the same form with that unequal superficies, and
stick every where even unto it. Then of moist Gyp shall you prepare a form of
the Glass, namely, by pouring Gyp upon the Unequal superficies; and when the Gyp
is dry, you have the form. Upon the form extend a foil of Tin, and let it agree
perfectly with the form every where, because the form and the foil are made
after the same superficies: strew quicksilver upon the foil, and as I said,
make it stick by means of a Hares foot. The Artists call this Av^vare: put
paper upon it, and pressing this upon the Glass, take away the paper; when you
know it sticks fast, take away your hand, and lay on a weight, and after ^^ke
it away, but with a careful balancing of your hand, lest it take wind, and that
the quick silver may all stick fast every where. Now remains how

To terminate Convex-Glasses.
Make Glass Balls, but of pure Glass, and without bladders as much as you can,
as the receivers for distillations; and from the hollow iron that it is blown
in by, let this liquid moisture be projected, namely, of Antimony and Lead; but
the Antimony must be melted twice or thrice, and purged, and cast Colophonia
in. So stir the mixture in the hollow vessel, and what remains cast forth: and
so in Germany they make Convex-Glasses.

CHAP. XXIII.
How Metal Looking-Glasses are made.
BUt Metal-Glasses are made another way. Wherefore if a Parabolical-Glass be to
be made, draw a Parabolical line upon a brass or wooden Table; what is without
it, must be filed away, that it may be equal, smooth, and polished: fasten it
upon an Axis in the middle, and fit it with Instruments, that may be fitly
turned about, let there be clay with straw under it, made up with dung, that
the Table being turned about, it may receive a Concave form exactly; then let
it dry, strew ashes upon it, and plaster clay above that, of a convenient
thickness; let it dry by the fire, or if you will, by heat of the Sun, take it
off, for it will easily part from the ashes: unite them together, that as much
space may be between both forms, as you think fit, for the thickness of the
Glass: when it is dry, cover it with this, leaving an open orifice on the top,
and some breathing places, that the Air may breathe forth at it. Then make such
a mixture; let them be put into a new pot that will endure the fire, and lute
it well within, that it may hold the faster; let it dry well, and do this twice
or thrice over: set it to the fire, and melt in it two pounds of Tartar, and as
many of white Arsenick; when you see them fume, pour in fifty pounds of old
brass, often used, and let it melt six or seven times, that it may be pure and
cleansed; then add twenty five pounds of English Pewter, and let them melt
together: draw forth some little of the mixture with some Iron, and try it,
whether it be brittle or hard; if it be brittle* put in more Brass; if too
hard, put in Pewter: or else let it boil, that some part of the Pewter may
evaporate: when it is come to the temper it should be, cast upon it two ounces
of Borax, and let it alone till it dissolve into smoke; then cast it into your
Mold, and let it cool: When it is cool, rub it with a Pumice-stone, then with
powder of Emril. When you see that the superficies is perfectly polished and
equal, rub it over with Tripolis. Lastly, make it bright and shining with burnt
Tin; most add a third part of Pewter to the Brass, that the mass may be the
harder, and become more perspicuous.

THE EIGHTEENTH BOOK OF Natural Magic: Treating of things heavy and light.
THE PROEME.
MAny miracles worth relating and to be contemplated do offer themselves when I
begin to describe heavy and light; and these things may be applied to very
necessary and profitable uses, and if any man shall more deeply consider these
things he may invent many new things: that may be employed for very profitable
ends. Next after these follow wind Instruments, that are almost from the same
reason.

CHAP. I.
That heavy things do not descend in the same degree of gravity, nor light
things ascend.
BEfore I shall come to what I intend to demonstrate, I must premise somethings
necessary, and set down some actions, without the knowledge whereof we can make
no proof, nor demonstration. I call that heavy that descends to the Center, and
I say it is so much the heavior the sooner it descends, contrarily; that is
light that ascends from the Center, and the lighter that ascends soonest. I say
that bodies yield one to the other, and do not penetrate one the other, as wine
and water, and other liquors: Moreover, this action must be premised, that
there is no body that is heavy in its own kind, as water in the element of
water, or Air in Air. Also vacuum is so abhorred by Nature, that the world
would sooner be pulled asunder than any vacuity can be admitted: and from this
repugnancy of vacuum proceeds almost the cause of all wonderful things, which
it may be I shall show in a Book on this Subject. It is the force of vacuum
that makes heavy things ascend, and light things descend contrary to the rule
of Nature, so necessary it is that there can be nothing in the world without a
Body. Therefore these things being premised, I shall descend to somethings. And
first, a most heavy body shut up in a vessel, whose mouth is turned downwards
into some liquor that is heavior, or of the same kind. I say it will not
descend. Let the vessel turned with the mouth downwards, be A B filled with
water, the mouth of it beneath must be put into a broad mouthed vessel C D full
of water, be it with the same liquor, or with another that is heavior. I say
the water will not descend out of the vessel A B. For should the water
contained in the vessel A B descend, it must needs be heavior than the water
contained in the broad mouthed vessel C D, which I said was of the same kind or
heavior, if then it should fall down it would be against the first action. The
same would fall out if both vessels were filled with wine or water. For if the
water contained in the vessel A B, should descend into the place of C D, there
would remain vacuity in A being there is no place for the air to come in; and
that were against the second axiom: wherefore by reason of vacuum, and because
the body is no heavior, it falls not into the bowl beneath. But should one make
a hole in the bottom of the vessel A, that the air might come in, no doubt the
water would not fall down into the bazon: Also, if the vessel A B were filled
with any ^ight liquor, and the broad bazon with one that is heavior, they would
not stir from their places. Let therefore the vessel A B be filled with wine,
and the mouth of it turned downwards into a bazon full of water; I say both
liquors will keep their places, and will not mingle; for should the wine
descend, either vacuum must needs be in the body A, or a heavy body must ascend
out of the vessel C D, which would be against the Nature of Gravity: and the
second axiom, namely, that heavy should ascend, and light descend: wherefore
they will not remove from their places. Hence comes that which is often done by
great drinkers and gluttons, who pour by drops into a cuphalf full of water, so
much wine as will fill the cup, they come so close together, that only a line
parts those liquors. And those that would sooner cool their wine, they dip a
Vial full of wine into a vessel full of water, with the mouth turned downward,
and hold it down under the water: for when the water touches the superficies
of the wine, they cannot mingle, and the wine grows sooner cool, though it is
necessary that the Vial should be lifted up to the superficies of the water,
and suddenly turned about, poured forth and drank; then fill them again, and
set in the bottle as before. From this advantage I complain of those, who first
drink water, then pour in wine, for wine being the lighter, and water the
heavior, they can hardly mingle: wherefore some drink at first the strongest
wine, then mingled, and last of all, water. At great men's Tables they first
bring wine in a Glass, then they pour in water, that the water by its weight
may mingle with the wine, and get to the bottom, and taste equally. Theophrastus
bids men first pour in wine, then water.

CHAP. II.
How we may by drinking, make sport with those that fit at Table with us.
When friends drink together, if we would by such a merry deceit delude the
guests that are ignorant of the cause hereof, we may provoke them to drink with
such a Cup; Let there be a great Cup made like a tunnel, let the mouth be broad
above, and beneath narrow Pyramidally, and let it be joined to a Glass-Ball, by
a narrow mouth; First pour in water, till the whole Ball be filled; then put in
wine by degrees, which by reason of the narrowness of the mouth will not
mingle, and the water is heavy, and the wine lighter; He that drinks first,
shall drink the wine; then give it your frind to drink, for he shall drink
nothing but water. But if your friend shall challenge you to drink thus with
him, and will have you drink first; fill the Ball of the Cup with wine, and
pour water upon it, and stay awhile, and hold him in discourse; for the water
will sink down by the narrow mouth, and the wine by degrees will ascend as
much, and you shall see the wine come up through the middle of the water, and
the water descend through the middle of the wine, and sink to the bottom; so
they change their places: when you know that the water is gone down, and the
wine come up, then drink, for you shall drink the wine, and your friend shall
drink the water. Hence it is, that to great inconvenience of those that drink
it, when we plunge our wine into a well in vessels of earth, or brass, ill
stopped, to cool it, the water being the heavior comes in at the least chink, and
forces out the wine, so in a little time the vessel is full of water, and the
wine is gone, that there is not the least taste of wine in it: wherefore stop
the mouth very close.

CHAP. III.
How to part wine from water it is mingled with.
FRom these I shall easily show two things, that a heavy body shut up in a
Glass vessel, having the mouth of it put within a lighter liquid body, they
will mutually give place, the lighter will ascend the heavior will descend, and
that without any hindrance one of the other, which I shall demonstrate from the
former principals. Let the Glass be turned downwards, and full of water, be, A
B, the water is heavior than the wine: Let the mouth of it B, be put into the
vessel C D, that is full of wine. These are bodies that will mutually yield one
to the other as I showed. I say the water will descend into the vessel C D, and
the wine will ascend into the vessel A B, where the water was before. For the
water, because it was contained in the vessel A B, it being heavy, presses the
wine in the vessel C D, that is lighter; and because there is no body between
them, the water descends on one side into the vessel C D, and the wine ascends
on the other side into the vessel AB. Now if the wine be red, that you may see
the difference or their colors, you shall see the wine ascend through the
middle of the water, as far as he bottom of the upper vessel that is put
downward into the other, and the water to descend hastily to the bottom of the
vessel C D, and one descend* as low as the other rises high; and if the
liquors cannot be seen distinguished, yet one goes without any hindrance of the
other, and without mingling, into its own place; and it will be a pleasant
sight to behold the wine going up, and the water falling down; and when they
rest, they will be so well parted, that not the least wine can remain with the
water, nor water with the wine. Wherefore, if you put into a Hogshead full of
wine, a long neck'd Glass full of water, in a short time the vessel turned
downwards will be full of wine, and the water will go down into the Hogshhad.
By this any man may easily conjecture

How to part water from wine,
because oft-time Country people and Vintagers use deceit, and bring wine
mingled with water, to be sold to the Merchant: we may easily prevent their
craft by this Art. Let there be underneath a vessel filled with wine, that is
mixed with water, and we would separate the water from the wine: But first
there must be a vessel that can receive all the wine, that is mingled in the
other vessel; and if we know not the quantity, we must conjecture at it, how
much it may be, of something less: then fill the said vessel with water* and
set it with the mouth downwards on the other vessel, that is full of wine and
water, mingled together; and let the upper part of the vessel turned downwards,
touch the upper part of the lower liquor, that no Air may enter, for then the
water will presently descend into the vessel underneath, and the lighter part
of the mingled liquor will ascend, and the water will sink down; and if it be
all wine, it will all ascend, no wine will stay with the water; if any thing
stay behind, you must know that so much water was mingled with the wine, which
may easily be known by the smell and taste, if you do it as it should be done.
Then take a vessel that will hold more of the same liquor, and put it into a
vessel underneath, till it takes it all in, whence by the proportion of the
wine ascended, and of the water, any man may know easily how much water is
mingled with the wine. But for convenience, let the Vial that shall hold the
water be of a round belly, and the hole not very great, and let the vessel
under, that contains the wine, have a narrow mouth, that the upper round mouth
may the better join with the undermost, and no Air come in. But because it
happens often, that the upper Ball, when it has drank in all the wine, the
wine will not fill it, and we would part the water from the wine; take
therefore the round Glass in your hand, and turn it about with the mouth
upwards, then will the wine presently turn about and come uppermost, which may
be a tongue laid in, be all called forth. Be careful to see when the wine is
all drawn out, remove the tongue, and the water will remain pure.

CHAP. IV.
How otherwise you may part water from wine.
I Can do this another way, not by levity and gravity, as I said, but by
thinness and thickness; for water is the thinnest of all liquors, because it is
simple, but wine being colored, and color comes from the mixture of the
Elements, it is more corpulent: Wherefore to part wine from water* we must
provide a matter that is full of holes, and make a vessel thereof, into which
the wine poured with the water, may drean forth; for the water will drean forth
through the pores of the matter, that is opened by a mingl^^ and corpulent
body. And though many kinds of wood be fit, yet Ivy is the best, because it is
full of pores and chinks: wherefore if you make a vessel of Ivy wood that is
green, and pour into it wine mingled with water, the water will in a short time
drean out; Yet I see that all the Ancients and modern Writers thought the
contrary, yet both reason and experience are against them. For Gaeto says, If
you would know whether there be water put to your wine, make a vessel of Ivy,
put your wine you think is mixed with water, into it: if there be any water,
the wine will run forth, and the water stay behind, for an Ivy vessel will hold
no wine. And Pliny from him: The Ivy is said to be wonderful for proof of wine.
If a vessel be made of Ivy-wood, the wine will run forth, and the water will
stay behind, if any were mingled with it: Whereupon both of them are to be
noted for a two sold error, because they say it comes from the wonderful
faculty of the Ivy, whereas every porous wood can do the same: Again, he says
that the wine will run forth, and the water stay behind, whereas it is the
contrary. But Democritus thought what was truest and more probable, who used
not an Ivy vessel, but one full of holes; says he, they pour it into a new
earthen pot not yet seasoned, and hang it up for two days, the pot, says he,
will leak, if any water be mingled with it. Democritas used another Art for the
same purpose. Some stop the mouth of the vessel with a new Sponge dipped in Oil,
and incline it, and let it run forth; if there be water in it, only the water
will run forth, which experiment also he uses in Oil: For the Sponge is full
of holes, and open enough, and being dipped in Oil, that hinders that the liquor
cannot run forth so easily. Africanus adds another reason: Put liquid Alom into
a vessel of wine, then stop the mouth with a Sponge dipped in Oil, and incline
it, and let it run forth; for nothing but the water will run out: For the Alom
binds the liquors, that they drean forth very slowly.

CHAP. V.
Another way to part a light body mingled with a heavy.
I Have another Art to separate a light body from a heavy, or wine from water,
or by another way. Make a linen tongue, or of bombast, and dip it into the
vessel, where wine is mingled with water, and let the tongue swim above without
the liquor, and ascend above it, and so hang pendulous out of the vessel, for
the lighter liquor will ascend by the tongue, and drop on the outside; but when
the lighter ascends, it attracts the heavy also: wherefore, when you see the
color change, take the vessel away, for the water runs forth. It is evident
that the wine being lighter, will always ascend to the top of the vessel, and
run forth by the tongue; though all Vintners say the contrary, that the water
will run forth by the tongue, and that the wine will stay within.

CHAP. VI.
How light is mingled in heavy, or heavy in light.
WE can easily know whether any light matter is mingled with heavy, or any
heavy matter with light: And I will expound the manner out of Archimedes his
Book, concerning things that swim above water; the cause whereof is, that if
Wood, stone, or any heavy Metal, be equal in weight to the same quantity of
water, the utmost superficies o^ the body will be equal with the superficies of
the water; if it weigh heavior, it will sink to the bottom; if it be lighter,
the lighter it is then the water, so much of it will swim above the wat^^.
Since therefore this is true, and wine is heavior then water, one and the same
thing will sink more in wine, than in water, and in thicker water the less.
Wherefore vessels are more drowned in River, than in the Sea; for Seawater is
thicker and more heavy, by reason of its salt mingled with it; as also we have
it in Alexander. If therefore you would know

Whether water be mingled with wine.
Put the wine you suspect to be mingled with water, into some vessel, and put
an Apple or Pear into it; if the Apple sink, the wine is pure; but if it flo^e,
the wine has water mingled with it, because water is thicker than wine: Which
Democritus says is contrary and false. He says it is necessary sometimes to
commit the Care of the wine of new wine to Stewards and Servants, also the
Merchant has the like reason to try, whether his wine be pure. They use to
cast an Apple into the vessel, but wild Pears are the best; others cast in a
Locust; others a Grasshopper, and if they swim, it is pure wine, but if they
sink, it is mingled with water. But if you seek to know

If new wine have any water mingled with it,
it will be the contrary for the contrary reason. For wine that is pure and
sincere is thin, but new wine at first is thick, feculent, gross, clammy,
because the feces are not yet sunk down, but in time it will grow clear and
thin. Wherefore if you put Apples or Pears into new wine, and the new wine be
most pure, the Apples will flote above it; but if there be water mingled with
it. ^he Apples will sink to the bottom: for freeze-water is thinner than new
wi^e, and lighter, i^ ^^useth the Apple to sink, which is excellent well
described by Sotion, and very curiously. He says, That we may know whether new
wine be mingled with water, cast wild Pears, that is green ones, into new
wine, and if there be any water, they will sink to the bottom. For when you
fill the vessel with new wine, if you cast in Services or Pears they will swim,
the more water you put to it, the more will the Apple sink. But we shall add
this for an addition.

When new wine is mingled with water, to know which part is the best, the upper
or lower part.
The Country people use after the pressing forth of the wine, when the clusters
are pressed forth, to ca^^ in a certain quantity of water, and so they make
drink for laborers in the Country. This new wine they divide, the Country man
has half, and the Landlord the other half: The question is which part is the
best, the first or last, that runs forth of the press. But if you well remember
what I said before, the wine being the lightest will come uppermost, and the
water being heaviest, will always sink to the bottom. Wherefore the first that
comes forth is the wine, that which remains, and is pressed from the clusters,
is watery. When water is cast on the clusters, it goes into the inmost parts of
the Grapes, and draws forth the wine that is in them, and so they mingle; but
being lighter, it chooses the upper place, therefore the upper part is best,
because it contains most wine: but if you turn the Cock beneath, the water will
first run forth, and the wine last

CHAP. VII.
Other ways how to part wine from water.
THere are other ways to do it, as by distilling. For in distilling the
lightest will ascend first, then the heaviest, when the fire is not too strong;
and that is but reason: wherefore that the liquor may ascend, it must first be
attenuated into thin vapors, and become lighter: therefore wine being thinner
than water, if it be put in a still in Balneo, the lightest vapor of wine will
ascend by degrees, and fall into the receiver: You shall observe the Aqua vitae
that distills into the vessel, and by the quantity of that, you may judge of
the proportion of water mingled with the wine. Also note, that when the
lightest part of the wine is ascended, the heavy feces remain, as water, or as
part of the wine. Oft-times in our distillations, when Aqua vitae was distilled
in Balneo, by chance the vessel brake that contained the Aqua vitae, and
mingled with the water in the kettle: I put the mingled liquor into a Glass
vessel, and putting a soft fire to it, first came forth the pure Aqua vitae,
simple without any water, the water stayed in the bottom, and kept not so much
as the smell of the Aqua vitae. By the veins running in the cup, I knew the
water ascended. I will not omit (though it be for another reason) for pleasure
and ingenuity to show

The manner to part water from wine,
that by this means we may know how much water is mingled in the vessel. Take
the quantity of the wine, and put it into a Glass Vial, and put the Vial into
very cold water, that all that is in the Vial may freeze, as I showed: If the
wine be sincere and pure, it will be the harder to freeze, and longer; if it
have much water, it will freeze the sooner: When the wine is frozen, break the
Vial upon a dish, the ice must melt by degrees; first the wine, because that is
hotter: than the water will remain frozen; Part the wine from it, for it will
be longer thawing: by proportion of this, you may know what part of water was
put into the vessel.

CHAP. VIII.
How the levity in the water and the air, is different, and what cunning may be
wrought thereby.
NOw I will speak of heavy and light, otherwise than I spoke before; namely,
how it is in the air, and how in the water, and what speculation or profit may
rise from thence. And first how we may know whether a Metal be pure, or mingled
with other Metals, as Gold and Silver, as in Gilded cups, or else in moneys:
where Silver or Gold is mingled with Brass, and what is their several weights:
which speculation is useful not only for Bankers, but also for Chemists, when
they desire to try Metals in fixing of Silver, or other operations, which I
will attempt to declare plainly. But first I will see whether the Ancients
speak any thing hereof. Vitruvius says Archimedes did write of this: For when
Hiero purposed to offer a Golden Crown to the Gods in the Temple, he put it to
the Goldsmith by weight; he made the work curiously, and maintained it for good
to the King, and by weight it seemed to be just: but afterward it was said,
that he had stolen part of the Gold, and made up the Crown with Silver to the
full weight. Hiero enraged at this this, bad Archimedes to consider of it: He
then by chance coming into a Bath, when he had descended into it, he observed
that as much of his body as went into the Bath, so much water ran over the
Bath: when he considered the reason of it, he leaped forth for joy, running
home and crying Eureka, Eureka, that is, I have found it, I have found it. Then
they say he made to lumps of equal weight with the Crown, one of Gold, the
other of Silver; then he filled a large vessel to the very brims with water,
and he put in the lump of Silver; the bigness of that thrust into the water,
made the water run over: wherefore taking out the lump, what flowed over he put
in again, having measured a sixth part, and he found what certain quantity of
water answered to the quantity of the Silver: then he put in the lump of Gold
into the full vessel, and taking that forth, by the same reason he found that
not so much water ran forth, but so much less of the body of the Gold was less
than the same weight in Silver. Then he filled the vessel with water, and put
in the Crown, and he found that more water ran forth by reason of the Crown,
than for the mass of Gold of the same weight, and from thence because more
water run over by reason of the Crown, than for the Gold lump, he reasoned that
there must be a mixture in the Crown. This was the Greeks invention, that is
worthy of praise, but the operation is difficult; for in things of small
quantity the theft cannot be discerned, nor can this reason appear so clear to
the eye, where the obsolute fashion of the vessel was wanting. Now a way is
invented how for all money, be it never so small, we can tell presently, and we
want not many instruments, that we may cry, We have overfounded Vpereureka,
Vpereureka, we have gone beyond Archimedes his Eureka. The way is this

To know any part of Silver mingled with Gold.
Take a perfect balance, and put in one scale any Metal, in the other as much
of the same Metal, but the purest of its kind; and when the scales hang even in
the Air, put them into a vessel full of water, and let them down under water
about half a foot: Then will it be a strange wonder, for the balances that
hang equal in the Air, will change their nature in the water, and will be
unequal: for the impure Metal will be uppermost, and the pure will sink to the
bottom. The reason is, because pure Gold compared with that kind, is heavior
than all impure Gold, because pure Gold takes less place; wherefore it will
way heavior by the former reason. If then we would know how much Silver is in
that Gold, put as much pure Gold in the other scale, as will make the balances
equal under the waters; when they are equal take them up, and the weight you
added under water, will be the weight of the mixture. If you would know how
much Gold is upon a vessel Gilded, put the Cup in one scale, and as much pure
Silver in the other, that the scales may hang equal in the Air; then put them
into the water, and the vessel will sink down; put into the other scale as much
pure Gold, as will make them equal under water, draw them forth, and that is
the weight of the Gilt of the plate: You shall do the same for Silver, Brass,
Iron, white or black Lead. But would you know whether in Money, Brass be
mingled with Silver, or Coin be adulterated with Copper; put the Money into one
scale, and as much of the finest Silver into the other, balance them equal;
then put them under the water, the Money will go down; add as much Brass as
will make the scales equal, then take them forth, and it will be the weight of
the mixture. Now will I set the weigh^s of Metals, how much they weigh more in
the waters, than in the Air, whereby without any other experiment we may know
mixtures. An Iron-ball that weighed nighteen ounces in the Air, will weigh
fifteen in the waters; whence it is that a Ball of the same magnitude must owe
three ounces to the water; wherefore the proportion of Iron in the Air to the
same in the waters, is as fifteen to nineteen. A Leaden Bullet of the same
magnitude, weighs 31 ounces in the Air, in the water but 27: A Marble Bullet
little less for bulk, weighs 7 in the Air, and 5 in the water: Copper weighs 16
in the Air, and 12 in the waters: Silver weighs in the Air 125, in the waters
113: Brass in the Air weighs 65 Karats, and one grain, in the waters 50 Karats
and two grains: Crown Gold in the Air weighs 66 grains, in the waters 6^: Gold
called Zechini in the Air weighs 17 Karats, under water 16 Karats: T^rkish
Ducat Gold weighs in the Air 34, under waters 32: Common French Crown Gold
weighs in the Air 67, under waters 60: Common Crown Gold of Hungary that is
old, in the Air weighs 17, in the water 16: Crown Gold of Tartary weighs 16 in
the Air, and 14 under water.

THE NINETEENTH BOOK OF Natural Magic: Concerning VVind-Instruments.
THE PROEME.
I Have spoken concerning light and heavy, now follow experiments by wind: for
these seem to follow the reasons of Mathematics, and of the Air, and water,
and a Philosopher who seeks, to find things profitable, and admirable for man's
use, must insist on these things, contemplate and search them out, in no thing
does the Majesty of Nature shine forth more. There are extant the famous
Monuments of the most learned Heron of Alexandria, concerning wind Instruments,
I will add some that are new, to give an occasion to search out greater
matters.

CHAP. I.
Whether material Statues may speak by any Artificial way.
I Have read that in some Cities there was a Colassus of Brass, placed on a
mighty high Pillar, which in violent tempests of wind from the nether parts,
received a great blast, that was carried from the mouth to a Trumpet, that it
blew strongly, or else sounded some other Instrument, which I believe to have
been easy, because I have seen the like. Also, I read in many men of great
Authority, that Albertus Magnus made a head that speak: Yet to speak the truth,
I give little credit to that man, because all I made trial of from him, I found
to be false, but what he took from other men. I will see whether an Image can
be made that will speak. Some say that Albertus by Astrological elections of
times, did perform this wonderful thing: but I wonder how learned men could be
so guld; for they know the Stars have no such forces: Some think he did it by
Magic Arts. And this I credit least of all, since there is no man that
professes himself to know those Arts but Impostors and Mountebanks, whilst
they cheit ignorant men and simple women; nor do I think that the Godly man
would profess ungodly Arts. But I suppose it may be done by wind. We see that
the voice or a sound, will be conveyed entire through the Air, and that not
in an instant, but by degrees in time. We see that Brass-guns, which by the
force of Gunpowder, make a mighty noise, if they be a mile off, yet we see the
flame much before we hear the sound: So hand-Guns make a report, that comes at
a great distance to us, but some minutes of time are required for it, for that
is the nature of sounds; Wherefore sounds go with time, and are entire without
interruption, unless they break upon some place. The Echo proves this, for it
strikes whole against a wall, and so rebounds back, and is reflected as a beam
of the Sun. Moreover, as I said in this work, words and voices go united
together, and are carried very far entire, as they are spoken at first. These
therefore being laid down for true grounds; if any man shall make leaden Pipes
exceeding long, two or three hundred paces long (as I have tried) and shall
speak in them some or many words, they will be carried true through those
Pipes, and be heard at the other end, as they came from the speakers mouth:
wherefore if that voice goes with time, and hold entire, if any man as the
words are spoken shall stop the end of the Pipe, and he that is at the other
end shall do the like, the voice may be intercepted in the middle, and be shut
up as in a prison; and when the mouth is opened, the voice will come forth, as
out of his mouth that spoke it: but because such long Pipes cannot be made
without trouble, they may be bent up and down like a Trumpet, that a long Pipe
may be kept in a small place; and when the mouth is open, the words may be
understood. I am now upon trial of it: if before my Book be Printed the
business take effect, I will set it down; if not, if God please, I shall write
of it elsewhere.

CHAP. II.
Of Instruments Musical made with water.
OLd Water-Instruments were of great esteem, but in our days the use is worn
out: Yet we read that Nero took such delight in them, that when his Life and
Empire were in danger, amongst the seditions of Soldiers and Commanders, and
all was in imminent danger, he would not forsake the care of them, and pleasure
he took in them. Vitruvius teaches us how they were made, but so obscurely and
mystically, that what he says is very little understood. I have tried this by
many and sundry ways, by mingling air with water, which placing in the end of a
Pipe, or in my mouth, where the breath of the mouth strikes against the air;
and though this made a pleasant noise, yet it kept no tune: For whilst the
water bubbles, and trembles or warbles like a Nitingale, the voice is changed
in diverse tunes, one note is sweet and pleasant, two, squele and jar. But this
way it will make a warbling sound, and keep the tune. Let there be made a Brass
bottomed Chest for the Organ, wherein the wind must be carried; let it behalf
full of water, let the wind be made by bellows, or some such way that must run
through a neck under the waters; but the spirit that breaks forth of the middle
of the water, is excluded into the empty place: when therefore by touching of
the keys, the stops of the mouths of the Pipes are opened, the trembling wind
coming into the Pipes, makes very pleasant trembling sounds, which I have tried
and found to be true.

CHAP. III.
Of some Experiments by Wind-Instruments.
NOw will I proceed to the like Wind-Instruments, but of diverse sorts that
arise by reason of the air, and I shall show how it is dilated, contracted,
rarefied by fire, condensed by cold. If you will

That a vessel turned downwards shall draw in the water,
do thus: Make a vessel with a very long neck; the longer it is, the greater
wonder it will seem to be: Let it be of transparent Glass, that you may see the
water running up; fill this with boiling water, and when it is very hot, or
setting the bottom of it to the fire, that it may not presently wax cold, the
mouth being turned downwards that it may touch the water, it will suck it all
in. So such as search out the nature of things say, That by the Sun beams the
water is drawn up, from the Concave places of the Earth to the tops of
Mountains, whence fountains come forth. And no small Arts arise from hence, for
Wind-Instruments, as Heron affirms. Vitruvius speaks the like concerning the
original of Winds: but now it is come to be used for houses. For so may be made

A vessel to cast forth wind.
You may make Brass Bowls, or of some other matter: let them be hollow, and
round, with a very small hole in the middle, that the water is put in at: if
this be use the former experiment: when this is set at the fire it grows hot,
and being it has no other vent, it will blow strongly from thence, but the
blast will be moist and thick, and of an ill savor. You may also make

A vessel that shall cast forth water,
There is carried about with us a Glass vessel, made Pyramidal, with a very
narrow long mouth, with which it casts water ver^ fa^ off. That it may draw
water suck out the air with your mouth, as much as you can, and presently
thrust the mouth into the water, for it will draw the water into it, do so
until a third part of it be filled with water. When you will spou^ the water
afar off, fill the vessel with air, blowing into it as hard as you can;
presently take it from your mouth, and incline the mouth of the vessel, that
the water may run to the mouth, and stop the air; and the air striving to break
forth, will cast the water out a great way* But if you will without attraction
of Air, make water fly far with it, heat the bottom of the vessel a little: for
the air being rarefied seeks for more place, and striving to break forth,
drives the water before it. Thus ^runkard making a little hole in a vessel of
wine, because the wine will not run out, the mouth being stopped, whereby the air
might enter, they will blow hard into that hole; then as they leave off, the
wine will come forth in as great quantity, as the air blowed in was. Now I will
show

How to make water ascend conveniently.
We can make water rise to the top of a Tower: Let there be a leaden Pipe that
may come from the bottom to the top of the Tower, and go down again from the
top to the bottom, as a Conduit; let one end stand in the water that we desire
should rise, the other end that must be longer and hang down lower, must be
fastened into a vessel of wood or earth that it may take no air at all* let it
have a hole above the vessel, whereby the vessel may be filled with water, and
then be stopped perfectly. Set a vessel on the top of the Tower, as capacious as
that beneath, and the leaden pipe now spoke of, must be fastened at one end of
the vessel, and go forth at the other end, and must be in the upper part of the
vessel, and let the pipe be divided in the middle, within the vessel, and where
the pipe enters, and where the pipe goes out, they must be joynted, that they
take no air: when therefore we would have the water to ascend, fill the vessel
beneath with water, and ^^op it close that it take no air, then opening the
lower hole of the vessel, the water will run forth; for that part of water that
runs out of the vessel, will cause as much to rise up at the other end by the
other leaden pipe, and ascend above the Tow^r; the water drawn forth is filled
up again, we may make out use of it, and the hole being stopped, the lower vessel
may be filled again with water, and so doing we shall make the water to escend
a ways. We may also

By heat alone make the water rise,
Let there be a vessel above the Tower, either of Brass, Clay, or Wood, Brass
is best: let there be a pipe in the middle of it, that may descend down to the
water beneath, and be set under it, but fastened that it take no air: let the
vessel above be made hot by the Sun, or fire, for the air that is contained in
the vessel rarefies and breathes forth; whereupon we shall see the water rise
into bubbles: when the Sun is gone, and the vessel grows cold, the air is
condensed, and because the air included cannot fill up the vacuity, the water
is called in, and ascends thither.

CHAP. IV.
A description of water Hour-glasses, wherein Wind or Water-Instruments for to
show the Hours are described.
THe Ancients had Hour-Dials made by water, and Water-Dials were usual, and
famous. Heron of Alexandria writ Books of Water-Dials, but they are lost. I
have writ a Book of them, and that this part may not be deficient, I shall show
two that are made by contraries, one by blowing in the air, the other by
sucking it out. This shall be the first.

A Water-Dial.
Take a vessel of Glass like a Urinal, it is described by the letters AB: On
the top is A, where there is a very small hole, that the point of a needle can
scarce enter it; at the bottom near the mouth, let there be set a staff OF,
that in the middle has a firm Pillar going up to the very top of the vessel,
let the Pillar be divided with the Hour Lines. Let there be also a wooden or
earthen vessel GH, full of water: Upon the superficies of that water, place the
Glass vessel AB, that by its weight will press toward the bottom, but the air
included within the vessel, keeps it from going down: then open the little hole
A, whereby the air going forth by degrees, the vessel will gradually descend
also. Then make by another Dial, the marks on the staff CD, which descending
will afterward show the Hourmarks. When therefore the vessel goes to the
bottom of the wooden vessel, the Dial is done, and it is the last Hour: But
when you would have your Dial go again, you must have a crooked empty pipe, OK,
the upper mouth K must be stopped with the finger K; so K being stopped with the
finger, that the air may not enter, sink it under the water, that it may come
within the vessel AB: then put your mouth to K, and blow into it, for that will
raise the vessel upward, and it will come to its former place and work again. I
shall also describe for my minds sake

Another Water-Dial,
contrary to the former, namely, by sucking in the air. Let there be a Glass
vessel, like to a Urinal as I said AB, and being empty set fast on it the
vessel CD, that it cannot sink down: then fill it with water, as far as B: Let
there be a hole near the top, E, wherefore sucking the air by the hole E, the
water comes into the vessel AB from the vessel CD, and will rise as high as FG:
when therefore AB is full of water, stop the hole E, that no air enter, and the
water will fall down again: In the top of the vessel AB, let there be another
very small hole, that the air may come in by degrees, and so much as there
comes in of air, so much water will go forth. On the superficies of the vessel,
make Hour Lines that may snew the Hours marked, 1, 2, 3, etc. or if you will
let the Still fastened to a Cork swim on the top of the water, and that will
show the Hours marked on the outside of the vessel.

CHAP. V.
A description of Vessels casting forth water by reason of Air.
NOw I will describe some Fountains, or Vessels, that by reason of air cast
forth water: and though Heron ingeniously described some, yet will I set down
some others that are artifically found out by me and other men. Here is
described

A Fountain that casts forth water by compression of the Air,
Let there be a vessel of water-work close every where, AB, make a hole through
the middle, and let a little pipe CD go up from the bottom of the water-work
vessel D, so far from the bottom that the water may run forth. Upon the
superficies of the Tympanum let there be C a very little hole with a cover to
it, or let it have as the Greeks call it, Smerismation, to shut and open it
handsomely, and in the upper surface of the Tympanum, bore the basis quite
through with a little pipe, which enters into the hollow of the Tympanum, and
having in the hole beneath a broad piece of leather or brass, that the air
coming in may not go back: wherefore pour in water at E, that it may be three
fingers above the bottom; then blow in air as vehemently as you can: when it is
well pressed in, shut the mouth; then opening the mouth A, the water will fly
up aloft, until the air be weak. I at Venice made a Tympanum with pipes of
Glass, and when the water was cast forth very far, the Lord Estens much admired
it, to see the water fly so high, and no visible thing to force it. I also made
another place near this Fountain, that let in light, and when the air was
extenuated, so long as any light lasted the Fountain threw out water, which was
a thing of much admiration, and yet but little labor. To confirm this, there is

An Artifice whereby a hand-Gun may shoot a bullet without fire,
For by the air only pressed is the blast made. Let there be a hand Gun that
is made hollow and very smooth, which may be done with a round instrument of
lead, and with Emril-powder beaten, rubbing all the parts with it. Then you
must have a round Instrument that is exactly plained on all parts, that may
perfectly go in at the mouth of the wind Gun, and so fill it that no air may
come forth: let it be all smeer'd with oil, for the oil by its grossness
hinders any air to come forth. So this lead Bullet being put into the Guns
mouth, and thrust down with great force and dexterity, then presently take away
your hands (but you must first shut the little hole that is in the bottom of
the hole) and the bullet and little stick will fall to the bottom, and by the
violence of the air pressed together it will cast out the Bullet a great way,
and the stick too, which is very strange. Also I will make

A Vessel, wherewith as you drink, the liquor shall be sprinkled about your
face.
Make a vessel of Pewter, or Silver, like to a Urinal; then make another vessel
in the fashion of a Tunnel, or a round Pyramid: let their mouths be equal, and
joined perfectly together, for they must be of the same breadth: let the spire
of it be distant from the bottom of the Urinal a fingers breadth, and let it be
open: then pour water into the vessel, and fill the Urinal unto the hole of the
spire end, and fill the Tunnel to the top, and the rest of the Urinal will be
empty, because the air has no place to get forth: when therefore any man
drinks, when the water is drank up as far as the hole of the spire end, by the
air pressed within, is the water thrust violently forth, and flies in the face
of him that drinks. Also there is a vessel that no man can drink out of it, but
he who knows the art. Make an earthen or metal vessel, in form of a Bottle or
Flagon, and make it full of holes from the neck to the middle of the belly:
From the bottom let a pipe ascend by the handle of the vessel, and the handle
being round about it, let it come above the brims of the vessel, empty: under
the handle in a place not seen, make a little hole, that any man holding the
vessel by the handle, may with his finger stop and unstop this hole when he
please: under the brim of the vessel, where you set it to your mouth, let there
be another secret hole. Then pour water into the vessel: if now any man put the
bottle to his mouth, and raises it to drink, the water will run forth at the
neck that is open, and at the belly; but he that knows the trick, taking the
vessel by the handle, shuts the hole with his thumb, and not moving the vessel,
he draws the air with his mouth, for the water follows the air, and so he
drinks it all up; but if any man suck, and shut not the hole, the water will
not follow.

CHAP. VI.
That we may use the Air in many Arts.
WE may use Air in many Artifices, I shall set down some, that I may give a
hint to others to invent more. And chiefly

How wind may be made in a chamber, that guests may almost freeze,
Make a deep pit, and put in a sufficient quantity of river or running water;
let the pit be close stopped, only let a pipe convey it through the walls, that
it may be brought into the chamber. Let the water be let down into the pit by a
kind of Tunnel, lest the air should come forth at the place where it goes in:
by the water is the air of the pit expelled, and comes by the pipe into the
chamber, that not only those that sleep there, but such as converse there are
extreme cold, and benumbed. I will show

How Air may serve for Bellows,
I saw this at Rome. Make a little cellar that is close on all sides, pour in by
a Tunnel from above, a quantity of water; on the top of the wall let there be a
little hole, at which the air may break forth with violence; for it will come
so forcibly, that it will kindle a fire, and serve for bellows for Brass and
Iron-melting furnaces; the Tunnel being so made, that when need is, it may be
turned, and water may be put in.

THE TWENTIETH BOOK OF Natural Magic: The Chaos, wherein the Experiments are
set down without any Classical Order.
THE PROEME.
I Determined at the beginning of my Book to write Experiments, that are
contained in all Natural Sciences, but by my business that called me off, my
mind was hindered, so that I could not accomplish what I intended. Since
therefore I could not do what I would, I must be willing to do what I can.
Therefore I shut up in this Book, those Experiments that could be included in
no Classes, which were so diverse and various, that they could not make up a
Science, or a Book; and thereupon I have here heaped them altogether confusedly
as what I had overpassed; and if God please, I will another time give you a
more perfect Book. Now you must rest content with these.

CHAP. I.
How Seawater may be made potable.
IT is no small commodity to mankind, if Seawater may be made potable. In
long voyages, as to the Indies it is of great concernment: For whilst Sea men,
by reason of tempests are forced to stay longer at Sea than they would, for
want of water they fall into great danger of their lives. Galleys are forced
all most every ten days to put in for fresh water, and therefore they cannot
long wander in enemies countries, nor go far, for enemies stop their passages.
Moreover, in sea Towns and Islands, when they want water, as in our days, in
the Island Malta, and in the Syrses, Soldiers and Inhabitants endured much
hardness, and Histories relate many such things. Hence I thought it necessary
to search curiously, whether Seawater might be made potable. But it is
impossible to find out any thing for this, how it may be done, unless we first
find out the cause of its saltness, and what our Ancestors have said
concerning that matter; especially since Aristotle says, That the salt may
easily be taken from the Sea, because the sea is not salt of its own Nature,
but by the Sun that heats the water, which draws out of it, cold and dry
earthly exhalations to the top of it, and these being there burnt cause it to
be salt, when the moist subtle parts are resolved into thin vapors. We
therefore imitating Nature, by raising the thin parts by Chemical Instruments,
may easily make it sweet. For so the Nature of the Sea, makes sweet waters for
the Rivers. There are also veins of the Sea, in the deep parts of the earth,
that are heated by the Sun, and the vapors are elevated to the tops of the
heighest Mountains, where by the cold superficies they meet with, they congeal
into drops; and dropping down by the vaulted roots of Caves, they run forth in
open streams. We first fill a hollow vessel like a great Ball, with Seawater,
it must have a long neck, and a cap upon it, that live coals being put under,
the water may resolve into thin vapors, and fill all vacuities, being carried
aloft: this ill sented grossness, when it comes to touch the coldness of the
head or cap, and meets with the Glass, gathers like dew about the skirts of it;
and so running down the arches of the cap, it turns to water, and a pipe being
opened that pertains to it, it runs forth largely, and the receiver stands to
receive it as it drops: so will sweet water come from salt, and the salt
tarryeth at the bottom of the vessel, and three pound of salt water, will give
two pounds of fresh water; but if the cap of the limbeck be of Lead, it will
afford more water, yet not so good. For Galen says, That water that runs
through pipes of Lead, if it be drank, will cause an excoriation of the
intestines. But I found a way

How to get a greater quantity of fresh water, when we distill salt water.
Make a cap of earth, like to a Pyramid, all full of holes, that through the
holes, Urinals of Earth or Glass may be brought in. Let their mouths stick
forth, well lu^ed that the vapor may not exhale; the cap after the fashion of
the limbeck, must have its pipe at the bottom running round, and let it crop
forth at the nose of it. Set this upon a brass Cauldron, that will hold much
water; fill it with salt water, after that the Urinals; and putting on their
caps, when fire is put under, both the Urinals will drop, and the cap that
contains others, by its pipe will drop out water also: for the vapors rising
from the Cauldron of hot water, will make the Urinals drop, and the cap will
drop withal. But if at Sea the commodity of such a vessel cannot be had. We may

Distill salt water otherwise,
though but little. Dioscorides shows the old way of distillation; we may that
way distill sea water in ships, which Pliny shows also. Fleeces of wool extended
about the ship, are made wet by the vapors rising from the Sea, and sweet water
is pressed out of them. But let us see, whiter

Salt water may be made fresh another way.
Aristotle says it, and Solomon before him, That all Rivers came from the Sea,
and return to the Sea; for by the secret passages under ground, the waters that
are sent forth, leave their earthly and dry parts mixed with the earth, and
they come forth pure and sweet. He says, The cause why the salt water comes
not forth, is, because it is ponderous, and settles, and therefore only
hot-waters of salt-waters, can run forth, for they have a lightness that
oversways the weight of the salt; for what is hot, is lightest: Add, that
waters running through the earth are much strained, and therefore the heavior
and thicker they are, the more do they continually sink down, and are left
behind; and the lighter they are, the more pure do they come forth and are
severed. For as Salt is heavy, so sweet water is light; and so it comes, that
they are sweet waters that run forth. This is the very cause why salt water,
when it moves and is changed, is made the sweeter, for motion makes it lighter
and purer. Let us see now if we can imitate Nature: Fill then great vessels
with earth, and set them so one above another, that one may drean into another;
and thus salt water dreaning through many vessels, may leave the salt behind.
I tried it through ten vessels, and it remained still salt: My friend said,
that he made it sweet through twenty vessels. Yet thus I thought to warn you
of, that all earth is not fit for this use. Solinus says, That seawater
strained through clay will grow sweet; and it is proved that the salt is taken
away, if you strain it often through thin sand of a River. Earth that lies in
covered places, and under roots, is naught, for that is commonly salt; as also
where Cattle are s^alled, which Columella says is naught for Trees, for that
it makes salt water, what is strained from it. Black earth is naught, for it
makes the waters sharp, but clay grounds make sweet waters. Paxamus, Anaxagoras
said, That the saltness of the sea came from the Rivers, running through salt
places, and communicating that quality to the sea. Some approve River-gravel
for this use, and their reason is, because always sweet waters are found by the
shores, and they say this happens, because they are strained through the sand,
and so grow fresh coming from the salt-sea: for the sweet water that is found
near the sea, is not of the sea, but such water as comes from the tops of
hills, through the secret channels of the earth, thither. For waters that drean
forth sweet, are sweet though they lie even with the sea, and in plain places;
as Apuila, where the waters drean not from the hills, they are salt. So on the
shores of Africa. But Aristotle brings an experiment from a vessel of wax; for
if one make a Ball of wax that is hollow, and shall dip it into the sea, it
being of a sufficient thickness to contain, he shall find it full of fresh
water, because the corpulent saltness cannot get in through the pores of the
wax. And Pliny, by letting down little nets into the sea, and hollow balls of
wax, or empty vessels stopped, says, they will draw in fresh water; for
seawater strained through clay will grow fresh. But I have found this to be
false. For I have made pots of clay, as fine and well as I could, and let them
down into salt water, and after some days I found salt water in them. Also, if
it were true, it is of no use, when as to sweeten one pound of water, a
thousand Balls of wax a day were not sufficient. But for this many vessels
might be invented of porous wood and stones. A vessel of Ivy, that parts, as I
said, wine from water, will not part salt from water if it drean through it.
But stones are brought from Portingal, made into vessels, into which sea water
put will drean forth sweet, if not the first, yet the second time, they use it
to break the stone; also, for that many pumex and porous stones may be tried.
Leo Baptista Albertus says, That an earthen pot well stopped, and put into the
sea, will fill with potable water. But I have tried all earthen vessels, and I
always found salt water. Aristotle in his Problems, says, It may be done

Another way,
If salt water cannot be drank cold, yet hot, and cool again, it is better to
drink. It is because a thing uses to change from contrary to contrary, and
salt water is contrary to fresh, and when it is boiled, the salt part is boiled
off, and when it is cold stays at the bottom. This I tried and found it false,
and more salt, for by heat the thin vapors of the water that are sweet exhale,
and the salt stay behind; and in lesser water, the same quantity of salt makes
it salter, as I said in my distillations. I wonder such a wise man would relate
such falsities. Florentinus borrowing it from him, says, If water be not good
nor po^able, but ill, let it be boiled, till a tenth part of it be consumed,
then purge it, and it will be good, For seawater so boiled, will grow sweet.
Let me see whether it can be made so

Another way,
and that in great quantity. There is a thing that being cast into large
vessels filled with seawater, by fastening the salt will make it fall to the
bottom, or by curdling it, and so it frees the water from it. Wherefore we must
think on things that have a stiptick quality, the Ancients tried this, the
Moderns have effected it. Pliny. Nitrous of bitter waters; if you put
Barley-flower dried to them, they are tempered, that you may drink of them in
two hours: therefore is Barley-flower put into wine sacks, and elsewhere. Those
that go to the Red Sea through the Deserts, make nitrous, and salt, and bitter
waters fit to drink in two hours, by putting in of Barley-meal, and they eat
Barley-meal. The like force has the Chalk of the Rhodes, and our Clay. Also,
Cooks with Catlings, and Meal of Wheat, will take salt out of very salt mea^. I
tried this often but found it false, yet some of the saltness was taken away.
Pliny. If you must drink ill waters, strew in powder of Penniroyal. Leo
Baptista Albertus, when they take up the water of Nilus muddy, if they do but
rub the edge of the vessel with an Almond, it presently grows clear: I tried
this to, and found it false: when common salt is cast into Aqua fortis, that
parts Gold from Silver, the Silver will presently descend. We see also, that in
the making of that they call read Alac, casting but Alom into Lie, the salt and
color will presently precipitate to the bottom, and nothing will remain but
clear water. We see that milk will curdle with many Herbs, which we speak of
elsewhere. We shall use therefore for this purpose, coagulaters and
astringents. Cooks say, That a Sponge put into a pot of salt water, will draw
the salt to it; but pressed forth again, and cast in once more will take it all
out. So wood wrapped about with fillets of linen, and put into the pot, will
draw the salt to it. Others bind in a clout Wheat-meal, and put it into the
pot, and draw forth the salt. Palladius where he speaks of seasoning of wines,
says, The Greeks bid men keep seawater that is clean, and taken out of the
calm sea the year before, whose Nature is that in this time, it will lose its
saltness or bitterness, and smell sweet by age. It remains to show

How sweet waters may be mended.
Leo Baptista says, If you place a glazed vessel full of salt, and well stopped
with lime, putting oil under that no water may penetrate into it, that it may
hang in the middle of the waters of a Cistern; these waters will in no time
corrupt. Others add also Quicksilver. If water begin to corrupt, cast in salt
to purge them; and if salt be wanting, put in some seawater, for so at Venice
they draw water from St Nicolas Well, for Mariners that go long voyages,
because it stands so near the sea, and salt lies hid in it, by communicating
with those waters. We read in Scripture, that Elizeus did this, who at Jericho
or Palestina, cast in salt into a Fountain, and made it potable water, which
was before bitter and corrupt. If water breeds worms cast in quick Lime, and
they will dye. When we would make wine clear, beat the white of an Egg, and
the troubled wine will descend, if you put it in. Others cast in the dust that
is on the catlings of small nuts, and the Spaniards cast in Gyp, to make in
clear and all these we may use in waters.

CHAP. II.
How to make water of Air.
IF all other means fail, we may make water of air only by changing it into
air, as Nature does; for she makes water of air or vapors: Therefore when we
want, water we may make it of air, and do as Nature does. We know when the Sun
heats the earth, it draws forth the thinnest vapors, and carries them on high,
to that region of the air where the cold is, those vapors are condensed into
drops, and fall down in Rain. Also we see in summer, that in Glass vessels well
rinced, and that are full of cold water, the air by coming to the outermost
superficies, will presently clow'd the the Glass, and make it lose its
cleanness; a little after it will be all in a dew and swell into bubbles, and
by degrees these will turn to drops, and fall down, which have no other reason
for them; but because the cold air sticking to the Glass, grows thick, and is
changed into water. We see also in Chambers at Venice, where there windows are
made of Glass, when a gross and thick vapor sticks to the Glass within, and a
cold vapor prevails without, that within will turn to dew, and drop down.
Again, in winter, in Brass Guns, which are always very cold, and are kept in
Cellars, and vaulted places, where men also use to be, that the air will grow
thick, and lighting upon the cold superficies of them, they will be all of a
dew, and drop with water. But to say no more: Make a large round vessel of
Brass, and put into it Saltpeter, unrefined, what will fill it; men call it
Solazzo mingled with Ice: for these two mixed, as I said in this Book, make a
mighty cold, and by shaking them, with the wondeful force of the cold, they
gather air about the vessel, and it will presently drop into a vessel
underneath. A deligent Artist will add more, that he may get a greater
quantity of water. It suffices that I have showed the way.

CHAP. III.
How one may so alter his face that not so much as his friends shall know him.
SUch as are taken prisoners, or shut up close and desire to escape, and such
as do business for great men, as spies, and others that would not be known, it
is of great moment for them to know how to change their Countenances: I will
teach them to do it so exactly, that their friends and wives shall not know
them. Great men do not a little enquire for such secrets, because those that
can dissemble theirown persons, have done great matters, and lovers have served
their Mistresses, and Parents have not suspected it. Ulisses attempting to know
what the Trojans did, clothed in counterfeit garments, and his face changed,
did all he would, and was not discovered. Homer.

With many scars he did transform his face,
In servants clothes, as from a beggars race.
He went to Troy, --
And when he desired to know what Penelope and her suitors did, he transformed
himself again. I shall show how this may be done many ways, by changing the
Garments, Hair, Countenance, Scars, Swellings; we may so change our Faces, that
in some places it may rise in bunches, in other places it may sink down. And
first,

How to dye the Flesh.
But to begin with the coloring of the Flesh. The Flesh may be dyed to last so
long, or to be soon washed out. If you will have it soon washed off, Steep the
shells of Walnuts, and of Pomegranates in Vinegar, four or five days; then
press them forth by a Press, and dye the face; for it will make your face as
black as an Ethiopian, and this will last some days. Oil of honey makes a
yellow color, and red, and it will last fourteen days or more. The fume of
Brimstone will discolor the face, that it will show sickly, as if one had long
kept his bed, but it will be soon gone. But if you will have it last many days
firm, and very hardly to come off: Use water of Depart, that seperates Gold
from Silver, made of Saltpeter and Vitriol, and especially if it have first
corroded any Silver; this will last twenty days, until the skin be changed. But
if you will

Change the Hair,
I taught elsewhere how to do this: yet I will take the pains to do it again.
Oil of honey dies the Hair of the head and beard, of a yellow or red color;
and this will hold a month. But if they be hoary, white, or yellow, we may dye
them black with a strong Lixivium, wherein Litharg is boiled. Also, it will
notably alter the Countenance,

To add or take off Hair,
An Unguent used in Stoves and Hot-houses, is good for that purpose, made of
Orpiment and quick Lime; for this will presently make the part bald, so the
eyelids and eyebrows being made smooth, will strangely metamorphise a man. We
can also make the Hair grow suddenly, with water of honey, and the fat of an
eel and horse, as I said. One may thus

Make his face swelled, pressed down, or full of scars,
Nothing does more deform the visage then the stinging of Bees. We can make
scars with caustic Herbs, by applying them, and letting them lie on for a
little time. Tumors and Cavities are made by using to the part milk of
Tithymal, as to the Mouth, Nose, Eyes, especially where the skin is off, that
by this remedy alone the face is deformed; so you may do the Cods and
Testicles: water of Cantharides smeered on, does presently cause bladders and
humors. Turbith beaten, and boiled, and anointed on, makes all swell where it
touches, chiefly the Testicles. The powder of the Yew, does so exulcerate the
skin, that the people will think the man is most miserable, and in a sad
condition. The remedy is the juice of the Poplar, or the oil of Poplar. The
fume of Brimstone and burnt straw, will discolor the face, as Hypocrites do,
who by such means alter their countenance. Mingle together the feces of Aqua
fortis one ounce, Pickle and Curcuma, of each one dram, with Oil to the form
of an unguent, and anoint your face, it will make it black. When you will wash
it with cold water, it will come to its former complexion. Comedians and
Tragedians, when they Act on the Stage, they smeer their faces with lees of Oil
to change them, that such as are their acquantance may not know them. Because
the stinging of Bees, Wasps, Hornets, do so change the face, making the Nose,
Mouth, and other parts to stand awry, and to be full of swellings and
depressions: If any man wash his skin with the decoction of Hornets or Wasps,
the place will so swell, that it will make men suspect some disease, yet it is
without pain. The remedy is Theriot drank, or smeered on the part: and this is
the fraud that false women use to counterfeit themselves to be with child. Beat
together Oyl-lees, coals of a Vine and Pomegranate Pills; and mingle them, and
if you touch your face with this liniment, you shall make it exceeding black:
but the juice of sour Grapes or Milk will wash it off.

CHAP. IV.
That stones may move alone.
THe Ancients say, that the stones called Prochites and Astroites, laid upon
some other plain stone, will move of themselves, if you put Vinegar to them.
The way shall be this: let a plain well polished, on the outward superficies,
Porphyr Marble stone, lie beneath; lay upon this the stone Trochites or
Astroites, whose outward superficies is made smooth also; then put to them a
little vinegar or juice of Lemons, presently of themselves will the Trochites,
as well as the Astroites, without any thing moving them, go to the declining
superficies: and it is very pleasant to see this. Cardan says, That such
stones have a thin moisture in them, which by the force of the vinegar, is
turned into a vapor; and when it cannot get forth, it tumbles the stone up and
down: There is the beginning of a thin vapor, but it comes not forth* because
it is credible that the passages are very narrow: I should think that air is
shut up in the veins of it, for it is probable, where you shall see substances
of diverse colors. Wherefore vinegar, because it is subtle of parts, goes in,
and drives out the air, which passing out by the vinegar, moves the stone. Yet
I have found that all stones will move themselves, that are mingled of diverse
stones, and have diverse open passages in their veins. For the vinegar entering
in at the joints, forces the stone to move it self. The Alabaster stone,
called vulgarly Lodognium, moves excellently, for it is distinguished by diverse
veins, and varieties of stones; and I have seen a piece, not only of one
pound, but of ^our pounds to move it self, and it was like a Tortois; and when
the stone began to move, it seemed like a Tortois crawling. That kind of
Marble moves by it self with vinegar, which is called Brocadello, which is
compounded of diverse and mingled parts. Also with vinegar does that spotted
Marble walk, which is spotted with red, yellow, and brown spots; they call it
the Lousy stone, and it makes the beholders to wonder at it. I must tell you
this before I leave off, because I would omit nothing. If the Marble be spotted
underneath, and be above all of one color and hard, or beneath all of one
color and hard, and above of diverse colors; when vinegar is poured on, or any
sharp liquor, it runs presently to the declining part; sometimes in circles,
sometimes by jumps, and sometimes hastily moving it self.

CHAP. V.
How an Instrument may be made, that we may hear by it a great way.
IN my Optics I showed you Spectacles, wherewith one might see very fat. Now I
will try to make an Instrument, wherewith we may hear many miles; and I will
search out a wood, wherewith that may be performed better and with more ease.
Therefore to find out the form of this Instrument, we must consider the ears
of all living Creatures, that bear best. For this is confirmed in the
Principles of Natural Philosophy, that when any now things are to be invented,
Nature must be searched, and followed. Therefore to consider of Animals, that
have the quickest hearing, we must think of those that are the most fearful;
For Nature takes care for their safety, that as they have no great strength,
yet they might exceed others in hearing, and save themselves by flight; as the
Hare, Coney, Heart, the Ass, Ox, and the like. These Creatures have great ears,
and always open toward their foreheads; and the open passages are to carry the
sound from the place whence it comes. Ha^es therefore have long ears standing
up high. Pollux. But Festus calls the Hare, Auritum, because of its great ears,
and quickness of hearing. The Greeks call the Hare Lagos from the great ears;
for La in composition augments, and Os signifies an ear, and it was fit that a
fearful creature should hear well, that it might perceive dangers farther off,
and take care for it self in time. The Egyptians thought the Hare so quick of
hearing, that it was their Hieroglyphick for hearing. The Coney is of the same
Nature, and has the same kind of ears. Cows have great hairy ears: she can
hear a Bull rore when he seeks to Bull a Cow, thirty furlong off, as giving
this token of his love. Aelian. A Heart has greater and longer ears, as it is a
fearful Creature: If he holds his ears right up, he perceives sharply, and no
snares can take him; but if he let his ears down, he is easily slain.
Aristotle, and Pliny from him. When they raise their ears, they hear quickly;
when they let them fall, they are afraid: and not to go over all Creatures that
have large right up open ears, I say those that have such ears, they raise them
and direct them forward, when they would hear afar off, and they are of most
perfect hearing. I shall show now by the contrary, that such Creatures which
have short small ears, and not so visible, are of dull hearing. Great part of
Fishes want ears, and such as have only holes and no ears, must needs hear
more deafly; for the outward ears are made by Nature, that the sounds might be
conveyed to the ears by them. Adrianus Consul of Rome, is a most clear witness
of this, who having this sense hurt, made hollow catches to hear better by; and
these he fastened to his ears, looking forward. And Aristotle says, That
Horses, Asses, Dogs, and other Creatures that have great ears, do always stir
them about, and turn them to hear noise, Nature teaching them the use of those
parts; and we find that they hear less that have their ears cut off: wherefore
it is fit, that the Form of the Instrument for hearing, be large, hollow, and
open, and with screws inwardly. For the first, if the sound should come in
directly, it would hurt the sense; for the second, the voice coming in by
windings, is beaten by the turnings in the ears, and is thereby multiplied, as
we see in an Echo. The sea-Periwinkle is an argument to prove it, which being
held to the ear makes a light noise. Now it remains to speak of what matter it
must be made. I think of porous Wood, for the holes and pores are passable
every way; and being filled with air, they sound with every small stroke: and
amongst the porous Wood, is the Ivy, and especially the tree called Smilax or
Woodbind, for a Dish made with Ivy, will let out the water, as I said.
Wherefore Pliny speaking of the Woodbind, says, It is proper to this matter,
that being set to the ears, it will make a small noise. And in another place, I
said that the Woodbind-Ivy would sound, if set to the ear. Therefore fit your
Instrument to put into your ear, as Spectacles are fitted to the eyes.

CHAP. VI.
How by some Impostures we may augment weight.
I Have set down some Impostures here, that such as handle with wicked men, may
take heed that they be not deceived. As

To augment the weight of Oil,
water is mingled with the Oil, that the fraud may not be known, let it be done
with troubled waters, as with the decoction of Wood, Rapes, Asphodills, that it
may the harder be discerned from it. Or else they put the choicest Gumtragant
into water for two days: then they bray it in a Mortar, always putting water to
it, to melt the Gum: add these to the Oil dropping forth, and they will be
turned to Oil. By the like fraud almost,

Silk is made to weigh more,
They put it upon the vapor that rises from boiling water, and this makes it
swell with moisture, and grow heavier. Others bray one ounce of Gum Arabic,
and being well passed through a sieve, they mingle it with the decoction of
Honey; they dissolve this mixture into water, and wet the Silk with it, and
then let it dry. Others keep it in the green leaves of Walnut-tree. If you will

Increase the quantity of Honey,
Add to it the Meal of Chestnuts of Millet, and that augments it, and it
cannot be known. So you may

Increase the weight of Wax:
Add to the Wax Bean-meal, excellent well beaten; and this will burn in
Candles without any excrement; for it increases the weight and bigness, and
the fra^d is scarce discerned. So you may

Augment Soap.
If you mingle the Ashes of Oxens shank-bones, well burnt it Potters ovens, or
white Brimstone. For you shall augment the weight and quantity, without and
distinction of it. If you would

Counterfeit Pepper,
You may gather green Juniper Berries, and let them dry till they shrivel; then
mix them with grains of Pepper. Others gather great black Vetches, and first
they boil them with wild Pepper; for swelling in the water, when they come to
be dried, they become wrinkled. I did sophisticate them so, that I deceived in
sport the best Apothecaries; and afterward, I did in mirth discover the fraud.
Take the Berries of the ripe red Sanguinaria; these when they are dried, will
be so shriveled, and like to Pepper, that any man almost may be deceived by it,
unless he tastes of it. So we may

Increase the weight of Wheat,
By setting a vessel of Wood within it, full of water or vinegar. For as Pliny
says, It will drink it in.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Harp and many wonderful properties thereof.
THe Harp has some properties in it, and things worthy to be observed, which I
shall propound here. First, I shall mention some wonderful effects, that the
Ancients speak of: then how they may be done, or how the Ancients did then.
Since Music is now more Adorned and Noble, than it was amongst the Ancients
(for then it was more rude and imperfect) and yet in our days it does not
perform those operations. It is certain that Musical Tunes can do much with
men, and there is no heart so hard and cruel, but convenient and sweet harmony
will make it yield, and on the otherside, harsh Music will vex and harden a
man's mind. Musaeus discovers, that Verse and Songs are a most delightful thing
to Mortal man: and the Platonists say, That all things living are charmed by
Music; and there are many effects observed of it. Drums sound in the wars to
provoke those that are slow to fight; and we read that the Ancients did such
like things. One Timotheus a Musician, as often he he pleased would play a
Phrygian Tune, and so enrage the mind of Alexander, that he r^n presently to
the wars; and when he would do otherwise, he changed his tune, and took off all
his courage making him lasie, and would then draw him being grown effeminate,
to Banquets and Feasts: And Plutarch says, That when he heard Antigenida
playing Melodies with a Pipe, that they called Harmatii, he was so inflamed,
that he rose in his Arms, and laid hold of him that sat next to him. Cicero
reports, That Pythagoras made a young man more calm by a slower tune, who was a
Tancomonite, and was whitled with wine, and mad for a whore, and spurred
forward by a Phrygian tune; for being a corrival, he sought to set the house on
fire where the whore was. And the same Author says, If young men are provoked
by the sound of Flutes to commit any wickedness, if the Piper play but a slower
tune they are called off again; for by the gravity of the Music their petulant
fury is alayed. Empedocles, when one set upon his Host, that provoked him with
reproaches and ill language turned the burden of his Song, and so assuaged the
fury of his anger. Theophrastus is reported to have used Musical Tunes to
repress the passions of the mind. And Agamemnon departing from his Country to
go to Troy, doubting of the chastity of Clitemnestra, left a Harper, who with
Music did so incite her to continency and chastity, that Egystus could not
enjoy her till he had killed the Harper. The Thracian Orpheus by the playing on
his Harp, made barborous Nations civil who were as hard as stones to be
softened. Music charms the tender ears of children, and Rattles will make them
quiet, and hold their peace when they cry. Wherefore Chrysippus is reported to
have written a peculiar Song for Nurses. Also wild Beasts are tamed with
Musical Tunes. Arion the Harper made friends of the Dolphins that want reason,
and they carried him safe to the shore, when he was cast into the Sea. Strabo
says, That Elephants are allured with drums. Stags are held with sounds, and
catched with sweet Music. The Swans under the North-winde are conquered by the
Harp and Musical Tunes: Little birds are enticed to the Net with Pipes; and the
Shepherds Pipe commands the Sheep, when they wander too far to field, to stand
still. In Mysia, when Horses back Mares, a man sings to them as it were a
marriage Song, and the Mares are so taken with the Music, that they become
great with Fool, and they bring forth most gallant Colts. Pythocaris a
Musician, when he sang earnestly swift Notes to his Pipe, is said to have made
Wolves become more tame; and which is far more wonderful, Antiquity cured
Wounds, Diseases, and Poisons by Melody, as Histories related. Terpander and
Aaron of Methymna, cured the men of Lesbos and Jonia of great Diseases.
Asclepiades a Physician cured deaf people by a Trumpet, and by singing he
stilled the sedicious people. In time past there was great store of Spiders in
Aquilia, which they commonly call Tarantulae, when the Sun is extreme hot they
bite most pestilently, and venemously; for this danger this healthful remedy is
only found out, that he that is bit must be charmed with much singing of
Musicians, and many musical Instruments. The sick though he want all sense, so
soon as he hears the Flute play, as if he rose from a dead sleep, arises from
the earth, and danceth after the Music; and if the Musician cease to play, he
presently faints, and grows stupedt and as the Music strikes up, so he does
dance the more. So to several Diseases the Ancients appointed several Music;
for the Dorick Melody caused Prudence, Chastity, and Learning; the Phrygians
made men fight, and grow furious, which the flute will do also. Therefore
Aristoxenus in his Plays, when he could not prevail with Dorick Music, he
changed to Phrygian melody that agreed with them. The Lydian Harmony sharpens
wit to those that are dull, and brings in a desire of heavenly things, upon
those that are oppressed with a love of earthly things. Aristotle in his
Politics, Do we not read that the Lacedaemonians rejected that kind of Music
called Chromaticum, because it made those that heard it too effeminate? Whence
I think it is not against reason, that the same may be done by the Lute or Harp
alone, but what is done by art or cunning, is more to be wondered at, which none
can deny. But if we would seek out the cause of this, we shall not ascribe it
to the Music, but to the Instrument, and the wood they are made of, and to the
skins; since the properties of dead beasts are preserved in their parts, and of
Trees cut up in their wood, as I said elsewhere in this Book. And to take the
most noted examples, if we will

Fright Sheep,
There is Antipathy between Sheep and Wolves, as I said often, and it remains
in all their parts; so that an Instrument strung with Sheep strings, mingled
with strings made of a Wolfs guts, will make no Music, but jar, and make all
discords. Pythagoras. If you will

Drive away Horses,
Horses are frighted in battle by Elephants, and a Camel Naturally hates a
Horse, as Aristotle and Pliny say, and some report that Horses will burst if
they tread upon the Wolfs footing, when the Horsemen rides them. So that if
drums be made of an Elephant, Camel, or Wolves skin, and one beat them, the
Horses will run away and dare not stand. By the same reason, if you will

Drive away Bears,
A Horse, that is a Creature made obedient to man, has a Capital hatred with a
Bear, that is a Beast hurtful to man; he will know his enemy that he never saw
before, and presently provide himself to fight with him, and he uses art
rather than strength for it; and I have heard that Bears have been driven away
in the Wilderness by the sound of a Drum, when it was made of a Horse skin.
Again, if we would

Make Horses gentle,
Aelian writes that by the playing on a Flute, the Lybian Horses are so
allured, that by this means they will become gentle for man's use, and will not
be so furious; they will follow the Groom that feeds them, whithersoever he
please to lead them with his Music; when he plays and stands, they stand
still, and if he play eagerly on the Flute, they are so ravished with it, that
they cannot hold crying, and let tears fall. Those that keep Horses make a
hollow pipe of the Tree called Rose-Laurel, and they go amongst the herd with
this, and playing on it they charm them all. Theophrastus has told us that the
Herb Oenothera will ^ame wild Beasts, and make them drunk; and as I said
elsewhere, Theophrastus his Oenothera is our Rose-Laurel, against Dioscorides.
It is reported, that

Women will miscarry,
if Fiddle-strings be made of Serpents, especially of Vipers, for being put on
a Harp and played on, if women with child be present, they suffer abortion,
and Vipers are wont to do as much by meeting them, as many write. Hermenias, a
Theban, endeavored

To cure many of the Sciatica
in Beotia, by Music; and it may be his Instrument was made of Poplar, for
Dioscorides says, That the juice of the Poplar-tree-bark will cure them, or of
Willow. Also Hellebore is good

For mad men
And Xenocrates cured mad men with Musical tunes, which Instruments might be
easily made of Horses Shank-bones, or the hollow stalks of Hellebore. Thales
Milerius used a Harp

Against the Plague,
which could be of no other Wood than the Vine-tree; since Wine and Vinegar are
wonderful good against the Pestilence, or else of the Bay Tree, whose leaves
bruised and smelled to, will presently drive away Pestilent contagion.
Theophrastus writes that some are excellent

Against the bitings of Vipers,
with Harps, Flutes, or other Instruments, which Instruments might be made of
Juniper, Ash, Bays, the Stags-bones, Ferula, Elder, Vine, and such like many
more. Pythagoras

Against Dru^^enness
used Music also: for he withheld a young man that was drunk from burning the
house of his corrival, may be with an Instrument of Ivy, or Almond-tree-wood,
especially that as it is of the wild Tree, for these afford great remedy for
drunkenness. Timotheus did so inflame the mind of Alexander the Great, that he
was mad to fight, and when he would he changed his mind, and drew out all his
courage; and he endeavored

To draw his sluggish and yielding thoughts from Battle to Banquets,
and so carried him which way he pleased, which could not be done, but by
Vine-wood, or Wood-Laurel. The Instrument of the Harper, who when Agamemnon
went from Greece to Troy, did keep Clilemnestra chaste by, his Music was made
of Willow, called Agnus Castus; for the women in the Feasts of Ceres, amongst
the Athenians, put Willow-Park-leaves under them, to keep them chaste when they
lay in bed, for so they extinguished the desire of venery. The Pythagoreans
used some Tunes

For sleep and waking;
For when they would by sleep overcome diverse cares, they played certain Tunes,
that easy and quiet sleep might come upon them; and when they arose, so soon
as they went out of their Chambers, with some Music they would dispel all
confusion and dullness of sleep, that they might set to their work. It is said
that the Aeolian Music does still the tempests of the mind, and rocks men a
sleep: they provoked men to sleep with Almond-tree, or Vine-tree-wood, and they
drove sleep off with Hellebore. Take this experiment that is common,

A Harp that is played on, will move another Harpstrung to the same height.
Let the strings be stretched alike, that both may come to the same melody
perfectly; if you shall strike one of the base strings, the other will answer
it, and so it is in the trebles, yet they must be at a moderate distance; and
if this be not very clear, lay straw upon it, and you shall see it move. But
Suetonius Tranquillas, in his Book, De Ludicra Historia says, That in Winter
some strings are struck, and others sound. Thus any ignorant man may tune a
Htrp, if one Harp be rightly tuned for Music, and lie still, he by stretching
the strings of the other, and by slackning them, and striking as the string of
the Harp that lies still guides him; so of the rest, But if you will

That a deaf person may hear the sound of the Harp,
or else stop your ears with your hands, that you may not hear the sound. Then
take fast hold of the Instrument by the handle with your teeth, and let another
strike on it, and it will make a Musical noise in the brain, and may be a
sweeter noise. And not only taking hold of the handle with your teeth, but the
long neck, near the Harp, and by that you shall hear the sound perfectly, that
you may say that you did not hear the Music, but taste it. Now remains what I
think is very pleasant

To make a Harp or other Instrument be played on by wind,
Do thus: When the winds are very tempestuous set your Instruments just
against it, as Harps, Flutes, Dulcimers, Pipes the wind will run violently into
them, and play low upon them, and will run into the holes of the reeds; whence
if you stand near and listen, you will hear most pleasant Music by consent of
them all, and will rejoice.

CHAP. VIII.
To discover Frauds whereby Impostors working by Natural means, pretend that
they do them by conjuration.
NOw will I open Cheats and Impostors, whereby Jugglers and Impostors, who fain
themselves to be Cujurers, and thereby delude fools, knaves, and simple women.
I, to cast down their fraud, by a admonishing simple people not to be deceived
by them, shall open the causes thereof. And first,

By what means they fain, that they can discover Treasures,
The greater part of Cozners, when they are themselves very poor and most
miserable of all men, they profess themselves able to find out Treasures, and
they promise to other men what they want themselves; and they use four Rods
that are double forked, the tops whereof sticking close together crossways,
they hold the lower parts of them with their hands open, near their belly, they
seem to mumble some Verses, and the Rods fall down, and where they fall, they
bid those men to dig that would find Treasures. The cause is, for that the Rods
seem to stand fast in their hands, and yet have no hold at all, and they seem
always ready to fall; and if they remove never so little from their place, they
presently fall down. Also, there are in men's arms and hands pulsations of
Arteries, which although they seem immovable, yet they do move the hands
unseen, and make them to tremble: Yet some Metal-Masters who report that these
forked Rods are a great help to them in finding out of Mines: For with a Knife
they cut the Hazel-tree, which they say is the fittest of all to find out
Veins, especially if the Hazel come upon any Mineral Vein. Others use diverse
Trees, as the Metals are diverse; for they use wands of Hazel for Veins of
Silver, Ash for Brass, Wild Pilch-tree for Lead, chiefly white-Lead, or Brass,
or Gold: then they take the Rod by both ends, and clinch their fists, but they
must hold their fingers clinched upwards toward heaven; and that the Rod may be
lifted up there where the ends meet, thus they wander here and there through
Mountainous places, and when they set their foot upon a Vein, the Rod will
presently turn about, and discover a Vein in any place; when they come off from
it, the Rod will be quiet, and they say the Veins have so great force, that
they will bend the Boughs of Trees that grew near, toward them, as Agricola
writes more largely.

Another merry conceit remains, that three Schroles of Paper not touched, shall
change their places.
This cannot be done but an ignorant man will admire it. Make three long
Schroles of Paper, or of linen, and let them be one longer then another,
equally; for all of them being made equal at the lower end, and turned about
equally, they take one the others place, and change their situation; put the
longest in the middle or in the first place, they change their situation; if
the longest be put last, they hold as they were. No man but will think this to
be done by the Devil, yet this proceeds from no other cause, but because in the
end of the revolution, the longer remains, and the last from whence it rises
stays behind. Aristotle in his Problems seems to mean this, why the Section of
a Paper, if any man cut it off straight from the plain basis in measuring, it
will be straight when it is turned about; but if it be bended, it will be
twisted? whether this falls out, that when the rounds of another Section are
placed on the same plain, that Section declining, is not equally opposite, but
somewhat less: wherefore when you part them, those rounds that are contained in
the same plain, will make a line, that belong to their own order, etc. Some
were deceived, who thought this proceeded from the force of words, and they
answered all questions by it as from an Oracle: for if they changed their
places, all should go well and prosper, otherwise they should have ill success;
and they would not change their superstitious belief, with reason and
experience, because they had so believed many years. If you will have

Money to turn about upon a point,
I often have seen Impostors that to cheat women used this fraud, that two
Schroles of Paper, or some other light matter upon a plain, should lift up
themselves, and move alone. If you search in Barley, you shall find a small
ear of wild Oats, that is black and wrested, like the foot of a Locust; and
if you bind this with wax to the top of a Knife, or point of a Style, and
shall sprinkle softly some drops of water upon them, when it feels the wet, it
will twist like a Harp string, and the Paper will rise, and so will Money turn
on the point of a Style. If we will

Discover theft,
we may do it thus, and recover what is lost. There are many superstitions for
theft, that stand by Natural reasons, and Cheaters ascribe them to the virtue
of Words. There is the Eagle stone, so called, it is as one great with child;
for shake the stone, and it rings in the belly: If then any one powder this,
and put it into good bread baked upon the Embers, and give it to a Thief, the
Thief cannot swallow it, when he has chewed it, but he must either be choked,
or discovered for a Thief; for he cannot swallow it being baked with that, as
Dioscorides says. The Natural cause for this is, because the powder that is
mingled with the bread is so dry, that it makes the bread extreme dry, and like
a pumish, that it cannot be swallowed, when it comes into the throat. Add to
this, that he who seeks to find a Thief, must say to the franders by, whom he
suspects that he will work wonders; whereupon he that is the Thief, has his
throat very dry, by reason of the fear and terror he is in; so that he cannot
swallow this bread with the powder in it, for it will stick to his throat; for
if he were void of fear he could scarce swallow it. There is another cunning
invention: they write the names of those that are suspected upon Schroles of
Paper, and make them fast in clay bullets, and put them under the water, the
pellets being well wet, open, and the light schroles of Paper rise above the
water. And this causes the spectators to admire, and to suppose it is some
diabolical art. The clay pellets are made as many as the standers by are, and
the names writ in the schroles, are wrapped up in the pellets: for the schroles
that are not very fast wrapped in the pellets, are not very fast bound in; but if
you will have them never to open, you shall work it well with the schrole, and
so it will never come forth. If you will have

Flowers to fall from a Tree:
When I saw this first I was amazed, but I asked the reason, and he showed me
it. It is a property of Mullens, that when in the morning it opens the Flowers,
if the Plant be shaken gently, the Flowers drying by degrees will fall all to
the ground; and one that sees it will think it comes from Magical Art, if he
that shakes them off shall mumble some idle words. Also,

Women are made to cast off their clothes and go naked:
To let nothing pass that Jugglers and Impostors counterfeit, They set a Lamp
with Characters graved upon it, and filled with Hares fat; then they mumble
forth some words, and light it; when it burns in the middle of women's company,
it constrains them all to cast off their clothes, and voluntarily to show
themselves naked unto men; they behold all their privities, that otherwise
would be covered, and the women will never leave dancing so long as the Lamp
burns: and this was related to me by men of credit. I believe this effect can
come from nothing but the Hares fat, the force whereof perhaps is venomous, and
penetrating the brain, moves them to this madness. Homer says, The Massagerae
did the like, and that there are Trees whose fruit cast into the fire, will
make all that are near to be drunk and foolish; for they will presently rise
from their seats, and fall to leaping and dancing. There are Thieves also

Who bore through the head of a Pullet with an Aule, and yet maintain that she
is alive.
And they say it is done by conjuration, and they promise to make a man hard by
this, that he cannot be wounded; for with some Characters fraudulently invented
and bound under the wings, they thrust through the head of the Cock with a
Bodkin, and staying awhile, they pull it forth again, and the Pullet flies away
without any wound, or loss of blood. When I considered of this, and opened the
Pullets head, I found it to be parted in the middle, and the Knife or Bodkin
passing through that place, hurts not the brain, and I have often tried it, and
found it true. There is also

A remedy for the Sciatica,
Great Cato, the chief man for all commodity, and the Master of all good Arts,
as Pliny says, In his Books of Husbandry he used some charms against the pains
of the Sciatica; saying, that if any thing be dislocated, you may charm it
whole again by this means. Take a green Reed four or five foot long, cut it in
the middle, and let two men hold them to the huclebones. Begin to play with
another, S. F. motas vaeta daries dardaries astataries dissunapiter, until such
time as they join together, and shake about your sword, when they come
together, and one touches the other, take that in your right hand, and cut it
asunder with your left; bind it to the place dislocated or broken, and it will
be whole. See how so worthy a learned man brake forth into such madness; nor
did he know by his great learning, that without the force of Words, green Reeds
cut long-ways, will turn round of themselves and meet, if they be pendulous, as
the wands of Willows, and brambles will do. Theophrastus gives the reason why
they turn round, in his Books De Causis Plantarum. Moreover we read in
Dioscorides, that a Reed with Vinegar applied to the hucklebones will cure the
Luxation of the loins, without words or superstition.

CHAP. IX.
Of some Experiments of a Lamp.
I Much rejoiced when I found amongst the Ancients, that Anaxilaus the
Philosopher, was wont to make sport with the Snuff of a Candle and the Wick,
and by such delusions would make men's heads show like Monsters, if we may
believe Pliny: By taking the venomous matter comes from Mares newly having
taken Horse, and burning in new Lamps, for it will make men's heads seem like
Horsheads, and such like: but because I gave no credit to these things, I never
cared to try them. But take these for truth.

To make men seem like to Blackmores,
Take Ink, but the best comes from Cutles: mingle this with your Lamps, and the
flame will be black. Anaxilaus is reported to have done this, for oft-times by
mingling Cutles Ink, he made the standers by as black as Ethiopians. Simeon
Sethi says, That if any man shall dip a Wick in Cutles Ink, and Verdigrease,
those that stand by will seem partly Brass-colour, partly Black, by reason of
the mixture. And we may imitate this in all colors; for setting aside all
other lights that might hinder it, for else the other lights will spoil the
sport, and if you do it by day, shut the windows lest the light come in there
and destroy the delusion. If the Lamp be green Glass and transparent, that the
rays coming through may be dyed by the color of the medium (which is of great
consequence in this) and green Coppras be mingled with the Oil, or what
moisture it burns with, and they be well ground together, that the liquor may
be green; make your Cotton of some linen of the same color, or bombast; this
being smeered with it, must burn in that Lamp: the light that is opposite
against you, will show all faces of the beholders and other things to be green.

To make the face seem extreme pale and lean,
This is easy; pour into a large Glass very old Wine, or Greek Wine, and cast
a handful of Salt into it: set the Glass upon burning coals without flame, lest
the Glass should break, it will presently boil; put a Candle to it, and light
it; then put out all other lights, and it will make the faces of the standers
by to be such, that they will be one afraid of another. The same falls out in
shops, where Bells and Metals are melted, for they seem so strangely colored
in the dark, that you would wonder at it, their lips look pale, wan, and black,
and blew: Also let Brimstone, when it burns, be set in the middle of the
company, and it will do the same more powerfully. Anaxilaus the Philosopher was
wont to work by such delusions. For Brimstone put into a new cup, and set on
fire, and carried about, by the repercussion of it when it burns, makes the
company look pale and terrible. That oft-times happened to me when at Naples I
walked in the night in the Leucogean Mountains; for the Brimstone burning of it
self, made me look so.

CHAP. X.
Of some mechanical Experiments.
THere are some Experiments that are witty and not to be despised, and are done
by Simples without mixture, which I thought not unfit to communicate to
ingenuous Men, and Artificers. There is an Art, called

The flying Dragon,
or the Comet: It is made thus; Make a quadrangle of the small pieces of Reeds,
that the length may be to the breadth, one and half inproportion; put in two
Diameters on the opposite parts, or Angles, where they cut one the other, bind
it with a small cord, and of the same bigness, let it be joined with two others
that proceed from the heads of the Engine. Then cover it with paper or thin
linen, that there be no burden to weigh upon it: then from the top of a Tower,
or some high place, send it out where the wind is equal and uniform, not in to
great winds, lest they break the workmanship, nor yet to small, for if the wind
be still, it will not carry it up, and the weak wind makes it less labor. Let
it not fly right forth, but obliquely, which is effected by a cord that comes
from one end to the other, and by the long tale which you shall make of cords
of equal distance, and papers tied unto them: so being gently let forth, it is
to be guided by the Artificers hand, who must not move it idly or sluggishly,
but forcibly; so this flying Sail flies into the air. When it is raised a
little (for here the wind is broken by the windings of the houses) you can
hardly guide it, or hold it with your hands. Some place a Lanthorn upon it,
that it may show like a Comet: others put a Cracker of paper, wherein Gun-power
is roled, and when it is in the air, by the cord there is sent in a light
match, by a ring or some thing that will abide; this presently flies to the
Sail, and gives fire to the mouth of it, and the Engine with a thundering
noise, flies into many parts, and falls to the ground. Others bind a Cat or
Whelp, and so they hear cries in the air. Hence may an ingenuous Man take
occasion, to consider how to make a man fly, by huge wings bound to his elbows
and breast; but he must from his childhood, by degrees, use to move them,
always in a higher place. If any man think this a wonder, let him consider what
is reported, that Archytas the Pythagorean did. For many of the Noble Greeks,
and Favorinus the Philosopher, the greatest searcher out of Antiquities, have
Written affirmatively, that the frame of a Pigeon made in wood, was formed by
Archytas, by some art, and made to fly; it was so balanced in the air by
weights, and moved by an aireal Spirit shut within it.

Soli Deo Gloria.
FINIS.
A TABLE containing the General Heads of NATURAL MAGIC.
The first Book; Treating of wonderful things.
What is meant by the name, Magic Chap 1 The Nature of Magic Chap 2
Instruction of a Magitian, what he ought to be Chap 3 Opinions of the Ancient
Philosophers touching the causes of strange operations, and first of the
Elements Chap 4 Diverse operations of Nature, proceed from the essential forms
of things Chap 5 Whence the form comes: of the Chain that Homer feigned, and
the Ring that Plato mentions Chap 6 Sympathy and Antipathy, by them to find
the virtues of things Chap 7 From Heaven and the Stars things receive their
force, and thereby many things are wrought Chap 8 Attract the virtues of
superior Bodies Chap 9 Knowledge of secrets depends upon the survey of the
World Chap 10 Likeness of things shows their secret virtues Chap 11 Compound
things by their likeness Chap 12 Particular creatures have particular gifts;
some in their whole body, others in their parts Chap 13 Properties of things
while they live, and after death Chap 14 Simples to be gotten and used in their
seasons Chap 15 Where they grow, chiefly to be considered Chap 16 Properties of
Places and Fountains commodious for this work Chap 17 Compounds work more
forceably; and how to compound and mix those simples which we would use in our
mixtures Chap 18 Just weight of a mixture Chap 19 Prepare Simples Chap 20
The second Book; Of the generation of Animals.
PUtrefaction, and of a strange manner of producing living creatures Chap 1
Earthy Creatures generated of putrefaction Chap 2 Birds which are generated of
the putrefaction of Plants Chap 3 Fishes which are generated of putrefaction
Chap 4 New kinds of living creatures may be generated by copulation of diverse
beasts Chap 5 Dogs may be generated of great courage, and with diverse rare
properties Chap 6 Pretty little dogs to play with Chap 7 Amend the defects in
dogs Chap 8 Diverse kinds of Mules Chap 9 Mingle Sheep and Goats by generation
Chap 10 Commixions whereby Beasts of diverse kinds are generated Chap 11
Copulations of a man with diverse kinds of Beasts Chap 12 Diverse kinds of
Birds generated by diverse Birds coupling together Chap 13 Commixions of Hens
with other birds Chap 14 Hawks of diverse properties generated Chap 15
Commixion of diverse kind of Fishes Chap 16 New and strange Monsters Chap 17
Ways to produce strange and monstrous births Chap 18 Wonderful force of
imagination, and how to produce party-colored births Chap 19 Women to bring
forth fair and beautiful children Chap 20 Either males or females to be
generated Chap 21 Experiments practiced upon diverse living creatures Chap 22
The third Book; Of the production of new Plants.
NEw kinds of Plants may be generated of putrefaction Chap 1 Plants changed,
one degenerating into the form of the other Chap 2 One fruit compounded of many
Chap 3 A second means Chap 4 A third way Chap 5 Fruits made double, the one
contained within the other Chap 6 Strange fruits may be generated and made
either better or worse Chap 7 Ripe fruits and flowers before their ordinary
seasons Chap 8 Fruits and Flowers may be had at all times of the year Chap 9
Made late and backward Chap 10 Fruit to grow bigger then their ordinary kinds
Chap 11 Fruit that shall have neither stone nor kernel Chap 12 Fruit produced
without any rines or shells Chap 13 Colors such as are not incident to their
kind Chap 14 Colors of Flowers may be changed Chap 15 Fruits and Flowers may
be changed to a better favor then ordinary Chap 16 Fruits to be sweeter and
pleasenter for taste Chap 17 Fruits in growing may be made to resemble all
figures and impressions whatsoever Chap 18 Fruits to be made more tender,
beautiful and goodly to the eye Chap 19 Diverse kinds of Fruits, and wines made
medicinable Chap 20 Fruits and Vines planted that may yield greatest increase
Chap 21
The fourth Book; The increasing of Household Stuff.
FRuits long preserved on their trees Chap 1 Flowers preserved on their own
stallks Chap 2 Fruit-safes or places to preserve fruits conveniently Chap 3
Time to be chosen for preserving such fruits as you lay instore for a great
while Chap 4 Manner of gathering fruits, and how to dress the stalk to prevent
the original cause of their putrefaction Chap 5 Grounds, fruits should grow in,
and be gathered which we lay up Chap 6 Fruits to be shut up close from the air
Chap 7 The Ancients shut fruit close in certain vessels, and put them in other
vessels full of liquor Chap 8 Fruits drenched in honey, to make them last for a
long time Chap 9 Fruits may belong preserved in ordinary wine, sodden wine, new
wine, or else in wine Lees Chap 10 Fruits very well preserved in salt water
Chap 11 Things that may be preserved in Oil, and Lees of Oil Chap 12 Apples
long preserved in Sawdust with leaves, chaff, and straw Chap 13 Fruits mixed
with many things for their preservation Chap 14 Things may be preserved from
putrefaction Chap 15 Diverse sorts of bread may be made Chap 16 Bread made of
roots and fruits Chap 17 Ways to make bread of corn and pulse Chap 18 Bread
increased in weight Chap 19 To endure long hunger and thirst Chap 20 Of what
fruits wine may be made Chap 21 Vinegar to be made diverse ways and of what Chap
22 Defects of wine managed and restored Chap 23 Oil made of diverse things Chap
24 Many sorts of thread may be provided Chap 25 Eggs hatched without a Hen Chap
26
The fifth Book; Of changing Metals.
TO convert Tin into a more excellent Metal Chap 1 Lead into another Metal Chap
2 Brass into a more worthy Metal Chap 3 Iron into a worthier Metal Chap 4
Quicksilver, its effects and operations Chap 5 Of Silver Chap 6 Operations
necessary for use Chap 7 To make a Metal more weighty Chap 8 To part Metals
without Aqua fortis Chap 9 To part Gold, or Silver, from other Metals with Aqua
fortis Chap 10
The sixth Book; Of counterfeiting precious Stones
SAlts used in the composition of Gems Chap 1 How Fliut, or Crystal is to be
prepared, and how Pastils are boiled Chap 2 The furnace and the parts thereof
Chap 3 To make colors Chap 4 How Gems are colored Chap 5 Gems otherwise made
Chap 6 Tinctures of Brystal Chap 7 Making Smalt or Ennamel Chap 8 Smalt of a
Rose color Chap 9 Leaves of Metal to be put under Gems Chap 10 How to be
polished Chap 11 Building a furnace for the coloring plates Chap 12 Rays
colored by a mixture of Metals Chap 13
The seventh Book; Of the Wonders of the Lodestone.
ITs Name, Kind, and Country Chap 1 Natural reason of its attraction Chap 2
The Load-stones opposite poles, North, South, and how they may be known Chap 3
The Stones force sent by a right line from North to South, through the length
Chap 4 The polar line not stable, but moveable Chap 5 The force of North and
South vigorous in the points Chap 6 By the touching of other stones, those
points will not change there forces Chap 7 A Lodestone will draw a Lodestone,
and drive it from it Chap 8 A sport of the Lodestone Chap 9 The greater the
Load stone, the greater its force Chap 10 The force of this Stone, will pass
into other Stones Chap 11 In the Lodestone hairiness is contused Chap 12 The
attractive part more violent, then the part that drives off Chap 13 Contrary
parts of the Stones, contrary one to another Chap 14 To know the polar points
in the Lodestone Chap 15 The force of drawing and driving off, cannot be
hindered Chap 16 Make an army of sand to fight Chap 17 Situation makes its
vertnes contrary Chap 18 The attractive force of the lodestone, may be weighed
Chap 19 The Mutual attraction, and driving off of the lodestone, and of Iron
Chap 20 Iron and the lodestone in greater amity, then the lodestone is with
the load stone Chap 21 The lodestone does not draw on all parts, but at
certain points Chap 22 The same lodestone that draws, does on the contrary
point drive off the Iron Chap 23 Iron to leap on a table, no lodestone being
seen Chap 24 The virtue of the lodestone is sent through the pieces of Iron
Chap 25 The lodestone within the sphere of its virtue, sends it forth without
touching Chap 26 The lodestone can hang Iron in the air Chap 27 The forces of
the lodestone cannot be hindered, by a wall or table coming between Chap 28 A
man of wood may row a boat, with other conceits Chap 29 A load stone on a plate
of Iron, will not stir Iron Chap 30 The Position of the Iron, will change the
forces Chap 31 The Iron rubbed with the Northern point of the lodestone, will
turn to the south, and with the south point to the north Chap 32 Iron touched
with the lodestone, will impart the force to other Iron Chap 33 The virtue
received in the Iron, is weakened by one that is stronger Chap 34 To discern in
a Stone the South or North point Chap 35 To rub the Iron-needle of the
Mariners compass Chap 36 The uses of Mariners Compasses Chap 37 The Longitude
of the world may be found out by the help of the Lodestone Chap 38 If the
Mariners Needle stand still, and the Lodestone move, or contrarily, they will
move contrary ways Chap 39 The Lodestone imparts a contrary form to the Needle
Chap 40 Two Needles touching by the Load stone, obtain contrary forces Chap 41
The force of the Iron that draws, will drive off Iron, by diversity of
Situation Chap 42 The Needle touched by the Lodestone on one part, does not
always receive virtue on both parts Chap 43 The Needle touched in the middle by
the Lodestone, sends forth its force at both ends Chap 44 An Iron Ring touched
by a Load stone will receive both virtues Chap 45 An Iron plate touched in the
middle will difits forces at both ends Chap 46 Filings Iron may receive force
Chap 47 Whether Garlic can hinder the virtues of the Lodestone Chap 48 A
Lodestone astonished may be brought to its self again Chap 49 To augment the
Load-stones virtue Chap 50 That the Lodestone may lose its virtue Chap 51 How
the Iron touched with the load stone loses its force Chap 52 That the Diamond
hinders the load-stones virtue is false Chap 43 Goats blood does not free the
lodestone from the enchantment of the Diamond Chap 54 The Iron touched with a
Diamond, will turn to the North Chap 55 Forces and Remedies of the lodestone
Chap 56
The eighth Book; Of Physical Experiments.
MEdicines which cause sleep Chap 1 To make a man out of his senses for a day
Chap 2 To cause several kinds of Dreams Chap 3 Excellent Remedies for the eyes
Chap 4 To fa^ten the teeth Chap 5 For other infirmities of man's body Chap 6
That a woman may conceive Chap 7 Remedies against the Pox Chap 8 Antidotes
against Poison Chap 9 the Plague Chap 10 Remedies for wounds and blows Chap 11
A secret medicine for wounds Chap 12 To counterfeit infirmities Chap 13 Of
Fascination, and preservatives against Enchantments Chap 14
The ninth Book; Of Beautifying Women.
TO dye the hair Yellow, or Gold-colour Chap 1 Red Chap Chap 2 Black Chap Chap
3 To make hairs part smooth Chap 4 How hair may grow again Chap 5 To take away
sores and worms that spoil the hair Chap 6 To make hair curl Chap 7 To make the
Eyebrows black Chap 8 To make the face white Chap 9 To make the face very
clean, to receive the color Chap 10 To make the face very soft Chap 11 To make
the face shine like silver Chap 12 To dissolve Talk, for to beautify women
Chap 13 The preparation of sublimate Chap 14 How White-lead is prepared for the
face Chap 15 The best Sopes for Women Chap 16 To make the face Rose-coloured
Chap 17 Against redness of the face Chap 18 To make a Sunburned face white Chap
19 To take sp^ts from the face Chap 20 To take off red Pimples Chap 21 To take
letters from the face, or elsewhere Chap 22 To take away Warts Chap 23 To take
wrinkles from the body Chap 24 Of Dentifrices Chap 25 To hinder the Breasts from
augmenting Chap 26 To make the hand white Chap 27 To correct the ill sent of
the Armpits Chap 28 How the matrix over-widened in childebirth may be made
narrower Chap 29 Sports against women Chap 30
The tenth Book; Of Distillation.
What Distillation is, how many sorts Chap 1 Extraction of Waters Chap 2
Extracting Aqua Vitae Chap 3 To distill with the heat of the Sun Chap 4 To draw
Oil by expression Chap 5 To extract Oil with Water Chap 6 To separate Oil from
water Chap 7 To make an instrument to extract Oil in a greater quantity, and
without danger of burning Chap 8 The description of a Descendatory Chap 9 To
extract Oil out of Gums Chap 10 To draw Oil out of other things Chap 11 To
extract Oil by descent Chap 12 Extraction of Essences Chap 13 Magisteries what,
their extraction Chap 14 To extract tinctures Chap 15 To extract Salts Chap 16
Of Elixirs Chap 17 Of a Clissus, how made Chap 18 To get Oil out of Salts Chap
19 Of Aqua Fortis Chap 20 Of the separation of the Elements Chap 21
The eleventh Book; Of Perfuming
OF Perfuming waters Chap 1 To make sweet water by infusion Chap 2 To make
sweet Oils Chap 3 To extract Water and Oil out of sweet Gums by infusion Chap 4
To perfume Skins Chap 5 To make sweet Powders Chap 6 To make sweet Compounds
Chap 7 To make sweet perfumes Chap 8 To Adulterate Musk Chap 9
The twelfth Book; Of Artificial Fires.
Diverse ways to procure fire Chap 1 The compositions for fire our Ancestors
used Chap 2 Diverse compositions of Gunpowder Chap 3 Pipes made to cast out
fire Chap 4 To make fireballs that are shot in Brass-guns Chap 5 Compositions
with burning waters Chap 6 Balls made of Metals, to cast forth fire and Iron
wedges Chap 7 How in plain ground and under waters Mines may be presently
dug Chap 8 Things good to extinguish fire Chap 9 Diverse compositions for
fire Chap 10 Fire-compositions for feastival days Chap 11 Experiments of fire
Chap 12 How a Candle shall burn continually Chap 13
The thirteenth Book; Of tempering Steel.
IRon by mixture may be hardened Chap 1 How Iron will wax soft Chap 2 The
temper of Iron must be used upon soft Irons Chap 3 How for all mixtures, Iron
may be tempered most hard Chap 4 Liquors that will harden Iron Chap 5 The
temper of a Tool shall cut a Porphyr Marble Stone Chap 6 To grave a Porphyr
Marble, without an Iron Tool Chap 7 How Iron by heating in the fire, may be
made tractable for works Chap 8 How Damask Knives may be made Chap 9 Polished
Iron, how preserved from rust Chap 10
The fourteenth Book; Of Cookery.
HOw flesh may be made tender Chap 1 How flesh may grow tender by secret
propriety Chap 2 How flesh may be made tender otherwise Chap 3 How
Shell-creatures may grow more tender Chap 4 That living creatures may be made
more fat, and well tasted Chap 5 How the flesh of Animals is made sweeter Chap
6 How they are made too bitter to be eaten Chap 7 How Animals may be boiled,
roasted, baked, all at once Chap 8 Diverse ways to dress Pullets Chap 9 How meats
may be prepared in places where there is nothing to roast them with Chap 10
Diverse confections of Wines Chap 11 To make men drunk, and loath wine Chap 12
To drive Parasites from great men's Tables Chap 13
The fifteenth Book; Of Fishing, Fowling, Hunting, etc.
What meats allure diverse animals Chap 1 How living creatures are drawn on
with the baits of love Chap 2 Animals called together by things they like Chap
3 What noises allure Birds Chap 4 Fishes allured by light in the night Chap 5
By Looking glasses many creatures are brought together Chap 6 Animals are
congregated by sweet smells Chap 7 Creatures made drunk, caught with hand Chap
8 Peculiar poisons of Animals Chap 9 Venomes for Fishes Chap 10 Experiments for
hunting Chap 11
Tee sixteenth Book; Of invisible Writing.
HOw a writing dipped in diverse liquors may be read Chap 1 Letters made visible
in the fire Chap 2 Letters rub^d with dust to be seen Chap 3 To write in an
egg Chap 4 How you may write in diverse places, and deceive one that can read
Chap 5 In what place Letters may be enclosed Chap 6 What secret messengers may
be used Chap 7 Messengers not to know that they carry Letters, nor to be found
about them Chap 8 Characters to be made that at set days shall vanish Chap 9 To
take off Letters that are written on paper Chap 10 To counterfeit a Seal and
Writing Chap 11 To speak at a great distance Chap 12 Signs to be made with fire
by night and with dust by day Chap 13
The seventeenth Book; Of Burning-glasses, and the wonderful sights by them.
REpresentations made by plain Glasses Chap 1 Sports with plain Looking-glasses
Chap 2 A Looking-glass called a Theatrecal-glass Chap 3 Operations of Concave
glasses Chap 4 Mixed operations of plain Concave glasses Chap 5 Other operations
of a Concave-glass Chap 6 How to see in the dark Chap 7 An Image may be seen to
range in the air Chap 8 Mixtures of Glasses and diverse operations of Images
Chap 9 Effects of a Leuticular Crystal Chap 10 Spectacles to see beyond
imagination Chap 11 To see in a Chamber things that are not Chap 12 The
operations of a Cristal-pillar Chap 13 Burning-glasses Chap 14 A Parabolical
Section, which is of Glasses the most burning Chap 15 That may burn obliquely
and at very great distance Chap 16 That may burn at infinite distance Chap 17 A
Burning-glass made of many spiritural Sections Chap 18 Fire kindled more
forcible by refraction Chap 19 An Image to be seen by a hollow Glass Chap 20
How Spectacles are made Chap 21 Foils are laid on Concave glasses and how they
are banded Chap 22 How Metal Looking-glasses are made Chap 23
The eighteenth Book; Of Things heavy and light.
THat heavy things descend, and light ascend in the same degree Chap 1 By
drinking to make sport with those that sit at table Chap 2 To part wine from
water it is mingled with Chap 3 Another way to part water from wine Chap 4 To
part a light body from a heavy Chap 5 To mingle things heavy and light Chap 6
Other ways to part wine from water Chap 7 The ^evity of water and air different
and what may be wraught thereby Chap 8
The ninteenth Book; Of Wind-Instruments.
Whether material Statues may speak by an Artificial way Chap 1
Musical-Instruments made with water Chap 2 Experiments of Wind-Instruments Chap
3 A Description of Water-hour-glasses Chap 4 Of a Vessel casting forth water by
reason of air Chap 5 How to use the air in many Arts Chap 6
The twentieth Book; Of the Chaos.
HOw water may be made Potable Chap 1 To make water of air Chap 2 To alter the
face that ones friends shall not know him Chap 3 That stones may move alone
Chap 4 An Instrument whereby to hear at great distance Chap 5 To augment weight
Chap 6 The wonderful proporties of the Harp Chap 7 To discover frauds in
Impostors that work by natural means and pretend conjuration Chap 8 Experiments
of a Lamp Chap 9 Some mechanical Experiments Chap 10
FINIS.

