A Witty Combat: OR, THE FEMALE VICTOR. A Trage-Comedy. As it was Acted by
Persons of Quality in Whitson-Week with great applause.

Written by T. P. Gent.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Roberts, and are to be sold at the Royal Exchange,
Fleet Street, and Westminster Hall, 1663.

ACTORS NAMES.
Old Mr. Carleton. Mr. G. Carleton his Eldest Son. Mr. J. Carleton his youngest
Son in love with the German Princess. Mr. King. his Son in Law. A Parson. Two
or three Gentlemen. Two or three Young Clerks. Two Watermen. Drawers. A
Cellarman. Fiddlers. Mrs. King. Madam Moders. Old Mrs. Carleton. Cook Maid.
Constable, and Officers.
A WITTY COMBAT: OR, The Female Victor.
Actus primus,
Scaena prima.
Enter two Watermen, as in an Alehouse at Billingsgate, and a Boy with a full
Pot of Ale. 1 Waterm. THou should have brought half a dozen Boy, this will
not wet, one Pot of Ale is no more in our Bellies, then a man in Paul's.


2 Waterm. That Is right: I prithee fetch a couple more, for what we do, we must
do quickly, and not make a days work on it.


Boy. I swear I can hardly spare another Pot, the House swarms with several
Companies, that we have scarce Pots enough to serve their turns; but drink as
fast as you will, I Will fill as fast, I Will warrant you.


1 Waterm. Away, away, a man may baul his heart out before thou will hear him:
bring us another Pot, and by that time this will be ready for thee to fill.


Boy. Well I Will try my Skill. Exit Boy.


1 Waterm. Come, here is half this to thee, fear it not, 'twill warm us within
man.


2 Waterm. I know it, and will pledge thee and it were a whole one.


1 Waterm. Passing good Ale, it goes down merrily.


2 Waterm. I believe there is no Bones in it: I have heard of Cock-Ale,
Lambeth-Ale, China-Ale, Rosemary-Ale, Mint-Ale, Wormewood-Ale, Orange-Ale,
Lemon-Ale. And I know not how many sorts more that are the Gentlemen's drink as
they call 'em; All is but Ale still, made of Water that runs by Billingsgate.
And for my part, when all is done give me the plain wholesome Ale of England
without welt or guard as they say, or a deal of mixtures; but of all drinks I
hate that of Coffee, it dries Men's Brains and makes 'em write Hudibrasses a
plaguey hard Word, and jangles like the breech of a Drum. Enter Boy.


Boy. Here Gentlemen I am provided for you.


1 Waterm. Gentlemen! you Knave! we may be drunk as Lords if we fit by it, but
soft and fair, two words to a bargain, the Fiddler played no such matter.


2 Waterm. No, no, we are for a touch and begone, here fill us this to, and
make have; Presto. within why Boy.


Boy. With a high pass and a repass I am gone, can I be here and there to, I Am
coming. Exit. Boy running.


1 Waterm. Have at thee again. drinks.


2 Waterm. Do thy worst Boy, come, to thee again, the Parish is but short Man.
drinks.


1 Waterm. 'Twill be welcome when it comes, off with it and it were a mile to
the bottom.


2 Waterm. See, I am a clean Drinker; Super naculum: boy, I hate to spill good
Liquor, and throw away the bottom, a man may want it before he dies.


1 Waterm. I, so the Parson told us this morning in the Boat, we had a jolly
Company of Passengers, but what she should be that is gone with the Parson my
Noddle cannot imagine.


2 Waterm. A notable perrilous witty Wench I warrant her, let her alone for
leading her men.


1 Waterm. She Will lead the Parson besides his Text I Am afraid; how she handled
him?


2 Waterm. Nay, marry he would have handled Her, by your leave friend.


1 Waterm. You say very right, but she was too cunning for him, She was Courted
by better Men in the Boat, but she was too hard for them all, I wonder the
Parson should carry Her away.


2 Waterm. Who would think that such a Yea and Nay man should carry so much
wickedness in his Hide.


1 Waterm. Oh hang 'em, there is no Whore-master, like the slye Whore-master:
the zealous old Scot Doctrin'd Whore-master of the Tribe of Henderson.


2 Waterm. What was he? what was he?


1 Waterm. What, what was he? why he was the Pope of Scotland.


2 Waterm. Of Rome thou mean Man?


1 Waterm. I say of Scotland, I know what I say well enough, and Marshall and
Calamy were two of his Cardinals.


2 waterm. Lord who would think it, Enter Boy with more Ale.
but thou will talk any thing in thy Ale.

1 Waterm. Under the Rose I may, Oh art thou there Boy, thou art he that does
the Liquor bring, though not the Bottle.


Boy. I promise you I made what have I could, but our house is so pestered.
I Am coming -- did you ever within why Boy. hear the like? but do you hear me?


2 Waterm. Who told you we did not?


Boy. Well, will you hear me then, there is a Gentleman inquires for you
without.


1 Waterm. What is he for a Man?


Boy. I tell you he seems a Gentleman.


1 VVaterm. Though he be not what he seems, it is all one to us; if he has any
Money he shall be welcome, and so let him in.


Boy. Well, I shall tell him what you say. within Boy, boy.
I come, and I come again Sir. Exit.

1 Water. Now should I laugh if it were some good fellow come to pay our
reckoning.


2 VVaterm. No, no, They are Fish too hard to catch; how e're drink about man.


1 VVaterm. That Is quickly done, here is toward thee.


2 VVaterm. The Other Pot, and away. --


Enter Gentleman and Boy. Gent. Where are the Watermen.


Boy. They are there Sir.


Gent. How now honest Lads, closeat it, you seldom sleep I think.


1 VVaterm. Yes troth Master we were just thinking upon it, I think and't
please you, you came up with this Tide in our Boat.


Gent. I did so.


1 VVaterm. We had a Company of merry Passengers, not to lie; truly, and
worthy Ones, or else I am very much mistaken


Gent. You had so, but one especially.


2 VVaterm. If I do not know where he be now never trust me.


Gent. Why I am here.


2 VVaterm. I know that too, but I know where you would be.


Gent. That Is a hard matter my friend.


2 VVaterm. Do you not mean a Gentlewoman.


Gent. There were many.


2 VVaterm. But I do mean the Gentlewoman, she that sat next the Parson.


Gent. Now you hit me.


2 VVaterm. And would not you be with her now, with all your heart and a piece
of your Liver?


Gent. I cannot tell, but I must give thee half a dozen of Beer for thy
conceits sake.


1 VVaterm. Ale is the life of a Waterman Sir.


Gent. Why then Ale let it be.


Boy. You shall have it with all selerity Sir. Exit.


2 VVaterm. Will your Worship or Honor, or I don't know what, be pleased to
sit down and take part of our Cup.


Gent. I came to that purpose.


2 VVaterm. Blessing on your heart, I do not love a proud Gentleman, methinks a
right Gentleman should not be proud by your favor Sir, here is even to you, and
to all our Company how ever dispersed now on Shore.


Gent. I Will pledge you, but my honest friends cannot you tell me what is become
of that pretty thing.


1 VVaterm. Pretty thing quoth a, she was worth ten pretty things; she was a
thing to thank God for.


Gent. You say well. Enter Boy with Ale.


Boy. Here Is your quickening Ale Gentlemen.


Gent. Set it down, and begone.


Boy. I come, I come presently. Exit Boy.


Gent. My friends here is to you both.


1 VVaterm. One at once Sir, and we are for you.


Gent. Is there no way to find her out?


2 VVaterm. Way quoth a, it is a shame for you all, so many Gentlemen aboard
her, and let a dry bon'd Parson carry her away!


Gent. Pox on it, I lost her in a mist; I know not how she whipped away.


2 VVaterm. You know not whether?


Gent. Very true, but I hope thou do?


2 VVaterm. We know nothing Sir, the Streets are wide and many.


Gent. Let this for once corrupt thy knowledge, she cannot be far off? Gives
him money.


2 VVaterm. If I thought so. --


Gent. She must be some where?


2 VVaterm. That Is certain if she be any where Sir, as doubtless she is, and
now I think on it.


Gent. I prithee then think on it.


1 VVaterm. London is a wide place Brother, have a care what you do.


Gent. I prithee hold thy prateing, I Will content thee too.


1 VVaterm. I say no more, but Brother have a care.


2 VVaterm. And now I think on it.


Gent. I, go on.


2 VVaterm. London is a wide place indeed, and a Man may as soon find a Needle
in a Bottle of Hay, as a woman-stranger in this City, yet I would advise you.


Gent. To what?


2 VVaterm. To have her Cried in every Parish.


Gent. Pish, I see thou art but a baffling fellow; give me my money again.


2 VVaterm. Yes, when can you tell? did you ever know a Waterman guilty of that
fault, to part with money when he had got it in his clutches. I am sorry I
cannot serve you, and there is all, the time was you might have served your self.


Gent. Thou say right, how cursedly was I mistaken! much good may do you
with your money.


1 VVaterm. 'Twill serve to pay the reckoning, Sir I wish you may find her.


Gent. Since you cannot inform me, my hopes, and search is ended, fare you
well. Exit.


VVatermen. We Will drink a health to your good fortunes Sir.


VVatermen. So, it is an ill wind blows no body good, Boy take your reckoning,
and now we will Enter Boy. take a good smart Nap, and then to the work again.


Boy. All Is paid in the Rose, and you are Welchmen Gentlemen.


1 Waterm. Thou art a wag Sirrah. Exeunt.


Actus primus,
Scaena Secunda.
Enter Parson, and Madam Moders. Pars. In verity it is a cold bleak morning, a
little of the Creature would do well: a Glass of Malligo is very comfortable,
yea, even unto the Spirits, with a Toast; it does regenerate, and quicken much,
and in a way does elevate, and stir the blood to action; it does assuredly.


Mod. I apprehend not that, (Sir) but I fear you give your self too great a
trouble, thus to follow me, I cannot reach your meaning.


Pars. Verily it is sincerity of love I bear to strangers, as we are exhorted
even so to do by the most learned Authors; Yea, we are all but strangers here,
and therefore assuredly we should love one another, yea, so the Word is, even
as one another. And see, Oh see, indeed law, look ye yonder, there is a door
open to Comers surely, which we have not till now found in our way; I hope my
courtesy, your Gentleness, will not refuse, yea truly I hope not.


Mod. I must house some where: feign I would be rid of this impertinent
Coxcomb, yet methinkes I Am chained unto him as some fate hung over me, he may
prove fortinate. --


Pars. How say you beauteous Creature?


Mod. In truth I say Sir you do so abound in Courtesy, I shall fall short in
my endeavors to requite it.


Pars. It Is an easy, yea, even a very easy matter surely will do it if you so
please, -- where is the Man o'th house here? Enter Mr. King


King. What is your will?


Pars. Nay, is it your will, that we may have a special Glass of Malligo.


Mr. King. The best in all the Town I warrant you.
Where are you there? Enter Drawer.

Pars. We are but newly come off the Water in verity: and something that is
warm is not a miss truly; how say you Sir? with this fair Creatures good
leave, I think it is not assuredly.


Mr. King, Show a Room presently do you hear, and draw a Pint of the best
Malligo, that is next -- do you hear, do you see, do you understand me. Exit Mr.
King.


Draw: I shall Sir -- will you please to walk into a Room.


Pars. Yea verily, how say you forsooth?


Mod. I am at your disposal Sir.


Pars. In verity I wish you were else, for ah -- He rubs his Elbow. ah -- pray
give me leave to take you by the hand forsooth ah -- ah -- it is as soft as
Velvet. Exeunt.


And enter again at the other end of the Stage, where there is a Table and
Stools set forth. Pars. A very pretty close convenient Room this is
assuredly; how say you beauteous Creature.


Mod. Why truly Sir the closeness of it does not at all concern me; if it were
ten times wider I should like it a great deal better. Enter Drawer with Wine.


Pars. Assuredly I think not so; yea, I can give you many reasons for it,
Divine, and Morrall, Hyperbolicall, or Tropologicall, -- but here is the
creature come, that is the wine, now this should have a fellow, that is a Toast,
where is the other Creature?


Draw. Even at the fire Sir,
To receive its Trial.

Mod. The fellow jeers him.


Pars. You answered well young man, yea verily; but let it not be burnt.


Draw. It shall not be a Martyr; he will turn first assuredly Exit.


Mod. Why this is excellent.


Pars. A good ingenious young man verily, I warrant him well notion'd, that is
to say in truth one that has something in him, yea certainly, but as I was about
to say; to draw my reasons to a head, that is to tell you what they are,
assuredly; and first. -- Enter Drawer. with the Toast.


Mod. The Toast is ready Sir.


Pars. You assure me right.


Draw. Yea, and it has got a new Coat by turning. Exit.


Mod. Ha, ha, ha,


Pars. Assuredly your mirth is comfort to me, what might occasion it, I pray if
that --


Mod. A Toy came in my head.


Pars. Your Sex have many: but in so sweet a thing as you, they do appear
(methinks) commendable, yea verily.


Mod. In that opinion you deceive your self, me you cannot Sir.


Pars. Not for Worlds on worlds! and yet the Weather may allow us to come
nearer one another, verily, without offense, or misconstruction; for it is raw
and cold, yea very cold. offers to remove.


Mod. The Room is warm, good Sir keep your seat.


Pars. Strangers I love, and strangers should love me, in verity they should
la; else we do deny the sense, bids us love one another; yea, verily we do,
I Will try how warm draws his Chair near Her. you are, and truly by a sweet
conjunction we may warm one another, yea assuredly.


Mod. Sir I understand you not.


Pars. I hope you will, an understanding Woman is a Jewel, yea, yea, a precious
Jewel in the Ears, and hearts of Princes and wise men assuredly, in sundry
places we do find it so, yea verily; ah, ah, ah, ah, this hand yea this same
hand of yours.


Mod. And what of it Sir?


Pars. It melts like Butter against the Sun believe me, I would come nearer
verily, that is unto your Lip, Enter Drawer. in verity it would affourd me
sweetness in abundance, truly assuredly it would, I pray, I pray. --


Mod. I am a strainger to your sense and Person: keep farther off Sir, or
indeed I shall, --


Pars. Yea, yea,


Draw. Nay, nay, are you so rampant; 'Parson, I thought I knew your meaning
Aside. by your Gaping; are you so hot? I Will send a cooler to you. Exit.


Pars. Ha -- ha -- ha -- ha -- ha. --


Mod. What Is your meaning Sir?


Pars. The Spirit boyles within me, ye Enter Mr. King. assuredly, and if it be
not looked to, certainly the Liquor will run over, yea in truth, la.


Mod. You are th'uncivill'st man that e're I met with, and undeserving of the
Coat and Title you do assume; hands off. --


Mr. King. A civil Gentlewoman I warrant her.


Mod. You rude fellow you.


Pars. Yea, as the Wise man said, a Woman's Tongue is Wormwood, yea verily Gaul
and bitterness.


Mr. King. A man of your Coat do you see to do these things do you see, it is a
shame do you see, do you mark me, that.


Pars. Assuredly I will pay for the Malligo and the Toast, yea I will.


Mod. I scorn your courtesy Sir.


Pars In verity I will.


Mr. King. Let him Mistress do you see, he has sworn do you see.


Pars. Assuredly I will, what is it pray?


Mr. King. But Twelve-pence do you see.


Pars. Twelve-pence is just a Shilling verily, and there it is assuredly; fair
one, I greet you well; but will conclude with the wise Man, he that takes a
Woman for his friend takes a wrong Sow by the Ear; yea verily. Exit Parson.


Mr. King. I do perceive do you see you are a stranger.


Mod. A very stranger to this Town indeed Sir.


Mr. King. And it is very likely do you see you have a charge about ye.


Mod. I have so Sir.


Mr. King. If you please do you see to make use of part of my House, do you see you
need go no farther, here you may be safe do you see, I see you are a civil
Gentlewoman, and it is pity do you see you should happen into a place that would
abuse you, there are some such in Town; do you see that will prey upon strangers
do you see, but you shall find no such thing here believe me.


Mod. I do Sir, and kindly do embrace your proffer.


Mr. King. You shall want nothing in my house do you see, if you please to see
your Chamber?


Mod. Sir you oblige me much for this civility. Exeunt.


Actus Secundus,
Scaena Prima.
Enter Mr. King and his Wife. Mr. King. SWeet Heart, I have a secret to impart
to thee, and a very precious one, do you see, it may be worth us pounds wench,
nay, if I said hundreds I should not lie, do you hear me? provided we order our
matters well, and carry 'em in the right way, do you see. And therefore I must
conjure thee by all loves and nuptial kindnesses that has or may pass between
us at Bed or at Board, do you see. --


Wife, What is all this for?


Mr. King, For it is no petty ordinary common thing do you see, but a thing of
profit do you see, and credit do you see, and honor may come on it do you see.


Wife, What is it? what is it?


Mr. King, If a man cannot reveal a thing to his own Flesh and blood, do you
see, who shall he do it to then do you see?


Wife, I pray Sweetheart let me know your meaning?


Mr. King, Women's hearts are like Cullenders, do you see, or Loop-holes, do you
see, but if a man cannot trust his own wife, his second self! do you see, I know
not what to say do you see.


Wife, Good Sweetheart let me understand you, do you doubt me Sweetheart?


Mr. King, I doubt no body do you see, but a secret is a secret, do you see, and
ought to be kept safe, tender as the Apple of ones eye, do you see, or the heart
in ones bosom, do you see.


Wife, Lord, lord, how I long to know it.


Mr. King, Yes you may long do you see, and shorten again, do you see, but who pays
for it do you see.


Wife, Nay, I prithee Sweetheart.


Mr. King, This it is do you see, to have a careful Husband do you see, that
rises early and sits up late, do you see, while you she things, you lazy drones,
you heavy eyed wives do you see, run to your roost e're it chymes tenn, do you see
me, there snug and snore till ten next morning, do you see; out upon such
huswifes I cry.


Wife, I, but Sweetheart, what needs all this? good, now let me know this
secret, this secret you talk of.


Mr. King, He that goes to bed with a Cap of cares on his head is an early
riser, do you see, he takes time by the fore lock, do you see, and must thrive do you
see, as it is seen in Cynder women, and Small-cole men do you see, who have a
penny in Purss to spend when the sluggish man does want it do you see.


Wife, You weary me, good Sweetheart to the purpose.


Mr. King, It is a secret do you see, that you must keep as close do you see, as
you do your sins, do you see, and reveal it to no body do you see, without my
privity do you see.


wife, You have charmed me chuck, pray let me know it.


Mr. King, Why then, do you see? --


wife, You know I do, dear heart you know I do, if you love me do not trifle
thus,


Mr. King, Why then I must tell you and exhort you, do you see, not to lie so
long a bed, you may get Fleas do you see, but no wealth there; a stirring Wife is
the only woman do you see, when all is done, do you think my Brother Bloodworth
would ever have come to be an Alderman or a Knight if his wife do you see had not
had a care of the Kitchen, and been stirring?


wife, Well, well, I Will begone Sweetheart, I see you have a mind to mock me;
prepare me for a secret to no purpose.


Mr. King, Yes, it shall be to a purpose do you see, and a good purpose too do you
see, this very morning e're the Crow had pist do you see, I got into my Bar do you
hear, and as good fortune would have it do you see, in comes a Parson and as
sweet a thing do you see, as modest and as comely as ever strod over Threshold
do you see, with him do you see, they drank a pint of Wine, and I found the Parson
was ill inclined do you see; and his Coat lined with letchery do you see.


wife, I pray Chuck by the way, where does that Parson preach?


Mr. King, That Is not to my matter do you see, I found her to be a virtuous
Gentlewoman do you see, a stranger, and a Person that had a charge about her do you
see, yea Jewels and Treasure do you see.


wife, And what then Chuck?


Mr. King, Why, then I discharged the Parson do you see, after he had discharged
the Reckoning do you see, as it was fit, but not before do you see.


wife, So then, and what became of the Gentlewoman?


Mr. King, Why she had a charge about her do you see, and you may think I would
take care of her do you see, she is forth comeing.


wife, Where, good Husband where?


Mr. King, In no worser place then our own house do you see.


wife, Now blessing on thee Chuck I shall have a Companion.


Mr. King, Hold there child, do you see, we must go wisely to work do you see, and
find out what she is do you see, for certainly she is a Gentlewoman of some
quality, and therefore you must use her with all respect becoming her Person
do you see; and when we find how matters stand let us alone to make our Markets
do you see, if we don't hang me do you see.


wife, Sweetheart, believe me if there be any confidence to be put in Woman,
your secret is locked here in this Cabinet of which none keeps a key but your
self; and if you think I retain any thing of a mothers wit in me let me alone
to sift her out; were she as subtle as the great Grandmother of us all.


Mr. King, Be wise do you see, keep things close do you see, and then I warrant ye
do you see. Exeunt.


Actus Secundus,
Scaena Secunda.
Enter Madam Moders, and the Maid of the House. Maid, My Mistress will wait
upon you immediately forsooth, and I am sent in the mean time to know what you
want.


Mod. I return my equal thanks to your Master and Mistress, and tell them if
they can spare me a Glass She opens a little Cabinet and spread some Jewels and
money upon the Table. bigger then this I travail with, to dress me by, they
will do me a kindness, and do you hear sweart a little Paper too, prithee, and I
will pay for it.


Maid, And Pen, and Ink forsooth?


Mod. No, I never am without one it is so necessary.


Maid, Do you want nothing else, forsooth.


Mod. Not at present,


Maid, I Will return withal speed forsooth.


Mod. Do so. Exit Maid.


Madam Moders alone. Mod. These People are highly officious, I have not met the
like civility in any place, what e're the reason is; if it continue thus, it
will be wonderful: I am a Stranger, and I must be so in my Deportment, as the
sight of these draws on respect, pointing to her Jewels. so a becoming
distance in me is necessary; to be too familiar renders a woman light, though
she be honest, and to be sour and surley is as bad, and argues want of
breeding, to avoid the censure of either, I Will walk between both, and as I find
my Company, appear neither too Jocand, nor yet too severe.


Enter Maid. Maid, I have brought the Glass, and the Paper forsooth.


Mod. You have done very well, set 'em down, I thank you.


Maid, My Mistress is just upon coming; forsooth.


Mod. She gives her self too great a trouble then, but she shall be most
welcome.


Maid, I Will tell her so forsooth, God bless you forsooth.


Mod. I thank thee Wench, gives her money. thy prayer deserves something, and
thou shall have it. --


Madam, Oh lack-a-day forsooth, no, no forsooth, but if it must be so forsooth
I humbly thank you.


Mod. Farewell, this must be done; A grain Exit Wench. or two cast on a
fruitful Soil may multiply. The Wench looks not like one would be ungrateful,
and I have gained experience by my Travail, that it is a thrift thus to be
prodigal. Enter Mrs. King. This should be the Gentlewoman of the house, I
should meet her now -- but stay a little. --


Mrs. King, I fear I entrude forsooth; you are busy.


Mod. I cry you mercy Mistress, some Letters I am fitting for the Post, but no
great business; to let my friends know where I do reside, that I may hear from
them, that is all.


Mistress, And that is enough for me. a side


Mod. Will you please to seat your self?


Mrs. King, I came indeed to invite you down to Dinner, goodness how these
hangings look for want of brushing, what an idle Wench is this, the Curtains
and Vallance too, and the Chaires and Stools too, what Windows are here, I
dare say they have not been well rubbed this week; the very Flore forsooth if
you will believe me have shined so, you might have seen your face in it,
goodness my Husband is such a man to put a Gentlewoman into a Room, -- Oh fie
upon it, I fear forsooth you are but ill pleased as you are ill fitted, but
indeed I promise it shall be amended.


Mod. It needs not Mistress, methinks it is very well, and so long as I am
contented, you need not trouble your self.


Mrs. King, That is your goodness forsooth, but will you be pleased to walk
down to Dinner, or will you have a Dish of Meat brought up?


Mod. No, Mistress I dare not take that State upon me as to dine by my self, if
I dine at all 'twill be with you, but truly I do not know how --


Mrs. King, If your Letters be all the hinderance, you have time enough to
dispatch them forsooth.


Mod. But I am all unready.


Mrs. King, You need not fear Strangers, my Husband and my self are all.


Mod. Say you so Landlady, then I dare venture.


Mrs. King, Will you please to lead the way forsooth.


Mod. No, I hope you will leave me in Possession of my Chamber.


Mrs. King. Oh because of shutting of the door, it is very right, Lord how
forgetful I am, pray pardon me forsooth. Exeunt.


Actus Secundus,
Scaena Tertia.
Enter Young Carleton and the Celler-man. Y. Carlet. Where Is my Sister?


Cellerm. Who do you mean, my Mistress.


Yo. Carlet. Prithee fool whom else?


Cellerm. Why then my Mistress your Sister is. --


Yo. Carlet. What art thou drunk, where is she?


Cellerm. Drunk, what is that word drunk? did you ever know me drunk? let
Cobblers and Tinkers be drunk, did you ever know a Cellerman drunk?


Yo. Carlet. Leave this fooling, where is my Sister?


Cellerm. drunk! drunk! how can he tell any thing that is drunk? yes I know
where your Sister is.


Yo. Carlet. Come where is she.


Cellerm. You may go look, drunk! if I did know I would not tell you; drunk!


Yo. Carlet. Go you are a Sot. --


Cellerm. A Sot! you Scriveners Boy, you Pen and Ink-horn, a Sot you
Shittafritter.


Yo. Carlet. Sirrah I shall box ye if you be thus saucy.


Cellerm. Box me, you cocaloach, you Tinder-box of a Clark, you Rump of a
Lawyer, you box me, come, boy come, come an thou dare Enter Drawer. here I
stand.


Yo. Carlet. Very hardly, art not thou a base Rascal to abuse me thus I could
kick thee about like a Football thou dirty fellew thou.


Cellerm. Who he offers to kick and falls down. me, kick me! Boy, boy, I Will
kick thee boy, thou spindle thou.


Draw. Why how now, what is the matter? what down man? up again and take
another. helps him up.


Cellerm. Drunk, and sot, and a Football to be kicked very fare, come kick for
kick, I Will so toss thee.


Yo. Carlet. welfare a good friend, you had given your self the other toss else.


Draw. Come prithee get thee in.


Cellerm. He says I am drunk.


Draw. Why so thou art insufferably, cursedly drunk.


Celler. Thou lie in sober sadness, cursedly, to say so, though thou were my
brother ten times over.


Draw. No more of this; go, go thy ways to sleep.


Cellerm. Sleep, Pox of sleep, I care not for sleep, I did not sleep ten wincks
all last night, I never sleep, am up early and late for my Masters profit, yes
Carleton, I am Carleton, what say you to that now Carleton, hah!


Draw. Prithee go thy ways up Stares, or into some by Room I prithee brother
do.


Cellerm. Yes, I shall but do you hear Carleton, if ever I meet you Carleton. --


Draw. Thou Wilt give him a Glass of Wine.


Cellerm. What then? it may be so I will, and the best Wine in the Celler too;
Carleton without being drunk Carleton, what say you to that Carleton, or a Sot,
Carleton, or a Football Carleton, how think you of that Carleton?


D. Very well, prithee begone.


Celler. I will not tell I Have taken him by the hand.


Draw. Why that is well done.


Cellerm. Why you must think I cannot but love the man for the Woman's sake, I
do so Mr. Carleton, she is my Mistress Mr. Carleton, weeps. and you are her
Brother Mr. Carleton, Flesh and Blood Mr. Carleton, is very near Mr. Carleton.


Draw. Now his kindness overflowes: will thou go in?


Cellerm. I will have a pint of Canary first to drink to Mr. Carleton, I pray
fetch it Brother I Will pay for it, honest Mr. Carleton, my Mistresses Brother,
but I am not drunk Mr. Carleton, nor a Sot Mr. Carleton, nor a Football Mr.
Carleton, I may be a fool Mr. Carleton, but I love you Mr. Carleton.


Yo. Carlet. Thou art an honest fellow.


Cellerm. Yes, and ever was Mr. Carleton, yet I will creep on all four to do
you good Mr. Carleton, and yet I am not drunk Mr. Carleton.


Draw. Thou art not, thou art not.


Cellerm. It may be I am so, so, as they say in a fair way, but drunk I hate to
be drunk.


Draw. Will thou go into a Room.


Cellerm. I will not stir a foot, nor a leg, nor a finger, nor a thumb, unless
Mr. Carleton commands me, and says honest Rogue I love thee.


Yo. Carlet. Why honest Rogue I love thee.


Cellerm. Why so now; is not this better then to say you are drunk, a sot, and
I Will kick you like a Football: -- why now you are a Gentleman; and if you will
go down into the Cellar I will not wast your Brothers Goods but what you drink
there I Will pay for, a man can say no more.


Draw. Another time Brother, another time.


Cellerm. Why what is that to thee, thou will be meddling with other men's matters.


Draw. No more quarrelling good brother: prithee go in.


Cellerm. Do you say I shall go in Mr. Carleton, if you say the Word I am gone.


Yo. Carlet. I, honest Rogue prithee begone.


Cellerm. Why then I fly. Stumbles.


Draw. Hold there man.


Cellerm. A pox of these Tobacco Pipes, they lie in a man's way basely: do you
hear brother, if company come in you know where to find me. Exit Cellerman.


Draw. Fast a sleep in the Cellar.


Yo. Carlet. It Is a very honest fellow, did not this drink abuse him.


Draw. It Is wondered where he gets it; in Company he shuns it, unless the sent
of the Celler makes him drunk, no man can guess it, or drinks with his own
shadow.


Yo. Carlet. Alas poor fellow; but where is my Sister?


Draw. At dinner Sir, or near upon it, with a most dainty Creature, a sweet
modest thing.


Draw. What is she?


Draw. A mere stranger happened in here by chance; she is worth your seeing
Sir.


Yo. Carlet. Say thou so; I confess I Am something bashful, but I Will
venture.


Draw. I would I durst. Exeunt.


Actus Tertius.
Scaena Prima.
Enter Young Carleton and Mistress King. Mrs. King. Good lack John that you
should be so simple to come so late, you know we dine betims, especially when
we have little Company; but if thou wilt take a snip such as it is, thou know
thou art welcome John.


Yo. Carlet. Pough, I care not for a dinner; I am vexed I mist the sight o'th
Lady.


Mrs. King. What Lady? John?


Yo. Carlet. You think that I know nothing; what Lady was it that came in this
morning early, very early.


Mrs. King. Why John as I am a Woman. --


Yo. Carlet. You know there was a Gentlewoman or Lady, stranger, came hither
this morning as I said before; fie Sister why do you make it so strange to me
your natural brother. --


Mrs. King. Lord, how do thou know this.


Yo. Carlet. What do I not know?


Mrs. King. Well now it is out; I ever took thee for a Conjurer by the scrawles
thou used to make at home; nay in my conscience I think verily if thou would
confess John, thou make Almanacks John, and fortune Books John; Oh thou
were always a wag John.


Yo. Carlet. Away fool; But may not I see this stranger?


Mrs. King. Well thou art a very Witch John, if I was not sworn to secrecy, yea
by my own Husband let me be hanged now, and thou by thy craft, thy wicked
craft, (for so it is) have found out all; but John thou can not see her now
for all thy cunning.


Yo. Carlet. Why so, Sister?


Mrs. King. In troth she is despatching Letters to be sent by the Post John, but
to morrow John.


Yo. Carlet. What then Sister?


Mrs. King. We shall feast our friends John, and cannot in civility do less
then invite her John, being a sojourner in our house John, and then thou shall
have thy belly full of seeing of her John, but no words John; if thou love
me; she is a well bred Woman, I perceive that John, already John; but no words
as you love me.


Yo. Carlet. Not a word I.


Mrs. King. Be sure you come betimes, and be very neat John, 'twill be for your
credit, and you may find the benefit of it in time John.


Yo. Carlet. Well, well, you know Sister I can be as spruce and finicall as
another when I please.


Mrs. King. I know it John.


Yo. Carlet. And so adue Sister.


Mrs. King. fare you well brother John. Exeunt severally.


Actus Tertius,
Scaena Secunda
Enter madam Moders and the Maid of the House. Mod. Sweet heart shall I trouble
thee.


Maid. No trouble forsooth to serve you.


Mod. Only to get a trusty messenger to deliver these Letters for me at the
Post office, they are of concernment, and their miscarriage will much prejudice
me; and therefore good sweet heart get one you know, and are assured of.


Maid. I Will carry them my self forsooth with my Mistresses leave.


Mod. That would do well indeed, but I fear thy mistress cannot spare thee.


Maid. Yes I warrant you forsooth.


Mod. shall I not be too troublesome.


Maid. Oh no forsooth.


Mod. I would not give her occasion of distaste.


Maid. You need not fear it forsooth, she is of a better disposition then so.


Mod. Well sweet heart I Will trust to your care then, there is money for 'em.


Maid. They shall be safe delivered forsooth. Exit.


Mod. I find these people's over kindness mixed;
With greyness of subtlety; their plausibility
Gives only Credit to their busy purpose:
My Landlady like to one Grandam Eve,
Covets to know more then she ever shall;
Yet I Will afford her to taste of the Apple,
And since she will needs trouble her self 'bout matters
That unconcernes her, I have fitted her,
My Letters which I know she will intercept,
And pry into, to satisfy her longing,
(Though it be most inhospitable and base,)
I Have framed accordingly there let her nibble,
Upon the bates I Have laid and please her self,
With thinking she knows all, when she knows nothing:
Whilst I Have seem still a stranger to her meaning,
The more respects she shows me, I will be
The more reserved which will draw greater on,
With some continuance, poor shallow thing
To hope to sift me out in my affairs,
My Education has not been so slender,
Nor my Wit left naked of Rudiments,
To be a Price for thee and thy designs;
All bold inquisitors ought thus to be
Deluded with some show of certainty.

Enter Maid of the House. Maid. The Letters are delivered forsooth.


Mod. Art sure on it?


Maid. Sure on it forsooth, I delivered 'em with my own hands I Am sure.


Mod. Say thou so, thou have made have then I Will promise thee.


Maid. Have you any more service to command me forsooth?


Mod. Not to night wench.


Maid. Shall I not help to undress you forsooth?


Mod. I was not dressed to day, and having nothing on but what I can cast off
without thy help wench, I acquit thy diligence.


Maid. Good rest to your Ladyship. Exit.


Mod. Ladyship! so, now it begins to work,
Will it rest there! no, their conceits fly higher;
A foreign Princess, that for love of some
Brave Englishman, has left her Native Soil,
And privately is here Arrived, or so;
But that is too lame, I Would rather have it thus;
A Noble Person that to view the World
With an experienced eye, throws off her State,
And like to the late active Sweedish Queen,
Retires into a Hut without her Retinue.
This meets my fancy and comes nearest to
Their Wit (if they have any) here is a Field
For us to play in; as I see 'em move,
I Will poyse their admiration, and their love. Exit.

Actus Tertius,
Scaena Tertia.
Enter Mr. King and his Wife. Mr. King. Good sweet heart do you see, I would not
have you so busy do you see, sweet heart a body does not know what may come on it
do you see sweet heart.


Wife. Prithee chuck hold thy tongue she is a brave Woman, nay, she must be a
gallant Woman, I know what I intend well enough, take you no care, the business
is mine chuck.


Mr. King. Nay, do you see, I will not cross you sweet heart do you see, I wish all
may go well, but you know she is but a stranger do you see, and a body may be
deceived do you see, of what you hope for do you see.


Wife. Let the fault lie on me then chuck, look here is my brother John. Enter
Yo. Carleton.


Mr. King. Brother you are very heartily welcome do you see, indeed you are do you
see, I cannot dissemble do you see, in truth I cannot.


Yo. Carlet. I know it, what needs all this brother?


Wife. You are very early John, and very smug John.


Yo. Carlet. I came just from the Barbers, but where is the Lady?


Mr. King. What Lady? I know no Lady I protest do you see, but my own Wife your
Sister do you see, who is the only Lady and Mistress of the house do you see.


Wife. Oh fie chuck, fie, you know, you know.


Mr. King. True, there is a strange Gentlewoman sojournes here do you see for
some time, but I know no more on it do you see.


Yo. Carlet. Why then a Gentlewoman let her be, so I can but see her.


Mrs. King. I think thou long'st for it John, hearken and thou may hear her
John, it is her sings above. voice I promise thee.


Yo Carlet. It Is a sweet one, -- hold good Sister hold, I love a good voice as
I love my life.


SONG.
A way, away, flatter no more
My easy Faith, for now I see
What thou in me seemed to adore
Thou make thy pleasures property;
No more, no more will I believe
The man that can so soon deceive;

Yo. Carlet. Excellent, excellent, -- Oh good She goes on.
Sister listen a little.

SONG.
Nor was it flattery that did,
Betray my heart, but that I loved,
For which my Reason has been chid,
And I the said effects have proved;
Then go, and I no more will see
The man that has abused me.

Yo. Carlet. Incomparable! the Voice of Nightengales are hoarse to hers: shall
I see her Sister?


Wife. Yes brother John you shall see her, but I must prepare her first, you
will not know her else, she will not be seen till Dinner time.


Yo. Carlet. Would it were ready, I shall be starved till then.


Mr. King. Rather then so do you see, we have a bye Bit for ye.


Yo. Carlet. You do not understand me brother.


Wife. No, no, John, heaken to me, she that I shall call Cousen when we are at
Dinner is the Party; and by that word John you may know her, but let none else
take notice of it.


Yo. Carlet. If her person be answerable to her voice, she will be taken notice
of, whether I will or no.


Mr. King. He says right Wife do you see, the truth is I would not have my
brother do you see, take any notice of her more then as a stranger.


Wife. That is my meaning chuck.


Mr. King. for she may be a person of Quality do you see, and she may not do you
see, all is not Gold that glisters.


Yo. Carlet. Good brother do not forstall the Market, when I know not how to
carry my self you shall instruct me.


Mr. King. Nay, brother I do not speak for your carriage do you see, but for your
good do you see, I would not have you ensnared do you see.


Wife. Ensnared Love! do thou think that I, who am his natural born Sister,
flesh, blood, and bone, would bring him into a snare love!


Mr. King. No chuck, but thou may be mistaken in the thing it self do you see
chuck.


Yo. Carlet. I perceive my Brother is not minded I should see the Gentlewoman,
fare you well Sister, I Will not be troublesome.


Mr King. Good lord do you see, my own heart is not welcomer to my Bosom then
you are to it do you see, but I speak by way of caution do you see, because I love
you,


Yo. Carlet. Certainly I Am neither fool nor madman, I have my Wits about me.


Wife. I John that thou have John to my knowledge, more wit then twenty of 'em,
and I am no fool neither John, thou know it, and I know more John then I
will speak; be ruled by me John, let me alone I Will order the business if thou
have a mind to her.


Yo. Carlet. When I have seen her I will tell you more.


Wife. And that thou shall John for all his pettishness.


Mr. King. Nay, I have done do you see, I Will meddle no more in it.


Exeunt. Enter two Gentlemen, with a Drawer. 1 Gent. Are the Guess all come.


Draw. Now you are come Gentlemen.


2 Gent. Are we the last Couple in Hell then.


1 Gent. I believe not; is Jack Carleton come?


Draw^ Yes Sir.


1 Gent. Nay then I fear we are tardy in point of time, for he used to be
always the last man born.


Draw. Today he came sooner then was exspected indeed, but you are not too
late, in very good time Gentlemen; will you please to walk up.


2 Gent. What else. Exeunt.


The Scaene of a Celler is discovered, wherein sits the Cellerman, by him a
little Table, with a lighted Candle on it, and several sorts of Pots about it.
Cellerm. Here am I placed to attend the noice above Stairs; I fill and fill,
all manner of Vessels from the Gallon to the Gill Pot, and they bawle and call,
and take 'em away as fast, but the devil of drop they give me; none has the
heart to say honest Wat here is to thee, and God-a mercy it is good Wine, hang
their money, I respect their love, but thou art not beloved Wat, therefore love
thy self Wat, the Poets say thou art Prince of the Spiggot and art in thy
Kingdom when thou art in the Celler, if so then all these are my Subjects, the
French, the Dutch, and the Spanish, nay I dare say if need be I can command the
Welsh, the Irish, the Scottish, and the English; then Wat do like a Prince make
use of thy Subjects as they make use of thee, for they would be musty else. --
within Wat, Wat, make have. do thou hear Wat thou art called upon, thou must
make have they say hum, -- so be it, by, and by, this must be filled with
Sherry, this with Canary brisk, this with old Malligo, but do you hear me Sherry,
Canary points to the Pots. brisk, and old Malligo, there is none of you shall go
'till I have taken excise -- here Wat, since no body else will, I Will drink to
thee my self, it is a cup of pure Sherry, Wat, why gra-mercy -- this is
something now, here is good fellowship, and no body sees! they say thou have a
good Pallat Wat, fills his Vessel and cup. I Will try it in faith, here is to thee
in a Cup of brisk Canary, off with it man, and so I will VVat, and now what
say thou to a Cup of old Malligo VVat? it cannot but be good, the best in
Town VVat I approve it, off with it man; doubtest thou me VVat? now are we
Company for Poets VVat, but hold -- will thou let thy French and Dutch Subjects
go free VVat? No thou will be an unjust Prince then, as for the English,
Welsh, Irish, and Scottish, they are poor, acquit 'em, acquit 'em, then here is
to thee in a Cup of Rhenish it is cleansing drink VVat; off with it, art thou
now for a Cup of spruce Claret, or White VVat? both; thou shall have 'em entire
boy, entire boy; rich Wine VVat, huge rich Wine VVat, damnable searching VVat;
yea falls into his Chair and sleeps it is so, it is so, it is so.


Enter two Drawers. 1 Draw. Here he is with all his Artillery about him,
dormant as a Mouse.


2 Draw. Does he not sleep Dogs sleep.


1 Draw. No you may hear him to Hogesden.


2 Draw. I Will waken him.


1 Draw. By no means, he sat up late last night, come help up They carry the
Pots off and so The Scaene is drawn. with these Pots.


Enter Mrs. King, and Young Carrleton. Mrs. King. Now Dinner's done, while they
are merry John let you and I consider of the matter; how do you like the
Person, John?


Yo. Carlet. Exceeding well; good at discourse, and of a modest countenance.


Mrs. King. Why law ye now, did not I tell you this John? and you would not
believe me, my Husband like a fool was of the same faith too.


Yo. Carlet. Pough I did believe you Sister, but has she that estate you talk
of too?


Mrs. King. What do you doubt me there too John? yes she has an Estate and a
glorious Estate John, but what it is I do not know John, yet I can shrewdly
guess John and if need be. --


Yo. Carlet. Is it in her own hands.


Mrs. King. Why now I see thou art not so wise as I thought thee to be John, in
whose hands should it be else John.


Yo. Carlet. Where lies it.


Mrs. King. Between Heaven and Earth John, does not all peoples Estates lie
there you fool.


Yo. Carlet. I would not be made one of good Sister.


Mrs. King. Nay, if you be there abouts John I have done.


Yo. Carlet. I must confess I never saw a person I ever fancied better; Pray
Heaven my flames consume me not, they take so soon, and are so fierce.


Mrs. King. Fear not John, I am her bosom John, and if she were not for your
turn, you should not have her John, but you must be ruled John.


Yo. Carlet. In any thing dear Sister thou will have me.


Mrs. King. Then put your self John into an Equipage beyond your self John,
appear as I would have you like a Lord John, with your Coach and Foot-boyes,
the sooner John the better; were it to morrow, and treat her nobly John, were I
a man, John I could do it to the life John, I know you want not friends to
furnish you, let it be so John, for she is a Lady, and none but him is
recommended for a Lord will carry her John.


Yo. Carlet. It shall be done dear Sister; I know where to be provided both
with money and Clothes.


Mrs. King. And then let me alone to manage things for thy advancement John.


Yo. Carlet. I, dear Sister prithee use thy Interest.


Mrs. King. If we should not do well for one another John, how would the World
look on us John? I love thee heartily John.


Yo. Carlet. I know thou do, and there is no love lost on either side.


Mrs. King. I Will lordifie thee John, I Will be thy HERALD: thou shall no more be
plain John, nor poor John, nor honest Jack as thy friends call thee; but my
Lord John, I will have it in my thought, and will dream upon it, for man, I must
not call you brother, nor you me Sister, observe that John, yet I would not
have you to forget John, that I am your Sister.


Yo. Carlet. Do think I will? but come, our friends do stay.


Mrs. King. Then my Lord John I pray lead on the way. Exeunt.


Actus Quartus,
Scaena prima.
Enter Cellerman, Drawer, and Cook-maid. Cellerm. Yesterday was a hot day, a
wicked hot day.


Draw. No, 'twas a very cool day; how can thou call it a hot day when thou
were in the Celler all the while?


Cellerm. Why goodman puppy the Celler is the hotest place in the house.


Draw. To thee sometimes it may be so.


Cookm. I know not what it was to him or you, but to me I Am sure it was a very
sultry hot day.


Draw. I, thou art a Wench that deals in fire, but he is for the other Element.


Cellerm. You, ly you Logerhead I hate Water.


Draw: But thou art quarrelsome in thy Ale.


Cellerm. I hate that too.


Draw. Small Beer can never stir thee.


Cellerm. I do not much affect that neither, it rots my Guts.


Draw. Some secret Liquor, some Nepenthe as the Poets call it, inspires thee
now and then abominably: but I am taught to tell you Brother mine, and Sister
Eke, that if you chance to see this day a Lord in shape as like Mr. John
Carleton as Puss to Cat, you must not think it him.


Cellerm. What him, what him?


Draw. Even him, I spoke off Mr. John Carlet, yea though you know the Nose upon
his face you must not think it him, but. --


Cellerm. But what?


Draw. A Lord.


Cookm. A Lord, ha, ha, ha,.


Cellerm. I shall laugh too, prithee what Lord.


Draw. The Lord knows what, but hear me it is no laughing matter mums the word.


Maid. May not one winck and laugh?


Draw. yea winck you may but laugh ye may not.


Cellerm. Where did thou get this Tone thou wicked elder.


Draw. Even of a Parson truly, yea verily it was, that brought the Lady to this
place assuredly.


Maid. Hold there is a Coach at door, no feasting I hope this day. Enter Yo.
Carleton with two Foot-boyes.


Cellerm. It Is he.


Draw. It Is not he.


Maid. But I say it is he.


Cellerm. And I am sure it is he.


Yo. Carlet. What he?


Omnes. My Lord.


Yo. Carlet. You do well. there, -- Gives them money.


Maid. Never go now if he ben't Exits. a hansome Gentleman.


Draw. And generous.


Cellerm. It Is pity he is not a Lord indeed, now my trouble comes on.


Maid. Or mine rather.


Draw. No I dare assure you the day will not be so hot to either of you as
yesterday was.


Cellerm. Then I shall be plagued with night work.


Draw. Why all times and seasons are alike to thee so thou do drink and sleep.


Cellerm. Hang ye Raskal I never was a drinker, a thorough drinker in my life.


Draw. Not to speak of.


Maid. Nay truly, VVat is as sober a man when he is not drunk, as any of us all.


Draw. Ha, ha, ha, come, come, let us about our business. Exeunt.


Enter Young Carleton, Mrs. King, Madam Moders, and two Foot-boyes. Yo. Carlet.
Boys.


Boys. Ny Lord?


Yo. Carlet. Get you down Stairs, take a Room there.


Boys. Yes my Lord.


Yo. Carlet. And when I call be ready.


Boys. We shall my Lord.


Mrs. Keng. And one of you bid one of my men bring up some Wine, shall it be so
my Lord?


yo. Carlet. I come not to be idle, 'twas well thought on.


Mrs. King. These boys are as bad as young Coach-horses, they Exeunt Boys.
take up so much time in teaching it wearies one.


Mrs. King. You may remedy it as they say my Lord, and have those that are
prepared to your hand my Lord.


Yo. Carlet. I may so indeed, but many of them have practiced sawcyness and
become surley. Enter Drawer with Wine.

Oh art thou come; where are my Foot-boyes?


Draw. Below, my Lord.


Mod. Do I dream? a Lord aside. since yesterday!


Yo. Carlet. Fellow fill some Wine.


Draw. Yes my Lord.


Mod. Can this be real? aside.


Yo. Carlet. Madam my hearty service to you.


Mod. You do too much eclips you title in it Sir.


Yo. Carlet. Not a whit Madam, Honor's bound to serve a person of your virtue
and your Presence: will you be pleased to take the air to day, my Coach is
ready.


Mod. Were I disposed, I could cammand one Sir.


Yo. Carlet. So you may mine Madam.


Mod. Not I Sir.


Mrs. King. Why will not your Ladyship accept his proffer?


Mod. You put strange Titles upon people Mistress. The Lord and Lady went over
the Green.


Yo. Carlet. A smart wit; would you would honor me so much Madam.


Mod. As how Sir?


Yo. Carlet. As to walk with me over the green.


Mod. No my Lord, I should be wet shod then, April's dew is deep.


Yo. Carlet. And therefore sweet.


Mod. Your Lordship makes that up a vulgar Error.


Yo. Carlet Well Sister. --


Mrs. King. Art mad or aside. foolish.


Yo. Carlet. Both; I am not right.


Mod. I do believe so.


Mrs. King. His Lordship is not well.


Mod. A-lack good Gentleman.


Yo. Carlet. I beg your pardon; I am forced to leave you.


Mod. No force Sir, in good time.


Yo. Carlet. She would be rid of me.


Mrs. King. How do you my Lord.


Mod. His Lordship would to Coach.


Yo. Carlet. Again.


Mrs. King. Will your Lordship have any Comfortable thing?


Yo. Carlet. No I Will to Coach, the Lady has directed me.


Mod. In the right way I hope Sir.


Yo. Carlet. Again? I will not stay, call my Boys fellow.


Draw. Why Children, -- I forgot my self, -- Boys, -- I Will send 'em up an't
please your Lordship.


Yo. Carlet. No, tell 'em I Am a going, and it is enough.


Draw. I shall my Lord. Exit.


Yo. Carlet. Madam give me leave to kiss your hand, -- your servant, your
servant Mistress. Exit.


Mod. His Lordship will be hard put to it, to serve us both.


Mrs. King. Me he cannot, you he may Madam.


Mod. Good Cousen, or Landlady, the last is the truest, be not so prodigal of
your favors in confering Titles of Honor at this rate.


Mrs. King. Why do you think I do not know you to be a Lady Madam.


Mod. I should be so were I a Madam really; but you are free in the bestowing
it as I suppose upon any person, because the word is common, and therefore
Landlady I do abhor it.


Mrs. King. Indeed you mist my meaning Madam, I never apply Titles to any
person but such as I know deserves 'em, as on your self, my Lord, or so.


Mod. But is he, that was here, a Lord really descended.


Mrs. King. A very Lord I do assure you Madam.


Mod. Since yesterday translated! for then he dined with us or my memory
deceives me.


Mrs. King. He did so, but then he was disguised.


Mod. Not with drink I Am sure.


Mrs. King. No, but in his freikes as they call 'em, and he has many, some
times he will go in the Street as he went for a wager, with his Collor all
unbutton'd, swetting like a Bull, his Cloak hanging behind him, in one hand his
Gloves, the other full of Papers, that one would take him for all the World to
be some young Clerk, or one that had Relation to the Law. At another time when
he has a mind to be privately merry he throws his Cloak over his Nose, and in
he steals, and is as good Company! --


Mod. For a mad Lord.


Mrs. King. Nay he is not mad, in truth he has some whymseys but they are huge
becoming I Will assure you Madam, if you were acquainted with 'em; then he has
been bravely bred Madam.


Mod. So a Lord should be.


Mrs. King. He Is a good Latiness they say, and writes a very good Hand.


Mod. Those are very good commendations for a Clerk indeed.


Mrs. King. Or for a Lord or a Gentleman or any body else believe me Madam; and
then he is as sober, as virtuous, and as hansome a young Lord though I say it as
any is within a hundred miles of his head, and of as sweet a disposition.


Mod. Methinkes you dwell too long upon his praises.


Mrs. King. If you were but well acquainted with him Madam. --


Mod. I must to my Chamber.


Mrs. King. And I Will wait on you Madam. Exeunt.


Enter Drawer, and a Footboy with a Box of sweet Meats. Draw. How now, did
these come from your Lord.


Boy. Yes to the Lady.


Draw. Where did thy Lord pick thee up?


Boy. What Is that to you Jack-a-napes I Will tell your Mistress Sirrah.


Draw. Why how now little impudence will you be lug'd by the Ears Sirrah, does
your Lord teach you no beeter manners you Arss-worme?


Boy. I cannot tell -- I must speak with your Mistress. Enter Mrs. King.


Mrs. King. Who Is there?


Boy. My Lord presents his love to you forsooth, and desires you would present
his service with this Box of sweet Meats to the Lady!


Mrs. King. Thou shall see it delivered thy self, Boy come in with me.


Boy. Your man is so unlucky he will not let me alone.


Mrs. King. fie, fie, meddle with a Child. Exeunt.


Draw. There Is a young Pimp now, he will be a stewed Rogue in time if his Lords
Trade continues. Exit.


Enter Madam Moders, Mrs. King, and the Footboy. Boy. He bid me tell your
Ladyship he will wait upon you in the afternoon, and have you abroad.


Mod. Will he, but it is a question whether I shall give my self that leisure or
not.


Mrs. King. By all means good madam.


Mod. How ever boy prithee present my service and thanks to him, gives him
money. there is something for thy pains.


Boy. Your humble servant madam. Exit.


Mod. Do You observe Landlady, the word madam is so out of fashion it is a
Foot-boyes Complement.


Mrs. King. What shall I call you then? Princess.


Mod. Away, away, I abandone flattery as I do Titles that are misapplied.


Mrs. King. Why directly your Presence and excellent parts cannot speak you
less, -- but saving my tale forsooth, odds so I cry your Ladyships mercy.


Mod. Nay let it go on so.


Mrs. King. Why then an't please you how do you like my Lord? is he not as I told
you a sweet conditioned Gentleman?


Mod. He begines well.


Mrs. King. And so He Will continue to the end I warrant ye.


Mod. That Is more then you know Landlady.


Mrs. King. My life on it.


Mod. It Is a hard venture in my opinion Landlady. Exeunt.


Enter Young Carleton, and Footboyes. Yo. Carlet. Let the Coach wait, and stay
you there.


Boys. We shall my Lord. Exit Young Carleton.


1 Boy. Jack let thee and I crack a Pint together.


2 Boy. I have no money.


1 Boy. Hanged, I have, the Lady was generous to me this morning.


2 Boy. Would she had been so to me.


1 Boy. It Is all one between thee and I, let us call the Coachman in and see if
he will join.


2 Boy. The more the merrier.


Exeunt. Enter young Carleton, Madam Moders, and Mistress King. Young Carleton.
Dear Madam.


Moders. Good my Lord do not deceive your self.


Mistress King. My Lord an't please your honor, the word Madam grates her
ears she says, because it is so common.


Young Carleton. Why then my Princess, for so you are asserted in my thoughts,
I will assure you most accomplished Lady.


Mistress King. I, this sounds well, how can you find in your heart to deny his
Lordship? most accomplished Lady.


Moders. My Lord, though young, I do perceive has been trained up in
Complements, they are indeed the Courtiers prayers.


Young Carleton. Then they should prevail.


Moders. With Fools, but not with such have understanding.


Mistress King. Most accomplished Lady, even for my sake.


Moders. How will my Credit stand that am a stranger, to be Coach'd out by one,
and so soon too, upon so slender an account.


Young Carleton. My heart shall stand betwixt you and all calumny; it shall
return the filth into their face that spits at yours.


Moders. You speak Nobly, my Lord.


Young Carleton. My Actions shall second my words most singular Lady.


Mistress King. Most accomplished, most singular aside Lady -- well John thou
deserve her.


Moders. You do so powerfully importune me, my Lord, I have no fence left for
my self, especially your honor being obliged to all Civilities.


Young Carleton. Count me a Tartar, most horrid Villain if I infringe, or
trespass in the least upon your virtue.


Mistress King. Is it granted? most accomplished, most singular Lady.


Moders. For your sake Landlady, you see I can deny nothing that is virtuous and
civil, as you say my Lord is.


Mistress King. As the innocent Babe, most accomplished, and most singular Lady.


Young Carleton. Will you vouchsafe your hand most gracious Lady.


Mistress King. Most gracious Lady, that is Yo. Carleton takes Moders by the
hand. another.


Young Carleton. To me this honor is received above rules of comparison
unexpressible. Exeunt.


Enter Old Mr. Carleton, and his Wife, and Mr. George Carleton their Eldest
Son. Old Mr. Carlet. George you are privy to your brothers secrets, how does he
find the Ladies pulse to beat? has he hopes of her.


Mr George Carlet. Doubtless Sir he has.


Old Mr. Carlet. He bussels strangely do think her worth his charge and
toil?


Mr. George Carlet. If he were not assured of that (as I believe he is) he
would not certainly pursue with so much eagerness his suit, that is my belief
Sir.


Mrs. Carlet. So it is mine, George thy brother is no fool.


Mr. George Carlet. That the Town knows, and if he should miscarry 'twould be
strange, I know not what the power of love may do.


Old Mr. Carlet. Do think she is the person that he speaks her?


Mr. George Carlet. Seriously Sir her breeding and her habit does denote her a
person of no small repute and quality, they say she speaks the Languages.


Old Mr. Carlet. Believe me that is rare in a Woman.


Mr. George Carlet. I Am in a manner a stranger to her person, (for she is very
shy, and takes state on her) but so I Have heard Sir.


Old Mr. Carlet. Perhaps by some that do not understand her.


Mr. George Carlet. I know not that Sir.


Old Mr. Carlet. Gibberish you know startles the ignorant


Old Mrs Carlet. Let her be what she will I Will see her.


Old Mr. Carlet. I prithee do, and what then?


Old mrs. Carlet. Marry I Will know what she is and from whence she came.


Old mr. Carlet. Do so, 'twill appear well in thee, I Will not be seen in it.


Old mrs. Carlet. And know what she has too I Will warrant you before my Son
shall Bed her.


mr. George. My Sister King and my Brother (as I am informed) can saaisfie you
in that point forsooth.


Old mrs. Carlet. And so they shall, I Will thither presently. Exeunt.


Enter Madam Moders, mr. King and mrs. King. Mod. Good now, be not so
importunate, I Will not see 'em.


Mr. King. Why how comes this do you see, I thought that all had been right and
sure do you see.


mrs. King. What has he done that has displeased you most accomplished, most
singular and most gracious Lady?


Mod. I Will not be blown upon by every person he brings with him, become the
Town talk, have my Credit stale, and buz'd in the ears of every idle fellow.


mrs, King. Indeed la if you will believe me, most accomplished, most singular
and most gracious Lady as his Lordship calls you; there is no body with him but
his Lady mother and a Banquet of Sweet-meates.


Mod. My Lord (though in himself a nobler person) had never been admitted to my
present but for your mighty importunities; I love to be retired, not to be
shown like to a piece of Dutch-work, newly brought over to all sorts of people;
pray let my Lord know where his error lies.


mr. King. And reason good do you see.


mrs. King. If we durst be so bold chuck, but his Lady mother waits most
accomplished, most singular and most gracious Lady.


Mod. I cry you mercy and excuse me to her.


mr. King and his Wife go off and bring Young Carleton and his mother in, the
sense of his gross error did transport me. Yo. Carlet. This is my mother and
your servant Lady.


Mod. Your Lordship has obliged my service to her, your faithful servant Lady.
Salute.


Yo. Carlet. Will you vouchsafe to grace this A Banquet is set out. homely
present with your acceptance Lady?


Mod. My Lord you know I am no Chaplain, nor needs there a preludiam to a
Banquet.


Yo. Carlet. My meaning is most precicious Lady you would add a sweetness to the
meats by tasting them.


Mod. Coming from you my Lord composed of sweetness they need no more addition.


mrs. Carlet. Words are but wind, you seem to be a Gentlewoman, pray what are
you?


Mod. More then I seem.


Mrs. Carlet. Where were you born?


Mod. At Billinsgate.


Yo. Carlet. Oh, dear Lady.


Mod. Why, should I tell her I was born at Rome what is she the nearer.


mrs. Carlet. Have you an estate,


Mod. I hope I have.


mrs. Carlet. Where lies it pray.


Mod. Where you shall never find it Lady, -- why thus inquisitive.


Mrs. Carlet. Have you the Languages, as they say you have?


Mod. Let your Son try me.


Yo. Carlet. Oh most precious Lady I am a stranger to the most of them.


Mod. So am I to your Mothers scrutiny, I could giv't a worse Title, but
hereafter if you intend to stock up precious time, pray spare your Visits, for
they will be fruitless.


Yo. Carlet. Oh mother your too indulgence has undone Exit. me, I Am lost for
ever, all my hopes are shipwrackt.


Mrs. Carlet. Why so Child?


Yo. Carlet. She has prohibited me the sight of her, which is as precious to me
as my Being.


Mrs. Carleton. It Is very strange, let her be never so high in Birth and
breeding, methinks she should not blame the Parents care, for that will be, and
must be.


Yo. Carlet. That Is the point I must insist upon; and that no more obstruction
may happen to my happiness, my Sister will inform my Father and your self the
state of her affairs, which may be mine.


Mrs. Carlet. Do so and you shall find me Instrumental for thy advancement.


Yo. Carlet. And dear Sister prithee use all thy wit and interest with her.


Mrs. King. Do ye doubt it brother John, no Lord but when she is present. Exeunt.


Enter two Drawers, and Cellerman to take away the Voyders. 1 Drawer. They have
not carried away all I see.


Cellerman. No, they have left the Voyders, and something more.


2 Drawer. What do you do here, get you to your Garrison the Celler.


Cellerman. Prithee prate not, this is my Garrison or any other place where I
am safe, They scramble for -- nay if you fall to scrambling I am for you.


2 Drawer. These will spoil thy drinking.


Cellerman. My drinking Jack Sprat, I could box thee sirrah.


1 Drawer. No, I dare say you wrong him, he is no drinker.


Cellerm. Who I? never in my life thou know it.


1 Drawer. The very stem oth' Celler now and then besots thee, Brother does it
not?


Cellerm. That may be, for the Wine fumes and flies into a man's head most
plaguely -- but now stand off -- let me speak the sense of the Poet to the
Auditory.

I Am not the Person that I seemed to be,
Although a Cellerman, I am not he. Exeunt.

Actus Quintus,
Scaena Prima.
Enter Madam Moders alone. Moders. GLory depends on Conquest, I have brought
(After so many Trials of my Wit,)
My amorous Lord, and his averse Allies
Upon their knees to supplicate my love;
This very minute I expect his Lordship
To hurry me into the Arms of Hymen.
For that is their drift I know, let their pretense
Be what it will; and i will embrace it. Enter young Carleton.

Young Carleton. My dearest Lady are you ready.


Moders. You see I am, but for what end my Lord.


Young Carleton. To hear the Music.


Moders. I have reason to love it my Lord.


Young Carleton. You are the Empress of it. Exeunt.


Enter Mr. King and his Wife. Mr. King. Well they are gone d' ye see, and
blessings follow both of 'em d' ye see.


Mrs. King. I, now you say so Chuck, but the time has been.


Mr. King. What has the time been honey? you know d' ye see, 'twas my care at
first d' ye see to preserve her here do you see.


Mrs. King. I but you never meant her for my Brother John, and that my Father
takes unkindly Chuck.


Mr. King. Who not I sweet heart? I never meant any man else do you see, as I am
here do you see, why you know I love my Brother John do you see, with all my
heart do you see, I only did express my care of him, being but a young man
do you see, and I knew not how things stood do you see, which it seems you knew
better do you see.


Mrs. King. Well chuck, what an honor will it be to my Father in his age to
have a Prince, or Princess to his Grandchild.


Mr. King. How Is that sweet heart?


Mrs. King. Nay, I say no more Windows have ears. Exeunt.


Enter Young Carleton, his Brother George, Madam Moders, and several others
attended upon by Drawers. 1 Gent. A Wedding and no Music.


Draw. They are in the house Sir.


Yo. Carlet. Prithee let us have'em; and now most gracious Lady as you have
given spirit to my Clay, and made my soul to caper in its Cottage by this blessed
Conjunction; know I Am still your servant.


Mod. My Lord I think all Complements ridiculous after this Ceremony. Enter
Music.


George Carlet. Come here is a good divertion, what Songs have you?


Fiddler. A hundred and fifty, two hundred if need be, I furnish all the Faires
and markets with 'em; I keep a Poet in pay on purpose Gentlemen, which is no
shall charge to me you must think, it is true the Poet is a pretty wit, but
what is wit or good lines, nothing, unless well Humored and well Sung, I sing
'em all my self, though the lines be never so bad I make 'em twang, which sets
off a Poet mainly you know.


George Carleton. Pox take you for a puppy, leave praising your self and let us
hear a Song.


Fiddler. What Song will you have Gentlemen?


Omnes. Any, any.


Fiddler. What say you to that of the love between a Kitchen Wench and a Chimney
Swifter.


Yo. Carlet. Sirrah do you know where you are.


Fiddler. I cry you mercy Sir, I Will fit you with a rare one. Sings.


2 Gent. Hold your howling and behang'd, what a mouth he makes, how he grates
the words and tears the sense?


1 Gent. He Is good for nothing; can thou tumble?


Fiddler. Tumble? I don't understand ye Sir.


Yo. Carlet. Come, come, a Dance or two, and so good Night Mr. Fiddler.


George Carlet. It Is pity to They play, the company dance. keep thee too long
from thy happiness.


Yo. Carlet. There, are you pleased?


Fiddler. Very nobly, we thank your Honor. Exeunt Music.


Yo. Carlet. Now Gentlemen I must crave your pardon, Lady your hand. Exeunt.


Omnes. A good Night to you Both. Exeunt.


Enter two or three Clerks. 1 Clerk. News, news, news, Boys.


2 Clerk. What News, what news?


1 Clerk. Wonderful, strange and true news, newly Printed and newly come
forth.


3 Clerk. Of the downfall of Grantham Steeple; the miraculous discovery of old
Braziel by a Ship-Carpenter at Namptwich, or the horrid murder of Tom Thumb,
some such paltry stuff.


1 Clerk. You are wide of the matter: Mr. John Carleton is married.


2 Clerk. Prithee to whom?


1 Clerk. To no less then a Princess, a German Princess believe me.


3 Clerk. Why then it must be no more Mr. John Carleton, but my Lord John
Carleton.


2 Clerk. Pough, I don't believe it.


1 Clerk. Thou art an incredulous Coxcomb, I tell thee they keep their Court
and State at Durham House 'ith Strand, there you may see his Lordship if you
have a mind to it.


2 Clerk. If I thought he would not take too much State upon him, I Would put my
Holy Day Habit on, and take a day to visit him.


3 Clerk. Set thy time and we will go with thee.


2 Clerk. Two days hence.


1 Clerk. Agreed, agreed. Exeunt.


Enter Mr. King, and his Wife. Wife. What happy Instruments have we been Chuck
in this business, they talk of giving hundreds of pounds to others, and I Am
sure we deserve thousands.


Mr. King. That Is very rightly said do you see, but for my part do you see, I look
not for a penny do you see.


Wife. In Troth Chuck if thou do not, I do, there is the short and the long
on it, my Father's gone to see if she will settle her Estate upon my Brother
John.


mr. King. And a great deal of reason there is in it, do you see Sweetheart, for
he has been at a vast charge do you see.


Wife. Her Estate will make amends for all, and though he is a false Lord now,
her Estate will make him current; money will buy Honor at any time Chuck.


mr. King. I if, it hit right, but there are so many cheates abroad do you see.


Wife. Why I hope thou wavering faith'd man thou do not think the Princess my
Sister one?


mr. King. If she be such a person, and have such an Estate do you see, my
Brother may bless the time he ever see us do you see, but if she be not the
person and has no Estate, why then it is a mere cheat do you see, and we shall
suffer in our credit cruelly do you see.


Wife. Lord help thy simple head; I warrant thee man. Exeunt.


Enter Old Carleton, and mr. John Carleton. Old Carlet. Unfortunate boy, thou
art undone for ever.


Yo. Carlet. Bless me, Sir, you do amaze me wonderfully.


Old Carlet. After thy loss of time, thy vast expenses in riotous Banquettings,
perpetual Visits, what have thou purchased?


Yo. Carlet. A reward above my merit Sir; a virtuous Princess of high
Endowments, and of ample fortunes, rich in her self, her parts speak her a
Dowre, sufficient for a person of my quality had she no other Riches to adorn
her.


Old Carlet. A very Pusscat, a subtle Carrion, and a cursed cheat.


Yo. Carlet. With pardon, Sir, I partly do imagine the cause of this your
sudden discomposure, you pressed her in my absence (like a Father) to settle her
Estate on me, which she unwilling to consent to, has raised this storm within
your quiet Bosom.


Old Carlet. An Estate, where lies it? at the Brick-hills, foolish boy; she is
not worth a groat, but what thou have out of thy prodigal affection given her,
her Jewels are but counterfeit, and she a base imposture.


Yo. Carlet. Good Father let not your passion so deceive your reason, she
cannot be so Sir.


Old Carlet. Boy, she is a Strumpet, a vagrant, a wandering Baggage that has two
Husbands beside thy self; a paltry Shoemaker is one of them, this I Will make out.


Yo. Carlet. You have thrown Daggers to my heart Sir.


Old Carlet. Be not troubled Boy, I Will hamper her, I warrant thee, come along
with me. Exeunt.


Enter madam Moders alone. Mod. I do expect a storm, and suddenly, by my bad
dreams; which tell me I must wade through mud and Water; signifying troubles
dangerous ones: yet I shall pass them all, clear as a sheet that has been
whitened by the whitsters hand.


Enter Old Carleton, Young Carleton, Constable and others. Old Carlet. That Is
the Strumpet.


Mod. Who do you handle, you unreveren'd Raskalls? why Father, Husband, what do
you mean?


Old Carlet. To hang you Whore for having of two Husbands


Mod. Is that all? Ha, ha, ha.


Yo. Carlet. Sure she is innocent, her courage speaks her so.


Old Carlet. Away with her Mr. Constable. Exeunt.


Enter Mr. King and his Wife. Mrs. King. Oh Chuck, Chuck thou have defiled our
Nest, and thrown a speck upon our Family; the Princess is a Whore, a double
Whore, she has two Husbands: has your early rising come to this?


Mr. King Why honey it is true, I took her for a civil Gentlewoman, and so I
entertained her do you see; now you took her for a Princess do you see, and there
is the mistake do you see: alas I would not have done such a thing do you see for a
thousand pound do you see; nay and more too as poor a man as I am do you see.


mrs. King. I wish it from my heart thou had been sick a Bed chuck when thou
did what thou did; but it is no matter, I hope to see her hanged.


mr. King. Why that will make amends for all do you see. Exeunt.


Enter two Gentlemen as from the Sessions House 1 Gent. I wished I had had your
place Sir, you sat near the Bench.


2 Gent. In Troth I was weary on it, I did not like the Scaene.


1 Gent. How does the Princess carry her self I pray Sir?


2 Gent. I understand you not Sir, unless you mean a Princess that derives her
Title from the powdering Tub.


1 Gent. Your pardon Sir, I mean the person now is at her Trial.


2 Gent. You may assure your self she wanted not Confidence, I might say
impudence.


1 Gent. They say her Husband is a hopeful Gentleman.


2 Gent. A sweet lad, my heart earnes for him; a man well bred of a good
Family, and in a hansome way, thus to be caught argues a weakness some where; a
gross oversight; a pituous shallow conception.


1 Gent. How do you think 'twill go with him Sir.


2 Gent. Not with him Sir, 'twill rather go against him, the Evidence is A
noise within. defective: --


1 Gent. Hark, -- I dare say she is quit.


2 Gent. A hard fate has followed thee friend Carleton.


1 Gent. I pity the Gentleman though a stranger to me: this business was not
managed well I fear, but there is away to bring't about again if she be the same
person.


2 Gent. I believe Enter madam Moders and several others after her. so Sir, --
bless my eye sight, here is the beast will none spit at her, how she stares and
gloates like old Grimalkin, or mother Gurtons Cat 'ith Colehole.


1 Gent. Is that she Sir?


2 Gent. Yes it is she Sir, for want of a better.


1 Gent. Your servant Sir.


2 Gent. I Am yours Sir. Exeunt severally.


Enter Moders alone, applying her self to the Auditory. Mod. I Have past one
Trial; but it is my fear
I shall receive a rigid sentence here;
You think me a bold Cheat, put case 'twere so,
Which of you are not? now you would swear I know;
But do not least that you deserve to be
Censured worse then you yet can censure me.
The Worlds a Cheat, and we that move in it
In our degrees do exercise our Wit:
And better it is to get a glorious Name
However got; then live by common Fame.

FINIS.

