^
^

(...)am not I Pope of Rome
torment me not before my time is come.

F. you are Cause of my Continual pains*
My soul is Lost for your Ambitio^s gains

O Christ who mercy (...) for th^e*
With Bloody hands (...)

(...) and be forever blessed* --
(...) that happy place of rest*

I am perplexed with perpetual fright
^

TO Godfreys Ghost I wish all things (...)
(...) may have our Pope of Rome (...)

Lo us depart and (...) fate
^

^
^

The POPE Haunted with Ghosts, in Relation to Sir Edmund bury Godfrey's
Murder, and the late Sainted Traitors, The Figures being by the Verses at
large Explained.


Nuncio. Horrors and Death! what dismal Sights Invade
His Nightly Slumbers, who in Blood does Trade.
Hear how they Curse him all, but he who fell
Great Britains Sacrifice by Imps of Hell;

1. Pope. How do my Eye Balls Roll, and Blood run back.
What Tortures at this sight my Conscience Rack;
Oh! Mountains now fall on me, some deep Cave
Pity me once, and prove my speedy Grave,

2. Fiend By Hells Grim King's Com and, on whom I wait
I Have brought your Saint his Story to relate;
His Torments, and the Horrid Cheat condole,
You fixed on him to Rob him of his Soul.

1. Pope. Oh! spare my Ears I Will no such Horrors hear;

3. Coleman. You must, and know your own Damnation's near
You must e're long be Plunged in Grizly Flame
Which I shall Laugh to see, though Racked with pain

1. Pope. Horrors! it is 'Dismal, I can hear no more,
O! Hell and Furies, how I have lost my Power

4. Sir E. Godfrey. See Sir this Crimson Stain, this baleful Wound
See Murdered me, with Joys Eternal Crowned
From Sacred Bliss my Sunft-Wing'd Soul did glide
Conducted hither by my Angel-Guide,
To let thee know thy Sands are almost run,
And that thy Thread of Life is well nigh Spun;
Repent you then, Wash off the Bloody Stain,
Or You Will be Doomed to Everlasting Pain.

5. Angel. Come Worthy of Seraphick Joys Above,
Worthy Our Converse, and our Sacred Love;
Come let us hence, and leave him to his Fate,
When Divine Vengeance shall ye Business State

1. Pope. Chill Horror seizes me, I cannot fly;
Oh Ghastly! yet more Apparitions, nigh

6. Whitebread. Thus wandering through ye gloomy Shades at last
I Have found Thee, Traitor, that my Joys did blast,
The half what we Endure no Tongue can Tell;
The Endless Tortures we Endure in Hell
This for a Bishopric I undergo,
But now would give Earths Empire were not so.

1. Pope Retire, good Ghosts, or I shall Dye with Fear

7. Harcourt. Nay Stay Sir, first you must my Story hear:
How could you thus Delude your Bosom Friend,
Your Foes to Heaven, and us to Hell thus send;
Damnation seize you for it, e're long you will be
Plunged Head long into vast Eternity;

1. Pope. Ho! Cardinals and Bishops have with Speed.
Bell, Book, and Candle fet^h, let me be Freed:
Ah! it is too late, by Fear Intrane'd I lie,

8. Bishop. Heard you that Groan with speed from hence let us fly

9. Cardinal. The Fiend has got him, doubtless let us away,
And in this ghastly place no longer stay.

FINIS.

