Popish Nat's Lamentation, IN A DIALOGUE BETWEEN Not. Thompson, the Popish
Printer, and The Popish Midwife, upon his arrival in Newgate April 5. 1682.
Mid. ALas! dear Not, art thou feat hither too,
After that thou have kept so much ado?
When we did hope by thee and thy two Tools
To Have seen the silly Protestants made Fools?
How comes it Not, that it thus comes to pass:
That thou have proved thy self the silly Ass?

Not. Dear Mother Midnight, I was now mistaken,
For I believed I could have saved my Bacon;
Some men there were did Promise, Swear and Vow,
And by the Mass they did confirm it too,
That what they wrote, to print I should not doubt,
And at a pinch that they would bear me out.

Mid. So said they once to me, yet here I ly,
The very men who once let Coleman die.
But yet to comfort thee, whilst thou art here,
Thou shall have wine, and money, and good cheer:
For I have reason' who have found it so,
To think them the best Keepers I do know.

Not. But what will the Cursed Whigs now do and say,
Janeway will rant now he has won the day:
Lampoons and Songs, upon me will be made
Laughed at by every Fool and huffing Blade,
I shall the talk be now of the whole Town,
And Whigs will boast how they have run me down.

Mid. Dear Not 'twas boldly Ventured at, to make
The Council prove what you did undertake,
When you declared that honorable board.
Would put you into a method proofs, to afford:
Did think they would believe our forged stories,
Or that they all were such as we, false Tories.

Not. My Impudence which all the world does know
Has dared at that which punies durst not do:
I thought to me it would a safeguard proved
With those, who I believed the Tories loved.
But han't they now made good what I did say,
And how to prove it put me in a way?
From Newgate at the first our project flew,
Council we here may get and Witness too.

Mid. Could thou indeed have made the world such Ninnies
As to believe thee, thou had got the Guinnies,
Thou had been rich, and wallowed in thy pelf,
Could thou have proved Sir. Godfry killed himself:
Thou fairly proferd'st at it, and for that,
They Will write thee in the Calendar St. Not,

Not. Sir. W -- whom I have often Cursed*
Will laugh at me until his Buttons Burst,
Indeed it is a great unhappy Chance,
That my great friend is lately gone to France.
Had she been here, I could have made a shift,
She would have helped me at so Dead a lift.

Mid. Cheer up thy drooping heart let it not sink,
Here you will have leisure for to plot and think,
Fear not the Cause dear Not, though thou art here,
Nor do not droop, because the Whigs will jeer.
There Is Heraclitus his forces up will muster,
And the Observator twice a week will bluster.

Not. But now I Am got into the wicked City,
I know that they of me will have no pity:
I have abused them so they will now me pay,
Action, on Action, on my back they will lay
So that, dear Midwife, I begin to doubt,
I from this place shall never more get out,

Mid. No Ignoramus Juries you will find.
For you to them have always proved unkind.
So many in this City given offense,
By putting them in your Intelligence.
That you must now look for no mercy here,
Yet droop not Not. for we will make good Cheer.

Not. I don't the Citisens nor City love,
And shortly did from them intend to move,
I was about some hundreds out to lay,
Had I but come this job and won the day:
I did intend to herd among your crew,
And with my press my gainful Trade pursue.

Mid. Come Not, fear not, we shall be rich and great,
The Tories at the last the Whigs shall beat:
The turning Tide begins to flow a pace,
And shortly you will see another face.
My friend the Astrologer has drawn a Scheme,
He tells me so and I dare Credit him.

Not. Unlikely it is that Popery should advance,
In England, when it is going down in France.
The Whigs of late begin to grin and sneer,
They have more hopes than we do know I fear:
I now may think of all my sins are past,
If they prevail I shall be hanged at last.

Mid. Never fear thy Neck, but save thee if we cannot,
Dear Not. thou shall be made a Tiburn Saint.
And all of us will thy black Sautus sing,
Whilst thou art going to Heaven in astring.
At least thou then shall die with great applause,
And the honor have to suffer for our Cause.

Not. Die like a sullen Dog, and never confess,
That I a against my Conscience did transgress;
That I was wheadled by the Jesuits train,
And that I turned for the ungodly Gain.
Tell me of Saint-ship, and a Religious gere?
I looked for Gold, and to be Knighted here.
I fear I did not well my Measures cast.
If I at Tiburn should be hanged at last.

Mid. I see you are Melanchollic, let us go in,
And with good Sack, we will wash away thy sin:
Our hopes are great, our turn will come again,
A Fig for France if we can England Win.

LONDON Prin^ed for J. Smith.


