THE WISH.

Written by Dr. POPE Fellow of the ROYAL SOCIETY.

Haec satis est orare Jovem.
Hor. -- -- -- nil
Divitiae poterint regales addere majus.
Id. LONDON: Printed in the Year MDCXCVII.

To the Right Honorable CHARLES Lord Clifford, Grandson and Heir to Richard E.
of Burlington and Cork, AND One of the Gentlemen of His Majesty's BED --
CHAMBER.
MY LORD,
THE Honor and Respect which I had for your Lordships Father, is not wholly
unknown to you; as also, with what Condescension, Familiarity, and Kindness, he
always used me. I own, those Days which I spent in his Lordship's Conversation
in France, were without Comparison, the very best Part of my Life. I designed
to have made my Gratitude Public; and to that End, Composed a small Treatise,
and Dedicated it to him, which he not only saw, but was also pleased graciously
to accept: But before I could get it Printed, he died, to the great Loss of the
Public, and all good Men; but to none so much as me, for my Damage is
irreparable, unless your Lordship succeeds him in his Favor to me, as you do
in his Honor and Virtues, which I hope, but dare not expect.

I humbly present your Lordship with this Copy of Verses, an Earnest of
something of a greater Bulk, but I dare not say of a better Composition; for if
the Approbation of my Friends, has not imposed upon my Credulity, and my Taste
does not deceive me, this is the most kindly, and palatable Fruit, that ever my
Cultivation has produced: I wish it were worthy your Acceptance; however, I
hope, I am excusable, having offered to your Lordship the best of my Substance.
I conclude, begging pardon for my Presumption, and praying Heaven to continue,
and increase the Felicities of your noble Family. I am,

My LORD, your Lordship's most humble, and obedient Servant W. POPE.

THE PROLOGUE TO THE WISH; Being a Parafrase on these Verses of Horace.
QUid dedicatum poscit Apollinem
Vates, quid orat? de patera novum
Fundens Liquorem?
Hor. Ode 31. Lib. 1. Me quoties reficit gelidus Digentia Rivus,
Quem Mandela bibit, Rugosus frigore Pagus.
Quid sentire putas? Quid credis Amice precari?
Id. Ep. 18. Lib. 1. That is,

When Poets offering at Apollo's Shrine,
Out of the sacred Goblets pour new Wine,
What do they wish? what do they then desire?
When I Am at Epsom, or on Bansted* Down,
Free from the Wine, and Smoke, and Noise of the Town,
When I those Waters drink, and breath that Air,
What are my Thoughts? what is my continual Prayer?
THE WISH.
I.
IF I live to be Old, 1 for I find I go 2 down,
Let this be my Fate. In a 3 Country Town,
May I have a warm House* with a 4 Stone at the Gate,
And a 5 cleanly young Girl* to rub my bald Pate.
CHORUS.
May I govern my 6 Passion with an absolute Sway,
And grow 7 Wiser, and Better as my Strength wears away,
Without Gout, or Stone, by a gentle decay.
Krom en stijf, van Ouderdom gheboghen. Crooked, and stiff, and bowed with Age.

1 La lunga Eta m' imbianchi il Crine,
E la Vecchiezza pur in'incurvi, e prema.
Petr. Vedendo la notte, e'l verno a tato.
E dopo le Spalle, i mesi Gai.
1. Petr. That is,

With Snowy Hairs, Temples with Furrows plowed,
And by the Weight of Years, my Body bowed.
Winter, and an eternal Night comes on,
And all my merry Years, and Days are gone.
2 Labuntur anni, nec pietas moram
Rugis, and instanti senectae
Afferet, indomitaeque morti.
Hor. Ocyor Cervis, and agente Ventos
Ocyor Euro.
Id. That is

Years fly away, nor can our Piety stop
The approach of wrinkled Age, and certain Death,
Swifter than Hearts, or Wind.
Ocyor and Caeli flammis, and Tigride foeta. Lucan. That is

Swifter than Lightning, and Tigres new with young.

Son giunto a'l loco,
Ove vita scende, chi al sin cade.
Petr. Sondo Jo cola giunto ove declina.
L' Etate omai cadente, a la vecchiezza.
Id. La vita fugge, e non s' arresta un' hora,
E la Morte vien dietro a gram giornate.
Id. Morte gia per ferir have alzato il brachio,
Per l'estre megiornate del mia vita.
Rotto da gli anni, e d'ul camino stanco.
Id. Volan l' hoar, e i giorni, egli anni, e i mesi,
E con brevissimo intervallo,
Habbiamo a cercar altri paesi.
Id. E bien che il giorno che la vita serra
Sia forse assai vicino e non previsto.
Tasso. La vita fugge, e la morte e soura le Spalle.
Petr. La morte s' appressa, e el viver fugge,
I di miei piu leggier che nissun Cervo,
Fuggon come ombre.
Id. I di miei piu correnti che Saetta.
Fra misery, e peccati,
Se son andati e Sol morte n' aspetta.
Non corse may si lieuamente a'l varco
Di fugitivo Cervo un Leopardo.
Id. Non posso il giorno che la vita serra,
Antiveder per la corporea Vela,
Ma variarsi il pelo.
Veggio, e dentro cangiarsi ogni desire,
Hor che IN me credo al tiempo de'l partire,
Esser vicino: o non molto d'a Lungo.
Id. May non usci Veltro di Catena,
Ne may Saetta, d' Arco fu mandata,
Ne falcon may d'al Ciel discese a Valle,
Che non restasse a lei dietro all Spalle.
Boiardo. Falcon may non fu si veloce
Quando da'l Ciel in giu con gran ruina
Viena la preda rapido e feroce.
Agostini. Si presto s'en fugge e si leggiero,
Ch'e tardo a seguirlo, once o'l pensiero.
Q. Marini. Pui lento di molto e men Veloce
Giran Turco, o Parto, da grand'ossa arcata,
Da concavo metal globo di piombo.
E da racchiusa Valle il Turbo Sbocca,
O da Squarciata nube il fulgor Scocca.
Rondine sopra rio Vola men presta.
Bracciol. Nonsi rapida may Cerva da l'onde,
Door il' Arcier attend a rivolge il piede,
Ne d'avanti a Sparrier per l'arria pura,
Sua salute a cercar Tortora Vola.
Idem. E va men presto.
Fulgore che per nube ardendo scoppia.
Idem. Gns tijt gael, als cen snelle stroom.
And zijn als skhymmen van even droom.
Jac. Cats. Which may be thus Translated.

I am thither come,
Where Life makes haste down, and grows near its end
In my Old Age, and with one Foot in the Grave,
Life flies apace, and does not rest one Hour,
And Death makes great Marches to overtake her
With his hand listed up ready to strike.
In the last Day of Life
Broken with Years, and tired with the long Way.
The Hours, Days, Months and Years, do swiftly pass,
All of us here in a small Space of Time,
Must march from hence, and other Quarters seek.
I cannot foresee the last Day of my Life,
Although perhaps it may not be far off,
Life flies away and Death treads on his Heels,
Life flies, and Death comes nearer every hour,
My Days are swifter than a Heart or Arrow.
No Leopard ever ran so fast
After a flying Bear.
I cannot foresee through my corporeal Veil,
The precise Day whereon my Life shall end;
But I perceive by my changed Hair and Thoughts,
There Is little distance betwixt me and Death.
The fleetest Greyhound slipped after a Hare,
The Arrow shot with great strength from a Bow,
The Falcon stooping at his Prey in the air,
Are Slow, if with Life's Swiftness they compare*
Times course so nimble is, and light,
No Leopard, nor no Thought can move so fast.
Much more slow,
Are Arrows sent from Turc, or Parthian Bow.
Faster than Globe of Lead
From Concave-Metal, or Lightning flies from Heaven;
Swallows upon a River, fly more flow.
Faster than a Heart,
Who Is seen a Huntsman, with his Gun in hand,
Faster than from a Hawk, the Turtle flies
To save her Life, or Lightning from the Skies:
Time passes faster than the swiftest Stream,
Our Life is as the Shadow of a Dream.
3 O Rus quando ego te videam? quandoque licebit
Nunc veterum libris, nunc somno and inertibus horis,
Ducere sollicitae jucunda oblivia vitae?
That is

Oh Country! when shall I retire to thee
With a few Books well chose, and a true Friend,
Free from the hurries which great Towns attend,
Lead such a Life the Gods shall envy me?
4 By the help whereof, I may mount my easy Pad Nag, mentioned in the Third
Stanza; in the West of England, they call it an Upping-stock.

5 Quae non offendat sordibus, Hor. That is,

One whose Look may not turn your Stomach.

6 Animum rege qui nisi paret
Imperat, hunc Frenis, hunc tu compescae Catenis.
That is,

Over your Passions, keep a watchful hand,
For if they don't obey, they will command.
Lenior, and melior fiam, accedento Senecta. Hor. That is,

Milder and better may I be
The nearer I approach to my last Day.
II.
May my 1 little House stand on the 2 Side of a Hill,
With an easy Descent, to a Mead, and a 3 Mill,
That when I Have a mind, I may bear my Boy read,
In the Mill, if it rains, if it is dry, in the Mead.
May I govern, etc.
1 Parva sed apta Domus. i. e. A little but convenient House.

Cheto annidarmi in retirato Albergo.
Senza may paventar d' Arm od' Armati,
Forze, insidie, rapine, Oltraggi, aguati.
Imp. That is,

In a retired and quiet Cell,
From Soldiers free, and dire Effects of Arms,
Thefts, Robberies, Murders, Insults, Rapes, Alarms,
May I in Peace and Safety dwell.
Cui siu di giunco il suol, di Can il Muro,
E di fraschi, e di paglie il tetto intesto,
Consumero con gioia il tempo, e le hoar,
E fia che Jo rida d'auer bell cerchio al meno
Si non di Lauro il Crin, d'uliva il Seno.
Imperiale. That is,

In quiet Cottage with green Rushes paved,
And walled about with Reeds together joined.
Covered with Straw, or Boughs oth' Neighboring Trees.
I could spend all my Life, in Joy, and Ease,
And though to crown my Head no Bays I find,
The Peaceful Olive shall adorn my Mind.
Be ato chi in part Erme, e lontane,
Chi d'al Vulgo, e dal mondo, hor ti sequestri,
E'l vasto mar de le misery umane
Mirando vai da quelli scogli Alpestri,
Bella tranquillita, che men villane,
Le belue sono, e gli animal Silvestri
Che non e l'uom, men fido e men Sincero,
Che quanto fera e men, tanto e piu fera.
Qui non pal^hi dorati, O marmi impressi,
Con pompa d'arte imitatrice appare,
Ma bella di natura, erbe, cipresse,
Palm, Valli, boschetti, apre piu rare.
Fontane a rivo rami e spesse
Cantan semplici Augei note piu chiare.
Che'l finto suon di lusingtuera voce,
Ch' a'l Orecchie piacendo, al' Alman noce.
Bracciolini. In English thus,

Happy are they, if any such there be,
Who live retird from worldly Business free,
In some remote and solitary place,
Sequestered from the Vulgar and the World,
Who see with Scorn from the Alps snowy Tops.
The immense Sea of human Misery:
Oh blessed Tranquillity! Oh heavenly Life!
And better Company of Beasts than men!
For men less faithful are, and less sincere,
The best Man comes the nearest to a Beast.
Instead of Marble Pillars here are seen
Tall Pyramids of Cypress always green,
Then arched and gilded Roofs, the azure Sky
Heavens Canopy, yields more Delight to the Eye.
Palms, Myrtle Groves, Green Valleys, Mountains, Hills:
And Springs branched into various murmuring Rills
Here the untaught Bird sings his natural Song,
More valuable than Sirens vocal Art,
Pleasant to the Ear, and hurtful to the Heart.
1 Neither on the Top, or the Bottom, the best situation for a House, or a
City, affording both Convenience of Cellars, and a Descent to carry off the
Waters*

2 It will be thought the Old Man has made a very ill Choice of a Mill to hear
his Boy read in, but they who make this Objection, either know not, or at least
do not consider, that Noise helps Deafness, which is incident to Old Age. That
this is a Truth, both Experience and Reason evidence.

I have known several, who could hear little or nothing in their Chambers, but
when they were in a Coach rattling upon the Stones, heard very well. I also
knew a Lady in Essex, whose Name was Tyrrel, who while she had occasion to
discourse, used to beat a great Drum, without which, she could not hear at all;
the Reason whereof is this, The most frequent Cause of Deafness, is the
Relaxation of the Tympanum, or Drum of the Ear, which by this violent and
continual Agitation of the Air, is extended, and made more Tight, and Springy,
and better reflects, Sounds, like a Drum new braced.

III.
Near a shady 1 Grove, and a murmuring Brook,
With the Ocean at 2 Distance, whereupon I may look,
With a spacious Plain, without Hedge or Style,
And an easy Pad-Nag, to ride out a 3 Mile.
May I govern, etc.
1 Et paulum silvae super his foret. Hor. That is,

And on my Land a little Tuft of Trees.

Fons etiam Rivo dare nomen idoneus, ut nec
Frigidior Thracum, neque purior ambiat Hebrum.
Id. Et tecto vicinus Jugis Aquae Fons.
Id. That is,

And near my House a Spring that always flows.

Labuntur altis interim ripis aquae
Fontesque lymphis obstrepunt manantibus
Somons quod invitet leves.
Hor. -- Per pronum trepidans cum murmr rivum.
Id, Levis crepante lympha desilit Pede.
Id. Vnde loquaces.
Lymphae desiliunt.
Idem. The Sense whereof is this,

And a Spring fit to give a River Name
Colder than it, none are in Thracia found
Clearer than it, none Hebrus Hill surround.
The Noise of Water tumbling down the Hills
And bubbling of the Springs provoking Sleep.
Runs murmuring as if it were afraid,
Runs nimbly down the Hill and Music makes
With' creaking of its liquid Shoes.
Waters in their Descent talking aloud.
Un Font ch' a bagnar invita
La labbra, alto cader da un vivo sasso
That is,

A Clear Spring issuing from a Rock
Inviting thirsty Travelers to drink.
Chiara Fontana
Sorgea d'un sasso, e acque fresche e dolce
Spargea souamente mormorando.
Pet. That is,

A copious Spring pouring down from a Rock,
Its Waters cold as Ice, and clear as Cristal.
Il roco mormorar di lucid'onde
S' ode de una fiorita e fresca riva.
That is,

Upon the cool and flowery Bank of the River
We heard the hoarse Sound of the murmuring Waters.
La font discorrea pe'l mezzo d'un Prato
D'arbore antique e, e belle ombre adorno
Ch'i viandanti co'l mormorin grato
Aber invita, e far seco soggiorno.
That is,

A silver Stream
Runs through the Field with shady Trees adornd,
And by its gentle murmurs seems to invite
The Passengers to drink, and stay all night.
Quel roco suon, chi fuor discioglie
Il mormorante strepitoso Rivo.
That is,

The hoarse Sound of the raped River.

Il mormorio del Acque,
Chi da'l collo vicin, di sasso in sasso,
A scherzar cala, placidetta, e fresca.
Imper. That is,

The murmuring Noise of the cold pleasant Stream,
Sporting and leaping from one Stone to another,
Chiari Rivi mormorando intorno
Sempre l'erbe vi fan tenere, e nove,
E rendea ad Auscultator dolce concento,
Rottotra picciol sassi il correr lento.
Ariosto. That is,

Clear murmuring Rivers pass,
Filling the Vale with Flowers, Herbs and Grass,
And to the Travelers, sweet Music make,
When they ride Post, over the rattling Pebbles.
Rive correnti di fontane vive,
A'l caldo tiempo, giu per l'erbe fresce.
Petr. That is,

Rivers descending from perpetual Springs
In The Heat o'th Year refresh the scorched Grass.
Il murmurar di liquidi Cristalli,
Giu per lucidi, fresci, rivi, e snelli.
Petr. That is,

The murmuring Sound the liquid Cristal makes
When it runs swiftly in cold lucid Streams.
Da'l cavo sen d'inaccessibil rupi.
Traboccar un Rio, ne la profunda Valle
E cresciuto in torrente, infra quei sassi
Muover con roco suon tumidi i passi.
Gratiani. That is,

To see a small Stream, from a hollow Rock
Grown to a furious Torrent in the Vale,
Move proudly, murmuring at every step.
Scorrea del verde prato, al lato manco,
Un lompido Ruscell, che dolce invita
Con l'acque pure, in su l'estiva rabbia
Facea de i Viandanti al arse Labbia.
That is,

Through the Green Field a River runs,
And courteously all Travelers invites
To drink its Waters, wholesome, cool, and clear,
And quench their Thirst in the great heat of the Year.
2 Neptunum procul a terris spectare furentem. Hor. That is

Safe upon Land to see the raging Sea.

Jactantibus aequora ventis,
E terra, magnum alterius spectare Laborem
Tua sine part pericli.
Non quia vexari quemquam est jucunda voluptas,
Sed quibus ipse malis careas quid cernere suave est.
Lucr. That is,

To him that is safe, it is pleasant to behold
Seamen in Storms, laboring to save their Lives,
Not that another Misery affords Pleasure,
The Pleasure comes from this, that we are safe.
IV.
With Horace and 1 Petrarch, and Two or Three more
Of the best Wits that reign*d in the Ages before,
With 2 roast Mutton, rather than Uen'son or Teal,
And clean, though course Linen at every Meal.
May I govern, etc.
1 A famous Italian Poet, who flourished in the Thirteenth Century, he was one
of the first restorers of Learning. The Author of this Wish has begun to write
his Life, and designs (God willing) in a short time to publish it.

2 Simple and parable Meat.

Parabilem amo venerem. Hor. That is,

My delight is in things easily procured.

Accipe nunc victus tenuis quae quantaque secum
Afferat, imprimis valeas been, nam variae res
Vt noceant homini credas, memor illius escae
Quae simplex olim tibi sederit, ut simul assis
Miscueris Elixa, simul conchylia Turdis,
Dulcia se in bilem vertent, stomachoque tumultum
Lenta feret pituita, vides ut pallidus omnis
Coena desurgat dubia, quin corpus onustum
Hosternii vitiis, animum quoque praegravat una,
Atque affigit humi Divinae particulam Aurae.
Which may be thus Translated.

Learn the Effects of spare and simple Diet,
First it preserves thy Health, which various Meats
Destroy, you will grant* this when you call to mind
How easily you digested Oxford Commons.
If you mix boiled, roast, fried, and flesh with fish,
Sweet things turn Choler, and Phlegm loads the Stomach.
Behold how pale, how sickly they appear
Who spend their Nights in Feasts, their Days in Sleep,
But that is not all, the worst is yet behind,
Their diseased Bodies influence the Mind.
And nail to the ground that Particle of Jove.
Pago il cor di poco, il suo ben creed
Pascer su parca ma pulita mensa
Piu di piacer che vivande il corpo
In vece de piu lauti e piu chiari Cibi,
Onde s' aggrava il' nauseato Gusto,
E onde ohime la Vita altrui si accorcia.
Imper. That is,

He with content at his own Table sits
Served with clean Linen and with common Meat,
Eating no more than what suffices Nature,
And thence with Appetite rises to his Studies
Taking more care to feed his Soul, than Body,
Variety he shuns and newfound Dishes,
Which bring their Thousands to untimely Death.
Ne turpe toral, ne sordida mappa
Corruget nares, ne non and Cantharus and Lanx
Ostendat tibi te.
Hor. Lest the foul Table-cloth and dirty Napkins
Should make you loath your meat.
Lest you should see your Face in the greasy Plates.
Et mundus victus non deficiente crumena. Id. That is,

Clean Diet and some Money in my Purse.

Mundaeque parvo sub lare pauperum
Coenae.
Hor. That is,

And cleanly Suppers in a homely Cottage.

Pauperies immunda domus procul absit, ego utrum. Hor. Nave serar magna an
parva ferar unus and idem. Hor. That is,

From unclean Poverties attacks securd,
Twill be all one to me to make the Port
In a small Wherry or a first rate Ship.
V.
With a 1 Pudding on Sundays, with stout humming Liquor,
And Remnants of Latin to welcome the Uicar,
With 2 Monte-Fiascone or 3 Burgundy Wine
To drink the 4 Kings health as often as I dine.
1 Tho the Poet never eats any, he provides this Dish for his Guest, but
principally in observance of the old English Custom, to let no Sunday pass
without a Pudding. From this, and many passages before, it is evident that he
is a very superstitious Fellow.

2 A Town in Tuscany clebrated for good Wine, and the Epitaf of a Dutch Man
buried there; all the Books which treat of Traveling through Italy relate the
story at large. But since it may be new to some who shall read this, I will set
it down in few words; A Dutch Traveller with his Servant lighted at the Inn
which lies out of the Town, and thence sent his Servant into it to find the
best Wine, ordering him to write Est upon the door of the House wherein he
found good Wine; where he found better, Est, Est; where the best, Est, Est,
Est: The Servant obeyed his Commands punctually. The Master follows, and finds
the Tavern bearing this last Inscription, and drank so much, that it cast him
into a Fever, whereof he died. His Servant buried him in the Church, ingraving
upon his Tombstone this Epitaf, which is still to be seen there.

Est, Est, Est.
Propter nimium Est,
Jo de Fuc. D. meus mortuus est.
That is,

Here lies my Master, due East and West,
By taking too much, of Est, Est, Est.
3 Beauln, A Town in the Dukedom of Burgundy, famous for a magnificent
Hospital, and the excellency of its Wines, which are incomparably the best in
France, if not in the World.

Experto creed Roberto. i. e. I do not speak this by hearsay.

4 So Horace writing to Augustus.

Hinc ad vina redit laetus and alteris
Te mensis adhibet Deum.
Te multa prece, te prosequitur mero.
Diffuso Pateris, and laribus tuum
Miscet nomen, ut Graecia Castoris
Et magni memor Herculis.
Longas o utinam Rex bone ferias
Praestes Hesperiae, dicimus integro
Sicci mane die, dicimus Vvidi
Cum nox Oceano subest.
This may be thus Parafrased.

When second Course comes in,
Then we begin
To bless the Gods and thee, mingling your Names,
With many Prayers, and Glasses filled with Wine
We drink your Health, crying, King live for ever.
Not Hercules, nor Castor ever found
Such Love in Greece, as thou in English ground,
For the Worlds good, may Heavens preserve thee long.
This is our sober, and our drunken Song.
Our first in the Morning, and last Prayer at Night.
VI.
May my Wine be Uermillion, may my Malt-drink be pale,
In neither extreme, or too mild or too stale.
In lieu of Deserts, Unwholesome and Dear,
Let 1 Lodi or Parmisan bring up the Rear.
May I govern, etc.
1 Laus Pompei, a wonderful fertile Town in the Duchy of Millan, whose Cheese
is of greater Fame, than Parmisan.

VII.
Nor 1 Tory, or Wig, Observator or Trimmer
May I be, nor against the Laws torrent a Swimmer
May I mind what I speak, what I write, and hear read,
But with matters of State never trouble my head.
May I govern, etc.
1 Those odious Names of Distinction, kindled great Animosity, and Strangeness,
and even Hatred, betwixt Friends and Relations, which are not (I fear) yet
thoroughly extinguished.

VIII.
Let the Gods who dispose of every Kings Crown,
Whomsoever they please, set up and pull down.
I Will pay the whole Shilling imposed on my head,
Tho I go without 1 Claret that Night to my Bed.
May I govern, etc.
1 If that should happen, it would be a shrewd Affliction to the Poet.

IX.
I Will bleed without grumbling, though 1 that Tax should appear
As often as New Moons, or Weeks in a Year,
For why should I let a seditious Word fall?
2 Since my Lands in 3 Utopia pay nothing at all.
May I govern, etc.
2 A Poll Bill. 2 A good Encouragement to pay for his Head, and c. 3 A Place in
Jupiter, or the Moon, or some other of the Planets, for it is not to be found
in the Map of the World.

X.
Though I care not for Riches, may I not be so poor,
That the Rich without shame cannot enter my Door,
1 May they court my converse, may they take much delight,
My 2 old Stories to hear in a Winters long Night.
May I govern, etc.
1 Pauperemque dives me petet. 2 Aniles ex re fabellas, Hor. That is,

Let the Rich look after me.
Old Stories aptly applied.
XI.
My small stock of Wit may I not misapply,
To flatter great men be they never so high.
Nor mispend the 3 few Moments I steal from the Grave,
In fawning, or cringing, like a Dog or a Slave.
May I govern, etc.
3 Quel poco viver che m' avanza. Petr. That is,

The small remainder of my Life.

XII.
May none whom I love, to so great 1 Riches rise
As to slight their Acquaintance, and their old Friends despise.
So Low, or so High, may none of them be,
As to move either Pity, or Envy in me.
May I govern, etc.
1 No de Dios tanto bien a nuestros Amigos que nos desconoscam. A Spanish
Proverb, In English thus,

Let not God make our Friends so rich as to forget us.

XIII.
A Friendship I wish for, but alas it is in vain,
Joves Storehouse is empty and cannot it supply,
So firm, that no change of Times, Envy, or Gain,
Or Flattr'y, or Woman, should have Power to unty.
May I govern, etc.
XIV.
But if Friends prove unfaithful, and Fortune a 1 Whore,
Still may I be Uirtuous, though I am Poor,
My Life then, as useless, may I freely resign,
When no longer I relish, true Wit, and good Wine.
May I govern, etc.
1 Fortuna saevo laeta negocio,
Ludum insolentem ludere pertinax.
Transmutat incertos honores
Nunc mihi, nunc alii benigna.
Hor. Laudo manentem, si celeres quatit
Pennas, resigno quae dedit, and mea
Virtute me involvo.
Hor. Hinc apicem rapax
Fortuna cum stridore acuto
Sustulit, hic posuisse gaudet.
Hor. Something to this purpose.

Fortune delights to play her cruel Game,
And, as the wind, is never long the same,
But to change Favorites always inclined,
Sometimes to me, sometimes to thee she is kind.
When thou think thou have her as sure as a Gun
She Will up with her Scut, and away she will run.
I am well pleased while she vouchsafes to stay,
But if she claps her wings, and scuds away,
What I Have received, I patiently lay down,
And wrap my self in my own Virtue's Gown.
Fortune fly's wantonly about the World,
And changes Crowns and Kingdoms every day.
XV.
To out live my 1 Senses may it not be my Fate,
To be blind, to be deaf, to know nothing at all,
But rather let Death come before it is so late,
And while there is some Sap in it, may my Tree fall.
May I govern, etc.
3 May I not lose my Sight, my Hearing, and my Memory, and be a Burden to my
Friends, and my self, (...). Telluris inutile Pondus, a dead unuseful Burden to
the Ground.

Di guai pieno, e d'angoscie e fatto in tutto.
Spiacevol, e molesto a tutti, anzi a me medessimo.
Petr. That is,

In Pain and Anguish altogether troublesome
Not only to my Friends, but to my self.
Vltima semper
Expectanda dies homini est, dicique beatus
Ante obitum nemo supremaque funera debet.
Ovid. That is,

No Man can be called Happy till he is dead,
It Is the last Hour denominates the Life.
If you tell an Italian, such a one is a rich, or happy man; he will reply, Dammi
lo morto, as much as to say, Let me see dead, and then twill be evident whether
he is or not; before that, no true Judgment is to be made. Some corporeal and
intellectual vigor. 4 May I die.

XVI.
I hope I shall have no occasion to send
For Priests, or Fysicians, till I am so near mine End
1 That I have eat all my Bread, and drunk my last Glass,
2 Let them come then, and set their Seals to my Pass.
May I govern, etc.
1 The Poet alludes to a Tradition amongst the Turks, who believe, that when
any one is born into the World, there is such a Quantity of Meat and Drink set
before him, which when he has consumed, he must die. The Moral whereof is, He
that desires to live long, must be sparing in his Meat and Drink.

2 That I may die Canonicamente e con tutti gli ordini. i. e. Die regularly,
observing all the Ceremonies, Formalities, and Punctualities, A la Coustume,
which is according to our barbarous Translation, To a Cows Thumb.

XVII.
With a Courage undaunted, may I face my last Day,
And when I am dead may the better sort say,
1 In the Morning, when sober, in the Evening, when mellow'
He Is gone, and left not behind him his Fellow.
May I govern, etc.
1 Dicimus integro
Sicci mane die, dicimus Vnidi,
Cum nox Oceano subest.
These Verses are Translated before.

S' io vissi in guerra, e in tempesta,
Morai in pace, e in porto, e se la Stanza
Fu vana, almen sia la partita honesta.
Petr. That is,

Tho I have lived in War, and in a Storm,
Oh may I die in Peace, and in a Port
Tho the first Parts I acted on Lises Stage
Were vain, may my last Exit make amends.
XVIII.
Without any 1 Noise when I Have pass do it the Stage,
And decently acted what part 2 Fortune gave,
And put off my 3 Uests in a 4 cheerful Old Age,
May a few honest Fellows see me laid in my Grave.
May I govern, etc.
1 Secretum iter and fallentis semita vitae.
Hor. Nec vixit male, qui natus moriensque fefellit.
Idem. That is

He Happy is who lived and died unknown.

2 Quem dederat cursum Fortuna peregi. Virgil. That is,

I Have run the Race by Fortune me assigned.

3 My Garments of Flesh, wherein I acted my Part on the Stage of the World,
when the Farce is done, and the Curtain drawn.

Al por giu di questa spoglia. Petr. Lasciando in terra le squarciete vele.
Idem. That is,

When I put off my tattered Rags,
And leave them here behind me on the Earth.
Quando de terreno
Carcere uscendo, lascirai tu e sparta
Questa mia grave, e frale, e mortal Gonna.
Petr. That is,

When I Am released out of this Mortal Prison,
Leaving my heavy, frail, and mortal Gown.
E quel velo
Che per alto destin mi venne in sort.
Id. That is,

That Veil that Heavens appointed me to wear:

precor integra
Cum mente nec turpem senectam
Degere, nec cithara carentem.
That is,

In a cheerful Old Age, and my Senses entire,

VIII.
I care not whether under a Turf, or a Stone,
With any Inscription upon it, or none,
If a Thousand Years hence, 1 Here lies W. P.
Shall be read on my Tomb, what is it to me?
May I govern, etc.
1 The Poet Presumes he shall have a very short and modest Epitaf if any, only
the Two First Letters of his Name.

S'el Latino o'l Greco
Parlan di me dopo la morte, e un' Vento.
Pet. That is,

If the Romans or Grecians speak of me after my death, it is but Wind.

XX.
Yet one Wish I add, for the sake of those 1 Few
Who in reading these Lines any Pleasure shall take,
May I leave a good 2 Fame, and a sweet smelling Name.
AMEN. Here an End of my WISHES I make.
May I govern my Passion with an absolute Sway,
And grow Wiser, and Better, as my Strength wears away,
Without Gout, or Stone, by a gentle Decay.
1 Non ut me miretur turba Laboro. Contentus paucis Lectoribus. i. e. I design
not to be read by many, nor covet the applause of the Populace. 2 Quae post
Fata venit, Gloria sera venit. Mart. i. e. Fame comes too late when it comes
after Death. Though Fame will not concern me after I am Dead, yet I wish for
it, because it will be a Pleasure to my surviving Friends. Si quos superesse
volunt Dii. Hor. i. e. If I do not (which has happened to many Old Men)
outlive all my Friends.

FINIS.

