THE POPES LETTER, TO Maddam Cellier In Relation to her great Sufferings For
the Catholic Cause, And likewise Maddam Celliers Lamentation standing ON THE
PILLORY, AND Also the Popes Commission to Maddam Celliers, for several places
of honor for her so well managing the Affair on her part hitherto, and if she
receive Martyrdom by the Heretics, a Canonization or Saintship among the
other holy Saints.
DEAR DAUGHTER,
HAving Received an Account from the Provincial of the Jesuits residing here
in Rome, how great and glorions an Instrument you have been in promoting the
Holy-Cause, and how very active you have showed your self, and of your great
sufferings almost to Martyrdom; I find my self bound to take notice thereof;
and to send you these under the Seal of the Fisher, to encourage your Zeal, and
to strengthen and provoke you to go on in so righteous a Cause. Fear not
therefore what man can do unto you: be Bold, Confident, Courageous, faint not
under the work; for I have ordered many hands to help you, and to dispose of
the Issue you shall bring into the World. Tho as yet the success has not
answered ours nor your Expectations, yet I am glad to find you have still no
small hopes of bringing about your great Design, in setting up our true
Religion, and in pulling down the Heretical; which is an Attempt as difficult
as it is good and meritorious, and therefore you are to make use of all manner
of ways to bring about so great a work. Though some Instruments have proved
false and wicked, and are become Traitors to us and the Cause, be not troubled
so long as our Cofers are full, and open, to be employed for the procuring
others; you shall not want them nor money for the carrying on what we have so
fairly begun. We give you therefore leave and authority, both to speak and
write in the Church, and to do and say what you and they whom we have assigned
of your Council, shall think sit or convenient; and by the power granted to us
in Heaven and Earth, we do authorize all you shall say or publish, to be Truth,
and do absolve your Conscience from all Scruples, though you did believe or
know the contrary; for by the unbounded power granted us, as the Head of the
Church, we do give you full Absolution in these matters. And for that end, we
have sent Indulgences both for lying and Perjury, free and without the usual
Fees. We have also of our great benignity, sent you a free pardon for all your
sins past, from the hour of your Birth, to the day of the date thereof; be they
of what Nature or Complexion soever; and also that you may to the hour of your
Death, be as innocent as the Child unborn. ^e do also send you Indulgence for
five thousand years yet to come, and have given order to my dear beloved Sons
the Jesuits, to give you Absolution for all your Sins whatsoever constantly
and without Penance; that you may not want Encouragement or be slack in the
holy Cause. We have also Dear Daughter, sent you a blank Commission, to be
either Abbess of any one of the Richest Nunneries in England, when they come
into our Hands; which you shall choose, or think convenient; but if you shall
prefer Temporal preferment to Spiritual, I have also sent you a Commission for
to create you a Countess, under what Title you shall choose, and twenty
thousand pounds of yearly Rent out of the Estates of the Capital Heretics,
whom yon shall find guilty of the same. And for a farther additional Honor,
and in honorable memory of your former Professions, we Create you Procuress
and Midwife-General, and a Fee to be received from all of those Professions in
England, and Wales, by you at their first admission, they receiving only their
authority from you for the same; which we make, confirm and ratify to be legal
and authentic. And Dear Daughter, that we may yet farther stir you up and
confirm you in your ^ealous work, we do promise you an immortal Crown after
this Life, and if you should obtain that of Martyrdom among the wicked
Heretics we do promise you to ingrave your Name among the other blessed
Martyrs and Confessors, who have suffered by the Heretics, in England; and
also we do further promise you Canonization or Saintship among the holy Saints
and Martyrs who have lately suffered in England, as St. Coleman, St. Ireland,
St. Gawen and the rest; and to be equal in Fame and esteem with St. Joan of
Arque, that great Championess for the Cause that Mall of English-Hereticks. All
these things considered, we hope Dear Daughter, that you will strenuously
endeavor by all manner of ways and means to promote the Cause, and not to let
your heart fail you, tho your Adversaries have published many disgraceful
things of you, while you were a Sinner, but we have already denounce the
Anathausas against them, and have given order to my Sons, the Dominican Priests
in England to make use of the solemn Rite of Cursing them with Bell, Book and
Candle; and we have also pronouneed all they have said, or shall say against
you, or that is any way contrary derogatory to your Honor, Reputation,
Modesty, Life or good Name, to be all wicked Lies and abominable invention,
malice, and dispight, and that my dear Sons the Jesuits and Priests of what
Order soever, and the Lay Sons of the Church, to endeavor all they can to make
it so to be taken and believed. And likewise on the other side, I do confirm
all you shall write and publish concerning your own Life and Transactions, or
in Vindication of your Honor, Modesty and Innocence, to be true and undoubted
as the Gospel; and likewise all that you shall say or relate, concerning your
Adversaries, or others, or whatever you shall Print or make known to the world
by the help or advice of one or more of my dear Sons, to be true Scripture,
undoubted and authentic in every Paragraph, Sentence, Line and Word, and that
they also beforementioned, Cause it to be believed and taken. We also have
ordered our Sons, the Franciscans, to preserve the Meal-Tub, in which lay hid
the Design of the holy Cause, among their chiefest Relics, and have also
bestowed on it the Authority of doing of Miracles, and that the Meal therein
should never be consumed, though all the Priests in England should make Cakes
thereof, every day that shall be assigned to your Saint-ship; and we have
ordered this Relic to be inshrin'd, and to be called the Holy Meal-Tub, with
St. Colemans Halter, and that our Sons may have full power and authority to
exercise pias, fraudis or any other manner of deceits, to cause the same to be
believed, and to be had in esteem and Veneration, and that the same be also
entered into the Legend of Reliquies and Miracles. All this Dear Daughter, have
we done for your encouragement, and therefore we hope you will proceed in that
forward and notorious dexterity, you have hitherto showed for the holy Cause,
and that you will not be afraid boldly to affront the Heretics, from the
greatest to the least; nor fear what they can be able to do unto you; neither
their Prisons, their Whips, Pillories, or Halters, for we can exalt you above
all, and make you live Righteous, Just, Holy, and a Saint for ever,
notwithstanding they should Condemn you as Infamous, and Traytress to your King
and Country. And we do engage to you, if ever we do get up again in England, we
will not spare the Cocatrices, but crush them so, they shall never more be able
to rise; we will exercise full power and authority, and root out all manner of
Heretics Root and Branch, and will have no pity or commiseration, but new
plant and slack that Land with new powers and Forces from abroad, so as they
shall never be able to pull their Necks out of the Yoke we have prepared for
them. Therefore Dear Daughter fear not to follow the Dictates of my dear and
venerable Sons the Jesuits, whom I have ordered to direct, advise and instruct
you from time to time, whose careful Instructions I desire you constantly to
follow, and to go on as you have begun; for the prosperity of these your holy
and pious undertakings, and for the encouragement of your endeavors, we here
send you our Fatherly Benediction. From the Vatican the first of August 1680.
Sealed with the Seal of the Fisher.

Maddam CELLIERS LAMENTATION Standing on the PILLORY.
HArk to my Lamentable Ditty,
You Pope-lings of both Town and City;
Of my Sufferings take some Pity,
For Heriticks assault me.
They do not think that it is enough
To see me with a Wooden Ruff,
For Writing Treason and such stuff;
But they with Stones must palt me.
But let them fling and fling again,
Though I schriek out, and feel no pain;
Whilst on me Showers of Stones like Rain,
Did make my Armor rattle.
For like a Championess I came
Not armed with Modesty, and Shame,
But clasped about with Armed Frame,
Prepared for the Battle.
Upon my Head I had a Case,
A Blinding Board before my Face,
Such as before Wild Cows they place,
To keep my Nose from ^uffit.
The Shed kept of the falling Storm,
The Dirt and Stones did me no harm,
I had against them got a Charm;
And laughed whilst they did Cuff it.
Apples and Eggs and Marrow-bones,
Dirt and Dung and pibble-stones,
The wicked Rogues flung for the nonce,
Which I put in my Pocket.
For Stones I Veneration had,
Loved them till Dangerfield grew mad,
Those given by many a Lusty Lad;
I cherished under Placket.
But these hard Stones I carry home,
With Brick-Batty, Tiles, and lumps of Loom,
Which shall est soon be sent to Rome,
There to be Sanctified.
For I do know my Father Pope
Will lay them up with Coleman's Rope,
To be a Saint I still do hope
Though by the Pox I dyed.
A Fart for all the Rogues can do,
I to the Cause will still prove true,
And to my own dear Meal Tub too;
If I come off alive.
In spite of Richardson and Fate,
All Heretics I still will hate,
And if Plots thrive again will prate;
And new Print my Narrative.
London, Printed by D Mallet, 1680.


