POOR ROBINS PROPHESIES. And DIVERTISEMENTS.
Since the Sybils, and Nostredamus,
Mother Shipton, Grebnerus, and Lilly,
By Predictions, have made themselves Famous;
Though never so Dark and so Silly.
Let Poor Robbin put in for a Prophet
With an innocent Prognostication,
If there happen no Good to come of it,
It shall yet do no Hurt to the Nation.
But from Starrgazing Wisards of State,
With their Factius Prognostiques; defend us;
What they seem to foretell, they Create
And they Cause all the Ills they Portend us.
It Is but tuning the Phansy of the Rabble,
And they will swear it is the Stars; when it is they do it;
Not so much as this Pitiful Bauble,
But I Will hang, if they don't put a Key to it
UPon turning up the Foundation of Mushrome-Hall, there was found a
Porridge-Pot with an Alms-Box in it. The Pott was made of Red Earth, as Man
was, and upon it, in Saxon Characters, as much as to say, OUR ORIGINAL. In the
Box were two Prophesies, written also in the same Tongue, which are here
faithfully Translated, as follows.

The First Prophesy.
When the Toad shall run away with a Leg of the Lion, and advance it self
against the Eagle, then shall the Men of the White Island suffer great
Tribulation, by reason of the Excessive Price of HORN-BOOKS, and the danger of
their BACON; and take grievous Surfeits of ROTTEN WARDENS. Then shall the Fox
whistle, and the Geese Dance, to the Tune of When Jocky first the War began;
and there shall be notable Glee among the Children of the Lake.

After this, there shall appear a Face of Brass, under a New thatched House,
and a Voice shall be heard crying WOE, WOE, WOE, unto those that BAWL; which shall
be terrible to the Translater of the DOBUNI, and the POOR WHORES, with their
PETITIONS, shall fall down before it. Then shall Men be distracted in their
Reckoning, and refuse to give Account of their Stewardships; and being far gone
in Ale and Concupiscence, they shall have a Hankering after the Flesh, and run
their Heads against Cross-Beames in the middle of their Cariere after the
Strange Woman; their Eyes being sunk into their Breeches, and the Understanding
fallen into the Lower parts.

The Second Prophesy.
When the Moon-Calf shall chop Logique with the Three Lions, and the
Fatherless-Child enter into a League with the French Cutter, the Trusty shall
take possession of the Housetop, and the Clother of the Dead shall call in the
Man of Letter; to his (...) and the Canon shall play upon him, from the Man of
Po.

In those days there shall come forth a Mighty Prophet out of the River of the
South, whose Daddy shall not be known, for he shall spring like a
Chedir-Cheese; out of the Milk of the whole Parish. He shall confound the
Oracles of the Pagan Almanacks, and give thanks upon his Knees to St. Stephen,
before the great Tribunal, for his success.

When this is come to pass, the Spirit of Delusion shall preach a New Gospel,
in the Name of the fallen Angel; Maintaining that Rebellion, Rapine, and
Bearing false witness are the special Privileges of a Babe of Grace. His sound
shall go out into Arabia; He shall hold forth in the Synagogues of smoke, and
the Martyr shall give Testimony unto his Doctrine. He shall be skilled in all
the Learning of the Egyptians; and of so wonderful a Memory, that he shall
never forget any thing, but his Sins, his Friends, and the Masters of his
Parish. He shall show his Parts before Principalities and Powers, and make
great Presents of State-Spectacles, for the Discovery of Non-Entities, and
seeing things invisible: by which means, his Virtues shall be made manifest.

And then shall come forth in a fair Foolls-Capp, and bound up in
Calves-Leather, the Living History of the Philosophy of Gotham with certain
Learned Exercitations upon the Devils Arss of Peake, which shall make the
Squire of the Wandle, and the Lady of the sorrowful countenance, great in their
Generations. But behold there is a sad Catastrophe at hand; for the Proud shall
be Humbled, St. George appears, and the Puissant shall eat Grayns.

Divertisements.
1. IF there be any Man, Woman, or Child, in Town, or Country, that can furnish
a considerable quantity of good substantial Statutable Bawdery, let them repair
with it to the sign of the Kings Whisperer, and they shall be well paid for
their pains, the Master and Mistress of the house, being upon a Collection of
Curiosities of that kind, which they intend to publish with Aretines Cutts, and
their own Notes upon them, for the Edification of both Sexes.

2. There is now ready for the Press, an Excellent Piece, called, The Memoirs
of Grim the Collier of Croydon, and Dame Gillian his Spouse, with Instructions
how a man may thrive in the world, without either Brains, or Honesty; being of
singular use, for Buffoons, Pimps, and Parish-Children.

3. Lost betwixt Tarts Coffee house, and Parliament Stairs, out of a
Calves-Leather-Case, a very fair, Large Conscience, ready hardened, and fit for
Use; together with Bills of Accounts, and two Apologys, one for Judas, and
another for the seven deadly sins, clearly proving that the Devil is not so
black as they paint him, with a Receipt to turn Hob-nails into Guinnyes.
Whosoever has found them, and will deliver them to the true Owner, in the
Christ-Cross-Row, shall have a good reward.

4. The Dr. that makes the rare Varnish for keeping people in countenance in
the cases of Swearing, Lying and Stealing without the common helps of Pillory
or Carting, so that they shall outface a Court of Justice, and never change
color for it, does now stand fair for Professor to the Societies of Newgate and
the Gatehouse, and is to be spoke with, from 8 to 12. in the Morning, at the
Graceless Babe; and from 2 to 7 in the Afternoon, at the sign of the
Cloake-Carrier. At other times he may be heard of at the Virginia in
Blackfriars.

This may be Printed May 23, 1677. R. L'Estrange.

Printed by H. B. in the Year 1677.


