THE CHARACTER OF A Formal Professor IN RELIGION. Preached in two SERMONS at
St. Chads Church in Salop, Jan. 11. 1661. On 2 Timothy 3. 5. By Tho. Porter M. A.
Minister of the Gospel.

Romans 2. 28. He is not a Jew which is one outwardly, neither is that
circumcision which is outward in the flesh.



Quid prodest veritatem verbis astruere and vita destruere? Cypr. LONDON,
Printed for the Author, and are to be sold at the three Daggers in Fleet
street. 1661.

To the Worshipful, and much valued Brother Robert Clive of Stych Esquire; and to
his religious Consort Mrs. Mary Clive, Grace, Mercy and Peace in our Lord Jesus
premised.
Custom (which in some cases is above Law) may (perhaps) excuse me in this way
of Dedication, attempting the Patronage of persons of worth and quality; and
Reason tells me, It is pity to part you, being as Zachary and Elizabeth. Luke
1. 6.
You may say of me, as Naomi said to her daughter in Law, The man is of near
kin to Ruth 2. 20.
us. And I may truly say, It is no small piece of my Honor and Happiness to be
near of kin to you, if not by Consanguinity yet by Affinity: and no little part
of my comfort to be received into your house, (as before into your hearts) when
I was little less then an outcast. I know you take no pleasure in your praises
published; yet Divines (for the most part) excuse the dumb man cured by Christ
for divulging the same (seemingly) contrary to Mark 7. 3. 6.
Christ's command. On this account I safely may, and justly must publish my
thankful acknowledgement for your kind reception of me and mine, with many
more favors indulged to me. I know not how soon I may be called (though I lay
no stress on my climacterical year drawing nigh) to appear before Christ's
Tribunal. I thought good to leave this pledge of my love behind me, (as Eliah
did his mantle) that it may lie by you and talk with you, (when I am dead and
gone, that you may be able to discern things that differ, Philip. 1. 6.
not taking a pebble for a pearl. And the rather because the Heads of these
poor Meditations (being repeated in your hearing) were (beyond their desert) so
well resented by you, not without an eager desire of a Transcript of them. In
hope therefore that your souls (and the souls of others also) may receive some
spiritual benefit and advantage, I have exposed these my mean labors to the
public view. As you have therefore received Christ Jesus, so Col. 2. 6, 7.
walk ye in him, Rooted and built up in him, and stablished in the faith, as ye
have been taught, abounding therein with thanksgiving. But (to be short) I
shall turn my Praises of you, into Prayers for you, as being more agreeable to
my sacred Profession, and more acceptable (I doubt not) to your modest
disposition; praying God to bless you, as he did the house of Obed-Edom for
entertaining the Ark of God, and praising God, if by this (or any other of
Gods) means I have added (or shall be instrumental to add) one cubit to your
stature: which certainly will be the Crown and rejoicing of

Your humble Orator and loving Brother, Tho. Porter.
Raptim ex Musaeo Feb. 5. 1661.
2 TIMOTHY 3. 5. Having a form of Godliness, but denying the Power thereof.
THE Apostle in the beginning of this Chapter discharges a warning piece to
Timothy, and to us in him, to take notice, that corrupt men should arise, and
were then arising in the Chrysostom. in loc.
bosom of the Church, ver. 1. which corrupted men are described, 1. By the
effects that they should work, perilous times, or troublesome; for the hearts
of the godly should be Pisc.
troubled, either with fear, not knowing what counsel to take, or course to
follow: or else with grief for the imminent destruction of precious and
immortal souls. 2. By their (...).
Characters, ver. 2, 3, 4, 5. which are nineteen in number; this last is not
the least, (a sin more grievous then all the rest in Chrysostoms judgment)
bringing up the Rere; Having a Form --

A Form: Beza.
Some read Information: but this is somewhat harsh and uncooth in our English
ears. Cypr.
Some, deformation, not in the sense of a Jesuit; (Cornel. a-Lapide) faith, as
if they seem to bring in a Reformation, and so call themselves of the Reformed
Religion, when indeed they are of a deformed Religion; But this is a mere
quibble of a wanton wit, with Cyprian. Deformation is nothing else but a
Delineation, Effigiation and Expression. Sir. v. Ambr. and Genev.
Others generally read it a show and shadow, an Image and conterferfeit.

Godliness: Sir.
Some read it Reverence of God; and indeed, many things are cried up under the
notion of Reverence, which are neither so nor so: Some of Religion and Piety,
and Devotion, as Acts 10. 2, 17. and 22. 12. a devout man.

But denying: Or having denied, as it is in the Greek, and so translated in the
(...).
Geneva Bible, i. e. they are resolved to deny the power of Religion, and yet
take on them the form.

Power: Or virtue and truth. For the truth of a thing is discerned by its
powerful operation.

Thereof: Which may relate (in the original) either to the Form, or to
Godliness, as if they had denied either Godliness, or the Form of godliness. It
may be indeed referred to both; but I conceive it to Godliness rather.

DOCTRINE.
There are some that have a Form of Godliness, but deny the Power thereof. This
will be cleared and confirmed by answering these ensuing Questions.

1. What Godliness is?

1. Negatively. 1. Not a natural inclination to Quest. 1.
that which is naturally good by constitution: as a man of a sanguine
constitution is not so subject to sadness but cheerfulness. For though in one
sense we are very prone to all evil, and backward to all good, Genesis 6. 5. with
Romans 11. 29. yet in another sense, we may be truly said to be naturally prone
to some good, Mat. 19. 12. -- There are some Eunuchs so which are born from
their mothers womb: i e. of a frigid constitution of body, and so unapt for
generation, and therefore enabled to live unmarried. 2. Nor a mere moral
qualification acquired by acts and industry, as temperance, patience, meekness,
justice; etc. It was said of Cato, (if I mistake not) that it was as possible
to pull the Sun out of its Orb, as Cato from the course of Justice. Thus Mat.
19. 12. Some made themselves Eunuchs, not in Origens sense, (who understanding
other Scriptures Allegorically, yet to his smart and shame understood this
literally) but in Paul's sense, 1 Cor 9. 27. who by moderate diet, prayer and
fasting did attain the gift of continency. As there is a moral integrity
asserted by Abimelech an Heathen Prince, Genesis 20. 5. and approved by God, v. 6.
so there is a spiritual integrity which Job was resolved to maintain to his
dying day, Chap. 27. 5. between which there is a vast difference: so it is
here. Only mark, that which is called chastity in the Heathens, is called
Holiness in Christians, twice in 1 Thessalonians. 4. 4, 7. as if it were no small piece
of Sanctification in them.

2. Affirmatively. It is an holy disposition wrought by the Spirit of God,
whereby the Soul is enabled to act religiously toward God and man in the whole
conversation in some measure.

To open a window, and give light to this Description, by taking it into parts.

1. Its an holy disposition. That which is here rendered godliness, is
translated holiness, Acts 3. 12. where the same word is used. 2. Wrought by the
Spirit of God) John 1. 13. which were born not of blood (that is, of natural
generation) nor of the will of the flesh, (that is, not by the power of
corrupted will) nor of the will of man (of any motion or indowment of the best
moral heroical man) but of God, viz. of the Spirit of God, by whom we are said
to be wrought to the self same thing, 2 Cor. 5. 5. as Stone and Wood are hewed
and squared by Masons and Carpenters for the building. 3. The Soul; this is the
subject of this and all other Theological virtues. 4. It enables; Habits
(whether infused or acquired) enable the soul to act, as in the eye, the
faculty of seeing enables for the act of seeing. 5. Religiously, i. e. suitably
to godly principles. 6. Toward God: so godliness is taken for the inward and
outward acts of his Worship. Tit. 2. 12. Soberly in respect of our selves,
righteously in respect of our neighbors, and godly in respect of God himself.
1. Tim 2, 2. in all godliness and honesty: Godliness in reference to the First
Table, and honesty in reference to the Second Table. 7. And toward man] 1 Timothy
6, 6. Godliness with contentment, which holds forth the whole duty of man,
Eccl. 12. 13. 8. In the whole conversation] as here 2 Timothy 3. 12. They that
will live godly in Christ, 2 Pet. 3. 11. in all holy conversation and
godliness; the words are in the plural number conversations, godlinesses; as
blood runs through all the (...).
veins in the body, and the threads through the cloth, so godliness runs
through the whole conversation, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23. The God of Peace sanctify you
wholly. 9. In some measure] Our state here is imperfect, 1 Cor. 13. 9.

What is the Form of Godliness? 2.


Answ. There is a substantial form, Phil. 2. 6, 7. The form of God, the form of
man, that is, true God and true man for substance. 2. An accidental form, Mark
16. 12. Christ appeared in another form. In this last sense it is taken here.
But we shall know what the form of godliness is, by the power of it. Now the
Power of godliness imports,

1. A Principle of grace and holiness, Ames. Coron. p. 377.
which is called a well of water, John 4. 14. an ingrafted word, Jam. 1. 21. an
incorruptible seed, 1 Pet. 1. 23. the Spirit that dwells in us, 1 Cor. 3. 16. an
abiding seed, 1 John 3. 5. an unction, 1 John 2. 27. a root implanted, Matthew.
13. 21. Job. 19. 28. the life of God, Ephesians. 4. 17. the Image of God, Col. 3. 10.
the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. A bare Picture of a man, though never so
curiously and artificially drawn, is but a form of a man because it wants a
Soul, and life as a true man has, Rev. 3. 5. a name that thou live. Where
there is no Soul of a man, there is no power of a man. Formal Professors are
like hollow Trees in an old Wood, tall perhaps, but pithless, sapless,
lifeless, or like a Bulrush, the caul is green and fresh, but pill it, and what
do you find in it but a spongeous unsubstantial substance? Trap.
as One says; The Lamps of the five wise and of the five foolish Virgins did
burn and blaze alike, but there was no oil in the vessels of the foolish,
Matthew. 25. 3, 4. Now he that has the power of godliness, has a Principle of
Grace.

2. Practices suitable to such a principle. A dead carcass may have all the
lineaments and parts of a true body, but it wants the soul and living actions:
A man that is indeed alive, puts forth acts of life; so it is with a true
Christian; he breaths, Lam. 3. 56. Psa. 42. 1. as the heart pants, etc. He
sees a beauty in grace, and filthiness in sin; a Formalist does not, Isa. 53.
2. He hears as the Learned, Isa. 50 4. He smells a sweet favor in Christ's
Name, Cant. 1. 3. He tastes how gracious the Lord is, 1 Pet. 2. 3, 1. But
contrarily, he that has but a face, is like these Idols, Psalm. 135. 16, 17.
they have eyes but see not, etc. Living and dead branches are in Christ by
profession, but the dead ones receive no sap, bring forth no fruit. True, some
works may be done by a Formal Professor, but such as are called dead works,
Heb. 9. 14. because there is no life in them, as you shall hear anon. Prove. 7.
17.
Excellent speech becomes not a fool, no more then a ring of gold in a Swines
snout.

3. The Property, which is strictly called Power, that is, the vigor,
vivacity, virtue, efficacy of both, 1 Cor. 4. 20. The Kingdom of God is not in
word but in power, 1 These. 1. 5. Not in word only, but in power. Counterfeit
Balsom is like to the true, but it wants the property of healing: The power of
godliness is in some respect like Christ, that rises with healing under his
wings, Mal. 4. 2. that secretly and insensibly sends forth a virtue to dry up
(in some measure) the bloody issue of sin, Mark 5. 29, 30. That is an
observable place, Joh. 10. 10. I am come that they might have life, and that
they might have it more abundantly; so the Books have it; but it is not a
comparative Maldon.
word in the Greek. It may be better rendered abundantly, that is, a fat and
vegetous life. So is the verb to be understood, 1 Cor. 8. 8 are we the better,
that is, fatter or stronger; and then the sense is, that they might have life,
not merely a life (for so has the prisoner and the sick man) but a sound,
vigorous, and comfortable life. If a soul had not pardon of sin, it would
not resist sin; if it had no power against sin, it could not resist sin; so
much power as the soul has to resist sin, so much power sin loses. Sin may
remain in the best, but does not reign. Romans 16. 4. Sin shall not have
dominion: I deny not, this vigor is not felt, nor perhaps exerted in case of
Satanical temptation, spiritual desertion, and sad transgression, as with
David, Psalm. 51. If Christians should not sometimes have dead hearts, they
would have proud hearts: But this is not ordinary.

3. What is it to deny the power of godliness? Answ Not verbally so much as
really and actually, not with the lip, but with the life, not in word but in
work: when men destroy in practice what they hold out in profession, as Tit. 1.
16. but in works they deny him, which they dare not do perhaps with their
mouths; and as he, 1 Timothy 5. 8. has denied the faith, that is, in not making
provision for his family, though he still maintain a profession of the Faith.
Thus an ancient Writer says, that as he is worse then an infidel, (l) that
joins not a good conversation Just. Mart. Resp. ad Qu. 3.
(which is a character and badge of a Disciple of Christ) to knowledge, faith,
and baptism; so it is here, nay he sins more grievously, because he sins mote
knowingly and wilfully.

4. Why have some the form of godliness, and deny the power? For the better
understanding, I shall show you:

1. Why some have but a Form. 2. Why they deny the power. 3. Why both together.
First, 1. Why some have but the Form of Religion.

Because 1. of the Custom of a Religious Education. The bringing up of some in
commonly-received truths does so accustom the mind to them, that they know not
how to deny them. See 2 Kin. 12. 2. Jehoash was a hopeful Prince while that
good Priest Jehoiadah was alive, but when he was dead, and his head laid in the
grave, Jehoash discovered himself what he was; thus children, servants, pupils,
under a good Parent, Master, Tutor, seem to be Religious: But a Swine is a
cleanly creature while it grazeth in a fair green meadow or field; but if once
it get out, it shows its Swinish nature by wallowing in the mire: so eating
does usually so accustom the palate to some kind of meat, that it cannot but
receive that food. Hophni and Phinehas had religious education under their good
old Father Eli; therefore they sacrificed still, though all Israel rang of
their lewdness. See 1 Samuel 2. 13. etc.

2. Because of the Clamor of a natural conscience if awake (though never so
ignorant and injudicious) which does egg on to Religion: now conscience must
have a bit to stop its month from bawling, or ringing a loud peal, Psalm. 78.
34. When he slew them, then they sought him, etc. As Esth. 8. 17. The people of
the land became Jews, for the fear of the Jews fell on them: So some take on
them a form of Religion, because the horrors and fears of conscience fall on
them. Now being rash and indiscreet, they imagine forms will bring them to
heaven, and therefore will do no more, being as here (ver. 8.) men of corrupt
minds, reprobate, that is, void of judgment, concerning the faith, as children
for want of wit are taken up with rattles, gugaws, and babies.

3. Because of the credit of men, out of a desire to be well esteemed among his
neighbors. Naturally men are desirous to be accounted good (and are too well
conceited of themselves) especially when Religion is in credit, some take it up
as a fashion. The Shechemites are content to be circumcised for the love of
Dinah, and esteem with her kindred, Genesis 34. 24. So did they of whom the
Apostle speaks, Gal. 6. 12. (...).
make a fair show; the word is, they set a good face on it: especially before
the Jews to ingratiate with them; Achitophel will bear David company to the
house of God, because Religion then was in credit. Its thought that David
speaks of that grand Politician, Psalm. 55. 14. Some make suit to wear the cloth
of a Gentleman, or a livery of a Noble man, for credits sake: So some take on
the form of Religion for the sake of credit.

2. They deny the power of godliness for these Reasons.

Because, 1. Its attained with difficulty, 1 Pet. 4. 18. The righteous are
scarcely saved: the word signifies hardly, (...).
and its used thrice in Act. 27. 7, 8, 16. in that dangerous voyage of Paul in
the Ship. The soul of the righteous with much difficulty, through winds and
waves, is brought into the Haven of Heaven. Luke 13. 22. strive, i. e. as in
agony, to enter into the strait gate, as through a crowd and throng of
temptations and corruptions: so we must deny our selves, Matthew. 16. 24. If any
man will be my disciple (in power as well inform, in truth as well as in title)
let him deny himself: An hard Lesson! Its an hard matter to deny a friend, if
he be importunate; an harder to deny a dear wife that lies in the bosom, if she
be earnest; hardest of all, to deny a man's self, if self be earnest. Now
because holiness and happiness are attained with so much difficulty, therefore
some take on them the form of godliness, and are resolved to deny the power of
it. The Form is easy, but the power is hard and difficult.

2. Its attended with opposition, persecution and hatred. Here ver. 12. They
that will love godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution. Act. 19. 22.
Through much tribulation we must enter into the Kingdom of God. The way to the
Crown lies by the Cross. While Paul was a Pharisee, a Formal Professor, he was
quiet, but now when he was turned on Christ's side, every Tavern rings of Paul,
every tongue talks of him reproachfully. There was a man (as I have read or
heard) that was huspled (as we say) in Court for going to hear Sermons out of
his Parish Church: While (said he) I was a drunkard, swearer, etc. I was quiet:
and if this be the fruit of gadding to Sermons, farewell Religion, said the
poor Wretch. But to give you a better instance, we read of a Fellow that
pretended to be a Disciple of Christ, but when Christ told him, Mat. 8. 19, 20.
The Foxes have holes, the birds of the air have nests, but the Son of man has
not where to lay his head: we read not one word more of him. There was another
man, Mat. 19. 16. 22.
that asked Christ the way to eternal life, when Christ bad him sell all, etc.
the young man went away sorrowful at that hard saying; which yet was a command
of conviction, not of obedience. Antigonus said, If a man knew the Cares that
attend a Crown, he would not stoop down to take it up, though he found it in
the way, walking. Surely some know the hatred that the power of godliness is
attended with, and therefore are resolved against it: Truth it self has said,
Mat. 10. 22. Ye shall be hated of all men for my names sake; therefore they go
away, and say, with those on another account, Joh 6. 60. This is an hard saying.

3. It is assaulted with Satanical temptations; The Devil knows, the power of
holiness will bring to everlasting happiness, and therefore out of pure spite
he assaulteth such a soul. Mat. 16. 18.
The gates of hell, that is, the power and policy of Satan (for power and
policy were in the gates, where the persons in Judicatory were wont to meet and
sit) may assail, though not prevail. Pharaoh mustered up his Army, when Israel
was gone out of Egypt, and were marching toward Canaan. Pirates will not set
upon an empty Pinnace, but a Merchants Ship laden with gold and silver, and
rich commodities from the Indies. A Thief will not break into an empty barn,
but into an house furnished with good household stuff, and money. Now carnal men
are told of this, and therefore they are resolved against the power of
godliness.

3. For both together. Some have a form of godliness, but deny the power
thereof.

Because of 1. The Woeful depravation of man's corrupted nature. It is agreeable
to man's naughty heart to have a form, and to deny the power of godliness. He
has in him so much imperfect goodness as that makes him to receive the Form of
holiness, and yet withal so much predominant badness, as makes him to deny the
power of holiness. Psalm. 12. 2. a double heart. An heart in show for God and
goodness, an heart indeed for sin and Satan, as that man of sin is rightly
called Antichrist; the Praeposition (...),
signifies pro and con; In show, he is for Christ, in substance against Christ.
So that it is no more a wonder to see some have a Form, and deny the power of
Godliness, then to see a Crow black.

2. The Wily disposition of Satan, who is very busy to water and cherish the
seeds of Formality of godliness, and of enmity against the power of godliness.
He was a glorious Angel by Creation, and is become an ugly Devil by his
defection, and being fallen from heaven, he maligns the happiness of poor
souls. He is therefore content that men should carry Gods Livery on their
backs, so that they will wear his favor in their bosoms. He is content that
men should be Gods servants in show, so that they will be his slaves indeed.
Thus it was with Ananias and Saphira, Act 5. 1. 2, 3, etc.
who seemed to be as forward and charitable Christians as the best, but out of
base fear and diffidence, least they should want in their old age, kept back
part of the price, being said therefore to be filled with Satan: this is that
spirit, Ephesians. 2. 3. that works effectually in the children of disobedience. The
heart is the Fort-royall, and if he can keep that, he cares not much for the
outworks.

3. The Wise dispensation of God, who does justly punish a number of men that
live within the pale of the Church, giving them up to Satan, and to their own
naughty hearts to be deluded with new forms, that he might avenge himself on
them for neglecting the seasons of grace, and rejecting the blood of Christ
tendered in the Gospel, 2 These. 2. 11. He gave them up to strong delusion. Romans
1. 18. who hold (imprison and impound) the truth in unrighteousness. God does
this holily and justly, but man unholily and unjustly.

Information. 1. There is a godliness not only in words Use 1.
and complements, but in deed and in truth. There is good coin, though some
bad. There is a faith unfeigned, 1 Timothy 1. 5. a Love without dissimulation,
Romans 12. 9. wisdom without hypocrisy, Jam. 3. 17. an obedience from the heart,
Romans 6. 17.

2. The goodness and excellency of Religion, because the worst of men will have
the form of it. That must needs be good (it was wont to be said) that Nero
persecuted; and godliness must be good, when vile men assume the form of it.
There was sure some worth in Samuel, in whose mantle and likeness the Devil
appeared: Gold and silver are precious things because they are counterfeited.
Wisdom is the principal thing, Prove. 4. 7. and wisdom is good with an
inheritance, Eccles. 7. 11. and it is sad also without it. Men may hate in
heart to be reformed in their life, when yet they take Gods Covenant in their
mouths, Psalm. 50. 16, 17.

3. Wherein the excellency of Religion lies, not in the form, but in the power
of godliness; Religion consists not in profession, but in power and practice,
Jam. 1. 26. 27. If any man seem to be religious and bridleth not his tongue --
this man's religion is in vain. Pure Religion -- is to visit the fatherless,
etc. Faith without works is dead, Jam. 2. 17. Col. 2. 23. a show of wisdom --
But the power of Religion is the substance and sinews, as Theoph. calls it.

4. Who are Hypocrites Theophil. in loc.
Some think the Papists are Dissemblers in Religion, that have but a form and
show of Religion, and deny and detest the power of it; that pray for pureness
and holiness of life, but their hearts rise up in a secret Antipathy against it.

5. Who are Fanatiques; our ears are filled with the sound of that word, which
comes from a Greek word that signifies to (...).
appear, or seem to be, what they are not. Now in Gods Name let them be taken
for Fanatiques (even in the sense of the Irish Dialect) who have a Form of
godliness, but deny the power of it.

2. For instruction. 1. Let us examine our selves narrowly and impartially,
Whether we have a form of godliness, and deny the power of it. To quicken us
hereunto, consider.

Mot. 1. There are such in the bosom of the visible Church. Of four sorts of
ground, there was but one good, Mat. 13. 8. 23. and 7. 47, 48. The kingdom of
heaven is like a Net that gathers bad as well as good fish. Christ floor has
chaff in it as well as wheat; his field has Goats in it as well as Sheep; his
visible body has rotten members in it (fit to be cut off) as well as sound to
be cherished. There is a Jew outward as well as inward, Romans 2. 28, 29. and
Romans 9. 6. They are not all Israel who are of Israel. It is good therefore to
try whether we be the persons that live in the visible Church, having a Form
only.

2. There are such even in Gospel times (if this may be distinguished from the
former) ver. 1. in the last days, that is, in Gospel Times of the
New Testament. M. Mede Apostasy. p. 64.
Some say, when an end of time is meant, then the singular number is used, as
four times in Joh. 6. 39, 40, 44, 54. and I will raise him up at the last day:
But when continuance of time is meant, its used in the plural number, as 2 Pet.
3. 3. there shall come in the last days scoffers: which have lasted these 1600.
years, and shall till Christ come again to Judgment. But this is not current
if you read, 1 John 2. 18. the last time (twice in that verse) and Jam. 5. 3.
Ye have heaped up treasure together for the last days. Howsoever without
doubt, here by the last days are meant Gospel times. It is good therefore to
examine whether we have but a Form: for if there was a Judas among twelve in
Christ's family (who was so good a Master) what may we think now?

3. Men may be guilty of gross sin, and yet have a form of godliness. Some
conceive these words are to be referred to the 18. particulars aforementioned,
Men shall be lovers of themselves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers,
disobedient to parents, unthankful (and which is strange) unholy, ver. 2. and
yet have a form of godliness, without natural affection; truce breakers, false
accusers, (Devils (...).
as the word signifies) etc. ver. 3. and yet have a form -- Traitors, etc. ver.
4. and yet have a form of godliness. Such were those Israelites who are called
Rulers of Sodom, and people of Gomorrha, Isa. 1. 10. to 16. Such were they
mentioned, Jer. 7. 9, 10. Who did steal, murder, commit adultery, swear
falsely, and burn incense to Baal, yet they did stand before the Lord in his
house. Such were they in Ezekiel. 33. 31, 32. Its good therefore to try whether we
be not the men and women having but a Form.

But secondly, I must premise these Rules or Cautions.

1. It is not simply sinful to have a form. All shows of Religion are not
unwarrantable, but where there is no substance. Though all is not gold that
glisters, yet true gold will glister. A man cannot carry a candle in a Lanthorn
(except a dark one) but the light will be seen through the horns of it. There
is a Spanish Proverb, Three things cannot be kept in, viz. a Cough, Fire, and
Love, to which you may well add grace, of which shows are not only allowed but
commanded, Matthew. 5. 16. Let your light so shine, etc. Phil. 2. 16. holding
forth the word of life, as the Admiral-ship holds out its Lanthorn behind, that
the rest of the Fleet in a foggy day or dark night, may steer their course
accordingly, 1 Pet. 2. 9. that ye should show forth the praises (or virtues) of
him. But to be a shell without a kernel (as they say of Halifax-nuts) that is
naught.

2. I deny not but there may be some Reality even in Formality, as to the third
ground, Matthew. 13. 20. there was a real cause, viz. the Spirit of God, though
by an inferior and common operation; and a real effect, joy, though it was but
temporary; and a real subject, an hearer, a rational creature. Indeed a Picture
of a man has no life, though it seem to see, etc. but comparisons run not (as
they say) on four feet. Real (I say) in opposition to imaginary, not to
hypocritical.

I confess it is very hard to distinguish between the form and power of
godliness. The Tares mentioned Matthew. 13. were so like the Wheat in those
Countries, that it was no easy matter to distinguish them; therefore Christ
would not have them pulled up; True Balsom cannot (at least for a while) be
distinguished from counterfeit, Is. 1. 25. and take away thy Tin. Tin (we know)
is so like to Silver, that some are deceived therewith; so is the form like to
the power. There is a likness between a Bristol and an Indian Diamond, yet a
skilful Jeweller can distinguish; if I fall short, impute it to want of skill,
not of will.

The Characters now are branched into Negative and Affirmative. 1. Negative,
which are five in Number. He has but a form of godliness, where there is

1. No Sense of the burden of sin, or of Gods wrath, or the woeful condition of
man by nature. If he never felt any trouble of mind, any affliction of spirit
for a state of unregeneracy, or for some special corruption, he has but a
form; I know that Matthew without any trouble of spirit (that we read of) was
called from the receipt of Custom; and God opened the heart of Lydia without
sensible pangs; and Timothy (it is thought) sucked in grace together with his
mothers milk; but this is not Gods ordinary way. The Lord himself humbled Adam,
Genesis 3. before he preached the Gospel, the promised seed to him. Peter's
hearers, Acts 2. 37. were pricked at heart, as with the P^ntosa needle or
dagger, before they were comforted. Paul himself, Acts 9.
was unhorst, and laid level with the ground before he had a principle of grace
insused. Therefore the Spirit is called the Spirit of bondage, Rom, 8. 15.
because it is the work of the Spirit to convince a sinner of his bondage to
sin, Satan, and Gods wrath, before he becomes a Spirit of Adoption.

2. No Serving the Lord in private and secret. Good Joshua Josh. 24. 15.
resolved, that he and his house would serve the Lord. Cornelius, Acts 10. 2. a
devout man, and prayed to God always. Look the Title of the 30th Plalm, at the
dedication of the house of David Calv.
teaching us, that our houses should be little Sanctuaries and Oratories for
the Worship of God. To prove Job an Hypocrite, it was charged (though falsely)
on him, that he did restrain Prayer before God. A true Christian has secret
sins to bewail, and secret mercies to beg, and there Christ is held (by the
Soul) in the Galleries Cant. 7. 5.
. What is Prayer but a friendly conference, a familiar talk with God? Now thou
can pray (thou say) in the Church, but no Prayer at all in thy house, in
thy closet. When did Jesus Christ see thee upon thy knees in secret? Thou art a
mere stranger to God, and come not at him.

3. No Seeking the Lord for himself, but for a man's own self. Isal. 9. 13.
neither do they seek the Lord of Hosts, with Hos. 7. 10. nor seek him (the
Lord) for all this. I dout not but they prayed, and sought the Lord (that
plough was not to stand still) but it was for themselves. Zach. 7. 5, 6. When
ye fasted and mourned in the fifth and seventh month, (...) all fast unto me,
even unto me? when you did eat and drink, did ye not eat for your selves and
drink for your selves? It should be to Gods glory, 1 Cor. 10. 31. that is the
ultimate end. The Hawk may sore high, but he has an eye on the prey below.
Self and nothing but self is sought, as the last and highest end, by him that
has but a form. He looks asquint at his own credit, profit, etc. as those
slaunting Preachers did, Phil. 1. 15, 16. or ^s Israel, Hos 10. 1.
who was an empty Vine, bringing forth fruit to her self, being the plenty was
Rivet. Loc.
bestowed on their Altars (as next words show) and so on themselves.

4. No Stability in any good course or company. James 1. 8. A double-minded man
is unstable in all his ways. Mark; a double-minded man, in allusion to Psalm.
12. 2. A double heart, a heart and an heart, is unstable, as a bowl on a smooth
table, ready to run with every tick of the finger; Off and on in duty, up and
down in Religion; in good company he seems to be demure; in bad company
debaucht, perhaps like water that conforms it self to the figure of the vessel
whereinto it is put. True it is, a good man may be disadvantaged by the society
with the bad; but this is not usual, and it is lamented sadly, Ps. 120. 5. Woe
is me that I sojourn in Mesech! Is. 6. 5. Woe is me, for I am undone, because I
am a man of unclean lips, and I dwelt in the midst of a People of unclean lips!
which brings me to the last.

5. No Sorrow for sin, specially for distractions in Gods Worship. It Is the
disposition of him that has the form only, to rove in his mind from God in his
service, and that without regret of spirit, without remorse of (...). Is. 29.
13. with Matthew. 15. 8. This people draws nigh to me with their mouth, but
have removed their heart far from me; As Dinah Genesis 34. 1, 2.
would needs be gadding abroad to see the fashions of the Country, but came
home ravished. Luther speaking with sadness of distractions in Prayer, a
Countryman hearing him, said, he could pray without a distracted thought; to
whom Luther said, Deal truly with me, and if thou can say the Lords Prayer
without a distracted thought, I will give thee my horse. The Countryman, said,
A match Sir, (hear what follows with pity and patience, and not with laughter
and irreverence) When he was come to the middle of the Lords Prayer, he said.
But shall I have the bridle and saddle too? Oh woeful and convincing Instance of
distractions! Believe it Sirs, this man is not alone; he has too many fellows,
whose hearts never smot them kindly for their roving imaginations in Gods
Service. He that has the power of godliness, endeavors to keep his heart
close to God in duty, 2. Sam. 7. 27. thy servant has found in his heart to
pray this Prayer, that is to say, Diodat.
he has gathered together all his thoughts and affections, and recalled them
from the errors of the World, to unite and employ them all in making this
Prayer before thee: He labors conscientiously to come up to that command, 1
Cor. 7. 25. to attend upon the Lord without distraction; for he knows that a
torn beast must not be eaten, Exodus 22. 31. nor distracted services will be
well-pleasing to the Lord. God would not have a Foal offered in sacrifie, to be
divided, Levit. 1. 17. See Assembl. Annotat.
to teach us to take heed of distractions in Gods Service. But if the heart be
wandering (as who can say he is pure, as to this?) he mourns unseignedly for it;
and with the woman pours out tears, Luke 7. 38. to admiration. Chrysol. Sermon.
93.
Behold Earth waters Heaven, whereas Heaven was wont to water the Earth, as
Chrysologus said. So that if thou did never feel the burden of sin, nor seek
God for himself, nor make Conscience to pray to him in secret, nor
indeavourest to keep an even tenor in good courses and company, nor mournest
for sin, specially for the rovings and wanderings of thy mind in Gods Worship,
as sure as can be, thou art the man, thou art the woman that have a form of
godliness, and deniest the power of it.

Thus of the Negative Signs; I come now to the Affirmative; but I must take
notice of one Character that is obnoxious to just Question. It has been
preached within a mile of an Oak, that, They who are against forms of Prayer,
have but a form of godliness: An uncharitable, unscriptural, unsavory
expression, a very false mark. For 1. It does not appear that our Savior
Christ used a form of Prayer, though it be said, Matthew. 26. 44. He prayed the
third time, saying the same words. For the last clause might be referred to the
Disciples, to whom he spoke the same words, as seems to be hinted by Dr.
Hammond, Annor.
He left them without saying MUCH TO THEM; But if that Clause is to be referred
to Prayer, There is no necessity to understand it of Christ's reciting the
selfsame words, Maldoitat. ex Euthym.
as is observed to my hand; Nor indeed is there verity in it; for if you
compare v. 39. with v. 42. its clear that he did not use the same words without
variation; and sure the Evangelist did not contradict himself. It should be
then translated (for it is in the singular (...) -- Quia Evangelistae notanter
dicunt Christum 2a and 3a vice eundem sermonem in precibus suis dixisse, ex eo
immote colligitur, VARIATIS precum verbis, scepum and sensum eorum fuisse
cundem and in varium. Gerhard. Harm. c. 2.* p. 23.
number) the same Reason, Motive or Argument in Prayer, and then the meaning
is, that Jesus Christ did in Prayer press and urge his Father with the same
Reason or Argument, the third time, not that he used the self-same words in a
stinted Form. And had Christ the form of godliness and not the power? This is
little less then blasphemy.

2. Though the Lords Prayer be a form of Prayer, (as I will not deny) yet it
has not been (and I suppose cannot be) proved, that the Apostles ever used it,
as such. The Scripture is silent, and where God has not a Tongue to speak, we
are not bound to believe; Quod non Legimus, non Credimus. Hier.
And had the Apostles a form of godliness only, and not the power?

3. The Primitive Church had no form of Prayer till Gregory the Great, 600
years after Christ, and his Form was not imposed till 800 years after Christ,
under Charles the Great. And had these Christians in the purest Primitive times
the form of godliness, and and not the power?

4. Add hereunto (if you will distinguish) an undoubted Testimony out of
Cocrates, Eccl. Hist. l. 5. c. 21.
according to Christophorsons Translation; Apud omnes Religionum and sectarum
formas, nusquam reperire peteris duas, quae in precandi more inter se
consentiant; i. e. Amongst all the forms of Religions and Sects, a man could
nowhere find two of them to agree in the same manner of praying. And had none
of them the power but the form of godliness only?

I pray you do me that Favor, nay that Justice, to bear me witness that I do
not preach against a Form of Prayer; that is not my business. I own a Form of
knowledge, Romans 2. 20. (read even now in the second Lesson) where the same word
(...).
is used, and a Form of wholesome words, 2 Timothy 1. 13. though it be not the same
(...).
word with that in my Text, and a form (...).
of Doctrine, Romans 6. 17. where the Word is compared to a Mould, and Hearers to
melted metal cast into it; and Forms of Prayers and praises mentioned in the
Scripture, yea and Forms of Confession of Faith, and of singing Psalms in the
public Assembly, etc. but my Design is to show the weakness and falsehood of
that Assertion, not long since delivered in a great Congregation, as aforesaid.

Thus I have made some way to (...) Signs. He that has but a Form of Religion,

1. Sets out himself of purpose to the show, doing his work of purpose to be
seen of men, (when as he might conceal the knowledge of them) and that for the
applause of the World, not for the approbation of God; As the formal Pharisees,
Matthew. 23. 5. All their works they do for to be seen of men; which is evident
in three Instances, as in Alms, Matthew. 6. 2. and in prayer, v. 5. and in
Fasting, v. 16. Thus Jehu could not be zealous, but Johonadab must take notice
of it, 2 Kings 10. 16. And he said, Come with me and see my zeal for the Lord;
Like Acts 25. 23.
Agrippa and Berni^^ that came with great pomp (the phrase is, (...).
with much fancy; all this outward pomp is but a fancy) or as Stage Players,
that act their parts on a Stage to be seen and applauded. That is observable,
Prove. 18. 2. A fool has no delight in understanding, but that his heart may
discover it sels, i. e. Mercer.
he might win to himself popular applause and vain glory. Our Chronicles and
Histories tell us, that Cardinal Campegius an Italian, Fullers Church Hist. l.
5. p. 172. s. 40.
being joined in Commission for the Pope with our Cardinal Wolsey, about the
Divorce of Hen. 8.) arrived at Calais, but Wolsey hearing his arrival was with
an equipage not so Court-like as he desired, and loath that his own pomp should
be shamed by the others poverty, caused him to stay there, till he sent him
more splendid accommodations (at least in outward show) But as the Cardinals
Mules passed Cheapside, they out of unruliness happend to break the Trunks they
carried, which were found full of nothing but emptiness, or (that which was
next to it) old Boots, and Shoes, etc. Just so a Formalist in Religion makes a
great show; but what is within? like the Apples Poma -- coatacta cinerescunt.
Tert. p. 101. c. 40.
of Sodom fair to the eye, but being touched, are nothing else but a compound of
ashes; or like the Egyptians Temples, gay without, but nothing within, but a
Crocodile, or a Cat, or some such ugly Creature. So is he that has but a Form;
his outside is fair, but his inside is very foul. When he comes into the
Church, he must squat down (like a Hare) to his private Prayer (dung-Devotion)
though the Minister and Congregation, or both be employed in some public act
of Divine Worship; contrary to the Book of Homelies Hom. of the right use of
the Church, part 2.
of the Church of England. Thus he sets himself out to the show; whereas
sincerity affects secrecy. He that has the power of godliness, seeks to be
good, rather then seems to be good.

Mistake me not; it is one thing to do a work that cannot but be seen, and
another thing to do it, that it may be seen. This is the end of the worker,
that is the end of the work.

2. He slubbers over the Service of God (when he is employed in it)
unspiritually, unzealously, with superficialness, and overliness, as a boy his
Lesson, or a Scholar his Task. Is. 64. 7. none stirs up himself to take
hold of thee. Heb. 9. 14. dead works, because they have (as we said) the
lineaments of a true body, but they want life and soul; now he has the power
of godliness (if he be a Preacher) that is like Christ in measure, Mark 1. 22.
he taught them with authority, and not as the Scribes; if otherwise, he prays
with feeling or fervency, Jam. 5. 16. The effectual fervent Prayer, (so the
Books have it, but it is in the Original) the operative (...).
Prayer, that sets all the powers of the Soul on working. One renders it a
through-wrought Prayer, in allusion to cloth, or such like, which (we use to
say) is throughly-well wrought, when another is but slightly wrought, Like
Elias, Jam. 5. 17. he prays in praying, and so, reads in reading, and fasts in
fasting. You have a notable example in Acts 9. 11. Behold he prays! Without
doubt, while Paul was a strict Pharisee, he prayed; For he says concerning
himself, Phil. 3. 6. -- touching the righteousness which is in the Law
blameless, (according to the Pharisees Gloss, which confined the Righteousness
of the Law to externals) Now Prayer is a part of that Righteousness, nay
according to the Pharisees practice, who did pray much, as you shall hear anon;
But he prayed not till now; then he prayed formally, now feelingly; then was
Prayer a mere lip-labor, now the travel of his heart; for Joh. 4. 14. God is a
Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in spirit and in truth.
Glowworms shine in the night, but they have no heat.

3. He Stands more on Rites than on Religion, more on the shadow than the body,
more on the circumstance than on the substance of Religion, more on humane
Inventions then on divine Institutions; He is fundamental in circumstantials,
as he is circumstantial in fundamentals; As the formal Pharisees stood more on
outward washing than holy walking, on the Tradition of the Elders, more then
the Truth and Latitude of Gods Commands. See Matthew. 15. from the 1 v. to the
16. v. but specially Matthew. 23. 23. Ye pay tithe of mint, and anise, and
cummin, and have omitted the weightier matters of the Law. Without breach of
charity, we judge the Papists generally to have but a Form, not daring to eat
an Egg in Lent, etc. yet make no bones of neglecting the Word, profaning the
Sabbath, and blaspheming Gods Name, etc. and is it not so with most
Protestants, streight-lac'd in a Ceremony, and loose-girt in the substance of
Religion! Surely the Heathens shall rise up in judgment against these. Socrates
Apud Xenoph.
said, God will be worshipped with that kind of worship he himself has
commanded; and Cicero said, He will not be worshipped with Superstition but
with Piety.

4. He sticks in the work done (as he strives not to do it in an holy manner)
Thus Micah said, Josh. 17. 13. Now know I, that the Lord will do me good,
seeing I have a Levite to be my Priest: as if nothing had been wanting Diodat.
in this establishment of a worship, but a lawful Minister (as the Levites
were) whereas there was a defect in all, in the Institution without command,
approbation and promise of God, in the place, means and idolatrous Ceremonies;
yet he rested in the work done. So did that Strumpet enticing the younker,
Prove. 7. 14. I have peace offerings with me, I have paid my vows, q d. I have
offered a Sacrifice of thanksgiving, and have a feast of the residue to
entertain thee with. Thus did the Formal Jews, they bound the Sacrifice with
cords to the horns of the Altar, but never minded the spiritual signification,
2 Cor. 3. 13. They could not steadfastly look to the end of that which is
abolished. They had no eye to Christ, who was the end of the Ceremonial Law
abolished. Thus they cried, Jer. 7. 4. The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of
the Lord, but never inquired after Christ, typified by that Temple. It is well
to keep the heart close to duty, but it is better to keep the heart close to
God in the duty. It is good to perform Service to God, but better to rest on
God in our performances. A true Christian is like Noah's Dove, that could find
no rest but in the Ark, to which therefore she returned; the Raven sent out did
not return, because it seized on some carcass on which it preyed. Psalm. 116. 7.
Return unto thyrest, O my Soul. A good heart is not satisfied till it find God
in the Duty. Peter and John when they were come to our Saviors Sepulcher, were
not contented with the gravecloathes, when the body of Christ was not there. It
was a pious saying, Bern. Epist. 112.
Lord, I never go from thee without thee. A sincere Soul labors to find Christ
in an Ordinance, else it makes pitiful moans, as the Spouse, who seeks him in
meditation, Cant. 3. 1. By night on my bed, I sought him whom my Soul loves; I
sought him but could not find him; and then in Religious conference with
Fellow Christians, v. 2. I will rise now and go about the City in the streets
and in the broad ways; I will seek him whom my Soul loves (O well a day!) I
sought him but found him not. And then in the Ministy of the Word, v. 3. I said
to the Watchmen, Saw ye him whom my Soul loves? The Communion without Christ
is but a sorry Communion to a gracious heart. Lord (says one Austin.
of the Ancients) Thou have made our heart for thee, and it is restless till it
come to enjoy thee. --

5. He Stints himself in Religion, so far he will go, and not a jot further. As
Psalm. 78. 41. they limited the Holy One of Israel; So do they that have but a
Form of godliness, limit themselves in the profession of holiness. As Henry the
Fourth of France would put to Sea, but no further then he could see the shore,
that if a storm came, he might put in to the shore again; So much Knowledge,
Faith, Love and Repentance, etc. they would have, and neither care for nor
desire more; whereas a true Christian aims at, and endeavors after the highest
pitch of grace and holiness, 2 Cor. 7. 1. PERFECTING: holiness in the fear of
God. Phil. 3. 12. (...).
I follow after, The word is, I persecute, I follow hoatefoot with utmost
earnestness; as an Army pursues a routed and flying Enemy, or as an Hunts-man
does the game; so did Paul, eagerly and uncessantly pursue after a greater
measure of the knowledge of Jesus Christ, having it (as it were) in Chase, and
resolving not to rest till he had attained it. v. 13. Forgetting those things
that are behind, and (...) -- prono and q. praecipiti corpre feruntur ad forum.
Beza Annot.
reaching forth to those things that are before; A clear Metaphor from Runners
in a race, who strain and stretch out head, hands and whole body, to reach the
mark with all their might. This word (says A Lapide.
One) has a great Emphasis, for it signifies to stretch out the hand to the
mark, and therewith to touch it, before the feet can reach it. That is a fine
phrase used twice, Tit. 3. 8, 14. to maintain (...).
i. e. careful to exceed and excel others, as Overseers of great works, who are
most eminent in skill and knowledge, Estius.
or as Professors of some Art and Science. Any pittance will serve a Formalist,
but a true Christian strives to the highest pitch of goodness. This is
excellently held forth in Heb. 12. 1. Let us lay aside every weight; Any heavy
thing is a hindrance to him that runs a race; Such is an opinion or persuasion
(wherewith the heart is swollen) (...), Tumor. Dan. Heins.
of perfection already attained, which indeed is not yet attained; Nothing does
more hinder progress, then an arrogant and proud conceit, that have we have
already reached the prize and mark. Therefore Quakers (that Diabolical Sect)
and others, have but a Form of godliness Si dixisti Satis est, periisti.
at best, and that is all, if some have so much.

6. He Storms at godliness in others. He cannot abide the power of godliness in
others, but his heart rises up (at least) in a secret Antipathy against it.
While Paul was a formal Pharisee, he persecuted this way to the death; See his
own confession, Acts 22. 3, 4. Gal. 1. 13, 14. I persecuted (said he) the
Church of God, Phill. 3. 5, 6.
where note (by the way) that the Church is to be taken in a larger sense then
for one particular Congregation, meeting together ordinarily for participation
of Gods Ordinances, and that they who are more zealous for unwarrantable
Traditions and the form of godliness, are most furious against the power of it.
If the fire of grace break out in any house, how many are ready to bring their
bucket to quench it? Now as 1 John 4. 20. He that loves not his brother whom
he has seen, how can he love God whom he has not seen? So he that cannot
endure the power of godliness, in a wife, child, servant, neighbor, etc. how
can he imagine that he has it in himself?

7. He Speaks bitterly against others for smaller faults, and neglects greater
in his own heart and life, and that without any regret or remorse. Mat. 7. 2, 3.
He beholds a mote in his brothers eye, and considers not the beam in his own
eye. Mat. 23. 24.
He strains at a gnat and swallows a camel. It is said of Arch Bishop Bancroft,
that he fell foul on Mr. Paul Bayne (a man eminent in Learning and Piety) for a
little black edging on his cuffs, threatening to lay him by the heels for it,
when he winked at greater faults in himself and others; Thus it is with formal
Professors, that make mountains of other men's mole-hils, and make mole-hils of
their own mountains.

8. He succors and harbors in his bosom some sweet sin secretly at least. The
outside is fair, but the inside is foul, as was said; compared therefore to
whited Tombs, Matthew. 23. 27, 28. which indeed appear beautiful outward, but are
indeed full of dead men's bones and of all uncleanness; So do these also
outwardly appear righteous unto men, but within are full of -- iniquity, Psalm.
5. 9. -- their inward part is very wickedness (in the abstract) See a rowsing
Scripture, Job 20. 12, 13. Wickedness is sweet in his mouth, he hides it under
his tongue, he spares it not, he forsakes it not, but keeps it still within his
mouth. Where a beloved sin (unrepented of) is compared to a piece of
Sugar Candy, that is rouled in the mouth and under the Tongue, which the man by
no means will spit out. He allows himself in some known sin, either closely in
his heart, as lust, pride, vainglory, etc. he cannot abide that little large
word, all. Ezekiel. 18. 31. Cast away from you all your transgressions -- or
openly, Herod will have his Herodias. How many among us have a show of
Religion, and yet make no bones of Lying, Sabbath-breaking, and the like? of
whom we may say, as old Isacc said of Jacob, counterfeiting in his garb his
eldest brother, Their voice is the voice of Jacob, but their hands are the
hands of Esau.

Thus of the first Use of Instruction concerning all, to try and examine our
selves, whither we have a Form of Godliness but deny the power thereof.

Now secondly, It teaches you that are jealous Use 2.
that you have but a Form, content not your selves with it, labor for the
power of it. Oh do not lay out your money for counters instead of Gold! Oh do
not with Ixion embrace a cloud instead of Juno! Be not like those Lorraine
Witches deluded by the Devil, who received withered Leaves in stead of pieces
of gold, having a mist cast before their eyes by Satan, that old Juggler! Oh
sit not down on this side the power of godliness. There is a Tale of Aquinas,
who praying to or before a Crucifix, it asked him what he would have? He
answered: Nil praeter te Domine. Aquin.
Nothing Lord but thee! O, Christ crucified now speaks to thee in his Ministry,
asking what thou would have? Oh poor sinner return this answer, Not the Form
only, but the power of godliness also. As Luther protested God should not put
him off with any thing on this side himself; So let it be thy Resolution, not
to be put off with any thing on this side the power of godliness. To quicken
you hereunto, consider these Motives.

1. The Disesteem your mere shows have with God, as Psalm. 73. 20. When thou
awakest, thou shall despise their Image; All the pomp and glory of the World,
is but as an Image or fancy in a dream; When the Lord awakes to Judgment, he
will contemn the bravery of the World; So he will despise and disrespect thy
Form of Godliness. Is. 1. 11. To what purpose is the multitude of your
Sacrifices to me (said God to the formal Jews) I delight not in the blood of
Bulls or of Lambs or of he-Goats; v. 12. When ye come to appear before me, who
required this at your hands to tread my Courts? (when yet he himself required
it) v. 13. Bring no more vain oblations to me, incense is an abomination to me;
the New Mons and Sabbaths, the calling of Assemblies I cannot away with, it is
iniquity, even the solemn meeting; and yet these things were expressly
prescribed them by the Lord. But now for sincere hearts, Psalm. 102. 17. He will
regad the prayer of the destitute (of poor shrubs, as the word Nam (...)
proprie sonat humile virgulium haud repens, vixque in terra appareus. Gembr. in
lot. Myricam etiam significat quae est herba humilis, spreta and abjecta.
Mercer.
signifies) he will not despise their prayer, whose hearts are honest, though
never so weak; for Psalm. 51. 17. The Sacrifices of God are a broken spirit; a
broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou will not despise. Mark, a broken heart
is not a Sacrifie only, but Sacrifices; i. e. instead of all Sacrifices, and
that of God, i. e. not only of Gods appointment but approbation and acceptance
also. Therefore he says, Is. 66. 2. -- To this man will I look -- q. d. He
that made heaven and earth, seems to overlook all other things and persons, and
casts a loving look on him that is poor, -- that has the power of Godliness.

2. The Damage you will sustain. -- Luke 8. 18. from him shall be taken that
which he seems to have; Such as formerly took up Christianity as the
Court-fashion, now left it; and whom Ethelherts smiles had made Converts,
Eadbald's frowns quickly made Apostates Full. Church. Hist. Cent. 7. b. 2. p.
70.
a counterfeit complexion will not last long. That is a strange word, 2 John 8.
Take heed you lose not those things ye have wrought. If thou have but a Form of
godliness, thou art in danger to lose all thy praings -- hearings, fastings,
receivings of the Lords Supper, etc. All the Prayers thou have said, all the
Sermons thou have heard, all the Chapters thou have read, all the Fasts thou
have kept, all the Sacraments thou have received, etc. And what an unutterable
and intolerable Miserius est perdidisse quam omnino non accepisse, Tertull. de
poeniten.
loss will this be? I may say and allude to Psalm. 39. 6. Surely every man
walks in a vain show -- so most men live in a vain form of Religion; or I may
say on better grounds, and (I hope) with a better heart, Matthew. 26. 8. To what
purpose is all this waste? The Swan was in the Law rejected for Sacrifice,
because it had a black skin under white feathers.

3. The Damnation you are obnoxious unto, Luke 20. 47. Who for a show make long
Prayers, the same shall receive greater damnation, with Matthew. 23. 14. for a
pretense make long Prayer, therefore ye shall receive greater damnation.
Observe by the way, long Prayers are not condemned, as simply unlawful in
themselves; for Solomon 1 Kings 8. 22 to 54.
made a long Prayer at the Dedication of the Temple, and so did they Nehem, 9.
4, etc.
in a solemn day of humiliation, spending the fourth part of the day in
confession and supplication, etc. and our Savior Christ himself continued all
night in Prayer to God, Luke 6. 12. but great Devotion was pretended, when
grievous Destruction was intended, when they did color their foul sins with
fair shows, the strength of their iniquities with the length of Prayer. These
formal Pharisees did palliate their covetousness and cruelty with seeming
Piety, devouring whole houses (there was their covetousness) and of widows
(which could not relieve themselves) there is their cruelty; All which was the
worse, in endeavoring to make the holy and pure God the Author or (at least)
fautour of their impiety. Such men's condemnation shall be greater; Multi in
terris manducint, quod apud inseros digerunt. Aust.
for dissembled Sanctity is double Iniquity.

I shall now propound to you some Directions.

1. Give credit to the Doctrine delivered, and that mere profession will not
bring a Soul to Salvation, Matthew. 7. 21. Not every one that says, Lord, Lord,
shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven -- yea though he prays with a seeming
zeal, T. C.
as the doubling of the word, (Lord, Lord) seems to import. Judas gave a kiss
to Christ, yet is gone to his own place, i. e. to Hell, Acts 1. 25. For I do
not think, that the clause of that verse. is to be referred to Matthias, D. H.
H. Annot. in loc.
(as some would have it) for then the words foregoing, must be put in a
Parenthesis (which is uncouch) and that by place is understood his Province,
office, or Ministry, suits not with the stream of Significatur eventus scelera
ipsius justo Dei judicio consecutus. Proprium, i. o. quia ipsi melius
conveniebat quam Apostolica functio. H. Grot. in loc.
Expositors, nor with the language of the Scripture elsewhere, and Scripture
must expound Scripture. A kiss then of Profession may be attended with
damnation in Hell. None are kept out of Heaven for lamented badness, but for
supposed goodness. A Ship ca'ld the Safeguard, or Good-speed have been
shipwrackt. This Historical Faith has been the beginning of conversion to
some, as the needle for the thread.

2. Get Christ, and union with him, Let him be formed in thy heart, Gal. 4. 15.
Be in Christ, and be a new creature, 2 Cor. 5. 17. See Ephesians. 2. 12. To be
without Christ is the Van; and to be without God, is the Rear of all Misery.
There may be (says Potest esse visibilis forma palmitis etiam extra vitem, sed
tamen invisibilis radicis victum habere non potest extra vitem. Aug. Sermon. in
Mat.
Austin) a visible form of a branch without the Vine, but it cannot have the
life of the invisible root, except it be in the Vine.

3. Go to the public Ministry of the Word, wear the threshold of the
Sanctuary, wait on God in that Ordinance; As Christ said to his Disciples, Luke
24. 49. -- Tarry ye in Jerusalem until ye be endued with power from on high;
endued or clothed -- (...) hic respondet Hebraee (...) quod 70 vertunt (...).
vid. H. Grot.
this word answers that Hebrew word in Judge. 6. 34. which the Septuagint
translate clothed: At Jerusalem the Gospel began to be preached, v. 47.
according to that Gospel-Prophet, Is. c. 2. 3. -- Out of Zion shall go forth
the Law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem. Therefore say I, miss not a
Sermon: Without the power of Religion, the poor Soul is in a naked condition,
and here is the Wardrop whence this clothing may be had.

Grieve and groan that thou have lived so long in a Form of Devotion without
the power, and pray (as well as thou can) for the Spirit of power, 2 Timothy 1.
7. We cannot pray without the Spirit, and yet we are allowed to pray for the
Spirit, and God has promised to give the Spirit to them that pray, Luke 11.
13. -- Much more shall the Heavenly Father give the Spirit to them that ask
him. Spare to speak, and spare to speed. He that hears the Ravens that cry to
him, may hear thee, though thou be as black as a Raven.

I come now to the third Use of Instruction, in a word or two to them that have
the power of Godliness. Use 3.


1. Lament and bewail with tears of blood, that so many living in the bosom of
the Church have but a Form of Religion, as, those that do deny Original Sin,
who yet, with Nepthali give goodly words, Genesis 48. 21. and by good words and
fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple, Romans 16. 18. I would be loath to
be uncharitable, but I assure you, I have not so much charity to think, that
they who deny Original Sin, have such experience of their naughty hearts, and
such acquaintance with the Scriptures that they talk of. They are strangers to
the power of godliness, that are strangers to the power of Original corruption.
2. Civil honest men, that are deadly Enemies to the power of Religion, whose
character you may find in Prove. 30. 13. There is a generation that are pure in
their own eyes, and yet not washed from their filthiness, from excrementitial
filth, T. C.
as the word signifies. 3. That upstart Generation of late Quakers, who have
the knack of railing and reviling Gods Ministers and people; See Jam. 1. 26. If
any man among you seeem to be religious and bridleth not his tongue, but
deceives his own heart, this man's Religion is in vain. 4. Profane men, who
carry the black brand of sin and Hell in their face and forehead, who profess
themselves to be Christians (and take it in snuf if they be reputed otherwise)
when they live like Pagans: Qui profitentur se Christiaons cum sint nequissimi,
opere et sensu perversi. Ambr. in loc.
Some think my Text to be understood of these. 5. Formal Professors, that pray
in the Church for holiness and purity of living, yet prate against piety and
purity, and live in all unholiness and impurity. As he says in another case,
Joel 3. 14. Multitudes, multitudes, in the valley of Decision; So multitudes,
multitudes, (of them that have but a Form of Devotion) in the valley of vision,
in the Church and Land, where preaching has been vouchsafed so long; This is a
Lamentation, and and shall be for a Lamentation, Ezekiel. 19. 14.

2. Beware of them who have but a Form of godliness, confide not in them. The
close of the verse in my Text is, from such turn awy. The old Devita.
Latin has it, shun them -- converse not with them, in a needless and familiar
manner, or thus, be averse to them; for a Bishop (and so every Christian) must
not only Non satie est vitare sed eos aversari, imo iis adversari. A Lap.
shun such, but set themselves against such. By this it is evident, that Paul
does not only speak of future time, but shows, that Esti.
in that present Age such kind of Formalists (whom he does here decipher)
should not be, nay, were not wanting, store enough. Phil. 3. 2. Beware of dogs,
beware of evil workers, beware of the Concision. It Is said three times beware,
as if we could not be too wary; according to the Lawyers Maxim, Abundans cautel
a non nocet.
Abundance of Caution does no harm at all. Beware therefore of Dogs, that
though they have a form of Religion, yet are covetous, v. 2. with Is. 56. 10.
-- greedy Dogs, that can never have enough. Beware of evil workers, that
(Judaizing) seem to be zealous for the Law, when their lives are bad, or Gro.
are not conversant bona side in the Gospel, the work of the Lord, Beware of
the Concision, who urging the Ceremonial Law, constraining others to be
circumcised, Gal. 6. 12. to cut off the foreskin of the flesh, when themselves
were cutters and renters of the Churches of Christ.

And the rather are we to be cautious of such;

Because 1. Of the Resemblance between the Form and the Power of Religion, and
therefore more apt to be deceived. Matthew. 7. 15. Beware of false Prophets which
come to you in sheeps clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves. Simiae
imitantur homines sicut lupi canes, quibus similes sunt. Cyp. ad Job.
Apes are somewhat like Men, and Wolves like Dogs, Silly Souls are much taken
with such shows, as children with gauds and gugaws. Col. 2. 23. Which -- have a
show of wisdom in will worship and humility, etc.

2. Because of the Rottenness of such, who not only fail us, when we have most
need, like waterbrooks in Summer, Job 6. 15. but hurt us the more. Prove. 25.
19. Confidence in an unfaithful man in time of trouble, is like a broken tooth
and a foot out of joint. A broken tooth does but pain a hungry man, chewing a
piece of bread or meat; a dislocated leg hinders a man from flying in time of
danger, and if he make an essay, he is more tormented. They that have been
seemingly our greatest friends, have really proved our greatest foes. None are
sorer persecutours, then Formal Professors; our Stories tell us, the husband
has carried a faggot to burn therewith his wife. Therefore listen to that grave
serious and seasonable counsel, Mic. 7. 5. Trust ye not in a friend, put ye not
confidence in a guide, keep the door of thy mouth from her that lies in thy
bosom. For the son dishonors the Father, the daughter rises up against her
mother. -- a man's enemies are the men of his own house. See Riber. loc.
Parents and propinqui credentium omnia jura sanguinis and necessitudinis
violabant, non solum odio novae Religionis, sed ut periculum suum vitantes.
No bands of Relation can hold them in, but they will discover themselves to be
Lions and Tigers, etc. Who were they that had a hand in persecuting Paul and
Barnabas but the Devout women? Acts 13. 50. or Religious women, Beza and vulg.
who were Jewish Proselytes ignorant of Christ, and fit instruments to prevail
with their husbands to drive away Paul and Barnabas.

Lastly, This may comfort true Nathanaels in whose spirit there is no
predominant guile, who (through free grace,) have the Form and Power of
Godliness too, in some measure. I would not have my Sun set in a cloud. Let
this Cordial be boxed up against the time of trouble and reproaches of ungodly
men. Whatsoever venom graceless men spit in their faces, yet they may rejoice
in this, that they are not in this black Bill, but their names are written in
Heaven, Luke 10. 20.

FINIS.

