Poor Robins Character of a DUTCHMAN, As also his PREDICTIONS On the affairs
of the UNITED PROVINCES OF HOLLAND.

TOGETHER With a brief Epitomy of the Ingratitude of the Dutch, and their
barbarous cruelties committed on the English at Amboyna, Polaroon, and other
Islands in the EAST INDIES.

Tho Savages to Scythian Rocks confined,
That know no God nor virtue of the mind,
But only sense pursue, who hunger tame,
With slaughtered lives they and their food, the same
Are not so cruel as these Men so rude
Who do requite Love with Ingratitude.
LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Harris at the Sign of the Stationers Arms in
Bell-Alley in Cole-man-street. 1672.

READER,
THou art desired to take notice that, that idle Pamphlet Entitled, POOR
ROBINS Collection of Ancient Prophesies, was none of his doing nor concern, but
done for profit by some other Person, and not POOR ROBIN.

POOR ROBINS Predictions on the affairs of the UNITED PROVINCES. OF HOLLAND.
EUROPE now being the Stage of Action, whereon Mars seems to keep his Court,
and English men like the Athenians having i^ching Ears after News, being more
desirous to know what is to come, then to rectify what has been done amiss
formerly; and I coming under the Notion of an Astrologer or Star-gazer, and
foretelli^g as many tru^hs in my Predictions as any of my Brethren
A^manack-Makers; being th^reto persuaded by many of my acquaintance, and yet
(to confess truth) not without some relish of profit to my self; have also
(amongst others) adventured to show you my Ju^gement of affairs, knowing, that
(with the mouse) I can eat as far into a Holland cheese as another.

But some cavilling Spiri^s will be apt enough to say, that these kind of
Predictions are but mere cheats, that now a days, the surest way of
Prophesying is after the thing is come to pas^; that the Stars are not so
legib^e to an Astrologers understanding, that out of them he can read what
future events will ensue. This is the opinion of a great many, but to such
Nullifidians, hear what the Divine Du-bartas says, Senc^less is he who
(without blush) denies
What to s^u^d ^^^c^^ most app^re^^lies:
And against experience he that spits Fallations,
Is to be hist from learned disputations,
And such is he who does affirm the Stars
To have no force on these Inferiors.
Though Heavens effects we most apparent see
In number more then Heavenly torches be,


But to come more close to our matter, to speak something of these people who
are of late transmografied from The Poor distressed States, to the High and
Mighty Hogen Mogens, that scorn to eat Fat Bacon with out Bread and Butter; In
whose Bellies (like Barrels) lie many pickled Herrings stewed therein with
Brandy; that scorn to drink by Retail, but by Wholesale; whose cups are not in
Decimo Sexto but in Folio, whose Noses in the cup in Winter saves the labor of
a Toast, and is enough to give their drink a second brewing; blind men with
eyes, and Cripples with Legs on, Who will for fourteen hours together sit,
Emptying the Bouls of Wine, the Brains of Wit.


Those who have seen my Observations and Predictions which I made upon the
Blazing Star or Comet that appeared in December, 1662. may there find what
direful effects I prefaged would ensue thereupon, especially to Zealand,
Holland, and the rest of the United Provinces, whose Tail tended directly
toward them, for such warnings questionless come not in vain; and though we
cannot excuse our selves from many and grievous sins, yet such monstrous
ingratitude as the Hollanders have shown to the English, such bloody and
inhumane butcheries committed by them against us at Amboyna, Polaroon, and
other places in the East Indies, such insolences at Sea, and ingratitude by
Land, must needs cry aloud for vengeance.

Ingratitude is a vice so accursed
That of all vices we account it worst.
I also by the Eclipses which happened in the next Year, told some of my
Friends who are now living to justify it, what sad ^ffects they did portend to
that Low Country, but High-minded people.

For when pale faced Cynthia at Noon days
Does intercept Sol^ most refulgent Rays,
But some great Sta^e Eclipseth and from Hell
Alecto looses all these Furies fell,
Grim lean faced Famine, fou^ infectious Plague,
Blood thirsty War and Treason hateful Hag:
Here pouring down Woes Universal Flood
To drown the World in Seas of tears and blood.
We read in Aesop of a Man who found a Snake nigh dead with cold, which he
kindly took home, warmed and nourished, when growing lusty, instead of thanks
it would have devoured the man. Such are these Dutch Low Landers, who near
expiring in the time of Queen Elizabeth, being ready to give up the Ghost, and
turn under Scullars to Charon the Ferry-man, were by the English kindly aided
and assisted, by whose valor they retained their Country, and now being warmed
without with good clothes, and within with Brandy, they spurn, kick and molest
that Nation, without whose aid they had been at this day no Nation themselves.

Call me ungrateful Man (says the Poet) and call me any thing* I was a vice
detested even amongst the Heathens themselves. The Lion out of whose Foot
Androgeus pulled the Thorn, even that dumb beast could have taught them better
manners, for he in requital saved his preserver^ life; but for man who should
be endued with reason above beasts, to come so far behind beasts in gratitude,
what thing can be more unreasonable? Well may we therefore cry out with Rombus
the Schoolmaster in Sir Philip Sidneys Arcadia.

O Temporibus, O Manoribus. But to persuade a Dutch man to thankfulness, is
almost as hard a task as to dissuade him from his dearest delight Brandy, that
Liquor which he accounts of more then the Poets do of Helicon, or the Thespian
Spring, and of which if you refuse to pledge him, he will presently be at
Snick-a-snee, where though he kill you, they will be so far from stopping him,
that with one voice they will cry, Lope sceilum, Lope, which is in English, Run
thief, run, a very fit appellation for them; for hear how the Poet does enstile
drunkenness*

Audacious thief, that often before ones fact,
Steals Man away, and leaves a beast in place.
And so much are they adicted to that swinish vice of drunken^ess, that not
only whole nights are consumed by them; but in their Cups they will also
consult of matters of State* a custom which the o^d Grecians used; but more
temperately, for thus in Homers Il^a^^ we find Nestor advising Again^mn^n.

Phoebe convivium senibus, deret te, nec inderens est:
Plena tibi vimo tentoria, quod names achivorum.
Quotidianae ex Thracia per latum po^tum advehunt.
Omnis tibi est comm^ditas excipiendi, multisque impe^as,
Multis autem congregatis, illi obdies qui op^^mum.
Consilium consulerit. Lib. 1.
Feast thou the ancient, it befits thy place,
With Wine by Greek Ships daily brought from Thrace.
Thy Tents abound, Provis^on at hand,
Of all sorts have thou, and Men at c^mmand.
Many assembled so, am^ngst the ^est,
His counsel follow that a viseth best.
This their so great inebriation caused as I co^ceive our Eng^ish Proverb when
they see a Man fudled, to say he is as drunk as a Dutchman; well may we
therefore conclude of these Men who are so given to stagger, that they are near
falling; and then th^se Water Rats who in adversity creep and fawn like
Spaniels, and in prosperity scorn and ^^^lifie their superiors, may be reduced
from la^di^g fat b^con when they feed on it with butter, to be fair and
mannerly, and eat Bread with their Pudding,

It is said of an English Man, that by two things he may be known wheresoever
he comes; The one is, that let the weather be never so hot, he will endeavor to
get toward the Chimney at co^ner; and hi^ second Character tells us, that when
he hears the Cl^ck strike, upon the first stroke, he asks him that is next him*
what is it a Clock? He has not the patience to tell it himself, whereby he
might know, but by his inquisitiveness hinders the other also from telling it,
by which means they both remain ignorant; These are two harmless things which
often in Jest I have heard spoken of our Nation. Now there is also two things
whereby a D^tch Man may be known, The first is, that tell him of any benefi^
received, and he has the art of forgetfulness at his Fingers ends; and for the
second, that when he rises in a morning, the first word that comes out of his
mouth is to ask for brandy; and I have also heard it (I suppose Jestingly)
spoken, that when the Women wean their Children, they only take a Sucking
bottle and fill it full of brandy, of which when the Child has once tasted, he
never regards his Mothers milk afterward.

A Dutch Man is like an O^^er, that lives partly on the Water, partly on the
Land, and gets Preys upon both, all is Fish that comes to Net; and as when
living he commonly feeds upon Fishes, so when dead the Fis^e^ commonly feed
upon him; for though ^e may escape St. ^homas a Waterings, yet for the most
part he makes his exit at Sea, when for to save the charges of a Grave he is
thrown into the Water, where one Shark devours another.

Strange thing in Nature '^is if you i^ heed
That one Shark should upon another feed,
Hogs will not feed on Hog^, neither yet will
The Wolves eat Wolves, nor seek their blood to spill;
But O a Dutch Man he is dainty Mea^,
And dress in pickle fit for Sharks to eat.
A Dutch Man in his great breeches is like to the picture I have seen of Some
body, and such he would feign accounted to be. He keeps a bust^e in the world,
drinks, slavers, and when he is a hungry offers up his devotions to a pickled
Herring, which he will maintain by nine^een several arguments, to be the
rarest dish in the world, and his chiefest argument is, because it is a Shooing
horn to draw down drink. He is very curious to keep his shoes clean, yet had
rather foul a Room by vomiting, then to be bated one ace of his beloved Liquor.
In sum, when sleep had a little revived him of the Staggers, he looks like a
toast drowned in ale, which is only fit to be thrown away.

He is Judged to be very chaste, and the reason is, she must be very mercinary
indeed that will admit him to her embraces, yet such trading may be, because
those people deal for ready money, and should she do a courtesy for a Dutch
Man he would not thank her for it, though perhaps he might have cause to
remember her in his bones.

But to draw toward a conclusion of the Character of a Dutch Man, least we
bestow more cost of the sauce then the Meat is worth. I shall only add a word
or two of exhortation to those Sons of Neptune and Bellena, our Gallant
Seamen, and so finish at this tim^.

Brave Martial Spirits, whose valor the world admires and dreads; you are now
entering on the Theater of honor and renown, fighting for your King and
Country, then which no cause whatsoever more just and glorious, victorious fame
attend^ your undertakings, in so just, so laudable, so honorable an
enterprise. Dread not those Men whose high ingratitude has justly made them
odious to all sorts of People who have but the least pretensions to honesty. Go
on bravely, fight valiantly, and never fear but to come off victoriously.

Then shall the Chronicles record your Names,
With lasting Honor and your splendid Fames,
Shall ever live, who for your Countries good,
So bravely and undauntedly have stood.
FINIS.

