POOR ROBIN'S CHARACTER OF FRANCE: OR, FRANCE Painted to the Life. IN A BRIEF
DIALOGUE OF THE Description of that Nation, their Manners, Customs,
Complements, Language, Discourse, etc. AS ALSO, An exact Character of the City
of Paris, of their Gentry, Peasants, Women, etc. By POOR ROBIN, Knight of the
Burnt-Island, a Well willer to the French Tailors.

London, Printed in the Year 1666.

To the Judicious READERS.
Gentlemen,
I Here present you with a Dish of Dainties, I assure you you no Kickshaws,
though dressed after the French mode. To describe that people aright, a man must
have in him extraordinary of the Mimmick, and therefore I would desire the
Reader in the perusal of these Lines, to add to them something of action; for
it is impossible to personate a Frenchman aright, unless he with it play the
Antic: My request therefore is to all those who shall read this ^ook in
Taverns, Alehouses, or Coffee-houses, to have a special care therein, that I
may not be murdered in my own Lines, but to add to it a graceful shaking of
the head, drawing back the legs, and thrusting out the shoulders, and then it
will be ala mode France. If all the humors I have writ of them do not suit patt
to the Nation the same time you read this, you must impute it to the fickleness
of those people, whose inconstancy is such, that let me now write never so real
a truth of their Garb or Clothes, though the Author and Printer make all the
haste imaginable, they will be in another fashion before the Book can be
published, that a Tailor may as well take measure of a Garment for the Moon, as
an Author to describe the Habits and Fashions of that People. So now Reader,
having told you at the door how you are to behave your self, if you please walk
in and see the Show.

POOR ROBIN'S CHARACTER OF FRANCE.
Englishman. GOod morrow, Monsieur.


Frenchman. Tres humble Serviteur, Monsieur.


Englishman. What makes you stirring so early this morning?


Frenchman. No ting, but me owe de leetle money to de Hoastess, and de
pocky-hora vill no stay, but send vor de Shargeant, dat scare me worss den de
Tiffell; begar me sooner see de Tiffel den de Shargeant, me be de sush Bird vas
vill no sing in de Cage: fish vay sall me take to be safe? me mus come no near
de Hoastess, me go in de France, den futra vor de Shargeant.


Englishman. And what Calling do you intend when you come into France?


Frenchman. Ah, me have de brava Calling in de Varle, me play ode Fidle, me
teash a to Dance, O so rare, so rare! begar London vill de undone when me be in
de France: Begar you no ave de autre man in all de Shitty so brave fellow as me
self; yet begar me no shuse but run, de pocky Shargeant do scare a me so.


Englishman. Indeed a Fiddler in France is a man of a very high repute, for I
remember about five years ago being in your Country at a town not far distant
from Orleans, whilst I and the rest of my company (amongst which was a Fille
de Joy of Paris) were at Dinner, there entered into our Room three of these
uncouth fellows, with Flats on their heads like covered Dishes, and in such a
garb as our Contrymen use to clothe Poles wherewith to affrighten Crows from
eating their Corn, being for the most part pinned together, and the rest
fastened with here and there a stitch, so that they were a la mode de
Tatterdemallion. At the first sight of them I cast one eye on my Cloak, and the
other on my Sword, as not knowing what occasion I might have of the one, to
desend the other; for by their insol^nt int^nsion and sa^cy boldness, I could
not imagine them to be other than Thieves: but when I took a more strict survey
of their Apparel, I soon altered that opinion, and rather guessed them to be
the Excrement of a Prison, though it soon appeared that I was alike deceived in
my thoughts, they being neither better nor worse than errant Fiddlers. These
fellows, though such as we in England should not hold worthy of the
Whipping-post, without leave, and without reverence on their parts performed,
fell to their work, abusing our ears with such an harsh Lesson, that one of our
Schoolboys playing on the Jews-Trump compared to this, might have been taken
for the Music of the Spheres: but as if this had not been punishment enough
unto us, they must needs add to it one of their Songs, but then how did I
bless my self in the remembrance of our Ballad-singers when they Chant the
Tunes of In Summer time, and Ch^vy-Chase! Now though I understood not French
perfectly yet by that little I had, and the simpering of the Fille de Joy, I
perceived it was Bawdy, yea, such as could not patiently be endured by any but
a Frenchman.


Frenchman. Begar you be de Rouge to speak sush ting of de Frenchman, no
peeple in de varle dat do sing like unto them; begar me should by de prate tink
dat dis drunk, but dat me no see stagger.


English man. But Monsieur, give me leave to proceed in my Story: what to do to
be rid of these fellows I knew not, for I knew not how to call them Rogues
handsomely in French, and for other Languages they understood none, and to beat
them, they were Villains of such an inferior quality, as indeed was not worthy
of mine or any honest man's anger; a knot of Rascals so infinitely below the
severity of a Statute, that they would have discredited the Stocks; and to have
hanged them, as it would have hazarded the reputation of the Gallows, so it
would have been unprofitable to the Executioner, their Clothes being only fit
for the Rag-woman; it would have puzzled a man in a whole years time to have
studied a Vengeance for them which they would not have injured, in the
suffering the greatest torment one could inflict on them, being not to hearken
to their Ribaldry. But to proceed, after their Song was ended, one of them
pulled a Dish out of his pocket, and set it before us, into which we were to
cast our Benevolence, which by custom (you know Monsieur) is but but only a
Soll from every man; such a rare Calling it is to be a Fiddler in France!


Frenchman. Begar me be no sush Fiddler, me be de Mushishaner, dat play to de
Lords, to de Ladies; me go brave in de Parrell, me kish de Shambermaid, me lie
wid de Kitchen-Wensh, but if me get her wid Shilde, O Diabolo, vat sall become
of me den?


Englishman. It is but shifting into another Country, you know Fiddlers and
Beggars are never out of their Sphere. I suppose it is impossible for you to be
lousy you shift so often.


Frenchman. Begar me go to Parry de brav^ Shitty in de varle, dis Shitty is no
compare wid Parry, no more den de Bushers knife is wid a long Tord.


Englishman. Indeed Monsieur your Comparison is very suitable, if by your last
word you mean Paris, as I suppose you do; the only stink of which place being
a greater strength unto it, and more powerful to keep out an Enemy, than the
Ditches or Bullwarks round about it; well therefore may it be said to be the
strongest Town in Christendom, if we take the word (strong) in that sense, as
when we say, such a man has a strong breath; for otherways it is so weak, that
if the stink of the streets keep him not out, there is no assurance to be
looked for of the Walls: But that which is most admirable, is, that in such a
perpetuated constancy of stinks, there is also such an admirable and distinct
variety, that a Chemical Nose after two or three perambulations, would hunt out
b^inde-fold, each several street by the smells, as perfectly as another by his
eye in a serene Sky at noon day.


French man. Par ma foy de tell loud lie, begar Parry is so brava dat no
express it, begar be Son of Debastalder to say Parry tinks, when it is sweet as
de Rose, and de brava Houses in de varle.


Englishman. I confess your Houses in Paris are very handsome to the
streetward, but for the Furniture within, they come very much behind ours; the
French men most commonly carrying all their wealth on their back, so that when
they are in their best Clothes, they may be said to be in the middle of their
Estates, when the poorest Trades man in London has his Plate to drink in, and
is served up with his Pewter-dishes of several sorts, your Artisans of Paris
coming so far behind them, that they would be glad of meat (could they but
reach to the price of it) although it were in a Wooden Dish.


Frenchman. Begar de Artisan of Parry be de brava fellow, de Engliss Tailor be
noting, de make Breech vit vor de Plough-man, it is not ala mode France: De
France Tailor trick de Clown up so rara, make him zhow like de Gentil-man. De
Engliss Barber Trim make man like de Goat.


Englishman. The French Barber trims so as makes a man look like a Monkey,
come Monsieur I must help you out with it: You French men are indeed excellent
fellows for Toys, very perfect at Toothpicks, Beard-brushes, and Gentle women's
Fans; but in other more substantial Trades how infinitely short do you come of
the English? Your Cutlers make such abominable and fearful Knives, as would
grieve a man's heart to see them, enough almost to make one loathe the Victuals
that should be cut by such misshapen Instruments. And your Glovers are worse
than your Cutlers, for you would imagine by their Gloves, that the hand for
which they were made, were cut off by the wrist. And what excellent workmen
your Painters are, may be seen by the Signs hanging over each door in Paris
for a distinguishment, as with us at London: but so hideously are these made,
and so little resembling the thing signified, that if a Hen did not scrape
better Pourtraitures on a Dunghill, I would be bound to eat no other meat but of
a French paisant woman's dressing during life, which would be a torment next to
starving; very convenient therefore is it that they have it printed in Capital
Letters under every Sign what it is, for fear the Spectators should take a Cock
for a Bull, or a Pigg for a Goss-hawk.


Frenchman. Me can no longra endure to hear Parry de brave Shitty in de varle
to be so degraste.


Englishman. A brave City indeed, and of a strange composition, wherein a man
cannot live in the Summer for fear of being poisoned with the stink, nor in the
Winter for the like danger of being mired with the dirt.


Frenchman. Begar if de speak so false of Parry de brava Shitty, vat will de
den do of de Country!


Englishman. For your Country, I must confess indeed the soil thereof is
enough plentiful, stored with Corn, Beasts, and Fowls; but alas, what is that
to the poor peasant, who only beholds it with his eyes, seldom or never so
much as tasting it with his mouth; a Capon or Rabbit being almost as unlawful
for these miserable Creatures to eat, as it was in the Old Law for any but the
Priests to eat Shewbread. I believe one of your Country Tailors has but an
ordinary Trade with them, they thinking themselves happy if in their apparel
they can but mount to Canvass, for woollen Cloth is beyond the reach of their
purse, and he that aspires to Fustain, will not stick to justle for the best
place in the Parish, even to that of the Churchwarden: For Hats they will be
sure to have them, though their Bellies pinch for it, and that it may appear
they have them, they always keep them on their heads. I suppose they are great
Enemies to Hosiers and Shooe-makers, because they seldom wear any Shoes or
Stocking;, but such as Nature furnishes them withal, unless it be on some
principal Holy Day, when they will be sure to go to Church.


Frenchman. Vat dis de speak of de p^isant, begar de paisant be de Clown in
all Country, but de France Gentilman is de brave Gentilman in de varle.


Englishman. What is spoken of your Nation in general, that they are won with
a Feather, and lost with a straw, may more particularly be applied to these
your de brave Gentil men, who at first sight will be as familiar with you as
your sleep, and follow you as does your shadow; but upon the least distaste,
for a word speaking they will draw their sword: They are brave fellows at a
first Onset, begin an action like thunder, and end it in a smoke, at the first
encounter more than men, in the close thereof less than women. They are very
Complemental, and full of their Court Cringes, without which none is accounted
a Gentil-man. At my first coming to Paris, one of these Monsieurs add essed
himself to me, carrying his head as if he had been ridden with a Martingal,
then did he draw back his legs, and thrust out his shoulders in such a
ridiculous posture, that made my Worship to laugh heartily to see the Ape
outdone by the Frenchman.


Frenchman. Begar me can forbear no longra, de Rouge, de Rascal, de
Jack-napes, compare de France-man ala moda, to de Ape, begar fleesh, blood,
speerit, na de Saul can no suffer dis; par ma foy de thrush Tord in de heart
bleed if de speak dis.


Englishman. Monsieur, not so angry, we know the temper of your Countrymen
well enough, though you will draw the Sword on the least distaste, a minutes
pause sheathes it again, then if a man beats you into better manners you will
take it kindly, kiss your hand, and cry Serviteur. I must confess at first when
I came to Paris, I did much admire the gallantry of your Nation, thinking no
place in the world comparable to it for Nobility and Gentry, until at last one
foul mistake rectified my judgment, which was this: There came to visit a
Scotch Lord of my acquaintance a French Gallant, who had on him a Suit of Turkey
Grogram doubled with Taffata, ^^asht after the French fashion, and belayed with
Bugle-lace, a Shirt of pure Holland appearing through the openings of his
Doublet, which was likewise wrought with curious Needle Work; the Points at his
Waste and Knees (for so the fashion there then was) alleged with a
Silver-edging; his Garters, Roses, and Hat-band suitable to his Points; a Beaver
Hat, and a pair of Silk-stockings; his Cloak also of Turkey Grogram cut upon
black Taffaty. This man by his Habit I guessed to be no less than a Lord, (for
who would have imagined Aesops Fable to have been a real truth, that the Ass
was dressed up in the Lions skin) and according to the man that I imagined him to
be, I gave him the Style of My Lord at every word. After some discourse, he
seeing me to clap a Handkerchief to my cheek, and to make a kind of a sour
face, asked me what I ailed? I told him I was very much troubled with the
Toothache. Alas, said he, that is a grievous pain, but ca^l on me at my
Lodging the next morning, and I shall presently give you ease: I humbly thanked
his Lordship for such an immense favor, with the greatest obeisance I could
devise; and the next morning somewhat before the time appointed, sent my
servant for a Barber to trim me and make me neat, because I could not tell what
occasion I might have of seeing his Lady, or his Daughters. This Messenger
chanced to happen on his Lordship, who was no other than a Barber; but when I
saw him come in with his Apron before him, and pulling a Case of Instruments
out of his pocket, bless me! I thought I should have split my self with
laughing, had not the consideration of my own folly, of being so obeysant to
him the night before, something restrained me. His Lordship, though he guessed
the cause of my extraordinary mirth, yet fell to work about me, to the earning
of a Quardesou, and indeed he was very dexterous in his Art, and soon made my
Chin ala mode; then would he have proceeded to to the pulling out of my Tooth,
but the pain being now something abated, I told his Lordship I would retain it
in my head a little longer: wherefore pocketing up his Quardesou, with a low
cringing, and less courtesy on my part than before, his Lordship departed.


Frenchman. Begar dat vas brave, de France Barber cousen de Engliss-man, begar
me no shuse but laugh till de burss: O de France Barbers be de brave fellows in
de varle, but where den did thee go ven de went from Parry?


Englishman. A Friend and I having a great desire to see the Country, we took
Post-horse, intending for Amiens, but might as good have been mounted on a
Post, as on such Jades; as lean they were as Envy is by the Poets feigned to
be, having neither flesh on their bones, nor skin on their flesh, nor hair on
their skin; neither was it so alone, that their bones might be numbered through
their skin, but the Spur-galls had made such Casements in their flesh, that an
ordinary Farrier might have known what Diseases they were troubled with, by
surveying their Entrails. They were very easy to be mounted, and there was no
great fear of melting them by overriding, surely Don Quixot's Rozinante was a
horse of State to either of these. Being thus mounted, and galloping a foot
pace, in twelve hours we had ridden fourteen miles; night coming on, and a
pretty big Town just before us, we resolved to lodge there, whert enquiring for
one of the chief Inns, we were directed to the skelliton of a House, which in
England would scarcely have passed for an Alehouse, and yet there it was an
Inn, ay, and an honorable one too: Alighting at the door, the Host of the
house came out unto us, at first sight I took him to be one of the three
Fiddlers I told you of before, a pitiful ragged, shabby fellow.


Frenchman. Dat is no honest to de grase French Inns, de base Guest dat rail
on de Host; begar de French Inns be more good den de Engliss Inns, ver in de
French Inns is de brave vine, but in de Engliss Inns is no ting but de Beer


Englishman. But Monsieur, notwithstanding your Wine, I suppose our ordinary
Alehouses are a story higher praise worthy than your Inns, as may appear by
the description of this, and by which you may give a guess at the rest. No
sooner were we alighted, but our Host (the ragged fellow I told you of before)
conducted us to a room, somewhat resembling a Charnel-house, being full as dark
and as dampish; on one side whereof was a pretty big hole, which formerly had
been a Glass-window, but the Glass being gone it was for the most part stopped
up with Pease straw: In this room was the resemblance of three Beds, for by
their description you will say it was improper to call them Beds; the
foundation of them was of straw, which not having been shifted in many a year,
it was so infinitely thronged together, that the Wooll-packs which our Judge
sit on in the Parliament, were melted Butter to them. Upon this lay a large Bag
containing a Medley of Flocks and Feathers, but so ill ordered, that they stuck
out of the sides like to the knobs of a Crab-tree Cudgel; the Sheets on those
Beds were party per pale, a mean betwixt white and black, and so course, that a
Mariner would have disdained to have used them for a Sail; the Coverlets were
alike answerable to the rest of the Bedding, here a hole, and there a patch,
and for Curtains and Valances, my Landlady had disrobed the Beds of them two
years before, to make she and the kind natured Gentleman her Husband, Clothes
of them.


Frenchman. Begar if de make Cloase of de Curtans and de Vaylance, den de look
like de Jack Pudding.


English man. Having taken a view of the Furniture of this Room, seeing every
thing so nasty, I supposed it was impossible to find any Victuals there; and
that if our horses were the Pictures of Envy, this place was the Receptacle of
Famine: But see how I was mistaken in my thoughts! for my Hoastess (whose head
was wrapped about with a dirty Dish-clout) had for our Suppers cut the throat
of a Pullet, and tearing it in pieces with her hands, she after that took away
Feathers and Skin together, stripping it as we strip Rabbets in England, then
clapping it into a Pan, it was soon fried and set upon the Table; the Napery
belonging to which was suitable to the Bedding, as foul and as dirty, my
Landlady being so provident a Creature, she would not have it worn out with
often washing. The Napkins were fit companions for the Clothes, which would
rather foul ones fingers with whiping on them, than make them clean.


Frenchman. Begar she were de Slu^t dat no w^sh Linen till de tink, par ma
foy de Shade va^^d bin hanged; began me could rail on her out of all de cry.


Englishman Nay Monsieur, you may as well rail on the rest as on this, for
though some few of your Inns be not altogether so wretched, yet is the
alteration almost insensible.


Frenchman. Begar de lie dear be brave Inns in France, in Paris, in Roven,
etc. one, two, tree stories high, where de Host go like de Gentilman, and de
Hoastess like de Madam.


English man. I speak not of your Inns in Paris, nor some other great Cities,
but of those in the Country, which are generally such as this, and therefore
Monsieur, give me leave to go on in my Story. The Meat being on the Board, we
fell unto it, hunger making us the better able to digest the Nastiness of the
Cookery: After Supper, desirous to go to Bed to refresh our Bodies, weary with
riding on those tired Jades, we called for a Chamberlain, but you might a good
have spoken Greek to them, none of them understanding what a Chamberlain was:
at last came a fellow with some patches hanging on him, but for the most part
open to the skin, who having pulled off our Boats, presently had recourse to
the Coverlet to wipe them, and having rubbed one side a little, left the other
part to be finished by us if we would have it; it was enough for him that he
had written the Copy. Thus forced to make a Law of Necessity, we lay till
morning, not making extraordinary haste out, lest perchance we might have lost
the sight of my Hoastess and her daughters; they were not very hard to be
known, for at the first blush a stranger might swear that they were of a blood,
and indeed it had bin great pity had it bin otherwise. Not to honor them with a
further Character, let it suffice to know, that their persons kept so excellent
a decorum with the house and furniture, that it was great pity they should be
parted.


Frenchman Begar me no vill stay if de speak so; Oh Mordien, we sall shitt me
self to hear do part, and den vill they say dear is de shitten Frenchman.


Englishman. Well then, Monsieur, to take my leave of this Inn; being about to
depart, we had such a throng about us of those ill-favored faces, and every
one chiming out this Ditty, Pour les Servant, that one might with greater ease
have distributed a Dole at a rich man's Funeral, than to give them a penny,
their importunity, be you never so hasty, will forestal your Bounty; yet their
ambition is not so high: after all this impudent begging, they expect but a
Soll, and he that gives them more out-bids their expectation, and shall be
counted a Spend-thrift.


Frenchman. Begar me vill stay no longra, de be sush time taking leave of de
Inn, dat de might in dat time have rid fife, sex, sefen mile.


Englishman. Well then, to proceed: Being mounted, and riding very softly
according to the Genius of our horses, at the end of the Town we came to a
great Green, and it being then a petty Holy Day, there was assembled on the
Green a Miscelany or Gallimaufry of all ages and conditions on purpose to
dance. --


Frenchman. Begar me mush speak now: O de dance, de skip, de fidele, par ma
foy de brava ting in all de varle.


Englishman. It seems your Nation does naturally affect it, not only the poor
Peasants, but also the Gallant Monsieurs and Damoseils; for here were assembled
both Youth and Gentry, Age and Poverty, the Rags interwoven with the Silks, and
wrinkled Brows interchangeably mingled with fresh Beauties. Those whom age had
forced to walk with a staff in the street, here taught their feet to measure
out the paces of a Dance, and others that had been long troubled with the
Sciatica, though they could not trip it so nimbly, yet would enfo^^^ their feet
to hobble. Some of them were so ragged, you would have thought that a swift
Galliard would almost have shaked them into nakedness, and yet would they
venture the loosing of their Clothes for the gaining of a Dance. Nay, those
whom either Age or other Infirmity had not permitted to go, yet would be
carried thither in their Chairs, to behold the Pastimes, and tread the measures
with their Eyes; to persuade them to stay at home when they heard the Fidle,
was to seek to empty the Sea with a spoon, or to persuade a Lutners Love-Lady
to become a Nun.

-- A work so great,
Would make Olympus bearing Atlas sweat.

French man. O de brave exercise in de varle, begar no ting is wid it de
compare. O de brave shite to hear de Fidele, to see them dance, to leap, to
skip. -- O dat me were amongst them. --


Englishman. That which to you is so pleasing, soon wearied us, wherefore we
took our leaves of them, and proceeded on in our Journey, and about Noon came
to another Town somewhat bigger than a Village, and comparable to the worser
sort of Market Towns in England, distant from the place where we lay before,
about five miles, (for we rid very hard, and spared not for Horseflesh) here
we resolved to bait both our selves and our horses, and to that purpose singled
out an Inn where we expected to find best accommodations, and indeed we
thought we had found a great purchase, for there it was our fortune to meet
with a Rabbet, larded it was, as all meat is in that Country, otherwise it is
so lean it would be burnt up ere it could be roasted, it was served up with the
feet on, and the reason of the custom thereof in that Country is (I conceive)
that being a frugal Nation, they would make them go the further. The sight of
this Dish gave us great content, but when we came to eat thereof, it proved so
tough, that I verily think it was no more than two removes from that Rabbet
which was in the Ark; but though it proved so bad in the eating, the price
thereof was good enough, no less than Half a Crown English. My Companion
thought it to be very dear, but I adjudged otherwise, for certainly the Grass
which fed it was worth more than eight times the money.


Frenchman. Begar some men do tink meat is no good if dat it be no dear, par
may foy vould me had it present, me could eat it, vor me is very angry.


Englishman. Nay Monsieur, if you be so angry that you grow quarrelsom, I
shall beat you into better manners.


Frenchman. Begar me no say quarrelsom, me be angry, dat is, me could veede on
de Rappit.


Englishman. O cry you mercy Sir, now I understand ye, I suppose you are
better to feed than to fight; but alas, Rabbets are too dainty meat for French
Peasants, for in that rank I must place ye, though now you have got on a
borrowed Garb of English Feathers, but when you come amongst your fellows, you
must then be glad to do as they do, your Bread of the coursest flour, and so
black that it cannot admit of the name of brown, and for drink have recourse to
the next Fountain, content only with so much as is sufficient to keep you from
the extremities of Cold and Famine.


Frenchman. Begar be de R^gue to call me Paisant, me be de Gentilman
Mushishaner, me be de Compaigne vor de Lord, vor de Madam, me fidele vor de
Gentilman, and at de Weddin.


Englishman. Now you put me in mind of a Wedding, I must tell y^ of one that
I saw once at Orleans, where at my going into the Town, I met with Mistress
Bride coming from the Church: The day before she had been somewhat of the
condition of such as scowre Dripping-pans in Great Men's houses, and went
accoutred as those women that in London cry Kitching-stuff about the streets of
the City: but now there was a strange metamorphosis in her, you would not
believe she was the same woman, she was so tricked up with Scarffs, Rings,
Cross-garters, Knots of Ribbonds, etc. that she was a la mode France. Now could
the fellow have married only her Clothes, I should have very much applauded
his fortune, but it could not be so (God be merciful to him) he was also
chained to the Wench, much good may it do him with her, and much joy may they
have together most peerless Couple.

Sing, Hymen, Hym^n, O Hymenae^,
O Hymen, Hymen, Hymenaee.
I would have a French man marry none but a French woman, for a fitter Match
cannot be.


Frenchman. Vat is dat de say? begar France weemen be de brave weemen in de
varle.


Englishman. Now Monsieur, I shall speak something of what I observed of the
women in your Country, and to begin with the Peasants, as being most in number:
They are a sort of people which cannot say the least claim to any share of
beauty, so that she which with us is reckoned amongst the vulgar, would be
amongst them esteemed for a Princess, quite contrary to the women in England,
where you have many thatched Cottages that harbor such Beauties, as would
tempt Jupiter from his Throne to court them in a golden Shower. Answerable to
their Beauty is their Attire, their head being wrapped about with an old Dish
clout turned out of service, or the corner of a Table-cloath reserved from
washing; the goodness of their faces tells us that that is sufficient, for why
should the backpart of their head be handsomer than the forepart? They have no
need of Masks, and the Bacon-rined color of their faces tells us that they
were strangers to Bon graces when they were children. As concerning Petticoats,
they have all of them such a kind of Garment, but most of them so short, you
would think them cut off at the Placket; Now when the Parents have worn them
till such time as the rottenness of them will save a labor of undressing, they
are a new cut out and fitted for the children, by which time they have done
with them, they speed to the dunghill, being scorned to be taken up by the
Rag-vvoman. For shoes and stockings they take no great care for, few of them
ever had above one pair in all their lives, and which they vvear every day,
being very durable. In this degree has Nature placed them, and the greatest
happiness that they do enjoy, is that they are contented with the same.


Frenchman. But vat is dis of de Paisant to de France Gentil woman.


Englishman. Well, next I will speak something of the middle sort of women, or
such as live in Cities and great Towns, (for I shall forbear to mention the
Court, as being above my sphere) of these sort of women there is much
difference from the Peasants; but in what? surely nothing but in attire,
otherwise Nature has not been over prodigal to them for beauty, so that Don
Quixot did not so deservedly assume to himself the title of The Knight of the
ill favored face, as they may that of the Damsels of it; The most comely and
best proportioned part about them is their hands, long, white, and slender; but
scarce shall you see one of a hundred, whose wrists, and betwixt their fingers
is no^ all overrun with a scab like to a leprosy. Their dispositions hold
good correspondency with their faces, and suit as well as a Toast and Nutmeg
does with a pot of Ale in the depth of Winter, all which you will swear to be
truth, when you once come but to hear them speak; no better Character being to
be gathered of them, then from their prating, which is so tedious and infinite,
that you shall sooner want ears than they Tongues; set but their Tongues once a
going, and they are like to a Watch, you need not wind them up above once in
twelve hours, for so long will the Thread of their discourse be in spinning,
such everlasting Talkers are they all, that they will sooner want breath then
words, there being no ways to silent them, but only to go out of their
Companies. But were this only to some of their Familiars, it were the more
tolerable, but stranger or acquaintance, all is one, though indeed no man is to
them a stranger, for in two hours time you shall have them as familiar, and as
merry with you, as if you had been of their acquaintance seven years, or bred
up in a house together ever since you were born; Now though I cannot condemn
any of them of dishonesty, as having had no such experience of them, yet to an
Englishman such sudden affability argues somewhat of a confident boldness, to
say no worse. I remember, the first time I came to London, being but a young
Novice, scarcely writing Man, passing through Luteners-lane, a Gentlewoman
standing at the door accosted me with these words, How do you Sir, I am
heartily glad to see you well, how have you done a long time? Seeing so
beautiful a Lady, with black patches on her face, and dressed Alamode de France,
thus to salute me, I could not choose but admire; Madam, said I, do you know me?
alack (Sir said she) pray come in and let us discourse together: but
notwithstanding her bold invitation away I went, and coming to my Lodging,
relating the story, Sir, said one to me, you must have a care of such
Creatures, for notwithstanding their brave Garb, they are no other then common
Strumpets. This sudden familiarity of the French-women made me to remember this
story. for --


Frenchman. Begar be de Rogue, de shallenge de feeld, compare de French Madam
to de Lutener-lane pocky-hora; begar me no shuse but feight up to de nose in
plood; begar me can no dure dis.


Englishman. You fight, you sh -- think you with high words to daunt me? do
not I know the Nature of your Country men better then so? how in one thing they
very much resemble the De -- meekness or submission makes them insolent, but a
little resistance puts them to their heels, or makes him your Spaniel.


Frenchman. Begar me tink no hurt, though de speak so. Tres humble Serviture
Mounsieur.


Englishman. Then to proceed in my story concerning the French women. They are
abundantly full of laughter and toying, and have always in store some
lascivious songs, which they refuse not to sing in any company, so that a
stranger would think modesty were quite banished the Kingdom, or rather that it
had never been there; and whereas women in other Countries are most ashamed to
discourse of those parts which makes them women. These French Dames will talk
of them, even before men, as broadly as a Midwife, or a Barber-Surgeon. So that
if that saying be true, that Modesty is the best apparel of a woman, I doubt
many of the Female sex in France, must go thinly clad, and a great many of them
quite naked.


Frenchman. Begar dear be but some dut be so bad as de peak of.


Englishman. Truly I saw but little difference amongst them, it is an
Epidemical disease, both Maids and Wives, Madams and Damsels, Rich and Poor,
alike sick of it, if there were any difference, it was only in this, that
those who were highest in their places and callings, were likewise highest in
this lightsom vein of ribaldry.


Frenchman. De speak of de Common hora, but de Fransh Gentilwoman be no sush.


Englishman. God forbid I should condemn every one of them, though they
generally be so, but for them you call Common whores, I must rank them in a
degree by themselves; It was my fortune once to be in the company of two of
these Fille de joys, but never since I first knew mankind and the world, did
I observe so much impudence in the general, as I did in these two; so
audaciously bawdie in their discourse, that even any immodest ear would have
abhorred their language, and of such a shameless deportment, that their very
behavior would have frighted lust out of the most incontinent man living, but
a Frenchman. In a word, they were Wenches able to have shamed all the Friars
with whom they had trafficked, for they would not be cast-a, and could not be
caut-a, and so I leave them, for methinks my discourse of them is unsavory,
but he that rakes in filthy puddles, must be sure to meet with nasty stinks.


Frenchman. Begar de hora be over all de varle, dear be de creat many in de
London, me go in de Turnbull street, me go in de Neetingale lane me go in de
Rosemary lane, me go in de Ra-ra-ratcleefe high way, me go to Damaris Page, me
sure do find pocky-hora, me veele it in my bones.


Englishman. Ha Mounsieur, have you got a Clap with a French-Fiddle.


Frenchman. Begar me no deny it, me pay Shurgeon one, two, tree pound var de
cure.


Englishman I commend you Mounsieur, for your ingenuous acknowledgment; but I
having spoken so much of the French-woman, I think it convenient to say
something of the men, for pity it is they should be parted.


Frenchman. Begar me will listen to dat, me love to hear of de France
Gentil-man.


Englishman. As I said of the women, you might character them out by their
discourse, so may I say of the men, you may look into their breasts by their
talk, which most commonly runs upon two wheels, treason and ribaldry. Never
in my life did I hear people talk less reverently of their Prince, and as our
Nation have been always addicted too much to your Apish fashions, so in our
late times, when Rebellion was rampant, had they got too much of your unworthy
custom of speaking irreverently of their King; but I hope that custom is out of
use with us now. I wish it were so in France; where scarce a day passes
without some seditious Pamphlet printed and published, in disgrace of the King,
or some of his Courtiers; the Contents of which Libels they will not spare to
speak of in each place where they come; take them from this, (which you can
hardly do till they have told all) and then they fall upon their ribaldry,
relating stories of their own uncleanness, with a face as confident, as if they
had no accidents to please their Hearers more commendable. Never did valiant
Captain more glory in the number of the Cities he had taken, then they will do
of the several women which they have prostituted.


Frenchman. Par ma foy me no dislike dat, me love to hear talk Bawdy de
leetle, me be no shamed of dat, begar it does teekle my ling^ to hear dit.


Englishman. Nay, I know that you are not only good to talk bawdy, but to act
bawdily, and to boast of it too, as many of your Contrymen have done, who
having been at London, upon their return, report strange Chimera's of the
English modesty; as what Merchants wives they enjoyed here, and in what
familiarity such and such a Lady entertained them at Westminster, when the poor
fools have been cozened with common Prostitutes; and to this purpose I shall
relate you a pretty story. A French Mounsieur coming over full pursed to
London, being hot in the Codpiece as many of them are, desired a Cooler, but
his ambition soared so high, that common beauties, (such as those of France)
would not serve his turn; but he must have a rare one, no less then a Phoenix;
and falling in acquaintance with a French Pandar, for a sum of money he
promised him the enjoyment of a Lady, who was much famoused for her beauty; the
Mounsieur gladly hearkens thereto, pays his money, and thinks every hour ten,
till the prefixed hour come. In the mean space the Pandar goes to a common
Prostitute, instructs her in the business, they share the money, and she takes
upon her to imitate the Lady; a Coach is hired, (for a Cart might have been in
danger of shaking her in pieces) the Pandar and she goes together, who conducts
her to the Mounsieur, the French Gentilman courts her alamede, swears he is her
servant, and she with a seeming unwillingness at last condescends to his
request, but whilst he is busy in his employment, she picks his pocket of his
Watch, and threescore pieces of gold, which as soon as she rises from the Bed,
is strait conveyed to the Pandar, who all this while guarded the door. Upon the
receipt of the prize he is gone; but before the pretty Mob could make an escape,
Mounsieur misses his Watch and his money, he storms and chafes like a madman,
mistrusts his Mob, but wonders a Lady of her quality, as he took her to be,
would do such a thing. Necessity has no Law, she endeavors an escape, gets
into the street, but Mounsieur overtakes her there, and lays flat felony to
her Ladyship, presently an huburb is made, the Constable comes and carries them
both before a Justice, the Frenchman challenges her Ladyship with his money,
and she challenges him with a Rape; the Mob is searched, but no money found;
Mounsieur is asked again, if he would swear positively she picked his pocket; he
considers of it, and then says, he was mistake; but she being known to be a
prime Trader in Fleet-yard, was sent to Bri^ewell, and Mounsieur dismissed to go
to borrow money to go to the Surgeon, of whom now he had great need.


Frenchman. Begar me was serve sush a trick one, me go into de Lutener-lane,
de-brave Gentilwoman at de door call me in; me kiss her, and me do someting
else, but when me was gone, me vent to de Ordinary to eat Veetle, ven me come
to pay, all me money vas gone.


Englishman. And how come you off with the Cook?


Frenchman. Begar de Cook call me French Rogue, tell me de beat-me, me vas
pray him to be quiet, and me vild leave de tord for his reckoning.


Englishman. That was a right French trick, to eat up the Cooks meat, and
leave him a a tord for his reckoning.


Frenchman. Me do no mean de tord in de belly, me mean de tord dat hang by de
side.


Englishman. Nay Mounsieur, it is pity you should ever speak any thing but
French, your Language being very agreeable to your Natures, which to be spoken
with a grace, the head, body, shoulders must all concern in the pronouncing of
it, and the many Proverbs wherewith it is furnished, makes it very significant
to your Nations humor of scoffing. Indeed it is very full of Courtship, which
makes all your people so Complemental: The poorest Cobbler in the Village having
his Court-cringes, and his Eau beneste de Cour, his Court holy water, as
perfectly as the best Lord of them all.


Frenchman. And vy shoole henot, begar Franceman be de all Gentilman.


Englishman. And that makes you in your ordinary discourse to bestow the
highghest of titles upon those of the lowest condition, and by this reason the
Beggar begets Mounsieurs and Madams to his sons and daughters, as familiarly
as the King.


Frenchman. Begar di^ true or me be de hang.


Englishman. But on what Gibbit Mounsieur would you desire to be hanged on,
for I observed in your Country there were several sorts of them, every Haute
Justice having his peculiar Gibbit, which were made wonderful methodically, by
the criticisme of which you may judge of the quality of him that owneth it; for
the Gibbit of one of the Nobles has but two pillars, that of the Chastellan
three, the Barons four, the Earls six, and the Dukes eight, so exact is your
Nation that they observe a Mode even in their Gallowses.


Frenchman. But begar me no love hanging, me shuse to die in de straw, den be
hang on de vine Gallows in all de France. Begar den me mus eat no more quood
Mutt, quood Beef, quood Lamb, etc.


Englishman. Now you speak of Beef, Mutton, and Lamb, give me leave to tell ye
some observations I made of your Cookery, and how your Gentlemen's tables
furnished, which though they come not nigh ours, yet are they beyond comparison
above the Paisants. Their Beef they cut out into little chops, so small, that
what goes there for a laudable dish, would be thought here to be a University
Commons, now served from the hatch. A loyne of Mutton serve amongst them for
three roastings, besides the hazard of making pottage with the Rump. They have
likewise store of Fowl, but such as the King found in Scotland, viz. foul
napkins, foul table clothes, etc. but to speak truth, that which they have is
sufficient for Nature and a friend, were it not for the strange mysteries of
the Kitching-wench. Their Cooks are much famed for rare fellows, but their
skill consists not in the handling of Beef, Mutton, and such like solid meats,
but in the making of puff-pastes, kickshaws, and such fine devices, only to
fill the pallat, but not the belly, and so by consequence would make rare
fellows in a Garrison, to cozen the belly, and feed the eye. Now if you can
digest the sluttishness of the Cookery of (which is most abominable at the
first fight) sit down and welcome, where you must say your own Grace, private
Graces being there as ordinary as private Masses, and from whence (perhaps)
they learned them. Grace ended, fall to where you like best, for they observe
no order nor method in their eating, and if you expect a to have Carver, you
may rise a hungry; thus are their Tables furnished, and think themselves served
in as great state as King Nebuchadnezars.


Frenchman. Vat is dat you say, No be got no sir.


English man. I said Nebuchadnezar, the name is something hard.


Frenchman. Begar so it is; No, no, no, no be got no sir. Eng. ne. Fr. ne.
Eng. bu. Fr. bu. Eng. chad. Fr. chad Eng. ne. Fr. ne. Eng. zar. Fr. zar. now me
have it, Ne-bu-chad-ne-zar, begar me vil carry dis name into me Country var to
cure de Toothake.


Englishman. And why may not that name cure the toothache, as well as many
cures which are ascribed to be done by Relics, of which Relics I saw diverse
of them at St Denis, a small town with a great wall, showing like all the world
like a Spaniards little face in his great ^uffe, or like a small chop of Mutton
in a large dish of Pottage at the th^ee Penny Ordinary, at this Town in the
Church of ^^ D^nis, is sa^d to be kept one of the naile^ Town in the Church of
St. Dennis, is said to be kept one of the Nails which fastened our Savior to
the Cross, as also a piece of the Cross it self, though so many parts thereof
are shown at several places, that were they all put together, would have broken
the back of Simon of Cyrene to have carried it. Here is also some of the Virgin
Mary's milk, the Arm of St. Simeon set in a Case of Gold, the Relics of St.
Lewis, and the Head of St. Dennis, with a part of his Body; of this St. Dennis
(being the Patron of France) I shall tell you a Story, more than ever you read
in the History of the Seven Champions of Christendom, and perhaps as true,
which is this: He being to suffer death under the Reign of Domitian the
Emperor, for not bowing before the Altar of Mercury, when the Executioner had
smitten off his head, he caught it in his arms, and ran with it down the Hill
as fast as his legs would carry him; having run thus half a mile he sat down
and rested, and so he did nine times in all, (you must conceive he was very
heavy laden to carry his head in his arms) but having ran three miles, he ran
himself quite out of breath, for then he fell down and died, over which place
was built this Church consecrated to his Memory wherein the aforesaid Relics
are kept.


Frenchman. Begar Sen Dennis was de brave fellow when he live, he cut, he
slase, he slay, he feight like de spright; he vas love Wench named Rossalen,
she make him Cuckoll, he wear de horns on his head sefen year; den came Zhorge
on de Hoars-back, and wid his Tord cut them off at one blow.


Englishman. Was not St. George of England than a brave man to do so worthy an
Act?


Frenchman. Begar he was de brave Shampion in all de varle, but de France man;
he kill de burn Dragon, but de Seignior Amadis de Gaul be kill de Shyant, one,
two, tree, four story high; begar den he was brave fellow; let me see den, dear
was Monsieur le Charlemaigne, de Roy Pepin, Monsieur Oliver, Monsieur Rowland,
begar de France man be de creat killer of de Shyants in all de varle.


Englishman. Indeed no Nation in the wo^ld is greater killers of Giants and
multitudes of people than the French; but how? why in Romances, wherein there
is little danger in fighting; but for real feats of Arms, alas how far short do
they fall in the performance! How often have they been beaten by the English,
with the greatest disadvantage almost that might be? witness Poicters, Crescy,
and Agen-Court Battles, wherein their Armies exceeded ours almost ten to one;
nay, have we not taken their Kingdom from them? the English King Crowned King
of France in France? where was their Valor then? Why they were forced to have
recourse to a Witch, one Joan of Arc, when France lay as it were expiring out
her latest breath. How were they forced to pretend a Message to her from God,
to breathe new courage into the hearts of their fanting Soldiers? and yet when
they had wrought all these Forgeries, it was not so much their Courage as our
own Divisions, that caused the English expulsion out of France.


Frenchman. Begar though me ha skill to Fidele, me ha no skill in de History,
me can no tell if de speak true; but me mush tink dis, me mush give looser
leave to speak.


Englishman. Nay Monsieur, if you are up with your Proverbs, I must also give
you one, which though but a homely one, yet sets out the three Nations, French,
English, and the Spaniards to the life. The French man is compared to a Flea,
quickly skipping into a Country, and as quickly skipping out; their Valor
being like a blaze of fire, makes of a sudden a great show, but is quickly
extinguished. The English are like a Lowse, slowly mastering a place, and as
slowly driven out again. The Spaniard like to a Crab fish^ hardly gaining any
thing, but where he enters seldom or never again removed.


Frenchman. Begar me leeke dis Proverb well enough of de men, vat is de
Pr^^verb of de weemen?


Englishman. They say that to the making up of an absolute Woman, the^^ is
required the parts of a Dutch woman from the Girdle downwards, the parts of a
French woman from the Girdle up to the Neck, over which must be placed an
English Face, for the greater perfection of all the rest; for if you come to
compare the French Beauries with the English, alas they are not to be named the
same day with them, their Faces being as bad a punishment to the Eyes, as their
Discourse is a torment to the Ears: And herein may the English glory, that
they have the fairest Women, the goodliest Horses, and the best breed of Dogs
in all the whole world; To which we may add, that as England is said to be A
Paradise for women, by reason of their Privileges, so it may be said to be A
Paradise of women, by reason o^ their un-marchable Perfections.


Frenchman. Begar de France woman be de hansom woman vor all dat.


Englishman. For your French women, as their shoulders and backs are so broad
that they hold no proportion with their middles, so are they of a very black
hair, and swarthy complexion; and though the Poets do commend Leda for he^
black hair, as in that Verse of Ovids, Leda fuit nigris conspicienda comis. yet
that blackness reached only to a kind of dark brown, not so fearful as this
of the French women, who are generally blacker th^n a gracious loveliness can
admit: And though black hair do give a luster to a beautiful Face, as a shadow
does to a Picture, or a Sable bearing to a Field a^gent; yet what are the
French women's Faces concerned in that, which are so far from that thing called
Beauty, that when they are adorned with black Patches, they look like rusty
Gammons of Bacon stuck with Cloves.


French man. Me can no shuse but confess me had rader eat of de Gammon of
Baoon, dan kiss de hansom woman in all de v^rle.


Englishman. Now you talk of kissing, I cannot but much admire that humor of
the French women, who though (as I said before) they are so light and wanton in
their discourse and gestures, yet are so coy of their Lips that they will not
admit of a kiss, accounting that woman that is kissed, more than half whored,
be her deportment other ways never so civil* Now, though I must confess I like
this their custom very well, it sparing me many an unsavory piece of
mannerliness when I was amongst them, yet it was to me a kind of a strange
Riddle, that they should confine all immodesty and lasciviousness to a harmless
kiss. But as it is said of the Italian, That he will rather murder a man in
private, than speak ill of him openly, so it may be thought of these Damsels,
that they will not refuse a man's bed in private, although they deny to kiss him
openly.


Frenchman. Begar de tell lie, de France Madam be de Civil Madam dat lives in
de whole varle.


Englishman. Yes Monsieur, I shall tell you of a piece of Civility of one of
your Madams, as I was informed by an Acquaintance of mine who was an
Eyewitness to it. That being at a Tilting, a Roguish Boy was peeking under a
Ladies Coats, a Courtier seeing it, went about to remove him from that saucy
action: but when her Ladyship perceived his intention, she hindered him with
this Complement, Laisse Monsieur, laisse les yeux ne sont pas larrons: The boys
eyes would steal nothing away. Certainly those who are so w^nton in their
discourse and actions abroad, will not stick out of play, when Night and the
Curtains may conceal it.


Frenchman. Par ma foy vis is no sush ting, de Frensh be a no so bad, dey
make more conscience den so.


Englishman. I will not deny but there may be some of them very conscientious,
but generally they are most irreverent and irreligious; great Scoffers, yea in
matters of Religion, and at those times when they should be most solid, witness
that Gallant who lying on his Deathbed, when he had the Host (so they call
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper) brought to him by a Lubberly Priest, he
said, That Christ came to him, as he went into Jerusalem, riding* upon an Ass.
Another of them being to receive the Sacrament, when the Priest had with many
words persuaded him that the Bread and Wine was the real Body and Blood of
Christ, he refused to taste of it, because it was then Friday. And I was
informed by a Gentleman, that at a Mass in the Cordeliers Church in Paris, he
saw two French Papists, when the most sacred Mystery of their Faith was
celebrating, break out into such a blasphemous and atheistical laughter, that
even an Ethnic would have blushed to have heard it. Can we then think these
men to be religious, who make a scoff at the Divine Mysteries of our Salvation?
Certainly had a Lutheran done this, some French hot-head or other, would have
sent them laughing to Pluto.


Frenchman. Dat is none good to do so; me had rather go to dine den to die,
to feed den to feight, dear is no sush haste to go to de Teiffel, he vill
have them soon enough me varrant ye. Me vill be glad to live so long as de old
woman of Parry.


Englishman. I remember dat old woman very well, who was of such an age, that
it is questionable whether she were ever young or no: for, but that I have read
the Scriptures, otherwise I should have been apt to have believed that she was
one of the first Pieces of the Creation, and that by some mischance or other
she had escaped the Flood: Our Countryman Tom. Parr the Salopian Wonder, was
but an Infant to her; at the least you could not but have imagined her one of
the Relics of the first Age after the building of Babel, several Ages before
the birth of the Wandering Jew; her face was for all the world like unto that of
Sibylla Erythrea in an old Print, or like that of Solomon's two Harlets in the
Painted Cloth, or like those Statuas on the outside of Westminster Abbey,
which for these six hundred years have been exposed to wind and weather. It is
doubtful whether our Arch Poet Ed. Spenser, when he writ his Poem of The Ruins
of Time, did not purposely intend it of her; sure I am it is very appliable in
the Title. Now by reason that all her Teeth were out, her Tongue was boundless,
and without ceasing would move for six and twenty hours togethet, the
fastidious pratler which Horace mentions in his Ninth Satyr, was but a Poisne
to her. Now whether she be living still, or no, I know not, but if she once
come to be speechless, I suppose she is then past all recovery.


Frenchman. Begar she was creat pratler indeed, and so me tink we be, derefore
me now make haste, vor my belly de chime Noon, and me mush make haste vor fe^r
of de pocky Shargeant.


Englishman. Well Monsieur, only one word before you go, and then farewell.
There is an old Proverb, that the Emperor of Germany is Rex Regom, the King of
Spain is Rex Hominem, the King of France Rex Asinorum, and the King of England
Rex Diabalorum. The Emperor of Germany is called Rex Regem, in respect of
having so many free Princes under him, who have power of themselves to Coin
Money, raise Soldiers, and other Immunities consenant to Regal Authority. The
King of Spain Rex Hominem, for that his Subjects are so constant and faithful
in their Allegiance, not questioning what the Prince does, but obeying because
he so commands it. The King of France is called Rex Asinorum, because of the
Subjects patient bearing of those insupportable Taxes which he sucks out of
their sweat and blood. Pride in matters of Sumptuousness, and the Civil Wars
which lasted a long time in that Country, having occasioned most of the Crown
Lands to have been sold or mortgaged, so that the Subject is now only the
Revenue of the Crown. The Kings hand lying so heavy upon them, that it has
almost thrust them into an Egyptian bondage: To recite all those Impositions
which this miserable people are afflicted withal, were almost as wretched as
the payment of them, I shall briefly instance in some few, and first Gabelle de
Sell, or Gabel on Salt, which is an Imposition that no man in the Kingdom (some
few Countries excepted) can eat any Salt, but he must buy it of the King, and
at his price; but this is not all, for though through poverty many of them
could be contented to eat meat (when they can get it) without Salt, yet are
they forced to take such a quantity of it, or howsoever they will have of them
so much money. This Imposition is exacted with such unconscionable rigor, that
it is thought to be worth unto the King 3000000 of Crowns yearly. Next is the
Taillon, a heavy burden which lies almost altogether upon the poor Peasant,
who are a people of any other the most unfortunate, paying such infinite Rents
to their Lords, and such innumerable Taxes to the King, that all their care and
extreme labor is only sufficient to pay their Duties, and keep them from the
extremities of cold and famine. This Imposition was at first levied by way of
Extraordinary Subsidy, and lay alike heavy upon all, but now it is confined
only to the Peasant; the greater Towns, the Officers of the Kings House, the
Officers of War, the President, Counselors, and Officers of the Courts of
Parliament, the Nobility, the Clergy, and the Scholars of the University, being
freed from it. Diverse Imposts have they besides, as the Soll upon the Liver,
which is the twentieth penny of all things bought or sold, only Corn and
Sallets excepted. Imposts upon Wine double and treble, and after all this, the
poor Vintner forced to pay the 8th penny of that Wine which he sells, to the
King. Then is there besides Imposts on all sorts of Fruits, Provisions, Wares,
and Merchandise, to which we may add the base and corrupt money in it, being
for the most part made of Tin and Brass. Hardly shall you see a Piece of Gold
of the French stamp, scarce any but what comes out of Spain, which are very ill
proportioned, and which one resembles to a French Cheese, being neither long,
nor square, nor round, nor thick, nor thin, nor great, nor little, nor any one
of these, but yet all, and yet none of them.

These Circumstances considered, we may the clearer see our own felicities,
which to express in a word, is to say only this, That the English Subject is
in no circumstance a French man, though we are so blind as herein not to see
our own happiness, but by our often Rebellions have given occasion to that
Apellation, that the King of England is Rex Diabalorum.


FINIS.

