Room for a Ballad. OR, A Ballad for Rome.
BEING A Continuation of the Catholic Ballad inviting to Popery; Upon the best
Grounds and Reasons, that could ever yet be produced.
To an Excellent Tune, called, The Powd^^ plot.
Wonder not, that the Scarlet Whore appears
With her Devices, in Red Characters;
Since through the World it is sadly understood,
That Popery is always Writ in Blood.


FRom Infallible Rome, once more I am come,
With a budget of Catholic ware*
Shall dazzle your Eyes, and your Fancies surprise,
To embrace a Religion so rare.
Oh! the Love and Good Will, of his Holiness still,
What will he not do for to save ye:
If such pains and such Art, cannot you Convert,
It Is pity but Old Nick should have ye.
Now our Priests are run down, and our Jesuits aground
And their Arguments all prove invalid:
See here he has got, an unheard of New Plot,
To Proselite you with a Ballad.
Then lay by your Jeers, and Prick up your Ears,
Whilst I unto you do display*
The advantage and worth, the Truth and so-forth
Of the Roman Catholic way.
If you did but behold, the Faith and the Gold,
Of which Holy Church is possessed;
You would never more stray, in the Heretical way,
But fly to her Lap to be blessed.
The Pope is the Head and does Peter succeed,
(Pray come away faster and faster)
He succeeds him it is true, but would you know how
It Is only in denying his Master.
He Is Infallible too, what need more ado,
And ever had Truth in possession:
For though once Mob Joan, Ascended the Throne,
The same was no breach of Succession.
Our Church and no other, is the Reverend Mother
Of Christians throughout the whole Earth;
Though Older they be, perhaps far than she,
Yet they must owe unto her their Birth.
Our Faith is so great, so sound and Complete,
It scorneth both Scripture and Reason;
And builds on Tradition, sometimes Superstition,
And oft-times Rebellion and Treason.
Our strict purity, is plain to each eye,
That Catholic Countries views;
For there to suppress, the sins of the Flesh,
Sodomy is in use and the Stews.
The second Part,
to the same Tune
Our Zeal has been felt, where ever we dwelt,
On all that our Doctrine deny:
(...) have a Suspicion, we make Inquisition,
and straight the poor Heretics Fry.
(...) they may Plead, or their Scriptures Read,
We value them all not a pin:
(...) best Argument, that we can invent,
(...) with Fire and Sword to begin.
^rost Godly way, whatever they say,
Since it their Salvation obtains,
^^kes them Orthodox, with blows and with knocks
(...) hammers Faith into their brains.
God we can make, of a thin Wafer Cake,
and eat him up when we have done:
(...) Drop of the Cup, Laymen must not sup,
For the Priests Guzles that all alone.
We have terrible Bulls, and Pardons for Gulls,
Holy Water to Scar-crow the Devil;
^ith Consecrate Swords, take them on our words,
They shall make the Great Turk be Civil.
We have Saints great store, and Miracles more,
With Martyrs a great many from Tyburn;
^^^ty Nuns that dwell, mewed up in a Cell,
As Chaste as Night walkers of Holbourn.
We have Holy Blood, we have Holy wood,
A Ship-load or some such matter:
We have Holy Bones, and some Holy Stones,
Would make an Old Ladies Chops water.
We have Holy men, seen but now and then,
Monks, Abbots, and Capuchin Friars,
With Merits so great, they can buy one a Seat
In Heaven, or else they are Liars.
(...) all you that would sure Salvation procure,
And yet still live as you list:
(...) but mutter and Pray, and say as we say,
And your Catholics good as e're P --.
We are brisk and free, and always agree,
Allowing our selves to be jolly;
(...) the Puritan tricks, of dull Heretics,
We count but Fanatical Folly.
^^^aring and Whoreing, Drinking and Roaring,
All those are but Venial Transgressions:
^^e Murdering of Kings, and such pretty things,
Are easily*Absolv'd in Confession.
(...) short Penance, does wipe away Sin,
And there is an end of all trouble;
Which having dispatched, you may fall to it again,
And safely your wickedness double.
Bring a good round Sum, Sins past and to come,
Shall presently be forgiven;
But this you must know, before you do go,
The Excize runs high upon Heaven.
For we have the Price, of every Vice,
Assest at a certain Rate;
So near at a word, we do them afford,
Not a Penny thereof we can Bate.
But if you're content, a while to be pent,
And in Purgatory purged;
A smaller Spell, shall preserve you from Hell,
And keep you from being Scourged.
Though you have lived a Devil, in all kind of Evil,
Bequeath but a Monastery,
And Angels your Soul, without Control,
To Abraham's Bosom shall Carry.
Nor need you to fear, who have bought Lands dear,
That were Holy Churches before;
We(...) for Life, but for your Souls health
At your Death you must them Restore.
Thus Popery you see* will kindly agree,
If you will it but Embrace,
But if you delay, there is so many in the way,'
That you will hardly get a good Place.
The Critical Time, is now in the Prime,
See how Holly Mother does smile,
And spreading her Arms, to preserve you from harms,
So gladly would you Reconcile.
To which purpose behold, do but tell out your Gold
And all Things in readiness be;
For the next Year, his Holiness (we hear)
Does intend a Jubilee. A Time when the POPE uses to grant General Pardons,
etc. Formerly kept only every Fiftyth Year: But now that his H^linesses Market
might the oftener Return, It is observed every Twenty-fifth Year, which happens
to be the approaching Year, 1675. And I wish that all Factious or Designing
Prists, and Poplings would be packing thither to observe It, that we might be
rid of them, having more occasion for their Room then their Company.

You that Pardons would have, or Indulgence crave,
To ROME, to ROME be Trudging,
And do not contemn, good Advice from a Friend,
Nor take his Ballad in dudgeon.
FINIS.
Printed for Benjamin Harris, at the Stationers Arms in Swithins-Alley near
the Royal Exchange.


