Poor Robins Collection of Ancient PROPHECYES.

Being twelve in Number, some whereof were delivered long since by our Famous
English Prophet AMBROSIUS MERLIN And found in old Manuscripts, now Printed for
the Readers satisfaction, others were found engraven on a marble stone, in the
Year 1520. being ingraved in Latin Characters, some whereof were Englished by
Mr. WILLIAM LILLY, With Alowance.

London Printed for Phillip Brooksby, and are to be sold at the next door to
the Golden Ball near the Hospital gate in West-Smithfield. 1672.

Poor Robins Collection of Ancient PROPHECYES.
FOr the better Illustrating this small Tract the Reader may take an account of
the several attribute given to Prophet, whereof some in our languages are
called Prophets, others Predict^s, and some of them are called Seers, the name
of pr^p^et was and ought to be p^e^^^r^^ ^h^^to those tha^ propresie Divine
Mysteries which should fu^urety h^p^en, the other ^i^, are more promiscu^sl^
used by several authors, but of that enough and before (...) some to enquire
i^ to which of these Lists this our Countryman M^l^n ought to be fi^d, it is
necessary I speak something of his Parents, his Mother being certain, but his
Father uncertain, for so say, whether he were according to Nature begot by a
Man and a Woman, or according to his Mothers confession begot or conceived by
an incuby, but whatever his Father was, true it is his Mother was the Royal
Daughter of King Demetius that sometimes flourished in this Isle of Brittany,
and thus much for his birth and Parents, we will now speak as well of his as
other famous Prophecies beginning at Henry the fifth the Black Prince so called
for his Victories in France, and continue them down to these times.

Merlins first Prophecy of King Henry the Fifth.
Note a strange mixture in the Planets seed,
For now a Mercury a Mars shall breed,
Who in his Arms accommo^ate and fit,
Shall compass more by War than be by Wit,
The Q^duceus to a Sword shall change,
And grim Orion shall though it seem strange,
Sit in Astreas Orb and from her tear
The three leaved flower she in her hand did bear,
And after many afurious Victory
At length invested shall this Lion be.
The exposition of this Prophecy is plain and meant of Henry the Fifth, who
conquered all France, and was crowned King of France in Paris the French have
the Flower De Luce in their Arms.

Merlins second Prophecy on Henry the Sixth.
How comes the Sun to rise where he should Set
Or how Lambs, Lions, Lions, Lambs beget,
Yet so^t must be, the Lamb though doubly crowned,
And thinking his large Empire has no bound,
Yet shall a Dolphin at a low Ebb Land
And snatch one powerful Scepter from his hand,
Thus it falls out twixt Father and the Son,
Windsor shall loose what ever Monmouth won.
This Prophecy was made good in Henry the sixth Reign, who for his meekness was
sirnam'd a Lamb he was doubly crowned in London and in Paris.

The Dolphin of Vien being at the lowest Ebb of State yet in time recovered the
whole Realm of France, with the Dukedom of Normandy, so that he snatched one
Scepter from his hand, thus Henry the Sixth born at Windsor lost all that Henry
the Fifth born at Monmouth had before achieved by his unmatchable Prowess.

Merlins Prophecy of King Henry the Eighth.
Rouse him shall this fierce Lain in his Den,
Be favored of the Gods and feared of Men.
Gallia shall quake, Albania stand in are,
And Caesar's sleep when he but shows his ^ar,
To league with him Hesperia shall take pride,
Those whom he Africa m^rse half black has died,
He further from the Scoptarchy of Hills
That Europe aws, and tripple Crown that fille.
The Christian world with terror takes the power
And bring it ^em^ unto his british bower.
By Alla it is meant the Kingdom of Se^iand and by Hesperia, Spain, and by
Gallia, France, by the Septarchy of Hills, meaning the seven hills on which
Rome stands and further taking on himself to be the supreme head of the
Church in his dominions takes away that power from the Popes tripple Crown.

A Prophecy of Edward the Sixth and may be continued to these times in some
part.
By birth a Caesar and in hopes as great,
There shall ascend to the Imperial Seat,
Upright he shall between two Basis stand,
The one in the Sea fixed the other on the Land,
Those like true Heroes shall great honor gain
Secure the continent and scou^e the Mains
And e're this great supporters taken away
His banners must in Northern Europe sway.
Edward the Sixth being riped out of his Mothers womb was called by the Name of
Coesar, after the same manner the great Roman Julius be so produced into the
world, had the surname of Caesar, his great supporter was the Duke of Summerset
the then Protector and the governor of the young King.

A Prophecy on Queen Mary
In time the Masculine Scepter cease to sway
And to a Spinster the whole Land obey,
Who to the Pap^l Monarchy shall restore,
All that the Phoenix had fetched thence before,
Then shall come in the Faggot and the Stake
And they of convert bodies b^n^fires make,
Men shall her short unprosperous Reign deplore,
By loss at Sea and damage on the Shore,
Whose bear being dissected you in it
May in large Characters find Callais Writ.
This Prophecy was made good in Queen Mary and Spinster is an ancient British
title given to the Female Sex when they used to be convend into any court
before King Edgars time, the rest of this Prophecy unriddles it self.

Merlins Prophecy of Queen Elizabeth, her Birth and Reign.
From the others Ashes shall a Phoenix rise
Whose birth is thus predicted by the wise,
Her chief predominant Starr is Mercury,
Jove shall with Venus in Conjunction be;
And Sol with them shine in his best Aspect
With Ariadnes Crown Astrea dect,
Shall then descend upon this terrene Stage
Not seen before, since the first golden Age,
Against whom all the lation bulls shall rore
But at Jove's awful summons shall give o^e,
Her brighs and glorious Sun be^m^ shall expel
The vain Clouds of the Candle, book and bell.
Of whom bred Vipers Menaces will come
A bad retort of favors she has done,
Though all these Dogs chase her with open cry
Live she shall L^^^, and feared then fam^sh'd dye.
Concerning the Astrologicall calculation of her birth in her it proved most
infallibly trve, all the other being so copious and plain, that any
intelligable Mar may understand them.

A Prophecy of King James by Ambrosius Merlin.
On ^orius back when hither shall be born
Through weeks ore tweede a Princely Unicorn,
Who brings into the world his own fair Crest
A Rampant Lion figured on his breast,
And to his arms six Lions more shall quarter
With six French flowers environed with a garter,
Joining by fates unchargeably dispose
The Northern Thistle, with the Southern Rose,
He shall the true Apostolic faith maintain,
With pious zeal during his blessed Reign.
There needs no explaination to this prophecy of King James being so
conspicuous, that each that can read it may understand it; thus far we have
traced the Prophesies of our fame'd English Merlin renowned throughout the
world, for this his admirable gift of Prophecy, in which are hinted many
predictions toward the lattererd of our Viper like, and ungrateful neighbors,
with a happy auguration of his present Majesty's Grandeur and victory over his
enemies, but we leave the wise discerning Reader to judge and find it out.

A discovery of some ancient Prophesies in the year One thousand five hundred
twenty a Marble Stone was found in the bowels of Mount Taurus upon an extreme
deluge, the words of the Prophesies were grave'd in ancient Lattin Charracters,
and thus Englished by Mr, William Lilly.

The Prophesies at large,
There shall arise a Star in Europe toward the house of the north, whose beam,
shall unexpectedly, enlighten the whole world.

This shall be in a most acceptable time when mortal Men being wearied with
war shall he desirous of peace.

Near unto this Stars setting a light as ancient as (...) former breaks out,
and running with eager flames of wart will shut up, or conclude his dominion,
with the coasts of Antitodus.

One Orb shall contradict, or contend with another.

The fixed Stars in motion shall run faster than the Planets, all these things
shall follow, viz, The Seas shall rise level with the Mountains, in a word,
night destruction and darkness shall conclude all these things.

Thus did the Mead reot out the Assyria Race
The Persian quickly speil'd the Meads in place,
Of him subdue'd, up starts the Maccde,
Who after yielded to the Roman Foe;
So do all Nations Justle out each other,
And so one People do pursue a nether;
And scarce a second that a first unhous'd
Before a third him thence again has roused.
FINIS.

