Trin-Unus-Deus. OR THE TRINITY, AND UNITY of GOD.

Showing The Co-eternity, Co-essentiality, and Co-equality of the Three Divine
Persons. The Difficulties of this, and other Christian Doctrines. The Reasons,
why the Church retains the Words Trinity, and Person. The signification, and
full importance of the Word Hypostasis, or Person. The newly raised Scandals,
hindering the faith of the Trinity. The fifth Monarchy, or, The Millinarian
Heresy revived, and the dreadful Consequences thereof. The new
Millinarian-Saints, and their designs.


In Ecclesia, Rationem praecedit Authoritas (Scripturae.)
Audiatur ad quod Possumus, Credatur ad quod non possumus.
Aug. de Moribus Eccles. l. 1. c. 25. and in Ps. 134. Tempore, nec Senior Pater
est: nec Numine, Major. Prud. in Apotheos: By EDM: PORTEP, B. D. sometimes
Fellow of St John's Coll. in Cambridg, and Prebend of Norwich.

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moscley, at the Princes Arms in St Paul's
Churchyard. 1657.

To the virtuous, and my ever Honored good Lady; The Lady Margaret Parston,
the Wife of the Right Worshipful Sr William Parston of Oxnet in Norf. Baronet
Peace and Truth.
MADAM,
SOme Portions of the Doctrines handled in this little book, were formerly
prepared for, and also presented to, your Ear; therefore I hold my self in good
manners obliged to represent the same to your pious Eyes, and heart to be
reviewed and ruminated. Seeing now the Pulpits are secured, and Plut. Mora.
lib. de Garrulit. Ovid. Met. 8.
our Tongues silenced by a dumb Spirit. So that, at most, we can be but
Penpreachers; and that no longer then the Press will be open to us; when that
also shall be shut, we must content our selves, and others with the only refuge
of him in the Poet, who said, At certe caelum patet, ibimus illac. We may
Eliah-like ascend up into Heaven in the Chariot of fervent prayer, (which no
man can hinder,) and others may use their Eyes, instead of their Ears, for
acquiring, and consolidating their Christian faith by perusal, of such writings
as formerly have been published by our true and learned Divines, and thereby
perceive the merciful providence of God in preordaining the helps of Books to
stand us in stead, when Preaching should fail, which old Writers called
Solacium and Medicamentum animae. 1. The Solace and Medicine of our Souls. For,
as a learned man once said, Aug. Ps. 121.
The Preacher is a Book to them that cannot read; So a good Book is a silent
Preacher to them that cannot otherwise hear necessary truths.

There were in old time, books called Live. and Plin.
Libri Lintei, i. e. linen books written by men: and there have been linen
books written by holy Women, but with the pens of Needles, such as the
Charitable Dorcas wrote, Act. 9. 39. for vesting of poor Widows: Such kind of
writings have been much practiced in that worthy, and most charitable family,
wherein God has planted you, to succeed your pious predecessors in their
goodness and charity, who have been for many years Nursing Mothers, as your
worthy consort, and his Ancestors have been Nursing* Fathers to poor people in
many Towns round about them; not only by clothing, but also by feeding them,
and providing for them by daily Alms, and large Annual Distributions, and a
Perpetual Hospital, and a Free School, and Sermons also to feed their Souls.
Surely these things are gone up to Heaven for a memorial, and have invited the
blessings of God to rest on that Family.

This is to me a pressing motive to present this Treatise to public view,
adorned with your name, that so it may be a thankful memorial, and
acknowledgement of those grand Charities, which have issued from your one house
to so many places about us; of which my self have heretofore diverse times been
employed, in some part, as a dispenser; and truly I have often in my thoughts,
chid my self, and others, as guilty of ingratitude, in that there has not been
a public acknowledgement thereof, before God, and man from any of those twelve
Towns, which have been annually refreshed by the same Charity. We might justly
be accounted worse then Luc. 17. 17.
those ten Leapers cured by Christ, if one, at least, should not return thanks.

But Christian Charity is not retarded by ingratitude, it is like God, who
gives to the unthankful: Never any age produced more unthankful wretches, then
this; wherein it has been often observed, that the same hands which have
received relief, have been employed in spoiling and plundering the goods of
their relievers; Such foul ingratitude and spoliations must needs hinder
Almesdeeds, Eleemosinarios extiagunt Rapteres. Aug, de Temp Sermon. 78.
as St Austin observed that it did in his time, and so it does now with many,
who are thereby disabled; and would so with all, but that they know for whose
sake their Alms are given, and that the Poor are but the, Laturarij Chri. ibid
lib. Ser. 50.
Crickers of Christ; for what is committed to them by Charity, is carried into
an everlasting Barn, and although their wickedness may exclude their Persons,
nevertheless their testimony will be present with God. Of such perseverance in
Charity, we have a memorable example in our Ecclesiastical History of
Anastasius Evag. l. 5. c. 5.
Bishop of Antiocb, who lived under the Reign of the covetous and griping
Emperor Justinus II. Yet this good man was so far from withholding, or
diminishing his Alms, that he increased them least (said he) Justinus should
take all away both from me, and from the poor. For, if men should respite
their. Alms until the times are quiet, and stay for a cessation of
Persecutions, they must expect till Satan be dead; for, as long as he lives,
Aug. in Ps. 127.
(As one says) there will be no cessation of oppressions. There is a Fable of
a King; Ovid. Met. l. 11.
Who turned every thing that he touched into Gold. This fiction was to
signify, that great Potentates can make all their designs, and pretenses serve
their turns for supply of their Treasuries. So we read of another (a) bountiful
Prince, Rex Anius.
whose Daughters could by their touch, turn all things into Corn, and Wine, and
Oil, and were therefore called Dictys Cretens, l. 1.
Caenotropae. This was to signify that Charitable persons in all their
endeavors for acquiring Wealth, do thereby, but labor, to enable themselves
to do good to others, and such (if any) is a good covetousness. So Cic. Or. pro
Rabir.
Tullie reports, of C. Curious, an honest Roman Publican, that he acquired
wealth, not to feed his own covetousness, but that thereby he might be enabled
to do good to others, as another Heathen says, Sen. in Herc. Oet.
Hic, Solas optat, quas donet Opes. Our Christian Writers often put us in mind of
Charitable thrift. Fulg. Epist. 2.
Proba a noble Lady, and Virgin would often fast, and also wear course, and
cheap apparel, that so she might save for the poor; They tell us, that the
forbearing of one meals meat, That one Jewel, or Ring, or one trunck of
apparel would feed and cloth many poor Christians. Origin, Orig. in Lev. hom.
10.
pronounces a blessing on them that employ the parcimony of fasting, for
feeding of the hungry: for (as one of our English Archbishops used to say, in
homely Latin but with a good meaning, Rog. Archiep. Ebor.
Bonus Servatius, facit bonum Bonifacium, i. e. Good Husbandry, makes good
Hospitality.

Charity is now (when there is most need of it,) waxen cold among us, upon
another reason, viz. by the Scandals of two factions: for the Romanists say
that our Solifidians have made men uncharitable, by requiring only a bare
Dogmatical or Doctrinal faith. And the Solifidians say that Romanists have made
Charity superstitious by their doctrine of Merit; certainly, both sides err;
for although Almsdeeds cannot merit Heaven, nor deliver us from sin, and
eternal death, so, as Christ does; yet they may, and often do deliver from
temporal Vengeance, and temporal death, as the perfect works and obedience of
Christ deliver from eternal punishments. The advice of the Wise, Dan. 4. 27.
and Honorable Prophet Daniel was to this purpose: O King, let my counsel be
acceptable to thee, and break off thy sins by righteousness, and thine
iniquities by showing mercy to the poor, it may be a lengthening of thy
tranquillity.] The merciful distribution of Alms, is called 2 Cor. 9. 6.
Sowing, to signify, that as the Earth returns us our seed with increase, so
much more will God to our profit, at least, by withholding deserved vengeance,
and giving us a longer time for amendment, and happily will add, Joh. 1. 16.
Grace, for grace;] so, that if the Grace of Charity be improved, he will add
the grace of faith, and perseverance, as he did to the Centurion, Act. 10. 4.
But then our Alms must be done without looking on our selves as if we were
benefactors, and doners unto God, but as humble Debtors, or Farmers paying, and
returning his due rent; not with any presumption of redeeming, or buying off,
our Sins; but in the form of an humble Suppliant, and Petitioner, and with
tears of Compunction, just as a good man will give some recompense (such as he
can) to his injured Brother, as a Testimony, and acknowledgement of the
offense, and of his sorrow: So a good Christian considers his Alms, as a
part of his repentance.

Such Charitable distributions are of greater concernment then some will take
notice of, seeing our Savior himself vouchsafed to be ministered unto by those
devout Women Mary Magdalen, Joanna, Luc. 8. 2, 3.
Susanna, and others; not for any personal need that himself had, (for he did
Miraculously feed more then 5000 at one time,) but as a pattern to us; and for
an encouragement, he has declared, that, what is given for his sake to his
poor members, is really given to himself; He advises us, Luc. 6. 30.
to give to every man that asks, this we should do, least that poor Creature
that is denied, prove, to be a poor Christ, and then no marvel, if our God stop
his Ears at our supplications, when we have stopped our Ears at his; for the
greatest, and most honorable Christians, are but beggars to him, and every day
do, or should, of him beg their daily bread.

This Christian duty is moreover, sweetened by most gracious promises of reward,
as high as any other, even with the inheritance of heaven, when it is said,
Come ye blessed of my Father, etc.] A great purchase for a small price, and
this, not because Heaven is Vile, or Cheap, but because our Lord is gracious.
The old Testament calls this Charitableness a lending to the Lord,] so does
the new Testament, where Christ says; Do good, and lend, hoping for nothing
again,] for if it be demanded, Prove. 19. 17. Luc. 6. 35.
how that can be called a lending, which is an absolute gift; the answer is,
that though it be a free gift to the poor, yet it is a lending to God, because
he does engage himself to re-pay. The Fathers translate the word Lend by
[faeneratur,] as lent to God upon Usury, or increase, which they call Aug.
Epist. 215.
immortal Usury; as if the Scripture took notice of our covetousness, thereby
to invite us to works of Charity for our own profit. The holy Woman Hannah said
truly, The Lord 1 Samuel 2. 7.
makes poor, and makes rich.] There is no doubt, but that one grand reason
why God permits so many poor to be in the World, is, to give us occasions,
and objects of Charity, and this for the great benefit of the charitable giver:
for God needs not our gifts, no more then he does our prayers; We have more
need to give, then he has to receive by the hands of the poor; he could, and
can make all rich; his great house, the World, is stored with provision,
sufficient for all his creatures; If it were not, he can supply defects, and
(as Chrysostom notes,) he can rain down showers of Gold, and all necessaries,
as we read in our own, and foreign Histories of showers of flesh, of Milk, of
Wool, and of Rivers of Wine, and Fountains of Oil, as in Scripture of Manna,
and Quails; whereby it is apparent that the precept of Alms, was intented for
the benefit of the giver.

This is the reason that the Scriptures promise Treasures in Heaven, and that
the merciful are blessed, and shall obtain Heb. 14. 13.
mercy, that our Alms are Sacrifices, and Jam. 1 27.
well pleasing to God] certainly, if Alms be Sacrifices, then, the Poor, the
Sick, the Widow, the Orphant, and aged are the Altars on which his Sacrifices
are to be laid: The Apostle tells us, That pure Religion, is to visit the
Fatherless and VVidows] verily that Religion which neglects these duties is
an impure Religion. The ancient Fathers have left us many comfortable
encouragements for it: They say Ambr.
The man is blessed, from whose house the poor never returns empty. Aug.
That the charitable Almes-giver, when he dies, he departs with firm security
and consolation. Christ.
That at the great judgment, the Saints and Angels will take notice of, and
commend their Charities. That the poor whom they have relieved shall then
openly declare them to have been their Patrones, and Preservers (as is
intimated, Luke 16. 9.) That then, Mercy will stand between them and Hell, and
will not suffer any of the merciful to pass that way. Thus they. But though
neither Men, nor Angels should then take notice of them; yet it is most certain
that the God of men, and Angels will acknowledge, and reward their persons, and
mercifulness.

And least we should be tired with long expectation of reward; The Word of God
seems to provide for that, by promises of temporal requitals, and those Mar.
10. 30.
very considerable as we read, Psalm. 41. 1. as Christ in the Gospel promises
an hundredfold reward in this time to them that for his sake, leave Houses,
Brethen, Sisters, Wives, Children, and Lands,] which promise is warily to be
considered, because some Millinarians would have it to be meant grossly, and
literally, as if for one house, or one Father, they must have an hundred houses
and Fathers here, a false gloss surely; For I trow, they expect not to have an
hundred Wives, neither does the promise mention Wives, though the condition do.
The meaning is, That they who so part with estates, and friends, shall have
both, multiplied unto them; for to them every true Christian, Man, and Woman,
shall be by love, care, and tender affection, as so many Fathers, Brethen,
Wives, or Sisters, ministering comforts to them. The Fortunes, and estates of
one, shall serve the necessities of the other; All the houses of the faithful
shall be open to them as if they were their own houses: For therefore did the
primitive Christians call one another Brethren and Sisters. Act. 4. 32.
The Apostles, who left their nets, instead thereof had all the wealth of
Christians laid at their feet, their wealth was common to the whole fraternity,
in so much, that no man called his estate, his own propriety. Gal. 4. 14.
Paul was entertained by the Galatians, as if he had been an Angel of God, or
as if he had been Christ himself.] And this charity lasted a long time among
true Christians. Tertullian for his time reports Tert. Apol. c. 39,
Christianis, omnia indiscreta sunt praeter Uxores, i. e. That, all they had,
was communicated to their Fellow Christians, except only their Wives, and that
the heathens hereupon would say. See how the Christians love one another.

But such Charity is now hard to be found (as Christ foretold) nor may we in
these dreggs and bottom of the world expect such temporal retributions. God
has given some, that men may know there is a reward; but he does not so reward
all here, least men should expect none other elsewhere St Ambrose says, Ambr.
de offic. l. 2. c. 16.
He knew some Priests who by giving to the poor, increased more in wealth. The
Roman History observes, that the charitable Emperor Paul Diac. in Tib. c. 2.
Tiberius II. was rewarded here, by finding vast hidden treasures, as the poor
Widow of Sarepta was also, for relieving the Prophet; but such returns are not
now to be hoped, nor are we to forbear the acts of charity, although we find
not such mundane retributions. It is the good Counsel of St Austin, That we
should not thus say, or think with our selves, I will do good to some poor
Christians, that so my store may increase. Aug. lib. Homil. Hom. 18.
Noli hoc quaerere, messis tua serius venit,] i. e. expect not your reward
here, for that harvest will be much later. When one brought to Luther a
legacy, which a certain thankful Auditor of his had bequeathed him, the poor
man took it with trembling, and said Melch. Ad. in vita Luth.
Metuo, ne Deus his praemiet,] i. e. he was afraid, least God did reward his
labors in this world; for verily, the withholding of rewards in this life, is
a certain pledge, that charitableness shall be rewarded elsewhere.

Madam, There is yet a more noble, and Heavenly hospitality to be practiced by
Christians; for the exercise whereof, I here present unto you Three Guests,
worthy of admission into the Tabernacle of your beautiful body and Soul,
because the beauty of both, was their gift, as one says. Ovid.
Forma Dei munus -- They are the same Guests that were formerly entertained by
your Father Abraham. They are Travelers, yea, and Genesis 18.
Wanderers, and have suffered repulses in many places of the Christian World,
and by many persons among us, even as our Christian Religion has been abused
by those who professed themselves to be lovers thereof; just as Potiphars Wife
Genesis 39.
loved, and yet persecuted Joseph: And as the Watchmen smote, and wounded the
Spouse; even so some that should be the Watchmen of our Israel, have uncivily
Cant. 57.
abused these holy Guests, and thereby wounded the very head of Christianity. I
am firmly confident, that you will joyfully admit them by faith, and
accommodate them by charity, and piously treat, and retain them with cheerful
perseverance. This treatise is as the knocking at the door, which is mentioned,
Rev. 3. 20. At which when you have opened, you will find that gracious promise
to stand firm, which is recorded in the Gospel. That the Father, and the Son,
and the Holy Comforter will come in unto you, and make their abode, and
continue Joh. 14. 16, 23.
with you for ever.

I crave your patience (good Madam) whilst I relate unto you one other grand
motive (besides the above mentioned, and my thankful acknowledgement of your
many favors,) why I have used your name in the Dedication of this book. St.
Ambrose, considering those words of Christ, Math. 25. I was in Prison] tells
us, That in the last judgment. Christian Professors will be asked Ambr. Sermon.
64.
whom they have delivered out of Prison. In the beginning of the sorrows of
this Land, when the unmerciful Pentephobers raged; among many others (far
better then my self,) I also was imprisoned, and then first understood the
words of Tertullian, who said that Tert. ad Martyr. C^rcer est Domus Diaboli.
a Prison is the house of the Devil,] So much harshness, and tedious restraint
we suffered, that truly my life was dwinling, and I was even at Death's door;
The Lady Hewet.
your Dear and virtuous Mother, (who is now with God) did much comfort me by
her personal visitation; But your self, did negotiate, and effect my
deliverance, The said Tertullian mentions Tert. cont. Valent. p. 375.
Angelam, i. e. a she Angel; verily you were the good Angel that lead me out of
Prison, and thereby prolonged that Life, which in just gratitude ought to serve
you whilst it lasts; and I trust, that this piece of your Christian Charity,
among the rest, will be to your comfort, remembered at the great day of the
Lord. In Psalm. 41. 1.
the mean time, David's Prophecy of blessings on the merciful, shall be my
Prayer for you. The Lord deliver you in time of trouble; The Lord preserve you,
and keep you alive, that you may be blessed upon Earth, and not delivered unto
the will of your Enemies.] The same Lord multiply his favors on you here, and
augment his own Graces in you, and in the end, crown them with Glory. So
prays,

Madam, Marsham in Norf. Your most obliged Servant EDM. PORTER.

The Contents of each several Chapter.
1. Chapt. HOw Christ is peculiarly the Son of God. How he is the first
begotten, and yet the only begotten. That the Holy Ghost cannot be called the
Son of God. That no Creature is the Son of God, so as Christ is. 1 2. Chapt.
The Difficulties of apprehending the Mystery of the Trinity, and other
Christian Doctrines. Of Philosophers, Jews, and Christians professing their
ignorance in matters of Nature, and Religion. 8 3. Chapt. More concerning those
Difficulties, and of our ignorance in Theological Doctrines of the Trinity and
Predestination; and of the overgreat boldness of some in handling those
Mysteries. 16 4. Chapt. That the Doctrine of the Trinity is obscurely delivered
in the Old Testament. Why the Septuagint concealed it. The resemblance of the
Trinity in things Natural, and Moral. The distinct proprieties of the Three
Persons, and their Unity. Of the use of some Words in Religion, which are not
found in the Scriptures. 25 5. Chapt. More of Words not Scriptural. Of the Word
Trinity, and of the Word Person. Why the Trinity is called Three Persons. Why
Baptism is administered in the name of the Trinity. 34 6. Chapt. Of the
Scriptural Word Hypostasis. The Grammatical, and Theological signification
thereof. Why the Three Divine Persons are called Hypostases. That the Godhead
resideth only in these Three Persons, and not otherwise. The Ubiquity both of
the Godhead, and of these Three Persons. 43 7. Chap. Of the Holy Ghost. That
he is one of the Divine Persons. That he is to be prayed unto, is showed by
Scripture, and by practice of the Church. That he is confessed in Creeds, and
invocated in Baptismes and Doxologies. 53 8. Chapt. Of Scandals hindering the
faith of the Trinity. 1. By forbidding the corporal worship of the Lord Jesus.
2. By disuse of the Doxologies, and Creeds, even in Baptismes. 3. By dissolving
the Order Episcopal, ordained by the Holy Ghost. Of Presbytery, That it is no
Scriptural order of Sacerdocy. St Jerome's Epistle to Euagrius explained. 63 9.
Chapt. More of Scandals. 1. By scandalous Ministers. 2. By dis-use, and abuse
of the Lords Prayer. Of Christ's Earthly Kingdom, and his corporal return,
before his coming to the last Judgment. That prosperity in unjust causes, is no
sign of Gods approbation. Of the Regal Style, Gratia Dei. Something concerning
public Thanks-givings. 78 10. Chapt. Of Millinarians, and their imaginary
fifth Monarchy. That it is an Heresy against the faith of the Trinity. Mr
Mede's Argument for Christ's Earthly Kingdom is answered. That Christ's
Kingdom shall last after the final Judgment, and continue for ever. 87 Sect.
2. Of Christ's Kingdom over all the World, and every Creature. That it ceased
not at his death; That neither the Roman Consistory, nor the Presbyterian
Vestry, can be called Christ's Throne. How it is in this World, and yet not of
this World. That the Policy of Christ's Kingdom is altogether unlike, and
diverse from worldly Policy. 96 Sect. 3. Of Christ's Kingdom, and Acts in
Heaven. Of his Melchisedechical Priesthood there. The manner of his
Intercession, Advocateship, and Mediatorship for us in Heaven. That it is not
by Sacrificing or praying for us there. What Priestly Act he there performs.
110 Sect. 4. Of Christ's Session at the Right hand of God. The difference
between the Right hand of God, and the Right hand of the Father; with the
abuses of that Article. Why Christ withdrew to Heaven. Of the re-building of
Jerusalem, and the Temple. Of the Jewish Monarchy, and their Pseudo-Messiah, or
the great Antichrist. 122 Sect. 5. The signification of the Jewish feast of
Atonement; and of the Highpriests entering the Sanctum Sanctorum, and of the
Mercy-seat; sprinkling of blood, Scapegoat, and Jewish Sacrifices; why God
disliked them. The signification of the Altar. Of Jewish and Christian
Liturgies. 135
11. Chapt. More concerning Millinarism. The dreadful and bloody Consequences
thereof. Of new Millinarian Saints, and the Meek. What Earth, or Land is
promised to the truly Meek. The Title of Saint, unduely placed, is an abuse of
the Holy Ghost. The Conclusion. 146


The Preface.
HAving formerly discoursed concerning the absolute Godhead of Jesus Christ,
and showed that he is the only and most high God, and (...) (as Divines use to
say) and the I am (i.) God absolutely and independently (for an Antidote
against the late Socinian commentary on the Hebrews:) It seems requisite and
seasonable, to consider the same Lord Jesus in his Relative Personality, as he
stands in relation to the Father, and so is the Eternal Son of the Eternal
Father. In the contemplation whereof, I shall be necessitated briefly to
discourse the Sacred Doctrine of the whole blessed Trinity, and each several
Person thereof:

And because this profound and mysterious Doctrine is far above the reach of
our Natural reason and comprehension, and therefore to be not only Reverendly,
but also Warily and Circumspectly handled, it being confessed both by Heathen
and Christian Writers Tacitus
Sanctius and reverentius visum est, de actis Deorum credere, quam scire, and
Cicero
De Potestate Deorum timide and pauca dicamus, i. e. it seems more reverend
to believe the power of God, then to presume to pry into it; and to speak
sparingly and timerously thereof; because as Origin says, Orig. in Eze. hom. 1.
De Deo vera dicere periculosum est, i. e. It is dangerous to speak of God,
albeit we speak nothing but the Truth.

I therefore do here most earnestly implore the assistance of the Father of
Lights, to illuminate the hearts both of the Writer and Reader, that from him
we may receive all needful evidence for our apprehension, and for our faith in
the holy Trinity, which now we are to discourse of, and to show that there are
Three Persons in the Godhead, and that they all are Coessential, Coequal, and
Coeternal.

Errata.
Page 5. l. 17. r. patre. p. 9. l. 9. r. (...), p. 17. l. 19. r. Salvianus, p.
21. l. 16. r. ipse, p. 23. l. 9. r. Abulenses, p. 24. l. 9. r. Idiotae, p. 34.
l. 10. r. contentiosius, p. 41. l. 31. r. (...), p. 44. l. 24. r. (...), p. 60.
l. 1. r. are that temple, p. 69. l. 21, and 22. r. signing, p. 75. l. 13. r.
voted, p. 76. l. 7. dele those godly, p. 78. l. 10. r. in Marcione, p. 109. l.
2. r. ne gentes, l. 22. r. spirit, p. 110. l. 9. r. whether, p. 125. l. 2. r.
lord, p. 129. l. 15. r. premises, p. 130. l. 24. r. take, p. 136. l. 22. r.
the feast, p. 137. l. 12. r. propitiation, p. 147. l. 25. r. men, p. 150. l. 5.
r. women. p. 151. r. them, p. 153. l. 2. r. auri, l. 12. r. devour, l. 17. r.
foul toad found, p. 158. l. 2. r. Augustine, p. 159. l. 4. r. paraechial, l.
13. r. metuant, l. 25. r. alio fastu.

In the Margin.
In the Epistle, p. 4. l. 3, and 4. r. extinguunt.

In the Book, p. 7. l. 1. r. Bas. cont. Eunom. p. 11. l. 7. r. Dion. Laer. p.
16. l. 2. r. Romans 11. 33. p. 17. l. 3. r. (...), p. 21. l. 2. r. Deor. p. 34.
l. 8. r. and hom. 46. and 31. p. 46. l. 6. r. Ascet. p. 131. l. 1. r. Ioh. p.
147. l. 1. r. 118. p. 149. l. 6. r. haer.

THE DOCTRINE OF THE Holy Trinity.
CHAP. I.
How Christ is the Son of God peculiarly by Eternal generation, and not only by
his Miraculous humane Birth. How he is the first bego^ten, and the
Only-begotten Son. That the Holy Ghost cannot be called a Son, nor any
Creature, so, as Christ is. Why Heresies are permitted.

TO this Discourse following, I am led by our Commenters inconsiderate, if not
malicious, Exposition of that place, Heb. 1. 2. Where it is said, He has
spoken to us, by ^or in) his Son] upon which words Heb. 1. 2.
he tells us that Christ is therefore called the Son of God; Because he was
wonderfully born of a Virgin; without the co operation of man, and only by the
miraculous Power of God.] 2. Because he was appointed to reveal the will of
God, etc.] This he learned of the old Arians, who did just so expound those
words as we find related by Ath. de Decret. Nic. Council.
Athanasius. Thus he wilfully leaves out the grand and most principal reason
of Christ's Son ship, and fasteneth on such shifts as are but frivolous in
respect of the main and indeed are not proper to Christ, but common to diverse
others.

For how is the Creation of Adam and Eve, less Miraculous and Divine, then
this, that the Commenter affords to the Son of God? Is it not as wonderful to
make a man of earth, as of a woman? And as much a Divine work to make a woman
of a man (as Eve was) as to make a man of a Virgin? And truly, as much may be
said of Isaac and J^hn Baptist, both conceived by Divine Power, by such Parents
as were naturally disabled from childbearing, both by age and sterility; for
Sarai was barren, Genesis 11. 30. and she was ninety years old before she
conceived, Genesis 17. 17. So Elizabeth was both barren and stricken in years,
Luke 1. 17. (that is) naturally indisposed for childbearing; so that their
childbearing must be confessed to be miraculous by Divine Power, as well as
Christ's humane generation.

By this reason, the Heathens might have called mere men the Sons of God, for
they affirmed that the first men did grow out of the earth, or that they sprang
from Trees, and are therefore called by them Autecthones, Aborigines, indigenae
and Terrae-filii, as is expressed by the Poet. Juvenal. sat. 6. and sat. 13.


-- Qui rupto robore nati Compositique luto, nullos habuere parents, And
Quondam hoc indigenae vivebant more -- Pers. sat. 3. Diodor. Sic. lib. 1. and
lib. 3.
And another alluding to this fiction, calls a lazy young Boy.

Vdum, and molle lutum -- Of which Heathenish error we read much in Diodorus,
who seriously, and Historically affirmed the first men to have grown out of the
earth, and this in Ethiopia; And to make this report credible, he tells us that
some Ethiopians must needs be so bred, because they were seated in such a place
as was inaccessable by any Forrainer, and without any possibility of egress by
the Inhabitants, by reason of the steep Rocks, and Sea, wherewith this Land was
enclosed, when they had not any Boats or Ships for Ingress or Egress: Therefore
these Heathens upon this conceit, might as well boast themselves to be the Sons
of God, as either Adam or Christ, (if we will believe this Commenter) yet they
ascribed the Original of men only to nature, not to God.

And indeed our ordinary forming in the Womb, and natural Births, are as much
to be accounted the Work of God, and Wonderful as was the forming of Christ, or
our first Parents and would be so esteemed if it were not so common and
ordinary; The Psalmist Psalm. 139. 16.
says, I am wonderfully made, and curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the
earth. The like may be said of the whole world which was so wonderfully created
by God, yet we call not the world the Son of God.

The Scriptures call Christ Pri^ogenitum, the first begotten Son of God,
because by his Eternal and Ineffable Generation; he was before all the other
Sons of God, whether men or Angels, (who are also called the Sons of God) The
same Scriptures call Christ Vnigenitum, The Only begotten Son of the Father,
because none other were so begotten as this Eternal Son of God was, being by
this Generation, of the same Essence, Nature, Substance, and Godhead that the
Father is, God of God. Even as the sons of men are of the same specifical
humane Nature and Essence with their Progenitors: But men are not so the Sons
of God, as they are of their natural Parents, because they are not of the same
Essence and Nature with God; for if they were then it must follow that man
should be, and properly be called God, just as a son of man is called man.

To the second Reason That Christ is the Son of God, because he was appointed
to r^veal the w^ll of God] We say, this is a so common to others: for so Moses
was Appoi^ted, and did reveal the will of God; so did the holy Prophets, and
after them the holy Apostles did the same; And S. Paul (who was most signally
so appointed from Heaven) tells the Asians, Acts 20. 27. I have not shunned to
declare unto you all the Council of God. Angels also declared and revealed the
will of God, and so does the Holy Ghost as fully as ever the second person did,
and rather more, because the Revelation of the will of God is by Christ himself
referred and respited until the Holy Ghost should come and teach it; as we
read. But the Comfo^ter Joh. 14. 26. 16. 13.
which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send i^ my name, he shall teach
you all things -- and He will guide you idto all truth: Yet Angels are not for
this cause to be so called the Sons of God: and to say that the Holy Ghost is
the Son of God the Father, or God the Son, was long ago adjudged Heresy, as we
are told by Athanasius; Athan. Epist. ad Serapion.
H^retici aiunt filium and spiritum^e ^e fratres and quod pater est avus and
spiritus est n^pos patris and filius fi^i, quia spiritus a filio est and filius
a Pater] ^e. Heretics say that the Son and the Spirit are brethren -- and that
the Father is the Grandfather of the Spirit, and the Spirit is the Son of the
Son; and such conceits are by Epiphanius said to be Heresies of the Ephiph.
haer. 19. and haer. 53.
Osseni, and the Sam saei Finally, those Anti Trinitarian Heretics, who
heretofore taug^th the same which this Commenter does, although they would
afford no better appellation to the Holy Ghost, then to call him Minist^um
Apostolum, and M^ttendarium i. e. a Minister, an Ambassador and Emissary of
God, yet they did not for this reason call him the Son of God: And although the
Scripture does call him the finger of God, because the Spirit does show the
secret Counsels of God, yet in all this Scripture, the Spirit is never called
the Son of God, or said to be begotten; And when the Macedonian Heretics
demanded an example or Instance, of One begotten, and another not begotten, yet
both to come from one. Gregory Naz. answers them Naz. Orat. 37.
that Eve and Seth were both of them from Adam; Seth was begotten, and Eve not
begotten.

When an earthly King sends his Ambassador to declare his will or desires to
another State, will any man say that the Ambassador must for this cause be
called the Kings Son? No surely, although he be Legatus a latere, or Legatus
natus (as our Archbish. of Cant. was once called) and a veridicus and no
Mendoza (as one pleasantly described an Ambassador Vin bonus peregre missus ad
mentiendu^ pro Repub.) yet no Son for this, neither are the Apostles to be
called sons, for this although S. Paul says. They are Ambassadors for Christ.
2 Cor. 5. 20.
There are other precences alleged by the Commenter in this matter, but they
are frivolous and light, and easily discernable by any intelligent Reader, to
be but vain, and are not worth the while to examine.

This Doctrine of the Eternal Son of God, and so of the Holy Trinity of
Persons, is of such necessity to be retained and believed, that without it,
Christians cannot reasonably fancy to themselves any probable way of Salvation;
because (as I have formerly showed) upon this Doctrine is grounded the
everlasting Covenant of grace, which is also called the Eternal Gospel, by
which only, we can hope for, and claim Salvation by and in Christ, wherefore to
me it seems a wonderful blindness of some in these Times, by whom the blessed
Trinity is not only unbelieved, but withal, so foully blasphemed, that it is
both unfitting, yea, and dangerous to report their words: and therefore in the
same case S. Basil in his Book against the Heretic Eunomius, wherein he was
forced to declare his blasphemous Errors, thus prayed: Baz. Cont. Eunol. ib. 2.
Domine in his quae loquimur propitius nobis sis, i. e. That God would be
merciful to him, for his only rehearsing Eunomius his blasphemies. God is
patient indeed, in suffering such abuses both of his Truth and Person, and does
therefore permit them, because he can extract some good use from them: upon
this reason S. Paul tells us, 1 Cor. 11. 19. There must be Heresies] as if
there were some need of them, which surely is chiefly this; That the rising of
Heresies, gives occasion to the Church to set forth, and explain the true and
holy Doctrine more evidently then otherwise it would be. But I proceed.

CHAP. 2.
The difficulty of the Doctrine of the Trinity and other Christian Mysteries,
that it should not discourage us from bileeving nor provoke us to impatience.
The most learned Philosophers, Jews, and Christians, professing their
ignorances.

THe Ancient Heretics rejected the Doctrine of the Trinity, because they could
not by reasoning comprehend it: and many now a days neglect it because it is
sublime, and hard to be understood. But this pretense will not serve their
turn; the difficulties should not hinder, but rather quicken our endeavors to
find out what we can; nor should they impede our faith from believing that
which we are sure the Scriptures propound to us, although we understand it not;
S. Ambrose says very truly Ambr. de Offic. lib. 1. c. 1.
Nemo est qui doceri non egeat dum vivit, ie. The most wise and learned men may
still be learners whilst they live.

Neither does God require our comprehension of all Christian Doctrine, but our
apprehension, and not our understanding, but our believing it. The Articles of
faith are tendered to us under the word Credo, i. e. to be believed though not
understood. Christ himself calls our Religion The Mysteries of the Kingdom of
Heaven, Mat. 13. 11. and S. Paul, The Mystery of godliness, 1 Timothy 3. 16. The
word Mystery signifies a thing secret and hidden, of (...) to shut: and in
another place he calls these Mysteries, Riddles, 1 Cor. 13. 12. here we see
darkly ((...)) i. e, in a Riddle. The Prophet says, Verily thou art a God that
hid^st Isa. 45. 15. Luc. 10. 21.
thy self: Christ said, That the Father had hid those things from the wise,
which yet he revealed to Babes; So Christ was figured by the Ark, which stood
in a secret place of the Temple; and there was also a Veil before it, to
intimate that Christ was for a time shut up, veiled and hidden; and indeed
Moses Veil signified the same thing, as the Apostle says of the careless Jews,
2. Cor. 3. 15. But even unto this day, when Moses is read the veil is upon
their heart -- when it shall turn unto the Lord, the Veil shall be taken away]
i. e. When by faith their heart shall embrace Christ, this darkness shall be
light.

For the submitting our carnal wisdom, and reason to the word of God, will
bring a greater evidence to our souls, then the profoundest disputes can do:
Upon these words, My sheep hear my voice.] S. Basil observes, Audiunt, non
disputant, ie. they make no disputes, but accept it; and the old reading of
those words, Isa. 7. 9 as we find generally in the Fathers, was, Nisi
credideri is non intelligetis] i. e. except ye believe ye shall not understand:
So S Peter puts believing before knowing, Joh. 6. 69. We believe and are sure]
it is in the Original we believe and know;] for in these Mysteries faith must
lead us to knowledge. Aug. in Joh. Tract. 29.
Noli intelligere ut credas sed creed ut intelligas, i. e. say not, I will not
believe until I understand, but first believe, and then understanding will
follow: Christ says, If you believe not that I am he, you shall dye in Joh. 8.
28.
your sins] blessed be God (says the Expositer) that he did not say Except ye
understand it.

Austin reporting the great faith of Christians in his time, tells us that it
was a common saying among them. Aug. de Tem. Sermon. 189.
Accepto baptismo dicere solemus, fidelis factus sum, credo quod nescio] i. e.
When we are baptized we use to say, now I am one of the faithful, for I believe
that which I understand not. When Abailardus would needs know the reason why
the Son of God would redeem and save mankind by his own bloodshedding, which
he might have done by his word only; S. Bernard returned this answer Bern.
Epist. 190.
. Ipsum interroga, mihi scire licet quod ita; Cur ita, non licet: i. e. Ask
Christ himself, for though I know he did so; yet why did he so? I may not
presume to know: and S, Austin gives this good advice concerning the Articles
of our faith which may be understood, and those also which we cannot
understand, Aug. in Ioh. Tract. 35.
Si potes Cape: Si non potes creed: i. e. Understand what you can, and believe
the rest, for in those great mysteries, it is safer to build our faith upon the
sure word of God, then to depend on a sandy foundation of humane reason, and to
be firmly assured of this, as Epiphaninus says. Ephiph. haer. 70.
Quicquid Deus dicit, verum est, licet nos non intelligamus, i. e. Whatsoever
God has said, it is certainly true, although we do not understand it; and
Blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed.

Neither should our weakness and want of Joh. 20. 29.
knowledge in such high mysteries, either discourage us, or move us to
impatience; for we may find in wiser men then our selves as great ignorance;
who yet were not ashamed to acknowledge it, for even in things mundane and
natural, the wisest Philosopher said, He Socrates.
knew nothing at all but his own ignorance: and Themistius. Anaxarchus.
another professed, That The greatest part of his knowledge, was but the least
part of his nescience; and another says he, did not know so much as his own
wants of knowledge: and many others by reason of this professed ignorance, were
called Dion. lacet. in Pyrrhon.
Sceptici, Ephetici, Zetetici and Aporetici, i. e. Considerers, unresolved
Seekers, Doubters as in a Labyrinth without any passage of Egress. Who knows
the true manner of the motions of the Stars? Men now doubt whether the Sun be
moved at all, or whether the Earth move or stand still; we are not satisfied in
the cause of Tides, nor, do we know the forms of many thousands of Creatures. A
great Philosopher said, Dic formam lapidis and Phillida solus habeto; Our own
soul knows not it self, nor does it know (by it self) what is within that
body which it informs, although it is within it, and in every part of it, as
Austin expresses it. Aug. de Trin. l. 6. c. 2.
Tota in Toto, and in qualibet ejus part, tora: nor does it know the forming
of the body in the womb, although it is (under God) instrumentally operative in
that work.

If we patiently endure our ignorance in these things, how much rather should
we, in the deepest mysteries of Religion, as Athanasius advised. Atha. Cont.
A^ian. O. 3.
Non quaerendam est quomodo D^us gignat nec modum, i^effabile est;] and just so
does Basil, Basil. hom. 25
Filius est G^nitus ne quaeras quomodo, dut quando, est imp^ssibilis responsio
i. e. God has a Son, inquire not how, or when he begot him, for it is
ineffable, and an Answer is impossible; the same Father says, that if he
thought it possible Cont. Eunom. lib. 3.
to know all things, then perhaps he would be ashamed to confess his ignorance;
but seeing the greatest Philosophers knew not the nature of a poor little
Pismire, how shall we be able to comprehend the great Mysteries of Epist 162.
God? Thus he.

The most learned of the Jews did not understand the meaning of their own
Religion, and Sacraments in the old Testament, although they were so conversant
therein, as appears by Philo the learned Jew, who confessed that he knew not
the meaning of those words, Genesis 1: 26. Let us make man] but he thought Phil^.
de Mundi Opific. p. 15.
that God had assumed some other helpers in that work, that so the miscarriages
of man might be imputed to those other fellow-Creators, and not to God; Thus he
Judaizeth, not knowing, or believing the Trinity. So Id. Lib. de Circum. page
811.
again, when he desired to show, to what end and purpose God appointed the
Sacrament of Circumcision. he does it so poorly, that it appears evidently
that himself knew not the meaning thereof; and verily at this day, no Jews
persisting in the, Jewish Religion do understand the intent and meaning of
their own Laws and Sacraments, but only the bare Letter, for if they did truly
know to what purpose and signification, their Sacrafices and Pascal Lamb were
ordained, they would not any longer continue in their Judaism, and therefore
Origin truly affirms. (l) De lege Mosis, melius quam Judaeus, nos
respondebinus, Orig. Cont. Cells. l. 2.
i. e. A Christian can render a better reason and account of Moses Laws, then
the Jews themselves.

Touching the Obscurity of the Scriptures the Christian Doctors, do generally
acknowledge it, and set down may reasons why the Holy Spirit would have them so
difficult: For they say. 1. If the Mysteries therein were so easily understood,
Truth would not so earnestly be sought nor be so pleasant when it is found. 2.
That these Obscuri ie^ are pr^fitable to incite us to a m^re ailig^nt
in^^isition. 3. Because a gracious truth, which w^ understand not, is the more
loved and ad dired, if it be believed. 4. That the Obscurity may prev^nt our
sati^ty or weariness of them that they grew not tedious or despicable. 5 To
abate the pride of the m^st pro^ound wordly Sciolists, who may find themselves
often posed in them. These and many other Reasons are alleged by Divines, of
Gods ordering these obscurities, and because we do not in all places of
Scripture understand the word, we should ascribe reverence to the Author, and
reserve humility to our selves, and seeing there are truths manifest, and
sufficient to feed us, that we should use the obscurer for our exercise and
withal to know, that what we cannot understand in the undoubted word of God, we
should (notwithstanding) believe, and then our nescience cannot hurt us.
Clemens of Alexandria tells us truly. Clem. Alex, Stro. l. 4.
Difficilia non sunt necessaria, necessaria non sunt difficilia] i. e. Those
things which are too hard to be understood, are not necessarily to be
understood, and those things which are necessarily to be understood, are not
hard.

Neither are the profoundest Doctors, and wisest men ashamed to acknowledge
their ignorance in these high Mysteries: Even King Solomon in the Person of
Agur, Prove. 30. 2. Prove. 30. 2.
says, Surely I am more brutish then any man, and have not the understanding
of a man:] This he said in respect of his own humane and acquired knowledge; but
not of that wisdom which was inspired by God. S. Basil was for his learning and
profound knowledge in Religion, called The Great; yet he says to every man Bas.
hom. 27.
Quae ignoras superant cognita] S. Hirome says Hier. n. 40.
in sacris Scripturis plu^a nescio, quam scio] S. Ambrose says. Amb. hexam.
lib. 6.
libenter fateor me nescire quod nescio.] Austin (the profoundest of them all)
says Aug. Epist. 119. de Animae Orig. c. 16.
Sanctis Scripturis multa nescio plura quam scio* and Non me pudet ut fatear
nescire quae nescio, i. e. Those things which we understand not in holy
Scripture, are far more then what we do understand -- Neither are we ashamed to
acknowledge our ignorance; Neither should any Christian be abashed to acknowledge
his ignorance in these profound Mysteries, lest by falsely boasting of
knowledge, they may truly discern blindness, as some who because they would not
be thought to be pur-blind, pretend to see what they do not: S. Paul says, 1
Cor. 14. 38. If any be ignorant let him be ignorant.] This he said, not to
discourage ignorant people from acquiring knowledge, but to restrain the
ignorant from boasting of more knowledge then they have: So Beza, very
pertinently expounds those words. Ignarus suam ignorantiam B^za in loc.
agnoscat -- nos imperiti, locum peritorum occupent,] i. e. That ignorant and
unlearned men should hold, and esteem themselves to be so, and not usurp the
places and Offices of the skilful. This is good Counsel for some in these
times; I wish our gifted-Donatist-Sermon-makers would consider it.

Now, what particular Doctrines, the Christian Doctors confessed to be too hard
for them, and incomprehensible by their learning, is next to be showed.

CHAP. 3.
More, concerning our ignorance in Points Theological. Of Predestination, and
of the Trinity. The presumption of some men in their overmuch boldness in
handling those Mysteries.

SAint Peter tells us that in S. Paul's Epistles some things are hard to be
understood; 2 Pet. 3. 16. Romans 11. 16.
and so S. Paul himself acknowledged when he cried O the aepths of the riches
and wisdom of God -- that his judgments are unsearchable, and his ways past
finding out; it is evident also, that the Apostles themselves were both
ignorant, and unbeleeving for a long time; concerning the Mystery of the Death,
and of the Resurrection, and of the Kingdom of Christ, until the Holy Ghost
descended on them, at the Feast of Pentecost.

No marvel then, if the greatest Theologs in the world are yet to seek in many
matters of our Religion. Who knows in what state, place, or condition, souls
departed are, although some confidently talk of Lymbus, and Purgatory? who can
tell when Christ will return from Heaven unto earth, except our new
Millenarians will teach us? What man living understands the Apocalypse.
Bodinus tells that when Calvin was asked his opinion of it, he answered that he
knew not what so obscure a Writer meant; for though Bod. Method. c. 7.
it be called a Revelation, as having been made known to the holy Writer
thereof; yet by others it is accounted Obvelatio, a veiling of Mysteries. Some
are confident that there shall be a general conversion of the Jews, and (...).
some endeavors are now in hand, in order to it; because the Apostle says,
All Israel shall Romans 11. 26.
be saved] yet how many Millions of Jews have departed this life in their
infidelity, since St. Paul wrote? As for the meaning of those words, learned
Origin thus writes, Orig. in To. lib. 8. cap. 1^.
Quis ille Israel sit, Deus solus novit and unigenitus ejus, and si qui amici
ejus sunt ad quos dicat, i. e. None knows but God, and those to whom he
tells it. Concerning the grievous passions of Martyrs, and the Pressures of
other holy men, Salvinus says, Salv. de. ^ub. lib. 1.
Quare Deus talia patiatur, non est humane imb. cilitatis cognosc^re, i. e. Why
God permiteth such oppression, man cannot find out. How have those words of
Christ, Joh. 6. and Mat. 26. Except ye eat the flesh of Son of the man, etc.
And, Take eat, this is my body] how have they exercised and posed the Christian
world, both of reformed and unreformed Catholics, and so have even the words
and form of Consecration of the Eucharistical Elements. Finally, how has the
Doctrine of the Sabbath, in the fourth Commandment tortured both our own, and
other Theologues? which Epiphanius and Austia expounded so as to be understood
of Christ: and verily except Christians do so apprehend it, we cannot render a
sufficient reason of our rejecting the Jewish Sabbath, but if therein we
understand Christ to be the Sabbath, Then we may boldly say with Austin, Aug.
cont. Adimant. c. 3.
Sabbatum non est repudiatum a Christianis, sed intellectum; i. e. That
Christians do not reject the Sabbath, but do more truly understand it then the
Jews do, or did; which I wonder that our Reforming Teachers do not hint now,
especially when we are become so strict Sabbatizers on the eighth day.

Touching the difficulties in the Doctrine of the holy Trinity, and of
Predestination, and other Mysteries. Let us see what the ancient and most
learned Divines thought. Austin says, Aug. confess. l. 13. De Tem. Ser. 189.
Soliloq c. 31. De verb. Apost. Ser. 20.
Trinitatem quis non loquitur, and quis intelligit? -- Angeli in caelo
Trinitatem scire non possunt, diunt, Quis est Rex gloriae? And Trinitas tua
tibi soli integre nota est, quis cognovit te, nisi tu te? and so he concludes,
Tu ratiotinare, ego mirer, tu disputa, Ego credam, i. e. Many talk of the
Trinity, but who understands it? The Angels in Heaven do not comprehend it, for
they said, Who is the King of glory? The Trinity is known only to God, for who
has known him, but himself; therefore Psalm. 24. 8:
whilst others argue, and dispute, I will only admire and believe. Thus he.

As concerning the Mystery of Gods Predestination, and Election. Origin
inquiring why Jacob was loved, and Esau hated, before they To. 9. 13.
were born, thus answers, Orig. in Genesis Homil. 12.
Supra linguam nostram est dicere, and supra auditum vestrum. i. e. That it was
above his Eloquence to declare, and his Auditors knowledge to understand. Thus,
this Learned man acknowledged his insufficiency in these high Mysteries,
although at another time he tells us, Rapit nos desiderium, ad ea quae magis
obscura sunt, disserenda. Orig. in Number. ho. 13.
That he had a more earnest desire to study and handle the greater difficulties
in Scripture, then the easier parts.

So we find in Austin and Prosper, many such passages, whereby they acknowledge
their nescience in such high matters. As 1. Why an Infant at the very birth of
it, was found to be possessed with a Devil? 2. Why one obtains the grace of
Christianity, and Baptism, and another not? 3. Why God punishes one, and
forbeareth another, when both are in the same fault? 4. Why God grants not
the grace of Perseverance to some, unto whom he has given the grace of
Christian Charity? 5. Why he suffers the children of some holy men to depart
out of this life, without Baptism, or any knowledge of Christianity; and yet so
disposes, that the children of his very enemies, and of Heathen Idolaters,
come into the Custody of good Christians, and so receive and embrace Christian
Religion? 6. Why some Infants are saved, and others not, when neither of them
were better qualified in order thereunto, one, then the other? 7. Why he with
holds some holy Professors from falling away, and not others?

To all these Questions, and many such like, the only Answers we find are,
Inscrutabile est -- scrutetur qui potest -- Nemo ex me scire quaerat, quod me
nescire scio -- Credamus Deum beneficisse, etsi nondum novimus quare fecit
Occulta esse causa potest, injusta esse non potest, i. e. These things are
inscrutable; find them out who can: Let no man expect to learn that of me
which I know my self to be ignorant in: But let us believe that God does all
things justly, although we know not why he does them. The cause may be hidden
from us, but it cannot be unjust in God. Thus Austin, and after him Prosper, to
the same purpose, concerning the secret Counsels of God, concludes, Prosp.
Resp. ad Genuenses 8
Nec necessarium est quaerere, nec possibile reperire, i. e. It is neither
necessary to pry into these Mysteries, nor possible to find them out; and
further advises that men should not busy themselves in the Questions of Gods
Election and Rejection, yiedling these reasons for his advice, in an Epistle
written to St. Austin, Prosp. Epist. ad Aug.
1. No man can resolve them. 2. There is no danger in omitting them. 3. They do
not edify the hearers. 4. Because under the title and pretense of
Predestination, which men cannot apprehend; a kind of fatal necessity is
brought in abusively. So that many imagine that they need not take any care at
all in a godly conversation, because Gods Election and Rejection must stand.
This was the reason, that in the Reign of King James public dispute upon
those Questions were restrained; And my self heard Bishop Montague, our late
Right Learned Diocesan of Norwich (of whom a late Writer says, That Mr. Burton
of Kingston.
he had Learning enough for two Bishops) openly in a Synod profess, That
although he had long studied, and read, and written much in those questions,
yet he found them unfadomable, and bottomless; and therefore advised his Clergy
to abstain from meddling therein, especially in their Parecial Congregations:
Surely if this Learned Father did not understand them, much less can his
inferiors, as one says, Cicero de Not. Deur. l. 1.
Quid est quod Velleius intelligere possit: Colta non possit?

But yet now adays we have many young Mauclerk Levites, that take these
Questions for their ordinary Theams in popular Auditories, and take upon them
(as St. Jerome complains of such) Hier. To. 9. n. 40.
Levita docebat quod pene non didicit; And as another tells us of Antonius the
Orator, who thus bespake his auditory, Cic. de Orat. lib. 2.
Docebo vos discipuli, quod ipsi non didici, i. e. so these men will needs
teach that which themselves never learned; as if they were informed by some
inspiration, or newly Juven. Sat. 2.
returned out of Heaven, as one says. Tertius e Coelo cecidit Cato: or as the
Proverb is in Tertullian, De Coelo statim in Synagogam, Tert. cont. Marc. l. 4.
i. e. is dropped out of Heaven into the Pulpit, or that some Nuncius syderius,
or Lucian's Menippus had communicated to them the secrets of Heaven, whereas,
in Doctrines of a far lower form, they are found to be unskil'd. Such as these
fill the brains of people with unedifying Questions, and indeed with very
dangerous presumptions, whereby many have been induced to believe, that their
wilful sinning shall not hurt them, or prejudice their salvation, because
they are Elect: And others have despaired, and laid violent hands on
themselves, as if an holy conversation were useless, and would do them no good,
because they imagine that they are not Elected; whereas the Election of God is
as well to an holy life, which is the means; as to salvation, which is the end.

But some people love to have it so, and will be taught such Doctrines as they
desire to hear, though without understanding; the Preacher must open his mouth,
a necessity is laid upon him. Clodius Pontifex cogebatur Cic. Orat. per domo ad
Pontif.
docere, antequam didicisset: No matter for any Book-notes, nor for any solid
grounds of knowledge acquired, Dabitur in illa hora, is enough, with a confident
pretense of the spirit, and contempt of other Teachers; to such we may yield
the Character of the Ancient British and Gallican Priests, called Druidae, in
Lucan,

Solis nosce Deos, and Coeli numina, vobis Luc. lib. 1.
Aut solis nescire datum -- I do well remember, that many years ago I heard Mr.
Thomas Cicil, of St. John's in Cambridg (my Learned, and ever-Honoured Tutor)
tell of a transmarine Professor of Philosophy, who in a public Lecture, much
labored to expound Platos opinion of the soul, but his auditory signified by
scraping with their feet, that they did not understand him, so he went over it
again and again; and then asked them nondum intelligitis? but they all
unanimously answered, non, non, whereupon the Professor himself ingeniously
confessed: Prosecto neque ego, i. e. That neither his Auditors nor himself
understood the Doctrine: It is well known, that some people who busied their
brains only in these deep Questions, when they resorted to their Teacher to be
resolved in some doubt, have by him been discovered to be utterly ignorant in
the plainest Articles of Faith; as it is reported also of that Learned
Spaniard, and Voluminous Writer, Abutensis, that when on his death bed he would
have rehearsed the Articles of Faith, his head was so full of high
speculations, that he could not go through with the Creed, but caused a stander
by to repeat it, and he only signified his assent to it.

Let us therefore be content to know what is revealed, and to believe what the
sure word of God has laid before us, and to leave Gods secrets to himself: We
are sure that God has his Elect; but yet, That only The Lord knows 2 Timothy 2.
19.
who are his: Neither let us covet in vain to know all things in this life, but
reserve something for our learning in the next life; being well assured that
when we have used our greatest endeavors, the Apostles words will yet be
verified, that here we know but in part. And although we cannot understand the
Mysteries 1 Cor. 13. 9.
of the Trinity; yet that this must not discourage us from believing it, seeing
the word of God says, There are three.

I know that diverse Antitrinitarian Theologues of Transslvania, and Polonia,
have published very subtle disputes against the holy Trinity; but I purpose
not to trouble the Reader with them, because their Arguments are sufficiently
answered, and the Answers published by many Learned Divines, to which the
learned Readers know how to have recourse, and the unlearned will not need
them, nor indeed could understand them. This little Treatise aims principally
at the information of the ordinary rank of Christians; and so of the most, of
whom Tertullian says; Simplices enim sunt, ne dicam, Idiolae major pars
credentium. Tert. cont. Prax.
That if by Gods assistance I may instrumentally promote their believing, I
have my desire; for although they cannot understand the subtle objections of
the Adversaries; yet a good constant Christian may resolve with that generous
Faith of the forenamed Father, concerning the Mysteries of Christ, which Jews
and Heathens esteemed folly; and as St. Paul says, The foolishness, and the
weakness of God.] 1 Cor. 1. 25.
De. Carn. Chri.
Natus est Dei filius; non pudet, quid pudendum est; Mortuus est Dei filius,
prorsus credibile est quia ineptum, certum est quia impossible. The Mysteries
of the Son of God, and the death of this Son of God, which others account
ignominious, foolish, and impossible; the Christian does therefore account most
honorable, credible and certain: The same we confidently affirm of this
Mystery of the Unity of the Godhead, and of the Trinity of Persons therein;
although to unbeleevers it seem ever so improbable. But yet God has not left
us altogether without the helps of humane reason, by affording us many
resemblances of this great Mystery, both in Nature and Morality; As will be
showed hereafter.

CHAP. IIII.
The Doctrine of the Trinity is obscurely delivered in the old Testament; but
clearly in the New. Why the Septuagint Translators concealed it from the
Heathens. The Resemblances of the Trinity and Unity in Nature. The three
Persons; and their several Properties, and joint Unity. Why the Fathers used
some words not found in the Scriptures.

SAint Basil observes upon those words, Bas. Hexam. hom. 9.
Genesis 1. 26. Let us make man] that the Jews (denying the second Person) said,
That God talked to himself; but, what Carpenter, (says he) being alone, would
so talk, or but with his instruments? for if so, then he must have said fiat
homo, i. e. Let man be made: but here is faciamus, i. e. Let us make, which
implies another Person, and that, no creature, or Angel; because he added, In
our Image] And after our likeness] for man was made in the Image of God, not of
Angels, or any other creature. Thus he. Gregory Naz. also observes, Naz. Orat.
37.
That the Old Testament speaks evidently of the Father, but obscurely of the
Son: And that the Evangelists speak plainly of the Son, but darkly of the Holy
Ghost, because God would not engage us in this part of Faith, until the
Godhead of the Father and the Son were more clearly manifested; thus by
degrees, like the Sun-light, illuminating man by little and little. So
Epiphanius notes against the Pneumatici, Epiph. haer. 74.
who denied the Godhead of the holy Ghost, that Moses plainly declares one
God, and the Prophets, two Persons in God, and the Apostles a Trinity of
Persons: And we are told by St. Jerome, Proaem. Quaest. in Genesis
That the Septuagint abstained from revealing the Mystery of Christ, and his
coming, to King Ptolomy, (who set them on the work of Translation) lest he
(being an Heathen) should think that the Jews had two Gods; and also because
(as Basil of Seleucia Bas. Seleu. Orat. 9.
notes) Gods appointed time for revealing Christ to the Gentiles, was not yet
come.

Indeed, we find in after times, that both Heathens and Heretics objected,
that the Christians had two, or three Gods, upon a confession of a plurality of
Persons: For Porphyrius called the Christians Trinity, Aug. de Civ. l. 10. c.
29.
Three Gods. So the Macedonian Heretics called the Catholics, Naz. Orat. 37.
Tritheitas, as if they had three Gods; but they were thus answered by
Nazianzen; That if the Catholics were so because they confessed Three Persons,
then must those Macedonians be called Bideitae, because they acknowledged two
Persons, viz. The Father, and the Son.

The Arians confessed Three Persons; but they denied the Unity of the Godhead
in them. The Sabellians confessed the Unity of the Godhead; but denied a
Plurality, or Duality of Persons therein; both these Heresies are refelled by
that speech of Christ, John 10. 30. I and my Father are one] as Prosp. notes,
Prosp. Sent. 346.
Vnum] hoc perculit Arium. Sumus] hoc Sabellium stravit, i. e. in that he says
One, this siniteth Arius; and in that he says Plurally, We are this confuteth
Sabellius. This observation he learned of St. Austin, who against both those
Heresies, thus confesses the Trinity, Aug. de qum que Haeres. To. 6. c. 7.
Gratias tibi Vera, and Vna Trinitas. Vna and Trina Veritas, Trina, and Vna
Vnitas: For as the Error of Heathens was in believing a Plurality of Gods; so
the error of Jews and Heretics, was in denying a Plurality of Persons in one
God.

Now that it may appear, that the Mystery of the Trinity is not so far remote
from humane capacity and faith, as if to Reason it might seem altogether
impossible: God has given us many resemblances thereof, which are obvious and
easy to be discerned; which Similitudes must not be thought fully to
correspond in all particulars, to the Divine Trinity, as we learn in Logic,
Omne simile est dissimile. Nullum simile est idem. Similitudo non Currit
quatuor pedibus, etc, i. e. Every like, is also unlike. No like is the same.
Similitudes do always halt with one foot. But it will be enough if we can find
some one particular wherein they are assimulated. We see that one man may
sustain three several Offices, or Persons; as One may be a Merchant, a
Soldier, and a Magistrate: These are different Offices, yet one man is all.
Marsilius Ficinus, in his Preface to the Book of Mercurius Trismegistus, tells
us, that he was therefore called Trismegistus, i. e. Thrice Greatest, because
he was the Greatest Philosopher, the Greatest Priest, and the Greatest Prince:
So the elder Pliny tells us, that Cato the elder was the best Orator, the best
Commander, and Plin. Hist. l. 7. c. 27.
the best Senator; here is one man is all these, though every one of these
Offices differ each from other; even as the Father, Son, and Spirit, are all
but one God, yet are Persons distinct one from another.

Dionysius Areop. resembles the Trinity to Dionis. de Div. Nom. c. 2.
three Lamps in a Room, which though they be several and distinct, yet the
light of all is but one light. Nazianzen compares it with Naz. Orat. 37.
the Sun, Sun beam, and Light; and to Fire, Heat, and Light; and to the Spring,
Well, and Stream; and to the Arm, the Hand, and the Finger; and to the Root,
the Body, and the Boughs of a Tree. St. Ambrose, to the three Ambr. de Dignit.
Hom. c. 2.
Faculties of the Soul. Understanding, Will, and Memory. St. Jerome tells us,
that Christ was therefore baptized in Jordan, because that Hier. in Mat. c. 16.
River represented the Trinity; for that it was called Jordan, because it
issued from two Heads, the one called Jor, the other Dan: All these Threes are
severally distinct, and yet unseparated in Nature. One Sun. One Fire. One
Water. One Arm. One Tree. One Soul; And one Jordan.

Yet, when we say, the Three Persons are but of one Essence, the Reader is to
be informed, that we are not so to be understood; as if we affirmed that there
is no Essential, or Quidditative difference between these Three Persons; for
the Three Divine Persons, must needs be distinct, and different in some
Essential difference; otherwise, they all must be confessed to be but One
Person: Therefore something there must be, whereby the Father is Father, and
not Son; and so in the other Persons, to constitute them, Persons distinct each
from other: For in Logic we learn, that even the very Accidents have their
respective Essence, (such as it is) to make them what they are, and so must the
several Divine Persons; have and to this our Orthodox Divines consent, for thus
they write. Personae habent unum esse absolutum, Essentiale, Natural; Sed
diversum esse Relativum, and Personale, i. e. The Three Persons have but one
Essence absolute of their own nature, but Diverse Essences Relative and
Personal. So that these several Essences or Acts, and Quiddities, are not in
the absolute nature or Godhead of them, but in the Relative Personalities; for
they are all Absolutely but One God, and yet they are distinct and several
Persons; they are entirely and truly One thing, and as truly, Three several
things: Which St. Anselm, (as it seems to me) does very acutely thus
determine, and express, Anselm. de incarn. c. 3.
Tres Res sunt, and una res, viz. Vna res Absoluta: Tres res Relativae. In uno
Communi unum sunt, sc. Dietate, In tribus Proprietatibus Diversae sunt, i. e.
The Divine Persons are Three things, and they are but One Thing, viz. They are
Three things Relatively, but One thing Absolutely; for in one common thing they
are but One, that is one in Essence or Godhead, but Three in Persons or
Proprieties. Thus he, and much more to this purpose.

If it be enquired what those Propertics are, which are peculiar to each
Person, and that do distinguish every Person each from other: In this we are
plentifully resolved by former Writers. Richardus de St. Victore, thus sets
Rich. de St. Vict. de Trinit. c. 15. and 25.
down their personal Proprieties. Pater dat solum: Filius accipit and dat,
Spiritus accipit solum, i. e. The Father gives only: The Son receives and
gives: The Spirit receives only from both: There cannot be another Property,
or Person, which neither gives, nor takes; for if so, then we should be
driven to confess a Quaternity of Persons instead of a Trinity.

Nazianzen sets down the Proprieties in these words: Ingenitus, Genitus,
Procedens, i. e. Naz. Orat. 23. and Orat. 28. Basil. Epist. 349.
Unbegotten, Begotten, Proceeding: And St. Basil, thus. Paternitas, Filiatio,
Sanctificativa potestas, i. e. Fatherhood Sonship, Sanctificative power; for
although the Father and the Son do Sanctify, yet they do it not immediately by
themselves, but mediately by the Holy Ghost, who is the Spirit of
Sanctification.

If therefore each Person have any one thing peculiar and proper to it self,
and incommunicable to any other of the Divine Persons; this Property must needs
prove it to be a several, and distinct Person. And if there be any one Person
in the Godhead, which does neither give to the Other, nor receive from the
Other; This must needs prove a Person without any communion with the other, and
so the Unity would be lost.

Now that it may by the Scriptures appear that there are several Proprieties in
the several Persons, and those incommunicable to the other Persons. We read
that The Son is the Image of the Father] but it is never read that the Father
is the Image of the Son, or Spirit; So it is said, The Word (or Son) was made
flesh] but neither the Father, nor the Spirit, are ever said to be made flesh.
So the Son is called The only Begotten] so is not the Father or the Spirit;
therefore the Ancient Writers called the Father Ingenitum, Innascibilem,
Impassibilem, i. e. Not Begotten, not Born, not Passible; nor can the Father be
said to proceed from the Son or Spirit: But these Properties cannot be affirmed
of the Son, who is Begotten, born, and suffered; nor of the Holy Ghost, who
proceeds from the Father, and the Son. Besides these, The Scripture does
clearly declare the several Personalities in the Godhead by our Saviors
words, Joh. 14, 15. I will pray the Father, and he shall send another
Comforter] Here is evidently a distinct Trinity. I, and He, and Another.

As touching the Unity of the Three Persons, the Arians utterly deny it; and
therefore they expostulated with the Catholics, because in the asserting
thereof, they used some words which were not found in holy Scriptures, as (...)
and (...), i. e. Essence and Consubstantiality; and they nicknamed the
Catholics, calling them Homousians, because the Nicene Fathers had inserted
the word Homousion in their Creed. One Pascentius was so offended therewith,
that simply mistaking it to be the name of a man, he required that the Church
would anathematize, or excommunicate Homousion, as Aug. Epist. 174.
Austin reports; But Athanasius made this answer to the Arians (b) That they
themselves used many more words Athan. in Decret. Nicaen. Council.
which were not Scriptural: As, That the Son was not always: That the Father
was not always a Father: That the Son was Factura, i. e. a Creature, and that
he was made of nothing; whereupon one Sect of the Arians were called Soz. lib.
4. c. 28.
Exoucontii; and that those frequent Arian words, Homoiousion, and
Innascibilis, were not found in the Scriptures, and that the Catholics were
forced to use new words, because the Arians raised new Heresies; although among
the Catholics, the self same Ancient Doctrine had continued immutable; for
upon the like occasion, even the holy Scripture it self had assumed a new word,
as we read, Act. 11. 26. That whereas before the Church Members were called
Disciples and Brethren; now they are by a new name called Christians. First, at
Antioch; and this, because false Brethren, and false Teachers arose, teaching
Doctrines contrary to the Apostles, and yet these Brethren were called
Disciples, and named themselves from men, as John Baptists Disciples did, and
as those mentioned, 1 Cor. 1. 12. said, I am of Paul, I am of Apollo, I of
Cephas, etc. therefore the Church (to prevent a Schism) would have all that
professed Christ to be called by one new name, Christians; which is thought to
be prophesied by Isaiah, when he said, Isaiah 62. 2. Thou shall be called by a
new name. Finally, because the Arians used the word Triousion, teaching thereby
that the Three Persons, were of three several Natures and Essences; therefore
the Catholics to assert the Unity of the Godhead, in all, and every Person,
most significantly used the word Homousion: Thus Athanasius, Atha. in Disput.
cum Ario. etc. To. 4.


Notwithstanding this true and just allegation: The Arians persuaded
Constantius (the then Arian Emperor) by Edict, to forbid that any new words
should be used in matters of faith; and this, upon a pretense of a Scriptural
inhibition, because St. Paul thus charge Timothy: O Timothee, depositum
Custodi, devitans 1 Timothy 6. 20. Hill. advers. Constable. lib. 1.
profanans vocum novitates] But St. Hilary addressed this answer, That St. Paul
did indeed command Timothy to avoid novelties; yet they were only profane
Novelties: Now, you command us to avoid new words, which are holy, and tending
to Piety, which is all one, as if you should forbid a new Antid^te, against a
new poison, or a new War against new enemies. Thus he. But there are other new
words of as great concernment, which some have found fault with, without cause,
as is next to be showed.

CHAP. V.
Of the word Trinity; Why it is used, the real Warrant for it in Scripture: Why
Baptism is administered in the name of the Trinity: And why the Trinity is
called three Persons.

THere are some that cavil even at the word and appellation of the Trinity,
because they find not this word literally in the Scriptures; who, yet cannot
deny that the same thing, and Doctrine is really found there; but both Heathen,
and Christian Writers, reprove such Wranglers as stand upon words, when the
thing it self is evident. Cic. cont. Salust.
Vbi rerum testimonia adsunt quid opus est verbis? And Aug. Epist. 174. ded^ct.
Christ. l. 4. c. 11
Quid est contensiosius, quam, ubi de re constat, certare de nomine? And
Bonorum ingeniorum indoles est, in verbis, verum amare, non verba. A good
disposition, and an humble Christian will embrace an old truth, though clothed
with a new word.

The Scriptural evidence for the reality and truth of the thing is clear; For
at the Baptism of Christ, the Three Persons, did distinctly, sensibly, and
separatly show, or declare their presence at one time: The Father audibly by a
voice. The Son and Spirit visibly; and therefore Chrysostom. hom. 24. Antioch. and
hom. 46. 31. Idem. Sermon. de Epiph. To. 6.
St. Chrysostom calls the Baptism of Christ, (...), The Epiphanie or
manifestation of Messiah; and he also calls that Apparition, Theophania, i. e.
the appearing of God. And moreover tells us of this Festival of the Epiphany
(which even in his days was solemnized by the Church) That is, was kept for the
commemoration, not of the Nativity, but of the Baptism of Christ; and for this
reason, the Church of England appointed, that, on the Feast of Epiphany, the
third Chapter of St. Luke should be read, as a Lesson proper for that day,
wherein the Baptism Luke 3. 21.
of Christ and this Apparition is declared: for therefore it was called
Epiphany, because at this Baptism the Lord Jesus was by the Father, and the
Holy Ghost openly proclaimed to be That Son of God, and that Messiah which had
been before promised, and Prophesied, in whom only, God would be well pleased,
and be at peace with man.

And surely, that Heavenly and Mysterious Apparition of the two other Persons,
was also for a further reach and purpose; namely to declare to the world, that
this Jesus was that man which was assumed into Personal union with the
Godhead; and that this Emmanuel, or God incarnate, was hereby declared to be
assumed into the number of the Trinity at that time; Although, in respect of
his pure Godhead, and as he was God the Word, he was One of the Persons of the
Trinity before, and also from Eternity: And although this Emanuel, or God
incarnate, was one of the Three Divine Persons, at the first instant and moment
of his Incarnation, yet he was not so declared, and manifested to be so, until
this glorious Apparition.

For this very cause it may with great reason be thought, that in
correspondence to this Apparition at his own Baptism; when he afterward
prescribed the form and words of Baptism for all Christians: He strictly
commanded, that they should be baptized In the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost. In the Original it is, (...)] Mat. 28. 19.
i. e. into the Name; which signifies that they should be baptized into the
Trinity. (For name does often signify the very thing it self which is named,
as Divines call that word, by which a thing is called, Nomen Nominans; and they
call that thing which is named Nomen, Nominatum) Baptism, is the Sacrament of
our entrance, and admission into the body of Christ, so by those words, Christ
signified that he would have Christians to be by Baptism offered, and tendered
for their admission into the fellowship, union, communion, and society, or
spiritual corporation with the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and this himself
had declared before, when he thus prayed to the Father, Joh. 17. 21. for all
Believers, That they all may be one, as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee,
That they also may be One in us. And so St. John tells us, 1 John 1. 3. Truly
our fellowship ((...)) is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ: and
because this communion or fellowship, is wrought by the holy Spirit, being the
Cement, or Ligament by which we are to be united, and joined to the Trinity:
therefore St. Paul mentions the Communion of the Holy Ghost with Christians,
2 Cor. 13. 13. And the fellowship of the Spirit, Phil. 2. 1.

Another evidence real we have by the words of St. John, 1 John 5. 7. There are
Three that bear witness in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Spirit, and
these Three are One] These words do so clearly declare both a Trinity in the
Godhead, and an Unity of the Three; that it is no marvel that the Arian
Faction did raze them out of that Epistle, in so much that they were omitted in
diverse Copies after the days of Arius: But we find them alleged before Arius
was known, by St. Ciprian in his Tractate. De simplicitate Praelatorum, page
164. in the Basil Edition of Froben. And again we find them cited by
Athanasius, to Arius himself, in his disputation held with the said Arius, at
the Nicene Council, as is set down in his Book entitled, Disputatio cont.
Arium: the words are found, page 717. in the Basil Edition, Ex Officina
Frobeniana, An. Dom. 1556. which Scripture was not then excepted against by
Arius himself. And long after that time, we find these words cited by
Fulgentius, in his Book entitled, Objectionum Arianarum discussio, near the
end, page 87. of the Basil Edition. An. Dom. 1621. Yet Fulgentius lived about
200. years after Arius was dead.

The rankest Arians at first, used in their Doxologies to glorify all the
three Persons by name, although with some words differing from the Catholic
Custom, but in their Baptisms they invoked all the Three Persons alike, so as
we now do: And although Arius had taught his Sectaries to use other words in
their Doxologies, then the Catholics used: as Glory be to the Father, by the
Son, with the Holy Ghost; yet as Theod. Her. Fab. lib. 4.
Theodoret very gravely observes, Arius himself durst not ptesume to alter the
form of Invocation in Baptisms, but baptized as the Catholic Church did, In
the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: yet in after
times, his Sectaries presumed to change the Baptismal form of words prescribed
by Christ, as we find, in Nicephorus, and is by me elsewhere showed.

There were some also which said that the Godhead was separately, and entirely
existent alone by it self, and not only residing in the Three Persons, but was
a fourth thing, Aug. Ep. 22 2.
Quasi quarta Divinitas, i. e. as a fourth Divinity, which does communicate and
infuse it self into the Three Persons, as St. Austin relates in an Epistle to
Consentius; so that these men would have the Godhead to he thought to be a
fourth Person, distinct from the other Three; so that instead of a Trinity, we
should believe a Quaternity of Divine Persons; But this opinion cannot be
approved, for the Godhead (in their sense) could not so be called a Person,
because it is (as they confess) communicable to the other Persons: But as our
Divines generally agree in this definition or description of a Person.
Melancht. in loc. com.
Persona est substantia (vel subsistentia) individua intelligens, and
incommunicabilis. If the Godhead be a Person, then it must be incommunicable:
And if it be communicable, then it cannot be a Person.

So likewise, the Heresy of Nestorius, who denied the Personal Union of the
Godhead and Manhood in Christ, and thereby divided Christ, making two Persons
of One, did thus bring in a fourth Person.

So the Heresy of Macedonius, who denied the Godhead of the Holy Ghost,
instead of a Trinity, allowed but a Binity of Persons.

These Heresies so moved and disturbed the Church Catholic, that for the
asserting this holy, necesary, and scriptural Doctrine of Three Persons in one
Godhead, they were forced to use this word Trinity.

There is yet another Quarrel about the word Person, because this word is not
found in Scripture, to be so used as the Church both present and Primitive,
have applied it; for even those that do confess that there is a Trinity in the
Godhead, yet why this Trinity, and these Three, should be called three
Persons, is that that troubles them.

Indeed the Scripture often names Three, the Father, Son, and Spirit: and it
says, There are Three, but even St. Austin himself, often demands, Aug. de
Trin. lib. 5. c. 9. lib. 8. proaen.
Tres Quid, and Quid Tria? For certain then, there are Three, but what to call
them, and how to answer when we are asked, Three what? the Scripture is silent,
and Id ibid,
Magna inopia laborat eloquium humanum, i. e. our language wants words to
express it. The same penury of words is noted in the Greek Tongue, by
Nazianzen, who tells us, Naz. Orat. 21.
Romana lingua non distinguit hypostasin ab Ousia, hinc Personarum vocabulum
introductum, i. e. Because our Language does not distinguish subsistence and
substance, therefore instead of a more proper expression, we use the word
Person to signify Subsistence: (Observe here, that Nazianzen calls Greek, the
Roman Tongue, because Greece was then under the Romans, and was therefore
called Romania, and the Inhabitants (...), and the grand City Constantinople
standing in Thracia, was called new Rome. and the Inhabitants of Greece were
all subjects, and some Citizens of Rome, so, conversing with the Latins; which
is the reason that we find so many Latin words even in the Greek Testament,
and in many other Greek Writers, both Heathen and Christian.)

Now, because the Scripture says There are Three, and that we dare not say
there are Three Gods, therefore we call them Three Persons, because we find not
any fitter word to express that, which without words we apprehend, and believe:
Neither do we call them Persons, as if we would have it thought that the
Scriptures did so say, but because the Scriptures do not gainsay it; but if we
should call them Three Gods, then the Scripture will contradict us, where it
says, Hear O Israel, Deuteronomy. 6. 4.
the Lord our God is one Lord: we therefore call them Persons, that so we may
answer in a word, when we are asked What Three? This is the resolution of St.
Austin, concerning the word Person, used by the Latin, or Western Church.

In like manner, the Eastern, or Greek-Church called them (...), i. e. Persons;
and so our English Translation rendered those words, Heb. 1. 3. (...)] The Image
of his Person, and so does the Geneva, both English and Latin Translation: And
if we should keep the Original word, and instead of Three Persons, call them
Three Hypostases, people would be little or nothing the wiser: And Austin tells
us, that Aug. de Tri^. l. 7. c. 6.
They that call them Three Hypostases, may as well call them Tria Prosopa. i.
e. Three Persons. The Eastern Fathers have many words by which they express the
Three Persons; As Naz. Orat. 28. and 29. Basil. Epist. 349. and in Asset.
Nazianzen and Basil calls them, (...), etc. i. e. Proprieties, Subsistencies,
and Persons: But the Latins generally call them Persons.

Indeed the Church was even necessitated, and forced to call them Persons,
because of Heresies, which used this very word, and thereby miscalled the
Divine Persons; for the Samosatenians said, that the Father and the Son were
but one, (...), i. e. one Person: and so also said the Sabellians, that they
were, (...), and (...), i. e. One Person, and one Subsistence, as we find in
Epiph. haer. 65.
Epiphanius: And in Chrysostom. hom. 32. Antioch.
Chrysostom: And Aug. de Trin. lib. 5. cap. 9.
St. Austin himself in one place confesses that he did not then know the
difference between those two words (...) and (...), i. e. Substance, and
Subsistence, but because he found that the Greek Church called them, (...), i.
e. One Substance; and Three, (...), i. e. Three Subsistencies, therefore the
Latin Church called them Three Persons, for they durst not say, they were
Three Substances, left they should be thought to acknowledge Three Gods.

As touching the Scriptural word Hypostasis, Heb. 1. 3. which diverse of the
Fathers Translated Substances; as namely, Hilary, and Jerome, and Austin,
rendering those words thus. Qui cum sit splendour gloriae and figura Substantiae
ejus, i. e. Who being the brightness of his glory, and the figure of his
substance. The later writers did more accurately, and critically translate the
word Hypostasis, by Subsistence, and Person; so that now the Reader may take
notice, that when Divines would express the Trinity, they call it three
Subsistencies or Existencies, or Persons; but when they would express the
Godhead, Nature, or Divinity of the Three Persons, then they call it, The
Essence and Substance of God: But of the word Hypostasis, which is of very
great moment, in Order to apprehend the Mystery of the Unity of Essence, and
Trinity of Persons; More in the next Chapter.

CHAP. VI.
Of the word Hypostasis, what it signifies Grammatically. That the Three
Persons are called Hypostases, because the Godhead resideth only in the Three
Divine Persons. The Ubiquity of all these Persons. The Coeternity of the
Father, and the Son.

IN the beginning of the Epistle to the Hebrews, we find three words which may
afford Heb. 1. 2.
us some direction in this mysterious Discourse of the Divine Person of Jesus
Christ.

First, He is called The Son of God. This word implies also a Father-hood in
God; and, Verse 3.
as all natural Sons are of the same nature and Essence with their natural
Fathers, so must this Son of God be Coessential, and Con-Substantial with God
the Father.

Secondly, He is called, The Brightness of his Glory ((...)) just as light is
of the Sun, and this word may teach us, the Coeternity of the Person of the
Son, with the Person of the Father, as the light of the Sun is Coetanious with
the Sun it self.

Thirdly, He is called the Character, or the express Image of his Fathers
Person, or Hypostasis: This word declares the Sons Coequality with the Father,
as the Impression fully answers the Seal, in all Dimensions.

The Reader may here further observe, that the Son is not called the Character,
or Image of the Godhead of the Father, (because he is the same God with the
Father) but he is called the Character of the Person only, of the Father
((...)) for as the Seal and the Impression are two distinct things, so are the
Persons of the Father and the Son: And as the Impression, Image, or Character,
represents fully the Sculpture of the Seal: So the Son fully represents the
Person of the Father, therefore the Son says, If ye had known me, ye should
have known my Father also; and, Joh. 14. 7. 9.
He that has seen me, has seen the Father. Now, although the Son be the Image
of the Father, yet he is not the same Person with the Father, which Person is
here called the Hypostasis, or Subsistence of the Father.

This word Hypostasis, which our English commonly renders Person, and the
Latins sometime Substance, and sometimes Subsistence, or Existence, is
originally from (...), to place, or establish; and it is compounded of (...)
and (...), which literally and Grammatically to the Letter, signifies a
Sub-station, i. e. that whereon, or wherein one stands, that which bears,
sustaineth, or carries a Station, a Stand, a Mansion of abiding, a Receptacle;
and the words Substance, Subsistence, and Existence, are all from the original
word Sto, i. e. to stand: And hence it is that some of the Fathers rendered this
word Hypostasis, Sub-stans, as signifying a Suppositum, or Substratum, i. e.
that which bears another. That Soldier which forsook his Standard, or
standing, was called an Apostate: The solemn Assemblies of Ancient Christians
for Devotions, because they were appointed to be at set times, and in appointed
places, were called Stationes, as In lib. de Coron. Militis.
Rhenanus notes upon Tertullian, Stationes Christianorum sunt Conventus ubi
Stantes precarentur: So the imperial Stations, were places where the Emperor
and his Army made a stand, and rested after a March; and Stativi, signified
places of Lodgings, or Inns, where Travelers stayed and rested.

From hence it may with great reason be collected, that when the Divine Persons
are called Hypostases, the Scriptures do hereby intimate, that the Three
Persons are the Stations, Mansions, Abidings, Rests, and Receptacles of the God
head, wherein the Godhead does for ever stand, and wherein only it is
sustained, and supported.

For the posture of the Godhead, is in the Scripture described by the word
Stand, as Psalm. 82. 1. God stands in the Congregation.] And Amos 9. 1. I saw
the Lord standing upon the Altar.] In Philo the Jew, God is called for his
Eternal Constancy, Philo. de Confus. ling: p. 324.
Semper Stans, (...), as his words are, and St. Austin in that pious book of
his Confessions, calls God, Aug. conf. l. 4. c. 11.
Semper stantem, i. e. Standing for ever; and we are told in Clemens Romanus
often, that when Simon Magus boasted that himself was God, he would be called
Stans, Clem. To. Recog. l. 2. and 3.
and we are also informed by the other learned Clemens of Alexandria, that the
Sectaries, or Followers of this Simon, worshipped him under the name Stans.
Clem. Alex. stro. lib. 2.
Stantem Colebant.

It must be confessed that our most Holy and True God, may justly be called
Stans, for his eternity and immutable Constancy, which is, and which was, and
which is to come, who stands Rev. 1. 4.
for ever when all other false gods either are fallen already, or shall fall;
and if we would know where to find this our God, and where he resideth, and
where to address our selves unto him; we must consider him in these Three Heb.
9. 24. The word (...),] is rendered Presence, and Conspectus, and Vultus, Dei,
by the English, and Latin Transl.
glorious Persons, as in the Stands, Stations, or Receptacles of the God head,
as an Heavenly Tri-Parelion, or three Golden Lamps, wherein the One, and Only
Light of the Godhead abides, and from whence it shines; nor can we otherwise
find our God, but by the illumination which proceeds from One, or all these
Persons. The first Person is called the Father of Lights: And No man knows
the Son but the Father, neither knows any man the Jam. 1. 17.
Father, save the Son, and he to whom the Son Mat. 11. 27.
will reveal him: And both these Persons reveal unto us by the Holy Ghost. He
shall teach you Joh. 14. 26. and 16. 13.
all things: And He will guide you into all truth.

These are the Hypostases, the Stations, or Mansions of the Godhead, wherein,
it dwells, and resideth for ever; for this reason it is said, Joh. 10. 38.
The Father is in me, and I in him] i. e. The Godhead of the Father is in in
the Son, and the Godhead of the Son is in the Father; and the Godhead of the
Father and the Son, is in the Holy Ghost; One Godhead is communicated to all
the Persons. But it cannot be said that the Person of the Father is in the Son,
because the Persons are incommunicable; wherefore, as young Logicians, reading,
or hearing of Vniversals, and by their senses perceiving no things but
Individuals, upon inquiry where to find these Genera and Species, they are
taught, that the residence or existence of Universals is only in particulars;
so young Christians are to know, that the Abiding, Mansion, and Residence of
the Godhead is only in these Three Persons, and no where else.

If it be said that the Godhead is every where, and therefore not to be
limited or confined to residence in the Three Persons. To this we answer, that
although it is certainly true that the Godhead is every where, yet the
Existence or Residence of the Godhead in the Three Persons, does not exclude
it from any place, nor confine or limit it within any bounds, or (in the least)
hinder its Vbiquity; for albeit, the Godhead is really present in all places,
and more also, although all places are contained and inclued in the
infiniteness of the Godhead, yet this Godhead is no where, but where it
resideth in the Three Persons; for these Three Divine Persons are also every
where. The Prophet says of the Father, Do not I fill Heaven and Earth? And the
Psalmist says of the Spirit, Joh. 10. 38, Jer. 23. 24. Psalm 139. 7. Joh. 3.
13.
Whether shall I go from thy Spirit? etc. And the Son of God says of himself.
The Son of man which is in Heaven] and this he said in respect of his Divine
Person, when his body was not in Heaven, but upon the Earth: And when he was
about to ascend into Heaven, even then he said, Lo I am with you always, even
unto the end of the world. Mat. 28. 20.


Neither do those other passages in Scripture any way contradict the Ubiquity
of the Divine Persons, as when it is said, Ex. 19. 20. The Lord came down upon
Mount Sinai,] and of Sodom, Genesis 18. 21. I will go down now and see, etc. And
in the Gospel, where it is said of the Father, and the Son, Joh. 14. 23. We
will come unto him, and make our abode with him] As if the Godhead, or Divine
Persons were not there before; But these Speeches are to be understood of Gods
appearing, or manifesting himself in such places, or to such persons, where he
is always really present, but does not always show, or manifest his presence:
And in this the Ancient Expositors agree. Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. Sermon. de
Spirit. To. 6:
Divinitas non migrat a loco in locum, sed est de apparentia corporea] i. e.
God does not go from place to place, but those sayings signify his visible
appearance in some assumed body. So St. Ambrose upon those words, Genesis 3. 8.
God walked in the Garden,] Ambr. de Paradiso. c. 14.
Ambulatio Dei, est praesentia apparens, i. e. The walking of God signifies
only the appearing of his presence, where he was truly present before: and
after them Fulgentius more home and clearly says, Fulg. ad Thrasim. l. 2:
Substantialiter ubique est Trinitas sed adventus, and Descensus s^gnificant
manifestationem ejus, i, e. The Trinity is really, or substantially, every
where, but when it is said, they came, or descended, these words signify that
God manifested his presenee there: This is the reason of that Scripture Phrase
so often used of the Lords appearing, as Genesis 17. 1. The Lord appeared to
Abram] to signify, that God then manifested his presence there where he was
before, although he did not there appear before to Abraham. This I trust is
enough to show the meaning and full importance of this considerable and weighty
word, Hypostasis.

Now touching the Coeternity of the Three Persons, both the old and new
Heretics deny it; for the Arians said, Athan in Decret. Nicaen. Council.
Pater non semper Pater, nec filius semper filius] i. e. That God the Father,
was not always a Father, and that the Son was not always a Son: But St. Austin
often opposed this Error, and thus expressed his determination. Aug. de Temp.
Sermon. 131. and 181.
Deus, non antea Deus caeperit esse, and postea pater, sed sine initio, and
Deus semper, and pater, semper fuit pater, semper habuit filium, i. e. God was
not first God, and afterward Father; but ever God, and ever Father, he was
always a Father, and had always a Son.

Indeed Tertullian notes, that God was not always to be styled Tert. cont.
Herm.
Dominus, i. e. Lord, though always God, and Father; and he observes, that in
Scripture God is not called Lord until man was made: And true it is, that
although the Father be from Eternity, the Father of the Son, or Word, yet he
could not be called either the God, or the Lord of the Son, but upon
supposition of the Sons Incarnation; and therefore not until man was created;
for as soon as man was made, the Son of man was in the Loins of Adam.

John Crellius, thus entitled his Book which he wret against the Trinity. De
uno Deo Patre, i. e. Of One God the Father] If his meaning were hereby to
acknowledge Godhead, and Paternity to be Coeternal; then it must needs follow,
that God must have an Eternal Son, othewise he cannot be an Eternal Father; for
so St. Basil notes. Bas. cont. Eunom. l. 4.
Si pater ante filium erat, cujus pater erat, si non filii? i. e. If the Father
were before he had a Son, whose Father was he, if not the Sons? And although he
be an Eternal Father of his Eternal Son; yet he cannot be called the Eternal
God or Lord of the Son, as Epiphanius has evidently showed, by distinguishing
these two Appellations of Father and God, thus, Epiph. in Ancor.
Deus, vocatur Pater Filii, propter aeternam generationem: and Deus, propter
incarnationem, i. e. God is truly called the Eternal Father, of the Son,
because the Son was begotten from Eternity; but he is called the God, or Lord
of the Son, in respect only of the Incarnation of the Son: just so the holy
Psalmist speaks cautelously, in showing that the Father cannot be called
either the God, or the Lord of the Son, but only with respect had to the humane
generation of the Son, Psalm. 22. 10. Thou art my God from my Mothers belly, as
I have formerly showed elsewhere.

King Solomon delivers the very same Doctrine of the Coeternity of the
Father, and the Son, under the name of Wisdom, Prove. 8. 22. The Lord possessed
me in the beginning of his way, before his works of old. I was set up from
everlasting. I was brought forth] just so does the Psalmist express the Eternal
generation of the Son, Psalm 1103. Ex utero ante Luciferum genui te] (so was
the old reading of those words in Jerome, and Austin) Brought forth] and from
the womb] these words signify that by Wisdom, the Son is meant, and the
mention of the Womb of the Father does signify that this Son is of the same
substance with the Father, as children of the womb are of the same substance
with their Parents: and Before the morning Star] signifies that the Son was
before time, or any other Creature.

And that it may appear, that by Wisdom, the Son of God is meant, the words of
the Apostle will declare, 1 Cor. 1. 24. where he calls Christ, The wisdom of
God: And as the Psalmist tells us, that God made all things in wisdom: So the
Gospel tells us, who this wisdom is, viz. The Son, The Word: The Father
created all things, but he created them by the Son, which St. John expresses
in these words, Joh. 1. 3. All things were made by him] that is, by the Son, or
Word: and this St. Paul does clearly apply to Christ, Col. 1. 16. For by him
were all things created that are in Heaven, and that are in Earth, visible, and
invisible, whether they be Thrones or Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers]
so, that even the most glorious Archangels, and Angels are but the Creatures
of this Son of God, and this Wisdom of God.

Finally, These men that tell us, That God has not always a Son, may as well
tell us, that God had not always Wisdom: But as they dare not deny the Wisdom
of God to have been from Eternity, so neither can they without very great
impudence, deny the Word, or Son of the Father to have been from everlasting. I
will conclude this Chapter with the words of St. Basil, who thus argued against
the Anti-Trinitarians. out of the words of St. John. Basil. Hom. 16.
To him that shall say. There was a time when the Son, or Word was not, you may
answer; If this speech be true which the Gospel delivers. In the beginning
was the Word] I pray when was that time when he was not?

CHAP. IIII.
Of the Holy Ghost. That he is one of the Three Divine Persons; and that he is
to be prayed unto, which is showed both both by Warrant of Scripture, and by
the practice of the Primitive Christians, and of the Church of England;
wherein, he is confessed in Creeds, and invoked in Baptisms and Doxologies.

THe Macedonian Heretics confessed the Divine Personality of the Father and
the Son, but they denied the Person of the Holy Ghost; and there are some among
us, who, although they will not openly deny the Divinity and Person of the Holy
Ghost, yet they are doubtful and suspensive therein. And this, because they
cannot, or will not find, that any Prayers in Scripture, are used, or directed
to the Holy Spirit, as they are both to the Father and the Son. They find the
Son of God praying to the Father: Father, into thy hands I commend my Spirit:
And, Forgive them Father, they know not what they do. They Luke 23. 46. 34.
find also St. Stephen praying to the Son; Lord Act. 7. 59.
Jesus receive my Spirit.

For the satisfaction of such as these, who are neither maliciously, nor
obstinately wedded to this error: I will endeavor to show, both the
Personality of the most Holy Spirit, and also that he is to be prayed unto; and
both these, by the evidences, and precedents of holy writ, and by the practice
of our of our own Church, and also of the Primitive Christians.

First, That the Holy Ghost is a Divine, and distinct Person in the Trinity, as
well, and as truly as either the Father, or the Son: We find that the
Scriptures record, and report many, diverse actions, and operations of the Holy
Ghost, which must needs be the performances of a Person; for He appeared as a
Dove: And as fiery Tongues. He teaches. He leads into all truth. He brought
into the Apostles memories whatsoever Christ had said. He decreed in a Council,
Acts 15. He forgiveth sins by the Apostles, by whom he was received, and
entertained for that purpose, Joh. 20. 22. He is an Advocate or Comforter. He
distributeth gifts. He spoke by the Prophets, and in the Apostles. He calls,
and makes Ministers, Act. 13. 2. And Bishops, Act. 20. 28.) where the very
Original word is (...), which I know not why our Translators rendered Overseers,
when in other places they Translated the very same word, Bishops, which is the
very Text word, without any alteration, but only as it is formed to out English
Idiom) In a word, this Holy Spirit is produced by St. John as a witness that
Jesus is the Christ, 1 John 5. 6.

Secondly, for Prayer: We say that the Scripture does evidently set down a
Warrant, and a Precedent of Prayer to the Holy Ghost, which you will find if
you observe the words of St. Paul, 2 Cor. 13. 13. The Grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and the love of God, and the communion of the Holy Ghost be with you.]
This is a Prayer; and here is not only a mention of the Holy Ghost, but indeed,
all these words, Grace, Love, and Communion, do relate principally (if not
only) to the Holy Ghost, for the Spirit is the Grace, and the Love of the
Father, and the Son; and the grace of Jesus, and the Love of the Father, are
conveyed unto us, only by the Communion and Inspiration of the Holy Spirit: The
Spirit is the Conduit of them, and the Cement, or Ligament by which our
conjunction, fellowship, Union, or Communion is wrought, and by which we are
joined, and united in one Mystical body or corporation with the whole Trinity;
and this is the meaning of that saying of St. John Baptist, concerning the
Baptism of Christ. He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost] for those that are
Mat* 3. 11.
baptized into Christ are by this Spirit united to him in one mystical body,
and so become One with him; and by this Union with Christ, they are united with
the whole Trinity; and therefore there is mention of the Holy Ghost, in the
formal words of Baptism, because our Union is wrought only by this holy Cement
of the Spirit; for this reason it is that the Apostle prays for the Communion
of the Holy Ghost. Communion signifies a mutual union of the Spirit with us,
and of us with the Spirit; Communio is as much as Counio, or uni^ cum.

The Scriptures are so plentiful in precedents of Prayers to the Holy Ghost,
that you may find them at least in thirteen of St. Paul's Epistles, and at the
beginning of every one of them; for thus we read, Rom 1. 7. Grace be with you,
and peace from God our Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ] This is a
Salutatory Prayer, as Expositors new and old generally agree; and herein the
Holy Ghost is in the first place, and chiefly intended; for he is that Grace
and Peace, which proceeds from the Father and the Son: The Holy Ghost is the
very goodness and sweetness of the Godhead, as we are taught by St. Austin.
Aug. de Trin. lib. 6. cap. 10.
Spiritus est genitoris Genitique suavitas: For without this Grace and Peace by
the Communion of the Holy Ghost, the Almighty Godhead would be uncomfortable,
yea, and terrible unto us.

If it be demanded why the Holy Ghost is not so particularly and openly
mentioned in that Prayer, as the other persons are, by the words, God the
Father, and the Lord Jesus: In this we are resolved by the same Father, writing
upon these words. Aug. Exposit. in Romans
Non adjungit spiritum, quia spiritus est donum dei and Gratia, and Pax sunt
donum Dei, i. e. He does not expressly mention the Spirit, because it is
implied, for the Spirit is the gift of God, and so are Grace, and Peace: The
Spirit and his Graces are not separated, but they go together; so that by
mentioning Grace and Peace from God, he must mean the Spirit of Grace and
Peace, for the Spirit is expressly called The Peace of God:] Phil. 4. 7. because
it is also there said, To pass, or excel all understanding] therefore it must
be a Peace infinite, and so must be God, who excels all humane
comprehension; and that the graces of the Spirit are called the Spirit it self,
is evident by the words of St. John, Rev. 1. 4. who there calls seven Graces
of the same One, and Only Spirit; (because every one may be called Spirit)
Seven Spirits] In a word, The Invocation, and Prayer to the Holy Ghost, is
meant, in St. Paul's other Epistles, where the very same form of words is used,
viz. Grace be unto you, and Peace from God our Father, etc. which the Reader
may at his leisure observe in perusal of all these places, besides the formerly
alleged, viz. 1 Cor. 1. 3. And 2 Cor. 1. 2. Gal. 1. 3. Ephesians. 1. 2. Phil. 1. 2.
Col. 1. 2. And 1 These. 1. 1. And 2 These. 1. 3. And 1 Timothy 1. 2. And 2 Timothy 1.
2. Tit. 1. 4. Philem. 3.

To all these p^ecedents, we may farther add the Baptismal form of words, to
which we are strictly obliged; which are thus set down. In the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost] which words many Divines doubt
not to call a Prayer, and Invocation of the Three Persons (although it is more
also) as Ph. Melancthon, and Beza upon those words In the name] tells us it is,
Invocato patre, filio, Spiritu] i. e. That it signifies the Invocation of the
Father, Son, and Spirit; and so says the Interlineal Gloss in Lyranus, and
many others.

To these we subjoin the Practice of the Church in glorifying all the Three
Divine Persons; in her Doxologies, which I trust, none will deny to be Prayers,
when we say, Glory be to the Father, etc.] which certainly, is a Prayer as
much, and as full, as Hallowed be thy name. Of these Doxologies, St. Basil
says in the behalf of the Church Catholic, and against Anti-Tri^itarians.
Basil. Epist. 387.
Nos glorificamus, sicut Baptizamur, In Nomine Patris Filii and Spiritus] i. e.
We glorify God in the same form of words that we are baptized withal, that is,
we glorify all the Three Persons equally and alike: And that the same Father
esteems the Doxology to be a Prayer, is clearly declared by him in another
place, where he thus advises. Constitut. Ascet.
In precibus, incipe a glorificatione i. e. he would have us always to begin
our Prayers with a glorifying of God.

Another practice, and usance of the Church present, was grounded upon that
place in the Scripture, Act. 15. 28. for, because at the very first Christian
Council, the style of their Decree is thus set down. It seemed good to the Holy
Ghost and to us] therefore in After-Counsels, they began with a Prayer and
Invocation, of the Holy Ghost particularly; saying, Veni Creator Spiritus;
which was also so used with us; and at the laying on of hands in conferring
Ecclesiastical orders, and in many parts of our English Liturgy, and
particularly in the Letany, a Prayer is specially, and singly addressed to the
Person of the Holy Ghost, thus, O God, the Holy Ghost proceeding, etc. which
Letany I think, all sober, well advised Christians, and uninterested in Schism,
will acknowledge to be an holy, charitable, Pathetical and Heavenly Prayer; and
besides our praying to the Holy Ghost: the Church confesses her faith, and
believing in the Holy Ghost, as well as in the Father and the Son: in the
Symbols, Apostolical, Ni^ene, and Athanasian, which Creeds are acknowledged
also by other reformed Churches.

Moreover, although we should pass by, and lay aside all that is before
alleged, and that no more could be said for Prayer to the Holy Ghost, but only
this, that the Apostle tells us of a Temple of the Holy Ghost] This may be
enough to satisfy the humble Christian; for 1 Cor. 6. 19.
doubtless, that Person to whom a Temple is lawfully piously and Christianly
erected, the same Person may with the same Piety and Christianity; yea and
must, be prayed unto, and Ipse Deus Templum aedificavit Spiritui sancto; nam
Deus corpora nostra aedificavit. Aug. de Symb. To. 9. lib. 1. c. 4.
worshipped in that Temple; and therefore the Holy Ghost certainly should be
worshipped, and prayed unto, whose Temple all holy people are, as we read, 1
Cor. 6. 19. Know ye not that your body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost] which
Temple far excels all other worldly Temples, it being a Temple made by God
himself, and made of the members of God. And if we should build a Temple to
Sacrilegi essemus, Templum faciendo creaturae. Etiam Angclo excellentissimo.
Aug. Cont. Sermon. Arianor. To. 6. n 18.
any Creature though the most excellent Angel, or Archangel, it must be
confessed to be Idolatry, and a sacrilegious robbing God of that glory and
houour which is his peculiar, and of which he says, Isa 42. 8. My glory, will
I not give to another; In a word, The bodies, and souls of true Saints are not
that Temple of the Holy Ghost, which will continue and stand ever, when all
other mundane Temples, although called by the names of Saints, will be utterly
demolished.

When King Henry the Eighth had un-Sainted the stubborn Saint, Thomas Becket,
and had demolished his Shrine and Altar, and secured all the rich Furniture,
Jewels, Gold, and Silver thereunto belonging: Some Irish Romanists, inquired to
what Saints Patronage they might now, for security, dedicate their Churhces;
Answer was made, that they should choose St. Peter and S. Paul: but said they,
What if St. Peter. and St. Paul be also un-sainted, what must we then do? They
were told, that then they should dedicate their Churches to the Trinity; which
they did, and so they stood at that time quietly. De Schism. Angl. p. 92.
This Story is reported by Nich. Sanders, in his Book De Schismate Anglorum. I
do therefore here exhort both my self, and others also, that seeing the old
Saints, and even the Apostles themselves are not now adays vouchsafed the title
of Saints, (although they cannot be unsainted, because that is not in man's
power) and that the Churches named by their names, and also by the Appellation
of Ecclesia sanctae and individuae Trinitatis, do for all this suffer wrack,
and are bereaved of their rights and riches, and left Mat. 24. 15.
desolate, as if the Abomination or Desolation were come upon us; and for as
much as we see that none of our outward stony Temples, are either
Persecution-proof, or Reformation-proof: Let us in the name of God, consecrate
and dedicate our own little Chapels, our private Tabernacles and Temples of our
Bodies and Souls to the everlasting, Blessed, and glorious Trinity, that so
they may abide firm for ever; for then their riches will continue
un-sequestrable there, where Thieves cannot break through and steal. Mat. 6. 19.


By what has been said, I trust it appears, That in the Godhead there are
Three Persons, all Coequal, Coessential, and Coeternal; and all to be invoked,
worshipped, and glorified; for see how the Apostle evidently expresses this
truth, 1 Cor. 12. where speaking of the diversities of gifts of the Holy Ghost,
yet calls the Author of those graces, The same Spirit. The same Lord. The
same God: which St. Ambrose also accordingly, 1 Cor. 12r
Elegantly expresses thus. Ambr. de Dignit. hom. c. 2.
Ipse Deus Tria est; and unumquodque horum Trium, Deus est; and omnia Tria, non
Dii, sed Deus est, i. e. God is Three, and every one of these Three is God; and
all these Three, are not (to be called) Gods, but God.

To this I must add one consideration more, That the constant faith and
confession of this Mysterious Doctrine of the Trinity, is of such near
concernment; that without it, all our endeavors will be but fruitless: Now,
since God has so plentifully revealed it under the Gospel, as we also read in
Origin upon Job, (if that Book be his) Orig. in Job. lib. 1. p. 420.
Quicquid fecerint homines, si non in fide Trinitatis fecerint, sine Causa
agunt, a quo enim recipient mercedem? i. e. Whatsoever any man shall perform,
except he do hold the faith of the Trinity, his labor is lost, for who else
will give him any reward? Most doleful therefore must be the condition of
unbeleevers, whose labors, though ever so morally specious; yet they are but
like one that runs swiftly in a wrong way; as Aug. in Psalm. 31.
St. Austin thinks; but yet more deplorable is the state of those, who do not
only not believe, or dis-beleeve, but moreover slight, and also blaspheme the
holy Trinity, with such foul language, that I think unfit to publish; and which
caused Gregory Naz. to break forth into admiration of the patience of God. Naz.
Orat. 13.
O Trinitas Longanimis quae eos a quibus proscinderis tam diu toleras, i. e.
That it was admirable Longanimity in the Holy Trinity to endure such
blasphemers so long, And this impiety is yet more heinous, when it is found to
be among those that profess Christianity, whereas indeed the denial of the
Trinity is most truly by St. Austin accounted Judaism: Into which Aug. de Temp.
Sermon. 194.
dangerous infidelity, it is to be feared, that more Christians will fall, then
the great endeavors of these times will convert Jews from it: And this because
so many Scandals, or stumbling blocks are laid in their way, of which, I take
my self to be obliged, to give some intimation to the Reader, before I conclude
this Treatise.

CHAP. VIII.
Scandalous practices against the faith of the Trinity, by forbidding the
worship of the Lord Jesus. By dis-use of the Doxologies, and of the Creeds, in
Baptism; And by dissolving Episcopacy, which is a disparagement of the Holy
Ghost, by whom Bishops were ordained. Of Presbytery, That is no sacerdotal
Order, but only an Office.

KIng Solomon advises, Prove. 22. 28. Not to remove the Landmarks which our
Fathers have set; yet commonly in all prevailing Schisms, or prosperous
heresies; the first act of Reformation, is in removing all or very many of the
former usances, although they be ever so good, useful, and laudable. St. Basil
says, that in the Arian Heretical Schism, Basil. de Spi^. Sanc. ad Amphil. c.
30.
Omnes patrum termini loco moti sunt, magna est inclinatio temporum ad
Ecclesiae eversionem caligo ecclesias occupat, unicus amicitiae finis est, Id.
Epist. 1. and 61. and 65.
ad gratiam loqui. Erroris similitudo est res firma ad Seditionis societatem.
Quilibet est Theologus. Episcopatus, ad homines vernas devenit. Patrum dogmata,
and Apostolorum traditiones contemnuntur. Recentiorum hominum inventa
dominantur. Pastores abiguntur, Lupi in roducuntur. Domus Oratioriae
deseruntur. Qui maxim blasphemant in populi Ediscopatum eliguntur. Gravitas
sacerdotum periit. Christianorum nomine tecti sunt persecutores. Nulla est apud
judices iniquos cani capitis reverentia. Thus he, and much more also to the
same purpose; Concerning the abuses of those Heretics, in abolshing the good
old Doctrines and Disciplines of the Church, the abusing of the most Reverend
Ministers; and in bringing into that holy Office, unlearned men, and any
Quicunque vult, of the lowest of the people.

Now although the dangerous heresies of Arians and Socinians have been
discountenanced, both by the late Parliaments, and also by the present
Government, and some of their writings condemned to the fire, (which acts are
by godly men esteemed very commendable, and are very comfortable unto them) yet
many Landmarks, and excellent parcels of our Christian Religion; and those
things wherein the Church of England did correspond with the Primitive Church,
are of late, in many places, removed, and disused, as if they were, either
impious, or Superstitious, or of very little, or no concernment, although some
of them are of very great use and necessary. This is that which occasioneth
many weak Christians to be scandalized so far, as to be suspicious of the truth
of the most high and necessary Doctrine of the most holy Trinity: as namely.

First, Concerning the Godhead of Christ, it might stagger the faith of many
weaker Christians, when they find it was commanded by order of a great and wise
Council, that No Declarat. of the Commons in Parl. Sept. 9. 1641. Phil. 2. 10.
man should bow his knee when the Name of Jesus was named; although the Apostle
had said, that In the name of Jesus every knee shall bow] for who could imagine
that Christians should be forbidden by Christians to worship their God? Or what
plain man would believe the Incarnation of Christ, were the Incarnation of the
most high God; or that the Incarnation were of such great concernment and joy,
when great men in Authority, and prudent, and professing godliness and zeal,
shall forbid the solemn memorial and celebration thereof; as if it were in
opposition to the Apostles, and to the practice of our own, and of the
primitive Church: and moreover to force it to be a day of fasting, and so of
sorrow? We read, that our Father Joh. 8. 56.
Abraham rejoiced to see that day] i. e. his Incarnation, and Birth; although
it was not revealed to him, what day of the month it should be, nor what year,
nor indeed in what century of years. The holy Priest Zachary at the news of it,
and the blessed Virgin Mother also, expressed their joyfulness, saying, Blessed
be the Lord God of Israel. And My soul does magnify the Lord, and my spirit
has rejoiced in God my Savior. The blessed Angels sing for joy, although the
benefit thereof belonged principally to men; but their charity was like
themselves, heavenly; rejoicing at p^ace on earth, and good will toward men:
even those men who are sullen on the day of the memorial thereof, even to
working and fasting as if Christ's coming in the flesh did no more concern them,
then it did him who said, What have we to do with thee thou Jesus of Nazareth,
art Luke 4. 34:
thou come to destroy us? The primitive Church ordained by Ecclesiastical
Canon, that if the Festival of Christ's Nativity should fall on the Quarta, or
Pro-sabbatum, i. e. on Wednesday or Friday (which were kept as fasting-days,
through the whole year, except only the fifty days of Penticost) yet that on
this Festival, the Fast should not be kept, as we read in Epiph. cont. Haer.
lib. 3. To. 2.
Epiphanius The other Eastern Fathers called that day. Basil. n. 16.
The universal Feast of all Creatures. Athan. n. 25.
The principal of all the Lords Festivals. Chrysostom. n. 11:
and the Metropolis of all holy days.

Secondly, Another shrewd Scandal is given by the late omission, and disuse of
the Doxologie, or glorification of the Trinity, which now a days is by most
incumbents quite left, as if the Doctrine of the Trinity were not true;
although the ancient Christians, and this Church of England so often used it as
a confession of the true Catholic faith, and in detestation of the infidelity
of Jews, Samosatenians, Arians, and Macedonians; for although some of them did
use a form of glorification of the Three Persons, both privately and publicly,
even almost as often as they fetched their breath: as Basil. de Spirit. c. 25.
St. Basil says; yet it was with a disparagement both of the Second and Third
Persons, so as is showed before; therefore the Church Catholic was necessarily
moved to glorify all the Three Persons equally, according to that form of
words which Christ appointed in Baptism.

But now we seldom hear the Ancient Doxologie at all rehearsed in most
Congregations, and which is worse, the rehersing of it is accounted to be
prejudicial, and dangerous to the reherser; and it has been confessed by one
in mine own knowledge, who is learned and Orthodox, that although he approved
of the Doxologie, yet he abstained from rehersing it, or from appointing it to
be sung when others desired it, so as it is set down in many places of those
Hymns which are joined with the singing Psalms, which are yet in use amongst
us (more then the Liturgical reading Psalms are) although those singing
Psalms and Hymns were never authorized by any Legislative power; and this he
did, not for any dislike thereof, but for fear of offending some Reformers, and
thereby indangering his livelihood.

Thirdly, Another block of obstructions is: That the Symbols of faith, the
Creeds, are in most Congregations quite disused: wherein the confession of our
faith in the Trinity, and our assent to all the necessary Doctrines of
Christianity is expressed; yet this is now omitted, and even in Baptism also,
where it is most needful: for although we find not that the Creed was used in
the primitive Church in their general Liturgies, yet it was never with them
omitted in the administration of Baptism. G. Cassander observes, Cassand in
Liturgicis.
That the Nicene Creed in the days of Basil and Chrysostom, was rehearsed at
the time of the Eucharist only, where none were present, but only the Fideles,
i. e. Communicants. So, that Creed which we call Apostolical, was always used
at Baptism. St. Ambrose tells us, that at the three dippings in Baptism, which
was the custom in his time at Millan, the person to be baptized was thrice
asked. Ambr. de Sac. l. 2. c. 7. r.
Credis in Deum Patrem? Then, Credis in Dominum Jesum? And again, Credis in
Spiritum Sanctum? To these three questions he answered to each, severally,
Credo, and so was at every several answer dipped; thereby confessing his Faith
in the Trinity, and we are informed by Saint Austin that the general custom
of the Latin Church in his time was, Aug. Confess. lib. 8. c. 2.
That the P^r^ty to be baptized, did himself openly in the Church (if he were
at age) rehearse the Creed, and declare his assent to the Articles of faith
therein; so that it was esteemed a sign of insolency and pride, if a man would
have another to rehearse it, that so he might only signify his assent, and not
rehearse it by himself personally. And to this purpose he tells a story of one
Aug. Epist. 67
Gabinianus, who had a long time deserred to be baptized; this man had one only
Daughter, and she fell sick, her father then bound himself by vow, to be
baptized, if his child recovered: she did recover, yet he performed not his
vow; then himself was struck blind, and thereupon vowed again, and received his
sight, and was baptized, But would not then at Baptism rehearse the Creed by
himself: then he fell into a grievous Palsy, which hindered his speech; and was
in a Dream admonished, that this calamity fell upon him, because he omitted the
rehearsal of the Creed in his Baptism. Then (because he could not speak) he
gave up the Creed under his hand writing, and was restored to the use of his
Limbs, but not of speech. Thus he.

Surely, the confession of faith ought not to be omitted at Baptism, because
Baptism is our submitting and restipulating to the Covenant of Grace, which
Covenant cannot by us possibly be performed, but only through faith in Christ,
by which faith instrumentally, we are united to Christ, and in him to the whole
Trinity: So that the principal branch of this Baptismal Covenant, is to be a
faithful believer: I marvel therefore how it can seem reasonable to any man
that understands Baptism, and especially to our learned Teachers; that one
should enter a Covenant in Baptism, of believing, when the things to be
confessed, and believed are not at all rehearsed, or mentioned. And yet more
strange it is, that although they have changed the old form of singing with the
sign of the Cross, into singing with the sign of the Covenant; yet the words
of the Covenant are not at all by them rehearsed: Whereas it is evident in
Scripture, that a confession of faith, and so a Covenant of believing is
required in Baptism; for when the Noble Eunuch desired Baptism, he was first
required to believe, and thereupon made a confession of his faith, thus, I
believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God; and Act. 8. 37.
so he was baptized. As for the reforming of great Fonts into little Basins,
and the like lesser matters, wherein, how much the amendment is better then the
supposed fault or defect, we dispute not; but we are heartily sorry, that in
many Congregations, the Incumbents do often refuse to baptize at all, except it
be the children of the Rich, of their own fraternity.

Fourthly, We have also lost the grave and venerable Order Episcopal, which may
justly seem to argue a dis-belief, or a disparagement of the Holy Ghost, of
whom it is said, Acts 20. 28. Spiritus sanctus posuit Episcopos] for if it be
indeed believed, that the holy spirit did plant, or place them; it must also be
believed that some contrary Ghost, or Anti-spirit it is that supplanteth them.
Our Lord Jesus himself; now, since he sat at the right hand of God, in Heaven,
yet there sitting, is called a Bishop, 1 Pet. 2. 25. The Shepherd and Bishop of
our souls; and the chief Shepherd, 1 Pet. 5. 4. ((...)) and the great Shepherd
of the sheep, Heb. 13. 20. The Appellation of Pastor belonged only to Bishops
in the Primitive Church, but but now every young Curat, though but an intruder,
will write himself Pastor, too arrogantly: St. John, in his Revelation, saw
four and Rev. 4. 10.
twenty Presbiters (so is the original) fall down before this great Bishop; but
our new Revelations have shown us twenty four Bishops falling before
Presbyters.

I suppose that the greatest adversaries of Episcopacy, will not deny the Title
of Bishop to be a scriptural word, as it is, and not an extraordinary or
temporary word, or appellation, as some others are, but a positive and fixed
name, and office: and if it be indeed so planted by the Holy Ghost in the holy
Scriptures; men should be afraid to raze it out, if they consider that Moses
charged his Israelites, neither to add nor diminish ought from the word that he
had Deuteronomy. 4. 2.
taught them: and so St. John at the very close of the Gospel, has left a
terrible threatening, which surely extends to all holy writ. If any man shall
add to it, God shall add plagues to him; Rev. 22. 18.
And if any shall take away from it, God shall take away his part out of the
book of life.

The greatest Sticklers, and Dogmatical opposers, and enemies to Episcopacy
(for I meddle not with Authoritative power) are those men who would have
Presbyters to be the Supreme Sacerdotal order; but I firmly believe that in the
Scripture, the word Presbyter was not intended to signify any order at all of
Sacerdocy, but only to signify a jurisdictive Authority annexed to the two
only Orders of Bishop and Minister; for Bishops are therefore called Presbyters
in the Scripture, because of their jurisdiction only. Presbyter is an
appellation of the Office, or work of a Bishop, but not of his Order, as St.
Paul does evidently distinguish them, 1 Timothy 3. 1. If a man desire the Office
of a Bishop, he desires a good Work.] Here is, 1. The Office, or Work. 2. The
Order, (...). Afterward, inferior Ministers were called Presbyters; and that
very early in the Primitive Church: And now all Ministers are generally called
Presbyters, which is improper and abusive, except there be first a faculty of
some part of the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction annexed to the Minister, which
jurisdiction, in due form, should be derived on them, by grant of the Superior
Order of the Bishop: for although it is very true, that in the Primitive Church
a new Order was set up, and called Presbyters, and placed between Bishops and
Ministers ((...)) yet this Order was only Ecclesiastical; but not Scriptural.
For the word (...), or Presbyter, in Scripture, is promiscuously used to
signify both Ecclesiastical, and civil Governors, because it signifies only
a jurisdictive Authority, and not a sacerdotal Order: In the new Testament,
Presbyters of the people, (Mat. 21. 23. and 26. 47. and 27. 1.) are mentioned.
And Presbyters of the Church, Act. 15. 4. 6. and 1 Timothy 5. 17. And Tit. 1. 5.)
in all which places, our English renders the word Elder But Beza varies in in
the Translation of it: for when it is said of the Laity, he renders it
Seniores, i. e. Elders. But when it is said of Ecclesiastical persons; there he
renders it Presbyteri, i. e. Presbyters.

In the old Testament we find but two Sacerdotal Orders, viz. 1. The
High Priest, Aaron and his Successors. 2. Inferior Priests, called the Sons of
Aaron So, in the New Testament we find but two Orders of Sacerdocy, viz.
Bishops, and the inferior Ministers, or Presbyters are both, called
Sacerdotes. by St. Augustine de civ. l. 20. c. 10.
1. Bishops. 2. Ministers, who are called (...): So St. Paul reckons them more
then once, as Phil. 1. 1. The Bishops and Deacons, and so 1 Timothy 3. 2. 8. So
St. Jerome in that Epistle to Evagrius (which has been so tugged and stretched
to make it speak for the Presbyterian design) does propound this sure rule,
concerning Ecclesiastical Orders, Hier. Epist. 84. To. 2.
Sciamus traditiones Apostolicas sumptas de veteri Testamento, i. e. What the
Apostles have delivered or written concerning Ecclesiastical Orders, was by
them taken from the patterns of Sacerdotal Orders, in the old Testament, which
certainly is true, because the same Immutable God is the Author of Orders,
both in the old and new Testament: St. Jerome goes on thus. Id. ibid.
Quod Aaron, and filii ejus, atque Levitae in Templo fuerunt; hoc sibi
Episcopi, and Presbyteri, and Diaconi vindicent in Ecclesia, i. e. That which
Aaron and his Sons, and the Levites were, during the Temple; The same may
Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons claim in the Church: But every learned man
knows, that the Levites were not Priests; therefore those that St. Jerome
calls Presbyters, must needs be the same that St. Paul calls Deacons, or
Ministers. Now if Presbyters must be the highest Order in the Church, by the
same proportion; Aarons Sons sholud have been the Highpriests in the Temple;
but then, what must Aaron himself be? a Cipher, a nothing? The truth is, that
neither in the time of the Synagogue before, nor since, in the time of the
Church; Presbyter, or Elder, were to be accounted the Appellations of Orders,
but only of an Office: and now to call Presbyters a distinct Order of Sacerdocy
is as if we should call Apostles, Prophets, 1 Cor. 12. 28. Ephesians. 4. 11.
Doctors, Evangelists, and Pastors, so many several Orders, which are but only
Offices: for the Apostleship it self is but an Office, but the Order of the
Apostles is called (...) Act. 1. 20. i. e. Bishopric.

It may therefore seem very uncomely that the Presbytery, which of it self is
no Order, should be advanced over the undoubted Scriptural Judge. 9. 15.
order of Bishops, as is in the Parable: The Bramble is not a tree, but was
made the King of Trees as Pliny also tells of a Shrub, which he calls Viscum:
we call it Missleto, Plin. hist. l. 16. c. 44.
Cum sedem suam non habeat, in aliena vivit, i. e. because it has no land of
its own, upon which it can grow, therefore it grows upon another Tree, but this
is not all, for some of that rank have proceeded too far, even to bitterness,
and open Pulpit-rayling against that high Order, wherein they have been called
Tyrants, and the dissolving of them, said to be a greater deliverance then that
of Eighty eight, or the powder Treason. This was said, when neither any
intelligent Auditor believed it, and it may charitably be thought, that the
Preacher did not himself believe it. A Jesuit he was, who once Emman. Sa.
said, A lie in a Sermon is no Mortal sin, but friend, without repentance, it
will prove an immortal sin.

I crave leave of thy patience, Good Reader, to tell thee another piece of
great partiality (that I say no worse) against that high Order, which I have
heard often related by persons Religious, of great quality, and of eminent
prudence and sobriety, and also by a Person of Honor, who were present
Auditors, when a grave Minister of the Presbyterian persuasion, reading in the
Church, the second Chapter of St. Peter's first Epistle; when he came to those
words in the last verse, For ye were as sheep going astray, but are now
returned to the Shepherd, and Bishop of your souls] this Minister read it thus.
But are now returned to the Shepherd, and Presbyter of your souls] whereas not
only our English Translation, but the Original Greek has the word Bishop. But
such men (...). 1 Pet. 2. 25.
may say any thing impune, so it be to the nulling Bishops, because it has
pleased some wiser-heads, to make use of Malevolent hearts, and Venal tongues,
to prepare the game for a more politic, and profitable reason of state; for I
cannot imagine that the dissolving of Episcopacy was noted, only for their ill
management of the Jurisdiction, but also for the good use which others might
make of their Temporalties, and if all the excesses of them, in their
jurisdictions, were now collected since primo Elizabethae, until Mar. 25. 1654.
The moderate administration thereof by some Presbyters since that time, will
not rise up in judgment against the Bishops.

CHAP. IX.
Of Scandalous Ministers. Scandals by dis-use of the Lords Prayer. Christ's
Kingdom on earth, and of his coming before the last judgment. Successes in
unjust causes are no signs of Gods approbation. The Regal style, Gratia Dei. Of
Thanks-givings.

THere has been much ado with us about scandalous Ministers: and the right
Character of them that are so indeed, is, that they are the men, which lay
stumbling blocks in our way, to retard us from going toward Heaven and to make
us fall into Hell But those godly those godly, studious, and laborious
Ministers, who endeavor both day and night to direct our souls in the right
way, toward Heaven, and to sufflaminate them which are too swiftly running
toward Hell, are quite contrary to scandalous Ministers; except this word
scandalous be understood in that sense as it is used, Romans 9. 33. and 1 Cor. 1.
23. where Christ himself was called (...). Jezabels Priests were indeed
scandalous Ministers, for they seduced the people, by magnifying Baal; but, was
Elias a scandalous Prophet, for showing the true God to that people. Verily,
many Reverend and Religious persons such as Elias was, are now, by the Canting
Language of these days nicknamed Scandalous, Malignant, and ill-affected, by
those that call other men by names proper to themselves; but I wish that they
would consider, that as there is a woe Matt. 18. 7.
to that man, by whom the scandal, or offense comes: So there is the like, Woe
unto them that call Isa. 5. 29.
evil good, and good evil.

Diod. lib. 1.
Diodorus Siculus tells us of an Egyptian Queen (Isis) that gave the third
part of her Land to Priests, to hire them to cry up her deceased Husband for a
God: And we are told by Eus. de Praep. lib. 1. c. 1.
Eusebius of an Egyptian King, that set up several Religions in the several
Provinces of that Country, that thereby the people might be divided, and so
despise and hate one another for Religion, least they should agree in one, and
so conspire against their King; whereby it seems that Divide, and Impera, was
an old Egyptian-Heathenish policy; but surely Dilige and Impera, is the better,
and more Christian.

There are also many Religions among us (I cannot say for what policy) and many
old revived Heresies brought in, as Arianism by Socinians: Donatism by
Anabaptists: Aerianism, by the Anti-prelaticals: And Judaism by some
Sabbatarians: And Millinarism by our new Chiliasts, (or Millers, as our Country
people call them) whilst the true Christian, and English-Catholick Religion is
by all those parties contemned, and depraved, as is showed before in diverse
particulars, to which I must add one more, which is a great scandal also
against the Person of Christ.

Fifth, The Lords Prayer is now in many places omitted, and quite dis-used;
whereby some people have taken occasion, most impiously and cursedly to
blaspheme both it, and also the Author of it; they call it the Devils
Faggot-bond; and they say that Christ (if he were now on earth) would be
ashamed of it, etc. surely those Demagogues that do thus principle their
Disciples, are the right scandalous Ministers, and no good teachers, as one
says, Plaut. in Bach.
Pejor Magister te ista docuit, it must be such a Preacher as Irenaeus speaks
of. Iren. lib. 1. c. 29
Serpens praeconiavit in Marcion, i. e. either Marcions Chaplain, or he that in
the Serpent Preached to Eve: For this Prayer was taught us by that God to whom
we are to pray, as if the Prince himself should pen our Petition, wherewith he
would be petitioned, that so he might the more cheerfully, and unscrupulously
grant it: Wherein we are minded first of our Adoption by the Son of God, and
whereby we say, Our Father: and it was by the best Primitive Christians, daily
used; and of such reverend esteem by the faithful, that none might presume to
use it, until they were Christened (that is) until in Baptism they had received
the Sacrament of Adoption, as we are informed by Chrysostom. Hom. Antioch. 58. Aug.
de Temp. Sermon. 126. Theod. Haeret. Fab. lib. 5.
Chrysostom, Austin, and Theodoret.

It may go for a Riddle, that this Prayer is not only omitted, but Preached and
declaimed against, by those men that would have us believe that Christ will
come down from Heaven corporally, and reign here upon earth with his Saints,
that is, with themselves, a thousand years before the last judgment; which
Doctrine, if these men do believe, and desire his so coming, it may be wondered
why they refuse to pray, Thy Kingdom come.

In this they seem, not to be their Crafts-masters, because this omission
gives occasion to the other party to suspect, that these Saints do not
themselves believe this Millinarian fancy, which they pretend; and also that
they do really fear lest Christ's Kingdom should indeed come: Because, if his
Kingdom come, then his Will must be done, On earth, as it is in Heaven; that
is, Cheerfully, willingly, and charitably; according to his own Evangelical
precepts, without Bloodshedding, or Rapine: then no covetousness, no
hypocrisy, no slandering, or malicious lying, and envying will take place; and
then there will be a restitution of all things, Acts 4. 21. (...), i. e. a
re-establishment, or restoring: so that all ill gotten possessions, must be
parted withal, and the wrong-sufferer, and wrong-doer, shall have their
rights: This is the grand Jubilee.

Christ's coming has in Scripture a double signification.

1. By his Spirit, ruling in our hearts; this is his Kingdom of grace, and the
Kingdom of God, which is within us.

2. It signifies his coming in particular judgment, in wrath and vengeance
upon a sinful, and rebellious people, neither of these do necessarily imply his
corporal coming.

Verily, it is not unprobable, that Christ's Kingdom may come upon us in this
Land; and that speedily, and before his final judgment, by reason of our grand
impieties: I mean, his coming in wrath, and vengeance, to bruise us with his
Rod of iron, mentioned, Ps. 2. 9. for so he came to the Jews at their last and
terrible destruction, of which Kingdom, John Baptist spoke, Mat. 3. 2. Repent
for the Kingdom of God is at hand: The Axis laid unto the root of the Trees: as
if he had pointed to the Roman destroyers, whose Ensign of Magistracy was an
Ax; and some after our Savior tells them of their hewing down, Mat. 7. 10. and
Mat. 42. 34. This generation shall not pass till all these things be
fulfilled,] i. e. that some, then alive, should live till the destruction of
Jernsalem should be finished. And when he foretold, that Peter should be
crucified; even then he said of St. John, If I will that he tarry till I come,
what is that to thee? the meaning was, that Christ's coming in vengeance Joh.
21. 22.
upon that City and Nation, should be before the death of St. John, as indeed
it was, for he lived many years after the destruction of Jerusalem. In this
sense Christ's Kingdom may come, and his Reigning; as a King, justly taking
revenge, and punishing his rebellious people: and we may justly fear that this
Kingdom is already begun among us for our crying sins, even the sins of the
Afflicting, as well as the afflicted party. I do well remember that at the
beginning of our late wars, an order from the Parliament, commanded the London
Preachers to declare in their Pulpits, that these troubles came upon this Land,
for the sins thereof.

Neither should those men, who are employed in executing the wrath of God upon
others, think, that themselves are Gods favorires, or Saints any thing more for
this; because they may find, that, most wicked men have been so ordained by
God, and by him acknowledged to be his instruments of vengeance: for of the
idolatrous King of Assyria, God says, Isa. 10. 5. O Assyrian, the rod of my
anger. the Psalmist also observes Psalm. 17. 13. The ungodly is Gods Sword. and
Austin tells us more also. Aug. in Ps. 36. Sermon. 1.
De peccatore fecit Deus flagellum, ei dedit honorem, and Potestatem, i. e God
uses the sinner as a scourg, and moreover he gives him both honor and power;
even Attila, the cruel Scythian Tyrant, called himself Flagollum Dei, i. e. the
rod of God. And no marvel; for Bears, Lions, Fiery Serpents, Winds and Storms,
Frogs, Flies Caterpillars, Thunder and Lightnings, Famines, Pestilences, and
evil Angels are used by God, to execute his wrath, yet these are not Saints;
indeed, as Origin says, Orig. in Josh. Hom. 4.
Peccatori omnis creatura hostis est, i. e. every creature may be an enemy and
scourg to a sinful people, and to put it out of doubt, the Prophet Jeremy
tells us of The Hammer of the whole earth] Ier. 50. 23. which both Aug. in Ps.
97 glos. ord. in. loc.
Austin and the Gloss affirm, to be meant of the Devil; Neither will any man
say that the Roman Idolaters were Saints, although God permits, and
prospered them with victorious success in subduing the Jews; because they did
not attempt that war, with any intent of serving God, but to serve their own
lusts, and coveteousness; and surely, successfulness, in causes unwarrantable,
and ungodly, which an heathen man did call Sen. in Here. Eur.
Prosperum Scelus, is so far from excusing, or ingratiating us with God, that
it argues a greater wrath, and curse of God upon us as Prosper notes. Prosp.
Sent. 42. Quando male vivis si parcit Deus, mag is irascitur in Psalm. 65. Aug.
Nihil est infelicius, felicitate peccantium, qua mala voluntas nutritur, i. e.
Nothing is more unhappy, then the happiness, and success of a sinner, because
thereby he is hardened in wickedness. I confess something may be said for the
Saint-ships of such instruments of wrath even from the mouth of God, reported.
Ierem. 22. 7. where, in St. Ieroms translation, Hier. in Jeremiam c. 22.
Sanctus vocatur Nabuchodonosor, and omnis ejus exercitus. Sanctus Numa] Mart.
lib. 11. Epig. 16. Sanctissima Sibylla.] virg. in. lib. 6.
it is thus read of Nebuchadnezzar. Sanctificabo Super te interficientem virum]
i. e. That God would Saintifie, (or prepare) a slaughter-man against the King
of Judah, so in this sense Nebuchadnezzar was a Saint, or a Set-apart.

Neither can Tyrant-Persecutors, or usurpers, in their dominions, unrighteously
acquired, justly use the Ancient style of lawful Christian Princes, viz.
Gratia D^i. But yet they may truly write Permissione Divina, because God does
permit the worst of men to usurp, yet without any allowance, or gracious
acceptance of his; And surely, it is a great hypocrisy, and mocking of God to
ascribe successes in wicked courses as to be demonstrations of his approbation
thereof; for to set up solemn Thanksgivings for unwarrantable achievements, is
as if we should give thanks to God for our Prosperous wickedness, and power of
oppressing others. The heathen Alexander, a great and prosperous robber, when
he had taken the City Tyrus, Faelix praedo. Lucan. lib. 10.
commanded that the Tyrians God, should be called Diod. Sic. lib. 17.
Philalexandros, i. e. The friend of Alexander. The Anabaptists at Munster,
made a solemn thanksgiving, for the beheading of one of the Queens, or Queans
of Surius Comment. ad An. 1534.
John a Leyden; so was there at Rome an Oration congratulatory made by Sixtus
Quintus himself An. Dom. 1589 for the barbarous murder of King Henry the third
of France, by a Dominican, or rather as one says, a Demoniacan Friar; as if
God had been the author, and favourer thereof. But he had a Roman precedent for
it, for when the noble Empress Octavia, was by Nero's command beheaded, a
solemn thanksgiving was appointed for it, and this, as Tacitus. Annal. lib. 14.
Tacitus says, by a decree of the then flattering, and wicked Senate. Our
learned Camd. in Hibern.
Camden tells us that the Irish robbers, before they went out to rob, used to
fall to prayer, that God would send them a prey, and after a robbery, they
called that prey, the gift of God. This kind of profane impiety, was taken
notice of, and reproved by the Fathers. One says, Aug. de vitae Christiana. c.
11. To. 9.
Quidam cum furtum fecerint, gratias deo agunt, putant Deum sceleris
participem. and another says, Ambr. Sermon: 66. To. 5.
Milites, viduas, orphanos, and indefensos persequuntur, and cum sacculos
fraudihus impleverint, loeti ad Ecclesiam currunt, and gratias agunt Deo, quasi
ab eo, haec pecunia conferatur, i. e. Some give thanks to God for their thefts,
as some Soldiers plunder Widows, orphans and unarmed people, and when they
have filled their Knapsacks, they run to Church joyfully, and give thanks to
God as if he had bestowed that money on them.

There has been another witty practice among such Cacocharistical
thanksgivers, to manage their affairs so as, that the injured and afflicted
parties shall give thanks for their own sufferings: as some mothers make the
child to kiss the rod wherewith he has been whipped) to prevent a further
danger; as an old courtier once said Sen. de Ira. l. 2. c. 33.
Senectutem in aula consecutus sum, injurias accipienao, and gratias agendo, i.
e. That he continued so long in Court, by receiving injuries, and giving
thanks; The hope of escaping future mischiefs has induced many to join in the
jolly festivals of thanksgiving, with those that have spoiled their country,
ruined their estates, slain their parents, children, or friends, and destroyed
their Laws, Liberties, and Religion, and this, least some Fimbria should
accuse them as ill affected. Cic. Orat. per Roscio Amerin.
Quod non totum telum corpore recepissent.] The Trojan Horse was brought into
that City, by the Citizens themselves as Dictys Cret. ^e Bello Troi. lib. 5.
one observes with great jollity, yet to the utter ruin of Old Troy. So when
the Kingdom of Hungary was taken by the Turks, a certain Courtier said, Surius
Comment. ad An. 1539.
Nunqu im vidi Regnum, quod majori gaudio, and tripudio perierit. i. e. He
never saw any Kingdom so joyful at its own ruin; although I believe many
innocent, but ignorant people in such cases, do, as one in Plaut. in Capt. Act.
4. Sc. 2. Nulia verier miscria, quam falsa laetitia. Bern. and Aug. in Ps. 85.
Plautus says, Gaudeo etsi nihil scio quod gaudeam, i. e. they rejoice with
others, though they know no cause of joy; Such joy is but Risus Sardonius,
which always ends in sorrow. When Burrhus a noble and valiant Gentleman, and
a faithful Counselor and lover of his Prince, saw the great Emperor Nero
singing and fidling in the Theater like a common player, he beheld him as
Tacitus says Tac. Annal. l. 14.
M^rens and laudans. i. e though with others he must applaud; yet, it was with
pity, and tears in his eyes.

It falls out many times, that the Thanksgivings, Bell-ringings, and
Bonefires, which to some are signs of joy; to others, are a certain argument
of some public mischief, as St. Austin observed of the Schismatic Donatists.
Aug. in Ps. 132.
Vos Donatistae, nostrum Deo Gratias ridet is, Plorant homines, vestrum Deo
Lauds. and again, Aug. cont. Julian. Pelag. l. 4. c. 3.
Vester risus fletum commovet intelligentibus, ut risus, phreneticorum, Sanis.
i. e. When the Church solemnizeth a thanksgiving (though for a public benefit)
the Donatists deride them, but when the Donatists celebrate their thanksgiving,
it makes understanding men mourn, as when mad men laugh, their wiser friends
are sorry for them.

Finaly, those that do really rejoice at the evils, and afflictions of their
quiet and innocent brethren, and at the ruin of Religion, and desolations of
their own Country, their joy is that passion which by Philosophers is called
(...), i. e. a rejoicing in evil, which is quite contrary to Christian charity:
The Apostle says, 1 Cor. 13. 6. It rejoices not in iniquity; And that himself
rejoiced not that his Corinthians were made sorry, 2 Cor. 7. 9. As many now a
days do. Heavenly Angelical joy is at the conversion, not at the ruin, though
of a sinner; Aug. in Magnificat.
Qui exultant cum male fecerint, gaudium suum in malignitate constituunt, non
in Deo. See how the man of God weepeth, when he, only foresaw the cruelties of
the Tyrant Hazael 2 Reg. 8. 11. and see, even an heathen King, fasting,
praying, and watching, for good Daniel, while he was in the Lions den, Dan. 6.
16. but for professors to triumph and insult at the ruin of religious men is
hellish, as Prosper says, Prosper Resp. ad Gall. c. 11.
Diaboli gaudium, est ruina Sanctorum.] i. e. If there be any joy in Hell, it
is for the ruin of godly men.

CHAP. X.
That the Millinarian heresy is scandalous against the Trinity, because it is
a disparagement of the Son of God. Mr. Mede's argument for Millinarisme is
answered.

THere is yet another Scandal, or stumbling block against the Divinity of the
second Person, lately laid again, by a new revival of an old heresy of the
Chiliasts, or Millinarians; who taught that Christ shall return to earth
corporally a thousand years before his coming to the final and universal
judgment, and then his Saints which shall rise from death, and those Saints
which he shall find living, shall begin their reign in this world as in a new
earthly Paradise, in all plenty of meats, and other worldly and carnal
pleasures and delights, just as Turks do now believe, and that all earthly
possessions shall be theirs, that other men which are not Saints, shall either
be slain, or at the best, so many of them shall be reserved as may serve for
vassalage to be triumphed over, and to do all kinds of drudgery works for the
Saints. Thus Aug. de Civ lib. 20. c. 7. and de Haeres. haer. 8. Lact. de Div.
prae. lib. 7. c. 24.
Austin and Lactantius state this fabulous and heretical fancy of Cerinthus,
Papias, Nepos, and Apollinarius; which was so plausibly propounded, that some
of the Fathers were much taken therewith, as Irenaeus, Tertullian, Lactantius,
and Austin himself for a time, while he was also a Manichaean; their reasons
were grounded upon some dark passages in the Prophets, and upon the 20. Chap.
of the Apocalips, which I think was never understood by man, since the death of
the writer thereof, but that which most concerns the business now in hand,
against the Son of God, is that argument which Mr. Ios. Mede late of Cambridg,
has used in his Commentary upon the Revelation cap. 20. which is both in his
own Latin edition, and also in the English Translation thereof; which I am
necessitated to take notice of in this place, because I do not find that this
argument has yet been answered, which is the strongest and most dangerous that
ever any Millinarian used, and for ought I know yet, this argument was never
used by any, but only Mr. Mede, who was a man of most profound learning, and of
a gracious, religious and sober life, who although he published this doctrine,
yet he did it with great modesty, and humility, and also with submission to the
judgment of the Church; But it was printed in a troublesome time, viz. 1642.
when the learned Churchmen had hardly leisure to examine it, or not power to
correct it; and surely, little did this worthy man think, what evil use some
men would make of it. The argument is this, in Mr. Mede's own words,

Regunm quod neque ante Domini nostri Mede. in Apocal. c. 20. p. 277.
(...) nec post ultimam resurrectionem est futurum, id necessario inter
utrumque est concludendum; nam post ultimam resurrectionem, Christus Regnum
tradet patri, 1 Cor. 15. 24. Ergo novum non inibit. Which is thus Englished by
Mr. Rich: More, the learned translator of that Book, page 122.

That Kingdom, which neither shall be before the appearance of our Lord, nor
after the last Resurrection; is necessarily to be concluded between them both.
For after the last Resurrection universal, Christ shall deliver up the Kingdom
to the Father, that he may be subject to him who subdueth all things to
himself, as is said, 1 Cor. 15. 24 25. 26. 27. 28. So far is he from being said
then to enter upon any new Kingdom, that he is to lay it down and deliver it up
to his Father.

This argument is grounded upon one certain truth, viz. That Christ must have a
Kingdom, which can not be denied. But it is also grounded upon two untruths, i.
e. That Christ shall corporally return to this earth, before his coming to the
universal judgment. 2. That Christ shall have no Kingdom after the last
judgment. These two are false grounds, or at least are reducible to that
fallacy which by Logicians is called Petitio Principii, i. e. when that is
presumed to be granted which is the main question, and in no wise to be
granted. Now if it may appear, that Christ must have a Kingdom after the final
judgment, and that eternally in Heaven; then there will be no need of his
corporal descending, and appearing on this earth, before the last judgment for
any establishment, or management, or, for proving of his Kingdom; because he
shall have a Kingdom, though not on earth, or although he do not corporally so
come as the Milliniarians expect.

What the meaning of those words of the Apostle is, which mention Christ's
delivering up the Kingdom, and the subjection of the Son, we shall examine
anon, but certainly they do not in the least, signify the ending, or
abolishing of Christ's Kingdom, or any abasing, or subjecting of his Divine
Person; for to affirm that Christ shall cease to be a King, and that he shall
turn subject, must be confessed by all learned and true Christians, to be not
only heretical, but also blasphemous against the Eternal Godhead of the Son of
God, and it is utterly against the Scripture and sure word of God; for this
very word, Subject, was the argument of Arius and his Sect against the Godhead
of Christ, which is here used against the Eternal Kingdom of Christ as we read
in Epipha. haer. 69.
Epiphanius.

Certainly, he that is the Eternal God, must also reign Eternally, and if he
must cease to reign, he must also cease to be God. The Psalmist often tells us
The Lord reigns. or the Ps. 93. 97. 99.
Lord is King; And that the Kingdom of God the Son is eternal, without any
resignation thereof, or any subjection of his Divine Person, both in this
world, and the next, is plentifully declared both in the old and new Testament,
as first in that saying of Daniel, which Mr. Mede alleged against this truth,
Dan. 7. 14. There was given him a Kingdom, that all People, Nations, and
Languages should serve him, his Dominion is an Everlasting Dominion, which
shall not pass away, and his Kingdom, that shall not be destroyed.] First, here
is a Kingdom over the world, or, over all nations. 2. A Kingdom everlasting and
least men should imagine, that the Everlastingness of it, was meant only for
its continuance till the end of the world, he adds. 3. Which shall not pass
away] as the world will pass away, and which shall not be destroyed] as the
world must be destroyed. This Prophecy of Daniel concerning Christ's Kingdom, is
confirmed in the Gospel, by the words of that Heavenly Angel, Luc. 1. 33. He
shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever, and of his Kingdom there shall
be no end.] Here is an ever, over Jacob; (that is) his Church: And that his
reigning may not be thought to be only in the Church Militant; the Angel
adds, Of his Kingdom there shall be no end] if no end, then surely, it must
not end with the world. The same Doctrine is declared by the Apostle,
concerning the same Son of God, Heb. 1. 8. which he received from the Psalmist,
Psalm. 45. 6. Thy Throne, O God, is for ever and ever.] here are two evers. One
to signify the ever of this World, and the other to signify the ever or
eternity of the other World. So Austin notes upon the doubling of this word
ever. In seculum Aug. in Psalm. 71.
seculi, est quantum hoc seculo durat, and quod post hujus seculi finem
promittitur, i. e. These two evers are for continuance of this world, and for
that which is promised after the end of this world.

But then it must be inquired, what is meant by Christ's delivering up the
Kingdom; And in what sense it is said that Then shall the Son himself be
subject.] To which inquiries, the reader may find a full, and I trust, a
satisfactory answer in my former book printed An. Dom. 1655. Lib. 2. c. 10.
If he peruse the tenth chapter of the second book entitled The Godhead of
Jesus Christ, which I shall not need to rehearse in this place fully, but only
briefly to touch.

First, Christ's delivering up the Kingdom, does not signify his relinquishing
or resigning, but only a presenting of his Kingdom; that is, his Church, his
Spouse, his Members and Elect, so says the Expositer, Aug. de Trin. l. 2. c. 8.
Non sic tradet, ut adimat sibi, i. e. he will not so deliver it up, as if he
had deprived himself of it. Just so the Father is said to have delivered all
things to the Son, Luc. 10. 22. as he was man, and the head of his Church, yet
for all this delivering, the Fathers Dominion over all, did not cease; As when
a Prince commits a Province to the Government of one of his Captains, the
Prince does not thereby lose his Soveraignity, as the Father delivered his
people to the Son to be governed, so that the Son re-deliver the same people to
the Father, but in better condition then he found them, for he will present
them righteous, holy, pure, just, and free from all sin, or matter of reproof.
Christ received them to govern, and he governed them so well, that in the end,
he will present them to the just Godhead to be rewarded, and crowned. The
Church on earth, whilst it is Militant, is said to be Black and comely, Cant.
1. 5. viz. Black, by reason of some pollutions of sin; and Comely, because it
is adorned with many graces; but when Christ shall present it to the Father at
the end of the world, it shall be delivered up, Comely and not Black. So that
this delivering, is only a presenting of his Church, which is his Kingdom, as
good Students, after their labors are presented to the University as
Candidates to be rewarded with the honor of Degrees; or as Queen Esther, when
she was purified, was so Esther 2.
presented to King Ahasuerus. This is all that reasonably can be gathered from
the phrase of Delivering up the Kingdom.

Secondly. The Subjection of the Son, is thus to be understood. We know that
Christ, as he is man, is called the head of the Church] Ephesians. 5. 23. And the
Church is called The body of Christ] Col. 1. 18. of this great body, all holy
Christians with Christ himself, are members and parts, (for the head is but a
part of the whole body) so that Christ the head, and all his Saints and members
are jointly but one mystical body or Corporation, and so but one Christ. So we
read, We are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones,] Ephesians. 5.
30. And Ye are all one in Christ Jesus] Gal. 3. 28. from these, and the like
sayings, the Ancient Fathers collected this true and excellent Doctrine. That
Christ the head, together with all his members or Church; are to be accounted
but one Christ which they called Christum universum, and Christum totum, and
Christum diffusum, and Christum plenum; and Plenitudinem Christi, i. e. The
universal, whole, diffused, and the full Christ, or fullness of Christ, as I
have formerly showed at larg.

Now, when the Apostle says, that Then shall the Son himself be subject] 1
Cor. 15. 28. his meaning is only this, that all the members of Christ, and so
the Whole Christ shall be at the resurrection fully and completely, and
perfectly subject, and obediently pliable to the will of God, for then all the
holy members of Christ shall be delivered up, or presented to God, pure,
spotless, quit, and free from all the dominion of the World, the flesh and the
Devil, which before during this mortal life, had some power in them, whilst
they were militant, and in war, by the Spirit, against the flesh: but then
Christ shall have put down all Rule, all Authority and Power of sin, so that
they shall not be any longer militant, but triumphant: so that then, and not
till then, the whole Christ, that is, not only himself as head, but all his
members with him shall be perfectly obedient, and subject in all things to the
Godhead.

For before this delivering up, or presenting this Kingdom, or Church; The
whole Christ, or whole body of Christ, as it never yet was, so it never will be
completely and perfectly subjected to the will and rule of God, because all the
members of Christ will not till then be fully obedient: for although Christ, as
he is man, and as he is considered only by himself, in his own particular
humane person, without relation to us, was ever obedient, and subject to the
Godhead, yet this subjection of his particular self was only in capite, i. e.
a subjection of one part, the head only; but at the Resurrection, when he shall
present, and deliver up this his Kingdom, or Church, then both head and
members, and so the whole Christ shall be perfectly and wholly subjected.

Finally, although Christ himself, as he is the Son of Man, and in the form of
a servant was ever subject; yet the same Lord Jesus, as he is the Son of God,
and in the form of God, Philip. 2. 6. he thought it no robbery to be equal with
God, and therefore, as he is God the Word, or the Eternal Son of the Eternal
Father, in this consideration of his divine Person, he never was, nor ever
shall be subject. Indeed his Manhood, or Man-head is subject, but in Christ
there is another head, and that is his Godhead as we read 1. Cor. 11. 3. The
head of Christ is God.] This head of Christ shall never bow it self to any, but
all knees shall bow to it. Romans 14. 11. Philip. 2. 10. for by this head, he is
said to be Over all, God, blessed for ever, Romans 9. 5. and by virtue of his
head, it it said Heb. 1. 6. 8. Thy Throne O God is for ever and ever, and Let
all the Angels of God worship him. This I trust is enough for clearing this
doubt.

SECT. II.
Of Christ's Kingdom over all the world, and every Creature that it ceased not
at his death. That neither the Roman Consistory, nor Presbyterian vestry can
be called Christ's Throne. How it is in this World, and yet not of this World.
That the Policy of Christ's Kingdom is altogether unlike, and diverse from
Worldly policies.

Mr. Mede's argument, above mentioned, is grounded upon another false
supposition (besided the former alleged) viz. That Christ's Kingdom is not yet
commenced or begun, or that Christ has not yet reigned as a King, either in
Heaven or Earth, nor shall begin his reign until his apearing ((...)) in
flaming fire, mentioned 2 These. 1. 8. which assertion I conceive to be
exceedingly injurious against the divine and humane Nature of Christ, and also
contrary to the Holy Scriptures.

For to deny the Kingdom of the Son, or Word, considered before, or without his
incarnation in his pure Divinity, is all one as to deny his Godhead: for who
can doubt, but that he who is the Creator, and the only and eternal God, both
does reign, and has reigned from the beginning of the World, and shall reign
until the end thereof, and after also to eternity: and that he has and does
govern all things in Heaven and Earth, working together with the Father, as
himself says, The Father Ioh. 5. 17.
works hitherto, and I work] and both these work by the Holy Ghost, which is
the Spirit of both.

The Kingdom of the God head is by divines thus distinguished:

1. The Kingdom of power, which even Heathens acknowledged in their supposed
God.

-- O qui res ^ominumque Deumque, Virg. Aen. ^
Aeteruis Regis Imp^riis and fulmine terris. 2. The Kingdom of grace whereby
he reigns in the hearts of the people, inclining them to obedience by the
Scepter of his Spirit, against their carnal inclinations either lucriferous, or
voluptuous, for this we daily pray, Thy Kingdom come, thy w^ll be done: as on
the contrary, Satan, or Sin is said to reign in the disobedient; drawing them
to evil.

3. The Kingdom of Glory in Heaven, in respect whereof the Son is expressly
called The Psalm. 24. 7.
King of Glory. This I presume no Christian will deny.

But our question now, is not concerning the Son, as he is in his single and
pure divinity, or as he is God the Word, or the Son of God. But we must now
consider him as he is The Son of Man, and since his incarnation, as he is
Emanuel, or the Word made flesh, or the Anointed of God, or Christ (for the
pure Godhead can not be anointed, because it is the anointing) neither could
the Son of God be called Christ, until he was incarnate, nor can Christ be said
to reign, until he was made Christ, that is, until the Son of God, by his
humane nativity became the Son of Man. For, though the Son of God, has been a
Son from eternity, yet he was not Christ or Anointed from eternity, but his
unction, and title Christ began then, as the Apostle says, Gal. 4. 4. When the
fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son made of a Woman.

By this double consideration of Jesus, we may perceive the reason why the
Scripture distinguishes between God and Christ, as 2 Timothy 4. 1. I charge thee
before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ] and why we so often read The Lord
Christ; and the Christ, or Anointed of the Lora, as Act. 4. 26. Ps. 2. 2. The
Lord Jesus in respect of his Godhead is called Christus Dominus; and the same
Lord Jesus in consideration of his humane nature assumed, is called Christus
Domini, i. e. he is both the Lord Christ, and The Christ or the Anointed of the
Lord. So that we may truly say, The Son of Man, is the Christ, or the Anointed
of himself as he is the Son of God. These considerations being premised. Our
Question of Christ's Kingdom is thus to be stated.

QUESTION, Whether our Lord Jesus Christ ever yet had, or now has any Kingdom
in, and over this World?
FOr if it may appear that Christ formerly had, and still has a Kingdom here,
there will be no need of his corporal descending from Heaven in this fag end of
the World, to take possession of that which he had before, and still retains.

Answer. The answer to this question is: That Christ now reigns on earth, and
has so done ever since he was Christ (that is) from the time that The word was
made flesh; that he reigns in this world, though his Kingdom is not of this
world, because it is not a visible reigning, after a worldly way, but in a
heavenly manner; he bears not the Sword Material, but a Spiritual Sword; he
raises not Armies of men, but commands Legions of Angels, his strong hold,
is Heaven, his prison is Hell, as 1 Pet. 3. 19. his Jaylors, Devils, his
executioners Plagues, Famines, Winds, Storms, Serpents, Wild-beasts, evil
Angels, Sicknesses, Deaths, Temporal, and Eternal: his Laws are mild, written
in Milk, the easy yoke of the Gospel; his tribute and taxes are faithfulness,
and obedience, his Kingdom does not invade or disturb other worldly Kingdoms,
but establishes them, for he refused a worldly Kingdom when it was offered and
refused to judge or arbitrate in a petty title of inheritance, between two
brethren, much less will he in this world judge the grand titles of Monarchies,
and great possessions to be taken from the rightful possessors, to the use of
Pretended Saints.

Let us see what the Scriptures say concerning the Kingdom of this Emanuel here
on earth. Isaiah says of Christ as of a child born whom Isa. 7. 14.
he called In manuel] which must needs be meant of the Son of God considered as
incarnate, That the government shall be upon his shoulders, of the increase of
his government and peace, there shall Isa. 9. 6. 7.
be no end upon the throne of David, and upon his Kingdom, to order it from
henceforth for ever.] Surely David's throne must be upon this earth, although it
signify the Church, whilst it is Militant.

Consider we next, what David himself says concerning this Son of David, in
that memorable passage Psalm. 89 I have sound David my servant, Psalm. 89. 20.
27. 29. 36.
I will make hi^ my first born higher then the Kings of the earth, his Seed
will I make to endure for ever, and his Throne as the days of Heaven, and as
the Sun before me.] The David here meant, must needs be this Son of David, that
is Christ, who is often called David, as J^r. 30. 9 They shall serve the Lord,
and David their King, whom I will raise up.] and Ezech. 34. 23. My servant
David shall feed them. -- ] so Hos. 3. 5. The children of Israel shall seek the
Lord their God, and David their King.] These Prophecies must needs be meant of
Christ, because the old David was dead before any of those Prophets were born;
Christ is called David, because he was to be the Son of David, and so is called
by his Fathers name as o her children now are, and the prophecies must needs be
understood of the Man Christ, because by his manhood only, he is the Son of
David, and not otherwise, nor can these sayings be verified of any other seed,
or Son of David.

Besides; These speeches can not be meant of any worldly temporal Kingdom of
David, for that was taken of David's posterity long before the birth of Christ
and this David himself foresaw, and confessed in the same Psalm: But thou have
cast off thine Anointed Thou hasi profaned Psalm. 89. 38. 39. 40. 42. 43.
his Crown by casting it to the ground* Thou have broken down all his hedges,
and brought his strong holds to ruin. Thou have set up the right hand of his
adversaries. Thou have turned the Edg of his Sword Thou have made his glory to
cease, etc.?] Therefore this prophesied Kingdom can not be meant of the old
David, or any of his posterity, but only of Christ, in whom only this Davidical
Kingdom still rests, and shall last on earth, as long as the Sun endures.

Of this Kingdom of Christ (as he is the Son of David) are those prophecies to
be understood Ps. 72. He shall come down like rain upon Psalm. 72. 6.
the mowen grass (or fleece of wool) This is said of the secret birth of
Christ, of a Virgin, without noise or clamor. He shall have dominion unto 8.
the ends of the earth] So had not any other of David's posterity. All Kings
shall fall before 11.
him, and all Nations shall serve him. This is not verified of any King but
only Christ. Prayer 15.
shall be made ever to him (or for him by his institution) and daily shall he
be praised, his name shall endure for ever, as long as the Sun, and men shall
be blessed in him, all Nations shall call him blessed.] any man that is but of
mean progress in Religion, may easily apprehend, that these speeches can fit
none other but Christ, even Balaam, an Heathen and a Magician; Number. 24. 2*
when the Spirit of God came upon him, prophesied of a Star to come out of
Jacob, and a Scepter 17.
out of Israel,] The Star signifies the Heavenly or Divine part of Christ,
which should condescend to take flesh from Jacob. The Scepter signifies the
Kingdom of this Heavenly Star, or Son of God so incarnate; or as he is the Son
of Jacob, or Israel: and so it must signify the Kingdom of Christ.

Neither is the Gospel silent concerning the universal Kingdom of Christ in
this world. The Angel said, He shall reign over the house of Jacob Lu. 1. 33.
for ever, and of his Kingdom there shall be Regi. De^. Mcrituro. Naz. Ambr.
no end] This was said of Jesus as he is the Son of Mary, therefore of the Man
Christ. The Wise men of the East call him King, and they offer Gold,
Frankincense, and Myrrh, as to a King and to a God, and to a Mortal, as the
Fathers generally agree. The news of this Kingdom came to Rome in the days of
Nero, and is reported by Suet. in Vospat. c. 4. and Joseph. de Bell. Iud. l. 7.
Suetonius, That by an old Prophecy it was foretold, That about those times,
there should come out of Judaea some who should have dominion over the whole
world,] This by flatterers was applied to Vespasian, though he thought it to be
meant of another, and not of himself, and therefore caused inquisition to be
made among the Jews for the posterity of David to be put to death: so did his
Son Domitian; and when two of them were brought before him of mean condition,
he asked them what estates they had, they answered, they had but Iugera. Eusebius
Hist. l. 3. c. 20. Paul. Oros. l. 7. c. 7.
39 Acres of Land: then he looked on their hands, and perceived them to be
hard, and brawny with labor, and so dismissed them as contemptible. Herod
believed the Prophecy of Christ's Kingdom, but mistook the manner of it, and
therefore slew the infants to prevent it.

What else can be the meaning of those sayings in St. John's Gospel, The word
was made Ioh. 1. 14.
flesh, He came into the world, and the world was made by him. He came unto his
own.] therefore 10. 11. Ioh. 3. 35.
the world was his. The Father has given all things into his hand,] This is
said of the Son now incarnate. Thou have given him power over all flesh.] This
was said before his passion, and that also Mat. 11. 27. All things are
delivered unto me of my Father.] This power was given to him as man, for by his
Godhead all was his before, there is also mention of a Kingly prerogative
annexed to his manhood, when it is said, The Son of Man has power on earth to
forgive Mat. 9. 6
sins] and this is so high, that in the Apocalypse he is called The Prince of
the Kings of the earth] Rec. 1. 5
so the greatest Potentates on earth are but his subjects.

Neither did his Kingdom cease whilst he was dead, and buried; there was no
Interstitium, no Inter regnum, or Interval of his Dominion for neither was the
union of the Godhead and man hood in him dissolved by death; indeed the body
and soul were parted each from the other, but yet so, that they did convene in
Vno Tertio, for they were both held in the hands of the Father, or God head, as
when one draws a sword out of the scabbard, and holds the sword in one
hand, and the scabbard in the other. Christ said at the point of his death,
Father into thy hands I commend my Spirit. Lu. 23. 46.
] therefore, neither could his soul be detained in Hell, (or wheresoever it
was) as it is said, Thou will not leave my soul in H^ll: nor Act. 2. 24. 27.
could the grave retain his body so as to hinder its reuniting with the soul,
as it is said, It was impossible that he should be holden of death.] we find
also both in his life time, and in the very lowest degree of his humiliation,
and death, all Creatures acknowledging his Soveraignity. He commanded the winds
of the air, He walked on the Sea, the Fishes brought him tribute, the Earth did
quake. The Sun was darkened in Heaven. Angels ministered unto him. Devils were
dispossessed by him. Graves gave up their dead bodies, and Paradise it self (as
it seems) sent back the souls of sleeping Saints.

The Kingdom of Christ in this world, is acknowledged both by Romanists, and
also by those Protestants that are of the Presbyterian persuasion, although I
conceive they both err in the circumstance and manner thereof: for the
Romanists place the Throne of Christ in their Roman Consist^rie, and in the
Infallible Chayr, but that Throne will not agree with the words of the
Psalmist, because all Kings and Nations have not fain before it, and many who
heretofore acknowledged it, have since utterly rejected it, so that the Roman
Catholic or universal Throne has not increased of late, nor the universality
thereof doth-last as long as the Sun, or days of Heaven.

Neither will the Presbyterian Vestry be suitable with the Universal Throne of
Christ, although some have said that the Presbytery is his Throne, and that it
is to be set up by the sword; but so is not the Sion of Christ, the Prophet
reproves the Jews for building up Sion in blood, it may be reasonably
suspected, that all the former Mich. 3. 10.
and present endeavors, and all the troubles and spilling of blood which has
been occasioned upon this pretense, was not really intended for the setting of
Christ upon his Throne, but rather to set up a Presbyterian tribunal that
thereon a Minister, and some select Elders, (instead of Christ) may sit as his
Commissioners to judge of men, and censure the highest Magistrates on earth, but
this Vestry Thron^ will not correspond with the Throne of Christ for these
reasons, 1. Christ's Throne must be over all Nations. The Presbytery never was
so. 2. It must have been in all generations since Christ: but 15 centuries of
years have passed, before such a supreme Presbytery was once heard of. 3.
Kings must submit to Christ's Throne; so did they never to the Presbytery. 4.
Christ's Throne is in Heaven, Psalm. 11. 4. Cathedran in Coelo habet, as Austin
says. Aug. in Epist. Ioh. tract. 3.
So is not the Pre-bytery. 5. Christ's Throne is but one, but there are many
Presbyteries, it were fit to agree first among themselves, in which Presbytery
they will place this Throne. 6. Christ's Throne is absolutely supreme without
any superior, so was never any Presbytery, for the very word (...) or Elder, is
but a comparative, and implies a superlative over it. I never read of any
Supreme Magistrate on earth, entitled Presbyter; but only Prester John, or
Presbyter Joannes, (if there be any Archb. Abbot.
such Prince and Priest) except you will call the Turk, the Grand Senior, as
others call him the Grand Seigneur. For when the Senate of Rome were supreme,
they were not called Seniores, but Senatores.

But if Christ's Kingdom be thus perpetually in this world, it would be
inquired, why himself said, My Kingdom is not of this world] we Ioh. 18. 36. 37.
answer, That Christ in the same breath (as it were) said also, That he was a
King, and that he was born to that end, and for this cause he came into the
world, to bear witness to the truth.] viz. the truth of his Kingdom; So that,
though his Kingdom be not Of this World, that is, like other Worldly Kingdoms,
which are supported by Armies and subjects fighting for their King, and by
Forts, Castles, Navies, Taxes, Tributes, and Penal Laws; yet it is a Kingdom in
this World, supported by the mighty, but invisible power of Christ, and not by
the arm of flesh.

If it be demanded, how that can be called a Kingdom, so mighty and perpetual,
as is said, wherein the Prince does not at all defend and protect his people
from pressures and injuries, but suffers them in all ages to be oppressed,
and that in most doleful manner by dreadful persecutions? To this we answer
that these oppressions of Christ's subjects do plainly show that the policy and
order of his Kingdom, is altogether unlike worldly policies, and the wonderful
manner of their protection, shows that it is wrought by a divine and
omnipotent power; for worldly Princes protect their people from suffering; but
Christ protects his people in their sufferings, and this so wonderfully, that
though They be killed all the day long, and Ps. 44. 22.
counted as sheep for the slaughter,] yet no persecutions shall overcome them,
they shall not be Ps. 2.
thereby extinguished, or diminished, but rather increased; Though the Heathen
rage, and the people imagine vanity, though Kings and Rulers take counsel
against them, yet neither these, nor the gates of Hell shall prevail, one
says, Vincent. Lyrin.
Non minae, non blandimenta, non vitanon mors, non Imperator, non homines, non
Daemones. Another says, Aug. de Civ. l. 22. c. 6.
Ligabantur, Torquebantur, urebantur, multiplicabantur. Tertullian notes,
Tert. Apol. c. ult.
Plures efficimur quoties metimur, and Origin: Orig. Peri Arch. lib. 4.
Christianitas poenis and mortibus crevit.] i. e. That neither threats nor
flatteries, nor life, nor death, nor men, nor devils, can force Christians to
deny Christ, their bonds, tortures, and burnings increase their number, the
more they are cut down, the more they are multiplied, and increase by dying.
Indeed Christ promised his perpetual presence with his people, and also the
presence of the comforter to abide with them for ever, and exhorts his little
flock, not to fear; but this must not be thought to be an exemption from
sufferings, as St. Ambros has truly taught us Ambr. de voc. Gent. l. 2. c. 1.
Non ut nihil patiamini sed ut nulla crudelitate superemini, i. e. Christ does
not quit his people from sufferings, but inableth them to stand firm in their
sufferings, and so to overcome both torturs and death, by enduring both, rather
then by them to be dared from the confession of our faith; as when two
duellists fight, he that is slain, is, in the worlds opinion judged to be
conquered; but in Christ's account, when a Martyr suffers torments and death
for his constancy in Faith, death is conquered, and the Martyr is conqueror;
for, because we can not say that his Faith is overcome by torments; it must
needs follow that torments are overcome by Faith, and so the Apostle tells us,
This is the victory that overcomes the world, ^ Ioh. 5. 4.
even our Faith,] when neither tribulation nor distress, non persecution, nor
famine, nor nakedness, nor peril of the sword, can separate us from the love of
Christ, no marvel, if in respect of all these the Apostle tells us, that we are
more then Romans 8. 37.
conquerors, and this through him that loved us, viz. by the power of Christ.

If we further inquire what it is that inableth poor and weak flesh and blood,
and the little flock to hold out against these merciless enemies; it must needs
be confessed, that it is this overruling power of Christ in us assisting, and
supporting his servants. The good Emperor Theod^sius, in a dangerous fight with
Eugenius the Rebel, cast off his arms and called upon God in these words Ruf.
Hist. l. 2. c. 33. Ambr. de obit. Theod.
Si in te confisus huc veni porrige dextram, negentes dicant, ubi est Deus
eorum? or Vbi est Deus Theodosii? Moses Bush was all on fire, but not consumed,
because God Ex. 3.
was in it, nor were the 3. Hebrew children consumed in the fiery furnance, for
One like the Son Dan. 3.
of God was with them The Apostles were beaten Act. 5. 41. but departed
rejoicing, whereupon Chrysostom observes, Chryside Virgin. T^. 4.
non est ea verberum natura, sed Christiana fides, not the stripes, but the Oil
of gladness in them made them rejoice; our nature is infirm, but grace is
potent. The Holy Martyr Ignatius confessed, Epis. ad Romans (...), etc.
That he found nothing in himself that was torment proof, but that the living
water which was in him extinguished the fear of burning. St. Ierom says, Hier.
cont. Pelag. l. 3. c. 6.
Hoc praestat timor Dei, ut alios timores contemnamus. and St. Ambros speaking
of the burning of the Martyr. Laurentius, says, Ambr. Sermon. 19. n. 41:
Ma^or slamma intrinsecus est,] The fear of God overcomes all humane fears,
and the fire of Gods Spirits within us wherewith our hearts burn, is more
ardent then the flames of Tyrants, as cruel Antiochus was told by a Martyr.
Joseph. de Macab.
Ignis tuus frigidus est O Magister crudelitatis, i. e. That the Tyrants fire
was but cold, in respect of this Heavenly flame. Thus does the Scepter and
Kingly power of Christ appear most in our weakness; and this is the method of
his Kingdom in this world. But of the carnal domineering, insulting, ruffling
and ranting Kingdom which Millinarians dream of, Christ says, My Kingdom is
not of this World.

SECT. III.
Of Christ's Kingdom, and Acts in Heaven, of his Melchisedechical Priesthood
there, The manner of his intercession, Advocate-ship and Mediatorship for us in
Heaven. That it is not by sacrificing, or praying for us there. What Priestly
act he there performs.

WE are next to inquire, whether Christ since his ascensio^ has any Kingdom or
Dominion in Heaven and what he has done there all this while; for the English
Socinian Commenter on the Hebrews, tells us, that this Epistle is The Preface.
a. 3.
the History of Christ in Heaven] which is true in part (although himself have
depraved it) but so are also other parcels of Scripture, as may thus appear, in
his ascension he was attended, and proclaimed King by Angels, as Justin.
Origin. Jerome. Ambros. and Chrysostom. understand these words Ps. 24. 7. Lift up
your Psalm. 24,
heads, O ye gates, (or O ye Princes) and the King of glory shall come in,] for
although as he is the Son of God, or God the Word, he was in Heaven before, yet
his humane nature was not there before his ascension, as is well expressed by
Ruf. in Symb. apud Cyp.
Ruffinus, Ascendit ad Coelos, non ubi verbum Deus, ante non fuerat; sed ubi
verbum caro factum ante non sedebat,] being there, he is said to have a Throne,
and that for ever and Heb. 1. 8.
ever, Ps. 45. 6. a Throne is Kingly, but this Throne is also on the right hand
of God, so it is the highest Throne: thence, he is said to give gifts unto men,
Ephesians. 4. 8. as The Holy Ghost at Pentecost was by him shed, Act. 2. 3. So he
gave Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers, Ephesians. 4. 11. to
those more gifts are added. Gifts of healing, helps in government, diversities
of tongues, 1 Cor. 12. 28. besides many other sanctifying graces to holy men,
and women. He ^hewed himself to be in Heaven, and at the right hand of God, to
the Protomartyr, Act. 7. 56. out of Heaven he spoke to Saul, and restrained him
from persecuting, Act. 9. He is called a Priest, an High Priest, and a Bishop:
he makes intercession for us in Heaven. Romans 8. 34. Heb. 7. 25. He is our
Advocate with the Father, 1 John 2. 1. And our Mediator, 1 Timothy 2. 5. etc. What
Act of Priesthood, and what kind of intercession Christ performs for us in
Heaven, and what is meant by his session at the right hand of God, we will
inquire anon, but first his Kingly authority is to be showed

After the Passion and Resurrection of Christ, and before his ascension, he
said, All power is Mat, 28. 18.
given unto me in Heaven and in Earth,] These words are weighty. The giving is
meant only, of a gift to his humanity, thus, That all power in Heaven and
Earth, which was naturally in the Son, or Word before his incarnation, is now
by the Godhead (even his own Godhead) communicated to his humane nature being
personally united with his divine nature, so that now the Emanuel, or Christ,
or the Word made flesh, has all power in Heaven, and Earth, the whole power of
the Godhead is in him. There is nothing done by God, either in Heaven or
Earth, but what Jesus Christ does, because there is none other God, but that
God, which he is, for he is the one, and only God. The Father and the Spirit
are with him, but one God; whatsoever the Father does, he does it by the Son,
and whatsoever the Son does, he does it from the Father, and by the Spirit, and
whatsoever the Spirit does, he does it from the Father and the Son. Christ
says, The Ioh. 5. 17.
Father works, and I work,] this because the works of one, are the works of
both. He says again, I can of my self do nothing] 30.
this he said because the Father and the Son are one; therefore the works of
the Son are the works of the Father also. (This is to be understood of the
Essential or Absolute works of the God head, but not of the Personal or proper
works of each several person,) he says again; The Son can do nothing of
himself, but what he 19.
sees the Father do] This is not so to be understood, as if the Father did
first perform a work to be as a Sampler; or pattern for the Son to work by, and
then the Son after him should perform such another work; but that the very same
individual work of the Father, is also the work of the Son: for example, The
Father made the world, so did the Son make the same world. If this work be not
the one, and self same work of the Father and the Son, then, as Austin argues,
Aug. in Joan. tract. 20.
Da mihi alterum mundum quem fecit Filius.] you can not show me two worlds, one
of the Fathers making, and another of the Sons making.

Indeed, before the incarnation of the Son, all the power in Heaven and earth
was in the pure Godhead, residing in the Father, Word, and Spirit; But since
the Word or Son was incarnate; all that power is communicated by the same
Godhead to the Son incarnate, who is thereupon called Christ and Emanuel.
There is now none other King of glory, but that God which is in Christ. St.
Jude calls him both The only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ. Jude 4. Ioh.
5. 22. 27.
] therefore himself says, That the Father has committed all judgment to the
Son] that is to Christ, and this Son shall therefore in the end, in his assumed
and visible nature, judge the world.

If it be said that his humane nature is a creature, and therefore must always
be subject to his Godhead; we answer, that it is true, but nevertheless, the
Emanuel, i. e. The Divine and Humane Nature jointly govern all things; for so
the body of a King is subject to the soul, or will of the King; yet the King
consisting of a Body and Soul: with both rules.

If it be said, that the Father and the Holy Spirit do also reign and govern
all things, as well as the Son, though neither the Father, nor the Holy Ghost
were incarnate: we answer that it is true, that all the Three Persons equally
govern, and we further acknowledge, that neither the Person of the Father, nor
the Person of the Holy Ghost are incarnate, but only the Person of the Son; yet
we believe that the whole Godhead, and essence of the Father, and of the Holy
Ghost is incarnate in the Person of the Son. This was affirmed by Christ, when
he said, The Father is in me, and I in him.] Ioh. 10. 38.
and John Baptist had said before, That God has given him the Spirit not by
measure,] Ioh. 3. 34.
and St. Luke says, that Jesus was full of the Holy Ghost.] and St. Paul
says, Col. 2. 9. In him Lu. 4. 1.
dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily.] whereby it appears that
the Dominion of Christ does not in any wise exclude the Dominion of the other
Divine persons* although St. Jude calls Christ the only Lord God, yet this word
(only) does not bar the Lordship or Godhead of the Father, and Holy Ghost;
because, (as our good rule in Logic teaches us) That Propositio exclusiva,
non excludit inclusa.

Next, concerning the Priesthood of Christ, he is said to be a Priest for ever,
after the order of Heb. 7. 17.
Melchisedech,] if for ever; then he must be a Priest in Heaven: but if so,
then the Socinians tell us that Christ can not be the supreme God, because the
supreme God can not be a Priest,] This cavil, I have met with before, and
answered Lib. 2. c. 15.
out of Arstin, That Christ is a Priest, only as he is the Son of man, as
incarnate, and Emanuel, but not as he is the Son of God, or God the Word, and
so Prosper also resolved this doubt upon those words, Thou art a Priest,]
Prosper in Psalm. 109.
Non quatenus ex patre, sed quantenus ex Matre natus, est Sacerdos,] i. e.
Christ is a Priest, not as he is the Son of his Father, but as he is the Son of
his Mother.

But we are further told by the Socinians, That Heb. 7. 1. p. ^ 16. etc.
Christ was not a Priest till he was dead, and that then his Priesthood began;
that the expiatory, or satisfactory offering of Christ, was not performed on
the cross, or on earth, but in Heaven] This they affirm, because they will not
believe that our Redemption was wrought by the death of Christ, so
blasphemously do they vilipend the blood of Christ: whereas indeed, the
ultimate expiation or satisfaction consists in the death of Christ, answering
to the very words of the Covenant, viz In the day thou eatest thereof, thou
shall surely dye,] and therefore the Apostle Genesis 2. 17. Romans 6. 23.
says, The wages of sin is death,] now, if Christ dyed for us on the Cross, he
there also performed the expiation, and paid the ransom, for if the expiatory
sacrifice were to be performed in Heaven, then must Christ have suffered death
in Heaven; but the Apostle tells us that after his resurrection he dies no
more,] This foul blasphemy Romans 6. 9.
is near a kin to that of Origin. which St. Jerome reports, Hier. Epist. 59. c.
4.
That Christ was to suffer in the Air, for the salvation of Devils, and to
suffer in Heaven also, because we read of Spiritual wickedness in Heavenly
places,] that so the inhabitants Ephesians. 6. 12.
of al regions might be saved through Christ's passions, Thus he.

It being granted that Christ is now a Priest in Heaven, it would be inquired
of what order, or kind, his Priesthood is there in this we are certified that
it is a Priesthood for ever; and that it is after or according to the
Priesthood of Melchisedech, (that is) Christ is such a Priest in Heaven, as
Melchisedech was on Earth, and therefore Christ in Heaven does such Priestly
acts, as Melchisedech did on earth.

For Christ, whilst he was on earth, was a Priest, but here his Priesthood was
Aaronical, i. e. like unto Aarons Priesthood, because Christ did offer a bloody
sacrifice, even his own body and blood on the Altar of the Cross, which he gave
for a ransom for us, Mat. 20. 28. For a propitiation, To. 3. 25. for our
Justification, To. 5. 9. for our Redemption, Ephesians. 1. 7. Col. 1. 14. to bear our
sins in his own body, 1 Pet. 2. 24.] (that is) to undergo the punishment for
our sins, paying the ransom of his own self for us, 1 Timothy 2. 6. This bloody
sacrifice of Christ, was typified, and only signified by Aaron, offering the
bodies and blood of Beasts.

But the sacrifice of Christ on earth, was also unlike Aarons; because Aaron
offered beasts, but Christ offered himself; Aaron might not offer human blood,
nor might Christ offer the blood of Beasts; whereupon it is said, Heb. 8. 4.
That Christ on earth could not be a Priest, because he could not offer gifts
according to the Law] (that is) he could not offer Levitical Sacrifices of
Beasts as the Legal Priests did, because he was not a Son of Aaron, or of the
Tribe of Levi. But he might and did offer his own humane blood, which was the
Substance, whereas the blood of Beasts offered by Aaron, was but only the
shadow.

Therefore, they that tell us, that Christ may not be called an Aaronicall
Priest, because he was not a Son of Aaron; may as well tell us, that he may not
be called The Lamb, because he was not literally a Lamb, taken out of the
Sheep-fold] The truth is this. As the Lamb was Ex. 12. 5.
but the shadow of Christ's Passion, so the Priesthood of Aaron was but the
shadow of Christ's Sacrificing Priesthood. This Sacrificing Priesthood of Christ
ended at his death; so that he is not any more to be sacrificed; but his
Melchisedechical Priesthood (and only that order of his Priesthood) must
continue for ever. St. Austin says of the Jews Aug. in Psa. 109.
Iudaei vident jam periisse sacerdotium secundum Ordinem Aaron, and non
agnoscunt Sacerdetium secundum ordinem Melchisedech.] This reproof touches,
not only Jews, but Romanists and Socinians. The Jews expect a restitution of
their Temple, and Aaronical, or Levitical Sacrifices. Romanists say, Christ is
daily Sacrificed on their Altars. Socinians say that Christ Offers and
Sacrifices himself Com. on Heb. 9. v. 12. p. 168.
in Heaven.] not considering that his Priesthood is only like Melchisedech's
now, which was not a Sacrificing Priesthood; for, we find not that any
Sacrifice was offered by Melchisedech on earth, neither may Christ our
Melchisedech be thought in any wise to offer Sacrifice in Heaven: But of this
more anon.

If Christ, being in Heaven, does there Sacrifice for us; it must also be
granted that he there prays for us, because no Sacrifice can be rightly
performed without prayer, but no good Christian may imagine that the mediation
of Christ in Heaven, is by way of prayer; neither can we find in any form of
prayers used by the Christian Church, that ever it was said Domine Jesus ora
pro me,] Lord Jesus pray for me, was never said, nor never will be in any
Church Catholic, therefore the Apostle when he mentions Christ's praying,
writes circumspectly, as it were on purpose to prevent this error, saying Heb.
5. 7. That in the days of his flesh he offered up prayers, thereby limiting
the time of Christ's praying to be before his death. Indeed we find often
mention, of his prayers on earth, by all the four Evangelists, but not one of
them Mat. 14. 23. Mar. 6, 46. Luc 22. 32. Ioh. 14. 16.
speaks of any prayer of Christ after his resurrection; nor any Apostle
mentions his praying after his Ascension.

The Socinians would have us believe that Christ Sacrifices, or prays in
Heaven, because themselves do not believe that Christ is the Supreme God, for
one of their arguments against his Godhead is this, That the Supreme God does
not pray. Therefore because Christ prayed, they say he is not God. This was an
old cavil of the Arians, and was often answered by the Fathers, as I have
partly showed before. One says Justin Mart. n, 32. Quaest. ad Orth,
Christus crebrius orabat ut inde homo esse appareret,] because (as another
says) Theod. in To. 8. 34.
ut Deus non perit, sed suppeditat. So Chrysostom answered Chrysostom. Hom. 32.
Antioch.
Christus orabat ut homo, nam Deus non orat,] and Austin often Aug. in Ps. 20.
and Ps. 34. and Ps. 87.
Secundum quod verbumest non orat, sed exaudit; humanitas interpellat
Divinitatem, and again, Habes Majestatem ad quam ores, and humanitatem quae
oret prote, orat verbum caro factum. and in another place, Christus oravit non
secundum formam Dei, sed secundum forman servi.] i. e. Christ prayed, only as
he was man, as he was made flesh, as he was in the form of a servant, his
Godhead did not pray. But is prayed unto, etc.

If it be demanded why Christ does not pray in Heaven as he did on earth before
his death? We answer, 1. He prayed before his death, because till then he had
not paid our ransom by his precious blood and death. 2. Because he had fully
satisfied the Justice of the Godhead before his Ascension, even to the utmost
farthing; therefore after this satisfaction, there could be no need, or use of
further praying. 3. When he ascended he took possession of Heaven, not only for
himself or for his own proper humane nature, but also for, and in the behalf of
his whole mystical corporation, and every member thereof: therefore now, no
need of praying for that; for, neither do we petition for things that are
already granted, and by us obtained and possessed. Our Savior, after his
meritorious life, and perfect obedience Active, and after his satisfactory
death, and thereby his perfect obedience passive, whereby the Covenant and Law
was fully performed and executed, had no cause at all in his own, or our behalf
to petition, but might and did justly challeng Heaven as due to himself; and in
him, to his whole body, and every member thereof.

But then (if Christ do not pray for us) it would be inquired what the meaning
is of those Scriptural words, which signify his acts and demeanor in Heaven,
and seem to imply his praying; as when he is called a Priest, Heb. 7. 17.
should not a Priest pray? So he is called our Advocate. 1 John 2. 1. and our
Mediator. Romans 8. 3 4.
1 Timothy 2. 5. And he is also said to make intercession for us, Romans 8. 34.

To this we answer, First. For his Priesthood in Heaven, that it is a
Priesthood only according to the order of Melchisedech, Heb. 6. 20. Therefore
it must correspond to that Priesthood only, and no other: now, we find not any
act of Priesthood performed by Melchisedech, but only Blessing of Abraham, Genesis
14. 19 for there is no mention of his praying, or sacrificing: Therefore the
only Priestly act of Christ in Heaven, is blessing the children of Abraham; And
this he does not verbally, or affectionately only but really, and effectually,
by pouring down manifold blessings, favors, and graces, and wonderfully
protecting and supporting his Abrahamites, or Church, here on earth in all
assaults and persecutions.

Secondly. For his intercession. The Original (...).
word is (...), Heb. 7. 25. which does not signify any supplicating,
entreating, or oral pleading for us, but only, that in Heaven he is for us, or
stands, and is present, or appears for us, as is expressed by the word
(...), Heb. 9 24. i. e. To appear in the presence of God for us, (that is) to
be ready, and at hand to succor us, yet not by way of supplication; for his
intercession is real, not oral; he claims Heaven as due to himself, and in
him to all the memmers of his body mystical, and this by virtue of his
obedience active, and passive; He there presents the first fruits, that is,
his own holy body and soul which he took from man, as free from all matter of
reprehension, immaculate, and innocent; because he was incarnate, he performed
the Law, and suffered death for us, he overcame Death and Hell, and ascended,
and sits at the right hand of the Godhead; so that he is not now a
petitioner for, but a possessor of, all glory, and power, and has earned
Heaven both for himself and us. It is said of him, Heb. 12. 24. That his blood
speaks better things, then that of Abel.] blood does not speak literally or
orally, but as Abels murder did really require vengeance on Cain, so the blood
of Christ does really require acquitment of us, by his full satisfaction to
Divine Justice, and this standing or appearing, is that, by which he is said to
offer himself in Heaven, Heb. 9. 25.

Thirdly. When he is called an Advocate, ((...).) 1 John 2. 1. and a Mediator,
((...)) 1 Timothy 2. 5. This Mediation and Advocateship of Christ in Heaven, does
not consist in verbal mediating, and pleading for us, as Advocates in Courts
do; for the Holy Ghost is also called Paracletus, Joh. 14. 26. yet no man will
say that he pleads for us verbally, or by entreating, Romans 8. 26. (...). Gal.
4. 6:
and praying, no more does Christ, because Divine Justice is not satisfied by
praying; for if prayers, or verbal pleadings could serve our turn, then
Christ's prayers on earth had bee^ sufficient to have procured our Salvation,
and so might have freed him from his bitter Passion, and Death.

Indeed, before his Passion, he mediated for us (Precario) by the intercession
of prayer; but now after the Consummatum est, that he has performed all, that
the Godhead required to be done, and thereby has brought salvation for us,
and fully paid for it; his Mediation, or Advocation is Authoritative, in
Plenitude of power: so that now the presenting of his glorious Person in Heaven
is a sufficient Advocate, his performance of the Law, together with his Passion
and Death, are the Plea, and the tongues that effectually move for us, because
the vigor and efficacy thereof is, and for ever will be looked on by the
Godhead as a full satisfaction to Divine Justice, which Doctrine is singularly
expressed by the great Apostle, To. 8. 3. Who shall lay any thing to the charg
of Gods elect? It is God that justifies, it is Christ that dyed, That is risen
again, who is at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for us.]
of which Right hand, we are next to consider.

SECT. IV.
Of Christ's Session at the right hand of God, The difference between the right
hand of God, and the right hand of the Father, with the abuses of that Article,
why Christ withdrew to Heaven. Of the rebuilding of Jerusalem, and the Temple,
of the Jewish Monarchy, and their Pseudo-messiah, or the great Antichrist.

NO one Phrase in Scripture does more express the Kingly, and omnipotent power
of Christ in Heaven, and in Earth; then this of his sitting at, or on the Right
hand of God; for the understanding whereof, I shall offer to the consideration
of the Reader, the four questions following.

First. What it is in Christ, that is so exalted,] To this, we say, That Christ
consists of two ingredients, viz God head and Man hood, and that this sitting
at the Right hand is not to be understood of his Godhead, but of his Manhood,
as he is the Son of Man, the Son of David, the Son of the Virgin Mother, for by
this humane nature, he became passible, subject to poverty, hunger and thirst,
weariness, injuries, buffetings, scourging and death; therefore as by this part
only, he is said to be humbled to death; the Death of the Cross, so in this
part only may he be said to be exalted, for by his Godhead he ever was at the
Right hand of God, and God over all blessed for ever. As he Romans 9. 5.
is God the word, he can not be said to be exalted, but as the word was made
flesh. It is our nature only, that the Son of God ennobled, and carried to the
right hand of God; and we have showed before, that the prophecies of Christ's
exaltation, were said only of the Son of David, that is, of Christ's humane
nature, for otherwise he is not the Son of David.

If it be said, that we may not separate his Godhead, from his Manhood, for
this is to make two Persons of one, and was the heresy of Nestorius: To this
we answer, That it is true, that the two natures of Christ, neither can, nor
may be severed or divided asunder by any Real separation; but yet they may and
must be distinguished, separated or abstracted, mentally, or Mathematically: as
Schoolmen say) that is, we may in our mind consider one part alone, without
considering the other, although both do really consist together, as a
Mathematician, considers the longitude of a body, without considering the
matter of it. So we, in this exaltation of Christ, consider only his humane, or
assumed nature. This is the judgment of the Ancient Church, delivered by
Theodoret, Theo. Dialog. ^^confu.
Sede.] De homine Christo dicitur, i. e. That this Sitting, is meant only of
the Man Christ.

Secondly, Who it is that so exalted Christ. Whether the Person of the Father,
only; or the Person of the Holy Ghost; or whether the Son exalted himself; To
this we answer, that the whole Godhead, and every Divine Person therein;
exalted Christ; even the Godhead of the Lord Jesus, exalted the Manhood of the
same Lord Jesus; for, there is but one Godhead in all the Three Persons,
therefore all the Three Persons exalted the humane nature of the Son; This
truth, the Scripture often shows though something mysteriously; for, David
says of Christ, The Lord said unto my Lord, sit Psalm. 110. 1.
thou at my right hand,] That is, The Godhead of the Son of God said to
Christ, for David calls Christ, His Lord, only for this reason, because the
Lord Christ was to be the Son of David, by taking flesh from David; for
otherwise, how is not the Lord that said it, David's Lord; as well as the Lord
to whom it was said? This is that Scripture wherewith Christ posed the
Pharisees. If David call him Lord, how is he his Son? David Mat. 22. 45.
calls Christ The Lord, in respect of his Godhead, but he calls the same
Christ, his Lord, because he was to be the Son of David by his assumed humane
nature; His Divine Nature was David's Lords; his humane Nature was David's Son.

The same David had said before of Christ, God, thy God has anointed thee with
the oil of gladness,] The meaning is, that the Godhead Psalm. 45. 7.
of Jesus, was to be the Anoynter and the Oil and Unction of Jesus; and
therefore the Godhead, is called his God, because the Lord Jesus, by his
Godhead, anointed Christ, or, The Son of God anointed, and exalted the Son of
Man.

So Christ, on the Cross, said, My God, my Mat. 27. 46.
God, why have thou forsaken me,] Now did Christ speak to his own Godhead. The
Son of Man spoke to the Son of God, which he therefore calls his God. The
forsaking here mentioned is not so to be construed, or understood, as if now in
this agony, his Godhead had quite departed from him, or, that the union of
the Godhead and Manhood were then dissolved; far be it from us to think so;
but the meaning is, that his Godhead did now expose, and give up, and deliver
the Manhood to death, and left it to the will and fury of that People. The
Godhead suspended, and withheld protection from the manhood, and did not send
Legions of Angels to deliver him, although the Godhead was still united with
the Manhood.

Thirdly. At whose Right hand Christ is said to sit.] Whether at the Right Hand
of one, or of all the Persons of the Trinity; This I conceive requisite to be
examined; because all our Liturgical Symbols, or Creeds, mention Christ's
sitting at, or on the Right Hand of the Father: which is certainly true,
because every Person in the Trinity is the Creator, and therefore the Father of
all Creatures, although only the Person of the Father is to be acknowledged to
be Father of the Word, or Son of God. But yet, this Symbolical expression does
not so clearly declare this Mystery, as the words of the holy Scriptures do;
wherein Christ is never said to sit at the right hand of the Father, but at the
right hand of God: Now the right hand of God, is the right hand of every Person
in the Godhead, and not only the right hand of the Person of the Father. So
that the meaning of this sitting of Christ, must be this: That the humane
nature of Christ is advanced to sit at the right hand of the Godhead, and so
at the right hand, both of the Father and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost:
that is, The Son of Man is advanced to sit at the right hand of the Son of God;
or thus, Man's nature, in Christ, is advanced above all Angels, and Archangels,
and above all Creatures in Heaven and Earth, and under the Earth, and above all
infernal powers, and that it is in honor, and power immediately next to the
supreme Godhead.

The misunderstanding of those words in the Creeds, which mention Christ's
sitting on the right hand of the Father, has occasioned a great abuse in men's
apprehension; for, hereupon they have Phansied Three Seats in Heaven, one for
the Father, and another for the Son, on the right side of the Father; and
(under both) a third Seat for the Holy Ghost, whereby they have advanced
Christ, above the Holy Ghost; but we are well assured that it is both against
our Christian Faith, and also impossible, that any one Person in the Trinity
should be above the other because all are Coequal; and it is as impossible that
any Creature should be above God the Creator (for the humane nature of Christ
is that which only is so advanced, and that nature, is a Creature) This abuse
was foreseen by St. Paul (as may be thought) and therefore by him care was
taken to prevent it, by those words, He has put all 1 Cor. 15. 27.
things under his feet.] that is, All creatures are by the Godhead, made
subject to the man Christ: it follows: But when he says all things are put
under him, it is manifest, that he is excepted which did put all things under
him,] (that is) Although all creatures are now under the Man Christ, yet
neither the God head, nor any Person therein are under Christ, his Manhood is
next in glory to God, but in no wise above him, or any Person in the Trinity.

The Fathers also took notice of this abuse, and wrote against it. Origin. upon
these words, Sit thou at my right hand,] advises Orig. in Mat. Tract. 23.
Ne describas sensibiles sessiones, aut Cathedras, and Sedentes humano Schemate
Patrem, and Filium: est de Regno Christi,] and after him Austin tells us, upon
the same occasion, Aug. de fide and Symb.
Tale Simulachrum Deo, in Templo Christiano collocare, vel etiam in cord,
nefas est,] i. e. That we should not describe the Father and the Son, sitting
on seats as men do, for the sitting of Christ signifies only his Dominion,
such a Portraiture in a Christian Church, or but in our very thoughts is
unlawful. Thus they.

Fourthly. What is meant by the right hand of God?] This phrase is not proper,
but figurative, and mystical, because no person in the Godhead hath-hands,
except the Son, who only is incarnate, and he it is that is said to sit.
Therefore the right hand of God must signify, 1. Power. 2. Happiness. 3. Glory.
Christ says, Mat. 26. 64.
you shall see the Son of Man sitting on the right hand of power,] The Psalmist
says, At his right Ps. 16. 11.
hand are pleasures for ever more,] The Apostle R^. ^. 5. Ephesians. 1. 21. Philip.
2. 9.
tells us, Christ is over all, far above all principalities and powers, That to
him every knee must b^w,] This implies a Kingly Majesty by the ceremony of
bowing the knee. The full meaning is, that Christ is placed above all
creatures, next to the Godhead, and has fullness of Power, Happiness, and
Glory.

There can not be invented a better expression of Christ's glory, then by this
phrase of the Right hand of God, for it implies both a Sovereignty above all
others, and yet a subordination to the Godhead, as Psalm. 45. 9. Upon thy right
hand did stand the Queen,] this, because the Queen is above all the Kings
people, but yet not above the King. So Solomon placed his mother on his right
hand. 1 King 2. 19.


When we say, Christ is subordinate to the Godhead, we must be understood to
speak onl^ of his humane nature; for when we speak of the whole person of the
Emanuel, then with the Apostle we say, it is no robbery to affirm him to be
Philip. 2. 6.
equal with God.

If he had been said to sit on the Left hand, men possibly might imagine some
Creature higher then Christ, for whom the right hand was reserved; but this is
the right hand, and highest seat, it can not be said to him friend, go up Lu.
14. 10.
higher.

Or if it had been said, as it is Act. 7. 56. That Christ was standing at the
right hand of God,] without any other mention of his sitting, it might have
been suspected, that he stood as a minister, or officer only: but this sitting
implies Authority, and Supremacy over all Creatures, for, To which of his
Angels said he at any Heb. 1. 1^.
time, Sit thou on my right hand? By all which promises I trust, it appears,
that Christ is the Supreme Lord and King over all the World and all Creatures
in Heaven and Earth, and therefore surely he has a Kingdom on earth.

If it be yet further demanded, why this Throne of Christ is not placed on
earth, seeing the right hand of God, (that is, his omnipotent power) is every
where, as well on Earth, as in Heaven; and why Christ did not continue his
visible residence, and bodily presence here on earth, as he now does in Heaven?

To this we Answer. First. There is now no need of his bodily presence on
earth, seeing he has not withdrawn the Presence of his Godhead, of which he
said Mat. 28. 20. I am with you always even unto the end of the World:] which
Austin thus expresses, Aug. in Ioh. Tract. 50.
Corpus coelo intulit Majestatem mundo non abstulit, nam secundum Majestatem,
semper nobiscum est, i. e, though his body be absent, yet his Godhead, or
Majesty is with us, which is the most noble part of Christ, for therefore;
Divines call his Godhead, his Majesty; because this word signifies the
supremacy: Majesty is the Title of the Supreme Magistrate, we say, The Kings
Majesty; and so when the supremacy was in the Consuls at Rome, and when it was
in the People, then was this title given to each respectively: we read both of
Tul. Orat.
Majestas Consulis, and Majestas Populi. The God head of Christ is his Supreme
Majesty; for, The head of Christ is God,] 1 Cor. 11. 3.
And yet his body which is in Heaven, is not divided, or separated from his
Godhead which is with us, for his Divine and humane natures are eternally and
inseparably united, and jointly govern all; as the body of the Sun is in the
Firmament of this material Heaven, yet by his influence, and beams moderateth
the seasons on earth, and so does Christ, (though bodily in Heaven) by the
influence and beams of his Majesty, govern all things here below.

Secondly. Christ himself gave a reason of his withdrawing from Earth, ^oh 16.
7. It is expediert for you that I go away, for if I go not away, the Comforter
will not come unto you,] This he said, not as if he could not on earth give the
Holy Ghost, but because the infirmities of men would not be in a capacity to
entertain him so as they should, for he gave it before his ascension but their
minds were otherwise busied; They were so fond of his bodily presence, that
they thought nothing could be done to them for their benefit, without it, for
they dreamed of his Earthly Kingdom, even just at his ascension, Act. 1. 6. as
Jews, and Millinarians now do; this earthly monarchy so filled their thoughts,
that they were not capable of the Comforter, they thought Christ could not
reign except his body were present, so that his Godhead was not considered,
but altogether neglected. The holy Woman Martha greatly erred in this very
thing, when she said, Lord if thou had been Ioh. 11. 21.
here my brother had not died.] as if Christ could not cure him, or raise him
except he were bodily present.

To cure them of this fond conceit, Christ withdraws to Heaven, as a Mother
withdraws her presence from a too fond Child, and as light and food are
sometimes withheld from Frantic men for their good, for this cause, it may
reasonably be thought, that Christ performed some miraculous cures on earth,
when he was not corporally present, thereby to teach men the omni-presence of
his Divine Spirit; for so, he cured the Centurious Servant, not going to Mat.
8. 13. Ioh. 4. 50.
the place where he was, and also the Noble man's sick Son, although he did not
go down to him at Capernaum, as the Noble man desired. To these reasons, many
other are added by Divines which are frequent and obvious in their writings, I
shall not need, here to rehearse them.

These premises being true, and all of them matters of Faith, it may be wondered
that any Christian should dream of removing the Court Royal of Christ from
Heaven to this base, and beggarly earth; Faustus the Manichean thought more
honorably of Christ then so, and said, Aug. cont. Faust. l. 20. c. 2. Mat. 17.
20.
That the Son of God resideth in the Sun; therefore the Manichees adored the
Sun. They who can believe this monstrous Article of Christ's removeal, to dwell
upon this earth, have need of a greater Faith then that which can remove
Mountains.

And yet I do not think it unprobable, but that before the end of this world,
there will be some such thing attempted, as Jews and Millinarians fancy,
concerning this Earthly Monarchy of Messiah: the Jews possibly may be
congregated to their old country; Jerusalem and the Temple there, may be
rebuilt; and that People may be the most potent upon earth; Their Captain, or
Leader that shall so congregate them, may by them, be thought, and believed, to
be their long-expected Messiah. Those Christians that then shall join with the
Jews, and their Leader, may be thought by themselves, and by the Jews to be
Proselite-Saints, and so together they may have a Sovereignty over all other
worldly Princes. These things are not impossible. But then, when this attempt
shall rake effect, their great Captain will not be the true Messiah, or Christ,
but a Pseudo-Christ, such as the Jews have often heretofore been abused by; nor
will this Monarchy be the mild and righteous reigning of Christ (whose Kingdom
is not of this world) But verily it will be that, which the Primitive
Christians so much feared; even, the Bloody, Tyrannous, and formidable raging
of the Grand Antichrist, so Origin thought, Orig. in Mat. Tract. 29.
The desolation of Jerusalem must last till the consummation of the World. Si
aedificabitur, Templum aedificabitur illi qui extollitur supra omne quod
dicitur Deus, i. e. If Dan. 9. 27. 2 These. 2. 4.
ever the Temple of Jerusalem be rebuilt it will be for him, that extolleth
himself above all that is called God. Thus he. The Monarchy of Antichrist
(whenever it comes) must be set up by the sword; His Palace Royal, and
Hypocritical Temple must be built in blood. Our own Fitzstephen. Stow. Speed.
Historians tell us that the Tower of London (built by the Conqueror) was
cemented with Lime, tempered with the blood of Beasts; But this Babel must be
cemented with the blood of men; and the Tyrant himself will be such, as the
crafty, and cruel Emperor Tiberius is described to have been. Suet. in Tib. c.
57. and 59.
Lutum sanguine maceratum, i. e. a Lout; like clay, tempered with blood, of
whom also it was foretold, Regnabit sanguine multo, i. e. that his reign would
be bloody; so will be the dominion of the Grand Hypocrite, who will be, not
only a blood-sucker, but a blood-supper, a man of blood, a destroyer, and
drunken with blood. The primitive Christians did so conceive of this
Pseudo-Christ; or Antichrist, and therefore they prayed for the continuance of
the Roman state (though persecutors) because they thought, Antichrist could not
come till that state was dissolved, and they also prayed, Tert. Apol. c. 32.
etc. 39.
Pro mora finis,] i. e. That the judgment of the world might be deferred,
because Antichrist was not to come till the day of judgment was near at hand;
for they feared to adventure the perseverance of their Faith to the trial of
such cruel forces. The apprehension of the persecution of this Antichrist,
inclined some to think. that it should be Nero, raised from the dead as Aug. de
Ci. vit. lib. 20. c. 19.
Austin reports. So Chrysostom thought, Chrysostom. Sermon. de 2. Adventu. Christi.
That St. Paul meant Nero by those words, 2 Thessalonians. 2. But Theodoret affirmed
that this Last, and greatest Antichrist shall be the Devil appearing in the
sha^e of a man and pretending himself to be the Messiah, Theod. Haeret. Fab. l.
5.


In the mean time, as there have been before, so there will be yet many
Antichrists, who will outwardly profess Christ, as members of the Church, as
Austin says Aug. in 1. E. pist. Ioh. Tract. 3.
Multi Antichristi intus sunt, nondum for as exierunt. Such are by St. Bernard
called, Christiani Antichristiani, i. e. Antichristian Christians (of which
sort more anon.)

Finaly, as all Petty-Antichrists have had preachers suborned to deceive, and
mislead the vulgars, so also will the Grand Antichrist St. Jerome called
Sabinianus, who was an Adulterer, and a scard^lous Deacon, Hier. Epist. 48.
Novum Apostolum Antichristi, i. e. a new Apostle of Antichrist. Prosper says
as much of the Great Antichrist, Prosper de Promis. p. 3. c. 11. 13.
Antichristus habebit suos praecones mendacii, and pseudoprophetas, i. e. That
he will have his false Prophets, and Preachers of lies. St. Jerome further
adds, That Antichrist will assume to himself a Legislative power; for, those
words Ps. 9. 20. which the English renders, Put them in fear O Lord,] Both
Jerome and Austin read, Constitue, Domine, Legislatorem super eos.] that is,
says he, Set Antichrist over them, for he will be, Hier. in Psalm. 9.
Lator legis malae Doctrinae,] i. e. a setter up of false Doctrine by a Law.

SECT. V.
The signification of the Jewish Feast of Atonement, and of the High Priests
entering the Sanctum Sanctorum, and of the Mercy-seat, Sprinkling of Blood,
Scape-goate, and Jewish Sacrifices, why God disliked them. The signification of
the Altar. Of the Jewish and Christian Liturgies.

THere is yet another passage in this History of Christ in Heaven, to be
examined, and that is, concerning the correspondency of Christ's entering into
Heaven, with the Jewish High Priests entering, and demeanor in the Sanctum
Sanctorum, (that is) the most Holy place of the Tabernacle, or Temple. This we
are compelled unto, because both the English and Latin Commenters on the
Hebrews, according to the Doctrine of the Socinians, often tell us, Jonas
S^hlicht^ngius in Heb. 9. 2.
Manifestum est, Pontificis nostri oblationem, and Sacrificium, non in cruce,
sed in Coelo peractum esse] which our English Translating commenter, thus
renders, It is manifest, that the offering, and Sacrifice of Christ was not
made upon the Cross, but was performed in Heaven,] By these words, they would
have us believe, that because the Jewish High Priest carried, and presented the
blood of Beasts in the Sanctuary. Therefore Christ must carry his own blood
into Heaven, and there, continually offer, and Sacrifice. It seems they do not
believe, that the Passion, and Death of Christ, finished upon the Cross, was a
sacrifice sufficient to redeem them.

What the intent, meaning, and signification of the Jews, High Priests, so
entering into the earthly Sanctuary, was; we shall better apprehend, by a
diligent consideration of the ceremonies performed by the said Priest, in that
great, and solemn Festival of the Jews, which is called The Feast of Atonement,
described Levit. 16. and applied to Christ, Heb. 9. 12. for in that Feast was
the great mystery of man's Redemption described by a type, figure, shadow, and
Holy Scene, as will appear anon; which Feast was therefore called a Sabbath,
and rest, Levit. 16. 31.
verse. 31. and was kept on the 10. day of the seventh month, (our September,)
Levit. 23. 27. Philo and Josephus both Jews, call this Feast, only, the Fast,
but the Scriptures and Christians have other names for it, whereby the meaning
thereof may be discovered. It is called, The Expiation. The Reconciliation. The
Propitiation and The Atonement.

I. Expiation.] This word signifies, purging, purifying, hallowing, cleansing,
appeasing, delivering from the guilt of sin, and restoring him to a State of
Piety, who by transgression has fallen into a state of impiety. This Festival
was therefore called the Feast of Expiation, because therein was Typically
showed, the means whereby sinful man was to be restored to innocence and to be
quitted, and purged from the guilt of sin.

II. Reconciliation,] This Feast was so called, because therein was
figuratively showed how sinful man is to be Reconciled to his offended God.

III. Propitiation,] it was so called, because it typically showed who it is,
by whose mediation, and intercession, the Godhead is made propitious, and
favorable, and by whom we are ingraciated with God, or, who is the
Proportiation for our sins, of whom we read, 1 John 2. 2.

IV. Atonement,] This is our English word by which that Feast is called, which
does singularly express the intent, and meaning thereof. It signifies our
uniting or re-uniting with God. God, and man, are by sin, set at odds, and made
two, or at variance, as Coelius a Choleric Orator in Seneca, said to another,
Sen. de Ira. l. 3. c. 8.
Dic aliquid contra, ut Duo simus,] But this Type shows how the disagreeing
parties may be agreed, made one, or set at one, and reunited, for this word
Atonement signifies that which the Latin word Vnitas does, viz. the At
onement, or making one, of those who before were differing and at odds.

In this great mysterious Festival, many circumstances are very considerable
for the business now in hand.

First. The High Priest was to enter into the Levit. 16.
most Holy place, alone, none with him, Lev. 16. 17. This was, to teach us that
Christ alone is he that takes away sins, and works our expiation,
reconciliation, and atonement or reunion with the offended Godhead.

Secondly. The High Priest went not into that Sanctuary, until the Sacrifical
beasts were killed, one for the Atonement of the Priests, and after, the other
for the Atonement of the people, and their blood respectively taken, verse. 11.
15. So Christ, did not actually expiate us, but by his death, and blood,
shedding his own blood.

Thirdly. The High Priest presented two Goats before the Lord, verse. 7. One was
killed, the other was kept alive. v. 7. 13. Both the Goats represented Christ.
That which was killed at the Tabernacle, signified, that the benefit of Christ's
death was tendered, and offered to the Israelites, or people of the Tabernacle.
The other, which was reserved alive, and sent away into the wilderness
signified that Christ, with all his efficacies and benefits should by his
Gospel, be sent and tendered, and presented to the Gentiles, or Nations, who in
the Scriptures are often called the Wilderness, and Solitary place, or desert,
as Isa. 35. 1. For, in Christ all the Nations of the earth are to be blessed,
Genesis 18. 18. The gathering of the people, (expectatio gentium) shall be unto
him, Genesis 49. 10. he was to be a light to lighten the Gentiles, Luc. 2. 23. And
Christ himself professed that he has other Sheep which were not of this
(Jewish) fold, Joh. 19. 16.

Some Expositers (as Theodoret. and Both the Glosses with Lyranus) have
thought, that this Hircus Apopompeus, i. e. the Emissary, or Scapegoat,
signified the Godhead of Christ, which could not dye. But this exposition can
not possibly agree with this type, nor, indeed, with the Analogy of Faith:
because, the sins of the people are said, to be laid on this Scapegoat, Levit.
16. 21. Just, as it is said of Christ, The Lord has laid on him the iniquity
of us all, Isa. 53. 6. This is not true of the pure Godhead of Christ, upon
which our sins could neither be laid, or imputed, nor could the pure Godhead
expiate, or satisfy Divine Justice because it could not dye, If the Son of
God, or the Word, had for ever continued in his pure Divinity, and had not been
incarnate, he could not have taken away the sins of the World: For it was man's
nature that was peccant, therefore the Son of God took upon himself that
nature, to destroy sin in the flesh; The work of Redemption was confined to the
Seed of the Woman, to the Son of Man, and to the Lamb of God: St. Peter
teaches us, that Christ bare our sins in his own body, 1 Pet. 2. 24. And St.
Paul often, That therefore God sent his Son in the likeness of sinful flesh,]
Romans 8. 3. That he Romans 8. 3.
has abolished in his flesh, the emnity,] Ephesians. 2. 15. That he has reconciled
us in the body of his flesh through death,] Col. 1. 21. 22. That we are
sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ. Heb. 10. 10.

This Scapegoat was to be sent into the wilderness (the Gentiles) by a fit
man] Levit. 16. 21. That is, Christ was to be delivered and made known to the
Gentiles, by such men as are fitly qualified, and enabled with endowments to
teach the Gentiles in the mysteries of Christ. Our Lord himself gave Apostles,
Prophets, Ephesians. 4. 11. 1 Timothy 2. 7.
Evangelists, Doctors, St. Paul styles himself a Doctor, or Teacher of the
Gentiles, these were Fit men indeed: Verily, they are too blame, that send
unfit men, and blind guides to carry Christ to the people. Bishop Goodman
lately affirmed in his book, that of his own knowledge some in these times have
been sent to preach Christ who (though not bodily blind) could never write, nor
read. It is reported of the learned French Divine Pet: du Moulin, that he
heartily wished, that the French King would grant him a general license to
preach, though it were with a condition of preaching in a Fools Coat, this
condition is now performed, for many in these times preach in a fools coat,
(if their coats be their own.)

Fourthly. The High Priest was to carry the blood of the sacrifice into the
most Holy place, and to sprinkle it on the mercy seat seven times,] Levit. 16.
14. This is the principal ceremony of all, and teaches us the full intent, and
purpose of all the Jewish Sacrifices, and how, only, they could be useful, and
beneficial to the Jews, and to us also; and how the true, and substantial
Atonement, or reconciliation of God with man was to be made.

For, The Mercy Seat signified, and represented the Body of Christ, the
Messiah; it was therefore called the Mercy Seat, because in Christ only, the
Godhead does acquiess, and rest fully pleased, and satisfied, and in him only
expresses the grand mercy of remitting our sins. It was called the
Propitiatory, because by Christ only, the Godhead is reconciled, and made
propitious to man; it was also called the Oracle, because, as God spoke to Moses
from this Mercy Seat, Numb. 7. 89. So he intimated thereby that in after times
he would speak to us by his Son, as is said Heb. 1. 2. and by the same Godhead
we are commanded to hear him, Mat. 17. 5.

Upon this Mercy Seat was the blood of those Piacular Sacrifices to be
sprinkled,] This signified, that all the Jewish Sacrifices, and blood of
beasts, were not of any value, or force at all to acquit, and redeem man, but
only as they related to Christ, as shadows, and representations of the blood of
Christ, that the blood of beasts did not at all propitiate of themselves, until
they were reduced, and by Faith brought home to Christ; so that those Jews
which offered the blood of beasts, without the faith of Messiah, and looked no
further then upon the beasts only, nor did consider and believe, that the
Messiah was to pour out his own blood for them, and that those Sacrifices were
ordained for none other end but to acquaint them, and daily put them in mind of
their redemption by the death of their Messiah, and so to nourish continually
their Faith, and hope in him: Their Sacrifices were vain.

For the Jewish Altar represented the Cross, and the Sacrifices thereon
signified Christ; the word Altar was used for the highness of it, (ab
altitudine,) God did therefore appoint them to Sacrifice on a plat raised
higher then the common ground, because it might adumbrate Christ lifted up on
the Cross: So that those Jews who in their sacrificing did not by faith
consider this, sacrificed no better then the Heathens did, and upon this very
reason God condemned their sacrifices, and moreover professed that they were
odious unto him: for so he says, I have no delight in the blood of Bullocks,
Isa. 1: 11. 13.
bring no more vain oblations: He that kills an Isa. 66. 3.
Ox, is as if he slew a man, he that sacrifices a Lamb, as if he cut of a
Dogs neck, or, as if he offered Swines blood, or, as if he blessed an Id^l.]
for although these Jewish sacrifices were appointed by God, yet are they
rejected by the same God, because Isychius in Levit.
Judaei tantum literam considerabant,] The Jews did not sacrifice with the
faith and consideration of Messiah, to be the Grand Sacrifice; They considered
only the bare letter, and outside in the precept of sacrificing, without
consideration of the Spirit, and meaning thereof. Therefore the Psalmist says,
Sacrifices and Offerings thou would Ps. 40 6.
not,] that is, God would not have them to be considered for any worth, or
efficacy in themselves, as if they were the ultimate duty, and perfect
performance of that precept of sacrificing, whereas, indeed, those sacrifices
were of no worth at all, except only as they related to Christ. This St. Paul
clearly declares, It is impossible that the blood of Bulls and of Goats should
take away sins. It follows, But a body have Heb. 10. 4. 5.
thou prepared for me: that is, The Son of God assumed his body, or flesh, from
us, that therein he might perform the grand sacrificing for sin. Hence it is,
that the blood of the Jewish sacrifice was to be sprinkled on the Mercy seat,
that is, on Christ, for what else can be the Seat of the Mercy of the Godhead
but only Christ, in whom only God is appeased, satisfied, and well pleased. In
a word; No blood could satisfy the Justice of the Godhead, and reconcile God
to man, but only that blood which was sprinkled on this Mercy Seat, viz. on the
blessed body of the Son of Man.

The blood of the Sacrifice was to be sprinkled seven times on the Mercy Seat,]
Lev. 16. 14. This signified, that the blood of Christ made a perfect
reconciliation, and was sufficient to expiate, for all times, and ages, from
the beginning of the world, to the end thereof; because all times are included
in this number of seven; there are but seven days created; All times are but
those seven days reiterated.

As the Jewish Sacrifices were instituted, only to be a representation of
Christ's Sacrifice, so our Christian Sacrifices of prayers are an aftermemorial
thereof, for we ask, petition, and pray for all things, in, and through Jesus
Christ our Lord. The Jewish Liturgy was only Sacrifice. The Christian
Sacrifice, is only prayers, those are the calves of our lips.

The Jews were limited to a certainty, and set form of Sacrifices, they might
not sacrifice any beast, but only of the Neat, Sheep and Goat, nor any foul,
but only Doves. None other beast, though never so great or precious, not an
Unicorn (if any were) not an Elephant, nor any other foul, not an high neckt
Swan, nor a proud Peacock.

The Church Catholic in correspondence thereunto, had their limited liturgies,
and set forms of public prayer, as we find in all ages since the days of the
Apostles, none might publicly in the Congregation offer the stang, or wildfier
of his own fancy, but was confined to the form prescribed, that so the
congregation might knowingly join therein. No such thing, as long, tedious,
Elephantine, and tautological Orizons practiced, as of late, as if men on
purpose slighted the advice of Christ against Pharisaical long prayers, Mat. 6.
7. and 23. 14. This by the way.

Now for conclusion of this question concerning the correspondence of Christ in
Heaven, with the High Priest in the Sanctuary, I desire the learned Reader to
peruse the whole passage in that great Festival of Atonement, described Levit.
16. and then judge whether there be any mention at all, of the High Priests
Sacrificing in the Sanctum Sanctorum; he will find that the Sacrifice was by
him offered, not within, but without the sanctuary, at the Great Altar; so was
the Sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ offered, not within the Sanctuary
of Heaven, but on the Gross, which was his Altar on earth; the denial whereof
contains more poison, then a plain Christian is aware of.

If our Commenter had been contented to affirm only this, That Christ
presents his holy body in Heaven, which was besprinkled with his own blood
here on earth, we would willingly agree with him therein; for certainly his
Passion on earth is, and ever will be looked on in Heaven, and considered by
the Godhead, as a full satisfaction, and expiation for all his members, and
will ever be present, and fresh in the sight of God.

For if Christ had not fully satisfied the Divine Justice, and paid the full
price of our redemption at his death; he could not have ascended into Heaven,
nor sat at the Right Hand of God, but must still have been held in Prison by
death as other dead men are; because he was indebted by the Covenant, as being
a surety for man: But now, that our surety is freed, and out of Prison, there
is no doubt, but that the debt was fully paid before his releasment. This is
all that I shall need to relate concerning the History of Christ in Heaven, for
if all could be written, (as St John said of him upon Earth,) The World it Ioh
21. 25.
self would not contain the Books.

By what has been said, I trust the Reader perceives, That neither the
Intercession, nor Advocateship, nor Mediatorship, nor Priesthood of Christ in
Heaven, does in the least, derogate from his Almighty power, and Sovereignty
both in Heaven, and Earth. For, his Priesthood there, is Melchisedechical, and
that was a Royal, or Kingly Priesthood. I fear, that I have wearied the Reader
in this long Chapter; which though I have marked for the Tenth, he may justly
call it Caput Decumanum.

CHAP. XI.
More, of Millinarism, of the dreadful consequences thereof, of new Saints, and
the new Elect, and new Meek, that these Titles unduely placed, are abuses of
the Holy Ghost. The Conclusion.

BY what has been said, the Reader may in part perceive, what evil
consequences attend this Millinarian Doctrine, even to the denial, of the
eternal Kingdom of the Son of God in Heaven; and verily, if it take place, it
probably may extend to the demolishing of all earthly Monarchies, and to the
dissipating and levelling of most private men's interests, and taking away
properties of Estates, and that Meum and Tuum, which has been so much
agitated, and instead thereof (as one said) to bring in a Suum, that is, to
settle all earthly goods and possessions, upon those men, that call themselves
Saints: and which is worse, upon the Millinarian principles, it may proceed to
the bloody Massacres of many millions of people in the World, and at best, to
the vassallage, and slavery of those that escape death; which will be a woeful
restitution of the long expected liberty of the Subject, and such as Plutarch
observed at ^lut. in vita ^yllae.
Rome: that after the outrageous fury of Marius, when Sylla succeeded, the
people saw there was a change, but yet no freedom from oppression, but a
proceeding from naught to worse, and as one says Terent. in Heaut.
Deteriores omnes sumus licentia, as if some men did construe this liberty, to
signify a licentiousness for one party to do whatsoever they please against
another, and to quite themselves from all subjection to Magistrates and Laws,
both humane and Divine, such revelling, and domineering will not become the
mild Kingdom, and easy Yo^k of Christ, nor can such hard taskmasters be
accounted reigning Saints; but Saints Rampant, nor can the exorbitant
litenciousness of one party, be called public liberty.

Upon those words, Psalm. 119. 125. I am thy Prosper in Ps. 119.
Servant] Prosper thus confesses. Neque enim mihi been cessit, quando esse
volui liber meus, and non servus tuus.] i. e. That it never was well with him
since he would take his own liberty, and not be Gods Subject.

We now perceive the reasons, why some Preachers have heretofore taught the
people. 1. That wicked man have no right to the Creature. 2. That God cannot
see sin in the Saints Gangren. haer. 43. 52, 153.
that know themselves to be in Grace. 3. That Christ shall live again on this
Earth, and put down Monarchies. 4. That all the Earth is the Saints. 5. That
with them, there ought to be a community of goods; (be like, they so expound
the Article of the Communion of Saints.)

Now we can guess at the cause, why we have of late such a numerous
Canonization, and Apotheosis, or Apocolocyntosis of Saints; for if all the
Earth must be in the possession of Saints only, what Earthly man will not at
least pretend to be a Saint, although in old time, as Theodoret tells us, men
called Saints, Theod de Cur Graec affe. lib 3. Luc 4 6.
Hagios, quasi Ageos: because they were not earthly minded. If Satan had not
lied, when he said that all Kingdoms of the World were at his dispose, he might
have hired a great part of mankind to stand for his designs, but Satan's rewards
of his Servants are in another Kingdom: indeed, one of the Roman Saints. (St
Francis) was voted at Rome, to that place in Heaven, which Lucifer lost; but if
this Millinarian Tyranny be put into practice, some for their great deserts may
hereafter dispute with Beelzebub, for the upper hand in his infernal
principality; for as there are many Saints in Heaven, which are not registered
in the Catalogue of Saints on Earth, (as Erasmus said) so Mr Fox reports, (as
the saying of St Jerome) that many are reverenced for Saints on Earth, who are
now tormented in Hell; when our English Becket was Sainted at Rome, one
Rogerus, a Norman, at a disputation in Paris, concluded that the said Becket
(for Speed in Hen. 2.
his rebellion) was damned; so Bellarmin reported out of a more Ancient Writer.
(Sulpitius) that one who had been a long time worshipped as a Saint, did by an
apparition confess that he had been a great Robber, and that he was executed
Bell de Sanct. To 2 lib. 1 c 7.
for his villainies, and that he was damned.

This new Sainting is but an imitation, and revival of an old Heretical Policy,
of magnifying those men, or things, that might conduce to the advancement of
their false Religiosities; So we read that the Heretics called Epiph. Haer 38.
Caiani, Sainted, and honored Cain, because he prevailed against Abel so, as
to kill him; for by this Success, they pretended, that Cain was fovourred, and
assisted by that God, who was stronger then the God of Abel: The same heretics
did also honor Judas as a great Benefactor to mankind, because he had betrayed
Christ to death, as in order to the redemption, and salvation of man. There
were also some Gnostics, who proceeded so far as to worship a very Serpent in
honor, and memorial of that Serpent which (they said) was the Author of
knowledge, or new-light to our Mother Eve, yet these also called themselves
Christians, but the Church called them Ophitae, i. e. Serpentarians, and so the
Manichees, most blasphemously affirmed, that the Serpent which deceived Eve was
Christ, as Aug Har. 17.
St Austin writes, at which strange blindness or impudence, he wondered and
said Id cont. Faust l 15 c 9.
O Haeresis Eb^ia, sed non vino, i. e. that it was an heresy, drunken, but not
with wine. But these Heretics had a fifth Gospel, which they called Epiph
haec. 38.
The Gospel of Judas, out of which surely, they learned these unholsome
Doctrines.

Those Manichees, were a Sect, of as ill Doctrine, and as bad demeanor as any,
for they taught, that there are two Gods, one good, the other bad; and they
forbade any relief, (even to bread, and water) to be given to any indigent
people, except they were of their own Sect: yet these Manichees had their
Saints also, whom they called Electos, and Electas; by the same token, that in
the night of the Manichean Vigils, when certain Women met in a room to keep
those wakes, then came the Electi Manichaeorum, Aug. de Morib. Manich. l. 2. c.
19.
and one of them put out the light; then was one of those Woman forced and
ravished in the dark; she knew not by whom, of such Elect the Scripture
speaks, where mention is made of the Chosen Charets of Pharaoh, Exo. 14. Ibid
de Temp. Sermon. 90.
7. and of the Election of Judas, John 6. 70. they were Elect; the first ad
malitiam a Diabolo, the second, Ad tentationem, per Diabolum, as Austin says.
There is also now a days a dangerous Ibid in Ps. 55.
flattery practiced in ascribing the title Elect to some Women, or Widows, that
are rich (you may be sure) although as yet no signs of God's Election have
appeared in them, but the contrary; St Paul describes holy Widows, by 1 Timothy 5.
trusting in God, -- continuing in Prayer night and day, -- well reported of,
for good works; -- lodging of strangers, -- washing the Saints feet, --
relieving the afflicted, etc. But these Flatterers place that salvation of
Elect Lady quite contrarily, on malicious busy-Bodyes -- on the afflicters of
good and innocent men, for which they both labor, and rejoice, -- on such as
wax wanton, and are of ill report, and live in pleasure, of such St Jerome
writes to the noble Virgin Eustochium, Hier. Epi. 22. cap. 6.
Plena adulatoribus domus -- clerici ipsi -- precia accipiunt Salutandi --
vident sacerdores suo indigere auxilio hinc eriguntur in superbiam -- Castae
vocantur, and Non^ae, and post caenam dubiam Apost^los somniant.] i. e. Their
houses are frequented by Flatterers, some needy Clerks take pay of them for the
Salutes-poor Priests, make then so proud, that they must be called Chaste, and
very Nuns, and although they feed high, and deliciously, yet (in opinion of
their Holiness) in the night they dream of the Apostles, (as if they appeared
to them in visions) Thus he. Such as these are to be exhotted, to make their
Election sure to themselves, by an Holy Christian, Charitable, and innocent
conversation, rather, then to suffer themselves to be flatteted into Hell, by
such Self-ended Hypocrites.

It is surely a great abuse, and blaspemy of the Holy Ghost, who is the Author
of all Sanctification, to fasten the appellation Saint, upon such persons as
have no holiness in them, except Covetousness, Rapine, Malice, Envy and
Hypocrisy may be called Sanctifying graces: That Scripture which our
Millinarian Saints allege for their right to wordly possessions, will in no
wise fit them, Math. 5. 6. The Meek shall inherit the Earth.] It is confessed
hereby, that inheriting Saints must be meek, it would be examined what the word
meek imports, and also what Earth or Land is there meant.

1. Meek signifies those that are mild, gentle, patient, and peaceable,
therefore not the furious, cruel, blood-thirsty, and war-making man: Blessed
are the Peacemakers, Mat. 5. 9 Mar. 5. 5. Lu^. ^. 30.
but variance and strife are the works of the flesh, Gal. 5. or of the Devil,
as himself confessed, that his name was Legion, Marc. 5. 9. where, a Latin
Word is used in the Greek Text, alluding thereby to the Roman Legions, as may
reasonably be thought.

2. The Earth, or Land there promised is not the Low Country of this Earth, for
this is Aug in Psalm 26
Terra morientium. i. e. the Land of the Dying, but it is the Land of the
living, Psalm. 142. 5. True Saints know that they have no continuing City here
below, but their (...), i. e. that Phil 3 20.
commonwealth, Kingdom or Country whereof they are to be inhabitants is
Heaven, and that is their Land of promise.

Neither will that Pharisaical, or comparative righteousness amount so high as
to Sanctification, such as, God I thank thee that I am not as other men:] The
non-Saints are accused as being Luc. 18 11.
Swearers, Cursers, Drinkers, and cruel man-slayers; and the Saints are also
recriminated for as great Crimes: but here, an Aposiopesis is necessary: There
is a sin which in Scripture, is called Genesis 18 20.
Peccatum Clamans, i. e a crying sin, but in other Writers, the same sin is
called Peccatum mutum, and Isych in Levit l 5 c 18
ineffabile, i. e. the dumb sin; which perhaps may be reproved impune when
those man are dead who will not endure the reproof thereof whilst they are
living. Great sins there are, doubtless, on both sides: St Jerome thus writes
to Sabinianus his accuser, Hier Epi 48.
Nunqnid vitia mea, virtutes tuae sunt? mecum age paenitentiam.] The vices of
one party, are not the virtues of the other; therefore it were best for both to
amend.

But yet the sins of those that profess such great holiness, are more
abominable in them, then in others: and especially when they are dogmatically
asserted, as if they were warranted, and approved by God; St Jerome mentions,
Hier. Epi. 22. Virgil Aen. 3.
Sanctam Superbiam; and in the Poet there is Aura sacra fames, i. e. holy
covetousness. The Pelugians twitted the Cat holicks as if they taught, Aug
cont. Iul l. 6 c 6. Piae frauds, apud Ambros de Jacob, lib 2: c 3.
Concupiscentiam sanctificatam, but falsely; for no outward profession of
Saintship can Sanctify Rapine, Murder, Sacrilege, and the like; but these
sins are represented far worse in the sight of God, when they are found in
professors of heavenliness, and mortification. It is said that the Fox will
fain himself to be dead, Epiph. in Physiol. c. 19.
that so he may catch and deavour birds that come within his reach, and we know
what great mischiefs have been acted by some seeming mortified men, even to the
deavouring of the Estates of Orphans and Widows, when they have been trusted as
fiduciaries; We read of a foul Aug ad frat in Erem. hom. 48.
found in a dead man's Skull, and of late we are informed, Mr Hoels Epist.
that a Serpent was found in the heart of a dead English man; an ill sign, (as
that learned and industrious Gentleman thought) of venomous, and Serpentine
designs in the hearts of some seeming-mortified men; that is the sin which the
Apostle calls, Ephesians. 6. 12. Spiritual wickedness in ((...)) heavenly places.
Astronomers tell us of a Serpent in Heaven, and of the Head, Ephesians 6 12.
and Tail of the Dragon there; So does the Apocalips mention a Dragon seen in
Heaven, Rev. 12 3.
whose Tail arew the third part of the Stars of Heaven. Surely no under-moon,
earthly, or under-earth plot is so likely to take effect, as an Heavenly
pretense, and Holy wickedness; as one says.

-- Parva sunt mala Sen. in Medea. Act. 4.

Et vile telum est, ima quod tellus creat;
Caelo petam venena, -- Descendat Anguis, etc.
How easily are poor people deceived, when Satan appears like an Angel of
Heaven, or like an Holy Prophet, and in the mouth of his false Prophets Zech.
13. 3.
speaks lies in the Name of the Lord?] how plausible are the promises of
Reformation of Religion in Doctrine and manners, and this with a Sacred
Covenant, with solemn fasts and humiliations? how acceptable is the expectation
of the extirpation of Popery, and superstition, of the establishment of a
learned, Godly, and painful ministry, of the propagation of the Gospel, and of
new light? But how will men be deceived, if instead of new lights: they must
have lightnings, and the Sons of lightning instead of the Sons of Thunder;
Thunders do no harm, lightnings do all the mischief; Christ says, I beheld
Satan as lightning, Luc. 10. 18.
fall from Heaven: new lights in Heaven, or new Stars, are false Stars, and but
blazing Comets, which Wisemen say, do always portend Calamities; we have many
true Stars fallen, or drawn from Heaven by the Dragon's Tail, as if that
particular sign of Christ's coming to judgment were already fulfilled: St Jerome
calls the Apostles Hier. Epi. Exeget. 14^.
Excussores, from those Scripture passages, Mat. 10. 14. and Act. 13. 15. Never
in this Land were seen so many Reverend, Godly, Learned, and truly Apostolical
Preachers, that now may justly shake the dust off their feet, which surely will
one day (without Repentance) be laid to the charge of the occasioners.

The Britans in old time used to say that the Speed. in Hen. 3. Sect. 71.
Irish Saints were very angry, and implacable Saints, because 5 Earls of
Pembrok, (the Sacrilegious Sons, of a Sacrilegious Father who had robbed a
Bishopric in Ireland) all dyed issueless; But what may the Irish say of
English Saints, who have taken all Bishops Lands from them, and from others,
and have already made entry upon earthly possessions, as if they did really
believe this millinarian Fable. This may perhaps be the cause of such
uncharitableness as these Saints practice against others, in hating,
oppressing, and spoiling them, and excluding them from admission into Society
with these Saints, as if they were afraid to have too many Saints of their
Communion, least their earthly Land of Promise should not be large enough for
all; indeed our English Zediack, or rather this Epicycle of our British Orb
may seem too little for their vast appetites, because the present He, and
she-Saints will surely beget other young Saints who (they say) must partake in
this inheritance. Arnobius writing against the Heathens conceit of Male, and
Female Deities, tells them that if it be so indeed, then, doubtless, they will
still beget some young Gods and Goddesses; for Nondum Senuerunt Jupiter, and
Mars, i. e. Gods cannot be disabled by age, Iuven. Sat. 6.
and then Arnob. con. Gent. l. 3.
Dijs plena essent omnia, nec Caelicaper^nt multitudinem eorum.] i. e. Not only
this Earth, but Heaven also, would be too little for them: The Roman Satyrist
also (though an heathen) derideth this error, for (says he) in the Golden age,
before Saturn left his Kingdom, there were fewer Gods then now.

-- Nec turba deorum
Talis ut est hodie, contentaque sidera paucis Iuvena. Sat. 13.

Numinibus, miserum urgebant Atlanta minori Pondere, etc.
i. e. That the multitude of new begotten Gods was a great encumbrance to
Heaven it self, and so will be the multiplying of reigning Saints to the Earth.

Augustus Caesar made a sumptuous Feast, but for twelve Persons, he is, and
she is, and himself sat down with them apparrelled in such robes as the Roman
Gods then ware, and this Feast was therefore called Suet. in Aug. c 70.
(...), i. e. the Feast of twelve Gods, yet the people murmured, and said,
frumentum omne, Dij comederunt,] that these few, had consumed all provisions,
it seems the heathens Goddifying was very chargable, as also was the Romish
Canonizing of Saints in later times, for the old Romans were so provident as to
forbear Consecrating, or Sainti-fying any of their Emperors until they were
dead, as when Basianus the Emperor had slain his Brother Geta, (to cover the
murder,) he gave order that Geta should be Goddifyed using these words,
Spartian. in Geta, c, 1,
Sit Divus, dum non sit vivus, and this also is the now-Roman Policy, not to
Canonize any, until they be dead; for living Saints would be chargable, and
therefore it may be thought great prudence, not to take in too many into the
Communion of living Saints, least the Commons should be Gal. 6, 10.
too scant for them all: for the Charity of new Saints is extended only to The
household of faith;] that is, of their own faith, their Charity begins at home,
and there it ends also: just as was the practice of the old Manichees who
accounted it a capital crime. Aug. conf. lib. 3. c. 10. and de Morib Man. lib.
2, c, 15.
To communicate so much as a morsel of bread, or a cup of Water to any indigent
person, except he were a Manichean, as is showed before.

But uncharitableness is not all, there is also in some, an Hypocritical, and
Pharisaical pride, so as not to admit any peers; of whom our learned Bish:
Mountague has left us this Character, Act. and Mon. cap. 7, sect. 29.
Hypocrita est qui amat se sine rivali,] for now, the Apostles themselves are
not by these men vouchsafed the title of Saint, which yet, they assume to
themselves: King James observed in a Sermon preached at Court, that the
Preacher, as often as he named Saint Paul, called him Paul: but when he mentioned
Calvin, he called him Master Calvin, whereupon the King asked his attendants; I
pray, who made Calvin a Gentleman, and Paul a yeoman, and we are informed by
many Writers, of a Calvinist of Geneva, that professedly preferred Calvin
before St Paul, and said, that if St Paul were there Preaching at the same time
when Calvin Preached, he would leave St Paul, to hear Calvin: Neither were the
Lutheran Surius Commentar. ad An, 15, 0.
behind in this point, for when the Augustan Confession was brought in at
Ausburg, a Lutheran said he would rather doubt of St Paul's Doctrine then of
Luthers, and that Confession. Neither are the Romanists behind hand, in
preferring their own new Saints, before the old ones: our late right learned
and famous Professor, Doctor Collins of Cambridge reports. Cont. Eud. page 2.
6.
That in a Church Window in Italy, under the picture of St Paul, was written
Per istum, itur ad Christum: but under the picture of their Saint Dominicus, in
the same window, was written, Sed magis per istum; So highly do people magnify
Saints of their own making.

We know that our English Saints are professedly opposite to the late Roman
Saints, and they have sufficiently declared it; It is related by a Spanish
Writer. Alfonso Viegas p. 798.
In the life of St Francis, that when this Saint was attending Pope Innocent
the third, to get his Franciscan Order confirmed. The Pope dreamed that the
Lateran Church in Rome was falling, and that he saw this poor Saint under
propping it with his shoulders, to keep it from falling, for which, his Order
was confirmed; the same Story is told by the same Writer, of their Saint
Dominicus; and verily these two Orders did much advance the Church of Rome by
their Preaching. We should be glad if our new English Preaching Saints, would
so by their true Doctrine, and Preachments; support the Church of England,
which some of their Brethren have much labored to demolish, and have too too
much prevailed, as all our Cathedrals, and some Collegiate Churches show, and
our very Parecial Churches are tottering; And this surely by the just judgment
of God, is come upon this Land for our sins: for therefore was the Ark of God
taken by the Philistines: as Prosper observes, Prosper de Promis. part. 2. c.
24.
Sic Deus Israel Israscitur peccantibus sacerdotibus, ut etiam Sacratis locis,
suis, vasisque non parcat.] When God is angry for the sins of his Ministers, he
does not spare his own Consecrated places, or Vessels, it follows. -- Metuan
Reges, and Gent^s quae Dei Sacrata vasa, captiva 1 Samuel 5.
retinent,] i. e. he wishes both Rulers, and People, (by the examples of the
plagued Philistines) to beware, that they detain not such Holy Captivated
spoils, (a good lesson for Church-Land, and Lead-buyers,) indeed Judgment 1
Pet. 4. 17.
must begin at the House of God,] which is with us come to pass, by the
assistance of many of our Nobility, Gentry, and Commonalty, who came in
cheerfully with money and Arms, to pull down the pride of Bishops as was
pretended. (But alio fastus, Diog. Laer. in Diog.
Plato said,) and this War was called by their (then Dear) Brethren of
Scotland, Bellum Episcopale. Now by this time, I believe, they perceive by
their own far greater pressures, that, The Judgment which began at the House
of God neither did, or will end there; especially, if this Millinarian design
of Saint-reigning, or Saint-Levelling take place: for so, that, will be
performed, for which the long Parliament (at the beginning thereof) was
petitioned, viz. That they would pull down the mighty from their Seat, and
exalt the humble and meek,] for these are the Meek ones, who say, they must
inherit this Earth.

If they will needs be Saints, yet they are but Earthly Saints, and may without
breach of Charity be suspected to be counterfeit: If the Scriptures tell us of
false Prophets false Apostles, false Brethren, yea and false Christ's too: and
if the Ancient Church observed such, as Austin called Aug. in Psalm. 132.
falsos fideles, and in Ps. 139.
falsos Justos, and he gives us an item how to discern them, thus. Falsi justi,
invident veris justis.] i. e. Those are but false Saints; who envy true Saints:
So, if we find the qualities of such counterfeits in our new Saints, we have
good reason to suspect them to be pseudo-Sancti, and Hypocrites.

Many moderate and prudent men, are of opinion that these new Saints
themselves, do not really believe this pretended reigning of Christ with them
on this Earth: They think that this Doctrine is now set on foot by some
parties, on purpose, only, to be a preparative for their seizing on the Estates
of great Possessors; because they observe that many Preachers have of late
published this Millinarism in their pulpits, and all at the same time, who
formerly meddled not therewith: and also that the new risen Quakers do harp upon
the same string, shrewd signs, that they are directed, and inspired by some
Montanistical, and earthly paraclete: But if these Saints will with patience
stay for this Soveraignity, until the time which the great Apostle has
described, 2 These. 1. 7, 8. viz. When the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from
Heaven, with his mighty Angels in flaming fire.] Then let them take all they
can get, no man will resist or gainsay them. The Lord prepare us all by grace
so, that we may love his appearing, and meet him with joy, and in the mean time
may wish and heartily pray -- Come Lord Jesus.

The Conclusion.
THE Church of England is at this day much dissetled, by many Scandals, and
revivals of old Errors; and it is also disfurnished of many ancient and
laudable usances (as has been showed) and moreover, many other rites of great
concernment, are either quite gone, or much out of use. For now, the
Administration of the Holy Supper (the grand comfort of Christians) is so rare,
that in many congregations, it has not been administered above once in ten
years. The uniformity of public prayer, and worship, which our Ancestors
established, and gloryed in, is quite gone; So is the reverend Decency of
Christian Burial, and the Sacerdotal benediction of Matrimony, and also the
Ecclesiastical cognizance thereof, which surely, should be in the Church,
because, the Apostle not only gives precepts concerning matrimony, but 1 Cor.
7.
also passed an Ecclesiastical censure upon 1 Cor. 5. 5.
the transgressor thereof.

Though all these are taken from us, and many other things also (besides
Ecclesiastical Lively-hoods,) yet (in the name of God,) let us still hold fast
the Faith, and confession of the Holy Trinity even to death; for if that go
away, all Christianity will go with it.

There was in Constantinople, in the days of Theodosius the elder, a parechial
Church* which formerly was called the Church of Alexander, but afterward it
was named Anastasia, i. e. the (...).
Resurrection, and this for many reasons, but principally, because in that
Church, Gregory Nazianzen had revived the Faith and Doctrine of the Trinity by
his Preaching, which before had been by Heretics quite extinguished and
buried, therefore this Church was called the Resurrection, as Sozomen reports,
Soz. l. 7. c. 5
pro resuscitatione Nicaeni Dogmatis, as that poem shows.

Tuque fidem extinctam, quae per mea verba vocasti
Ad lucem, vates dulcis Anastasia.
I pray God, that our Churches, in this point, may not prove Saint Sepulchers,
to bury the Doctrine, faith, and confession of the Trinity, and that we may
never have cause, as that learned Bishop had, to say at his Farewell, with a sad
heart and voice, (b) Vale Naz. Poemat. Sur. Comment. ad An. 1546.
Trinitas, meditatio mea, i. e. Farewell O blessed Trinity my long study, and
Meditation.

Surius, the Carthusian Friar, tells us, that when Martin Luther was lying on
his deathbed, he called to the standers by, in these words; Orate pro Domino
Deo Nostro, and ejus Evangelio, ut ei been succedat.] i. e. pray for our Lord
God, and his Gospel, etc. This, the Friar tells in disgrace of him, as if
Luther thought that God had need of our Prayers. But both the Prayer, and the
intention of that good man was holy, and zealous; I will make no doubt of
concluding this discourse with the like desire.

Good Reader, let us heartily pray for the Holy Trinity, thus far, that the most
sacred, wholesome and necessary Doctrine thereof may prosper, and never be
forgotten, or dis-believed among us. Amen, Amen.

L. Deo.

FINIS.
Courteous Reader, these Books following are printed for Humphrey Moseley, at
the Princes Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard.
Various Histories, with curiosts Discourses in humane Learning, etc.
1. Historical relations of the united Provinces of Flanders, by Cardinal
Bentivoglio: Englished by the Right Honorable Henry Earl of Monmouth. Fol.

2. The History of ^he Wars of Flanders, written in Italian by that learned
and famous Cardinal Bentivoglio; Englished by the Right Honorable Henry E. of
Monmouth. The whole work Illustrated with a Map of the 17. Provinces, and
above 20 Figures of the chief Personages mentioned in this History. Fol.

3. The History of the Wars of the Emperor Justillian, with the Persians,
Goths, and Vandalls, written in Greek by Procopius of Caesaria in eight Books,
translated into English by Sir Henry Holcroft. Knight. Fol.

4. De Bello Belgico, the History of the Low Country Wars, written in Latin
by Famianus Strada, in English by Sir Robert Stapylton, Illustrated with diverse
Figures. Fol.

5. The use of passions, written by I. F. Senalt, and put into English by
Henry, Earl of Monmouth 8o.

6. Judicious and Select Essaies and observations by the Renowned and learned
Knight, Sir Walter Raleigh, with his Apology for his Voyage to Guiana. Fol.

7. The Complete Horseman and Expert Farrier in two books, by Thomas De Gray
Esquire, newly printed with additions. in 4o 1656.

8. Unheard Of curiosities concerning the Talismanicall Sculpture of the
Persians. The Horoscope of the Patriarchs, and the judgment of the Stars, by
J. Gaffarel, Englished by Edmund Chil^ead, Chapter Chapter Oxon.

9. The History of the Inquisition, composed by R. F. Servita, the compiler of
the History of the Council of Trent, in 8o. translated out of Italian.

10. Biathanatos, a Paradox of self-murder, by Dr. Jo. Done, Dean of St.
Paul's London.

11. The Gentleman's Exercise, or the Art of limning, painting, and blazoning of
Coats and Arms, etc. by Henry Peacham Master of Arts, 4o.

12. M. Howels History of Lewis the thirteenth King of France, with the life of
his Cardinal de Richelien. Fol.

13. Mr. Howels Epistolae Ho elianae. Familiar letters Domestic and Foreign, in
six Sections partly Historical, Political, Philosophical, the first Volume
with Additions. 8o.

14. Mr. Howels new volume of Familiar letters partly Historical, Political,
Philosophical, the second Volume with many Additions. 8^.

15. Mr. Howels third Volume of Additionall letters of a fresher date, never
before published. 8o.

16. Mr. Howels Dodono's Grove, or the Vocal Forest, the first part, in 12o.
with many Additions.

17. Mr. Howels Dodona's Grove, or the Vocal Forest, the second part, in 8o,
never printed before.

18. Mr. Howels, Englands Tears for the present wars.

19. Mr. Howels F^re-eminence and Pedigree of Parliament, in 12o.

20. Mr. Howels Instructions and Directions for Foreign Travels, in 12o with
diverse Additions for Traveling into Turkey, and the Levant parts.

21. Mr. Howels Vote, or a Poem Royal presented to his late Majesty, in 4o.

22. Mr. Howels Angliae Suspiria and lachrymae, in 12o.

23. Marquis Virgilio Malvezzi's Romulus and Tarquin, Englished by Hen. Earl of
Monmouth, in 12o.

24 Marquis Virgilio Malvezzi's David persecuted, Englished by To. Ashly. Gent.
in 12o.

25. Marquis Virgilio Malvezzi, of the success and chief events of the
Monarchy of Spain, in the year 1639. of the revolt of the Catalonians from the
King of Spain. Englished by Rob. Gentilis Gent. in. 12o.

26. Marquis Virgilio Malvezzi's considerations on the lives of Alcibiades, and
Coriolanus, Two famous Roman Commanders, Englished by Rob. Gentilis.

27. Policy unveiled, or Maxims of State, done into English by the Translator
of Gusman, in 4o.

28. Gracious priveleges granted by the King of Spain to our English
Merchants, in 4o.

29. Englands looking in and out by Sr. Ralph Maddison, Knight, 4o.

30. Gratiae Ludentes, jests from the University.

31. The Antipathy between the French and the Spanyard, an ingenious
translation out of Spanish.

32. Mr. Birds grounds of Grammar, in 8o.

33. Mr. Bulwers Phylocophus, or the Deaf and Dumb man's friend, in 12o.

34. Mr. Bulwers Pathomyotomia, or a Dessection of the significative Muscles of
the Affections of the Mind, 12o.

35. An Itinenary containing a voyage made through Italy in the years 1646,
1647. illustrated with diverse Figures of Antiquity, never before published, by
John Raymond, Gent. in 120.

Books in Humanity lately Printed.
36. THe History of Life and Death, or the prolongation of Life, written by
Francis Lord Verulam, Viscount St. Alban in 12o.

37. The natural and experimental History of Winds, written in Latin by
Francis Lord Verulam Viscount St. Alban, translated into English by an admirer
of the learned Author. 12o.

38. The life of the most learned Father Paul, Author of the History of the
Council of Trent, translated out of Italian by a person of quality. 8o.

39. Paradoxes, Problems, Characters, etc. by Dr. Donn Dean of St Paul's, to
which is added a book of Epigrams, written in Latin by the same Author,
translated by Jasper Main. D. D. 12o.

40. Ignatius his conclave, a Satyr written by Dr. Done Deane of St. Paul's.
12o.

41. A Discovery of subterraneall Treasure, viz. of all manner of Mines and
Minerals, from the Gold, to the Coal, with plain directions and rules for the
finding of them in all Kingdoms, and Countries, written by Gabriel Platt. 4o.

42. Richardi Gardener, ex Aede Christi Oxon. specimen Oratorium. 8o.

43. The Sovereignty of the British Seas, written by that learned Knight Sir
John Burroughes Keeper of the Records in the Tower. 12o.

44. Grammatica Burlesa, or a new English Grammar made plain and easy for
Teacher and Scholar, composed by Edward Burles Master of Arts.

45. Artificial Arithmetic containing the Quintessence of the Golden Rule,
the true valuation of all Annuities, also to find the distance at one station;
An Art never till now published, useful for Merchants, Gunners, Seamen, and
Surveyors, by Robert Iager of Sandwich in Kent Gent.

46. Natural and Divine Contemplations of the Passions and Faculties of the
Soul of Man in three books, written by Nicholas Moseley Esquire. 8o.

Several Sermons, with other exeellent Tracts in Divinity, written by some
most eminent and learned Bishops, and Orthodox Divines.
47. A Manual of private Devotions and Meditations for every day in the week,
by the right reverend Father in God, Lancelot Andrews late Lord Bishop of
Winchester, in 24o.

48. A Manual of Directions for the Sick, with many sweet Meditations and
Devotions, by the right reverend Father in God, Lancelot Andrews, late Lord
Bishop of Winchester, in 24o.

49. Ten Sermons upon several occasions, preached at St. Paul's Cross, and
elsewhere, by the Right reverend Father in God, Arthur Lake, late Lord Bishop
of Bath and Wells. in 4o.

50. Six Sermons upon several occasions, preached at Court before the Kings
Majesty, and elsewhere, by that late learned and reverend Divine, John Done,
Dr. in Divinity, and Dean of St. Paul's London, in 4o.

51. Private Devotions in six Letanies, with directions and Prayers for the
days of the week and Sacrament, for the hour of Death, and the day of
judgment, and two daily prayers, for the Morning and Evening, written by Dr.
Henry Valentine, 24o.

52. A Key to the Key of Scripture, or an exposition with notes upon the
Epistle to the Romans, the three first chapters, by William Sclater, Dr. in
Divinity and Minister of the word of God at Pi^mister in Somersetshire, in 4o.

53. Sarah and Hagar, or the sixteenth Chapter of Genesis opened in ninteen
Sermons, being the first legitimate Essay of the pious labors of that learned,
Orthodox, and indefatigable Preacher of the Gospel, Mr. Josias Shute. B. D.
and above 33 years Rector of St Mary Woolneth in Lombardstreet, in Folio.

54. Christ's Tears with his love and affection toward Jerusalem, delivered in
sundry Sermons upon Luke 19. v. 41, 42. by Richard Maden, B. D. late of
Magdalen College in Oam. in. 4o.

55, Three Sermons viz. The benefit of contentation, The Affinity of the
faithful, and The lost sheep found, by Mr. Henry Smith. 4o.

56. Ten Sermons preached upon several Sundays, and Saints days, by Peter
Hausted Mr. in Arts, and Curat at Vppingham in Rutland in 4o.

57. Eighteen Sermons preached upon the Incarnation and Nativity of our blessed
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, wherein the greatest mysteries of God-liness are
unfolded, to the capacity of the Weakest Christian, by John Dawson Oxon. in 4o.

58. The History of the Defenders of the Faith, discoursing the state of
Religion in England during the Reigns of King Henry 8. Edward 6. Queen Mary,
and Queen Elizabeth. by C. L. in 4o.

59. Christian Divinity, written by Edmund Reeve Batchelour in divinity, in 4o.

60. The Communion-Book Catechism expounded by Edmund Reeve Batchelour in
Divinity, in 4o.

61. The true and absolute Bishop, wherein is showed how Christ is our only
shepherd and Bishop of our souls, by Nicolas Darton, Master in Arts, in 4o.

62. A description of the Newborn Christian, or a lively pattern of the Saint
militant child of God, written by Nicholas Hunt, Master in Arts, in 4o.

63. Divine Meditations upon the 91. Psalm, and on the History of Agag King of
Amalek, with an Essay of Friendship written by an honorable person,

64. An Historical Anatomy of Christian Melancholy, by Edmund Gregory Oxon, in
8o.

65. Lazarus his Rest, a Sermon preached at the Funeral of that pious,
learned, and Orthodox Divine, Mr. Ephrim Vdall, by Thomas, Reeve, B. D:

66. The Survey of Man, in a Sermon as it was delivered by Mr. John Bishop at
his Fathers funeral.

67. Enchiridion containing institutions Divine and Moral, written by Francis
Quarles, 24o.

Books in Divinity Lately Printed.
68. THE Psalms of David from the new Translation of the Bible, turned into
Meter, to be sung after the old tunes used in the Churches; by the Right
Reverend Father in God Henry King Bishop of Chichester. 12o.

69. Choice Music for three voices, and a thorough-Base composed by Mr. Henry
and Mr. William Laws, brothers and servants to his late Majesty; with diverse
Elegies set in Music by several friends upon the death of Mr. William Laws.
4o.

70. Letters between the Lord George Digby and Sir Kenelm Digby Knight,
concerning Religion. 8o.

71. Essaies in Divinity by Dr. Donn. D. of Saint Paul's, before he entered into
holy orders. 12o.

72. Public devotions, or a Collection of Prayers used at sundry times by
diverse Reverend and godly Divines, together with divine implorations, and an
introduction to prayer. 24o.

73. The Sinners Tears in Meditations and Prayers by Thomas Fettiplace of
Peterhouse Camb. 12o.

74. Quaestio Quodlibetica, or a discourse whether it be lawful to take use
for money by R. F. Knight.

75. Sions Prospect in its first view presented in a summary of Divine Truths
consenting with the faith professed by the Church of England, confirmed from
Scripture and reason, composed by Mr. Robert Mossom Minister: 4o.

76. Flores Solitudinis, certain rare and elegant pieces, viz. Two excellent
discourses. 1 Of Temperance and Patience. 2 Of life and death by I. E.
Nierembergius. The World contemned; by Eucherius, Bishop of Lions. And the life
of Paulinus Bishop of Nola, collected in his sickness and retirement, by Henry
Vaughan.

77. 14. Sermons on several Texts of Scripture with a Catechism written by
Willam Gay Rector of Buckland.

Choice Poems with excellent Translations, by the most eminent wits of this age.
78. EPigrammata Thomae Mori Angli, in 16o.

79. Fragmenta Aurea, a collection of all the incomparable Pieces written by
Sr. John Sucklin Knight, 8o.

80. Poems, Songs, Sonnets, Elegies, and Letters by John Done, with Elegies on
the Authors death, to which is added diverse Copies under his own hand, never
before in print. 8o.

81. Juvenalls 16. Satyrs translated by Sir Robert Stapylton, wherein is
contained a Survey of the manners and actions of Mankind, with Annotations, 8o.

82. Musaeus on the loves of Hero and Leander, with Leander's letter to Hero,
and her answer, taken out of Ovid, with Annotations by Sir Robert Staplyton, in
12o.

83. Poems, etc. written by Mr. Edward Waller of Beconsfield, Esquire. 8o.

84. Pastor Fido, the faithful Shepherd, a Pastoral, newly translated out of
the Original, by Mr. Richard Fanshaw, Esquire 4o.

85. Poems, with a discovery of the Civil Wars of Rome, by Mr. Richard
Fanshaw, Esquire in 4o.

86. Europa, Cupid crucified, Venus Vigils, with Annotations, by Thomas
Stanley, Esquire 8o.

87. Coopers Hill, a Poem written by Mr, John Denham Esquire the 2d Edition with
Additions, 4o.

88. Medea, a Tragedy written in Latin by Lucius Annaeus Seneca, Englished by
Mr. Edward Sherburu Esquire with Annotations, 8o:

89. Seneca's answer to Lucilius his Quaere, why good men suffer misfortunes,
seeing there is a Divine providence, Englished by Mr. Edward Sherburu, Esquire 8o.

90. Madagascar with other Poems, by Sr. W. Davenant.

91. Poems with a Masque by Thomas Carew Esquire. Gentleman of the Privy Chamber
to his late Majesty, revived and enlarged with Aditions, 8o.

92. Poems of Mr. John Milton, with a Masque presented at Ludlow Castle before
the Earl of Bridgewater, then President of Wales, 8o.

93. Poems, etc. with a Masque called The Triumph of Beauty, by James Shirley,
Gent. 8o.

94. The Mistress, or several Copies of love-verses, written by Mr. Abraham
Cowley. 8^.

95. Stepps to the Temple, sacred Poems with the delights of the M^ses upon
several occasions by Richard Crashaw of Cambridge. 12o.

96. Divine Poems written by Francis Quarles 8o.

97. Clarastella, with other occasional Poems, Elegies, Epigrams, Satyrs,
written by R. Heath. Esquire:

98. Poems written by Mr. William Shakspeare.

99. Arnalte and Lucenda, or the melancholy Knight, a Poem translated by L.
Laurence. 4o.

100. The Odes of Casimire, translated, by Mr. George Hills of Newark. 12o.

101. Alarm to Poets by I. L. 4o.

102. Fragmenta Poetica or Miscellanies of Poetical Musings, by Nich. Murford
Gent. 12o.

103. Hymnus Tabaci, Authore Raphaele Thorio. 8o.

104. Hymnus Tabaci, a Poem in Honor of Tobacco Heroically composed by Raphael
Thorius, made English by Peter Hausted Mr. of Arts, Camb. 8o.

105. ^lor Iscanus, a Collection of some select Poems, and Translations,
written by Mr. Henry Vaughan

106. Argalus and Parthenia by Francis Quarles.

107. The Academy of Complements wherein Ladies, Gentlewomen, Scholars and
strangers may accommodate their Courtly practice with gentile Ceremonies,
complementall, amorous, high expressions and forms of speaking, or writing of
Letters, most in fashion, with Additions of many witty Poems and pleasant New
songs. 12o.

Poems lately Printed.
107. Poems and Translations, the complete works of Thomas Stanley Esquire 8o.

105. Choice Poems with Comedies and Trage dies, by Mr. William Cartwright late
student of Chapter Chapter in Oxford, and Proctor of the University. The Aires and
songs set by Mr. Henry Laws, servant to his late Majesty in his public and
private Music.

108. Herodian of Alexandria, his Imperial History of twenty Roman Caesar's,
and Emperors of his time, first written in Greek, and now converted into an
Heroic Poem by C. Stapleton. 4o.

109. The Card of Courtship or the Language of love fitted to the humors of
all degrees, sexes and Conditions.

Incomparable Comedies and Tragedies written by several Ingenious Authors.
110. COmedies and Tragedies written by Francis Beaumont, and John Fletcher,
never printed before, and now published by the Authors Originals Copies,
containing 34 plays, and a Masque, Fol.

111. The Elder Brother

112. The Scornful Lady

113. The Woman Hater

114. Thierry and Theodoret

115. Cupids Revenge

116. Monsieur Thomas

117. The two Noble kinsmen by Francis Beaumont. and John Fletcher.

118. The Country Captain and the Variety, two Comedies written by a person of
Honor. 12o.

119. The Sophy, a Tragedy written by Mr. John Denham Esquire Fol.

120. Brennoralt, or the discontented Colonel, a Tragedy written by Sir John
Suckling Knight. 4o.

121. The deserving Favorite by Mr. Lod. Carlel.

122. Albovine King of Lombardy

123. The Just Italian

124. The Cruel Brother

125. The Unfortunate Lovers

126. Love and Honor by Sir William Davenant.

127. The Sophister by Dr. Z.

128. Revenge of Bussy D Ambois

129. Byrons Conspiracy

130. Byrons Tragedy. George Chapman

131. Contention for Honor and riches

132. Triumph of Peace in 4o J. Shirley

133. The Duchess of Malfy by John Webster.

134. The Northern lass by Richard Broom.

135. The Cid, a Tragicomedy translated out of French by Joseph Rutter Gent.
12o.

136. The Wild Goose Chase a Comedy written by Fr. Beaumont and John Fletcher.
Fol.

137. The Widow, a Comedy by Ben: Johnson, John Fletcher, and T: Middleton.

138. The Changling by T Middleton and Rowley. 4o.

239. Six new plays. 1. The Brothers. 2. The Sisters. 3. The Doubtful Heir.
4. The Imposture. 5. The Cardinal. 6. The Court-Secret, by I. Shirley.

140. Five new plays. 1. A mad couple well matched. 2 The Novella. 3. The Court
Beggar. 4. The City Wit. 5: The Damoiselle, by Richard Broom

141. The Tragedy of Alphonsus Emperor of Germany, by George Chapman 4o.

142. Two Tragedies. viz. Cleopatra Queen of Egypt, and Agrippina Empress of
Rome, by Thomas May Esquire.

Plays lately Printed.
143. THe Gentleman of Venice, A Tragi-Comedy by James Shirley.

144. The Politician, a Tragedy by James Shirley.

145. The Passionate Lovers in two parts, by Mr. Lodowick Carlel.

146. Mirza, A Tragedy, really acted in Persia with Annotations by Robert
Barron Esquire.

147. Three new plays, viz. 1 The Bashful Lover. 2 The Guardian. 3 The very
woman, by Phillip Massenger, Gent.

New and Excellent Romances.
148. CAssandra the Famed Romance, the whole work in five parts, written in
French, and now Elegantly rendered into English by a person of quality, Fol.

149. Ibrahim or the Illustrious Bassa, an excellent new Romance, the whole
work in four parts, written in French by Monsieur de Scudery, and now
Englished by Henry Cogan Gent. Fol.

150. Artamenes, or the Grand Cyrus, an excellent new Romance, written by that
famous wit of France, Monsieur de Scudery Governor of Nostre-dame, and now
Englished by F. G. Esquire. Fol.

151. The continuation of Artamenes, or the Grand Cyrus, that excellent new
Romance, being the third and fourth parts, written by that Famous wit of
France, Monsieur de Scudery Governor of Nostre-dame, and now Englished by F.
G. Esquire. Fol.

152. The third Volume of Artamenes or the Grand Cyrus, that excellent new
Romance, being the fifth and sixth parts, written by that famous wit of France,
Monsieur de Scudery Governor of Nostre-dame, and now Englished by F. G. Esquire.
Fol.

153. The fourth Volume of Artamenes, or the Grand Cyrus, that Excellent new
Romance, being the seventh and eighth parts, written by that famous Wit of
France, Monsieur de Scudery Governor of Nostre-dame, and now englished by F.
G. Esquire. Fol.

154. The History of Polexander, a Romance, Englished by William Brown Gent.
Fol.

155. The History of the Banished Virgin, a Romance translated by I. H. Esquire.
Fol.

156. Casandra the famed Romance, the three first books, Elegantly rendered into
English by the Right Honorable the Lord George Digby. 8o.

157. The History of Philoxipes and Policrite, a Romance, made English by an
honorable person. 8o.

158. The History of Don Fenise, a new Romance, written in Spanish by Francisco
de las Coveras, Englished by a Person of Honor. 8o.

159. Aurora Ismenia, and the Prince, with Oronta the Cyprian Virgin,
translated by Thomas Stanley Esquire.

160. Cleopatra, a new Romance, Englished by a Gent. of the Inner Temple, in 8o.

161. La Stratonica or the unfortunate Qeene, a new Romance, translated into
English.

162. Choice Novels, and Amorous Tales written by the most refined wits of
Italy, newly translated into English by a person of quality. in 8o.

163. Nissena, a new Romance, Englished by an Honorable person, in 8o.

164 Dianea, a new Romance, written in Italian by Gio Francisco Loredano, a
Noble Venetian, Englished by Sir Aston Cockaine, in 8o.

Books lately printed for Humphrey Moseley.
165. A German Diet, or the Balance of Europe, wherein the power and
weakness, glory, and reproach, Virtues and Vices, Plenty and Wants, Advantages
and Defects, Antiquity and Modernes of all the Kingdoms and states of
Christendom are Impartially poised by James Howel Esquire. Fol.

166. Renatus des Cartes', excellent compendium of Music with necessary and
juditious Animadversions thereupon, by a person of Honor, Illustrated with
diverse figures in 4o.

167. The Scarlet Gown, or the History of the lives of all the present
Cardinals of Rome, written in Italian and Englished by Henry Cogan, Gent. 8o.

168. A discourse of constancy, by Justus Lipsius, faithfully Englished by R.
G. sometimes of Chapter Chapter Oxon. containing many sweet consolations for all that
are afflicted in body, or in mind. 12o.

169. Le Chemin abrege, or a compendious Method for the attaining of Sciences
in a short time, with the Statutes of the Academy of Cardinal Richelieu,
Englished by R. G. G^nt.

170. The Academy of Eloquence, containing a complete English Rhethorick, with
common places and forms to speak and write fluently according to the present
mode, together with letters amorous and moral, by Thomas Blunt. Gent. 12o.

171. The Secretary in fashion, or a compendious and refined way of expression
in all manner of letters, with instructions how to write letters of all sorts,
composed in French by P. St de la Serre, in 8o.

172. Curia Politiae, or the Apologies of several Princes justifying to the
World their most eminent actions by the strength of Reason, and the most exact
rules of Policy, by the acurate pen of Monsieur de Scudery, Governer of
Nostre-dame, and now Englished with the figures of many Emperors and Kings.

173. (...), or observations on the present manners of the English, briefly
anatomizing the living by the dead, with an useful detection of the
Mounte-banks of both sexes by Richard Whitlock M. D. late fellow of all Souls
College in Oxon 8o.

174. Scholae Wintoniensis Phrases Latinae The Latin Phrases of Winchester
School, corrected and much augmented with Poeticalls added, and four Tracts. 1.
Of words not to be used by elegant Latinists. 2. The difference of words like
one another in sound or signification. 3. Some words governing a subjunctive
mood not mentioned in Lillies Grammar. 4. Concerning (...) and (...) for
entering children upon making of Themes, by H. Robinson D. D. sometimes
schoolmaster of Winchester College, published for the common use and benefit
of Grammar schools.

175. Atheismus Vapulans, or a Treatise against Atheism rationally confuting
the Atheists of these times by William Towers, late student of Chapter Chapter Oxon.

176. De Juramenti Obligatione promissorij Praelectiones Septem. Of the
Obligation of Promissory Oaths, seven Lectures read in the Divinity Schools at
Oxford by Robert Sanderson D. D. and englished by his late Majesty's
appointment. 8o.

177. Politic Maxims and observations written by the most learned Hugo
Grotius, translated for the ease and benefit of the English statesmen by H. C.
S. T. B.

178. The perfect Horseman or the experienced secrets of Mr. Markhams fifty
years practice, showing how a man may come to be a General Horse -- man by
the knowledge of these seven Offices, Viz. The Breeder Feeder Ambler Rider
Keeper Buyer Farrier. Published with some Additions by Lancelor Therford
Practitioner in the same Art. 40. years.

179. Divine Poems written by Tho. Washborn. B. D.

180. Buxtorf's Epitome of his Hebrew Grammar, Englished by John Davis Mr. of
Arts.

181. Fasciculus Poemalum and Epigrammatum Miscelaneorum Authore Iohanne Done.
D. D.

182. Poemata Graeca and Latina, a Gulielmo Cartwright, C. C. Oxon.

183. The Marrow of Complements, containing Amorous Epistles, complementall
entertainments, Dialogues, songs, and Sonnets, presentations of gifts,
instructions for Woers, with other pleasant passages.

Books newly Printed for Humphrey Moseley.
184 THe fifth Volume of Artamenes, or the Grand Gyrus, that excellent new
Romance; being tho ninth and tenth Parts: Written by that famous wit of France,
Monsieur de Scudery, Governor of Nostredame, and now englished by F. G. Esquire.

185 Elise, or, Innocence guilty; a new Romance; translated into English by
John Jennings Gent.

186 Clelia, an excellent new Romance, written in French, by the exquisite pen
of Monsieur de Scudery, Governor of Nostredame de la Guard.

187 Coralbo, a new Romance in three Books; written in Italian by Cavalier Gio
Francesco Biondi, and now faithfully rendered into English.

188 The Lusiad, or, Portugalls Historical Poem; translated into English by
Richard Fanshaw, Esquire.

189 The History of Philosophy, the first Part; by Tho. Stanley, Esquire.

190 The History of the Kingdom of Naples, with the lives of all their Kings;
written by that famous Antiquary, Scipio Mazzella, with an Addition of what
happened during the Rebellion of Massaniello, and continued to this present
year, by I. H. Esquire.

191 Mr. Howel's fourth Volume of familiar Letters, never published before.

192 Manziny, his most exquisite Academicall Discourses upon several choice
Subjects; turned into French by that famous Wit, Monsieur de Scudery, and into
English by an Honorable Lady.

193 The English Treasury of Wit and Language, digested into common places, by
John Cotg^rave, Gent.

194 Lusus Serius, a Philosophical Discourse, of the superiority of the
Creatures, by Michael Mayerus.

195 The Aphorisms of Hippocrates, with a short Comment on them; taken out of
Galen, Heurnius, Fuchsius, etc.

196 Euphrates, or, the waters of the East, by Eugenius Philalethes.

197. Hermeticall Physic, or the way to preserve and restore health, by Henry
Nollius Chemist, and Englished by Henry Vaughan, Gent.

198 Dr Valentine's private Devotions in Welsh.

199 Mantuan's Eclogues, Englished by Tho. Harvey.

200 Medici Catholicon; or, a Catholic Medicine for the Diseases of Charity;
by John Collop, Dr. of Physic.

201 Poesis Rediviva, or, Poetry revived, by John Collop, M. D.

202 The Saints Expectation and Reward; A Sermon at the Funeral of Mr. Thomas
Wiborow, by Michael Thomas Minister of Stockden in Shropshire.

203 A Sermon against Murder, occasioned by the Massacre of the Protestants in
the Dukedom of Savoy; by William Towers B. D.

Books Printed this Term.
204. RAgguagli di Parnasso; or, Advertisements from Parnassus: Written in
Italian by that Faous Roman Trajano Bocalini, and put into English by the right
Honorable, Henry Earl of Monmouth.

205 A complete History of the Lives and Reigns of Mary Queen of Scotland, and
of her Son and Successor, James the Sixth, King of Great Britain, France, and
Ireland, by William Sanderson.

206 The Destruction of Troy, an Essay upon the second Book of Virgil's Aeneis,
by John Denham, Esquire.

207 Poems, viz. 1 Miscellanies. 2. The Mistress, or Love-Verses. 3.
Pindarique Odes: 4. Davideis, or, a sacred Poem of the Troubles of David; by A.
Cowley.

208 God Incarnate, showing that Jesus Christ is the Only, and the most high
God. In four Books, containing Animadversions on Dr. Lushingtons Comentary
upon the Epistle to the Hebrews, by Edmund Porter, late of St. John's Coll.
Camb. Prebend of Norwich.

209 Ducis Buckinghami in Ream Insulam Expeditio: Authore Edovardo Domino
Herbert, Barone de Cherbury. Quam publici Juris fecit Timotheus Balduinus, L.
L. Doctor e Coll. Omn. Anim. apud Oxonienses Socius.

210. The Siege of Antwerp, written in Latin by Famianus Strada, Englished by
Tho. Laneaster, Gent.

211 The History of Philosophy, the second Part, by Tho. Stanley Esquire.

212 Clelia, an excellent new Romance, the second Volume: Written in French by
the exquisite Pen of Monsieur de Scudery, Governor of Nostredame.

213 Argalus and Parthenia, written by Francis Quarles, and Illustrated with 30
Figures, cut in Copper relating to the Story.

214 Practical Arithmetic, in whole Numbers, Fractions, and Decimals; fitted
to the several uses of Gentlemen, Merchants, or Tradesmen; by Richard
Rawlins, Professor thereof, in Great Yarmouth.

These Books are now in the Press.
215. GLossographia, or a Dictionary interpreting all such hard words, whether
Hebrew, Greek, Latin, Italian, Spanish, French, etc. as are now used in our
Refined English tongue: Also the Terms of Divinity, Law, Physic,
Mathematics, Heraldry, Anatomy, War, Music, Architecture, explained by Thomas
Blount of the Inner Temple, Bar. rester.

216. Astrea, A Romance written in French by Messire Honor D'Vrfe, and now
Translated into English.

217. An Introduction into the Greek Tongue most plainly delivering the
principal matters of the Grammar thereof, composed for their sakes which
understand not Latin; and yet are desirous to have competent Knowledge in that
language, by Edmund Reeve. B. D. Instructor of all the Original Tongues.

218 The Rules of the Latin Grammar construed, which were omitted in the Book
called Lillies Rules, and the Syntaxis construed by Edmund Reeve. B. D.
Instructor in all the Original Tongues.

219. Politic Discourses written in Italian by Paul Peruta, Gent. of Venice,
Englished by the Right Honorable Henry Earl of Monmouth.

221. Of the Passion of the Soul, and contentment of mind, by Peter du Moulin,
the Son. D. D.

These Books I do purpose to Print very speedtly.
222 HEsperides, or The Muses Garden, stored with variety of the choicest
flowers of Language and Learning, wherein grave and serious minds may be
refreshed with the sollid fruits of Philosophy, History, and Cosmography,
intermixed with the sweets of Poetry; And the ceremonious Courtier, The
Passionate Amorist, with his admired Lady, may gather Rarities Suitable to
their Fancies, by John Evans, Gent.

223. Mosaicall Philosophy, written in Latin by Robert Fludd, Esquire and Dr in
Physic, and by himself afterward translated into English.

224. Disquisitions upon the Nativity of our Savior Jesus Christ, by the
Honorable Sir Isaac Wake.

225 The Expedition of the Duke of Buckingham into the Isle of Ree, written in
Latin by the Right Honorable Edward Lord Herbert of Cherbury, etc. and now
rendered into English.

226. The Life of A Satyricall Puppy, Called Nim, who worrieth all those
Satyrists he knows, and barks at the rest by W. D.

227. The Anatomy of Profane Love, written in Italian, and Englished by I. S.

228. Nicholas Flaminell his Exposition of his Hyeroglyphicall Figures, with
the secret Book of Artephius and the Epistle of John Pontanus concernig the
Philosophers Stone. With an Addition upon the same Subject written by Synetius
that most Learned and Famous Grecian Abbot, never Printed before.

229. Brittain's Ida written by that Renowned Poet Edmund Spencer.

230. A Discovery of the Hollanders trade of Fishing, and their Circumventing
us therein, with the means how to make profit of the fishing, by which they
have made and yet do reap so great a benifit, by Sir W. Munson Knight sometimes
Vice Admiral of England.

231. Sir, Charles Cornwallis his Negotiation as Leiger Ambassador for Spain.

232. A Discovery of the State of Christendom, containing many secret passages
and hidden Mysteries of the times both past and present with Historical and
Political Observations thereon by a person of Honor.

233. A Grammar Lecture with Elegies, written by Francis Beaumont Gent.

234. A Discourse touching peace with Spain and retaining the Netherlands in
Protection written by Sir Walter Raleigh Knight; presetned to his Majesty.

235. A Discourse of the War of Germany with the Lord Chancellor Bacon's
Petition and Submission to the House of Peers.

236. Andrea Palladio his four Books of Architecture treating of private
Buildings, Highwayes, Piazzas exercising places and Temples, Translated out of
Italion, by, H. L. Esquire

237: The Distresses.

238. The fair Favorite.

239. News from Plymouth.

240. The Seige. By Sir W. Davenant

241. The Spartan Ladies.

242. The Discreet Lover or the Fool would be a Favorite

243. Osman the Great Turk or the Noble Servant. By Lodewick Carlell Gent.

244. More Dissemblers then Women.

245. Women beware Women.

246. No Wit Help like a Woman's. By Tho. Midleton, Gent.


