Poor Robin's PROPHECY.

BEING A true Astronomical Prediction of the Beginning, Continuance, and
Catastrophe of the ensuing Year 1679. And what will be the Principal Actions
therein.

With Allowance.

LONDON, Printed for W. A. 1679.

Poor Robin's Prophecy.
IT is not long since we had published a certain Pamphlet, entitled the
English Oracle, something claiming affinity with this: The Title of which was
not confirmed by the Purport. For instead thereof we had a long Circumlocution,
condemning the Noble Science of Astronomy, and all it is Speculations; although
I esteem him no competent Judge of any matter whereof he has not some
knowledge; and consequently a too bold sentencer of it. That there may be
Predictions learnt from that Siderial School is undeniable; being consonant to
the judgment of all Antiquity. The reading of Jerusalem's Ruin among the Stars,
preceded the accomplishment many years. Nay Postel, a Christian Writer, does
take God and Christ to witness, That in the Hebrew Characters among the Stars
(Vidit omnia quae in Rerum naturae constituta sunt,) He saw all things that
were constituted by Nature. Nor was Postell Lunatic when he broke forth into
that Protestation. But I stay no longer on this Circumstance, lest I should
seem guilty of that which I condemn.

If we may credit Albumazar and Ptolemy about the motions of Celestial Bodies,
whose influence does excitate and procure continual change in this lower
Region, we shall find this Year, That the Moon's Eclipse will be the cause of
many mutations: Her Eclipse I find by my skill will be in one of the Twelve
Months of the Year.

Winter.
But let us take the beginning and end of the Year in their due course; And
first of all for Winter, according to my account is the first Astronomical
Quarter of the Year; and shall have a sooner beginning and longer duration with
poor Men than with Rich. This season shall be subject to so great Frosts, that
unless looked to, Charity will not only catch cold, but be congealed to a stone;
and so instead of its designed kindness, prove the contrary by Oppression. Also
I portend that Rich Usurers Purses this Quarter will be so frozen up, that
nothing will be found efficacious enough to thaw them but the warm breath of
Usury, or some hopeful Mortgage.

Of the Spring.
I predict concerning that season, by the superior Planets, that there will be
such a Springtide of Usurers, Brokers, Projectors, Trencher-Flies, cast up
this season, when all things are Crescent, that though they nip not (like
Pharaoh's Frogs) every flower of the Field, yet will they hurt the most part of
all the wholesome Herbs they come to, unless some strong Easterly Wind drive
them up the Hill, to that leaveless Tree that bears no fruit of it self, but
rids Vermin from others.

Of the Summer Quarter.
Summer, according to the Computation of Astronomy, takes its beginning the
twelfth of June. In this Quarter Beggars scorn Barns, and lie in Ditches. And
there shall be such a fervent fiery heat abounding, that many unprotected shall
not dare to go over the Threshold of the Door, lest some Bailiff (a more
hurtful and dangerous object than a Hare) chance to cross their way with ill
luck a quarter of a Year after. I portend likewise, That through the extremity
of the season, the fat Consciences of diverse Men will be melted away into
nothing.

Autumn.
This last Quarter of the Year begins by my Account when Ceres joyfully
expects a fruitful Harvest; after long wishings and longer Toylings. About the
latter end of this Quarter, the Chimny-Corner is frequented, yea and many will
be so inflamed with sitting in the Alehouse, that their Mamsy-Noses will be
able to light a Candle, and serve in the Night instead of a Lanthorn.

Now for some General Predictions on the whole Year.
This Year 1679. The Golden Number shall have no place in poor Men's Purses.
And this Year many shall go sober into Taverns, where, by a certain
Metamorphosis, they come out Mad. This Year shall be dubbed many Ale-quaffers
into fellowship with that ancient and much desired Order of Red-Roses.
Likewise, This Year shall be born many strange Children, that when they come to
Age, will be so ignorant that they shall not know their own Fathers. And
whereas the Eclipse of the Moon this Year is short; it signifies to us that
Women's love shall be very short and Momentary; insomuch that hereupon diverse
great storms shall happen, and many loud Winds, together also with incredible
Hailstones, (no lesser than Joint-stools) shall fall upon Men's heads.

I portend also, that sundry other Occurrences shall happen; Many strange and
woeful Diseases shall Reign: as hollowness of the Heart, infirmities of the
Tongue; so that, that Member shall play the Harlot, and lie with all Men.

Moreover also, I foretell to those Patient Things, whose Wives are as light as
their Weights, that they shall be troubled with great swellings in the Brows,
and unless that Distemper be met and prevented, it will certainly break out
into that painful Disease of the Horn-Cholick. Likewise by reason of the
abounding of Cherries, Plums, and other stony-fruit this Year; by eating
thereof many Men shall be troubled with a Distemper of such a Nature as none
can cure but Cunning Women.

I Predict further; many Citizens, Sailors, Advocators and others, shall have
great luck in Hunting: for though the Game be too quick of foot which they
follow, yet going homewards, they shall have the fortune to meet with some
desirable Purchase.

Likewise, This Year I infallibly Prognosticate that Silver shall be dearer
than Tin, and Gold more precious than Lead; and, as it is thought by some, so
much scarcity of either, that a whole Teem of Knights of the Post shall not be
able to draw 100l. through Cheapside, without the help of a substantial
Fore-horse.

And lastly, I Prognosticate, That Hens, Capons, Geese, and such Dainties,
shall little haunt poor Men's Tables this Year; but fly quite away to fat Churls
Houses. And for those Misers, although few things concern them in this
Prophecy, yet let me give them this Caveat, That having Clothes enough, they
keep themselves warm; and having Coals enough, they provide good Fires; and
having a liberal Purse, they go to Bed always with a Cup of Malaga; and having
a good Wife, they make much of her: and then for ought I can perceive by my
skill, they are like to live as long as they can, though not so long as they
would; and not die one hour before their time.

THE END.

