Moral and Political FABLES, ANCIENT and MODERN.

Done into Measurd PROSE intermixd with RYME.

By Dr. WALTER POPE, Fellow of the ROYAL SOCIETY.

Omne tulit punctum, qui miscuit Utile, Dulci.
Lectorem Delectando, pariterque Monendo.
Hor. LONDON: Printed for Thomas Horn, at the South-Entrance of the
Royal Exchange. School.

To the Right Honorable Sir JOHN HOLT, Knight. Lord Chief Justice of England, And
one of His MAJESTY'S Most Honorable PRIVY COUNCIL.
My LORD,
THOUGH I have no reason to be inamourd with the Proceedings in Westminster Hall,
having from thence been grievously harassd by a causeless, expensive, litigious
and tedious Process, and sufferd great Hardship, even by the Confession of my
Adversaries, yet I have a Profound Veneration for all Learned, Honest, Upright
and Impartial Judges, amongst whom Your Lordship may justly challenge the
Chiefest Place, as it is notoriously known, and gratefully ownd by the whole
Kingdom; And cannot but be True, for, The Voice of the People is the Voice of
God.

It is upon this Account only, that I presume to Dedicate this small Treatise
to Your Lordship, begging your Pardon for this Boldness, proceeding from one,
who has no other Knowledge of Your Lordship, than by Hearsay, and Report.

But from what manner of Report? Not an uncertain Rumor, whisperd in Corners,
by a Few Partial, Bribd, and Servile Flatterers; But Proclaimd Aloud in the
Marketplaces, by an Universal, Irresistible, Uncontradicted Blast of Fame, and
Supported by the Concurrent Suffrages of All Wise, Learned, Virtuous, and Just
Men.

My Lord,

I am sensible, that I injure the Public, in so long detaining Your Lordship
from doing Good, in your Eminent Station.

I am, My LORD, Your Most Humble Servant, WALTER POPE.

Moral and Political FABLES.
FABLE I. The Fox changing his Prayers.
Through a Walls narrow Cleft a Fox Espied
Much Poultry feeding in a Farmers Yard,
Fearing it might his Entrance retard,
He desired Jupiter to make it wide.
Being got in and having seizd a Hen,
As he was carrying it, with joy, to's Den,
He saw a Dog at's heels, and O Jove cried,
Make the Hole narrower, it is now too wide.
The MORAL.
Men's Wishes alter with their Interest.

FAB. II. Two Pots.
TWo Pots were carried down a rapid Stream
One of cast Iron made, one of bakd Clay.
The lightest of the two, which swifter saild,
And left the heavy Iron Pot behind,
Who in great fear of sinking, cried aloud,
Dear Sister stay; let us unite our force
The better to resist the impetuous Waves:
That must not be, the Earthen Pot replied,
For if one on the other should fall foul,
Who Will have the worst; it is easy to foretell,
Your Iron-sides will break my brittle Shell.
The MORAL.
Shun both extremes, each of them danger brings:
Be not Familiar, nor contend with Kings.
Another Parafrase of the same.
Out of a Millers House a sudden Flood
Carried two Vessels, one of Potters Earth,
And one of heavy solid Metal made.
The Earthen Pot the other oversaild,
Dancing upon the Billows like a Cork;
But her Companion, who much Water drew,
An^ slowly movd, finding he strove in vain
TO oretake her, she was got so far before:
He cried aloud, Sister, dear Sister stay
For your old Friend, hear what I have to say:
Lets make this perilous Voyage hand in hand,
And spend the time in Conference till we land.
Sir, said the Earthen Pot, it grieves me much
I cannot now comply with your desire;
For if we should by chance together knock,
What will become of me poor brittle Crock?
Who can secure me from your Iron Frock?
FAB. III. The Fox and Hedghog.
A Fox, much tird with swimming cross a Stream
Being got to th'farther side stuck in the mud
Near him, upon the Bank, in ambush lay
A swarm of hungry Flies, expecting Prey;
These, when they saw the Fox in that sad plight,
Down from the Bushes made a speedy flight;
Settled upon his Back and drunk his Blood.
By chance a neighboring Hedghog past that way,
And saw the Fox as in the Owze he lay,
And thus to him he spoke, Command me Sir,
I wish my Power were equal to my Will;
I have not strength to pull you out of the mire,
But if you please I Will rid you of those Flies.
The Fox replied, I Would rather they should stay,
They Have filld their Bellies, they have done their worst,
If they should be removd, a hungry Brood
Will come and suck the remnant of my Blood.
The MORAL.
Rather small Inconveniences endure,
Than by removing them greater procure.
FAB. IV. The two Asses.
TWO laden Asses travelld the same way,
One carrying Sponges and the other Salt:
The last, scarce able to support his Load,
Fell down in a deep Brook which crossed the Road
When thence he had swam to the farther Bank,
He found there was no Burden on his back,
And merrily trudgd on with his empty Sack.
The other Ass perceiving this Event,
Resolvd to try the same Experiment;
And lay down in the deepest part o'th'Ford,
But never rose again; the Sponges swolln
With imbibed moisture, were so heavy grown,
That they lay like a Millstone on his back.
The MORAL.
One Remedy will not cure all Diseases.

FAB. V. The Lamb and Wolf.
A Lamb, out of a Room three Stories high,
Raild at a Wolf, as he was passing by,
Calling him ravenous Beast, Murderer, Thief,
And all the opprobrious Names he could rake up.
The Wolf marchd gravely on as unconcernd;
Yet he was heard to say, as he withdrew,
It is the place rails at me, it is not you.
The MORAL.
Poor Men, well backd, dare speak against the Rich.

FAB. VI. The Hunting-Match.
THE Lion, Fox and Ass together met,
And for a solemn Hunting set a day:
They went, and had the luck to take much Game;
The Lion bids the Ass divide the Prey,
He obeyed, and made thereof three equal parts;
The Lion taking this for an affront,
Killd him of the spot, then put the Fox upon it
To make a new division. The Fox
All the best pieces laid upon one heap,
Leaving a little of the worst for's self;
Which when the Lion saw, Brother, said he,
In what School learnt you to divide so well?
The punishment inflicted on the Ass,
The cunning Fox replied, taught me this skill.
The MORAL.
Dangers which befall Fools instruct the Wise.

Another.
Hunt not with Lions, contend not with Kings.

Another out of Iac. Catts.
Sijt ghy even Esel inder daet,
En kiest geen leeu tot mede-maet.
That is,

To be an Ass if it is thy fate,
Choose not a Lion for thy Mate.
Another out of the same.
Met groote Heeren is it quaet Kersen eten,
Sy kiesen de grootste, en schieten met de steenen
That is,

It Is ill eating Cherries with your Superiors,
They will choose the best, and squirt the stones into your eyes.
FAB. VII. The two thirsty Frogs.
TWO Frogs, who wanting Water, were constraind
Their ancient Habitations to desert,
Made many a weary step, until at last
They in a deep Wells bottom water found.
Which seen, one said let us leap in and drink;
To whom the wiser Frog this answer made,
Let Us look before we leap, for if the Drought
Should last, and water fail us in this Well,
How can we live here? how can we get out?
The MORAL.
First eye the end, and then begin to act.

FAB. VIII. Mercury and the Carver.
TO try in what Esteem he was on Earth,
Mercury, in a human shape came down
From Heaven, and went into a Carvers Shop:
Seeing the Effigies of Thundering Jove,
He askd to what its purchase might amount,
The Carver answered Fifty pounds at least;
Mercury smild to find Jove's Price so low,
And next inquired, how Juno would be sold.
To whom the Carver, that will Cost you more,
The Drapery makes it dear; it is worth Threescore.
Then pointing at is own Effigies, said
And for that Mercury what must be paid?
Expecting an Exorbitant demand;
The Carver answered, Jove, or Juno buy,
And into the bargain, I Will throw Mercury.
The MORAL.
They have no Merit who think they have most.

FAB. IX. The Man and Satyr.
A Satyr, and a Man, for a long time
Livd in great Friendship, which was thus broke off,
The Man, in a cold Season breathd on's hands,
And was by the Satyr askd why he did so,
I do it, said he, to warm my Frozen hands.
Another time, the Man blowd on his Broth,
Which, to the Table boiling hot was brought,
The Satyr askd, and now, why do you blow,
To make my Pottage cool and fit to eat,
The Man replied: which when the Satyr heard,
He in a fury rose, and left the house,
I Will to the Woods again, Mankind adieu,
He said, with those I will not Friendship hold,
Who, out of the same Mouth, blow Hot and Cold.
MORAL.
Trust not a Man thou findst in Various Tales.

FAB. X. The Ass and Horse.
AN Ass, in the same Stable, saw a Horse
Constantly sed with Oats, carefully Dressed,
Well Litter'd and well Cloathd; ready to Burst
With Envy, he his own condition Cursed,
For I, said he, am always carrying Loads,
And forcd to feed on Thistles in the Roads;
And when I am at home, can scarce get Straw
Enough, to satisfy my craving Maw:
But when he saw the Horse go out to War,
Carrying an Armed Soldier on his Back,
Rushing into the midst of Hostile Troops,
Spurrd, Wounded, Lean, half starvd, he changd his Mind,
And thought himself the Happier of the two.
The MORAL.
If Poor Men knew what Troubles Grandeur brings,
They would not envy Potentates and Kings.
FAB. XI. The Ass and Fox.
AN Ass put on a Lions Skin, and ran
About the VVoods, and terrifid the Beasts,
And thought to put the same Trick on the Fox,
But he had heard him Bray, and to him said,
I knew thy Voice, else I had been afraid.
The MORAL.
Rich Robes cannot conceal a Fool that Talks.

FAB. XII. The Crow and Minerva.
A Crow to Pallas made a Sacrifice,
And to the Feast invites a Neighboring Dog,
Who as a sincere Friend, thus to him Spoke.
Why are you at this vast Expense? it is lost,
You strive in vain to appease the Angry Gods,
They hate you Mortally, and have decreed
No faith be given to your Auguries*
The Crow, fetchd a deep Sigh, and thus replied,
I know I Am out of Favor with the Gods,
Yet I will not Despair, I Will Sacrifice,
Give frequent Alms, make solemn Vows, Repent,
And with repeated Prayers I Will Heaven Torment,
And not desist until the Gods relent.
The MORAL.
Constant Devotions, Prayers, Repentance, Alms,
Storm Heaven, and appease the Angry Gods.
FAB. XIII. The Countryman and the Horsman.
A Country man carrying a Hare to sell
At the next Market Town, a Horsman met,
Who poizd the Hair in's hand, and askd the price,
Then spurring's Horse, bore it off in a Trice:
The Countryman thus Cheated of the Hare,
Called after him that took it, Friend a Word,
I give it you, when it comes to your Board,
Do not forget to Drink the Founders Health.
The MORAL.
Of a bad Market Wise Men make the Best.

FAB. XIV. The Dog and Shadow.
A Dog, with Flesh in's Mouth, crossing the Po*
Perceivd his Shadow in the Stream below,
And byth' Refraction of the Rays deceived,
He the Objects greater than they were believd;
Greater the Dog, greater the piece of Flesh,
Snatching at which he dropped his own, and said*
Good Gods, how bad a Bargain have I made,
I have lost the Substance, grasping at the Shade;
Have I not wisely managed this Affair,
To quit a Bird in Hand for one in the Air?
The MORAL.
Buy not Hope dear, leave not a Lark in Hand,
For all the Bustards upon Sal'sbury Plains.
FAB. XV. The Weasels and Bat.
A Weasel caught a Bat, who humbly beggd
That he would spare his life, and set him free.
The Weasel answered, No, that cannot be,
For I am a sworn Enemy to all Birds.
I am no Bird, the Bat replied, and showed
Her featherless Belly, and her naked Breasts,
And Teats, wherewith she gave her young ones Milk.
Which when the Weasel saw, he let her go.
The same Bat, by mischance, another time
Into another Weasels Clutches fell,
And made the same request. It is in vain,
The Weasel answered, for I spare no Mice.
I am a Bird, said she, and showed her Wings,
And, thus twice changing Names, savd his life twice.
The MORAL.
That Mouse, who has but one Hole, is soon caught.

FAB. XVI. The two Dogs and Cook.
A Certain Man upon a Solemn day,
Invited an old Friend to a great Feast,
And his Dog too invites the Dog of the Guest,
Who at the time appointed came, and saw
The several Dishes in due order ranged:
Pleased with this Sight, thus to himself he said,
Lord, what a Dinner shall I have to day
I never shall be pinchd with hunger more,
Wagging his Tail, in token of delight.
The testy Cook, perceiving a strange Dog,
Took him by the Tail, gave him a sudden toss,
And through the Kitchen Window made him pass.
Thence down he fell into the Street, half dead.
As he went reeling home, he met a Friend,
Who askd him how he likd that sumptuous Feast?
To tell the truth, the bruised Dog replied;
I eat, and drank, and made such a Debauch,
I know not which way I came out o'th House.
The MORAL.
Nothing from those expect, who undertake
To give large Thongs out of another Hide.
FAB. XVII. The Lion and Beasts.
ALL the Beasts went to visit their sick King,
Except the Fox. The Wolf laid hold on this
Neglect, to make him odious at Court,
And thus his Accusation began;
What Pretense, what Exemption can he plead,
For not making his Court, as well as we?
It Is an Affront not to be born by Kings.
I know his heart, he hopes to see you dead,
And the Crown placed on an Usurpers Head.
The Wolfs last words were overheard by the Fox,
At the entrance of the Cave, yet he came in,
And creeping on his Belly toward the Throne,
Humbly desird an Audience, and thus spoke.
Sir, there is not any one of all the Beasts
Has been so careful of your Health as I;
I have traveld all about the World, I have seen
The best Fysicians, I have inquird of all,
And at last found a Cure for my sick King,
It Is this; In a Wolfs Skin you* must be wrapped,
While it is yet warm, and newly taken off.
The Lion said, this Remedy is at hand,
And to uncase the Wolf gave his Command.
As the Wolfs Skin was pulling ore his Ears,
The Fox played on him with his bitter Jeers,
Is this, said he, a Dress fit for the Court?
Or are you, from a Cook, a Wrestler turned?
The MORAL.
So may all those succeed, who dare abuse
Kings Favors, to destroy the Innocent.
Another MORAL.
They who design Wrongs, ought to be betrayed,
And caught in the Snares, which they for others laid.
A Third MORAL out of I. C.
Wie andreen netten spant, valt der selver in.

That is,

He that lays Snares for others, is often caught himself.

FAB. XVIII. The Foxes.
A Fox was by the Tail caught in a Snare,
And to get loose no other means could find*
Than this, to bite it off, and leave't behind;
And so he did, without further delay,
Not daring remain there till break of day.
Having escapd this Danger, home he went,
But being ashamd to appear before his Friends
In that undecent Garb, he laid a Plot
To make the rest of the Foxes quit their Tails:
And on a day, when the Chief Foxes met.
To make good Laws, and Grievances redress,
He made a set Harangue against Long Trains:
He said, they were a heavy, useless Load,
For nothing good, unless to sweep the Road*
To gather dirt, and filth, and tire the wearer:
And would have gone on farther, when a Fox
Replied, Dear Brother when you had that Tail,
That odious Tail, which you declaim against,
Why did you not propose this Useful Law?
The MORAL.
To serve the Commonwealth many pretend,
When private Interest is their chiefest End.
FAB. XIX. The Eel and Snake.
AN Eel inquird of his old Friend the Snake,
How't came to pass, the Family of Eels
Were so much persecuted by Mankind,
Who every day, and hour, new ways contrivd
To find them out, though under Waters hid,
In The Mud, and in the Rivers hollow Banks,
And yet, you Snakes, who are so like to us,
That one can scarce be from the other known,
Without disturbance, live in the open Fields?
The Snake replied, our Humour's too well known,
We Are not of a sedate, and reposd Phlegm,
Designed by nature to endure affronts,
Those we receive, with Usury we return.
The MORAL.
The Wolf eats him, who makes himself a Lamb.

FAB. XX. The Ass and Image.
THE Passengers, upon their bended knees,
Adored the Image of a Heathen God,
Born by an Ass, this puffed him up with Pride,
And made him think this Honor done to him,
Stubborn and Restive instantly he grows,
And would no farther carry his RARE CHOSE*
The Driver gave him many a Bastonade,
And by those, forcd to obey the unwilling Jade*
And as he passd through the Adoring throng,
He cried aloud, that all of them might hear,
Thou art an Ass, though thou a God do bear.
The MORAL.
Let Magistrates consider they are but Men.

FAB. XXI. The Mule.
A Well-fed pamperd Mule talked thus to himself,
I am fat, I am handsome, I am swift of foot,
My Father was a Horse with Golden Trappings.
But being forcd to run, he soon did tire,
And then confessd a dull Ass was his Sire.
The MORAL.
Prosperity makes Men forget their selves,
Then we know what we are, when Fortune frowns.
FAB. XXII. The Swallow and Birds.
A Certain Farmer sowd a Field with Flax,
When that Plant was not well known in the World,
Being resolvd to try what 'twould produce,
Not thinking it would prove of so great use,
Feed, and employ so many thousand Poor.
A Swallow, who had traveld far, and knew
To what use it was put in remote Parts,
Fearing that Mode might be there introducd,
Causd all the Birds to meet in Parliament,
Told them the Effect of that pernicious Plant,
And what they must expect when 'twas grown up;
To'th' place where'ts sown by general consent,
Let Us go, said he, and pick up every Seed,
And so secure our Nation from that Weed.
But they laughed at him for a fearful Fool,
The Flax springs up, which he beheld with grief,
And desird all the Birds to meet again,
You see, said he, that Plant begins to mount
His Head above the Earth, now while it is young*
Let us all go, and pull't up by the root.
They laughed, and one replied, Pray Sir go you,
We trouble not our heads with future things.
In a short time the Flax was ripe, and plucked,
And thousand Nets in every Field were spread
Upon the Rivers Banks, and in the Woods,
And then the Swallow met the Birds again,
And found them sad, and heard them all complain,
How many of their Kindred had been slain,
How many Prisoners were in Iron Cages;
It Is now too late, said he, with patience bear
The Miseries you have drawn upon your selves,
Which I foretold, and showed how to prevent,
Movd by the Public Interest, not mine own,
For then, I knew how to secure my self
Against the Miseries which I foresaw.
Now I am safe, having made Peace with Man,
Which I Am convincd none of you ever can;
I live in's House, and please him with my Song,
And under such protection, fear no wrong.
The MORAL.
They justly suffer who reject Advice.

FAB. XXIII. The Fly and Chariots.
SEveral Chariots were to run a Match,
On one of them, in a convenient place,
A Fly placed himself, to see the Race.
The Sign was given, they running with full speed,
Raisd a prodigious quantity of Dust,
Enouf to 'bscure the brightest Rays of the Sun,
Then said the Fly to himself, How Great am I?
With what ease have I filld the Sky with Dust?
The MORAL.
It Is foolish to usurp another Praise.

FAB. XXIV. The Master and Dogs.
A Great Snow fell, and lying long, confind
A Country Gentleman to his Mansion House,
Until all his Provisions were consumd;
Finding at length, no succor could be had
From the next Village, or the neighboring Towns,
The Snow had made the Ways so deep, and bad;
He first his Poultrey killd, and then his Sheep,
At last, the Oxen too, which Tilld his Ground.
Which when the Dogs perceivd, in a great fright,
They left the House, to save their lives by flight.
For if he has no mercy on those Beasts,
One of them said, whose Labors gain him Bread,
What can we look for, who by him are fed?
The MORAL.
When on the Righteous Affliction falls,
With what face can the Wicked hope to escape?
FAB. XXV. The Ape and Fox.
AT a great Ball, made by the Beasts, an Ape
Dancd to the Admiration of them all,
And was by the Majority chose King.
The Fox envying him this high Degree,
Could not with any patience behold
An Ape in the Throne, wearing a Crown of Gold.
Yet, least the King his discontent should smoke,
To him he went, and in this manner spoke;
May the Gods bless you with a prosperous Reign
Who is not for you now you are our King?
I know a Place where a great Treasure's hid,
Which by the Law of the Land belongs to you,
And thither I Will conduct you, if you please.
The Credulous Ape believd the Crafty Fox,
And followd him through may an uncouth Path,
Until at last he fell into a Toil.
Finding himself past hope of getting free,
He cursd the Fox for this disloyal Fact,
And called him Traitor: To which he replied,
How can you manage weighty State Affairs,
Who are with so much ease drawn into Snares?
The MORAL.
Fools in Authority show what they are.

Out of Italian.
La Scinia quanto piu in alto Sale
Tanto piu scuopre le sue vergogne.
That is,

The higher the Ape climbs, the more he discovers nakedness.

Out of I. C.
Ass Apen hooge Klimmen ^oillen,
Dan siet men eerst haer naeckte villen.
Or,

It Is seker, als even Aep will klimmen in den Spriet,
Dan islet, dat man eerst sijn naeckte villen siet.
That is,

Then when an Ape is Eminently High,
His naked Breech is seen by every Eye.
FAB. XXVI. The Lion, Ass and Fox.
A Fox and Ass together went to Hunt,
And in the Woods they a fierce Lion met,
The Fox trembling with fear, had his recourse
To his usual Arts, and thus toth' Lion spoke;
Grant me your Pardon Sir, and I Will betray
This stupid Ass into your Royal hands,
This said, he led the Ass into a Snare.
The Lion pleased to see that part of's Prey
Secure, reservd it for another day,
And of the Foxes Flesh made his first Meal.
The MORAL.
Treason is often lovd, but Traitors never.

FAB. XXVII. The Fox and Grapes.
A Hungry Fox saw hanging on an Elm
Ripe Grapes, and leapd, and leapd at 'em in vain,
At last despairing of success, retird,
And said, It Is well I missd them, they are sour.
The MORAL.
When cunning Men find all Endeavors vain,
They seem to slight, what they despair to obtain.
FAB. XXVIII. The Ants and Grasshopper.
ON a clear Winters day, a troop of Ants
Brought out their Corn, to dry it by the Sun,
A hungry Grasshopper passing that way,
Saw their great plenty, and demanded Alms,
To whom an Aged Ant made this return;
What business had you, Friend in Summer time,
When Corn profferd it self in every Field,
That you did not lay in your Winters Store?
The Grasshopper replied, all Summer long,
I Travelers delighted with my Song.
To whom the Ant, we'll no supplies advance,
Who Sing in Summer, must in Winter Dance,
The MORAL.
In The Summer of your Youth provide for Age.

Another MORAL out of I. C.
Dergadert graen in uwe Schueren,
De Oeogsten sal niet lange dueren*
That is,

Against Winter lay in Grain,
Harvest will not long remain.
Another out of I. C.
God is even ricke Born hy spijst de wild dieren,
Het zy, die in het wont of om den oever swieren,
Maer schoon hij yder be sin eygen voedtsel biet,
Noch voodt hij even well de leuye buycken niet,
Geen Mensh, of ander Dier, en late sich vediogen
At watter spijse soeckt, moet loopen, remien, vliegen
Die Dos, vie sit en geewet, of leuyert, in den kuyl
Hout well de poten droogh, maer krijght niet in den muyl.
Al watter adem heest, behoortet aen te merken,
Dat wat van Adam kompt bevolen is to werken*
Wie geen beroep en heest, en niet ter werelt doet
En heest geen vasten troost waer op hy wort gevoet.
That is,

God keeps a plenteous Magazene, and thence
Does to the whole Creation Food dispense,
To Fowls in the Air, to Fishes in the Deep,
To Worms, who in the Earths hollow Entrails creep,
To Beasts, that graze upon ten thousand Hills,
But never any lazy Belly fills.
Who will not Work, unworthy is to Eat,
All Adams Sons must live by their Brows sweat.
The Fox, who in his Den, does gaping lie,
Keeps not only his Feet, but his Throat dry.
Who nothing has, and is to no Art bred,
Where Is his assurance, to be cloathd, or fed?
To this purpose see more at the end of the 82. FAB.

FAB. XXIX. Mercury and a Woodward.
A Country Man, lopping a Willow Tree,
Whose Boughs hung over a Stream, let fall his Ax,
And sat lamenting by the River side,
Crying, he was undone, he had lost his All,
His Instrument by which he gained his bread.
To him Hermes appeard, and profferd aid,
And when he had heard the Woodward Story, divd,
And out of the River brought a Golden Ax,
Then askd the Country Man if it were his.
No Sir, said he, I never was so Rich.
Mercury divd again, and in his Hand
Brought up another Ax of Silver made,
Toth' Country Man he the same question puts,
And the same answer as before receives.
He dives again, and found an Iron Ax,
At sight of which the joyful Man cried out,
Sir that is mine, I give you many thanks.
Hermes admiring his tried Honesty,
Bestowd them all on him, and sent him home.
When this was noisd about, a Crafty Clown
To the same place repairs, throws in his Ax,
And then sat down, silling the Air with Cries.
Mercury proffers to repair his loss,
And diving, from the Rivers bottom brought
A Golden Ax, which when the Clown espied,
That Is mine, by Jove it is mine, aloud he cried.
But Meroury detesting this foul Lie,
Threw't in again, and strait to Heaven did fly.
The MORAL.
God often makes those who are Honest Rich,
And brings to Beggary Evil Doers.
FAB. XXX. The Wolf and Dog.
IN a small Country Town, a Hungry Wolf
Saw a Dog sleep before his Masters Gate,
And took him up in's mouth, with a design,
In a more private place, on him to Dine.
The Dog humbly desird a short reprieve,
Urging, that he was lean, and not good Meat,
But in a few days he would be fit to eat.
There will, said he, to morrow at our House
A Wedding and a sumptuous Feast be kept,
With all Varieties the Country yields,
There I shall eat my fill, and make my Flesh
More tender, fat, delicious and wholesome,
Fit for your Palate, then at your command,
I Will freely put my self into your hand.
This prevaild with the Wolf to let him go.
After some time, the Wolf returning, saw
The same Dog sleeping on the top of the House,
Whom with fair words designing to Cajole,
Come down, said he, don't forfeit your Parole,
That sacred Promise made in your distress,
Come down, fear not, I Will Treat you as a Friend.
The Dog replied, I must not stir from hence,
Here I am Sentinel by my Master placed,
Let this suffice, when you catch me again,
I Will neither beg a Pardon, or Reprieve,
Nor with pretended Weddings, Fob you off.
The MORAL.
No wise Man falls into the same Snare twice.

Another MORAL out of I. C.
Even Dos, die aen het lijf den strick eens voelde prangen,
Is naemaels wonder schouw, en qualijck om te vangen.
Even visch, die eens den haeck were in het aes gewaer,
Wat veedtsel dat se vint daer vreestse voor gevaer.
Even schaep, dat eens den Wolf is uyten mont genomen,
Will naeu sijn Harders hont omtrent hem latem komen.
Even duyf, well eer ontsnapt de klaeuwen van den Dalck,
Al wasse voort ijts slecht, die wort ten lesten schalck.
Even Mench, die in den storm eens schipbrenc heest, geleden,
Dreest oock even stille ree, en vry niet sondes reden*
Even Hont, die eens het lijf van sode was verschroeyt
Schrickt ^ock vor killig not, dat in de beeckey vloeyt,
Even huys-man, in hetwout eens van de (...) gesteken,
Of schoon hem al de gif is nyten been gewken
Die howdetet voor verdacht, so maer even hagedis,
^ont stijgen uyten praem, of uyt het groen ^is.
That is,

The Fox, who once has felt the smart of the Gin,
Grows wondrous shy, and falls no more therein.
The Fish, who has been once by the Angler struck,
Suspects that every bait conceals a Hook:
The Sheep, snatchd out of the Iaws of Wolf or Bear,
Even of the Shepherds Dog stands in great fear.
A Pigeon, who out of a Hawks Beak is got,
Becomes Wise, tho before he was a Sot.
A Shipwrackd Passenger once safely Landed,
In every little Brook fears to be Stranded.
The Dog, who has bin scalded in a Pot
Of boiling Liquor, thinks all Water hot.
A Man, who has been bit once by a Snake,
Thinks there lies one in every Bush and Brake.
More MORALS out of I. C.
Wat ver seert, dat Leert.
Wat men niet en besuert, en besoetmen niet.
Niemant leert als met schade of Schaem.
Wat niet en cost, en deugt niet.
Stagen maken Wijs
'T vertrant Kint vreest de vyer
Den Hont, en rieckt niet aen de cant.
Daer hy de neus eens heeft verbrant.
That is,

What smarts, that instructs.
Without sour, there is no sweet.
No better Masters, than Shame and Pain.
What cost nothing, is worth nothing.
Stripes make Wise.
The burnt Child dreads the Fire.
The Dog will avoid that place where he burnt his Nose.
FAB. XXXI. Jupiter and the Farmer.
ACretan Yeoman hird a Farm of Jove,
On these Conditions. Jove obligd himself
To send what Weather's Tenant should desire,
To Rain, to Shine, to Blow from any Coast:
And he, in lieu of Rent, was bound to pay
Half of the annual product of the Land.
The Farmer cultivates the Ground with care,
And Jove kept touch, but when the Harvest came,
It answered not the Hopes of the greedy Swain,
Nothing but Husks appeard empty of Grain.
Now you are convincd, Jove to his Tenant said,
What stress upon your Wisdom can be laid,
Take my Advice, try it another Year,
Do you plow, sow, harrow, and weed the Ground,
And let me send what Seasons I think fit.
He accepts the proffer, seals another Lease,
And the next Year reapd a prodigious Crop,
That filld his heart with Joy, and Barns with Corn
He never after prescribd Laws to Jove,
Nor was concernd when it froze, or snowd, or raind,
But thought that weather best which God ordaind
The MORAL.
Do thy endeavor, and leave the Event to the Gods.

FAB. XXXII. Jupiter and the Ass.
AN Ass who servd a Gardener, complaind
That he had too much Work, too little Meat,
And thence to be removd, did Jove entreat;
Jove placed him with a Potter, he soon found
He was not betterd by this Change, being bound
To carry heavy loads of Clay, and Tiles,
And Earthen Vessels, then again he prayed,
That he might serve one of another Trade.
And by Jove's order to a Tanner went,
Where the poor Beast led a laborious Life,
Carrying the stinking Skins of his own kind;
Ore-whelmd with grief, thus to himself he said;
Had I continued where Jove put me first,
I might have livd as well as other Asses,
But of all Masters now I serve the worst,
For when he shall have killd me with hard work,
He Will not stop there, but Curry my dead Skin.
The MORAL.
They who in hopes of better, Masters change,
Leap out of the Drying Pan into the Fire.
FAB. XXXIII. The Bird.
A Shepherd caught a Bird, and having tied
A Thread about his Leg, gave it his Son;
The Bird grew weary of his Life, and watchd
A fit time to recover's Liberty,
Which when he found, he fled to a high Tree.
Carrying the fatal String about his Knee,
Which caught among the Boughs, and held him fast.
When he perceivd he must be starvd to death,
It had been better much for me, he said,
To have endurd the Follies of the Boy,
Where I had all Conveniences of Life,
Then to lose it, and Liberty at once.
The MORAL.
Sometimes the Remedy's worse than the Disease.

FAB. XXXIV. The Raven and Serpent.
A Raven flying over a River, spied
A venomous Serpent, sleeping on the Grass,
And bore him thence, presuming he was dead;
But when the Serpent wakd, and found himself
In The Ravens Claws, he turned about his head,
And made his Teeth meet in the Ravens Flank.
Who soon perceivd the smart of the mortal Wound
And said, Oh might I lose what I have found,
This Prey has been my Death, this Gain my Loss
The MORAL.
Gain's often more pernicious than Loss.

FAB. XXXV. The Ass and Horse.
AN Ass, ready to faint under his load,
Desird a Horse, traveling the same Road,
To carry part of's Pack, and save his life.
But the proud Horse rejected his Request;
The Ass resenting this unkind denial,
Sunk down, and presently gave up the Ghost.
But when the Horse perceivd he should be forcd
To carry the Asses Burden, and his Skin,
He sighd, and said, this Punishment is just,
I denyd succor to my Friend at need,
May it to all who thus act, thus succeed.
The MORAL.
It Is the interest of the Rich to assist the Poor.

FAB. XXXVI. The Fox and Wolf.
A Fox, by chance, into a deep Pit fell,
Being in fear of death, cried out aloud,
And begd a Wolf to let him down a Rope.
The Wolf lookd gravely into the Pit, and askd
What News? whence came you? whither were you bound?
When fell you in? how long have you been there?
And many such impertinent Demands.
To whom the Fox, first help me our, and then
I Will answer, your what? whence? whither? and when?
The MORAL.
When thy Friend wants, ask him no needless Questions.

Another out of Iac. Catts.
So ghy even Drient ge rye ven Kondt
Stielt hem nietuyt, maer helped ters^^ont.
That is,

If thy Friend's in need,
Help him with speed.
Another out of the same.
Dersiet u Drienden voor den noot,
Het rups, dient in de pop ge doot.
That is,

Delay not Friends, who thy assistance beg,
But forthwith crush the Cockatrice in the Egg.
FAB. XXXVII. The Ant.
THat Animal, which now is called an ANT,
Once was a Man, but of Mankind the worst,
So Covetous, so much in love with Gain,
That all day long, in the Fields, he took great pain,
And when 'twas Night, he stole his Neighbors Corn,
And privily conveyed it to his Barn.
Great Jove, abominating such foul Deeds,
In any Creature of a humane shape,
Made him an Ant, but left his Soul unchangd.
That still its former Qualities retains,
Of sparing, coveting, getting, thieving, hoarding.
The MORAL.
What Is in the Bone, will never out of the Flesh.

FAB. XXXVIII. Jupiter and Minerva.
THE Gods met in a Wood, and several Trees
Appropriated to their Deities.
Jove chose the Oak, Myrtle the Cyprian Queen,
The God of Wit, the Laurel ever green;
The Poplar Hercules, Neptune the Pine.
Pallas admird to see the Gods reject
Those that bore Fruit, and barren Trees Elect.
And askd the reason of her Father Jove,
We do it, said he, lest we should be esteemd,
To sell the Honors which we freely give.
She answered, you may, Sirs, do as you please,
I choose the Olive for its useful Fruit.
Jove kissd his Daughter, and replied, you are wise,
Thou art the genuine Offspring of my Brain.
The MORAL.
For all unprofitable Glory's vain.

FAB. XXXIX. The Mice.
THE Mice a General Assembly held,
To find Expedients how they might resist
The Force, and secret Treacheries of the Cat;
After a long Debate, it was proposed,
To hang a Bell about their Enemy's Neck,
Whose sound might give them notice of's approach
This was approvd, and would have been decreed,
Had not an aged Mouse rose from his Seat,
A Mouse of high Degree, and Royal Blood,
A Mouse. whose Merits all the House admird,
And beck'ning with his Hand, Audience required.
Fathers, said he, the Wit of Mice, or Men
Could not invent a better Law than this,
Could it be brought to bear, and put in use,
Who dares about the Cats Neck hang the Bell?
Where are those Mice their Country love-so well?
The MORAL.
Too dangerous Counsels never take Effect.

FAB. XL. The Boar and Ass.
A Stupid Ass revild a Generous Boar,
And could not be prevaild with to give ore,
At length the Boar thus mildly to him spoke,
Coward, rail on, thy baseness makes thee safe,
For tho thou well deserve to be chastizd,
I must not foul my Tusks with thy vile Blood.
The MORAL.
The Moon contemns the Barking of the Dogs,
It Is no disgrace to be revild by Fools.
FAB. XLI. The Boar and Dog.
A Boar and Dog happned to disagree,
And many bitter words betwixt them passd,
At length the provokd Hog by Venus swore,
To kill the Dog, if he did not give ore.
To whom the Dog, can thou by Venus swear?
Who has thee in such detestation,
That whosoever eats thy unclean Flesh,
May not approach unto her Sacred Shrine.
The Boar replied, the Goddess could not show
A clearer Evidence of her Love to me,
Than to count those unholy, and profane,
Who rejoice in my Death, and eat my Flesh.
The MORAL.
A wise Man can retort the Calumnies
Of's Enemies, and turn them to his praise.
FAB. XLII. The Cuckoo and Birds.
SEveral Birds were perchd on the same Tree,
And near the top, a solitary Cuckoo,
Almost coverd with Leaves, whom when a Pie
Espied, believing that it was a Hawk,
He with all have retird, to save his life;
The rest of the Birds, at the next Rendevous,
Reproachd him for his needless cowardly flight;
To whom the Pie, no other answer made,
But this, I Would rather'r should of me be said,
He took a Cuckoo for a Hawk, and fled
Than a Hawk for a Cuckoo, and is dead,
MORAL.
There Is no Comparison betwixt Shame, and Pain.

FAB. XLIII. The Heart and Uine.
A Hunted Heart, flying before the Dogs,
Got to a Vineyard, and lay there conceald,
Until the Huntsmen gave him over for lost,
And were returning Melancholy home.
Thinking himself secure, he fell to brouze,
And of their verdant Livery strip the Boughs,
So was he by the Huntsmen seen, and shot.
Before he dyed, I could expect no less,
He said, to himself, for making such return,
To the Vine, who harbourd me in my distress.
The MORAL.
So great's the Crime. it is a delight to see
Ungrateful Persons suffer Misery.
FAB. XLIV. The Wolf and Ass.
A Wolf, pretending Kindness, came to see
An Ass sick in his Bed, and near to death,
The Asses Colt then by his Father sat,
And saw the Wolf knock at the Stable door,
He lockd it first, then through a Crany spoke,
Who Is there? what do you want? The Wolf replied,
Fain would I know how does your Noble Sire,
To whom the Colt. Better than you desire.
The MORAL.
When Enemies pretend to Kindness, look
About thee, there is under that Bait, a Hook.
FAB. XLV. The Master and Dog.
A Master seemd exceeding fond of's Dog,
With his own hand he constantly him fed,
And with much kindness, often stroakd his Head,
But when he had a mind he should be beat,
He orderd his Man to do it; at length,
The Dog grew weary of his life, and fled.
After some time, he and his Master met,
And held a Conference in the open Fields.
He told him, 'twas an ungrateful Act,
To quit a Master who had fed him well,
And never gave him a hard word, or blow.
The Dog replied, you have me often beat,
To you I owe these Scars, this hairless Back,
For what your Servant did by your command,
I look upon it, as done by your own hand.
The MORAL.
He does it, who commands ill to be done.

FAB. XLVI. The Husband and Drowned Wife.
A Husband, being told his Wife was Drowned,
And showed the Place where she fell in, he walkd
Thence toward the Rivers head, in search of the Corpse.
One of his Friends cried out, Sir what do you mean?
Dead Bodies never swim against the Stream*
If you design to find her, change your Course.
To whom, the mournful Widower thus replied,
No, my dear Wife was always so morose,
Peevish, Perverse, and full of Contradictions,
So different from all the rest of the World,
And so tenacious of her Evil Humor,
It will accompany her, now she is Dead,
And make her Corpse mount up to the Spring Head.
The MORAL.
Believe not a bad Woman, tho she is dead.

FAB. XLVII. The Holyday and its Eve.
A Discontented Holyday-Eve revild
The Festival his Lord, with these foul words,
What do thou take thy self to be? thou Drone?
Thou never setst thy lazy hands to Work,
Yet farest deliciously, go richly clad,
And spendst, what I by Labor get and Sweat,
He that wont Work, unworthy is to Eat.
To whom the injurd Holyday replied,
Content your self with your Condition, Friend,
It is your duty to maintain your Lord,
It Is upon me alone, that you depend,
My being Easter, makes you Easter-Eve.
The MORAL.
Nobles and Commoners support each other.

FAB. XLVIII. The Ape and Delfian.
A Leaky Ship sunk on the Attic Shore,
The Seamen and the Passengers were drowned,
Only an Ape was taken up alive,
By the Commander of a Delfian Ship,
Which happned to be near, when the other sunk.
Amongst other discourse, the Delfian askd
If he a Citizen of Athens were;
I am, said he, and of the Noblest Tribe.
The Delfian replied, then you must know
Pireum, so the Athenians call their Port;
The Ape, concluding 'twas some Man of Note,
Answered, I know him well, he is my dear Friend.
The Delfian now convincd, he had savd a Beast,
With Indignation, threw him overboard.
The MORAL.
Unskilful Liars easily are discovered.

FAB. XLIX. The Lark.
A Lark, who every Spring, did use to build
Her Nest, and lay her Eggs, in the green Wheat,
So early, that her young ones might be fledge,
Before 'twas reapd, did once by a mistake,
Make her Nest, hatch her Eggs, in rath ripe Corn,
And found not out her Error till too late,
She saw the Harvest near, her young ones Callow,
Not in Condition to be timely movd,
Therefore in the morning, ere she went abroad,
She thus bespoke them: Children, when I am gone,
Mind every thing you chance to hear, or see,
And give me an account, at my return.
They watchd, and saw the Owner of the Field,
Walking that way, discoursing with his Son,
And overheard him say, this Corn is ripe,
And if it be not quickly reapd, will shed,
Go Son, to the next Village, and entreat
My Friends assistance, to cut down this Wheat,
Early, by break of day, to morrow morn.
The affrighted Larks, this to their Mother told.
Children, said she, your danger's yet remote,
Be not dismayed, for if we can stay here
Till we are dispossessed by his Friends,
By that time your young Feathers will be grown,
And you will be able to transport your selves
Where ever I shall guide you, through the Air,
Leaving the same Commands, away she flies,
Next day. The careful Husbandman awakes
Early, at the first crowing of the Cock,
Rises, comes down, and fearing to be late,
Sat buttoning of his Doublet at the Gate,
Thence casting many a wishful look to the Coast
From whence his hopd-for succor ought to arrive,
Seeing the Sun grown high, and no Friend come,
Thus to his Son he spoke; Since we are deceivd,
Henceforwards set a Mark upon such Friends,
Who only cry God bless you, when we sneeze,
But, when we stand in need, afford no help.
Go, all our near Relations invite
To meet me here, to morrow, by daylight,
That we may get this Corn down before Night.
This News the young Birds to their Mother told,
Mother, they cried, Mother, we are undone,
Not one of us can fly, few of us run,
Yet out of doors to morrow we must turn.
Such terror seizd them of approaching Death,
They mingled Sighs, and Tears, with every word.
She smild, and said, you are still secure, he will find
His Friends and Kindred equally unkind,
Be mindful still of what you hear, and see,
This said, away a Foraging she flies.
The next Sun rises, the good Man, in vain,
Expects his Kindred, none of them appears;
Since there is no trust to be reposed in Frinds,
Or Kindred, Son, said he, to morrow bring
Two Sickles, you and I will cut this Corn.
As soon as the Old Lark this understood,
To a securer place, leading her Brood,
Follow, said she, we have staid the utmost hour,
There Is no Eluding Interest, and Power.
The MORAL.
What thou can do, expect not from another.

Another MORAL.
He that will bring his Business to an end,
Must go himself, he that will not, may send.
A Third out of I. C.
En wach niet van u naest bloet,
All wat u sellifs niet en doet.
That is,

Expect not from Relations, or Friends,
What you can do your self, without their help.
A Fourth out of I. C.
So ghy u Bry-Pot blasen Kont,
En roept daer toe even Dremden Mour.
That is.

Make not use of another breath
To cool thy Furmity when it is too hot.
A Fifth out of I. C.
Het best mist, op den acker is 'tmeesters, oogh, end voet.

That is,

The best Dung upon the Field, is the Masters Eye, and Foot.

Another out of I. C.
Wat batet, inden nnot, even ander toe te spreken?
We yet gedaen begeert, dient handen nyt te steken,
Ghy, laet dan noyt u werk op dees, of gene, staen,
Of anders, Lieve Drient, so vlijfter onge daen*
That is,

There Is no relying upon foreign aid.
He that would have's work done, must do it himself.
They who their business put off, and delay
Till others do it, may for ever stay.
Another out of I. C.
Die de Hoe aengaet, die grij^tse by den stiert.

It Is the Owner of the Cow, that pulls her by the Tail out of the Ditch.

Another.
Die Koe en lickt geen vreemt Kalf.

A Cow licks no Calf but her own.

Another.
Let op u eygen saken, Here,
Men hinckt niet van eens anders Seer.
That is,

No Man halts for another pain.

Another out of I. C.
Het ooge van d^n here, dat maeckt de yeerden vel.
Het ooge van de vrou, dat maeckt de Kamer Not.
That is,

The eye of the Master makes the Horse Fat,
The eye of the Mistress makes the House Neat.
Another out of the same.
Been bod' en wasser oyt so goet,
Bhelijck de Mecster sellefs doet.
That is,

He Is the best Messenger, that is most concernd.

Another out of the same.
Maeckt u bed soeje ^^apen wilt.

That is,

If thou would sleep well, make thy Bed thy self.

FAB. L. The Wolf and Lamb.
A Wolf was drinking near a Rivers head*
And saw a Lamb, upon his bended knees
Quenching his thirst in the same Stream below,
He though fully resolvd the Lamb should die,
Sought a pretense to kill him legaly,
And with the Cloak of Justice, cover wrong.
With a stern Countenance, and impetuous Tone,
Thus to the Lamb he spoke, Vile Animal,
Do thou know who I am? and use me thus?
Dare thou disturb the Water which I drink?
Sir, said the Lamb, I hope I Have done no wrong,
The Water which I trouble, goes not back
Against the Stream, to prejudice your draught.
Then you dispute, the baffld Wolf replied,
What is this else, but to tell me I lyd?
But what is in the Bone will never out of the Flesh.
Your Family has always hated mine,
And set against us Shepherds and their Dogs.
The Lamb began to answer, but the Wolf
Impatient of delay, tore out his Heart.
The MORAL.
No Plea is good when Bad Men are in Power.

Another out of the Dutch.
Men slacht to onoozel Lam, om't vet, *en om de rock,
Want wie den Hondt will slaen, vind ^ichtijlick cenen Stock.
That is,

Men slay the harmless Lamb, for's Flesh, and Skin.
A Stick is easily found to beat a Dog.
FAB. LI. The Ass and Wolf.
A Wolf, in Surgery professing Skill,
Bargaind upon a promise of Reward,
To pull a Nail out of an Asses Foot,
Which when he had performd, he askd his Fee.
The ungrateful Ass unmindful of his word,
Gave him so rude a Kick upon his Head,
That made him fall down sprawling, and half dead*
After some time awaking from his Trance,
He said, I justly suffer this disgrace,
For practicing an Art I never learnt.
The MORAL.
Let not the Cobbler go beyond his Last.

FAB. LII. The Mad Lion and Goat.
A Goat, seeing a Lion raving Mad,
Running about, and roaring, said to himself,
If a wise King can hardly be endurd,
How sad is the Condition of us Beasts,
Who must live under Power with Madness joynd?
The MORAL.
Wrath, armd with Power, cannot be withstood.

FAB. LIII. The Thrushes.
A Numerous flock of Thrushes passd the Alps,
To feast upon the Grapes of Lombardy,
Whereof some few returning fat, and plump,
Were envied by the rest that stayed behind.
They cursd their Fate, their Cowardice, and Sloth,
Which made them lose their share in that rich prey.
To whom, one of these Travelers replied,
Youd change your minds and pity us, did you know
How many thousands of us made this Voyage,
And to what paucity we are reduced,
The rest being taken Prisoners, Maimd, or Killd.
The MORAL.
The Court has many made, and more undone,
And even undone those, whom it has made.
FAB LIVE. The Old Man and Death.
A Poor Old Man, carrying a heavy Load,
Ready to faint for want of strength and breath,
Threw his Pack down, and called aloud for Death,
To whom when Death appeard in's ghastly shape,
The terrified Old Man cried out, Good Sir,
Pray help me lift this Burden to my Back.
The MORAL.
Those who desire Death, fear it when it comes.

FAB. LV. The Cormorant, Bat, and Bramble.
A Cormorant, a Bramble, and a Bat,
Resolvd to try their Luck in Merchandise:
The Cormorant adventurd Brazen Ware,
The Bramble Cloth, and the Bat ready Cash,
Borrowed of griping Bankers at great Use.
They cheerfully Embarqud, despising Danger,
So prevalent with them was the hope of Gain;
A sudden Storm arose and sunk their Ship,
And they three only got alive to Land.
And ever since this their unhappy loss,
The Cormorant stands watching on the Sand,
Hoping the Waves will cast his Vessels up:
The Bramble pulls the Passenger by's Coat,
Tares Patterns off, to see where it is her Cloth.
But the poor Bat his Debts so much affright,
He dares not peep out of the doors till Night.
The MORAL.
To root out Vice, it is not an easy thing,
'Twill grow again, if you leave the least String.
FAB. LVI. The Young Raven and his Mother.
A Raven by the Fysicians given ore,
Now at the point of death, his Mother begd
To procure solemn Prayers, make sacred Vows,
And bargain with the Gods to save his life.
To whom she thus replied, Son it is too late,
Thou have made all the Gods thine Enemies,
Defild their Temples all their Altars robbd,
What hopes have thou thy Prayers should prevail?
The MORAL.
They who in wicked deeds their whole life spend,
Cannot expect a comfortable End.
FAB. LVII. The Fly.
A Hungry Fly, fell int' a Pot of Broth,
And having eat, and drank his fill, perceivd
His strength decreasd, his Body heavy grown,
His Wings wet, and unfit to bear his weight;
In short, seeing no way to avoid death,
With a sedate Mind, and undaunted Heart,
Thus to himself he said, I have eat, and drank,
And washd, why should I be afraid to die?
The MORAL.
Bear patiently what thou can not avoid.

Another MORAL out of I. C.
Ghy moet, indien ghy kondt, het quade seer geneseu,
En so ghy niet en kondt, in als geduldigh wesen.
To this purpose.

O Man! what ever is thy Lot,
Either it may be remedied, or not.
If not, with patience thy Lot endure,
If It may, with speed the Remedy procure.
FAB. LVIII. The Fox and Raven.
A Raven who had found a piece of Cheese,
Bore it to's Nest, on one of the neighboring Trees.
And having laid it down, began to Crow
Aloud, that all might his good Fortune know.
A Fox, who heard the noise, and understood
The meaning of it, quickly leaves the Wood,
Draws near unto the Tree, and thus did speak,
Just as the Raven took the Cheese in's Beak.
Good Gods! what beauteous Bird's before mine Eyes?
How smooth they lie! how do thy Feathers shine!
No Color equals Black, and no Black thine.
Would I might hear thy Voice, if thou could Sing,
Thou were a Present for the greatest King.
The Raven tickled with the Foxes praise,
And willing to hear more, began to Sing,
With a hoarse voice, and let the Cheese fall down.
Which when the Fox had seizd, Raven, said he.
It Is true you are handsome, but thou have no Wit.
The MORAL.
All Flattery is upon ill design,
And they are Fools who hear it with delight.
Another MORAL out of Horace.
Si tacitus pasci potuisset Corvus, haberet
Plus dapis, and multo rixae minus invidiaeque.
To the same purpose out of I. C.
It Is seker, so de ^aef kon in der stilhept eten,
Sy kreegh even vollen buyck, en niemant sou het weten,
Maer mits hy by den roof so luyde sit, en Krast,
So krijght hy menigh mael even ougenooden gast.
That is,

Were the Crow wise, and could with silence eat,
He would have fewer Spongers, and more Meat.
Another out of I. C.
So dickwils als 't Schapie bleet, verliestet even veetien.

That is,

As often as the Sheep bleats, he loses a monthful.

Another out of the same.
It Is best dat 't Schap in stilheyt eet,
Want als het bleet, verliest even bleet.
Even still Seugh die eet de draf.
That is,

It Is the still Sow that eats the Broth.

FAB. LIX. The Pie and Peacock.
OF Birds the general Assembly met,
To elect a King, the chiefest Candidate
The Peacock, popular for his great Estate,
His beauteous shape, and glorious painted Train,
Had gaind the greatest part upon his side,
And certainly would have been chosen King,
Had it been put to the Vote, which when the Pie
Perceivd, he stood up, and cravd leave to speak,
Turning his Face to the Peacock, Beauteous Sir,
Said he, if the Eagle should with us wage War,
How would you lead us on? and bring us off?
The MORAL.
In choice of Magistrates, a handsome Face
Must to the Beauty of the Soul give place.
FAB. LX. The Heart and Hind Calf.
A Young Red Deer, thus to his Father spoke,
You are swifter, you are greater than the Dogs,
And better Armd, why don't you stand, and fight?
To whom the Heart replied, Son you have said
The truth, Nature for me has done her part,
Has given me every thing but a stout heart,
That Is wanting, when the noise of Hounds I hear,
I must be gone, I cant command my fear.
The MORAL.
Nature in every thing will be obeyed;
Achilles Arms cannot make a Coward fight.
FAB. LXI. The Swan and Goose.
IN the same Court, a white Goose, and a Swan
Were kept, one for the rareness of his Song,
The other to be eaten with a Friend.
A Friend arrives, orders were sent toth' Cook
To kill the Goose, but he, unwittingly,
Mistook one for the other, both being white,
And seizd the Swan, who, as Swans usd to do
In former times, sung his own Funeral Dirge,
And so was known, and so he savd his life.
The MORAL.
Many from Dangers Eloquence preserves.

FAB. LXII. The Boy and Scorpion.
A Wanton Boy, hunting of Grasshoppers,
By chance, espied a Scorpion on the Ground,
And stretchd his right hand out to take it up,
The Scorpion turned up his forked Tail,
Then, thus said to the Boy: Fool, touch me not,
For if thou do, thy Sport will cost thee dear*
And thou will Grasshoppers henceforwards fear.
The MORAL.
That City's ruin's near, where it is hard
To know who is a good Man, who a bad.
FAB. LXIII. The Lion and Fox.
A Fox, who never had a Lion seen,
Met one in the Wood, and was so much afraid,
He had like to have sunk down dead upon the spot,
The second time he feared, but not so much,
And the third enterview, to him he went
Boldly and cried, God bless your Majesty.
The MORAL.
What terrible appears, at the first sight,
Being often represented, yields delight.
FAB. LXIV. The Swallow and Crow.
A Swallow and a Crow, had a Contest,
Whose Beauty, and whose Color was the best,
And many Arguments were urgd, pro and con;
At last the Crow, this demonstration usd,
Your Beauty is a fading Summer Flower,
On mine, the coldest Winter has no power.
To which the Swallow had nothing to reply.
The MORAL.
That Good's to be preferred, which longest lasts.

FAB. LXV. The Father and Sons.
A Father, near to death, called up his Sons
To his Bedside, and told them he had hid
Great quantities of Gold in the Vineyard,
Bidding them dig it up, when he was dead;
This said, he died, and left them ignorant
In what part of the Vineyard the Gold lay.
No sooner were the Funeral Rites performd,
But they began to work, and delve the Ground,
They cleard the roots of the Vines, they broke the Clods,
And scourd the Ditches, but they found no Gold*
But yet, their Labor was not ill bestowd,
For the next Year the Cultivated Vines
Enrichd the Owners with a plenteous Crop,
Which when the Eldest of the Sons perceivd,
He said, This is the Gold our Father hid.
The MORAL.
Labor and Industry are surest Riches.

FAB. LXVI. The Dog, Cock and Fox.
A Dog, and Cock, benighted on the Road,
Took up their Lodgings in an aged Oak,
The Cock in the boughs, the Dog in's hollow Trunck,
The Cock, next morning crowd by break of day,
As it is their use, to whom a Fox approachd,
And earnestly desird him to come down,
For he so much delighted in his Song,
And Martial Mien, that he should count himself,
The happiest Fox in the World, to see him near,
To embrace and kiss him. The Cock understood
His fraudulent intent, and thus replied,
Sir, I desire it much, but cant come down,
Without the Porters leave, wake him, I pray,
He Is fast asleep in's Den, at the Oaks root.
The Fox, suspecting nothing, put in's Head,
And made a hideous noise, at which the Dog
Leapd out, seizd on him, worried him to death.
The MORAL.
A Cheat ought not, if cheated, take it ill.

FAB. LXVII. The Ass, Ape and Mole.
A Mole ore-heard an Ape and Ass complain,
Ones Tail was short, the other had no Horns,
And thus reprovd them; With what Face can you
Bewail the want of useless Ornaments?
When you behold me, Patient, though Blind.
The MORAL.
Compare thy State with theirs who are worse than thee,
Then thou will easily bear thy Misery.
FAB. LXVIII. The Young Men and Cook.
TWO Young Men went to a Cooks Shop, one stole
A piece of Flesh, and to his Fellow gave't;
The Cook soon missd it, and there being none
But those two in the Shop, chargd them with Theft:
He, who had took it, swore he had it not,
And he who had it, swore he stole it not.
Well, said the Cook, though you have deceivd me,
You cannot cheat the Gods, who all things see.
The MORAL.
They who Swear most, are least to be believd.

FAB. LXIX. The Boy and Cockles.
A Country Boy, a dish of Cockles bought,
And laid them to be roasted on the Coals,
Which their internal moisture rarisied,
And causd them to emit a whistling sound:
Fools, said the Boy, is it a time to Sing,
Now, when your Houses burn about your Ears?
The MORAL.
All Actions out of season deserve blame.

FAB. LXX. The Miser.
A Covetous wretch had hid a bag of Gold,
And almost every hour went out to see it,
A Neighbor, wondering at his constant Walk,
Observing where he went, and what he did,
Found out the Treasure, and conveyed it thence.
The wretch returned next morn by break of day,
When he perceivd his God was flown away,
He wept, and tore his Beard, and his gray Hair,
And wishd for Death, through horror, and despair.
A Passenger informd of the cause of's grief,
Said, Father leave lamenting, hide a Stone
In the same place, and think it is your Gold,
You Will be as rich then as you was before,
For he that dares not use it, has no store.
The MORAL.
The Miser wants what he has, and has not.

FAB. LXXI. The Olive Tree and the Reed.
AN Olive and a Reed had great disputes,
Which was the better Plant. The Olive said,
Weak Fool, dare thou compare thy self with me?
My Root shoots down to the Center of the Earth,
Thine's in the Surface, and scarce hid with Mold.
I scorn the strongest blasts of Northern Winds,
At every little breath of Air thou bowest,
So low, that thou can hardly rise again,
And always movest thy Paralytic Head.
The Reed not daring to reply, stood mute,
Expecting time and place to be revengd,
And was ere long. A furious Storm arose,
And laid the Olive prostrate on the ground,
Which when the Reed perceivd, aloud she cried,
This fate is due to Insolence, and Pride.
The MORAL.
Trust not a Calm, a Storm is always nigh*

FAB. LXXII. The Asses and Jupiter.
THE Asses sent a solemn Ambassade,
Entreating Jove to grant them a release
And freedom from the Miseries they endured.
Jove answered, that could never be procured,
Till they could make a River with their Piss,
This he intended for a flat denial.
But they believing Jove was serious,
Have ever since been making of the trial,
And where they see one Piss, all do the same.
The MORAL.
Asses believe Impossibilities.

FAB. LXXIII. The two Neigbouring Frogs.
TWo Neighboring Frogs livd in great Amity,
One in the Road, the other in a Pond
A little thence removd, and more secure,
Who, as a Friend, his Neighbor thus advisd:
Why do you choose to dwell in such a place,
So much exposd to danger? Quit it Sir,
(...) with me, I have plenty void of fear:
To which, the Courteous Frog this answer made,
For your kind proffer, I return you thanks,
But cant be brought to change my native Soil,
There was I born, and bred, there will I die:
This said, he went to his Quarters, and there staid
Till he was pressd to death by a Cart Wheel.
MORAL.
Ill Men defer Amendment, till'ts too late.

FAB. LXXIV. The Mice and Cat.
A Colony of Mice planted their selves
In the same House, and livd in much repute,
And with great prudence managd their Affairs.
To save their selves from the insults of the Cat,
They, by consent, retird to the House top,
And resolvd there to stay during their lives;
Which when the Cat perceivd, she took this way
To countermine them, and obtain her ends,
She hung her self upon a Pin in the Wall,
With her Head downwards, feigning to be dead,
A Mouse, who saw her in this posture, said,
That Trick will not do, I Will not believe thee dead,
Though I should see thy Skin pulld over thy head.
The MORAL.
Superabundant Caution does no harm.

FAB. LXXV. The Eagle and Fox.
LOng had the Eagle and the Fox been Friends,
And that their Amity might increase, resolvd
To live together, the Eagle built her Nest
Upon the highest Branches of an Oak,
And the Fox made his Burrow near its Root:
It happened, both had young at the same time,
And when the Fox was gone in quest of Prey,
The treacherous Eagle stole his Cubbs away,
And with her Flesh feasted her self and brood:
The Fox returned, perceiving his great loss,
Was struck with horror of that heinous Act,
Much did he grieve for his dear Childrens death,
But more, to see himself in such a state,
Having no helps, no prospect of Revenge.
But 'twas not long before the Scene was changd.
A Country Farmer sacrified a Kid
In The open Fields, thither the Eagle flies,
And from the Altar steals a piece of Flesh,
To which stuck fast a Coal of the sacred Fire;
This being brought to her dry, woody Nest,
Set it immediately in a bright flame.
Then did the Eagle see her young ones drop
Half roasted, into the mouth o'th* joyful Fox.
The MORAL.
Heaven vindicates the wrong done to the Poor.

FAB. LXXVI. The Trees and Thorn.
THE Trees desird the Olive to accept
The chief Command of the leafy Nation;
To whom, he said, can you believe, that I,
Who live contented with my own Estate,
Whose Fruit is so much prizd by Gods, and Men,
Will change my happy Life for anxious Cares,
Always attending upon Crowned Heads?
No, lay this weight on some ambitious Fool.
Being thus repulsd, they to the Fig Tree went,
And beggd him to supply the vacant Throne;
Can you, said he, suppose I Will quit my Fruit,
Which is more sweet than the Hyblean Honey,
For Aloes, and Gall, the food of Kings?
Being twice repulsd, they to the Vine repaird,
And humbly beggd him to accept the Crown,
He showed his Branches loaded with ripe Grapes,
More bright in color than the Tyrian Purple,
You see, said he, my Riches and my Store,
These pleasant Grapes which such a Liquor yield,
That recreates the heart of God, and Man.
Can you desire me quit this happy Station,
And my self ruin, to preserve your Nation?
If I do so, I justly may be deemd
The greatest Fool of Trees. I Will be no King.
Tird with denyals, they at last chose the Thorn,
Who greedily lays hold of the profferd Crown,
And swelld with Pride, thus to his Subjects spoke,
Now I am King, I expect to be obeyed,
Against all those who dare oppose my Will,
I Will send a raging Fire, which shall not spare
The tallest Cedars of Mount Libanus.
The MORAL.
To Command over others none desire
But those who intend to gratify their Lust.
FAB. LXXVII. Momus.
JOve, Neptune, Pallas, when the World was young*
Strove which of them should do it the greatest good,
And by consent chose Momus to be Judge;
Jove in his own Similitude made a Man,
The God of the Sea a Bull, Pallas a House;
This done, they sent for Momus, to pronounce
Which of their Gifts, in his Esteem, was best;
But he found fault with all. First with the Man,
Because there were no Windows in his Breast,
Through which his inclinations might be seen:
He said the Bulls Horns were not fitly placd,
They would have been more useful on his Breast,
He blamd the House, because 'twas not on Wheels,
And could not from ill Neighbors be removd.
The MORAL.
Nothing against Detraction is secure;
Who dare be Virtuous, must this Plague endure.
FAB. LXXVIII. The Two Dogs.
A Certain Dog never peepd out of Doors,
When the least drop of Rain fell from the Clouds,
Of whom, a neighboring Dog, his Friend, inquird
The cause of this strange Humor; he replied,
By scalding Water once I had like to have did,
And ever since have been afraid of Cold.
The MORAL.
He whom a Snake has bit, runs from an Eel.

FAB. LXXIX. The woman and Oculist.
A Woman, much afflicted with sore Eyes,
Sent to a skilful Oculist for Cure,
He came, and undertook it for a Sum,
Which she engagd to pay, when she was well:
He often came, and often dressd her Eyes,
And whilst, forcd by the smart, she kept them shut,
He every day stole something out of the House,
Till there was nothing left. At last it chancd,
His Remedies had their desird Effect,
Then the Oculist demands his recompense,
But she refusd to pay't. My Sight is worse,
She said, then when you first enterd my door,
Then, every part of the House appeard to me,
Well stord with Goods, but now I nothing see.
The MORAL.
Benefits are effaced by Injuries.

FAB. LXXX. The Boar and Fox.
A Fox observd a Boar whetting his Tusks,
And askd him why he so employed his time,
Having no prospect of an Enemy?
The Boar replied, not without cause, for when
I am assaulted, 'twill be too late then.
The MORAL.
The fittest season to provide for War
Is then, when we enjoy a profound Peace.
FAB. LXXXI. The Thief and his Mother.
A Thief to the Place of Execution brought
To suffer Death, the just reward of's Crimes.
As he upon the Ladder stood, espyd
His sorrowful Mother pressing through the throng,
To take the last leave of her dying Son.
The Officers permitted them to embrace;
But he, instead of a departing Kiss,
Bit off her Nose and spit it in her Face.
The Crowd, detesting this unnatural Act,
Cried out, no torment can be great enuf,
No sort of Death for such a Parricide.
Hear me, said he, condemn me not unheard:
This Woman, whom I have treated in this sort,
Is the only cause of my untimely death.
When I was Young, not knowing Good from Ill,
And from my Play-fellows some Trifles stole,
I brought her them, which she receivd with joy;
It Was her Encouragement made me proceed
In that lewd way and commit greater Thefts,
For which I undergo this shameful death;
From whence I might have easily been preservd,
Had she chastizd me for the first Offense.
The MORAL.
A cruel Mother is better than a mild;
Sparing the Rod is spoiling of the Child.
Another MORAL.
Quo semel est imbuta recens servabit odorem Testa diu. Horace.

That is,

New Casks, for a long while hold their first scent,
Young Twigs, to any form are easily bent.
Another out of I. C.
Die well bemint
kastijt sijn kint.
That is,

Who their Child like,
They their Child strike.
Another out of the same.
Even Aep, oyt al te grooten min
Die perst haer jonck de lenden in.
That is,

An Ape, to her young may no affection lack,
And yet not hug 'em till she breaks their Back.
Another out of the same.
It Is well, na mijn begrijp, in duden tijt gheseyt,
It Is beter dat het kint, als dat de moeder schreyt.
That is,

Though there is no Music, in one, or the other,
It Is better to hear the Child cry, than the Mother.
FAB. LXXXII. Hercules and a Carter.
A Loaded Wagon stuck in a deep Way,
Immersd, up to the Axtle-trees, in Mud,
And by it the idle Driver mourning stood,
Complaining of his Fate, and begging help
Of Hercules, who at his call appeard,
And thus admonishd him; Do first what you can,
Goad the Oxen, put your Shoulders to the Wheels.
In your distress you should have workd, not prayed,
That Is the securest way to obtain Gods aid.
The MORAL.
The Gods help none but those who help their selves.

Others out of I. C.
God spijst de voghelen, maer sy moeten der o^^ vliegen
Niemant en komen de gebraden duyven in de^ gerlogen mont,
Armoede is leuyheyts loon,
Wie besoeten will, moet besueren,
Die de eperen hebben will, moet het kakelen den hennen lijden.
Den slapenden Dos valt niet in den muyl.
Hant aen den ploegh, so salt God vorderen
Tot Gods hulp behoeft arbeyt,
Rept handen en voeten, God salt versoeten.
Stroopt u armen, en seght God wouts.
Den slapende Wolf en loopt geen schaep in de^ mont.
Die't verken killen will moet hem het tieren troosten
Even vliegende kraey vangt wat.
This may be so Translated.

God provides meat for Birds, but they must fetch it
Roast Pigeons fly not into any Man's mouth.
Poverty is the Wages of Idleness.
Who will get, must Sweat.
They who will have Eggs, must bear with the cackling of the Hens.
Nothing falls into the mouth of a sleeping Fox.
Put to your hand, then cry, God speed the Plow.
Labor Gods Help procures.
Make bare your Arm, then cry God help.
No Sheep run into the mouths of sleeping Wolves.
He that will kill a Hog, must endure his noise.
A Crow upon the Wing, finds something to eat.
Out of I. C.
Wie Rosen plucken will, en match geen prickels mijden,
Wie honich-graet begeert, die moet de byen lijden.
Door hem die bruchten soeckt, tis't wenschen niet genoeg
De handt moet out de mou, de handt moet aen den ploeg.
That is,

Who Will gather Roses, must endure the Thorns.
Who will eat Honey, must not fear the Bees.
It Is not enuf to wish Corn were in the Mow.
The Hands must quit the Muff, and hold the Plow.
Another out of the same.
Even stille mool en maeckt geen meel.
Even Dos die slaept, even drooge keel.
'That is,

The Mill that moves not, no Corn grinds.
The Fox that Hunts not, no Prey finds.
FAB. LXXXIII. The Fortune Tellers.
ONE, who pretended skill in Conjuring,
Was telling Fortunes, in a Marketplace
Amongst a great Crowd of admiring Fools,
To whom a Messenger drew near, and said,
Is this a time to entertain the Mob?
Your House is broken up, your Goods are stolen,
There Is nothing left you but the naked Walls.
Hearing this News, in have he left the Crowd,
And went to see what loss he had sustaind.
As he returned, there met him on the way
A witty Fellow, who thus to him said,
Can you, who know not what is done at home,
At a great distance, foretell things to come?
The MORAL.
He is not Wise, who is not so to himself.

FAB. LXXXIV. The Old Lion and Fox.
AN aged Lion, now no longer able
By Hunting to provide Meat for his Table,
Resolvd to make use of another way,
And get by fraud, what he could not by force.
Feignd himself sick, and took his Bed, and groand.
This News was quickly through the Forest spread,
The Beasts their visits of Condolence made,
Entering one by one, into his Den,
And when they came within his reach, were slain.
By this Trick, he maintaind himself some time.
At last the Fox approaching near the Cave,
Askd how he did, the Lion answered, Ill;
Why do you keep at distance, pray come in,
Let me embrace, and kiss you, my dear Friend,
Before I go into another World.
No, said the Fox, I dare not come too near,
I am terrified by the footsteps in the Sand,
I find of many entering Beasts the track,
But there is no sign of any that came back.
The MORAL.
A Prudent Man does many Evils shun,
And guesses from small Signs, what is to be done.
FAB. LXXXV. The Lion, Fox and Ape.
THE Lion put a Proclamation out,
Strictly commanding all four-footed Beasts,
Who wanted Tails, by a prefixed Day,
To quit's Dominions. Upon which, the Fox
Packd up his Tools, in order to be gone,
And seek his Fortune in a foreign Realm;
At the first Inn, he overtook an Ape,
Going the same way, with the same intent,
Who thus accosted him, Sir, are you Mad?
You're not at all concernd in this Decree,
For you have Tail enuf, if not too much.
It Is true, replied the Fox, yet I Will begone,
For what can unarmd Innocence avail,
If the King's pleased to say, I have no Tail.
The MORAL.
Trust not thine Innocence, stay not an hour,
Where Kings pretend to Arbitrary Power.
FAB. LXXXVI. The Astrologer.
A Star-gazer, in a clear Moonless Night,
In The midst of Winter, went into the Fields,
To count the Number of the Pleiades,
And mark the Houses where the Planets lodgd,
For fear he should misplace them in his Scheme,
Wholly intent upon his Heavenly Theme;
And walking carelessly, fell in a Pit,
And fearing to be froze to death, cried out.
A Country Man, who was that Night in the Fields,
To look after his Yews, and new-faln Lambs,
Hearing that pityous cut-cry, to him came,
And looking with his Lanthorn into the Well,
Espied the Astrologer, and thus to him spoke,
Neighbor, ben't always staring on the Skies,
But sometimes look below, how the way lies.
The MORAL.
They who can all things by the Stars foretell,
May easily avoid an open Well.
FAB. LXXXVII. The Ass and Fox.
AN Ass put on a Lions Skin, and ran
About the Fields, and terrified the Beasts,
And thought to put the same Trick on the Fox,
But he had heard him bray, and to him said,
I knew this Voice, else I had been afraid.
The MORAL.
A Fool, in Royal Robes, is known by's Speech.
The Ape the more he climbs, shows more of's Breech.
FAB. LXXXVIII. The Woman and Wolf.
A Hungry Wolf, hunting about for Prey,
Came to a Country Cottage, and there heard
A Mother menacing her crying Child
To give't the Wolf, if it did not desist:
The Wolf, who thought the Woman spoke her mind,
Patiently waited for the froward Boy,
Until he heard the Mother change her Note,
And say to the Child, be not afraid, my Dear,
We'll kill the Wolf, if he comes for my Babe.
Thus disappointed, back to the Wood he goes,
Vexd, pensive, desperate, cursing his stay*
And all the way he went, had this in's mouth,
What a strange thing is Man, whose words and deeds
Have no conformity one with the other?
The MORAL.
Words do not always show what is in the Heart.

FAB. LXXXIX. The Hen and Swallow.
A Foolish Hen, thinking they were her own,
Sat upon Serpents Eggs, till they were hatchd,
To whom a Swallow said, What Is your design,
To show so great marks of maternal Love
To those, who when grown up, will you destroy?
The MORAL.
Save a Thief from the Gallows, he will Hang you.

FAB. XC. The Ass. Raven and Wolf.
AN Ass, with a Gald Back, wandering in the Fields,
Seeking a shady place, wherein to lie,
Safe from the persecution of the Fly,
Was by a Raven seen, who on him pitchd,
And with his sharp Bill, wounded and peckd his Sore,
Which made him bray, and winch, and run about,
And causd great pleasure in the Rabble Rout:
Which, when a Wolf perceivd, he sighd, and said,
How sad is the Condition of us Wolves?
Whom all Men persecute at the first sight,
Yet, in the injuries of this Crow delight.
The MORAL.
It is less dangerous to some, to steal
A Horse, than others to look over the Hedge.
FAB. XCI. The Lark and Fowler.
A Lark high mounted in the Air, espied
A cunning Fowler pitching Nets, and Snares,
And askd him what he meant, what he contrivd:
I intend to build a City for the Birds,
He said, and then behind the Bushes went.
The Fowler gone, the Lark drew near, to see
What progress was in this new City made,
And hopping carelessly about, was caught;
The Fowler then appeard, to whom the Lark,
My Curiosity has cost me dear,
If you Treat all Birds so, none will dwell here.
The MORAL.
A Cruel Prince depopulates the Realm.

FAB. XCII. The Fox and Bramble.
A Fox, in climbing ore a Garden Hedge,
Ready to fall, laid hold upon a Bramble,
Which pricked his Feet, and tore his Fur from's Skin*
In a great fury, thus revild the Thorn:
Is this, said he* an Entertainment fit
For Refugees, who fly to you for help?
To whom the Thorn did thus reply, or smarter,
Who can expect kind usage from a Brier?
We are by nature framd to scratch, and tear,
Now you are convincd what it is to catch a Tartar.
The MORAL.
When you are in need, ask not an ill Man's help.

FAB. XCIII. The Fuller and Collier.
A Collier, much pressd his Friend a Fuller,
That they might dwell together in one House;
To whom the Fuller answered, by no means,
I cannot consent to such a strange demand,
My business is to make Cloth clean and white,
What ere you touch, becomes as black as Night.
The MORAL.
Ioyn not with those whose Interest thwarts thine.

FAB. XCIV. The Fox and Uizour.
A Curious Fox went to a Tradesmans Shop,
Who servd the Plays, with Vizards and with Masks,
And searching every corner of that place,
He found the likeness of a humane Face,
And was with its Proportion much pleased,
And the rare Workmanship therein expressd;
The World, said he, cannot show a finer Head,
Had it the chiefest requisites, Wit, and Brains.
The MORAL.
A Beauteous Face, renders a Fool more known.

FAB. XCV. The Two Mice.
Horace in the Sixth Satyr of the Second Book, describes the Fable of the City
and Country MOUSE thus.
-- Olim
Rusticus urbanum murem Mus paupere fertur
Accepisse Cavo, veterem vetus hospes amicum.
Asper, and attentus quaesitis, ut tamen arctum
Solveret hospitiis animum. Quid multa? neque illi
Sepositi ciceris nec longae invidit avenae;
Aridum and ore ferens acimum semesaque lardi
Frusta, dedit, cupiens varia fastidiae coena
Vincere tangentis male singula dente superbo:
Quum pater ipse domus, palea porrectus in horna,
Esset ador loliumque, dapis meliora relinquens:
Tandem urbanus ad hunc, Quid te juvat, inquit, amice,
Praerupti nemoris patientem vivere dorso?
Vis tu homines urbemque feris praeponere silvis?
Carpe viam, mihi creed, comes terrestria quando
Mortaleis animas vivunt sortita, Neque ulla est
Aut magno aut parvo leti fuga, quo bone circa,
Dum licet, in rebus jucundis vive beatus:
Vive memor, quam sis aevi brevis, Haec ubi dicta
Agrestem pepulere, domo levis exsilit. Inde
Ambo propositum peragunt iter, urbis aventes
Maenia nocturni subrepere. Jamque tenebat
Nox medium caeli spatium, quum ponit uterque
In locuplete domo vestigia; rubro ubi cocco
Tincta super lectos canderet vestis eburnos,
Multaque de magna superessent fercula caena,
Quae procul exstructis inerant hesterna canistris.
Ergo ubi purpurea porrectum in vest locavit
Agrestem, veluti succinctus cursitat hospes,
Continuatque dapes, nec non vernaliter ipsis
Fungitur officiis, praelambens omne quod affert,
Ille cubans gaudet mutata sort, bonisque
Rebus agit laetum convivam, quum subito ingens
Valvarum strepitus lectis excussit utrumque,
Currere per totum pavidi conclave, magisque
Exanimes trepidare, simul domus alta molossis
Personuit canibus, tum rusticus, Haud mihi vita
Est opus hac ait, and valeat, me silva, cavusque
Tutus ab insidiis, tenui solabitur ervo.
An Excellent Parafrase of the same by Mr. Abraham Cowley.
AT the large foot of a fair hollow Tree,
Close to plowd ground, seated commodiously,
His ancient and Hereditary House,
There dwelt a good substantial Country Mouse.
Frugal, and Grave, and careful of the main,
Yet one, who once did Nobly entertain
A City Mouse, well Coated, sleek and gay,
A Mouse of high Degree, who lost his way,
And arrivd early, and belighted there,
For a days Lodging; the good hearty Host
Did all the stores produce that might excite,
With various taste the Courtiers appetite,
Fetches, and Beans, Peasen and Oats, and Wheat,
And a large Chestnut, the delicious meat,
Which Jove himself, were he a Mouse, would eat.
And for a Haut-goust, there was mixed with these,
The Sword of Bacon, and the Coat of Cheese,
The precious relics of the Harvest, he
Had gatherd from the Reapers Luxury.
Freely, said he, fall on, and never spare,
The bounteous Gods will for to morrow care:
And thus at ease on Beds of Straw they lay,
And to their Genius sacrificd the day;
Yet the nice Guests Epicurean mind,
Though Breeding made him Civil seem and Kind,
Despisd this Country Feast, and still his thought
Upon the Cakes, and Pies of London wrought.
Your Bounty and Civility, said he,
Which I Am surprisd in these rude Parts to see,
Shows that the Gods have given you a Mind
Too Noble for the Fate which here you find.
Why should a Soul so virtuous, and so great,
Lose it self thus in an obscure retreat?
Let savage Beasts lodge in a Country Den,
You should see Town, and Manners know, and Men,
And taste the generous Luxury of the Court,
Where all the Mice of Quality resort;
Where thousand beauteous She Is about you move,
And by high fare, are plyant made to Love,
We all, ere long, must render up our breath,
No Cave or Hole can shelter us from Death.
Since Life is so uncertain, and so short.
Let Us spend it all, in Feasting, and in Sport.
Come, worthy Sir, come and with me partake
All the great things that Mortals happy make;
Alas, what Virtue has sufficient Arms
TO oppose bright Honor, and soft Pleasures Charms?
What Wisdom can their Magic force expel?
It draws this Reverend Father from his Cell.
It was the time, that witty Poets tell,
That Febus into Thetis Bosom fell;
She blushed at first, and then put out the light,
And drew the modest Curtains of the Night.
Plainly the truth to tell, the Sun was set,
When to the Town our wearied Travelers get
To a Lords House, as Lordly as can be,
Made for the use of Pride and Luxury,
They come, the Genteel Courtier at the Door
Stops, and will hardly enter in before,
But it is Sir your Command, and being so,
I Am sworn t'Obedience, and so in they go.
Behind a Hanging in a spacious Room,
The richest work of Mortlaks Noble Loom,
They wait a while their wearied Limbs to rest,
Till Silence should invite them to the Feast;
About the hour, that Cynthias silver light
Had touched the pale Meridian of Night:
At last the various Supper being done,
It happened, that the Company being gone
Into a Room remote, Servants and all,
To please their noble Fancies with a Ball,
Our Host leads forth his Stranger, and does find
All suited to the bounties of his mind;
Still on the Table half-filld Dishes stood,
And with delicious Fare the floor was strowd;
The courteous Mouse presents him with the best,
And both with fat Varieties are blessed:
The industrious Peasant every where does range*
And thanks the Gods for his life's happy change;
Lo, in the midst of a well-fruited Pie,
They both at last glutted and wanton lie;
When see the sad reverse of prosperous Fate,
And what fierce Storms on mortal Glories wait.
With hideous noise, down the rude Servants come,
Six Dogs before run barking into the Room;
The wretched Gluttons fly with wild affright,
And hate the fullness which retards their flight;
Our trembling Peasant wishes now in vain,
The Rocks and Mountains coverd him again;
O how the change of his poor life he cursd,
This* of all lives, said he, is sure the worst,
Give me again, ye Gods, my Cave and Wood,
With Peace, let Tares and Acorns be my Food.
FAB. XCVI. Upon the same Subject.
TWO Mice, of different Quality, and Estate,
Contracted a strict Friendship. Ones House stood
In The Capital City, the others in a Wood;
The Country Mouse invites his wealthy Friend
To come and eat with him, at his poor Cot,
To taste the Country Food, and breath the Air:
The Courtier accepts this Invitation,
Willing to see what lives those poor Souls led,
What were their Pastimes, upon what they fed.
Variety pleases both great Mice, and Men.
I Will come, said he, dear Friend, I Will spoil your Jest,
When must it be? You shall have notice, Sir,
Replied the Country Mouse, and took his leave.
When all things were in readiness, he sent,
Aquaints his Friend, and begs him not to fail.
He comes, is introducted to the Hall,
Fenced about with Reed, instead of Wall,
And strewed with Rushes, new fetchd from the Field:
In a remote Corner, an Oyster-shell
Was placd, filld with clear Water from the Spring*
Wherewith they might both quench their thirst, and wash;
He placd his Guest at the upper end of the Board,
Upon a tuft of Moss, and then brought forth
His Store, the Swaert of Bacon, Chiches, Beans,
Patings of Cheese, Kernels of Nuts and Plums,
And other Cates, in the Country highly prizd,
Which he, with pain and cost, and help of Friend,
Had got together against that great day.
You know, said he, I cannot Complement,
I never was bred in the Inns-of-Court,
Never saw a College, or a Dancing-School,
Pray Sir fall to, accept this homely Treat,
I wish it were much better for your sake.
they eat and drank, and pleasantly discoursd,
And then, to help digestion, walkd in the Field;
At their return, he waits upon his Guest,
And shows him his best Chamber, and best Bed,
Which with clean Sheets of Wheaten Straw was spread.
They made but one Sleep till the Sun went down;
Such placid Sleep to good Kings is unknown,
Whose care for others rest disturbs their own.
He brought him part of's way, to a Friends House,
Where they embracd, and kissd, and took their leaves.
The Guest to his courteous Host returns his thanks,
And makes him promise the next Holyday
To come, and take a Commons, at his House.
Upon the day prefixd, the Country Mouse,
Having washed, and brusht, set forwards on his way*
After Sun set, and so orderd his pace,
He arrivd at Midnight at the City Gate,
Thence, to the Palace of his Friend he goes,
Whom he found waiting for him at the Door,
The Courtier would have had him enterd first,
But he refusd, not knowing 'twas the Mode;
To wash his Feet, he Orange Water brings,
Then in an upper Room, shows him a Bed,
Of The richest Velvet made fit for a King;
Pray Friend, said he, lie down, and sleep a while,
You must be weary, having walkd so far.
The Country Mouse without reply, obeyed:
When all the Meat was set upon the Board,
The Courtier goes himself, calls down his Guest,
And placing him on his right hand, thus spoke;
Friend, you are welcome, eat of what you please,
Here Is all variety your heart can wish,
Olios, Ambigues, Bisques, Grilliades,,
Cocoes, Vinellii, Pigniates, Pistaccios,
Parmisan Cheese, Botargo, Caveare,
And Ketchup, which will make you please your Wife,
And several other Dishes, whose strange Names
The untravelld Mouse had never heard before:
They were just sat, and scarce had eat one bit,
When suddenly the Pantry Door flies open,
A Light appears, several Lacqueys enter,
Following he Master Cook with Silver Voyders;
At the appearance of this hated Light,
They both betook their selves to hasty flight;
As soon as those unwelcome Guests were gone,
Come, said the City Mouse, the Coast is clear,
Let us return, and fall to our Good Cheer:
But his poor Friend, who in a cold Sweat lay,
Refusd to come, having lost his Appetite,
And not yet half recoverd out of's fright.
But when he found that no Excuse would serve,
With much reluctance, he came, sat down,
Picked here and there a bit, but relisht none,
The Meat he swallowd went down like chopped Hay,
The Wine seemd to his Palate prict and dead:
While he was thus uneasy at the Feast,
They are again alarmd, and as before,
Both the Mice hid their selves behind the Door;
The City Mouse, who the greater Courage had,
Having such dangers frequently escapd,
Used all his Eloquence and Art, to engage
His Friend to appear a third time on the Stage.
But he lay in his Hole, expecting death,
Not daring move his feet, or draw his breath:
Next day the Courtier having pressd in vain,
His fearful Guest one Night more to remain,
Gave him leave to go home. The joyful Mouse
Spoke thus at's parting: Ever honored Sir,
And my most Noble Friend, you have made a Feast
Fit for a King, which I with thanks accept,
But never shall be able to requite;
Though to be plain, Sir, I don't like the Sauce,
The Sword over my Head. You may feed on
Meats with hard Names, and hard digestion,
But if kind Heavens restore me to my Cell,
I Will feed on simple, unbought, wholesome Meat,
Growing in every Field, and every Wood,
Such as our Fathers eat before the Flood;
I Will bring my unruly Passions to obey,
From fear of Death, and vain Ambition free,
I Will lead a God-like Life, and pity Kings.
The MORAL.
The Middle state of Men is most secure,
Con^tent, not Wealth, does Happiness insure.
FAB. XCVII. The Cat and Cock.
A Hypocritical Cat had seizd a Cock,
Whom, though he was fully resolvd to kill,
Yet sought a fair pretense for this foul Fact;
He first accusd him, that he made a Noise
Early in the morning, and disturbd Men's sleep:
The Cock replied, I do this for their good,
To give them notice of approaching Day,
That they may rise, and follow their Affairs.
The Cat urgd further, you are Incestuous,
And do not from thy nearest Kin refrain.
I do it, answered the Cock, to increase the Brood,
And yield my Owners Table plenteous food.
My Belly has no Ears, the Cat replied,
Though I can find no fault in thy defense,
My raging Hunger must be satisfied,
Therefore I Will dine to day at thy expense,
This said, with the Cocks blood her mouth she died.
The MORAL.
Against Injustice, Reason pleads in vain,
No Argument like Force, when Tyrants Reign.
FAB. XCVIII. The Father, Son, and Ass.
AN Old Man, and his Son, a little Boy,
Drove an unloaded Ass to the next Fair,
And followd both on Foot. A Country Man
Seeing this Sight, rallied them in this sort;
What Is your design? do you lead out that Ass
To play in the Fields, as Pedants do young Boys?
Neither of you are slt to walk a foot,
One's past that labor, the other not come to it.
By these true Jests the Father being stung,
Commanded the young Boy to mount the Ass,
Which, when another Country Fellow saw,
Here Is a fine Show, said he, a lusty Boy
Riding, and an Old Fool creeping on foot.
This being heard, and judgd true, by the Old Man,
He bids his Son alight, and rides himself,
Until he came to the Entrance of a Town*
Where several idle People being met,
Gazd at him; Is it not a burning shame,
Said one, to see a lusty Fellow ride,
And a poor weak Boy trudging by his side:
Not being able to endure these Taunts*
He sets his Son behind him on the Croup;
A Traveller, who pitied the poor Ass,
Demanded, pray, what Crime has that Beast done,
To be so heavy loaded with two Clowns?
Have you a mind he should be Meat for Crows?
These various opinions put the Old Man
Out of his Wits, but yet in hopes to please,
He was resolvd to leave no Stone unturnd.
At last, he the Asses Legs together tied,
And bore him on his Shoulders, and his Sons
On a long Pole. At this unusual Sight,
The numerous Spectators laughed outright,
And at them every one let fly their Bolt,
And jeering, said, were ever two such Fools?
Were there, in Bedlam, ever two so mad?
The Father finding all he did displeasd,
And willing of his Burden to be easd,
Threw the Ass headlong into a deep Pool.
Thus the Farce ended, of the Ass and Fool.
The MORAL.
They who will always change, and always mend,
As long as any Fool shall reprehend,
Will never bring their Labors to an end.
Another out of I. C.
Soeckt ghy even Peert, of wijf, maer suyver van gebre^en,
So mooghie vry het wertk voortaer well laten steken,
It Is seker, lieve vrient, dat u ket Bed* en Stal,
Geduerigh ombe wont, en ledigh wesen sal.
That is,

They who are resolvd never to Wed, or Ride,
Until they find a Faultless Horse, or Bride,
Must always walk a-foot, and lie alone.
Another out of I. C.
Wie e^^^e veer will sien, en raken,
Hoe kan hy oyt even Bed maken?
That is,

If every Feather must in's proper place be laid.
How much time will be spent, before the Bed is made?
Another out of I. C.
Hy moet veel brijs hebben,
Die den el^k mont sal stoppen.
Men hoe^t veel Pap met volle Potten,
Om mont te stoppen aen all Sotten.
That is,

Of Papp a hundred thousand brimful Pots,
Are not not enuf, to stop the mouths of Sots.
FAB. XCIX. The Cat, Cock and Mouse.
A Wealthy Mouse, had her dear Husband lost,
And all her numerous Progeny, but one,
By open force, or stratagems of the Cat,
To breed this only Child was her chief care
To see him Married, and the Estate Intaild,
Which had been many Ages in that Name,
Upon his Heirs, in lawful Wedlock got;
She never let him budge out of her sight,
With him she went to School, with him to play,
With him she dind, and suppd, and slept all day.
Tired with so close consinement, the young Heir,
When Is Mothers back was turned, stole out of doors,
But to secure's retreat, took several Marks,
And carefully observd, how the Ways turned;
At length he came where he a young Cock spied,
Strutting about the Room, with wanton Price,
And an old Cat, lie prostrate on the Floor;
Toward them he creeps, the cunning Cat lay still,
In hopes to get him further from his Hole,
And then Regale her self with his young flesh:
The wanton Cock, the Mouse no sooner saw,
But after him he runs with open mouth,
Making a hideous noise, sweeping the ground
With his extended Wings; at which strange sight,
The fearful Youth betakes himself to flight,
And without looking back, got to his Hole;
His Mother much rejoyed at his return,
But when she saw him look so pale and wan,
Trembling with fear, panting, and out of breath,
What ails my Child, she cried, where have thou been?
Tell me, my Joy, what strange Sights have thou seen?
Mother, said he, I saw two wondrous things,
One of a Hair not much unlike to yours,
Four Feet it had, a long Tail, slaming Eyes,
Short Ears, a round Head, and a mild Aspect;
Much was I taken with his Countenance,
He seemd so Courteous, Assable, and Kind;
As I was drawing near to hear him speak,
The other thing, running with open mouth,
Made to me, and had killd me, if I Would staid;
He had, Mother, methinks I see him still,
Only two Feet, his Mouth was made of Horn,
And a raw piece of Flesh grew on his Head,
His Body short, with various Colors decked,
An upright Gate, bright Eyes, a bushy Tail,
And on his scaly Legs, he wore long Spurs.
The Mother by her Sons description, knew
What he had seen, and thus to him replied;
Ah foolish Child, thou know not good from ill,
And art not to be trusted by thy self,
That Creature, which thou thoughtst so amiable,
So Courteous, so Assable, so Kind,
Whom to discourse thou had so great a mind,
Is the worst Beast that lives under the Sun,
Cruel, persidious, fraudulent, unjust,
And a sworn Enemy to all thy Kind;
He killd, and eat thy Father, and thy Brothers,
He many Widows makes, and Childless Mothers,
He had killd thee too, if thou had gone near;
Him always dread, approach not near his Tents,
If thou desire to avoid untimely death,
If for thy Mother thou have any love,
For my Life, dearest Child's, bound up in thine.
The other, who so proud to thee appeard,
So fierce, so cruel, so much to be feared,
Is a young frolic, wanton Fool, like thee;
He delights not in Blood, and Cruelty,
Water he drinks, Corn is his only Food,
There Is nothing in him of the treacherous Cat;
He has a valiant Heart, and cheerful Song,
And scorns to do, or suffer any wrong;
The Assault he made on thee, was a mere Trick
Of Youth, a feignd Attack, a false Alarm,
Designd to please himself, not thee to harm.
The MORAL.
A cheerful Countenance shows an honest Heart*
From those who wear that Badge, suspect no ill,
But when thou dealst with Men of cloudy Brows,
Pretending to more Conscience, than others,
Look to thy Hits, for they will Cheat their Brothers.
FAB. C*. The Boaster.
ONE who had traveled far, at his return,
Told many famous Acts he had done abroad,
And this amongst the rest, that being at Rhodes,
He out*leapd all the Inhabitants of that Isle,
Which he could by authentic witness prove*
To whom, one of the Standers-by replied,
What need is there to muster Witnesses?
If it be true, convince us by your Deeds,
Let Us see you do it. Here Is Rhodes, and here is a Leap.
The MORAL.
Words may be spared, when Deeds can be produced.

FAB. CI. The Two Citizens and Ungrateful Son.
A Citizen settled his whole Estate,
In Marriage, upon his only Son,
And for a season friendly with him livd:
At length, his Sons Wife proves with-Child, and thus
Spoke to her Husband, I am Breeding, my Dear,
And cannot endure to see your Father spaul,
And smoke stinking Tobacco, in my Hall:
As you love me, and this your Child, unborn,
Laying her Hand upon her pregnant Womb,
Let it be so no more. Away he goes,
And tells his Father this Complaint of's Wife,
And prays him for the future, to look out
Some other place, wherein to Spit and Smoke.
This to the Old Man was a Thunderclap,
But he was forced to yield to those hard Terms,
For they must needs go whom the Devil drives.
Next day* when he had dined, he took his Staff,
Walked out, to give a Visit to a Friend,
A wealthy Citizen, who had left off Trade,
And on's Estate in the Country livd retird,
Leading a cheerful hospitable life,
He comes, and with great kindness is receivd.
After a Glass or two, the Courteous Host,
Said, Sir, in your dejected Countenance,
The troubles of your Mind plainly appear;
What Evil has befaln you? tell your Friend.
He told this Story, and though it is very bad,
I fear, said he, the worst is still behind*
For when my Daughter's pleased to give the word,
Her Husband's so obedient, and so fond,
I shall be turned out, and constraind to beg.
I thought, his Friend replied, that you had known
The World too well, to strip your self of all,
And trust to the good Nature of a Son,
But what is past cannot be now undone;
I think I have a Project in my head,
Will settle you for your life, and you restore
To greater Freedom, than you had before.
If you do this, the injurd Man replied,
You Will be to me, a Father, and a God.
Know then, replied his Friend, I too was once
A wealthy Citizen, I too, had a Son,
To whom I gave a plentiful Estate,
To set him forth in the World, but not my All,
Something I kept, against a rainy day,
Besides a Rent Charge, upon which I live;
I have two thousand Guineas in a Chest,
With these I Will trust you, these at several times,
You, and I, to your Lodgings will convey.
What they contrivd, they soon put in effect,
Then by advice, the Old Man a Sickness feignd,
Doctors, and 'Pothecaries, came in shoals.,
With Clyster-pipes, and Gally-pots, and Glasses;
To whom, when is Son profferd to pay their dues,
Hold Child, said he, I have some Money left,
Here, take this Key, it opens such a Trunk,
Bring thence what is sufficient: with joy
He goes, unlocks the Trunk, and finds the Gold,
But without breaking Bulk, returns the Key,
And was so generous, to defray the Charge
Of's Father's Sickness, out of his own Purse.
The Old Man recovers, quits his Bed, comes down,
Dines, and then proffers to go out, and Smoke
Under a Shed, in the Yard, as he was wont.
Which, when his Daughter saw, Sir, what do you mean,
Stay in this Room, she said, Spit where you please,
Use the House freely, take it for your own;
You have been lately Sick, you're weak, and old,
I would not for the World you should take Cold.
And ever after, to the day of's Death,
He was by's Daughter Honored, and Caressd.
The two old Friends their Visits interchangd,
Till all the Gold returned from whence it came.
And brought at several times so many Stones,
As filld the empty Trunk up to the top,
Loaded with Years, at length the Father dies,
The Son performs the Funeral Obsequies,
Then taking by the hand his joyful Wife,
He leads her to adore the Golden Fleece,
But finding nothing there, but Stones, and Brick,
He stood amazd, and said, with a deep groan,
My Ungratitude has turned this Gold to Stone.
The MORAL.
Put not thy Clothes off, till thou go to Bed,
Part not with all thy Estate, till thou art Dead.
Another out of I. C.
Niemant en ontkleet him ^eern eer hy slapen gaet.

That is,

Let none Undress before they go to Sleep.

Another out of the same.
Wiljie mijn Erf? wacht tot Ick sterf.

That is,

Would have my Gold? stay till I Am Cold.

Or thus,

If you are desirous, Friend, my Land to have,
Wait patiently, until I am in the Grave.
Another out of the Italian.
Quanto piu l' uccello e ve^chio, tant piu mal voluntieri, Lalcia la piuma.

To this purpose I. C.
Wat match men van even ouden Mensch vegeeren*
Hoe ouder Doghel, hoe nooder, u^t de Deeren?
That is,

Why should an Old Man give away's Estate?
The oldest Birds, of Feathers have most need.
Out of I. C.
Als de Dogel komt tot aen haer lesie dagen
Dan staen de pluymen diep, en vaster alsse plagen.
That is,

The older the Bird, the deeper and faster the Feathers.

FAB. CII. The Herdsman.
A Herdsman rangd about the Fields, to find
A Heyfer, he had lost, and made a Vow,
To sacrifice a Kid to Jupiter,
If he would show him where his strayd Beast was;
After long search, he found him in a Wood,
And a fierce Lion, feasting on his blood:
Then being ready to fall dead with fear,
O Jove, said he, I promisd thee a Kid,
If thou would show me who had stole my Steer,
Conduct me back in safety to my House,
I Will give thee the best Bullock in my Stall.
The MORAL.
The Gods know best what is fit for them to grant,
Men often pray for that, they had better want.
FAB. CIII. Mercury.
JUpiter orderd Mercury to prepare
A lying Potion, for all Tradesmens use;
He pounded the Ingredients in a Mortar,
Observing punctually measure and weight,
And brought it to his Patients when made up,
All of them, but the Tailor, took the Dose,
Yet there remaind much Liquor in the Cup,
All which the Tailor greedily drank off.
The MORAL.
Ever since that, All Tradesmen have been Liars,
But Tailors more Notorious than the rest.
FAB. CIV. Apollo and the Deceiver.
ONE in his own opinion, wondrous Wise,
Holding a Bird in's Hand, to Delfi went,
And getting near the Altar, thus he spoke:
Tell me, Apollo, tell me presently,
Is this Bird, in my Hand, alive or dead?
Being prepatd, to prove Apollo lied,
Had he, It Lives, or It is Dead, replied*
For if the Oracle had said, it Lives,
He would have killd it, and produced it Dead:
But if Apollo should, it is Dead, reply,
He would show it alive, and let it fly.
Apollo knowing his intentions, said,
It Is as you please, either Alive, or Dead.
The MORAL.
They Cheat their selves, who think to Cheat the Gods.

FAB. CV. The Heart and Horse.
In the First Book of Horaces Epistles, and the Tenth Epistle, the Fable of the
HEART and HORSE is thus expressed.
CERVUS equum pugna melior communibus herbis
Pellebat, done^ minor in certamine longo
Imploravit opes hominis, frenumque recepit:
Sed post quam victor violence discessit ab host,
Non equitem dorso, non frenum depulit ore,
Sic, qui pauperiem veritus, potio^e metallis
Liberate caret, dominum vehit improbus, atque
Serviet aeternum: quia parvo nesciet uti.
FAB. CVI. A Parafrase of the same.
AHart happend to quarrel with a Horse,
And beat him out of the Pasture by main force.
Who not being able to endure the Affront,
Retird to the Woods, and resolvd there to stay,
Till he had found a sure, and speedy way
To cancel his Disgrace, by sweet Revenge.
At last, he fixd upon a strange Resolve.
In suppliant posture to crave aid of Man,
Of Man, whom hitherto he had defied,
And never sufferd on his Back to ride,
Of whom, he had been jealous all his life,
Keeping himself untouchd, unbackd, untamd.
To him he goes, and his sad Story tells,
I Will be at your disposal, Sir, said he,
If you will avenge me of mine Enemy.
The Man had often seen this stately Beast
Wantonly galloping about the Fields,
And much admird his Strength, Spirit, and Shape;
Often employed both Stratagems, and Force,
To get him into's power, but all in vain,
And now on that design he thought no more,
But as impossible, had given it ore.
Wondering to see him, on his own accord
Render himself, his proffer he accepts,
With joy, and promises to do him right.
Then did the Horse, with patience admit
The Saddle, Holsters, Pistols, Bridle, Bitt,
And the armd Champion too, Booted, and Spurrd.
His Soul was so intent upon Revenge,
He did not feel the heavy Load he bore,
Though never any pressed his Back before.
With winged speed, his Rider he conducts
To his Foes Haunt, at this unwelcome Sight,
The affrighted Heart betakes himself to flight,
But being Fat, and Pursy, was soon tired,
And by the Horsemans Spear, pierced through the side;
The warm blood gushing from his gaping wound,
With Tyrian Purple died the Verdant ground.
The Horse rejoycd to see his Enemy dead,
And in's return, thus to the Conqueror spoke;
You have repaird my Honor, slain my Foe,
Pray Sir, accept my Thanks, and let me go.
The Man replied, that Bargain's yet to make,
Since I have servd your Turn, you must serve mine.
I am your Master now, which said, he gave
Srict orders to his Groom, to keep him safe.
Whilst he was Young, he many Races won,
Afterward, hunted Fox, and Hare; being Old,
He Plowd, and Harrowd, carried Grist to the Mill,
And Lime, and stinking Dung to the Fallow Field,
Did all the Drudgery of the House, fed ill,
Being no more regarded than an Ass,
And when he had finishd his laborious Life,
Was at last, carried in a Cart to's Grave.
He had's Revenge, but livd, and died a Slave.
The MORAL.
Who lose their Liberty, and win Revenge*
Make a bad Bargain, and buy Gold too dear.
Another.
May they, who to enslave England are inclind,
No better Usage, from their Rider, find.
FAB. CVI. The Calf and Ass.
A New-weand Calf, and a laborious Ass,
In the same Field, sed on the tender Grass,
And as they were in the midst of their repast,
The affrighted Calf cried out, I hear a Drum,
And see a Band of Soldiers march this way,
What will become of us, if here we stay?
Let Us go to the next Wood, or Cave, and hide.
It Is best for you, to fly, the Ass replied.
You are in greater Jeopardy, than I,
For, if you fall into your Enemies power,
It is impossible you can live an hour;
To the Pot and Spit you go, are Boyld, and Roast,
And feast the hungry Soldiers, at your Cost;
I have no reason to dread such a Treat,
Lean Asses Flesh is not such tempting Mear,
Nor, do I fear, to be a Captive led,
For, I, where ere I live, must earn my Bread:
My Fate's the same, set me down where you please,
There is no place where Asses live at Ease:
I cannot expect Fortune should change her Style,
And in my latter days vouchsafe a Smile;
She ever has, (...) will, me expose
To Hunger, heavy Burdens, and hard Blows.
Without concern I hear the Trumpet sound,
Nor do I care, by whom the Battle's won,
Either French, or English, Ottoman, or Hun,
I must remain a Slave, till my Life's done.
The MORAL.
It concerns those who have Money in their Purse,
From Innovations, to preserve the State.
Unalterable is the Poor Man's Fate;
He may change Masters, and be never the worse.
FAB. CVII. Hope.
HEalth, Wisdom, Wealth, Empire, and all the Goods
That Mankind can enjoy, or can desire,
Jove put into a Pot, and soald it up,
Then gave it to a Friend, on Earth, to keep,
With a Command, he should not break the Seal;
But he could not refrain therein to peep.
Upon the opening of the Pot, they all
Returned in have, to Heaven, from whence they came.
Only Hope, loath to depart, stayed on the Brim.
And ever since, is to the Afflicted Kind,
Loving their Company, whom Fortune hates.
The MORAL.
Hope, of all Miseries that Men endure,
Is the only Cheap, and Universal Cure. Cowley.
FAB. CVIII. The Nose.
WHat shall I do with this prodigious Nose?
On which a cluster of young Noses grows,
Of various Magnitudes, and different Shapes,
All Red as Rubies, or Burgundian Grapes.
A Nose that is pointed at by all I meet,
That frights the Boys and Women in the street,
And my self too, when, in a Glass, I see it.
A Nose, that every hour, worse and worse grows.
I cannot endure it longer. Off it goes.
Bring me a Razor, Boy, or a sharp Knife.
Thus spoke, a Man, weary of's Nose, and Life.
But when the Knife toth' root of's Nose was laid,
He stopped, and to himself thus calmly said:
Hold, think a while, may I not, by this Fact,
Incur the Penalties of the Coventry Act?
Instead of mending, shall I not spoil my Face,
And bring upon me, Pain, Expense, Disgrace?
Strangers will swear 'twas a Venereal Wound,
And shun my Conversation, as Unsound.
Out of the same Glass they will refuse to drink,
And stop their Noses, at my Notches, stink.
My Smart will be increased, my Cure delayed,
Until the Surgeon's bountifully paid.
I shall repent too late, when thou art gone,
It Is better to have an Ugly Nose, than none.
If we two part, I run risque of my Life.
Nose, keep thy Place, Boy, take away the Knife.
The MORAL.
Some Remedies are worse than the Disease.

FAB. CIX. The Traveller and Tortoise.
A Traveller, on a long Journey bent,
Entered a Wood, just as the Day was spent,
Ready to faint, and resolvd there to sleep,
Until the Sun should out of the Ocean peep.
To get new Strength, and fresh Spirits create.
Then, as he thought, he on a Hillock sat.
But, what to him appeard a rising Land,
Was a great Tortoise, coverd over with Sand.
Who, pincht with hunger, travelld all the Night
In search of Food, to appease his Appetite.
Cropping the tender Herbs, he found in's way,
Without making a Halt, or the least stay.
His constant, tho slow motion, much ground rid,
And brought him, far from thence, where he lay hid
Next morn, the Traveller about him gazd,
And stood surprizd, confounded, and amazd
At the great Alteration of the Scene,
And could not comprehend what it should mean:
What a strange Metamorfosis is this?
All things I saw last Night, this day I miss.
When I sat down to sleep, he said, there stood
A Rocky Mountain, and orelookt the Wood.
A stately Palace graced a pleasant Hill
On my right hand, why is it not there still?
Is it removd, pulld up by the roots, or sunk?
Have I my Wits lost? am I Mad, or Drunk?
Nothing its Place, nothing its Shape has kept,
Besides this Sandy Bank, on which I slept.
Then, taking of it, an attentive view,
He saw it move, and what it was he knew.
The MORAL.
Time passes unperceivd, Pale Death draws near,
And steals us hence, before we know we are here.
FAB. CX. The Birds and Fenix.
IN former Times, the Empire of the Birds
Did not belong to the Kings Eldest Son.
Or any other of the Royal Blood,
But was disposd of, as the States thought good.
The Bird, who had most Votes in the Grand Diet,
Was ownd King, and possessd the Throne in quiet.
Of that Assembly, such the Customs were*
It was, freely, Elected every Year
Out of each several Species of Birds,
But might not Act, until the King was dead.
Freedom of Speech, Liberty in Debates,
Were Fundamental Privileges of those States;
The greatest, and the least, were Equal there,
None were brow-beaten, none of them domineerd:
The Wren was not despisd, nor the Eagle feared.
No Votes were to be bought, or sold; no Bribes
Given, to corrupt the Officers, or Scribes:
And many more, too long, here to inesrt.
A King died, and the August Assembly met,
A sit Successor on the Throne to set.
The first day of the Sessions, 'twas decreed,
No Bird of Prey should to the Crown succeed;
For they had, heretofore, their Tyranny felt.
This raisd the Ostriches, and Peacocks hopes,
To obtain the Crown, by their Embroiderd Copes.
The Pulses of some of the House they tried,
But found themselves, even by their Friends, denied.
Several Factions, and Cabals were framd,
But, before any Candidate was namd,
A Politic Parrot to the Rostrum fled,
A Parrot, by a Learned Doctor bred,
Who often to him talkd, and sometimes read,
And with Chymeric Notions filld his Head,
Out of old Legends, and Romances culld,
Wherewith the World had a long time been gulld.
Having cravd Audience, he his Speech began:
Let not this Noble Senate take it ill,
That I presume, my Advice to interpose,
Hear it then, if you think fit, with me close.
Under the Cope of Heaven, there is but one,
Of all the Birds, worthy to mount the Throne,
No more than One. Then he the Fenix named,
And on his Virtues, a long hour declaimd,
With so Pathetic, and Persuasive Note,
That it upon the Attentive Senate wrought
To choose the Fenix, by Unanimous Vote.
'Twas next debated, how the Instrument
Of his Election, might to the King be sent;
And how the Ambassadors should find the Road,
For they were all in the dark, as to's Abode.
Ten thousand Couriers, with expanded Wing,
Were sent abroad, in Quest of this new King.
They visited every Climate, every Zone,
All parts of the Globe, which yet remain unknown:
Seas, Mountains, Lakes, every Hill, every Plain,
Caves, Grotto's, Hermites Cells, but all in vain.
Though a strict search was made, all the World round,
This PERFECT KING could never yet be found.
The MORAL.
Britannia bless thy Fate, thy Prince revere,
If there is a FENIX in the World, it is here.
FINIS.

