THE SIEGE OF BABYLON: As it is Acted at the Dukes Theater. Written by SAMVEL
PORDAGE, of Lincoln's Inn, Esquire Author of the Tragedy of Herod and Mariamne.

Non tibi plus placeas, quia multis forte placebis:
Id specta potius, qualibus ipse places.
Manci. de Quat. Virt. Licensed, Nov. 2. 1677. Roger L'Estrange.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Tonson, at his Shop under Gray's Inn Gate next
Grays-Inn-Lane, MDCLXXVIII.

TO HER Royal Highness THE DUCHESS.
Madam,
IT is not without Fear, that I approach your Throne; esteeming it a more
difficult task, to write an Epistle Dedicatory, than to make a Play: lest, on
the one hand, I should fall into the Crime of Presumption; or on the other,
slip into that, of Flattery. Confidence, if not Impudence, seems to be entailed
on Poets; and Ambition, or rather greediness, of vain Applause, by which they
would mount above others, carries them often, beyond the Limits of all Modesty,
and makes them rudely press, into the presence of Greatness, and Majesty. On
this Rock, I may now seem to run, and to have left my self no excuse, for
daring to set your Great Name before my Poem. But, Madam, it is to your Goodness
I must fly; and that favorable protection, which you afford those who want it,
must shield me from the envenomed Darts, of envious Detractors. They will have
Veneration for your Name, and stand in awe, when they shall know you have seen,
and approved this Play, that you have taken it into your Protection, and that
it is not without your permission, I offer it to your Highness; which I do,
with all the Humility I ought to have, and with all the submission, and respect
I can express. There is some necessity for me, to gain so powerful a Patroness,
considering the smalness of my Merits, and the niceness of this Critical Age,
in which the greatest Wits pass not without Censure, nor the most perfect
pieces of humane Invention, without being carp'd at. What would have been
current Coin, in the Ages past, will now be looked on as debased Metal; and
that Wit, which is esteemed but mean, and ordinary now, would have been then
accounted great, and miraculous. Wit is refined, and Ingenuity made bright, not
only by the Industry of Poets, and endeavors of the Learned, but by the
example, of the Court, and encouragement of Princes, who diffuse it like Light
to all that know them; among whom your Royal Highness, as a Star of the first
Magnitude, shines, with the splendour of your Mind, and enlightens the Souls of
others. I need not fear to be accused of Flattery, since you are a Theme too
high, all we can say, is still below you, and there can be no such Figure as
Hyperbole in your description. When I consider all your excellencies, I
approach you, with admiration, and am swallowed up in the Sea of your
perfections. Your Beauty, your Extraction, your Wit, Ingenuity, and acquired
parts; your Goodness, Piety, Wisdom, and Generosity, with all your other
Virtues, and Accomplishments; deserve each a particular Panegyric, and are
large Themes, on which the greatest Wits, may exercise their Pens. But Madam,
these are things too great for my undertakings, and it is now my business only,
to crave your acceptance of this Poem, which may serve for a diversion when
wearied with more serious Thoughts. I have saved the Persian Princesses from
the Cruelty of Roxana, but it is you only, Madam, that can protect them, from
the greater Tyranny of Critics, such as make it their business to find fault,
with what they cannot mend, who turn the greatest sense into Ridicule, and
Burlesque even the Virtues, and the Graces themselves. Statira flings her self
at the feet of your Royal Highness, and hopes you will give her a favorable
Reception, since you have extended your Favor to Mariamne, and showed a more
than ordinary kindness to that Tragedy, which has hitherto passed under the
Name of another, whilst I was out of the Land: but, Madam, since there is so
much Glory in it, to have pleased your Highness, and to have given satisfaction
to many Persons in the Royal Circle, I cannot forbear to own it, that your
Royal Highness may be the more easily induced, to smile on this, which, with my
self, I prostrate at your Feet, begging your pardon for the presumption of
assuming the Title of MADAM,

Your Royal Highnesses Most humble, most obedient, And most devouted Servant,
Samuel Pordage.

THE PROLOGUE,
Spoken by Mr. Smith. PRologues of old, as learned Authors say,
Used, to have some Coherence, with the Play,
Were not so much, for Ornament, as use;
Like necessary Porches, to a House;
They, to the Inner Rooms, did introduce.
But now, such is the custom of the Age,
A rough hewn Satyr, enters first, the Stage.
Who barks, bites, pushes, and at all does hit,
Pelts Men, and manners, with his wicked wit,
Grinns at the Court, the Country, and the Citt,
And sometimes snaps, you Critics, in the Pit.
Such is the Rage, that one Poetic Brother,
Falls foul with, and downright, rails at another,
And tho, the play, be moving, soft, and sweet,
And Verses run, on smooth, and even feet,
And tho it does of Love, and Honor treat,
And shows a body, soft, fair, gay, and neat,
The Prologue still, has a rough Satyr's face;
Which does the moving, sweet, soft, thing, disgrace
What e're the Play be, Custom does prevail,
It must be Satyr, in its Head, and Tail.
But Gentlemen, our Author bid me say,
He^d have no Satyrs face, before his Play,
Nor should it have, tho it be much in Vogue,
A swinging Tail, a lashing Epilogue.
Ladys, to you, he does himself address,
From you, he would receive, his happiness,
If your fair hands, shall his endeavors bless,
He will not fear, the Critics of the Pit,
Those Cursing, Damning, Mugletons, of Wit.
The Actors Names.
Orantes Prince of Scythia -- Mr. Betterton
Lysimachus a Prince of Macedon -- Mr. Medburn
Eumenes a Prince of Cappadocia -- Mr. Ievone
Ptolomy Captain of Alexander the great -- Mr. Crosby
Perdicas Captain of Alexander the great -- Mr. Smith
Cassander Captain of Alexander the great -- Mr. Harris
Araxis Servant to Orontes -- Mr. Norris
Statira Widow of Alexander the Great -- Mrs. Betterton
Roxana Widow of Alexander the Great -- Mrs. Lee
Parisatis Sister to Statira -- Mrs. Seymour
Thalestris Queen of the Amazons -- Mrs. Gwin
Cleone Confident of Statira -- Mrs. Gillo
Hesione Confident of Roxana Mrs. Le-Grand
Soldiers, Attendants, etc.
The SCENE BABYLON and the Fields adjacent.

Lately Printed.
The Tragedies of the last Age Considered and Examined, by the Practice of the
Ancients, and by the Common Sense of all Ages, in a Letter to Fleetwood
Shepherd Esquire By Tho. Rymer of Gray's Inn, Esquire Price bound 1 s. 6 d. Edgar, or
the English Monarch, an Heroic Tragedy, written by Tho. Rymer Esquire Price 1 s.
Both sold by Richard Tonson* at Gray's Inn Gate next Grays-Inn-Lane.

THE SIEGE OF BABYLON.
ACT I.
SCENE I. Babylon Besieged.
Enter Lysimachus and Ptolomy with drawn Swords. Ptol. NOw, my brave Friend,
both Love, and Honor calls,
Let us together run, to scale these Walls;
Let Us thus for Honor, and for Love contend,
Till Death, or Conquest, shall our Quarrel end.
Thus our great Cause, may by the Sword be tried,
And Fortune now, our Rivalship decide.

Lysi. No, Ptolomy, to that, I Will never agree,
Fortune, shall never judge 'twixt you, and me;
Blindly, she does her Favors often bestow,
Our Happiness, shall from our Merits flow:
So Parisatis, judgment best shall give,
Which of us two, shall die, and which shall live.

Pto. Lysimachus, that way, does worse appear,
All we can do, can never merit her,
She, like the Gods, is mounted far above,
The reach, of all our merits, or our Love.
Then, let not her, that cruel judgment give,
One, to condemn, to make the other live,
She, of that doom must certainly repent,
Make Fortune judge, and keep her innocent.

Lysi. You cannot place her, in your Thoughts, too high,
And I fall down to her* Divinity,
She, like the Gods above, can never err,
All must be just, and good, that comes from her.

Ptol. Think not, I poorly prize my life, above,
Or your high Friendship, or my own just love,
Yet since, but one of us can her obtain,
Let fortune judge, which of us shall be slain:
Condemned by Fortune, I shall die with joy,
But her Refusal doubly would destroy.

Lysi. Refused by her, death will a pleasure grow,
But flattering Hope, makes Death more cruel show,
'Twere just for him, whom she refused to die,

Pto. That Justice then adds to his misery.

Lysi. Whilst Love, does either with some hope inspire,
Deaths cold embrace, unjustly we desire.

Pto. If now I die, by yours, or my own hand,
I die, before I did my Love offend,
But once refused by her, I guilty grow,
For her refusal only, makes me so:
My Death, will then, to every one appear,
Not the effect of Love, but of despair.
If she accept me, I can know no Joy,
Since my good Fortune, must my Love destroy.

Lysi. As great as yours, I dare pronounce my Flame,
Tho yours so *unruly seems, and mine so tame,
The Gods, with greater Love, can none inspire,
Nor can your Breast, feel a more scorching Fire*
Yet Love, shall never make my Sword divide,
That knot of Friendship, which we two have tied.

Ptol. Why should I, in suspense, one moment be,
When my own hand, holds my own destiny?
This Sword, can quickly finish, all our strife,
By cutting off my own, or your much dearer life.
Empire, our Friendships bounds, could not remove,
We parted stakes, but cannot do so, in Love:
Two Kings may friendly sit, upon one Throne,
But in Loves Empire, one must reign alone,
Since she, whom we adore, we cannot divide,
We with our swords, our quarrel must decide.
Let this the greatness, of my passion speak,
When, for my love, I must our friendship break.

Ly. No, Ptolomy, this Sword shall never offend
The man, whom I so long have called my friend;
And so much honor in thy soul does dwell,
Thy unresisting friend, thou dare not kill.

Ptol. Lay by that Name, for in it lies a charm,
Which does my Soul, of all its rage disarm,
My blood grows stiff, and cold; that sacred Name,
Strives to extinguish my unruly flame,
But that Charm, by a greater Ple remove,
My Friendship must, and shall give way to Love.
My life, I for my friend, would sacrifice,
But for my Love, that Friend I must despise.
Defend thy self --

Lysi. Since Friendship's sacred name, so weak does prove,
Here wound her Image, whom we both do love,
That beauteous Image, to us both so dear,
Will deeply graven in my heart appear;
Strike home, and to our quarrel put an end,
Dispatch at once your Rival, and your Friend.

Whilst Ptolomy stands in a fighting posture, with his Swords point toward the
breast of Lysimachus, who spreads open his arms. Enter Orontes and Araxis.
Oron. Is this a time, for friends to disagree?
With joy our Soldiers, for the Assault prepare*
But wonder much, where their brave Leaders are.
Methinks that Love, which your two Souls inspires,
Should quicken, and add wings, to your desires;
It Is just, we first, our Princesses redeem,
Before we offer, to dispute for them.
Remember, Sirs, these Walls our Loves enclose,
Remember, they are Prisoners, to our Foes.
Embrace, embrace, and let us have away,
Our Soldiers, in their arms, do for us stay;
Each minute now, seems a long age to me,
Till we have set the fair Statyra free.

Ptol. It Is true, Orontes, to my self I seem,
Like those who sleeping walk, and talking dream.
My ^unquiet passions now are grown so strong,
Against my will, they hurry me along;
(...), what sense, nor reason, cannot approve,
And unprovoked would kill the Friend I love;
Against my own heart, I all my forces bend,
And e're I gain my Mistress, lose my Friend;
Pity me then, when forced by cruel Fate,
I do those things, which tho I do, I hate.

Ly. Come, Ptolomy, let us set our Princess free,
Let us like Friends, in that just Act agree,
And then the Combat, for which you now sue,
I Will force my friendship, to require of you.

Ptol. I Will yield to that, it is but a just delay,
Orontes, now to danger, lead the way.

Oron. What various shapes, does mighty love put on!
How different, to us, seems his power to be!
Here dark as night, there brighter than the Sun;
Here a Calm deep, there a rough raging sea,
In every breast, he has a different sway,
Whilst the whole world, does his great power obey.

Exeunt. SCENE II. A Palace within Babylon.
Enter Queen Statira, Parisatis, and Cleone. Sta. Ye Gods of Persia, and thou
chief, the Sun,
What crimes have we, or our Forefathers, done,
That ye thus load, with misery and disgrace,
The small remains, of great Darius Race?
O happy Swains! who innocently free,
The pains of greatness, at a distance see:
Ye gaze at us, and happy call our State,
And often do envy, what we most do hate.

Par. Sister, since nothing can dark Fate withstand,
For Fate, does even the Gods themselves command,
To its decree, they do themselves submit,
Which shows their Godheads, have less power, than it.
If then our ruin be decreed, why should
We mourn for that, which cannot be withstood*
But since, Man cannot in Fates black Book read,
And that we know not, what is fore-decreed,
Hope, like a glimmering Star, in night, does rise,
And gives some comfort, in our miseries.
Our Friends without, may yet successful prove,
Valor does wonders, when inspired by love.

Stat. Ah Parisatis, it is not death I fear,
Honor, than life, to me, is far more dear;
To you, I may confess, without offense,
I next to Honor, prize the Scythian Prince,
Whose noble Acts, my Heart, long since, did move,
E're I did yield, to Alexander's love.
For his sake, then, I am obliged to live,
Since he, from me, does all his joys receive.
But when, I think, what dangers him surround,
A thousand fears, my much grieved soul, do wound,
Such is his love, such his respect, for me,
I know, he will either die, or set me free.

Pari. That fear is just, which does your soul subdue,
But have not I the same concern for two?
Two noble Friends, whose virtues I approve,
As once in War, so Rivals, now, in Love.
Your troubles, Sister, less than mine appear,
You but for one, but I, for two do fear.

Stat. Weak are those streams, which in two channels run,
The deep, and violent, always flow in one.
You both their virtues, may perhaps approve,
May both respect, and yet but one may love.
Reason, in love, we take not for our guide,
Whilst things are, by magnetic Nature, tried:
For whilst you equally, their virtues prize,
Your Soul with one alone, does sympathize.

Pari. So great, is their united friendship grown,
They are no longer counted two, but one.
One Mind, one Will, to them Heaven seems to give,
And but one Soul, does in both Bodies live:
And this one Soul, in both, breeds one desire,
And burns in one, and the same, amorous fire:
So I, in loving both, do love but one.

Stat. Sister, the love, you speak of, you will find,
But like a flash of Lightning, in your mind.
The end, of virtuous love, is to enjoy,
But yours, unnatural, must that end destroy:
Though you, love both alike, yet you would be loath
We should believe, you would enjoy them both.

Pari. But, Sister, if I can enjoy but one,
The Gods, not I, shall make that choice alone.
I hold, the equal Balance in my hand,
Where, both their loves, and virtues, equal stand.
If then, I should my self, on one bestow,
I should be most unjust, and partial grow.

Stat. Strange is your love, fantastic is their fate,
For you destroy, that happiness, you create:
If happy, in your love, they seem to be,
Your equal mind, destroys their vain felicity.

Enter Perdicas. Perd. The Trumpets, Madam, me to danger call,
Our valiant Foes, begin to scale the Wall,
Nothing it seems, their courage can affright,
Nor the Moats depth, nor the Walls dreadful height.
This desperate assault, does but declare,
It is the last Effort, of their despair.
But, e're I go, their fury to withstand,
Madam, I Am come, to know what you will command.

Stat. You, Perdicas, are too imperious grown,
And as you please, you now command the Throne,
For though, I was your Royal Master's Wife,
I must my Empire quit, to save my life.
You, and Roxana, now do all things sway,
You will not me, but I must you obey.

Perd. Humbly, before your Feet, I prostrate fall,
I have no power -- you my great Queen have all.
What I possess, to love I sacrifice,
And live by the influence, of those beauteous eyes.
How often, in vain, do I your pity crave,
Your mercy beg, as humbly, as your Slave?
Did I not thus, with reverence you adore,
I should command, what I so often implore.

Stat. If I am Queen, as sure I ought to be,
You should obey my will, and set me free.
I with one word, could all your Foes subdue,
Were I not by Roxana held, and you.
For me, and for my liberty, they fight,
Whilst you detain me, and oppose my Right.
You urge your Love, but make it show like Hate;
For what has Love to do with tricks of State?
You sue to me, yet let Roxana sway,
Pretend to love, and yet can disobey.

Perd. Madam, should I obey, I were undone,
You quickly would leave me, and Babylon.
This gentle force, my Love's constrained to choose,
Lest I should you, fair Queen, for ever loose.
My life is measured, only by your stay,
And death approaches, as you go away.
If with the proud Roxana, I comply,
It is to shield you, from her cruelty.

Pari. To Love, and Duty, badly he pretends,
Who does his Queen restrain, and fights her Friends.

Stat. Indeed our Interests, do but badly close,
When those I call my Friends, he counts his Foes.

Perd. Those you call Friends, indeed, I would subdue,
But fight them not, because they are Friends to you;
They Would pluck you from my Arms, and with you all
That I can good, or dear, or happy call.
I should of Love, but evil Symptoms show,
Should I submit, and tamely let you go:
He that would have you, must my Life pursue,
And by my death alone, must purchase you.

Enter Soldier. Sold. Your presence, Sir, Cassander does desire,
Your Soldiers beaten, from the Walls retire:
The Enemy has such bold fury shown,
The like ^ill now, I think was never known.
They rear their scaling Ladders, round the Wall,
Though Shot as thick as hail, upon them fall:
With Rams, and Slings, the Battlements they beat,
And force your men, with fireballs, to retreat.
Up their tall Ladders, in thick swarms they fly,
And with their warlike shouts, they rend the sky.

Perd. Let them mount up, and let them enter in,
We'ave men enough, to beat them forth ag'in.

Sold. The Scythian Prince, his Shield over his head,
The way to Honor, and to danger led:
And spite of all resistance, that was made,
He gained the wall, and there alone he stayed.
There fighting, like wild Boars, with wounds enraged,
I left Cassander, and that Prince engaged.

Perd. Madam, for your commands, I only stay.

Stat. I Will not command --
But, if you will oblige me, as you say,
Spare those that fall, with in your power, to day.

Perd. How much I love, my Actions shall declare,
When I the Life, of my loved Rival spare.

Exit with the Soldier. Stat. Ye Gods above, that generous Life defend,
Which Love alone, into such danger brings,
Let not his Fate, on our bad Fate depend,
The Illustrious offspring of so many Kings.
For, if you have decreed, that we shall dye,
Involve not him, in our sad Raines too;
Grant him that peace, which you to us deny,
And us alone, with your fierce wrath pursue.

Pari. The Gods are just, and justly all things sway,
Let Us then to their just wills, our selves submit;
And without murmuring, their wills obey,
For they best know, what is for poor Mortals fit.
We our own Peace, and happiness destroy,
Whilst we with fear, and grief, our selves annoy.

Stat. Your wise, yet vain Philosophy, I hear,
Yet see, your smothered troubles, in your eye;
That Heart is senceless, that is void, of Fear,
When, such a load of ills, does on it lie.
Let Us to the Altars, of our Gods repair,
And force them, to be kind, with Incense, and with Prayer.

Exeunt. SCENE III. The Royal Palace in Babylon.
Enter Roxana, and Hesione. Rox. This day, Hesione, I shall happy be,
If the Just Gods, make good their own Decree.

Hesi. The Oracle, I do remember well,
Which, did long since, this famous Siege foretell,

Roxa. Such pleasing words, can never be forgot,
For, in my memory, they are deeply wrote,
Thus spoke, the inspired Priest -- When Babylon, shall Stormed be,
By him, whom thou do Love,
That Day, auspicious shall to thee,
Above all others, Prove:
The Objects, of thy Love, and Hate,
Shall, from thy Hands, receive their Fate.
Those Hours, which then, shall smile on thee
If thou know, how to use,
Thou may, for ever, happy be,
Or Ioys, for ever loose.
In thy own Hand, thy own Fate lies,
If Bad, blame not the Deities.

Such Favors, may the Gods, again, refuse,
If I, through Folly, should their Gifts abuse.
I Will willingly submit, to any Fate,
When I have satisfied, my Love, and Hate.

Hesi. Madam, this Day, you shall have your desire,
You shall Orontes, and Statira see,
Below your Feet, waiting their Destiny.
But whilst, you hold their Fates, in your own Hand,
You on a nice, and ticklish point do stand,
You have the power, but how to use it, there
Lies all the Danger, and deserves your Care.

Roxa. The Gods assist the Bold, whilst Cowards be
The Framers, of their own ill Destiny.

Hesi. Your wisdom, Madam, mighty things has done,
That, won you Alexander's Heart, and Throne.

Roxa. But yet, that wisdom never could remove
Cruel Orontes, from his fixed Love.

Hesi. The Gods, at last, your pains will Recompense.
And put into your Hands, that Cruel Prince.

Roxa. We must not leave, all for the Gods to do,
To Princes, they have given some power too.
They show the opportunity, and way,
But we, our selves, must act, as well as they.
Whilst Perdicas, that watchful Dragon's, gone,
And left my Rival, and his Care alone,
Pave sent my Guards, to seize her, and when she
Is in my Power, then I shall happy be.

Enter Statira, Parisatis, and Cleone. Guard. Stat. It seems, Roxana, you will
reign alone,
In my great Fathers, and my Husbands Throne.

Roxa. At your bad Fate, and at the Gods repine,
That Throne, indeed was theirs -- but now is mine.

Stat. Long since, in secret you have me betrayed,
But now, my Right, you openly invade.

Roxa. My Power, will make my Right be understood,
By that our Husband, made his Title good.

Stat. But if your Right, must by success be tried,
The Gods, as yet, declare not on your side:
For, our brave Friends, who nobly take our part,
May yet our Right, with their success assert.

Roxa. Let what will happen, you may understand,
You're Prisoners, and your Fate I now command.

Stat. I scorn, Roxana, for my Life, to sue,
I Would not accept it, as a Gift, from you.
Since, I Am your Rival, in your Throne, and Love*
There is some Reason, you should me remove.
But, let not my dear Sisters blood, be spilt,
Her Innocence, involve not with my Guilt.

Pari. Till now, my Sister, you were never unkind,
Think not to fly, and leave me here behind.
We both will dye, if Death be her intent.

Roxa. Statira, yet may both your deaths prevent.
If she will Orontes, and his Love disown,
She shall not only live, but share the Throne.

Stat. Orontes is all virtue,
And all you offer, if compared to Him,
Below, that generous Prince's worth, does seem;
Than Life, or Crown, he is a greater prize,
And for his friendship, I do both despise.

Roxa. With your own mouth, you have pronounced your fate,
Go pray -- your lives have but a little date.
Secure them Guard -- you in my power are now,
I have resolved your death, and sworn it too.

Stat. You cannot, Roxana, fright them with that doom,
Who, have before, the fear of death overcome.

Exeunt Statira, Parisatis, and Guard Enter Cassander wounded, Soldiers with
Orontes bound. Cass. Madam, your strict commands, I have obeyed:
Love, more than other interest, can persuade.
By these, my numerous wounds, and loss of blood,
My faithful duty, may be understood.
Can I more proof, of my obedience give,
Than to permit, my greatest Foe, to live?

Roxa. I do, Cassander, this great kindness own,
Which makes, the greatness, of your passion known.
Retire, and let your glorious wounds, be dressed,
This service shall be written, in my breast.

Cass. My Prisoner, to your care, I here resign.

Exit Cass Roxa. I am his Prisoner, more than he is mine. aside.
Soldiers retire, in the next Chamber stay. Exeunt Soldiers.
You look on me, Orontes, as your Foe,
Yet it is my kindness, which does life bestow.

Oron. The life you gave me, you may take away,
That debt to you, I Am ready still to pay.

Roxa. I did not give you life, with that intent,
And scorn, so soon, my kindness to repent.

Oron. In giving life, you have no kindness shown,
But you, and all your kindness, I disown.

Roxa. What greater proofs, of kindness, can I show,
Than still, to keep my heart, entire for you?
I love -- Let me not name, that word again,
Gods! that a Queen should blush at your disdain.

Oron. It Is that unruly passion, in your breast,
Has robbed my soul, of all its joy, and rest.

Roxa. Can my kind love, disquiet your repose?

Oron. You call that love, which more like hatred shows.

Roxa. By that alone --
You may the greatness, of my passion see.

Oron. By that, I know, you love your self, not me
For, you would never seek, your own delight,
If your fierce soul, knew how to love aright.

Roxa. It is that passion, which for you I have,
That makes of me, a powerful Queen, a Slave.
Repentance, is beneath me, I Will go on,
And end the work, I have so well begun,
And, if at last, you do my hopes destroy,
She, whom you love, you never shall enjoy.

Oron. Such vicious love, I ever shall refuse.

Roxa. Your life, and death, within my power, does lie,
I Will make you love me, Prince, or you shall die.

Oron. In vain, you think to affright me, with my Fate,
Death is more welcome, than the thing I hate.

Roxa. So much disdain, can be no longer born,
It has roused up, my anger, and my scorn.
Orontes, now, the difference shall be seen,
Betwixt the love, and anger of a Queen.
Enter Guards. Guards! --
Secure this Pris'oner, with your greatest care,
And on your lives, let none to him repair.
Load him with chains -- Exeunt Guards and Orontes.
I soft, and gentle means, no more will try,
Orontes, and Statira both, shall dye:
The Gods, have put them, in my power this day,
To let them 'scape, would my own cause, betray.
I Will love no more -- His scorn has raised my hate,
Nor, with my pass^^n, will I more debate:
Lest foolish love, should my Resolves oppose,
I Will kill 'um, while the Storm of anger blows.
Freedom, to me, his death, can give alone,
And hers, will fix me, steadfast in my Throne:
From different causes, both shall find one fate,
Love kills Orontes, and Statira hate.

Exeunt. ACT. I.
The SCENE, The Camp under the Walls of Babylon.
Enter Eumenes and Lysimachus, leading Ptolomy wounded. Lysi. GReat, as your
passion, you have courage shown,
But Fortune, has your mighty deeds o'rthrown,
And she, into whose hands, you would have laid
The treasure of your love, has you betrayed.
Yet I, by virtue, will my love advance,
And no advantage take, of Arms, or Chance.

Ptol. Bright Honor, all your glorious actions sways,
And Crowns your Brows, with Myrtle, and with Bays.
Against your life, this day I had design,
Yet you, with hazard, of your own, saved mine,
Stopping the progress, of your great success,
You ran, to save a Rival, in distress.

Lysi. If, to a Rival, I did succor lend,
It was, because, that Rival was my friend:
But Fortune had, in giving death to you,
Deprived my love, of all its glory too:
With what bright luster, will my true love shine.
When virtue gives it conquest, over thine?

Ptol. That virtue, which shines in your Soul so clear,
Does, in my breast, raise jealousy, and fear;
I doubt, the power of its illustrious charms,
Will ravish Parisatis, from my Arms.
But tho, I see your Trophies in the Field,
And know your power, yet I can never yield,
In Arms, brave Rival, me you are above,
But yet, I will your equal be, in love:
In that alone, I will with you contend,
Though I oppose my Reason, and my Friend.

Lysi. I should esteem you less, if you should prove
More constant in your Friendship, than your love:
If, in your love, you could inconstant be,
I should believe, you might be so to me.
Nor did I show my kindness, on that score,
My Thoughts were not, so very mean, and poor:
Love on, and with me, still in love contend,
If you more Rival grow, I Will grow more Friend.

Ptol, Friend! let me die, lest I ungrateful prove,
I can die for you, but not cease to love.

Eume. It Is time, brave Friends, to end this generous strife,
And, to your smarting Wounds, some ease to give.

Ptol. From hence, Eumenes, I will never go,
'Till brave Orontes Destiny I know.

Eume. Though he my Quarter, next to his assigned,
The Great Thalestris, took up all my mind,
Such wonders, did that brave Virago do,
As raised love, in my breast, and envy too.
I saw her lead, her valiant women on,
And boldly, to the greatest dangers run,
Not for my self, but much for her afraid,
I always nigh her fought, to give her aid.
When I stones falling, on her head, beheld,
I ran between, and caught them on my Shield:
I watched the darts, as from the Walls they flew,
And between them, and Her, my self I threw.
But she, disdainful, did my kindness shun,
And more provoked, did more on dangers run,
Till she, at last received a dangerous blow,
Which, to the ground, did the brave Queen o'rthrow.

Lysi. But where is now, our gallant Amazon?

Eume. Sir, she is, to the General's Quarter gone,
For she had heard, a murmuring Rumor tell,
That in the Assault, the brave Orontes fell.
Enter Thalestris, Araxis, and Guard of Amazons. But see, she is here --

Lysi. Where is Orontes? --

Thal. Araxis best does know.

Arax. I know not, whether he now lives, or no,
I Am yet amazed, to think, what he has done,
For by himself, he Babylon has won.
Nothing could force his Courage, to retire,
Which pressed the row Storms of Stones, of Darts, and Fire
In spite of all, my Master forward went,
Till he, at last, had gained the Battlement,
There like some God, he threat'ned the whole Town,
And all their Force, and Rage sustained alone,
For tho, his Soldiers did no Courage lack
They were, by force of Arms, all beaten back.

Lysi. If brave Orontes lives, we will set him free,

Eume. If dead, we will revenge his Destiny.

Ptol. We the proud Mistress, of the World, will burn,
And all her lofty Spires, to Ashes turn.

Thal. Let us, this Night, for a new storm prepare,
Fortune, does oftentimes, change sides in War,
Though now, we have received the worst, in fight,
Let Us try, to'assault them, favored by the night,
After success, we may expect the Foe,
More negligent, and more secure will grow.

Lysi. We'll to the General's Tent withdraw, and straight
In Counsel, what you now propose, debate.

Ex. Lysi. and Ptol. Arax. To enter Babylon disguised, I Will try;
And serve my Master, and his Friends, or dye:
Fortune, assist me, and propitious be,
And I Will build Altars, to thy Deity.

Exit. Eume. Madam, how like the Sea, when calm, you show,
So soft your aspect, and so smooth, your brow;
But once, this day, when you grew rough in Arms,
You seemed to me, like the Wild Seas, in Storms.
The quiet Sea, does some soft pleasure yield,
But its great power, in Tempests is beheld,
His dreadful majesty, then best appears,
When he shoots up his Waves, to the bright Stars
Though you seem sweet, in your soft smiling Charms,
You are more noble, in your dreadful Arms.
'Twas that fierce bravery, which I saw in you,
That only could, my untamed Heart, subdue
From gentle Eyes, often proceed's Love's flame,
But mine, more strange, from their fierce Lightning came.

Thal. And so it seems, Since you so boldly dare
To me, an Amazon, your Love declare:
But since, my fierceness, did your Love beget,
I ever, will your Love, with fierceness treat:
With Anger, Pride, with Farie, and Disdain,
And not with Smiles, your Love I Will entertain.

Eume. Soft Love, will all your Anger, soon assuage,
Or, with my Blood, I will appease your Rage.

Thal. In Arms, and Wars, we Amazons delight,
We are all bred, to labor, and to fight.
Love, Ease, and Softness, we as evils shun,
But soon to Battles, and to dangers run.
If among us, any weak Cowards be,
We make them Slaves, to serve the valiant free,
Or banish them, as Bees, drones from their hive.

Eume. Ah! that the God of Love, his power would show,
And with his powerful Arms, your Heart subdue:
That you might taste, what Joys, in Love abide,
And know the pain, to be of Love denied.

Thal. My women do the Joys of Conquest know,
No pain like that, of flying from the foe.
Our joys, and pains, both real are, and true,
None, those of Love, but in their fancies knew.
We the Chemera laugh at, more than hate,
Which your false joys, and punishments create.

Thal. Hither, Eumenes, I for Glory came,
Drawn by the Valiant Alexanders Fame,
By wars, my Fame, and Knowledge to improve,
And not to hear, your idle talk of Love.
Let Love, and Peace, to weaker souls seem good,
They Are things, which cannot, by us be understood.

Eume. But when, the sweets, of gentle Love, you find,
You, both to Love, and me, will grow more kind,
The God of War, overcome, by Love's soft Charms,
Pliant and gentle grew, though fierce in Arms.

Thal. Fierce War, with us, does ever make abode,
Which frights away, that little lazy God,
To peaceful, and luxurious Courts he flies,
To fair soft Bosoms, and to wanton eyes:
The noise of Trumpets, from us drives him far,
He still delights, in peace, no business has, in War.

Eume. But yet, your Women, deal with love, and peace,
Our Capadocians, help them to increase.

Thal. I blush to hear it, tho Confess it true,
Our Women, heretofore, have met with you,
Nature, not love, did to this Rigor bind,
They only sought you, to preserve their Kind:
To what the Law of Nature, does Ordain,
They have submitted, tho with grief, and pain*
But I, that evil Custom, so abhor,
My Subjects I Will Command, to use't no more,
And e're I Will stoop, to do a thing so base,
I Will be the last, of our illustrious Race:
Since, without men, th^re can no issue be,
Our glorious Empire, shall have end in me.

Eume. Rather, fair Queen, the Laws, of love, obey,
They teach a gentler, and more noble way:
To Compass your Desires, and men subdue,
At once, to make us Slaves, and Victors too,
Overcome us, Madam, with your natural Charms,
Let us fall, by your eyes, not by your Arms.
For Woman Man, for Man was Woman made,
Each was Created, for the others aid:
Then, whilst you live, without us Men, so long.
You the Divinity of love, and Nature wrong,
Lay now aside, at length, of men, your Hate.
And let, each Woman, choose a loving Mate,
Your Empire, that way, shall continued be,
And you, your beauteous self, increased shall see.

Thal. Eumenes this is Treason, against our State.
Which will not love inspire, but move my hate.

Eume. In what I can, Madam, I will obey,
So I may love, do you prescribe the Way,

Thal. If I should now, to let you love, consent,
It shall be only, for your punishment:
Love then, -- but look, for nothing, but disdain,
Love without hope, to be beloved again.

Exit cum suis. Eume. Her Soul is marble, and she cannot be moved,
She cannot love, nor will she be beloved.
Her Heart is steel, loves form, it will not take,
Love there, tho sharp, can no impression make.
But I must love, tho I still love in vain,
Tho without hope, and answered with disdain:
With Constancy, I will her love pursue,
Who knows, but Constancy, may her subdue,
That in her Breast, at last, may love imprint,
And make more soft, that Heart, which now is flint.

Exit. The SCENE A Prison.
Enter Roxana. Roxa. I am afraid, the Lightning, of his eyes,
Will pierce my Breast, and my soft Heart, surprise.
How hard a thing, it is to break, love's Chain.
And not to think, that pleasure, which is pain.
But love, no longer, shall my Soul infest,
I with revengeful Rage, have armed my Breast.
Since, with disdain, he did my love deny,
I will the pleasure have, to make him die.
This is the Way --
The Scene opens, and discovers Orontes bound in Chains Speak now Orontes, e're
it be too late,
Will you have life, with love, or Death, with Hate?
Your Fate, does now, depend on your own Breath,
In your own Choice, is either life, or Death.

Oron. He were unworthy, of Statiras love,
Who would for fear, of Death, unconstant prove.
As, for her sake, I Would be content to live, Draws a dagger out of her sleev.
So for her, willingly, I death receive.

Roxa. Then Death I bring -- Disdainful man: stand fair,
This, from thy Breast, Statira's Form shall tare.
Incensed, I will a merciless Tyrant prove,
And Stab that Heart, will not admit my love.
I Will laugh, with joy, to see thy life expire,
And with thy Blood, I Will quench thy amorous fire.

Oron. Strike boldly then -- play well, the Tyrants part,
You Will find, an easy way, to my unguarded Heart.
Except my Queen, nothing that is here beneath,
Appears, so welcome, to me, now, as Death:
For since my Fate, does her I love deny, advances with her Dagger.
With joy I fall, and with Content, I die.

Roxa. Then thus, Orontes, I will end our strife,
This blow, shall cut my love off, and thy life.
What trembling's this, has seized my Heart, and Arm?
There Is magic in his Looks, in's Eyes a Charm. aside.
I find, I cannot my Intents pursue,
I feel, some kind of foolish pity too.
I'ave thought on it now -- It shall be so --

Oron. What now Roxana? Delay tortures me.
The Death you bring, to me, does pleasant seem,
'Twill wake me, from a sad, unquiet Dream:
It will give ease, to my afflicted mind,
And make me think, in this last Act, you are Kind.

Roxa. Nay, Sir, since you, unwilling are to live,
I will, to punish you, grant a Reprieve.
You shall not find pleasure, in that Death I bring,
Death, is not Death, unless it has a sting.
Some other way, I Will satisfy my hate,
Your Eyes, shall first behold, my Rivals Fate,
For since her Life, you, to your own, prefer,
Before thou dy'st I Will kill thee, first, in her.

going out Oron. Stay, Tyrant stay, be not so inhumane,
Will you not kill, unless you kill, with pain?
If by my scorn, I merit your Revenge,
Act not your hatred, in a way so strange.
Kill the offender, do not spare his blood,
But murder not the Innocent, and good.

Roxa. If she be good, she fitter is to die.

Oron. And does no pity in your Bosom lie?

Roxa. Let pity, and good Nature dwell elsewhere.
I have more strong, and violent Passions there.

Oron. Can then no Prayers, your great wrath, assuage?

Roxa. No more, than they can still, the Oceans Rage*
The great Concern, you for my Rival show,
Does but the more provoke, to speed the blow.

Oron. To save her life, what is it I would not do?
Yet cannot perform, what is required by you.
I cannot put out, loves great, and sacred fire,
The Gods can only quench, what they inspire.
Some other way propose --

Roxa. In Vain, Orontes, now, to me you sue,
For I have learned, how to deny, by you.
You say, I things impossible require,
And yet, the same, you now of me desire.
If to save her, you cannot your love subdue,
Hate's not less strong in me, than love in you.
That says, you must, to this Decree submit,
To see Statira slain, or her for ever quit,

Oron. The choice is hard, Roxana -- Let her live
And all thy Injuries, I will forgive.
My Hate of thee, I Will from my Breast remove,
And that is more, than half the way, to love.

Roxa. To hear him thus entreat, I dare not stay,
My passion will, at last, it self betray. aside
I will no longer trifle thus, with you,
You know my will, and what you have to do.
Think on it -- I but a little Time will give,
To make your choice, if she shall die, or live.

Exit Oron. As men, in storms, a sinking Barque, to free,
Are forced to fling their wealth, into the Sea.
To save Statira's life, I now must quit,
My constant love, and the rich joys of it.
But Earth, as soon, may from it is Center move*
As I can force my self, to leave my love.
Nor can I let her die -- no, no, in vain
Roxana thinks, to keep me with this Chain,
No cruel Queen, from all thy Tyranny,
And from these Chains, Death soon shall set me free.

The scene Closes ACT. III.
The SCENE, Babylon.
Enter Cassander and Peredicas meeting him with his Guard. Perd. WHat sadness
is it, Cassander, moves you now?
It ill becomes, the Lauress on your brow*
This Day, I did believe, that I should see
You full of smiles, after our Victory.

Cass. If I am sad, after our great success,
Me thinks, your Looks, Sir, do no Calm express:
If dark, and shady Clouds, hang in my Eyes,
I see in yours, a storm begin to rise.

Perd. Whilst I to wounds, and Death, my self expose,
Killing my Friends, because Roxana's foes,
She gets my' adored Statira* int' her power,
And keeps her prisoner, in the Palace Tower:
But I am going, thence to set her free,
And with my sword, to give her Liberty.

Cass. Whilst I, for her, to wounds, and dangers go,
And, against my Interest, save my greatest foe,
Whilst her commands, I carefully obey,
And yield this mighty Empire, to her sway,
She meets my Love, with a disdainful frown,
And him, who scorns her, with her Love, does Crown,

Perd. Our Love, and Interest, should us two conjoyn
It is one Man, disturbs your peace, and mine:
It Is fit Orontes then should dye, that he
May never more disquiet you, or me.

Cass. Yes he shall dye, by all the Gods I vow,
This Arm shall, shortly, give the fatal blow.

Perd. By all the Gods, if in my power it lies,
When I first see him, by this Arm he dies:
And when we have this obstacle removed,
We shall be kindlier used, and more beloved.

Cass. Their furious Love, will cool, and we shall find
Our Queens, who now disdain us, grow more kind.

Exeunt severally. The SCENE, The Palace Royal in Babylon.
Enter Roxana, and Hesione. Rox. Who are in love, at all times cannot be wise,
Passion, o'recomes our weaker policies.
Who in safe peace, and undisturbed would reign,
Should have no passions, yet often passions feign.
Our Reason, and our Judgment they infest,
And open lay, the secrets of our Breast.

Hesi. Madam, of all the Passions, Love's most bold,
And still is found, most hard to be controlled.

Rox. Just now disturbed, I from Orentes came,
Full of Revenge, of Anger, Love and Shame,
Being o'repowr'd, by their impetuous tide,
I could not my resistless Passions hide.
But at Cassander, did the Venom throw,
Of my Disdain; and Hare too plain did show.

Hesi. I'ave wondered, Madam, with what skill, and Art,
You have kept under, his aspiring heart:
He cannot boast, that he in Love does thrive,
And yet, you keep his little hopes alive.

Rox. I know not, which has in my Heart, most share,
Love, or Ambition: both are mighty there,
I cannot be content, with one alone,
I Would have my Love, and not forgo the Throne.
For Love'^ sake, Perdicas my Friend I style,
Ambition makes me on Cassander smile,
Tho I intend, at last, both to beguile.
What noise is that? -- Clashing of swords within.

Enter Guard. Sold. Perdicas, Madam, on your Guard does fall, I fear he will
force, Statira from us all.

Rox. Go, stop him wretch -- make have -- stop him I say,
First dye, and with your Bodies, block his way. Exeunt Guard
This amorous fool, will spoil my great design.

Exeunt Enter Perdicas fighting with the Guard. Perd. I Will force my way, tho
you an Army were.

Enter Roxana and Hesione. Roxana snatches a sword from on of the Guard, and
stops Perdicas. Rox. How Perdicas! Come further if you dare.
Over this Breast, you first must make your way.
Is this the great Respect you to me pay?

Perd. Madam, you may account this Action rude,
It Is better yet, than your Ingratitude:
Whilst Blood, and Life, I venture for your sake,
From me, what is more dear, than Life, you take.

Rox. You are too Rash -- It was your good I sought,
And I will soon, make you confess your fault.
Command your Guard, off --

Perd. Go wait without --

Rox. Retire you, to your charge. To her Guard flings away the sword.
Now, Perdicas, I will my mind disclose.
You, from my Rival, long have sought in vain,
For Love's deep wound, some Rem'edy to obtain:
To a deaf Statue, you do still complain.
You to a senceless Rock, your Love make known*
And court a Mistress, with a heart of stone.
I for your Rival, the like pains endure,
Which He, you know, has still denied to cure.
He scorns my Love, and does my sickness mock,
And wears an Heart, far harder, than a Rock.
All gentle ways, we too, too long, have tried,
Have humbly sought, but still have been denied
No longer now, let us our pains endure,
A desperate Ill, must have a desperate Cure.

Perd. It Is true, all gentle means, I long have used
My hopes, and patience, I have found abused,
My tortured heart, for pain can hardly live,
And to my wounded soul, none ease can give:
But yet if prayers, will not make my Goddess kind,
I know not which way, you can force the mind.

Rox. The stubborn mind, like grown Oaks, will not bend,
You cannot bow them, but with force they rend.
So our stiff Rivals, will not with us comply,
E're they will bow, and yield, they will break, and dye.
Death they despise: I know our loves to shun,
If Death be offered, both to Death will run.

Perd. If the stiff mind, can no way forced be,
What is it, you would propose, for Remedy?

Rox. Art must be used, and I have found a way,
To make them both submit, and us obey.
They both, above themselves, each other Love,
And through one, we must the other move.
Though either Death would choose, ere they would comply,
They Will yield, before they will see each other dye.
They Will tender grow, their Passions will be moved,
To see Death offered, to the thing beloved:
Then at your feet, you will Statira see,
And I Orontes, supplicating me.

Perd. So great's the pain of Love, which I endure,
I any means would try, to' obtain a Cure:
We cut our Flesh, and put our selves to pain,
A Freedom, from some sharp Disease, to gain,
So I must stab, and wound my bleeding Heart,
Whilst I procure, Statira's pain and smart.

Rox. That our Design, may to our with succeed,
Threaten with Death, but what you do, take heed.
For if your Life, must with Statira's end,
Upon Orontes Life, mine does depend.

Perd. Madam, I to your wisdom, and your Care
Shall leave the management, of this Affair.
I shall observe, all that you shall command,
And take my blessing, from your bounteous hand.
I with this subtle Queen, seem to comply, Aside.
But I have vowed, my Rival soon shall dye.
With skilful cunning, she now plays her part,
But I will countermine her Art, with Art.

Exit Rox. Thus Raging Beasts, we do with Ginns, ensnare,
And subtle slights, for mighty force prepare:
The Elephant, and Horse, obey our will,
And the fierce Lion's tamed, by Art, and skill.
If what I now design does take, it is well,
If not (who can the event of things foretell?)
I for my safety, will so well provide,
That what seems jest, in earnest shall be tried.
The Rival of my Love, and Crown, shall dye,
My' Ambition, and Revenge to satisfy:
But cunning Perdicas, deceived must be,
With words, which do not with my Thoughts agree*
The Rash Cassander, I must too beguile,
And six him, with the favor of a smile.
Hesione, send for Cassander strait,
And whilst, with you, he does my leisure wait,
Charm him with hopes, and my late frowns excuse,
It Is no great sin, fond Lovers to abuse.

Exeunt The SCENE, A Tower of the Palace.
Enter Statira and Parisatis. Stat. Death, which each moment, we expect to see,
Is far less dreadful, than this news to me;
Whilst my Orontes was in safety, I
With less Concern, and more Content could dye.
But now, my soul oppressed, with busy ear,
Is ruffl'd, and for Him, disturbed with fear.

Pari. But Sister, why are you disturbed so much
You know, Roxana's Love for him, is such,
You may assure your self, and well believe,
He no ill treatment, will from her receive.
What is it then, should so uncalm your mind?
Unless you're jealous she should be too kind:
But his great love, and constancy you know,
Not all her Charms, and Arts, can overthrow.
This great attempt, and valiant Act does prove,
That he still wears, a true, and constant Love.

Stat. That constancy, you think should me secure
From Fear, does cause the Fear, I now endure,
For what will not, that wicked Woman dare,
To do, when Love is turned into Despair?
Whilst she has hopes, her Love will make her kind,
When they are lost, she will show her cruel mind:
Robbed of her Whelps, a Tygress will not be
So Cruel, and so full of Rage, as she.
Her Love's no pure, unmixt, and gentle Fire,
But is an impure Flame, an hot, untamed Desire.

Pari. Are you content, he should inconstant prove,
To shun the Fate which threatens, his true Love?

Stat. Should I consent, should I request it too,
That is a thing, I know, he could not do.

Pari. In things that no ways remedied can be,
We must submit, to hard Necessity:
By Death, our Troubles will to peace be changed,
And though we dye, we shall not dye unrevenged.
We have two Friends, who with their armed powers,
Will soon revenge Orontes Death, and Ours.

Enter Cleone. Cleo. The Captain of Roxana's Guard, does wait
Without, and asks to be admitted strait:
His business Madam, I can no ways learn,
But's looks betray, some great, and sad concern.

Stat. Go Cleone, and bring him in -- Exit Cleone
The unexpected news of Death, might fright,
But expectation, now, does make it light:
They who for it, beforehand do prepare,
When it approaches, don't like others fear.

Enter Captain with the Guard and Cleone Capt. By me the Queen, does let you
understand,
(Madam, I must obey her strict command)
It is her pleasure, that you strait must dye.

Stat It Is what I expected, from her Cruelty,
She told me her self, what now I hear from you,
I then believed her Threats she would pursue,
Therefore, to dye, I have my self prepared,
But has the Tyrant, Sir, my sister spared?

Capt. I know not, Madam, what sh' intends to do,
My Orders, now, concern not her, but you.

Pari. In vain, she spares my Life, if she must die,
Nature, and Friendship, us together tie,
And they have knit a knot, cannot be unti'd,
Nor shall her Tyranny, us two divide,
For the kind Gods, to us, a power do give,
That, at our pleasure, we may cease to live.

Stat. Sister, you ought to Death, no more to run*
Than you for fear, should its approaches shun:
On the Gods wills, with patience, you, must wait,
And neither, run to seek, nor shun your Fate.
When I am dead, I Will hover in the Air,
And there, I will unseen, of you take Care.
Adeu dear sister -- Embrace
-- I Am assured my Friend
Will both Revenge me, and your Life defend.

Pari, Cruel Roxana! thus to make us part,
Is from my Breast, to tare my living Heart.
Adue dear sister -- Embrace
-- Tho w' are parted thus
Death shall again, restore our Joys to us:
You, but few moments, shall before me go,
E're I Will overtake you, in the shades below.

Stat. To what place is it, I must go to dye?

Capt. It Is to Orontes Prison. --

Stat. What! Will Roxana be so good, to me*
Will she, once more, let me Orontes see?
For this great kindness, I Will her wrongs forgive,
Tho after that, I but one moment live.

Capt. If kindness she designs, I do not know,
But, Madam, thither it is, that you must go.

Stat. Let Us go then, Death it self seems pleasant, there,
This unexpected Joy, has banished fear.

Exeunt Capt. Stat. and Cleone with Guards Pari. How fast, the Dream, of
Greatness, slides away!
How soon is worldly Pomp, and Glory lost.
Fortune, with Princes, still delights to play,
And in their Ruins, does her great power boast.
The great, stand high, on slippery Rocks, of Ice*
They cannot move, but they must move, in Fear,
Like seeming stars, that shoot down, from the Skies.
They tumble headlong, from their lofty Sphere.
Happy are they, who in poor Cabbins dwell,
And there content, rest on their humble Beds,
Great Joys, nor Griefs, enter their homely Cell,
Nor Cares, Distrusts, nor Fears, disturb their Heads:
Their pleasures small, but natural, and true:
Happy! if their own happiness they knew.

Exit The SCENE, The Prison of Orontes, He is discovered lying bound as before.
Oron. The Gods are deaf, to them I cry, in vain*
Unmoved, they see, and pity not our pain:
But since, for all our ills, one Cure they gave,
Why should we ask, what we already have?
(...), to all Troubles, gives a gentle end,
(...) the Worlds, and Natures faults, amend.
The way to Life's but one, not easily found,
To Death, the ways are plain, and do abound,
The Gods, put nothing, in our power more sure,
To show, it was, for humane ills the Cure.
To thee, blessed Cure, I now resolve to fly,
The last, but most assured, Remedy.

Enter Statira and Cleone. Stat. Ah Prince! what barbarous Heart, has bound
those hands?
And fettered them, with such unworthy Bands?
Those hands, which have such glorious Actions done,
Which have so many Laurels nobly, won?
Those hands, which were by Heaven designed, to bea^
A Scepter, and not slavish Chains, to wear.
Can Love do this? Can Love, in fetters bind?
Can Love, thus cruel be? and thus unkind?

Oron. Since for your sake, I do these fetters ware,
Than Crowns, or Laurels, they more glorious are:
They Are full of glory, and of pleasure too,
C^owns I prize less, than suffering for you.
(...) noble Bond, which binds my Heart, I prize,
And tho your Slave, Roxana's Chains, despise.

St^t. Those Chains, Orontes, are more justly mine.
R^xana meant them, for my hands, not thine:
She could no other way, with all her Art,
(...) me, subdue your Heart
She knew, that I could, my own sufferings, bear,
And understood, that yours, touched me more near
This visit then, not from her kindness springs,
Her Cruelty, now, us together brings,
That by your sufferings, I might Torment find,
And by my Torment, she might move your mind.

Oron. These sufferings, Madam, I should count but light,
Did they not keep me from your beauteous sight,
Whilst I enjoy, that happiness, I find
No Grief, can touch, the quiet of my Mind,
Your sight, my Sorrows and my Griefs, destroys,
And hides all other Passions, in my Joys:
So the admired Elixir does enfold,
Such Virtue, which base Metals turns, to Gold

Enter Perdicas, Roxana, Hesione, with (...) four Blacks with Crooked Scymiters
by their (...), and strangling Cords in their hands. Roxa. Too long, too long,
Statira, you have lived.
And me, of all my peaceful Joys, deprived.
My foolish pity, has my Torment been,
But now, no more, against my self, I Will sin.
My Actions past, I Will not excuse to you,
Nor Reasons give, for what I, now, shall do,
It is by Power, that Gods, and Kings do Reign,
And by my power, I Will, now, my will obtain.
To these extremes, that Man, has made me fly, P^inting to Orontes
It Is he, has urged me, thus to make you die.
For I have vowed, you shall no longer live, P^inting (...)
From those black hands, you shall your Death, receive.
Unless you will Orontes, now resign,
And what is more, persuade him to be mine*

Perd. And, I, Orontes, must to you declare,
That I have sworn, your Life, (...) not spare*
If you will not Statira quit to me,
I now am Master of your Destiny,

Stat. I do not doubt, Roxana, but you will,
What you'ave designed, with (...), fulfill.
For your black Crimes, to all the World proclaim
You have no sense of Honor, or of shame
But end, what you'ave begun -- for know that I
Your Pity scorn, and Cruelty defy.
In vain, you think, to make me quit, for fear,
What is, than Life, a thousand times more dear.
To threaten me, with Death, in vain you try,
It Is more to quit Orontes, than to dye.

Oron. This base Tyrannick way, you may pursue, To Perdicas
Who never yet Honor, or true Valor knew,
By them alone, you should advance your suit,
For her, with blood, and services dispute.
But, like a Robber, you have seized your prey,
Thou more safe, yet more ignoble way.
In thee, what mark, of Valor can be found,
Who thus do treat a Prince, who, like a Slave, is bound.

Perd. Thy Life, Orontes, now, at stake, does lie,
It Is in her choice, if you shall live, or dye. Pointing to Statira
By thy advice, or of her own accord,
Let her resolve --
If she, Orontes, does thy Life esteem,
She soon, may thee, from Death, and Bonds, redeem.

Roxa. And if Orontes, does Statira love,
That Death, which threatens her, He may remove.
Determine strait, if Life, to her you will give,
Few are the moments else, she has to live.

Oron. Fair Queen, what, is it, you resolve to do?

To Statira Stat. What Is just: I have resolved, to dye for you.

Oron. Your Life, fair Queen, is sacred, and divine,
More worth, than are a thousand, such as mine:
It is unjust, that you should dye, for me,
My Death, perhaps, may end your misery.

Stat. You are unjust, if you my Death lament,
Or seek to hinder, this my last content.
For this, Orontes, is the only way,
I'ave left, my mighty debt, to you to pay.
Your Life, for me, you often did expose,
From me, your trouble, and your Danger grows,
You'ave made your Love, and Valor nobly known,
Which I till now, never had the power, to own.
But now, Orontes, I some proofs will give,
Since for your sake, I will no longer live.
That my Affection, to that hight is grown,
It cannot, by fear of Death, be overthrown:
My Death, dear Prince, shall seal, my Love to you,
And witness for me, that my Love was true.

Oron. What happiness is this, you give to me!
Nothing can add, to my Felicity,
Now you, for me, have so great kindness shown,
And, what I never deserved, your Love made known:
But, Madam, I request, and humbly sue,
That you will live, and let me die, for you.

Stat. Alas! in Life, in Liberty, or a Throne,
What pleasure can there be, when you are gone?
All our Felicities below, we find,
Are current made, and measured by the mind:
From me, all joys, all pleasures, soon will fly,
And torments seize me, when my Prince shall dye
I Would have you live, Orontes -- but live mine,
You to Roxana, I can never resign.
My Life, I can resign, and Empire too,
Those I can give her, but not give her you.

Oron. No, Madam, no, I here my promise give,
I will not, for the proud Roxana, live:
A thousand Deaths, I for your sake prefer,
To Life, and the Empire of the World, with her.
Live then fair Queen -- tho from you I depart,
My Image, still shall live, within your Heart:
And, Perdicas, since you to Love pretend, To Perd
Her, from Roxana's Cruelties, defend:
Keep her Life safe -- I make it my last prayer,
My fair Queens safety, now is all my Care.
Assure, me, that she shall, in safety be,
And I Will forgive, what e're thou do to me.

Stat. In Perdicas's power, that does not lie,
For if you live not, I resolve to die.
And if I am not, by Roxana, slain,
By my own hand, that Freedom, I Will obtain.

Perd. Ah! Madam, do you thus resolve, at last?
Will you repay thus, all my kindness past?
I for your sake, have spared my greatest foe,
Shall my Indulgence, be rewarded so?

Stat. Yes, Sir, this firm Resolve, which now I make,
Not all your Threatenings, shall have power to shake.
There is no other way, to separate
Us two, but by my Death, for which I wait,

Perd. No it is by his -- And by the Heavens, I vow,
Not all the world shall save him from it now.
Dye -- dye Barbarian -- with thy Blood repay, Draws his sword to run Oront,
through
That Peace, which thou from me have ^ane away

R^xa. Hold Perdicas -- if you Orontes hurt,
I Will strike this Javelin the row Statira's Heart,

Roxana snatches a Iavelin from one of her Guard, and presents it to Statira 's
Breast. Oron. Ah Perdicas! run -- save the Queen --
From fierce Roxana's power, set her free,
And then you, safely, may give Death to me.

S^at. Here, here, Roxana, plunge thy cruel Spear: shows her Breast.
The child of great Dartus, cannot fear.
Strike the row this Heart -- strike boldly, do not spare,
And pierce his Image, who disdains thee, there.

Perdicas casts himself before Roxana 's Iavelen, and Roxana places her self
between him and Orontes. R^xa. Ungrateful as thou art, thou shall not dye To
Oront.
Thy Life is safe enough, whilst I am by;
For wi^h my own, will thy Life defend,
And though thou hate me, show my self thy Friend.

Oron. Since to Statira, you'ave such malice shown,
You are to me most black, and odious grown:
Even Perdicas, I love much more, than thee,
And pardon, all his cruelties, to me,
Because his care, and tenderness I'ave seen,
In snatching, from thy Murderous hand, my Queen,
When you, with so much wrath, and Rudeness, pressed,
That dreadful Javelin. against her tender Breast.

Perd. For you fair Queen, I all my Blood, will spend, To Stat.
Your precious Life, I Will with my own defend:
Put I entreat you. to return with me,
TO a^oid Roxana's further cruelty.

Stat. I pardon all, what she to me did do,
To me, she was less cruel far, than you,
But one Death she had given, and Eased my pain,
You many Deaths, had you Orontes slain.

Perd. Madam, your self did first Orontes slay,
When you took from me, all my Hopes away:
A Rival, in Despair, you should not blame.

Stat. Despair should quench, and not increase Loves flame.

Perd. We must not here dispute -- Madam let us go,
I will secure you, from this Cruel Foe.

Stat. I Sir your prisoner am, and know it well
Pray'ers are Commands, with those who can Compel.
Orontes Live, and I will live, for you, To Oront.
And, if you're forced to dye, I will dye too.

Oron. Live still, fair Queen, my Heart, to you I give,
I will be yours, whether I dye, or live.

Roxa. Have you forgot, to what we did agree? To Perd. going off.
Remember Sir, you first broke Faith, with me,
Lost your Respect, and now not only jarr,
But have denounced against me, open War.
Tyrant, thou would have slain, what I above
Mankind, the World, or Life, or Empire, love.
Assure thy self, I will not my Rival spare,
I Will seek her, in thine Arms, and Kill her there.
Perdicas, I Will do it -- it is not thy Art, or power,
Shall thee, or her, from my Revenge secure.

Perd. Madam, the Gods protect the Innocent.

Exeunt Perd. Stat. Cleone, with their Guards. Roxa. Whilst I have pow'er,
declare for me they must,
Or I will fling, their Temples in the Dust,
Overthrow their Altars, all their Flammins slay,
And take from them, their Deities away.
Tell me no more of Gods, my pow'er shall be
My greatest, and my only Deity.
It Is that the whole World adores -- It Is pow'er alone,
Which must maintain me, in my Husband's Throne.
Guards, -- Keep this prisoner safe -- but let him be To her Guards.
From those base, and unworthy Chains, set free.
What Pow'er is this, which does my Heart subdue, The Guards bow.
That would at once oblige, and punish too?

Exit with Guard and Blacks. Oron. My Life depends, yet on a slender thread,
For whilst Statira lives, I must live too,
With faint, and empty hopes, I still am fed,
And wait to see, what the just Gods will do.
But if my fair Queen dies, from hence I Will go,
To seek her in the blessed shades, below:
For, Loves strong bonds, so fast our Souls have tied,
That Fate it self, cannot us two, divide.

Goes in, the Scene Closes. The Fourth ACT.
The SCENE, The Camp under the Walls of Babylon.
Enter Lysimachus, Ptolomy, Eumenes, and Thalestris. Ptol. NOw, generous Rival,
and my noble Friend,
My Love, no more, on Fortune, shall depend;
She has declared, already, on your side,
By Virtue only, shall our Cause, be tried:
My Love for Parisatis, I Will pursue,
But then, I Will strive, to Merit her, like you.

Lysi. There Is nothing, Ptolomy, I esteem above
Your glorious Friendship, but my greater Love:
In that alone, I must with you Contend,
And strive to Conquer, and subdue, my Friend.

Ptol. Whilst we thus strive, each other to subdue,
At once continuing Friends, and Rivals too,
Since Friendship losses shares, and parts all gains,
One does not loose, what the other Friend obtains.

Lysi. We have, to storm the Town, this Night, agreed,
Now let us show, our Diligence and Care,
And our whole force, for this assault, prepare.

Ptol. We need not doubt, all Pow'er to us must yield,
When Love, and Honor, lead us to the Field.

Eume. Madam, if in the assault, my Death I find,
May not a gen^rous pity, move your Mind?
It with one Tear, you should my Fall lament,
'Twould ease my Grief, and I should dye Content.

Thal. If you should fall, whilst Glory you pursue,
I should not pity, but should envy you.
Some great, and brave attempt, may Passion move,
Fortune* and Noble Valor I can love.

Eume. I will to Dangers, as to Conquest run,
And do such Things, the like were never done.
I wish, the Gods, new dangers would Create,
And not give Conquest, at too cheap a rate.
Where Blood, and horror reigns, I will be there,
And on ten Thousand Swords, rush without fear.
If acts of Valor, your great Mind can move,
You, e're to morrow, shall Eumenes love.

Thal. If feeble Love, your Courage shall inspire,
You shall, in me, Honors great force admire.
I fear Eumenes, you will blush, for shame,
When you do less for Love, than I for Fame.

Enter Captain with a Letter. Capt. Some of my Soldiers, Sir, being nigh the
Wall,
Perceived an Arrow, at their Feet, to fall;
Taking it up, to shoot it back, they spied
This Letter, fast about the Arrow tied;
To me they brought it, and I hit her flew,
Perceiving it, directed, Sir, to you.

Delivers the Letter to Lysimachus, who reads it to himself. Lysi. Captain, I
give you thanks, for your great care,
Let all your men, for the Assault prepare,
Let them be ready, and in Arms attend,
E're night, I will, to you, my orders send. Exit Capt.
My Friends, this Letter, from Araxis came,
He is, it seems, got into Babylon.
See what he writes -- reads a Letter.
I am got into Babylon undiscovered, and by the means of a Captain of
Cassanders, a Friend of mine; will this Night make you Masters of the Town: He
has lately been disgusted by him, and I have made him absolutely ours: He has
this Night the Command of Semiramis's Gate. Stir not till you see a Fire on the
old Tower of Ninus, at what time you shall be received in at that Gate, without
opposition. Observe the sign.

Araxis.




The Gods, this moment, are to us grown kind,
And favor, what before we had designed.

Ptol. It Is our just Cause, does them to us incline.

Lysi. Come Ptolomy, let us watch, the happy sign.
This night, I hope, we shall our Princess see,
And her, from Danger, and from Prison free.

Thal. Our Danger, now, Eumenes, will be small.

Eume. I wish, for blessed occasions, now, to show,
How much I dare attempt, to merit you.
Since fighting only's pleasing to your Eye,
You should both see me fight, and fighting dye.

Exeunt. The Scene. The Palace Royal.
Enter Cassander, Roxana, Hesione. Roxa. Can you pretend to Love, yet fear to do
The thing, your Mistress does require of you?

Cass. I do, with pleasure, your commands obey,
When reason, does over your fierce passions sway.
But, what you now require --
Will the bright luster, of your Virtue stain.

Roxa. I find, your passion for me, is but small,
Love without Limits, or love not at all;
Were your Love great, your Reason would submit,
And you would think, that just, which I thought fit.
If you loved as you ought, and I were she,
Your Love would have no bounds, no shores but me.

Cass. My Love, no other Bound, than you does know,
I have no will, but what from yours does flow,
But if our Hearts, and Wills, but one are found,
Yet honor, is to both, the equal Bound,
How do I then, your will, and pleasure shun,
When I do all, in Honor, may be done?

Roxa. That empty Name, Cassander, you may prize,
Since I am less, than shaddows in your Eyes,
But on their Deaths, whom you so well defend,
My life, my peace, my happiness depend.
It Is by their Deaths, and by their Deaths alone,
I must preserve my life, and fix my Throne.
Do you in Honor, my desires refuse,
Whilst I through it, my life, and Empire loose.

Cass. Ah! Madam, that which makes you thus severe,
Is rather the effect of Hate, than fear.
You hate Statira, and would her remove,
Because she is a Rival, in your love:
She dead, your dying hopes, would then revive,
But that destroys my hopes, which makes yours thrive.
Should I do all you ask, I soon shall see,
Orontes have, what should be given to me.

Roxa. It Is true, Orontes once my heart possessed,
But hatred, now has driven him from my Breast.
Of late, Cassander, I your Image find,
Making too deep impressions, on my mind,
Your constant Love, and Services, I weigh,
And will, at last, my obligations pay.
This last effect then of your Duty show,
And for Reward, I Will give my self to you:
When you, for me, have this great Service done,
Take then your Mistress, and with her a Throne.

Cass. There Is nothing in this World, like you I prize.
Love ranks you equal with the Deities:
The great Roxana's pow'er, who can withstand?
Mortals dispute not, what the Gods command.
I do submit, and will your Will obey,
And soon will snatch your Rival's Life away.
When your bright God, sleeps in the Western Wave,
And will not look on those, he cannot save:
When horrid Night, arises from the deep,
And over the World, deep Silence shedds, and sleep,
Then I, about this dreadful work, will have,
And those you doom to dye, shall sleep their last.

Roxa. Go my Cassander, it is you alone
Must fix Roxana, on the Persian Throne:
No bold attempt, from danger, can be free,
It Is still well done, if it Successful be:
What you intend, you by surprise must do;
But, I shall leave the Management to you.
Let not in vain, the precious Minutes have,
Dispatch, that you, a Lover's Bliss may taste,
Think on our Joys, and our Felicity,
The Prize, a Crown, and what is greater, Me.

Exit with Hesione. Cass. It must be done, such is Roxana's Hate,
Her Rival's Death, can only it abate:
And such is my great Passion, I must be
The Instrument, of all her Cruelty.
I see the Danger, which I cannot shun,
And to the Precipice, run headlong on:
Great is the Prize, Roxana, and a Throne.
Enter a Black Mute. To day, this Mute, was giv'en me, by a Friend.
Oxas come near -- I will to you impart,
The most important secrets of my heart.
I do repose in you, no Common trust,
You can be secret, but can you be just? Black bows.
Can you obey all that I shall Command? Bows again.
And do what e're I bid? -- you understand? Black bows.
Without Remorse, can you obey my Will? Bows again.
Can you unmoved, the Blood of Women spill?
Thou instantly two Princesses must Kill. Black starts.
Hah! does the name of Princess, make you start?
Have thou a tender place about thy heart?
The Black bows, and puts his hand to his Sword, making signs it shall be
done. It Is well -- anon I will Instruct you more.

Exeunt. The SCENE, The Palace of Perdicas within Babylon.
Enter Perdicas, Statira, Cleone. Perd. Madam you're safe, and now many banish
fear,
Whilst I give Orders, to secure you here;
Roxana is unbounded in her Hate,
Cruel, and to be moved, no more, than Fate.
Her bloody, and her barbarous intent,
I must with strong, and double Guards prevent,
Madam, you will not long, be here alone,
My Guard's already for the Princess gone.

Stat. That is an Obligation, I must own.

Perd. I might at last, hope a more gentle Fate,
If Services, could overcome your Hate.

Stat. My Friendship, if you please, you may obtain.

Perd. It Is Love, the Soul of Friendship, I would gain.

Stat. Love is a Thing, I have no Pow'er to give.

Perd. Nor is it in my Power, without that Love, to Live.
But, Madam, this your Hatred may remove,
Knowing, all my Offenses, spring from Love.
Love is not Love, if's Empire once decays,
Or if Love's Power, Reason's dull Law obeys. Exit.

Stat. On Love tho he, both pure and sacred be,
Men without shame, fling their own Infamy.
And when they long, in wicked ways have trod,
All their vile Faults and Crimes lay on the God.
But Love, thy Nature, is divine, and pure,
Thou can no spots, nor blemishes endure.
Tho all things, do thy Mighty Pow'er obey,
Honor, and Reason, still with thee bear sway.

Enter Parisatis. Pari. Have the Kind Gods, a longer Life assigned?

Embraecing. Stat. If granting life be Kindness, they are kind.
Our Tragic-Scene, you see, is not yet past.
Death will conclude, our Play of Life, at last;
In the mean time* each here must act his part,
Moved by those Powers above, which rule the Heart.

Pari. The Gods, when we are pressed down, yield some relief,
And sprinkle short-lived Joys, among our Grief:
The life, of every one, is checkered still.
(Tho mixed unequally) with good, and ill,
Which set each other off, like Black, and White,
This, makes that seem more dark; that, this more bright:
So late despairing any more to meet,
Has made the Joys, of this Embrace, thus sweet.

Stat. Our Joys soon vanish, like a Winters day,
Sorrows like long, and tedious Nights, do stay.
The Gods dispose our Lots, as they think fit,
We mortals cannot Choose, but must Submit.
Bid Charmion sing --
In her sweet Voice, I often have pleasure found,
Music like Balm, eases grief's smarting wound.

They sit. A SONG.
What are all the Ioys, of Life,
In which the mind,
Does never find,
A true content, unmixt with strife?
They are like Clouds, which in the Night,
Impregnate with reflected Light,
Appear, then vanish out of Sight.
Our Ioys, like gathered flow'ers, decay,
Which soon Consume,
Their own perfume,
And breath their Life, in sweets away.
No pleasure, here, is permanent,
Nor the delights, that Men invent,
Can, to our Souls, give true Content.
But when the Race, of life, is run,
And that to Death,
We yield our Breath,
We gain the Mansions, of the Sun.
Then true Content, the mind shall see,
Then all our Ioys, shall perfect be,
And some, like our bright Deity.
Pari. The Night grows old, it is time to go to rest,
Sleep calms the passions of a troubled breast.

Stat. Sleep which to others a soft pleasure seems,
To me, of late, new troubles brings in Dreams,
My laboring Fancy, there, Affliction finds,
Not that repose, sleep gives, to other minds.

Pari. Those Images, which in our Dreams abound,
Do, but with gentle strokes, our Fancy wound:
But Balmy sleep, gives, for a while, relief,
Allays the smart, and Cures the sting of grief.

Stat. With wakeful thoughts, my Soul's so much oppressed,
My Eyes, no sleep can find, my Mind no rest,
I know that Death, or some great danger's nigh,
I Am much afflicted, yet I know not why:
The knowing Soul, approaching ills discerns,
And then the Body, by some signs, forewarnes,
When to the Stars, she is about to go,
She suddenly grows light, and strangely things does know.

Pari. The Gods divert, those evils, which you fear,
Or give us strength, the ills they send, to bear.

Enter a Soldier of Perdicas's Guard. Sold. Madam, we by Cassander are
surpised,
And all your Guards, are by his Soldiers siez'd:
Some fled, but most, did in your service dye.
Fly, Madam, if it be not yet too late,
Whilst in your defense, go meet my Fate.

Exit. Clashing of Swords within. Stat. It Is vain to fly, it will but argue
fear,
Since we must dye, let us stay, and meet Death here.

Enter Cassander with Mute, with drawn Swords. Cassander turns about speaking
to the Soldiers who were about to Enter. Cass. Soldiers retire --
Defend the passage, let none enter here.
Turning to the Princesses the Women running about them shreeking. In vain
you will strive, your destiny to shun,
From the long reach of Fate, you cannot run
And since you know, there is no avoiding it,
Be wise, and to necessity submit,

Stat. I can submit, to what the Gods decree.
But that, Cassander's, yet unknown to thee.

Cass. Fate's Book is open, and we now may read,
What the great Gods (before time was) decreed.
It Is there I read, your Fatal destiny,
The Gods have willed your Death, and you must dye.

Stat. Our death, is by Roxana willed, and you,
And we must yield, if the Gods will it too.
We can resign to them, the life they lent.

Pari. But must you be, the hateful Instrument?

Stat. When Is cruel Hand, our Innocent Blood has spilt,
He Will find a just reward, for all his guilt.

Cass. I come not here, with Women to dispute,
Oxas, you know my pleasure --

The Mute kneels, showing them a Strangling string, and making signs to them
to submit. Pari. Sister, I beg it, with my latest breath,
Let me first try, th'untrodden paths of Death.
I will descend before, and ^^rew the way
With Flowers, that leads, to the Eternal day.

Stat. First, from the close, dark Prisons, of the Womb,
I to the trouble, of short life, did come,
And first, I in the paths of Death, will tread,
Which to the joys, of our bright God, do lead.
Raise not my tender passions, with your Tears, Pari. weeps.
Like a soft smiling Hebe, Death appears.
I have no thoughts, which do disturb me now,
But what proceed, from my great care of you.
When through the straight of Death, my way I Have made,
And my just debt, to Mother Nature paid,
When my freed Soul, shall find a larger Room,
And I all Light, and Spirit shall become,
On Flowery Banks, where happy shaddows stray,
For thy dear Soul, I will expecting, stay.
Remember Sir, the blood, from whence we spring, To Cass.
That I was Wife, to the Worlds greatest King,
Your Master too -- Now condescend to crave,
That I may dye untouched, by any slave.
Let my own Women, your commands obey,
That Is all, Cassander, I have now to say.

Cass. Be speedy then --
Oxas -- go in, stand a Spectator by,
Touch not their Persons, only see them dye.

Stat. Give me that String -- Takes the strangling string from the Mute.
-- This Sister is the Friend,
That soon will give, to all our troubles, End.
Come banish fear, it is but a little breath,
We loose -- It Is guilt, that Terror gives, to Death.

Exeunt with Women weeping and Mute following. Cass. She Is gone, -- and strait,
will be for ever gone,
Alas! what Beauty, Love has overthrown!
Tyrannic Love, which forces me to do
A thing, against Virtue, and my conscience too.
I feel a soft, and tender passion rise,
And from my Breast, to flow into my Eyes.
Assist me Love -- I fear I shall relent:
Pity, would make me cowardly Repent,
If her bright Image, I so much adore,
Did not by force, attract my Passions more.

Exit. Enter Roxana, Hesione. Roxa. Their words, and actions, must Mysterious
be,
Who think to gain a Crown, by Policy:
Who cannot dissemble well, can never rule,
And a plain dealer, is esteemed a Fool.
Let not Cassander blame me, -- He deceives
And cheats himself, when he my words believes.
Love has put out, his minds discerning Eyes,
Yet the same passion, makes me quick, and wise.
He vainly Hopes, to gain a Crown, and me,
With an Eternal blot of Infamy,
But he will only that, and danger gain,
Whilst I the profit, and the fruit obtain:
I shall stand safe, and sheltered, from all harm,
Whilst he endures, the fury of the storm.
Close at his Heels, the Tempest will pursue,
And soon overtake, I hope, o'rewhelm him too.
Thus Princes, do of ills, themselves acquit,
And favorites dye for Crimes, their Kings commit
Enter Cassander. Cassander here -- I must dissemble now,
And a new face will to my Lover show.

Cass. Roxana here! -- she does my steps pursue, aside.
She doubts I cannot be cruel, or not true:
A Rival dead sh'accounts an happy sight,
And comes to glut, her bloody Appetite.
To the other World, your Rival now is gone,
And you, great Queen, Command this World alone.
The furious Perdicas, I Have Prisoner made,
By Gold, and his corrupted Guards betrayed.
Sometimes in Fury, the whole World he threats,
Anon, more mild, as humbly he entreats,
Now deep Revenge, by all the Gods, he swears;
Then courts his Guards, then curses, and dispa'res,
And calling on the Queen, bursts into Tears.

Roxa. What! have you then the great Statira slain?

Cass. Yes -- she is dead, that you alone might Reign.

Roxa. O Gods! It cannot be --

Cass. Not be? -- when you
Did pray, desire, entreat, command it too?
I am amazed --

Roxa. Ah! I did soon Repent,
Those harsh commands, from my strong passion sent,
You saw the flames, of the then raging fire,
And should have quenched, my Exorbitant desire.
You those Commands, might very well distrust,
Which bid you, to be cruel, and unjust.

Cass. Madam, your vain Repentance, comes too late,
No Humane power, can now recall their Fate.
Enter Mute. What! is Statira, and her Sister dead?
Mute makes signs they are Dead. By this, the greatness, of my Love, you see,
And what Commanding power, you'ave over me.
Great Queen, you shall the whole Worlds Scepter sway,
Whilst at your feet, its Kings their Crowns shall lay,
And your Cassander kneel, more great than they.

Roxa. O cruel Man! whom some fell Tygress bore,
Could not that move you, which the Gods adore?
Beauty, so Sacred, and Divine, a good,
Which safe, 'midst bloody Arms, unguarded stood,
Could that no fear, nor reverence, move in thee?
Had thou no awe, of its Divinity?
Tyrants who durst, Priests, Altars, Gods, invade,
Have still to Beauty awful Reverence paid.
Could not her Sex, her Blood, her Dignity,
Give some stop to thy Monstrous cruelty?

Cass. It Is well dissembled -- but your heart I see,
You may deceive the World, but cannot me.

Roxa. Dissemble! Oh my Heart, swells in my Breast,
And with such loads, of sorrow, is deprest,
I never shall again, with joys, be blessed. weeps.
Show me this dismal sight? --

Cass. False Woman, you shall see that welcome sight,
Will Not move your sorrow, but your Eyes delight.
They go toward the further part of the Stage, the Scene opens and discovers
Statira and Parisatis lying as dead on two Couches their faces Veiled, Cleone
and other Women sitting by them on the Ground weeping. See there they lie, hid
in Deaths gloomy Night.

Roxa. There lie the marks, of thy Barbarity;
Which I with trembling, and with Horror see.
In silence, I a Sisters Death will mourn,
My Soul, for my weak Limbs, too heavie's grown.

Returns leaning on Hesione. Cass. She feignes so well, and so much Art, does
show,
I doubt I shall anon, believe her too. The Scene Closes.
Would I had pow'er, to give them Life again,
That you, Roxana, might not weep in vain!
It Is now your dear Dead Sister, but if she
Could Live, she would then your hated Rival be;
And I, who am, so barbarous a Man,
Should Courted be, to Murder her again.
Great Jove, who all the lesser Fates controules,
Send from above, from thy great stock of Souls,
Two new immortal sparks, or the old return,
That grieved Roxana, may no longer mourn.

Roxa. Leave your vain wishes -- Let the Gods alone.
There Is business, of more moment, to be done.
When the Sea's calm, the Air Serene, and clear,
The Ship before the Wind, each Buoy can steer.
But when the Winds, roar in their shattered shroudes,
When Heaven's bright face, grows terrible, with clouds
And angry Seas, to moving Mountains grow,
The Pilot then his skill, and Art does show.
It Is now, Cassander, you must show your skill,
And try, if you can save, as well as kill.
Now you must show, your courage, and your care,
To every Guard, and every Watch repare:
Statira was beloved, and you will see
The enraged Babylonians Mutiny:
They will revenge her Death, on you, and me.
If us, from threatening storms, you now can save,
You shall enjoy, the Fortune, of the Brave.

Cass. T'obtaine your Love, your Foes I have withstood,
Imprisoned Friends, and dipped my Hands in Blood,
Your Interests, and your Factions mine have made,
But I with scorn, and with neglect, am paid.
Let the storm rise, I long enough have strove,
To show my obedience, and my matchless Love.
I like a God, will now withdraw my Guard,
And let Ruin loose, till you my Love reward.

Roxa. Let R^ne come, Cassander, you will learn.
It does not me, so much as you, concern.
Were you a God, and had the power of Jove,
You never should compel me, Sir, to Love:
I know your merits, and your passion see, --
Go to your charge -- leave the reward to me.

Cass. By what strong Charm, am I compell' to Love!
I must, and will, this wicked Charm remove.
Think not, that you with Tears, can me beguile,
False as the Hyena, or the Crocadile,
Weep over your prey, when in your Heart you smile,
I Will humbly seek, no more, for Love my due,
But try by force, and Arms to compass you:
My Hands once more in Blood, I will embrew,
And change your false, and feigned Tears, to true.

Exit Mute following him. Roxa. When Love, and high Ambition do possess To
Hesi. smiling.
Thy Soul, thou may at my great pleasure Ghess.
The dead Statira, was a happy sight,
Oh! how my Heart, was filled with the delight!
Nothing can now, my happiness remove,
I have no Rival, in my Throne, nor Love:
The way to Empire, and to Love is plain,
He whom I love is safe, she I did hate is slain.

Hesi. I saw dark Clouds, in your fierce Lovers Eyes,
I fear some storm, will suddenly arise,
His Soul, is full of Jealousy, and spite,
I wonder, you so much his anger slight.

Roxa. Let him rage on, he will grow tame, at last;
Men play with Fishes, when they'ave hook^d them fast*
It Is sport to hear, and to behold a while,
A Lion roar, and struggling in the toil.
I can with ease, the furious Beast beguile,
Awe him with frowns, and cheer him with a smile,
Now I must build, and now destroy his peace,
Sometimes his hopes, sometimes his fears increase,
And so, in equal balance, keep them still;
Thus I subject, this Lion, to my will.
Enter Mute, hastily makes signs, and pulling Roxana by the Sleeve to follow
him. What means this Mute? what is it he would have?

Hesi. Madam, he your assistance seems to crave.
Some business of importance, brings him here.

Roxa. He seems both full of have, and full of fear.
Alas! I cannot divine, what this should be.
Ill know, what his dumb signs, do signify.

Exeunt, hastily following the Mute The SCENE, The Prison of Orontes.
Enter Cassander. Cass. I bowed my Neck indeed, to mighty Love,
When I would scorn, to be a slave to Jove,
His chains I did admit, and never strove:
They looked so fair, so easy seemed, and light,
They shone so glorious, and appeared so bright,
I took pride in my Bonds, and wore them with delight.
But now they are heavy, and uneasy grown,
They sit too close, and off they must be thrown.
But ah! I fear it is past my power, and skill,
My Rebel Heart, will not obey my will.
It loves the great, and proud Roxana still,
Ill Love, but Court her, at another Rate,
My Love, shall now appear, to her, like Hate,
I am resolved, I will turn Rebel strait.
Her hopes, which on Orontes life, depend Draws his Sword.
Shall, with his life, have instantly an End.

Goes toward the further part of the Stage, the Scene opens and discovers
Orontes leaning on a Couch. Oron. Soft sleep, over half the World, his Wings
does spread.
And does on weary Eyes, his Poppies shed;
Nature her self, in silence, seems to nod,
And all things rest, full of the drousie God,
Yet I, whom wakeful thoughts, and cares infest,
Nor for my Soul, nor for my Eyes, find rest.
What vision's this, appears before my sight, Sees Cass. with a drawn sword.
So fierce, and dreadful, in the dead of Night?

Cass. I am thy evil Genius, and am come,
With this, Orontes, to pronounce thy doom.
By mighty Jove, and all the Gods, you shall
To Love, and Anger, now a Victim fall.

Oron. Tho I from hated life, would gladly fly,
I will not, at your pleasure, tamely dye.

Rises and comes forth. Cass. You must Orontes --
Roxana is not here, to help you now,
You stand between, my happiness, and me.

advances to kill Orontes. Enter Roxana and Hesione. Roxa. O Gods! what
spectacle is this I see! To Hesi.
Run -- Call my Guards -- Exit Hesione.
Traitor be gone --

Roxana runs betwixt Cassander and Orontes. Cass. When I have killed Orontes, I
will go.

Roxa. You first shall kill, your Queen, and Mistress too.

Cass. I'ave vowed his Death, and will my vow perform.

Roxa. I'ave vowed his safety -- He shall take no harm.
Is this the way, you your great passion prove?

Cass. I now a Rebel am to Love.

Strives to come at Orontes. Roxana to hinder him. Roxa. And like a Rebel, I
will use you now.
Enter Guards -- seize Cassander and dis-arm him. Traitor, you shall at last,
my power know.
Bear hence this rageing Beast -- To the Guards.
In Chains, and a close Prison, keep him safe,
Till he grows tame again --

Cass. Ungrateful Queen --
I have too long your slave, and lover been:
But I, in spite of your bewitching Charms,
Will Live, to kill, your Gallant in your Arms.

Roxa. Guards have him hence -- Exeunt Guards with Cassander.
Can my Orontes, still inhumane be?
Have you no Love, nor pity left for me?
Did thou the Milk, of some fierce Tygress Suck?
Or was thy Heart, cut from a Scythian Rock?
That thou can see a Queen, whom Kings adore,
Fall at thy Feet, and Love, with Tears, implore. Kneels.
Can you so tender, to Statira be,
And a cold Marble Statue, still to me?

Oron. Roxana rise -- takes her up.
A noble Soul, to Love, was never compelled,
Bright virtue only, makes brave Souls to yield:
But your blind passion, bears such evil sway,
That leads you far, from virtues paths, astray.
You asked a Heart, that was bestowed before
On Queen Statira --

Roxa. In vain you do on her your Love bestow,
Unless you will Court her, in the shades below.

Oron. How! Is Statira dead! --
Ah! cruel Tygress! have you slain the Queen?
Of all that is fair, and good, have you the Murthress been?

Roxa. I tried that way, your Rocky Heart to move,
And see, how soon, it can be touched, by Love.
Statira Lives --

Oron. Lives! -- Where? -- into her Arms I Will fly,
Or -- tell me, is she dead? that I may dye.
Without her, to the Gods, I would not go,
Nor tread, the blessed Elysian Fields below:
Without Statira, I no bliss can know.
But if she is dead, I Will fly away
From life, and here, not one short minute stay,
Speak -- is she dead? -- you rack me with delay.

Roxa. This tender passion, for my Rival shown,
My Loving Heart too, on the Rack has thrown.
But I will be revenged, and you shall dwell
In anxious doubt, and tortured in that Hell.

Oron. Stay -- do not thus, in cruelty delight:
Let me not linger here -- Kill me outright:
Tell me sh's dead, and kill me with that word,
Or say she lives, and a reprieve afford.
Free me from pain, or send my Soul from hence.

Roxa. Thy Soul, shall feel, the torture, of suspense,
I will torment thee yet -- thou shall not know,
Whether Statira, is alive, or no.

Exit with Hesione. Oron. What shall I do? it is pain, and Death, to Live,
Each Minute does ten Thousand tortures give,
And yet in Death, I dare not seek my bliss,
Lest, in that unknown Region, I should miss
The happiness I seek, --
And lose my Queen, in that World, and in this.
O Gods! What pains do you for Souls prepaire,
Who dare not hope, yet know not to dispa're.

Goes in, the SCENE Closes. The Fifth ACT.
The SCENE, Babylon.
Enter Eumenes, Lysimachus, Ptolomy, Thalestris, Amazons, and Soldiers. Eume.
THe City's won, and none left to oppose,
Within the Palace Walls, are all our Foes.

Lysi. In vain, in vain, have we a Conquest made,
The cruel Gods, have all our hopes betrayed,
And with them, all, our Earthly Joys, are fled,
The Queen, and her fair Sister too, are dead.
This is the news, which like a deadly Dart,
Now pierced my Ears, and struck me through the Heart.

Thal. Why did the Gods, such Heavenly forms Create,
And join, with so much Beauty, so ill Fate?
They give us cause, their Godheads to blasphem.

Eume. The ways of Providence, do Riddles seem,
And are, like various Fancys, in a Dream,
It Is past our skill, to find the Sense of them.
Their Murderers, let us with Revenge, pursue,
The Gods, will aid us, when their works we do.

Ptol. Yes, brave Eumenes, we will first Revenge
Their Death, and then the Scene of Life I Will change.

Lysi. Since Love, could not our Friendships know unty,
We will both perfect Friends, and Lovers dye.

Embrace. Ptol. Death shall not have pow'er, our Souls to disunite,
For both, shall hence, together take their flight,
And since our Body's, here the difference make,
Our Souls below, shall but one shadow take.

Lysi. Come, my dear Friend, let us about it strait.
Draw up the Army, to the Palace Gate, To the Soldiers.
Let it with all our Troops, be compast round,
And then with Ramms, o^rethrow it to the Ground.

Exeunt Omnes. The SCENE, The Palace Royal in Babylon.
Enter Roxana with Hesione. Roxa. My Soul, is with too great a load oppressed,
My Eyes can find no sleep, my Mind no rest,
For my designs, will all Successless prove
If I cannot make, the Scythian Prince, to Love.
I'ave saved his Life, with hazard of my own,
And disobliged those, who should guard my Thron^.

Hesi. Time, only can, his Rebel Heart subdue,
Extinguish his old Flame, and kindle new.
All your perfections, he will then admire,
And in his Breast, feel a new Amorous fire.

Roxa. Statira, still in his great Heart, does live,
I doubt, he never, will her Death forgive.

Hesi. Time, does on all, a blessed oblivion shed,
Which takes away, the memory of the dead,
On grieving Souls, it by degrees does creep,
And does surprise insensibly, as sleep.
Nature, at last, must tired, and weary grow,
The highest Tides, of grief, still ebb most low.

Roxa. I cannot, with so long expectation, wait,
Let Love, and Time, like slaves, attend my State,
I must and will have satisfaction strait.
When the whole East, submits to my Command,
Shall he alone, my Will, and pow'er withstand?
shouts within. Hark -- hark -- what shouts are those, so loud?

Hesi. They Are shouts of Joy, and of a Multitude.

Shout again. Rox. What can this mean! -- It does my Soul affright,
The Babylonians, are grown mad, to night.

Enter an Officer of Roxana's Guards. Offi. Madam the City's taken, and your
Foes
Have routed all, who durst their force oppose.

Roxa. The City taken! -- you'ave neglectful been.

Offi. 'Twas not Neglect, but Treason let them in.
They entered, at Semiramises Gate,
Where none opposed them, till it was too late.
Thence, like a Torrent, they the City filled,
And all, who did oppose them, easily killed.
With eager shouts, a Squadron, this way made,
Your Guards, and Royal Palace, to invade:
Your routed Soldiers, wheresoever they fly,
For Perdicas, and for Cassander cry.

Roxa. Have -- away -- to your Captain run, with speed,
And let Cassander, from restraint, be freed.

Offi. -- I fear, it is now too late,
The Foes, by this are at the Palace Gate.

Rox. Be gone -- tell me not of your fears, but fly,
Effect, what I command you strait, or dye. Exit Officer.
I know not which way, my hard Fate, to shun.
Ah! cruel Fate! how can this loss be born!
And how shall I endure, Orontes scorn!

Hesi. I hope the Gods, will yet, some pity show,
With patience wait, their Wills you soon will know.

Roxa. Their Wills, they in my ruin, have made known,
But I Will not stoop to theirs, but to my own:
For since they will, I shall be quite undone,
I Will will it too, and on my Fate, will run.
My Death, shall be the effect, of my own will,
For first Orontes, then my self I Will kill:
I then in dying, shall some pleasure find,
To leave Orontes dead, will please my mind:
Perhaps his Ghost, below, may prove more kind*
If not, I Will there, his fierce tormenter prove,
Eternally, I Will kill him, with my Love.

Enter Officer and Soldiers. Offi. Cassander is set free, but will not fight,
He seems, to hear, our dangers, with delight,
And said, the Gods, revenged his wrongs, this Night.
After some pause, a few choice men, he took,
And suddenly enraged, the place forsook.
But muttering as he went, I heard him cry,
I will my Rival kill, before I dye.

Roxa. O Gods! I must this wretches pow'er control:
With this, I Will first let out, his treacherous Soul.
Snatches a Iavelin from the Officer. Under a tottering Tower, I seem to stand,
And would uphold it, with my feeble hand,
I see it shake, and know, at last, 'twill fall,
And, with its Ruins, overwhelm us all.
But like my self, a brave great Queen I Will dye,
Whilst, with my Fate oppressed, dead Princes round me lie.

Exeunt. Enter Perdicas with Sword in his Hand. Perd. Horrid Confusion, reigns
in every place,
And all things now, look with a dreadful face:
In this confusion, I my freedom gain,
But Oh! my Soul, is tortured still, with pain,
The cursed Roxana, has Statira slain.
I now am come, to set my Rival free,
In her Revenge we shall like friends agree.

Scene opens, and discovers Orontes. Oron. Again disturbed! -- what, Perdicas,
are you
Come, to dispatch, your hated Rival too?
Make have -- but first, this satisfaction give,
Tell me, ah tell me, does Statira live?

Perd. She Is gone -- she is gone -- she is vanished from our sight*
The cursed Cassander, put out all her light,
And those fair eyes, which shone, than Day, more bright,
By Death Eclipsed, are hid in shades of Night.

Oron. Here -- Pierce my Breast, and with a welcome blow,
At last, some Kindness, to your Rival show.

Opening his Arms. Perd. Statira's death, puts to our strife, an end,
You not my Rival, now may be my Friend.
Take this -- Gives him a Sword.
From my restraint, I, but just now, got free,
First hither ran, to give you Liberty,
That we the Scenes of War, Blood, Death, might change,
And, on her Foes, Statira's Death revenge.

Oron. Tho I, from hated Life, would fly away,
A brave, and just Revenge, invites my stay,
The Gods, and you, have armed my hand, once more,
I swear, by her blessed Shade, I still adore,
I will revenge her Death --
Enter Cassander and Soldiers. -- The Monster see. --

Cass. What! Perdicas releast!
And is Orontes too, of Arms possessed!

Oron. Thou most accursed of humane Kind --

Cassander and Soldiers fight with Orontes and Perdicas, Cassander falls
wounded by Orontes. Enter Roxana, hastily followed by Hesione, Officers and
Soldiers. Roxana wounds Orontes with a Spear, the Soldiers are beat off the
Stage by Perdicas and Roxana 's Soldiers Roxa. Oh Gods! What have I done! --
Thus humbly prostrate, to my Prince, I bow,
Kneels, and about to Embrace the Knees of Oront. he steps back. My Soul, has
given, all Empire up, to you,
And my proud Heart, great Love, has conquered now.

Oron. Touch me not Tygress, with those guilty Hands,
Honor forbids, what passion now Commands,
Else by Cassander, bleeding you should lie,
And your Cursed Souls, to Hell together fly.

Cass. Fate here has thrown me, as a useless thing,
Wounded, and bleeding, here, in pain, I lie,
I have not strength to fight, nor wound enough to dye.
Death, has no pain, like that, which now I feel,
Seeing the great, and proud Roxana Kneel,
Poor spirited Woman, can thou be so mean,
To stoop, below the grandeur, of a Queen?
Thy noble Pride, did first, my Love beget,
Oh! let it like the Sun, in Glory set,
As he, with setting Beams, makes red the air,
In spite of Clouds, which angry Gods prepare,
Let your proud Heart, be thoroughly understood,
Look gay in Death, and falling set in Blood.
Dye whilst a Queen, -- Play an Heroic part,
First, with a Sword, pierce his rebellious Heart,
Pointing to Oront. Then, rush on Death's inevitable shelf,
Kindly kill me, and bravely stab thy self.

Roxa. Tho Love has forced my mighty Heart, to sue,
I yet have pride, and scorn enough for you. To Cass.
Bear him from hence --

Cass. False Queen -- when I'ave Death's frozen passage crossed,
I will return, to haunt thee, with my Ghost.

Exit carried forth by Soldiers. Perd. Keep in, a while, his Life's expiring
flame,
Till Death approach him, with a greater shame.

Oron. Come, let us to our fighting Friends repair,
And seek a Death, which will be welcome there,
I, with my Breast, will catch some flying Dart,
And give't, an easy passage, to my Heart.

Exeunt Oront. and Perd. Roxa. He Is gone, and left me, like a wretch, with
scorn,
Fallen, from my greatness, wretched and forlorn.
In Babylon, I never will be seen,
Below the glorious title of a Queen.
I then must dye --
Dye, e're I have, all signs of Empire, lost,
Dye, e're I all my Misery understand,
Dye, whilst I may have Death, at my Command.

Draws out a Dagger* Enter Messenger. Mess. The Enemie's into the Palace got.

Roxa. Slave, let me dye, a Queen, in all my Pride,
As once the great Assyrian Monarch died.
Go -- Burn the Palace, set it strait on fire,
Encompast round, with Flames, I Will here expire,
All my rich Treasure, and my Jewels burn,
And this great pyle, with me, to Ashes turn,
I Will dye enthroned -- the Palace be my Urn.
Slave art thou here -- Why is not all this done?
Am I not yet a Queen -- haste and be gone. Goes to strike him with the Dagger.
Exit Officer.
But oh! my Heart, I feel a shivering fear,
I cannot dye, and leave Orontes here;
What satisfaction, should I now receive,
Could I once more behold him, while I live,
For one last look, an Empire I would give.

Enter Orontes, Perdicas, Lysimachus, Ptolomy, Eumenes, Thalestris, Amazons and
Soldiers. Lysi. The Babylonians, when they understood
Roxana's cruel Act, their Arms flung by,
And now for Justice, on the Murth'rers, Cry.

Ptol. Those who opposed, and were our foes before,
With one consent, their dear Queen's death deplore,
They now in heaps, before the Palace crowd,
And for Revenge, and Justice cry aloud.

Perd. And Justice they shall have -- seize that false Queen.

Roxa. Slaves keep your distance -- see, Death stands between.
Holds forth her Dagger to the Soldiers. I scorn my Fate, within your Power
should lie,
I both the Power of Men, and Gods defy,
I Will use my own, when I am pleased to dye.

Oron. Let her own guilty Hands, her Life pursue,
The G^^^, by them, will on her Justice do.

Perd. Oh! barbarous Queen, you did your self deceive,
Y^u ^^^^ght, there were no Gods, or did believe,
They were not just, but they, at last, have sent
Me, from your Bonds, to give you punishment.

Roxa. If Death, be the great punishment, you mean,
You threaten, what with Prayers, I would obtain,
You could, to me, no greater To^ment, give,
Than to permit me, without Hope, to live.
Death is the Blessing, which I wish for most,
Now I'ave Orontes, and my Empire lost.

Oron. The just Gods, think a Crown, for such unfit,
Who seek by horrid Crimes, to purchase it.

Roxa. The Crimes, I did commit, the Gods above*
Will easily Pardon, because Crimes of Love.
To kill a Rival, I account no sin,
And I would do it, were it to do ag'in,
It does, with such delight, my Mind possess,
The Pleasures of a Crown, would please me less.
She would have given, more tortures, to my Mind*
Lived she; than I shall now* in Dying find.
In Death, alas! no bitterness would be,
But that, I find, I still am scorned by thee.

Perd. The Gods, did long* their Vengeance, keep in store,
And now, on your Cursed Head, their Thunderbolts, they pour.

Roxa. I scorn, my Mouth, should my great Heart, belie,
I both Mankind, and the unkind Gods defye,
And tho with P^agues, they still should me pursue,
They never, shall my 'unconquer'd Heart, subdue:
Thus -- not the Gods, but my own Sacrifice Lifting up the Dagger.
I Will fall -- I must take Courage from those Eyes,
Pausing and looking on Orontes. I Will take one farewel-Look, before I dye,
One more, and I Will, for ever, from you sly.

Perd. Your Wound still bleeds --

Oron. It Is slight -- I must, a greater wound, prepare.
The World shall see, the Power of Death, too weak,
The Joys of my Immortal Love to break.
I, to my Love, have made a solemn Vow,
By all the Gods, I will perform it now. Draws forth a Dagger.

Lysi. Brave Prince, we Rivals too, have Vowed the same,

Ptol. Our Souls possess, the like immortal flame.

Roxa. Ah! will Orontes dye -- New Joys I feel,
I Will stay, and watch my Princes fatal blow,
Then in my Breast, I Will plunge my Dagger too,
And, at one instant, both our Souls, shall start,
Together, both, from our dull Bodies, part,
And if a Spirit, can a Spirit hold,
I will his Soul, within my Soul infold.

Perd. The dreadful face of Death, I'ave often beheld,
In all her shapes, I'ave seen her, in the field,
There Is none will think, that now I shrink for fear,
Or that I Would sly, tho many Deaths appear.
A vain, fantastic place, Elysium seems,
But you believe --
The Tales of Priests, and idle Poets dreams.
The Queen's Death, I Will revenge, then Altars rear,
To her great Name, make her a Goddess, here,
Whilst you, vain Blisses seek, you know not where.

Oron. Statira gone, I nothing here can find,
Which can give ease to my disturbed mind.
You gentle Ghosts, look down from Heaven above,
And see the Effects of true, and faithful Love.

Lysi. With you, Dear Souls, our Bliss, and Joys are fled,
It is no Life, to Live, now you are dead.

Ptol. Our Souls, and theirs, through Love, were so much one,
Ours cannot stay behind, when theirs are gone.

Oron. After our Loves, to that blessed place, we will go,
Where Love's immortal, and no change, does know,
Where Rivals cannot, our long bliss destroy,
And where we undisturbed, each other shall enjoy.

Enter the Mute. Arax. Ah! Sir, does this black Mask, disguise me so,
You cannot, your own faithful Araxis, know?

Oron. Araxis! --
I cannot Araxis find, in this disguise.
Let me embrace you, e're I dye -- Embraces him.
Ah! this has been a sad, and fatal Night.

Arax. The Day appears, with clear, and cheerful Light.

Oron. About my Heart, a Night of sorrow lies.

Arax. You will find Day, in your Statira's Eyes.

Enter Capt. with Statira, Parisatis, Cleone. Oron. I, with the weight, of my
own Joys, am pressed,
They cannot be contained, within my Breast?
Do I but Dream, or am I truly blessed.

Roxa. O Gods! I am betrayed -- my Rival's here,
Worse, than a thousand Deaths, she does appear.
Death, which before, I looked on, with content,
Will now my torture be, and punishment.
What can my Torment, and my pain express?
Orontes, and my Crown, she will possess.

Stat. I live, my Prince, -- by your Araxis care.

Arax. And by The Assistance, of this Captain, here,
presenting the Captain to Orontes, they Embrace. He me disguised, feigned me a
Mute, and Slave,
And me, a present, to Cassander gave.

Roxa. Gods! was I thus betrayed! --

Arax. The Gods were kind --
And wrought by me, more than I had designed.
They first made known, Roxana's vile intent,
And made me then, an happy Instrument,
The Queens most horrid Murder, to prevent.

Stat. We went to dye, but 'twas no small surprise,
To find Araxis, in this black disguise,
By his contrivance, we our Foes deceived,
For what, they much desired, they soon believed,
We strangled, dead, and veiled appeared, in view,
Till, from the place, our cruel Foes withdrew:
Thus, the kind Gods, their wickedness withstood,
And saved the Relics, of Darius Blood.

In the mean time Lysimachus and Ptolomy Court Parisatis in dumb show. Oron.
Divine Statira, you're so great a prize,
For you, the whole World's Empire I Would despise:
The Persian Crown's, to me, of small esteem,
Compared, to this unvaluable Gemm: kissing her Hand.
Upon your brow, the Scythian Crown shall shine,
And, at your feet, I prostrate all that is mine.

Roxa. It Is time to dye -- their bliss I cannot see,
Hell -- tortures -- and confusion follow me:
Harpies, my Soul, with cruel Tallons tear,
She can, no longer, the sad torment bear:
Thus I will set her free -- she cannot know Stabbs her self.
A greater Torment, nor more pains below,
To a worse Hell than this, she cannot go.

Stat. Rescue her life -- Let her repenting Live,
It is my Glory, that I can forgive.

As she goes to repeat the blow, the Soldiers seize her. Roxa. Ye cruel Gods,
who thus my will oppose,
Who thus Enslave me, to my mortal Foes,
And make my imperious Heart, to stoop to them,
Whilst Life remains, I Will curse you, and Blasphem.
But ah! I hope, my Soul's, from Prison freed,
I feel Life gently sliding hence -- I bleed --
What thick dark fog is this, before my Eyes?
So -- now my Soul, to unknown Regions flies.
Where is my Love -- see -- yonder -- where he rests,
Come, use the softer Pillow, of my Breasts:
Here thou may sleep, secure from Rivals harms,
Whilst, I enclose thee gently, in mine Arms.
Now undisturbed, we will taste immortal blisses,
I Will hush thee fast with sighs, then wake thee with my kisses.

Stat. She raves -- she raves -- and from her sense is gone.

Roxa. Oh! my sick Heart -- I shall be well anon.
Where is Orontes? -- set me on my Throne,
From Babylon, I know I Am wandered far,
Yet I Am a Queen, my Kingdom is a Star:
Go fetch that Rebel -- bring him to my feet,
I Will make, at last, his stubborn heart submit.
Let half my starry Kingdom, down be hurled,
And overwhelm his little Earthly World.

Stat. Remove her hence -- Thus Gods their Judgment show,
That poor ambitious Mortals, here may know,
They sit above, and see, and govern all below.

Roxana is carried off the Stage Raveing. Perd. See here, another Wretch,
that is forced to sue,
For Justice, to the Gods, and greater you.
Madam, I Love, and grow distracted too.
Thus lowly, Madam, I fall down before Kneels.
The beauteous Image, which I still adore.
Condemn me strait to dye, and mercy show,
Life will be worse than Death, if I loose you.

Stat. No Perdicas, you must not dye --
All your offenses, I do now forgive:
I wish, I could as soon, your grief remove,
I can, my pity grant you, tho not Love.

Perd. Your pity, Madam, cannot ease my Grief,
And to the wounds of Love, gives small relief.

Stat. Well Perdicas, I Will give my Friendship too,
All but my self, I will bestow on you.
I Will with you share, my Empire, and my Throne,
If that is too little, wear my Crown alone.

Perd. I want no Crowns, my Arms, can them subdue,
Nor sought I, for your Empire, but for you.

Oron. There Is nothing, Sir, that I esteem above
Your noble Friendship, but Statira's Love:
I for the Queen, not for her Empire, strove.

Perd. Half the World's Realms, this, did already win,
puts his Hand to his Sword. And when I please, can Conquer 'um over ag'in.
For Empire, let the ambitious sue to Jove,
Nothing can satisfy my Soul, but Love.

Stat. All the rich Treasure, Alexander ^^ft,
That Princely Robber's, not inglorious Theft,
To buy your friendship, I will freely give,
Let me in peace, with my Orontes Live.

Perd. Go bait the Covetous, with such sordid pelf,
I Will not accept a World, without your ^elf.

Oron. Since you to be my Foe, are still inclined,
You shall Orontes, still Orontes find,
From all the World* I can m^ Queen defend,
And t^^s, to our debate, shall put an End: Lays hold on his Sword.
Dye then* my Rival, or else live my Friend.

Per^. Gods! am I threatened? -- Lays hold on his Sword, St^^ira stops him.

(...) (...) Perdicas -- Show me some proofs of Love:
All Cause of Quarrel, with your self remove.

Perd. Show me the path, in which you would have me tread,
I Will follow it, tho it to Hell should lead.
What would you have me do? --

Stat. -- Still think me dead.
Do, what you did resolve, to do, before,
When you did never think, to see me more.
You ave seen the sad Effects, of Lawless Love,
Let Virtue, his Tyranny sway remove.
The other half World, go Conquer with your Sword,
War, will diversion give, or cure afford.

Perd. Madam, I Will try, to' obey your strict Command,
But here I Vow, at the Altar of your Hand, Kisses her Hand*
Whilst the Gods grant me Life, I ever will
Honor, Respect, Love, and adore you still.
To Arms -- to Arms,
Till my unquiet, restless Life shall cease,
The World, like me, shall never be in peace.
Madam farewell --
-- I don't your threatenings fear, Turning to Orontes.
I Will go to Scythia, if not meet you here.

Exit. Lysi. Thus humbly prostrate before you we fall,
Lysi. and Ptol. kneeling to Parisatis. You are our Judge, and on your gentle
Breath,
Depends the Sentence, of our Life, and Death.

Ptol. Madam to you, we now for Judgment fly,
Say which of us must Live, and which must dye.
Love cannot permit, two Rivals in one Throne,
He is a Monarch, and must reign alone.
Our Love, and friendship in this both agree
To own your Sentence just, what e're it be.

Pari. Rise Noble Friends -- I will impartial be,
She makes them rise. I cannot grant, what you now ask of me.
Your Equal Virtues, so my Heart divide,
I cannot now, your friendly strife decide.
I should be, unjust --
To Murder one, whilst I the other save:
Since if I one accept, I the other lose,
I will be just to both, and both refuse.

Lysi. In choosing one, you will some Mercy show,
But you will both destroy, in doing so,
Destroying both, you Cruelty express,
In saving one of us, you show much less.

Ptol. Madam, since both, cannot your Love enjoy,
Let not our Friendship, our great Bliss destroy:
For tho we both, thus for your Love contend,
Each, is at once, a Rival, and a Friend.
In choosing one, you one of us Redeem,
Refusing both, you both to Death Condemn.

Pari. In both of you, I, a rare Friendship see,
Love has not power, to make you disagree,
You both have been, so noble, and so brave,
And both such Equal Love, and Merits have,
That it would be, an unjust thing, in me,
To give to one, the Palm of Victory.
Therefore brave friends --
I Would rather be thought Cruel, than unjust.

Lysi. Since our fair Princess, will not our cause decide,
Our Quarrel must, at last, by Arms be tried. turning to Ptolomy.
Our sacred friendship, must not be above,
The higher, and more sacred pow'er, of Love.

Pari. Live still brave friends, as friendly as you did,
Still as you were, both friends, and Rivals live,
I now command it -- He who disobeys,
Looses my Love, and his own cause betrays.
Let not your Love, your Friendship now divide,
The Gods, and Time, will your kind strife decide,
To them we will leave your cause -- whilst you agree,
You equal favor, shall receive from me.

Lysi. Madam, our Fates lie in your powerful Hand,
I will obey, what ever you Command.

Ptol. And I Will endeavor, by obedience too,
To please, tho I shall never merit you.
Rival, and Friend, for so we still must be, To Lysi.
Let us Embrace -- and like friends still agree.

Lysi. Love, has most nobly, our high friendship Crowned.

Embracing. Eume. Madam, in you, lies my felicity, Kneeling to Thalestris.
Ah! let me not alone unhappy be.
Let me not only have a cause to mourn,
Whilst you my Love, and Services do scorn.

Oron. Madam, we all d^ for Eumenes sue,
None, his high merits, can reward, but you.
I hope, you will not, our just suits delay,
And spoil the Luster, of this happy day.
We cannot freely, our own Bliss, enjoy,
If you this Prince's happiness destroy.

Thal. Eumenes rise -- I can resist no more, Takes up Eumenes.
Love made some progress, in my Heart before.
In these brave friends, I such rare virtues find,
Which reconcile me now to Men, and make me kind.
To all my Women, you shall Husbands give,
And we will henceforth, like other Nations live,
Henceforth, we will no longer live, alone,
But joined, by Love, make of two Kingdoms one.
We then shall loose, our Monarchy, and Name,
And only Live, by History, and Fame.
So Rivers, having the row large Kingdoms past,
Loose Name, and Waters, in the Sea, at last:
What Mortal dares, with mighty Love contend,
Who thus can give, to our great Empire, End?

Oron. Let us, fair Queens, now to the Temple go,
To pay those Vows, which to the Gods, we owe:
Let the Holy Altars, with bright Incense shine,
And Hecatombs, fall to the Powers Divine:
In Pious Joys, let us loose all sorrows past,
A true, and Virtuous Love, Heaven Crowns, at last.

The Curtain falls. FINIS.
EPILOGUE
Spoken by Statira. POets, like Gods, Create, what forms they please,
Monarchs, and Mighty Heroes, kill with Ease,
And Murdered Princes too, from Death, can raise.
We Live, and Dye, as pleases Mr. Bays.
At one House, I am, by Roxana, slain,
But see, at this, I am alive again,
And spite, of all her Cruelty, and rage,
I Live, am Queen, and Triumph, on the Stage.
The God-like Poet, Mortal Actors too,
Strive thus, with various Skill, to pleasure you,
They punish, they reward, they kill, they save,
And all to find out, what it is you would have,
For You -- like Gods, like Goddesses you -- sit,
To Judge our Actions, and the Poets wit,
And it is but just, all should to you submit,
Poets your Drudges, for you form a Play,
They shape, with artful Words; the senseless Clay,
And to the Image, a dead form they give,
But it is from you, it must its Life receive,
You make both Poets, Plays, and Players, Live.
FINIS.

