CHRISTOPHAGIA.

The MYSTERY of Eating the Flesh AND Drinking the Blood OF CHRIST.

And the Modus, or Manner thereof DISCOVERED.

Joh. 6. 53. Then Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily I say unto you, Except
ye Eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and Drink his Blood, ye have no Life in
you. Tale tuum Corpus nobis Divine Redemptor Quale est corporibus Panis
Vinumque Virorum Cento Virg^li^nus. Eclog. 5. -- Si quid novisti rectius istis
Candidus imperti; Si non, his utere mecum.
Hor. By ED M. PORTER, D. D. and Prebend of Norwich.

London: Printed by Tho. Nemcomb for Tho. Collins, at the Middle-Temple-Gate in
Fleetstreet. 1680.

TO THE READER.
IT pleased his Gracious K. Charl. II.
Majesty in his Royal Prudence and Piety, by His Declaration of October. 14. in
the 14 Year of His Reign, to direct his Clergy of this Realm, to insist chiefly
in their Ordinary Sermons on Catechistical Doctrines. Which gracious
Directions, if obeyed and performed, may (with Gods Assistance) produce
tranquillity and peace in this Church, and increase knowledge and comfort in
the People.

Of all those weighty fundamental Doctrines, none is more desirable and
comfortable, than that of the Sacred Eucharist (if it may be rightly
understood) which upon serious consideration, and in our time has been added
to our elder Catechism, about sixty years since, by the Authority of our then
Royal Beauclerk King JAMES of ever happy Memory. And yet at this day, no one
part of all those necessary Doctrines is less apprehended, or understood by the
People.

That Question which the Jewish Disciples moved, How can this Man John 6.
give us his Flesh to eat? has never yet been so fully and clearly answered,
but that People are still to seek; and it is too evidently perceived, that they
do not understand one half of that Mystery: Neither do we much marvel thereat,
because indeed, the whole Christian World, both anciently, and also in our
days, has been, not only exceedingly exercised, but also seem to have been
posed in that Mysterious question, as may appear by the multitude of Books
published upon that Subject, both by the Fathers, and also since by many
Learned men of the Reformed and Unreformed Churches, wherein many passages of
the Fathers are produced, which are so mystical and ambiguous, that Men of
contrary Persuasions, challenge their authorities to assert their differing
Interests.

Yet of the multitude of Quotations out of the Fathers, by Cardinal Bellarmine,
not one does fully reach or extend to, and clearly prove the new doctrine of
Transubstantiation; neither is that word found in any of those ancient Fathers
by him alleged, nor does the Modus, or manner of Eating the Flesh of Christ
appear to have been defined, or described by them, although we find the words
Mutation, Conversion, Transformation, Transfiguration and Transelementation,
often used by them in the Question of the Eucharist, which come not home to the
newer Invention of Transubstantion. The misunderstanding of those former words,
has been long ago blown off by the Reformed Writers; and the observation of
Origin did very early, and timely preclude the dangerous acception of those
ambiguous passages, which dropped from the Pens of the Fathers, who on the 10.
Chapter of Leviticus, and in the 7th. Homily says, Est and in Evangelio
litera, quae occidit eum, qui non Orig. in Lev. n. 7.
spiritualiter advertit, ut nisi manducaveritis carnem meam, etc i. There is
even in the Gospel a Letter which kills him, who does not consider it to be
spiritually meant, Except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, etc.

Many Sentences are found in the Fathers, which are doubtful, and seem so near
the brink, that many Learne^ men by misunderstanding them, have fallen into the
ditch.

St. Cyprian (or some other under Cyp. de Coena.
his name) had written, Deus usque hodie corpus suum creat, That God unto this
day does still create his own Body. And Panis iste non effigy sed natura
mutatus, factus caro, i. that the Sacramental Bread is changed, not in shape,
but in is nature, and is made Flesh.

After him St. Hilary says, Nos vere Hill. de Trin. l. 8.
verbum carnem, cibo Dominico sumimus, that Communicants do truly receive the
Word made Flesh in the Lords Supper.

After him St. Ambrose said, Sermo Ambr. de Sacram. l. 4. c. 4.
Christi mutat species elementorum. And, Panis iste, ubi accesserit
Consecratio, fit corpus Christi, i. That the words of Christ did change the
Sacramental Elements, so that by the words of Consecration, the Bread is made
the Body of Christ.

After him St. Chrys^stome said, Christus Chrysostom. Hom. 2. Antioch.
carnem suam nobis reliquit, and ipsam habens, ascendit, That Christ left his
Flesh with us, and yet took it with him when, he Ascended.

But the words of St. Cyril (if they Cyril Hieros. Mist. 4.
be his own) seem more harsh than the former, and require a more charitable
gloss, to reconcile them with the truth of this Mystery, where he says,
Christus, ut aquam in vinum mutabat in nuptiis, sic vinum in Sanguinem
transtulisse credendus est in Coena -- And adds, Panis qui videtur, non est
panis; nec Vinum, vinum, sed Sanguis Christi, i. As Christ turned water into
wine John 2.
at the Marriage, so it is to be believed, that he turned wine into Blood at
his last Supper, wherein that which seems Bread, is not Bread, nor is the
Wine, Wine; but it is the Blood of Christ.

If these Fathers, by these words meant only a Sacramental change of the
Elements, viz. of the use, name, signification and operation of them, we
willingly assent; but if they meant a real change of the matter, substance, or
essence of those Creatures, we utterly dissent.

As for those words of Mutation before mentioned, which are used in this
question, both by the Latin and Greek Fathers, we say, that the word
Transformatio, (...) signifies but a new formality, or (...), or consideration
and account put upon the Holy Bread, although it continues in its own
substance, bread. As when of cloth a Gown is made, or of wood a Chair, or of
gold a Ring, the substances of Cloth, Wood and Gold, still remain, although a
new name or appellation is put on them.

So the word Transfiguration, (...) is used, because the elements by Dedication
or Consecration to so great, and holy an use, are made more than they were
naturaly of themselves before, and are considered, not as only mere Bread and
Wine, but as figures and Sacraments of the Body and Blood of Christ, and this
by Consecration or Sacramental constitution, not (...) but (...).

So the word Transelementation, (...), if it be meant and understood of the
advancement, preferment or dignity added to the Elements of Bread and Wine, so
as, that after Consecration to that Spiritual use, they are to be considered
not as only Bread and Wine, or only as Elements, (so far we assent) because of
mere Elements they are made Sacraments. Thus Theodoret very judiciously Theod.
in Eranist. Dial. 1.
observes, that Christ in the Holy Supper changed the names of the Elements,
Non mutans naturam, sed adjiciens gratiam, viz. that he graced those signs or
Sacraments with the title or appellation of his own Body and Blood, although
they still retained their former substance, figure and form; for so he expressly
declares in his third Dialogue, Manent in priore Id. Ibid. Dial. 3.
substantia, figura and forma.

In like manner the words of St. Austin Aug. Psalm. 33. hom. 1
on the 33. Psalm are to be understood, where he says, Christus in manibus
suis ferebatur, quando dixit hoc est Corpus meum, i. Christ was carried in his
own hands, when he said, This is my Body: That which he then bare in his hands
was only the Sacrament of his Body, which yet he called his Body, although the
Sacrament is but the sign thereof, signum rei, but (as other signs often are)
it is called by the name of the thing signified, Res signi. The former is
mentioned and meant in the Institution of that Sacrament, Mat. 26. 26. The
latter is mentioned, Mat. 26. 26. John 6. 53.
John 6. 53. which is the very reality of the thing it self; for by those words
of Eating and Drinking, Christ declared the necessity of an Union or
Conjunction of our flesh and blood with His, in order to our Redemption, and so
to Life, saying, Except ye Eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, etc. ye have no
life in you.

It may reasonably be thought, that many learned Romanists, do not really
believe that impossible Doctrine of Transubstantiation, who yet either for
fear, or hope of profit, do profess and teach the same; for great are the
privileges and profits that arise from it; and as the Prophet says, the
Priests teach for hire, and the Prophets Mich. 3. 11.
divine for money. The Fathers often observed, that evil spirits used to speak
from the belly of Pythonists, who are therefore called Ventriloqui, upon those
words of Isaias, Quaerite ventriloquos. Isa. 8. 19. Orig. in Loc.
Origin says, that the Prophet pointed at such Ecclesiastics as would teach
for their own belly, or profit; for ever since the Curse was laid on the
Serpent, That he should go Genesis 3. 14 Phil. 3. 19.
on his belly; Satan has got advantage by such of his Instruments, whose god
is their belly. Surely, if that doctrine were not profitable to the Teachers
thereof, it would soon be as despicable at Rome, as it is now with us.

One Cassius a Roman Judge, when Tul. Orat. pro Roscio Amer. n. 4
any Man was accused at his Tribunal for some heinous fact, he would first
enquire, Cui bono, what profit might accrue thereby to the accused, if his
accusation were true? And when Rullus a Tribune very earnestly urged for the
Lex Agraria, i. for power to make sale of all the Roman Provinces, he was first
required to quit himself from suspicion of his own Covetousness, Si Populo
Consulis remove Id. Orat, contra Rullum.
te a suspitione commodi tui. If the Roman Priests would faithfully instruct
the People in this gracious and comfortable Mystery, they should forbear making
such gain as they do, by the consequences of their Doctrine thereof, which
otherwise may be thought to be the Diana of Rome, like that other of Ephesus, a
craft by which they have their wealth, for of Acts 19. 25.
all their Legend of Romances, none are so profitable to them as this, as Pope
Leo the Tenth profanely said of the whole History of Christ, Quantas opes nobis
peperit illa fabula de Plat.
Christo? We that are but Bystanders or Lookers on, may wonder at their
Priests, as Cato sometimes did at the old Aruspices, how one of Tul. de
Divinat. lib. 2.
them meeting with another, can forbear laughing in their sleeves, considering
how grossly they have abused the People.

This little Essay concerning the Flesh and Blood of Christ, is like to find
such entertainment with them, as himself had on Earth, To be for a Sign that
shall be spoken against; and possibly it may find as little acceptance with
some among us, particularly in that part hereof, wherein the propagation or
traduction of our Souls is asserted, the denial whereof I esteem to be a
Philosophical Heresy, as much disturbing the Doctrine of our Church,
concerning Universal Redemption, for so Epiphanius accounts Epiph. Haer. 8.
the errors of Epicureans, Stoics, and Pythagoreans among his Heresies.

But yet, because our Church does not expressly define that, or limit and
declare the Modus or Way of Eating the Flesh, or Drinking the Blood of Christ,
therefore the pious and diligent Disquisition of the truth and manner thereof
(without gainsaying the Doctrine established herein) I conceive, should be
freely permitted, neither should any man's private Opinion (although of another
Judgment) prescribe to us, or hinder this our Inquisition, seeing it is not
Magisterially dictated, but humbly offered, as an Essay: And also, because many
of the right Pious and Learned Fathers, have with great judgment and industry
described, and directed us in this very way, as will appear to the Reader of
this Book.

THE PREFACE.
IN order to the profitable Perusal of this Book, we are first to consider, how
the Son of God came to be concerned and interested in the Affairs of Mankind;
especially, in the grand work of Redemption and Salvation.

This Work was resolved and concluded before the Creation, either of Mankind,
or of the World, by virtue of a Secret, but a most Gracious Covenant,
transacted between the Father and the Son from Eternity, which Covenant is
often mentioned in the Gospel, under the title of the Everlasting Covenant,
Heb. 13. 2. Ephesians. 3. 11 Rev. 14. 6
and is called the Eternal Purpose, which he purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord;
and the Everlasting Gospel. In all which places the word (...) is used.

We cannot apprehend any other Conditions in this Covenant, but only, that the
Godhead in the Person of the Eternal Father, required performance of the future
Laws to be imposed on Mankind, the intended Creature, with promise of Life to
the Performer, and the penalty of Death to the Transgressor.

To these covenanted Conditions, the same Godhead in the Person of the Eternal
Son, restipulated and agreed, that Mankind should either perform the said Laws,
or so suffer. This we conceive to be that Covenant, and also to be attested by
the same Godhead, in the Person of the Eternal Spirit of the Father and the
Son, who also until this day (as the Apostle speaks) bears witness with
Romans 8. 16.
our Spirit; And so do all the Three Divine Persons, all of them being but One
God of Truth, as St. John says, There are Three 1 John 5. 7.
that bear record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Spirit, and these
Three are One. Upon these premised Reasons it is, (as I conceive) that the
Apostle calls Christ (...), i. Surety, or Fide-jussor. Heb. 7. 22.


In order to the performance of this Covenant, we are next to consider that God
the Son assumed our Human Nature, and became perfect Man, and in that Human
Nature, did actually and perfectly perform that whole Law or Covenant, for
which he was engaged, in the behalf of Mankind; whereupon it is said of the
Son, In the Volume of the Book it is written of me, to do thy Heb. 10. 7.
will O God, (in Capite libri) that is, in notitia Praedestinationis aeternae,
says the Dionys. Car. in loc.
Expositor. The Writing in the Volume of the Book signifies, that he was
preordained, or predestined from Eternity so to do. He had said before,
Sacrifice and Offering thou would not, but a Body thou have prepared for me
-- then said I, lo I come; all which words were taken out of the 40th. Psalm.
From hence it is, that God the Son is called the Angel, or Messenger of the
Mal. 3, 1.
Govenant, because he was interested and sent, for performance of the said
Covenant. And therefore the whole Flock of Mankind was committed to him, as his
Sheep, to be ordered and governed; for so it is expressly said, that the Father
gave them to him; John 10. 29. 1 Pet. 2. 25.
and He is therefore called by St. Peter, the great Shepherd of the Sheep.

This Engagement of the Son (as Surety for Mankind.) occasioned those words of
the two great Apostles, for thus St. Paul writes of God, He has chosen us in
him Ephesians. 1, 4.
(Christ) before the Foundation of the World; and, He has saved us --
according 2 Timothy 1. 9.
to his own purpose and Grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus, before the
world began. And, In hope of Eternal Tit. 1. 2.
life, which God that cannot lie, promised before the World began. Just so St.
Peter says upon the same reason, You were not 1 Pet. 1. 18.
redeemed with corruptible things -- but with the precious Blood of Christ --
who 19. 20.
was foreordained, before the Foundation of the World.

These expressions of Chosing us in Christ, and of Grace given us in Christ,
and of Christ foreordained, and of Life promised, and that before the
Foundation of the World. And all these, only in, and for Christ, must needs
relate to that aforesaid Eternal purpose, Covenant or Agreement, beeween God
the Father and God the Son, before the Creation.

For to whom could the Promise be made, before either Man, or Angel, or
Archangel, or any Creatures were made, but only to the Eternal Word, or Son of
the Father? And why to him? but only, because the Son entered into that
Covenant, and thereby became the Surety and Undertaker for Mankind. Therefore
to him only was this Promise made, and in him, and for him to Mankind. And by
virtue of this Covenant, the Lord Jesus became necessarily obliged, both to
perform the Law, and also to under go his bitter passions of death, as himself
often acknowledged, Mat. 16. 21.
and all the four Evangelists have recorded Mar. 8. 31 Luke
from his mouth, that He must suffer many things, and be killed. 24. 46. Joh.
3. 14


All this being presumed and granted, there is yet one thing more (of the
greatest concernment to us) to be considered, viz. how his Obedience in
performing the Law, and his Death for the transgressions thereof, can be
satisfactory to Divine Justice for us, seeing God has often declared, that one
shall not be punished for another, especially an Innocent for a malefactor;
which seems to be our case, for we are the Transgressors, but Christ is
innocent, yet he is punished, and we quitted.

Our Answer is, that Christ, and Mankind, are not to be looked on as Two, but
as One. Nor is his death, the death of one for another, but of the same; He as
a Surety, and we as the principal Debtor; He as the Head, and we as the Members
of the same Body. The Surety and the principal, are but one Person in Law, and
the Head, and the other parts are both one, and the same Body in Nature.

Therefore, that the proceedings of the Godhead, concerning the work of Man's
Redemption, might appear to be contrived, not only with infinite Mercy, but
also with exact Justice. God at the beginning so ordered, that the Redeemer,
and the Redeemed should be united in One original Fountain, who to that end
planted all the Bodies and Souls both of Christ, and of all Mankind, in that
One First Man, from whose Flesh and Soul, both Christ, and all Mankind, have
derived their Bodies and their Souls. In this consists our Union with Christ,
and hence it is, that Christ and we are accounted but One, and this is that
Union which was meant, and described by Christ under those figurative words, of
Eating his Flesh, and Drinking his Blood. The clear demonstration and proof
whereof, is the whole, and only design of this ensuing Treatise.

The learned Romanists I conceive, do perfectly understand, that the benefits
which come by Christ, cannot otherwise with justice be communicated to Mankind,
but only by the Union of Christ with us, viz. of his Flesh with our flesh, and
of his Soul with our souls; And therefore they have phansied this Union to be
effected, by an Oral and carnal Eating of his living Flesh, and Drinking his
Blood in the Sacred Eucharist, by their way of Transubstantiation.

For the learned French Cardinal of Perron, in his Book of the Eucharist,
written in French, affirms, that the real natural Presence of Christ in the
Sacrament is to greatest purpose, because the Residence of Christ's Natural Body
in our bodies, does really and substantially join us unto God, establishing a
true and real Unity between God and Men. Thus far he, which is observed by Dr.
Jer. Tailor in his Book, entitled The Real Presence and Spiritual of Christ in
the Sacrament, page 50.

We also confess the necessity of this Union, but by another way, which is
plain, evident and comfortable, as it is described in this Book, as I trust
will appear to the Reader. So that no need will be of that Roman Subterfuge,
and pretense of their horrid, unreasonable and impossible Mode by an Oral,
gross, carnal and literal Eating of his Flesh, and Drinking his Blood, with
which Imposture, a great part of the Christian World has been a long time
abused; but by the cool and sober perusal of this Discourse, the Ingenuous
Romanist may happily in some measure be undeceived.

The most complete and perfect Union of Christ with Man, consists in five
things. 1. Carne, in Flesh. 2. Anima, in Soul. 3. Spiritu, in Spirit. 4.
Vadimonio, in Covenant or Suretyship. 5. Fide in Faith.

The Union which I shall chiefly endeavor to describe in this Tractate,
consists in the two first of these, which I firmly believe to be intended,
and meant in that Speech of Christ, Joh. 6. 53. Except ye Eat the Flesh of the
Son of Man, and Drink his Blood, etc.

THE Flesh of Christ.
CHAP. I.
HE that attempteth to discover the grand mystery of Eating and Drinking the
Flesh and Blood of Christ, must begin his Work very early, even at the Creation
of our first Parents, or rather, before the foundation of the World. Because,
the most wise, merciful, and just Godhead, had designed the redemption of
Mankind from Eternity by God the Son: And did lay the foundation, and the
frame, order, and method thereof in the first Man, and the first Woman, from
whom every man and woman that are, were, or hereafter shall be born, with
Christ himself also, have derived both their Flesh, and their Souls, that so an
Union and conjunction might be made of the Redeemer with the Redeemed; without
which Union, the Son of God could not be fitly qualified to perform with
Justice the great Work of Redemption of Mankind.

Concerning this Union, those words of Christ are to be understood. John 6. 53.
Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man, and Joh. 6. 53. Mat. 26. 26.
drink his blood; and those other words Mat. 26. 26. This is my Body, and This
is my Blood; both must needs be true, because Truth has spoken them: The
former were meant of the real, and substantial Union and conjunction of our
flesh with his Flesh, and of our souls with his Soul; the latter were meant of
the Representation or similitude of our true, real and substantial union with
Christ, in his whole humane Nature, signified to us by the Sacramental eating
and drinking of Bread and Wine, as it was before represented to the Israelites
in eating the flesh of the Paschal Lamb. For as with them, and with us, The
Lamb, and Bread and Wine, were really to be taken into our bodies, and do
really nourish us, and unite themselves with our bodies, and grow into one bulk
with us: So Christ with Mankind must be united, and be One with us, otherwise
he cannot with the strictness of Divine Justice be the Redeemer of Mankind,
neither could man be capable of redemption by him.

Concerning the truth and reality of eating and drinking the flesh and blood of
Christ the Redeemer; the Reformed Chruches, and also the Unreformed do both
agree, and yet exceedingly differ, and disagree in the manner, and way thereof.

1. The Roman Transubstantiators would have us believe, that Christ is eaten in
the Sacrament, really; pretending, that the Bread and Wine are
transubstantiated, or rather annihilated; and that the whole Christ is brought
into the room thereof, and so eaten.

But this cannot be the mode, or way of eating Christ, because the eating and
drinking by him meant, must have been in all former and past Generations, and
must still stand firm and true, although the Sacrament or Eucharist had never
been instituted; for Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Noah, and Adam himself must have
eaten so, as is here meant, else they could not be redeemed by Christ. And this
Eating of Christ was true and real, before he was actually Born or Incarnate.
St. Paul says, Our Fathers did eat the same meat, and drink of the same Rock
that 1 Cor. 10. 3.
followed, and that Rock was Christ; therefore they did eat Christ, so as he
meant.

2. The Lutheran Consubstantiators would have men believe, that the Flesh and
Blood of Christ literally understood, are really, carnally, and grossly
received, in, and with the Sacramental bread and wine.

But neither can this way be true, because the Eating here meant must have
been, and still is, without the Sacrament thereof; for the flesh of Christ is
now, and has been eaten by those that never heard of, nor ever did receive, or
communicate in the Sacrament, for Children, Heathens, Turks and Jews, and the
most profane Christians, must have eaten Christ, otherwise they could have no
possibility, or be in any capacity of Redemption: Yet the Scriptures, the
primitive Fathers, and the Church of England do clearly declare, that the
benefit of Redemption belongs, and is offered to God the Son has redeemed
me, and all Mankind.
the whole World, to all, and every Man and Woman, as our Church Catechism
teaches.

3. The Zuinglians, who are called Sacramentarians, would have men believe
thatf Eating the flesh, and Drinking the blood o Christ, is meant only of
receiving the signs, figures or Sacraments thereof, viz. by bread and wine in
the Eucharist.

But neither can this way be the right meaning thereof, because we must truly,
and really receive the very thing it self; for we must corporally be united
with the flesh of Christ, and really, and truly must our Souls be united with
the Soul of Christ, else no redemption can possibly be, either of our bodies,
or of our Souls by him. Calvin upon those words, This is my Body; very truly
Calvin. n 1 Cor. 11. 24.
affirms, Neque fallax est Christus, qui vacuis figuris nos ludat -- Mihi
extra controversiam est -- Veritatem hic, cum suo signo conjunctam esse. (1.)
Christ did not delude us with empty figures, I doubt not at all, but that the
truth was joined with the sign.

4. The Church of England does not (to my apprehension) clearly determine of
the Modus, or manner of Eating the Flesh, or drinking the blood of Christ,
either in the Sacrament, or out of the Sacrament; yet thus far this Church
proceeds in the mystery Art. Relig. 28.
of the holy Supper, and says in the 28th Article, that it is the Sacrament of
Redemption, just so as St. Cyprian had before written of the same thing in an
Epistle to Coecilius, wherein he calls the Lords Supper Sacramentum
Redemptionis; because Cyp. 2. epist. 3.
thereby, as by an holy sign, we are taught the manner, way, and method used by
Christ in the work of our Redemption.

The Church of England again declares in the Office of the Eucharist, that the
faithful and penitent Receivers do spiritually eat and drink the Flesh and
Blood of Christ, that they dwell in Christ, and Christ in them, that they be
One with Christ, and Christ with them; the meaning is, that the holy Supper is
the Sacrament, or mysterious sign of our Union with the flesh of Christ, and
with the blood or Soul of Christ, just as both S. Austin, and Aug. in John 26.
Ansel. in Mat. 26.
after him S. Anselm called it Sacramentum Vnitatis. (2.) The Sacrament of
Union, and the very word Communion (as this Sacrament is called) signifies the
same. Communio is all one with counio, or unio cum; because the sacramental
Eating and Drinking represents the Union, or conjunction of the flesh, and
soul of Christ with our flesh and soul, without which neither our bodies, nor
our Souls can be by him redeemed.

I will not at present engage or meddle with the doctrine, or meaning of the
words in the mystery of the holy Supper of our Lord, which was but the sign of
the grand, and real mystery of the Eating the flesh of Christ, of which only I
am now to treat, in relation to those Words of Christ in the 6. Chapter of St.
John, before the Holy Supper was instituted, of which words, my purpose and
earnest endeavor is to find out, and to discover the meaning, and true sense;
and my hearty desire and prayer, that my Labors herein may in some measure
conduce to an agreement between dissenting Parties.

The Roman, and also the Reformed Church-Writers, men of great wisdom, Learning
and sobriety, have spent their precious time and labors, something (as I
humbly conceive) besides the matter, purpose and intent of those words of
Christ.

1. The Romanists have labored too much, to assert and prove a carnal, gross
and literate eating of the very flesh of Christ orally; grounding their
Doctrine of Transubstantiation upon those two Speeches of Christ before
mentioned; but with ill success, having so much been perplexed in answering and
excusing the impossibilities, and the unprofitableness of such an Exposition,
that they were forced to fly to the old Poetical refuge of (...), or miracles,
whereof they say there are eleven in effecting their Transubstantiation; we may
ad a twelfth, which to me seems the greatest of all, viz. that so many wise,
and learned men should profess and believe such unnecessary, and manifest
impossibilities.

2. The Writers of the reformed Church have employed their time and labor in a
negative way, principally in confuting the impossibility of that Roman
Doctrine, and in proving that we do not Orally eat the very flesh of Christ,
for although they acknowledge that Speech of Christ to be true, when he said,
Except ye eat the Flesh, etc. yet they truly affirm, that they are not to be
understood of a gross, carnal, and oral Eating; This negative Doctrine
occasioned a pretense to the adverse Party, to accuse them of an attempt to
confute and gainsay the words of Christ.

These practices on both sides, I conceive, have bin the cause of hiding or
obscuring the most gracious, and comfortable doctrine of our Union with the
body or flesh of Christ; and consequently of the doctrine of our Redemption by
him, both of them being certainly employed in those words of Eating and Drinking.

It is therefore to be wished, that such Learned men for the future, would
employ their studies in a positive Way, in showing how those Mysterious Words
of Christ are true, and to be rightly understood, rather than in a negative
confutation of a wrong Sense, which work solidly performed, would clear the
darkness of that Mystery, and be exceedingly comfortable to pious Souls, and
evidently declare the Wisdom, Righteousness and Mercy of our ever Blessed
Redeemer.

CHAP. II.
IN order to the opening of this Mystery, we are first to enquire what our
Redeemer meant by those words of Eating and Drinking my Flesh and Blood, which
certainly are not to be understood literally, but figuratively.

The Reader may observe, that the grand Mysteries of our Religion in the Holy
Scripture, are represented and exemplified darkly, as under a cloud, or veiled
with the similitude of Eating.

1. The Tree of life in Paradise was planted to be eaten of; it was the figure
or type of Christ, who called himself a Tree, Luke 23. 31. and a Vine, John 15.
5. and the Life, John 14. 16. and is called Rev. 2. 7. The Tree of Life. The
typical Tree was ordained to preserve and continue a worldy life, as Christ the
substantial Tree to procure an Eternal, and heavenly Life.

Although that Tree of life was permitted by the Godhead to be eaten of by our
first Parents, yet they never did eat of it, because in the state of their
Innocence they perceived not any need thereof, being in a condition of not
dying (as Divines say) Potuit Adam non mori; nor was any malady upon them, so
as to need any medicine to cure them of any disease; But afterward, when by
their transgression they had incurred the curse of Mortality, they were
excluded from that Tree of life, least they should take of the Tree of Life,
and live Genesis 3. 22. Genesis 2. 17.
for ever; whereby the Commination of God should have failed, who had said, In
the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die.

There was another Tree in Paradise called the Tree of Knowledge, of which the
Genesis 2. 9.
Man was forbidden to eat, although it is said, that the Woman saw that the
Tree was good for food, and pleasant to the eye, and to be desired to make one
wise. So though they abstained from the Tree permitted, yet Genesis 3. 6.
they did eat of the Tree forbidden.

The Tree of Life represented Christ, the Tree of knowledge represented the
Law, as Tertullian very judiciously affirms and proves. That law concerning
the Tree, Tert. adv. Judaeos.
was Primondialis Lex, the first Law that was imposed on Man, and had been
large enough (says he) if it had been obeyed. Lex data Adae and Aevae, est
quasi matrix omnium Id. ibid.
praeceptorum Dei quae pullularunt postea, data per Mosem; It was as the Womb,
out of which sprang the Ten Commandments given by Moses; and in that first Law,
all those Moral laws are couched and implied.

As the Tree of Life signifies Christ with all his Evangelical mercies; And
the Eating of that Tree signified the Union, conjunction and inherence of
Mankind in him: So the Tree of knowledge signified the Law with all its
strictness, rigor and penalties. And the forbidding to Eat of that Tree,
signified, that we should not trust to, or rely on it, or expect to obtain life
by performance of the law, or justification and Salvation by the works thereof:
This I conceive to be the meaning of forbidding the Tree of knowledge, as
relating to the Law; because I find diverse passages concerning the said law,
even in the Gospel, which to me signify the same, as by the works of the Romans
3. 20.
Law shall no flesh be justified; and, The Law works Wrath; it is called also
Romans 4. 15.
The Ministration of death; and the Ministration 2 Cor. 3. 7, 9.
of condemnation. Therefore we are to depend on, and feed and nourish our hope
and faith, only by Christ, who is the only true Tree of Life, and not to
confide in the Law, because we cannot possibly by our own selves perform it,
nor by any other way, but only in, by, and through Christ, and this by that
interest which we have in him, by our union with his Flesh and Soul.

2. The Manna (every one knows) signified Christ. The eating of Manna signified
the union of Manna with the Bodies, or flesh of the Israelites, which was a
type of the necessity of Man's union with the flesh of the Redeemer.

3. The Paschal Lamb signified the Lamb of God; And the Eating thereof
signified the conjunction or union of the flesh of the Redeemer with the
Redeemed.

4. The legal Sacrifices, represented Christ to be sacrificed on the Altar of
the Cross: And they were to be eaten, (except Holocausts.) The eating of them
signified man's union with the Antitype, that is Christ, even as that which we
eat becomes one with us, it grows into one bulk with our bodies, and is united
with us, and is animated with the same life and soul with our bodies, it lives,
it dies, and is buried, and rises again with us, and continues with us after
the Resurrection everlastingly; in like manner, the flesh of Christ is united
with our flesh, without which Union there can be no Redemption of us by him,
nor indeed any resurrection of our Bodies, nor Immortality of our Souls, more
than of the bodies and souls of brute Creatures; (as will appear hereafter)
therefore Christ said, Except John 6.
ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man, etc. you have no life in you. And in the
Sacramental sign of this real Mystery, he said, Take, eat, this is my Body
(that is) my Mat. 26.
Body is to you such a thing, as this Bread which you eat is to be; which will
be concorporated and joined in One, and united with your bodies, and will be
animated with the same life and soul, wherewith all the parts of your body were
formerly endued and informed.

If it be enquired, why the very individual flesh of Christ should not be in
truth, and reality, and propriety of speech confessed to be eaten, in full
correspondence with the Type, viz. the flesh of the Paschal Lamb, which was
really eaten?

Our Answer is, That if there were no other way, or signification of Eating the
flesh of Christ, but only Orally; or as the Letter sounds; then of necessity,
it must be so meant and understood, and must be so eaten, as the Paschal Lamb
and the Sacrifices were. But there is another way and meaning thereof, wherein
the flesh of Christ is truly said to be eaten, both before he was incarnate or
born, and also after his Ascension into Heaven, in both which times it was, and
is, impossible to be 1 Cor. 10. 3.
eaten Orally.

For when his Disciples were offended at the mentioning of Eating his Flesh, he
said, What and if you shall see the Son of man ascend Joh. 6. 62
up where he was before? as if he had said, my flesh must have been eaten, so
as I mean, even before I took human flesh upon me. And also, after my assumed
flesh shall be ascended locally into Heaven, and not be any more upon Earth, or
out of Heaven until my return at the last Judgment, and therefore far out of
the reach of any mortal hand or mouth; therefore it cannot be meant literally
of any oral, o^ gross carnal Eating.

If we shall rest satisfied, and seek no farther into this Mysterious Eating,
than only to believe, that Christ does daily in the Sacrament thereof
vouchsafe, and condescend to exhibit his very true Body in, or under the
species or appearance of Bread, or Wafercakes, and that his very Body is so,
really existant in many thousand distant places in the same minute of time;
which to human Reason is incredible, and contrary to Philosophy, and even to
our senses: If we can swallow this vain, impossible and unprofitable Camel, it
would be a quick expedient, and an easy or lazy gloss to unriddle this grand
mystery by; which has a long time perplexed, and posed the Christian World.

Concerning which, (good Christian Reader) I do here tender my poor
Meditations, in humility, not Magisterially; but with due submission to the
judgment of my Superiors; most earnestly begging of God, instruction,
illumination, and a right understanding herein, and wholly trusting and relying
upon him, who by his Apostle has thus directed and promised, that, If any want
wisdom, Jam. 1. 5.
let him ask it of God -- and it shall be given him; in hope therefore of his
assistance, I proceed to examination of the particulars, of Eating the Flesh,
and Drinking the Blood of our Redeemer.

CHAP. III.
THe words of Christ, from whose lips never any guile or untruth fell, are
these. Verily, verily I say unto you, except Joh. 6. 53*
ye eat the Flesh of the Son of man, and drink his Blood, ye have no Life in
you; here are two Verilies, or Amens, which are often used by S. John only,
whereas the other Evangelists never use but one Amen in the weightiest
narrations; this double Assertion falling from the mouth of Christ, argues a
certain, and undeniable truth, which because it is hard and mysterious, yet
necessarily to be received and believed, therefore it is thus strongly and
vehemently affirmed, and must be believed, although i^ be not at first
understood, for this is a character of Christian Faith to confess the Words of
God to be true, although we do not understand them, as Prosper says, Magna
fortitudo est consentionis, cui ad sequendam Prosp. de Voc. Genesis l. 2. c. 2.
veritatem, autoritas sufficit, latente ratione. The valiantness of Christian
Faith is, in consenting to Truth by authority of Gods Word, when the reason
thereof does not appear.

The Jews asked (whilst Christ was John 6. 52.
with them on earth) How can this Man give u^ his Flesh to eat? We may now much
rather ask the same question, seeing his Flesh is now in Heaven far remote from
us, and certainly his Flesh since his Ascension, never was on Earth to this
day: Therefore to eat his Flesh orally, grossly, and literally understood, is
both unpossible, and (as Christ affirmed) unprofitable. The Flesh profits
nothing, or, if to eat his Flesh orally, John 6. 63.
were necessary and profitable, how can we come at it? The Apostle advises,
Say not in thine heart, who shall ascend into To. 10. 6.
Heaven, that is, to bring Christ down? That which is meant by Eating his
Flesh, is done already, and brought home to us.

Eating in Scripture phrase does not always signify Oral eating, nor does it
so signify in those Words of Christ; David, Abraham, and the Antediluvian
Patriarchs must so have eaten Christ, as Eating here signifies, else they
could not have been redeemable by him. Christ said, Blessed Mat. 5. 6.
are they that hunger and thirst after Righteousness, upon which words S.
Austin asks, Quis dilaniat justitiam? and adds ne putetis morsibus fieri.
Who can eat Righteousness, think not that this Eating is done by morsels: So,
Pharisees devoured widows Mat. 23. 14.
houses, yet they did not Eat them. Men are often said to feed their eyes,
Pascere oculos, Virg. Aen. 1.
and Animum pictura pascit inani in the Poet; yet neither our Eyes, nor our
Souls can eat. The Church exhorts to feed on Christ in our hearts, this is
done without a Mouth-eating. The Psalmist says, They eat up my People as
bread, and They have devoured P. 14. 4.
Jacob, that is, says Austin upon that place, Gentes, multos in suum malignum
corpus, Aug. in Ps. 78.
seu Societatens transire, terrendo coegerunt; the Heathens have forced many
into their malignant body and association by terrifying them, yet not by Oral
eating. Ezekiel is commanded to eat the Roll, and Ez^k. 3. 3, 10. Rev. 10. 9
so is St. John commanded to eat the Book, which signified, that they should
deeply take the words thereof into their consideration, to consider and ponder
them in their hearts and minds. Peter, one of the brothers of Lombard, is
commonly called Petrus Comestor, and another great Writer was called Jacobus de
Voragine, Peter the Eater, and James the Gulf or devourer; not for gormondizing
of meat, but because of multitude of Books, which by their Readings they had
devoured and digested, as Cato was called heluo librorum, a very Glutton Tull.
de Fin. lib. 3.
of Books by Tully.

But above all the former Eatings that Divine Ecstasy, or Trance, or Rapture of
St. Peter, recorded Acts 10. does clearly Acts 10. 13.
show, that there is another way and meaning of Scriptural Eating, which is not
Oral; for in that Vision there was presented to St. Peter a vessel descending
from Heaven, wherein were all manner of four-footed beasts of the earth, and
wild beasts, and creeping things, and fouls of the air, and a Voice came to
him, rise Peter, kill and eat.

By these several creatures, the Nations, or Gentiles are signified, as
formerly in the vision of Daniel, the four Monarchies were Dan. 7.
presented to him in the shapes and resemblances of four Beasts. The first as a
Lion, the second as a Bear, the third as a Leopard, the fourth as a dreadful
Beast with iron teeth, both these apparitions of those creatures, signified
People and Nations.

It is a very mean conceit, and a low gloss of some late Expositors, put upon
that mysterious Vision of St. Peter, by which was signified the calling of the
Gentiles to the Gospel. But those Writers would have no more meant thereby, but
only a permission to eat of such Creatures as were formerly forbidden, as
unclean by the ceremonial Law; yet we find not mention of any fish in the
Vessel, although some sorts of fish are mentioned amongst forbidden meats as
unclean, viz. such as have not fins Levit. 11. 10.
or scales; whereby we may reasonably conclude, that the Vision had a farther
reach and project than Eating; the mention of wild beasts signified the mission
of the Gospel to such People as were not then civilized, such as are now called
sylvestres Populi, Savages, barbarous and lawless; some as yet are called the
wild Irish. Surely the vision, under the apparition of Beasts and fowls,
pointed at Men only who are conversant on the Earth, and in the Air, as beasts
and fouls are, but live not in the Water.

St. Peter was commanded to kill and eat the Gentiles, which if literally
understood, would be most barbarous, and also impossible. But to kill signified
to mortify them, to convert or turn them from their Idolatry, to kill their
Heathenism in them, as St. Austin says upon those words, Occiduntur, cum
Christiani fiunt ex Paganis. Aug. in Ps. 149.
The Heathens are said to be killed, when of Pagans they are made Christians;
and again upon the word kill he says, Macta, Id. Ps. 30.
id est, occide quod fuerant, fac quod tu es. Kill in them what they were, and
make them such as thou art. Neither is Peter commanded only, to kill or convert
them, but also to take the Gentiles so mortified and converted into the Body,
Fellowship and Communion of the Church; and so the same Father expounds the
word Eat. Petrus recipit Gentes in communionem Id. lib. 50. homiliarum hom. 45.
to. 10.
Ecclesiae, quasi escam, ut incorporentur. By Eating, Peter is required to
receive the Gentiles into the mystical body of the Church, and to incorporate
them, as meat is concorporated with our natural bodies. This Exposition is
evidently confirmed by St. Peter himself, for after this Vision, he went
forthwith to Cornelius a Roman and Gentile, he preached Christ to him, and
converted him, and baptized him, and thereby received, and incorporated him in
the Corporation of the Church.

The Eating of the flesh of Christ in those mysterious words of Christ, is in
like manner to be understood, so as to signify an (...), or rather a (...),
that is, our Incorporation or Concorporation with Christ, or the union or
conjunction of our bodies with his Body, and so does the forenamed Father
expound those very words of Christ, Except ye eat, etc. Nisi incorporentur Aug.
in l. c.
Christo, and, Qui venit ad Christum, incorporatur ei, to eat the flesh of
Christ, signifies to be incorporated in him, as every one must be that comes
to him.

Peter did not Orally eat the Nations, neither is it required by those words,
that we should Orally eat the flesh of Christ; what frantic Fanatic will so
understand those word of Christ? If thy right hand offend Mat. 5.
thee, cut it off, etc. as actually to the Letter, to cut off his own hand, or
pull out his own eye.

From the grounds and reasons premised, my Conclusion is, and ever will be,
that the Eating of the flesh of Christ is meant, and to be understood only of
the union or conjunction of our flesh with his Flesh, or our concarnation with
him, so as to be flesh of his Flesh, as the Apostle says; without Gal. 5. 30.
which Union there will be no possibility of Redemption of our bodies by the
bitter passions, and death of his blessed Body. But how this conjunction, and
union of his Body, and our bodies was contrived and effected, is next to be
enquired.

CHAP. IV.
IT is certainly necessary for our Redemption, and in order thereto, that first
there must be a true, real, and corporal union, or conjunction of our flesh
with the Flesh of our Redeemer; which corporal union was contrived and effected
by the most Wise, Just, and Merciful Godhead, and was by him designed, and
plotted before the Creation, on purpose to put Mankind into a capacity of
Redemption, his Providence foreseeing the fall of Man, and his goodness and
mercy providing the cure of Redeemableness by God the Son, to be in time
coincarnate with us, and to become Emanuel.

For if it may appear, that the flesh or body of Christ was made of the same
Materials of which our flesh and bodies are made, and if both he and we, have
derived our Flesh from the self-same lump of the first Man, who then can deny
an Union, and conjunction of him with us in that first Lump?

The first Man was made of a piece of Earth, and the first Woman was derived
out of the Man, and not made of another piece of Earth; for the Woman could not
have been in union with Christ, except she had been taken out of the Man, as
Christ, and all Mankind are; nor could she, or we have been capable of
Redemption by Christ, without this union with Christ in the first Man.

Hence it is that the Apostle says, We are Members of his Body, of his Flesh,
and of his Ephesians. 5. 30, 31, 32
Bones. The like he says of Christ and his whole Church, They two shall be one
Flesh, but I speak concerning Christ and his Church. This is said, because all
Men and Women, with Christ also, were originally joined and united in Adam, and
therefore Prosper Prosp. ad Cap. Gallorum.
observes, Nullus est hominum cujus natura non erat suscepta a Christo; there
is not any Man in the world, whose Nature was not assumed by Christ. Ipse Adam
toto terrarum orb sparsus est, Aug. Ps. 95. And St. Paul says, God has made
of one Blood all Acts 17. 26.
nations of Men, it is meant of the blood of the first Man, by which word Blood
something more is implied than only Flesh, as will appear hereafter, and more
than Blood literally taken.

In the Old Testament, where we read of Filius Hominis, or Son of Man, the same
words in the Original are Ben-Adam often. The Genealogy of St. Luke derives
Christ from Adam, and St. Paul calls Christ, the Last Adam, as children are
called by the 1 Cor. 15. 45.
names of their Progenitors; therefore St. Austin, to show the original of all
Men, with Christ himself, says Omnis homo terrenus Aug. Retract. l. 1. c. 16.
est Adam, every Man of the Earth is Adam; for it is as easy to apprehend
Christ to be the Son of Adam, as to be the Son of David, and of Abraham; and as
easy Mat. 1. 1.
to understand that Christ was united with Mankind in the loins of Adam, as to
apprehend that Levi was in the loins of Abraham Heb. 7. 10
when Melchisedech met him, which was long before Levi was begotten.

Moreover, even when Adam was formed, there was an original corporal union of
all Mankind in that one parcel of Earth, of which Man was made, which is the
reason why not only Adam, but all his Posterity are called Earth and Dust; O
Earth, Earth, Earth hear the Word of the Lord. Genesis 3. 19 Jer. 22. 29.


The reason why I have said, that the Redeemer must be united, and be one with
the Redeemed, is, because God does not punish or reward eternally one for
another, but the same that performs or transgresses his Laws, is punished or
rewarded. The Wise man says, He that justifies the Prove. 17. 15.
wicked, and condemns the just, are both abominable to the Lord. The Jews had
a cursed and murmuring Proverb among them, The Fathers have eaten sour grapes,
and the Eze. 18. 2 Jer. 31. 29.
Childrens teeth are set on edge; their meaning was, that their Fathers had
committed that sin, for which their Children were punished; but God did
control that false imputation, saying, Every one shall die for his own sin;
And, He that eats sour grapes, his teeth shall be set on edge; and, the Soul
that sins, it shall die. So it is said in the Gospel, Every man shall bear
his own burden; Gal. 6. 5^ 1 Pet. 1. 17.
and, God judges according to every Man's work. Therefore the Redeemer must be
really united, and be as one man with the Redeemed, otherwise the passions, and
Death of Christ the Redeemer, cannot in the exact Justice of the Godhead,
satisfy for the sins of the People.

Christ said to a young man, If thou will Mat. 19. 17.
enter into life, keep the Commandments. This must be confessed to be true,
that no man can be saved except he perform the Law: If it be enquired, how any
mere man can enter into Life, seeing every one transgresses the Law; We
answer, that every true and faithful Member of Christ fulfilleth the Law,
because Christ has performed it, who is One with his Members.

This weighty and necessary Doctrine of the union of Christ with Mankind, is
evidently and plentifully declared, both in the Holy Scriptures, and also in
the Writings of the Fathers (which I have elsewhere showed at large) in the
Gospel. Christ said, I am the Vine, ye are the branches, the root, stock, and
branches of the Vine are Joh. 15. 5
but one Tree. St. Paul says of Christ, and of men, that they are (...) fellow
Plants, or planted together, planted in Adam, and, we being many are one body
in Christ; and, Romans 6. 5 Romans 12. 5.
as the Body is one, and has many members, and all the members of that one
body, being many are one body; so is Christ. And your 1 Cor. 12. 12. 1 Cor. 6.
15. 1 Cor. 12. 27. Gal. 3. 28
bodies are the members of Christ, and ye are the Body of Christ, and members
in particular; and therefore the same Apostle says of the Galatians, Ye are
all one in Christ Jesus.

The union or Oneness of men with Christ does not consist only in this, that
Christ communicates his Spirit to us men, but also, in that Christ and all
Mankind were originally together in the first Man, and are all derived from the
flesh and blood of him, as I noted before from the words of St. Paul, Acts 17.
26.
that God made of one blood all Nations of men; and that one Blood was the
blood of Adam.

For although we never were in the loins of Christ, nor derived from him, yet
because Christ, and we, and all Generations of men were originally in the loins
of Adam, therefore in him we were then all united.

CHAP. V.
IN the next place we are to enquire, what was the Doctrine of the Fathers
concerning the Body of Christ, and also concerning the Union of the Head with
the members thereof.

1. The Body of Christ in Scripture has a double signification. 1. It
signifies the natural, proper and individual, or personal Body of Christ, of
which it is said, a woman poured ointment on his Body, and Joseph begged Mat.
26. 12, 27, 58
the Body of Jesus.

2. The Body of Christ signifies his Body Mystical, that is, the whole
Corporation of Christ and his Members, of which it is said, He is the Head of
his body the Church. Col. 1. 18


Christ's Natural body is but a part of his Mystical body, as our head is but a
part of our natural body. And as the head, and other parts of our natural body
are visibly united; so Christ, and all his Members are united, and joined by an
invisible Tie or knot, both in Flesh and Soul, as will hereafter appear, as
also in one Spirit, proceeding from Christ the Head, and communicating it self
to every particular member of that great Mystical Body; as it is said of the
precious Ointment upon the Head, Psa. 133.
which ran down upon the beard of Aaron, and went down to the skirts of his
garments; the ointment signified the Spirit and its graces.

In consideration of this Union, by those three knots or ligaments just now
mentioned, the Fathers looked on Christ and his Members, and considered them so
united, as upon one Body, or one Man, or one universal Person, because there is
no one man or woman in the World whose nature Christ has not assumed, whereof
St. Ambrose says, In Christo summa universalitatis Ambr. de chit. Saty. To. 4.
p. 146.
est, and portio singulorum; Christ is as the total Sum of all men, and a
portion or parcel of every man. To the same purpose Prosper says, Tota
Ecclesia, cum Christo capite Prosp. Ps. 102. Id. Ps. 131.
est unus homo, and in another place he says, Tota civitas Dei est unus homo,
in capite and corpore: The whole Church with Christ the Head, is one Man, and
the whole City of God is but one Man, in the head and body. St. Austin is very
plentiful and Aug. in Joh. Tra. 108.
plain in this matter of Union, and says, Vnus est Christus, caput and corpus,
ipsi sunt ego; and in another place, Vnus Homo caput Aug. Ps. 127. Id. Ps. 30.
and corpus Christi sumus, non solum Christiani; and again, Christus est multa
membra, unum Corpus. The meaning of all is, that they are but one Body, and are
considered as one Person, for as the Head, and the other parts altogether are
but one man, so Christ, and all his mystical Members are but one whole Christ;
which whole mystical Body consisting of Christ the Head, and Christians the
members thereof, the same Father often calls Christum totum, and Aug. in Ps.
36. and 37. and alibi.
Christum plenum, and Christum universum, and Plenitudinem Christi, and
Christum diffusum, that is, the whole, full, universal, diffused Christ, or the
fullness of Christ; St. Paul also uses the same expression concerning Christ
and his Members: He (God) Ephesians. 1. 22, 23.
has given him to be head over all things to the Church, which is his Body,
the fullness ((...)) of him that fills all in all. So that Christ himself with
his Church, are here said to be the full Christ, or fullness of Ps. 82.
Christ.

And as in Scripture many are called 1 Cor. 8. 5. Psalm. 105. 15.
Gods, (although there is but one God) because God distributes his Spirit to
them. So many are called Christ's, (Nolite tangere Christos meos) because Christ
has united himself with them, both by his Spirit, and by his Flesh, of which
union of his Flesh himself says, He that eats my flesh, dwells John 6. 56.
in me, and I in him; because he has taken his flesh from the same Original,
whence our flesh is derived, therefore as our flesh dwells in him, so his
Flesh dwells in us.

St. Hilary in his 8. Book de Trinitate, Hill. n. 3.
declares the union of the Flesh of Christ with the flesh of Men, and those
not only holy and spiritual men, but also with unholy and carnal men, in these
words, Habemus in nobis carnalibus manentem per carnem, Christum: we that are
but carnal men, have Christ by his flesh remaining in us. And just so writes
the venerable and blessed Martyr, Archbishop Cranmer, in his Book against Bish.
Gardener, That Christ did unite himself with us as Man by his Incarnation. But
this necessary Doctrine of mutual union of Christ and Mankind, has been too
much neglected by late Divines, who have but only hinted, or lightly touched
it, whereunto, in their Disputes concerning the Eating of the flesh of Christ,
they have been necessarily driven; which Doctrine is of such weighty
concernment, that it deserves very serious and diligent inquisition.

There is a very hard, and dark passage of St. Paul, concerning Christ's
delivering up his Kingdom, and of his subjection to God; in the Exposition
thereof, many Divines have greatly and dangerously erred, in dethroning Christ;
as if those words did signify the Period, and utter ending of his Kingdom,
which we are sure must last for ever.

The words of St. Paul are these, When the end comes, he shall deliver up the
Kingdom 1 Cor. 15. 24. 28.
to God, even the Father, and then shall the Son himself be subject to him,
etc. These words cannot possibly be rightly understood, but only by considering
Christ, and his Members jointly, as one full and whole Christ; for though the
Man Christ, considered only by himself, in his own particular Person, and only
in his Manhood always was, is, and for ever will be subject to the Godhead; yet
the whole Christ, that is, not only his self alone, but his mystical Members,
even his Saints, and his Elect, at, or after the final Judgment, shall be so
subject, and so perfectly and completely obedient to the Godhead, as they never
yet were, nor ever will be, during this World; of which Subjection and Union I
have elsewhere written at large

CHAP. VI.
BUt why does Christ require this Eating, in these terms, and words of the
Flesh of the Son of Man? Why might he not rather have said, Except ye eat the
flesh of the Son of God? For the flesh of Christ was the flesh of God the Son,
and God the Word. St. John says, the Word was made Joh. 1. 14.
Flesh, and his Blood is expressly called the Blood of God by the great Apostle,
Feed the Church of God, which he has purchased with Acts 20. 28.
his own Blood, and St. John calls his life and death, the life and death of
God, Hereby we perceive the love of God, because he has 1 John 3. 16.
laid down his life for us. And his Virgin Mother is often called by the
Fathers, (...), the Parent or Mother of God.

1. To this we answer. First. That the Son of God (considered only and singly,
as the Son of God in his pure Godhead, and only as God the Word, and as he was
in the form of God only, and without Incarnation) could not be our Redeemer,
and if he had continued so, as to be only the Son of God, as he was from
Eternity, and had never taken our human Nature upon him, so as to be thereby
really the Son of Man, he could not be the Christ, neither could any
obligation, or engagement have been upon him to perform the Law, which Law was
imposed only upon Mankind; neither could he have redeemed us, because he could
not die, being not mortal, otherwise then by assuming our Mortal nature, into
Personal union with his Immortal and Divine nature: Therefore in order to the
office of a Redeemer, he must become a Man, and his flesh must needs be the
flesh of the Son of Man.

2. Secondly. We say, That although the Son of God had really assumed a body
and flesh some other way, and not from Man or Woman, as sometimes he did in the
days of the Patriarchs in the Old Testament, as namely, when he appeared to
Jacob, of which it is said, There wrestled a Man with Genesis 32. 24. Josh. 5. 13.
him till the breaking of the day. And a man of War appeared to Joshua, with
his sword in his hand, who is called the Captain of the Lords host, whom Joshua
called Lord, and fell on his face to the earth, and worshipped Exodus 3. 5*
him, and pulled off his shoes from his feet, as Moses was commanded before by
God. Surely this was an apparition of God the Son, in the assumed body and
shape of Man, who appeared most evidently before to the Patriarch Abraham, of
whom it is written, that the Lord appeared to Abraham Genesis 18.
-- Three Men stood by him, they talked with him, they eat with him, and
traveled toward Sodom; one of the Three, certainly was the person of the Son
of God (whoever the other two were, I will not dispute) who being here called a
Man, no doubt, but he had then taken a body of Flesh upon him, howbeit that
flesh and body was not derived, or propagated from any man or woman, as
Tertullian observes, Christus cum Angelis Tert. adv. Marc. lib. 3. n. 42.
tunc apud Abraham in veritate quidem apparuit, sed nondum natae, quia nondum
moriturae, Christ with the other two Angels, did verily appear at Abraham's Tent
in true, and real flesh; yet not in flesh born, or derived from Mankind,
because he was not to suffer or die in that Flesh. Therefore he could not (by
reason of that assumed flesh) be called the Son of Man, although he was like to
a real Son of Man, and but only like; and if the Son of God had still retained,
and continued in that assumed body or flesh, in which he then prefented himself
to Abraham, and had not taken his human Nature otherwise, from his Virgin
Mother, and so from the first Man, he could not have been our Redeemer.

Such another apparition we find in the Prophet Daniel, who in his Vision, saw
one like the Son of Man, who came with the Dan. 7. 13
clouds of Heaven. This was meant of the Son of God, who in Daniels time was
not the Son of Man, or Ben-David, being then not incarnate of the Virgin; and
is therefore said to be only like the Son of Man, or as it is said in another
place of that Prophet, One like the similitude of the Sons of men; and One like
the appearance of the Sons Dan. 10. 16, 18.
of Men.

But the Redeemer must be not in similitude or appearance only, but truly, and
really the Son of Man, before he could be completely qualified for our
Redeemer; because the Redeemer, and the Redeemed, must be necessarily united in
flesh mutually, and must be considered and looked on by Divine Justice, as if
they were but one man, or one Person, which was wrought and performed by the
union of Christ with all Mankind in the loins of Adam, from whom all our bodies
and souls are derived.

For the Law of God must be performed by that human Nature, upon which it was
imposed, which law never has been, and never will be perfectly kept by any
mere man; therefore the Son of God made himself the Son of man, and so, to be
under and subject to the Law, and a Performer of the Law in the behalf of all
the Sons and Daughters of men; as both the Old and New Testaments declare.
Sacrifices and offerings H^b. 10 5
thou would not, but a body have thou prepared for me. And, In the Volume of
the Book it is written of me to do thy will O God; then said he, Lo I come to
do thy will O God. And, I delight to do thy will O my Ps. 40. 8.
God, yea, thy Law is within my heart; and, by the which will we are sanctified
(or designed for Redemption) by the Offering of the Body of Jesus Christ, once
for all: And, You now has he reconciled in the body of his Heb. 10. 10. Col.
1. 21, 22. 1 Pet. 2. 24.
Flesh through death, to present you holy and unblameable; and his own self
bare our sins, in his own body on the tree.

CHAP. VII.
THe Redeemer of Mankind must needs have been, both the Son of God, and also
the Son of Man, and therefore is called Emmanuel or Theanthropos; because the
Son of God (as only so) could not die, and therefore not redeem us. Nor could
the Son of Man (as only so) satisfy Divine Justice for the sins of the World.

None can be in a condition and state redeemable by Christ, but only Adamites,
that is, Adam and his offspring Eve, and their Posterity; because they only
are united with the Redeemer in the first Man.

The Apostate Angels can have no Redemption, nor any benefit by the Incarnation
or death of Christ, for want of this Union, because (as the Apostle observes)
He took not on him the nature of Angels, but he took on him the Seed of
Abraham. Heb. 2. 16.


We find several addresses in the Gospel, made to Christ by the title of Son of
David, and we perceive by the events of them, that Christ did well approve of
that Appellation, as by the two blind men Mat. 9. Thou Son of David have mercy
on us; Mat. 9. 27. 20. 3. 15. 22.
and by two other blind men Mat. 20. Have mercy on us O Lord, thou Son of
David, and by the woman of Canaan, Mat. 15. for all of them obtained of Christ
what they so desired. The Church of England so prays, O Son of David have
mercy upon us; and St. Matthew begins his Gospel with Jesus Christ the Son of
David. St. Luke derives Christ through many Generations of men through Adam;
and Christ himself very rarely, and but secretly calls himself the Son of God,
but very often, and openly, and mostly the Son of Man, because by Joh. 9. 35.
37.
this Sonship he became Jesus the Savior and Redeemer.

The Athanasian Creed declares, that it is necessary to everlasting salvation,
to believe rightly in the Incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ. And the Hymn of
St. Ambrose and St. Austin (daily repeated in our Churches) thus declares the
way and means used by the Son of God, to qualify his Divine Person so, as to
be a fit Redeemer. When thou tookest upon thee to deliver Man, thou did not
abhor the Virgins Womb; by all these expressions it appears, that the
Redeemership of Christ did consist, not only in his Godhead, but also in his
Manhood, in neither singly, but in both jointly. Both Christ himself, and all
Generations of men must have proceeded from one Original, otherwise Christ
could not be the Redeemer of all the World; And if any one Man in the World can
be found, that descended not from Adam, Christ cannot be the Redeemer of that
man.

There were diverse Heresies raised in the Primitive times of the Church, which
depraved the Doctrine of the Incarnation of Christ, and thereby greatly
disturbed, even nulled the Doctrine of Redemption, and therefore the Fathers
took special notice of them, and strongly confuted them.

1. The ancient Heresy of the Valentinians Epiph. haer. 31.
was, that the Flesh of Christ came from Heaven, and only passed through the
Womb of the Virgin Mary, as water through a conduit pipe; But the Angel said to
her, Thou shall Lu. 1. 31.
conceive in thy womb; and her Cozen Elizabeth being then inspired by God, said
to her, Blessed is the Fruit of thy Womb; therefore 42.
if Christ were Conceived, and were the Fruit of the womb, he surely was not
only a Passenger, or only as a Traveller in an Inn, or as a Guest or Stranger,
but he is expressly called a Son, which could not be if he were not bred in the
Virgins womb.

2. Apelles and his Sect, said, that Christ Epiph. haer. 44.
made himself a Body of the Elements, and that he did not receive his Flesh
from the Virgin.

3. The Manichees said, that the flesh and Aug. epist. 74.
body of Christ, was not a true and real body and flesh, but only a similitude
or shape thereof, and a mere Phantasm. They confessed him to be God, but denied
that he was Man; contrary to the blasphemy of the Jews, who knew him to be a
Man, but would not confess or believe that he was God.

4. Some Anabaptists also in the former Pat. Symson cent. 16.
Century sprang up in Germany, who said, That Christ took not his flesh and
blood of the Virgin Mary, but brought them with him from Heaven.

Those Anabaptists fell into this Heresy, by misunderstanding some passages of
Scripture, where it is said, The Son of Man Joh. 3. 13 6. 38.
came down from Heaven, and where Christ said of himself, I came down from
Heaven. And where St. Paul said, The Second Man is the Lord from Heaven. 1 Cor.
15. 47. Apollinarius dixit carnem Christi ab aeterno fuisse, and de coelo
descendisse. Soz. l. 6. c. 27.


But those sayings which are meant properly of the Godhead of the Son of Man,
yet are also truly said of the whole Person of Christ, by an Antidosis, or
communication of Properties, as Divines call it, which consists in this, That
the two distinct Natures in Christ, viz. the Godhead, and the Manhood do both
of them communicate their several properties each to other, by reason of the
Union of those two distinct Natures, in that one Person of Christ.

Hence it is, that the Scripture so speaks of the Person of Christ. They
crucified the Lord of Glory. And, the blood of 1 Cor. 2. 8 Acts 20. 28. Acts 3.
15
Christ is called the Blood of God. And, the Jews are said to have crucified
the Prince of Life. And of the Thief, Christ said, This day shall thou be with
me in Paradise, Luke 23. 43.
yet Christ himself was not then in Paradise, as Man, but only as God. In the
same sense, the words of Christ abovementioned are to be understood, The Son
of Man came from Heaven, which is true, because the same Son of Man was also
the Son of God, and the only God, who indeed came down from Heaven.

Not only the Heretics, but the Heathens also, depraved, and obscured the
Doctrine of Redemption, by affirming that Men at first sprang out of Trees, or
grew out of the Earth,

-- Rupto robore nati, Juvenal Sat. 6.

Compositique luto, nullos habuere parents.
And the Jews also said that God made at first, two Women for Adam, although we
find but one, and her taken out of the side of the first Man, flesh of his
flesh; the other must have been otherwise made, whereupon the Jews feigned
Genealogies, as derived from the womb of the second Woman, which are those
Genealogies which St. Paul called vain, (as St. Austin thought) Aug. To. 6. n.
16. 1 Timothy 1. 4.
which Jewish fiction depraved the doctrine of our Union with Christ, and
consequently of universal Redemption of Mankind; because that Work was limited,
and confined to the Seed of Eve, who was that Woman, whose Seed should bruise
the serpents head, who was the only Woman that was taken out of Adams side, and
all Nations of men, with Christ also have proceeded from the loins and womb of
that one Man, and that one Woman.

This necessary Union was intimated by the Prophets, and also by the Apostle,
by the similitude of earthen Vessels, and of bread: The Potter has power over
the clay, of the same lump to make one Vessel to honor, Isa. 45. 9. Jer. 18.
6. To. 9. 21. 2 Cor. 4. 7.
another to dishonor; and St. Paul calls our bodies earthen Vessels. Christ
also, and his Members are resembled to Bread, in respect of their Union and
communion one with the other. The Bread which we break, 1 Cor. 10. 16.
is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ, for we being many are one
Bread, and one Body, for we are all partakers of that one Bread: The similitude
holds in this; that as many earthen Vessels are made out of one lump of clay;
and many Breads or loaves, out of one dough or lump of Past, wherein they were
first united, before they were extracted and severally formed; just so, all Men
in the world with Christ himself, were at first united in that one lump, or
mass of the first Man, before they were extracted; of which Union St. Paul
says, that God has made of one blood (whatever blood signifies) all Nations
of Acts 17. 26
Men.

CHAP. VIII.
THe Eating of the flesh of Christ certainly signifies, only the Union of our
flesh with his Flesh, which Union was from Eternity designed by the Godhead, in
his merciful purpose toward Mankind, his future, and intended Creatures, as
has been before showed.

But then if so, we are next to enquire, why it pleased our Redeemer to
express, and declare this Union, by such seeming-harsh, and tragical Words, of
Eating his Flesh, and drinking his Blood, which if literally and grossly
understood, of Oral eating and drinking the flesh and blood of Man, are such
things as all civilized People, both Christians and Heathens abhor, and those
that have been observed so to do (as Pliny writes of the ancient and rude
Plin. hist. lib. 7. c. 2.
Scythians) are branded with a character of barbarous savageness and
inhumanity; as Plutarch and Salust noted of the Catilinarian Plut. in vit.
Cicer. Salust. de bell. Catil.
conspirators, that they entered a wicked Covenant by a bloody ceremony of
killing a man, and tasting of his flesh, and drinking of his blood mingled with
Wine, and St. Jerome writes, that himself saw Hier. con. Jovin. l. 2. c. 5.
barbarous People in France feeding on human flesh.

The Answer hereunto is, That our Savior therefore chose this similitudinary
way to express our Union with himself, because he would signify a necessity of
our most near conjunction with him, so as to be one flesh with his Flesh, in
order to the Redemption of our bodies by his Body, which otherwise could not
be, as is showed before; for there cannot be a surer Union than such, as our
food with us which unites it self, and grows into one bulk with our Bodies (as
is before said) the whole stature and increase of our magnitude from Cap. 2.
our Nativity, our augmentation from one cubit at our Birth, to five cubits at
our full and ripe Age, is wholly by our food, so that nothing is more ours than
that: There was a truth in that Epitaph of the voluptuous King Sardanapalus,
Haec habui Plut. mor. Diod. Sic.
quae edi, he accounting nothing to be his, but what he had eaten, for when all
other worldly acquirements of lands, wealth, treasures, and honors at our
death are utterly lost; that only, by which our Food is united with us shall be
restored, and after the Resurrection will continue with us for ever, and must
he accounted ours.

Like this union, is the Union of our flesh with the Flesh of Christ in the
first Man, which is the ground of our Redemption, and of the Resurrection of
our bodies, without which, neither could be more than the resurrection of brute
beasts; for in the first Man was the general Atonement of mankind with Christ,
both in flesh and in Soul, by which Union, Mankind is made capable of claiming
the benefits of his Merits, and of the Passions of his blessed Body and Soul.
Christ says, No man has ascended Joh. 3. 13
into heaven but the Son of Man, etc. upon which words St. Austin says, Si vis
ascendere, Aug. in loc.
esto in Christo; whosoever shall ascend into heaven, must necessarily be in
Christ, that is, united with Christ; for except we so eat the Flesh of the Son
of Man, etc. we have John 6.
no life in us.

This doctrine of Union, was represented and signified by Christ, in the
Institution of his Holy Supper, by eating and drinking that sanctified Bread
and Wine: That Sacrament is therefore called by St. Cyprian, the Sacrament of
Redemption, and by St. Austin, the Sacrament of Union, and both Cap. 2.
the Scripture and the Church call it the Communion, which word clearly
signifies the mutual Union of Christ and Mankind (as is before showed) which
the Primitive Fathers did so rightly apprehend, as may appear by a general
usance, practiced in those times in the office of the Sacrament.

In the Sacramental Chalice, the Fathers for many Ages tempered or mixed water
with the Wine, although we find neither Precept, nor Precedent for it in the
holy Scriptures; yet de facto it appears that so it was, by many evidences in
the Fathers, as in Justin Martyr, Cyprian, Ambrose, Chrysostom and Austin;
which Custom is to this day continued in many Places and Churches, and (by
reason of the Antiquiry thereof) it is pretended to be an Apostolical
Tradition, and very early instituted as a Canon by Alexander the first, who was
Bishop of Rome about the year of Christ 118. as Platina reports.

Of this Usance St. Cyprian renders this Cyp. l. 2. epist. 3.
reason, and plausible account in an Epistle written to Caecilius; in the
sacred Chalice (says he) the Water signifies the People, and the Wine
represents Christ. Vinum sine aqua, est Christus sine Populo; Aqua sine vino,
est Populus sine Christo; Wine alone may signify Christ without his People,
and water alone may signify the People without Christ; but both together so
mingled in the Chalice, was to signify that Christ, and his People were so
united, concorporated and entwined one with the other, as the wine with the
water; therefore Christ said, He that eats my Flesh, and drinks my John 6.
Blood, dwells in me, and I in him; which is as much as if he had said, he
that dwells in me, is he that Eats my flesh, which dwelling is mutual; for
by this Union the flesh of Christ dwells in us, and our flesh in him.

There were a Sect of Heretics called Theod. haer. fab. lib. 1.
Hydroparastatae or Aquarii, set up by one Tatianus, mentioned in Theodoret,
who consecrated water only in the Sacramental Chalice without Wine; and are
therefore by St. Austin put into his Catalogue of Heretics, under the title of
Aquarii, because Aug. T. 6. haer. 64.
water alone did not represent that mutual Union of Christ and his People,
which the Church intended, as is before said, by their mixture of Water with
Wine.

CHAP. IX.
THere were in the Primitive times some Heretics, who thought those words of
Christ concerning the eating his Flesh, and drinking his Blood, were to be
understood grossly and literally, of Oral eating, just as the Transubstantiators
at this day pretend, and as formerly the Disciples of Capernaum thought, when
they asked, how can this Man give us his flesh to eat? Upon which words St.
Austin says, Discipuli ejus Aug. in Psalm. 25.
acceperunt id stulte, carnaliter cogitantes, quod Dominus praescisurus erat
particulas de corpore suo, and eis daturus. Those Disciples apprehended that
speech foolishly, and carnally, thinking that he would cut his Body in pieces
and give it them.

The Manichees said, that when men did eat fruits, or herbs, or other food,
that then they did eat the parts or Members of God, mingled with those
creatures. As St. Austin Aug. cont. Faust. l. 13. c. 6.
reports of them.

The Gnostick Heretics used for their Mysteries or Sacraments, to bruise the
flesh of a newborn Babe in a mortar, and to eat it with Honey and Pepper, and
for this they pretended those words of Christ, Except ye eat the flesh of the
Son of Man, etc. as Epiphanius reports. Epiph. h^^r. 26. Hie. Epi. ad Marcel.
n. 18. Epip. haer. 48.


The Montanists also cruelly and impiously used to prick the veins of a sucking
Child, and with it to knead Meal, and of both to make their Encharist, as
Epiphanius reports, and St. Cyril of Jerusalem names Cyril. cat. 16.
a Montanist-Woman, one Midra, who practiced this cruelty in the 16th.
Catechism of Illuminates, if those Catechismes be his.

Now let the prudent Reader consider, whether the Doctrine of the
Transubstantiators be not grounded on the same misunderstood Principle, on
which the abovenamed Heretics founded their Errors and cruel practices, viz.
on those words of Christ, Except ye eat the flesh, and drink the blood of the
Son of Man, etc.

These practices brought a great suspicion, and raised scandalous reports upon
the ancient Christians, as Epiphanius observes; Epip. haer. 26. and 29.
for, because those Heretics, who did really in their Mysteries so do, as is
said, and called themselves Christians, therefore the Jews and the Gentiles,
and Persecutors thought that all true and Catholic Christians did the same.
Salvianus tells us, that Salv. n. 6.
the Gentiles said, that Christians in their Sacrifices committed Homicide.
Origin Orig. n. 36
says, that the Jews accused Christians to be eaters of Humane flesh.
Tertullian reports, Tert. Apolog. n. 2.
that they were accused as murderers of Infants. And Athenagoras, that they
Athenagoras n. 72. 75.
were charged with Thyestian Feasts (Thyestes was maliciously trapan'd to the
eating of the flesh of his own Children unawares.) Minutius Foelix confirms,
that in his time Minut. in Octavio n. 99.
Christians generally were accused falsely, as Murderers, and Eaters of the
flesh and blood, and members of Infants, mingled and wrought up with Meal.

In later times, Huldericus Zuinglius the Zuing. Sup. n. 11.
younger, in his Supplement of the Chronology of Pet. Pictaviensis, reports
of Averroes a great Philosopher, and an Heathen, who lived about the year of
Christ 1149. hearing of the Doctrine of real, and carnal Eating the very flesh
of Christ, as it was in his time taught by some Christians (as now it is by
Transubstantiators) said, that Summaest insania adorare quod comeditur. Theod.
in Genesis quaest. 55.
of all Religions that he had seen, he thought there was none worse than
Christianity, because Christians, Deum quem colunt devorant, They professed to
eat him whom they worship, and acknowledge to be their God.

To these calumnies and false aspersions of Christians, the Fathers and the
abovenamed Apologists, have left us true, satisfactory, and undeniable
Answers, by any man that is judicious, and uninterested in the Herisie of
carnal Eating.

1. The Christians affirmed that their very Accusers confessed, that they never
saw any such thing done by any Catholic Christian.

2. That the true Christians suffered patiently stripes, wounds, torments,
losses, yielding themselves patiently to all injuries, and also in the midst of
their sufferings prayed for their very Afflictors; therefore unlikely to be
Manslayers.

3. That they could not reasonably be imagined to eat the flesh and blood of
Men, except they first killed those that were so to be eaten; but Christians
were so far from either killing, or eating human Flesh, which was unlawful,
that they abstained from eating the flesh of other Creatures which was lawful.

4. That their Christian Discipline, restrained them from being so much as but
spectators only of the bloody conflicts of Gladiators, and even of the Baytings
and slaughters of Beasts, which usually were presented in the Roman Theaters by
the Roman Emperors and Consuls, and by other heathen Princes; nor might they
go to see the Execution of men condemned to die.

5. That Christians accounted those Women guilty of Homicide, and liable to
answer to God for murder, who used medicinal Drinks or Druggs to destroy
Conceptions, or cause Abortions. Surely they would not murder Children born
and perfect, who were careful to preserve unborn Conceptions.

6. That Christians accounted those to be Infanticides or Parricides, who did
but on-only expose their own Infants.

7. That they who firmly believe a Resurrection of their bodies, cannot
reasonably be thought to make those bodies sepulchers of other Bodies, by
eating them, who also shall certainly so rise again at the last day: These, and
many more Allegations, we find in the ancient Christian-Writers to confute the
slander of Anthropophagy.

The Transubstantiators of our time, may upon more evident reasons be charged
justly with such Accusations, than the Primitive Christians were, because those
do not only acknowledge, but with all the cunning, and subtilties, and
arguments that Man's wit and brain can invent, pertinaciously and obstinately
assert the real, carnal, corporal and Oral eating of the Body, and drinking the
Blood of Man, even of the best Man that ever was, the Man Jesus, whom they dare
not deny to be to this day, and forever to continue Perfect Man, as well as
Perfect God; and more also they affirm, that in the Blessed Eucharist they eat
and drink, not only his Body and Blood, but also his Soul, and his very
Godhead, although Christ had said before to his Jewish Disciples, that so to
eat his Flesh (as then the Capernaitans, and our Transubstantiators now
apprehended those words) profits Joh. 6. 63
nothing; And as to the Eating or drinking his Soul and Godhead, that is
altogether impossible.

St. Austin in his Polemicks against the Aug. cont. Marc. l. 2. T. 6.
Marcionites, considering those words of Eating and Drinking the flesh and
blood of Christ, says, figurate dictum, that those words are figurative. And
sapienter intelligamus, we are warily to understand them; for (says he)
Horribilius videatur, humamanum sanguinem potare, quam fundere, To drink Human
blood seems to be more abhorred, than to spill it; for the same Father had
written before, Si Scriptura videtur Id. de Doct. Christ. l. 3. c. 15. To. 3.
n. 55.
flagitium, aut facinus jubere; figurata locutio est, ut nisi manducaveritis
carnem Filii Hominis, when the Scripture seems to command any heinous or
mischievous act, it is figuratively meant, as those words are, Except ye eat
the Flesh of the Son of Man. And in that Sermon de Coena, which goes under the
name of St. Cyprian, which Cyp. de Coen. n. 95
was not his, but written about the Year 1150. not long before
Transubstantiation was first established: Upon those words, Except ye Eat, etc.
it is said, If the flesh of that Person were divided into pieces, it would not
suffice all Mankind, it would be consumed, and with it our Religion would
cease. Therefore certainly that Eating which Christ spoke of, is not to be
understood of Oral eating, as may appear also by that which follows.

CHAP. X.
THe learned Reader may be pleased to observe with me, that those words of
Christ, John 6. Except ye Eat, being in the Original (...), are far otherwise
read and rendered by all the Latin Fathers generally, than as they are now
Translated with us in England; for Tertullian, Cyprian, Hierome, Austin,
Prosper, and other Fathers thus read them. Nisi manducaveritis, which words
signify the time past, as if he had said, Except ye have eaten the flesh of
the Son of Man; just so does the Translation of Sixtus, and Clemens render
those words, Nisi manducaveritis, and biberitis. So does Bellarmine, and
generally all the Roman Writers, and the Lutheran Writers, and Calvin and Beza;
and so do the Translators of the Greek Fathers, as of Origin and Epiphanius;
indeed Orig. in Levit. c. 10. n. 7.
all, though they be of diverse Persuasions in Religion, yet they agree in the
said rendering of those Words, and our own right Learned Grammarians consent
unto, and approve of this Reading; and St. Austin Aug. in Joh. Tract. 25.
seems to intimate the same saying, Creed, and manducasti.

From whence we may observe, that Eating the Flesh of Christ, in their sense,
or by their Interpretation at least, is not to be understood of any present
Oral Eating, or if it were to be done only in the future, or in the present
Eucharist, or as if it were not already done; for the Eating here meant, is
intended generally by all Mankind, and not only by holy Men, as Prophets,
Patriarchs, Apostles, Israelites or Christians; but also by Infidels, by
Pagans, Turks, Athiests, and the very worst of all Mankind, by such as never
heard of Christ, and those that never received the Sacrament of the Body of
Christ, or so much as once heard of it, and moreover by such as despised it;
nor is Cain or Judas (the worst of both Testaments) excluded from this Eating
of the flesh of Christ, so as it here signifies, because they were redeemed by
him.

My reason for this Assertion is, because I firmly believe, that this Eating
signifies only the Union of the bodies of all Men in the World, with the body
of Christ, in that one original Lump of Adam, wherein the worst of Men have
their Interest and Participation, as truly and really as the greatest Saints on
Earth; for the Son of God by his Incarnation, assumed Human flesh, which was
the same, not only with the flesh which holy Men derived from the loins of
Adam, but with that Flesh which Unholy, and generally all Men received thence.
All Adamites of what condition soever, do communicate in the Incarnation of
Christ; nor is there any Man whose flesh Christ has not assumed, and with
whose flesh the Flesh of Christ is not united; because the benefit of his
Incarnation, was to be tendered to all the Progeny of Adam, that is, to the
whole Adam, which is all Mankind, and only to them; from which benefit and all
the consequences thereof, the Apostate Angels are utterly excluded, because (as
the Apostle says) He took not on Heb. ^. 16.
him the Nature of Angels, but he took on him the Seed of Abraham, and
therefore he took on him the Seed of Adam, in whose loins both Abraham, and
Christ, and all Mankind were united (as before is showed.)

The time when Man does thus Eat the flesh of the Son of Man, that is, when our
flesh is united with the Flesh of Christ, is at our Conception in the Womb; for
then we at first concarnate with Christ, and then we first communicate in the
same Flesh which Christ, and we, by propagation have derived from the first
Man; Hence it is, that David the Type of Christ, said of the Men of Juda, Ye
are my Brethren, my bones and 2 Samuel 19. 12.
my flesh, which was true, only because David, and that Tribe were united in
the loins of the Patriark Juda: Just so the Apostle says of the Ephesians, and
of himself, We are Members of his body, of his Ephesians. 5. 30
flesh, and of his bones, which cannot otherwise appear to be true, but only by
the Union of their bodies with the Body of Chirst, in the loins of the first
Man; for we, nor they did descend from the Body of Matthew. 25. 40.
Christ, nor were we ever in his loins, yet he calls us his Brethren, because
we with him have one Father in the flesh, that is, 1 Cor. 15. 45.
Adam, whose Sons we all are, and so is Christ, who is therefore called the
last Adam, which is the name of his Father, as Aug. Retract. l. 1. c. 15.
Cassander Page 47.
other Men are also called by the names of their earthly Fathers; as Austin
says of all Men, Omnis homo terrenus est Adam, every man on earth is Adam; and
Cassander in his Book de duabus Naturis in Christo, very truly observes,
Christus juxta carnem, est consubstantialis universo humano generi, Christ
according to the flesh, is consubstantial with all Mankind.

There are yet some few Questions to be examined and discussed, in this weighty
Mystery concerning the Union of our flesh with the flesh of Christ, which is
here signified by Eating, of which we are next to enquire.

CHAP. XI.
IT being granted, that our flesh and the Flesh of Christ are so united or
entwined, and mingled one with the other, as is said; it may be enquired what
virtue, or efficacy has the Flesh of Christ, more than the flesh of the
Patriarks, Prophets and Apostles? with whom we are as really united in the
first Man, as we are with Christ; for we know that the flesh of Christ is a
Creature, and so is the flesh of those who all descended from Adam, as Christ
did.

To this Query we answer and grant, that the flesh, or body of Christ was, and
still is a Creature, for he took upon him the Phil. 2. 7.
form of a Servant, a servant must needs be a Creature, and every creature is a
servant to the Godhead, only the Godhead is neither a creature, nor a servant;
therefore the flesh of Christ being considered alone, and only by it self being
a Creature, does not enoble Christ, nor entitle him higher, than to be styled
only the Son of Man, the Son of the Virgin Mary, and of David, of Abraham, and
of Adam.

But withal we are to consider, that this Son of Man, and this form of a
Servant, was personally united with the Son of God, and with the Form of God,
the flesh of Christ was the flesh of God the Word, of which it is said, the
Word was made Flesh, and the John 1. 1, 14. 1 Timothy 3. 16. Romans 8. 3*
Word was God, therefore Christ is called God manifested in the flesh, and of
him it is said, that God sent his Son in the likeness of sinful Flesh. The
flesh which the Son of God assumed, was true and real Flesh, yet not sinful
flesh, but only in similitude, viz. like to the flesh of other Men which is
sinful: This Son of God by Incarnation, being made the Son of Man, is called
Emanuel, Isa. 7. 14.
and this because he is God, personally united with Man, and is Theanthropos,
9. 6.
and though he is very Man, yet he is also very God, and is therefore by the
same Prophet called the Mighty God, and the Everlasting Father.

True it is that the flesh of Christ is a Creature, but not singly, and soly,
and only a mere Creature, but such a Creature as was always united, and
personally joined with the Creator; for the flesh of Christ never was
consisting, or existing alone without his Godhead, his Humanity was ever united
with his Divinity. The good Rule of Divines is, Humana natura in Christo, non
est Cass. n. 1. Fol. 11.
Persona appellanda, quia non subsistit per se, there never was any minute of
time since the first Conception of Christ, wherein his flesh, body or Manhood
was alone disjoined, or separated from his Godhead; therefore the single human
Nature of Christ may not be called a Person. Cassander says very truly, Non
primum natus est Homo Cass fol. 32.
communis de Virgin, and demum post habitavit in eo Verbum, sed in ipso utero
Virginali, secum Carnem conjunxit, We are not to think, that Christ was first
born a common Man, and that afterward, God the Word united himself with his
flesh, for that was done in the Virgins Womb, his Flesh was never existing
alone, but ever was the Flesh of God, his Body always was Corpus Dei, the Body
of God, as the Scripture calls his Blood, the Blood of God, Acts 20. 28. And
Acts 20. 28. 1 John 3. 16.
his Death, the Death of God, as St. John says, Hereby we perceive the love of
God, because he has laid down his life for us. The laying down of the life of
Christ, is called the laying down the life of God.

The virtue and efficacy of the Flesh of the Son of Man, and that which makes
his flesh so benificial to Mankind, consists in this Union, viz. Because his
Flesh is joined, and personally united with the Word or Son of God; for his
Flesh, if it were nothing else but only flesh, it could not profit us, as
Christ said, the Flesh profits nothing; for it is the Union of his Divine
Spirit with his Flesh, that makes his flesh Vivifical or Quickening, as Christ
said, It is Joh. 6. 63
the Spirit that quickneth, the Flesh profits nothing, the Words that I
speak, they are Spirit, and they are Life; the meaning is, that the whole
efficacy of his Flesh consists only, in and by the conjuction of his Divine
Spirit with it, who is not only Vivifical, but also Life it self, therefore the
Apostle says, the last Adam was made a quickening 1 Cor. 15. 45.
Spirit. The last Adam signifies Christ, who is called Adam, only because his
Human nature was derived from Adam, which human Nature was made Vivifical, by
being united with the Divine quickening Spirit, and because this last Adam, and
the Divine Spirit or Godhead, were personally united in Christ; therefore he
says of him, The Second Man is the Lord from Heaven. The flesh Verse. 47.
of Christ thus being sweetened by his Divine Spirit, is like that Leaven
mentioned Mat. 13. 33.
in the Gospel, wherewith the whole lump of Mankind is seasoned; the efficacy,
power, and operation whereof may more easily be apprehended by this similitude.

As wood, or a dead coal, or iron do no^ of themselves alone burn, or heat a
man but if they be joined with fire, and made red hot thereby, they will heat
and burn. The flesh of the Son of Man alone, is like the wood and iron, and the
Divine Spirit united with the flesh, is like the fire (as he once appeared in
Cloven tongues, like as of Acts 2.
fire) by which Spirit only, the flesh is actuated, and made operative, hence
proceed those effects, and productions mentioned in the Gospel, where Christ
said, I am the Bread which came down from Heaven, and John 6. 33, 41, 51
gives life to the World; we know that only his Divine Spirit came from
Heaven, not his flesh, of which effects we shall say more in their due place.

CHAP. XII.
ANother Question to be disputed concerning the Modus, the way, or manner of
this mysterious Eating, is, how Men can be truly said to eat the Flesh of
Christ? And this, because those that disavow, and abhor the Dream of
Transubstantiators of a gross, carnal, and Oral eating, have conceived another
way, which they call Eating Spiritually; which word is used in this question by
the Church of England, declaring to the penitent and faithful Communicants,
that They Spiritually eat the Flesh of Christ, and drink his Blood, They dwell
in Christ, and Christ in them, They be One with Christ, and Christ with them,
which is true.

By those words of Dwelling in Christ, and being One with him, and Eating his
Flesh, this Church declares.

1. First, a true and real Union of our flesh with his very Flesh, although she
utterly denies the gross and Oral eating, and tearing of his Flesh.

2. Secondly, she declares by the word Spiritually; That this Eating is to be
understood only Mystically or Spiritually, and not carnally or Orally; for Oral
eating is only of the Sacrament, but not of the very real Substance, which is
signified by that Sacrament. So we are now to enquire, what is meant by the
Eating the flesh of Christ spiritually.

To this we Answer, That this word Spiritually has a double signification, for
D. Vshers Sermon. ad Parl. 1620.


1. First. It is by many Learned Men thought to signify, only the Receiving
the Spirit of our Lord Jesus, by which we are united with him; because the same
Spirit which is in Jesus, is from him the Head derived, and communicated to his
Members. Of this Union of the Spirit, or spiritual Union of us with Christ, the
great Apostle often speaks, He that is joined to the Lord, 1 Cor. 6. 17. 12.
13. Ephesians. 4. 4.
is one Spirit; and, By one Spirit ye are all bapzed into one Body; and, There
is one Body, and one Spirit. By virtue of this one Spirit so communicated, the
whole multitude of the Church, or Members of Christ, are accounted but one
Mystical Body.

But this Spiritual Union, or Union in Spirit, although it is true and real,
yet this alone may not be thought to be so plenary, or so sufficient an Union,
as is necessarily required for expediting that great Work, for which the
Blessed Godhead designed Man's Union with Christ, as may appear by the Reasons
following.

1. First. If to eat Spiritually, should signify to receive the Spirit of
Christ only, and no more, and be only so by us apprehended, utterly disowning
the eating, or the real Union of his Flesh with our flesh, in truth and
reality; we shall thereby disturb and null the Order of the grand, and
merciful work of Redemption, which could not be wrought, only by an union or
conjunction of the Spirit of the Son of God with us, but also with the Union of
his blessed Flesh and Blood with our flesh and blood, because the Spirit alone
is not a Redeemer; for the Spirit could not suffer, and die for us as a
Redeemer must, it was the vital blood and death of the Redeemer, that was
necessarily required for Man's Redemption.

2. Secondly. The Son of God (as only so) was a Spirit from Eternity (for God
is a Spirit.) But if the Son of God will vouchsafe to become a Redeemer, he
must needs be first the Son of Man, and Emanuel, as the Church in her Hymn
confesses, When thou tookest upon thee to deliver Man, thou did not abhor
the Virgins Womb.

For if God the Son, or God the Word, had so continued in his pure Divinity,
and had not assumed our Human nature, so as to be the Son of Man, and the Word
made Flesh, he could not have been Christ, nor Jesus, nor Priest, nor
Sacrifice, nor Redeemer; for otherwise, we might as well say, that the Person
of the Father, or the Person of the Holy Ghost were our Redeemers, although
neither of those Persons assumed our nature, as Austin, or rather Gennadius
observed, Aug. T. 3. n. 72.
Nec Pater, nec Spiritus assumpsit carnem, sed Filius tantum. So all Divines
will assent to this Theological Axiom, Divina Cassander Fol. 30.
natura non est Redemptrix, quia pati non potuit, the pure and single Divine
nature could not be the Redeemer, because it could not suffer or die. And we
know that Redemption was confined and limited, so as to be only by the Seed of
the Woman; but the Spirit, or Holy Ghost is not the Seed of the Woman,
therefore God the Son took on him that Seed, and that form of a Servant, and
therein he became our Redeemer, because thereby he became Mortal, and could
suffer and die.

Neither could the human Nature of Christ, considered singly and alone, without
his Divine Nature, and by it self only have redeemed us, because no mere
Creature could possibly be of sufficient worth to ransom the World, or to
satisfy Divine Justice for the sins of Mankind.

3. A third Reason is, That other Creatures (besides Mankind) have the Spirit
of God (which is the same Spirit with the Spirit of Christ) yet those other
creatures have no benefit by the Incarnation and Passion of Christ. For the
blessed Angels are plentifully endowed with the Spirit, yet because they are
not united with the flesh and blood of Christ, they cannot be capable of any
benefit thereby, or of Redemption (if need were) more than the evil, or
Apostate Angels are; because the Son of God dit not assume the nature of
Angels, nor Heb. 2. 16.
did any Angels assume the nature of Man. Besides, other inferior Creatures
are not destitute of the Spirit of God, which is said to fill Heaven and Earth.
The Psalmist Jer. 23. 24. Ps. 139. 6 Joel 2. 28
could not tell, whether he should go from the Spirit, and God by his Prophet
had said, I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh, which is truly performed,
not only on Mankind, but also on other inferior Creatures; for by the virtue
and vigor of the Spirit, they live, and move, and have their being; yet Acts
17. 28.
they are not thereby capable of the benefits or effects which come by the
Incarnation, because they are not so united with Christ as our Nature is. For
these reasons I conceive it may appear, that the Eating, or the Union with the
Flesh of Christ, is not meant of Receiving only the Spirit, or of eating his
Flesh spiritually, in that sense which is abovesaid.

2. Secondly. Those words of Eating spiritually, in the sense of the Church I
conceive to signify such a kind of Eating, as is distinct and different from
the literal or Grammatical signification thereof, and from any gross, carnal or
Oral eating; and that it signifies to Eat according to the Spirit, that is,
according to the intent, purpose and true inward meaning and sense of the
Spirit. For we know that the word Spirit, in Scripture is often opposed to the
word Letter, as may appear by those words of St. Paul, God has made us able
Ministers of the 2 Cor. 3. 6.
New Testament, not of the Letter, but of the Spirit. Upon which words St.
Athanasius Athan. To. 3 n. 26
thus writes to Serapion, Vos si sacras literas evolveritis, invenietis
Spiritus vocabulum in hoc usurpari, ut mentem verborum significet, If you will
peruse the Holy Scriptures, you will find that the word Spirit is used to
signify the Mind, or meaning. Now the spirit, mind or meaning of those words,
is to be really united with Christ, yet without any Oral manducation literally
taken. The Psalmist says, God has spoken once, twice Psalm. 6^. 11.
have I heard this, Duo haec audivi, that is, says Isychius, that he
considered not only Isych. in Levit.
the Letter, but also the Spirit, or meaning of the words; for the Letter is
but folium Spiritus, as the same Father says, like to the leaf which covers
the fruit, or like unto the Vail, wherewith the shining face of Moses was
shadowed, or as the shell is to the kernel. Origin, in his Tractates upon St.
Matthew, calls the Letter sepulchrum Prophetarum, Orig. Tract. 3. and 26.
like a sepulcher in which the prophetical Mysteries are hid, but the
signification and meaning of the Letter is (says he) Regalis, and dignior
intellectus, which he calls animam and spiritum Literae, the more noble, and
more worthy understanding of the Prophetical Writings, and the very life and
spirit of them.

In the Levitical Law those Creatures are Lev. 11. 3
accounted clean, which divided the hoof, and chewed the Cud, which in the
Spirit or meaning, signified those Persons, who in their Meditations on
Scriptural Figures, did distinguish or divide the outward Letter, from the
inward Spirit or meaning thereof. And St. Austin was bold to say, Aug. in Ps.
103.
Quaedam quasi absurda miscet Spiritus sanctus, ut ex eo quod non possumus
accipere ad literam, cogat nos spiritualiter quaerere, It has pleased the Holy
Ghost to mingle some passages with his Word, which seems uncomely and absurd,
that thereby he might compel us to search out the Spirit, or meaning of that,
which we cannot conceive fit or true according to the bare Letter. As, If thy
right eye offend thee, etc. or Mat. 5.
If thy right hand offend thee, etc. The great Orator observes, Scriptum
sequi Calumniatoris Tul. pro Caecina N. 14.
est, boni judicis voluntatem scriptoris, He is but a Wrangler, who urges only
the bare letter of a Writing, but a good Judge will consider the will and
meaning of the Writer. So say we, that because to eat the flesh of Christ
literally taken, is impossible, and unprofitable, and undecent, therefore we
deny that way, and acknowledge the other way of Eating spiritually, which
(according to the intent, Spirit and meaning of Christ) signifies the real
Union of us with him, both in flesh and soul, so as is above showed, and will
be more hereafter.

CHAP. XIII.
THere are others that think, that the Eating and Drinking the flesh and blood
of Christ, is by Believing in him, which they call Eating by Faith, without any
consideration of any other Union with his Flesh and Blood: But these men do not
rightly weigh and ponder the order and method, which our most wise, most just,
and most merciful God designed for the acquitment of lapsed Mankind, that
their Redemption might be wrought, not only by his Mercy, but also with a
strict observance of exact Justice, which could not be performed without an
Union of the Redeemer, and the Redeemed, as is before showed.

This Union (which Christ called Eating) is not performed only by Faith or
Believing, for the Blessed Angels believe, yet cannot be said to eat his Flesh,
or to be united so with him, as is here required; even the Apostate Angels do
also believe every Article of the Christian Faith, and this upon more certainty
and evidence, than many good Christians have knowledge of, and with their
believing they tremble, and although they believe as we do, yet they have not
so eaten, nor are so united with Christ, as Mankind is: I may truly say of
Angels, Credunt, sed non edunt; because they are not so united, they are
utterly incapable of the benefit of Christ's Incarnation, and therefore of
Redemption by him.

There have been, and still are many Millions of People in the World, who never
believed the Christian Faith, as Pagan-Infidels and Jews, and such as are
abovementioned, Cap. 10.
and many barbarous and uncivilized People, that still sit in darkness, and in
the shadow of death, who never so much as heard of Christ. Yet all these, being
the Redemtion is as broad as Human nature, Bish. Bedels Letter pa. 26.
race and posterity of Adam, have every one so eaten the flesh of the Son of
Man, as is here meant, that is, they are united with the flesh of Christ in the
loins of the first Man; which Union was actuated at their conceptions, in the
Wombs of their mothers, although they never were, or perhaps never will be
Believers; of all such I may say, Edunt, sed non credunt; therefore this Eating
cannot be meant only of Believing.

St. Austin in his 25. Tractate on St. John, Aug. in Joh.
writing upon those words in the 6. Chapter, This is the work of God, that ye
believe Joh. 6. 29
on him whom he has sent; says, Quid paras dentes and ventrem? creed, and
manducasti, Why preparest thou thy teeth, and thy stomach? believe, and thou
have eaten; by which passage, some have thought that St. Austin meant, that
Believing was the only way of Eating the flesh of Christ.

But the contrary is proved before, and if St. Austin were of that Opinion, he
is not to be followed therein; yet I am confident that he did not so mean,
because I find that this learned Father, has diverse times otherwise expounded
those words, which mention the Eating and Drinking the flesh and blood of
Christ to be meant of our Incorcorporation in him, which must signify the
union of our flesh with his Flesh; for so he Aug. lib. 3. con Pelagian. c. 4.
to. 7. n. ^9.
says of those words, John 6. Nisi manducaveritis carnem, nemo potest vitam
aeternam habere nisi incorporetur Christo, No man can have Eternal life except
he be incorporated in Christ. And in another place he bringgeth in Christ
saying, Qui venit ad me, incorporatur Id. in Joh. Tract. 25. Ibid. Tract. 27.
mihi, he that comes to me, is incorporated in me. Again he says, Manducare
illam escam, est manner in Christo, and Christum manentem in se habere, to eat
that Food is to abide in Christ, and to have Christ abiding in him. And in the
same Tractate, he thus shows the union or conjunction of Christ's Flesh with
our flesh, Siquis liquefactae cerae, etc. If a man shall Id. ibid.
melt wax, and then put other melted wax into it, he wholly mingleth the one
with the other. Just so is it with the flesh of Christ and our flesh, whereby
it comes to be truly said by Christ, He that eats my Joh. 6. 56
Flesh, and drinks my Blood, dwells in me, and I in him; for certainly,
that God the Creator might effect this Union of Mankind with the Redeemer, he
extracted all out of one, as Prosp. very judiciously observes, Deus ex uno
fecit omnes, ut in Christi corpus Prosp. de Prove. n. 39.
venirent, God made men (Christ and all) out of one Adam, that all Men might
come into the Body of Christ.

If now it be granted, that St. Austin did intend those words to signify so as
is above said, then they will amount no farther than this which to me seems a
true gloss, and as much as if he had said, think it not needful to prepare thy
mouth to eat the Flesh of Christ, for, Creed and manducasti, thou have so eaten
his Flesh already, as he meant, by being united with him in the very
Conception: only believe in him, and thereby that Eating or Union shall be
profitable for thee, and not otherwise; because the Union or Concarnation of
our flesh with his, without Faith cannot reach so far as to Salvation, for the
very worst of men (as is said before) are united in flesh, with the Flesh of
Christ.

The Wisdom of the Godhead, with Justice and Mercy designed this our Union with
the flesh of God the Son, on purpose to qualify and prepare our foreseen
lapsed Nature, so, as by this way to put Mankind into a condition, and capacity
of Redeemableness, and so of Salvation possibly, which could not otherwise be
consistent with Divine Justice; as neither could it become his Mercy to have
created Mankind, on purpose to torment us for ever in Hell. Our perdition is
not from him, but from our selves, for he would not the death of a Ezekiel. 18. 32.
sinner; therefore has he set us into this way, and possibility of Life.

For the Nature of Mankind has been in three several conditions, which Divines
express by these three words. 1. Natura Instituta. 2. Natura Destituta. 3.
Natura Restituta. By which they mean the state of Innocence, the state of our
Fall, and the state of our Recovery by Christ.

The first was, whilst our first Parents (who were created pure and holy)
continued in that Original Integrity without sin.

The second was after their Fall or Sin, by which they became destitute, and
were deprived of their prime Graces and Purity, and we by them.

The third condition, is our restitution to Grace and Pardonableness by Christ,
who being the Son of God, to effect this Restitution, became the Son of Man, by
assuming the same Nature which we have; and in that Nature perfectly performed
that Law of God (which was imposed upon us) in our behalf, and for us, and
moreover bare in his own Body the punishments due for the sins of our lapsed
Nature.

All the wisdom of Men and Angels could not find out a way, whereby lapsed
Mankind could with justice be restored; but the merciful Godhead effected it
by God the Son, to become Emanuel; this was the Lords doing only.

Or if any creature had known, or discovered the same means; what Man or Angel,
or Archangel, durst presume to have suggested it to the Godhead, so as to say,
Thou O God have imposed a Law on man, which, Mankind by all its own power
(being lapsed) cannot possibly perform. And thou have threatened death for
transgression thereof, which no Man possibly by himself can escape; therefore
do thou O God, thine own self perform thine own Law, and to this end abase thy
self, and assume man's Nature on thee, and suffer the punishment due to Man; for
otherwise, the whole Generation of Mankind must perish everlasting. How
unlikely, or rather impossible would this suggestion seem to any Creature ever
to take effect?

Yet the merciful Godhead in great power and wisdom, did just so perform that
great Work. Well might St. Paul say, We preach Christ crucified, the Power of
God, and 1 Cor. 1. 23, 24.
the Wisdom of God; Christ signifies God, yet not only his pure Godhead, but
as God is Incarnate, and made Man. The Wisdom of his Godhead appointed this way
of ransoming the whole World from death, by the death of one Man; and the Power
of his Godhead enabled and empowered one Man to perform that Work with full
satisfaction to Divine Justice. When Christ had miraculously cured a
Paralitick; St. Matthew tells us, that the multitude glorified God, Mat. 9. 8.
which had given such power unto Men; and we for weightier reasons, shall be
ever obliged to say, Glory, and honor, and thanks be to the Son of God, for so
enabling and impowering the Son of Man.

Thus far we have proceeded in showing the Modus or way, which we conceive of
the Eating the flesh of Christ; If this Exposition be approved (which is easily
understood) it will quit us from the multitude of impossibilities, and the
Labyrinth of subtilties and intricacies, wherein that other way of
Transubstantiation has entangled many Learned men; for mine own part I am
persuaded, that if this way (which I have here described) be slighted, we shall
never by any other way attain to any certain, or but probable understanding of
this Mystery.

In the next place (by Gods assistance) we will endeavor to discover the other
part, and more difficult Mystery, which is called the Drinking of the Blood of
Christ.

My whole Design (Good Reader) in the former Chapters of this Book, was to show
and prove the Union of our flesh or body, with the Flesh or Body of Christ, as
being necessary to the Redemption of our bodies by his Body.

In the following Chapters, I am to show the Union of our souls with his Soul,
to be altogether as necessary to the Redemption of our souls by his Soul; which
that I may perform truly and plainly, I humbly implore the Divine, and
Illuminating assistance of the Spirit of our Lord Jesus, our Blessed Redeemer.

CHAP. XIV.
The Blood of Christ.
THe Words of Christ, which concern and import the Drinking of his Blood, John
6.
are meant, and are to be understood in like manner, as we said of Eating his
Flesh, for both those expressions signify only the Union of our flesh and
blood with the Flesh and Blood of Christ, or with that, which is by him called
his Blood.

For the word Blood, has a more high and noble signification in that speech of
Christ, than the outward and literal sound expresses; for to drink his Blood,
literally and grossly understood, is as impossible as unprofitable for us, as
has been before showed of the Oral eating of his Flesh.

Besides, if we will suppose it possible, whilst he conversed with Men on
Earth, or at the time of his death, and the real shedding of his Blood; we say
that in that time the eating or drinking of Blood was forbidden by God in the
Jewish Law, and afterward Lev. 17. Acts 15.
by the Apostles in the Gospel; therefore certainly in those words of Christ,
some other thing is meant by Blood, which liteterall and properly is not very
Blood. The blessed Virgin Mary, and Mary Cleophas, and John 19.
Mary Magdalen, and St. John the Evangelist, stood by the Cross when Christ was
crucified, and although his Blood trickled down from his Hands, and Feet, and
Side, yet there was no care taken by any of those holy and zealous Persons to
catch, or preserve his Blood in any vessel, for any present or future use,
which would not have been so carelessly neglected, if the Oral and literal
Drinking thereof had been profitable or useful; therefore surely there is some
other mystical meaning of Drinking his Blood. Mr. Fox reports, that one
Johannes de Mountziger wrote, that Christ Act. and Mon. sub Edw. 3. n. 38.
at his Resurrection resumed to himself all the Blood which he had shed in his
Passion, the Writer (it seems) thought that the stock of his Blood needed to be
carefully husbanded, for if at this day his Blood were literally, and orally to
be received by Communicants, how many Tunn of blood would be sufficient to
Communicate the whole Christian World? But the word Drink, and the word Blood
signify something else, and not as they sound, as is next to be showed.

Of the word Drink.
We know that this Word has other significations in the Holy Scriptures,
besides oral Drinking, for Christ himself, when he said, If any man thirst, let
him come to me Joh. 7. 37
and drink, he did not mean or intend it, of any oral Drinking, as the same
Evangelist immediately thus declares, saying, This he spoke of the Spirit,
which they that believe 39.
on him should receive; Surely no Believer can orally Drink the Spirit or Holy
Ghost. So when Christ was apprehended by the Soldiers, and St. Peter attempted
to rescue him; Christ declared that he would not be rescued, saying, The cup
which my John 18. 11.
Father gives me, shall I not drink it? This cup, and this drinking he meant
of his Passions; and that speech also, when he prayed, saying, O my Father, if
it be possible; Matthew. 26. 39.
let this cup pass from me; and when he foretold some of his Disciples, that
they should drink of the same cup that he drank of, he Mar. 10. 39.
meant it of his own, and of their Passions; we read of drinking Iniquity, and
of drinking Job 15, 16. 21. 20. (...).
the wrath of the Almighty. The old Greek Poet Anacreon phansied, that the Sun
drinks the Sea, and that the Moon drinks the Sun. The Sun and Moon properly
do not drink, neither are Iniquity, wrath of God, persecutions and passions,
such things as Men can properly be said to drink Orally; therefore surely these
speeches are but figurative, and by them we are to understand some other way of
Drinking, which is not Oral.

Of the word Blood.
Neither is the word Blood, in that speech of Christ, to be taken or understood
properly and literally, according to the mere Grammatical signification
thereof, as if Christ had intended that Men should drink his very Blood: this
could not be his meaning, as may appear by these Reasons following.

First, Because (as is beforesaid) Blood was forbidden in the Old Testament,
Flesh with the life thereof, which is the blood thereof, Genesis ^. 4.
ye shall not eat; this inhibition was by God, afterward by Moses, being
directed by God, He that eats any manner of Blood, Lev. 17. 10.
I will cut him off from among his People This Judaical and Ceremonial Law, was
in force at that time, when Christ spoke those words.

Secondly, Because Blood was forbidden in the New Testament, by that holy and
unerring Council of the Apostles, assisted by the Spirit of their Master Jesus,
It seems Acts 15. 28.
good to the Holy Ghost and us, that ye abstain from Blood. This Decree was
directed to the Gentiles, for the Jews were then, and before zealous enough in
abstaining from Blood, by virtue of the old Law; and the Christian Gentiles by
virtue of this Apostolical Decree, did absolutely forbear Blood for some Ages
of the Church, and it became one of the common Disciplines of Christians, and
was so esteemed in the days of Tertullian, and after him.

Thirdly, It being granted that the Christians, upon this reason did abstain
from the blood even of beasts (which is true, and easily proved) how can it be
imagined, that they should eat or drink the blood of Man, or (which is less
credible) the Blood of that Man, whom they believed, and knew to be their most
High, and only Lord God. Fourthly, If it were possible for us Men, now to drink
the very Blood of Christ, orally and literally understood, it could not in the
least advantage us in order to our Redemption, because it was not the mere
Blood of Christ literally taken; that was the price of our Redemption (although
one drop of his precious Blood was worth more than the whole World) for he shed
his Blood at his Circumcision, but that Blood was not Redemptive; suppose he
had opened a vein, and presented or offered that Blood, yet this could not have
redeemed us; neither could that Blood, which issued out of his Body in Agony
and bloody Sweat, or at his Scourging or Crowning with thorns, or that at the
piercing of his Hands and Feet; all these Bloodsheddings together could not
redeem Mankind, but the Blood of Christ, which was really redemptive, was his
Vital Blood, whereof the words of St. Peter are rightly to be understood: Ye
know that ye were not redeemed with corruptible 1 Pet. 1. 18.
things, but with the precious Blood of Christ, as of a Lamb; and St. John
declares that it was of a Lamb, considered as a Lamb slain, and we know that
the Paschal Rev. 13. ^*
Lamb slain, was the Type or figure thereof.

It was not then his mere Bloodshedding that redeemed us, but it was the
pouring out of his Life and Soul, that was the ultimate act and consummation
thereof, of which all the four Evangelists have carefully informed us. St.
Matthew, St. Mark, St. Luke, after the narration of all his grievous
Sufferings, adds this as the principal, and most concerning and beneficial to
us, that he gave up the Ghost, for Christ himself had said before, The good
Shepherd lays John 10. 11, 17
down his life for the Sheep; and, Therefore does my Father love me, because I
lay down my life; for the Redeemer was engaged, not only to perform the Law
actively in his life time, but also passively, by his death to undergo the
penalty due to the Transgressors of the prime Original Law, which was, In the
day thou eatest thereof, thou shall Genesis 2. 17.
surely die. The great Apostle often minds us of this great Truth, saying, We
are reconciled to God by the Death of his Son; To. 5 10. 8. 34. Phil. 2. 8.
and Who is he that condemns? It is Christ that died; and, He became obedient
to death. And for our remembrance and acknowledgment thereof, the holy
Sacrament was set up, as the same Apostle says, Ye show the Lords death till
he come, and Christ had before 1 Cor. 11. 26. John 15. 13.
declared, Greater love than this has no Man, than to lay down his Life for
his friend; surely his own love was the greatest love.

CHAP. XV.
THe Law of abstaining from Blood was enacted by God, in a typical reference to
the Blood of Christ, which was to be shed in after times upon the altar of the
Cross, for Expiation of the sins of Mankind, which Expiation was (before the
death of Christ) typically represented by the death and blood of certain
Creatures appointed by God, whereby the legal or ceremonial Atonement was to be
performed, for which purpose God did except, and reserve the blood of those
Sacrifical Creatures from being eaten by Men, which reason is declared by God
himself evidently (as to me seems) in these words, I will set my face against
that Soul that eats Blood, and Lev. 17. 10, 11.
will cut him off from among his People, for the life of the flesh is the
Blood, and I have given it to you upon the Altar, to make an atonement for your
Souls, for it is the Blood that makes an Atonement for the Souls, this was the
law for the Blood of the Sacrifical Creatures.

And as for the blood of other Creatures which were profane, and not to be used
for Sacrifices, their blood was also forbidden to be eaten by Men, but by
another Law Lev. 17. 13. Deuteronomy. 12. 16.
was commanded to be poured out upon the earth as water, and to be covered with
dust: this Law being but a ceremonial and Typical law must be confessed to
become void and antiquated, when the Type was fulfilled by the bloodshedding
and death of Christ, and that fully declared and published.

But then we are to enquire, what moved Apostolical Council to revive that
Antiquated law of abstaining from Blood, more than the other Ceremorials, of
Sacrifices, Circumcision, Paschal Lamb, Sabbatizings, etc. And why they imposed
this Decree or Canon upon the converted Gentiles?

1. To this we answer. First, That the Gentiles in the Pedagogy of the Church,
on purpose for compliance with the converted Jews, least they should be
soandalized or offended with Christianity it self, when they should see
Christians eating Blood, from which, themselves in the time of their Judaism,
were by their law debarred, and could not suddenly be withdrawn from so old a
Custom, until they were more fully instructed in Christian Religion; for it
might seem to them a disparagement, and a contempt of Moses and his Laws: which
reason is intimated by St. James, in that he said, Moses is read in the
Synagogues every Acts 15. 21.
Sabbath day, which he spoke in that very Council; so we our selves at our
Tables, forbear the setting on of certain meats, which our selves like, because
they would be offensive to some of our invited Guests, as Swines flesh, Cheese,
and such like. Yet this Discipline of abstaining from Blood, was not intended
to be a continual, and standing Law in Christianity, but only a temporary
Ordinance, and to last no longer than there was danger apparent, of occasioning
a Schism, or Division between the Converted Jews, and the Christian Gentiles.

2. This Discipline did as well become the mildness of Christianity, as that
old Law did the Religion of the Jews, whereby they were restrained from using
such cruelties to Creatures, as possibly might be practiced by Eating some
parts of the bodies of Beasts, whilst other parts were preserved alive; which
kind of cruelty was acted by the Romans upon the bodies of the captive Jews, at
the last destruction of Jerusalem, when they were condemned to be devoured by
Lions, or other Beasts, and were so cruelly used by the Beast-masters, that as
Josephus reported, one half of their Jos. de Bello Ju. Lib. 7.
bodies were eaten, and the other half kept alive in warm blood, for a second
meal for the Beasts.

3. This Discipline was needful in Christianity, especially in those primitive
times of Persecution, to confute those calumnies and false accusations, which
the Heathens, and Persecutors raised against Christians of their Thyestean
Feasts; as if in their Sacraments they had used to Eat the flesh and blood of
Children, which they had for that use murdered, which thing the Christians
abhorred, and to show that they were far from any such bloody practices (by
direction of that Apostolical Canon) they abstained even from the blood of
Beasts, during the whole time of the Persecutions.

4. That Discipline which was intended to continue but for the abovesaid time,
is needful, and of great concernment to be seriously considered and pondered
in these times, as a clear evidence against the semiuniversal deluge of
Transubstantiation, whereby the Eating and Drinking of the living flesh and
blood of Christ, is so fiercely and pertinaciously maintained, although the
Apostles who forbad Blood, certainly in those very times did often communicate
in the Sacrament of the Blood of Christ: Therefore they did not think that
Sacrament to be turned into blood, nor did they in the least believe that
Doctrine thereof, which is now taught; they did really and orally drink the
blood of the grape, but in no wise orally the Blood of Christ. Porpherie
sometime a Christian, but afterward Soc. l. 3. C. 19.
an Apostate Idolater, as Socrates reports, said Sanguis est esca Daemonum,
that Blood is the food of his Idol-Devils, in his Porphy. n. 13.
Book de Sacrificiis.

We should in the next place enquire, what Christ meant by those words of
drinking his Blood which he spoke, both before the Eucharistical Sacrament was
set up, and also at the Institution thereof, which we must respit for a little
time, until we have cleared some Questions concerning the Apostolical Decree
against Blood, which I have said was but a Temporary Canon, at least in part.

In that Council, and in their Rescript to the Gentiles of Antioch, three
things are forbidden. 1. Idol-meats. 2. Blood. 3. Fornication, in these words,
That ye abstain Acts 15. 29.
from meats offered to Idols, and from Blood, and from Fornication (for those
other words, things Strangled, are implied in the word Blood.)

The first of these three we are well assured, was but Temporary, because S.
Paul did soon after permit the eating of Meats brought from the Shambles,
although they had been offered to Idols, as the common custom of the
Gentile-Idolaters was in those times; and also, although the Christians did
know, that those meats had been offered to Idols; only in case any Christian
Brother should take offense thereat, then he advises to abstain, saying,
whatsoever is sold in the 1 Cor. 10. 25.
Shambles eat, asking no question for conscience sake; and though they are bid
to a feast by an Unbeliever, yet eat; But if any man 27. 28.
shall say unto you, this is offered unto Idols, eat not for his sake that
showed it.

The second concerning Blood, was also Temporary, for the reasons
abovementioned.

The third concerning Fornication was not Temporary, for it was forbidden by
the 7th. Precept of the Moral Law, and by the Levitical Law, Lev. 19. 29. Deuteronomy.
23. 17. and by the Gospel often. Neither Fornicators nor Adulterers, etc. shall
inherit the Kingdom of God; and, Whoremongers 1 Cor. 6. 9, 18. Heb. 13. 4 Ephesians.
5. 3.
and Adulterers God will judge, by which laws, both Jews and Christians were
restrained, and also the very Heathens by the Law moral, although they took no
notice thereof; therefore this law against Fornication was in force before that
Council sat, and will so continue, as long as the World endures.

But then our Question must be, why it pleased that Council to impose that
Canon Decree upon the Gentiles, seeing they were restrained before?

1. Our Answer is, that it was so ordered Gentiles which were already
converted, but all others which afterward should be converted.

2. Because those Gentiles, which then continued in their Heathenism, did not
account Fornication to be a vice or sin, having no commerce with the Mosaical,
or Moral, or Evangelical Laws, neither had they any Civil, or Municipal law in
force against it, as may appear by the most civilized, and best governed
Commonwealth of Rome, whilst it was Heathen. Even Tully himself in one of his
Orations delivered in Open Court, said, Si quis est qui meretriciis Tull. pro
Caelio n. 31.
amoribus interdictum Juventuti putet, est ille quidem valde severus -- And,
Abhorret ab hujus seculi licentia, and a majorum consuetudine atque concessu --
And, Quando hoc non factum est? quando reprehensum? quando non permissum?
quando fuit, ut quod licet, non liceret? He that thinks Fornication interdicted
to young Men is very severe, it is contrary to the licentiousness of this Age,
and the custom of our Ancestors, and their Concessions. When was it not done?
when was it reprehended? when was it not permitted? when was it unlawful to
act that which was lawful? thus he; And for former times, we find this
licentiousness to have been proclaimed in their Theaters. Plus est scortorum
Plaut. in True. Curcul. Poen. n. 37, 62, 74
fere, quam muscarum olim cum caletur maxim; and, Publica via nemo ire vetat
-- and, Mercatus meretricium apud aedem Veneris; That there were more Harlots
than flies, that Fornication was a common highway, wherein no man was
forbidden to walk, that the Temple of Venus was the market for Harlots, thus
Plautus: And a little after him Terence Ter. Adelph.
says, Non est flagitium in Adolescente scortari, etc.

The Christian Writers also took notice of this piece of Heathenism, as St.
Austin Aug. To. 10. n. 38.
testifies, De verbis Apostoli, Ser. 4. Fornicari, inebriari licite
committuntur, sed non Dei legibus, quis enim ad Judicem ductus est, quia
meretricis lupanar intravit? si uxorem habens, vitiavit ancillam, quis crimen
habet? etc. After him Salvianus says, Fornicatio Salv. de Gub. li 7.
nondum prohibita per leges Romanas, and Lupanaria aedisicant, timent ne
Homines nimis casti essent, he adds, That the Roman laws which forbad
Adultery, for removing that corruption from Matrons, yet permitted Fornication
with the unmarried Women. This Heathen practice continues even to this day in
Rome-Christian, and so it did here in England, for by K. Hen. 2. and his
Parliament, the Stews or Bordello was Stow's Survay.
permitted, and continued all the time that England held Correspondence with
Rome, until it was put down by K. Hen. 8. they had certain Signs painted on
the walls of those Houses to be known by, whereof one was a Cardinals Hat, as
J. Stow reports. Now let us return to the signification of Blood.

CHAP. XVI.
IT will not (I suppose) be denied, that the Apostolical Council did forbid the
Eating of Blood, so as is said; And that the Apostles, and the Converted Jews,
and the Christian Gentiles, did abstain from blood by virtue of this Decree;
Add yet (notwithstanding that Apostolical Constitution) the Apostles
themselves, and other Christians did drink the Blood of Christ, in that sense
which Himself meant before the Sacrament, John 6. And also in the Sacrament, of
which he said, This is my Blood, and, Drink ye all of this.

All this being true and confessed, we are next to enquire diligently, what our
Redeemer meant by this word Blood, which certainly did not signify his own
very natural Blood, literally and grammatically taken; but some other thing,
which for some weighty reason he was pleased to call Blood.

That other thing which he meant by Blood, we confidently affirm to be his
Soul, his Human or reasonable Soul, and this we doubt not to make clear and
apparent (with Gods Assistance) by the Holy Scripture, because we find by many
overtures and plain expressions, that the Life or Soul in Holy Writ, by the
Mouth of God is called Blood.

At the Creation of Man, God appointed to Adam, and so to the Ante-diluvian
Patriarks for their food, only the herbs bearing seed, and every tree, in which
is the Genesis 1. 29.
fruit of a tree yielding seed. But after the Flood, he gave to the Patriark
Noah, and his Sons, every Moving thing that lives, to be Genesis 9. 3.
meat for them; and although he gave them the flesh of his Creatures, yet so
early he forbad the Eating of the blood with the flesh, giving this reason;
Flesh with the life thereof, which is the Blood thereof shall you not eat.

The Blood (we see) is there called Life, although we know that Blood in
propriety of speech, is not the Life or Soul of Man or Beast, but only
signifies the Life or Soul; for one may loose some Blood by a wound, or
otherwise, yet the life may continue, and because the Soul it self is
invisible, therefore that which is visible is named for the Soul; and because
the blood is the companion, and also the chariot of the Soul, and because the
letting out, or spilling the Vital blood, carries out with it the life and
Soul, therefore God presently after called Man's Blood, the Blood of our lives,
which he will require at the hand of every Beast, and at the hand of every Man
(who shall commit homicide) at the hand of every man's Brother, will he require
the life of Man, by which words it appears, that Blood and Life here signify
only the Soul.

In another place, where Blood is forbidden, it is said, The life of the flesh
is in the Blood, and, The life of all flesh is the Blood Lev. 17. 11, 14
thereof, and more plainly God says, The blood is for the life thereof;
whereby it may appear, that Blood was not esteemed to be really the life or
Soul, but only to represent, or signify, or to stand for the life or Soul. St.
Austin considering that place in Deuteronomy. Deuteronomy. 12. 23.
where it is said, Be sure thou eat not the blood, for the Blood is the life;
says, Sanguis Cont. Adimant. C. 12. T. 6
pecoris ejus anima, sc. in signo, The blood of the creature is the Soul, but
only in sign, he adds, Our Lord doubted not to say, this is my body, when he
gave the sign of his Body. The same Father on the like words Lev. 17. 14.
says, Anima est sanguis, non Aug. con. Adv. legis L. 2. c. 6.
quia hoc erat, sed quia significabat, sicut dicitur Petra est Christus, Blood
is the Soul, not that blood is really the Soul, but because blood signifies
the Soul, even as St. Paul speaks, the Rock was Christ; and it is usual 1
Cor. 10. 4.
in Heathen Writers, to put blood for the Soul, and the Soul for blood, as in
Virgil.

Purpuream vomit ille animam -- And, Virg. Aen. 9.

Sanguine, quaerendi reditus, Animaque litandum,
As Hugo Grotius has observed to be frequent, Grot. de Satisf. n. 10. 14.
that because that Blood is instead, or place of the Soul often put, therefore
it is called the Soul; so that by offering the blood of Beasts, they meant the
life, or Vital blood of those Creatures killed and sacrificed.

When the Scripture says, Whosoever sheddeth Man's blood, by Man shall his blood be
shed; Genesis 9. 6.
every one knows, that by shedding of Blood in that place, is meant the taking
away a Man's life; Est animae non parcere, Isych. in Lev.
says Isychius upon these words. Judas said, I have sinned in betraying
Innocent Mat. 27. ^
Blood, he meant his betraying his Masters life to death. The Jews said, His
Blood be 25.
upon us, and our children, that is, let his death or murder be laid to our
charge. The Apostle says to his Hebrews, Ye have not yet Heb. 12. ^
risisted unto Blood, that is to Martyrdom, or loss of your lives. So when
Christ spoke of drinking his Blood, he spoke of his Soul, for so his Blood
signified, and must necessarily be so understood.

But how we can be truly said to drink a Soul, seeing the soul of Man is a mere
Spirit, and incorporeal, and therefore not literally drinkable; and yet that
these words of Christ must really be performed: How both these can stand
together, is next to be enquired.

CHAP. XVII.
THat the Blood of Christ (in those words) signifies the human Soul of Christ,
I nothing doubt, and to drink his Soul orally, is as impossible* as it is for
us to drink his Blood literally taken, which is now in Heaven; therefore (as I
have showed before) that the Eating of his Flesh signifies only the Union of
his Flesh with our flesh; so the Drinking of his Blood or Soul signifies, only
the union of his Soul with our Souls, which two Unions, viz. of our flesh and
souls with his Flesh and Soul, are so necessary, in order to the redemption of
our bodies by his Body, and of our souls by his Soul, that otherwise we could
not with Justice be redeemed by him.

This Union which seems so secret and mysterious, is declared to us by Christ
in this Figurative or Metaphorical speech of Drinking his Blood, which is all
one, as if he had said, except my Soul be united with your Souls; so as that
wine which you drink for your food and nourishment, is turned into your Blood,
and then is joined and united with your Persons, and becomes One with you,
otherwise your Souls cannot be redeemed by me; for the word Blood signifies the
Soul of Christ, and drinking his Blood certainly signifies the conjunction, or
union of his Soul with our Souls, in order as a necessary way or method, to put
us into a capacity of redemption of our souls by his Soul. For we cannot be
capable of the benefits of the Passions, death, and Obedience of Christ, except
we be One with him, both by the union of our flesh with his Flesh, and of our
souls with his Soul; because God does neither punish, nor reward one for
another, as is at Chap. 4.
large showed before.

Therefore, that the Son of God might be every way fitly qualified to be a
Redeemer of Mankind, he assumed human Flesh from the same Original that we had
our flesh, that thereby he might be a Redeemer of our flesh or bodies; and he
assumed an human Soul from the same Fountain, from which all our Souls sprang,
that thereby he might be a Redeemer of our souls, as Athanasius has observed
in his Athan. T. 3. n. 23.
Book of the Incarnation, In Redemptione corpus pro corpore, and anima pro
anima reddenda fuit, and integrum aliquid pro integro homine; He was to give
his Body for the redemption of our bodies, and to yield up his Soul for our
Souls, and his whole Man for our whole Man.

There are three Ingredients to be considered in the Redeemer. 1. His Divinity
or Godhead (for he was and is God, the most High, and the only God.) 2. His
human Flesh or Body. 3. His human Soul. By the two latter by him so assumed, as
is said, he became Perfect Man; as by the former he was, and is Perfect God.

His pure Godhead alone, and considered without his Human nature assumed, could
not be a Redeemer, because the law was not imposed upon God, or the Son of God,
as only so, but upon Mankind or Sons of Men: Nor could the pure Godhead suffer
death, which was to be suffered by the Redeemer.

Or if the Godhead had assumed only an human Body or Flesh, without an human
Soul; this could have been but a Redeemer of the Body, at most (if that) but
not of the Soul.

Or if the Godhead had assumed only an human Soul without a Body, it could not
have redeemed our bodies, nor our whole Man, as the Axiom of Divines teaches
us. Divisus Christus non est Salvator, viz. Beza Cat. Part. 2. p. 18.
If Christ had not united all these Ingredients in his one Person, his Godhead,
his Flesh and his Soul, we could not have him for our Savior.

Or if Christ had been only a mere Man, consisting of Soul and Body, as we all
do, and had not been God, he could not have been our Redeemer; because it was
only his Divinity, joined with, and united personally with his Flesh and Soul,
that gave luster, worth, and infinite value to his human Nature, so that (for
the great work of man's Redemption) it was necessary that the Redeemer should
be, not only Perfect Man of a reasonable Soul, and Human flesh subsisting, but
also with them Perfect God.

Or if Christ, being very God, had really assumed a Body, and also a Soul
otherwise, and not from his Virgin Mother; but had made a Body, and also
created a Soul for himself, which had not been derived from Mankind, and so not
united with our bodies and souls; or if his Body or Soul had come down from
Heaven (as some Heretics said) and passed through the Virgins Womb only, as
water does through a pipe, and had been only for a time an Inhabitant, or
Inmate of the Womb, and had not been really the Seed of the Woman, and the Son
of the Virgin, and the very Fruit of the Womb both in Soul and in Body, and
derived from the first Man, and the first Woman, as we all are; he could not
have been our Redeemer, because he could not be united otherwise with all
Mankind in flesh and soul, nor we with him.

For as our Union with his Flesh (which is called the Eating of his flesh) must
needs be with it, as it is the flesh of the Son of Man, which signifies, that
it must be with that Flesh or Body of his, which he assumed and derived from
Mankind, by being conceived in the Womb, and not from any other flesh or body,
which the Son of God had sometime taken on him, otherwise than by Conception
and Birth, (as is before observed in his Apparition, and converse with the
Patriark Abraham) so likewise the union Genesis 18. Suprac. 6, 7.
of our Souls with his Soul (which is called the Drinking of his Blood) must be
with that Soul of his, which was so derived from the first Man, and the first
Woman by Propagation, as all our Souls are, otherwise we cannot be united in
our Souls with his Soul, neither could he be a Redeemer of our Souls.

This Doctrine of our Union with Christ, both in our Bodies, and also in our
Souls was intimated, though something darkly (as to me seems) at the
Institution of his holy Eucharistical Supper, which is next to be very briefly
touched.

CHAP. XVIII.
WHen our Savior had a long time concealed the Mysterious way, or manner how
our Redemption was to be effected by him; and how his own proper and personal
Death, might be satisfactory to Divine Justice, for, and instead of the
deserved deaths of all Men: Yet (that he Might not leave his Disciples
altogether ignorant in so weighty a Concernment) he was pleased a little before
his death, in some measure to reveal that Secret to his Apostles, and by them
to his succeeding Church, for which purpose only, he instituted his last Holy
Supper, to be a visible Sign or Sacrament, and also a Memorial thereof in all
Generations, until his Coming again.

First therefore, He took Bread, and gave it to them, and said, Take, Eat, This
is my Luke 22. 19.
Body which is given for you; as if he had said, my Body is already to you,
such as this Bread will be to you; for by Eating and Digesting it, the Bread
will be your nourishment, it will be joined and united with your Bodies, and
grow into one flesh with your flesh, and be one Body with you.

Christ calls himself Bread, (Ego sum John 6.
Panis) because, as bread being eaten and digested, becomes incorporate or
incarnate with us; so is Christ Incarnate, or rather Concarnate with us. We
receive our Flesh from our Mothers, the bread which the Mother eats, is
converted into milk, with which the Infant is nourished, and thereby is fleshed
and grows; so that the Bread and the Child become united, and grow into one
Body.

St. Austin says concerning this very thing; Quod manducat matter, hoc manducat
Aug. Psa. 33. Ser. 1.
Infans; sed quia minus idoneus est Infans, qui pane vescatur, ipsum panem
Matter incarnat, and per humilitatem mamillae, and lactis succum, de ipso pane
pascit Infantem, That which nourishes the Mother, the same nourishes the
Infant, but because the Infant is not able to eat bread, therefore the mother
does first digest, and so incarnate the bread, and uniteth it with her own
body, and of it, by her mild and tender Breast she produces milk, by which the
Infant is mediatly so fed with the said bread.

Such is the Union of the Flesh of Christ with our flesh, because both he, and
we received our flesh from that one Original lump of the first Man, wherein
both he and we were united, and thereby he and we became one Body, just as our
food becomes one flesh and one body with that Body of ours, which we had,
before any new Addition was made to it by any new food, which is the reason why
the Scripture accounts Christ and his Members to be but one Body, as the
Apostle says; We being many, are one To. 12. 5. 1 Cor.
Body in Christ; and, We are the Body of Christ and Members in particular, and,
Ye are all one in Christ Jesus; and, We are Members 12. 27. Gal. 3. 28 Ephesians. 5.
30
of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones. By virtue of this Union, the
obedience of Christ, both Active and Passive, is, and justly may be accounted
ours, because Christ and his Members are One. And for this consideration only,
and for this resemblance only, Christ said of the Sacramental Bread, This is my
Body which is given for you.

Likewise of the Wine Christ said, This is my Blood -- Drink ye all of this. We
know that by Blood, the life or soul is signified (as is before proved)
therefore the Sacramental Wine represented his Soul; the Wine which we drink
(as well as the Bread which we eat) becomes our nourishment, and so unites it
self with our Persons, and grows into one bulk with us, and is really one with
us, and thereby it becomes to us such as the Soul of Christ is already to us;
for our souls and the Soul of Christ are really united, because his Soul, and
our souls, and the souls of all our Ancestors and Posterities ever were, and
still will be derived, and propagated from that one Original Soul of the first
Man, in whose Soul at its very Creation and Insufflation, the Soul of Christ,
and all our Souls are virtually included and united: Therefore surely, the
meaning of those words of Christ must be this, that his Soul and our Souls must
have been so united, as well as his Flesh and our flesh, that so he may be
fitly the Redeemer both of our Bodies and of our Souls; for certainly, no man
can have Redemption by him, except (as a necessary Preparative thereunto) he be
really united with him, both in Flesh and in Soul, which is that very thing
which Christ called the Eating of his Flesh, and Drinking his Blood.

This Doctrine is not new, but has been long ago taught by the School, in
those times when Truth might be declared without danger of the Faggot: For Pet.
Lombard, Sent. 4. Did. 11.
about the year of Christ 1150. (which was before Transubstantiation was
established in the Church of Rome) thus writes, Christ (says he) took on
himself the whole Nature of Man, that he might redeem the whole Man, therefore
his Assumption is celebrated in the Holy Supper, by the two Elements of Bread
and Wine. Panis ad carnem refertur; Vinum ad Animam, ut animae and carnis
susceptio in Christo, and utriusque liberatio in nobis significetur; The Bread
represents the Flesh, and the Wine the Soul, that thereby the Assuming of a
Body and a Soul by Christ, and the Deliverance or Redemption of our Bodies and
Souls by him, may be signified. So Clemens Romanus long before, Christus dedit
carnem suam pro carne nostra, and animam suam pro anima nostra, vid. f. n. 3.
in Clem. Romans

Those that imagine that the Sacramental Chalice, representh only the Blood of
Christ, and that those words of Christ, This is my Blood signified only the
mere natural Blood of Christ, Grammatically, properly, and literally taken;
such do greatly err, and mistake the Mystery, for this cannot possibly be the
meaning thereof, because (as is before said) his mere Blood was not Redemptive;
for the Act of Redemption, consisted Sup. cap. 14.
only in the pouring out his precious Life and Soul for us; so that by the
Blood, the Soul must needs be meant, and the Sacramental Wine, must needs
relate to the Life or Soul of Christ.

Those likewise that teach the withholding of the Sacramental Chalice from the
People, or Lay-Communicants, do misunderstand the meaning thereof; they
pretend, that after the pronouncing of the words of their Consecration, the
Wine is not Wine, for that the substance of Wine is quite gone and annihilated,
leaving nothing behind but only the mere Accidents, viz. the color, taste, and
quantity of the Wine, but not the Wine it self, and that the Chalice does
contain only the Blood of Christ instead of the Wine; and because they make the
People believe, that in their little Wafer-Host, the whole Christ is contained,
viz. his Body and Blood, therefore in Receiving the Host, they receive both the
Flesh, and the Blood by Concomitancy. But herein they err, in that they think
that by the word Blood, only mere blood is meant, which indeed does signify
not literally Blood, but the Soul of Christ, in which Soul if the People do not
really Communicate, that is, if their Souls be not really united with the Soul
of Christ, they cannot be in a full capacity of the Redemption of their souls
by his Soul. Besides, what need was there, that Christ should require with the
Eating of his flesh particularly, as another thing, the Drinking of his Blood;
if by Blood he had meant only mere Blood, seeing that the living Flesh of
Christ must needs include his Blood, as themselves acknowledge.

The laborious and tedious Disputes of Divines, of contrary Persuasions in
Religion concerning the presence of Christ in the Sacrament, whether it be a
carnal and corporal Presence, or only a Spiritual Presence, I conceive (with
submission to Superiors) to have been as needless, as we have found them to be
fruitless and endless; their various glosses upon the Scriptural words in that
business, have more obscured the question, as Origin said of the Exposition of
a passage of St. Paul. Hic sermo non sui nanatura, Orig. in To. 12. 16
sed interpretatione obscurior fact us est. And Maldonate, a learned Jesuit of
Mald. in Lu. 2. 34.
late observed concerning a place in St. Luke, Nescio an facilior hic locus
fuisset, si nemo eum exposuisset. They both conclude, that some Scriptures
would be more easily understood, if Expositors had not too much tampered with
them, and so verily I think of those words, which mention the Eating and
Drinking the Flesh and Blood of Christ.

The real and true Presence of the Flesh, and Blood, or Soul of Christ, is not
to be thought to be in the Elements, or Sacramental signs of Bread and Wine,
neither is there any need of, or benefit by such a Presence; but the true, and
concerning, and beneficial Presence of Christ is in, and with the Communicants,
which Presence is effected by the Union of his Flesh and Soul with our flesh
and soul, so as has been before showed.

Wherefore, if we will be content, and rest satisfied with this plain, and
easy Exposition of those words of Christ (which I firmly believe to be true,)
viz. that the Eating and Drinking of His flesh and blood, signifies only the
union or conjunction of his Flesh and Soul with our flesh and soul; all
difficulties and obscurities will be cleared without any violence to those
words of Christ. And the order and method, in which the just and merciful
Godhead proceeded in preparing, and in making a way to the Redemption of our
lapsed Nature, will be (to our great Consolation) made manifest to us.

We have seen before, how our flesh, and the Flesh of Christ have been united;
in the next place, we are now to show, how the Union of our souls with his Soul
has been wrought, and really performed.

CHAP. XIX.
IN order to the understanding of the Union of our Souls with the Soul of
Christ (which is mysteriously veiled, by an obscure description under a
Figurative Speech of Drinking his Blood,) we are first to enquire of, and to
find out the Original or Spring, whence both Christ, and we have derived and
received our Souls; For if it may appear, that the human Soul of Christ did
proceed from the very same Fountain, from which all Men in the world have
received their Souls; then it cannot be denied, that his Soul and our souls,
were joined and united in that one Original Fountain, which is the Soul of the
first Man.

For, why should it seem less credible or harder to conceive, that all Human
Souls are derived, and have proceeded from that one Soul of the first Man, than
to believe and acknowledge, that all Human Bodies, Christ's and all, are derived
and propagated from the body or lump of the said first Man? Surely no Learned,
or but Intelligent Christian will deny, that Christ, and all Men were united in
the Loins of Adam.

Now if it be enquired whence, or from whom Christ immediately received his
Soul? We answer, that he received it from his Blessed Virgin Mother, and in her
Womb, and that it was derived and propagated from her Virgin Soul, for he had
no Earthly Father, from whose Thigh his Soul could be propagated.

If it be again enquired, whence the blessed Virgin received her Soul? We
answer, that she also received it from her Mothers Soul, and in the Womb, and
so we affirm of all the souls of Men and Women, that they are propagated from
the souls of their Mothers, and that this Propagation ascends ultimately unto
Eve the first Woman, from whose Soul the Soul of Christ, and the Souls of all
her Posterity are descended.

If it be farther enquired, when Eve had, and received her Soul? We answer,
that she received her Soul with her Body also from the first Man, her Body from
his Body, and her Soul from his Soul; and whence Adam received his Soul, the
Scripture evidently declares, that his Soul was immediately Created and
Inspired by God, in these words, God breathed into his nostrils the Genesis 2. 7.
breath of Life, and Man became a living Soul.

We farther affirm, that the Soul of Adam was the only Soul that was created by
God; and also, that from that one Soul, all human Souls from that time till
now, and also until the end of the World are, and will be derived and
propagated. We read not of any other particular Soul in the Holy Scriptures,
that was immediately created by God, because, indeed all Human Souls were
Originally couched, and virtually included in that one Prime Soul of the first
Man, Inspired by God.

Good Reader, observe with me (that Bucan. p. 86. 88. Woolnor. p. 77.
which has been formerly observed by other Writers) that those words, which
our English Translation renders the breath of Life, Genesis 2. 7. might, and
should more fitly and truly have been rendered the breath of Genesis 2. 7. Chaiim.
of Lives.
Lives, Spiraculum Vitarum: Because in the Original, the word which is
translated Life, is a word Plural, and signifies Lives, it may therefore
reasonably be conceived, that the most wise Spirit of God, intended to signify
by that Plural word, that the whole multitude of human Lives and Souls, were
potentially and virtually residing in that one created Soul of Adam, and were
to be derived and propagated from thence to all Mankind, Christ and all; as
being the Spring and Fountain of all future Souls; for of him only, and of none
other it is said, that God breathed into him the Breath of life or lives.

We know that the first Woman had a Soul proper to her self, but we find not
that God did newly Create, or Breath into her a new and several Soul, because
she did receive her soul from the Man, and so it must have been produced for
weighty Reasons, and not any other way; her soul was derived from his soul; the
Godhead did not create two Originals, or Fountains of souls, nor of bodies, for
both the flesh and the soul of Eve, and of all Men with Christ also, were
necessarily to be derived from the flesh and soul of Adam; for otherwise,
although the first Man, and the first Woman were united in flesh, yet they had
not been united in Soul, except Eve's soul had been derived from the soul of
Adam, nor could the soul of Christ by any other way have come from Adams soul,
and consequently he could not have been the Redeemer of the souls of Adams
Posterity. Certainly all Men in the World are Adamites, both in respect of
their bodies, and also of their souls, so is Christ himself Ben-Adam, therefore
the Apostle calls him the Last Adam, because he was the Son of 1 Cor. 15. 45.
Adam, therefore he is called by his Fathers name.

By reason of the Union of our bodies with Christ's Body in the loins of Adam,
the Apostle says we are members of his Flesh, and by reason of the Union of
all Men's souls in that one Original Soul of Adam, the same Apostle said to the
Athenian Philosophers, that God has made of one Blood Acts 17. 26.
all Nations of Men. Blood in Scripture signifies the soul, as has been
proved before, and so I believe it does in that place, and so the meaning must
be, that God has made of one Soul all the souls of all nations of Men, which
surely is true.

For if their was a necessity, in order to the Redemption of our Bodies, that
the Redeemer must have received his flesh by Propagation from the first Man;
the like necessity must needs be for the Redemption of our Souls, that the
Redeemer must have received his Soul by Traduction from the Soul of the same
first Man, in whom the Redeemer and the Redeemed, were necessarily to have been
united in soul, as well as in body, otherwise he could be but an Half-Redeemer,
and we but Semiredempti, i. e. redeemed but in one part, or half-redeemed, for
it would prove but a Redemption of our Bodies only, and not of our Souls.

Gregory Nazianzen in an Epistle to Cledonius Naz. Orat. 51.
a Priest, which goes under the title of the 51 Oration, thus writes; The Son
of God took upon him the Nature of Man, and all that of Man, which needed help
and recovery; therefore he must needs have taken the Soul, as well as the flesh
from Man, for otherwise, he would be like to a Man, who having a sore eye, and
a sore foot, and should apply a Medicine to the foot only, and quite neglect
the eye. Thus he, so that although our bodies were well provided for by having
a Redeemer, yet the souls would want a Redemption for themselves, and so the
sentence of God would be executed on them, The Soul that sins, it shall die.
Eze. 18. 4


But the Merciful Godhead took care, both of our bodies, and of our Souls, and
therefore sent God the Son (as the Apostle says) in the likeness of sinful
Flesh, and Romans 8. 3.
for sin condemned sin in the flesh. So likewise did he send the same Son of
God in the likeness of a sinful Soul, thereby to condemn sin in the Soul; the
Lord Jesus is a Savior, not only of bodies, but of souls also, and is
therefore called by the Apostle, the Sheepherd and Bishop of Souls, 1 Pet. 2.
25.
as Moses and Aaron had formerly styled him, The God of the Spirits (or Souls)
of all Number. 16. 22.
Flesh. The Son of God was the Creator, not only of bodies, but also of souls,
and the Son of Man was, and is the Redeemer of both.

For this gracious purpose only, God did unite himself with Mankind, not only
in Flesh, but in Soul also, and thereby he became a Complete Emanuel: And this
union or conjunction of God with Man, was effected by the Propagation, or
Traduction of the Flesh and Soul of Christ, from the flesh and soul of the
first Man, as all our Bodies and Souls have been, and now are, and will be to
the end of the World. Of the Traduction of our bodies no Man boubteth, but of
the Original and Traduction of Souls great disputes have been, and yet are, of
which we are next in order to consider.

CHAP. XX.
THE Doctrine of the Original of the Soul of Christ, and of all human Souls,
and consequently the Doctrine of the Redemption of our souls by the Soul of
Christ, has been much obscured by the vain, and trifling Arguments of some
natural Philosophers; and as much by the frivolous Queries of some late
Theologues, whereas some learned Physicians (to whom Jacobus Horstius. Geor.
Horstius! Animas propagari ab animabus parentum putat Keckerman Phys. p. 630.
Truth is more beholding in this point) have with great judgment, and by their
Experiences showed and proved, that our Souls are derived by Traduction, from
the Souls of our Mothers in the Womb, (as the Soul of Christ certainly was) and
as one of them says, Instar surculi ex trunco, as a young grift sucketh life
from the stock. And the Souls of all Mothers (as is beforesaid) are derived
from the Soul of the first Man; unto which Doctrine all men, who do rightly
apprehend and understand the order and method of Redemption, to consist in the
Union of Christ with Mankind, will be driven at last to consent.

Those Men that oppose the Traduction of Souls from the Soul of Adam, demand
how it is possible, that such an innumerable company of Souls can be derived
from one single Soul, seeing the Soul is a Spirit, and indivisible, and
therefore not to be parted by Decisions, and mincings into such several
parcels; for so in time it would have nothing left to it self, but would be
utterly annihilated.

But these Men may as reasonably doubt, how so many thousands of Bodies could
proceed from that one single Body of the first Man, during the 930 years of his
life, without any diminution of the quantity or dimensions of his Body, seeing
they were all Originally in his Loins. Or how the Sun communicates his light to
every star in Heaven, without any diminution or lessening his Light; nothing is
more like the Soul than light. The Philosophers called the Soul of Man (...),
propter cognationem cum lumine, as Plutarch says, because it is Plut. con.
Colot.
so like to light, and Christ is said to Enlighten every Man, because he has
given a John 1. 9.
reasonable Soul to all Men, as Expositors agree. St. Austin resembles the
traduction of the Soul to the Light of a lamp. Ignis Aug. cont. Pelag. T. 7. n.
63
lucernae integer manet, licet altera de illa accendatur; Millions of Tapers
may receive light from one single Taper, without diminishing the light of that
one Taper; and so our Souls are propagated from that one Original Soul, without
any division or diminution thereof.

Let it be considered, that the Soul of the first Man was created immediately
by God, of which it is said, God breathed into his Genesis 2. 7. Bucan. p. 86. 88.
nostrils the breath of Life, or of Lives; this Breath of God, was Spiraculum
Omnipotens, of which the Psalmist says, By the Breath Psalm. 33. 6
of the Lord the Heavens were made, and all the Host of them by the Breath of
his mouth. The human Soul has a prerogative of its Original, above other
inferior Animals, of whom it is never said, that God breathed into them the
Breath of life. That first Soul of Man especially, was like unto Fire, as one
says of all Human souls, Igneus est Ollis Virg. Aen. 6.
vigor -- It surely had the vigor of fire, and did extend it self into the
grand Corporation of all Mankind; as one spark of fire may inflame a whole City.

The brute Creatures, ever since their first Creation, did propagate their
Souls to their kind; and to this day those Creatures do receive their souls by
Traduction from their Dams. The greatest Sciolists in Natural Philosophy,
cannot reasonably prove any other Original of those brute Souls, but only by
propagation, which yet they deny to human Souls.

It must be confessed (by Christians) that the souls of brute Creatures were at
the beginning created by God, as the reasonable Soul of Adam was; yet the souls
of Brute Creatures are mortal, but the reasonable Souls of Men are immortal;
the reason is, because the Divine Nature did personally unite it self with our
whole human Nature, which is the only reason why human Souls do not die, and
that human Bodies after death, shall rise again to Life, at the general
Resurrection. But the Divine Nature, did not so unite it self with the nature
of those other inferior Creatures, which are therefore left to perish utterly:
Of which something has been Cap. 11.
said before, and more will be said in its due place.

The prime cause of the propagation of Human souls,, is the gift of God by his
Benediction, recorded in these words, God blessed them, and said unto them, be
fruitful, Genesis 1. 28.
and multiply, and replenish the Earth. Can we imagine that this Benediction of
fruit-fulness and multiplying, should extend to flesh, or bodies only, and not
to Souls? Whereas the like blessing of fishes and fowls, enabled them to
produce and propagate not only bodies, but the whole Creatures, viz. both the
bodies, and the souls of their Kinds, of which Benediction we thus read, God
created Whales, and every living creature Genesis 1. 21.
which moves, and every winged fowl; and God blessed them, and said, be
fruitful, 22.
and multiply, etc. By virtue of this Benediction, those Creature are enabled
unto this day, to produce their kinds, both in bodies and in souls. This gift
and blessing of fruitfulness both of fowl, and of cattle, is also again renewed
after the Flood, and repeated, Genesis 8. 17. and also of Mankind, Genesis 8. 17. 9.
1.
Genesis 9. 1. God blessed Noah and his Sons, and said unto them, be fruitful,
and multiply, and replenish the Earth.

It may seem strange that those Divines, who confess the Traduction of our
bodies with the Body of Christ, from the loins of the first Man, as being
necessary for Redemption of our bodies; yet that they should deny the
Traduction of our Souls, with the Soul of Christ from the first Man, which is
altogether as needful for the Redemption of our Soul.

In the Holy Scripture, care is taken to declare the derivation of our souls
from our Parents, rather than of our Bodies, because that of Souls is more
secret than the other of Bodies. Genesis 46. 26. it is said; Genesis 46. 26.
All the souls which came with Jacob into Egypt, which came out of his loins,
(or thigh) all the Souls were sixty and six.

How Souls can be truly said to come from the loins, or thigh of the Man
(without a Figure or Metonymy) is hard to be understood, except we will thus
apprehend it, viz. that although the Souls of Mankind, being in the Womb, are
immediately, and truly derived from the souls of the Mothers; yet they are here
said to come from the loins of the Man, because the seed of Conception, which
came from the Man, has it it self Potentiam receptivam, a power or capacity of
receiving the soul or life, (though it has not Potentiam productivam, any
power of it self to produce, or introduce the Soul:) And because the Womb
alone, without that seminal conception from the Man, cannot produce a soul or
life, therefore are the Souls said to come from the loins of the Man; for there
never was, nor ever will be a Childbearing Woman, without the Cooperation of
Man or Malekind, except only that miraculous Childbirth of Christ by his
blessed Virgin Mother, which was wrought by the Holy Ghost. Nor was there ever
any Soul derived immediately from Man, but only the soul of Eve, which
accompanied her flesh The reports of Buddas and Plaeto are Fables, Hier. n. 14.
at her Production out of the side of the Man. But ever since Eve, all her
Posterity have received their lives or souls in the Womb, from the lives or
souls of their Mothers, as may appear probably by the time, when the Conception
is first animated in the Womb, which is next to be considered.

CHAP. XXI.
COncerning the time when the said Conception in the Womb, is first animated,
or enlivened with a Soul, which is called Quickening; both Philosophers and
learned Physicians, and also our experienced Matrons, who have born, and
brought forth many children, have informed us; That some Conceptions are not
quickened, but about the end of 20 Weeks, others at 15 Weeks, and some at 10
Weeks, and surely at the first instant, or beginning of the Conception, the
Soul is not presently Infused: So Aristotle acknowledges, that the soul is not
Arist. de Genesis Any. l. 2. c. 3.
then Actually in the conceived Seed, but only Potentially, so as is before
said. Now if it be granted, that our souls come from the Souls of our Parents,
and also, that they are not transmitted with the Seed from the Father; it will
follow, that they cannot in reason be thought to be propagated from the Father;
because no Man will believe, that after so long a time, whilst the Conception
remains in the womb without life or soul, and also the Man being absent, in a
far remote distance of place from the Woman (as it may, and does many times
happen) I say it cannot be imagined, that at the instant of Quickening, the Soul
or Life should wander from the Father, by a kind of Metempsychosis, or
Transmigration, unto the mothers Womb. This being impossible, it must follow,
that the Soul necessarily does proceed, and is derived only, and immediately
from the Soul of the mother, wherein, if she fail, by reason of some continued
Indisposition of the Womb, she is called Barren, and because the Animation of
the Conception is only from the Woman, therefore (because of her failing
therein) Barrenness is imputed only to the Jer. 22. 30.
Woman, and not at all to the Man, though Childless.

It is so with the Seed of Man, which is conceived in the Womb, as it is with
meat received into the stomach, which has no life in it self Actually, but it
has a power or capacity to receive life, which life it will afterward
actually receive, when it shall be really united with the former parts of the
Body, for then the life and soul will enter into it, as they did before, into
all the additional parts of our Bodies; for we see that our bodies have been
augmented by our food, and have grown into so great a bulk, from our so small
dimensions at our Birth.

This being evidently true, why should it seem less credible, that the Soul of
the mother enters into, and enliveneth her Conception in the womb; then it is
to believe and acknowledge, that the Soul does enter into and enliven the new
acquired parts of our Bodies, which have been added by our food?

The time and manner of the Soul's entering into the Conception, is thus
described by that learned Physician before mentioned; when (says he) the parts
of the Embryon are once shaped, formed, and perfected Jac. Horstius.
to that use in the womb, then does the life or soul of the Mother, together
with the Vital Spirit, proceed from her heart, and enter into that fruit of her
womb. This is the time when we receive our Souls, by traduction from the souls
of our Mothers; and this is the time of the Union of our souls with the Soul of
Christ, which Christ himself called Drinking his Blood.

That common saying concerning the Original of the Soul, Creando infunditur,
and infundendo creatur; if it be meant of every particular human Soul, is very
erroneous and untheological, and will appear anon to be Heretical; because it
is destructive of the Doctrine of Redemption, except we will confine it, and
understand it to be spoken only of the Soul of Adam, which was the first, and
the only human Soul, that ever could truly and properly be said to be so
created and infused.

Neither is the time of Drinking the Blood of Christ to be confined, or thought
to be first performed, when we receive the Sacrament thereof, because the Blood
of Christ is not really in the Sacramental Chalice, neither is his Soul there,
but his blood or Soul are in the Communicants, for this drinking of his Blood
(which is really intended by those words) must have been performed, although
the Sacrament had never been set up; for we drink the Blood of Christ at our
quickening in the Womb, because then our blood or souls, are united with the
Blood or Soul of Christ, when we are not in any capacity of Receiving the
Sacrament thereof: Therefore all the Latin Fathers, and all later Theological
Writers, although they are of several and opposite Persuasions in Religion, yet
they generally Read those words of Christ, Nisi Biberitis, which I conceive to
signify a Tense of the time past, Except ye have drank, as is observed before
of the word Eat. The flesh and blood of Christ is not now to be eaten and drank
really, for that was actually performed before, even at our Union with his
Flesh and Soul, in our Mothers Wombs.

St. Austin upon those words, Psalm. 22. Aug. in Psalm. 21.
10. Thou art my God from my Mothers belly, observes, that although God the
Father, was the Father of God the Son before his Incarnation, and from
Eternity: Yet that he could not be called the God, or the Lord of the Son, but
only in consideration of his intended Incarnation. And because, the Son in the
womb of the Virgin, assumed the whole Human Nature, and not only Flesh, nor
only a Soul, but both, therefore God the Father became his God, and his Lord,
the God and the Lord, both of his Body and of his Soul: This the same Father
diverse times observes, as namely on the 136 Psalm, and also in his To. 6. n.
17. and 19.
Polemicks against the Arians.

The Church of England evidently declares the same Doctrine, in the 2 Article
of Religion, in these words.

Christ took Man's Nature in the Womb of Art. Rel. 2.
the Blessed Virgin, of her Substance, so that two whole and perfect Natures,
that is to say, the Godhead, and the Manhood, were joined together in one
Person.

It being granted, that Christ took the whole and perfect Human Nature upon him
in the Womb; it must needs be consequently granted, that he there received his
Human Soul, because neither the Flesh alone, nor the Soul alone, can be truly,
and severally called the Perfect Human Nature. We know that the Ancient Church
accounted Athan. de Incar. n. 22. Epip. haer. 77.
them to be Heretics, who taught that Christ assumed only his Flesh, but not
his Human Soul, in the Womb of the Virgin.

The Athanasian Creed also declares, Athan. Symb.
that Christ was Man, of the Substance of his Mother -- Perfect God, and
Perfect Man. He could not be Perfect Man, of the Substance of his Mother,
except he had received both his Flesh and his Soul from her, otherwise by her,
he could have been but Semivir, i. an imperfect or half-man.

The true and real Union of the Son of God with Mankind, consists in the
assumption of his Flesh and Soul from Mankind, by which assumption, the Son of
God became the Son of Man, and by it only he is styled Emanuel. And the Union
of Mankind with Christ (which is called Eating the Flesh of the Son of Man, and
Drinking his Blood) consists only in the propagation or derivation of our
Bodies and Souls, with the Body and Soul of Christ, from that one Original Mass
and Fountain of all Human Bodies and Souls, viz. from Adam, in whose loins and
Soul all Mankind, with Christ himself, were in the beginning United.

CHAP. XXII.
THE Doctrine of this Union, is so necessarily to be joined, and considered
with the grand Doctrine of our Redemption by Christ, that it cannot reasonably
be by us apprehended, how our bodies or our souls, can with Divine Justice be
redeemed by him, without the mutual Union of his Body and Soul with our bodies
and souls. For if Christ must necessarily have taken his Flesh of Man, because
he might not otherwise destroy, or condemn sin in the flesh; the like reason
will hold concerning the Soul, that he might not condemn sin in the Soul, but
by assuming his Romans 8. 3
Soul from Man. The Soul by sin fell as much as the Body, or rather much more;
for the transgression of Gods Command, was principally or soly the act of the
Soul, the body did but only execute that which the Soul prescribed and
dictated. The body by it self could not sin, more than a sword by it self can
wound, or a pen alone can write. St. Austin often tells us, and truly, Non
peccat, nisi Anima, only the Soul Aug. de Genesis lib. 10. c. 11.
sins.

The same kind of Arguments, by which the Fathers answered and confuted those
Heretics, who denied the traduction of the Body of Christ, from the body of
the first Man, are as firm and strong to confute the other sort of Heretics,
who denied the propagation of the Soul of Christ from the Soul of the first
Man; both which Heresies depraved, and indeed destroyed, and nulled the
Doctrine of Redemption of our Bodies and Souls, by the Body and Soul of Christ.

Epiphanius, and after him St. Austin report this as the Heresy of
Apollinarius, Epip. haer. 77. Aug. in Joh. Tract. 47.
that he affirmed, that Christ had no Human or Intellectual Soul, but that his
Godhead supplied all the Offices, and actions of a reasonable Soul in his Body.

St. Jerome and St. Austin charge Origin, Hier. n. 42. Aug. Epist. 27.
that he had taught, that the Souls of Men were more Ancient than their Bodies,
and that they were created before their Bodies, and that they came from Heaven,
this error of Origin appears in his Third Book Orig. Per. Arch. l. 3. c. 3.
and Lib. 4. c. ^
Perj. Archoon, in which he agrees with the Opinions of Plato and Aristotle,
who had said, that the Souls of Men were not derived from their Ancestors, but
came from without (...).

These erroneous Opinions, disturbed the doctrine of our redemption by Christ,
which Redemption necessarily presupposes an Union of our souls with the Soul
of Christ, which Union cannot otherwise be found, but only in the Original
Fountain of all our Souls, viz. in the Soul of the first Man.

Let it now be considered, whether the present vulgar Opinions, and the
Doctrines of some Divines and Neoterick Writers, be not altogether as
destructive of the doctrine of Redemption, as those Errors of the abovesaid
Ancient Heretics were, seeing these Men affirm, that human Souls are by
thousands daily and newly Created, whereby they busy the Godhead with new
Creations of Souls upon the quickening of every Conception, whereby they
manifestly declare, that they deny the Union of our Souls, with the Soul of
Christ in the first Man, and consequently deprave and nullify the doctrine of
the Redemption of our souls by his Soul. Certainly there must be a real Union
of our Souls, as well as of our bodies with the Body and Soul of Christ, for
otherwise he could not be a Redeemer of our bodies and souls.

Yet in this Doctrine concerning the Union of the Soul of Christ, with the
Souls of us Men (which we have here asserted) we are not so to be understood,
as if we meant or affirmed, that there is but one particular Soul of all Men,
which was the error of Averroes an Ethnic Philosopher, about 1150 Years of
Christ, as Tolet reports; Tolet. in 3. Phy.
neither do we approve of the Opinion of some Ancient Platonicks, who said,
there was but one universal Soul of all Creatures in the World, which they
called Animam Eusebius, de Prae. Naz. Orat. 37. Aust. de de Temp. Ser. 143.
Mundi, which error is taken notice of by Eusebius, Nazianzen, and Austin, who
said, that those Heathens having a glimmering apprehension of the Ubiquity and
general Cooperation of the Divine Spirit with all Creatures, called it a Soul.

But our Assertion does not in the least gainsay the Plurality of the Souls of
Men, more than the Plurality of their Bodies; for as multitudes of fruits and
flowers, may grow and proceed from one Tree, or one Stalk, and yet, we say not
that they are but One fruit, or but one Flower: So, although all our Bodies,
and all our Souls, sprang from that One Body, and that One Soul of the first
Man, yet there are, and will be innumerable particular Bodies and Souls. We
affirm only this, that all human Bodies are but the offspring of that One
first Body; and all human Souls, are but as the Daughters of that One Original
Soul of Adam; neither does the Plurality of particular Souls, hinder the Union
of that multitude in their prime Original Fountain, wherein they were radically
joined.

The Jews used to say, that Adams Soul was in David, and the Scripture says,
that The Soul of Jonathan was knit with the Soul 1 Samuel 18. 1. Acts 4. 3^.
of David; and that the multitude of Believers were of one Soul. These sayings
may be rightly understood of Union, not only in regard of mutual Love, Concord
and Affection, but also in consideration of that one Original Soul, from whence
all of them sprang; for the Soul of Adam branched out not only to David, but to
Christ, and also to all Men in the World, and in this consideration the Soul of
Jesus our Redeemer, is One with our Souls, being so knit and united with ours
as is said, therefore the holy Man Macarius thus writes Macar. Hom. 14.
thereof. Vna anima est Ecclesia apud Deum, quia habet Communionem cum Sponso
coelesti, The Church is as one Soul with God, having Communion with her
Heavenly Spouse, or one Soul is a Church, as St. Paul says of the Husband and
Wife, (as the resemblance of Christ and his Church.) They two shall be one
flesh -- and, I speak of Christ and his Church, and Nazianzen calls Basil,
Dimidium Ephesians. 5. 31 Naz. Orat. 19.
animae.

As for those speeches concerning Union of Souls, which fell from Heathen
Writers, I take to be meant only, of the amity and concord of Friends, as that
of Horace and Virgil, Hor. Od. 3. Pers. Sat. 5.
-- Animae dimidium meae. And of Persius,

-- Quant aque nostrae
Pars tua sit cornute animae -- And of Ovid,
Qui duo corporibus, mentibus unus erant. Ovid de Trist.

And of Aristotle concerning two Friends, (...). For these Heathens Diog. in
Vit. Arist
did not understand the mystery, nor the great concernment of the Union of our
souls, with the Soul of Christ, our God Incarnate.

CHAP. XXIII.
WE have showed before, that by reason of the Union of the flesh of Christ with
our flesh, Christ and his Church are looked on, and considered as one Body, and
are so called by the Apostle, Ye are the Body of Christ. Much rather may we 1
Cor. 12. 27.
be said to be One with Christ, by reason of the Union of his Soul with our
Souls; for otherwise the great Mystical Body, or Church of Christ, wanting the
life or soul of her Head, would be but as a Carcass or lifeless Body, neither
could we be perfectly and completely so, as the Apostle says of the Galatians,
Ye are all one in Christ Jesus, except Gal. 3. 28
our souls be united with his Soul; nor can this Union of Souls, be any other
way apprehended, or possibly effected, but only by the Propagation of His and
our Souls, from the Original Soul of the first Man.

The Doctrine of the Propagation of all human Souls, from that one, and only
created Soul of Adam, is not new, but was anciently taught and received very
early, in the Primitive Church, although it was not fully established by
general consent.

Tertullian in his Book de Anima, clearly Tert. de Anima. Cap. 27.
declares, Animas ab Adamo esse, that our Souls are derived from Adam; and
again in the same Book he says, Omnis Anima in Adamo Id. ibid. Cap. 40.
censetur, donec in Christo recenseatur, Every Soul is censed, or accounted in
Adam, until it is new enrolled and accounted in Christ. St. Jerome
acknowledges this to be the Doctrine and judgment of Tertullian, and he
farther adds, Animas Hier. ad Marcellinum Ep. 82. To. 2. p. 254.
ex traduce, maxima pars Occidentalium autumant, ut quomodo corpus ex corpore,
sic anima nascatur ex anima, etc. The greatest part of the Western Church
holds, that as our body was derived from the Body, so our souls do spring
from Souls. St. Austin also disputes very eagerly for the Traduction of Souls,
yet neither he, nor St. Hierome Aug. Epist. 28.
would then presume to determine that difficult question.

Pelagius the Heretic was one of them, Aug Epist. 157.
who denied the Traduction of Souls from the first Man, and presuming thereon,
used that denial as a principle Argument against Traduction of Original sin
from our Parents, for surely, if our Souls be not derived from them, and so
originally from Adam, we should not be liable to the guilt of his sin, because
the Soul only is the seat of sin, as is before showed.

They that affirm and believe, that God does yet daily create new Souls, may
consider whether they do not thereby manifestly fall into the Heresy of
Pelagianism, Aug. To. 3. n. 72.
for by denying the propagation of the Soul (which they confess of the Body)
they consequently disbelieve the Traduction of Original sin, which cannot be
derived by the body alone, because only the Soul is the seat, and subject of
sin.

Let them also consider, whether (by affirming, that God does daily create new
Souls) they do not thereby charge God to be the Author of sin, seeing sin is
only in, and by the Soul?

Those Scriptures, which they use to allege for the daily creation of Human
Souls, will in no wise serve their turn. As God gives life to all, and, In him
we live, Acts 17. 25. 28.
and move, and, We are his offspring; for it is true, that God gives life,
although it be by Propagation of life, and we live by his gift, and we are his
offspring; because the first Soul was created by Him immediately, from which
first Soul, all succeeding Souls were, are, and still will be derived.

That Saying in Ecclesiastes, the Spirit (or Soul) shall return to God who gave
it. This Eccles 12. 7.
does not in the least gainsay the Doctrine of Propagation of souls from Adam's
Soul, nor does it at all prove a daily Creation of new Souls. We confess that
God gave the first Soul to the first Man, immediately by himself, and we
affirm, that God daily gigiveth Souls, but this daily Gift is not by way of any
new Creation, but only by way of Propagation from that First Soul, which
Propagation is effected by his daily Concurrence, and Divine Cooperation with
his Creatures, and not otherwise. And so also, God daily is Operative in making
Human bodies, although not by way of Creation, but by his Concurrence, and
Assistance with the ordinary means of Generation; So that if we be asked, who
made us? We may truly answer God.

These are the ways whereby God has wrought from the Beginning, until this
Day, and this upon a most Merciful design, viz. To make us capable of
Redemption, by the Union of our bodies and Souls with the Body and Soul of the
Redeemer.

Hitherto (Good Reader) we have endeavored to show the Union of Christ with
Mankind, which we have said to consist in this, that Christ has assumed both
his Body and his Soul, from that One, and the same Root and Fountain, from
which, all Men with Him received their Bodies and Souls, and wherein He, and we
were originally united.

Now we are necessarily to enquire, how Christ can be quitted (more than we)
from that stain of corruption, which is propagated from the loins of the First
Man, and is called Original sin, of which we are next to consider.

CHAP. XXIV.
CHrist being the Redeemer, must necessarily be untainted, and free from all
sin, not only Actual (which no Christian will deny him to be) but also from
Original sin, otherwise he cannot take away the sins of others, but would
require another to take away his sin.

The legal Type of the Redeemer was, a Lamb without blemish, and himself being
Ex. 12. 5:
the Evangelical Antitype, is just so described by St. Peter, A Lamb without
blemish 1. Pet. 1. 19.
or spot; he is described by the Prophet, to be lead like a Sheep to the
slaughter. Sheep Isa. 53. 7. 2 Cor. ^. 21. 1 John 3. 5.
have no sin; St. Paul says, he knew no sin. St. John says, In him was no
sin. And that it was needful for us, that he should be so, we are taught by
the Apostle; Such an High Priest became us, who is holy, harmless, Heb. 7. 26.
John 8. 46.
undefiled. Christ challenged his most malicious Censurers, the Jews, Which of
you convinces me of sin? But how it came to pass, that Christ could be free
from that Universal contagion, wherein all the other whole Race of Mankind are
involved, is now our Question.

To this Question, I have answered at large in one of my former Books, and I
trust Satisfactorily, which I shall not need Lib. 3. c. 11. De Incarn.
to rehearse fully in this place, but only to point at the most concerning, and
principal Passages thereof summarily, and as briefly as I can.

The First sin, that was charged on our first Parents, was their eating of the
forbidden fruit; but that sin was not by them transmitted to their Posterity,
for we did not eat thereof; nor can their Posterity be charged with the Sin,
but only with the Curse: For that first sin made them, and all their
Offspring, Christ and all, liable and subject to the Curse denounced upon sin,
which was Mortality; In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die.
Hence Genesis 2. 17.
it is, that not only we, but Christ also, by taking his Flesh and his Soul
from them, became liable to death, yet He without sin; therefore the Apostle
says, Christ was made Gal. 3. 13* 1 Cor. 15. 21, 22.
a Curse for us; and, by Man came death; and, in Adam all die. The Curse was
Death, and that Curse fell not only upon us, but also upon Christ, as St.
Austin very truly observes, that Christ derived mortality, from the substance
and mortality of his Aug. cont. Julia. Pelag. l. 5. To. 6. 23.
Mother, but not sin. The Apostle says, The wages of sin is Death; the Death
of Christ, was the wages of the sin of Adam and Eve, but not of the sin of
Christ, for he had no sin; therefore the Apostle very warily declares, That
God sent his Son in the likeness Romans 8. 3
of sinful flesh, he does not say, in the likeness of flesh, for his Flesh was
real and true flesh, not only a bare similitude thereof, as the Manichees said,
but he says, Aug. Epist. 74.
in the likeness of sinful flesh, that is, although the Flesh of Christ was
not sinful, yet it was like the flesh of other Men, which is sinful in them,
He was in all parts tempted Heb. 4. 15.
like as we are, yet without sin.

The second sin of our first Parents, which is properly, that Original sin,
which is from them propagated, and transmitted into all their Posterity, which
have proceeded from the loins of Adam, and the womb of Eve, by the ordinary
natural way of Copulation and Generation, is that sin, which the Scripture
calls Concupiscence or Lust, in which lust or concupiscence, all children are
begotten, and the lust wherein they are begotten, is transmitted into them from
their Parents, and remains in them as long as they live.

He that will carefully peruse the History of our first Parents, both before
and after their fall, may discern, what sin of theirs that was, which they left
as an inheritance, entayled upon all their Posterity, which naturally proceeded
from them. We find that before the Fall, they were both naked, Genesis 2. 25.
and were not ashamed; but after the Fall, they were ashamed and afraid,
because they were naked, and hid themselves, and to cover that, of which they
were most ashamed, they made them Aprons of fig leaves, Perizomata, which
served to cover Genesis 3. 7, 10.
only their Secret parts, not their breasts, or faces, or hands, and this they
did, because in those Parts their lust or concupiscence appeared, for before
their Fall, lust had not entered into them, neither had the Man known the Woman
till after the Fall, which is noted first, Genesis 4. 1. where it is first said,
Adam knew Eve his Wife, and she Genesis 4. 1.
conceived and bare Cain, who was the First-fruit of their Concupiscence.
Afterward it is said, Adam begot a Child in his own likeness Genesis 5. 3.
-- and called his name Seth, (that is) in a condition of sin, like unto his
Father, for although Seth was a good Son, yet he, as much as his brother Cain,
was begotten in sin, in lust and concupiscence, wherein also, all the
succeeding Generations from Adam and Eve, unto this day are begotten, viz. in
lust and concupiscence. And this Concupiscence is that Original sin, whereof
the Psalmist says, I was shapen in iniquity, Psalm. 51. 5
and in sin did my Mother conceive me. The Apostle says the same of all Men,
in consideration of this Original sin: Death passed To. 5. 12.
on all Men, for that all have sinned. Diverse Expositors put this gloss upon
those words (excepto Christo) they meant that all have sinned, except only
Christ, which is true, and may thus be cleared.

The Generation of Christ, was far different from all other Generations of
Mankind, for it was without Copulation and carnal Concupiscence, because he was
born of a Virgin, without the Cooperation of Man, which was so designed by the
Godhead, on purpose to preserve the most holy Body and Soul of the Redeemer
without sin; which being of so great concernment for our comfort to be known,
was foretold by God himself first, then by his Prophets, then by his Angel; The
Seed of the Woman must bruise the Serpents head, no Genesis 3. 15
mention of a Man, Behold a Virgin shall conceive, Isa. 7. 14. Jer. 31 22.
and bear a Son; And, The Lord has created a new thing in the earth, a Woman
shall compass a Man. 1. A Woman only, without a Man. 2. Created, therefore it
was the Extraordinary and Omnipotent work of the Creator. 3. A new thing, for
it never was so before with any Woman, nor will ever be so again. 4. To compass
a Man, 1. to enclose a Man-child in the womb of a Woman, and she a Virgin,
utterly unknown by Man, this is the peculiar Work of the Godhead. Although
Turks say, they have always such Births among them; therefore Christ's Birth of
the Virgin was no Balaeus n. 54. Hier. con. Jovinian. n. 14. Mat. 1. Luke 1.
marvel. So Buddas the Indian was falsely said to be the Son of a Virgin.

This Prophetical Woman, was the blessed Virgin Mary, who was declared by the
Heavenly Angel Gabriel, to be a pure Virgin after her Espousals, and after the
Conception, and after the Birth of her Son Jesus. And because the Mother of the
Redeemer, was necessary to have been a Virgin, therefore all our Church Creeds
declare the same, That Jesus was born of the Virgin Mary, That he was Incarnate
by the Symb. Apostol. Nicaen. Athanas. Ambros.
Holy Ghost of the Virgin Mary, That he was Man, of the Substance of his
Mother; and in the Symbolical Hymn of S. Ambrose, and St. Austin, it is said of
him, When thou tookest upon thee to deliver Man, thou did not abhor the
Virgins Womb. In all these, notice is given of the Woman, and Virgin, without
any mention of Man; the Redeemer was to be answerable to Melchisedech, Heb. 7.
3. Aug. To. 7. n. 3.
(...), as St. Austin says, Sine Matre Deus, sine Patre Homo, he was God from
Eternity, of the Substance of the Father, but Man, of the Substance of his
Virgin Mother only, from whom he received both his Fesh and Soul.

CHAP. XXV.
IT being granted or presumed, that Christ received both his Flesh, and his
Soul from the blessed Virgin Mother, and she hers from our first Parents. We
are yet farther to enquire, how his Flesh and Soul Dominicani and Franciscani
differunt in hac r^.
could be free from that Original sin, except we will also grant, that his
Mother was conceived without sin, which I suppose, no Learned, or but
Intelligent Divine will affirm, it being accounted by St. Austin, one of the
Pelagian Herisies, who yet refused Aug. cont. Pelag. T. 7. n. 50.
to dispute against her in that Question, Propter honorem Domini, as he says.

Our Answer is, that although Christ derived both his Flesh and his Soul from
the Virgin, and although his Virgin Mother was certainly conceived in sin, and
therefore not without Original sin, during her whole life; yet Christ did not
with his Flesh and Soul, derive any sin from her, because he was not by her
conceived in sin, viz. in lust or concupiscence. For Original sin is Aug. T. 3.
N. 73.
not derived into us, by receiving our Flesh and our Souls from our Mothers,
but only by concupiscence and lust, whereby ordinary Conceptions are produced.
But Christ was conceived of the Virgin, by the Holy Ghost, without man, and so
without lust, and therefore without any sin, which is the reason rendered by S.
Austin, Nulla concupiscentia carnali Aug. in Enchir. T. 3. n. 58
seminatus est Christus, ergo nullum peccatum Originaliter traxit, i^ That
because Christ was not begotten, or conceived in carnal lust, therefore his
Conception was without sin; so Isychius answers, Christi humanitas munda est,
ut quae non genita est ex Viri Isych. in Levit. Cap. 14.
immunditia, Christ's whole human Nature was clean, because not begotten in
uncleanness; so that although both the Flesh, and the Soul of the Virgin Mother
were stained with Original sin, yet the Flesh and Soul of Christ sprang from
her, without her sin, because he was conceived without carnal Copulation and
Lust.

Sometimes (we know) worms are bred in men's Bodies, and derive their flesh and
bulk from them, yet it would be ridiculous to say or imagine, that these worms
draw original sin from those Human bodies, because they are therein bred,
without any copulation or carnal concupiscence. Herod was eaten of worms, which
were bred Acts 12. 23.
in his own body, yet those worms by that Generation, did not derive any sin
from Herod. And if now any Man should be miraculously produced, and formed out
of another man's Body, he should not thereby attract any sin, because such a
Production would be without copulation and lust, as Aquin. 1. 2, 9, 81. Art. 4.
Orig. T. 2. N. 44. Aug. in Psalm. 21.
Aquinas determined.

Origin in his 14 Homily on St. Luke, and St. Austin on the 21 Psalm, and in
other places, both of them do expound those words of David, Psalm. 22. 6. I am a
worm, and no Man; to be meant of the Conception of Christ. Quia vermis non
aliunde, sed in corpore Origo est, because Christ was bred in the Body of his
Mother without Copulation, as worms are in other Bodies, and therefore without
sin. Eve her self was made of Adam's Body and Soul, without any Copulation or
lust, and therefore without any derivation of sin; indeed her Extraction was
before the Fall, and before Concupiscence was entered into the Man, which yet (I
conceive) would have so been, although the Woman had not been so made, till
after the Fall of the Man.

For certain then, the blessed Mother of our Redeemer was a pure Virgin, until
the Birth of her Son Jesus; but whether she continued and persevered in her
Virginity, until her death is not necessary, or much pertinent to be
considered in this Question, it being a full, and sufficient argument of the
pure and sinless Conception, and Birth of Christ, that he was born of the
Virgin Mary, during her Virginity. Mariam Joseph concubitu nec cognoverat, nec
cogniturus erat. August. To, 7. N. 52.

Yet in the Primitive Church, both Eastern and Western, it was generally
received as a Truth, that she persisted in her Virginity to her death. (...),
the Greeks said, and the Latins, as Austin declares, Aug. de Catechi. Rudib.
c. 22. Tc. 4.
Maria Virgo, concipiens, pariens, moriens. It was so near an Article of their
Faith, that such as denied her perpetual Virginity, as Helvidius in St. Jerome,
and Jovinian Hier. con. Helv. Au. To. 7. n. 55. Epiph. Haer. 78.
in St. Austin, were accounted Heretics, and such are out by Epiphanius in his
Catalogue of Heresies, under the title of Antidicimarianitae with us, since her
departure, she is called to this day the Virgin Mary.

There is a Prophetical Allegory recorded Isa. 29. 11.
by the Prophet in these words, The Vision of all is become unto you, as the
words of a Book that is sealed, which Men deliver to one that is Learned,
saying, Read this I pray thee, and he says I cannot, for it is sealed. This
Allegory is thus unriddled by St. Chrysostom, Chry. n. 59 Greg. Neo. n. 2.
and before him by Gregory Neocaesaria (except one of them, or his Scribe
borrowed it from the other) they expound it of the Virgin Mary, and Lyranus
says, it was indeed L^ra in Ice.
meant of the secret Coming of Christ.

The Book signifies the Virgin Mother, the Sealing of it was the design of
God, to preserve her in a Virgin Estate to be (...), a living Palace, and
Temple to entertain God; the Man to whom this Book was delivered, signified
Joseph, who is said to be Learned (sciens literas) because he had a former
Wife, and also Children by her, (as some say) yet he could not, or might not
open or read this new Book, because it was sealed, or kept shut, for a great
and Heavenly purpose, such as is before said. Thus they, just so St. Ambrose
and St. Austin, expound that Vision of Ezechiel, concerning the shut Gate, by
which Ezekiel. 44. 2.
no Man might enter, because the God of Israel has entered in by it. This Gate
signified Mary, who was semper intacta, Joseph vir non Ambr. n. 49. Aug. T. 10.
n. 51.
transit per eam, Deus Israel ingressus est eam. The Virgin Mother, is often
called by the Fathers Porta Coeli, and a Book has the name of the Writer, as
the Eunuch read Isaias, Acts 8. 28. And Moses is read every Sabbath Day. Acts
15. 21. Aug. Ps. 121.
St. Austin calls himself a Book, Nos sumus Codex eorum qui legere non
noverunt. So the Virgin Mary is that Book.

This I trust is enough, to show the meaning of those Mysterious words of
Christ, concerning the Eating of his Flesh, and Drinking his Blood.

The CONCLUSION.
HItherto we have showed the Real Union of Christ with Mankind, both in Flesh,
and in Soul, and the Modus or manner, how it is brought to pass. And that it
does not consist in Eating, and Drinking the Sacramental Bread and Wine, for
without that Men may be Redeemed and Saved; but not, except they Eat the Flesh
of the Son of Man, and Drink his Blood.

Now for Conclusion, I shall only enquire, what effects and issues are produced
by this Union, which is signified by Eating and Drinking.

And these I find to be Two. 1. Immortality of all Human Souls whatsoever,
because all Men, good and bad, are united with Christ in Soul. 2. The
Resurrection of all Human Bodies, both of holy and unholy Persons, because all
are united with Christ in Flesh. Both the effects may clearly appear by the
words of Christ.

For First he says, Except ye Eat the Flesh, John 6. 53.
etc. ye have no life in you; therefore they that have so eaten his Flesh, etc.
have life in them.

Secondly, In the very next words he says, Whosoever eats my Flesh, and drinks
my Blood, 54.
has Eternal Life, and I will raise him up at the Last day. 1. Eternal Life,
is meant of the Immortality of all Human Souls. 2. Raising up at the Last day,
signifies the Resurrection of Human Bodies at the last Judgment.

From these Premises we may easily collect, that because all Men, both Good and
Bad, are really united with Christ, both in Soul and Flesh (as has been proved
before) therefore all Men, both good and bad, shall have Eternal life, viz.
Immortality of Souls, and Resurrection of Bodies.

If it be questioned, whether the Damned may be said to have Eternal life,
because they have been united with Christ, so as is said?

We answer Yes. For their Souls are Immortal, as really as the Souls of the
Blessed, and their Bodies shall be raised to Life at the general Resurrection,
as truly as the Bodies of the Saints; both the Blessed and the Damned, in
Bodies and in Souls, shall then have Everlasting life, the one in happiness,
the other in Misery.

And although the Miserable State and condition of the Damned (as Beza says)
Bez. Cat. p. 31.
is not worthy to be called Life, and is therefore called Eternal Death, and
Everlasting Damnation, yet it is such a death as is called Mors sine morte, and
(...), it Aug. T. 13. n. 31. Letan. Longa sic morte necabat, Virg. Aen. l. 5. 1
Cor. 15. 26.
is a living death, and endless living in misery; it is a life, though worse
than death, or annihilation, and such an everlasting life as Devils have. The
mention of Everlasting fire, implies everlasting Bodies, and in that it is
said, that Death is to be destroyed; this argues, that then there will be no
more Dying, and therefore it is said, The Dead shall be raised incorruptible;
And this mortal shall put on Immortality, and this is true, both of the Good,
and of the Bad, for all must stand before the Judgment Seat of Christ; and Romans
14. 10. Apost. Nicaen. Athan.
this is confessed in all our Church Creeds. The Resurrection of the Body, and
Life Everlasting, and that we look for both, and that all Men shall rise with
their Bodies, and shall give an account; All, therefore Good and Bad.

This being evident, we are further to enquire, what is the efficient, or true
cause of the Immortality of Human Souls, and of the Resurrection of Human
Bodies, more than of the souls and bodies of other inferior Creatures, although
their bodies and souls were at first Created by God, as ours were; and
therefore the Mahumetans say, that there shall be a Resurrection of Brute
creatures, as Armachanus reports; and Arm. f. 161.
Heathens said, that in their Elysium, a place was for Birds, as Ovid. Amorum,
L. 2. Eleg. 6.

Colle sub Elysio nigra nemus illice frondet, Ovid. Amorum li. 2. El. 6.

Vdaque perpetuo gramine terra viret.
Si qua fides dubiis volucrum locus ille piarum
Dicitur, obscoenae quo prohibentur Aves.
To this our Answer is, That because Human bodies and Souls, are united with
the Body and Soul of Christ, in the first Original Soul and Body, therefore our
Souls are Immortal, and our Bodies shall rise immortal; but so shall not the
other Creatures, because they are not so united. The reason is clearly declared
by Christ himself in these words, He that eats me, even he shall live John 6.
57.
by me. For as the Body and Soul of Christ are now Immortal, because united
with the Divine Spirit, as himself says, I live by the Ibid.
Father, so our Souls are, and our Bodies shall be Immortal, because they are
united with the Body and Soul of the Son of God; and this, not by virtue of his
mere Soul, and his mere Flesh, both of them being of themselves but Creatures,
but because his Soul and Body are, and ever were personally united with the
Divine Spirit, or Godhead; that is it only, which caused this kind of Vitality
in all Mankind, for of his mere Flesh alone Christ says, The Flesh profits
nothing. Joh. 6. 63
But of the Spirit or Godhead, united with his Flesh, he says, It is the
Spirit that quickneth, the words that I speak unto you, they are Spirit, and
they are Life; and therefore the Apostle says of the whole Person of Christ,
The last Adam was made a quickening 1 Cor. 15. 45.
Spirit, that is, He was made so by Union with the Godhead, for the Flesh of
Christ alone was mortal, but by this Union, it became both Vital and Vivifical.

They that say, that our Souls are Immortal only by Creation, being Reasonable
Souls, and should have been Immortal, though God the Son had not united himself
with our Nature. These to me, seem to gainsay the words of Christ, for it is
not by the Reasonabless, but their Union with the Soul of Christ, that makes
them immortal: I suppose, they will not say, that our Bodies shall rise from
death, only because they are human Bodies: No, for both these are the effects
of this Union, which Christ called the Eating his Flesh, and Drinking his
Blood, and nothing else; and therefore St. John says, God has given to us
Eternal Life, and this 1 John 5. 11. 12.
Life is in his Son; he adds, He that has the Son has Life, and he that
has not the Son has not Life.

To this most Holy Son of God, and Son of Man, our ever blessed Redeemer and
Savior, together with the Eternal Father, and the Divine Spirit of both,
Benediction, Honor and Thanksgiving for ever and ever. Amen, Amen.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS.
Chapter. 1. THE Union of Christ with Mankind in Adam, in order to our
Redemption, signified by the Eating and Drinking the Flesh and Blood of Christ;
the different understanding thereof, by Romanists, Lutherans and Zuinglians,
from the Church of England. 2. The signification of eating of the Tree of Life,
of the Tree of Knowledge, of Manna, of Sacrifices, and of the Paschal Lamb. 3.
That Eating the Flesh of Christ, is not meant of Oral Eating, of St. Peter's
Eating, paralleled with our Eating of Christ. 4. That the necessity of our real
Union with the Flesh of Christ, is called Eating; how we are united with his
Body, and the benefit thereof. 5. The Doctrine of the Fathers concerning our
Union with the Body of Christ; of his Body natural and mystical. Of the
Subjection of Christ 6. Why this Union is described, by eating the Flesh of the
Son of Man, and not rather of the Son of God. 7. That the Redeemer was
necessarily to be the Son of Man, and also the Son of God. 8. Why this Union is
expressed by such Tragical words, of eating his Flesh, and drinking his Blood.
Why the Primitive Church mingled water with Wine in the holy Chalice. 9. The
practice of some Heretics, in eating Human flesh in their Sacrament, compared
with the Doctrine of Transubstantion. The calumny of Anthropophagy charged upon
Christians, and removed. 10. That this Eating the Flesh of Christ is now to be
done, for that it was performed at our first Conception in the Womb; that the
Fathers, and all other Latin Translators, render those words of Eating the
Flesh of Christ, otherwise then we do. 11. How our Union with the Flesh of
Christ, is more beneficial to us, than our Union with the flesh of the
Patriarks, Prophets and Apostles. 12. Of Eating the Flesh of Christ
Spiritually, what is meant by it, and whether such an Eating be sufficient to
the right end. 13. Of Eating by Faith; whether believing the Articles of Faith
be that Eating, which is thereby meant. Of those words of St. Austin, Creed and
Manducasti, how to be rightly understood. The three states of Mankind. 14. Of
the Blood of Christ, that it is not literally to be understood, nor to be drank
Orally. 15. Of the forbidding of Blood, by the Law and the Gospel; that it was
but a Temporary Discipline. Why Fornication was forbidden to the Gentiles
converted by the Apostolical Council. 16. That the Blood of Christ, signifies
the Life, or Soul of Christ. 17. That Drinking the Blood of Christ, signifies
only the Union of our Souls with his Soul. Of the 3 Ingredients in Christ, The
Godhead, Flesh and Soul. 18. To what end, and special purpose the Holy Supper
was instituted; the abuse by witholding the Chalice from the People; that the
corporal Presence of Christ is not in the Saments, but in the Communicants. 19.
That the Soul of Christ, and all other Human Souls are derived from the
Original soul of Adam; that the Doctrine of daily Creation of new Human Souls
is erroneous; that our Souls proceed immediately from our Mothers, and in the
Womb. 20. Of the Traduction or Propagation of the Soul of Christ, and of all
other Human Souls from Adam. Some doubts and objections cleared; The true cause
of the Immortality of Human Souls, and of the Resurrection of our Bodies, more
than of brute Creatures. 21. Of the time when Conceptions receive life and soul
in the Womb, which is called Quickening. Of Barrenness. That the Union of our
souls with the Soul of Christ, is at our Quickening in the Womb; the Doctrine of
the Church of England therein. 22. That the Soul of Christ must as necessarily
have proceeded from Adam, as his Flesh; Of some Heresies, which gainsayed the
Traduction of Souls; The Doctrine of daily Creation of new Souls examined. 23.
The judgment of the Fathers concerning Traduction of Souls; The error of the
Pelagians therein, and the evil consequences thereof. 24. That Christ was free
from Original sin, although his Soul and Body were derived from Adam. 25. That
although the Mother of Christ were conceived in sin, yet her Son Jesus was free
from her Sin, and how. That she was a pure Virgin at the Birth of Christ. That
her perseverance in Virginity to her Death, though it is true, yet it is not
necessarity pereinent to this question. Conclusion. The Effects of our Union
with Christ, viz. 1. The Immortality of all Human Souls. 2. The Resurrection of
all Human Bodies, which are called Eternal Life, and Raising at the last Day.

FINIS.

