THE French Conjurer. A COMEDY. As it is Acted At the Duke of York's Theater.
Written by T. P. Gent.

Serpit humi tutus. Licensed,

Aug. 2. 1677. To. L'ESTRANGE.



LONDON: Printed for L. Curtis, in Goat-Court on Ludgate hill. 1678.

THE BOOKSELLER TO THE READER.
AS Prefaces are commonly nothing to the purpose, even so little an Author as a
Bookseller may venture to write one. And to show you that this is as modish an
Epistle as most are, I do assure you, it has as little in it as any you ever
read. In the first place I have nothing to say about the Play: for as the
Author stood upon no Reputation in the Acting of it, so he has none to defend
in the Publication. Nor has he any thing to say about the Critiques: for as he
never intends to trouble the Stage again, he has no occasion of begging their
Favors in Reversion, and securing of Votes beforehand. And for his Brother
Poets, he has nothing to say to them neither; no, not so much as to rail at
them. And last of all, the Author has nothing to say for himself, nor I for
him; and so I am

Your Humble Servant.

PROLOGUE.
Since it is the Women's Play, I hope you will excuse
Whatever we bring, because it comes from us.
Consider what the Stage has done, and Plays,
Of all things, most deserve your love and praise.
And, Gallants, though you are but seldom good,
Yet to us women most of all you should.
No sooner comes a Beauty here in play,
But strait your Coach and six takes her away.
And you who cull the Flock, should be so kind
To comfort the forlorn you leave behind.
Besides, no sooner are your follies known
But Fop on Stage is strait so lively shown,
Nay, and his Picture too so ugly done,
'Twould fright him into sense. Thus Plays are writ
To breed you Mistrisses, and teach you Wit:
And, Gallants, 'twere ill-natured, I protest,
To like the Birds, and yet destroy the Nest.
But if in spite you will still grow worse and worse,
I will e'ne give you this one hearty Curse:
May all the mighty Sums you ever sent
Your Mistrisses, be on your Valets spent;
And when at Nine months end the Miss grows sickly,
May none of all the Brats you own be like ye.
Actors Names.
Avaritio, A rich old covetous Spaniard. Mr. Jevon. Claudio, A young noble
Spaniard. Mr. Crossby. Dorido, In love with Clorinia. Mr. Gillo. Horatio, His
Friend. Mr. Norris. Truro, Claudio' s Servant. Mr. Pursevall. Monsieur. Mr.
Anth. Leigh. Audacio, Horatio' s Bravo. Mr. Richards. Pedro, A
Gold-wire-drawer. Mr. John Lee. Valerio, Avaratio' s Son. Clorinia, Avaritio' s
Daughter. Mrs. Barry. Leonora, Pedro' s Wife. Mrs. Hughs. Sabina, Servant to
Claudio. Mrs. Norris. Scintillia, Clorinia' s Maid. Mrs. Eliz. Leigh. Millia, A
Maidservant to Claudio. Servants, Bravoes, Watchmen, Messengers.


The Scene Sevil.

THE French Conjurer.
The first ACT.
Enter Senior Claudio alone. Claud. WEll, I am resolved to win this pretty
Creature, whatever it cost me: I Will spend the value of half a Spanish
Plate-Fleet, but I Will have her.

Enter Sabina. [He embraces her. Dear Sabina, welcome my little Princess; if
thy Cargo consists of that dear treasure Hope, unlade, unlade: what news? no
sign, no light, no glimmering? what hopes? tell me.


Sab. Senior Claudio, question not the success of your design; for I have made
such a progress already into it, as will admit of no obstruction.


Claud. Fly to the relation of it.


Sab. Well, thus it is: Your dear Leonora, and the fool her Husband, takes it
for granted that I am Servant to my Lady Abbess of the Covent of St. Sylvester;
and under that character I have been several times with them for gold-wyre for
the use of the Covent, as I pretend. The advantage they hope from the custom of
the Covent by my means, gains me a very favorable reception.


Claud. And the charge of it, Sabina, I will not grudge to bear; thou may
command my whole Estate upon this Errand.


Sab. Well then, if I do not deliver this Fort, with all the Outworks belonging
to it into your hands, and before this night be over, may I never bring kind
couple together again, but live as poor and wretched as a Confessor in a
Garrison, and as shabby as a Bawd in a Pillory.


Claud. And if thou do, be consident to be as happy as I can make thee.


Sab. Marry, Senior, and my own happiness is so material a thing, that should I
omit any thing that might gain it, I wish all the Curses of an Ash. wednesday
may fall upon me.


Claud. I fear, Sabina, you will find it a more difficult piece of service
than you yet apprehend: for she is so tainted with that morose Spanish gravitie
of ours, that she put the Slight upon the Charms of Treats and Presents.


Sab. Then she is no English woman, I dare swear: for, as I am informed, Treats
and Presents meet with no opposition there. I have wished my self in England
many a time.


Claud. Why so, Sabina?


Sab. Why, Senior, it is the Land of Privilege for women: the very daughter of
a Laundress there, after she bears the honorable title of a Miss, expects, nay
commands Attendance and Equipage suitable to a Duchess. And for the men, they
are such lovers of change of Faces, that it is thought if there were a Colony of
Lapland, Witches transported thither, for the sweet sin of Variety, they would
sometime be courted for Beauties. And now I talk of Variety, how do you think,
Senior, I might pass there?


Claud. You are pleasant, Sabina; but all this adds nothing to my affairs:
therefore prethy remove the Scene from England into Spain, and tell me, shall
my dear Leonora


Sab. Well, Senior, and now you put me in mind of England, I cannot choose but
pity your case, that such a noble young rich Don as you should be put to that
toil, that charge, and that trouble, for the obtaining such a paltry creature
as a Citizens Wife. An Intrigue with a Citizens Wife in England, is as common
as a Frolic at a Carnival here, and has full as little danger in it. There Is no
locking up their Wives, nor engaging whole Families to punish their frailties.
If a Gallant be caught in the fact by a Wives Brother, nay, or a Husband
himself, he may as easy come off for Adultery there, as a man may for Murder
here. The Gallant gets but out of the way for sanctuary, and the Wife gets her
Parents to make up the Breach, at worst, but to pay a new Portion, and all is
well. The kind Cit uses his Wife that wrongs him, as he does the man that robs
him; he had rather have his stolen goods quietly again, than to hang the thief
and loose them.


Claud. Well, but to my business.


Sab. Aye, aye, to your business; you shall have her, you shall have her: I am
already so forward in my projection, that


Claud. Kind wench!


Sab. She Is your own, and so your Servant Sir. Expect to see me come loaded
with the best news you ever heard in your life: Such a Mistress, and such a Plot


Claud. Hark you, one word more.


Sab. Your Servant, your Servant.


[Exit. Claud. Whirz! -- Well, if her wit be as fleet as her heels, the Devil's
in it if I miscarry. This is the nimblest little Bawd I ever met with: Most of
her profession are such heavy bundles of filth, that the very sight of the
nauseous Caterer is enough to spoil a man's appetite to the Venison.

Enter Servant. Sir, there is a Monsieur came from Madrid would speak with you.


Claud. Go fetch him in.

Enter Dorido and Horatio. You are come in a very fortunate minute.


Dor. Why, Senior?


Claud. Faith, to give me your approbation of a Monsieur I have sent me from
Madrid.


Hor. Dam your Monsieurs, I hate 'em.


Claud. Faith I am no admirer of 'em my self; but the Ambassadors kindness I
could not refuse.

Enter Monsieur and Truro. Well Gentlemen, how do you like my Frenchman?


Dor. There Is a head of hair like the Forest of Arden.


Hor. And a pair of Breeches like the Crim Tarters Pavilion. The French and
English are such Prodigals, that you shall have a French Monsieur, or an
English Lord, bestow more in clothing themselves and Footboys, than would
completely robe all the Infantry belonging to one of our Spanish Armies.


Dor. Senior Claudio, if you do not put the change upon his Dress, your whole
Fortune must go to purchase him Ribbon, Pantaloons, and Perrywigs.


Claud. Fear not that: I intend that one yard of Cloth shall make him a whole
Suit, and one Mode serve him his life.


Hor. I would gladly know the reason of the mutability of those people: I have
seen a French Courtier in twelve several Modes in one day.


Dor. The reason I Will tell you: They make an advantage by it.


Claud. An advantage? prithee how?


Dor. They have gained such an influence over the English Fops, that they
furnish them with their French Puppy-dogs for Valet de Chambres.


Claud. And I have heard of an English Captain that threw up his Commission
because his Company would not Exercise after the French Discipline. But your
opinion of my Monsieur.


Dor. Gad, mine is, that one born and educated in the very bowels of the
various Modes of France, and one that has lived among the Belly-gods of
England, can never make a fit Servant for the gravity and severity of our
Spanish Dress and Diet.


Claud. Take the Monsieur in, and let the Tailor and Barber be sent for, and
bid 'em be sure to put him into a right Spanish dress. Here Is a Bush sit for a
Signe-post, and there is a pair of Breeches so large, that the motion of 'em is
enough to raise a Hurricane. Sirrah, let his Breeches be made straight, and
stufft with Whalebone, to reduce his Limbs into a Spanish Posture. These
Monsieurs walk and salute as though their Joints went on hinges.


Mons. Let me pray give te little more room in te Breek, for te varre good
reason.


Claud. Your reason.


Mons. Fait me have to var sore Breek. Oh te damned Osteler tat sent a me from
Madrid on te damned trotting-horse; and te pockie Spanish Gypsey in te ditch,
Morbleau.


Claud. Well, I am satisfied with your reason; your Breeches shall be a little
larger.


Mons. Me confess te var great Obligation.


[Exeunt Mons. and Serve. Claud. Well, I find I shall have a hopeful Servant of
this Monsieur; but before I have done with him, he shall be able to give
lessons of Frugality to both the Courts of England and France.


Exeunt. Enter Pedro and Leonora. Ped. We are infinitely bound to my Lady
Abbess for her good custom.


Leon. So are we to her Servant Sabina. Well, that is an innocent virtuous
Maiden, on my Conscience.

Enter Sabina. Look, Husband, where she comes. Welcome, dear Sabina, how does
my Lady Abbess?


Sab. She is well, and making heavenly preparation for her self and all her
good friends.


Ped. I am glad to hear that; then I hope we shall not be forgot.


Sab. Be confident of that.


Ped. Then, Wife, we will even leave that tedious troublesome work of heavenly
preparation to that good Lady; for she understands the knack of it better than
we: besides, she has nothing else to do.


Leon. Good Husband, talk not so profanely.


Ped. Good Wife, by your favor, is it not a little unconscionable for a man to
be put to the Trouble of making provision both for this world and the next too?


Leon. Oh fie upon you for a wicked man!


Sab. Well, Senior Pedro and Leonora, I have a request to you both, from my
Lady Abbess.


Ped. What is it, Sabina? but no matter what it is, for I will grant it before
I know any further: So will you, Wife, will you not?


Leon. But however, Sabina, let us know my Ladies commands first: It is not
discreet to subscribe to a blank.


Sab. It is to bear my Lady company to morrow, being the Midsummer-feast: And
this, I hope, Leonora, you will not refuse.


Leon. I were to blame, if I should.


Ped. Nay, thou deservest to be cursed by Bell, Book and Candle, if thou do.
But have a care, Wife, that you do not return as some Puritan Ladies have done,
who will not admit of carnal converse with their Husbands, because wicked and
profane, and pretend a command from the Spirit for it; which in my conscience,
if there be such a thing as Divinity in Matrimony (and Faith that is a question,
as the world goes now) such a command must come from the Devil.


Leon. Do you think, Husband, that my Devotion can ever injure my Love or
Obedience?


Ped. I hope not, Wife; but you must pardon me if I a little fear it: for I
have observed that those who are so passionately in love with Religion, never
love any thing else: All other duties must be slighted for that. You shall have
a Wife shut her self up for a whole day to prepare for an evenings Vespers, and
then unconscionably deny her Husband a whole nights Benevolence to prepare for
a mornings Lecture. Out upon her!


Leon. Well, Husband, if you fear that, I Will stay at home.


Ped. No, go, and take my Prayers along with thee, that thou may return so
severe in Sanctity, that thou may be able to work Miracles, whilst I get an
Abbots Estate by showing 'em.


Sab. Devotion destroy Obedience, Senior Pedro? in that you are mistaken: I
have as much Zeal as may justly title me Religious, yet it never obstructed my
duty to my Lady, or love to my Friend: A hundred Prayers a day I never omit;
and I think that may be called Zeal.


Ped. Yes marry, and the height on it too. Thou exceedest me Ninety eight: two
short Prayers a day I can make a hard shift to run over, and I think that is
enough in Conscience for a man that never designs himself a Factor in Piety. I
did at a high Festival once, but venture at the trouble of Four Avemaries
extraordinary, and it threw me into a Fever of six months after.


Sab. But Sir, the Gold Wyre. I shall be chid for staying.


Ped. I Will step and fetch it.


[Exit Pedro. Sab. I shall think the time long till I see you in the Monastery:
You will find a Reception there you little expect.


Leon. Indeed, Sabina, every minute will be an age to me, till I am at that
pious Feast.


Sab. You Will meet such warm devotion there, let me tell you, you will have a
heavenly entertainment.


Enter Pedro. Ped. Here Is the Gold Wyre. Was there ever such Obligations thrown
upon wretches of our mean condition? Well, Wife, we are the happiest people in
the whole world: Such a Customer, and such a Lady Abbess -- I cannot but think
how she will tickle thy sweet imagination with her heavenly Company.


[Exeunt. The Scene opens and discovers Truro the Tailor and Barber dressing
the Monsieur in a Spanish habit; and all the while they are dressing him he
swears to himself. Mons. Journee Morbleau; oh Diabolo, Diabolo, etc.


Trur. Prethy Monsieur be patient; look in this Glass, and be so wise as to
grant this dress much better than Pantaloons and Perriwigs.


[He looks in the Glass. Mons. Begar, matter Fashner, te Devil take you for mine
Breek; my foy, me must do my beseness in te Breek.


Tail. A pox on you; and be glad you have Breeks to do your business in.


Mons. Well, me vill make te varre great complaint to Senior Claudio.


Tail. If you do, the next Breeches I make you, shall be so straight that they
shall be laced on.


Trur. But hark you; what shall we do for Mustachioes?


Barb. I have an artificial pair will do as well, till his own grows up.


[Puts him on a beard. Mons. Te little Vig and te grand Mustach, be var fine
tings for te Spanish Commodity. Begar, var me in London in it is garb on St.
Taffies day, me should be hang on te Signe-post for te Jack-a-Lent.


Trur. I wish he had been hanged, before he came hither, that it might have
stopped his journey.


Mons. Now me be te right Spaniard.


Tail. Yes marry are you, and by the virtue of that dress may challenge as much
freedom as any he in Sevil.


Barb. Your Mustaches secure you against all affronts.


Mons. My foy, var fine; ten tare for your Matter Circumsiser -- and tare for
you te damned Fashner.


[Bents one, and kicks the other. Exeunt Barber and Tailor. Enter Claudio. Claud.
What Is the matter here?


Mons. Begar me be var glad you be come to Fashner and Barber.


Claud. What have they done?


Mons. My foy, mine Breek be much te straight, and te Mustach so great, tat it
much be trouble to sup the Pottage, Morbleau.


Claud. Your Breeches must be straight to put your legs and whole body into a
right order. Come, let us see you walk.


Mons. Be not it is var well?


[Walks. Claud. Is not that better than going and saluting as though your body
were dis-joynted, and every limb taking leave of one another? Truro, how do you
like the Monsieur now?


Trur. So well, that when I die I Will make him my Executor.


Mons. Indeed, Truro, me give te var great thanks for te civility.


Claud. You are beholding to Truro, Monsieur; and, Truro, you have a great deal
of reason to esteem the Monsieur, for he is recommended to me for a man of
Parts, and a great Prosicient in the study of Astrology.


Trur. Oonds, does he look like a Conjurer?


Mons. None my foy, me be no Conjure, but me have te little acquaintance wit te
Star.


Claud. That is an Art I have a kindness for. I must propose a Question to you;
if you can give me satisfaction in it, you shall command what respect you
please.


Mons. And begar if me give you not te var great satisfaction, let me nere be
dressed A-la-mode again. What be te Question, Senior?


Claud. Whether or no I shall gain the thing I hope for? That Is all I will say
at present: a dark Question I must confess; but the Resolution of it will gain
you the greater Reputation.


[Monsieur pulls out an Almanac. Mons. My foy, Senior, it is Question be deman
in te hour of Venus, tarefore it must be for te woman. To morrow me will tell
you more.


Claud. Well, be sure you do. Be gone, be gone all.

[Exeunt Truro and Monsieur. Enter Sabina. Methinks, Sabina, I read hopes in
thy very looks.


Sab. Do you so, Senior? That Is an argument your eyes are good, that can read
at this distance without Spectacles.


Claud. Be quick, and tell me what you have done, Sabina.


Sab. Done! I have made Leonora, and her Husband both, believe that my Lady
Abbess expects her company to morrow in the Covent. She has promised to be
ready when I call her; and I will here promise to convey her into what room of
your own house you please to have her. When I have done that, do you manage the
rest as you please.


Claud. Dear Sabina, do this, and thou shall drein me into Gold: do it, and
thou shall find me^ as generous as a Miser on his deathbed.


Sab. Then fear not commanding what woman you please. Those Ambassadors from
Peru and Mexico negotiate more Love-affairs, than all the Ministers of Cupid
put together. But, Senior, what stranger was that I see in the Family?


Claud. That Is a French man presented to me by the French Ambassador, and a
great Astrologer.


Sab. I must needs see him, and talk with him.


Claud. I Will bring you to him.


[Exeunt. Enter Truro and Monsieur. Mons. What te Devil, must me feed on noting
but te lang Sleeves, straight Breeks, and grand Mustach? Begar me do not like
te diet var well.


Trur. Pox choke you, what would you have? Have you not already eat about three
parts of a Pilchard, besides a dish of Vegetives? when half a one use to serve
me above three days.


Mons. Damn te Pilchar, a barrel would be noting in my stomach. Oh te Anglitar,
te boon Anglitar, me never break mine Fass tare, but with half dozen Pigeon,
Three four Chicken, good strong Beer, and half dozen bottle de Wine: Was not
tat var boon, Truro?


Trur. Boon? a Devil on you; if all this went to the making of a Breakfast,
what the Devil must your Dinners and Suppers be? That damned English stomach of
yours will never make a fit Soldier for the Low Countries. Thou will never be
like the brave Castilian, who can carry as much Provision in his Mustaches as
serves him a Campaign of six months.


Mons. Begar, me be so hungry, as tat me vill to my Closet and make complain to
the Star, journee.


[Exit. Trur. Thou may gaze at 'em long enough, before thou fill'st that
unmerciful wem of thine.


Enter Sabina. Sab. Did you see the Monsieur, Truro?


Trur. Had you come a little sooner, you had seen a pretty War between him and
his ravenous stomach. He is so hungry, that he is gone to Breakfast with Mars,
Jupiter, and Venus; where his food will be nothing but heads and tails of
Dragons. But if the Celestial Cook dress 'em up in foul dishes, he destroys
his pocky squeazy French stomach.


Sab. Where is he gone?


Trur. Into his studious Closet to stuff his Lunatic head, since he can get
nothing for his belly.


Sab. Pray direct me to him.


Trur. Come, follow me then. Well, if there be such a thing as Astrology, a
State-policie amongst the Stars, and this French fool be an Astrologer, the
Celestial government has not over-wise headpieces for Privie-Councellours.


[Exeunt. The second ACT.
Enter Clorinia and Scintillia. Clor. OH, Scintillia, what a part have I to
act? To gain that little opportunity we have, I am forced to appear willing to
live and die in a Nunnery, to humor my Father's covetous resolution of saving
a Portion by me. Though I am satisfied, I cannot live without my dear Dorido.


Scin. Madam, Love was never subject to any Law, nor did ever call to its
counsel Duty or Reason; and if so, why should you bring your Obedience to a
doting old Father, in competition with the love and preservation of your self
and Dorido? Let the Sacred Knot be tied, Madam, and then farewell all dispute.
Whether would you sacrifice your self to a peevish old Father, or make your
self happy in an accomplished loving Husband? Come, be ruled by me; stear the
nearest course to your own bliss.


Clor. I thank thee, Scintillia, for thy advice, and I will use all the means I
can to follow it. But prithee what is a clock, Girl?


Scin. About Ten.


Clor. About that hour I expect Dorido. Prithee see if my Father be busy in
discourse with that Gentleman that came to traffic with him for Pieces of
Eight.


Scin. I go.


[Exit. Clor. If Dorido come but at this luckie minute, I shall have the
opportunity of letting him into the house; a blessing we rarely meet with. My
Father, when he is within, watches me; when he goes out, locks me up for fear of
being stolen; and when he goes to bed, takes the keys up with him: So that our
stolen interviews are no nearer than from a Balconie, or through a Window; when
iron bars and stone walls maliciously interpose.


Enter Scintillia. Scin. Madam, if Dorido comes now, you are secure. Your
Father is as safe as if he were in Heaven: He is within, counting his Bags at a
large round Table spread with Gold.


Clor. Then I Am safe: His soul and body are both charmed to that Circle. Oh
that Dorido were but come! Hark, one knocks, that must be he.


[Scin. opens the door, and enter Dor. who runs and kisses her hand. Scin. Oh,
Madam, the house is alarmed! Your Father is a coming.


Clor. Step in here.


[Shuts him into another room. Enter Avaritio, with a Bag under his arm, and
another in his hand. Avar. Oh, Daughter, did you not hear a noise in the house?
I am consident somebody was attempting to rob us.


Clor. Indeed, Sir, I heard no noise that disturbed me, till I heard you.


Avar. Why up so late, Girl?


Clor. Why, Sir, it is but Eleven.


Avar. Time for young Girls to be in bed.


Clor. Indeed, Father, I fell a reading my Lady Sylvanes account of a Religious
life; and it so pleased me, I had quite forgot my self.


Avar. Alas, poor Clor. thou art always thinking of the Monastery. I protest
this Religion does so run in her head! Well, have patience, the time draws nigh.


Scin. Yes, to marry Dorido.

[Aside.
Avar. Well, good night, Clo. So, so, haste, haste to bed, Girls.


[Exit. Clor. A good night to you, Sir.


Enter Dorido. Dor. I hope he had no mistrust of me.


Clor. No, no, this is but the effect of his Fear, and the product of his
Dreams. He dreamed last night of his being robbed to day; and he is so great an
observer of Dreams, that whatever impression he takes in his sleep, is never to
be removed when he wakes.


Scin. Hark, Madam, a fresh alarm. He is returning again.


Clor. And if he find you here, we are ruined. Oh, Sir, be gone.


Dor. Must I go -- I cannot -- But if I do, spite of the watchful eyes of an
obdurate Father, my soul shall stay behind --


Clor. Farewell, my faithful Dorido. Time I hope hereafter will be more kind to
us.


Dor. Were I not consident of that, I Would stay and dare my fate.


Clor. Oh, Sir, make haste!


[He kisses her hand. Dor. Once more, and I am satisfied against all affliction.


[Exit. Clor. Why did my fate this pleasing Scene begin?

Just show me bliss, then take it back again!


[Exeunt. Enter Truro and Sabina. The Monsieur is discovered in his study at
his Globe. Trur. Look where he sits, like the man in the Moon with his bundle
of sticks at his back, peeping into the Heavens as if he were acquainted there;
when, in my conscience, he is as great a stranger there as I am.


Sab. Prithee call him.


Trur. It Is to no purpose: His soul is got into the body and bowels of the
Stars.


Sab. However call him.


Trur. Monsieur, Monsieur, are you at leisure? have you done breakfasting with
the Stars? if you have, this friend of mine would speak with you.


Mons. Donna Sabina! Oh my varre good friend, velcome.


Trur. I Will even leave you together.


[Exit. Mons. What be your business!


Sab. I have a Question to propose.


Mons. What be your Question? it is be de var good hour of Luna.


Sab. I am concerned in an affair for Senior Claudio, and would gladly know
what success I shall have.


Mons. Oh, oh, me will tell you presently.


[He takes a Figure, looks on it. Sab. Dear Monsieur, make what haste you can;
for I am to be at Senior Pedro's the Gold-wire-drawer, about Three a clock: Oh
that fair Wife of his! Claudio shall have her. Good Monsieur dispatch.


[Monsieur starts up. Mons. Begar, me was so intent on te Figure, tat me forgot
Sabina; but now me will give you var great satisfaction. It Is about te woman, te
fair woman.


Sab. It is, dear Monsieur, a Beauty.


Mons. She be te married woman, and her Husband have te relation to te Gold
trade.


Sab. He is a Gold-wire-drawer indeed: A blessing on thy prophetic Spirit;
this can be nothing but Divine Revelation. -- But Monsieur, for a confirmation
of your judgment, describe her to me.


Mons. I will. Hole -- it is be a woman of te middle size, inclining --


Sab. Inclining to tallness.


Mons. To tallness: And as for her hair, it be --


Sab. Black.


Mons. Var black, her visage var --


Sab. Round.


Mons. Round.


Sab. Oh heavenly, this is fine!


Mons. Let me see, her nose pretty size; but she have a mark on her --


Sab. On her chin. You say right, Monsieur.


Mons. On her chin, and a mold on her --


Sab. Left cheek. Very right again -- prodigious --


Mons. Her left cheek. Shall I proceed, and tell her private marks?


Sab. No, no, Monsieur, you have described her as exactly as if you had been
married to her. But to my main business, shall I gain this woman for Senior
Claudio?


Mons. Me vill tell dat var quick. Here be Sol and Luna in Conjunction in te
seven house, var boon; Jupiter and Venus look on te Ascend wit te good grace.
Begar, if he not get her, me will turn eiter te Physician or Divine, rail
against te Star, and all toes tat give te credit to deir prediction.


Sab. Well, Monsieur, I know what I know: You must deal with the Devil.


Mons. O fee, fee! no Diabolo -- wit te Star, dat be all.


Sab. Well, certainly you must have the very soul of Prophecy -- such a man --
Well, you are sure he shall gain her? --


Mons. Fait, te more sure of tat ten te Pope be of his salvation.


Sab. Nay then I Will never question it. Well, dear Monsieur, adieu. You shall
have more of my Company. This Art is such a bewitching thing; and I do so love
a man of Parts! Well, dear Monsieur, adieu.


Mons. Well, well, adue, adue.


[Exeunt. Enter Avaritio, Clorinia, and Valerio. Avar. Will Senior Claudio be
here to day?


Val. Yes, Sir, I expect him.


Avar. He shall be welcome. I protest I have not seen him since his return from
Flanders.


Val. I suppose you have heard of the worthy deeds he has done in those parts.


Avar. Indeed, Son, I have not heard of braver actions done by any man.


Clor. Who is this, Sir, that you give such a Character of?


Avar. Senior Claudio, Child.

Enter Claudio. Senior Claudio, welcome. I protest you are so welcome to me --


Claud. Senior Avaritio, I have no question of it. The fair Clorinia!

Madam, the world is not so just in that Character it gave of you, though very
honorable. Your Beauty I find is much above what common fame has proclaimed
it.


Clor. Senior, you are a Courtier, and therefore have the privilege to flatter
without wounding Reputation or Judgment.


Avar. Well, Senior, for all that Beauty you lay to her charge, she is resolved
for a Nunnery.


Claud. A Nunnery, Sir!


Avar. Resolved upon it to a miracle.


Claud. Yes, where my friend Dorido acts the part both of Lady Abbess and
Confessor.

[Aside.
Avar. But what do you say to this resolution of hers?


Claud. Faith, Sir, I say she does well in it; for she is too Divine for any
service but Heaven's.


Avar. Now to try my Daughter, I will get Claudio seemingly to persuade her
from a Monastic life.

[Whispers in Claudio's ear, but speaks aloud. Good Claudio, see what arguments
you can use to her to persuade her from this Covent-voyage: I would willingly
have her marry, that she may make me an aged Grandfather.


Clor. It shall be none of my fault if you be not one.

[Aside.
Claud. At your request I Will use my interest.


Avar. But I Will watch your -- Now for the trial of my Daughters heavenly
inclinations.


[Hearkens to them. Claud. Madam, why so violently bent on a Nunnery! I grant
it may correspond with the Laws of Heaven, but not of Nature: for she
undoubtedly designed you for a Mother of a most glorious Issue, or she would
never have robbed both Heaven and Earth for your composition. Can you imagine,
Madam, that so much Beauty was designed to be concealed like a Taper in a Tomb?


Avar. Good, I profess, Don. Now let us hear what she will say to this.

[Aside.
Clor. Senior Claudio, desist -- You must allow, were I Mistress of a far
greater share of Beauty and Parts than those you flatter me with, it were
profaneness in you to say they were ill disposed on a religious life.


Avar. Oh my blessed Child! I see thou art not to be shaken.


Claud. Come, Madam, I must be plainer with you: I know you love Dorido, and
let me beg you to love him well.


Clor. Yes, I will love him, and love him truly, love him as I ought.


Avar. What does she say?

[Aside.
Clor. I Will pray for him: That is the best and truest love, and that is the
only love that I can pay.


Avar. Enough, Clor. enough. Come, Senior, I heard all. Oh my best Girl! Well,
this Religion is a sweet thing.


Claud. Why, did you hear us? If you had not interrupted me, I had made
astrange discovery.


Avar. As how, Senior?


Claud. Only that this very Dorido that has been so long suspected for a
Loverof hers, is so strangely possessed --


Avar. With what?


Claud. Nay, they may even go together; never were two so well paired.


Avar. Paired? how, Sir?


Claud. Nay, they hit one another humors so exactly --


Avar. Pray, Sir, be plainer, I do not understand you.


Claud. Why, do I talk Riddles to you? I warrant you, you have not heard then
that Dorido designs for a Covent?


Avar. Lord, Sir, not I, I profess.


Claud. Why it is all the talk of the Town. Not heard on it!


Avar. Not a syllable.


Claud. Are you in earnest?


Avar. Why, Senior, as I hope to be saved, you are the first man that ever told
me on it.


Claud. Alas, Sir, it has been his private design this Seven years, only he
durst not make it public in his Fathers lifetime, because his violent Father
was so absolutely against it. But now his Estate is in his own hands, the world
shall not hinder him.


Avar. Is It possible, Senior? Nay then I Will give him the greater freedom with
my Daughter. I profess he was the only man I feared.


Claud. This news is so stale, that I am half ashamed to tell it. I have 2000
l. of his in my hands already, for the building of an Hospital. He Is not a man
for this world, I can assure you.


Avar. Well, Senior, I applaud him; he is a prudent wise ingenious man, take it
from me. This building of Hospitals is a fine thing. Truly I designed to build
an Hospital my self when I was a young man, but my Father, as thou say, was
absolutely bent against it. Building an Hospital! You shall stay and dine with
me for this good news.


[Exeunt. The third ACT.
Enter Truro and Sabina. Trur. A Pox take that nitty confounded French man, he
has talked and stargazed himself into more favor with my Master, than any
true-born Castilian can ever expect to do with all his faithful service. How
often has my Master condemned the English for being such Apes to the French,
and now himself becomes guilty of as great a folly!


Sab. I hope not so, Truro.


Trur. Do you not see, that nothing is to be done in our Family, before
application be made to the Monsieur for advice and counsel?


Sab. Hold, Truro; he shall never command in chief there: I expect a
Quarter Masters place at least.


Trur. Still we must be in the damned English fashion, a Whore or a French
Rogue must command the whole Family.


Sab. What do you say?


Trur. Faith, Dona Sabina, I am glad to hear you are like to have so great a
power in the Family.


Sab. Truro, it shall be never the worse for you.


Trur. Well, but as I was saying before, you see that the great Wig must be
worn again, in despite of all opposition; the grand Mountach, the grace and
beauty of a right Spanish face, must now, Turk-like, be circumcised. Nay, the
gravity of our Breeches, which for so many ages have scorned all change, must
now, within their own Dominions, be outfaced with profane Pantaloons: and all
this, because my Master is bewitched with his Astrologer.


Enter Claudio. Sab. Senior Claudio, the Monsieur does so stick in Truro's
stomach, that except you command a Peace, Wars will ensue.


Claud. The Monsieur merits all the freedom I give him; but did he not, my
actions shall admit of no control.


Trur. Sir, I have known you the most violent against the French, of any Don in
Spain; but I see you are resolved to make the world believe the Monsieur is a
Conjurer: for certainly nothing but Magic could make this alteration in you.


Claud. No disputes, but call him in. I suppose by this time he is in his
A-la-mode again.


Trur. If he be, Sabina, have you a care of him.


Sab. Why so, Truro?


Trur. The air of his great fluttering Wig, and the waft of his Pantaloons,
will blow your Coats about your ears.


Sab. Marry come out, my saucy Companion! I Would have you to know, my Coats are
not blown up so easily.


Claud. Stay, Sabina, you shall see him in his French dress. Truro, call him in.


Trur. The Devil, if you please; for he is the better Companion of the two.


[Exit Truro. Sab. I see Truro is no lover of the French.


Claud. No, he is not. The English Mechanics would throw a whole year into
Play-days, on condition their great men loved the French and their Kickshaws no
better.


Sab. Are the English Dons such lovers of the French then?


Claud. Oh so much, that a French Clap is more welcome at Court than a dull
English Ague. Then their Language they do so dote on, that they have Masters
out of France to teach French to their Magpies, Parrots, and Starlings. And if
their Sauce be not Frenchisied, their Meat is not fit for Dogs.

Enter Truro, and Monsicur combing his Wig. Now I hope, Monsieur, you are dressed
to your own satisfaction.


Mons. We, Senior.


Claud. This is a very graceful dress, Truro.


Trur. Graceful! Pox take him, he raises such a dust with combing his Wig, it is
enough to stifle one.


Claud. How do you like that Hat, Truro?


Trur. Why should his shallow Coxcomb have so broad a Covering?


Claud. Methinks his Breeches are like the Tower of Babel, hung round with
Confusion.


Trur. In my opinion they are like Bells hung in a Steeple, where his legs
serve for Clappers.


Sab. Fie, Senior Claudio, you will destroy the Monsieurs good opinion of his
dress.


Mons. Noune, my foy, me like it much te better, for te pleasure it give Senior
Claudio.


Claud. Go, Monsieur, you may to your study again.


[Exit. Trur. He likes your Spanish diet so ill, that now will he mount himself
upon a Cloud and ride into the Heavens to dine with those false Fotune-tellers
the Planets; a crowd of wandering Gypsies that pick our pockets with a lie, and
we are such silly fools as to believe 'em.


Claud. Then, Truro, you have no great opinion of the Stars.


Trur. No more than of a pound of Candles lighted at the wrong end: for as sure
as I am here, their influence over us at birth is equal. Nay, for my part I
declare, it is my opinion, that a Candle lighted in the Room when and where the
Child is born, must needs have a greater power over it, than a Star in the
Heavens some hundred thousand miles from it.


Claud. Well, you may say what you will; but I have so great an opinion of
Monsieurs study, though I think he is no great Conjurer, that I intend to be his
Scholar. How like you that?


Trur. Shall I be free in my answer?


Claud. I Will give you the freedom of a Companion.


Trur. Then let me beg you not to concern your self with those Starry studies.


Claud. Why, prithee?


Trur. Why, would it not be ridiculous for a man of your wisdom and quality to
waste either time, money, or pains in drawing of a Circle, and then dividing of
it into twelve parts, placing a Bull here, a Lion there, a Crab in one corner,
and a Goat in another; and then to fall a cursing that old Dog Saturn, that
bloody Rogue Mars, that jilting Queen Venus, and that sly Cur Mercury, and the
rest of the Gang, for looking askew on your Ascendant: and when all comes to
all, and you come to give a grave judgment upon your Houses with all those
monstrous Cattle in them, faith the conclusion is, Perhaps it may be so, and
perhaps it may be otherwise; and who the devil would give himself such a
trouble about a Perhaps?


Claud. And do you think there is no more truth than this in Astrology?


Trur. Faith, no more truth in the answers of the Stars, than in a pair of Dice
thrown upon the Wheel of Fortune.


Enter Monsieur. Claud. I am glad you are come, Monsieur: Now if you can but
say as much for the Stars as Truro has said against 'em, --


Mons. Morbleau, what have Truro said agains te Star?


Claud. Only that there is never a word of Truth nor a grain of Sense in
Astrology.


Mons. Begar, me vill let you see tat tare be te much truth in te Star. Had te
grand Julius Caesar take te advice of te Astrologer, my foy, he had no bin
butcher in te Senate House; nor had Henry te second of France bin kilt riding
at te Tilt, if he had been rule by te Astrologer: And let me tell Truro, if he
no be rule by me, and mend his behavior, he shall die by te Hangman.


Claud. What say you to this? does not the Monsieur speak to the purpose now?


Trur. Good Senior give me leave to turn Fortune Tellers for once.


Claud. With all my heart.


Trur. Well then, if the Monsieur do not die of a French Clap, be buried in a
House of Office, and afterward be sung about the streets for a false
Fortune Tellers, let me never feed more of any thing but Radishes.


Mons. My foy, Senior Claudio, me see tat te Star be so var anger wit Truro for
his slight 'em, tat me fear for his sake dey vill throw tar vengeance on te
whole Family.


Claud. Truro, be gone; I have some private business with the Monsieur.

[Exit Truro. Come, Monsieur, your answer to the Question I proposed.


Mons. Awe, Senior.

[Pulls out a Figure. It Is Skeam vill tell me all.


Claud. Shall I gain this woman?


Mons. Hole, hole; here be Mars in Conjunction wit te fair Venus, and Sol look
var well upon Madam Luna: Begar, if you no get her, me vill draw te Curtain
before te Heaven, tat te Star shall no more see vat ve do. But te Dragon tail
in te second house make you pay var dear for her.


Claud. That I am confident on already. Go thy ways, Monsieur, if thy
Prediction comes to pass, I am resolved to write a book in defense of
Astrology. Yet

No matter what those idle Planets prate;

She is the only Star that tells my fate.


Exeunt. Enter Avaritio, Clorinia, and Scintillia. Avar. Clorinia, I am
troubled at a dream I dreamt last night.


Clor. Fie, Sir, the prejudice you have received by those false Visions,
should, one would think, make you not regard 'em. What was it, Sir?


Avar. You are concerned in it.


Clor. I, Sir!


Avar. It was, That thou had changed thy Resolution for a Religious life.


Clor. That Is the greater argument for it: for Dreams are always to be
construed quite contrary to what they seem.


Avar. I protest I was mightily troubled at it.


Scin. Indeed, Sir, you have paid a dear rate for the experience of the truth
of Dreams. Have you forgot since you untiled your house for a bag of gold you
dreamt was hid in the Roof of it, and when you had done, found nothing but a
Sparrows nest, and some few pieces of old Iron?


Clor. And you may remember that another time on the same occasion, you killed
a hundred head of Cattle, by reason you dreamt the Philosophers stone was to be
found in their kidneys.


Avar. Away, you waggish girl.

Enter Dorido and Horatio. Senior Dorido, welcome. Well, Claudio has told me
all your designs.


Dor. My designs?


Avar. About you know what I mean.


Dor. What does he say?


Clor. My Father has heard of all your design for Religion, your going into a
Covent. The two thousand pounds you have put into Claudio's hand for the
building an Hospital, is a very pious work.


Dor. I understand her.


Avar. To him, daughter, to him. Ah, you're well met, I profess.


Clor. Your pious care -- to cheat my old Father,

(aside) -- to provide for another world, has strangely pleased me.


Avar. That Is a good Girl. Do you hear, Senior?

[to Horat.
Clor. Pursue this holy principle, and we shall meet together -- as often as we
please

(aside.) -- in Heaven.


Avar. Hah!

[Lifting up his eyes.
Clor. My kind Father, I say, -- will never suspect us,

(aside.) -- will make me the happiest woman in the world -- in letting me see
you often,

(aside.) -- in letting me lead a Religious life, and crown my days amongst a
Quire of Cherubims.


Avar. Oh, my child, my child! let me embrace thee. This Religion is such a
Jewel! Let your foolish sottish old Fathers breed up their Children in the
vanities of the world, I have a Daughter will make an Angel.


Dor. Sir, by your favor let me answer her.


Avar. By all means, Sir; your discourse I know will charm her.


Dor. Madam, -- Sister I should say, oh that you could but look into my Soul,
and know how much I am transported -- to see you thus kind,

(aside.) -- to hear you talk so piously.


Avar. Good again. Well, such a Daughter, and such a Friend, are not in the
world again!


Dor. Your thoughts, divine Sister, are so much mine, such bliss, such charms,
and such raptures there are -- in thy dear Love,

(aside) -- in true Devotion, that on my knees I vow to live and die -- my dear
Clorinia's,

(aside) -- in a Cloister.


Avar. Oh rise, rise, Senior. Well, you are a good man: Oh, Dorido, this is
heavenly music to my Daughter. Come, Dorido, since you are in so good a
humor, you shall go in with me, and we'll discourse further of a Religious life.


Dor. Sir, I wait on you. But is it not your pleasure that Clorinia should go
with us? A pious mind cannot be too much strengthened.


Avar. Alas, Sir, she has been reading all this afternoon. I protest she is so
given to Books, that I am afraid she will pore her eyes out upon 'em. No, no, she
shall stay and play a game at Chess with Senior Horatio. You know Devotion must
have a little respit.


Dor. Pox on him.


[Exeunt Dor. and Avar. Clor. Come, will you play?


Hor. If I do, I must be sure to loose. Chess is a game requires more care than
a man of my temper can have in such fair company.


Clor. Come, venture that.


Hor. Madam, the opportunity's too precious to be so lost.


Clor. Ha! what is this?


Hor. Only I dare not play with you, you are too much a Conqueror already.


Clor. Nay, then I Will call in better company.


Hor. Stay, Madam, hear me but one word, and then call in the Company to
witness your Cruelty and my Misery.


Clor. Go on, Sir.


Hor. The danger of your Father's return, and the peace your Beauty robbed me
of, will not give me time nor thought enough for a studied address; therefore
take it thus:

[Kneels, and kisses her hand. I love you, Madam.


Clor. Are you in earnest?


Hor. Are doubts, fears, distractions, jealousies, and all the torments of a
bleeding heart, things to be jested with?


Clor. And dare you tell me this?


Hor. Bid a wretch on a Wrack in all the agony of his dis-joynted limbs, not
dare to groan, and be as easily obeyed.


Clor. And can you be this villain to your friend? Do you not blush? Does not
your guilty blood fly in your Traitors face?


Hor. Madam, if I blush, it is not my Treason, but my Love that brings that
glowing color in my face. I cannot keep down my boiling blood and carry

Such sire as mine within me. Dear Madam,

Have you no pity for my sighs? Yes, do,

Resolve to see me die.


Clor. To see you damned.

Yes, Devil, to thy hell, there thou will find

A conversation fit for thy black Soul.

Had you proclaimed defiance to your friend,

Renounced his friendship first, and then invaded

His right, your guilt had been more pardonable:

But the base Hypocrite's a part so abject,

As is below my scorn.


Hor. Her scorn!


Clor. A Rebel is a glorious Villain, when a Traitor

Is but a despicable slave. But, Sir,

To put an end to your vain hopes, were your Love

As brave and generous as it is base and barbarous,

I should abhor the thoughts of him that could

Suspect me guilty of a change so mean:

My constancy's not to be blasted so.


Hor. [Laughs.] Faith, Madam, now have I only rallied with you all this while,
and now must I expect to find you as furious as an Amazon, for this trick I
have put upon you; never to see your face again is the least Composition I can
make.


Clor. How, Senior!


Hor. 'Twas an odd exploit, an Artifice I used to try your Constancy, and my
friends Interest. And now this rage and scorn from you, confirms his happiness
and my hopes.


Clor. A Trial of my Constancy call you it? Did not your zeal for your friend
atone for you, I know not how I should bear so bold a piece of curiosity.


Enter Avaritio and Dorido. Dor. Never was an Heretic in an Inquisition so
baited as I have been.

[Aside.
Avar. Daughter Clo. daughter!


Dor. Friend,

[to Horatio.] I know it is toward bedtime with this old fool, and he always
takes the Keys up with him; and I have not said half my mind to my dear
Clorinia: Take an occasion of telling her, I desire a little discourse with her
at the Parlour-window at Eleven; by that time he will be asleep. She knows the
old sign.


Hor. Enough.


Avar. Well, Daughter, this Dorido is a fine man I profess; I once designed him
for thy Husband --


Clor. How this old Gentleman can dissemble!

[Aside.
Avar. But now you have both made a better choice. Senior Dorido, [Horatio and
Clorinia whisper. there are strange blessings in store for you: So pious a
mind in a young man, and a Gentleman too, I profess is admirable.


Clor. Enough, I Will steal down to him.


Avar. Daughter.

[Takes her by the hand. Senior, good night. Well, I protest he is a miracle.


Exeunt Avar. and Clor. one way, and Dor. another. Hor. Her Constancy is the
Rock on which I split; I must make her hate Dorido; remove the Giant, and the
Maid's my own. I am none of those whining Lovers that can fall sick and die at
the feet of a Denial.

I will go on, and scorn a base retreat;

Despair the Coward only does defeat.


Exit. The fourth ACT.
Enter Horatio, and Audacio holding a Flambeau. Hor. CAn you be nimble and
dextrous, Master Engineer?


And. As a Mercury, Senior.


Hor. Then thus: Watch at the turning of this street, and when you see Senior
Dorido come by, put out your Light, and that shall give me notice for my
Design. When he hears the noise I shall raise, I know he will make up hither;
then do you alarm the Watch, and play the part I ordered you.


And. To a tittle.


Hor. To your Post quickly, the minute draws nigh; it is near Eleven.

[Exit Audacio. Now must I act the subtlest piece of Treason

That Love, animated

By Jealousy and Revenge, could ever inspire.

I love Clorinia, and consequently hate

Her darling Favorite Dorido;

And what we hate, we are prompted to destroy.

It Is true, I am false to my friend; but what is friendship in one scale, when
Love is in the other? Love is a passion that is taught and rooted in our Souls
by nature, when Friendship is but a humor put off or on at pleasure. Love
comes by force, and Friendship but by choice, and is but generally the Creature
of Fear or Interest.

Ha! he has put out his Light, and Dorido's coming. Now for my sign.


[Whistles; at which a Casement opens, and Clorinia speaks from within. Clor.
Dorido!


Hor. I, dear Madam.


Clor. Oh, dear Dorido, my unkind Father is not yet in bed, and I am in such
danger here, that I cannot tell you half the kind things I have to say. Let
that Letter speak for me.


Gives him a Letter through the Casement, which he takes, and as he takes it
stabs her Arm with his Dagger. Clor. Murder, murder!


Enter Horatio's friend Audacio. Hor. So, take that Letter and Dagger, and
convey 'em into Dorido's pocket.


And. Enough.


[Exeunt severally. Enter Dorido. Dor. Death and Confusion! My Clorinia's
voice! What infernal sound is this?


Enter Avaritio in his Nightgown, and Clorinia with her arm wrapped in a bloody
Handkercher, Scintillia with a Candle. Avar. Ha, murder! what is the matter?


Clor. Oh, Sir, as I was going up to bed, I saw the Parlour-window open, and as
I went to shut it, some wicked villain caught me by the hand and stabbed his
Dagger into my arm.


Dor. Lightning blast him for it.


Avar. Geraldo, Diego, Sanco, Francisco, rise you rogues. Dorido!


Dor. There Is no staying till your Servants rise: the villain will be gone
beyond their reach. Do you run and fetch a Surgeon, and let my Sword pursue the
impious Devil.


[Exit Avaritio one way, and as Dor. offers to go another way, he is met by
Horatio's friend with the Alguazile and Guards. Enter Watchmen here. And.
That Is he, seize him.


Dor. Bold slaves, what is this for?


[They fight with Dorido, and take him. And. Are you the Lady that cried out
murder?


Clor. Yes, what then?


And. Oh, Madam, this is the barbarous villain that stabbed you.


Clor. Dorido!


Dor. I the villain!


And. Hey day! now has he the impudence to deny it. Did not I see you steal up
to that house, then whistle, and a Lady put her hand out of that window and
give you a Letter; which you received, and returned the Compliment with your
Dagger?


Dor. Blasphemous dog! Is the Traitor distracted?


Clor. I am all amazement!


And. Do you intend to face me out of my senses? Madam, I thought he had been
going to rob the house, and watched him, and saw him do it.


Dor. Hell and Damnation! Traitor, Liar, Hell-hound, what did you see me do?


And. What I Will justify to be true. Nay, I am sure the Dagger must be about
him, or not far off: for he did not stir one step, Gentlemen, before I called
you.


Dor. The Dagger about me! search me, Devil.


And. Search him, Gentlemen.


They pull a Dagger and a Letter out of his pocket. Watchman. A bloody Dagger,
and a Letter for one Senior Dorido.


And. Did I not tell you, Gentlemen?


Dor. Ha! what enchanting Fiend has conveyed that Dagger into my pocket? Madam,
if there be truth in Heaven, or faith in man, I could no more be guilty of this
Outrage, than I could burn a Church. Some malicious Devil, envying our Loves,
has used this artifice to undo me.


And. If there be truth in Heaven, or faith in man, this blustering Gentleman is
as truly guilty of this Outrage, as you are the unfortunate Lady that suffered
it.


Dor. Infamous Varlet! what art thou, that such an Imputation should be
believed from thy mouth?


And. Gentlemen, convey us both before the next Judge; I am ready to attest by
oath what I have seen and known.


Clor. Gentlemen, pray lend me your Prisoner for one minutes discourse.
Ungrateful man!

Is this your best return for all my kindness?


Dor. And can you persecute me too? My angry stars

And this false impudent slave, has made me mad.


Clor. No, your guilt, not he, has made you so.


Dor. Madam, by all that is good, I neither received that Letter nor ever saw
that Dagger, whatever Magic conveyed it into my pocket. I heard you cry out
Murder, ran in to your assistance, saw you bleeding, and my Soul bled for you.

I heard your shreeking voice with so much horror,

That I Would have given my Life, and half my right

To Heaven, to have reached the villains heart for it.

And can this be the man that stabbed Clorinia?


Clor. No, Sir, these Evidences are too plain.

Conveyed by Magic thither! If there be such a thing as

Magic, it is in impious men's false Oaths and broken Vows,

That can bewitch believing Virgins hearts,

And use 'em as thou do.


Dor. Oh, Madam, as you would keep me on this side Hell,

And hold my hand from tearing out my heart,

Oh, do not lay this horrid Crime against me:

A Crime so distant from my purer thoughts,

As my heart trembles but to hear.


Clor. They that can prove such Traitors as thou art,

Want not pretenses to seem innocent.


Dor. And can you still suspect such faith as mine?


Clor. Did I for this run to the window

With as much haste and zeal to meet you there,

As a departing Saint mounts up to Heaven!

And when, like a poor fond mistaken fool,

My eager hand so kindly gave that Letter,

And in it all the tendrest thoughts that Love

Could ever inspire; this cruel man,

When he received my very Soul,

Could barbarously stab the hand that gave it.


Dor. Oh, cruel savage woman!


Clor. Take him hence.


Dor. Oh, my best Angel, hear me.


Clor. Oh, my Devil!

Make haste, take him away: and, perjured man,

Tell the new Mistress, for whose sake you did

This hellish deed, to make your title good,

You sealed your falsehood in Clorinia's blood.


Exeunt severally: Manet only Scintillia. Enter Avaritio and a Physician.
Avar. What lazy Rogues are these Physicians! he was in bed, and I was forced
to stay till the reverend fool rise.

Ha! Girl, where is Clo?


Scin. Oh, Sir, she is gone in almost distracted.


Avar. Oh Heavens, distracted! The loss of blood will put her in a Feavour.
Dear Sir, make haste.


Exeunt. Enter Senior Pedro and Leonora. Ped. I wonder Sabina comes not; it is
about the time of her appointment. What a Pettycoat have you got on there, Wife?


Leon. It Is very well, Husband: My Lady Abbess I know hates a gaudy dress.


Ped. Nay, a modest garb certainly becomes Devotion best.


Enter Sabina. Sab. I am afraid I have staid to the prejudice of your patience.


Leon, No, I have a greater stock than so. But I pray how does my Lady?


Sab. Very well. Dear Leonora, she will expect us. Are you ready?


Leon. I am ready.


Ped. She got no sleep to night for thinking of this Holy voyage.


Sab. And Claudio will keep her waking a little longer.

[Aside. Good woman, her thoughts are on Heaven. Well, I hope the Monastery is
not out of the road to it.


Ped. I Will lead you to the door. Well Wife, when you are in your Altitudes,
have some little thought on the good man at home.


Exeunt Sabina and Leonora. Enter Truro and Monsieur. Trur. Since this Monsieur
got into his French dress, he struts it at a wondrous rate: But I hope once
more to uncase him, and bring that rotten Carcass of his into Spanish fetters
again.


Mons. Truro, be wise, and te Star will be your good friend.


Trur. Oh, plague light upon the nonsensical babbling of your Stars, and all
your French acquaintance with them.


Mons. My foy, Truro, you have much te pride, and tat be no boon. Te French man
get var great regard from te English Lord, by tare great submission.


Enter Claudio and Millia. Claud. Millia, be sure when you hear any knock at
the gate, look out of the window; if they be women that enquire for Dona
Betrix, be you quick in opening the door and showing 'em a room.


Mill. I shall, Senior.


Claud, And let not one of you appear besides. Go, be gone every one about his
business.

[Exeunt Monsieur, Truro, and Millia. And now will I to my Chamber and expect
my call.


[Exit. Enter Sabina and Leonora. Sab. Oh, dear Madam, I had almost forgot Dona
Betrix, though I promised to call her: that is the house; come, Madam, I must
beg your pardon for one minute.


Leon. I am solely at your service.


[Sab. knocks. Mill. [above.] Who Is there? and who would you speak with?


Sab. Is Dona Betrix within?


Mill. Yes. I Will come and conduct you to her.


Sab. You shall go with me, we shall not stay.


Leon. Use your pleasure.


Millia opens the door. Mill. Will you be pleased to walk in, and I Will acquaint
her.


Exeunt Millia, Sabina and Leonora; and enter again in a Dining Room. Mill.
Will you rest your selves here till I return?


Sab. Millia, I Will go along with you. Dear Leonora, assure your self I Will make
a quick dispatch.


Exeunt Millia and Sabina, and lock the door. Enter Claudio at another door.
Leon. O Heavens, my Virtue is betrayed!


Claud. My dearest Leonora! welcome. Now, my best life, you are mine. Dear
Madam, surrender, and save the trouble of a storm.


Leon. You may thank wretched Sabina for it. Is this the Monastary, thou wicked
Hag -- and are you my Lady Abbess -- How durst you act so villainous a part
under so holy a pretense?


Claud. Dear Madam, look but into the Affairs of the world, and you will discover
the Mask of Religion frequently put upon worse designs than this.

[Takes her hand. Come, my pretty Saint, this inclination of man to your Sex is
so universal, as renders it not such an offense to Heaven, as men of Holy
Orders are pleased to tell us it is: No, no, dear Leonora.


Leon. How can you talk so! Were I convinced it were no Crime, yet the blemish
it would throw upon my Reputation, will never suffer me to yield.


Claud. Your Reputation, on my life, shall not be wounded.


Leon. What! and yield to your base desires?


Claud. The Light shall be no witness to what we do; and a thing so concealed
can never call your Honor into question. It Is not the doing of a thing, but
the knowledge of it after it is done, that gives the fatal blow to Reputation.


Leon. However, vile man, 'twill wrong my Husband.


Claud. It can be none to him, so long as his ignorance has no other opinion of
you than what is just and honorable. But I delay my joys -- Come, dear Madam --


Leon. Oh, Sir, you make me stark mad: What do you mean, you wicked lascivious
man you? --


Claud. Nothing, dear Leonora, but all the Kindness, all the Love, and all the
Raptures in the world.


Leon. Touch me if you dare! I Will tear your eyes out: If you come but near me,
I Will -- nay I Will --


Claud. What will you do?


Leon. Why, what will you have me do? Well, this opportunity's a mere Devil!

[Aside.
Claud. Consent to make me the happiest man that lives.


Leon. Well, Sir, I protest it is not in my nature to use so fine a Gentleman
unkindly. Alas, I would submit to any thing, and make you happy, if I durst:
But oh, the sin, the sin! I will not; let me go, you are a villainous man, would
betray my Honor, damn my Soul, and -- I hate you. I Will cry out; help, murder!


Claud. Well, dear Leonora, I Will grant you your desire. I will deny my self the
greatest happiness Beauty can give, and man possess, rather than force that
bliss you cannot yield. But, divinest Madam, if you could be kind, what
charming Magic would there be in those dear Arms, what Nectar in those Lips,
and what Elysium on that soft Bosom!


Leon. Nay, Sir, go on, you speak so prettily! Though I must never yield to any
wicked thing, yet we may talk as kindly as we please.


Claud. And is that all?


Leon. No, Sir, were I a single woman, or if you were my Husband, or so, I
could deny you nothing -- But --


Claud. Well, I Will send for a Priest, and marry you presently.


Leon. Two Husbands! Alas, Sir, I have too much of one already.


Claud. Madam, your sweetness has so transported me, that if you cannot yield,
I must force you --


Leon. But are you sure you will force me? for I vow I will not go willingly.


Claud. I Am past all patience.


Leon. Stay, Sir, if I must go, let us resolve to be as little wicked as we
can: Let Us stay and say our Prayers before we go.


Claud. Let Us love first, and pray afterward.


Leon. But you shall promise me first you will not use me too roughly, for my
poor Husband's sake.


Claud. Oh, Madam, I Am a tenderhearted man;

Indeed I Will be as gentle as I can.


Exeunt. The fifth ACT.
Enter Clorinia. Clor. WAs ever so much inhumanity!

How are my Thoughts distracted! Well, if this

Perfidious Dorido be what I suspect him,

His Love defaced, and such a Monster made,

No Angel ever fell so soon, or turned

So black as he. The change appears so dreadful,

That I dare scarce believe my Eyes and Senses.

Enter Avaritio and Horatio. My Father and Horatio! This interview

May give some new discovery. I Will o're-hear 'em.


[Steps aside. Avar. This Dorido is the wickedst Rogue that ever breathed.


Hor. Alas, Sir, he is all wickedness. His very pretenses for Religion were all
baits to trapan you.


Clor. What Is this I hear?

[Aside.
Hor. The truth on it is, he loved your Daughter, and designed to steal her.


Avar. Steal her!


Hor. And all his fair disguises of Devotion were but to gain access to
accomplish it.


Avar. Precious Rascal!


Clor. I am all astonishment.


Hor. And because she refused to break open your house last night, and run away
with him, he stabbed her.


Avar. Dainty Rogue!


Clor. Death, what a Traytor's here!


Hor. Sir, I confess he was my friend, and under that name I long concealed his
crimes; but now they are grown too odious for my friendship to wink at: my zeal
for Justice, and my sense of your Injuries, h^ve waked my sleeping Reason. I
cannot see you cheated and abused.


Avar. Then belike all this Monastery-business is laid by.


Hor. The devil of any such place did he ever intend to trouble.


Avar. And I warrant he will build no Hospital neither.


Hor. An Hospital! a Bawdy House. He build an Hospital! No, Sir, his hot
Spanish blood will find other uses for his money.


Avar. What Is become of the two thousand pounds in Senior Claudio's hands?


Hor. Called in again, I can assure you: 'twas only laid there for a bait for
you. Sir, to be plainer with you, I do not like your Daughters proceedings.


Avar. How, my Daughter!


Hor. I say, she is to blame, to have Love in her heart, and Religion in her
tongue.


Clor. This is beyond all sufferance.

[Aside.
Avar. How! is not my Clo for a Nunnery?


Hor. She Is no more for a Nunnery than you are for an Almshouse.


Avar. No Nunnery!


Hor. They only masqueraded with you all this while. Their
midnight-assignations at your Parlour-window, have secured her from ever
troubling a Monastery.


Clor. Monster, Barbarian!

[Aside.
Avar. O Rogues, Cheats, Gypsies! Francisco, Diego, Sancho, Geraldo.

Enter Servants. Sancho, send for a Mason: I Will have the Parlour-window next
the street taken down, and the wall made up; and, you Rascal, see that no body
comes into my house without my orders. I shall have this Rogue come in disguise
into my house, and some Ganonical Thief steal like a Pimp in after him, and
marry them. But now I think on it, I am a Magistrate, and will give every body
their Oaths that comes within my doors. And, Sirrah, do you see that the
Balcone be nailed up: The Gypsy may drop down Love into the street. Cheat her
old Father! And, you Rascal, take notice these two Rooms are all the walk I
allow her. Assignations! I Will spoil their sport.


Hor. Pray, Senior, do me the favor, when you tell whence you had this
intelligence, not to name your Author. I am unwilling to gain a fair Ladies
displeasure.


Avar. I profess, Sir, I will not speak a word of you. Cheat her old Father!


Hor. Sir, I am afraid I have disturbed you: I Will take my leave of you till
some other time.


Avar. I profess you are the best friend I have in the world.


Hor. Not one word of me.


Avar. Not a syllable.

[Exit Horatio. Run away with a young Rascal! I Will watch your waters, I Will
warrant you.


[Exit Avaritio. Clor. Well, I am the most unfortunate of women!


Enter Valerio. Val. What Is the matter, Sister?


Clor. Oh, Brother, had you been here, you had discovered the vilest piece of
Treachery -- That Barbarian Horatio, Dorido's false friend, has disclosed all
our designs, and so incensed my peevish old Father, that these two Rooms are
my Prison, and my Servants my Jaylours.


Val. And can Horatio be so great a Villain!


Clor. This is the least of my Misfortunes. I have abused the best of men. Now
am I certain 'twas this villain stabbed me; and I, unhappily deceived by that
mercenary slave the accomplice in his design, have laid the Crime upon the
guiltless Dorido; and to complete my miseries, must never see him more.


Enter Claudio and a Servant of Avaritio's, with Monsieur and Truro. Claud.
Prithee thank thy Master for my admission; but tell him

I have no design upon his Daughter, that he need be so cautious.


Serve. Pray, Sir, be not angry with me, I only execute my Commission.


[Exit Servant. Mons. Begar, dese Spanish Lady be kep up as close as de Jack in
box, Morbleau.


Clor. Senior Claudio, you are come to see the unhappiest Maid that Fortune
ever persecuted.


Claud. Aye, Madam, with much ado I am come to see you; but your Father keeps a
pack of the most ill-natured Rascals about him.


Clor. Oh, Sir, they are my Jaylours. That Monster Horatio has discovered all
our plots, and I must never see Dorido again.


Claud. Indeed, Madam, I fear you will not.


Clor. How, Sir!


Claud. His grief and his distractions for your unkind suspicion, have so
dejected him, that you will either never see him more; or so altered, that you will
scarce know he was the man that loved you.


Clor. Oh, Sir, you stab me to the very heart.


Claud. That attempt upon you was so far from being his act, that it is
impossible but it must be done by some malicious Rival or Devil.


Clor. That Devil is Horatio: And I like an enchanted fool could suspect the
innocent Dorido; and as a just Reward for my suspicion, I am for ever doomed to
live immured within these walls. I Have so much injured the unhappy Dorido,

That I can no ways recompense his griefs,

But by some bold adventure for his sake.

What is it I would not do for that brave man?


Val. Sister, let us set some new designs afoot.


Clor. Designs! I Will fire the house, and run away with him.

It Is no mean act can expiate my Crime.

To talk of Monasteries, and delude

A credulous Father, is too mean a service.

I cannot testify that love I bear him,

But by some noble Passage to his Arms.


Claud. This kindness, Madam, will revive him. But, Madam, you shall steer a
safer way: I have a new plot.


Clor. What is it?


Claud. To rob your Father. You know he is covetous, and could we neatly and
handsomely be masters of two or three of his Bags, the fright 'twould put him
into to loose his Money, and the way that I Would propose to find the Thief, shall
bring you into Dorido's very Arms; nay, you shall marry him before your
Father's face.


Clor. It Is a brave Project, if it do but take.


Claud. Trust to my Conduct.


Val. But now I think on it, Sir, his Money is all out at use. Yet now I think
on it, I have found a way as well. My Father, about six months since, lent a
Spanish Lord Six hundred Ducatoons upon a Necklace of Pearl. I Will steal that:
and as good luck would have it, he is just now gone into his Closet. I Will after
him; and whilst I hold him in a Tale, I Will steal it: it is in a little box, and
will be easily slipped into my pocket. I Will be with you presently.


[Exit. Clor. Good luck attend you.


Claud. Truro and Monsieur, my two trusty Servants, shall be in the Plot. This
Monsieur, you know, has set up for an Astrologer: I Will persuade your Father he
is a Conjurer, and can raise the Devil to get his Pearl again: and so we'll
wheedle the old Gentleman, with your Brother and you, to my house, where Dorido
disguised shall attend us; and whilst the Monsieur is charming your Father to
get his Pearl again, a Priest shall be there and conjure you two together.


Clor. I like it rarely!


Claud. Truro, when Valerio returns, and brings the Pearl, do you slip out and
disguise your self, and come in this Lord's name to demand the Pearl.


Trur. I Will do the business. Within three or four doors lives a Barber of my
acquaintance, he shall transform me. But, Sir, the Lord's name.


Claud. Oh, Madam, what shall we do for his name?


Clor. As I remember I have heard my Father speak of him. His name is Don
Antonio Don Rinaldo du Peralta.


Enter Valerio. Val. I have it.


Trur. Enough.


[Exit. Clor. As I could wish.


Val. I began a very serious discourse with him, and I had scarce spoke ten
words, but he fell so horribly a railing against you as amazed me. And whilst
he was busy in the heat of all his fury, I performed the Operation. But see,
he is here!


Avar. Oh, Hussy, are you there? You are an excellent jilting Baggage: Nothing
would serve your turn, but cheating your old Father, would it?


Clor. Cheat my old Father! Heaven defend me!


Avar. Oh, no, not you. You have done nothing: Only loved Dorido, made
Midnight-Assignations with Dorido, and contrived to run away with Dorido;
that is all.


Clor. Who I, Sir!


Avar. Oh, do you start! You see I have found you out. These young sluts think
they have all the Wit, and their silly old Fathers want Sense: but, Hussy, you
shall find you are mistaken.


Clor. Indeed I never intended any such thing.


Avar. Hussy, you lie. I know your haunts, Mistress. My Parlour-window has
been sweetly visited between you; but I Will stop your peep-hole. If I had not
discovered you, I should have been made a Grandfather through the Casement. Is
this your pretense for Religion! You Will make a precious piece of Nuns-flesh.


Claud. Come, Senior, you must forgive her; Love is a Passion that cannot be
resisted. If she have transgrest a little beforehand, she will make never the
worse Nun for it afterward.


Avar. By your favor, Sir, I Will never forgive her. Forgive the Baggage!


Enter Truro disguised. Trur. Senior Avaritio.


Avar. With me, Senior?


Trur. From my worthy Patron Don Antonio Don Rinaldo du Peralta.


Avar. I have the honor to keep a Neck-lace of Pearl belonging to his Lordship.


Trur. Senior, the Six hundred Ducatoons, with the Interest and Principal, are
in Don Oreate the Goldsmiths hands, whither I am commanded to desire your
company; where, upon returning the Pledge, the Money shall be paid.


Avar. I Will fetch it, and wait upon you to his Lordship.


[Exit Avar. Claud. Now, Truro, when he comes back and misses it, bear up
briskly to him.


Trur. I understand you.


Avar. Valerio, Valerio.

[From within.
Clor. It works. To him quickly.


Avar. Valerio!


[Exit Valerio. Claud. Now, Monsieur, can you bluster out a few hard words, and
Hocus pocus him dexterously?


Mons. Let me alone for de sheat: begar, me vill represen de Conjure told life.


Claud. When we have him at our house, we'll humor it rarely. I have
Trap-doors, and God knows what: and we'll raise Thunder and Lightning, and play
the Devil and all.


Enter Avaritio and Valerio. Avar. Undone, undone, undone!


All. Heaven forbid!


Avar. Oh the Pearl, the Pearl!


Trur. What do you say, Sir?


Avar. Oh it is stolen, lost, gone! I Am betrayed, I Am robbed, I Am ruined!
Unconscionable Rogues, Six hundred Ducatoons at one clap!


Trur. Six hundred, Sir! Two thousand, Senior, two thousand: It cost my Lord no
less; and, though I say it, 'twas a penieworth.


Avar. Worse and worse! I am blown up! my heart, my life, my blood's all gone!


Trur. Truly, Senior, I pity your loss, considering you must pay my Lord the
price on it to buy another.


Avar. Pay the price on it!


Truro. Why, Sir, do you think my Lord will not have satisfaction?


Avar. Satisfaction! Let him stab me, drown me, hang me, send me to th'Gallies;
do any thing with me. Two thousand Ducatoons!


Trur. Well, Senior, be not dejected; I have some comfort for you.


Avar. What Is that?


Trur. My good Lord --


Avar. Oh, sweet Sir.


Trur. My good Lord -- for my sake -- do you mark it --


Avar. You are a kind man.


Trur. For my sake (take notice) shall bate you (pray observe me) shall bate
you (do you see) Fifty Ducatoons. You shall pay him but Nineteen hundred and
fifty.


Avar. Plagues and Furies! Had I lost both my Eyes, an Arm, and a Leg, 't had
been nothing; but this affliction is unsufferable.


Clor. You may see how Heaven is angry with you, and lays this calamity upon
you for afflicting your poor innocent obedient Daughter; and abusing so honest
and so worthy a Gentleman as Senior Dorido.


Avar. He Is a Rogue, he is a Villain; it is he has stolen my Pearl, he is a Thief:
bear witness, Gentlemen, I say he is a Thief, I say he stole the Pearl; nay,
I Will vow he stole 'em. I Will go instantly to a Judge, have him apprehended and
hanged for stealing 'em, and then beg his Estate to pay for 'em.


Clor. Oh fie, Sir, how can you lay so scandalous a Crime to so guiltless a
Gentleman's charge?


Avar. Nay, Hussy, I can prove 'twas he that stole 'em, and you were his
Confederate; and I Will have you both hanged.


Clor. How, Sir?


Avar. Did not he, by the malice and instigation of the Devil, come to you at
the wicked hour of Midnight at my Parlour-window, which you opened to him, and
let him feloniously in at it to rob me?


Clor. Oh fie, Sir, it is not wide enough for him to put his hand through.


Avar. Bear witness, Gentlemen, she confesses he put his hand through; and I Will
swear the Devil stood behind him and thrust his body after it. I say, 'twas
he that robbed me, and I can prove. 'twas he that robbed me; and I Will have him
hanged like a Thief as he is. Two thousand Ducatoons!


Claud. Well, Sir, I pity your case, and have bethought a way to get your
Pearl again.


Avar. The Pearl again!


Claud. Nay, it is an infallible way: It must do in spite of fate. If I do not
bring 'em again, nay, though the Thief had swallowed 'em --


Avar. Swallowed 'em! Pox choke him.


Claud. Nay, though he had swallowed 'em, I Would make him disgorge 'em, but you
should have 'em again.


Avar. Oh, Sir, this is divinely spoken! But how, how, dear Senior?


Claud. You must know, this Monsieur is a professed Astrologer, and by the by, to
serve a friend or so, can conjure; that is, can raise the Devil: You understand
me.


Avar. Raise the Devil!


Claud. To raise him in an honest way's nothing. Monsieur, give him a taste of
your skill.


Monsieur makes a great many ridiculous postures, then falls a conjuring in a
great deal of blustering cramp words. Avar. Oh hold, hold, dear Sir, hold, hold.

[Monsieur stops. Oh, Sir, I have not been at Confession these two years; let
me but go to Confession first, and then raise the Devil and welcome.


Mons. Your humble Serviture; commanda me, and me vill raise de Spirit, de
Tunder, de Lightning, de Cloud, de Vind, and de Tempest.


Avar. Aye, but are you sure they can raise the Pearl again?


Mons. Morbleau, de great Devil not able to raise de little Pearl! fee, fee,
Senior.


Avar. But are you sure he can get at 'em?


Mons. Noting surer, noting surer. Rater den fail, me vill send him to Sea to
fish for more.


Avar. Well, I profess it is a good-natured Devil. But hark you, Sir, are you
sure it is a Devil that you dare trust?


Mons. Journee, vit mine whole Estate.


Avar. Two thousand Ducatoons is a tempting sum; and if he should keep 'em when
he has got 'em?


Mons. Courage, fear noting.


Claud. Sir, the place of his Operation is at his Study at my house; we must
desire your company thither.


Avar. Well, I Will only order my Servants to have a care of my Daughter, and go
along with you.


Mons. Senior, de whole Famile must go along wit you, de young Son and de fair
Daughter; dey may be concern in de Robbery. Pardonna me, Madam; my Art spare no
body.


Avar. Aye, now I think on it, she shall go with us. If Dorido and she have laid
their heads together, he will firk it out of her with a vengeance.

Senior, pray beg his Lordships pardon, and tell him his Neck-lace is at
present in Hucksters hands; but we'll firk it out of 'em with a vengeance. Clo,
come along with me.


Mons. Tief, steal de Jewel!

De teevish hide of Rogua me vill drub,

Journee, by Lucifere and Beelzebub.


[Exeunt. Enter Pedro and Leonora. Ped. Well, Wife, now give us a little of
your Entertainment at the Monastery.


Leon. Oh, it is extreme fine!


Ped. Aye, but I would fain have you describe it.


Leon. What shall I do?

[aside.] Oh, it is the sweetest, rarest Entertainment in the world!


Ped. Aye, but let us hear the particulars. What did you see? what did you
hear? what did you do? what did you say? Come, let us know all.


Leon. I shall be undone, if this discourse hold.

[aside.] What did I see? what did I do? Oh it is not to be expressed! In the
first place, I went along with Sabina, and she led me into the most delicious
sweet place -- But, Husband, I have News to tell you: I heard just now of a
famous Astrologer newly come to Town.


Ped. But you don't tell me your Entertainment.


Leon. Oh, you cannot imagine it, unless you saw it, so rich, and so divine --
Well, but this Astrologer is so witty and so ingenious a man, that I long to
ask him a question.


Ped. With all my heart. But what did the Nuns do?


Leon. Oh, Sir, they knelt, and they prayed, and they sung, and they --
Prithee, my dear, let us go to him; I have a question to ask him, you little
think of. Guess, my dear, prithee guess -- I am so ashamed -- Well, but for
once I Will tell you: I Would ask him how many Children we shall have; I do so long
for a Child, and I would have it a Boy, that it may be like thee, my dear.


Ped. Kind dear Rogue! Well, but you are the strangest woman! I ask you about
the Nuns, and you answer about Boys and Girls. Prithee, dear, I do so long for
this Entertainment.


Leon. Well, now I think on it, I Will have my will before yours. You shall go
along with me to this Astrologer's, and then I Will tell you my Entertainment: I
vow and swear I will not tell you else. Now, do, make me forsworn.


Ped. Well, thou art so cross!


Leon. Besides, this Astrologer lives at Senior Claudio's; and I am sure we
shall be welcome thither.


Ped. Senior Claudio's! Boy, your Mistrisses Vail, and my Sword and Cloak.


[Exeunt. The Scene opens, and discovers Monsieur's Study. Enter Claudio,
Avaritio, Clorinia, and Valerio. Enter at another door Monsieur in a
Conjuring-gown, and Dorido disguised in the same habit. Avar. It Is a very odd
place, Senior.


Claud. The Spirits he deals with, like it the better.


Mons. Velcome into mine Cell. Te Star, and de Constellation --


Dor. The wandering Spirits of the Air.


Mons. De superlunary and de sublunary Minister --


Dor. The Demons and the Cacodemons --


Mons. De eterial Peripatetick --


Dor. And all the Celestial Outacoustions --


Mons. De great Devil and de little Devil, my foy, votre tres humble Serviture.


Avar. Pray thank 'em, and tell 'em I am their humble Servant. Dear Sir, stand
by me,

[to Glaud.] I no not like those Outacoustions. But hark you, Sir, if a man may
be so bold, what kind of things are those Demons and Cacodemons?


Mons. Demons and Cacodemons? why, dey be de Pimp to de great Devil; me send
'em on de Errand, de Message; dey pierce into de Eart, dive into de Sea; fly
in de Air, mount into de Cloud; dey raise de Wind, de Lightning, de Tunder; and
obey me in all my command.


Avar. Pray desire his Devilship to use no Ceremony with me. Cannot I get my
Pearl without all these Demons and Cacodemons?


Mons. Oh, no, Senior; it be deir business to serve my friend.


Avar. Pray desire his Devilship not to take it ill.


Mons. He will no take it ill.


Avar. Two thousand Ducatoons is a great loss.


Mons. Do not me tell you --


Avar. I vow and swear I would not trouble him, if I could possibly help it.


Mons. It be no trouble.


Avar. I would not gain his anger for twice the sum.


Mons. Journee, he vill be no anger --


Avar. I profess, if I thought he would --


Mons. Morbleau, I say he vill be no anger. Do you tink me lie?


Avar. I ha'done, Sir, I ha'done.


Mons. Now, Sir, me vill proceed to my Operation.


Dor. Great Sir, your Art and Experience in this profound study, needs no
advice.


Mons. Alas, me understand noting. Me have de little civilitie from de Spirit,
de little command ore de Familiar; dat be all.


Avar. I profess he is a modest Gentleman.


Mons. Now, Sir, place a de Circle on de right hand, and anoder on de left; var
boon.

Dorido places two Circles on each side the Stage. Now, Sir, set de fair Lady
in dat Circle, and me vill set de ancient Gentleman in dis: var boon!


They place Avaritio in one Circle, and Clorinia in the other. Dor. My dear
Clorinia!


Clor. Now, Dorido, if fortune favor us!


Mons. Now, Sir, vatever you see, or vatever you hear, you no speak nor stir:
take care you be safe in dat Circle.


Avar. Aye, Sir.


Enter Pedro and Leonora. Claud. My Leonora here! Senior Pedro, this visit is
wondrous kind: What your Lady too! This favor is extraordinary. What kind
Gale has brought such fair Company to visit my poor house!


Ped. My Wife, you must know, has a strange desire to put a Question to the
Cunning man you keep.


Claud. With all my heart, Sir.


Leon. Well, I hope you will pardon a bold intruder? But Curiosity's a venial sin
in our Sex. Pray excuse may Blushes when I tell you before my Husband that I
have extremely longed for that satisfaction which can be only had at Senior
Claudio's.


Claud. This kindness is beyond expression!


Leon. I know you will call me a confident creature for this: but I vow it is a
fault I cannot help.


Claud. Was there ever such a witty charming Rogue! She courts me before her
Husband's face.

[aside. Well, Madam, the honor you have vouchsafed your humble Servant, has
so obliged me, that if there be any Art or Magic in the world that can please
a fair Lady -- Sir, you will pardon me -- by this kiss you shall have it.


Ped. Aye, good Senior, let her have it: for uds-bodikins if you don't, she will
lead me so troublesome a life --


Claud. Oh, Sir, leave her to my care. Senior, [to Avar.] here is a little
important business has made me rude. Monsieur, you must use a little slight of
hand with this Gentleman, and get that Lady off for me; you understand me.


Mons. Senior, me vill do it.

Sir, [to Pedro.] by de favor of your good Star, you be come in de fortunate
minute of my Operation. Here be de Gentleman dat have been robbed of de Jewel
vort Two tousand Ducatoons.


Ped. And can you help him to it again?


Mons. Journee, wit as much ease as me drink, or me sleep.


Ped. Oh, Wife, this is a fine man indeed!


Mons. Me beg your patience.

[to Avar.] Remember my council; no speak, no stir from dat Circle.


Avar. I warrant you.


Claud. Whatever you see or hear, be not afraid, it is all but Juggling.

[to Leonora. Monsieur conjures, and it thunders.
Avar. What shall I do! what shall become of me!


Ped. Wife, wife, oloh!


Avar. Heaven have mercy upon us. Claudio, Valerio, stand by me.


Mons. O fee, de coward; fear noting.


Ped. Wife, wife, oloh.


[It thunders louder. Avar. O death, hell, what shall I do!


[Goes out of the Circle. Mons. O fee, in de Circle, de Circle.


Avar. Oh, Sir, if you have any pity for me, don't fright me at this unmerciful
rate.


Mons. Morbleau, you be de strange man in de whole world: none but de boy, de
shilde, be frighted at de Tunder: De grave Cavalier, and be fraid!


Avar. Oh, Sir, I cannot help it, if it would save my life. The next clap of
Thunder strikes me dead.


Ped. Aye, Sir, the Gentleman says right; it makes me tremble every joint.


It thunders again, and Leonora falls down in a Trap. Ped. Oloh!


Claud. Dear Monsieur, I love thee. Now will I fly into my dear Leonora's arms.


[Exit. Ped. Oh my Wife, my Wife, my Wife!


Mons. De grave Gentleman, and cry! For shame, for shame!


Avar. You may see what comes of your wicked Conjuring; the Devil has fetched
away one of our company already.


Ped. Aye, aye, the Devil has got her. She Is gone, and I shall never see her
again!


Avar. I am afraid the house will fall upon our heads.


Ped. Oh my Wife!


Mons. Journee, vat be de matter? You shall have your Wife again safe and sound,
safe and sound.


Ped. No, no, the Devil has tore her to pieces by this time! I am undone, you
wicked man you! If I had but received all her Portion, and she had gone to the
Devil then, 'twould never ha'vext me: But she is under age, and I have not been
married this half year, and I shall be hanged for bringing her hither. I am
accessory to her Murder. Oh my Wife, my Wife!


Mons. Morbleau, you shall be no hang, nor she be no murder: she be alive and
var well; nay, she be in dis room, dis var room still.


Avar. In this Room!


Ped. Say that again.


Mons. Me have only cast a Mist before your eye.


Ped. A Mist!


Mons. She be in dis Room; only she be invisible.


Avar. and Ped. Invisible!


Mons. Dis be noting but de trick of my Skill, my Art: me can make de whole
Famile de whole invisible, si you play, Monsieur.


Ped. And are you sure my poor Dear is only invisible?


Mons. Noting else. She be in dis Room still. Hist, dare she go.


Ped. Where?


Mons. Dare, just dare.

[Pedro catches at her. O fee, she be too nimble for you, you canno catch her;
she serve you de slippery trick.


Ped. Aye, Sir, I am satisfied you can do Miracles, and all that; but dear Sir,
help me to her as soon as possibly you can.


Mons. She shall come by degree: De Mist before your eye shall vanish presant.


Avar. Sir, Sir, pray make an end of my business, I am not very well, I am
all-o're in a cold sweat; and therefore pray help me to my Pearl again, that I
may go home to bed.


Mons. Bring in de Priest.


Avar. Priests, Sir, for what?


Mons. Because me raise de Spirit, and when de Priest stand by, de Spirit have
no power.


Avar. But are you sure they ha'nt? will not he tear me to pieces?


Mons. No, no, dey be as innocent as de Lamb.


Enter a Priest, who goes to Dorido and Clorinia; and Truro in a Priests habit,
who goes to Avaritio. Avar. Dear Divinity, stand by me.


Trur. Fear nothing, Sir, I am your protector.


Monsieur conjures. Ascenda, ascenda, ascenda! A Spirit ascends. Ped. The
Devil, the Devil, the Devil!


Avar. I am dead, dead, stark dead --


Mons. Courage, dis be de harmless innocent Spirit; dis Devil hurt no body.


Avar. Oh, Sir, the sight of him kills me!


Mons. Kill! O fee, he be de good-natured Devil; he be so far from killing, dat
me vill make him dance to entertain you.


Avar. Dance, said you!


Mons. Me can command de Music in de Air.


Priest. Now kneel, and take her by the hand.

[to Dorido.
Dor. My dear Clorinia, this blessing is so ravishing, that I can scarce
contain my Joys.


Avar. Upon thy knees, Clo! that is a good girl; pray for me, pray for me.


Mons. Aye, Senior, she be very good Daughter, de pious Lady. But now observe
my Art.


Monsieur circles his Wand, and the Spirit dances. Mons. [The Dance ended.]
Now, Sir, dear be de Jewel; make him a ver low bow, pass him a Compliman, kiss
his hand, and tank him.


Avar. Kiss hand, said you?


Mons. Vat, vill be uncivil to de generous kind Spirit?


Avar. Uncivil, with a Pox! I dare not come near him.


Mons. Vat vill you no take de Jewel?


Avar. Let him but lay it down, and stand a little further off, and I dare
venture to take it.


Mons. Oh dat be no good fashion. You mus-take it from his own hand. Forward,
forward, courage.

[Thrusts him forward. He takes the Jewel. Your Compliman, your Compliman.


Avar. Oh, Sir, you kill me, you kill me!


Mons. Your tank, your tank.


Avar. I shall die, I shall die!


Mons. Your tank.


Avar. And please -- your Devilship -- I am your Devilships most -- humble
Servant -- I kiss your fair hand, and so I take my leave.


Ped. Is he gone?


[The Spirit sinks. Mons. Now vere be you hurt?


Avar. Well, I shall never claw off this fright.


Enter Leonora. Ped. My Dear, art thou come again!


Mons. Did me no tell you she would come again?


Ped. My Dear, where have thou been?


Leon. Oh, I have been the Lord knows where! I have been in a Trance, my Dear.


Ped. A Trance!


Enter Claudio. Leon. When I sunk under the ground, a great two-handed Devil
got me into his Cell, and caught me in his arms and held me so close, that he
had like to have stifled me.


Ped. Stifled thee, poor Rogue!


Leon. And would you think it? he had scarce let me go two minutes, but the
furious Devil caught me so again.


Ped. Come, Wife, let us be gone. I have been frighted almost out of my wits.
Senior, your humble Servant.


Claud. Are you going, Senior?


Ped. Yes, Sir.


Leon. I thought to have put a Question --


Ped. Oh, no more Questions, no raising of damned Spirits, good Wife.


Leon. But some other time will do better. I am very well satisfied at present.


Claud. Dear Madam, adieu.


[Exeunt Ped. and Leon. Avar. Clo, and Valerio, come, have me home to bed. Oh
sick, sick!


Mons. Oh no, Sir, your Daughter mus stay, and go to bed wit dat Gentleman.


Avar. How! what is this?


Dor. Sir, your Son-in-Law, the happy Dorido.


[Kneels. Clor. And your dutiful Daughter Clorinia.


[Kneels. Dor. Beg your Pardon and your Blessing.


Claud. Come, Sir, forgive 'em; they have loved one another, and now have made
one another happy.


Avar. Hussy, is all this true?


Clor. I cannot deny what is made in Heaven. Yes, Sir, he is my Husband.


Avar. Cheats, Rogues, Villains, I am betrayed!


Mons. Betray! Oh no, your Daughter be only married to dat Gentleman by a
trick of my invention; dat's all.


Avar. All, said you? Gypsy, how durst you play the Traitor, and see the Devil
so near you?


Dor. 'Twas her best policy to avoid him. The Devil could have no power over
her whilst she was at so pious a work.


Mons. We, Senior; de Devil have no power to take de fair Lady, especial when
she be taking de fine Gentleman.


Avar. Not take her, with a Pox! If he would not take her then, let him take
her now: for she shall never get one Cross from me.


Dor. However, let us have your Blessing, if we have nothing else.


Avar. Dissembling, cheating, jilting Varlets, go hang your selves.


Enter a Gentleman in Boots. Gent. Gentlemen, I have been seeking for Senior
Dorido, and was directed hither.


Dor. Sir, I am the man.


Gent. An't please you, Sir, your rich Uncle at Madrid, Senior Fabricio, God
rest his Soul, is dead; and dying without Issue, you are left Heir to his
Estate. I am come Post to inform you, and desire you to come to take possession.


Avar. Heir to Senior Fabricio's Estate!


Gent. Twenty thousand Crowns per annum, is a Blessing comes not every day.


Avar. Twenty thousand Crowns per annum!


Dor. But is my Uncle dead?


Avar. Aye, so the Gentleman says. But be not afflicted; alas, we must all die.


Dor. I am not so much afflicted at his death, as at your anger and displeasure
for marrying your Daughter.


Avar. Why truly, Senior Dorido, I have been a little angry with you; but I vow
my anger's soon over. And for any ill will I bear you, God knows my Soul --

Fabricio's Estate!

[Aside. Why really, Sir, I always had a great esteem for your person. Your
Father was my very intimate Acquaintance, a worthy honest Gentleman.


Dor. But, Sir, shall we have your Blessing?


[Kneels. Avar. Lord, Sir, what do you mean! Rise, rise; my Blessing on you
both.


Dor. Monsieur, I shall study to requite this kindness.


Mons. Sir, it be always de grand business of de French man, to oblige de fair
Lady.


Dor. But here --

[to Valerio and Claudio.] -- I must die a Debtour.


Mons. Vell, Sir, now me have done my magic Charm,

Next Circle dat you make be in her arm.

My Conjuring Art can boast var little merit;

It Is de fair Lady dat can raise de Spirit.


Exeunt omnes. EPILOGUE: Spoken by Monsieur.
BEgar, de Play be done, and now me guess,
Journee, me Conjure vat be de success.
You tink de Play be dull, me tink so too:
And, Gallant, am not I a Witch, Morbleau?
Play take, and Author be so grand a fool
To turn de French Nation to ridicule?
Dere's no such ting in nature: No begar,
De Frenchman be de Wit in Anglitar.
Dough he be fool in France, dat be no matter;
Shange but de Scene, and come but cross de water
In English Air, he strait turn man of part,
Get de Lords money, and de Ladies heart.
And shall
De English Fop abuse him on de Stage?
Journee, all my French blood be in a rage.
Damn d' English Acteur, English Teatre,
Dere's no such ting as Wit nor Acting dear.
De Wit, de Sense, de Fame, and de Renown,
Be in de French Troop at toder end o'Town.
Dear Player be brisk aerie Spark, here Dog
Of Actor, more like heavy English Log.
Beside, de English fool breed Beauties here,
And when gay Miss does on de Stage appear,
Strait keeping Spark, undo de Teatre.
Dere's no such danger among de wiser French,
Dear matron Actress with grave face, fat paunch,
And greasy look, more fit for Bawd den Wench.
Here dull Comedian spend Ten tousand pound,
Build house, and act togeder seav'n year round.
Begar, dat be no good French fashion; Dey,
Like true Knight Erran, scorn so long a stay;
Act but a veek or fortnight, and away.
No House, no Beauty, no Estate t'engage;
Journee, dear be no Ruining deir Stage.
FINIS.

