POOR ROBINS DREAM, OR THE VISIONS OF HELL: WITH A DIALOGUE Between the Two
GHOSTS OF Dr. T. and Capt. B.

LONDON: Printed by M.S. MDCLXXXI.

POOR ROBINS DREAM, OR THE Visions of Hell.
WHen th'charming News had passed Charing Cross,
And they deposed, that would dismount that Horse.
The Senators their hated patience forced,
As Thames once for Sempronia stopped her course.
Like Boys that were just from a Vineyard skar'd,
All stood amazed, but never a word was heard.
But when they found they were pursued by none,
But the Master stood only to keep his own.
They then unto their wonted passion flew,
And swore they would prove those Grapes to be their due,
Next time they came they would have the Master too
In The City. All their steady-Heads they tossed,
Like Wives at Billingsgate, when a good Bargain's lost.
Ballads of grief about the Town they sent,
As if they lost a Loyal Parliament.
Such clamorous Consternations, with false Cries,
Enough to tear great Jove down from the Skies.
None daring to confront those Factious Atheists,
Dreading that scand'lous Name they call, Church-Papist.
Then I e'ne laid me down upon my Bed,
Where sundry Contemplations seized my troubled Head.
In a trembling Trance I on a sudden fell,
Wherein I saw that damned Den called Hell.
Where ten thousand Scenes, with Legions of black Fiends,
Of burning Rebels, there they made their Skreens.
Old Noll and Bradshaw, Ireton and Pride,
Burning like Beacons; on the other side
Then perjured Rogues, drawn up in arched Rings,
Their Tongues like Serpents, showed their flaming Stings,
Thought I, Is this the fruit of killing Kings?
When that Scene changed, methought I clearly saw,
A solemn Conventicle groan out yells of woe.
Their Hats pinned to their heads with fiery Nails,
Their Ears drawn out as large as Spanish Frails.
Their Eyes like oval Lanthorns; glowing Rouls,
Or flaming Flambois, from their treacherous Souls.
Their Mouths unto their ugly Ears were drawn,
Spirits froth'd out, like poisoned, foul Frog-spawn.
Upon their Backs was writ in blood, I see,
Damned for Rebellion and Hypocrisy.
Amongst this prodigious and confused throng,
The Holder forth was called Dr. Tongue;
Who so excelled, Hugh Peter's being there*
That he was forced to fall into the Rear.
Till interposed by a Champion stout,
With flaming Sword made way through the hellish Rout.
B.
And cried to T. thou damned Orator,
Thou art the cause of my Soul burning here.
T.
Why what wast thou when first I did thee know?
But one condemned for Robbery by the Law.
B.
Why what wast thou poor Fool in Forty one?
But a poor Weaver then leapt from thy Loom.
Then stepped into a Tub to preach Sedition,
And took the Covenant for thy Commission.
Which thou pursued till all the Rump was ruined,
And Charles returned, and to his Right resumed.
And then thou made a Breech of thy own Mouth,
Swore back again, but never preached truth,
And in thy Age, more treacherous, than in youth.
T.
That cannot be imputed perjury,
To swear for those that rule by tyranny.
Or for any else, as Times may turn by fits,
That Is but a knack of living by ones wits.
But I never robbed upon the King's Highway,
Nor boasted on it unto my Friends next day.
Nor I never feigned my self to be a Lord,
Nor pilfer'd Coin without the help of Sword,
Nor never was proved perjured by Record.
B.
Thou damned Hell-hound, have thou now forgot,
Who was so active in the Popish Plot?
'Twas thou that patcht up O's Depositions,
And then delivered them without Commissions.
Which thou taught him pretend he had dispersed,
Then thou thy self turned tails and was releast.
Yet still thou did persevere in thy sin,
Taught Tony and the rest to bring me in.
To meet you at Cabals, and Foxes-hall,
Where I received my Lessons from you all.
You taught me what to speak, who to impeach,
All Loyallists you brought within my reach.
Both Queen and Duke I to the Block must bring,
Nay -- had I lived, I must have peacht the K --
Now who is the cause of my Soul's suffering?
T.
All this I own was truth, and ten times more,
But thy black Soul was damned long before.
Thou had committed Murder, Theft and Rape,
So 'twas impossible thy Soul should 'scape.
For had thou lived till each true string had twang'd,
Thou then had surely been both damned and hanged.
B.
Thou splay-mouth'd Fiend, I hold thy words in scorn,
Thou deserv'dst hanging long e're I was born.
Thou and thy Brother Baxter, Spawns of evil,
Who kept your correspondence with the Devil.
And spewed your poison over Three brave Nations,
And brought in Oats to all their desolations.
The Devil taught you how to tutor Cooper,
And Beelzebub himself his Over-looker.
One Paw upon the Tap holds in the Bong,
The other guides his tottering Head and Tongue.
And cries, My Tony thou shall live to see
Englands destruction, and its Monarchy,
And my chief Engine, Tony, thou shall be.
And of all the Plots and Sham-plots thou art Father,
And all the Evidence thou'st patcht together;
For which Indulgence I Will inspire thee still,
And thus the Devil helps old Machiavel.
T.
Why? Tony was the cause of my Damnation,
It was his malice that enflamed the Nation.
'Twas He, under pretense of doing good,
That squeezed poor Innocents, and broacht their blood.
'Twas He that made his Grace a stalking Horse,
And hid himself behind his pocky Arse.
'Twas he that taught Tub-Preachers to seduce
The People, to choose Members for their use.
Such as in the late Rebellion played their parts,
And now are downright Rumpers in their hearts.
To all the Olivarians that are living,
His damned Documents he is daily giving.
It Is He that all the Rebels now controuls,
For fear they should repent and save their souls.
Or rather that they may come boldly on,
By force of Arms to end what he begun.
Or else his Head must fly for what is past,
And's Tap must burst, to show his soul is cursed.
B.
For Godfrey's death, 'twas thou persuaded me
To come in guilty; that black Perjury
Does gnaw my soul in these infernal flames,
That guiltless blood cries vengeance through my veins,
And showrs upon me in perpetual streams.
I swore that of that Murder I did know
A man, that in my life I never saw,
Yet three men's Lives I took by perjured Law.
T.
Tony and Godfrey's Brother that contrived,
To make the forged Plot the more believed.
The truth of which they never yet would tell,
Neither Oats, nor us that is now in Hell.
If e're that stifled Murder be unvailed,
Old Tony's mouthing Gang will soon be quail'd.
And those Cabals which daily now devise,
As the old one dies, to make new Plots to rise.
They Will then disperse, lest they all be trapann'd,
And their wise heads forsake their souls that is damned.
B.
Thou now speak like a Subject when't's too late,
Or one that knew not what they would be at.
It Is their ambition to be thrown in Gaols,
'Twould raise the Rout if Habeas Corpus fails.
Then Tony'l grin and prog about for Coin,
T'encourage his possessed herd of Swine.
Lurk in his hole to see 'em stave and tail,
But never come out, till he finds who will prevail.
T.
When he was young, he never durst to fight,
But in malicious mischief took delight.
For when the Nation flowed with blood before,
Tony was always thirsting after more.
How many thousand pound this Plot has cost him,
To buy the bloods of those that never crossed him?
When he has got poor Innocents condemned,
By his patcht Evidence, how eagerly he will send
To those that have most interest in the Rout?
He Will hire them t'come to force the Prisoners out,
To see them sacrifice before his Snout.
Which they will soon do, or else break down their hold;
For why, they are Tony's Cattle bought and sold?
While they are butchering, old Tony flears,
For more such Bargains, smells with both his ears.
Tony hired Ar. for to cut's own Throat,
Ar. was cunning, did but half the Joke.
Yet kept his money, and remained his debtor,
And promised him the Lives of some was better.
Though Tony's sides have several teer of holes,
He lusts after bodies, as the Devil after souls.
For if e're this trade of Papist-hanging's ended,
He Will bring in Presbyter and Independent.
Both Care and Curtis, Smith and pillor'd Ben,
After the best, he will hang the worst of men.
All that his Pate has drawn in to support him,
He Will hang them all, if Fate do ever thwart him.
Both Lords and Evidence that is now for him,
Nay perhaps his Grace, who now he is making K --
Or those who all this prosecution commence,
He can hang them with the same Evidence.
Should we have lived till such a Change broke forth,
To save himself he would have hanged us both.
He Is such a Knave, and they such silly Elves,
When he has a mind, he will make'um hang themselves.
B.
Heart, Blood and Wounds, would he have hanged up Bedlow?
Oh -- that my Lady Mother did but know --
That cursed Cannibal? had I lived two years longer,
I Would have hanged him, that rotten damned Whoremonger.
Let Us out of Hell, the Porter we can bribe,
We Will bring him Tony's soul, or some of that damned Tribe.
We Will tell the K -- that Tony is the cause
Of all this plotting, and subverting Laws.
That Tony is so treacherous and so apish,
That he is the head of all the plotting Papists.
For 'twas his Plot, and none but he contrived it,
And he is the Rogue that ever since revived it.
Each Prison round the Town he searches duly
For Evidence, to recommend to Rowly.
But takes such pains to teach each Tool its Chapter,
As a man to make a Spaniel Dog a Setter.
Which must impeach Bishop and Judges too,
And all that for the K -- withstand his Crew.
The Courtiers he corrupts till they are discarded,
Then by his Tribe for him they must be guarded.
While he sits at the helm to guide Sedition,
All legal Laws he counts mere Superstition.
He sits environed round with Brother-Vipers,
Who imitates his Nods like Scotch Bag-pipers.
Pendent and Bitter, and Mare-frigging Quaker,
Keep time, Tony, that brave Law Bear-baiter.
For he united them to stand together,
Against all that is Lawful, Loyal, or whatever
That Is direct opposition to the Crown,
To pull the Bishop and Monarchy down.
But he illustrates his grave Dispute,
By quaint Objections, coined against the D --
Against him his Bristles has long time stood snarling,
Yet cannot spit his poison beyond Sterling.
Could He wrench out that Pillar of the State,
He thinks the rest would fall in's hands by fate,
What a graceful Noll old Tony then would make?
Just like a Monkey he would become the Throne,
His Court Buffoons, and Pugs of the same Spawn.
Then Tony would be sure that all is his own.
Could he persuade the K -- to sell his Brother,
He Would never break his brains to find another.
To keep Sedition, and support the State,
Tony himself would be legitimate.
Let Us give the K -- this Caution, for it is true,
That he in time may know what is best to do.
With that a thundering noise their Contract broke,
The Den was darkened with infernal smoke.
Horror of yells and groans the Spirits strains,
Till on a sudden all flasht out in flames.
In which the Conventiclers sprawling cried,
For all Eternity must this abide?
With that a shower of Blood fell down upon 'um,
In which they spewed and stunk like Rebels, dam 'um*
For 'twas the blood of Innocents they would drawn,
When they lived here, to make the King their own*
Some of the Heads were hanged up by the Tongues,
The rest the Devils pitch about with Prongues.
To make way for approaching great Procession,
Which howled and roared without an intermission.
Their Tongues hung out with Froth like lathering Soap,
These were the Rabble burning of the Pope.
Amongst whom were Curtis, Harris, Smith and Care,
The Scene was just like that at Temple Bar.
Both Pope and Pageants, Jeffreys and the Friars,
But every step knee-deep in Blood and Fires.
Of those that did support 'um and the Rout,
But there they roared, and here they used to shout.
Both Squibs and Crackers from their mouths did fly,
Against Church and State they belcht out Blasphemy.
Their Skins were veiled with City-Mercuries,
Seditious Libels and their forged Lies.
Which taking fire at once made such a smother,
Down fell the Pageants, Rout, and all together
Did sprawl and howl in that infernal Flame,
Then I awakt, and all was but a Dream.
FINIS.

