THE SINGLE SONGS, With the DIALOGUE, Sung in the New OPERA, Called BRUTUS of
ALBA: OR, Augusta's Triumph.

Composed by Mr. Daniel Purcell.

LONDON, Printed by I. Heptinstall, for Henry Playford at the Temple-Change,
Fleetstreet, and Samuel Scott at the Middle Temple Gate, where the first Vol.
of Deliciae Musicae, and the first and second Books of the second Vol. also the
New Scotch Song (numbered the first) is to be had; where all other sorts of
Vocal and Instrumental Music is sold. 1696.

Price one Shilling.

TO Richard Norton, Esquires. AND Anthony Henley, Esquires.
GENTLEMEN,
YOU having been pleased to be my first Encouragers at coming to Town, and
since that to continue your Favors to me; I thought it my Duty (as it is my
Ambition) to present this part of the Performance to your Acceptance, as the
best Recommendation of it to the Town, and further Encouragement to the
Endeavors of

Your Most Obliged, and Humble Servant, Dan. Purcell.

A Song
Sung by Mrs. Cross.
^ CEase Cynthia, cease, cease, cease your fruitless tears, cease, Cynthia,
cease, cease, cease your fruitless tears; in vain you do for Pi -- ty move;
Strep^on regardless all your pas -- sion hears, and vows he can no lon -- ger
love; then learn of him Incon -- stancy, no lon -- ger wait his be -- ing kind,
but to some other Lo -- ver fly, and banish, ba -- nish him your mind.

Sung by Mr. Church, the Words by Mr. Io. Hanes.
^ I Courted and Writ showed my Love and my Wit, and still pretty Flavia de
-- ny'd; 'twas her Virtue I thought, made me prove such a sot, to a-dore her
the more for her Pride; till I happened to sit by her Masked in the Pit,
whilst a crow'd of gay Beaus held her Play, when so wan-ton -- ly free, was her
smart Re-par-tee, I was Cured and went blushing, went blushing a -- way.

II.
How Lovers mistake,
The addresses they make,
When they swear to be constant and true,
For all the Nymphs hold,
Though the sport be still old,
That their Playmates must ever be new;
Each pretty new toy,
How they will long to enjoy;
And then for a newer will pine?
But when they perceive,
Others like what they leave,
Then they cry for their Bauble again.
Sung by Mr. Leverige, the Words by Mr. Io. Hanes.
^ HOw happy am I the fair Sex can de -- fie, and can every day say that my
heart is my own, I never saw yet that Beauty or Wit, but I Would love if I
pleased or could let her a -- lone; I thought that my flame would still be the
same, for Beau -- tifull Celia, if Ce -- lia was true; but Love is so blind
when Ce -- lia was kind, I changed her for Mop -- sa, for Mop -- sa was new.

II.
Then Phillida's Charms,
Forced her from my Arms;
But when Phillida would not grant my desire,
I presently kneeled,
To the next that would yield,
To quench my old flame I made a new fire.
III.
Now is it not fair,
That my faults I declare;
Then Ladies be it known to all you I adore,
Since I must deceive,
Take you the same leave,
The Devil's in it if you can ask any more.
A Song
Sung by Mr. Freeman.
^ It Is vain to tell me I am de -- ceiv'd, for Ce -- lia seems so kind, 'twere
Sin she should not be be -- liev'd, since I no cheat can find: If flat -- te --
ry with false -- hood lie in her soft youth con -- ceal'd, a thousand times
I Would ra -- there dye than have the truth, than have the truth re -- veal'd.

II.
Let buisy fools in Libels rail,
Their malice I Will out-brave;
On me no scandal shall prevail,
So she the appearance save:
For if I think I have her Heart,
My own for hers is due;
Let her but act the tender part,
I Will think the joy is true.
Sung by Mrs. Willis in the 3 d. Act.
^ GReat Queen of Hymen's hallowed fires, the sovereign of all Chaste de --
sires, that with true joy the genial Bed in -- spire; See, see what bend -- ing
Knees we pay thee, thus a -- door thee, thus, thus o -- bey thee; See what
bending Knees we pay thee, thus, thus a -- -- door thee, thus, thus o -- bey
thee.

Sung by Mr. Church, Words by John Robens, Esquire.
^ WHy Clo -- e, why, why will you not perceive, the woun -- ds you give, you
give my heart; why, why like a tyrant will you live, re -- gardless, re -- --
guard -- less of my smart: My si -- ghs have tired the pi -- tying Swains, my
groans have filled, have filled the Grove; yet Clo -- e still unmoved re -- --
mains, and vows she will never, and vows she will never, she will never, ne -- ver
Love.

II.
But Cloe, oh! at length be taught,
Reserv'dness is a crime;
And if you can commit a fault,
It Is one to fool with time:
Old age may come, your Charms will wast,
Your Beauties may decay;
Then to Love's tenders't joys make have,
Be happy whilst you may.
III.
Single the Phaenix lives alone,
The reason for it is this;
Nature at once permits but one,
If two they would taste the Bliss:
With envious Eyes long she perceives,
Joys other Creatures prove;
For want of which the world she leaves,
Expires in flames of Love.
^ LEt others boast of li -- ber -- ty, I en -- vy not their Bliss; A -- min --
tor's Charms have cap -- tiv'd me, and I am on -- ly his: If Lo -- ving true
be called a Chain, it is plea -- sing to en -- dure, for who can count that
thing a pain, they ne -- ver wish to cure?

Sung by Mr. Freeman in the 5 th. Act.
^ IF Mortals lau -- gh and sing, it is time we Gods, we Gods take wing; To
mount, to mount and send him down the guar -- di -- an of his Crown; As -- --
tree -- a, As -- tree -- a, who from Earth was driven till Al -- bion called her
back, till Albion called her back from Heaven, till Al -- bion called her back
from Heaven.

A Dialogue Sung between Mr. Edwards, and Mrs. Cross.
^ WHY, Why do thou fly me pretty, pretty, pretty Maid; though old, I feel, I
feel Loves fire, which cannot, which cannot be quenched with -- out thy Aid,
then prithee, then pre -- thee fair one be not cold, for though it is true I Am ve
-- ry, ve -- ry old, I still have young, I sti -- ll have young de -- sire, I
still, I sti -- ll have young de -- sire. Nay prithee dear Nestor cease, cease
this discourse, for I Have often, I Have often been ^ told, that for a young Virgin
there is no -- thing worse, than to bed with a Man, than to bed with a Man that
is old. You much mi -- stake, my pret -- ty fair, for old Men al -- ways
constant are. I do not doubt your constan -- cy, for age of course must
constant be; your youthful Vigor be -- ing gone, you scarce can think, can
think of more than one. Is there nothing then can gain you? Yes, yes there is.
Here Is Gold, will that ob -- tain ^ you? Oh! fie, fie, fie. See here, see here
is store of Gold, oh! fie, fie, fie, fie, oh! fie, you are old. No matter Child,
no mat -- ter Child, here is Gold. Well I Will take it for once, but I must have
more, for this is too lit -- tle, too lit -- tle to win me: Nay ra -- there than
so thou shall have all my store, and if that fail, and if that fail, the Devil,
the Devil is in ye. I thank you, and now I must go. And ^ I will go with ye,
Oh! no, no, no, no, Why sure Child you will not, you will not serve me so? In -- deed
but I must, Then give me my Gold, No, no I never make presents to Men that are
old.

CHORUS.
^ No, no I never make Presents to Men that are old. Then give me, give, give
me my Gold; give, give me my Gold.

FINIS.
Vocal and Instrumental Music lately Printed and Reprinted with large
Additions, for Henry Playford at his Shop in the Temple-Change, Fleetstreet.
HArmonia Sacra, in 2 Books, containing Divine Hymns and Dialogues lately set
to Music by Dr. John Blow, and Mr. Henry Purcell, and other Eminent Masters.
Price Bound of both Books 15 Shillings, the Second Book Sticht 4 s.

Deliciae Musicae, in 4 Books, with Three Elegies on our late Queen, being the
first Volume, Contains most of the Newest and Best Songs, by the late Famous
Mr. Henry Purcell. The Price of the Volume Sticht, 5 s.

The whole Book of Psalms in 3 Parts, by John Playford, as they are Sung in
Churches: Printed for the use of several Masters in most Countries, who teach
the same. The 2 d. Edition in 80. Price Bound 5 s.

The Introduction to Music, with Mr. Purcell's Addition, being the best Rules
for Composition, Price bound 2 s.

The New Treasury of Music, in Fol. being the best Collection of Song-Books
for this 20 Years last past. Price Bound 2^ s.

The 2 d. Book of the Pleasant-Musical Companion, being a Choice Collection of
Catches in 3 and 4 Parts, to which is added several Songs for Two Voices, by
Mr. Henry Purcell, and other Eminent Masters. Price Stitcht 2 s.


