though Satan does in Chains of Darkness ly,
^et has he power on Earth men's Souls to buy,
^ut that is but limited: for here you see
^im foiled, and God my Gracious God to be.


THE YOUNG MAN^ Conflict with, and Victory over The Devi^ by FAITH.

OR, A True and Perfect Relation of the Experiences (...) T. P. begun in the
15th. and continued till t^^ 17th: Year of his Age, who (upon his first
Co^victions, having an earnest desire to serve Christ in the Work of the
Ministry) was much tempte^ to make a Contract with Satan, who often appeared
visibly, and made Eminency in Learning the grand Bait to catch his Soul; but
(by an Omnip^tent Hand) was Prevented from that Agreement

Pub^ished for the Benefit of such, who have bin, or shall (...) tempted in the
like manner; And Composed by way of Dialogue between four Interlocutors, Viz.

Evangelus, a Minister of the Gospel. Paulus, a young Convert Demas, an
Apostate. Apollion, the D^vil.

By T. P.

MIC. 7.8. Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy, wh^^^^ fall, I shall arise;
when I sit in darkness, the Lord shall (...) a ^ight unto me.

LONDON, Printed for John Hancock Sen. and Iun. at (...)three Bibles in Popes
Head. Alley in Cornhill. 16^^.

To that little Flock in and about the County of Hartford, the Author sends
Greeting.
SIRS,
WHEN I take a View of the Wonderfulness of Gods Providence in bringing me
first among you, together with those Bonds of Love, by which I am held so fast,
that it is my quotidian and daily study, how I may be further capacitated to
serve you, and the Church of my Lord Jesus; Verily, I must confess, you are the
People that have all my thoughts: And besides this, you are those who have the
greatest interest in my Prayers; Others have some of my heart, but next to God
you have all my heart, I have heard much of the love of a Minister to his
People, as that I could scarce give credit unto it; but I do now believe it,
because Experience has taught me so, though that by which I am obliged unto you
is not the same as with a Minister and his People, it being only a sincere Love
begotten by my frequent, painful and laborious Preaching unto you, without any
further charge, and yet notwithstanding how do I love you, and pray for your
happiness in this World, and the World to come; I cannot endure to think of your
damnation, no, not any of you. I am sick at the heart (many times) through
fear, lest I should rise up in judgment against some of you, because there are
those amongst you, that seem to takeiittle notice of God, Christ, and their
immortal souls, though through grace all of you are not molested with the
Contagion of this Distemper, which is so Epidemical, not only in foreign
Places, but likewise in our English Island, as that it does many times occasion
Floods of Tears to run down from the eyes of Gods precious Servants, who, as so
many Lots, do bewail the iniquities of this Land. Sirs, I have thought good to
reach you with my Pen, when my Tongue cannot; and hence it is, that I dedicate
this unto you in part, though it is possible I could have found out many
others, whose Names I might affix in the Frontispiece of this Book, only my
Love is most endeared to you; and wherefore do you think it is, that I should
concern my self so much with you; would you know, take then these few Reasons.

First, because God made me not altogether for my self, but for you and others;
we were not made for our selves, and therefore we act most like beasts, when we
only mind our selves, and not others, who are our Kinsfolk, according to
Creation; but when that goodness that is in us is so diffusive, as that it
leads us forth to succor those who srand in need of our help, then we act as
our selves, and like rational creatures, it is God that created me, and why did
he create me, but that I should serve him, and in what better way can I do it,
then in the first place to seek my own salvation, and after that, the salvation
of you and others. But,

Secondly, the End of my Creation is not all by which I am induced to concern
my self thus with you, but likewise the End of my Redemption requires me so to
do; I, you, and all of us were no sooner created, but we fell from God; and
through Adherence to the Devil, lost that glorious Image which he had invested
us with, and thereby forfeited the favor of God, and so became the Children of
Wrath; but now Jesus Christ, that immaculate and spotless Lamb of God, who knew
no sin, became sin for us, by assuming the humane nature, and taking upon him
the guilt of all our transgressions, Isa. 53.6. How then can I, you, or any of
us, be slothful in Gods service, when he has done so much for all of us as he
has done; May we not say as Bernard did concerning Christ, Dilexisti me Domine
magis quam ^ipsum.
Thou have loved me, Oh Lord, more then thy self! And now the End wherefore
Christ did all this was, that we might be restored to Gods Image again, and to
serve him in all manner of holiness; And in no better way can I do this, then
in looking after my own soul and the souls of others.

Thirdly, the End of my Redemption does not only require me thus to concern my
self with you, but likewise the End of my Sanctification.

I am sanctified (as I hope) and am washed with the water of Regeneration. Now
it is the duty of those who are sanctified, to lead other in the way to
Sanctification and obedience of the Spirit; This our Savior lays down as a
Rule to Peter, That when he was converted, Luke 22.32.
he should strengthen his Brethren. But

Fourthly, the very End of my Ministry requires me to have a diligent care of
your souls; It Is a duty of us who are Preachers of the Gospel, to pity and look
after poor souls that are in their blood; and God, yea, Angels and my own
Conscience do bear me witness how I pity your souls, and that I could go
hundreds of Miles barefoot ^o do any of you good, though never so mean in life
and descent; I was devoted from the Womb to the Ministry; and now when I come
forth unto it, shall I not in any wise answer the end thereof, the Lord forbid.

Fifthly and lastly, not only the End of my Creation, Redemption,
Sanctification and Ministry; but likewise the end of my Preservation does thus
oblige me to you: Has God done for me what he has done, and shall I not to
the utmost do what I can for him; Has he wrought such deliverances for me, and
shall I be slack and negligent in his service, far be it from me, and all those
who have experienced the like that I have; And has he moreover kept me
hitherto, and must I not seek his glory; to such perverse walking the Lord put
an end: Many other Obligations there are, by which I am bound to look after
you; ( viz.) I am a dying Creature, and therefore whilst I have life I must act
for God, because when I am in the Grave I cannot write unto you, My
Preaching-Work then will be over; And h^nce it is, that I do think it meet,
whilst I am in this earthly Tabernacle, to put you in mind of these things, and
to stir you up to the doing thereof; And as the consideration of my Mortality
should move me to do what I can for God; and you see likewise the consideration
of yours should make you more willing to hear and receive, Post mortem nulla
Paenitentia.
what I and others do both Preach and write unto you.

And now, Sirs, what remains, but that you would follow those Practical things,
Christi revere^se Tribunal.
which the good Spirit of God may by these Lines put you in mind of; Consider,
you must one day render an Account for all the good Sermons that you have
heard; the Word will either prove a savor of life, or of death; you will
either be the better for Sermons, or the worse, and therefore to you now I
speak, that have often heard the vociferation of the Gospel, but are not as yet
reformed; Consider, after Death comes Judgment, Scio Domi^e Jesus quod
districtus arbiter ^mnium ven^urus clandestina hominum facta and verba cogit^ta
in lucem proferes. G^rhard de extremo judicio.
and then what will you do, will you not wish that you had taken the good
Counsel of God given by his Ministers, will you not then remember these Sermons
which once you, forgot as soon as ever you went out out of the Church, and will
not the remembrance thereof be as a Worm gnawing of your Consciences in Hell,

Oh with what shame and confusion will ye then be clothed, when all those
secret sins, which you thought were impossible to be brought to light, shall be
made manifest before the Lord Jesus, who is ((...)) light it self. Moreover,
consider that without you have an Advocate, the^e is no standing at this
Tribunal, and who is this Advocate, but Jesus Christ will plead to the utmost
for you, if you can but make sure of him, for without him nothing can be done,
in order to your being sheltred from that wrath of God, which then shall be
revealed on all those who have slighted this Advocate, and have accounted
Sermons of no worth, further believe and consider, that if you have not the
Lord Jesus to stand as your friend, you must be thrust down into Hell, and
there howl with the damned for ever: And what think you now of these things, do
you steadfastly believe them; if you do not, search the Scriptures, and there
you will find what I have said to be true; if you do believe them, why then do
some of you live, as if there were neither God, Heaven, Hell or Judgment; if
these things are sincerely believed by you, stir up then, and lay hold upon
God, and claim of him deliverance from wrath to come, for it is hastening apace,
and w^ unto you if you lay up nothing against this burning wrath of God for the
time to come, is as sure as the time that is present, why therefore are you all
for the present time, assure your selves, that the walking in repulse against
these Considerations, and the sweet motions of the Spirit will make you smart
one day. But

Finally, if you will all observe these things to do them, what a blessed
Meeting shall we have, how wide will the Gates of Heaven stand open for u^?
what a Welcome will God the Father give us, the very thoughts of it does glad my
very heart and soul; Suffer therefore the good Word of God to take Impression
upon you; Endeavor to live a life of Grace here, that so you may live a Life of
Glory hereafter; Persevere in all good, hold out to the end, for the Crown will
make amends for all: Be constant in the use of means; Follow Peace with all
men, be useful in your several Vocations, that in all things ^u may be fit for
the being received (...) into the Heaven of Heavens; which is and ever shall be
the desire ^d Prayer of him,

Who is, SIRS, Your Souls Friend, THO. POWELL

PAULUS in his Unconverted state AEtatis suae 12.
Evangelus. WELL met, The first Salutation. Wha^soever is sinful, is
delightful to the carnal eye.
Friend; Whither are you going?


Paulus. I am going to see a Play, for they say it is very well worth ones
observation.


Evangelus. How! to see a Play? I would not have you for a World, It is the
work of a Minister to anticipate every sinful enterprise.
could I but hinder you, I would, for there is nothing but wickedness and
Profaneness for your Contemplation; and if this is worth your observation,
judge you.


Paulus. You talk more like a Phanatick then a Civil and honest man, A carnal
man knows no difference between things spiritual and temporal, 1 Cor. 2.14.
for I verily believe, there may be as much good gathered from the observation
of such a sight, as sometimes hearing of a good Sermon.


Evangelus. A Repro^f
Oh, what Prodigious and black ignorance is this, to think that more benefit
may be received from open Prof^neness, then from hearing the Word of God; Have
you not yet known the difference between evil and good.


Paulus. How will sinners plead for the satisfaction of their sensual desires
from evil examples. An Answer ^o the aforesaid Plea.
There are some (I believe) as good and as wise as your self, that goes to such
places; and certainly, if it be lawful for them, it is lawful for me.


Evangelus. That is true friend, if lawful for them, then it is for you; but it
is not lawful for them, and therefore let such be never so wise, yet if they go
to such Places as you plead for, they do in that fall short of being wise men;
And moreover, herein is showed much of your folly in grounding lawfulness for
the same, on no other Foundation, but because such and such do so, whereas we
that are Christians should endeavor to make our lives congruous with the
Sacred Writ, yea, that which the Prophets and Apostles have built upon should
be our Foundation.


Paulus. Pray, Ephesians 2.20. This is a Proverbial speech amongst the Naturalists.
Sir, keep your breath to cool your own Pottage, for every Tub must stand upon
its own bottom, therefore catechize not me, for I will not be catechized by
you, and as long as I have a mind to go, I will go.


Evangelus. Friend, The End of our Creation are these two. 1. The Glory of God.
2. The good of each other.
be not so touchy, for I mean you no hurt, nothing I am ^o you: it is true, and
that every Tub must stand upon its own bottom I know, yet considering that
^very one was not made for himself, but for the Glory of God, ^he good and
benefit of each other, therefore it does behove us to be giving one another
good Counsel; If you know any thing more then me, I Will learn of you: and if I
know any thing more then you, you shall learn of me if you please.


Paulus. Nay, this is very fair, I must needs confess.


Evangelus. Divine cont^ivement.
Well then, my friend, if it may s^ please you, to deny your self of going t^
that Place, first intended by you, I wi^^ then tell you what we will do in
stea^ thereof.


Paulus. I don't much care if I do for once.


Evangelus. What think you then of going t^ yonder Grove; where we may sit down
in the shade, and discourse concerning Soul-Affairs.


Paulus. With all my heart, good Sir.


Evangelus. Providentia guber. not omnia.
Well Friend, seeing then that Go^ his Providence has bin pleased to ^ring us
into one another Company; ^ill you give me leave to ask you a ^w Questions?


Paulus. Yea, Sir, and I shall thank you ^oo.


Evangelus. What do you think then concerning Heaven? Practical Question.



Paulus. It is a good place, no doubt.


Evangelus. Yea, and how happy shall we be if we can but get thither.


Paulus. Why, do you question getting thither?


Evangelus. Yea, that I do; Heaven, though it is a Saints, yet it may be called
in question by a Saint. Wicked men think, they bring assurance of Heaven with
them into the world.
Don't you?


Paulus. No, I did never question getting to Heaven, since I have been born, I
thank God for it.


Evangelus. Questioning of our selves is a demonstration of our sincerity.
I am apt to think, you might ha^ had more cause to bless God, for qu^stioning
your title to Heaven, the^ for not questioning it; and I am (...) opinion, that
you and others w^ scarce get to Heaven, except yo^ come first to doubt of your
righ^ thereto.


Paulus. Strict Godliness in the eyes of the World is censuring.
You are the strangest man that ^ ever met with in all my life; and indeed this
is the fault which I find^ to be in you Phanaticks, viz. you^ censuring.


Evangelus. Friend, you mistake us, and I suppose you do not very well
understand me, for did you not say just now, that you questioned not getting to
Heaven.


Paulus. Yea, I did, what of all that?


Evangelus. A Soul-searching question.
I only then ask you, the Grounds on which you build your hopes for Heaven so
steadfastly, without the least questioning assurance thereof.


Paulus. The Mercy of God, Naturalists think God has no other Attribute, then
his Mercy to glorify. We are fallen with Adam.
no better ^rounds can there be.


Evangelus. The Mercy of God* that is true, ^iend; but Gods Mercy has bin
^rfeited long ago through our diso^dience in Adam, have you now ^ined it: if
you have, pray tell me ^w, and by what means?


Paulus. Nay, Matters of sublime spirituality, are new things to the carnal eye.
if so, the Lord look down ^on me, for I never heard of this ^fore.


Evangelus. It is very true, my Friend; and ^ce it is, that we have brought
(...) with us into the World, by ^ich we are made the Heirs of ^ath.


Paulus. Be you sure, this is true.


Evangelus. Do you believe all those Truths c^^tained in the Holy Bible?


Paulus. Do I believe them* yea* certain^^ or else I should be a Papist or an
I^^fidel.


Evangelus. Then see this proved from these (...) Places of Scripture, Psalm.
51.5. I (...) shapen in iniquity, and in sin did (...) Mother conceive me; And
Ephesians. 2^ We are by nature the children wrath, Cum multis aliis.
even as others. So Romans 5. l^ By one man sin entered into the wor^^ and death
by him, and so death (...) over all men, for that all ha^ sinned.


Paulus. Nay, here is Scripture enoug^ none can deny.


Evangelus. A true Mi^ister, i^ loath that any should perish, and go out of the
World mistaken.
Well then, seeing (...) it is as I say, had I (...) Grounds (do you thin^ for
speaking what I di^ and therefore I pray (...) willing to give me some further
sa^^^faction touching the belief of your ^^^vation.


Paulus. Nay* Faith can puzzle carnal reason at any time.
you have so puzzled me, that ^^w I know not what to do, except it to tell you,
that I pray Morning ^^d Evening.


Evangelus. Well, what of all that? I hope you not expect to get to Heaven by
your ^^ayer, do you?


Paulus. Yes* Upon this Rock many are split.
I do, or else I know not how to (...) to Heaven.


Evangelus. Oh Friend, Whether ignorance is the Mother of Devotion, I leave it
for you to judge; but ignorance, I am sure, is the (...) that breeds high
thoughts of our selves, and low (...) of our Lord Jesus.
had you been acquaint^^ with godly Ministers, or any of ^^ds People, and
desired their Instru^^^ons, certainly you would have bin (...) now acquainted
with the way that (...) to Heaven and eternal Happi^^^s, for thou art grossly
ignorant thinking to be saved by Prayers.


Paulus. I don't say Prayers only, (...) take in Reading of good Books, a^
hearing of good Sermons.


Evangelus. Ephesians ^.5, 8. By grace ye are saved.
Nay, it is all one for that, (...) if you take in all good Works what^^^ ever,
they will prove insignificant^ merit salvation.


Paulus. Say you so, why I never heard (...) from our Minister, and he is a
(...) good Churchman.


Evangelus. Nay, as to that I know not, but (...) I Will assure you, that what I
have hea^^ from you, as yet does rather savor Popery, then of true
Christianity.


Paulus. There is a ^ind of zeal to be found in Naturalists.
How! a Papist, Sir; God forbi^ for I am sure I am so far from bei^^ a Papist,
that if I do but meet (...) one, I go the other side of the (...) because I
will not see him. I do hate him.


Evangelus. So Carnality affects.
Perhaps you walk more by custo^ then by judgment; for I Will assure you it is
as I say.


Paulus. Pray Sir, tell me then, what must save me, if good works cannot;
Thanks be to God I met with you: or else I should have died in this mistake,
notwithstanding our Minister.


Evangelus. Why thus you see, What a sad con^^deration is this, that when God
has sent hi^ Son into the World* he is not known by the best part of (...).
Friend, Gods dealings with us are various; but to gratify your desire, let me
ask you this Question; Did you never hear of Jesus Christ? Here has not bin so
much as one word concerning him.


Paulus. Nay, hold you; I have heard of Jesus; what of him?


Evangelus. What of him* why it is he that must save you.


Paulus. Its no marvel then, why I have heard such a talk concerning Jesus
Christ, but I ever thought it was my good works that must save me.


Evangelus. Behold the vast difference between a believer, and an unbeli^ver;
One depends upon Christ for salvation; and the other depends upon duties for
salvation. A true Believer is willing to be nothing, so that Christ may
something, whereas an unbeliever acts to the contrary.
Nay, Friend, I will show you an insuffi^iency in that; and lik^wise, that
salvation is only to be had in Christ, and by him you must be saved, if ever
saved; Receive these Scriptures for the truth of both, Romans 3.20. Therefore by
the deeds of the Law no flesh shall be justified in his sight; for by the Law
is the knowledge of sin; So the 28 th. verse, Therefore we conclude, that a man
is justified by faith without the deeds of the Law, Gal. 2.16.


Paulus. Why then, by your Reckoning, I have all my work to begin before I can
get to Heaven.


Evangelus. If you understand no more then this, I must needs say, you are far
from being a new creature; and if far from being a n^w creature, then far you
^re from the Kingdom of Heaven.


Paulus. How do you prove that?


Evangelus. I prove it from these following Scriptures, Mark 16.16. He that
believes and is baptized, shall be saved; and he that believes not, shall be
damned. So Luke 13.3, 5. I tell ye, nay, except ye repent, ye shall all
likewise perish, John 3.3, 5. Verily, verily, I say unto thee, except a man be
born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God; And what think you of th^se
Scriptures?


Paulus. Why, I think they are very good; but if I have all this to do, as you
say, and am still to begin the Christians A, B, C; then I had as good desist a
little while, seeing that as yet I am but young, and so for a time take my
pleasure: and when I come to be old, I Will then take this way to serve God which
you have prescribed; for I am afraid lest I should not hold out in serving God
another way, in regard that I have taken so much pain* in the other, for indeed
I am spent.


Evangelus. Oh Friend, give not way to the Devil^* these are only his
suggestions, believe him not; for can you serve God in a more acceptable time
then in the days of your Youth; Consider, I pray you, these following things.


First, Consider your Youth; God requires Eccl. 12.1. Remember your Creator in
the days of your youth. Secondly, it is a Question whether you may live to an
old Age, which if not, what will become of you. Thirdly, grant that you live to
an old Age, it is a Question whether the day of grace may last so long.
Fourthly, if the day of grace should last so long, it is a question, whether
you will not, through the pains and imbecilities of old Age, be rendered
incapable to serve God. Fifth^y, Consider you may serve God when it is too
late, but you can never serve him too soon.
Paulus. Verily, this is true, I cannot deny it; but do you not think, that God
is more glorified by an old Convert, then by a young.


Evangelus. When you have such suggestions as these, endeavor to make them
abortive at their birth; for any will tell you, that there is nothing more
acceptable unto God, then when a young man offers up the Flower of his Age unto
him; yea, and what does conduce more unto Gods glory then the same.


Paulus. Well, I am now convinced of my folly, especially of confiding in good
works for salvation.


Evangelus. Well, bless God for it; and now seeing, through infinite mercy, an
insufficiency in good works to save you, what think you of God?


Paulus. Why, I think that he is a Spirit.


Evangelus. He is so, Joh. 4.24^ ^imonide^ the more he stu^ied to know what God
was, the harder still it seemed unto him. God cannot b^ defined.
my friend, and they that worship him, must worship him in spirit and in truth.


Paulus. This I knew a great while ago.


Evangelus. Very good, are there more Gods then one?


Paulus. Y^a surely, there must be three Gods; God the Father, God the Son, and
God the Holy Ghost.


Evangelus. Know, Friend, that thou art woefully ignorant; for though there be
three Persons in the Godhead; yet th^se three are but one in substance all this
while; there is but one individual Deity; as the Fire does contain in it three
Properties, 1. Its self. 2. Heat. 3. Light. So though there be but three ways
of subsisting in the Godhead, yet all this while it is but individual.


Paulus. Pray Sir, is there any Scripture for this?


Evangelus. Yea, Scripture enough; see Deuteronomy. 6.4. Hear, O Israel, the Lord our
God is one Lord, Isa. 44.6. I am the first, and I am the last, and beside me
there is no God, Isa. 45.22. Look unto me, and be ye saved all the ends of the
Earth, for I am God, and there is none else. So 2 Cor. 8.4, 5, 6. and Ephesians. 4.5.
1 Timothy 2.5.


Paulus. I confess these Scriptures do hit me; Some do think, if they do but
read Gods Word, it is sufficient, thoug^ they take no notice o^ what (...)
contained therein.
for how many times have I read the Bible over* and yet* do not remember these
places.


Evangelus. You minded then well what you read, for certainly, if you had read
diligently, and with a desire to know, you would have given a more pertinent
Answer to such a Fundamental and Practical Point of Divinity as this. But this
is not all, our Souls are spirits, Angels are spirits, and the D^vils are
spirits; what difference is th^^^ then between God and these?


Paulus. Why, I suppose he is bigger then all of them.


Evangelus. Bigger then all of them; this is no solid Answer. God, he is an
increated Spirit, all others are created; God, he is an infinite Spirit, all
others are finite.


Paulus. Nay, this is very good.


Evangelus. Well, I am glad you like it, but what difference is there between
the Devils and the Angels.


Paulus. Why, I suppose they are both Spirits, and both Angels, only the Angels
in Heaven are the good Angels, and the Devils are the evil ones.


Evangelus. Thou say right; the Devils th^^ are now in Hell were once
righteous Angels, but through pride and malice they are now become, of all
creatures, the most miserable; but where do the Devils inhabit?


Paulus. I suppose the Devils do dwell in Hell, Chris^u^ Leo dicitur, propter
fortitudinem, Agnus propter inno entiam: Leo, quod invictus: Agnus quia
mansuetus. Ipse Agnus occasu vicit Leonem, qui circuit quaerens quem devoret,
Di^bolus Leo dictus ^eritate, non virtut^. Aug.
it being a Place prepared for them and the wicked.


Evangelus. The habitation of the Devils is, Habitatio Diab^lorum est p^rtim
A^^ partim in^ernus putat. Aug. 1.8. de Civ. Dei. c. 22. Illos usurpasse ^erem
ad exercenda^ s^am dominationem in homines, vult Ambros. in ^p. ad Ephesians. Ipsos
antequam ad det^^iora conversissent, ^^ris administrationem habuisse, tradit
Theodor. epitom. divin. Decret. Denique Lombard l. 2. s^nt. did. 6. cap.
solet. Author est, Luciferum, Princip^m Diabolorum, relig^rum man^re in
inferno, nec a^ nos tentendos accedere: alios vero Diabolos alternis vicibus
huc and (...) ferno ad animos hominum cruciandos vel deduce (...) ad infernum
venir^, qui ^liis suc^edentibus ipsis (...) tantur in infernum.
partly in Hell, and partly in the Air; The Devils do dwell in the Air unto the
Day of Judgment, and usurping the same, on purpose that they might rule in the
hearts of men; But what difference is there between the spirits and our souls,
for our souls, you know, are spirits?


Paulus. Nay, I believe, now you ask me that which you cannot answer your self.


Evangelus. Angeli sic ^o^is exc^nt, ut in^^rnis contempla^ionis gaudils non
priventur. Greg. Tres vitales Spiritus c^e^it Omnipotens: unum, qui carne non
tegitur; alium, qui carne tegi^ur, sed non cum carne moritur; alium, qui carne
te gi^u^, and cum carne moritur; Primus Angelorum, ^ecundus Hominum, tertius
Brutorum est. Als^ed.
Think not so, friend; for the Angels were the first Creatures that God made,
whereas our souls are not: the Angels are not covered with flesh, but our souls
are; the Angels are perfect spirits, but our souls through union with their
bodies are imperfect and impure; but enough of this, what think you now of
Jesus Christ?


Paulus. Who is Jesus Christ; why he is the Son of God?


Evangelus. It is true, my friend, he is so; for God the Father testifies it,
Mat. 3.17. The Church acknowledges it, Matthew. 16.16. And the Devils confess
it, Luke 4.41. But who do you think of these were first, God the Father, or God
the Son?


Paulus. There is a question indeed, surely the Father must be before the Son.


Evangelus. Yea, friend, that is true; it is so in natural generation, Prove. 8.
John 10* 30. Ego and Pater sumus unum. Christ is equal with the Father
according to his Divine Nature, but inferior according to his Humane.
but here it is not; for Christ Jesus is coeternal with his Father, and equal
with him in Power and Glory.


Paulus. This will not stand by reason.


Evangelus. Divine Mysteries are not to be apprehended by carnal reason, for he
who would see by an eye of Faith, must shu^ out the eye of Reason; and what
think you now of the Holy Ghost?


Paulus. Why, I suppose he is God too, is he not?


Evangelus. Yes, he is so; see 1 John 5.7. For there are three that bear Record
in Heaven, the Father, Word and Holy Ghost, and these three are one.


Paulus. Nay, this is very evident, you bring Scripture (I say) to prove what
you say.


Evangelus. Well, if so be you do believe what I have said concerning the
blessed Trinity, say with me, God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy
Ghost, and these three are one.


Paulus. God the Father, God the Son and God the Holy Ghost, and these three
are one.


Evangelus. Right, what think you now of the Creation of the World; did God
make the World of something, or of nothing? The Phi^osophers (...) this Maxim,
Ex ^ihil^ ^^hil fit.



Paulus. Of something surely; for out of nothing, nothing can be made.


Evangelus. Friend, what do you think Creation signifies?


Paulus. Truly, I know not very well.


Evangelus. Why, it signifies a making all things of nothing.


Paulus. Say you so.


Evangelus. Yea, and have you not read that the World was made only by the
especial word of his Power, O^id! Metaph. After the old Chaos was brought into
form^ the Poets did feign, That the World was divided into four Ages* The first
was the Golden Age, the second was the Silver Age; the third, the bra^en Age;
and the fourth, the ir^^ Age: The four Ages whereof by Perdic^^^ is compared to
the four Seasons of the Year* the first, resembling the Spring time, the second
Summer, the third Autumn, the fourth Winter. Mun^us magnu^ homo, homo parvus,
mundus esse dicitur.
not that we should understand that any word did really proceed from God, but
only that he willed it.


Paulus. Did God, do you say, only speak^ the word, and was this World made; I
cannot believe this, except you bring me Scripture.


Evangelus. If Scriptures will convince you, I Will bring you Scriptures enough.
See Psalm. 33.9. For he spoke, and it was done; he commanded, and it stood fast,
Heb. 11.3. Through faith we understand that the Worlds were framed by the Word
of God, so that things which are seen, were not made of things which do appear.
So Romans 4.17.


Paulus. Mundus est Speculum A^ributorum De^.
All this now is very clear unto me.


Evangelus. When we receive any benefit from God, we should keep ^une with the
P^almist. ^enedi^ite, bless ye the Lord.
I am glad of it, and therefore bless God; And now tell me, I pray you, what
you what is your belief concerning the Incarnation of our Savior?


Paulus. I do believe that Jesus Christ did come into the World to save sinners.


Evangelus. And that he was made Man.


Paulus. No, I cannot think so, in regard that it is impossible for God to
become man.


Evangelus. Herein thou art grossly ignorant, because thou do believe Christ
came into the World, and yet cannot think he was made man.


Paulus. No, nor I shall not, except you give me good Scripture for it.


Evangelus. Nay, The Bereans were commended for examining of the Apostle Paul's
doctrine; H^^ Mysterium est abscon^i^um a seculis, patefactum in tempore,
Paradoxum and impossible visum Iudais and Gentibus aestimatum, d^piis tanquam
ma^eria sotidi Gaudii and consolati^^is.
you are to be commended for that, because you are not to take any thing from
me, or any man, without Scripture, and therefore, if Scripture will do the
business, Scripture you shall have enough: See John 1.14. And the Word was made
flesh, and dwelt among us, (and we beheld his glory, as of the only begotten of
the Father) full of grace and truth. So 1 Timothy 3.16. And without controversy,
great is the Mystery of Godliness, God was manifest in the flesh, justified in
the Spirit seen of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the
world, received up into glory.


Paulus. I see Scripture does hold forth this truth but who would think that
this should be so.


Evangelus. ^^de in Be^am in lib. Confession is Christianae fidei c. 3. artic.
19.
It is so, and that for these Reasons, as I suppose. 1. Gods Justice by Man was
offended, Deus homo fit, ut homo divinae gratiae and naturae particeps fi^t.
Ger^^^d. med. 14. p 52.
therefore by Man it was to be satisfied. 2. Christ was Man that he might die,
for had he not been Man, he could not have died. 3. He was Man, that he might
sympathize and condole with us in all our conditions and infirmities. 4. He was
Man, that he might be d^^ompleat Mediator. 5. He was Man, that he might make
Man Partakers of the Divine Nature.


Paulus. Then by this reckoning you must make Christ a sinner.


Evangelus. So he is (i.e.) by Imputation. Jesus Christ is the greatest sinner
in the World (says Luth^^) by imputation.



Paulus. This is strange doctrine, methinks, to make Christ a sinner; (...) if
also he is man, then consequentially he is not God.


Evangelus. Your consequence is false, Vide Bezam i^ lib. Co^fessionis
Christianae fidei p. 13. c. 3. ^rtic. 20.
my Friend; for Christ is God-Man, God that he might satisfy, 1 Timothy
Man that he might die, 2.5.


Paulus. Well, these things are very deep and profound, therefore (I pray you)
ask me something else, and I will meditate upon them when I come home.


Evangelus. Very good, the next Question then shall be this, what think you
then concerning the Resurrection?


Paulus. Truly, Sir, this has been ever obscure to me, I could wish you would
inform my judgment concerning it.


Evangelus. This truth the Sadduces denied, Mat. 22.23. The great Mystery
contained in this Truth, made the Philosophers to dream of a Transformation,
one body being transformed into the shape of another, or a Transmigration ^oul,
taking its flight out of one body into another. They could not think that one
numerical and individual body, after it is corrupted in the water, consumed by
fire, converted into earth, vanished into air, nay, eaten up by fishes, and
those fishes ea^en by men, it was above them to think, that this same body
should rise again. When Paul disputed this Point at (...) the great
Philosophers of the Epicur^^^s laughed at him, What will this Babbler say? They
looked upon this as babbling.
With all my heart, for I like this enquiring mighty well; Now that there shall
be a Resurrection, it is evident from these Places of Scripture, Dan 12.2. And
many of them that sleep in the dust of the Earth shall awake, some to
everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting 'contempt: John 5.28, 29.
Marvel not at this, for the hour is coming, in the which all that are in the
Graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth, they that have done good,
unto the Resurrection of life; and they that have done evil, unto the
Resurrection of damnation. So see 1 Cor. 15. and Rev. 20.12, 13.


Paulus. Well, this truth I also believe; for I see, there are many Scriptures
for the demonstration and proof of the same.


Evangelus. What think you now concerning the last Judgment, do you believe it
or not?


Paulus. I do believe that Jesus Christ will come at the last day, and judge
the world.


Evangelus. And are you willing, friend, that I should try your knowledge in
this necessary truth.


Paulus. Willing, why do you think I should be unwilling: pray don't question
that, for I am so willing, as that I shall look upon you as my best friend, if
you take the pains to inform me in this.


Evangelus. Well then, seeing that I have such a free access unto you, I shall
ask you these several Questions, in order to your better understanding of this
great truth; what then is the last Judgment?


Paulus. Extremum judicium, est quando Dominus Jesus Christus in adventu suo,
cum virtu^e magna and Maje^ate, extremam omnibus hominibus, juxta sua facta
sententiam feret aequam and irrefragabilem, tum pills, tum impiis, aut ad vitam
aeternam, aut ad supplicium aeternum. Et hoc frequenter debemus meditari cu^^
Hier^nymo, qui ait; Quoties illum diem considero, toto corpore contremisco;
five enim comedo, sive bibo, sive aliquid aliud facio* semper videtur illa tuba
terribilis sonare auribus meis? Surgite mortui, venite ad judiclum.
The last Judgment is a day (as I suppose) wherein Christ Jesus our Lord and
Savior, shall come down from Heaven with great Glory, to judge the whole
World, and give unto every one according as his works shall be.


Evangelus. Very well (my friend) for your Answer pleases me exceeding well,
but how manifold is the coming of Christ?


Paulus. How manifold is the coming of Christ; why, is there more comings of
Christ then one?


Evangelus. Yes, Christ coming threefold. Venit Christus occulte judic^^dus,
venie^ and mani^este judicaturu^.
friend, the Scriptures do hold forth unto us a threefold coming of Christ; the
first was in the flesh about sixteen hundred years ago, when he came in the
form of a servant, taking upon him our sins; the second is, his coming now
with the Power of the Gospel, in the hearts of sinners; and the third is, his
future coming, when he shall in the end of the World come in glorious Glory,
not to be expressed: And this is called his second Appearance to Judgment, Acts
10 42. Christ is appointed by God the Father Judge both of the quick and dead.
So Acts 17.


Paulus. These are wonderful things, pray tell me now, how Christ will judge
the World?


Evangelus. Visible in the clouds; for even as he ascended, so shall he
descend; but wherefore do you think, my Friend, Christ will judge the World?


Paulus. That he may render eternal life, with fullness of joy unto the godly,
and eternal punishment to the wicked.


Evangelus. You answer right, but what do you think will be the Order of this
Judgment?


Paulus. Truly, Sir, I know not very well.


Evangelus. Antecedent, Concomitant, and Subsequent.
My friend, observe, there are certain Transactions that do pr^cede this day,
certain Transactions done in the day, and certain Transactions that does ensue
this day.

First, some things there be that ar^ antecedent to, or coming before this day,
which will be these, 2 These. 2.
1. A Subversion of the Roman Empire, Mat. 24.
and the Man of Sin revealed. Luke 21.
2. The Rising of false Christ's, and false Prophets. 3. Signe^ that shall be in
the Sun and Moon. 4. The Gospel being preached through^ out all Nations. 5.
Obedience yielded unto the Gospel by Jews and Gentiles and all that do pertain
unto the Election of Gods grace.

Secondly, those Transactions done in this day are these. 1. The Son of Man
shall be seen in the Air. 2. The dead shall rise, both righteous and
unrighteous. Mat. 25.
3. Christ shall separate the bad from the good, and denounce the last sentence.

Thirdly, that which follows this day, is the proportioning of a reward unto
every Man's work; and now tell me what thou think of these things?


Paulus. Truly, they are things that I never knew till now.


Evangelus. Bless God then for what you know, and answer me this question, Is
the Iudgement-Day known unto any or no?


Paulus. None but unto God, as I suppose.


Evangelus. Thou say right, for neither Men nor Angels know this day, but God
himself, Matthew. 4. And thus, friend, I have showed you these Points of
Divinity, to be believed of all that seek after an eternal life of Felicity,
being these as follows, 1. God, or the Trinity. 2. The Creation of the World.
3. The hypostatical Union, or Christ's assuming the humane Nature. 4 The
Resurrection. 5. Judgment. I come now to ask you how and by what means you may
come to know God?


Paulus. By the Holy Bible.


Evangelus. It is true friend, the Scriptures, contained in the Old and New
Testament, is the only Rule by which we may come to know God and serve him
(...) but tell me what thou do understan^ by the Old and New Testament.


Paulus. By the Old Testament I understan^ the Writings of Moses and the
Prophets, and by the New Testament the Writings of the Evangelists and Apostles.


Evangelus. Your Answer as you should do; But are the Scriptures sufficient of
themselves to work faith in us or no?


Paulus. Truly, I am not able to determine of that.


Evangelus. Why then I will tell you, the Scri^tures of themselves cannot work
faith ^n us, but by Gods Spirit cooperating ^ith them; and hence it is, that
the lord is called a dead letter, 2 Cor. 3.6
not but that the Word is quickening, but because the Word of it self without
the Spirit, cannot so much as work any ^race in us.


Paulus. This I do believe.


Evangelus. Then I hope you do believe the Scriptures to he so Canonical, as
that ^t is Blasphemy to esteem of any other Writings, to be of equal Authority
with the same, and so consequentially those are to be blamed who annex the
^pocrypha to the Bible, and do fre^ently take out certain verses contained
therein, as their texts, whenas the Scriptures, and only the Scriptures, are
for a standing Rule in Gods Church.


Paulus. But is not the Apocrypha the Word of God?


Evangelus. No, for they were not written in the Hebrew Tongue, nor
acknowledged a^ Canonical by the Jews of old, to whom the keeping of the
Oracles of God was committed.


Paulus. I am now convinced of that, which I thought I should never have been
persuaded to the contrary.


Evangelus. Again, if you do grant the Scriptures to be infallible, you must
then grant that the Scriptures are not to be ruled by the Church, but the
Church by the Scriptures.


Paulus. If so be the Scriptures do not depend upon the Church, for the Truth
and Authority thereof, how then can we be assured that it is the Word of God.


Evangelus Friend, herein you are grossly mistaken, for we may be assured of
the Scriptures being the Word of God; which may be proved from several
Testimonies and Arguments divine and humane; I 2.59.^1. 1 John 2.20, 1 Cor.
2.10. 11, 12, 13. 2 Cor. 2.21, 22.
from Testimonies Divine, being two, internal and ^xternal; One is the
Testimony of the Spirit, who sometimes by special R^v^la^ion and Power do
declare the (...) thereof, upon the Hearts and C^nsc^en^es of Men and Women;
and th^^ is the divine internal Testimony: The divine external Testimony is the
Scriptures, testifying of themselves; and hence it is many times, 2. Ti^ 3.16.
2 Pet. 1 20.21.
that they do run in this Order, (Thus says the Lord) Thus says God.

Now the Arguments to prove the same, are deduced and taken from. 1. The
efficient causes of the Scriptures, viz. Men, the Calling, Miss^^^ and
Insperation of whom was divine.

Secondly, the Scope and End of the Scriptures being the glory of God, and the
eternal salvation of our souls.

Thirdly, the subject matter of the Scriptures, which is so full of Majesty and
Div^nity, as that it is far beyond humane capacity to comprehend. This is
sufficient to show the Authority of the Scriptures, without depending upon the
Church. Thus is the truth of the Scriptures, and the Authority of them
evidenced without the help of the Church.


Paulus Is not the Testimony of the Church then of some use?


Evangelus. Yes, that I deny not, but the thing which I aim at is to show, that
the Authority and Truth of the Scriptures can be made apparent, from Gods
Spirit, and from themselves, without the help of the Church, which assertion
does contradict the Papist, who does audaciously affirm, that the Authority of
the Scriptures do absolutely depend upon the Church, the absurd consequences of
which opinion are these. 1. Of all, to hold that the Scriptures has no more
Authority, but what the Universal consent of the Church gives unto it, is to
make the Scriptures no otherwise, but a Nose of Wax, yea, it is to make the
eternal and inviolable truth of God, rest upon the pleasure of men; verily the
matter and scope of the Scriptures is to be denied and to be of no use at all,
if this opinion is right, these and such like are the Absurdities that must of
necessity be held by retaining opinions of this kind.


Paulus. But did not Austin say, that he would not believe the Gospel, save
that the Authority of the Church moved him thereto.


Evangelus. The Papist do give a false interpretation upon his words, if we do
but consider the whole tenor of his writing. For as Calvin well Observes,
Austin had then to do with the Manichees, who arguing with them, spoke thus, I
my self would not believe the Gospel, save that the Authority of the Church
moved me thereto. Meaning, that he himself when he was a stranger from the
faith, could not otherwise be brought to embrace the Gospel for the assured
truth of God, but by this that he was overcome with the Authority of the
Church. And what marvel is it, if a man not yet knowing Christ, have regard to
men, therefore Austin does not there teach, that the faith of the godly is
grounded upon the Authority of the Church.


Paulus. I am very well pleased and satisfied in what has been said, have you
any more Questions to ask me?


Evangelus. Yes, friend, I have many Questions to ask you still. How do you
prove, that Salvation is only to be had through Christ?


Paulus. How do I prove it? I prove it from Acts 4.12. where it is thus
written, Neither is there salvation in any other, for there is none other Name
under Heaven given among men whereby we must be saved.


Evangelus. Thou have given the right Scripture; but now, if salvation is only
to be had in and through Christ, does it not, do you think, concern you to have
an interest in this Christ?


Paulus. Yea, certainly that it does.


Evangelus. Are you then interested in him?


Paulus. Truly, I question it, but how may I come to have an interest in him?


Evangelus. That must be by faith.


Paulus. What is faith?


Evangelus. Faith is a receiving of Jesus Christ into the Heart, as he is
Priest, Prophet and King, with a fiducial dependence upon him, being fully
satisfied, that there is salvation, in, through, and by none but him. Faith is
the substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen. Heb.
11.1.


Paulus. How is this Faith attained?


Evangelus. Romans 1^.17. 1 Pet. 2.2.
It is attained by a conscientious use of the Word, and increased by Prayer and
Sacrament.


Paulus. What is Prayer?


Evangelus. Ou Prayers are our Sacrifices, and Christ alone is the Altar, where
on we must offer them to God the Father.
Prayer is the pouring out of our souls unto God in the Name of Christ, by the
help of the Spirit, and with faith on the Promises, for those things which are
agreeable unto his Will.


Paulus. Prayer is the wing, wherewith the soul flye^h to heaven, and
Meditation the eye, wherewith we see God. Amb.

Whether it is lawful pray unto Angels?


This I remember, for it has been told me a great while ago.


Evangelus. You understand herein, I shall examine by asking you several
questions concerning this duty; as first, ought we to pray unto God, and only
unto him?


Paulus. Only unto him, excepting Saints and Angels.


Evangelus. How do you mean Saints and Angels? I hope you don't hold praying to
them.


Paulus. Nay, I cannot think any otherwise, but that it is lawful to pray to
them, for they are those who do make a way unto God the Father for us.


Evangelus. I deny it, John 14.6
and therefore shall affirm, that Christ only is the way to the Father; but
that I might further clear this truth, observe, 1. Prayer is a part of Divine
Worship, (which all grant) and God only is the object of Divine Worship,
therefore to pray unto any besides God, is a perfect violation of that Command,
Deuteronomy. 6.1^. Mat. 4.10. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall
thou serve. 2. Consider, we have but one Intercessor and Mediator in Heaven, 2
Tim^ 15.
and therefore it is a high affront unto Christ, to make any use of others in
that kind. 3. Consider that excellent place of Scripture, Rev. 19 10. And I
fell at his feet to worship him; and he said unto me, see thou do it not, I am
thy fellow servants. And in the last place, consider here is but little
encouragement for any of us to pray unto Saints, because the best Saints in
Heaven is ignorant of our conditions here below, Isa. 63.16. John 14.21.


Paulus. Why, truly all this is clear, none can deny.


Evangelus. Well, friend, what think you of this question? can one pray, and
not speak?


Paulus. No, surely, that cannot be.


Evangelus. Yes, one may, for there is vocal Prayer, and mental Prayer: Vocal
Prayer is the expressing our desires unto God by the words of our lips; Mat. 69.
and Mental Prayer is the offering up of our desires unto God without the help
of words, as Hannah prayed when her voice was not heard. 1 Samuel 1.13.


Paulus. How may I pray, so as to find acceptance with God?


Evangelus. First, direct your supplications unto God. Secondly, Pray in faith,
Thirdly, with a sense of your wants. Fourthly, with a sense of your
unworthiness, to have any of your wants supplied. Fifthly, with Sincerity and
Perseverance. Sixthly, beg what you beg in the Name of Christ. Seventhly,
conclude your Prayer with a Doxology, being this, For thine is the Kingdom,
Mat. 6.
Power and Glory, for ever and ever. Amen.


Paulus. I thank you, good Sir, for this seasonable advice.


Evangelus. What think you now of the Sacrament?


Paulus. It is an Ordinance instituted by Jesus Christ himself.


Evangelus. Est Promissionis divinae sigi number a Deo institutum constat autem
Elemento and verbo, ut ext^t memoria Promissionis.
A Sacrament is a seal of the Covenant of grace, whereby as God does oblige
himself to give unto us all the benefits contained therein, so we in like
manner do by that oblige our selves to be the Lords, and to be true and
faithful^ unto him.


Paulus. This I now do understand.


Evangelus. Very good, now how many Sacraments are there of use in thi^ Gospel^
Dispensation.


Paulus. Surely, there are but two.


Evangelus. There are but Sacraments in the Christian Church.
Thou say right, and therefore the Papists herein are to be blamed, wh^ say
there are seven Sacraments, whereas we do deny any such number, and do affirm,
that there are but two Sacraments, viz. Baptism and the Lords Supper: Baptism
is a Sacrament, wherein the washing with wa^er, in the Name of the Father, of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, does signify and seal our ingrafting into
Christ; the Lords Supper is a Sacrament wherein these things given, viz. Bread
and Wine are signified, exhibited and showed forth unto us; the Body of our
Lord Jesus which was broken, and his blood which was poured out abundantly for
the remission of our sins. Circumcision and the Passover was in the Law, in
room whereof comes Baptism and the Lords Supper; Baptism in the room of
C^rcuncision, and the Lords Supper in the room of the Passover.


Paulus. In this I am also very well satisfied.


Evangelus. I am glad of that; Of Transubstantiation.
but what think you of this? Is the bread really transubstantial, and turned
into the Body of Christ?


Paulus. Yes, that is really my belief; for does not our Savior say, This is
my Body, 1 Cor. 11.14.


Evangelus. Friend, believe it not; because there is not Grounds whereupon
Reason should be built, much less faith; Observe what I have to say
contradictory to it; and you will find, that such an opinion is against
Scripture, Sense and Reason. Consider, these words (This is my body) is no
proper but figurative expression; were all Scriptures to be understood
literally, then there would be some reason for the understanding of this
expression, to be as you would have it.


Paulus. What do you tell me of Figures? surely, our Savior would have spoken
more plainly to his disciples than so, especially in the instituting of an
Ordinance.


Evangelus. Christ spoke intelligible enough; but tell me, is not that plain
enough, when we take the words as they are frequently and commonly used in
Scriptures.


Paulus. Yes, That I cannot deny.


Evangelus. Well then, Three Acceptations of a Door in Scripture, threefold, 1.
It is an Entrance into the heart, Cant. 5.4. Psalm. 24.9.2. Church, John 10.1 3.
Heaven Mat. 25, 10.
these words are common and frequent in Scripture, John 6.14. is thus written,
I am the Way; so John 10. I am the Door; Christ properly is no Door, but only
as a Door is an entrance into a Place, so Christ in this respect is an entrance
into Heaven; Now compare this with the other Place of Scripture, (This is my
Body) the true meaning is, This is a figure, sign, and Pre-Presentation of my
Body; (This is my Body,) that is, as Bread does nourish, strengthen and refresh
the Body, and satisfy the natural appetite, so the Body and Blood of Christ,
received by faith, does strengthen, nourish, refresh and satiate the spiritual
appetite. Observe, I pray you, how oppugnant this is to reason; for is it not
absurd, that bread should be turned into another substance, and yet the
accidents remain the same; there is the color, ^as^e and smell of the bread;
if the bread in the Sacrament is turned into the real Body of Christ, then the
Nature and End of a Sacrament would be destroyed the nature of a Sacrament is to
be a Sign, and the Ends of it is to be a remembrance of Christ, both which
supposes Christ's Body to be absent. Again observe, our Lord Jesus mentions
Bread after the words of Consecration, saying, (the bread which we break,) 1
Cor. 10.16. He that eats this bread, 1 Cor. 11.27, 28. If the bread is turned
into the real Body of Christ, then wicked Communicants may receive Christ, and
Christ's Body must be in a thousand Places at once; and now what say you unto
all this?


Paulus. I see now, as you say, that this opinion is oppugnant unto Scripture,
Reason, and our three senses, viz. Seeing, Smelling and Tasting; I wish with
all my heart that I could stay a little longer with you, for the benefit which
I have received from you is unconceivable, but I am sent for an Errand and
therefore cannot; yet if you please to inform me where you dwell, and what is
your name, I shall thereby be much obliged unto you.


Evangelus That you shall my friend, I dwell in such and such a place, my name
is so and so.


READER.
AS Concerning this young man, being so willing to defer his Repentance unto an
old Age, was the main Suggestion, which did keep him off from Closing with
Jesus Christ (of whom is shadows in this Dialogue, and signified by Paulus)
together with his believing that God was more glorified by an old Convert, than
by a young one, but when you come to understand how God dealt with this young
man in bringing him off from all those letts and Impediments, by which he was
kept from Closing with Christ, you will admire, it being in form following.

This young Man, as aforesaid, being much molested with Temptations of that
kind; One day above the rest, a Small-coal man going along the streets, did
measure some thereof unto a Customer, who having no sooner done it, but he
imm^^^^tely fell down dead, (although he was as well as I am now at this
present writing) which being noised abroad, and many coming to see him, he made
one; who seeing him to lie dead on the ground, was amazed, especially when he
understood the suddenness thereof.

Thus, after a little Contemplation upon him, he goes home; falling down upon
his knees, saying to God, Lord have mercy upon me; and this was all he could
say for an hour together, (sometimes it was) Lord have mercy upon me a sinner,
and pardon my sins; thus continuing for the space of many weeks, despairing of
Gods mercy to his soul; and being also convinced of his former ignorance, he is
now glad to receive good Counsel from any body, his mind and will being
changed, makes him to believe, that there is salvation only in Christ, and
looks now upon all his duties, (as a Paul's indeed) accounting them but dross
and dung compared with our Lord Christ.

But one day more than the rest, praying to God, does earnestly beg of him for
a pardon of all his sins; Thus Expostulating with God for the attainment
thereof, Lord, (says he,) Thou have given a Pardon unto some, and why not unto
me? what way and course therefore may I take for the obtainment of the same;
and immediately at his request, (after the performance of duty) the Lord was
pleased to give in this Text of Scripture, Isa. 55.7. Let the wicked for sake
his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the
Lord, and he will have mercy upon him; and to our God, for he will abundantly
pardon; from hence he gathers hopes of Gods mercy unto his soul, but in
temptations his hopes vanished away again; as to those other Scriptures which
the Lord was pleased to han^ forth unto him, for his stay and comfort in his
journey to the heavenl^ Jerusalem, is contained in the ensuin^ Dialogue.

And observe, what now treats o^ him, is about his converted estate; being
the second Part.

The End of the First Part.
The Second Part, being YOUTH in his unconverted state AEtatis suae 16.
Evangelus. WELL met, A Salutation a^ before.
Friend; how is it with you now?


Paulus. Now I wonder at my self, Especially of his future ^state.
how ^^norant I have bin; and especially ^f my being so unconcerned with my
(...) estate as I have.


Evangelus. Yea, The work of God upon a convert^^ soul is one of the greatest
wonders and miracles in the world.
Friend, when God is pleased to (...) a sinner a sight of his fearful (...) out
of Christ, he is startled, and (...) amazed, at the consideration of (...)
former security therein.


Paulus. I have found it so, blessed be God (...) you.


Evangelus. And blessed be God also, for that ^rovidence which brought us then
to gather, and which now has vouchsafed another like opportunity, wherein we
may confer about the things of another world? how therefore (my friend) ha^ God
dealt with you since I last parted from you?


Paulus. God (I hope) has blessed what then you said unto me, the verity of
which has bin set home, by a specia^ and extraordinary Act of Providence.


Evangelus. What kind of Providence (I pray friend) has been exercised toward
you since I last saw you?


Paulus. That, Sir, which the Lord was pleased to hand forth unto me (by you
your self,) in answer unto those two suggestions, wherewith I was heretofore
troubled, has bin seconded by the sudden death of a poor Small-coal-man.


Evangelus. How, I pray?


Paulus. He was going along the streets, who was measuring of a few Small^oal
to one of his Customers, A Declaration of Gods Work upon his soul, and the
blessed eff^cts it has produced, which may serve as an Item to others. God must
have all the Glory, because it is he that works all our works in us and for
us.
did ^^mediat^ly fall down dead, al^hough he was as well as now you and I are
in body, that the sight of ^is death together with the sudden^ess thereof, did
startle me, and shew^d the vanity of protracting and de^erring time and
repentance as I ^id.


Evangelus. Oh! Glory unto the Father, Son and Holy Ghost be ascribed for ever!
Oh, ^ow is your heart affected with this!


Paulus. I am so unsatisfi^d in mind, as that does render me very incapable ^f
performing any service unto God.


Evangelus. Be sure you give not present Enter^ainment unto any thing
suggested, without special examination, what is (...) therefore in which you
are unsa^^sfied?


Paulus. Either to despair or presume, is many times our condition.
In Gods mercies.


Evangelus. How so, for when you knew nothing^ you could then render unto me
God^ mercy, as grounds sufficient, on which you built your hopes of salvation^
Then (my friend) you had no cause s^ to to do, but now you have, I dar^ say.


Paulus. A converted soul is migh^y inquisitive.
I do suppose, it is all one for that^ inform me, I pray you, then, how I may
come to obtain Gods favor and grace; for I find, as once you tol^ me, that I
have lost it in Adam.


Evangelus. Friend, as Gods favor was lost in Adam, so it is found in Christ,
see^ therefore the favor of God i^ an^ through Christ. Joh. 14.6.



Paulus. I must first come to Christ and receive him, before I can make use of
him to reconcile me unto God, whereas my faith is weak, and will not as yet lead
me unto him.


Evangelus. Does that faith which thou have, assent to Gods Essence; and that
he is a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him.


Paulus. Yea, I think it does so, if my heart deceives me not.


Evangelus. Well, if so, then you have that which will commend you to Jesus
Christ, and not only commend you un^o him, but likewise that which will ^nable
you to receive him* see Heb. 6.1. For he that comes to God, must believe that
he is, and that he is a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him.


Paulus. God will (I see) make use of you to do my soul good, but what do you
think now of my Condition?


Evangelus. Why, I do believe that thou art an ^lected Vessel,


Paulus. What is the reason do you think ^hen that I should be all this while
without an assurance of Gods Lo^^ and mercy to my poor soul.


Evangelus. Wait, and thou shall have it, an^ consider well this Scripture,
being Man 9.17. Neither do men put new win^ into old bottles, else the bottles
break and the wine runs out, and the bottle perish: but they put new wine
into ne^ bottles, and both are preserved. From which I would have you to note,
tha^ though God has his saving work i^ your soul; yet many corruptions ther^
are unsubdued, which must be morti^fied, before he sees it meet and convenient
to give you assurance; nay, unti^ then, perhaps God sees you uncapabl^ as to
the management thereof.


Paulus. A sincere Saint bleseth God for every mercy.
Blessed be God also for this goo^ Counsel and Advice.


Evangelus. If it has proved so to be, I desi^^ to bless God likewise.


Paulus. Sir, being in haste, I must bid yo^ farewell; but I shall consider upon
what you have said.


Evangelus. Farewell then, They part from each other.
but I hope I shall see (...) again


Paulus That you shall, for I cannot (...) ^ee you now and then.


YOUTH in his CONE^^^^ Etatis^uae 18.
Evangelus. Ministers are glad when they can have any opportunity, wherein the
Work of the Lord may be carried on.
OH, my good friend, how glad a^ I to meet with you, for I will a^^sure thee,
thou have been much upon my heart; where has been your abo^^ all this while,
that I have sought you ^^ frequently, but could never have t^^ happiness to
find you until now.


Paulus. Whether (Good Sir) you a^ glad to see me I know not; but I a^ sure, I
am glad to see you: for m^ wants and indigencies are innum^ rabble and how to
express them un^ any other (but your esteemed sel^ I know not: in regard that
hereto^ fore you have been very benefici^ unto me. In the like strait the now
I am in, wherefore (worth^ Sir) if the present opportunity do serve as well for
you, as it does ^ ^e, Administer something of Com^rt unto me I pray you? The
sufferings of our Lord Jesus, are not only applicatory, but exemplary.



Evangelus. It is a duty, my friend, incumbent upon those who are Preachers of
the Gospel, to imitate their Lord and Sa^iour, and to tread those same steps,
^herein he before them did tread, who ^lways made the extremity of sinners, ^is
opportunity to do his Fathers Work, and the like must I; speak on therefore,
and welcome.


Paulus. I am in such misery, These two extremes undoes many, elther we are
prone to think our conditions better then they are, or worse then they are, Job
19.2^ Miserius nihil est misero se non miserante. None are in misery but they
that cannot pity themselves.
that I know ^ot what to do; my Condition is ^ch that I am ashamed to make ^
known, and my crimes are so hor^id, that for a great time I have con^ealed
them, and loath I am still to di^ulge and bring them to Light. Oh! therefore
pity me, pity me.


Evangelus. Why do thou say, thou art in such misery, as that thou know
not what to do; I cannot choose but give ^hee a check for saying thus, upon these
several respects.

First, we ought not to despair ^ long as we have a God, which inde^ we have, 1 Samuel 17.46.

Secondly, there is no malady so r^ mediless, but God can apply a Reme^
thereto; no wound so sore, but God ca^ ^eal; no misery so anxious and irr^
coverable in our apprehensions, but ^ can extinguish the anguish there^ heals
it, and makes that which is i^ possible with us possible with himself Genesis
18.14. There is no misery the side of Hell and the Grave, but Go^ out of his
infinite free grace has ap^ pointed some proper means for the same, viz.
hearing and reading the Word for the unconverted, Prayer an^ receiving of the
Sacrament for the weak in Gifts and Graces, and Christ unto all in general, who
will receiv^ him by faith, Mat. 11.28.

Thirdly, why do thou say, tha^ thy condition is such, as that thou ar^
ashamed to make known; was not a^ our conditions once s^, for a natural
condition is a damnable, cursed and ignominious condition, Ephesians. 3.

Fourthly, why do thou make the aggravations of thy sins as an Argument to
conceal them; whenas God in his Word has said, He that hides his sins shall
not prosper.

Finally, David used the aggravations of his sins, as an Argument with God to
Pardon them.


Paulus. Do you think (good Sir) that I am not a miserable creature, when the
Sin against the Holy Ghost is imputed to me.


Evangelus. This is a cunning stratagem of the Devil; The sin against the Holy
Ghost is a final impenitency. Augustinus intellig^t percatum in Spiritum
sanctum, ^ au^ finalem impaenite^iam in iis, qui non accipiunt Evangelium aut
desperationem. Qui^ haec peccata proprio pugnant cum gratia and (...)
abjiciunt. Nam cater^^ peccata, cum fugimus ad gra^tam remi^tuntur. Ideo sic
interpretatur Augustinus dictum Christi: Qui dixerit verbum contra Spiritum
sanctum, id est, qui ^^bum gratia, quod praedicatum, and confirmatum est
Testimoniis spiritualibus, finaliter repudiat, is habet peccatum in Spiritum
sanctum. Peccatum in Spiritum sanctum est, cum quis divina veritati, and quidem
Evangelio cujus fulgore sic perstringitur, ut ignorantiam causari nequeat ta^^
destinata malitia resistit, in hoc ut resistat. Alsted.


for those who have committed this sin, have never the Gift of Repentance,
their hearts are so hard as that they cannot mourn; and indeed, the great
reason rendered, why the sin against the Holy Ghost is unpardonable, is, because
there is no repentance for the same; bat now this is not thy case.


Paulus Sinners under their first convictions, takes themselves to be of all
most miserable.
Ah, but you do not know the misery that I am in.


Evangelus. You cry out of your misery, but you do not tell me wherein it does
consist?


Paulus. The Devil does what he can, to divert us of those opportunities, which
he thinks may prove most advantageous unto us, many times by dese^^ing we are
hindered from effecting what we hindered.
My misery I would fain express, but I cannot, I see therefore that this
opportunity will prove to be a lost opportunity, unto my soul, and O wretched
man as I am: That I should make a Non-Improvement of those precious seasons
which might be so exceeding advantageous unto me, I shall only now desire of
you to appoint another time wherein I shall to the utmost (if God willing) lay
open my deplorable Condition unto you.


Evangelus. But hark you (my friend) do not think that I can be put off with
such a frivolous excuse as this, As the Devil does endeavor to hinder
Ministers, from doing their Fath^rs Work, so Ministers, in like manner, does
endeavor to hinder the Devil from the Accomplishment of his cruel Designs.
shall we meet together and go away without profit to each other, this is a
temptation of the Devil, therefore adhere not to it.


Paulus Sir, The Devil can frame excuses at his will.
business does call me home, and I am also under such an indisposition of body,
as that I cannot talk any longer with you?


Evangelus. What then, It is the duty of Christians to pray one with another.
shall we not pray before we part, if you will, I Will join with you.


Paulus. No, (Good Sir) do you, and I will join with you.


A PRAYER Performed by the MINISTER.
O Most Glorious and Gracious Lord God, from everlasting to everlasting thou
art the great Creator of Heaven and Earth, and the wise Disposer of all things
which thou have made; We the most unworthiest of all thy servants, do desire to
prostrate our selves before thy Divine Majesty, under an humble acknowledgment
of thy Goodness, thy Grace, thy Truth and Faithfulness: thy many mercies
renewed and continued every day to us, and our great unworthiness of the least
of them: We are not worthy of the crumbs that fall from thy Table; not only
because we were born in sin, but because we have lived in sin, and have daily
added to our sins, by the vanity of our thoughts, words and actions, and the
unsu^^ableness of the whole man to all thy Commands: We are ignorant of them,
yea, we have dug to our selve^ Cisterns that will hold no water; W^ have
doubted of thy Promises, broken thy Laws, polluted thine Ordinances, Profaned
thy Sabbaths, abused thy Mercies, slighted thy Judgments, sinned against the
light of our own Consciences, against Grace received, against the motions of
thy Holy Spirit, against Heaven, and in thy sight, and we are not worthy to be
called thy children; and therefore most justly may thou pour down thy
displeasure upon us, and empty the Vials of thy wrath upon us and ours; it is
mercy, nay, infinite mercy and free grace, that we are this side of Hell and
the Grave, but much more that we have an opportunity to plead with thee; how
many are there in Hell, that would give ten thousand worlds for what we enjoy
and have; We bless thee (O Lord) for Jesus Christ, by whose blood these Mercies
were Purchased, and the Privileges which we now enjoy, receive him for us, and
accept us in him, magnify thy grace in and through him toward us, by
pardoning our sins, remiting our transgressions, sanctifying our nature,
washing our souls in the water of Regeneration, and by evidencing thy favor
unto us under all our cloudy and gloomy dispensations; and this is that (O God)
which we are come about at this time; it is the Sunshine of thy countenance,
and strength against our adversary the Devil. Behold, O Lord, thy servant
before thee, that is molested by Satan, and burried with his temptations.
Behold, O Lord, the enemies which he has to wrestle with: how are they
increased both from without and from within; increase his faith, that his
spiritual existence may be sustein'd; let him not perish in his distress and
warfare for want of thy assistance; seeing, O God, that we sue not to thee for
any terrene or earthly enjoyments, but for grace, that we may through strength
received, therefrom be enabled to repel and quench all the fiery darts of the
evil one; and therefore for the sake of thy Son Jesus hear us, and strengthen
thy servant, whereby he may now at ^ist conquer Satan, who has so much
^^deavored to overthrow him: Ap^ear for him (O blessed Jesus) unto whom all
Power is given in Heaven and in Earth; and being tempted, ^nowest how to
succor those that be ^empted. And with us, sweet Father, ^e mindful of all
thine throughout the ^hole World; Bless thy Church and Zi^n, bring home Jews
and Gentiles, and ^ll that belong unto the Election of thy ^race; Give unto thy
Son the Hea^hens for his inheritance, and the ut^ermost Parts of the Earth for
his Possessions. O Lord, keep up England from falling from thee, let it not
languish nor decay in Godliness* and let ^ot wantonness under the means of
^race procure any want of grace; thou ^ast divided us, bring us together again;
And thou who art a God of Order, O settle Order in thy Church, ^^d Unity among
thy Saints; Let ^uch as do err out of ignorance, learn ^nowledge; and such as
have sinned against knowledge, find repentance; Endu^ the Magistrates with the
knowledge of thy Spirit of Grace and Wisdom, as well as with Power, that w^ may
live a peaceable and quiet life under them, in all godliness and honesty. O let
thy Ministers be clothed with holiness, write it on their Breasts, give them
the Urim and Thummim, and let them shine by holiness of life, as well as by
doctrine, and Crown all their labors with a Garland of Souls.

Remove not (O Father) thy Candlestick from us, for our unworthiness of it, and
unthankfulness for it; but pardon our unpro^^ableness under it, and teach us to
profit more and more; And now, O Lord, comfort thy afflicted Servant before
thee; stand by him, and be his Help; and all this we beg in the Name, and for
the sake of Jesus Christ, to whom with thy self, and ever blessed Spirit of
Grace, enable us to ascribe, as is most due, all Power, Praise, Glory, and
sincere obedience, from us and all thine, now, henceforth, and for evermore.
Amen.

^e dat^ locum Diab^l^. Ephesians. 4.27
Well, I Will detain you no longer, only take this from me, Do not give place to
the Devil.

Reader,
Take notice, that this poor young ^onvert, having taken his leave of this
^recious Minister, does in his return ^omewards meet with a cursed in^rument of
the Devil, being one De^as (by name) a sad Apostate, who ^^swades him to throw
off Religion, and to turn Atheist (that is, nothing at ^ll) of which this
ensuing Dialogue ^ill give a further account.

Demas. How now, why do you look somelan^holy; no doubt but you have been with
^ome Phanatick Priest or another, your ^ountenance is so dreadful.


Paulus I blame your folly, Accus^ tuam stu^titiam.
for he whom ^ have been with, let him go under what notion soever, is a holy
man, and has been one of great use to me.


Demas. I swear you talk more like a mad ^an than any body else, The wicked of
the World do ^ccount godly sorrow nothing but madness and distraction
I tell ^ou; if you believe all what they say, you will be distracted, if you are
not already.


Paulus Whether I am distracted or no, I matter not, for take notice, I must
observe what they say unto me, because it concerns what I am to do for God, and
for my own soul,


Demas. Why, do thou think there is a God?


Paulus. Yes, as firmly as I do believe the Sun to be in Firmament on Noondayes.


Demas. None are so impiou^s, and sinfully audacious, as such who have fallen
from the truth, whereof they were once Professors.
Do thee: I hope then, before I shall have done with you, to make you of the
same opinion as I am.


Paulus. There are many opinions in this world.
What opinion (I pray) are you of?


Demas. What opinion am I of? why I am of such an opinion, as that I can
produce you one, whom I Will affirm to be God, Omnipotent, Omnipresent,
Om^iscient, and more just then the God whom you serve; for I shall tell you, I
have been of the same opinion with your ^elf, and have believed on the same God
which you believe, but now I am of another mind, and I question not but that ^
shall make you of the same also, if you ^e but ruled by me.


Paulus. Pray what is he?


Demas A sober Gentleman. Mark how the Atheist contradicts himself to call his
God a Gentleman, it seems then his God is not a spirit.



Paulus. Will he do one no hurt? It is not good to be too inquisitive after
evil spirits.



Demas No he will not hurt you; for he is a harmless Gentleman, you may see him
if you please.


Paulus Pray then bring him and let me see him. True is that Adage Nemo
l^editu^ ni^^ ^ sci^so, No man is h^^ted but by himself.



Demas A Diabolical contrivement
Rather than that, I would have you come to my House about ten a Clock to^
morrow morning, and then we may talk together without any interruption: You
know where I live.


Paulus Well then I Will be sure to come, if I am in health.


Demas Be sure you do not fail me.


Reader Now follows another Conference between Evangelus a Minister of the
Gospel, and Paulus the young Convert, who endeavors to hinder him from going,
but cannot.


Evangelus So, So, I see I am forced to visit you, before you will visit me.


Paulus Truly (Sir) I cannot help it, for I have been so out of order both in
soul and body, (since I saw you last) a^ that I am not fit to keep any body
Company


Evangelus Why did you not send for me all this while? A true Minister is at
the Call of any that may want him.
if you had, I should have come; for I doubt you have had no company, since I
have been with you.


Paulus Yes Sir, I have had some Company with me.


Evangelus. What company, (I pray) good company?


Paulus. Truly, Some evil company are so subtle, as we cannot mediately find
out what they are.
I know not very well, it was a man, but what to make of him, I know not: For
he has undertaken to bring me a Gentleman that is as fully God, as he whom I
and you serve.


Evangelus. Oh fie, The Christians God is but one God, Deuteronomy. 6.4.
why are you so deceived, as to think any such thing? what evil company have
you commun'd with, know you not, that there is but one God, and that is our
God? what a blasphemous wretch was he that told you, from whence did he come,
and where does he dwell?


Paulus. His name is Demas, Deceivers are here, and there, and every where.
he came out of the Country, his place of abode (for a time) is in the City;
and about ten of the Clock this Morning; I am bound by virtue of Promise to
come and see him and the Gentleman.


Evangelus. Holy Anticipation is allowed.
Well, although you have promised to^ come and see him, yet I do intend to
prevent you.


Paulus. Mark the fallacious way of arguing from a deceitful heart.
No, pray Sir, say not so, for if I^ should disappoint him, he would then^
reflect upon us and our Religion, and cause the honor of Christianity to lie
at stake, if you are loath to let me go alone, do you then go with me.


Evangelus. I, nor you, neither shall go; if they will come to us, well and
good; but for us to come to them, I do not approve of it; therefore think not
of going, though you have promised, remembering the Proverb, Its better sometimes
to break a Promise then to keep it.


Paulus. How if they should come to me after you are gone.


Evangelus Then send for me; We must have a care of challengeing the Devil,
left therefore the Devil
and I dare to meddle with them, if they come upon our own grounds.

^hereby God suffers him to conquer us, what we do in a way of Disputation with
must be only in our own defense.


Reader,
Now take notice, that after the departure of this Minister; these two
Deceivers comes unto this sweet Convert; One of which proves no otherwise then
the Devil, as you shall find by the sequel of the story.

Demas and Apollyon. How now, How Ironically do they speak.
who taught you to break your Promise, did your Priests?


Paulus. No, Necessitas ^on habit legem.
other busines^ did intervene, so as yet I could not come according to promise.


Demas. Well, this is the Gentleman of whom I spoke, and Promised to bring to
you.


Paulus Christians cannot but show themselves civilly to strangers.
Is it so, I pray you; Sir, sit down, for you are very welcome.


Apollyon. The Devil can carry himself as civil and sober as any.
I thank you, Sir,


Paulus. The young Man's Petition unto the Devil for concession, In a matter of
special concernment.
I did promiss to inform a friend of mine concerning you: Wh^ promised to come
unto me, and to make one of our Company.


Demas. What is he, I pray?


Paulus He is a Minister of the Gospel.


Demas. 'As there is no room for Gods children here below among the wicked, so
likewise there shall be no room above in Heaven for the wicked among Gods
children. The devil must have a word in.
Oh it is no matter for him, another time we^ serve as well as now, (...)
moreover, I brought th^^ Gentleman with me, o^ ly to speak concernin^ affairs,
privately among our selves.


Apollyon. It will not be convenient to have an^ besides our selves.


Paulus. Well, Mitte Diabolum, let the Devil alone.
Sir, what you please.


Apollyon. Sir, The Devil, makes a bargain with the young man.
I understand here, by my friend, that you are under some sore Conflict,
wherefore I was desired occasionally by our self, and instrumentally by him,
^.e. Demas, to visit you; and so consequentially to administer something of
^omfort unto you, in order to which I must have you to promise me these three
several things. First, to deny the God whom now you serve. Secondly, ^o abstain
from the Company which you frequent. Thirdly, to believe what I shall say unto
you.


Paulus To any thing that is reasonable, The Bargain is accepted upon such, and
such conditions.
^ shall yield, especially if you can but ^move your self to be God, and him
whom I serve to be no God, the pro^ation of which I expect through ^ertue of
promiss, made by your friend.


Demas Well that he can do.


Apollyon. The Devil is a brag.
Yes, and easily too.


Reader,
Note, how Demas does app^ himself to Apollyon, prescribing a^ ter what manner
the Conferen^ shall be carried on with conven^ency.

Demas. The Devil must have one to help him.
The only Method, as I suppose, carry on this Conference among (...) selves,
is, (Good Sir) by letting hi^ produce those Arguments, which has so prove a
God; and so you to a^ swer as he brings them, and pray (...) me how you like
it?


Apollyon. I like it very well; how do yo^ like it, Sir?


Paulus. I do like it very well also, provide^ you will not let the plainness
of (...) Arguments make any thing invalid.


Apollyon. Well, produce your Arguments co^ cerning the certainty of a God.


Paulus. I shall after this manner express myself; The Trinity proved from five
Considerations.
And first of all, the Creatures do testify the truth of a Deity, and him whom
I serve, in regard that it is he who gaveth being of all things, viz. The
beings of the Heavens, and of the Earth, and all things contained therein.
Secondly, that kind of Gubernation which is among all Creatures, whether
humans, divine or diabolical, does evidence the one supreme Government, which
is of God. Thirdly, the great impression of a Deity upon the hearts of men,
evidenced by the accusations of a guilty conscience; and likewise by that
Worship which Heathens do ascribe unto fa se god, which being considered it
does exceedingly demonstrate that there is a true God, though they be ignorant
of him. Fourthly, I do believe there is a ^od, and that it is him whom I serve,
because the Scriptures do directly make an obvious discovery and revelation of
him. Fifthly and lastly, I do believe that all what I have said is true,
because the Devils in Hell would tear us in pieces, were it not for the
Existence of an Almighty God.


Apollyon. Well, all this we do not deny: Vengeance will be executed upon the
devil one day, for appropriating Gods titles unto himself.
for wha^ you have said as yet does prove me as much God as any other, therefore
you must begin again.


Paulus. As long as faith is in a soul, so long is the Reverence of a Deity
continued.
Nay, I would not for a thousand of Worlds think any otherwise, but that there
is a true God^ and he it is whom I serve.


Apollyon. Nay, but I Will prove to the contrary, and will affirm, The devil is a
blasphemous spirit.
that the God whom you now serve, is a diabolical Spirity, and likewise is one
whom I shall, in Process of time, inflict my wrath upon, for his carriage both
to me and all mankind.


Paulus. Observe the Combat between youth and the devil.
Why, is not that God whom I serve, now in Heaven, and surely if so, then he is
the true God.


Apollyon. That is true, The devil is a lying spirit.
he is in Heaven, but it is only by usurpation.


Paulus. Whose Throne is Heaven then?


Apollyon. It is the Throne of the true God.


Paulus. Who is the true God? The youth (through ignorance) familiarizes too
much with the devil.



Apollyon. He who now does talk with you. Audacious blasphemy.



Paulus. How come you to be out of your place then?


Apollyon. I came out of my place for your sake.


Paulus. Sir, A doubting soul affects nothing so much as plainness.
I am in great distress, pity me therefore, and do not argue sophistically with
me, who am not able at this time to answer you.


Apollyon. Have a care you do not by me as the woman of Samaria did, Behold the
devices of this fallen Angel, the Lord keep us from him.
when I appeared visibly on earth (to the whole world) for the sake of mankind.


Paulus. O what shall I do?


Apollyon. Believe in me that you may have life.


Paulus. Lord have mercy upon me.


Apollyon. The Devil can bring Scripture for a need.
Why do you doubt, I am a Spirit do you not know that God is a Spirit John 4.24.


Paulus. I do believe God is a Spirit.


Apollyon. Why do you then contend with m^ any further, who am so fully God as
have declared unto you.


Paulus. When we are tempted, we should rather say. Get ^lee behind us, Satan;
than to talk with him, and ask him Questions.
Did you create the Heavens and the Earth, and all thing contained ther^ in.


Apollyon. The Devil is made up with nothing but lies.
Yea, and you too.


Paulus. Lord have mercy upon me.


Apollyon. How far does God sometimes suffer the Devil to usurp his Prerogative.
Nay, him whom thou think to be God, I made.


Paulus. Pardon me then blessed God) that I have offered to con^end thus with
thee; Oh poor young man! my bowels do yearn after thee, and all in thy
condition; yet I doubt not, but God will raise thee up again, and show thee the
vanity of thy ways.
^als by (I pray) my ^alapert, audacious, and rustical carriage ^owards thee;
for I see now I am, ^ike the woman of Samaria, who, through ignorance, ascribed
the title of Sir ship unto him that was King over Heaven and Earth, even as I
have done toward thee.


Apollyon. I pardon thee, O Devil pardon thy self.
because what thou have done, has been through ignorance.


Paulus. Yea (good Lord) that it was. Faith is battered.



Apollyon. Well, time does call me away, The Devil rehearses over his bargain,
that he might be sure, for he is fearful of his prey.
for indeed I have many souls to look after, therefore I must leave you, only
desiring you to remember those three things once Proposed; viz. 1. The denying
of God which once you served. 2. The abstaining from those Ministers, which
once you frequented. 3. The believing what I have said, and shall furthermore
say unto you.


Paulus. With all my heart, good Lord.


Apollyon. Farewell there, to-morrow-morning I Will come and see you again.


Paulus. Oh, my Lord, go not away so soo^ from me.


Apollyon. It matters not, as long as I shall come so quickly unto you again.


Paulus. Then farewell, my Lord.


Reader
Take notice, that when the Devil had parted from this Youth, Demas the day
after comes according to promiss; But Apollyon is not with him; from whence we
may gather thus much, It is impossible for the Devil to keep his promiss, in
regard that he is the father of lies and liars, The end wherefore Demas came,
you will understand by the ensuing discourse.

Demas. How do you, my friend?


Paulus. As well as any damned creature can do, but where is my Lord.


Demas. He could not come through excessive want of him at another place;
Observe this plain contradiction; for if he was God, then he could not have
been hindered; moreover, this denies the Omnipresence of God, as well as his
Omnipotence.
but why do thou say, thou art damned, for if so, then thou art
irrecoverable; which if thou were, Apollyon would not undertake to do any thing
for you, neither should I have brought him to you.


Paulus I believe you good Sir, Here is Thanksgiving without occasion, and a
blessing of the devil instea^ of God. The trying of no way conscientious, is
the cause of ma^y tha^ comes to be nothing.
and therefore do desire to bless God for you, because you brought me
acquainted with him.


Demas. Alas, I have tried all ways, but could find no rest, till I met with
him, and so it will be with thee.


Paulus Ha, how may one be deceived; for I thought that I was in the right way,
and worshipped the true God, but it seems it is otherwise, do you think
therefore your God will receive me, after I have been serving a strange God?


Demas. The devil and his companions are all one. A cursed inqui^tion.
Yes, yes, I Will warrant that.


Paulus When will he come to me then?


Demas. Tomorrow morning precisely, at five of the Clock; I came therefore, as
desired by him, to inform you of it, and likewise from my self to advise you of
several things.


Paulus Speak on, and well come.


Demas. We are apt many times to welcome that, which in the cl^se, conduces to
cur ruin.
First, be sure you do remember and ^e^r in mind what Apollyon said unto you
last; Now that which I have from my self unto you is this, Whatsoever my Lord
shall require of you, condescend unto it immediately; therefore if he should
require your self, give up your self unto him by a free Resignation of spirit,
without any doubting, for if you should in the juncture of time that he
requires any thing of you, seem to refuse, he then departs from you totally and
finally; This I know, because, through fear, I had like to have given him
occasion my self; and hence it is that I caution you.


Paulus The Lord your Master treble it into your bosom, for what you have done
unto me.


Demas. Nay, my Work is wages.


Paulus I Question not but it is.


Demas. Well, I must bid you adieu.


Paulus And you also, but be sure yo^ bring my Lord with you.


Demas. Don't question that.


Reader When this young Convert had departed from his two supposed friends* and
from one especially, he walks abroad, and in his return homewards, finds a
letter directed unto him by that Choice Minister of Jesus Christ, from whom he
had abstein'd so long, and by whom he could not be found, through obligation
unto a Promise. The Letter is as follows.


To the Beloved of my Soul T.P.
My Son,
FOR so I may call thee, because in the Lord Jesus I begot thee, in whose Name
I command attention unto the affectionate Exhortations of your distressed
father, who through thy disobedience unto God, has almost brought his hoary
head with sorrow unto the Grave: and for which cause I have made my tears my
meat and drink, day and night, ever since I saw thee last. Ah Child, thou art
gone, which vexe^ me sore; but the consideration of thy being gone from God,
vexes me sorest of all; how happy would thou make me, if I could but see*
thy face before I go from hence, and be seen no more: I long to understand thy
Conflicts, as once I did, that I might thereby administer something of comfort
and advice, in a more sympathizing and condoling manner then ever. The thoughts
of thy groans pierces me to the heart; but the thoughts of thy trials and
temptations does so oppress my spirits, as that I know not what to do; Art thou
not therefore blameworthy, to carry thy self in such an occult and secret
manner as thou do; fall down, I beseech you, through the sense thereof;
think not of being freed from Satan, while thou art such a friend unto him in
keeping of his counsel. The Devil is a subtle enemy, adhere not to him,
believe him no^, and give no credit unto any of his suggestions; to be ruined
is sad, but to be instrumental to thy own ruin is more sad: Something of the
Devils wiles thoa have already s^^n: O therefore, let such an Experiment
anticipate all his other designs from having effect; keep off from him, have
nothing to do with him; for there is nothing but malice and evil in all his
designs: I hear, you make a strict Inquisition after Satan, I pray wherefore
is it? Have you a mind to lose your soul? Are you in love with your own
damnation? Is the loss of Heaven, and the Enjoyment of God nothing? Will the
Devil ve a better friend to you then God? Will the Flames of Hell be as sweet
as a Bed of Roses? Will weeping in the Labyrinth of eternal misery, be more
pleasant then the singing Hall^lujahs in the glorious Heavens? which is best to
be chosen, misery, or felicity, Judge you; which would you choose, to sit at Gods
right Hand, or his Left; why I tell you, if you combine with the Devil, you
will then take Gods gre^test Enemies part, and thereby will lose all those
perpetual, heavenly and celestial Ioys, Promised and Prepared for Gods Elect.

If thou believe and know what heaven is, live then as one that knows the
same. Oh, go to the throne of grace, and leave it not, till thou do find the
grace of God and the Oil of Consolation Poured into thy heart, and for the
order of your appearing unto God, demean your self as the Prodigal, Luke 15.
Cry as David, Psalm. 38.18. For I will declare my Iniquities, and will be sorry
for my sins; how thy state now is, I know not, and therefore after what manner
to write to thee I know not, I do believe your case is dreadful, by the
oppression of my own spirlt, and your being so long absent from me, and whether
now this may come to you I cannot tell, therefore I shall desist from writing
so amply as I would.

Aug. 16. 1672. Your Father in the Lord Jesus W. W.


The young Man having received this Letter, reads it; and having read it, he
considers upon it, and at last is affected exceedingly therewith; but these two
Deceivers coming unto him again, does through their vain discourse and
diabolical concernment, make this Youth to yield unto them, so as that he
forgets the Letter (which came from his dear friend) in which was contained
such wholesome, seasonable and compassionate Instructions.

Demas and Apollyon. So, what now, I hope you have not transgressed.


Paulus Not I indeed.


Apollyon. How then comes it to* pass you look so sad?


Paulus I have by an unparalleld providence, received a letter from one who
loved me, which is strange in regard that he knew not where I dwelt.


Apollyon. The Devil proves there is no Providence by a Lie and corrects the
young man for his illiterat^ness.
Sha, Providence; there is not such things as that; for those things which you
call Providence, are only things which falls out by chance; and you also talk
illiterately and foolishly, to say that was unparalled, because such as this
has bin common ere now.


Paulus Nay, I do not know, but none shall make me to believe any otherwise but
that it was Miraculous, if it will not hold with being unparalled.


Demas. Pray let me speak a word in your ear. There are the whisperings of an
evil spirit, us well as a good.



Paulus. With all my heart, Good Sir.


Demas. Pray now, have a care of carrying your self foolishly, left thereby you
occasion him to depart, as I told you once before.


Paulus Well I will.


Apollyon. How are you composed in mind?


Paulus Not very well, My Lord.


Apollyon Behold the Devi^.
How can you call me Lord? and adjoyn such an ep^thite (as my) thereto, whereas
you have not given up your self unto me.


Paulus Will you accept of me, Oh Lord?


Apollyon If I had meant otherwise, I should not have ask'^ you.


Paulus The young Man speaks to the Devil after the Language of Canaan, which
ou^ht to be used with God only.
Lord I am at your service, do with me as seems good in thy sight.


Apollyon Has that God which you served, been good to you?


Paulus Hard thoughts of God are the fruits of Atheism When the soul has hard
thoughts of God, the Devil will do what he can to multiply them
Truly I must needs say this, that though I had many things of the other ^od
whom I served yet he would not give me all as I desired.


Apollyon That I believe, and shall I tell you those many things which you had
of him were not so real as they were Presented to you, being only shadows.


Paulus It Is likely so truly. The young man now accords with the Devil in
everything A time appointed for the Contract.



Apollyon Well if you are willing (as you say) to be my Servant, meet me about
five of of the Clock at night, by the place where we use to meet, and bring
with you your Penknise, Paper, and Pen, this is all, only be sure to meet me
without fail, or else be it to your own peril.


Paulus I Will be sure not to fail you.


Apollyon Till then farewell.


Reader
Thus thou see how this poor Convert is tossed up and down through the wiles
and Machinations of Satan, how Sollicitous have been the vety powers of H^ll,
to destroy the soul of this young man, how have they Combined together for the
making of their stratagems effectual. For once he went with an intent to meet
the Devil, and as he was entering into the appointed place, the Spirit of God
interrupted him by setting home this Scripture, with such power, Mat. 16.26.
For what is a man profited, if he should gain the whole world, and lose his own
soul; At that he was forced to return home again, and ask God for pardon, and
yet nevertheless Corruption being very prevalent and the Devil mighty busy, he
was thereby impuls'd to make another attempt in the like manner, who
accordingly did, as you may understand by what shall follow.

Apollyon. The Devils salutation
Well met ( my Paulus) why does^ thou muse with thy self?


Paulus The young man is daunted.
I am at a stand, and know not what to do.


Apollyon. An Interrogation.
At a stand, why so?


Paulus He reasons with the Devil.
You know (O Lord) the business which we are met about, and the weightiness
thereof, therefore I hope, reason will show why I look so.


Apollyon. Friend, The Devil knows how to suit hims^If, according to the
constitutions of People. The Devil makes many times, as if he was but
indifferent, in those things which he is most earnest and desirous of.


As for my part, it matters not, whether or no you consent to what I require;
it was for your happiness that I required this from you; but to conclude, take
notice, that I will not be made a fool by such an one as you; Go therefore to
your other God, and see what ^e can do for you, for I scorn to receive you.


Paulus. Good Lord, fret not your self so, for I am not going away from you,
only I desire deliberation, suiting with a work of so great a concernment as
this.


Apollyon. Nay, The devil is an angry spirit.
call not me Lord, except you were my servant; and as for your deliberation,
you have had time enough already.


Paulus. Ha, We are apt many ti^es to consider when it is too late.
but I never did deliberate upon it till now.


Apollyon. The Devil knows so well the advantage of consideration, as that if
he should give way to it, he knows it would dash all his designs to pieces.
If so be you could not deliberate, when you had time enough, expect it not
now.


Paulus. Well, if so, you will not give me leave to satisfy my self herein; I
know not what to say to you.


Apollyon. You know not what to say to me, say something or nothing; and if in
this you be not satisfied, a Fig for you.


Paulus. Be not angry, I pray.


Apollyon. Here is cause to be angry, when you deal thus with me, Bla^^hemy.
who am so fully God. Consider the aggravation that does attend it, therefore
in this one minute resolve me, either in the negative or affirmative.


Paulus. What would you have me to do?


Apollyon Only this, The Author dares not write here what he did write, lest it
should prove a tentation.
Put P^n to Paper and write thus.


Paulus. Well, Note, thus far he went, and further he had gone, if divine Grace
had not restrained him.
I will write thus, ( For)


Apollyon. Proceed, The devils Advice to the young man Divine Providence
interrupts. The devil claims him before he is his.
why stay you your hand?


Paulus. I know not what the matter is, for I cannot move my hand.


Apollyon. You had as good go on now, seeing that you have written the first
word, viz. (For) for you are mine by what you have done already.


Paulus. I defy you as yet, The young man defies the devil.
for I know what I have done.


Apollyon. A Nuncup^ti^^ Well is as good as a written one, A devilish
machination it was, that which had almost prevailed upon the young man, in
making of him to yield, by putting Pen to Paper, of which further observe.
so that what you have not done by Pen you have done by word of Mouth, and
therefore it is all one.


Observe. I.
The young man supposing him, with whom he had conferred so long, to be the
Devil, breaks forth into these breathings of spirit (unto the true God whom
once he served) viz. Now, now, now, O precious Savior, give me something for my
faith to act upon, by making of thy self unto me ^ present help in the time of
need, and for the future try me.

Observe. II.
The Devil perceiving such sweet Motions to be upon the heart of the young man,
and being destitute of all hopes in having him as his prey; does by the
Authority of God vanish and leave him for a time.

Observe. III.
This young man, as he was walking up and down, did experience more and more,
that he with whom he conspired against his God, was the Devil, which caused him
to cry out thus, O wretched man as I am, that I should go so far with the
wicked one; how shall I escape damnation, whenas I have thus transgressed.

Observe. IV.
This young man wondering at him self, did meditate upon several things; and as
he was reading one place of Scripture, alluded to in a book, entitled, ( The
Sinners Sanctuary) being, Hebr. 10.23. Let us hold fast the Profession of our
faith without wavering, for he is faithful that promised. The Devil assaults
him again, and appears in the shape of a white Spaniel dog, with a Letter in
his Mouth, saying unto him, Thou (...) not Elected; at which the young man
rises up, and speaks to God as follows.

And I thought thou did give unto at some token of love and mercy; but ^ow I
am afraid that I was deceived, and therefore if the manifestation which then I
had was not right, skew it (I pray thee) unto thy servant; but if right, then
be pleased to back it with another as Powerful as before, through the efficacy
of some Scripture, co-essential with it, which the Lord accordingly did in the
very junctur^ of time; and bringing also with the same a Scripture essential
thereto, viz Hos. 11.3. From whence he gathere^ That the truth of Election did
not consist in a bare knowledge thereof, bu^ that Election might be where no
appearance thereof could be foun^ The Youth now traveling homeward does in his
way meet with a great man stiff Dog, running round about him and catching hold
on the left latchets o^ of his shoes, does vanish. And b^^ ing returned safe
home, he meets wit^ the holy Minister who was so much concerned with him, and
the discourse be^ tween these two, it as f^lloweth.

Evangelus Oh, My Lamb! Where have tho^ been all this while? For it rejoices
my soul to see thee once more.


Paulus Oh, but you have no cause to be glad in seeing me at this time, and i^
such a condition.


Evangelus. Why talkest thou thus (My Child) as now thou do, tell me
therefore to case my oppressed soul, where thou have been, and what is the
matter with thee?


Paulus. I have been where I have seen a man that did come out of the Air, The
young man talks lightheaded, through the excessive te^n* p^^t^ons of the devil.
The danger of shunning good Council.
yea, where I know not my self I have been.


Evangelus. Obstinacy against good Council does always bring forth evil
effects; for now have I prayed with thee, wept over thee, and given thee good
Council, but by none of these could I prevail, for fighting and rejecting of
which thou art brought into unspeakable misery.


Paulus. I am sensible of this, He despairs.
but here lies my misery, it is too late.


Evangelus. Do not say so, as long as we have a day in which we may work.


Paulus. Did I belong to God, I should receive something of comfort from what
you say, but you know not my condition, in vain therefore it is to take pains
with such an one as I.


Evangelus. Why not take pains with you now* I have done so once, and God has
blessed it; and I question not but he will d^ the like now.


Paulus. It is the sin of young Converts, to condemn and censure every thing,
which seems not at the first view right.
I believe nothing is too hard for God, and I know that he can save my soul, but
I am sure he will not.


Evangelus. The misery of this young man contributes anxiety to the Minister.
My C^^^d, it pricks me to the heart, in hearing such blasphemy proceed from
thee; certainly an evil spirit has bin busy with thee.


Paulus. An ambiguous speech.
Busy, yea, and more busy will he be.


Evangelus. Child, I am thy friend, thou know it; do not therefore put me
off with such Riddles, AEnigmaes, Allegories, and dark kind of speeches as
these are* (...) I do not affect them, especially from ^han one as your self.


Paulus. I am afraid the devil has bin too ^d for me. The grounds of fear.



Evangelus. Wherein, my Lamb!


Paulus. The last time that you was with (...) (you may remember) you en^ir'd
of me, what company I had? (...) which I replied, A man that I ^ew not very
well.


Evangelus. What, that irrenious fellow?


Paulus. Yea, that fellow.


Evangelus. But I hope, you have not seen him, the Gentleman which you spoke
of, ^ce that time.


Paulus. Yes, but I have to my sorrow, I ^nsure.


Evangelus. I am afraid so too, The Ministers suspicion.
what did you do ^hen you were together?


Paulus To rehearse I dare not, to con^ I am ^o^nd.


Evangelus. The Minister se^ks a^^er an interpretation of the young M^ is
Proverb.
What means this (To reveal I (...) not, to conceal I am bound) who i^ that you
are so obliged to, as that dare not disoblige? none but surely.


Paulus I wish it was so.


^vangelus. Dally not with me, if it is to contrary, tell me so.


Paulus He ^eclare this A^ost^ey.
Loath I am to tell you, beca^ was once a Christian, or at least in pretense,
once I did own Christians God. But who do think is my God now?


Evangelus. The Ministers belief 'of the youth.
Him, I hope, besides whom properly can be said to be God.


Paulus Is not the Devil God?


Evangelus. In what respect the devil is God.
Yea, catachr^stically and impro^^ he is so called, but (I hope) (...) him whom
thou have chosen.


Paulus. What he is, The dev can transform him* self into many shapes.
I know not, but he ^es in the habit of a Gentleman.


Evangelus. What is it the Gentleman which you (...) me of just now.


Paulus. Yea, that is him whom I have own^^ to be God.


Evangelus. How! Renounce it for the sake of our soul, I charge you.


Paulus. It has bin past renouncing long ^go.


Evangelus. God forbid, I would not have it so ^orten thousand worlds.


Paulus. It is so confirmed, as that ten thousand and ten thousand cannot revoke
it.


Evangelus. What have thou done then?


Paulus. I have given my soul to him.


Evangelus. Did he require it of thee, and have thou done it?

The young man did go very near in contracting with the Devil, but he did
totally contract with him, as you will find in fine.
Yes, yes, yes.


Evangelus. ^ Do thou^ know what thou h^^ done?


Paulus. I think so, why what is the ma^^ter?


Evangelus. What is the matter? thou have (...) Gods greatest enemies part.


Paulus. Who is that, I pray?


Evangelus. Satan, which is called the Devil.


Paulus. The young man prays for a deprecation of his misery. Behold how his
misery is augmented by many gradations.
The Lord forbid.


Evangelus. Nay, it is so, and Christ have mercy on thee; from a Christian thou
ar^ become a Wizard; and so consequentially thou art ripened for Hell, a^ much
as once I thought thou were for Heaven; thy condition is such, as i^ renders
thee incapable of the love of God; so that now he hates you, his Children hates
you, your Relation hates you; and, adieu, my friend, adieu.


Paulus Attend (Good Sir) and do not you who has been always my friend leave
me now in my greatest perplexity. Examine me a little, before you give me over
quite, and let the time before encourage you hereunto.


Evangelus. I wish you were but more sensible; when I saw you first, you seemed
to be somewhat penitent; but I am afraid now God has stricken thee with a
judicial hardness and blindness.


Note, in this Discourse comes Demas, who interrupts, and speaks as follows.
Demas. I wonder, Sir, you would urge him to renounce that which he has sealed
to by his own blood, and calling God as a witness to the same.


Paulus. O stop thy mouth; false thou have been to me, for as to paper, yea,
and also blood, I do deny, and therefore say no such word.


Evangelus. Is this he (my Child) whom thou call'st Demas; if so then, that
thou did not enter into any combination with him and his Comrague the Devil
by blood, return Praise to God, and matter not what they say: And wherefore do
thou (O Demas,) impute that to my Lamb, which he was never guilty of?


Demas. Pray who be you, that you rage so much at me, as if I was engaged to
the Devil, and as if I was the cause of troubling your friend; both of which I
deny, and pray speak no more but what you can prove.


Evangelus. Thou art a Liar, being like the Devil thy father; for we fear not
thee nor any of thine, and it shall be proved that thou were the great
Instrument, which the Devil made use of to destroy my Child; but the God whom
we serve has deceived thee, Glory be ascribed unto him for ever.


Demas. Know you friend, I will not be th^^ taunted at by you; and did I b^
bring the God whom I serve, yo^ would tremble, merely through a fight of him.


Evangelus. We care not for you, nor your God; and if you should bring him
hither, we would not stir out of our Places.


Demas. I shall ere long make trial of that, and until then, farewell.


Evangelus. And farewell y^u.


Paulus. How glad am I that he is gone.


Evangelus. Ha Child, An Exhortation to Thanksgiving.
walk as long as you live in the sense of this mercy, of agracious God unto
you, in restreining you from doing what you was tempted to; And now for the
glory of this God, I do desire you to make a brief Confession of your being
first acquain^ed with this Person, Motives to Confession*
and so with the Devil, and what it was he required of you, tha^ these things
may be left as a Narra^tive of Gods dealings with you unt^^ succeeding
Generations.


The CONFESSION of PAVLVS
When I first began to be troubled, this Person ( Demas) being a^ ancient
Acquaintance of mine, wh^ at first seemed mighty zealous in the ways of
Godliness, did of late visit me very often, and perceiving of m^ to be somewhat
unsatisfied, he demanded the Reasons thereof; and a^ last understanding
something of it, he told me that he had experienced the God whom I served, not
to be the true God, producing substantial Reasons (as I thought) for the proof
thereof, which winn'd so upon me, and being likewise perceived by him, it did
make him somewhat prevalent with me, to grant leave that he might bring the
Gentleman unto me, ( i.e. Devil) which being granted, and concealing it from
you, together with many temptatious that attended me. I did meet him at a
certain time and place appointed, and so in process of time he got me to deny
these three things. 1. To deny the God whom I served. Observe the evil eff^cts
that do ensue the concealing of suggestions.
2. To abstain from the Ministers I frequented. 3. To believe whatsoever be
should say unto me; which after these were granted, he then made me to promise
my soul unto him, in form as aforesaid, () and as soon as I had set Pen to
paper; and writ this word ( For) I could not go any further, which being
perceived by him, he cursed me, and withal told me, that if I did not write, it
was all one, and I was his, as long as I had set Pen to Paper; only this he
added, If I would write all, then he would be more merciful unto me at the
expiration of my time; but if I did not, he then would use me ^o much the more
cruel; the saying of which does at this present time trouble my soul very much
(...) ^hinking that I am his: And therefore, I pray Sir, what think you of it?

Evangelus. Child, that was only a temptation framed by himself, to draw you
aside (...) set Pen to Paper.


Paulus. Say you so, but what shall I (...) then with your God, which I on^
worshipped, he, I suppose, will b^ never recounted unto me, because have
disowned him and all his Commandments.


Evangelus. Truly (my Child) if so be it is a^ things are Presented to me, I
mus^ needs say then, If your Head was (...) fountain of tears, and your Hands
streams thereof, you could not sufficiently mourn for what you have done; and
moreover, if God had damned you longere this had been committed, he would have
been justified therein, but much more now, when you are guilty of that which I
thought you would never have been guilty of. Nevertheless, from hence gather
Hope, viz. Gods restraining of you to do what was intended, it being an
infallible sign that God is willing to save thee.


Paulus. O that I had but assurance of it.


Evangelus. Nay, (no doubt) it may be a long time before God will give you an
assurance of his love, in regard that you have by exceeding Provocations
forfeited it.


Paulus. Ha, but I am one, that can never be at peace, unless God does
immediately tell me that all my sins are forgiven, nay, I am afraid I shall
kill my self, if God does not cast some favorable aspect upon me.


Evangelus. How do you talk! have you not provoked God enough already, and will
you provoke him still? have a care lest you do thereby augment your misery.


Paulus. Alas, I am damned, I am damned, do not then blame me for speaking so.


Evangelus. I must needs confess your case is desperate; but yet
notwithstanding this, if you will go to God in his own way, you may find mercy.


Paulus I have (without doubt) committed the sin against the holy Ghost, in
regard of those several aggravations which do attend my Sins, for did you ever
hear of any saved, who sinned after their Baptism, and acknowledgment of the
truth.


Evangelus. Nam multa possunt ostendi veteris and Novi Testamenti exempla ubi
lapsi remissionem peccatorum and absolutionem a Christo and Ecclesia sunt
consecuti, viz. David, Manasse, Petrus, lapsa est Galatarum Ecclesia, and a
Paulo ad poenitentiam revocata: and Paulus ipse Corinthium incestum jub^t
recepi post poeni tentiam. Aug.

The young man's sins of omission and commission.


Yea, surely, for what think you of David, Manasse, Peter, and the Church of
the Galatians, when called in by Paul to repentance.


Paulus If I had but access to the Throne of grace, it would be something, but
I have been for a year and an half (through sin) debarred there from, how think
you therefore that I can go without Blushing.


Evangelus. If thou would have God to take any notice of thee, thou must go
to the Throne of grace in great shame and confusion.


Paulus What if I cannot lift up so much as my eyes unto him. He cannot lift up
his eyes to God.



Evangelus. Yes, Luke 16.
for have you not read of the Publicans demeanor before God?


Paulus This is true, and therefore my dear friend, I am much obliged to you,
for all your love and pains with me, and if you will be pleased to tell me what
I must do when I come home, I shall thereby be engaged more than ever.


Evangelus. First, Heb. 7.25 Ezekiel. 33.11. Psalm. 32.5. Psa. 38.18
believe that God is still able and willing to save thee.

Secondly, confess thy iniquities, be sorry for them, and then ask forgiveness,
with a firm resolution in the strength of Christ, to do so no more.

Thirdly, by the greatness of thy sins plead for a Pardon from God.

Fourthly, make Christ the Way to the Father, excluding altogether your own
works and righteousness, from justification and salvation. Joh. 14.6. Mat.
26.41. 1 These. 5.17. Phil. 4.11 1 Timothy 6.8 Ephesians. 4.27. Jam. 47.


Fifthly, omit no duty for your life.

Sixthly, endeavor to be content in all states and conditions.

Seventhly, be not a friend io the Devil, by concealing any of his Suggestions.

Ephesians. 4.27. 2 Co. 11.2.
Eighthly, tempt not the devil.

Ninthly. For the future live with a more holy jealousy then ^ver.


Paulus This together with what you have formerly done for me, I shall remember
(I hope) as long as I live.


Evangelus. Nay, many things I have to say, but you cannot hear them now* I
shall therefore reserve them till another opportunity that you and I may have;
but in the mean time, the God of Heaven bless you, and so farewell.


FINIS.
Courteous Reader,
Which Title thou shall well deserve, if thou will but excuse the Author from
such Errata's as have escaped the Press, being very many and great, his
distance from the City not giving him the opportunity to peruse the sheets as
they were done, the most material whereof are here subjoined, and do beg the
coverture of thy candid censure.

ERRATA in the Epistle Dedicatory.
Line 31 read not of any of you, line 177 leave out and. line 218. read but
Jesus Christ who will plead.

Errata in the Book.
Page 3 line 4. in the Margent put Ephesians. 2.20. p. 8. l.6. put three for two.
page 22. l 1. for 1 John 5.7. put Acts 5.3. p. ib. l. 6. for I say r. I see. p.
34. l. 3. for 4. r. 24. p. 35. l. 1. for your r. you. p. 49. l. 3. for it r.
them. p. 42. l. 17. for you understand r. your understanding. p. 57. l. 5. for
that r. thus. p. 66. l. 3. for gratia r. gratiae. p. 66. in the last words of
the Margent r we are hindered from effecting what we intended. p 67. in the
Margent, for does. r. d^. p. 75. l. 4. for I shall r. shall I. p. 79. l. 13.
for as yet r. as that.

Thus with many more, which would be tedious and somewhat vain to particularize,
besides the mis-placing of Comma's, Periods and Marginal Notes.

An Advertisement to the READER.
REader, Thou art desired to take Notice, that by Evangelus (one of the
Interlocutors) is signified a holy Man and Minister, who often conversed with
the Author when he was in his deplorable condition. By Paulus, the Author
himself, considered in his unconverted and converted estate, together with his
Conflict. By Demas, an Apostate and Atheist, who was instrumental to the
bringing of the Author to his sad condition. And by Apollyon is signified the
Devil himself, who often appeared visibly, designing thereby the Authors
destruction.

Vale.

A CATALOGUE of BOOKS Printed and are to be sold by John Hancock Sen. and Jun,
at the Sign of the Three Bibles in PopesHead Alley.
TWelve Books Publish^d by Mr. Thomas Brooks.

1. Precious Remedies against Satan's devices, or a Salve for Believers and
Unbelievers Sores. 2. Heaven upon Earth, or a Discourse touching a
well-grounded Assurance. 3. The unsearchable Riches of Christ. 4. Apples of
Gold for young Men and Women. 5. String of Pearls, or the best things reserved
till last. 6. The Mute Christian under the Smarting Rod. 7. An Ark for Gods
Noah's. 8. Crown and Glory of Christianity. 9. The Privy Key of Heaven, or, A
Discourse of Closet Prayer. 10. A Heavenly Cordial. 11. A Cabinet of Choice
Jewels, or, A Box of precious Ointment. 12. London's Lamentations. Mr. Calamy's
Godly Man's Ark.

