A VINDICATION OF Henry Portington ESQUIRE, Being Unjustly committed to
Newgate, UPON The Information of a MAD MAN.

London, Printed, 1665.

The Preface.
READER,
I Beg your Pardon, if I err in Form, but in Truth not at all; the Reasons
which incite me to this trouble, are

First, To clear me and our Party of that unworthy aspersion, too much used by
the Enviers of His Late Majesty's Friends; that I, and such as I, was drinking
when we should be Fighting.

Secondly, I was, and am now to Employed by twenty select Officers, having no
other Design but for promoting their Honors, and endeavoring the advantaging
their Dividends, in the Indigent Moneys, in which my expectation is frustrated,
to the Dissatisfaction and Ruin of us all; for, if they were to give me their
shares, I should be no gainer. This I publish to the World, that I may return,
as I came, without blemish.

Yours Henry Portington.

A Vindication OF HENRY PORTINGTON Esquire
DIfficile est Satyram non scribere: It Is pain and grief to an ingenuous Soul
to keep silence, and see Apostasy and Parasitical Baseness flourish in the
seeming Garments of belyed Truth and Loyalty, to see these lurk undiscovered by
the Wise, would make the Tongue of the Stammerer to speak, and the Pen of the
Rude and Unlearned to write: And however, the galled will kick, and the most
guilty themselves will accuse us, as guilty of the Crime of being Accusers and
Informers, this must not deterr or abash us. I wish all Governors would so
countenance the just Accusations of honest men, that the dishonest might be
discountenanced; then should not Vice rise by the ruins of Virtue; for to say
truth, Mercy to the bad, is Cruelty to the good: To connive at the faults of
public notorious Offenders, is to justify them in their wicked actions, which
is equally as heinous as to condemn the innocent, for so the Divine Oracles
tell us, He that justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the just, even
they both are an abomination to the Lord: It will not excuse us that we never
were of the number; there will be cause enough to condemn us, if we through a
fond indulgence wink at them; Parum interest faveasne sceleri, an illud facias,
Sen. For my part, had their unworthy practices been prejudicial only to my
self, I should have been content to have suffered in silence; but who can
endure to see his Majesty abused, his Bounty frustrated, the Parliaments
Charity misimployed, and other truly Loyal Subjects wronged? For certainly,
when it pleased his Sacred Majesty, at the request of his Parliament,
graciously to bestow that considerable sum of 60000 l. upon his truly Loyal,
suffering, indigent Officers, it was not his Majesty's intention, nor can it
enter into the heart of man to think, that it was intended for those that did
never serve really under his late Sacred Majesty of ever blessed Memory, as
Officers in the late War; nor yet for those that, deserted his service; much
less for those that served against him; and yet all of these lay claim to a
share thereof, and go away with recompense, whilst his Majesty's constant,
loyal, indigent servants, who through all hazards and extremities, have born
Arms by the command of his late Majesty, in the defense of the Kings Person,
Crown and Dignity, and who have continued faithful through the whole course of
the late Wars, are exposed to scorn and penury: This is no small abuse to his
Majesty, that his Bounty should be frustrate, by falling into their hands to
whom it was never intended: Besides, it may prove of dangerous consequence, for
that his Majesty may hereby mistake his Foes for his Friends, whilst
treacherous and undeserving persons receive the reward and character belonging
properly to persons of Loyalty and Honor. And if it be objected, That those
persons so obliged by the Kings Bounty, will become faithful ever hereafter;
And therefore, there can be no danger in mistaking. I answer, That I wish they
may prove so; but they must excuse us if we somewhat fear, that they who were
so unthankful and faithless to that Saint-like King of glorious memory, whose
care and burden was so great, whose Piety and Charity did shine so clearly,
will ever be truly thankful or faithful to any: Sic notus Ulysses. But this is
not all, that his Majesty is thus abused, though it is most intolerable: the
Parliament is also abused, in that their Charity is misimployed; and well may
they hereby be discouraged from making any request of the like nature for the
future: The Kingdom in general is abused and dissatisfied, seeing their Moneys
go the wrong way; and, which is grievous in the eyes of all true Loyalists,
the late War raised by the Lords and Commons, may now stand upon Record to be
Lawful, seeing those that ever fought against the King, are joined in the same
qualification of Loyalty with those that only fought for him: And thus his
Majesty's loyal and indigent servants, that are publicly known to have stood
all Extremities of Hazards and Necessities, are discouraged, and utterly out of
capacity of doing further service for their King and Country; whilst the
Bread of the Children, who acknowledge, reverence, and obey the King, as the
Father both of Church and State, is given to Dogs: What more is left remaining
to his Majesty's poor Sufferers but their Honor, and that they may transmit
that fair to Posterity? I shall add my endeavor, by declaring my knowledge
concerning the Officers of the Northern Army, wherein I served; and when all
those who served faithfully and constantly are known, it will be easy to
discern who are counterfeits.

IN the beginning of the Wars and late Rebellion, I was Cornet to Captain Roger
Portington, and as soon as I knew how to Command, I raised a Troop of my own,
consisting of 90. Horse, which I recruited from time to time, and has at this
day two Leiutenants, Trumpeter, and 38 Soldiers; all times were we faithfully
serving his Majesty, through the extremity of the whole War, not one revolting
to the Enemy, in the Regiment of Sir William Savill's; after whose death, we
continued in the name of Sir George Savil, commanded by Lieutenant Colonel
Portington, and here you shall have a hint of most of the Engagements our
Regiment was in, my self and my Troop never absent from any.

Upon the Convoy of the Queen Mother at her landing at Barlington to York.

At the fight of Seacroft-Moor, under the Command of the Lord Goring, where we
took 800 Prisoners.

At Tankersley-Moor under Sir Philip Byron, where we took 400.

At the Seidge of Leeds.

At the Taking of Rotheram.

At the Taking of Howley-Hall.

At Asherton-Moor, where we took 1600. Prisoners, Colonel Heron and Howard
slain, and many of our Regiment.

At the taking of Bradford.

At the taking of W nckfield Manor, Colonel Dalbey slain all under the command
of the Marquess of Newcastle.

At Harthington in Darbyshire, where we took 300, of which I had the Convey to
Chesterfield to Leiutenant General Kings Quarters.

At the taking of the Pinnace where my Troop had the guard of two small Guns,
through the Isle of Axholm, in which the Earl of Kingstone, and Mr. Nevil was
slain.

At the Seidge of Gainsborough where that Person of honor and gallantry
Colonel Cavendish was slain, and many others.

At the Seidge of Hull.

At Horn Castle, twice to little purpose, under Lieutenant General Henderson.

At the fatal Battle of Winsby, where Sir Ingram Hopton, Major to our Regiment,
was barbarously murdered after quarter given, Captain Vernat, Cornet Roe
slain, and scarce one Officer but dangerously wounded, and the first time our
Regiment was beaten, under the same conduct.

At taking Leiutenant Colonel Lasseb's, and his Foot, in the Isle of Axholm,
with Sir John Mayn, Leiutenant Gregory slain, Officer to Leiutenant Colonel
Robert Portington.

At Selby where my Lord Belasses was taken, and at least 300 Horse out of our
Regiment.

At the taking of Liverpool, under his Highness Prince Rupert.

At Marston Moor, Lieutenant Buridge commanding my Troop was slain, my self
being sent from Liverpool to Westchester, being in a very sad condition, and
not rid of some wounds I had formerly received. But recovering, I came to
Clythro Castle, where I was most civilly used by Sir Tho. Danyel, which did
much add to perfect my full recovery, which no sooner perfected, I went to
Appleby in Westmoreland, where I met the Northern Horse with my Lord Langdale,
missing of my own Troop, my Lieutenant who was slain, and four of my soldiers.

Now begins the extremity of the War.

At Malpas under my Lord Langdale himself wounded, Colonel Beton, and Cornet
Hogson slain, then Colonel Tuke had the command of the Horse into South- Wales.

Against Monmouth after it was surprised, Sir Will. Blackstone dangerously
wounded, and my Lieutenant Marsh slain.

At Ledbury under his Highness Prince Rupert.

At the taking Salisbury by my Lord Langdale, after Ludlow thought to have beat
up our Quarters, but repulsed by the vigilance of Sir Francis Anderson, Sir
Robert Hilliard, and Captain Sunderland dangerously wounded.

Under the Lord Goring with an intent for Portsmouth.

At Daintrey.

At Melton Moubray Sir John Girlington, Captain Cescoyne of our Regiment,
Captain Hungate, a Reformade in my Troop, all slain.

At the relief of Pontefract Castle, where we took 1500 Prisoners, Mr. Meltham
and Leiutenant Higdon slain; all these three engagements in one week performed
by the Lord Langdale, and made our Retreat without any loss into Cheshire.

At the relief of Beeston Castle, under his Highness Prince Maurice.

At the relief of Hereford.

At the relief of Douington Castle, where the Northern Horse had the guard of
his late Majesty, commanded by his Highness Prince Rupert to Oxford, where I
brought up the rear by Abington, without the loss of a man.

At the taking of Leicester, his Majesty present.

At Naisby.

Against the piece Army in Wales with my Lord Ashley.

At the releif of Sir John Winters House, with my Lord Langdale, and Colonel
Russel.

At Claerwall, where the Enemy kept a Garrison under ground, under the Lord
Langdale, and Colonel Russels.

In the severe march with his Majesty to Doncaster, and so to Huntington, where
I had the guard at Gormanchester, took the Mayor of Huntington in a Hogstye,
who endeavored to keep his Majesty out; then into Wales, and to
Wroughton-Heath, many gallant persons slain; back into Nottinghamshire, where
in Worsupp-Park many of us Officers had the happiness to kiss his Majesty's
hand, and then commanded under the Earl of Bristow, and Lord Langdale for
Scotland, to join with the Earl of Montross.

At Sherburn Sir Richard Hutton, Colonel Carnaby, Captain Godfrey, who had the
Command of Sir John Gutherwicks Troop in our Regiment, all slain, Sir Jorden
Crofland dangerously wounded, after which, I had the command of our Regiment
into Scotland.

At Avon in Scotland, where Colonel Brown fell into our Quarters.

At Dumfress, where the Earl of Bristow had his Horses stolen out of stables
quartering at the Provosts of the Town.

At Ravenglass, there I was commanded by entreaties by the Earl of Bristol, and
Lord Langdale, to return with Sir William Huddlestone, and Sir Horatio Carry,
for the Soldiers of our Regiment mutinied to part with their Officers, and
would have sunk the Boat which was to convey them to the Isle of Man; so I
consented to hazard my self to save so many Persons of Quality; in our retreat
there was not a Color left flying but my own, and in that black night the
Enemy fired all the Beacons in the Country round to give us light, the event
of which proved sad.

At Worton Sands, where we repulsed the Enemy; Captain Braudling wounded.

At the Seidge of Skipton, and so with Sir William Black-stone, Leiutenant
Colonel Carr, and several of the Garrison to Lichfield.

At Slowithold, my Lord Ashley, and Sir Charles Lucas both taken Prisoners, and
so to Oxford, where we were in a sad condition; but coming to the Governor,
Sir Tho. Glenham, with whom I had formerly been acquainted, did give order for
us, and the next morning sent for me to attend his late Majesty of ever blessed
Memory, to whom I gave the best account I could of the Earl of Bristol, the
Lord Langdale, and all the Officers that took Boat; and of those that returned
out of Scotland to Oxford, I knew but five, Captain Grimston, Captain
Braudling, Captain Wilson, Leiutenant Herman, and my self; his gracious Majesty
did charge the Governor to provide for us, and the next day I received five
pounds, which was all I ever received, except one weeks pay for my Troop, after
the Queen Mother landed at Burlington, and did by the assistance of Sir Thomas
Wentworth endure till the Surrender, and came out upon the Articles.

For the second War upon the surprise of Pomfret Castle, the Enemy sent
several Parties to apprehend us, but having advice of both, the taking of the
Castle, and the Enemies intention, Roger Portington, Robert Portington, and my
self, all having real and honorable Commands in the first War, raised all the
men we could, with whom we forced our way to their assistance, for which
services Roger suffered eleven years Imprisonment, and damnified in his estate
near as many thousand pounds, and we as much as any that adhered to his
Majesty, according to our Talent; Robert irrecoverably, as it was supposed,
wounded at Willowby, and all of us Prisoners at the death of Oliver, one at
London, another at Hull, and my self at York.

Since his Majesty's return, I have been Lieutenant to Sir Godfrey Copley of a
Troop of Volunteers in the Regiment, and under the Command of his Grace the
Duke of Buckingham, where all the best of that part of the Country are pleased
to ride in, having 70 of the said Troop within two miles where I live, who has
been, are, and I despair not, will be, at the sound of a Trumpet, (having one
continually quartered with us) at his Majesty's service, as all the rest is.

Thus have I briefly run over the sad Scaene of a direful Tragedy, wherein it
may be easily supposed, what miseries I suffered from his Majesty's Enemies,
and the Kingdoms Subverters; to be plundered of my whole personal Estate, and
that considerable, my real sequestered, and the greatest part of it sold, was
no trouble: But to have my Wife and Family turned into the open streets at
Doncaster, whom none durst harbor; but her own Sister, not living far remote,
having compassion on her, took her home: for which charitable act, her Husband
Mr. Wray was imprisoned and sequestered: And at this time, the remainder of my
Estate ready to follow the first, having by reason of the forementioned
Calamities, contracted so much debt, as otherwise I am not able to discharge,
this is a trouble: To be imprisoned perpetually for his Majesty was no trouble;
but being come home for a while by the Mediation of some Friends, to have some
Sixteen Gentlemen, my neighbors, come to visit me, all taken Prisoners with
me, and suffered very much, this was a trouble: To serve his Majesty
faithfully, this was no trouble; but to be counted disserving, this is a great
trouble: To be arraigned at the Assize at York. for serving the King, where the
Judge wished me to thank the Jury, this was no trouble; but to be committed to
Newgate, and arraigned for disserving; these all put together, produce
heartbreaking troubles. And if those persons who have neither been Active nor
Passive for his Majesty, but Neuters rather, and not constant, but rather
disloyal, shall be rewarded, and such as my self rejected, we must expect
recompense in another World, where Astrea dwells. In the Interim, I could wish,
that every man that intends to share, or has shared in his Majesty's Bounty,
might make a Narrative of what he has done or suffered, and where he served in
the late Wars: And then it is my humble Petition, That his Sacred Majesty
would be pleased to do Justice, rendering to every man impartially to his merit,
since Justice is the Beam of Princely Balances:

As says the Old Rule:

(...)
Or live without Distress,
Or dye with happiness.
(...)
It Is good for them to dye,
Whom Life brings Infamy.
(...)
It Is better not to live,
Than wretchedly not thrive.
The Names of some of the Officers who were slain and dyed truly Loyal, in the
Regiment of Sir William Savill, none that revolted.
Sir Ingram Hopton Major, Major Robert Portington. Capt. Copley. Capt. Vernatt.
Fleetwood, Armitage, Wentworth, Gasguoyne, Benson.
Lieutenants.
Godfrey, Batt, Lee, Cullier, Gregory, Burridge, Marsh, Savill, Purdee, Batley,
Cunye, Snow.
Cornets.
Byrum, Townesend, Roe, Burdett, Tailor, Bright, Smyth, Corrington.
FINIS.

